THE History of Adam, or the fourfold state of Man, Well formed in his
Creation, Deformed in his Corruption, Reformed in GRACE, and Perfected in Glory.

BY Mr. HENRY HOLLAND, late Preacher at Saint Brides Church in London.

LONDON Printed by T. E. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster-Row at the
sign of the Talbot. 1606.

To the Reverend and right worshipful, Richard Neyle Doctor of Divinity,
Deane of Westminster, and Principal Clarke of the Kings most Excellent
Majesty his Closet, all prosperity, etc.
AMong other accidents of this mortal life (right grave, worthy and learned
Doctor) this is one, to build and not to inhabit, to plow and not to see the
harvest, to purpose and not to attain the end of our designs, to write and
compile books and studies, and not to live to publish them. So has it been
with Lawyers, Physicians, Philosophers, Linguists and Divines, and among other
in late times, with that most learned man Chemnitius a German Divine, who after
he had undertaken that worthy work of the Harmony of the four Gospels, which
by the opinion of one of our grauest and learnedest Divines, Doctor Whitaker
was called Caput veneris. For that (in his judgment) he having but entered to
speak and write of the head of the Gospels, namely, Christ's incarnation and
some few miracles and sermons, laid unmatchable grounds, as it were the colors
that none could imitate, afterward before the work was one quarter performed,
to the great loss, not only of the learned, but of all Christendom, was
taken out of the miseries of this present world. Among English Divines (that I
may not press you with any unnecessary relations, because you love singlenes
and plainness) it was also the lot of as godly and discreet a preacher as any
I ever knew in my days, to draw his last breath before he could effect to his
content, the publication of sundry his experimental works and observations,
about afflicted consciences and troubled or contrite minds, I mean master
Greenham. But as God would not give the Land of promise to Abraham, but to his
seed and children, and as Moses might not enter into Canaan, but see it a far
off: so it fared with these men, they saw their wished desires, like Palinurus
watching and waiting the return of his ships, although they dyed before their
perfection, and therefore their names are their heirs, and God stirred up
learned men to set forth to the world their intended, learned and godly
labors, for Lycerus published Chemnitius, and master Holland a preacher late
of S. Brides in London, did the like for master Greenham. Now all things have
their course and revolution. Iron sharpeneth iron, so does man sharpen the face
of his friend. He that keeps the fig tree shall eat of the fruit thereof,
and he that waits upon his master shall come to honor. As in the water face
answers face, so the heart of man to man. Pro. 27.17.18.19. That is, they
provided for themselves which thus regarded other men, and as Rahab by
entertaining the spies of Israel, deserved to be regarded by Israel at the
sacking of Jericho, so have these men, to have the like done for them, that
they did for other.

There came unto my hands about half a year past, a treatise or copy bearing
title, The fourfold state of Adam, compiled by master Holland aforesaid, and
allowed by authority to be printed. But it seemed the work wanted the father,
(be it spoken without offense) for it was not well clothed, cowched, or bound
up together; and besides, of the four est^tes propounded in the title, it
wanted one. It had passed through the veiw of many learned men, every one
approving that which was done, and none helping to bring it to some perfection:
at last my friend the Printer (having a desire, first, for the glory of God,
and good of the Church: secondly, for the releife of the poor widow and many
fatherless children) meeting with it, freely undertook the charge and
adventure (which cannot be small) to imprint and set it forth to the world. But
finding no coherence in the matter, nor pleasant order in the manner, (the
margents of the copy being greater, or as great as the book) was forced to
break off, and leave that enterprise: and so offered the same to me, praying my
help (which God knows is weak) to contriue it and bring it into such a
fashion as might be plain, and intelligible to the English Reader; I accepted
the labor at the first, not weighing the wants, but thought only to supply in
it the place of a Correctour. And therefore reading it, I found many things in
the margent which were ordained for the page, and because I found in it a great
number of pithy and substantial points curiously and not vulgarly handled
(like able soldiers wanting a Marshall, or like the beautiful limbs of a
naked body lacking garments) I strained my self, for the honor of God and my
love to the dead, both to marshall all things according to his meaning (so
near as I could) and also to put upon his fatherless Orphan, such garments
and attire as my poor ability could provide. But when I had gone through it,
and found a maime at the last (for the good man was first of all called to the
glory of heaven, out of this world, before he had or could express it in his
intended treatise) I knew not what to do, but stood still, amazed and
perplexed, thinking with my self, that if it should go forward without the
legs, it would be refused for an impotent: If I should add unto it and not
express my addition, those learned men which had formerly seen it, would
condemn all for counterfaite: If it should stand still and not go forward, the
Printer might be discouraged in some other such charitable course: And to
think that the Author had left that part in some other of his books and
labors, and there to look for it, was as if I should have wished him alive to
end his own work, and why should I do so good a man such wrong as once to
desire his presence on earth? who already before me was gone to heaven, rather
I will trot out my purgatory pains, and run out my race for him on earth:
These were my thoughts then in private, which now I publish to the world. And
to you before all other most worthy, learned, and admired Deane, for as he
when he lived, preached these things at the Church of Saint Brides (which is an
appurtenance of your Collegiate Church, whereof he was Pastor, so also do I
eat my bread upon your allowance, in another possession of yours, wherein I
make known to the world, and do hereby desire men that are now alive, and
those that shall be hereafter borne, to take knowledge of your care for the
good instruction of the souls of such flocks, as Law and Authority have in
former times appropriated to your Church of Westminster. I may not exhort you,
it were boldness, although I know your humbleness would bear it. This is
your due, and receive it as a Theological gift from a dead man, patronage it,
for so much as is master Hollands deserves favor, and for the residue which
is mine, it craves pardou. You love the Church and every divine thing, and
therefore I have presumed to prefixe your name in the front of this divine
work, that both learned and godly which shall ever see or read it, may know
your piety and zealous affections, and pray with me for the increase of your
favor both with God and men, for your supportation by the holy Ghost, for your
further advancement to the good of God his Church, for the length of your days
to be passed in quiet and contented health, and for your blessed and assured
entrance into that which the later end of this treatise describes, namely, the
kingdom of heaven. Amen. From Saint Buttolphes Aldersgate, September. 22. 1606.

By him that is unworthy of your favor, yet devoted to honor you, Edw.
Topsell.

To all Christian Readers, especially Londoners, Auditors, and friends to the
late Godly Preachers, master Greenham and master Holland.
AS by God his providence master Greenham did not live to publish his own
works, but left them at large, which so had perished, had not master Holland
undertaken with much care, travel, and pains, to collect and diuulge them to
the world for your good: so by the same hand over ruling all things, master
Holland also tilled another man's vineyard, and left his own untilled through
untimely death. But God forbid, but that the names of such just men should be
had in everlasting remembrance: therefore to you I commend this book as the
voice of Lazarus, preaching out of Abraham's bosom, and if ever you loved
either master Greenham, or master Holland while they were living, and
especially the later, I do require you in the name of Jesus Christ, as you will
answer both him and me at the appearing of our Savior, that you show it now
after his death. For your sakes he spent his life, yea, and lost his life; for
his diligence in keeping his flock, and teaching you in greatest extremity
brought him to that sickness, that cut off his days. And seeing he had such an
ardent desire to promote religion, and considered that one day death would
close his eyes, and earth stop his mouth from preaching, in private he
collected these instructions, with an intent to imprint them, for your
benefit, when he should be in his grave. Now you have them, through the care
of his poor widow, and charity of the Printer, whereinto I have added a
discourse of our joys, and estate after the later day. I assure you by reading
this book you shall better know your Generation, Degeneration, Regeneration
and Glorification, then in any other of this quantity. I preiudge no man's
labors, I honor all, I desire that all learned men would do their endeavor
to preach when they be dead, (for our harvest will be all eaten up in a winter
to come.) I wish readers to lay aside scorn and rash judgment, especially
such as are idle themselves (for a spiritual man must be the doer, and not the
judge of the Law.) I pray God increase the number of good laborers in his
vineyard (for good pastors will be precious soldiers in another age) and
continue our blessed liberty of preaching, professing, writing and hearing of
the Gospel of Christ. Farewell.

Yours while he is able to preach, Edw. Topsell.

Of the necessity and use of Cathechizing. 1. Sunday.

Question. 1.
ARe all men in the visible Church, true and living members of the mystical
body of Christ, and in communion with him?

Answer.

No: Some are natural, some are spiritual men, some in Christ, some without
Christ: for all that be with us are not of us. 1. Ioh. 2.19. Ep. 2.12.

Question. 2.
What call you a natural man?

Ans. The natural man is he, which is lead by the instinct of nature in all
his actions, and wants the holy spirit of a Christ in any measure, and
therefore has no faculty to perceive, nor judgment to discern b the holy
things of God. a Jude. ver. 19. b 1. Cor. 2.14. Phil. 1.9.10.

Quest. 3. What call you a spiritual man?
Ans. A Gal. 6.1.
spiritual man is he, which by the light of the Gospel, and a preaching
thereof, and through Gods special grace and free mercy in Christ, has
received the holy spirit b of Christ in some measure to c discern the will of
God revealed in his word.a Gal. 3.1. b 1. Cor. 2 15. c Ephe. 1.13. Romans 8.2.
and to grow up a perfect man in Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.

Quest. 4. Have all spiritual men, or the faithful, or that be in Christ,
the same measure of the spirit?

Ans. No: some are 1 strong men. 2 babes.
in Christ. Heb. 5.12.

Three points in the strong. 1 (...), he is exercised in holy exercises.

2. After this comes (...), sound judgment to discern the things which differ.

3 he has (...), an habit of knowledge, and sound judgment, etc. Col 2.2
which is his (...). Romans 4.


Quest. 5. What is a strong man in Christ: (of whatsoever estate or condition?)

Ans. That man whose mind and heart the spirit of Christ has so exercised in
the word of grace that he can discern good and evil. Heb. 5.14.

Quest. 6. And what is a babe in Christ?
Ans. Babes in Christ are such, as have received but in weak measure the
graces of Gods spirit: and as yet be dull of hearing, weak in understanding,
and inexpert in the word of righteousness. Heb. 5.12.14.

Quest. 7. Most men that seem to come to Christ and to favor his Gospel, are
but weak: how grow they up to be strong men in Christ?
Ans. By attending his holy ordinance in the ministry of his word and
sacraments. Ephe. 4.12.

Quest. 8. How must these babes be fed?
Ans. Not with strong meat, but with milk, that is, they must be instructed
in the first principles of the word: which we call our Catechism. Heb. 5.12.
and 6.1. and 4.5. 1. Pet. 2.1. Psalm. 119.9.10.

Quest. 9. What is Catechizing?
Ans. Catechizing, is a form of instruction, wherein the same matter is often
* repeated that the weak may the better conceive it, and remember it.* Deuteronomy.
6.5.6. Es. 28.9.10.

Quest. 10. Is this Catechizing so needful, and of what antiquity is it?
Ans. First, It is commanded of God. Deuteronomy. 6.6. Secondly, it was practiced
publicly in the Church of the Jews. Thirdly, Abraham was commended for it.
Genesis 18.19. for having 300. in his house they were (as it is written, Genesis
14.14.) instructed or Catechized in holy religion. 1. Eunice ^. Lois.
Fourthly, so in all the ages following even till Christ. 2. Tim. 1.5. 2. Tim.
3.15. 2. Ioh. 4. Fifthly, 3. Lady. Paul first catechized the Corinths.
this form of teaching the Apostles continued and commended in their practice:
1. Cor. 3.1.2.3 so Paul the Corinths: so in like manner the Hebrews. Heb.
5.11.12. it is very plain they had been well catechized, and albeit they had
suffered much for Christ, Heb. 10.32.33. yet now they were become very dull and
have need to be well Catechized again. Sixthly, so was Theophilus first
instructed Luke 1.4. as appears in the original. Seauenthly, the Church
which followed immediately the Apostles, continued the same methood and form
of doctrine: for they had special men appointed to Catechize all Nouices and
all Conuerts: as that learned Origin was appointed in Alexandria by Demetrius
Bishop there. Again it seems they kept a true Register of their Catechized in
their Churches: For Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 7. and 3. names three of them in one
Chapter: for, speaking of their martyrdom, he says, 1. Heraclides.
that Heraclides was but once Catechized, or entered in his Catechism, when he
was martyred. And Heron being well Catechized, 2. Heron.
he was but newly baptized when he was martyred. 3. Rhais
And Rhais was but in her Catechism, when she was baptized in the fire.

And thus we see how in elder ages the babes in Christ were carefully taught
the first grounds of Religion: and so being well grounded they were admitted by
confirmation Heb. 6.3.4.5.
and laying on of hands to the Lords Supper: and to communicate with the Church
in other exercises of Religion. Romans 14.1. Tertul. de praescriptione Hereti,
ante sunt perfecti cathechumenoi qua^ edocti.
The breach of this order Turtulian cries out against it: saying, that with the
Heriticks there was no care of this distinction: They are men grown, or
perfect men: with you (says he) before they be any thing grounded in the
Catechism. I would this were no just complaint against us and our time. The
ages following kept the same course, see August. Tom. 4. de catechiz. rudibus.
To. 6. sermon. ad catech. Cyrils Catechism.

Quest. 11. But our people cannot abide to be Catechized publicly: nor know
not how to Catechize their families privately.
Ans. The most part are enemies to their own salvation: they have these and
the like carnal objections, and excuses. 1. Object. They are ashamed so to be
taught. Answ. They ought more to be ashamed of their ignorance. 2. Ob. They
have no time to Catechize their families. Ans. God will not so be mocked:
first, he has commanded his Sabbath for it, and more also the evening,
morning, and the noone time of the day. Deuteronomy. 6.6. 3. Ob. This strict order
would scare away all servants. Ans. Such servants are better lost then found.
4. Ob. They are too young as yet, they will to morrow. Ans. If thou will not
hear this day, it may be thou shall not the next day, Heb. 3.15.16. Pro. 1.5.
Ob. They are too old. Ans. The blind doting sinner is still accursed albeit an
hundred years old. Esa. 65.20.
6. Ob. Our Fathers prospered without all this Preaching and Catechizing. Ans.
The Pagans and unbelievers best prosper in the world. Psalm. 73.1.3.4. Job.
21.8. And this was the old Idolaters complaint. 7. Ob. Such as have learned the
Catechism are as lewd as they were before. Such as have eyes can see better
then the blind. Servants are not accepted for their good meaning.
Ans. The Servant which knows his Masters will and does it not shall be
beaten with many stripes. 8. Ob. We mean as well as the best. Ans. Such as
have killed the Prophets thought they did God good service. John 16.2. we must
not go by our own good meaning.

Of the well formed Adam, 2. Sunday.
or of man in his first excellency in his creation, when the beautiful Image
of God shined in him.
Question. 1.
WHat is that most cheareth and comfort thine heart, both in life and death?

Answer.

That both in 1. Cor. 6.19.20.
soul and body, whether I live Romans 14.8.
or dye, I am not mine own, but I belong unto my most faithful Lord and
Savior 1 Cor. 3.23.
Jesus Christ, in whom I find a full Esa. 53.2. 1. John. 1.7. 1. Pet. 1.23.
redemption from all power of sin, Satan, Genesis 3.15. Heb. 2.14. Col. 1.13.
death and hell: (all which held me as captive Luke 1 71.
before) That the God of all grace and comfort has of his own free mercy
called me by his Gospel out 2. Th. 2.13.14 1. Pet. 2.9.
of darkness into his marvelous light: and sanctified Ephesians. 1.13. Jude ver.
1.2.
me by his holy spirit to serve him, and does reserve me unto Jesus Christ for
ever, that has wrought this faith in mine heart. John. 6.29.

Quest. 2. How many things must be known to attain this assured consolation
in life and death?
Ans. Four things. First, Adam constitutus.
what the excellency was of the first Adam, whom we may for difference sake,
call the well formed Adam in communion with God and holy Angels. Secondly, how
base and wretched man is by nature, Adam destitutus.

The man without Christ. Ada^ restitutus. The man in Christ.


or of Adam after his fall, whom we may call the deformed Adam, or the man
without Christ, in communion with the Devil and unclean spirits. Thirdly, how
blessed the man is which is restored to grace by faith in Christ: and this man
we may call the reformed Adam. Fourthly, how all the reformed Adams, 1. Pet.
2.9.
or all which have put on Christ: must strive to show forth the virtues of him
that has called them out of darkness into his maruailous light, ever zealous
in good Adamus fidus and gratus. Tit. 2.11.
works.

Quest. 3. Now let me hear what arguments have you, to manifest the great
excellency of the first Adam?
Ans. The holy Ghost in the glory of man's creation, commends his excellency
by this which follows. Genesis 1.26. Psalm. 8. and 92.

Finis primus in intention, vlt. in action.
First, from the day and time of his creation: he was created the sixth day after
the creation of all creatures in heaven and earth: as if the Lord had decreed
to make him Lord of all the visible creatures in heaven and earth, his most
special instrument on the earth to set forth his glory: Wherefore no doubt he
was unto God more dear then all the frame of heaven and earth.

Secondly, from the provident care of God for him before his creation: for the
Lord (as a wise father) purposing to advance this Adam to the seat of the
Empire of all the world: he leaves nothing unprovided before hand, but settes
all things in a most comely frame and order to serve him.

Est profatio patris ad filiu^. Tertul. de resurrectione. These words were not
spoken to the creatures wanting reason, nor to the Angels, least they should be
thought to be partakers of this glory.
Thirdly, from the great consultation of the holy Trinity in his creation: Let
us make man. That creature which was made with such consultation, as no one
celestial body, nor all the goodly things we see in heaven and earth had the
like for their creation. Genesis 1.6.14. must be of great excellency: but man
alone was created with this consultation, therefore was he of great excellency.

Fourthly, from the form of his creation, in our Image. Man was made like none
of the goodliest creatures, but like the Lord himself, not so much in the
glory and beauty of his body (no doubt as beautiful as the Sun. Mat. 17.) as
in his soul and spiritual substance, which God breathed into him: like the
Angels; and yet in the substance of the Soul he did not so much resemble God,
as in the graces, gifts and qualities of the Soul, as wisdom and knowledge,
Col. 3.10. righteousness, holiness, and truth. Ephesians. 4.24. David considering the
excellency that was in this Adam, and that shall be in all the saints after
the resurrection, breaks forth into that holy exclamation. Psalm. 8.4.5. O
what is man!

Fifthly, from the state of his full restoring into his first excellency, after
resurrection. First, for the bodies of the saints shall be exceeding glorious.
Mat. 13.43. Dan. 12.2.3.4 Secondly, likewise the soul adorned with all good
graces. Heb. 2.8. Psalm. 8.4.5. Thirdly, the state immutable never to be
changed. 2. Cor. 5.4. 1. Cor. 15.53. Ephesians. 1.14. Fourthly, brethren with Christ,
and heirs annexed with him in one kingdom and house for ever. John. 14.3.4.
Romans 8.17. John. 15.14. Fifthly, Inspeakable glory. Psalm. 8.4.5. This Erat enim
Adam animalis non spiritualis homo, quales post resurectionem beneficio Christi
euademus. Danaeus Antiq. p. 27. 1. Cor. 15.44. August. lib. 14 de ciui. Dei
cap. 11.
glory (I grant) excels the first, but yet in this glass we may behold the
Image and picture of the first Adam.

Sixthly, from his empire and dominion over all creatures under God: he that
was first ordained of God, the Lord and governor, and chief commander over
all creatures, in the air, on the earth, and in the sea, was of great
excellency and glory. The first Adam was so ordained, and this the Prophet
remembers in like manner. Psalm. 8.6.

Quest. 4. Now show briefly what reasons have you of the creation of man in
the last place, the last day, and what further use have you of this doctrine?
First, I say that he might have all good means of Gods providence to serve
him and see Gods care and love toward him before his creation: hereby our
faith in God concerning his providence has a comfortable confirmation, for his
love and care to them which be reformed in Christ, is the same and not
diminished: he is as careful, loving and as provident now, as then: for he is
not changed. Secondly, that by sight of the creatures, which do attend upon
us, we might in them discern our Creator, the invisible God. Our senses,
look how many they be in number, so many ladders they may be every day, (
Psalm. 19.) for us to clime up to behold the wisdom, greatness and goodness of
the Creator. And so must we daily taste him, and see him in the creatures. Psalm.
34.8. Thirdly, to stop the mouths of all Atheists which blaspheme, saying,
that man is as old as God himself: we see man is not so old as the poorest
beast or worm on earth. Fourthly, least any should imagine, that man created
some of the creatures, or at leastwise to have been of Gods counsel in the
creation of them. Fifthly, to show unto man, and unto all ages, the infinite
wisdom, power and goodness of Almighty God: for if we do well consider
the frame of heaven and earth, and the creatures which are in them: we should
(as it were) think he had spent all his wisdom and power in the creation of
them: The Sun alone how wonderfully is it made? nothing can be hid from the
heat thereof. Psalm. 19.
But behold after the creation of al, he makes man, a work far excelling all
the former works: as the Fathers say: The Cedar of Paradise, the picture of
heaven, the glory of the earth, the governor of the world, and the Lords own
delight. And therefore no Emperor on the earth had such pouision, and such
free use and command over the creatures, as he had.

The second part of the Catechism. Of the second state of man, ^. Sunday.
or of the deformed Adam: the man without Christ: or the state of rebellion,
and unbelief.
Question. 1.
HOw shall we best know the miserable condition of the man without Christ?

Answer.

We may not trust our own wisdom, sense and experience in this argument, for
these may deceive us: we must be herein taught by the most holy truth of God,
revealed in the Scriptures.

Quest. 2. By what special arguments, does God in Scripture set before us the
misery of the deformed Adam, or of that man which has never put on Christ?

Ans. By four special arguments, or most clear and manifest demonstrations.
First, by comparing the arguments of his present misery and wants, with those
of his excellency before specified. Secondly, by a diligent meditation, and
due consideration of the history of man's apostacy. Thirdly, by observation of
two most fearful consequents of that apostacy in all unbelievers in this
life: for all without Christ are shut up in bondage, under the dominion, first
of Satan. Ephesians. 2.1.2.3. secondly, of sin. Romans 5.21. and 6.12. Psalm.
19.18.19.
Fourthly, by the most holy righteous and royal Law of God. Romans 3.20. Romans
7.7.

Quest. 3. Now compare the arguments of the misery of an unbeliever, with
those arguments we heard of the excellency of the first man?
Ans. First, how dear the first man was unto God, it is most clear by all the
former arguments of his exellencie: But now the case is quite altered: for this
second Adam, or man without Christ, is a very stranger, and enemy unto God.
Col. 1.21. the child of wrath. Ephesians. 2.3. and without Christ the child of
everlasting perdicion, he that is in this state is most deformed and most
miserable: every man living without Christ is in this state: therefore every
man living without Christ is most deformed and miserable.

Secondly, Genesis 3.17.
from the deformity and curse which is upon all creatures for the sin of
man, we heard before of Gods great love to the first man, in his providence,
in blessing and preparing the creatures to serve him: Now in this contrary
state of man, all things (without Christ) are accursed and unclean. To every
man under wrath, that is, to all unbelievers: all things are unclean and
accursed. Genesis 3.17. Tit. 1.15.16. Every man without Christ is under wrath:
therefore to every man without Christ all things are unclean and accursed.

Thirdly, from the comparison of that first image of his excellency, with the
second of his misery, for so the holy Ghost teaches us to observe the glory
of the one, and the deformity of the other. First, as touching his bodily
substance, in the first state he was naked, and yet not ashamed. Ge. 2.25. such
was the glory and majesty of that body: Now his deformity is such, that
notwithstanding he be received to grace, and reformed in some measure in
Christ, yet till he be refined in the resurrection, he cannot well think
of, much less look upon his own nakedness without shame, as we see in our
first Parents. Genesis 3.7.
If our bodies in this mortality have not a shadow of that excellent glory of
the first Adam, it is all lost. That body was blessed, void of all griefs:
This body (we know by our common experience) is subject to evils innumerable:
for wanting the guarde and fense of Gods providence, the weakest creatures,
even worms and flies in a moment of time, destroy and consume it: That body
had a wonderful perfection in all senses: This feeble body has many wants and
great weakness in all parts thereof: That body was immortal: this is subject to
death and mortality every hour, and to death eternal if it be not freed from
the second death by the precious death of Jesus Christ. Retentum mentis.
Secondly, for his soul and spiritual substance, where shined most the Image
of God, it has ever since lost all grace and beauty: Some poor light it has
in natural things, and a general sight of God and goodness, serving only to
make him inexcusable. Romans 1.19.20. Here first the bright shining light of
Gods wisdom in the mind is clean put out: and darkness has possessed the
very seat of reason. Ephesians. 5.8. John. 1.5. And that wisdom which the Scripture
calls carnal, earthly, Receptum mentis.
sensual and devilish. 1. Cor. 1.20.21. James. 3.15. By this we cannot
comprehend God. Ioh. 1.5. 1. Cor. 2.14. for this is enemy to God and all
goodness. Romans 8.7. Next, this faculty is become so vain, that in spiritual
things it cannot discern between truth and error, evil and goodness. Ephesians.
4.17. Lastly, this man is apt only by nature to think and conceive in mind
that which is evil. Genesis 6.5. 2. Cor. 3.5. Ierem. 4.22. so that we have by
nature the spawne of all heresy and error. Gal. 5.20.

Secondly, the conscience of the first man was full of true joy, peace, and
consolation. This deformed Adam: 1. Retentum conscienciae.
first has left in him some conscience to check and bridle the rage of his
disordered affections. Romans 2.15. 2. Receptum conscientiae.
But his conscience is unclean and uncomfortable. Tit. 1.15. before it be
purged by the blood of Christ from dead works. Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, Free will is proper only to God, and no creature whatsoever.
the first man had freedom and strength to will and perform that which was
good, holy, and right, yet was he and his will mutable, for God alone is
immutable: This man has a certain liberty of will in all natural, civil,
and moral actions, and in evil things: but no strength to will or desire that
which is good and acceptable unto God, 1. Retentum voluntatis. 2. Receptum
voluntatis.
before grace and faith in Jesus Christ be given him, as is manifest by these
holy Scriptures. Romans 5.6. Phillip. 2.13. 2. Cor. 3.5.

Fourthly, and lastly, the first Adam had a wise heart, a meek spirit, and all
his affections well ordered, and well governed by the light which was in his
mind: This second man has his affections, but so distempered and so
disordered, that he cannot govern them, Receptum affectionum.
but is rather ruled and governed by them, till grace in Christ come to
crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5.24.

The fourth argument of the first man's excellency, The fourth Argument.
was his sovereign dominion, and rule, and power which God gave him over all
creatures: Psalm. 8. But now this second Adam has lost all that dignity, for
the creatures all repine, disdain, and groan to serve him. Romans 8.22. and have
all lost their first grace and beauty. Tit. 1.14.15.

Quest. 4. What is the use of all these arguments, concerning the misery of
this deformed Adam, or man without Christ?
Ans. First, the former meditation serves to humble us, by due consideration of
that glory and beauty we lost, and of the deformity and misery we be come
unto. Secondly, this meditation ought to curb and bridle us, that we never let
lose our hearts to sin against God: for if God spared not the first man for
sin in his excellency, he will not spare us in this misery. Thirdly, this
ought to awake all sinners, seeing they find themselves thus miserable without
Christ, to labor in all holy means to put on Christ, that they may be freed
from this bondage, and recover their former excellency again: specially
seeing that by his Gospel he reaches forth daily his loving hand, calling
such from darkness into his marvelous light.

Quest. 5. The second demonstration of a man's misery in unbelief, or without
Christ, what is it?
Ans. It is the history of man's first rebellion, and apostacy from God,
recorded. Genesis 3.1.2.

Quest. 6. What must we principally note in this story?
Ans. First, a conference or disputation. Secondly, the issue and end of it.

in the conference, first the persons confering and disputing, where consider
two things: First, The tempter and deceiuer Satan. Secondly, the tempted and
deceived Eaue.


Secondly, the conference it self, where consider two things First, the
argument weighty, life and death. 2. the manner. 1. The tempters challenge. 2.
The woman's answer. 3. Satan's reply.



The issue of the conference. First, high transgression and rebellion is
committed. First, they join in league with Satan Gods arch-enimie. Secondly,
they fall into flat rebellion, and breach of Gods Law. Genesis 3.6.
Secondly, great misery ensued The arguments whereof are. First, fear and
trembling within. Secondly, shame and nakedness without.



Quest. 7. This Scripture is very excellent: what special points are we to
observe in this story?
Ans. First, that Satan is an old murderer, as our Lord Christ calls him.
John. 8.44. For that he murdered (as here we see) our first parents in the
beginning. Secondly, how that our first parents, in their first state of
excellency being left of God for that instant (for just causes only known to
himself) and having no strength but their own, they fell by degrees into many
fearful sins, for all their wisdom and graces failed them, when Gods good
spirit left them.

Thirdly, Satan's choice for instruments is to be noted: for like as then he
chose the subtellest of all beasts for that work: So in all ages, for the like
attempts, he desires the best wits, and most apt to deceive. For Magic in
Egypt and Chalde, the Priests and the Astrologers served him well in that
faculty. In Absolons conspiracy, Achitophell served him well for that
practice: John. 13.27.
for heresy and schism none more fit to seduce men from Gods truth, as false
Teachers, false Prophets, false Priests. 1. Pet. 3.7. 1. Tim. 2.14.
By such instruments he circumuents many, as the Apostle warns the Corinths.
Fourthly, Satanicall temptations are very Serpentine smooth, Faemina vas
infirmius a Deo sibi permissa, a marito absente deserta, allisu Sathanae fracta.
and very delightful in the beginning, but most dangerous, deadly, and bitter
in the ending. Fifthly, the woman first tempted, and first seduced; Satan
begins his battery where the wall is weakest, he knew that even then the woman
was the weaker vessel.

Quest. 8. How is it that she fears not the Serpent: and doubts nothing to
have such conference with him? 1. Doubt.

Ans. She had no fear then, for she had no sin: or for that then the
Serpent was not so terrible in form: and for that then there was no such
enmity between them, and some affirm that then man and the Serpent were most
familiar together.

Quest. 9. 2. Doubt.
But it may be doubted how the Serpent spoke? Antiq. Iud. c. 3 De duplici
serpentis prudentia, vide Epiph. lib. 1. de haeris. tomo. 3. haeris. 37.

Ans. Satan spoke in the Serpent, for as the old Testament speaks only of
the instrument: so the new Testament (the best expounder of the old) often
teaches us, that Satan was the principal agent in that practice. John. 8.44.
Satan was the first liar and murderer from the beginning. Ergo Satan was
that serpent, or in that Serpent: and for this cause he has four names. Reave.
20.2. the Dragon, that old Serpent, the Devil, and Satan. The first liar and
murderer that was the Serpent, or in the serpent: The Devil was first liar and
murderer: ergo the Devil was the Serpent, or in the Serpent. So did he speak
in the Pithoneste. Acts. 16.17. and in many wizards and witches.

3. Doubt.
Quest. 10 Wherefore would not Satan speak himself without an instrument?
Ans. Satan could not then so easily fasten any motion upon the heart of man
by suggestion, as now he can in the children of disobedience. Ephe. 2.2. and
that invisible spirit could not have any external and real conference with
them without an external and real instrument. And thus far of doubts.

Sixthly, we must note in this conference the place, as well as the time of the
temptation: even in Paradise. If the Serpent could then and there play such
parts; what may he not do now to our utter ruin and destruction, if Gods
grace do not both prevent and preserve us. Bernard says truly, quum tam
horribile praecepitium in Paradyso accidisse legaemus, quid nos facturi sumus
in sterquilinio? If such an overthrow happen in the Paradise, what horrible
fall may come upon us on the dunghill.

Seauenthly, Satan intending Gods dishonor, and man's utter confusion, So did
he by Balaam the wizard, make a breach between God and his people. Number. 25.9.
Revel. 2.14. Jude. 11.
to effect both, he proceeds on this wise, laying as it were these grounds: No
sin, no shame: No unbelief, no doubting of Gods holy truth. Wherefore he
lays here all his engines, and all his faculty by subtle questions, to cause
the woman first to doubt of Gods blessed truth and holy will revealed unto
them. He labors ever to keep out the word from the heart. Luke. 8. Mark. 4.
Mat. 13. and to steal it from us, when we have it. Mat. 4.3. Act. 13.8. 2.
Cor. 4.4. In this question he flatly crosses Gods word, for the written word
is, Thou shall freely eat of every tree one excepted: and he says ye shall
not eat of every tree: intending sophistically to abuse the holy Scripture, as
Mat. 4. he does Psalm. 91. omitting (as there) the part which makes against him
Genesis 2. ve. 17. and mentioning that part only which may seem to make for him.

Eighthly, but as weak Christians are ready to lay open their ears to the
hissing of every Serpent, Three sins here follow in order. 1. (...) 2. (...).
3. (...).
and so they are seduced, and by degrees fall from one error to an other, we
break off conference and dispute not in humanity with such as deny maxims,
manifest and known grounded truths: So learn here by this example, never to
suffer Satan to suggest within thee, or dispute without thee against the
manifest written known truth of God: so Christ speedily cuts him off. Mat.
4.10. and 1. Pet. 5.9. for want whereof Euah fell into error, blindness, and
unbelief.

Quest. 11. Before we proceed for our further instruction in this story: let
me hear what you can say for the signification and use of these two special
trees, the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil?
Ans. First, I find Gods holy spirit to mention thrice the one, and twice the
other. First, of the tree of life he speaks Genesis 2.9. and Genesis 3.22. and ver.
24. Secondly, of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Genesis 2.9. and again
verse, 16.17.

Secondly, for their place in the garden, it was not obscure, but in the best
part, even in the midst of the Garden, for so it is written, the tree of life
in the midst of the Garden Ge. 2.9. and the tree of knowledge of good and
evil not far from it as appears in this conference. Genesis 3.3. The fruit of
the tree which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said ye shall not eat
of it, neither shall ye touch it least ye die It is like then they were both
most fair and most beautiful.

Thirdly, Nomina arborum imposita sunt diuinitus, e^ indicta homin^, vt eo
religiosius. de euentu vtramque partem cogitaret.
God gave these trees special names, that men might the more religiously
consider of the use and end of both.

Fourthly, now for the use of these trees: First, I answer for the tree of
life: The first use of it was, to lift up their eyes unto the Lord God the
author of their life: and to put them in mind continually that by him, and
for him alone, they live, move and have their being. Secondly, it is certain
that it was unto our first parents a lively Sacrament of their immortality
through Jesus Christ, if they had continued in obedience. The fruits thereof
did well represent the benefits of Christ. Reave. 2.7. We may not imagine that
this tree had any such virtue in it self, to give immortality unto others,
which it could not give it self, but by gods special ordinance it was unto
them a lively seal of immortality through Christ during their obedience. Like
as the rainbow was ordained of God to signify and seal that after the flood
which it did not before: and as we see the superscription of the Prince
causes that part of the mettle which is stamped and coined to differ in use
and value from that which is not coined.

Fifthly, here we may learn, if our first parents had need of Signs and
Sacraments to lift up their eyes to the Creator, and to seal the word, how
much more have we? Again, if they then could not preserve life but by the Lord
of life Jesus Christ, where shall we look for life if we turn us to any other
but unto this blessed tree of life Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, for the tree of knowledge of good and evil, to pass by men's
conjectures sufficient it is for us to know, that it was so called, not for any
poison or deadly infection that this tree had in it self more then any other
tree, or more then our Sacramental bread and wine contain any special bane
or poison in them, and yet he that eats these unworthily, eats and drinks
his own judgment. 1. Cor. 11. but metonymically, Effect for the cause.
or by a figure, it was so called, because that who so did eat thereof (God
having made a law to the contrary) should forthwith feel and find the loss
of their excellent liberty, and be possessed with extreme and present misery.

Seauenthly, when the woman gave the Serpent some intertainement, in
misleadging Gods holy Law, ye shall not touch it: Fight against all doubts of
Gods word. Ephesians. 4.14. Col. 2.2.
and in doubting of the truth thereof: least ye dye: for to doubt, is to waver
concerning Gods truth, neither to be with it, nor against it. Then began he to
be more bold and vehement: and following her doubtful conclusion, makes it
more doubtful: saying, ye shall not so dye, or so Thus speaks he in all
unbelievers against the word.
certainly dye, and hereunto he adds a special confirmation full of
sophistry and deceit. For his confirmation and proof stands of notable
blasphemies and lies, you need not so doubt to eat of the forbidden tree:
First, 1. Blasphemy.
for that God in this prohibition does know this fact would turn to your great
good. Secondly, for that it is very manifest, 2. blaphemie and lie.
that the feeding on this tree shall cause you to abound in great knowledge of
deep mysteries. Thirdly, 3. Blasphemy.
for that by this tree ye shall have such a change of nature that ye shall
after some sort be Deified, equal to God, or to his glorious Angels: and so
he tempted Christ. Mat. 4. for the wings of vain glory, makes many follow
after Satan, and fly aloft to their utter ruin and perdition.

Eighthly, we may here observe Satan's boldness, to utter many lies and
blasphemies one after an other, when he sees us to let go our fast Diabolus
non est repent pessimus.
hold and l^ne of Gods holy truth, and not to tremble when we hear his name
or truth blasphemed: Wherefore let us keep fast the word of truth in an honest
and a good heart, for if we forsake it, God will forsake us, and give us over
to believe lies and blasphemies, as here we see. 2. Th. 2.9.10.

Ninthly, where as Satan does promise her that by eating the forbidden fruit
their eyes should be opened, he deceiues with a phrase or sentence full of
ambiguitie: as may appear by these special differences following. For the
eyes of the body are opened: First, when the blind are cured. John. 9.
Secondly, when a man sees that he could not see before, albeit he was not
blind: as Balaam, and Gehezi, Number. 22.31. 2. Kings. 6.17. Genesis 16.21. 2. King.
6.19.
and Agar the Angels of God. Thirdly, when men see plainly, that which they
saw before darkely: as Elishas enemies coming to Samaria and the two disciples
going to Emaus. Secondly, the eyes of the mind are opened: First by
instruction. Act. 26.18. Secondly, by adversity. Job 33.16. Psalm. 119. Luke.
15. Thirdly, by the biting, griping, and tormenting of the conscience for
sin: and thus were Adams eyes opened. And this the devil intends what so
ever he pretends.

Tenthly, To conclude corcerning this conference. First, here remember this
instruction to hold fast the word of truth, and hide it in thine heart. Prou.
2.1.2.3. So soon as a man begins to let go his hold, and lightly to regard
it, or to doubt of it, he begins to shake off the true fear of God. It is our
faith which knitteth us unto God, and unbelief seuereth us from him. Secondly;
next remember, it is a bad sign of a cold heart, emptied of Gods spirit, if we
can hear the holy name of God, or his blessed word blasphemed without grief
and trembling.

Verse. 6.
Quest 12. Thus far of the conference. Now let me hear of the fact, and
event which followed?

Ans. First, actual rebellion followed after the former inward and secret
sins of the mind and heart, as we see. Genesis 3.6. The signs and the
forerunners of the first and second death immediately possessed them.
Secondly, This actual rebellion and apostacy from God brought present
misery upon their souls and bodies. ver. 7. Romans 5.12. By sin came death.

Quest. 13 First, as touching the rebellion and fact here recorded what learn
we thereby?
Ans. First, we may note the three special baytes, whereby Satan hooketh and
deceives all the world. Saint John also notes them, and numbreth them, First,
the Lust of the flesh, for our flesh boyleth (before it be crucified) as a pot
on fire full of lusts. Romans 13.14. Gal. 5.17.24. she says in her heart, this
forbidden fruit it was good for meat, that is, good for the belly: Secondly,
The Lust of the All evil enters into us by the senses and thoughts. The evil
eye is the Devils porter which lets in the beasts of hell to destroy the Soul.
eyes, she says in her heart, it is fair and pleasant to the eyes: Thirdly,
The pride of life: she says finally, in heart, that it was a tree to be
desired to get knowledge: And so to come to honor, and great glory. The
premises embraced, the conclusion must be practiced, say the Lord what he
will to the contrary.

Secondly, Peccatu^ completum.

Consider well. First, the person offended. Secondly, the persons offending.

Thirdly, the time when. Fourthly, the place where. Fifthly, the manner how.

A conspiracy with Satan the arch-enemie of God.


how after inward conspiracy and subscription of heart to Satan's lies and
blasphemies, she comes to the practice of open rebellion and manifest treason
against God. For this fact was not a light The greatest sin pardonable that
ever was committed against God.
offense (as some have deemed) as shall appear by the consequents: for it has
brought the whole frame of heaven and earth out of frame, and an heavy curse
upon our first Parents and all their posterity. Romans 5.12.

Thirdly, how she became Satan's instrument to deceive the man: first, by the
same deceitful persuasions wherewith Satan seduced her: secondly, by example
she preuailes with him, so that both fell most dangerously into the same form
of transgression and condemnation, although he thought himself so dear unto
God, that the Lord would not at this time draw out against him any sword of
justice.

Quest. 14. Now I desire to have some short view of all their sins, which
apertaine to this apostacy or contumacie as the Apostle speaks. Romans 5.
Ans. The first sin is unbelief: she begins in the first entrance into the
conference, to doubt of the truth of Gods holy word ver. 2.

Secondly, to 2. to continue a conference with Satan disputing against the
known truth, and against our consciences.
continue conference with the arch-enemie of God, blaspheming the Lord, and
oppugning his holy truth.

Thirdly, 3. Curiosity.
Curiosity, they seek after strange knowledge, not contented with Gods holy
word. ver. 5.

Fourthly, 4. Pride.
Pride, they desired greater glory, and to have some greater excellency, or to
be like the Lord himself in glory. ver. 5.

Fifthly, 5. Co^tumacie and manifest rebellion against knowledge and conscience.
manifest Contumacie, they proceed to the breach of his Law, against their
knowledge and conscience. ver. 6.

Sixthly, they 6. To prefer Satan or to believe lies and reject ye truth.
prefer Satan and his lies, before God and his holy truth. ve. 6.

Seventhly, they are 7. unthankfulness.
unthankful unto God for the manifold and inspeakable pledges of his favor
and love toward them.

Eighthly, they sin 8. Presumption.
presumptuously: When any child of God falls into any foul sin against God,
against his knowledge and conscience (as David into adultry, he falls into
many sins together.
presuming to be so highly in Gods favor, that he would not so afflict them
for their transgression.

Ninthly, and lastly, after a full resolution, in great presumption they
proceed to the 9. The practice of the treason in committing the outward act.
practice of this high treason against God, and did eat, against Gods manifest
charge of the forbidden fruit, and so murdered themselves and their
posterity.

Quest. 15. Now tell me what were the consequents of this Verse. 7.
rebellion or contumacie (as the Apostle speaks) of our first Parents?
Ans. They beecame forthwith the children of wrath, and of death; By sin they
became subject to all the evils of this life, and the everlasting curse of God
after death. So the Law speaks. Genesis Chap. 2.17. So the Apostle speaks.
Romans 5.12. So the event speaks by sundry effects as after shall appear.

Quest. 16. What is death?
Genesis 5. ver. 7.8.
Ans. A separation from the comfortable presence, grace, love, and favor of
God, both in this life, and life to come, a state contrary in all respects to
that first state of his excellency.

Quest. 17. How many kinds of death are mentioned in Scripture?
3. kind evil.
Ans. Four: first, death in sin, the forerunner and messenger of the second
death: Romans 6.2. Ephe. 2.1. the state of all unregenerate: Secondly, death unto
sin, Romans 6.2. the state of the regenerate: Thirdly, the natural death of
the body, called a dissolution. 2 Timothy 4.6. Fourthly, death eternal, or the
second death. 2. These. 1.9. Revel. 20.6.

Gen 3.8.9.10. etc.
Quest. 18. And were our first parents, after their transgression, subject to
these three kinds of death?

Ans. Yea, first they beecame dead in sin, as appears from the 7. verse, to
the 19. by the effects of sin in them, their nakedness, their shame, their
deformity, their fear and trembling, their hiding of themselves, their
covering of sin with all their might, utterly ignorant, how to please God, all
which are marks of an eulll conscience, or of a man dead in sin.

Secondly, for the natural death or dissolution in the first death, the decree
is here manifested and recorded which was never yet repeated ver. 19. Heb. 9.28.

Thirdly, they came also by sin under the heavy curse of God for the second
death, against the which the Gospel concerning their mediator and redeemer
Jesus Christ is preached unto them. Genesis 3.15. and Gal. 3.8.

Quest. 19. How does the Lord preach the Gospel and offer the means of
reconsiliation and repentance unto our first Parents.
Ans. First, the Lord to awake them, gave them some visible sign of his
presence. verse. 8. Secondly, but when his presence did but amaze them, he
spoke distinctly, and called them in a special manner to accounts. ver. 9.
Thirdly, he ripped up their hearts, and set their sins in order before them.
Note the great goodness and patience of God in the conversion of sinners.
verse. 11. Psalm. 50. to drive them to the full confession of them: by two
questions or arguments, as thus: first, who told thee of this nakedness? where
there was none to tell thee, or cause thee to sin but thy self. Secondly, I
see by thy trembling thou have broken my Law, for where there is no feeling of
sin, there is no contrition, no confession, no remission.

Quest. 20. Where are now all the gifts of nature and free will.
How forward finds the Lord our first Parents to repent them of their
apostacy?
Ans. Adam had no strength at all to reclaim himself, nor to attend Gods
voice, when God began to reclaim him to repentance as appears by these
arguments.

First, like a man in a fever cries only of his heat: so all his thoughts run
upon his nakedness and shame, Genesis 3. ver. 10.
utterly vnmindeful of Gods free mercy, that as yet has kept him from hell
and everlasting perdicion.

Secondly, he seeks by all means to cover and lessen his sin: and regards
not how injurious he is to God and man: Faemina. Verse. 12. Contrary before.
Genesis 2.23.
first to the woman: This woman, that is, this foolish vain woman is cause of
my sin: secondly, he says God gave her, and sent her to him as the cause of
his ruin and destruction.

Verse. 12. Note these degrees in an extorted and involuntary confession.
Thirdly, he comes to an extorted and confused confession. I did eat, that is,
I have eaten indeed, but as being seduced, I wot not well how, nor of what
tree. So the woman hid her sin in like manner. And thus do all the sons of
Adam when God in mercy sends them means of repentance: 1. Non feci.
first, they deny stoutly that they have sinned: 2. Feci quide^, sed been feci.
secondly, they ad impudently being urged, I have done so indeed, and have I
not well done? 3. Si male non multum male.
thirdly, if their fact be convinced to be a sin: they answer, if it be
sin, it is not so heinous, nor so great a sin: 4 Non mala intention.
fourthly, and if yet they be further urged as touching the greatness of
their sin: they say their purpose and intention was not so evil: 5. Aliena
suatione.
fifthly, and lastly, if their intention and purpose be manifested: they
confess they have sinned, but being lured, persuaded, and occasioned by
others, but when a man seeks sufferage by excuse, he misseth his pardon.

Quest. 21. And how did the Lord proceed to work in them a true faith, and
unfeigned repentance?
Gal. 3.
Ans. By preaching Christ and his Gospel unto them, that is, by preaching
their everlasting freedom and deliverance, by the mediator Jesus Christ, the
true seed of the woman, which is here promised should bruise the serpents head.
For as the woman alone was the first organ of the Devil to bring in sin to
Adam and her own everlasting perdition, with all their posterity: so the
woman without the means of man became the organ of the holy Ghost to save her
self and the man, with all their posterity. Where we may note how true
repentance is an effect of the spirit proceeding from faith and the Gospel.
First, the Gospel of Christ is manifested to the sinner, then some general
faith and grace to receive it is wrought in the heart by the holy Ghost: then
follows a true Mat. 5.2.3.4.5.6. Psalm. 31.5.
humiliation, Psalm. 51.
contrition, and confession, and so the pardon of sin is sealed Ephesians. 1.14.
by the spirit of adoption.

Quest. 22. And how did the Lord proceed with our first Parents, after their
repentance and true humiliation before him?
Ans. He tells them that now having escaped the second death, they must for
their further humiliation bear and suffer many temporal chasticements in this
life, because of the great pride and corruption, which is now by this rebellion
and fall settled in them. The woman should have many sorrows, but specially in
the concepion, bearing, birth and education of children. The man many griefs
and afflictions in this life, and both in his ordinary calling, and in the end
be turned to dust, unto the day of the resurrection.

Quest. 23. What use learn we here to make of our afflictions?
Ans. First, in them and by them to be truly humbled, assuring our selves,
they be good for us, and proceed from our fathers love. Secondly, ever to
acknowledge that when we be afflicted, it is Gods inspeakable goodness, that
they be temporal here, and not according to our deserts eternal in hell. The
afflictions of this life to the Godly are but gentle crosses: but curses to the
wicked. Thirdly, In all thine afflictions, remember thou art but, as it were, a
little galled in the heel, but Satan bruised in his head, and that the God of
peace will not leave us till he beat him under our feet. Romans 16.
Fourthly, in the view and consideration of the frame of heaven and earth, to
remember how sin is the cause of all confusion and evil on earth, and the
cause that heaven and earth have lost their first glory and beauty.

Quest. 24. What means the Lord by casting them forth, out of that Paradise,
fensing the place with Angels and a fiery sword?
An. He means not yt if they could find the tree of life, the fruit of it
might restore them to their former state, for no Symbol can or could ever
confer any such gear: but the Lord knowing how prone we be by nature to
hypocrisy and superstition, to seek unto the creatures, and to forget the
creator: he wills him hence forth to depend upon his word and providence and
to live by faith in the Son of God: not to trust any lying spirits any more,
but to wait only on the living God, and for this see more in master Perkins
on the Creed. page 83. to 94.

The third way to know the misery of man without Christ: by two special
consequents of that apostacy, the dominion of Satan and sin in this present
world.
Question. 25.
THus far shall suffice concerning this history: now let us hear what may be
said concerning the principal consequents and effects of that apostacy?

Answer.

They are two which we are specially to consider: First, the dominion of
Satan. Ephe. 2. Chap. 2. the dominion of sin. Romans 5. and both these are
called Romans 12.32. the state of unbelief.

Quest. 26. Tell me first what special arguments, can you ground upon the 2.
Chapter to the Ephesians to demonstrate the misery of man without Christ?
Ans. The greatest part of this Chapter, tends principally to that end: one
special conclusion touching this matter we have in hand, which may be hence
gathered is this: Satan and all wicked spirits, our deadly enemies, are of
great strength and power to hurt us, Verse. 1.
working effectually by suggestion, as a blasting contagious spirit or wind,
Verse.
in all the deformed and blind Adams of this world: having all Ephe.
2.1.2.3.4.5.

If here then we would know, what the deformed Adam, or what the misery of
man without Christ is: We have the What the deformed Adam is, or the man
without Christ.
he is a man dead in sins and trespasses, walking according to the course of
this world after Satan, which spiritually, and inuisibly works in him all
rebellion and disobedience to the holy revealed will of God: causing him to
dwell and delight in the lusts of the

Quest. 27. I pray you let us hear some thing of Satan's power to hurt us,
without Christ: for that some fear him too much, and some nothing at all?
Ans. The power of Satan and wicked spirits against us may be known, and is
manifested unto us in the Scripture by three special arguments: first, by
their names: secondly, by their great knowledge and long experience in this
world: thirdly, by their evil art and works, which they have wrought in all
ages.

First, the wicked spirits which fight against us, and which have all
unbelievers in bondage, are called by sundry significant names for our
instruction in the old and new Testament.

In the old Testament they are called by these names: first, the 2. Cor. 11.3.
Serpent, because by the Serpent, Satan first deceived man: Secondly, the
wicked spirits are called Shegnir in Leu 17.7.
Goats and Sheg. in Deu. 32.17.
Cowes, because they did appear unto witches and Idolaters in this form:
thirdly, the name Job. 1 6. Zach. 3.2 3.
Satan which signifies a deadly enemy: fourthly, they be called lying 1.
King 22.22. Ioh. 8.43.
Spirits: because they teach lies, and fill men with error: fifthly, spirits of
Hos. 4.12.
fornication, of covetousness, of jealousy, of giddiness, of uncleanness,
Es. 19.14.
because these be their works in unbelievers.

Tibi nomina mill mill nocendi arts. Luke. 11.21. Ioh. 14.30.16.11. Heb.
2.14.
In the New Testament ye have these names: First, That Tempter, Mat. 4.
Secondly, That evil one. Mat. 13.16. Thirdly, That enemy. Mat. 13. ver. 17.
because he is a special tempter, the Father of all evil, and our
arch-enemie. Fourthly, that strong man armed: beecasue he keeps such
possession of unbelievers. Fifthly, The Prince of this world, and of death:
because the greatest part of this world is in a spiritual bondage (as it were)
captives unto Satan, and by him unto death eternal, as he is said to have his
throne among unbelievers. Revel. 2.12. Sixthly, The old Dragon, Revel. 12.9.
because Satan and all his wicked spirits, have many years experience to
seduce and to hurt Gods people. Seauenthly, Beliall. 2. Cor. 6.15. for that as
some say, he is the author of confusion, as Christ is of order.

These names are not given to one evil spirit, as the chief Lord and
commander of all the rest; but the Scripture speaks of these invisible
spirits after this manner to teach us: first, that all wicked spirits, do
conspire and agree (as it were) under one government, kingdom and cursed
league to dishonor God, and to destroy men. Secondly, for that they desire to
tyranize over the souls and bodies of men even in earth. Lastly, it is
manifest that these names, Principalities, Ephe. 6 12.
Dominions, Powers and Thrones are come to all Devils, without exceptions.

Secondly, what knowledge our spiritual enemies have, the Scripture best
teaches us: for the Scripture testifies of their long experience, deep
knowledge, and great strength to hurt us. First, their experience is of five
thousand years and above. Secondly, By their long experience and quick sight,
they are seen in the qualities, and causes of most natural things in this
present world. Thirdly, they can soon discover (by reason of their agilitie
and swiftness) things which are far distant. Fourthly, They are well seen in
the history and books of holy Scripture. Mat. 4.6. Fifthly, and lastly, they
are often called to and sent of God, for the execution of his justice, whereby
they are able to speak other-whiles the truth of future events, as the Devil
did to the witch of Endor of Saul's death. 1. Sam. 28.19.

Thirdly, for Satan's works: he and all wicked spirits are marvelous expert
to hurt any of the visible creatures in the air, in the water, and on the
earth, and to work great wonders, where and when the Lord seals them his
commission. There strength appears in Egypt in the grievous and great plagues,
wherewith the Lord smote Egypt. Psalm. 79.49. There strength appears in that
strange affliction of Gods holy servant Job, by open violence of tempest
destroying his children, by secret suggestions in thieves and robbers spoiling
his cattle and goods, and close practices of strong poison, infecting his body
with incurable botches and boyles. Job. Chap. 1. and 2. Lastly, the persecution
of the Church of God by Tirants, by Heretics, Witches and Wizards, has ever
been by the secret practices of wicked spirits working in the Children of
rebellion. Es. 8.19.20. Leu. 20.6. 1. King. 22.22.
Confer these Scriptures. 2. The. 2.9.10.11.12. Revel. 2.10. Deuteronomy. 18.10.11.
Leave. 20.27. Ephesians. 2.2.3.

Quest. 28. Now let us hear the second point noted in the Answer of the 26.
Question, namely, that Satan works in all that are without Christ, and how
that is?
Ans. We can easily prove that Satan works in the children of rebellion,
and having received the spirit of grace and of judgment soon discern where
he works, but very hard is it for us to know in what form and manner wicked
Spirits so infect all unbelievers.

The holy Ghost assures us, he can occupy and work in them upon the
principal parts and faculties, of the Soul: and first for the heart the seat
of our affections. The Devil put this in Judas heart to betray his Master
Jesus Christ. Ioh. 13.2. 1. heart.
The Devil comes to the hearers of the word which are likened to the high
way, and takes away the word immediately out of their hearts. Luke. 8.12. Mar.
4.15. The Devil filled Ananias and Saphiras heart with hypocrisy. Asts. 5.3.
2. mind.
Secondly, for the mind and reason, this part also is ready to hear and
entertain all evil motions of wicked spirits, for they are called spirits of
error, because they do fill men's minds with error. 1. Kings. 22. and hold
the minds of men, as it were, fast bound, that they may not admit the gracious
light of God shining upon them. 2. Cor. 4 4.

Where Satan dwells, signs of secret working.
To know then where Satan dwells. The Scriptures sets before us these
special arguments following: First, a heart filled with unbelief, Act. 5.3.
Secondly, The mind full of gross ignorance in the very grounds of Salvation.
2. Cor. 44. Heb. 5.12. Thirdly, To walk in darkness when men pretend
knowledge. 1. John. 1.5.6.7. Fourthly, to dwell in polution and uncleanness of
body and mind argue Satan's presence and effectual working. Mat. 12.44.45.
Fifthly, To rest contented with a bare historical knowledge of the Gospel.
Luke 8.12. Sixthly, to persecute the word with blasphemies. Mat. 12.30. with
violence. John. 8.44. and with secret and subtle practices. Act. 13.10.
Seauenthly, to be so choked with cares and pleasures, as that the word cannot
be fastened on the heart. Luke. 8.14. Eighthly, long contempt of the means of
Salvation argues Satan's effectual working. 2. Tim. 2.25.26.

Next, for the manner of Satan's working in men. As the holy Ghost works
inuisibly and spiritually, neither seen nor heard, but felt inwardly in some
measure in all true believers, better known by the fruits, then by any sense:
much like the wind blowing where it lists. John. 3. even so the operation of
wicked spirits in unbelievers is by an invisible and secret breathing and
suggestion, when as men are persuaded they are carried away with the very
imaginations and motions of their own hearts, and as the light of the Sun
peirceth the clouds, water and air, so does the Devils operation the bodies of
men.

Quest. 29. I feel often many strong motions within me, which cause me to
tremble, and I know not whence they come, for I strive against them and I fear
even to name them.
Ans. All Gods people are so troubled in like manner, much or little. These
motions and thoughts proceed from a special agent because: first, being so
evil they proceed not from our souls, nor from our corruption, for that we
do not delight in them at all, but rather suffer them do any thing to trouble
us: secondly, Gods spirit is no cause of them, for that they be so evil:
thirdly, such strange and sudden motions must come into us by the secret
working of Satan. Let us then rejoice that we do not intertaine them but pray
and strive ever against them.

Quest. 30. Now proceed to that you said in the third place. Question. 26.
that all men (without exception) are bound over in this spiritual bondage unto
Satan before that Christ lose them.
Ans. True, it is so. And such a bondage and servitude this is, that these
miserable captives think not their state to be a bondage but a freedom: and
so addicted be such to follow Satan, that much calling and crying cannot
reclaim their dead hearts, Luke. 11.21.
till Christ himself vouchsafe to bind the strong man, and to cast him forth:
and to open, soften, and quicken the dead hearts of men, which lie a sleep in
this extreme misery and bondage. All under the curse are under Romans
5.12.11.32. Heb. 2.14.15. All without Christ are under the curse. Gal. 3.10.
therefore all without Christ are under the Prince of death. All unclean people
are in league and communion Mat. 12.13. All without Christ are unclean. Job.
14.4. and 15.14.15. therefore all without Christ are in communion with unclean
spirits.

Quest. 31. Now to conclude this point, I pray you tell us wherefore does the
Lord suffer Satan thus to tyrannize and rage in this world?
Ans. The Lord permits evil spirits in this world. First, for the
manifestation of his great justice and wrath upon the vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction, Romans 9.
for these God plagues many ways in this life by wicked spirits. Exodus 7.8.9.
Chapters. Secondly, They are sent often to chasten and to humble Gods Children
for the manifestation of his love and mercy upon the vessels of glory whom he
vouchsafes to redeem from this bondage by his Son Jesus Christ, who sets
them free to praise his mercy for ever. John. 3.16. 1. John. 3.8. John.
8.32.34. 2. Cor. 12.4.5. Thirdly, that we might ever consider and look well to
our standing in this world, for that we be in warfare and in pilgrimage: 1.
Cor. 10 13.
if we intend therefore to make our abiding here, God will stir up the
instruments of his wrath to awaken us, let us then stand fast and be watchful.
Ephesians. 6.12.13.

Quest. 32. Now let us hear what is the second great and general evil which
is common to all the posterity of Adam, before they be redeemed by grace in
Jesus Christ?
Ans. The second evil which followed the apostacy of Adam, and has possessed
all his progeny, is original sin, and the corruption of nature, The
regiment of sin.
whereby all men living are come under the dominion of sin, and that saying of
the Apostle, Romans 5.21. Sin has reigned unto death. is true, of all the
sons and daughters of Adam, before grace reign in them by righteousness
unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. That our natural corruption
is hereditarie and has infected all Adams progeny, is very evident by this
Scripture. Like as al debt binds the debtour to inprisonment where there is no
payment to the creditor, so sin binds us unto death as to a prison when there
is no satisfaction for sin.
Romans 5.12.13.14. Wherefore as by one man Sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, and so death went over all men, by him in whom all men have
sinned. For unto the time of the Law, was sin in the world, but sin is not
imputed while there is no law. But death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over
them also that sinned not, after the like manner of the transgression of Adam,
which was the figure of him that was to come.

In these verses and the rest of the Chapter, observe well these comparisons.
First, by Adam came sin: By Christ comes righteousness. Secondly, by sin
came death: by righteousness comes life. Thirdly, Adams sin went over all:
Christ's righteousness is imputed to all believers. Fourthly, Death reigns over
all Adams Sons, before grace: life is granted freely to all the adopted
Sons of God.

Quest. 33. First, I pray you tell me, what names gives the Scripture to this
natural corruption, which the learned divines call original sin?
Ans. First, it is called that Sin. Romans 5.12. that is the hereditarie evil.
Secondly, That Sin that dwells in us. Romans 7.17. for that no sin so
continues in the believer, as this does to the day of death: therefore it is
called. Heb. 12.1. that Sin that hangs so fast on. Thirdly, The Law of the
members, because it has all members and parts of our body at command (before
grace) to obey it, and to be ruled by it as by a Law. Romans 7.23. Fourthly, it
is called often concupiscence or lust. Romans 7.7. James. 1.14.15. because it is
the mother of all unclean motions and lusts in us. Fifthly, The old man. Romans
6.6. so he calls the whole mass of our corruption. Sixthly, the flesh, because
this rebellion so much appears in the outward parts. Gal. 5.17. Ephesians. 2.3.

Quest. 34. Many there are which deny that there is such a dangerous
corruption in our nature: for the Papists say, it has not the very nature of
sin, but is a froth, and has some appearance of sin: The Pelagions say there
came no such sin from Adam by generation or natural propagation, but by
imitation: the Anabaptists say that since Christ's incarnation there was never
any one borne in sin.
Ans. It is very clear by the light of Gods word that there dwells in our
nature, a contagious infection which we have by propagation from our Parents:
These Scriptures yield a pregnant proof which cannot be gainesayd, Moses
says. Genesis 6.3.5. and 8.21. The imaginations of man's heart are evil from his
youth, here the Lord condemns our very nature as evil, assuring us it has a
secret poison in it. David's testimony. Psalm 51.7. Behold I was brought forth
in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Job condemns our
nature as poisoned and infected when he says. Chap. 14.4. and 15.14.15. Who
can bring a clean thing out of filthiness or unclean? and again, What is
man that he should be clean, and he that is borne of a woman that he should be
just? Paul says our very nature is poisoned and accursed, when he says, we
are all by nature the children of wrath. Ep. 2.3. To. 7.18. for I know that in
me, that is in my flesh dwells no good thing. Lastly, this holy Apostle to
the Romans. 5.12 shows plainly how sin came into our nature by
propagation: and 7. Chapter, how it dwells in our nature even in the state of
grace, fighting against Gods Law and holy spirit in the regenerate during this
present life.

Quest. 35. Now describe this sin plainly according to the Scriptures?
Definit.
Ans. Original sin is that natural corruption which is come into the world
by the apostacy of our first parents, derived from them by natural propagation
into all mankind, infecting and poisoning all parts of men, so as before grace
and regeneration he has no strength to move or incline to any good, but to
evil only, and thereby also he is subject to the first and second death,
till he be freed by grace and faith in Jesus Christ.

Quest. 36. The Apostle also adds in the 5. Chapter to the Romans. ver. 14.
that death also reigns, is not this a third and evil consequent?
Ans. There are many evils have followed Adams fall, and accompanied our
corruption which we have from him: but these two before named are principally
to be noted, for they cause all the rest. Death reigns because of that sin
which dwells in us. These be three terrible kings or Tyrants rather, Sin,
Death, and the Devil: and they are more terrible, because they be knit
together in a league, as it were against us. Sin depriving us of grace is
terrible, but more ugly when we see death follow after it: death of it self is
dreadful, but yet if death would make a quite dispatch of us that we should
never be seen, it would less amaze us, but when we see Satan the tormentor
follow after it with endless wrath, we must before grace stand as perplexed
ever in bondage to these three enemies, till Christ free us. Heb. 2.14.

Of actual Sin and the dangerous grouth of sin, without Gods special
grace preventing it: or of sundry dangerous steps to hell.
Question. 37.
NOw because we have seen the natural root of all our evils, let us proceed
to take some view of the branches and fruits or of the actual sins which
our natural corruption breeds?

Ans. If we confer and compare wisely two Scriptures together, we shall by
Gods good grace discern the growth of sin even from the root unto the
branches and full perfection of sin. The Scriptures specially to be noted
are these. James. 1.13.14.15. and Heb. 3.12.13.

Quest. 38. First tell us what degrees of sin find you in that place of
Saint James.
Ans. Thee holy Ghost in the third to the Hebrews teaches us. ver. 13. that
the heart is hardened through the deceitfulnes of Sin: and Saint James in his
Scripture teaches us what the sense and meaning is of these words: for he
says that sin first is breding and working secretly and deceitfully, and as it
were spreading his roots under ground, and so by degrees breaks forth, to the
hardening of the heart, if Gods holy grace prevent it not. Again, saint James
teaches us that sin by degrees comes to ripeness and full perfection and so
brings death everlasting. The holy Ghost in the place before cited to the
Hebrews, sets before us the degrees of sins perfection.

Quest. 39. First, let us hear what be the degrees of the deceitfullesse of
sin?
Ans. They are these following. The first is, a drawing away: The second is, a
bayting: The third is, a conception: The fourth is the birth of sin.

Quest. 40. And what call you the degrees of the perfection of sin?
Ans. First, when sin is brought forth and committed, it breeds negligence
and coldness in holy exercises. Secondly, This coldness and negligence breeds
contempt. 1. Negligence. 2. Contempt. 3. Hardness.
Thirdly, Contempt causes hardness of heart. Fourthly, hardness of heart
causes a 4. A malicious heart.
malicious evil heart. Fifthly, the malicious evil heart becomes an 5. An
vnbeeleeuing heart.
unbelieving heart. Sixthly, the unbelieving heart, causes an 6. An idle erring
heart.
idle erroneous heart. Seauenthly, the erring, or idle wandering heart, causes
the heart past feeling, Eighthly, the heart past feeling causes an 7. An heart
past feeling.
apostaticall heart.

Quest. 41. Tell me briefly what you mean, by these first degrees of the
deceitfulness of sin? 8 an apostalicall heart.

Ans. The first old root of sin and first step to hell is concupiscence, or
that hereditarie evil which we have from our first parents, for the Apostle
often warnes us of the deceitfulness of Sin. Romans 7.11. Ephesians. 4.22. Heb.
3.13. and therefore because the mother is deceitful, the daughters deceive us
often. Ephe. 4.22. The second degree of sin, or step to hell, the first
daughter of concupiscence is a secret motion of the heart, which Saint James
calls a drawing away, whereby is meant, that Satan and the pleasures of sin,
draw and steal away a man's heart to such persons and places, as can soon
minister occasion, and fit baits to allure us unto sin, example to clear
this: David being drawn away from Gods presence, and possessed with an idle
heart fit for vain thoughts, was soon taken with that bayte which was laid
for him. 2. Sam. 11. The third step to hell, or degree of sins deceitfulnes:
is a bayting or entising, whereby is meant that Satan discourses at large
with a man's heart, being drawn away from Gods presence, of pleasures, riches,
honor, glory and such like, and for this practice Eve with Satan is a notable
president. Genesis 3. The fourth degree of sin, and fourth step to hell is
called the conception of sin, Definit.
whereby is meant that the heart does like and entertain the former bait and
motions unto sin. The sinner is overcome with the delights of sin and
Satan's persuasions, and does purpose in heart to practice and bring forth that
evil which he has conceived. Signs of conception are, Signs of conception.
traueling in heart Psalm. 7.14. taking thoughts, Romans 13.14. and inquiring how
to practice that evil which is conceived. Examples are: Achab sick in
conception. 1. King. 21.4. Judas traueling with mischief. John. 13. Sichem
inquiring how he might find Dinah for his lust. Genesis 34. The fifth degree and
fifth step to hell, is called the birth of sin: whereby is understood the
actual and external commission of sin. This birth follows after j
conception, in some sooner, in some latter. 2. Sam. 13 12.
Absolon conceived murder, two years before it was practiced. So Mar. 6.17.
Herodias. The believers do never dwell long in conception: for they are
prevented and kept by faith and grace in Jesus Christ. And thus far of the
degrees of the deceitfulness of sin.

Quest. 42. Let us hear in like manner what you can say of the degrees of the
perfection of sin?
Ans. The first degree of sins perfection, and the sixth step to hell is,
lukewarmnes and coldness in all good exercises. This Difference between the
sins of the Godly and Godless. 1. The Godly fall. Gal. 6.1. the Godless walk
and lie in sin. 2. The Godly fallen cannot rest in sin, but the godles
delight in sin. 3. The godly if they fall are overtaken by some occasion. Gal.
6.1. The Godles seek al occasions of sin. 4. The godly after their fal^ are
soon reclaimed, the godles most hardly, and if they leave a little, they
return to sin again worse.
degree appears often in the falls of gods children. Signs of this evil are,
loss of the liberty and joy of a good conscience, and of our salvation, to
be distasted concerning the word, to leese the comfortable presence of Christ.
In David's example we shall find this degree of sin after he had committed
murder and adultry. Psalm. 51 1.2.

The second degree of sins perfection, and seventh step to hell is the
contempt of the voice of Christ speaking in his word: First degree of
prouocatio^.
This is a fruit of long negligence and lukewarm profession. Contempt is to
pass by the voice and word of God as a vain thing. Mat. 13.13.14.15.16.
Examples, Achab, Iezabel and all the enemies of the word of God: many foul
sins follow this evil. Romans 2.4.5.6.

2. Degree of provocation.
The third degree of sins perfection, and eight step to hell is hardness of
heart: he that continues without repentance in the long contempt of the holy
voice of God, shall be given over to Satan to be hardened in his heart. Rom
2.4. so as he shall neither be touched by Gods judgments to humiliation, nor
moved by his mercies to any consolation: for these signs of an hardened heart
may be gathered. Heb. 3.7.13. First, to tempt God by seeking new arguments of
his providence, power and goodness. Secondly, to see many wonders, and to
receive many blessings, without thanksgiueing. Thirdly, not to regard a long
experience of Gods mercies and justice as the people in the wilderness. Psalm.
78.

3. Degree of provocation.
The fourth degree of sins perfection, and the ninth step to hell, is an evil
or malicious heart, which follows very justly an hardened heart. We have
naturally also an evil heart. Ier. 17.9. Genesis 6.5. but the holy Ghost in the
third to the Heb. ver. 12. speaks of an heart which by custom of sin, and as
it were, by art is become far worse, by many degrees. for this heart is very
secure not much moved with any check of conscience for any sin committed. This
heart swallows up continually common sins without any check, lying,
dissembling and common oaths, as light sins not to be regarded: and
disputes not long to commit gross and grievous sins, and to live in them: as
Herod and Herodias, Agryppa and Bernice in open incest: Felix and Festus in
briberie, covetousness and oppression: Achah and Iezabell in Idolatry,
superstition and all rebellion against God.

An vnbeleueing heart. 4. Degree of provocation.
The Fifth degree of sins perfection, and the tenth step to hell, is an
unbelieving heart: This follows a malicious evil heart, as the effect
follows the cause. And is indeed the just punishment, and hand of God for
many sins aforegoing. This is not to believe, nor to give credit to the holy
oracles of God contained now in his written word. This sin greatly prouokes
Gods holy spirit. Number. 14.11. Deu. 32.19.20. and 1.31.32. examples here may be
Lots Sons, the word of God seemed unto them to be a jest, they gave no credit
to their fathers preaching. Genesis 19.14. Great afflictions and griefs of mind,
and fears may bind up the heart of Gods best children for a time in
unbelief, anguish of spirit and cruel bondage. Exodus 6.9. and 43.1. Mark.
16.14. Luke. 28.38.39.41. John. 20.25.27.

The Sixth degree of sins perfection, 5 Degree of an erring heart.
and the eleauenth step to hell is an erroneous or idle heart, given up to a
reprobate sense. First, there are two kinds of errors. The one is of the
understanding, and this we call ignorance: This error is not so dangerous. 1.
Tim. 1.13. Heb. 5.2. The second kind is of the heart and affections, when as
these parts are not settled to rest on God and his word, but are ready to
embrace lies, idolatry and superstition, and to forsake Gods holy covenant.
Psalm. 78.37. Their heart was not upright with him: they were not faithful in
his covenant. Heb. 3.8.9.10. Long contempt, malice of heart, and unbelief
against the word causes God to smite men with his spiritual plague. Romans
1.28. Ephesians. 4.18.19. 2. The. 2.11.

The Seventh degree of sins perfection, 6. Degree of provocation. An heart
past feeling.
and the twelft step to hell is an heart past feeling. The heart is past
feeling, when the conscience has lost her proper and essential properties to
accuse and excuse. The Gentiles were plagued with this, for the long contempt
of the light of nature, and the often checks of their consciences accusing
them: The people under the Gospel may far more justly be plagued with this
spiritual plague for the contempt of the light of nature and grace shining
upon them. 1. Tim. 4.2. Signs of this deadly poison, are these first,
wantonness in sin: secondly, greediness in sin: thirdly, to be given over to
all uncleanness. Ephe. 4.19.

The thirteenth step to hell, and last degree of sins perfection is, an
apostaticall heart: and this is the most woeful state that may be, and
unrecoverable, for here men sin in the highest degree, even the sin
impardonable; they have before quenched the graces of Gods spirit, and now
they proceed to despite the spirit of grace, and to renounce the whole
covenant and all the holy means of their salvation, striving, fighting, and
persecuting the holy truth of God as much as in them lies, with blasphemies:
and these they do cheerfully, wittingly, and willingly withstand and oppose
themselves against Jesus Christ, and his most holy spirit. This sin alone is
impardonable: and this is the highest degree of sins perfection mentioned in
the Scripture.

The Fourth and the most certain mean to know the misery of man without
Christ is, by the Law of God: for that by the Law comes the knowledge of
sin. Romans 3.20. and 7.7.8.
Question. 43.
We have heard by very effectual and plain demonstratio^s how great man's
misery is by nature and without Christ: But the Lord yet commends unto us a
Fourth glass to behold our deformity and misery, what is that?

Answer.

The great and wonderful Law of God: for thus it is written Romans 3.20. Romans
4.15. and 5.20. Gal. 3.19.
By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. Chap. 7. ver. 7.8. I knew not Sin
but by the Law.

Quest. 44. Where is this Law written, that so serves to reveal Sin: and
what is it?
Ans. I mean the moral Law of God commended unto us, in the twenty Chapter
of Exodus: and this Law as I suppose, Definit. 1.
may truly be in this manner described. The Law of God is the holy
commandment of Jehovah, whereby his nature and will concerning our obedience
is revealed and made known unto us.

Again, first more fully to discribe what this Law is: for the first cause of
it, The Heathen that their Law might have authority and credit among men, ever
feigned some false God the author o^ them. Minos king of Creete said his Laws
came from Jupiter, Licurgus king of the Lacedaemonians infers his Laws to
Appollo, Solon of Athens to Minerua, Numa Pompilia 2. king of the Romans
received his laws from Aegeria, and the Turks their Alkaron from Mahomet.
we doubt not this Law came from God: and of him, and by him has a most
royal and heavenly authority: and written by his own hand, given first to
Moses, and by him commended to the Church for all posterities.

Secondly, for the matter it concerns the will and nature of the true God.
When the Lord forbids murder, first he manifests his will, that he is a
God which abhors cruelty and violence in man: next that by nature he is
most inclined to show mercy. And likewise in forbidding adultry: first, he
wills our holiness and sanctification: next he teaches us that by nature
he hates all uncleanness of soul and body.

Thirdly, for the form of it, it is spiritual, holy, and just. Romans 7.12.14.
and able to discover the inward affections and secrets of the heart, as in the
last commandment.

Fourthly, for one principal end thereof: it serves as a special instrument
sent from God to teach us what the nature and danger of Sin is. Romans 3.20.
next it is the guide which God has sent us to direct us in the way to heaven.
Psalm. 119.

Quest 45. Answer me yet one doubt more, did not the Maniches and old
Heretics justly speak against this law: seeing the Apostle calls it the
mystery of death. 2. Cor. 3.7. and again he says the law kills Romans
7.9.10.11. Sin took occasion by the commandment, and deceived me, and
thereby slew me.
Ans. We must wisely discern between the natural effects of the Law, and
the accidental consequents of the same: or what the Law works in our corrupt
nature. The Law is holy, just and good and has holy, just and good effects.
Romans 7.12. in those which are truly renewed by the word and spirit of grace: but
the contrary effects and works follow in the unregenerate because of the
corruption the Law finds in them. The Law unto these is like water cast upon
lime, which soon discouers the heat and fire which is within: so the Law works
upon sinners: serving well to discover their inward and most secret corruption.
But the Law unto the believer which receives Christ and his Gospel, is sweet
and comfortable like the waters of Marah (rectified and made pleasant with the
tree cast in by Moses. Exodus 15.25. So put Christ to the Law and he changes
the bitterness of the Law into sweetness. Psalm. 119.19.

Quest. 46. First, let me hear what you can say of the special circumstances
of time, place and persons concerning this Law.
Ans. First, I say for the time of the promulgation of this Law: it was the
first This year was the 430. after the promise made concerning the Messiah
with Abraham Genesis 12.13. sealed. Genesis 17. so says the Apostle. Gal 3.17.
following Moses Exo. 12.40. and Ge. 15.13.
year of their deliverance out of Egypt, and the third month of the year.
Exodus 19. ver. 1.

Secondly, for the place: it was in Horeb, called the mountain of God. Exodus
3.1. a place of great excellency and note because of that vision to Moses
concerning his embassage to Egypt, and for that the Lord himself here spoke all
the words of his Law unto his people. This was a mountain in the wilderness
of of Sinai. Exodus 19.1.

Thirdly, the speaker of this Law, or the person which first delivered it in
that place was Iehoua himself, three in persons, one true God, in substance.
Exodus 1^.^ He came down, or gave some visible signs of his presence, They
hear God speak as in a pulpet of fire.
in fire on the mountain. Exodus 19.18. The mount for the time might not be
touched by man or beast. Exodus 19.13. The messengers of his coming and
presence were Thunders, Lightnings and a thick Cloud, and the sound of a
Trumpet exceeding loud. Exodus 19. ver. 16. and Earthquake. ver. 18. Thus was
preparation made for his Majesty to speak and to deliver this great law unto
his people. After all these, follow the voice of words. Heb. 12.9. that is a
lively voice speaking distinctly: or a voice sounding the lively oracles. Act.
7.28. and notwithstanding the people heard God speak, yet they saw nothing,
that they might never set up any image to resemble him. Deuteronomy. 4.15. And the
voice of God was so terrible unto them, that the people trembled and feared
much, and desired they might no more hear it. Exodus 20.18. Lastly when God had
spoken all the words of this Law, he writ the same himself in two tables of
stone. Exodus 31.18. These tables were the work of God, and this writing was
the writing of God, graven in the tables. Exodus 32.16.

Fourthly, the auditorie or people which heard the voice of God, were the
people of Israel. Exodus 19. They are prepared to meet the Lord three days
before his coming. First, Moses propounds unto them the form of the
covenant, Verse. 5.
and demands if they be willing to accept Gods covenant, to serve and worship
him as his peculiar people according to his will. They answered all that the
Lord shall command, Verse 1.
we will do, for this Law was confirmed by many and great miracles both
before and after the promulgation and writing of it. Secondly, they must
prepare themselves to meet the Lord the third day, this preparation was by
prayer verse 10. and fasting. ver. 15. confer. 1. Cor. 7.5.

Quest 47. What rules must be remembered for the right understanding and use of
the commandments of this Law?
Ans. First, whereas the Lord in the morrall Law sets down in every precept
but the grosest, and greatest sin forbidden in the Law, yet we must remember
that under it, he understands all, even the least sins of like nature; all
the causes, signs, and effects of the same sin: for example, in the seventh
Law is forbidden only in word, but actual adultery: yet the Lord under this
one word understands all sins, which pollute a man in that kind of
uncleanness, all the causes and effects of that uncleanness.

Secondly, all precepts affirmative include their negative: and the negative
their affirmative. Where God forbids adultry, he commands chastity, and to
keep our vessels in sanctification and holiness.

Thirdly, the decalouge is no otherwise to be understood, then as the best
interpreters, the holy Prophets and Apostles have opened it, and taught it in
their time.

Fourthly, these ten Laws, must be unto us as ten special rules by which we
must try ever all the thoughts of our hearts, words of our mouth, and actions
of our life.

Fifthly, the first table concerns and contains all our immediate service and
worship of God: the second, our duties unto men, Amor, Dei amorem proximi
generat.
The first is of greater excellency, for that the love of God is the only
fountain of our love to men.

Sixthly, that every one of these ten Laws, may have the deep impressions in
thine heart, ever set before thee, the nature, greatness and authority of
the Law given, that so thou may rightly conceive of the excellency of this
Law.

Seauenthly, he that will practice the holy and good things commanded in this
Law, must first renounce and forsake the evil things forbidden in this Law.
Psalm. 37. Tit. 2.10.11.

He that will know and practice one, must know and keep all.
Eighthly, the righteous man respects not one Table, and forgets the other, but
none fully respects all these commandments of God Psalm. 119.6.

Quest. 48. What divisions and parts are to be considered in the decalouge?
Ans. First, the decalouge is divided into two parts, or two tables. This
division is manifestly allowed of God. Ex. 34.4. Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 10.43. and
Mat. 22.37.

The second division is into ten parts or precepts, and this also is Gods own
division. Deuteronomy. 10.3.4. and 4.13. Then he wrote upon the tables according to
the writing, the ten commandments which the Lord spoke unto you.

The third division is of the precepts of each Table. The first has foam, the
second has six precepts, and no more. For the first table* whereas some
confound the first precept of having Iehoua for their God, and the second of
the form of his worship, it is evident, they are two distinct Laws: the first
concerning the nature of the God we worship, Deuteronomy. 4.15. and 18 v 1. distinct
Laws against the first and second Idolatry.
he must be Iehoua, where the grosest Idolatry is forbidden: The second, of
the form and manner of Gods true worship: when all man's inventions, as a
second Idolatry are forbidden. And for the second Table, that there are but
six Laws contained in it, is evident: First, for that in the 17. ver. (where
they say there be two distinct Laws) we have the numbering of diverse like
special lusts and secret motions of concupiscence: This Law in one verse has
many special branches.
wherefore if any one of these branches be a Law, every one of the rest must
be. The like repetition and branches ye have in the second and fourth Law.
Secondly, the Apostle comprehends all that is said in this seventeenth v or
tenth commandment in this one word: Thou shall not Or lust.
covet To. 7. ver. 7. Thirdly, we shall ever find diverse Laws distinct to
be written in diverse verses: This Law is written in one verse.
But here we have but one verse the 17. of the 20. Chapter of Exodus and so the
21. ver. of the 5. Chapter of Deuteronomy. wherefore the Lord here commends but one
Law unto his people. Fourthly, and lastly, the order of the examples here
specified in Exodus, The order of the examples.
is not the same in Deu. 5. for these words, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, in the book of Deuteronomy. have the first place, but in Exodus, thy
neighbors house, is the first branch: So by their division, if here be two
Laws, it is uncertain, which is the ninth or the tenth Law. But this
confusion may not be granted concerning the most holy Laws of God.

Quest. 49. Now let me hear what is the brief sum of the decalouge?
Ans. The true form of all the holy worship of God is set before us in this
Law.

First, The form of Gods worship.
in our service and duties immediately performed unto him, and commended in the
first Table, where we be taught to consider: first, what the nature of the
God we worship is, in the first precept: secondly, what the form of his
worship is, in the second precept: Thridly, what his private and daily worship
is, in the third precept: Fourthly, what his public worship must be, in the
fourth precept.

Secondly, in our duties to our brethren, in the second Table: where God
requires of us, both external obedience to his Laws: commanding the
preservation, first of Dignity in the fifth precept: secondly, of Life, in the
sixth precept: thirdly, of Chastity, in the seventh precept: fourthly, of the
right of possession, in the eight precept: fifthly, of a good name, in the ninth
precept: and inward obedience, where he commands that all the secret motions
and affections of the heart, to be according to his will, and condemns the
contrary, in the tenth precept.

Quest. 50. Let us hear the very words of God in the first Law, and what
service and duties are commanded, and what sins are forbidden in it?
1. Precept.
Ans. The words are these: I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall have none other
Gods before me. In these words I consider two things: first, a preface:
secondly, a precept. The preface contains three special arguments, from the
excellency, greatness, and goodness of the Lawgiver, serving right well to
move Gods people, with attention and reverence to hear and to receive all the
words of this Law.

The first is this, from the right of creation, I am Iehoua, he that is Lord
over all, from whom, by whom, and for whom are all things, may justly and
rightly command all of necessity to obey his Laws: Ex illo sunt esse, et
posse, omnia sustinet, omnia regit. The Jews are so superstitious that they
neither dare speak nor write the name Iehoua, but in place of it, when they
speak or write they use the word Adonai.
Iehoua is such a Lord: therefore are we bound to hear him and obey him. The
name Iehoua teaches us what the essence and glorious majesty of God is: that
he alone has his being of himself, and is the fountain and cause of all
things that are in heaven and earth, sustaining and ruling all things by his
mighty power. Romans 11.36. of him from him, by him, through him, and for him
are all things. This name also signifies unto us that he is true and constant
in his word and promise. Exodus 6.2.3. So then we see these three consequents,
may justly and rightly follow from this first argument. First, If he give life
and being unto all things, and sustain all things, good reason he should
command and rule all things. Secondly, if he be alone of such excellency,
as his name imports, then must he be our God alone and none other. Thirdly,
If he be Iehoua, true and constant in his word, then shall no jot or least
part of his laws and promises pass till all things be performed. Mat. 5.18.
The second argument is this: I am thy God: that is, which have bound my self
unto thee by a free covenant of grace and mercy in Jesus Christ. Ier. 32.33.

The second reason in form serving the first Law thus.

That God which has and can make alone an everlasting covenant of peace and
mercy in Jesus Christ, is to be acknowleged for the true God, and worshipped
alone. Iehoua is the God of that eternal covenant of peace, etc. therefore
Iehoua the true God, is to be worshipped alone and none other.

The second reason applied to all the commandments thus.

The God which has granted us his free covenant, etc. we are Mal. 1.6. Leu.
19.2.

Ye shall be holy for I the Lord your God am holy.


bound to obey all his Laws: these ten precepts are his Laws, therefore we
are bound to obey them.

Which has brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
These words contain three arguments, from their late deliverance from Egypt,
which may serve also for confirmation of the second part of the second reason
going before thus.

That God of whose greatness and goodness in thy deliverance from that
Egiptian bondage, thou have a most comfortable experience he is thy God by
covenant, and let him be thy God and none other: and much bound art thou to
hear and to obey his Laws. Iehoua is that God, which has brought thee out of
Egypt, and out of bondage, for a people freed from bondage are never their
own, but his which f^eeth them. 1. Cor. 6.19. therefore let Iehoua be your
God, etc.

The holy Ghost warnes this people often, never to forget that bondage and
their happy deliverance. And the Apostle tells us that these things which
were done for the Church, then were signs and types, of spiritual things.

Pharoh and the Egiptian bondage what they signified. Egypt a picture of hell.
Pharoh was a notable type and pattern of the Devil which wrought in him.
Col. 2.3. and by him. Revel. 2.10. against Gods people. Egypt might well
resemble hell, for Gods people did endure an heavy bondage, and most bitter
afflictions there. The red Sea was a manifest type of the precious blood of
Jesus Christ, whereby we must be washed and sprinkled before we can escape
the hands of all our enemies. 1. Cor 10.1.2.3. Col. 1.13. He has delivered us
from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his
dear Son. This argument is often remembered, as being a special motive to
induce this people to their obedience, Number. 23.22. Judge. 2.1. and Chap. 6.8.9.
Micah. 6.4. Deu. 4.20. And so in like manner our spiritual redemption is often
set before us, for the same end and purpose, Luke 1.74. Romans 12.1. Tit. 2.11.
1. Pet. 1.17.18.

Quest. 51. This shall suffice of the preface, let us hear what you can say of
the first precept?
Ans. The words are these: Thou shall have none other Gods before me, or any
of the other Gods, or strange gods to Iehoua be thy God only: know him, love
him, fear him, trust in him and worship him as thine only Lord and God, for
he is the true God only, and thy God by covenant, and the God of thy most
wonderful redemption.

Thou shall have none other Gods. That is, albeit vnbeeleeuers account, affect
and place many Idols in the place of Iehoua, even in their hearts: as their
belly. Phillip. 3 19. the Devil. 2 Cor. 4.4. their riches. Mat. 6.24. yet thou
shall not do as they do, let Iehoua only be thy God.

Before my face: That is, with me, as ve. 23. following: or in my presence, for
that God is exceedingly provoked to jealousy, so often as we thrust any false
God into his place: as if an unchaste wife should bring an adulterer openly
before her husbands eyes the more to vex his mind.

Quest. 52. Now let us hear what does the Lord specially require of us in this
Law?
Ans. First in that he says, 1. Knowledge is here commanded.
Let Iehoua be thy God only: his holy and great charge is, that we know him
and his will: for how can we worship him as God, whose nature and will we
know not. This teaches the holy Apostle saying. Romans 10.14. how shall they
call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him,
of whom they have not heard. Ioh. 17.2. This is life eternal that they know
thee, the true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

And first this must be a found and true knowledge of God, by the clear light
of his word. True rules of sound knowledge.

1. A grounded knowledge. 2. Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 4.12.13.14


We may not rest with the unbelievers in a bare opinion or light imagination,
for no sound love, nor godly affiance and trust in God, can be grounded or
settled upon the weak and fantastical conjectures of human reason, or any
such deceitful foundation of man's invention. Mat. 15.8.9.

Secondly, 2. A working knowledge.
our knowledge must not be historical only as the devils is. James. 2.19.
but of power unto sanctification John. 15.3. for the word of grace purges
them, and works effectually in them that believe. 1. These. 2.13.

Thirdly, 3. Endeavor to grow in knowledge. 2. Tim. 3.7.
when the holy spirit writes in the heart his divine rules of sound knowledge.
Ier. 31.33. he works also an endeavor and care to increase in the knowledge of
the truth. Col. 1.10. 2. Pet. 3.18. and to grow in grace.

Quest. 53. Let me hear what be the special branches of this knowledge?
Ans. First, to know there is a God. Secondly, to know there is but one God,
not many. Thirdly, to know that this one God has three distinct persons in one
divine essence. Fourthly, to know what God is, as he has revealed himself in
his most holy word.

The first branch, that God is, I learn: first, 1. The book of nature.
in the book of nature. Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and
the firmament shows the works of his hands. Romans 1.20. The invisible things
of God, that is his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the creation of
the world.

Secondly, by the book of God, wherein I see* hear; The book of God.
and feel the great power and majesty of God speaking within me, searching
and checking the very secret thoughts of mine heart. Heb. 4.12. The word of God
is mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, etc. dividing a
sunder the soul and the spirit, the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner
of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

3. The Scripture of the spirit.
Thirdly, by the Scripture or writing of the holy spirit: which has engraven
and written his Laws in our hearts: according to his promise. Ier. 31.33. and
32.40.

4. The testimony of conscience.
Fourthly, by the testimony of conscience, concluding and speaking of this
point ever constantly, till men have smothered this sergeant (which god has
left in them) and by custom and continuance in sin are become past feeling.
Ephesians. 4 18.19.


2 Branch of the knowledge of God.
The second branch, that there is but one God only: I am taught: first by the
book of nature which teaches me there can be but one infinite, and eternal
first moouer, maker and preserver of all things in heaven and earth. Heb.
1.2.3. Secondly, the book of God is my best teacher: herein I learn this
truth. Deuteronomy. 6.4. hear Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord. Ephesians. 4.5.6.
There is but one Lord, one God and Father of all. Thirdly, I have here also the
consent of the Church in all ages.

3. Branch of the knowledge of God. Distinction of persons.
The third branch, this one God almighty, has three distinct persons in one
divine essence Father, Son, and holy Ghost.


This most admirable mystery cannot be known, but only by that his reveled
will contained in his written word, as Mat. Chapter. 3. and the 28. where three
distinct persons are clearly set before us: The Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. The Father is God and Lord: the Son is of the same nature. Heb.
1.1. John. 1.1. So is the holy Ghost in like manner, 4. Branch of the knowledge
of God what he is.
Iehoua God and Lord of heaven and earth, confer Act. 28.25. Esaias. 6.8.9.

The fourth, and Last branch what God is: this can he best teach thee, who
discribes himself unto us in terms and words fitting our capacity on this
manner. Exodus 3.14. I am that I am: say unto the children of Israel, I am has
sent me unto you. Exodus 34.5.6.7. The Lord proclaimed the name of the Lord,
saying, The Lord, the Lord strong, merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and not making the wicked innocent,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon childrens
children, unto the third and fourth generations.

Quest. 54. What is the second point of obedience here commanded?
Ans. To love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Or thought Deuteronomy. 6.4.5. Mat. 22.37. Luke. 10.37. Cant. 8.6.7.
mind, and with all thy strength. Mar. 12.30. To submit my self in all powers
of my soul and parts of my body unto Iehoua: and to make more account of him
and his will, then of all the wicked, yea then of mine own salvation, if they
could come in question and comparison together.

The Lord in that Scripture (so often repeted) first, would have us banish, and
endeavor to cast forth continually all things contrary to his law: that our
minds may not think of them, nor our affections desire, nor our hearts embrace
and entertain them.

Secondly, when we do him any service, he would have us to do it with such
cheerfulness, as that no part of us within or without sit idle, but that we
strive with all our might to express the good affection of our hearts in his
service. The mind must discern him, the soul desire him, the heart must
receive him and lodge him, 1. These. 5.25.
for thou must love thy neighbor as thy self, but God above thy self, never
prize him and his love with any thing.

Motives to stir up our hearts to love God, are these. Reasons to move us to
love God.
First, for that his love is the only fountain, and first cause of all our
happiness. Ephe. 1.4.

The first cause of our election.

The first cause of our creation. Psalm. 8.

The first cause of our redemption, Ioh. 3.16.

The first cause of our vocation. Romans 8.29.

The first cause of our adoption, justification and sanctification. Romans 8.15.
Ephe. 1.13.

The fountain and first cause of our love, for we love him because his love is
shed into our hearts. Romans 5.4.5. and we love him, because he loved us first.
1. Ioh. 4.19.

Quest. 55. What undoubted signs be there of the true love of God?
Ans. First, love must issue out of a clear heart, from a good conscience, and
from faith unfeigned: 1. Tim. 1.5. So that if a man find himself to have these
three in any good measure, he may be well assured his love to God is sound,
for before that faith purge the heart. Act. 15.9. and bring to our consciences,
a discharge from our sins in the blood of Christ. Heb. 9.14. we can never
truly love God. When Mary's sins were so given her, she burns in love
toward Christ, and would signify her love by all means possibly that she
can. Luke 7.47. for which cause Christ gave this testimony of her, many sins
are forgiven her: the true mark whereof is this, she loved much.

Secondly, the infallible mark of our love to God, is our love to his word.
Prou 2.1.6. Psalm 119.11. Luk ^ 19 59. Luk^ 8. Act. 16.
This says Christ: If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my father
will love him, and we will come and dwell with him: he that loves not me,
keeps not my word. John. 14.23.

Thirdly, this word we must not only keep unto our selves, Luke 22.32.
but carefully labor to communicate the same unto others, and to draw others
to serve the Lord, specially unto our children and family. Deuteronomy. 6.5.6.7.
These words which I command thee this day, Exodus 12.26 Genesis 18 19. Josh 24 15.
1. Cor. 31.2. Romans 2.18 Heb. 5.11.12.
shall be in thine heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy
children, and thou shall talk of the^, when thou tarriest in thine house, and
as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up,
otherwise, in blind families men love their horses better then their children.

Fourthly, a fourth undoubted sign we love God, is the love of our brethren.
1. John. 3.14. We know we are translated from death to life, because we love
the brethren: he that loves not his brethren abides in death. 1. John.
4.19.20 If any man say I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar, for how
can he that loves not his brother, whom he has seen, love God whom he has
not seen.

Fifthly, to rejoice to think of Christ and to talk of Christ. Gal. 6.14.15.

Sixthly, to desire Christ's presence above all things, and to mourn for his
absence. Can. 5.6.

Seauently, to love all things that appertain unto him and his service.

Eighthly, to esteem greatly of Gods graces. 1. Cor. 2.2. Phil. 3.8.9.

Ninthly, to call upon his name with boldness, and with a good conscience.
Heb. 10.19.22. and Chapter. 4.16.

Quest. 56. What is the third branch of obedience required in this Law?
Ans. Trust in God, and an holy affiance proceeding from a lively faith in
Jesus Christ. Ephe. 3.12. We must know God, that we may believe in him, and
love him: we must believe in him and love him, before we can assuredly trust
in him, and rest, and wait upon his providence and holy will.

A man is said truly to trust in God when (having a comfortable persuasion and
answer by Gods spirit of the pardon of sins, and grace in Christ Jesus,
Psalm. 37.2.3.4.5.6.7.
) delights in the Lord, studying to please him, committing and commending all
his affairs unto God, waiting patiently on the Lord in all dangers: because he
sees his goodness in Christ, and his almighty power to deliver him: and the
signs and marks of this holy affiance and trust in God are these.

First, to do good. Psalm. 37.3, he is bountiful and good to many, for he is
well assured God will repay it again. Psalm. 112. Job. 21.22.


Secondly, to delight in the Lord. Psalm. 37.4. look what friend we know best,
love best, and trust most, in him we delight most.

Thirdly, hope follows also this holy affiance and trust in God, and this is
a quiet expectation of help from God, in all future events. Psalm. 37.5.
deuolue thy way, that is, thine affairs on the Lord, and trust in him, and he
will bring it to pass, for patience is the daughter of God, and faith which
brings quietness, if not cheerfulness in present evils. Contrary to this
hope are: to seek to unlawful means in troubles, as Saul did. 1. Sam. 28.
and Ahaziah, to witchcraft. 2. King. 1.2.3. and those distrustful cares
forbidden by Christ. Mat. 6. in evils and dangers present.

Fourthly, a cleaving unto God specially in troubles, resting by faith on him
alone when we see no means of his providence to help us. Josh. 23.8. Stick
fast, or hold fast, or cleave fast unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto
this day. Act. 11.23. Barnabas in Antioch exhorted all, that with one purpose
of heart they would continue in the Lord. David in Ziklag in wonderful
distress (when his company perplexed in their hearts, and in great bitterness
were ready to stone him) he prayed in his heart and comforted himself in the
Lord his God: and the Lord gave him then a wonderful deliverance. 1. Sam. 30.6.

Question. 57. What is the fourth branch of obedience required in this Law?
Ans. The true fear of God: And here to show what this virtue is: Gods spirit
teaches us, that a man truly fears God, when being cast down with the
excellency of his majesty, power, greatness and goodness, wisdom, mercy
and justice: he is drawn and moved to come into Gods presence with greater
reverence then before the greatest Majesty in the world, knowing his
greatness, and tasting his goodness in Christ and by his word, he does most
of all things fear to displease, and desire to please God in all things. The
arguments to stir up our hearts to fear God are these. First, for that the
holy Ghost does so often assure us that the man is blessed which fears the
Lord. Psalm. 128. Prou. 18.14. Secondly, for that Gods spirit most delights in
these men. Es. 66.1.2.3. Psalm. 147.11. Thirdly, for that it is a special
bridell to keep us in the obedience of Gods holy Laws. Ier. 32.40. Examples
Exodus 1.17. in the midwiues of Egypt. Genesis 39.9. in Joseph. Fourthly, for that
this man alone is acquainted familiarly with Gods secrets. Psalm. 25.14. Fifthly,
for that this virtue is the beginning of all religious and divine wisdom.
Prou. 1.7. Sixthly, for that Gods fear shall better provide for our wants, then
all the preposterous shifts in this life for the wicked. Psalm. 34. ver. 9.10.
for that God makes many sweet promises unto him, and his seed after him.
Psalm. 25. and 37. first, his soul shall dwell at ease. 25.14 secondly, his
seed shall inherit the land. 16. thirdly, he shall want nothing that is good.
Psalm. 34.10. Seauenthly, for that God every where commands us to fear him.
Psalm. 2.11. Phil. 2.14.15.

Quest. 58. How is this fear begotten in us?
Ans. This holy and clear fear of God is bred and preserved in us: first, by
meditation of Gods mercies in Jesus Christ: Psalm. 130.3. There is mercy with
thee, that thou may be feared. Secondly, by meditation of his power and
justice: Job. 31.23. Gods punishment was fearful unto me, and I could not
be delivered from his highness. Again. Deuteronomy. 28.58.59. If thou will not obey
and fear this glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy God, then the Lord will
make thy plagues wonderful. Thirdly by hearing the word preached. Esa. 66.2.3.
Fourthly, by prayer, which pierces the clouds, and ascends unto the high
throne of majesty, where it beholds unspeakable graces, with unutterable
passions.

Quest. 59. What is the fifth branch of the obedience of this Law?
Ans. Humility: which is a special grace of God, Definiti.
and follows the former virtues, as the effect the cause. This virtue causes
us to judge our selves as empty and void of all good things in our selves,
and to give God the glory of all the good things we have received, and is a
great ornament to a man. 1. Pet. 5.5. Deck or adorn your selves inwardly with
lowliness of mind. The same Apostle commends it again to women as a special
ornament. 1. Pe. 3.3.4. labor not so much for external beauty (says he)
but let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt with a meek and quiet spirit,
which is before God a thing much set by. This was Abraham's humility: the
nearer he comes to God, the more lowly and vile he is in his own eyes. Gene.
18.17.

The lively commendations of humility in the Scriptures are these: 1.
Humility the gate to receive Corist.
first, all the labor of Gods spirit by the ministry of the word, has this
scope, to prepare men's hearts in humility to receive Christ: for before men
be humbled they cannot possibly entertain Christ, confer Esaias. 57. ver.
14.15. and Esaias. 4. ver. 12.13.14.15.16. Before we be poor in spirit, we
cannot mourn and sorrow for sin. Mat. 5.34. No sorrow for sin, no
confession of sin: No confession of sin, no spirit of meekness. Mat. 5.5.
No spirit of meekness and humility, no hungring desire of grace: No desire of
grace. Mat. 5.6. No spirit of faith. 2. Cor. 4.13. No receiving and lodging of
Christ. 2. Cor. 13.5. No spirit of adoption. Ephesians. 1.15. Romans 8.15.

2. The reside^ce of the Trinity with him.
Secondly, where soever this grace is, there in that soul the Father, Son and
holy Ghost, dwell and keep residence. Esa. 57.14. John. 14.23. Reu. 3.20.
Cant. 5.2.3.4.

3. Life of God in him.
Thirdly, he that is endued with this grace, may be well assured, the life of
God is in him. Esaias. 57.15. Ephe. 4.18.

4. Taught of God.
Fourthly, whereas others receive instruction by man, the humble are so beloved,
that they alone be taught of God. Psalm. 25.9. Esaias. 66.2.3.

5. The first gate to heaven
Fifthly, Humility is the gate of everlasting glory. 1. Pet: 5.6. humble your
selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time, so
Pro. 15. ver. 33. and 18.12. Mat. 5.3.4.

6. Only wise.
Sixthly, this man alone is wise: Pro. 11.2. with the lowly is wisdom.

7. Filled with good things.
Seauenthly, this man is ever filled with the good graces of Gods spirit whereas
the Lord ever sends the proud and rich empty away. Luke. 1.52.53. drawing his
sword against him, True marks of humility. 1. To mourn for want. 2. To mourn
we can not do that we should do. 3. Contentment. 4. To abide in our calling.
5. Not to despise.

where-euer he meets him.

The marks of Humility are these. First, to bewail our wants and
infirmities, Mat. 5.5. Secondly, to be aggreeued in heart we can no better
serve and please God, Romans 7.18.24. Thirdly, not to seek a better place and
condition of life, then we know to be given us and allowed of God. 1. Tim.
6.7.8. Fourthly, to walk faithfully and modestly in our vocation. 1. Cor. 7.20.
Fifthly not to despise our brethren. 1. Pet. 2. verse 17.

Quest. 60. What is the sixth branch of obedience here commanded?
Ans. To worship God in spirit and truth. Ioh. 4.22.23. Esaias. 45.21. What
prayer is.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Mat.
4.10. Deuteronomy. 6.16. This worship principally consists in an holy invocation of
God in prayer and thanksgiving. This worship no man can ever perform to please
God, before he has received the former graces: that is, before he has heard
God sound his blessed word unto his Soul. Romans 10.4. that he may have
knowledge: before his knowledge has bred faith in his heart, that faith bring
forth 1. Tim. 1.3.
love; that faith and love cause him to trust in God: and to fear God: and
before that all these virtues bring forth humility, for the man truly humbled
serves and worshippeth God and none other. Heb. 11.28. The blind people
worship they wot not what. John. 4.22. Act. 17.23.
They grope after the unknown God, and him they ignorantly worship little
better then the old Pagans in Athens. They conceive diverse pictures of God in
their minds, because of their blindness, and so worship an idol, but cannot
possibly find out the true God and worship him in spirit and truth.

Quest. 61. Now we have heard what the Lord does command and require at our
hands in this Law: let me hear also what is forbidden?
Ans. First, Ignorance is here condemned: for like as knowledge does enlighten
us and guide us into the possession of all Gods mercies and kingdom: so
contrarily ignorance is a bar to keep us in misery and perpetual bondage.
Against this sin the Lord complains by one Prophet thus. Es. 1.3. Ier. 4.22.
9.3. Hoshea. 4.6.
Esaias. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib: but
Israel does not know, my people understands not, and by an other he says:
my people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Hosh. 4.6.

1. Cor. 2.14.
This ignorance is either first natural, as in all before grace, 1 Cor. 2.14.
or, secondly affected: which is never to desire the good means of knowledge,
and to reject it when it is offered, Job. 21.14.15.
of these Job speaks Chapter. 21.14.15. They say to God depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways, who is the Almighty that we should
serve him, and what profit should we have, if we should pray unto him. Such are
our blind multitude, who notwithstanding the great light of God shining among
them, yet lie in gross ignorance even of the fundamental points and chief
grounds of holy religion.

Quest. 62. What is the second gross sin here forbidden?
Ans. Atheism which is to deny the divine nature and attributes of God: Such
were the Ephesians and the Gentiles before grace. Ep. 2.12. ye were at that
time without Christ, and Atheists in the world.

2. Pet. 3 4. Exodus 5.2.
Atheism is either: first, close and secret of the heart, we may call it
mental Atheism, of such Psalm. 14.1. or secondly, open and professed: these
men fight against nature. Romans 1.18. and are abhorred of Pagans.

Open Atheism known by profession or practice.
Signs of this sin are: first if it be open and professed it is known by
manifest blasphemies against the majesty of God affirming with the Epicures
that the world has neither beginning nor ending: secondly, by practice to
scorn Gods promises and threatenings. 2. Pet. 3.4. Exodus 5.2. and all his holy
worship and service. Mal. 3.13.

Quest. 63. What is the third sin here forbidden?
Ans. The gross and highest kind of Idolatry: which is to worship, love, or
trust in any thing, or to set up any thing in the stead and place of Iehoua: as
the old Pagans did: first, the men of Babell had The Tabernacles of Daughters,
or the anointing of daughters.
Succoth-Benoch. 2. King. 17.30. Secondly, the men of Cuth, Nergal. ibid.
Thirdly, the men of Hamath had The fire of the sea.
Ashima. ibid. Fourthly, the Auims made Prophesying a vision some oracle of
Satan
Nibhaz and Tartak ibid. Fifthly, the Sepharuims The power of the king.
Adrammelech and Anammelech. ibid. Sixthly, As stroking.
Chemosh was the God of the Moabites. 1. King. 11.33. Number. 21.29. Seauenthly,
Baal and Riches.
Ashteroth of the Sidonimas. Iud. 2.11. 1. King. 5.11. 2. King. 23.10. Eighthly,
A Fish.
Dagon was the God of the Phillistines. Iud. 16.23. Ninthly, Their king of
Counsel.
Milcom or Molech was the God of the Amonites. 1. King. 11.5. Tenthly, Baal a
Lord, it was a general name for all Idols, because they were as Lords and
commanders of all their worship specialy.

Baal-berith. Judge. 8 33. Baal-peor. Number. 25.3.


Baal-zebub was the God of Eckron. 2. King. 1.6. Eleauenthly, Mahomet is the
Turks Prophet him they call upon and worship. Twelftly, Satan is the God of
all witches and wizards, to whom they bind themselves either by a secret false
faith to worship, and follow, or by an open covenant prostitute themselves unto
him to serve him in any kind of abomination he shall command them to
practice.

Quest. 64. I pray you let us hear more at large of the Idolatry of
witchcraft: do witches so worship the Devil as men say?
Ans. Yea, and all such as seek after them to consult by them with Satan.
Every man is that in truth that he is in the hour of temptation and day of
affliction.

First, Saul in his calamity could no way be comforted: he had killed the holy
Priests and prophets, a cruel tyrant and great contemner of the word of God*
therefore he seeks to Satan by witchcraft. 1. Sam. 2.8.

Secondly, Balak when his people were vexed in their minds, and in great fear
of Israel, Number. 22. ve. 6. Josh. 13.22.
he sent with all speed to Balaam the wizard: grounded upon this false and
devilish persuasion, I know whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou
cursest is cursed.

Thirdly, when the Lod plagued the great Cities of the Phillistines, Ashdod
(where the Temple of Dagon was) and Gath the kings city, and Ekron (famous for
Baal-zebub the God of Ekron) for the profanation and contempt of his Arc and
holy service, in their greatest misery they consult with their priests and
wizards how they may best escape that hand of God which then plagued them. 1.
Sam. 6.2.

Fourthly, when Nabuchadnezzar was troubled with his dreams, albeit he had
Daniell and his fellows ten times wiser then all the inchanters of his
kingdom. Dan. 1.20. yet his rest is most on his own Inchanters, Astrologians,
Sorcerers Chaldeans, and by these, and in trusting their lies, his greatest
affiance is in the Devil which sent them. Dan. 2.2.

Fifthly, when Belshasher scorned God and his worship: God smote him with an
exceeding trembling in his heart by the sight of the handwriting which
appeared: he then forth with seeks this remedy, he cries aloud that they
should bring the Astrologians, the Chaldeans and Soothsayers to comfort him
Dan. 5.7. And thus do unbelievers and false worshippers seek to the Devil
and to his instruments in their troubles: But we must remember the name of the
Lord our God. Psalm. 20.7

Egypt and Chalde did greatly delight to profess these abominable faculties.
These nations provided for their wizards liberally: they had their ordinary
granted by the king: Genesis 47. ver. 22. And of all customs and tributes the
first part was the Priests, that is, for the wizards, the second the kings the
third the Soldiers. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 2. cap. 3

Quest. 65. But it is hard to know a witch, few as yet of the learned can
define a witch: and therefore it is a hard judgment to condemn all for
witches that men call wise men, and wise women?
Exodus 22. Deuteronomy.
Ans. First, the Lord making a Law against witchcraft, as well as against
adultery: and punishing both with death, thought it not so hard to find out
these sinners in all ages of the world.

Secondly, again repeating his Law, and making it more plain unto us: Deuteronomy.
18.10.11. ver. he charge them that if they found any making profession or
practicing in any of the kinds of witchcraft there specified, a regarder of
times, a marker of the flying of fowls, a Sorcerer, etc. he should be
reputed a witch, or a wizard, and suffer for his profession, albeit his secret
practices with Satan were never known to any man.

Thirdly, If witches and wizards being sought after, could be known after
inquisition in Samuels times, much more in our time, because of the great light
of the Gospel to discover them: but we read that the inquisitors of those
times found them and swept the Land near hand clean of them. 1. Sam. 28.12.
therefore they may in like manner be discovered in our time.

Fourthly, again the works of the flesh are manifest, not hard to be
discerned: Gal. 5.22.
witchcraft is one of the works of the flesh, and it is not so strange and hard
to be discerned.

Quest. 66. I grant a witch may be discerned and discovered: but it is hard
for every man to know them.
Ans. Not so, a man of mean gifts assisted by Gods holy word and spirit may
soon discover them. If it were not so, it were hard for the Lord to make a law
against such, adding a fearful commination against them. Leu. 20.6.27. The
Lords meaning is, if any were known by profession or practice (as we see to
this day there are not a few) to be addicted to any of those forbidden
faculties. Deuteronomy. 18.10. that then no man presume to consult with such for any
cause whatsoever.

Quest. 67. Now proceed to the fourth sin forbidden us in this Law.
Ans. Infidelity and distrust in God be here forbidden and condemned as great
enemies to Gods holy worship and service.

An unbelieving heart, is a heart which does refuse to hear, to believe, and to
obey the holy written word of God: this heart every man has by nature. Genesis
6.4.5.6. Ier. 17.9. but their unbelief is far greater* which have received
some light and taste of the good word of God, and yet after this refuse to
believe. Signs of the heart possessed with unbelief are these.

First, some secret signs be these: first, to love and like, to rejoice to
hear, and speak more of the creatures then of the creator and his word, as of
riches. Mat. 6.24. pleasures. Luke 8.14. bellicheere* Phil. 3.19. children
parents, and parents children. Mat. 10.37. etc. secondly, an unclean filthy
conscience delighting and sleeping in sin, argues unbelief.

Secondly, more manifest and open signs be these: first, to reject the
Gospel, and to be utterly ignorant after the long use of the means. 2. Cor.
4.4. secondly, to tempt God. Reasons to persuade and to preserve us against
unbelief: are these.

First, for that unbelief causes apostacy. Heb. 3.12. by faith we be knit
to God through Jesus Christ Ephe. 3.12. So by unbelief we fall away from God.
Job. 21.14. and 22.21.

Secondly, a sin that does most highly displease God, and which he spares
not to plague Number. 14.11. and to punish in his best children. Number. 20.12.

Thirdly, a sin that binds (as it were) the hands of Christ, and keeps back
many blessings from us. Mar. 6.5. Mat. 17.17. John. 20.27.

Fourthly, the very great root of all sin is unbelief, the first sin of
our first parents. Genesis 3.2.3.4. and a strong bar to keep us from the
everlasting rest. Heb. 3. and 4. Chap. Luke 12.4. Reave. 21.7.

Fifthly, as men suffer their hearts to grow in unbelief, or their hearts to
be possessed with this sin, so they grow daily in the contempt of God,
hardness of heart, and carnal security.

Quest. 68. Thus far then having heard of the obedience and disobedience of
this first law: let us see what use may be made of this: Of the use of the
first Commandment and manner how we are to apply our selves. for our
examination thereby
first to humble and to reclaim the man without Ephesians. 2 12.
Christ: secondly, to confirm and to direct the Romans 8.1. 2. Cor. 13.5.
man in Christ, that is, every living member of Jesus Christ.

Ans. First, let the man without Christ or the deformed Adam set before him
this Law as his judge, to pronounce the true sentence of justice against him on
this manner.

The spirit of God (the best expounder of this Law) by his Prophet Moses, and
the Apostle Paul says, that they be accursed that continue not in all things
written in this law to do them. The man unrepentant in this wise.

1. By the curse is meant the everlasting maledict and wrath of God.

2. The Lord requires doing

3. All.

4. Continually.




But I am so far from doing all, that I have done nothing that is here
commanded: Nay I have done some of the clean contrary evils here forbidden:
and that continually from my youth up unto this present time, as may apppeare
(if being arraigned, and examined in the presence of God according to this Law)
my conscience must plead guilty to all the parts and branches of this first
Law of God.

First, the Lord requires knowledge in all his servants, that they may love him
and fear him, etc. But I have not known him by his word, and but darkly by
his works: Nay what is worse, I have in heart most affected ignorance: I have
thought often that there is no God: I am ready to worship any false God, and to
be of any religion, witn any Prince in any nation under heaven, as may best
serve for my present peace and liberty on earth. And I have thought it good
wisdom for ease in troubles to seek to all witches and wizards, and if need
were for my further good, to worship the Devil himself, in this blindness
and unbelief have I lived: and therefore my conscience cries guilty, and by
this light which God here sets before me, I must confess that I am justly
accursed and under the most fearful condemnation of God, to be tormented in
hell for evermore.

Secondly, let the man in Christ, The man repentant in this wise.
or now desiring to be in Christ, set this glass before him on this manner.
First, set against the curse of the Law, that most sweet and comfortable
promise of the Gospel. Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Secondly,
mark and observe well wherein thou art short of the obedience of this Law, in
any of the branches before specified, or have fallen into the contrary sins
forbidden: let the meditation of Gods love in Christ, and the sight of thy
sins here set before thee draw from thee daily some unfeigned tears of
repentance. Luke. 7.47. for by walking uprightly in the obedience of this Law
thou may show the power of Christ dwelling in thee. Psa. 119.1. 1. Pet. 2.9.
Thirdly, that it may truly appear that thou art in Christ, and Jesus Christ in
thee. 2. Cor. 13.5. pray fervently in the spirit.

Quest. 69. Let us hear first what you can say generally of the scope, sum,
sense and parts of the second Law?
Ans. First for the scope, it is this, that with all care and conscience we
worship God in that form he has prescribed in his word and not after man's
invention. The first law was, concerning the duties which do directly concern
the nature and person of God, and touching the substance of his worship: this
Law is concerning the form and manner of his service: and here the question is
answered (which has most disquieted the Chruch in all ages) who shall
prescribe the form of Gods worship? shall Angels? shall men? shall the Church?
shall Councels? shall the learned and the wise, or shall every man serve God
according to the imaginations of his own heart? The answer is, that when we
have made choice of Iehoua for our God, and rejected all false Gods, according
to his first Law: least our minds should invent him any service, he has here
prescribed laws himself for his own most divine and spiritual service.

Secondly, the sum therefore of this Law in few words it is this: worship the
Lord thy God according to his revealed will written in his word, and never
presume to offer him any will worship of humane invention.

Thirdly, for the sense: the words are these: Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image. The Lords meaning is not to forbid all making of Images, for
God did allow and command many to be made by Bezaleel and Aholiab. Ex. 31.1.2.
and 35.30. 1. King. 8. Blind worshippers sought often to represent the true God
by an Idol, as, Hosh. 2.16. and Exodus 32.5.
and Salomons Temple was richly adorned with Cherubins and Images of gold and
silver: The Lord then here first forbids a man to make any image to represent
him, as is very manifest. Deuteronomy. 4.15. where he charge them not to represent
him by any thing, adding this reason. verse 12. you heard the voice of words
but saw no similitude save a voice: teaching us that he can better instruct us
by his word then by any pictures.

Nor the likeness of any thing in heaven above: God forbids here to make
any image of any false God, which can be imagined, seen, or known to be in
heaven, in earth, or in the waters. Deuteronomy. 4. in the heavens, as Stars ver.
19. Angels, Saints: in the air, as fethered fowls. ver. 17. secondly, the
likeness of any thing on earth, as man and beasts. ver. 18. thirdly, of things
under the earth in the waters, Dagon was formed like a fish. 1. Sa. 5.1.2.
as of any fishes. ver. 18.

Thou shall neither bow thy self unto them, nor serve them: here we be
forbidden all manner of service unto an Idol, and unto the true God before an
Idol. By bowing, is meant all manner of bodily worship, capping, kneeling,
kissing, dancing before the Idol. Exodus 32. or by any such sign to favor or
like them, serve them, or worship them.

The general here seems to be put after the special: that no manner of
service be done to Idols, or to God in Idols or images: for that Idolaters can
worship Idols, and God in Idols being far absent from them, by vows, by
gifts, etc. as well appears in the Popish superstition. Arguments. 1 2 3


For I the Lord thy God, as before in the preface, am a mighty God, that is,
he is able with a strong hand to plague thee for all false worship, as he did
all Israel. 2. Kin. 17.20. and 32.41. They feared God and served their Images
therefore the Lord by a strong hand cast off all the seed of Israel: Mal.
1.16.8* 14.
if thou serve a man, thou must do as he appoynteth: if a mighty man it is
dangerous to do otherwise.

4 No cause in us he should love us, much less be ielous over us.
And a Jealous God: God has bound himself as by a special covenant in a holy
marriage with his people. Esaias. 54.5. Ephe. 5.26.27. when therefore men estrange
their love and service to any thing else, then he cries out by his spirit,
that he is provoked to jealousy by spiritual whoredom. Hosh. 1.2. Chap.
look how deeply it smites the heart of the loving husband, that his wife and
spouse follow a stranger: so in like manner is it between us and the
Almighty, when we impart his worship to any other, or serve him not as he
commands: But jealousy (says Solomon. Pro. 6.34.) is the rage of man: so
kindling his ire that he will not spare in the day of vengeance: Therefore
avoid all spiritual whordome, for the Lord when he is provoked to jealousy
is a consuming fire. Heb. 12. he uses often this complaint, They have moved
me to jealousy with that which is not God, they have provoked me to anger with
their vanities. 5.
Deu. 29.20. Ezech. 8.2.

Visiting the iniquity: God is said to visit his people when he comes against
them with the sword of 1. Sam. 15.23. Mat. 23.24. Exodus 17.14. Deuteronomy. 25.17. Two
effects of jealousy.
justice. These two reasons following are two fruits and effects of jealousy.
The first is an exceeding long anger, the second is an exceeding love and
mercy, for jealousy abounds in these two affections. There is a notable
example of this jealousy. An example of Gods jealousy. Exodus 33 10 11. to be
diligently marked.
Exodus 32. for the golden calfe: for Moses with all his holy tears and prayers
could not quench the flame of it verse 10.11.12.13. yea, notwithstanding, that
Calfe was burnt in the fire, ground to powder, and strowed upon water, and the
idolaters drunk of it. ver. 20. notwithstanding three thousand men were slain
by the Levites at that time ver. 28. notwithstanding that Moses proceeds in
most fervent prayer, as it were standing in the gappe between Gods wrath and
his people, and crying, that if God would not be appeased, that he would raze
him out of the book of life. ver. 32. yet the Lord as not respecting all the
promises, and hardly appeased for the time, answers, In the day of my
visitation, I will visit their sin upon them. ver. 32. So we see the Lord
provoked to jealousy is a consuming fire.

Of Fathers upon their Children: we be taught how this justice is executed.
Ezech. 18.3. for the Jews then complained of injustice, that they should be
punished for the iniquity of their Fathers: they are there answered, that the
soul which sins shall dye the death, where they were taught, that they
committing the same Idolatry with their Fathers, or continuing the same or the
like, were in the same condemnation: yea, they do increase wrath upon
themselves, they are first pinched for their own, and then not repenting, for
their fathers superstition, but continuing in their steps their judgments are
justly doubled upon them: for so it follows in the words of the Law (...) is,
being of full age, (...).

Object. But Infants hate not God? Ans. True it is they commit no action of
hatred, until they come to years of discreation, but only are possessed with
natural corruption and disposition unto evil. The old Wolf deuoureth the
sheep, the young sucking whelps do not so, not for want of nature, but for
want of strength. The spawne of all sin and iniquity is in all the sons of
men from their infancy. Ep. 2.3.

Unto the third and fourth generation: By the third generation, I take it is
meant the Nephue, and by the fourth his son. The Lord here stays, first,
for that since this Law was delivered in Sinai, the fathers saw no more
discents in their progeny but the third and fourth generation. Again, a
second reason may be for that in the fourth generation the natural affection
of kindred begins to dye and wear away.

Object. And will the Lord so long remember anger Ans. So long, if Children
repent not, but persist in the idolatrous steps of their fore fathers.
Wherefore it stands us all in this land in hand not only to reject the
Romish superstition, but also to addict our selves (in unfeigned repentance for
the Idolatry of our Fathers) to worship Jehovah in spirit and truth, according
to his holy will revealed in the Gospel. John 4.

Of them that hate me: first, when I turn from Gods Law to follow
will worship, I am here taught that I do in heart hate the Lord, intend and
pretend what I can to the contrary: secondly, that both superstitious and
profane parents which do not bring up their children in the true worship of
God: but suffer them to be infected with superstition, are very murderers of
their own children.

The sixth argument. Showing mercy unto thousands* here is the last argument to
contain us in the obedience of this Law. The true worshipper is blessed in his
progeny for many generations, for the Lord is strong, mighty, merciful and
gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy
for thousands* Exodus 34.6.7. Psalm. 103.5.

First, the rich promises of Gods free grace and mercy in Christ, which
concern this life present, and that which is to come. 1. Tim. 4.8. do
appertain to the true worshippers of God and to their children. If but a mean
Prince would thus bind himself to us, and to our children, we would never
forget the clemency: and often solicit him for accomplishment thereof, how
much more bound be we to remember the rich mercies of God in Jesus Christ,
Ephe. 4.
so often promised to the Godly and his clildren. Pro. 20.7. he that walks
in his integrity is just, and blessed shall his children be after him.

Secondly, Of them which love me and keep my commandment: this amplification
is added to warn children to follow the steps of their religious parents, and
not of their superstitious forefathers: for God binds himself only to the
obedient children of faithful beeleeuing parents: as the Psalmist right well
expounds it. Psalm. 103.17.18. The loving kindness of the Lord endures for
ever and ever, upon them that fear him, and his righteousness upon childrens
children, unto them that keep his covenant, and think upon his commandments
to do them.

Thirdly, here we be taught, that the true love of God, and the keeping of
his commandments are inseparable. The love of God is the fountain of all true
obedience. John. 8.47. he that is of God, hears Gods word, ye therefore hear
them not, because ye are not of God: if ye love me keep my commandments.
The parts, or special branches of this law are these.

The first general branch is, the Law it self, concerning the form of Gods
holy worship: and here note generally two branches: first, concerning the
erecting of an Idol or Image to represent. 1. the true God, Father, Son and
holy Ghost 2. or any false, or supposed God to be worshipped by it, either in
heaven, as Stars, Birds: or in earth, man or beast: or in the waters, as
fishes: secondly, concerning the worshipping of the true God, 1. Before an
Idol, 2. Or the false God in any of these visible forms.

The second general branch is, confirmation and ratification of this Law, by
these six reasons. 1. I am Iehoua. 2. I am thy Lord and God. 3. I am a mighty
God. 4. I am a jealous God. 5. I visit the sins of the Fathers to the third
and fourth generation. 6. I show mercy to thousands etc.

Quest. 70. Now let us hear, what be the special branches of obedience
required of Gods people in this Law?
Ans. In this second Law the Lord charge all his people to worship him in
that form and manner which he has himself prescribed in his word, therefore
our first care must be to keep rules in the principal branches and parts of
his worship and service prescribed unto us, which are these.

The first principal branch of the holy worship of God

The second branch of Gods holy worship here commanded,

The third branch, is the right form of invocation and

The fourth and last special form, to be respected of gods

Question. 71. First, let me hear breefely, what does the Lord require of his
Ministers touching the form of preaching and dispensation of his word.

Ans. If God has prescribed his word unto man in other special branches of
his worship: and bound his people to a prescript form from the which they
may not decline, much more in preaching, which is one principal part of his
holy service and worship. The rules commanded and appertaining to this form of
Gods holy worship are these following.

1. Preach the pure word of God not men's inventions.
First, the faithful dispenser of Gods mysteries, must be sure that he preach
the very words of God. 1. Pet. 4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as the
words of God, for that the word of God only is the immortal seed and
instrument of the regeneration of Gods elect. James. 1.18. of his own will he
begat us by the word of truth. 1. Pet. 1.2 3. and again, to this end give
attendance unto reading. 2. Tim. 1.13.

2. Wisdom in application.
Secondly, in dispensing the word of reconciliation committed to the true
Ministers of Christ, as their only scope must be thereby to reconsile men
unto God. 2. Cor. 5.19.20.2. So to effect this: they must not content
themselves generally to propound the same to Gods people, but with all care and
conscience so to apply their holy sermons as may most serve for the 2. Cor.
14.12.26.
edification of Gods people. Ephesians. 4.11. desiring ever to approve their
ministry unto the consciences of men in the sight of God. 2. Cor. 4.2. and
3.17. and 5.11.

Thirdly, that their ministry may take good effect in the souls of Gods elect
to their edificasion: the holy Ghost sets before them, and prescribes unto
them special heads and grounds to follow: that all their speeches must ever
tend, first, to teach, called (...), doctrine serving to inform the mind
touching the Articles of Faith, or to comfort, secondly, to reprove, called
(...), which tends to reduce the minds of men from error in doctrine, thirdly
to instruct in holiness and true righteousness called (...), which instruction
serves to inform men touching their life and conversation, that Gods people
may be zealous in all good works. 2. Tim. 3.16. Tit. 1.9. fourthly, to correct
called (...), which serves to reduce men from ungodliness and
unrighteousness. 4. Pastors life.


Fourthly, to this holy worship is required in the true minister of God, that
by life or doctrine he give none occasion of offense to any in the Church of
God. But contrarily, 1. Tim. 4.12. that he be unto them that believe an
example, in word, in conversation, in love, in the spirit, in the faith, and in
pureness. 5. Prayer.


Lastly, Gods spirit warns all his servants in this high calling, that they
never cease crying and calling upon God; that he would fructify and bless
that which they have sown and planted. 1. Sam. 12.23. saying, Romans 1.7.8. 1.
Cor. 1.1. 2. Cor. 1.2.3.
Let that sin be far from me, that I should cease to pray for you, or to
teach you the good and right way. For so shall they purchase a good name and
great liberty in the faith. 1. Tim. 2.13.

Que. 72. The second branch of Gods worship here commanded, is the fruitful
reading and hearing of Gods word preached: what special rules have you
concerning this duty?
Ans. Such as will profit specially by the public ministry of Gods word
preached must remember three things: first, a careful preparation before:
secondly, a religious attention for the time present: thirdly, a godly
meditation after the public exercises of religion.

First, for our private preparation: this the Lord commands us. Eccles 4.17.
Take heed to thy foot when thou enterest into the house of God, and be more
near to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools: for they know not that
they do evil. And this preparation is called our sanctification. Exodus 19.10.
Ioell. 2.15. To this preparation and sanctification belong two things: first,
what we must embrace and practice, that we may profit by the public
ministry: secondly, we must know what we must reject and avoid, as the
special lets of the fruitful hearing of the word of God preached: which are
these.

The first Let. Intemperancy.
First all intemperancie, or feasting, or excess of meats the day before the
Saboth, as also on the Saboth day specially: for full bellies have empty
souls, and such as feed largely on pleasant meats can not so well taste, much
less feed on the good word of God. The Apostles example and practice is a good
rule for preacher and people 1. Cor. 9.27. I beat down my body, and bring it to
subjection, least by any means after I have preached to others, I my self
should be as an abject.

2. Distracting cares.
Secondly, we must empty our hearts, as at all times, of all distracting
cares. Mat. 6. so specially on the Saboth day of all ordinary and lawful
cares of this life, for that we come to meet the Lord into his house, and to
hear him, the same is to be said also of all the pleasures and delights of
this life, for that Christ our master teaches us that cares and pleasures
choke the word, and cause that it cannot possibly possess the heart to bring
forth any fruit acceptable unto God. Luke. 8. Mar. 4. Mat. 13.

3. Pride. The Prophet Daniell and Apollo are 2. notable examples against this
pride, for they were content to be taught by their inferious. and Job. 4.
Choice of Teachers.
Thirdly, pride of heart, for some measure of knowledge, and some gifts
received: against this evil distemper of mind, set ever before thee: first,
the general charge of God to all men, to attend the public ministry of his
word. Reave. 2.11. Romans 10.14. secondly, the practice of the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles. Psalm. 122.1. Act. 18.

Fourthly, we must avoid a proud schismatic and partial choice of
teachers, which is bred either of a wicked affection, or for some diversity of
gods gifts in the teachers. This was Achabs sin. 1. King. 22.8. and Felix was
not unlike affected. Act. 24.25. 1. Cor. 3. and 4. Chap. The Apostle blames the
Corinths greatly, for this affectionate hearing, respecting some external
conditions, and inequality of gifts. We must remember that Gods graces are
diverse: Ephesians. 6.
Some abound in knowledge, and want the grace of utterance: Some pierce the
heart with preaching Gods Law: some refresh the wearied soul with preaching of
the Gospel: Some profit much, and can do best in public preaching: Some can
do better in private conference. Accept of all, and praise God for his graces
in the meanest of his servants.

Fifthly, another evil here to be avoided, 5. prejudice against the person.
is a blind prejudice, and wicked conceit against their persons: and this
malady will never suffer thee to profit by their preaching and ministry.

Sixthly, 6. Carnal security.
carnal security and impenitencie causes the ministry of Gods word to be
fruitless in us: when a man carries with him a wicked resolution to lie in
sin, saying, such and such I am, and so I purpose to continue let God or the
preacher say what they can, I live by lying and swearing, or by usury, and so I
will live still, God will not reveal his secrets to such hearts. Psa. 25.14.
But for their contempt gives them over to many spiritual plagues which they
feel not, John. 12.40. Es. 6.9.7. Satan.
some for many years. Romans 1.28. 2. The. 2.11.

Seauenthly, the last let and enemy in this holy work, is Satan, who ever
follows as a companion with all and every one of the rest aforegoing, he takes
away the word from some immediately. Mark. 4.15. from others by degrees, and as
occasions best serve him, he ever watches his time to choke the world, and
to make it fruitless. Luk 8. Mat. 13.

Quest. 73. Thus far what evils we ought to avoid in our private
preparation: Now what must we do that we may be fit to attend the public
ministry?
Ans. When a man has well emptied himself of all the former evils, then let
him remember a preparation and sanctification, first, of the mind, by reading
and meditation: secondly, of the heart, by fasting and prayer.

First, to prepare the mind: preaching and reading must never be severed. In
reading regard for matter, 1. Reading.
that specially which concerns thee, and carefully the book and text which is
handled, this was the practice of the holy Prophets. Daniell. 9.2. and David.
Psalm. 119. of the people of God. Act, 17.11.

Secondly, let meditation follow: 2. Meditation.
for this is the life of reading and of all good learning. Psalm. 1.2. and
119.97. If the Devil cannot keep us from reading he will endeavor to bar
us from meditation.

Secondly, prepare the heart, for there rests the immortal seed of
regeneration. Pro. 4.4. Psalm. 119.11. Luke. 8.15. This preparation is first by
prayer, 1. Prayer.
pray earnestly for a good heart: examine carefully and soundly the affections
of thine heart, how sinceere they be: for we do not often that we know to
be best, but that our heart fancieth and likes as best. And here know this
that a willing desire to learn is a singular grace of God, pray heartely for
it, that the word may be as a sweet and comfortable food unto thy soul. Job.
23.12. for the heart prepared has two good properties: first, a most reverend
fear of Gods word. Esaias. 66.2.3. secondly, an hungring desire to feed upon
it, and to receive it: this desire is sometimes called faith. Io. 4.39.42. Heb.
4.2.

2. Fasting.
Next fasting is hereunto a special help, as appears in the practice of the
Godly in all ages.

Quest. 74. So much for preparation before: what say you for attention, which
is the second duty required in him which will hear the word of God to his
salvation?
Ans. Here the spirit of God seems to require of us these three things: first
a diligent attention of the ear to hear: secondly, a considerate intention of
the mind to conceive: thirdly, a faithful retention of the heart to hold
fast, and keep the holy will of God revealed.

1. Attention.
First, for attention, God requires the ear specially and the eye to attend on
him while he speaks: the ear. Eccles. 4.17. Romans 10.14. Prou. 2.1.2. Psalm.
45.10. the eye. Luke. 4.20. Nehe. 8.3. Luke. 5.1. Act. 8.6. and 10.33. Origin
hom. 12. in Exodus
contrary to this reverend attention are these sins: sleeping, talking,
gazing, reading in the holy assemblies.

Secondly, God requires a godly mind to consider well and seriously of the
holy word which is taught: this will cause men to observe wisely the book, the
text, and the doctrines which are delivered: 2. Intention.
a fearful sign of wrath is it to hear much and to understand nothing, this
speaks the Apostle. 2. Cor. 4.3.4. If the Gospel be then hid, it is hid to
them that are lost: In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds: that
is of infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the
Image of God, should not shine unto them. Deuteronomy. 29.4. here let it not content
thee to observe some words or sillables or sentences: but wisely consider of
all doctrines and exhortations, and learn to refer all to special heads and
grounds of the Catechism: This intention is a true note of the Lords work in
opening the heart. Act. 16.14.

Thirdly, 3. Retention.
whereas God here requires a faithful retention of the heart: know this that a
good heart to keep the word is a great treasure and a special grace of Gods
holy spirit. And this heart men have, which are so changed and so renewed in
heart, that they can find in their own hearts those lively impressions and
forms of doctrine, as it were, effectually graven or pictured in their own
hearts, by the working of Gods spirit in the ministry of the word. Romans 6.17.
and obey from the heart unto the form of the doctrine, whereunto they are
delivered, desiring to retain the word that they may fruitfully practice it.
Luke. 8.15. Ioh. 13.17. Mat, 7.21.

Quest. 75. And what is to be done after that we have heard the word preached?
Ans. Here again God requires meditation of us that we may possess the good
things we have heard, and that they may have deeper impression in us. This
meditation is either with our selves, or with others. Meditation with our
selves is either, of the mind, or of the heart. The meditation of the mind is
a discoursing with our own understanding of all that we have heard and can
remember: a number are well affected with the word in the Church, and for want
of this exercise when they are gone, their affection soon dies in them. And
here we labor yet better, for the clearing and understanding (by the light of
the Scriptures) of all such doctrines as we have received. Psalm. 119. This
meditation the Heathen call the refining of judgment, the life of all good
learning. This serves well for the increase of knowledge and sound judgment.

The meditation of the heart follows after: and here by due examination of our
hearts, we cause the things we have heard and well conceived to work upon
our hearts and affections. Act. 2.37. We must first settle our judgment
before we either fear or chere up our hearts, least we have false fears, or
false joys: many have judgment and yet have not their hearts purged, because
thy join not affection with judgment.

Meditation with others is either with god, or men. Meditation with God, is by
prayer or in prayer, to remember and to recite the good things we have heard
before the Lord, desiring his holy spirit to write and to engraue the same in
our hearts according to his holy promise. Ier. 32. Meditation with men: we
call conference with the Godly, and this is with the brethren, either of the
same congregation which heard with us, as our own family Act. 17. and others.
Mal. 3.16. 1. Pet. 3.15.16. or the Godly Pastors and Teachers themselves if
need require. Act. 2.37.13.42. Mar. 4.10.

And thus continuing in these holy exercises, the true worshipper shall attain
by degrees Gods gracious blessing in time an assurance of spiritual wisdom
and understanding. Col. 2.2. his weak faith. Mat. 17. shall be made strong in
Christ, he shall have an assurance of faith, Romans 4.21. his love shall be
from the heart, and unfeigned: and lastly he shall attain a sound judgment to
discern good and evil. Heb. 5.14. Phil. 1.9.

Quest. 76. Now let us come to the third form of Gods worship which is
invocation: and here first let us hear breefly how the Lord stirs up his
people to this kind of worship: and next what special rules be given to bind
us to the form he has prescribed in his word.
1. Gods charge.
Ans. Motives unto prayer are these following. First, Gods charge ought to move
us unto this holy exercise and duty. Psalm. 50.14.15. Romans 12.11.12.

2. Gods promise.
Secondly, God promises many rich graces and blessings to those which worship
him in spirit and truth. Psalm. 50.14. Luke. 11.10. Mat. 7.

Thirdly, he assures us that the spirit of prayer is a singular Romans 8.14.15.
Act. 9.14. 1. Cor. 1.2. Zac. 12.10.11. for the wicked cannot pray. Psalm. 14.3.4.

Fourthly, 4. A weapon against the Devil.
there is no one better weapon against the fiery darts of the Devil. Ephe.
6.18. James. 4.7.

Fifthly, examples: our Lord and Savior Christ spent whole nights, or a great
part of the night in prayer. 5. Examples.
Luke. 21.27. Daniell three weeks. Chap. 9. and Nehemias continued a great
part of the year in fasting and prayer, for Gods Church and people. Nehem. 1.
and 2. Chapters.

Sixthly, 6. A familiar talk with God.
prayer is a familiar talk with God before the throne of grace, where we are
promised (if we come in the faith of Christ) we shall find mercy and grace
to help in time of need. Heb. 4.16. Ephesians. 3.12.

Seauenthly, ever set before thine eyes, 7. Effect. Saint James puts us in
mind of this argument. chap. 5. ver. 17.
how greatly the prayers of the faithful have prevailed with the Lord in all
ages: Moses cries unto God against Egypt. Exodus 14.15. God gave then a strange
deliverance against Amalceh, so long, as he fainted not in prayer Israel
prevailed. Exodus 17.11. Again, when Gods wrath was ready to break forth to
consume all the congregation for Idolatry: by prayer it was quenched and
restrained. Exodus 32.10. saying, now let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot,
for I will consume them. Josh 7.8. 1. Sam. 12. Ezra 9. Nehem. 1.2.9.
When Aoron stood praying beetweene the living and the dead, the plague ceased.
Number. 16.48. So we read of the prayers of Joshua, Samuel, David, Elias, Ezra,
Nehemias, Daniell, and other Prophets.

But it may be objected, we cannot so prevail with God as those holy men did.
James. 5.17.
Ans. Saint James answers that Elias was a man subject to like passions as
we are: and the Apostle Paul. Act 14.15. we be men subject to the like
passions as ye be.

Now, concerning the rules of Gods word in this form of Gods holy worship:
they are these following. 1. Person in grace.


First, the person which will have his prayers accepted of God, must first see
that himself be in favor and grace with God by faith in Jesus Christ: for a
polluted person which has a polluted soul and conscience, Act. 15 9.
defiles the most holy exercises of religion Tit. 1.15.16. Hag. 2.13.14. for
faith grounded upon the word of promise is the mother of all prayers, which
have acceptance with God. Iame. 1.6.7.

2. A righteous. man.
Secondly, he that will be heard of God in prayer, and prevail with him for
graces desired, must be a righteous man, Psalm. 14 4.
one that works righteousness. James. 5.16. for the contrary it is written,
God hears not sinners. John. 9.31. and again. Pro. 28.9. he that turns
away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer is abominable.

Thirdly, God does not only require in this worship that a man be in grace
with him through Christ, and righteous in life, but also that when soever he
speaks unto him, he come with a renewed repentance: and put up every petition
and request in faith, for a man may be a faithful person generally, and yet
an unbeliever in particular. as the disciples. Mat. 17. Abraham. Genesis 12.
Zachary. Luke. 1. as James. 5.15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick: Romans
14.23. Mar. 11.24. Mat. 9.22.28.
that is, if the godly ministers and brethren carry with them a holy persuasion
that through Jesus Christ their prayers shall gain mercies and blessings for
the sick, they shall be heard, and the weak shall be comforted, for every
request must be in faith, for no thing can please God without faith. Romans
14.23. Heb. 11.6. and no prayer is to be offered unto God, without the
mediator Jesus Christ.

4. Every petion must be grounded on some promise.
Fourthly, the Lord also requires of us in his word that we make no requests
nor put up any petition unto him for any thing whereof we have no express
promise in his word. This Saint John teaches us. 1. John. 5.14.15. And this is
the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask of him according to his
will, he hears us, and if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask,
we know that we have the petitions that we have desired of him.

Fifthly, in every petition we make unto God, 5. We must express two things in
prayer.
we must express two things: first, a sense and feeling of our wants: and
this will cause our prayer to be fervent. James. 5.16. The prayer of a
righteous man avails much if it be fervent. Secondly, a desire to obtain of
him that grace whereof we stand in need. Heb. 4.16.

Sixthly, 6. To avoid battologies and many words in prayer.
when we speak unto God we must not use any long continued speech,
rashness, nor many words, for this he speaks in a special charge concerning
this: Be not rash in thy mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty, to utter any
thing before God, for God is in the heavens and thou art on the earth,
therefore let thy words be few. Ecclesi. 5.2. and Christ speaks thus: When
thou prayest use no vain repetition as the heathen: for they think to be
heard for their much babbling, be ye not like them therefore, for your
heavenly father knows whereof ye have need, before ye ask of him. Mat.
6.7.8. and thus the Apostle bids us pray continually. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. the
Lords meaning is, not that we should ever be in lip-labor, and omit all
other duties; but that beside our morning and evening sacrifice, we should at
all times and in all occasions commend in our spirits the desires of our
hearts, our words and works unto God in the name of Jesus Christ.

Seauenthly, 7. The afflicted mind prays best, even the^ often when he thinks
his prayers be rejected.
we must not in passions of mind desist or be weary, but seek the Lord, and
think upon him the more we be troubled: yea albeit we pray long, yet he
still fills our spirits with anguish: yea albeit we be so buffeted and
astonished that we cannot speak. Psalm. 77.2.3.4.5. notwithstanding I say all
this affliction and trouble: we must neither be persuaded that we do not
pray, nor that God regards us not, for it is an imposture of Satan and an
error of conscience, for the spirit of prayer even in these afflictions helps
our infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought (when we seem to
pray best to our own liking) but the Spirit it self makes request for us,
with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed. Romans 8.26.

Eighthly, meditation is a necessary companion of all holy exercises, 8.
Meditation with prayer.
and specially of prayer: it serves well to prepare us before we talk with
God. Eccles 4.17. and in griefs of mind holy men have ever mixed their prayers
with meditations. as Psalm. 119. and Psalm. 77. the Prophet speaks of himself
that after much mourning and calling upon God: he commined with his own
heart, and his spirit searched diligently.

9. Time and place of prayer.
Ninthly, the true worshippers must also have special regard of place and time
of prayer, for the Lord has given rules for both, albeit we be not tied as
the Jews were, to have respect to Jerusalem for sacrifices, but yet we may at
all times and in all places call upon God, lifting up pure hearts without wrath
or doubting: yet for our private prayers, Christ his charge is, that we pour
them before our heavenly father in secret. Mat. 6.7. and this was his own
practice. Luke. 6.12. and 21.27. Public prayers require a public assembly and
meeting of Gods people into one congregation, and this has a special promise
of Christ: Mat. 18.20. where two or three (that is a small number) are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. The godly mourned much
for their absence from these holy meetings. Psalm. 84.42.43. Time.
Again, for time, the Godly are to divide their times so wisely, that they
forget not their times appointed for this exercise: David compounded with
himself to speak unto God three times in the day, morning, evening, and at
noone time will I pray and make a noise. So did Daniell Chap. 6.10. The morning
is most fit for this service: and God requires ever that we consecrate unto
him the first fruits of the day. Psalm. 5.3. 1. Sam. 1.19.

10 Gesture in prayer.
Tenthly, The gestures of the Saints in prayers are to be observed for our
direction, for they use that form which may best serve the time and place, and
to stir up their hearts and affections unto prayer. Moses prayed kneeling and
lifting up his hands: and when he was weary, he sat down and prayed still
lifting up his hands unto God. Exodus 17.10.11. Solomon prayed standing and
stretching out his hands toward heaven. 1. King. 8.22. Ezra. fell upon his
knees, and spread out his hands unto the Lord God. Chap. 9.5. Nehemias sat
down and wept, and prayed unto God, chap. 1.4. Hezechiah. lying on his sick
bed turned his face to the wall and prayed. 2. King. 20.2. Daniell kneeled on
his knees three times in the day. Our Savior fell upon his face and prayed.
Mat 26.39. David sighed often and wept much in his prayers unto God. Psalm.
6.9.10. and 22.1.2. and 77.2.3.4.

Eleauenthly, 11. Thanksgiving.
in prayer as we must be mindful to call for our wants, so must we never
forget in this holy worship to give thanks for benefits received: both to
prevent the untowardness of nature, which is so unwilling to this, we will
pray often for a thing, but hardly give thanks once: as also to shame our
selves the more, if happily we grow negligent herein. For such is the
corruption of our nature, that some little grief of an evil present (for the
which we can with many sighs and groans call upon God) takes away from us all
the remembrance of former benefits, and so all thankfulness for them: But we
see the godly when they pray most earnestly for that they desire, they give
most humble and hearty thanks for benefits received: first it has been the
order of the Church to begin and end their exercises with praises: secondly,
this exercise shall continue when all other shall cease, thirdly, in civil
matters, either by natural Logic, or cunning Rhetoric, we have learned to
begin a new suit with a thankful commemoration of the old: this we must not
forget in prayer having examples, in David, with others. Psalm. 107.118. First,
public. Exodus 15. Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Chro. 20.26. Secondly; private. Genesis 32.10. Es.
38. Psalm. 103. 1. Cor. 10.31. 1. These. 5. Col. 3. what so ever ye do in word
or deed.

Twelftly, our last care must be in this service (as we be justly
occasioned) publicly and privately to give an edge, and wings unto our prayers
by the exercise of fasting, which is not a virtue but a step to virtue,
yielding a daily help to prayer, for this cause we read often of this staff of
prayer in the practice of the Prophets of God, 12. Fasting.
and Apostles of Christ. Daniel prayed and fasted. Chap. 9.1.2. David fasted
and prayed. 1. Sam. 12.16. Anna fasted and prayed. Luke. 2.37. Our Savior
fasted and prayed. Mat. 4. The Apostles fasted and prayed. Act. 14.23. Such
then as be ignorant of this holy exercise, or having knowledge use it not,
follow not the holy presidents which God has left us in his word, for
instruction and imitation.

Quest. 77. The fourth special form of Gods worship is, the administration
and participation of the holy Sacraments: what rules be given concerning this
form?
1. God himself has ordained his Sacraments in these visible forms.
Ans. First, that ever we consider how God has ordained his Sacraments (by a
special express charge in his written word) to be ministered in certain
known visible signs, and to be continued (in that form and manner he has
prescribed) in his Church to the worlds end.

2. A special promise of grace added to the visible element and action
Secondly, we are bound to consider here how God has to annexed to the outward
element and action a special promise of grace in Christ, and has commanded
these external means, by them to apply and to seal unto the hearts of all
true beeleeuers, all his blessed promises and rich mercies in Jesus Christ.

3. Consider rightly of all Sacramental phrases.
Thirdly, we must endeavor to understand wisely all the Sacramental phrases:
that we may rightly discern beetweene the signs and the thing signified: as
where the Lord calls circumcision the covenant. Genesis 17. the lamb the Pasouer.
Exodus 12. the bread the body of Christ. 1. Cor. 11.23. Baptism our
regeneration. Act. 3. We must advisedly consider how the holy Ghost uses this
manner of speaking: first, to lift up our hearts and eyes that we fix them not
on the external elements, bu^ consider of them as of divine mysteries and
pledges of invisible graces: secondly, for that they carry with them in verity
and truth (by the work of the holy Ghost) unto the true hearted believer, all
the good things which are offered and sealed by them.

Fourthly, 4. The Ministers of Christ must take heed they do not profane his
holiness in the administration of these divine mysteries. Leu. 10.3. Number.
10.12.
here Gods ministers must consider (albeit the substance of the Sacraments does
not depend upon their worthiness or unworthiness) that they be in grace with
God through Jesus Christ: for otherwise they greatly hurt themselves and hinder
others, (as much as in them lies) in dispensing these holy mysteries. Esa.
6.7. Mal. 2.1.2. And they must not decline from the form which Christ has
prescribed in his written word to the worlds end. 1. Cor. 11.23.

Quest. 78. Thus far shall suffice concerning these four special branches of
Gods worship: Occasions of Gods worship.
what occasions and helps of Gods worship be here commanded?
Ans. These following: First, 1. A vow.
a religious and holy vow which may be discribed on this manner. A vow is an
advised and voluntary promise made unto God, Definition.
for the performing of some exercise, which lies in our own power, and free
choice to do or leave undone: and in respect of some circumstance or occasion,
serving fitly to quicken us unto prayer and other holy exercises of religion.
Deu. 23.21. Number. 30.14. Genesis 28.21.22.23.
And here these rules must be kept that we may not vow and promise unto God
any thing unadvisedly: first, we may not * vow things forbidden of God, as are
superstitious exercises, Popish pilgrimages, and the like: secondly, we must
not vow any thing above our strength, as the Popish vow of single life in their
Priests, clean contrary to Christ's words. Mat. 19.11. All men cannot receive
this thing. Thirdly, we must not conceive by our vows and observation of them
any opinion of merit: Fourthly, we must so long observe our vows as it serves
fitly to help us and further us in prayer, and other holy exercises.

Secondly, 2. Godly books.
the help and use of Godly books written according to Gods word may quicken
our zeal in Gods holy worship. Eccles. 12.11.

Thirdly, the Lord here commends unto his people, 3. Schools of good learning.
the erecting and maintaining of all Schools of good learning, as the
seminaries and nurceries of the Prophets, and of his holy ministry. 1. King.
18.13. 2. King. 2.17.

4. Provision for the ministry.
Fourthly, here the Lord requires sufficient provision for his Ministers that
they may do their work with joy and not with care and grief, for that is
unprofitable for Gods people. Heb. 13.17. 1. Tim. 5.17.18. 1. Cor. 9.1.11.

5. Building and repairing of Churches.
Fifthly, here we be commanded the building and maintaining and repairing of
Churches and of all things that belong hereunto.

6. Mercifulnes to the poor.
Sxtly, familiarity with the true worshippers of God, and a liberal and
bountiful hand in releauing and comforting the poor, Christ knits both
together in doctrine. Mat. 6.1. and 14. and Cornelius in practice. Act. 10.
ver. 1.6.7.

Quest. 79. Thus far of the affirmative part, now in the negative what sins
be forgiven?
First, to represent any of the three persons in Trinity by a picture.
Ans. The first and greatest impiety here forbidden, is to represent any
person in the Trinity, by any picture, Image, painted, or formed in any
matter. And here to avoid this evil we ought to consider: first, how prone
our cursed nature is unto this. Gal. 5.22.23.24. and how the blind souls
proceed in this idolatry: for when man has fained in his vain heart that God
is like that picture he has conceived and drawn in his mind, and approved in
his heart: then he purposes to express the picture of his mind, by some
external figure and work of his hand: this done he likes it, so that he
both honoreth it in body, and some invisible God before it in his mind.
Secondly, let us ever advisedly consider what the holy Prophets, Evangelists
and Apostles, (the best expositors of this Law) speak against this practice:
for by them the holy Ghost moves and warns us as follows.

They may not picture Iehoua, nor resemble him by any thing. First, for that
they saw no Image in the day that God spoke the words of this law before them
in Horeb. Deu. 4.15.

Secondly, the Prophets judge it a thing most unreasonable to compare the first
cause of all sense and reason unto blocks which are void of all sense and
reason, David notably opposes God and Idols.
for so we compare idiots for want of reason. Psalm. 115.3.4. Act. 17.25.29. and
to compare an infinite spirit to a finite body, and the incomprehensible and
invisible God unto a stock. Esaias. 40.21. Ier. 10.8. Habacuk. 2.18. for that his
nature is such as no natural thing can resemle him, much less aritficiall, no
heavenly creature can represent him, much less an earthly.

Thirdly, consider well the great charge of God in his Law commanding to
destroy all Images tending to any superstition. Number. 33.52. Exodus 23. Deuteronomy. 7.

Fourthly, we be bound to follow herein the presidents and practice of holy
kings ever abolishing all such monuments of superstition. Asa. 1. King. 15.
Iehu. 2. King. 10.26.27.28. Hezekiah. 2. King. 18. Josias. 2. King. 23 Chap.

Fifthly, the very Gentiles had the same use of their Images, which the Papists
have at this day: for they said, See Gregor. ep. 109. lib. 7. and ep. lib. 9.
and August. in Psalm 113. Images are more able to corrupt blind souls by
reason they have mouths, eyes, ears and feet, the^ to reform them, because
they speak not, see not, hear not, walk not. 2. Ob We may picture Christ.
they did not worship stocks and stones, but the power of God present in them
and by them.

Sixthly, the Devil practiced in and by Images sundry kinds of illusions in
elder ages, as is well known he does even to this day in the blind Popish
superstition.

Seauenthlie, but here they object against all this: first, that the Popish
pictures in Churches, are but lay men's books, to put them in mind of divine
matters, which they can not otherwise so well conceive, and soon forget. Ans.
The holy Ghost answeareth, that there is no agreement nor fellowship between
the Temple of God and Idols. 2. Cor. 6.16. and tells us by his Prophet they
teach lies. Ier. 10.3.8. Habak. 2.18.

Secondly, next it is objected: that albeit it be granted, that we ought not
to think that the Godhead is like to gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art,
and the invention of man. Act. 17.29. And that we may not picture the Father
in the form of an aged man (as the Papists do) for albeit Daniell call him
the ancient of days, yet Saint James tells us there is no shadow nor
appearance of any change in him: yet if it may be granted, that the holy
Ghost may be resembled by a dove, or by cloven tongues as Mat 3.16. Act. 2.3.
Ans. No such pictures can represent him: for the dove was not sent to that end,
but to be a visible sign of the presence of gods holy spirit which is
invisible: as the cloven tongues were afterward a simbole to the same purpose,
where also the wind there mentioned does more fitly represent the spirit, as
Ioh. 3. and the tongues the gifts of the same spirit. So likewise the Dove may
in some sort set before us the graces and gifts of the same love, and
meekness. And to this end the cloud unto the people of the Jews did serve as
a special simbole of the presence of Iehoua, Father, Son and holy Ghost: yet
never painted to resemble God, or to be adored, or to worship God by it in the
Church of the Jews.

3. Object. of the picture of Christ.
Thirdly, it is objected, that the humanity of Christ, and the picture of
Christ crucified may be allowed, not for adoration but in sign of love and
commemoration.

Ans. First, I answer in the words of the Apostle. Gal. 3.1. labor that Jesus
Christ may be so pictured by the preaching of the Gospel in the mind, that
thou may by the eye of faith behold him as clearelie and more effectually
then if he were described in thy sight and crucified before thee: For by
faith we behold him which is invisible. Heb. 11.1.27.

Secondly, I say we be bound to discern between the precious body of the
Son of God, and the sinful carkases of mortal men: for that this is a
mystery most admirable that God should be manifested in the flesh. 1. Tim.
3.6. that God and man should be so united together that both natures make but
one person: so as albeit death parted the natural soul from the natural
body, yet that precious body was still the body of that person which was the
Son of God, no way subject to any change or corruption. Act. 2.27. An Image
will teach us to disioyne in our minds those holy natures which God has so
conjoined as man ought not in the thoughts of his heart to separate them, but
ever by spiritual wisdom and faith to distinguish them.

Thirdly, The Turks Present sent to the pope is but a fabulous ground for any
true hearted Christian by such a picture to dishonor his Lord and master Jesus
Christ.
I say if no man on the earth can at this day give us the true picture of
Christ: then is it intolerable audaciousnesse for any earthly man to
counterfaite falselie his holy parts and members. But no man can give us his
just stature, or truly discribe his phisiognomie: therefore this ought not to
be practiced. And if a man cannot bear to be abused and falsely or untruly
resembled and conterfaited by picture: shall we think it none offense to the
Son of God?

Fourthlie, we may reason from the writings of the holy Evangelists, who were
appointed and sent from God, purposely to discribe the Son of God Jesus
Christ: for if they with one consent, deny us any help at all, or any one
live concerning the external lineaments, and form of his body: then ought
not man to presume to picture Christ after his own invention: but we see
clearly how the four Evangelists purposelie pass over this matter, the holy
Ghost foreseeing the superstition of Antichrist, and how the Popish painted
Christ's should be worshipped, to the great dishonor of our everlasting Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

Fiftlie, we may reason against this Popish God on this manner: if that
picture of Christ, which was allowed and commanded of God himself. Number. 21.8.
Io. 3.14. being superstitiouslie abused, must be burnt to ashes. 2. King. 18.4.
then much more these false pictures of Christ never allowed, but dissalowed of
God, and most impiouslie adored of vain men, ought to be rejected with a
far greater detestation. If any doubt of the Popish Idolatry to their cross
their own book O crux aue, spes vnica, hoc passionis tempore.

Agne pijs iustitiam, reisque dona veniam Again.

Ecce lignum crucis venite adoremus. Again. Crucem tuam adoramus Domine,
resurrectionem tuam sanctam glorificamus. Council. Trid. fess. 9.


and daily practice in their false Church testify against them.

The fourth objection, they say the picture of Christ serves well to confute
the old Heretics, The Martionites and Valentinians which denied that Christ
had a true, natural, humane body.

Ans. First, if these and the like Heretics believe not the words, nor respect
the works of Christ: if they will not believe Moses and the Prophets testifiing
of Christ, with his Apostles and Evangelists, they will not believe any one
that shall return from the dead, and much less a dead and painted Christ.

The Godly Emperors Valens and Theodosius made a law, that none should make
any Image of our Savior. Christ: and if any were found it should be utterly
defaced and rejected. Again, Epiphanius rent in pieces the picture of Christ,
on a cloth. Anno. 565. because said he, it was contrary to holy Scripture.
Epiphan. Epist. ad Johan. Epis. Hierosolymit. Eusebius says, that some
conuents of the Gentiles, carried about in tables the pictures of Peter and
Paul and Christ also, because this was a custom (says he) to remember their
Patrons and benefactors. Eus. lib. confess. cap. 36. Their very words are these:
As our care is, in and by all means to maintain the religion of the most high
God: so permit we none to purtraite, engraue, or picture, in colors, stone or
any other matter whatsoever, the Image of our Savior: moreover we command
that wheresoever such an Image can be found, it be taken away, and all those
to be chastised with most grievous punishment, that attempt any thing against
our command. Petr. Crinitus. lib. 9. de honest. discipl.

Quest. 80. What is the second sin here forbidden?
Ans. In the second place we be here charged not to worship the Image we
have made, nor the true God in, by, with, or before an Image or in an Idols
Temple, for if man proceed to erect an Image unto God, he will be no less
bold to honor it, and his God (as he best fancieth) in it, and before it.
First, for this Idolatry it is flatly forbidden in the express words of the
Law. Thou shall not make any graven Image, etc. Thou shall not bow down to
them nor worship them: And the Psalmist says, confounded be all they that
worship carved Images. And the Lord requires all holy and religious worship to
be reserved for himself. Mat. 4.10.

Ob. Their blind and unlearned distinction of douleia and latria will not
serve, for the light of God has taught us now to dispell such Popish
mysteries, and the Scripture does often confound these words, and indifferently
use the one for the other. Romans 1.9. 1. The. 1.9. Mat. 4.10. Revel. 19.20.
And whereas here they say they worship not the Image but Christ and his holy
mother before their Images. Ans. The holy Scripture discouers this veil, by
the like practice of elder ages: for (as these men say) the old Israelites did
not worship Baal as God, but God in Baal, confer. Judge. 2.11. with Hosh. 2.16.
they did not imagine that Baal was the invisible God almighty, but that the
service which was done before that Image was done to the Lord himself. Again
Michahs superstition is condemned by the holy Ghost. Judge. 17. and yet did he
not repose any great confidence in his Image, but thought his worship done
before that Image was very acceptable unto God. And the Israelites, for the
golden calfe, saw the form and knew right well the matter of it: and set it up
for none other cause but to stir up their affections the better to serve the
invisible God: yet they were most fearfully plagued for their invention.

Lastly, we may not show any signs of favor by our presence or otherwise unto
this Idolatrous worship: against this the Apostle disputes. 1. Cor. 8. and
Romans 1.

Quest. 81. Proceed to an other branch here forbidden?
Ans. 3. sin. An Image to represent the false God, or any of the creatures to
worship them by it
The third sin here forbidden is to erect and set up an Image to any false
God, and to worship any false God, or any of the creatures in heaven, or earth,
or in the water under the earth, in, by, with, or before an Image fained and
set up to this end and purpose. This was the great Idolatry of the Israelites
in the molten calfe after the manner of the Egiptians madness, and blindness
of Pagans. Romans 1.23. Herod. li. 1. c. 2. says that the Egiptians were the
first, that made Images to represent their Gods with what figures they listed.


Against this the Prophets spoke and writ much in their times, as Ier. Chap. 7.
ver. 18. and 44.17. where he teaches us how this blind kind of Idolaters
ever conclude of religion by their bellies: For thus they reasoned then in
defense of their superstition and Idolatry. The worship of the Queen of
heaven, that is, of the Sun, Moon and Stars is best: for when we continued
that religion, then had we plenty of victuals and were well, and felt none
evil. And thus do the children of the false God, even the Papists to this day
conclude against Gods holy and pure worship. For they fill their Temples with
the Images and pictures of the Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors,
Virgins, Angels, Archangels, and such like, worshipping their Image, and
inuocating the Saints departed, before these dead pictures, as is well known
by the practice and charge of the Church of Rome: and if they relinquish this
abomination, they are settled in this mis-beleefe they shall not prosper. But
Gods pure worship and wisdom and will is known only to Gods faithful
people, unto whom the holy Ghost gives this special mark, they abhor all
monuments of superstition. Esaias. 30.21. because invocation of Saints is
forbidden: first, by the Apostles. Act. 10.25. and 14.13. Secondly, by the
Angel. Reave. 22.8. Iud. 13.16. Thirdly, for that it cannot proceed from faith.
Romans 10.14. Fourthly, for that they see not the meaning or sense, (...) the
groans and desires of the spirit of prayer. Romans 8.26.27. Fifthly, for that the
mediator of our intercession must sprinkle our prayers with his blood and so
present them to God. Sixthly, for that the faithful never worshipped but
Iehoua, Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Images and pictures beegan to be set up in Churches about the year 380. the
first occasion was this: they reverenced greatly the holy memory of the
Apostles and Martyrs of those times, and therefore set up in private houses the
pictures of them, as we do in these times, the pictures of Master I. Calvin,
master P. martyr, Beza, Bucer, Melanchthon, and others: from their private
houses they began even then to set them up in Churches, but only for memory
sake: and yet the Godly Fathers then were offended that these Images (made
only for civil use) should be set up in Temples, desiring to retain (as they
speak) pristinam and primitiuam simplicitatem; for they feared the mischief
which followed. See the Book of Wisdom. Chapter. 14.10. 11.12.15.16. to the
like effect.

Quest. 82. Proceed to the fourth Sin.
Ans. Under this kind of serving God in and by Images here forbidden, all the
inventions of men as touching the substance of Gods worship are condemned, and
such service of God, the Apostle contains under this one general head
will worship. Col. 2.23. Deuteronomy. 12.8. Ye shall not do every man what seems
good in his own eyes. Es. 29.13. Their fear toward me was taught by the
precept of men, that is, they worship me in vain following the precepts of
men. Mat. 15.9. For this practice the Prophet Jeremy says the people of his
time did walk stubbernly after their own heart. Ier. 13.10. and 16.13. and
18.12. and 19.15.

All corruptions and sins in preaching the word, in hearing the word, in
administration and participation of the Sacraments, and in invocation contrary
to the former rules of piety, as being merely of the devil, and man's
invention, belong to this question and are here condemned: Deuteronomy. 12.32. 1. Sam.
9.13. and 8.10.
as for example in the blasphemous sacrifice of the Mass, for the holy
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ is quite profaned by the doctrines
of the son of perdition, Master Iuell against Harding all the points in the
Mass.
Christ having ordained no such sacrifice, and therefore all their Priests are
no more the Priests of the Gospel, being not ordained to preach, but to
sacrifice for the quick and dead, neither is it possible (if the doctrine of
Papists be true, that without ordination there can be no Church) that the
Papists have ever had any Church, Ministry, Priesthood, or worship of God,
since first they were ordered to sacrifice for the quick and dead.

Quest. 83. What occasions of Idolatry be here forbidden?
Ans. Occasions of Idolatry. 1. Presence in the Idols Temple.
All occasions whereby our hearts may be stolen away from the pure worship of
God unto Idolatry. As first to yield bodily reverence to the Mass, or Idols
service, whatsoever we pretend to the contrary: this sin is condemned. 1.
Cor. 8. chap. and 10. where these reasons of great weight may be noted: first,
the true worshipper may not be partaker of the sacrifices and Sacraments of a
contrary religion, and of contrary effects: The supper of Christ is the
communion and participation of the body of Christ: but the sacrifice of the
Mass is the communion and drinking of the cup of the Devil. 2. Worshipping or
gracing the Idol by any gesture or action.
1. Cor. 10.21. Secondly, again we must glorify God in our bodies and in our
spirits, for they are Gods. ver. 26.

Secondly, any sign of favor or liking of an Idol, or Idoll-seruice, 3.
Reservation of relics, as of the nails, which pierced Christ's body, which
the Papists say were but three and yet make the people believe those three be
wholly in seven several places, the like may be said of most of their relics
which they have fetched from the Turks, by their own confession. 4. To
remember Idols or false Gods in our common speech.
by kissing it, or capping, bowing, kneeling before it, though they pretend,
all they do is to the person represented by it: against this speaks Hosea in
his time in these words. Chap. 13.2. The Idolaters say one to another, whiles
they sacrifice a man let them kiss the calves. And so they kissed Baal. 1.
King. 19.18. long before in sign of love and reverence to that false God.

Thirdly, an occasion to Idolatry is the reservation of superstitious
relics. Deuteronomy. 7.25. The graven images of their Gods shall be burnt with
fire, and covet not the silver and gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee,
least thou be snared therewith. Esaias. 30.22. Ye shall pollute the covering of
the Images of silver, and the rich ornament of the Images of gold, and cast
them away as a menstruous cloth, and thou shall say unto it I abhor thee.

Fourthly, to keep any remembrance of them in common speech or otherwise.
Psalm 16.4. The sorrows of them that offer to an other God shall be
multiplied: their offerings of blood will I not offer, neither make mention of
their names with my lips. Exodus 23.13. Ye shall make no mention of the name of
other Gods, neither shall it be heard out of thy mouth. Hos. 2.17. I will take
away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall be no more remembered
by their names.

5. All Society with Idolaters
Fifthly, our hearts may be stolen away to Idolatry, by joining in society
and familiarity with Idolaters: and here we be forbidden specially: first,
to make marriages with them: for that were to join together the sons of God,
with the Daughters of a strange God. Genesis 6.2. Mal. 2.11. Genesis 24.3.28.1.34.14.
Esra. 9.14.
Secondly, to join in society and league for wars with them. 2. Chron. 19.2.
Iehosaphat for joining with wicked Ahab in wars, received this answer:
would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord, therefore for
this thing wrath from the Lord is upon thee. Thirdly, by merchandise to
minister unto Idolaters any matter to feed and keep them in Idolatry, as our
Merchants that carry wax into Popish countries or such as give or lend pictures
of Christ, or his mother, or Idolatrous heretical Books to Popish minded men.

Quest. 84 What sin else is here forbidden?
Ans. Superstition is here condemned, which may well be discribed to be a
vain fear, whereby Satan does so possess the hearts of Idolaters that they
cannot relinquish their accustomed religion, be it never so contrary to the
holy will of God. Signs of this superstitious fear are these. Col. 2.23.

First, it is tempered, set forth, 1. Show of wisdom.
and colored with great appearance and show of wisdom, as if it were a
service most acceptable unto God.

Secondly, next it is shadowed with great humiliation, 2. Great humiliation.
wherein is pretended great obedience to God and man, not refusing to undergo
any condition for religion sake, as we see in Jupiters Priests, and people at
Listra. Act. 14.13.

Thirdly, 3. Spares not the body.
this sin is well colored and covered in not sparing the body: for these men
will seem to bear willingly any chasticement in body for mortification sake;
for this cause the Priests of Baal (to seem the more religious) cut themselves
before the people, with knives and launcers till the blood gushed out upon
them. 1. King. 18.28. And to this end monastical vows, pilgrimages, Popish
penance, etc. are had in the Church of Rome in great estimation.

Quest. 85. Proceed yet further to more branches, If there be any more of
this kind?
Ans. Hypocrisy.
I add here in the next place the sin of hypocrisy as being a sin most
repugnant to the pure worship of God: Definition.
for hypocrisy is a fained worship of God, true in outward appearance, but
false in inward affection John. 4. and God requires of us principally to
worship him in spirit and truth, This is well described and taught us. Mat.
15.7.8. This people comes near unto me with their mouth, but their heart is
far from me.

Hypocrites are like whited tombs. Mat. 23.27. and like folish virgins which
have light in their lamps and seem to watch as well as others, till they have
most need of light, and then they are without. Mat. 25.8. They are like bull
rushes which bend down their heads for a day, but soon after look stately
and proud again. Es. 58.5. Signs of hypocrisy are these. First, to hunt for
glory and credit in the world, by seeming to love God more then any. 1. Sam.
15.13. and ver. 30.31. Secondly, to be very quick in the fight of other men's
sins, but blind in his own. Mat. 7.4.5. Thirdly, to regard the traditions of
men more then the word of God. Mat. 15. Act. 4.19. Fourthly, to be careful in
the lesser duty, and careless in the greater, to strain at a Gnat, and to
swallow a Camel. Mat. 23.23.

The trial and examination of the Conscience.

The conscience here by this light truly examined will say, and confess as
follows: I have thought that if a man did worship God with a good mind and
meaning, after the custom of the Church of Rome it would be well accepted: I
have thought the preaching of the Gospel foolishness: I have thought a man
might well pray to Saints and Souls departed: I have thought, a man for faith
need not preaching, but to believe quietly as our forefathers, and as the
Church does believe: I have thought, a man has no such need to read or hear
the word of God with such care and conscience: I never came to Church with such
preparation as here is required: and when I departed I was no whit wiser then
when I came into the Church: I have thought, that God being invisible might
best be honored being represented by some Image set before us: I have thought,
that Images were godly ornaments for the Church, and pretty books for ignorant
people: I have thought, that Images, specially of Christ and the Virgin Mary,
have virtue and power to work miracles: I have thought all the worship of God
in the Mass very good devotion, pilgrimages, relics of Saints, and such like
ware as the Church of Rome sold us to be great helps to piety and to Gods
holy worship. And for the traditions of my Fathers, my opinion rested more in
the ancient belief of my late progenitors, then in the prime and immediate
law of God, I could never beeleeue but that an humble and good mind, without
the Law of God was as acceptable as all the instruction of the Gospel, and
that it was a Godly thing, to fast, to cut, to whip, and to afflict my body,
although I were never so commuanded by God: it was as I thought a glorious
thing to worship the Angels and the Saints departed, neither did I ever till
now see any cause why I should not pray for my departed friends: yea, until
now I cared for nothing but to please the world, and I would never have yielded
to worship God, but because the King, State, and great men of the world did
like and approve such actions, but oh how far have I erred from the Law of
God? as far as ever Paul went from Jerusalem, or as any ship without mast or
stern in the midst of the sea from haven, surely therefore I will unload my
evil wares, and go unto the holy word of God that I may buy more without
money, that I may search for wisdom, as for treasure, and for knowledge above
precious stones, O my soul thou have too long dwelt among these rocks of
offense and unprofitable friends, therefore yet at the last sit down at the
feet of this mountain, be not afraid of the voice of God, he that harkneth
to him has chosen the better part, which shall never be taken from him.

The third Law. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain,
Exodus 20.7.
for the Lord will not hold him Or Impunem.
guiltless that takes his name in vain.
Question. 86.
Scope.
NOw Let us hear first what the scope and sum is of this Law?

Answer.

The scope and principal purpose of Gods spirit in this Law is, that we have
the excellent Majesty and name of Iehoua, in most high and honorable
estimation with us. The true worshipper being taught to worship Iehoua alone,
and in that form and manner he has prescribed: here he is straightly charged
to think and speak of Iehoua with most high reverence (as in the first
petition of the Lords prayer) our first request and desire must be, that God
would give us a most religious and tender care of his glory, that his name
might be ever hallowed, and no way dishonored by us.

Quest. 87. Proceed to show what the parts are of this Law: and what is the
sense and meaning of the words?
Part ^.
Ans. This precept has two parts: First, the Law it self: Thou shall not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain. Secondly, the confirmation of the Law:
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. The
sense and meaning of the words is this.

Name.
First, by the word name is meant here any title or attribute of God whereby he
is known and discerned from the creatures. We cannot say properly that God
has a name, because plurality (for which cause names are used) falls not
into the single and undivided nature of God. This word has these acceptions
and significations in Scripture. First, it is taken for God himself. Psalm.
116. ver. 13. Secondly, it is used to signify the properties and special
attributes of God: properties, as strong, almighty. Exodus 6.2.3. and 15.3.
Ielous. Exodus 34.14. Attributes, as mercy, justice, power, and goodness.
Thirdly, it signifies our affiance and trust in God. Micah. 4.5. We will
walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever. Fourthly, for his holy
mysteries: the Word and Sacraments. Mat. 28.19. Act. 9.15.16. Fifthly, for all
the holy worship of God and of Christ, as: Act. 21.13. I am ready to dye at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. Sixthly, it is used for Gods holy will
and commandment. Deuteronomy. 18.19. 1. Sam. 17.45. Seauenthly, for the glory of
God. as. Psalm. 8.1. O Lord how excellent is thy name in all the world, which
have set thy glory above the heavens.

Take or assume, that is a metaphor taken from precious things, which may not
be touched with polluted hands, as if he had said use not, think not, speak
not of my name, but with fear and reverence, with care and conscience.

In vain, that is, without just and good cause and respect. Think not of God
irreverently, speak not rashly, falsely, hipocritically, etc. Heb. Io link.
non expiabit none of the commandments has these words. Master Caluins sweet
words of this Law. Labor with all thy mind and thoughts, with all thine heart
and affections: in and by all thy words and works to glorify the name of God.


For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, A metonymie for the Lord will not
leave him unpunished, and Saint James says here the meaning is, least ye fall
into the Lords judgment or condemnation. chap. 5.12.

First, generally concerning this Law: we be here charged so to order our
selves in our minds and tongues that we neither think, nor speak any thing
of God himself, or his mysteries, but reverently and with much sobriety, that
in waying his works we conceive nothing but honorably toward him: that
whatsoever our mind conceiueth of him, whatsoever our tongue utters, it may
agree with his excellency and with the sacred majesty of his name, and so may
serve fitly to set forth his praise and glory: that we never rashly or
irreverently think or speak of his holy word and mysteries, or abuse them to
ambition, covetousness, or vainly to seek our own praise and glory, but that
as they bear the dignity of his name imprinted in them, so they may keep
their honor and estimation among us: lastly, that we never carpe against, nor
speak evil of his works, as wicked men are wont reprochfully to jest and
scorn at them: but that whatsoever we hear or see done by him, we report it
with words to the praise of his wisdom, greatness and goodness.

Quest. 88. Let us proceed, as in the two former Laws: first, to consider by
what special sins and vices Gods name is profaned, next by what virtues and
good works it is honored.
Ans. Here first the Lord condemns all the idle and common oaths, whereby his
name is rashly and vainly abused and profaned among men, quite contrary to
this Law, and to his great charge. Mat. 5.33.37. James. 5.12.

Three kinds of oaths with us
Of these vain and common oaths there are three sorts: First, the impious and
terrible swearing by the essential names of God. Secondly, civil oaths, by
the creatures. Thirdly, superstitious oaths.

Beliall in all nations: to swear by God, by the Lord, by Jesus, by Christ, by
his blood, by his bones, by his wounds, by his death, by his life.

2. Civil oaths. Of this kind were those oaths among the Jews, by my head,
by the earth, by the heavens Mat. 5.33 34 35
The second kind of vain oaths among blind people, are these and such like:
By my soul, by this bread, by this drink, by this money, by this light I see,
by these ten bloody bones, by this good day. And many more such like inventions
of Devils in Papisme and Paganism, and these, for distinction sake, we may
call civil oaths, for that they pass as freely as any civil speech without
check of man or conscience among this kind of people.

3. Superstition.
The third kind of oaths sauors altogether of that superstition where it was
first borne and bred: of this kind are these specialls following. By the
Mass, by the Rode, by my faith, by my truth, by Saint Anne, by Saint John, by
Saint Mary, by the will of God, by my holidome, by this book, by the four
Evangelists. Against this kind we have a special charge, by the holy Ghost.
Josh. 23.7. Keep no company with these nations, neither make mention of the
name of their Gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them nor bow
unto them: but stick fast unto the Lord your God. And Zephaniah. 1.5. I will
root of the remnant of Baal, and them that swear by the Lord, and swear by
Malcham. Psalm. 16.

Quest. 89. What can you say against this common practice of swearing?
Ans. First, we say it is the charge of our Lord and master Jesus Christ
(interpreting this Law purposelie, against the false gloss of the Jewish
rabbines, Mat. 5.
) that we swear not at all, by the creatures, nor rashly and without just
cause by the Creator: and that if we pass yea and nay a simple denial, or
affirmation, whatsoever is more in our ordinary speech, in anger or mirth, in
contracts or conference, proceeds from Satan.

Secondly, the spirit of Christ in other Scriptures warnes often against this
sin: James. 5.12.
By Saint James he assures us these sins are bound up under wrath and
condemnation: and he charge us to have a most special regard against
swearing. By the Preacher, Chap. 9.2. he makes these two flat contrary, to
swear vainelie, and to fear an oath: The Turks swear not, but being
occasioned by great necessity. If there be any idle swearer among the^, he is
not admitted, for any place of government, of what condition soever he be in
common wealth. Guliel. Tripoli.
by the Prophet. Ier. 12.16. he cries against false Prophets which taught the
people to swear by Baal, and Chap 5.7. against the whole Church for this
sin, saying. How should I spare thee, for this? thy children have forsaken
me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. And by his laws. Deuteronomy. 28.58. Leu.
24.14.15. In the blind time of Popery in this land, King Henry 5. made these
good orders against this sin: If a Duke did swear he paid the poor forty
shillings: If a Lord or Baron, twenty shillings: If a Knight or Esquier, he
paid ten shillings: If a Yeoman, forty pence: If a page, he was beaten naked
with a whip.

Thirdly, I say that to swear is to call him, or that, we swear by, as a
witness of the truth of our speech, and action, and to plague us (if we
forswear) for our perjury. Now the Lord alone is the searcher of all hearts,
and can alone find out and revenge perjury: therefore is he greatly
dishonored and blasphemed when we ascribe this power and honor to the
creatures. Now neither governors nor Prelates, nor preachers fear any kind of
oath. Conci. Carth. 4. ca. 16. Si clericus iurauerit, exco^muniretur, et
deponatur.


Lastly, by the testimony of the good martyr of God master Hooper, he
speaks in these words: if common swearers be suffered to swear without
punishment: the sin is so abominable that assuredly the Maiestrates and whole
common wealth are like in time to smart for it. Such as honor God shall be
honored, and such as despise him shall be dishonored. 1. Sam. 2.30.

Quest. 90. What is the second sin here condemned?
Perjury.
Ans. Perjury, or forswearing, and this sin Gods holy verity describes to
be the abuse or profanation of the name of God for the confirmation of a lie.
Leu. 19.12. Mat. 5.33. This sinner will either make the Lord blind and weak,
and easy to be deceived, or to testify and approve an untruth. Josh. 7.9.
For this cause Achan is warned by Joshua before his death to give glory unto
God, in the confession of the truth, and not by perjury and wicked swearing to
stane his holy name with a lie. How many sins in perjury.
In the sin of perjury, I find these foul and gross sins bred, as in a
monstrous belly: the first is a lie, which is a false speech uttered purposely
to deceive, and this proceeds from the Devil. John. 8.44. The second sin
here is an impious invocation of God to testify and approve a lie. The third
evil in perjury is a profane contempt of Gods threatening, wherein he
avouches that he will fearfully plague all perjured persons. Lastly, this
sinner is a great plague to the common wealth, and all human societies: for
what contracts and bands of love can there be among men, where faith and truth
are buried? for a holy oath (which this sinner prophaneth and scorneth) is the
last refuge among gods people to end all controversies. Heb. 6.16. Arguments
against perjury.


More arguments against this great and fearful sin, may be these
following. First, 1. Gods threatenings.
the spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures, threatens often these men
saying, by his Prophet. Zachr. 5.3.4. The curse of the Lord of hosts shall
enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that falsely
swears by my name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall
consume it with the timber thereof and stones thereof. And again. 1. Chapter 8.17.
Let none of you imagine evil in his heart against his neighbor, and love no
false oath. And by his Prophet David. Psalm. 5.6. Thou shall destroy them that
speak lies, the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man.

Secondly, 2. An example of Gods wrath for perjury.
he plagueth this sin in David's time with three years famine, on that land,
for that Ioshuas oath was not kept with the Gibeonites, and when the seven
sons of Saul (for violating that holy oath) were executed, it is said that
God was appeased with the Land. 2. Sam. 21.1.2.14. ver.

Thirdly, the very Gentiles did greatly abhor this sin: 3. The Gentiles
did abhor perjury.
as we may see in the King of Babylon, who put out the eyes of Zedekiah for
the breach of his oath made unto him. 2. Chron. 36.12.13. 2. King. 25.6.

Fourthly, the Christian Emperors cut of the tongues of

Lastly, the Lords charge unto these sinners was, 5. The public repentance of
a perjured person.
that they must testify their humiliation to the Church, as in that act of
restitution (by a public confession) with signs of their unfeigned sorrow for
this sin: and they must provide their sacrifice which must be offered for them
by the Priests with the prayers of the Church, that God may be reconciled with
them in Jesus Christ. Leu. 6.3. and 5. Chap. ver. 4.5.6.7.

Quest. 91. What is the third sin here condemned?
Ans. In the third place we may add these sins, Exorcismes.
adiurations by exorcismes and consecrations in the Popish Mass, holy water,
coniurations and charms in the profession and practice of witchcraft, for by
these the great name of God is greatly profaned, for coniurations and charms
can not be practiced without Scriptures, Pater-nosters, Aues, and Creedes, and
such like good words.

First, for exorcismes, we see in the practice of those stories. Act. 19.13.
the name of our Lord Jesus profaned, for Luke says: That certain vagabond
Jews exorcistes, took in hand to name over them, which had evil spirits, the
name of the Lord Jesus, saying we adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul preaches.

And this kind of sinners, for that they serve Satan by some secret or open
pact or bargain, and so be bound to worship him, as their God: in this
respect their sin respects the first Law, but in that by practicing their
art, they so abuse the holy name of God, The name of Jesus much profaned by
Popish exorsists.
and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, their sin also is here condemned.
And like as we see these elder exorcists in the days of the Apostles, had
often in their mouths the name of Jesus, for they better liked the name Jesus
then Christ, so the popish exorcistes to this day. Again, like as Satan then
by collusion gave place to those wicked exorcistes sometimes for the greater
gain, so he does in the Church of Rome, he fears greatly the Jesuits of
these times: but we know the subteltie of that Serpent, and how easily he can
yield some ground to gain more, for his chief purpose thereby is to hold men
in more admiration, love and liking of these abominable arts. But we be
charged to try such dreamers, with all their illusions by their doctrine and
faith which they profess. Deuteronomy. 13. and Es. 8. cap. 20. ver. Again in the
coniuration or consecration of the Mass, and of salt and water to make holy
water, they make many vain and superstitious repetitions of the names of God,
with many crosses, and when they prefixe it before Bulls and pardons.

Charms for health, and for things lost. Solution.
Ob. And whereas they say that many be restored to health by such holy words,
and things lost are found, and thefts are discovered by such Godly charms.
Ans. First, we must learn, that God most wise has forbidden in his Law such
execrable arts, and therefore we may not expect any good by them. Deuteronomy.
18.10.11.

Secondly, he condemns the practice of these arts by examples in his word, as
in Ahaziah who sent to Baal-zebub to Eckron for the recovery of his health. 2.
King. 1.2.3.

Thirdly, if the Lord give Satan leave to yield and grant us our requests:
he prevails the more with us, to fill our hearts with unbelief, and
rebellion against the word: and then he takes from us an outward, to
recompense us with an inward evil, he remoues the lesser, 1. King. 22.22.
Job. 1. and. 1. cap. 2. The. 2.10.11.
to bring the greater malady upon us, for the spirit of error and unbelief
which did afflict Ahab was a far greater evil then all the sores and
afflictions of Job.

Fourthly, he gives us temporal ease, that he may procure our eternal
disease: therefore let not our health or any blessing of this life, be more
precious unto us, then Gods great charge and our faith in Christ.

Lastly, we are to know it for Gods divine truth, that charms, figures,
words, characters can do nothing: if any thing be done and acted, Satan is
the author, covering himself under these shadows. And when Satan obeies
witches or wizards to effect any thing by their arts and charms expected of
ignorant people, it is to retain all these sinners in unbelief, and that he
may seem careful to observe his league, and covenant made with his
instruments and vassals concerning such practices.

Quest. 92. Proceed to the fourth special sin here condemned?
Ans. The holy Apostle says, that Gods name is profaned, when his word and
doctrine is blasphemed. 1. Tim. 6.1. The contemners of religion and of the
Gospel spare not to disgrace, to jest, and scorn holy Scriptures to their
own everlasting perdition, in private houses, in open theaters: against such
the divine oracle of God speaks. Prou. 13.13. He that despises the word
shall be destroyed, but he that fears the Commandment he shall be
rewarded.

Again to this place appertains the great charge of God to this people, that
no man by his life and conversation give none occasion to the enemies of Gods
truth to blaspheme the truth, professors of the Gospel by their evil life
cause the word of God to be blaspemed. 1. Tim. 6.1. Let as many servants as
are under the yoke count their masters worthy of all honor, that the name of
God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of. Leu. 22.31.32. Ye shall keep my
commandments and do them, I am the Lord, neither shall ye pollute my holy
name, but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel: I the Lord
sanctify you. Romans 2.23.24. Thou that gloriest in the Law, through breaking of
the Law, dishonourest thou God? for the name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles through you. And here the greater the persons offending are, the
greater reproach they bring to God and his word, and the greater wrack and
calamity is like to fall by their offense upon the Church and people of God.
This is clear in the examples of Eli and his two sons: 1. Sam. 2.17.
for their sins caused the service of the Lord to be abhorred: and then
great afflictions followed.

Quest. 93. What is the fifth special sin here condemned?
Cursing.
Ans. The sin of imprecation, cursing and execration: for in such speeches
men do invoke the name of God. The word signifies to be cut off, or to
desire of God to be cut off, or that some vengeance from God may smite him.
Mat. 26.74.

Imprecation is either first of men, as of our own selves, or other men: or
secondly, of the other creatures. All kinds of cursing are forbidden. Le.
19.14. Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the
blind but shall fear thy God, I am the Lord. Romans 12.14. Bless them which
persecute you, bless I say and curse not. Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which hurt you: and examples for all ages be recorded in Scripture. The bloody
Jews which sought by all means to kill the holy Apostle, bound themselves
with a rash and impious oath, or rather desire of God to cut them off, and to
give them over to Satan, if they did either eat or drink, before they had
killed Paul. Act. 23.12. And this was one of Peter's sins when he denied his
Master. Mat. 26.74. For it is written. Then beeganne he to curse himself, and
to swear, saying, I know not the man, here the devil watches this
opportunity (for swearing and cursing have one spirit for their father)
supplanted this good servant of Christ, and gave him a wound the smart and
remembrance whereof (being cured) did no doubt exercise his heart to the hour
of death, and this was Jobs sin Chap. 3.

The cursing of other men is to wish some great evil from God to fall upon
them: so Shemei did to David in his troubles in that great conspiracy of
Absalon. 2. Sam. 16.5. he came forth and cursed and he cast stones at David,
crying and cursing he said, come forth thou murderer, and son of Belial.
And of Goliath it is said, that he cursed David by his Gods. 1. Sam. 17.43.

This sin is committed in sundry forms of devilish imprecations in our
times by Godless and unbelieving people, as these following, and such like:
Sundry form of devilish imprecations.
God damn me body and soul if this or that be so. The Lord confound me body
and soul, If I did this thing. I pray God I may never stir from this place,
if I have said or done this thing. I pray God this bread may be my last if I
did so. And against other men they send forth these and the like hellish
speeches. The Devil take thee, and such as thou art. Go thy way, the Devil
go with thee.

Object. But holy men have now and then desired a curse from God on their
enemies, as Elisha against the men of Bethell and their children for mocking
him, He cursed them in the name of the Lord: and his curse took effect on
them, for forty two children of the Idolatrous people were devoured of Bears.
2. King. 2.24.25. And David prays often against his enemies wishing many
evils to fall upon them. Psalm. 69.22.23.24. and Noah pronounced a curse on his
son Cham. Genesis 9.25. Ans. The Answer is this: first, we must note with what
spirit and affection they do so curse their enemies. Secondly, how their
enemies are Gods enemies, and the great enemies of his Church, and so they
respect not their own private injuries, but Gods glory and the good of his
Church. Thirdly, this they do by the extraordinary motion of the spirit.
Fourthly, we have an express charge on the contrary to bless and pray for
our very enemies. Mat. 5.44. and to curse and blaspheme no man. Romans 12.14.
Tit. 3.2.

Again, many men greatly fear the curses of the impious, and stand in great
doubt how to answer them. Learn of David what to do in this case. First, give
the wicked none occasion to curse thee, or to blaspheme God for thy sin.
Secondly, answer him not, but pass by him in silence. Thirdly, be well
assured that God has let Satan loose, and by him stirs up Shemei to curse
thee for thy further humiliation. Fourthly, and lastly, be well assured in
thine heart: that as the sparrow by fleeing, and the swallow by fleeing escape,
so the curse that is causeless shall not come. Prou. 26.2.

Quest. 94. The Lord speaks unto us not only by his word, but also by his
judgments, and by his works: and is not the profane contempt and abuse of
these here condemned?
Psalm. 19.1.
Ans. No doubt: for all his works declare and set forth his power, his
providence, greatness, goodness, wisdom, justice and mercy, and so they
manifest unto men the excellency of his name. Psalm. 145.8.9.10. All thy works
praise thee O Lord, and thy Saints bless thee: They show the glory of thy
kingdom, and speak of thy power: to cause his power to be known to the
sons of men, and the glorious renown of his kingdom. We hear him in his
word, we see him in his works, Psalm. 78.7.8.
we feel him in his judgments, we taste him in his creatures every day: now
to speak of any of these, or to use them without feeling, without faith,
without reverence, without fear, without thanksgiving, is a great profanation
of the holy name of God.

The second part of the third Law.
Quest. 95. We have heard what special sins God condemns in this Law: now
let us hear what special duties he does command.
Ans. First, the Lord here requires at our hands to reprove, and correct, and
to punish all the former sins and sinners, by whom his great name is
dishonored, according to the power, place and calling which the Lord has
given us. If the Maiestrate do not correct and redress these enormities in the
common wealth. 1. Sam. 2.23.24.25. if the ministers do not rebuke these men
sharply. Tit. 1. Cha. ver. 13. The cause of the comtempt of Magistrates and
Ministers.
and with all authority. 2. Chap. ver. 15. then do they honor the wicked above
the Lord. 2. Sam. 2.19. and they shall be dishonored before the people. For
the truth of God abides for ever. Them that honor me I will honor, and they
that despise me shall be despised. 1. Sam. 2.30. and the same is said against
the Priests in Malach. 2.8.9. Ye caused many to stumble or fall against the
Law: ye have broken the covenant of Leui says the Lood of hosts. Therefore
have I made you also to be despised and vile before all the people, because ye
kept not my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

Quest. 96. To pass over the duties of Maiestrates and Ministers, I pray you
let us hear at large what you can say of the duties of all private men in
private admonition and Christian reproof, See the book of household
government. Aug. Corpore stetisti, animo fugisti, fugisti quia tacuisti,
tacuisti quia timuisti, nam fuga animae timor est.
and how they be to proceed to private chasticement in families that the
great name of God be not blasphemed?
Ans. It is very manifest that the Lord threatens great wrath as against all
sins, so specially these gross sins whereby his great name is so dishonored.
The private man must dye (before God is guilty of the same sin) which does
not reveal a blasphemy, how much more the magistrate not punishing and the
Minister not reproving these sinners: Leu. Chap. 5. ver. 1. But to proceed to
answer of this most christian duty of private admoninion: the first Law and
great charge of God concerning it, is written. Leu. 19.17. Thou shall not hate
thy brother in thine heart, but reprove thy neighbor freely or plainly, and
suffer him not to sin, or let not his sin rest upon him.

Here first consider and observe the occasion of these words in the former
verse immediately going before: for there we have two Laws: the first is
concerning our brothers good name, that we never impair it by walking about
marchandizing of tales against it. The second is touching his life that we
never consent in any place or time to hurt the same. Then he adds this law
as apointing a special remedy and preservative against all such evils.

In these words generally we are to consider: First, the charge of God
concerning this duty, where note, first, whom to reprove: a brother, no
stranger: secondly, the form, freely, and plainly. Secondly, the confirmation
of the charge: first, to omit this duty is an argument of deadly hatred, thou
shall not hate him in thine heart: secondly, to omit this duty is to leave our
brother in a most lamentable estate, for so his sin will rest upon him, or
he will lie, and it may be die in his sin.

First, of the duty here commanded, next of the motives annexed to practice
the same. First, of this duty the spirit of God speaks often, giving us
special rules concerning it in the Old and in the New Testament. Mat. 18.16.
If thy brother Sin against thee.
offend thee, go and tell him his sin, between thee and him alone: if he
hear thee thou have won thy brother. Here we be to note two things, first, a
rule: that a brother must reprove a brother for private sins privately, and
our brothers offense must be known and manifest unto us, that we may give him
no causeless or unjust reproof, for that is dangerous: next, a reason is
added to perform this dut^e: if he hear thee thou have won thy brother:
that is, if he reform what is amiss by private admonition, then art thou the
Lords instrument to keep him from perdicion: and thou do save his soul from
death. James. 5.20.

Secondly, of this duty speaks Saint Jude ver. 20.21.22.23. But ye beloved,
edify your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost: and
keep your selves in the love of God, loking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto eternal life: and have compassion of some in putting difference,
and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, and hate the garment
spotted with the flesh. This Scripture teaches us: first, to perform this
duty to brethren not to strangers: secondly, that when we reprove, we labor
also to instruct and to edify such brethren in the faith of Christ: thirdly,
that we add fervent prayer to our private admonition: Fourthly, that we watch
carefully one of us over an other: Fifthly, that we labor for the spirit of
judgment to discern between such as sin of infirmity, and them which
sin of pride and malice: Sixthly, that we reprove the weak with all
compassion and lenity: Seauenthly, that we deal more roughly, and severely
with the proud: Eighthly, that such as will admonish must be unspotted and
blameless.

Thirdly, of this duty speaks Saint Paul to the Galathians 6. Chap ver. 1.
Brethren if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are
spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy
selfleast thou also be tempted. Here again we be taught: first, that this
duty is to be practiced only among brethren. Secondly, there is no exception
of brethren, of any degree or condition whatsoever, but if he offend, he must
bear a private admonition. Thirdly, that we must discern what kind of sin,
and in what manner our brother is fallen: whether he be preoccupied by men or
Angels, and so fallen by occasion into any fault, or resting and lying in a
sin not before manifested. Fourthly, that a Christian reproof must be
performed with the spirit of meekness. Fifthly, that a Godly wise admonition
is by good art and skill to cure, and to restore a member fallen and loosed out
of joint, into his right place again. Sixthly, the argument annexed to perform
this cure with the spirit of lenity and love is this: consider well thy self,
it may be thou may also be tempted, and fall in the like manner.

Fourthly, again of the same duty writes the same Apostle, to the Hebrews,
the 3. Chap. ver. 12. Take heed brethren; least there be in any of you an
evil heart, and vnbeeleeuing to fall away from the living God: but exhort one
another daily, while it is called to day, least any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin Here note again: first, every brother offending
must be admonished. Secondly, any brother may fall without Gods special grace,
and the watchfulness of the godly brethren, into most dangerous sins, and so
by degrees into apostacy. Thirdly, admonition must be continued throughout
the whole course of our life.

Fifthly, again to the Thessalonians 2. Epistle, 3.14.15. ver. he writes on
this manner. If any man obey not our saying note him with a letter, and keep
no company with him that he may be ashamed: yet count him not as an enemy,
but admonish him as a brother. This Scripture is principally to be understood
of the public censures of the Church: yet it commends unto us greatly as
well private as public admonition, and teaches us, that we may not converse
with brethren when they fall away from the holy canons of apostolical
doctrine, either to be vicious in life, or heretical or schismatic in
judgment.

Sixthly, to all these places of the new Testament, we may add this one place
of the old. Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit,
and let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil, that shall not break
mine head, for within a while I shall even pray in their miseries, or rather as
Tremelius, quo amplius fecerit, eo amplius erit oration mea in malis eorum, id
est, quaecunque mala ab eis feram, eo magis grato animo pro eis precabor. Where
note: first, the godly christian must delight in admonition: and remember that
the wounds of a lover are faithful, and the kisses of an enemy unpleasant.
Secondly, he that will recover another by admonition, he must be a righteous
man himself* and of good report in the Church of God. Thirdly, an admonition
is as a sharp corrosiue to our corruption, smiting, lancing and piercing
deeply, but by degrees it will appear a most sovereign balm to cure even
very rotten and festered ulcers in us. Fourthly, the Godly being admonished
seek unto God by hearty and unfeigned prayers, and thanksgiving for themselves
and their brethren which have done this cure upon them.

Quest. 97. Now describe this duty of christian admonition according to the
Scriptures.
Ans. Christian admonition is a holy action performed by a brother proceeding
from faith and love tending to awake and cure any brother offending, carefully
respecting the rules of piety and the quality of the offense.

First, we say that an admonition is either private or public.

Secondly, for persons admonishing and reproving: Persons admonishing.
it is clear this duty appertains to all degrees, and states of men,
superiors, inferiors, equals, carefully respecting the rules of faith and
godliness as after shall be showed.

Thirdly, the person admonished, Persons admonished.
we see by the consent of all the Scriptures, he must ever be our brother,
professing with us the Gospel of Christ: no stranger, we have nothing to do
to iugde or censure or to admonish them which are without. 1. Cor. 5.12.

Fourthly, we must account every one a brother, Who a brother
which makes in the visible Church the same profession with us, being accepted
into the same covenant with us, sealing it with the Sacrament of Baptism
according to Christ's holy institution, making profession with us to renounce
the Devil, the world, and the flesh, and promising to live in faith and
obedience of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The first distinction of brethren.


Fifthly, every brother is either true or false.

Sixthly, true brethren are such, and so to be accounted, as profess the faith
of Christ, and in all singlenes and uprightness of heart walk before men ever
endeavoring to hold fast faith and a good conscience, and to testify the same
by their obedience to the Gospel, and love to their brethren. 1. Tim. 6.12. 1.
John. 3.14.15.

2. Distinction.
Seauenthly, the godly brethren are either weak or strong.

3. Distinction.
Eighthly, the weak brethren are either weak in knowledge and of weak gifts,
as nouices in religion and in the faith. Romans 14.1. or weak and tender in
conscience: having some wound of the spirit. Prou. 18.15.

The weak brother which is but young in the faith of Christ: he is said to
be inexpert in the word of righteousness. Heb. 5.12.13. and must be
admonished with all wisdom and love, ever adding instruction with reproof,
that he may grow up in the first grounds of religion.

The tender hearted, weak conscience and wounded spirit is very heedefully to
be reproved, that we may wisely supple and cure his heart which is sore
broken and faintie. Es. 57.15.20. Prou. 18.14.15.

What the strong man is.
The strong man is he which has attained the assurance of faith. Romans 4.20.21
the assurance of understanding. Col. 2.2. 2. Pet. 1.12. the assurance of hope.
Heb. 6.12. and being expert in the word of righteousness has his wits
exercised to discern good and evil. Heb. 5.13.14.

And thus Saint Jude warns us respectively and with judgment to regard
strong and weak, that being able to discern beetweene the falls and offenses
of both, we may learn to speak a word in due season, fitting the person,
time, and place, that so our admonition may be like an apple of gold with
pictures of silver. Pro. 25.11.

False brethren. 4. Distinction.
Ninthly, false brethren are all such in the Church as make a false profession
of the gospel. And these are of two sorts: first, secret and close hypocrites:
secondly, open and manifest. Hypocrites are all such as go far with us in
the profession of the Gospel, but their hearts being unsound, and full of
hardness and unbelief, they are unfaithful to Christ and his word, ever
known to God, and in Gods appointed time, manifested to men and Angels. 1.
Tim. 5.24.25.

Open and manifest false brethren are all such as by their words and deeds
testify they do not believe nor obey the Gospel, 5. Distinction.
and yet in Baptism have made a solemn profession of both. And these are of
two sorts, either utterly blind, or inlighted with some knowledge. Of the
first kind, is the blind multitude spoken of in the parable of the sower.
Mat. 13. Mar. 4. Luke. 8. likened to the high way. All these must be
admonished often and taught of all good christians with a tender commiseration
of their miserable blindness: as Christ with bowels of compassion. Mat. 9.36.

Again, this first kind so utterly blind in the Gospel, 6. Distinction.
either are those whom the Scripture calls by the name of sinners. Mat. 9.10.
Psalm. 1.1. dead in trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. or worse: the proud Just before men,
impious before God.
iustitiarios which are further from heaven. Mat. 9.13. both these in the
parable are to be referred to the high way as being altogether blind in the
Gospel: and both must be admonished, albeit an admonition is more hardly
fastened on the one then on the other.

Of sins there be two sorts: first, some less hardened, 7. Distinction.
and may be the sooner reclaimed: Secondly, some more hardened as the scorner.
The scorner is he, which scorns the sacred Scriptures, the profession of
faith and Godliness, and makes a mock of sin, etc. Psalm. 1.1. The scorner
which is most hardened in heart against God and his word is either proud
malicious and impudent as a dog, Psalm. 21.59. Prou. 26. Es. 56.
as the heretics: or filthy and unclean, as the swine in sin, as all they
be which the Apostle describes to be given over to wantonness to work
uncleanness with greediness. Ephesians. 4.19. Of these sinners these special rules
are given us. Prou. 9.7.8. He that reprooueth a scorner purchases to himself
shame: and he that rebukes the wicked gets himself a blot: rebuke not a
scorner least he hate thee, but rebuke a wise man and he will love thee. Mat.
7.6. Give ye not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swine, least they tread them under their feet, and turning again all
to rent you. 1. John. 5.16. There is a sin unto death, I say not that thou
should pray for it. Athanasius to Marcion in Rome, as he past by him in the
street, demanding, an non nosti me Athanasi, received this answer. Noui te
primo genitum Diaboli. 1. Rule.
Tit. 3.10.11. Reject him that is an heretic, after once or twice admonition:
knowing that he that is such is perverted, and sins being damned of his own
self.

Quest. 98. Thus far of the persons admonishing and admonished: now what be
we to observe in the form of an admonition?
Ans. First, that all Christian admonitions must proceed from faith and love,
and be performed with judgment considerately. Heb. 10.24. consider one another
and provoke unto love and good works. The Godly must be reproved with all
meekness of spirit, as Abraham does Lot. Genesis 13.8. Let there be no strife I
pray thee between thee and me, neither between thy heardmen and mine, for
we be brethren: yet if the matter so require sometime more roundly and
effectually, as Gal. 2.11. The Apostle Paul did Peter: I withstood him to his
face.

2. Rule for admonition.
Secondly, we may not reprove upon uncertain reports, without sure grounds,
and good evidence, to convince our brother justly for his offense. David herein
offended in condemning so rashly good Mephibosheth. 2, Sam. 19.25.

3. Rule for admonition.
Thirdly, inferiors may not reprove their superiors without special regard of
time and place and all circumstances; but most consideratly with all submission
and reverence due unto them* as young Elihu does the ancient and grave friends
of Job. Chap. 32.6.10. And such an admonition no Christian superior is to
despise. Job. 31.13.14. and as Namans servants admonished him. 1. King. 5.13.
father if the Prophet etc.

4. Rule.
Fourthly, consider well whether the offense be directly against thy self, or
against another, or immediately against God: for if our admonition proceed
from any private revenge, it can not have a blessing from God nor be
effectual for the good of our brother.

5. Rule.
Fifthly, this duty cannot be performed effectually but by skillful, righteous
and known brethren: for that admonition is a binding, searching, curing and
restoring of a member or part of the body loosed and fallen from his right
place; and as a searching for a mote in a tender eye. Gal. 6.1. Psalm. 141.5.
Mat. 7.

Sixthly, the time must be heedefully regarded, 6. Rule.
reprove not a dronken man in his drunkenness, nor angry man in his choler.
Prou. 25.11. a word spoken in his place is like an apple of gold with pictures
of silver. David had his time for Shemei. 2. Sam. 16.10. Prou. 26.5. Answer a
fool according to his foolishness least he be wise in his own conceit.

Seauenthly, we must ever labor that the spirit of love, 7. Rule. A general
rule
meekenes and compassion appear in all our reproves, that we may be ever
seen to desire, to win and gain, and so to save our brother from
destruction. Mat. 18.15. Gal. 6.1. James. 5.19.20. ver.

Quest. 99 Now let me hear what should move us to perform this duty?
Ans. First, 1. Motive to admonition. Leu. 19.7.
we must ever remember what the Lord says in his Law: he that performs not
this duty to his brother, he does hate his brother in his heart: and next add
the words of the Evangelist Saint John. ^. John. 3.15. whosoever hates his
brother is a manslayer; and ye know that no manslayer has eternal life
abiding in him: and again, he that hates his brother is in darkness, and
walks in darkness, and knows not whether he goes, because that
darkness has blinded his eyes 1. John. 2.11. And again. 1. John. 3.14. we
know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren:
he that loves not his brother abides in death.

Secondly, 2. Motive. Leu. 19.7.
we must remember also what the Lords second motive is in his Law: if we
reprove not our brother he shall perish in his sin: for his sin rests
upon him, and will grow by degrees deceitfully hardening his heart, and if his
heart be hardened, it proves malicious and more evil by custom, and then
becomes an unbelieving heart, and so in time he shall fall away from the
living God. Heb. 3.12.13. Sin by degrees grows more dangerously then a
gangrene or a leprosy.

3. Motive.
Thirdly, where this duty is rightly performed, it is a special mark of the
spirit of grace and sanctification to rest on that man. John 16.8. for
wheresoever he abides, he reproves the world of sin, of righteousness,
and of judgment.

4. Motive.
Fourthly, we must help our brothers Ass being fallen, and lying under his
burden. Exodus 23.5. much more our brother lying in danger under any sin, and
we must set the blind man in his way. Leu. 19.14.

5. Motive.
Fifthly, the person offending is blind, and knows not his offense: or he
knows it, but considers it not: or if he consider it, he thinks no man
notes it, or is offended: or if any be offended, he thinks it but a light
offense. Therefore we see christian reproof is a most needful physic for
strong and weak continually.

Quest. 110. What is the second branch of obedience commanded in the third Law?
1. The commendation of an oath.
Ans. A lawful and religious oath is here commended: as may appear by sundry
arguments. First, it is a part of Gods service. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Secondly, it is the
means which God has appointed to end controversies before the public
Magistrate, for the due execution of justice. Ex. 22.10. Heb. 6.16. Thirdly, it
is one of the signs of the conversion of the Gentiles. Esaias 19.18. and 65.16.
Fourthly, the practice of holy men, first publicly, David and the Elders in
Hebron. 2. Sam. 5.3. Joshua puts Achan to his oath, or confession before the
Lord. Josh. 7.18.19. Abraham. 14.22. to the king of Sodom. Isaac to Abimelech.
Genesis 26.31. Booz to Ruth in marriage. Ruth. 3.13. Secondly, privately. Jonathan
and David. 1. Sam. 20.11. Iocob and Laban. Genesis 31.53. Obediah to Elias. 1.
King. 18.10.

What an oath is.
Secondly, this may be the description of an oath allowed by the Scriptures: An
oath is an holy invocation of God (as the best witness of all truth, and the
revenger of all such as profane his name, in calling him to testify to an
untruth) to end all controversies, for the clearing of the truth, and for the
defense of justice and of Laws, specially in judgment. Heb. 6.16. Ier 4.2.
Exodus 22.11.12.13.

Rules to be observed.

First, Gods name must only be used in an oath, and none of the creatures,
for that he alone sercheth the heart.

Secondly, we may never proceed to an oath, but when all other testimonies
and proofs do fail us.

Thirdly, he that swears must know the truth perfectly, and not offer
himself to it rashly, but being called in judgment for the defense of
justice. For he that swears for defense of an untruth, makes God a
witnesse-bearer to a lie. He that swears things uncertain, must have an
evil conscience: He that swears things unlawful fayneth in God some
contrary wills: He that swears to things impossible, by his impious
dissembling (if it be in knowledge does mock the Lord, therefore Jeremy
says: we must swear in verity, not falsely: in judgment, not rashly: in
righteousness, not to pervert justice.

Fourthly, it is great impiety to accept of the oath of such men in judgment
for the ending of controversies, and the defense of truth and justice, which
fear not an oath, but continually profane the most holy name of God.

Thirdly, they say that an oath is either voluntary and private,

Fourthly, the form of an oath, 4. Form of an oath.
that it is a calling upon God to witness of the sincerity of our hearts in
our words and actions may appear by this Scriptures. Romans 9.1. I speak the
truth and lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost Phillip.
1.8. God is my record how I long after you all, from the very heart root in
Jesus Christ. 1. These. 2 ver. 5. neither did we ever use flattering words, as
ye know, nor colored covetousness, God is record. Of this kind are all
oaths in admission to magistracy, in ordination, and calling to the ministry,
to serve in a camp, etc. Wherefore in an oath we are ever to respect carefully
three things, first, the matter: secondly, the form: thirdly, the end. First,
the matter, that it be weighty, clear. Secondly, the form, that it be
allowed of God. Thirdly, the end, the glory of God in the ending of
controversies to the glory of God.

Fifthly, it is here doubted whether all oaths be to be kept, abeit the form
of our oath be not lawful, yet if the matter be true, just and clear, it is
a sin to break it, as Labans oath to Jacob, or any Papist swearing by Mass,
etc. The rabbines of Jerusalem were of contrary judgment. Mat. 23.16.

Rules for the keeping of an oath are these.

First, we may not keep or observe our oath, when a thing is become
impossible, which was possible when we did swear: as he that swears
perpetual chastity thinking he shall be able to perform it, yet afterward
through continual burning, finds the contrary, he is not bound to perform
that oath.

Secondly, if the matter fail whatsoever the form is, it may not be kept, as
when we have sworn to do any thing, the doing whereof is a manifest sin and
breach of Gods law: that oath may not be kept, as Herod's oath for the death of
John Baptist. Mar. 6. and the Jews to kill Paul. Act. 23.14. David knew that
he had sinned in swearing rashly Nabals death, 1. Sam. 25.21.
and was changed, and did bless God afterward for the changing of his mind.

Thirdly, if the matter or cause of our oath be lawful, albeit hard and to our
loss, yet our oath must ever be performed. Psalm. 15.4.

Quest. 101. Tell me breefely what other good things be principally required
at our hands in this Law.
Ans. These duties following do most concern Gods name and glory, for without
them God can not possibly be glorified.

The first is private instruction of our families: The third branch of the
obedience of ye third law: instruction of our famalies.
this God requires at our hands. Deuteronomy. 6.6. for that without this there is no
hope that Gods great name may be hallowed in our houses, of this he speaks
in these words. Deu. 6.6. The words which I command thee this day shall be in
thine heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

Secondly, to take all occasion gladly when it is offered, 4. To praise Gods
excellency.
and to seek occasion in time and place convenient, to commend Gods
greatness, excellency, wisdom, power, goodness, justice and mercy
manifested unto us in his word and in his works. Psalm. 8.1. Bradford his
meditations. 1. Gods works. 2. Gods words.
O Lord our God how excellent is thy name in all the world, which have set thy
glory above the Heavens, and O Lord how excellent are thy works, in wisdom
have thou made them all. Psalm. 12.6. The words of the Lord are pure words as
the silver tried in a furnace of earth, fined seven fold. Psalm. 119. O Lord
thy word endures for ever in heaven. Psalm. 19.8.9. it conuerteth the soul, it
rejoices the heart. And this duty we must desire to remember in the use of
his creatures, ever desiring they may be sanctified unto us by the word and
prayer: first, the word must teach us what, when and how to use the creatures.
1. Tim. 4.4. Secondly, by prayer we desire Gods presence, and the grace of his
spirit for the sanctification of them to us. 1. Cor. 10.3.

Thirdly, the name of god is magnified by a free profession of his truth, which
is a true declaration of that holy and certain knowledge we have received of
him, and his will, by his word as need shall require, being ready to approve
it with loss of goods and life, as may best serve to Gods glory and the
confirmation and salvation of our brethren. Romans 10.10. With the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth, man confesses to Salvation.
Mat. 10. Whosoever confesses me before men, I will confess him before my
father which is in heaven. 1. Pet. 3.13.14.15. Who is it that will harm you if
you follow that which is good? notwithstanding blessed are ye if ye suffer for
righteousness sake: yea, fear not their fear, neither be ye troubled, but
sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer
to every man, that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. Heb.
10.32.33.34. Now call to remembrance the days that are past, in the which
after ye had received light, ye endured a great fight in afflictions: partly
while ye were made a gazing stock, both by reproaches and afflictions, and
partly while ye became companions of them, which were so tossed too and fro,
for both ye sorrowed with me for my bonds, and suffered with joy the spoiling
of your good, knowing how that ye have in heaven a better, and more enduring
substance. Reu. 6.9. And when he had opened the first seal, I saw under the
Altar the souls of them, that were killed for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they maintained. etc. Cha. 14.12. Here is the patience of the
Saints, here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus. And for a motive: the Lord binds himself to advance them to the
chair of honor, that will honor him: and vomits them as a loathsome burden,
that be luke warm professors of his truth. 1. Sam. 2.32. Reave. 3.

The sixth branch of the obedience of the third Law.
Fourthly, and lastly, true zeal is a special grace whereby the great name of
God is magnified in and by the saints. This is often both commanded and
commended in the holy Scriptures: first, Christians must be zealous in the
profession of Godliness and repentance. Reave. 3.19.2. Cor. 7.1. and of good
works. Tit. 2.14. and in every good thing, Gal. 4.18. Secondly, examples,
Moses, Exodus 32.19.20.26. Phinehas, Number. 25.7. Psalm. 106.30. Elias, 1. King.
18.21. David. Psalm. 69.9. and 119.139. Epaphras, Col. 4.13.

Definition.
We may describe godly zeal to be a grief of heart conceived for the contempt
of God and his word, mixed with a holy endeavor to redress any such evil, so
much as in us lies, and to perform any good work to the advancement of Gods
Glory and the Salvation of his children.

Notes of true Zeal.

First, true zeal begins in our selves, and casts the first stone at our
selves, and plucketh the beam out of our own eyes, that we may the better
draw the mote out of our brothers eye, and takes his proceeding to others.
Genesis 14.23. Job. 1.
Thus Abraham with all the Patriarks and Prophets be ever more zealous against
themselves then others.

Secondly, true zeal is ielous even of those secret evils, in our selves,
which are not only not espied of others, but are unknown also to ourselves,
though our conscience does not press us, yet herein are we not justified,
says Saint Paul.

Thirdly, true zeal is constant, not hot by fits: cold in affliction, and hot
so long as the world favors: it keeps a continual tenor, Saul and Pharao
have good motions by fits, but Christians must be constant in their zeal and
love.

Fourthly, true zeal will cause us to rejoice in the public prosperity of
the Church when private crosses make us sad. Paul imprisoned was not so grieved
at his own bands, as he rejoiced at the liberty of the Church and Gospel.

The trial and examination of the Conscience.

First, examine thy self as in the presence of God, the searcher of all
hearts: whether thou have all thy life so ordered thy mind, thine heart and
thy tongue, that thou have neither thought nor spoken any thing of god, nor of
his word and works but most reverently, ever desiring to advance the
excellency of his name imprinted in them? Whether thou have not committed the
sins forbidden in this Law, Swearing The terrible oaths as Atheists.
on this manner. Whether thy mouth has been accustomed to swear the great
and fearful oaths by God, or by any of the most precious parts of Jesus
Christ? If thy conscience plead guilty, this Law condemns thee, and thou art
in the hands of God to receive sentence and execution every day.

Civil oaths, by this bread, as Carnalists. Superstitious oaths, by faith, as
Papists.
Secondly, whether thou have been accustomed to swear the civil oaths by the
creatures, or the superstitious oaths, by the Mass, faith and truth and such
like: If thy conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee, and thou art in
the hands of God to receive sentence and execution every day.

To deceive.
Thirdly, whether thou have sworn at any time purposely to deceive any man?
whether thou have sworn any thing whereof thou had no certain knowledge,
Swearing doubtfully.
or whereof thou have doubted? whether thou have sworn to do any thing, which
thou did never mean to do? Never mean to perform our oath. Unlawful
oaths kept.
whether thou have not broken unlawful oaths and wicked vows: or have not
done that which by a solemn and religious oath and vow thou have promised to
do? Whether thou have not in thy place and calling, any way profaned the name
of God: either in the not observing of lawful oaths, or in using vain oaths
to gain liberty, For liberty.
riches, wealth or any preferment in this life? If thy conscience plead
guilty, this law condemns thee, and thou art in the hands of God to receive
sentence and execution every day.

Exorcists.
Fourthly, whether thou have used any kind of exorcismes, coniurations,
adiurations, or any of those damnable arts of magic; or by them sought or
expected any help to further thy self to any purpose? Whether thou have at any
time iested, Iested at holy thing.
scoffed and scorned holy things, God and his holy word, in familiar talk or
otherwise? Whether thou have made a profession of the Gospel to cover a wicked
and sinful life: False profession
or by thy conversation have given cause to the enemies of the Gospel to
blaspheme? if thy conscience cry guilty: this law condemns thee, and thou art
in the hand of God to receive sentence and execution every day.

Cursing. Light regard of Gods works and judgments.
Fifthly, whether thou have used any form of imprecation and cursing of thy
self or other men? whether thou have not lightly regarded the great judgments
of God falling on many sinners in this life, or have past by them, as things
happening by fortune and chance, without due and reverent regard of Gods
providence, power and justice? If thy conscience cries guilty, this Law
condemns thee, and thou art in the hand of God to receive sentence and
execution every day.

Next consider well whether thou have omittted the duties commanded in this
Law: Admonition public.
as whether thou have according to thy place and calling, rebuked, admonished,
and chastened all kinds of sin, and specially the aforenamed sins whereby
the great name of God is dishonored: if thou have not done this duty, thy
conscience cries guilty and thou art in the hands of God to receive sentence
and excution every day.

Sixthly, Admonition private.
whether thou have used the most Christian and holy duty of private admonition
to thy brother offending God, or thy self, or any man living, and in that holy
form and manner (to convert him, win him, and save him) as God has prescribed
in his word? if thou have not done is duty, thy conscience cries guilty, and
thou art in the hand of God to receive sentence and execution every day.

Seauenthly, To refuse a holy oath.
whether thou have refused a religious and an holy oath, or have denied to
swear in verity, judgment, and justice, as God commands for the defense
of the truth, Law and justice, and for the end of controversies, which cannot
otherwise be ended: if thou have not done this thy conscience cries guilty.

Eighthly, whether thou have not sought all occasion to magnify the
excellencies, greatness, To magnify Gods excellency. To renounce the truth.
and goodness of God manifested unto us in his word and in his work: if thou
have not done this, thy conscience cries guilty: whether thou have at any time
denied God, or the profession of Jesus Christ and his Gospel before men, when
thou have been called before the enemies of Gods truth, and examined: or
whether thou have made a free profession and confession of the holy truth, and
of thy faith: if thou have not done this: thy conscience cries guilty.

Ninthly, and lastly, whether thou have been cold or luke warm or zealous
professor of the Gospel: Zeal.
whether thou have examined thy zeal, and have found it to be most hot
against thy self, even searching the most secret corruptions, constant and
continuing, most careful and most rejoicing in the welfare of Gods Church and
people: if this zeal be not in thee: thy conscience cries guilty, and this
Law holds thee fast bound up in thy sins and for a condemned man, looking for
some fearful destruction at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
come in flaming fire to render vengeance to all them which have not obeyed his
holy Gospel: oh, therefore what wings of the morning, or utter darkness can
carry thee away, and hide thee from that guilt, which God has here vowed not
to hold guiltless, or how can thou remain so benumbed as not to fear and
dread the same? the sin thou see is written with a pen of iron, and he
that runs may read it, this curse is a winged book flying every where to
call for judgment, and is not thy name written therein? thou can not, thou
may not, thou ought not to let slip this opportunity, now with candels and
lanthornes to search in thy dark conscience, and in every corner therein, what
and which of those sins have entered therein, they cannot mask themselves, or
deceive thee, they have no wedding garment on, and if thou examine them, thou
shall find them speechless, ask them how they came into thy heart, and
therefore for the preventing of Gods judgment, judge thy self and take these
thouhgts being shamefully naked and bind them hand and foot to cast them from
thee, upon him, from whose devilish seducement and suggestion they first of
all were begotten in thee, so shall thou wash thy coat in the blood of the
Lamb and have the holy Ghost to direct thee for evermore.

Quest. 102 Let me hear the words of the fourth law: and next what the
principal scope of it is, what the parts, and the sense of the words of the
law?
Ans. The words are these. Remember the Saboth day to keep it holy, six days
shall thou labor and do all thy work, But the seventh day is the Saboth Of.
for the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son,
nor thy daughter, thy manseruant, nor thy Deu. 5.14. nor thine Ox, nor thine
Ass, neither any of thy cattle, that thy man servant and thy maid servant may
rest as well as thou.
maid, nor they beast, nor the stranger that is within thy gates: for in six
days the Lord Perfected. 1. Scope.
made the heaven and the earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested on
the seventh day, therefore the Lord blessed the Saboth day and hallowed it.

First, the principal scope and end of this Law is, that we being dead to
our own affections and works, should religiously addict and address our
selves to seek the kingdom of heaven, and to attend Gods holy worship all the
Sab^th day: continuing in the public and private exercises and means which
God has commanded in his word.

Secondly, Order.
it is good for us to observe the order of Gods Commandments, which is this:
The first Commandment sets before us the substance of Gods worship: the
second, the form thereof: The third, the end: The fourth, teaches us the time
when this service should be publicly and solemnly practiced. The former three
Commandments set before us those duties, which we owe and must perform
daily unto God: This last commands that public form of gods worship, which
must be religiously kept in one day in the seven unto God.

Thirdly, again we are to note generally concerning this Law, that whereas
our natural corruption is so great an enemy to these most sacred laws, and
for this cause has bound us with special bands to the obedience and keeping
of the three former Commandments: In this fourth precept he adds more
reasons (as desiring yet more strongly to bind this inbred enemy of God
within us) for that we resist and fight more against this Law, then any of all
the rest of Gods commandments: and for that in the practice of this consists
the observation of all the former, and neglecting this we neglect all religion.
Ier. 17.12. and 27 Ezech 20.21. and 23.38. Nehe 9.14.
This is clear by Gods complaint often in the Prophets: for he says that all
his service is overthrown, for that his Sabothes are polluted, and defiled.

How this Law differs from the rest.
Fourthly, we be also to observe here, how this Law differs from all the rest:
first this Law has a special note as a preface set before it, in the word
remember, which is wanting in all the rest* Secondly, the rest be only either
negative or affirmative, that is either bid or forbid: but this Law does
expressly forbid the evil to be committed, and expressly command the
service which God requires. Thirdly, the rest of the Commandments do but
only bind a man for him self to the observation of that which is commanded:
but this law expressly charge us with a care of our whole family for the
observation of the Saboth, and not only this, but charge us also that we
cause the stranger within our gates, to worship God with us: yea, all the
beasts we have must rest this day with us.

Fifthly, the fourth Law has two parts. First, the precept, where we may
observe a preface or a note of attention, in the word remember, and the charge
it self containing these branches: first, that the Lord commands a Saboth,
that is one day in seven for his people to rest in. Exodus 20. ver. 8.
Secondly, that the Lord commands this day to be sanctified and consecrate for
holy exercises: where we must consider what works do sanctify and profane
the Saboth. Thirdly, how this sanctified Saboth, or holy rest, must be on the
seaueth day and none other. Fourthly, who is to perform this rest with us: all
and every one in the family, these specialls are numbered: man, as parents and
mistrisses, man and wife: children, sons and daughters: servants and
strangers, men and maids and beasts the Ox and the Ass.

Secondly, the confirmation has these four reasons: first, for that I permit
and grant thee six days for thine own works. Exodus 20. ver. 9. Secondly,
for that the seventh day is the Lords own day, commanded and consecrate by
himself, for himself and his own service. ver. 10. Thirdly, for that God
rested the seventh day. Fourthlie, for that God has promised a special
blessing to all true worshippers in the sanctification of it.

A note of attention. Luke. 17.32. Deuteronomy. 8.2 32.7 and Add this word to every
part of this law to stir up thy self advisedly to consider the charge.
Remember. The meaning is, consider well, The Sense.
and prepare thy self, and observe well the Saboth to sanctify it. Deuteronomy. 5.12.

The Saboth. That is, the day of rest which is said in the tenth verse to be
the seventh day. It is called the rest, because of the rest which is proper
to this day. In the beeginning this name was appropriate only to the seventh
day, but under the Law many other Saboths are commanded.

To sanctify it, To sanctify is to separate any thing from the common use, to
consecrate the same to Gods service.

Six days shall thou labor. That is, I freely permit thee to work six
days in thine ordinary vocation, that thou may attend my holy worship the
seventh day, as I have commanded.

And do all thy work. That is leave no part to be finished on the Saboth day.

But the Seventh day is the Saboth. That is, Verse. 10.
this is the only day wherein I command that holy rest to be obserud.

Of the Lord thy God. Or unto the Lord thy God, or for the Lord thy God: that
is, to be spent wholly and religiously in the service of the Lord thy God: or
the day which he challenges to be wholly spent in his service.

In it thou shall not do any work. The Saboth day thou may not do any of
thine ordinary works in seed time nor in harvest. Exodus 34.21.

Thou, master, father, or governor of house and family, or of any society.

Nor thy Son, etc. All men and cattle, which we have at our command and use,
as being in subjection unto us.

Nor thy stranger. Jew borne or Proselite. Within thy gates, within thy charge.

For in six days the Lord made heaven. That is, Verse. 11.
the Lord rested after his work, and therefore so do thou the Saboth day.

Therefore, That is, first, that thou may give that to the Lord for his
worship (as before) Secondly, that thou may not tire and weary thy self, or
any thing that is thine, man or beast. Exodus 23.12. Deuteronomy. 5.14. Thirdly, that
thou may ever remember Gods rest in the creation. Fourthly, that thou may
never forget thy deliverance from Egypt. Deuteronomy. 5.15.

The Lord blessed the Saboth day. That is, the Lord has given this day a
special blessing in that he has ordained it for his own service, and
hallowed it, or sanctified it: that is, has himself set this day apart for
this holy use: so this word is used. Exodus 29.44. and. 40.13. Leu. 27.30.28.

Quest. 103. Now proceed on to consider more nearly what the Lord requires in
this law: and first what this word Saboth signifies?
Ans. First, (as before I said) this name does properly belong to the seventh
day, because of Gods rest in the creation, and the rest then commanded to Gods
people. Genesis 2.1.2.3. on the seventh day.

Secondly, under the Law it signifies other feasts, commanded of God wherein
the people rested, as on the seventh day. Leu. 16.31.

Thirdly, sometimes it is taken for, first, weekly Saboth, the seventh day:
secondly, the monthly Saboth, the first day of the month: thirdly, the Saboth
of years, every seventh year. And fifty, which was their Iubil: for the
which they counted seven times seven years, which makes forty nine years,
and the next after (which is the fiftieth) was their Saboth: fourthly, the
great Saboth, and this was when the pasouer fell on the Saboth day: as when
Christ suffered. John. 19.31. Fifthly, the word signifies a resting, from the
works of the flesh to bring forth the fruits of the spirit. Heb. 4.8.9.10.
which begins in this life but is perfected in heaven. Sixthly, it is taken
generally for all the service of God. Ezech. 20.13. my Sabothes have they
greatly polluted.

The first signification literally, agrees with this Law: now then first this
very word teaches us that men should rest this day, and we can no more take
away rest from it then alter the name and nature: Exodus 31.15.35.2.
and that this rest is no idle rest appears. Exodus 16.23. To morrow is the
rest of the holy Saboth.

The Reasons wherefore God requires our rest from all our works on the Saboth
are these. That men must rest on the Saboth, and wherefore


First, the cheifest cause of this rest is, that we might wholly attend upon
Gods worship this day, for that the service of this day requires a whole man.
The affairs of this life are two distinct things: we can never well intend
the one, but when we rest from the other, for let a man on the Saboth what he
can sequester himself from the ordinary works of his calling, yet shall he
find himself (without special preparation and sanctification) marvelous
unapt to perform the duties of the Saboth.

Secondly, we may truly and clearly show it thus: From Adams example.
If Adam in that state of glory and innocence had need of this rest, that he
might the more freely give his soul and body and apply himself to God on
this day, and to the holy exercises of religion, then much more we in this
state of corruption.

The third reason may be this, for the retaining of health: For health.
for when we do seriously exercise the mind in hearing, prayer and
meditation, the body must have rest. Adam had no need of any such refreshing,
for he labored without weariness: yet that his mind might more intend his
holy exercises, he was commanded to rest from all his works. Genesis 3.19.
This reason is pointed at. Deuteronomy. 5.14. saying, that thy man-seruant may rest
as well as thou.

Quest. 104. But some think this rest of the Saboth was but ceremonial,
serving the Jews only to put them in mind of their freedom from the
Egiptian bondage, and that they must rest from sin, and so come to
everlasting rest. For the Apostle numbreth it with other ceremonies, taxing the
Galathians in these words: Gal. 4.10.
ye turn again to impotent and begerly rudiments: Ye observe days, as the
Saboths: and months, as the new Moons, the first and seventh month. Times: as
the feast of Easter, Whitsontide, Tabernacle, Years, as the seventh and
fitieth?

The Law partly moral, and partly ceremonial.
Ans. We answer that the Law concerning the Saboth is partly ceremonial,
partly moral. Whereas the Saboth had this use unto the Jews, to put them in
mind of their freedom and rest by Christ, we answer with the Apostle. Col.

Reasons to prove the fourth Law concerning the Saboth to be moral, are these.

Saboth before the Law.
First, it was observed and kept religiously in the Church* two thousand years
before the ceremonies of the Jews began: and has now continued one thousand
and six hundred since they ended.

Secondly, there are ten special words. Deuteronomy. 10. ver. 4. or ten special
branches of the moral Law, or of that covenant which God made with his people
in Sinai: But if ye take away this fourth Law, ye have but nine left.

Adams Saboth
Thirdly, we say If Adam in his excellency had need of this day. Gen,
2.1.2. much more we: for if the service of this day was a testimony of Gods
image in him, and a special means to preserve the same: it cannot be but
this commandment also must be needful for us, for the repairing and
recovering of that excellency by Christ which we lost in Adam.

Apostles Lords day.
Fourthlie, the Apostles in taking this day, and giving for it the name of the
Lords day. Reave. 1.10. (being before called the Saboth) and ordaining
public exercises for it: do manifestly show the necessity of it, and the
equity that it must be perpetual, and religiously observed.

Fifthly and lastly, we may reason as a godly man against the Papists thus:
They say the second Commandment against Images is but ceremonial, he
answers, so long as we find our nature so prone to set up an Image to
represent God by it, and to worship God before it: so long let that be a
moral Law to humble us: In like manner may we say of the Saboth: So long as we
feel our corruption so to fight against the religious observation of the
Saboth, and so prone to profane it: so long let us also acknowledge it a
special Law to bind our unbridled affections: but we shall find a
perpetuity in the one, therefore there must be the like perpetuity in the
other.

Sixtlie, this day is a great and glorious day by many arguments of
excellency: first, the first day of the world: Secondly, the first day of the
manna: Thirdly, the day of Christ's Nativity and Baptism (as some think) and
of his resurrection, as all agree: Fourthlie, the day the holy Ghost
descended: Fiftlie, the day the children of Israel passed over the red Sea:
Sixtlie, the day when Aaron and his sons received their consecration. Psalm.
118.24. This is the day which the Lord has made let us rejoice and be glad in
it.

Quest. 105. Now having thus far taken some general view of this Law: let
us consider here what is commanded, and what is forbidden: how the Saboth is
sanctified, and how profaned. For this is the chief end of this Law, and that
whereunto the rest of the Saboth is to be referred. Remember to sanctify it.

Ans. We sanctify and keep this day holy when we bestow it and spend it in
gods most holy worship, for the increase of our own sanctification. It is no
day to feast in, and to feed our bodies with meats and drinks, but to feed our
souls with holy things: it is no day to visit friends, it is no day to gather
debts: it is no time for plays and delights, Es 58.13. Ier. 17.22.
nor for the most lawful recreations: but to be consecrate and kept holy unto
the Lord. First, for if the Lord will not allow the most needful work of seed
time and harvest on the Saboth, shall we imagine he will allow idle
recreations: secondly, do not our idle sports as much alienate our minds from
the exercises of the Saboth, as the works of our ordinary callings? yea, much
more: for that our lusts do much more delight in these, and be possessed with
these exercises of recreations (as we call them) more then with any other
work, therefore these must make us more unfit for to keep a holy Saboth,
then cart and plow, for melius est arare quam saltare, it is better (says
Augustine for Psalm 91. to plow then to dance.

The works of the Saboth, are these.

First, we be here commanded a spiritual rest from sin: and to prepare our
hearts humbly to meet the Lord. We be commanded (I say) to rest from all the
corrupt motions and lusts of our flesh (as all the week days) so specially
this day: and to strive and endeavor that our minds, our hearts and
affections may be so settled and quieted, as with all cheerfulness and comfort
we may present our selves in the Lords court and sanctuary to attend upon him
for this day. Heb. 14.10. This is a resemblance of our eternal rest in heaven,
for he that is entered into his rest, has also rested from his own works, as
God did from his. Eccles, 4.17. Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into
the house of God, and be more near to hear, then to give the Sacrifice of
fools. Esaias. 56.2. Blessed is the man, etc. that keeps the Saboth, and
polluteth it not, and keeps his hand from doing any evil. Again, Chap.
58.13. If thou consecrate the Saboth as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor
him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, nor speaking a
vain word. Chap. 1.13. I cannot suffer your new Moons, nor Sabothes, nor
solemn days, it is iniquity, my soul hates them. The reason is added, your
hands are full of blood.

Our first care in the sanctification of the Saboth must be to look well that
our own souls, be holy and sanctified: for if we have not sanctified our
selves unto God first, Romans 12.1. all our other sacrifices are unclean and
polluted. Tit. 1.15.16.


Secondly, the Lord here requires and commands the public administration of
his word and Sacraments, and that his people attend (all without exception)
hereunto. And this is one special end of the consecration of this one day. The
public administration of the word and Sacraments.
That God might communicate his will this day unto his people, by them to whom
he has committed the word of reconciliation. 2. Cor. 5.19. for they must this
day specially stand in Christ's stead to call upon Gods people, and to speak
unto them, as also unto God in Christ's name, that so God and his people may be
reconciled together, for by hearing comes knowledge, by knowledge we come to
faith in Christ, as the Apostle teaches. Romans 10.9.10.14. The public
exercises of reading and preaching Gods word, administration and participation
of Sacraments on the Saboth are commended often by the practices of the
Prophets and Apostles, for the first portion, was out of the five books of
Moses, the second portion answering the first, was out of the Prophets. In
Antioch a city in Pisidia: after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the
rulers of the Sinagouge sent unto Paul and Barnabas, saying, ye men and
brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on. So
again. ver. 42.44. The next Saboth day came almost the whole City to hear
the word of God. Act. 20.7. The first day of the week the disciples being come
together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow, and continued preaching till midnight. Act. 15.21. Nehem. 8.18.
Moses of old time has in every City them that preach him seeing he is read
in the Sinagouges every Saboth day. Act. 17.2. When Paul came to Thessalonica
he disputed with the Jews, and spoke unto them out of the Scriptures three
Saboth days: and so was he accustomed to spend the Sabothes. And thus did the
Apostles on the Saboth minister unto the Lord in reading, and preaching the
Scriptures, administration of the Sacraments, etc.

And this was the practice of the age following the Apostles, for thus one of
the best writers of that time speaks: let us take heed that our rest be not
idle and vain, but being sequestered from all the affairs of this life, let us
wholly attend the holy worship of God on the Saboth. It is most certain that
the true worshipper, worshipping God in spirit and truth, at all times and in
all places, is promised to receive a blessing, Io. 4.23. 1. Tim. 2.8. Mat. 6.6.
Mat. 18.20.
and to beeheard. But yet the Lord has bound himself to have a more special
regard where but a few of his Saints are assembled in the name of Christ, and
this the Psalmist often teaches us. Psalm. 22.22. In the midst of the
congregation will I praise thee. ver. 25. I will praise thee in the great
congregation. Psalm. 68.26. Praise ye God in the assemblies. Psalm. 107.32. let
them exalt him in the congregations of the people, and praise him in the
assemblies of the elders. They were taught of God to call upon, and to
encourage one another to frequent the holy assemblies. Esaias. 2.3. Many people
shall go into the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: for
they shall say one to an other he will teach us his ways, and we will walk
in his paths. David speaks thus of his practice. Psalm. 55.13.14. It was thou
O man even my companion, my guide and my familiar: we delighted in consulting
together, and went into the house of God as companions. And Psa. 84.2. my soul
longs, yea faints for the Courts of the Lord. And Psalm. 112.1. I rejoiced
when they said unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord.

1 Some with us regard reading not preaching. 2. Some respect preaching, no
reading. 3. Some respect both. 4. Some regard neither.

And this is the commendation of the disciples, in the primative Church, they
greatly rejoiced in the holy assemblies, and exercises of the Church. Act.
2.42.46. They continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking
of bread, and prayer. Again, They continued daily with one accord in the
Temple, and breaking bread at home.

And here men must religiously attend on God and his word the whole time of the
holy assembly: The Prince him self (if he be present) may not depart before
the congregation be dismissed. Esaias. 46.10. The Prince shall be in the midst of
them, he shall go in when they go in, and when they go forth, they shall
go forth together* yea the Magistrates are bound to restrain the people for
the observation of the Saboth. Jeremy is commanded to preach this. Chap.
17.20.21.22.

Thirdly, in the last place after the most principal exercises of the Saboth,
the Lord commends unto us this day the ^^re of the poor and sick, as special
fruits of piety and badges of our Christian profession: for if the Lord this
day Deuteronomy. 5.14. And thus Christ him Io. 5.1.8, 7.23. Luke. 13.10. Mat. 12.10.
Luke. 14 1.6.
And the Apostles charge is that on ^he Saboth we have the poor in special
remembrance. 1. Cor. 16.1.2. Concerning the gathering for the Saints, as I have
ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so do ye also: every first day of the
week, let every one of you put aside by himself, and ^y up as God has
prospered him.

Quest. 106. Let us hear as breefely what is forbidden?
Ans. The Lord himself answers thus generally in his Law. ver. 10. The
seventh day is the Saboth of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any
work. First, we are to note how the Lord doubleth and repeteth these words
often Saboth of rest, to bind our hands from all works.

Secondly, next how that he is not content to deliver his ^inde and will in
this general negative form: thou shall ^t do any work, but also descends
into particulars: forbid^ng such things, and at such times as might carry with
them ^reatest probability of being exempted, and might make greatest show of
reason for liberty: as the gathering and preparing of the Manna: the holy
work, Exodus 16.23.26 Exodus 31.13. Exodus 34.21.
and building of the tabernacle: that they must religiously observe the Saboth
even in those two special times of seed time and harvest. So then ^t is very
manifest that the Lords will is, that we rest even from the most needful and
special works of our special callings, all husbandry in country, all trades
and works in towns and cities, that we may cheerfully attend on the Lord in
the exercises of the Saboth. Here Satan and our corruption bark and say: if
we do not work we cannot live. Ans. first, remember six days are appointed
for this end: secondly, remember the Devils suggestion has ever been thus: if
we give our selves to serve God we shall surely die of famine, etc. Mal.
3.13.14.15.16. Therefore shake of all distracting and dangerous cares. Mat.
6.33. 1. Tim. 6.7.8.9.10. and remember Gods promises, not only for heaven, but
also for this life, belongs to godliness. 1. Tim. 4.8. And whereas the Lord
has thus bound us from the ordinary works of our callings, that we might the
more freely serve him: he does not so strictly bind our consciences but that in
cases and times of necessity we may and must omit the exercises of the
Saboth: as to quench the violence of fire, to stay the fury and rage of
enemies, to defend the life of man and beast. And so in all such cases for the
preservation of man or beast, or goods: as cannot bear the intermission and
rest of one Saboth, notwithstanding let no man here impose upon himself such a
necessity that may compel him to yoke his Oxen, Mattis. conc. 1. cap. 1. The
Lord would have no Manna gathered on the Saboth day, nor fire kindled among the
Jews. Exodus 35.3. and 16.24. yet was the Saboth made for man. Mat. 12.1. that
is, to further and help man to life everlasting, and to preserve his life
present: we are therefore to use these outward elements in all sobriety and
wisdom, so as we may be better able to observe the duties of the Saboth, for
the Lord would not have us neither in the use nor in want of them, at any hand,
disabled to attend his holy worship, as for example, without fire in these cold
parts, some part of the year, we can hardly endure to attend the exercises of
the Saboth.

Thirdly, it is very clear that faires and markets, buying and selling, of all
wares whatsoever small or great, are utterly forbidden on the Saboth. Nehemi.
13.15. In those days I saw in Judah them that trod wine presses on the Saboth,
and that brought in sheaues, and which laded also Asses with wine, grapes and
figs, and all burdens, and brought them into Jerusalem on the Saboth day,
and I protested to them in the day that they sold victuals. There dwelt men of
Tyrus also therein, Verse. 16.
which brought fish and all wares, and sold on the Saboth unto the children of
Judah even in Jerusalem: Then reproved I the

Fourthly, all idleness, reuelling, dancing are here concondemned: Esaias.
58.13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Saboth, that thou do not thine
own will, or that wherein thou delightest on mine holy day: If thou will call
the Saboth thy delight to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, and shall
honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, or that
wherein thou delightest, not speaking a vain word: then shall thou delight in
the Lord. Also slothful security at Sermons is forbidden* Act. 20.7.10.

Fifthly, and lastly, we be here forbidden to cause any man to break the
Saboth directly or indirectly, by performing such duties for us, which we will
not be seen to perform our selves, for we be commanded the contrary, that
we compel and command so many as we can to the observation of the Saboth:
which if we do not their sins no doubt run every Saboth upon our score:
here be guilty of spiritual murder, all such masters as retain servants
(like horses and mules in a barbarous kind of servitude) on the Saboth from
the public means of their salvation. Let all such remember the special
charge of God directly sent unto them in this Law: Ephesians. 6.5.9. Col. 3 21. Tit.
2.9. 1. Pet. 2.18.
and remember that they have a great Lord in heaven whose wrath is as a
consuming fire.

Punishments for the breach of the Saboth are these.

Punishments for breach of Saboth.

Floods in faires with us.

Scaffols falling, to the destruction and hurt of many in stage-plaies. Some
punished to teach the rest. But not al, to show there is a day of judgment.


First, by the Law of God in old time as we may read. Number. 15.32. death of
body.

Secondly, by old Councels excommunication that those which deny their
presence to the Church in earth, by wilful negligence may be ever cut off
from the assembly of the righteous.

Thirdly, we have had in the time of fayers on the Saboth day diverse great
floods to the loss of goods and life in many places, and this sin we
retain of the Italians which make their sunday a day of market.

Fourthly, many times at bear bayting the falling of scaffolds whereby men,
women and children have lost some their lives, some their limbs, and the women
with child have not been spared as is yet fresh in the memory of wise men,
within the space of twenty years, and certainly these were punished to be
examples of admonition to the rest, and although all dyed not, let none
therefore gather that either they perished by chance of rotten posts, or such
like, or that God did punish them that were slain and hurt at their pleasures
for some other cause, but rather think that they which dyed, perished for that
sin, and that the residue are but reserved to a day of judgment.

The trial and examination of the conscience.

First, consider well and examine thine own heart, as being set before the
throne of the justice of God: whether thou have at all times reverently and
honorably thought of the Saboth, and of the public ministry of the word and
Sacraments, 2. Cor. 5.
which God in wisdom has appointed to be the holy means of thy salvation?
if thou can not find this humble submission and reverence of these divine
exercises in thine heart, thy conscience pleads guilty, and this Law condemns
thee.

Secondly, whether thou have prepared thy self to meet to the Lord on the
Saboth, for the divine majesty and presence of God the father, the Son and the
holy Ghost does fill the sanctuary and does rejoice in the holy assemblies of
his Saints: I say examaine thy self of thy preparation, by reading,
meditation, prayer, conference: if thou have neglected this duty, thy
Conscience cries guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

Thirdly, whether having used a Godly preparation before, thou did also
religiously attend and observe the word of god both read and preached, with
such reverence and meekenes, as if thou hardest Christ himself read and preach
unto thee? if thou have not respected this duty, thy conscience cries guilty,
and this law condemns thee.

Fourthly, Cares.
whether thy Soul has not wandered about the cares of this life, during the
holy exercises on the Saboth, that albeit thou wast present in body, yet thy
mind was so distracted, that thy soul was absent, and received no blessing by
any of the holy exercises of the Saboth: if thy conscience cry guilty this
Law condemns thee?

Fiftlie, whether thou have bestowed this day wholly in divine exercises (as
thou art commanded) namely in hearing, reading, meditation, conference: for the
better understanding of things heard and received by the public ministry: if
thou have neglected this duty, thy conscience cries guilty and this Law
condemns thee.

Sixthly, and because this Law gives special charge concerning the family, our
sons and daughters, men servants and maid servant: inquire whether on the
Saboth thou have not respected these, both to bring them also to the holy
assemblies, and by private conference to cause them to understand the things
they have heard, so instructing them in the knowledge of the truth, that they
may learn also the true sanctification of the Saboth: if thou have neglected
this duty, thy conscience cries guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

Seauenthly, inquire whether after the exercises of the Saboth, thou have
remembered the poor and the sick, to releaue the one, and to comfort the
other: if thou have neglected these duties, thy conscience cries guilty, and
this law condemns thee.

The Minister of Christ.
Eighthly, inquire (if thou be the minister of Christ) with what care and
conscience, with what fear and faith thou have sanctified the Lords Saboth, in
the preaching of Gods word, and administration of the sacraments: for he is
accursed that does the Lords work negligently, wherefore if thou have been
negligent in thy duty, thy conscience cries guilty and this Law condemns
thee.

Ninthly, whether thou have admitted any known wicked sinners to the blessed
Communion, without any admonition that they may be reclaimed to grace and to
unfeigned repentance, that they profane not the holy mysteries of Christ, and
whether thou have not sorrowed deeply in heart if any such have past: if thou
have neglected these duties, thy conscience cries guilie and this Law condemns
thee.

Tenthly, whether thou have sought and endeauored to plant in the hearts and
minds of all in thy charge (with all thy might) the chief grounds of holy
religion, which we call the Catechism, which every man is bound to learn and
know perfectly: if thou have neglected this duty, thy conscience cries guilty
and this Law condemns thee.

Eleauenthly, whether any plays or fighters be suffered in Church or
Churchyard, or in any other place appointed for gods holy worship: such as by
authority may restrain these enormities and do not, their consciences cry
guilty?

Twelftly, If thou have any way impaired or infringed the right of Churches,
the maintenance of Gods public ministry, orintermedled with the benefices,
Mal. 3.8. Romans 2.22.
tithes and anuities of Churches, due to the ministers of Christ, which attend
the charge of souls: thou have committed sacrilege, and thy conscience cries
guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

13. and lastly, whether thou have spent the Saboth, or any part of the Saboth
in the works of thine ordinary calling, or in lawful recreations and games,
or in feasting, dicing, dancing, or in any such exercises, lawful or
unlawful: if thy conscience cry guilty this Law condemns thee, and thou art
in the hand of God to receive sentence every day, hour and minute.

The fifth Law.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Verse. 12. Tremel.
that That they may prolong thy days.
thy days may be prolonged upon That Land.
the Land, which the Lord thy God shall give thee.
Question. 107.
NOw we be come to the second Table, tell me what is the princiall scope, and
sum of these Laws following?

Answer.

First, like as the first Table principally respects the service and worship
of God, so the second Table specially concerns the preservation of the Church
and people of God, and the good of the common wealth. Secondly, the sum of
both our Lord Christ has given us. Mat. 22.37.38.39. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, Romans 13, 8.9.10
with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: this is the
first, and the great commandment, That is, the brief sum of the first
Table. And the second is like unto this, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. This is the sum also of the second Table. And these two Tables are not
without cause said to be like the one the other: first, for that they proceed
both from one Lord: secondly, for that both respect Gods worship and glory,
the first immediately, the second mediately: Amor Dei amorem proximi generat.
thirdly, for that the obedience of the one and the other is inseparable: the
second respecting the first, as the effect does the cause: fourthly, for that
the transgression and disobedience of both have like punishments, temporal and
eternal.

Quest. 108. Let me hear what drift, and parts, and sense is of the fifth Law?
Ans. First, the end of this Law is, that with all reverence and regard we
preserve the dignity and honor of our neighbor, that is, of all such as God
has set over us, as superiors, and a religious care and government of
inferiors, being well assured that where the duties of superiors and
inferiors are neglected, there can neither religion, nor virtue nor any good
thing prosper.

Secondly, this Commandment has two parts: the one, the Law it self, where
consider: first, who be to be honored, father mother, that is, all superiors:
secondly, how and in what measure superiors must be reverenced, Honor:
thirdly, Sense.
who must honor, children: that is, all inferiors: the other confirmation:
that they may prolong thy days, etc.

Honor, by this word are understood all duties of love, Deuteronomy. 21.18.
subjection, Leu. 20.9.
reverence, fear and Mat. 15.4. 1. Tim. 5.17
thankfulness, with all religious respect and regard for the preservation of
the dignity and estimation of all such as are set over us.

Father and Mother, By these words we understand first, our natural Ephesians. 6.1.
parents which have been the instruments of Gods providence to bring us forth
into the stage and theater of this life. This government, and dignity of
parents is first to be respected: first, because we be bound hereunto by most
bands of love and nature: secondly, because the government of Parents is most
ancient, and the rule of all other gouernme^ts: thirdly, because god would
have all superiors to bear the affection of Parents, toward all their
inferiors.

Secondly, the Church is a special mother for us on earth, whose honor we
must tenderly respect, for he that despises her, God rejects him, and must
account him as a Publican. Mat. 18.17. Es. 49.23. Gen 20.2. 2. Kin. 5.13. Genesis
45.8.
and we understand here Kings and Queens: the nurcing fathers, and the nurcing
mothers of gods Church and people. Thirdly, all Governors, and such as bear
rule for the good of the Church. Fourthly, all Gods true ministers, and
faithful teachers of Gods holy word. 2. King. 2.12. 13. cha. 14. 1. Cor. 4.15,
Job. 29.16.
Fifthly, all Gardinars to whom the wardship of children after the death of
their parents is committed. Sixthly, the masters and teachers of all arts,
liberal and mechanical, and of all faculties needful for the common wealth.
Seauenthly, and lastly, all the aged which as fathers can help us with council
and experience.

Mother, She may not be neglected, but all duties of honor done unto her
notwithstanding her weakness, sex and all her infirmities, because natural
corruption does soon break forth into contempt and rebellion against the
mother, therefore the Lord has made special mention of the mother in this
Law, Prou. 1.8. Eccle. 3.3.4. and 7.27.
calling us to a special reverend regard of her often in his word. Prou.
23.22. Obey thy father, that has begotten thee, and despise not thy mother
when she is old.

Now if we ask a reason wherefore all inferiors are thus bound of God to
yield this honor to their superiors: the cause is manifest. The Lord himself
does inuest them with his honor, they sit all over us as Gods vicegerents, and
in every one of them we must ever consider that Gods blessed image is set
before our eyes: first, in the natural parents we behold Gods tender
affection toward us: secondly, in the Princes and Rulers we find a certain
image of the majesty and glory of God: thirdly, in aged men ye have the
picture of Gods eternity: Fourthly, in a wise man the image of Gods wisdom
shines before our eyes.

That they may prolong thy days: Parents are said to prolong life, because
they be the instruments of Gods providence hereunto. They may truly be said
under God to prolonge the life of their children: first by their good education
and instruction specially in Gods holy worship and service when they be young:
secondly, by their wise government when they come to riper years: thirdly, by
giving them some lawful calling, and honest means for their maintenance, when
they come to age: Fourthly, by their continual blessing of them, and of all
means for their good, by recommending them continually unto God in prayer.

Thy days on the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, This is that
special promise noted by the Apostle. Just. I.C. lib. 2. cap. 8. ser. 37.
Ephesians. 6.1.2. and expounded thus: That it may go well with thee, and that thou
may live long on earth, godly children have the promises both of this life,
and of that which is to come. 1. Tim. 4.8. and contrarily the fearful
threatening of God is often verified of rebellious children. Prou. 30.17. The
eye that mocketh his father, and despises the instructions of his mother, let
the Ravens of the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eat him.

Quest. 108. This Commandment is affirmative: rehearse the general duties, or
signs of honor and reverence, which all men are bound to yield to all
superiors: or common to all superiors.
Genesis 50.18.
Ans. They are these following: First, to rise up, and to stand before them
when they sit. Le. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoar head, and honor
the person of the old man, and dread thy God, I am the Lord.

Secondly, to rise up to meet them when they draw near: This we see in
Abraham to the Angels whom he received and reverenced as most holy Fathers.
Genesis 18.2. He lift up his eyes and looked, and lo, three men stood by him, and
when he saw them, he ran to meet them, from the tent door, and bowed himself
to the ground, This Solomon a King performs to his mother. 1. King. 2.19.
Bathshebah went unto the King, to speak unto him for Adonijah. And the King
rose to meet her, and bowed himself unto her.

Thirdly, to uncover the head before the ancient. 1. Cor. 11.9.10.

Fourthly, to bow the knee before them, for so does Solomon to his mother, and
Abraham to the Angels, supposing they were but men.

Fifthly, to give them the better place in all meetings: for this the Apostle
teaches. Romans 12.10. Luke. 14.7.8.9.10.11.
In giving honor go one before another. Ephesians. 5.21. Submit your selves one to
another in the fear of God. And this we see practiced by Solomon. 1. King.
2.19. He caused a seat to be set for the Kings mother, and she sat at his
right hand. And this reverend regard of superiority was in Joseph and his
brethren the Patriarchs in Egypt, to the great admiration of the Egiptians.
Genesis 43.33. Joseph sat by himself, and they sat before him, the eldest
according to his age* and the youngest according to his youth: and the
Egiptians marueled among themselves.

Sixthly, to give the elder the first place of speaking: So does Elihu teach by
his own example. Job. 32.6. I am young in years, and ye are ancient, therefore
I doubted and was afraid to show mine opinion: and ver. 16. he adds. When I
had waited (for they spoke not but stood still, and answered no more) then
answered I in my turn.

Seauenthly, to give titles to all persons according to their place, of honor
to the honorable, of reverence to the reverend. 1. Pet. 3.6. Sarah obayed
Abraham, and called him Lord. 1. Sam. 1.14. Annah answered Eli saying, nay my
Lord, I am a woman troubled in spirit.

Eighthly, to honor them for their calling and office, for we are bound in
conscience to perform these duties, and not for civility or manners sake.

Ninthly, to obey them in all things which they command us according to the
divine rules of piety and justice.

Tenthly, with thankfulness and with cheerfulness and diligence in all
service, all which points we may observe in Eleazar that faithful servant of
Abraham. Genesis 24. chap.


Quest. 110. And what be the duties common to all superiors?
Job. 31.13. 2. King. 5.13.
Ans. First, to love and tender the state and welfare of their inferiors, as
the natural Parents do their natural children.

Tit. 2.2. Heb. 12 1.13.7.6.12. 1. Pet. 5.3. 1. Pet 3 1.2.3.
Secondly, to be examples of all piety, sobriety and justice: and to go ever
before them as good presidents for their imitation in all the holy exercises
of religion, that they may say with Job. chap. 29.8. The young men saw me, and
hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up.

Quest. 111. What be the general sins of inferiors against superiors: and
of superiors to their inferiors?
Ans. The common sins of inferiors be these. First, to hate them for their
calling, as a number of popish protestants, or carnal Gospellers, do the
ministers of the Gospel for their calling sake.

Secondly, to ascribe unto them more honor then is due unto them: as the
people did to Herod after his glorious Oration, they shouted, crying: The voice
of God, and not of man. Act. 12.21.22.

Thirdly, to aggrauate and to discover their infirmities and weakness as Cham
did to his father Noah. Genesis 9.22.

Fourthly, to flatter them in their sins, as the young Sycophants did
Rehoboam, whose counsel he followed to his ruin. 1. King. 12.14.15. or not
to admonish them in love, if need require.

The common sins of Superiors, be these.

First, to neglect their duties to their inferiors, which concern either
their souls or bodies, their welfare in this life, and their salvation in the
life to come.

Secondly, not to correct the lesser sins by admonitions and censures, nor
the greater by more special chasticements.

Quest. 112. Now let us come to the special duties of superiors and
inferiors in the private family: and first of parents and children?
Ans. First, the first duty (following the order of nature) is of the mother
that with all care and conscience she endeavor the preservation of the life of
her child even from the first conception in her womb (albeit she endure many
sorrows as Gods special chasticements for her good) till it be borne, and
come to years of strength. A barren womb better then a barren breast.
Wherefore here a special duty lying on the mother is the nourishing of her
own children with her own breasts, if the Lord shall grant her that good
blessing: first, for that the holy Ghost accounts this one good note of a Godly
matrone. 1. Tim. 5.10. She is well reported of for good works: next is added,
if she have nourished her children.

Secondly, the examples of holy women must be followed, whose daughters
religious mothers are said to be, when they do well and do perform duties.
1. Pet. 3.6. But Sarah gave suck to her own son Isaach. Genesis 21.7. albeit
she had many women in her family which might have eased her of that duty. The
like we read of that godly woman Annah the mother of Samuel. 1. Sam. 1.29. And
of the blessed Virgin Mary the mother of Christ. Luke. 2.12. Instruction is
required also in the mother. 2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.15.
This then ought religious Matrons to respect carefully, and the rather for
that this is the principal duty that God requires at their hands when he
says. 1. Tim. 2.15. Notwithstanding all their sins, through bearing of
children, they shall be saved, if they continue in faith and love and holiness
with modesty. Four pearls to adorn godly Matrons.


A second duty which specially concerns the husband as head, is to provide
for the family, for the maintenance of wife and children. 1. Tim. 5.8. If there
be any that provides not for his own, and namely, for them of his household,
he denies the faith and is worse then an Infidel. This care and conscience we
find in Jacob, when he answers Laban of his faithful service he adds
these words. I have served thee long and thou art become rich through my
diligence and faithfulness: now when shall I travel for mine own house also.
Genesis 30. ver. 30.

A third duty common to both Parents is this: to catechize, instruct and to
bring up their children in the instruction and information of the Lord. That
this duty concerns father and mother jointly, appears. Prou. 30.17. Again
the charge of God is great, and to be considered. Deu. 4.9. Take heed unto thy
self, and keep thy soul diligently, that thou forget not the things which
thine eyes have seen, and that they depart not out of thine heart, all the
days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons. Deu. 6.6.
These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart: and thou
shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of them,
when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up. To this charge agree the words of
the Apostle. Ephesians. 6.4. Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring
them up in instruction and information of the Lord.

Examples are Bathshebath. Prou. 31. and Ennice and Lois 2. Tim. 1.5.3.15.

A fourth duty of parents is to correct and chastise their Children with
wisdom and moderation, ever considering they punish their own corruption in
them, which they first gave, and calling upon God in spirit fervently for a
blessing upon their chastetisements. To warn us of this duty let us often set
before us these Scriptures. Pro. 3 12.13.24. Heb. 12 7.23.13.14.
Pro. 22.15. Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of
correction shall drive it away from him, therefore inure children to do things
rather to please God, then for flattering or for gifts. Prou. 13.24. He that
spares his rod, hates his son: but he that loves him chasteneth him
betime. And that parents may have a noble example herein for imitation, it is
said that the Lord corrects him whom he loves even as the father does the
child in whom he delights. Prou. 3.12.

A fifth duty of parents is the good education of their children, as in Gods
faith and fear principally, so in good arts carefully, that they may beecome
profitable members in Church and common wealth, for this is the Lords charge.
Pro. 22.6. Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall
not depart from it, at the least let them learn to read and write.

A sixth duty of parents to children is that having brought up their children
in such sobriety and chastity as beecommeth the Saints of God, when they come
to years, to make choice for them, and to advise them to keep their vessels
always in holiness and honor, both in the single state, and in the married
life, and at this time specially to allow for their maintenance more or less,
according to that portion which God has given them. This godly care for the
marriage and maintenance of children we see in Abraham. Genesis 24.1.2. and in
Isaac and Rebecca. Genesis 27.46. and Cha. 26.35. and in Naomi. Ruth. 3.1.2.3.

A seventh duty is, such children as the Lord shall give thee, to consecrate
them to the Lord, with a holy desire they be his, and do him service, as Hamah
did Samuel, and it may be Ennice did Timothy: God specially requires the
first borne.

An eight duty is, with all convenient speed to provide they may be baptized
in the public congregation in the presence of special and faithful
witnesses. Esaias. 8.2.

Sins of Parents forbidden in this Law are these.

First, to be improuident, and not to respect the welfare of children in this
life.

Secondly, to cark and care for their bodies, and to suffer their souls to rot
in sin. Crates in Plutarch says, We may well cry against foolish parents
from the tops of hills: with great cares do they provide for their children,
but respect not for honesty and virtue what they shall be
Heathen men could see this as a common sin in Parents and condemn it.

Thirdly, to bring them up in looseness, pride, idleness, and wantonness,
(and wantonness ends in wickedness) as Eli did Sophin and Phiceha, and as
David did Absalon and Adonijah: their wanntonnesse did end in wickedness, to
the no small grief of his heart, 1. Sam. 1. and. 2. Chapters.
for the one at his death he sorrowed and wept bitterly: of the other it is
said, And his father would not displease him from his childhood. 1. King. 1.6.
wherefore here we must ever remember that Proverb. If thou smitest he shall
not dye.

Fourthly, over severely, without judgment to provoke them to anger, by unjust
or unmeasurable chasticements in words or stripes. Ephesians. 6.4.

Quest. 113 What be the duties of children to Parents, commanded in this Law?
Ans. This precept speaks unto children, as it were, face to face, as being
most prone to the breach of this Law: for children be more ready to forget
Parents and their duties, then Parents to forget children: and therefore the
Lord to meet with this corruption, gives the first charge unto children, to
perform all duties of honor to their Parents.

The first duty of Children to Parents, and the root of all the rest is a
cheerful reverence, which is a special grace well tempered with love and
fear. An example for this duty we have in Joseph, who when he met his aged
father Jacob. Genesis 46.29. presented himself unto him, with reverence, and to
testify his affection and love, he fell upon his neck, and wept upon his neck
a good while.

The second duty employed in the word Honor, (as the Apostle interprets)
Ephesians. 6.1. is obedience: Children obey your Parents in the Lord. Examples of
true obedience commanded justly in Scripture are these, Isaac to Abraham. Genesis
22. the sons of Ionadab the son of Rechab. Ier. 35.14. And of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, of whom it is written, that he followed his mother Marie
and his supposed father Joseph, and was subject unto them. Luke. 2.51.

The third duty, to help their infirmities, and to provide for their Parents
when they are old. Of this duty the Apostle speaks. 1. Tim. 5.4. in these
words. But if any widow have children or nephews, let them first learn to
show godliness toward their own house, and to recompense their kindred, for
this is an honest thing and acceptable before God. The practice of this duty
we find in good Joseph, most carefully supplying his old fathers wants, and
providing for his brethren. Ge. 45.9. and among Birds for the Storke when she
is old keeps her nest continually, and the young provide for her: hence is it
the Apostle calls children without natural affections. 2. Tim. 3.3. A heathen
woman had a daughter that nourished her with her breast in prison, when all
persons were forbidden to releaue her. Valerius. Mar. lib. 5. Cap. 4. Plin.
lib. 13. cap. 23.

The fourth duty here commanded is to bear with, and to cover the infirmities
of parents, so much as in us lies, and so far as Gods honor and Law will
permit us. The practice of this we see in Sem and Iapheth who covered their
naked father, when cursed Cham discovered him. Ge. 9.23. and Jonathan bare
patiently the threats of his bitter and bloody father. Saul. 1. Sam. 19.3.4.

Quest. 114. Now rehearse breefly the contrary sins here condemned.
Ans. First, cursing of Parents is a most detestable sin, and here condemned.
The Lord pronounces him accursed that curses his Parents. Deuteronomy. 27.16. and by
the Law of God among the Jews, he was to die for it. Leu. 20.9. Exo. 21.17.

Secondly, to smite father or mother, is a most grievous sin and here
condemned: This sinner was by Gods law adjudged to dye for his offense: for the
words are these. Ex. 21.15. He that smites his Father or mother shall dye the
death.

Thirdly, to mock or despise the father or mother is a great sin and
transgression of this Law: against the which the Lord pronounces that
fearful threatening. Prou. 30.17. The eye that mocketh his father, and
despises the instruction of his mother, let the ravens of the valley pick it
out, and the young Eagles eat it. Cham is set for an example of Gods wrath for
this sin to all posterity. Genesis 9.

Fourthly, secretly to wish their death to enjoy their goods and lands, houses
and possessions, and that they may be cheef Lords after them. This was Esaus
sin for he desired in his heart Isaacks death, that he might rule over all,
and be revenged on his brother Jacob. Gen 27.41. Thus do Vipers to seek
their own life and liberty, they rend and break their dams belly, and so the
old dies when the young first come to light.

Intractable and refractarie.
The fifth sin in Children against this Law is to disobey the government and
charge of their Parents, which sin the Lord often greatly condemns in his
word, accounting it a special mark of Paganism. Romans 1.30. and one of the
fearful sins of the last times. 2. Tim. 3.2. This sinner must dye also by
Gods Law, after that he is convicted and found by Law to be refractarie and
stubberne against his Parents. Deuteronomy. 21.18.

Sixthly, and lastly, to marry without Parents knowledge and consent is a great
dishonor to Parents and a grievous sin condemned in this Law. Of this sin
profane Esau is set forth an example for all ages, for whose sin his mother
mourns in these words. Genesis 27.46. I am weary of my life for the daughters of
Heth, if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth like these of the daughters
of the land, what avails it me to live?

Quest. 115. Thus far of natural Parents and their Children: now of Parents
by office and place: And here first let me hear of the second band of duties
in private families between Masters and Servants.
Ans. The Apostle interpreting this Law. Ephesians. 6.6.9. commendes unto us the
duties of Masters and Servants in the next place in these words. Servants be
obedient unto them that are your Masters, according to the flesh, with fear
and trembling, in singleness of your hearts as unto Christ, not with service
to the eye as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart, with good will, serving the Lord and not men, and know ye
that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be bond or free: and ye Masters do the same things unto them,
putting away threaning, and know that even your master also is in heaven,
neither is there respect of person with him.

Duties of Masters and of Governors of Families, be these following.

First, they are bound by this moral Law of God to instruct their Servants, as
they must their Children, in the true knowledge of God: for without instruction
how shall they serve them, as the Apostle commands, as serving the Lord
Christ. Again the same Apostle. Tit. 2.9.10. commands Servants to adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things, without instruction they can never
possibly grace it, but disgrace and dishonor both God and his word in all
things they take in hand. The practice of this duty we see in Abraham, who
being commanded to instruct his Children and his Household. Genesis 18.19. it is
recorded of him that he did carefully instruct and Catechize three hundred
persons in his family. Genesis 14.14. In like manner this was Iosuas care not
only for his Sons and Daughters but also for his Servants, as himself
testifies. Chap. 24.15. where he uses a holy protestation not only for
himself and his Children, but also for his whole family, that they shall
serve the Lord, and this can never be without instruction. The like conscience
and care we find in Cornelius the captain. Act. 10.7. for he is said to
have Servants fearing God. Lidia being converted, is Gods instrument to bring
unto Christ all her household. Act. 16.15.

Secondly, Masters must give Servants and Children no evil example, but
endeavor to go before them, as holy presidents and examples of faith and
godliness, of all purity and sobriety of life, to guide them in all love and
meekness, wisdom and judgment: for so have all the hol^ ^^thers ever done.
Abraham's three hundred Servants would never have been so ready, so tractable,
so religious but that they saw in their master a pattern of all piety and
religion. Cornelius Servants, (being soldiers) would not have been so forward,
but that they saw their master was a man in word and deed truly fearing God.

Thirdly, the third duty of Masters to Servants is to give them the
recompense and reward of their labor: this the Apostle charge. Col. 4.1. Ye
Masters do to your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye
also have a Master in heaven. 1. Tim. 5.18. The laborer is worthy of his
wages. Leu. 19.13. The workemans hire shall not abide with thee until the
morning. And here we may say, that if humanity requires that they be
liberally rewarded, much more piety requires a loving an a large
bountifulness unto good Servants: of this speaks the Son of Syrach in these
words. Ecclus. 7.20.24. If thy Servant works truly, entreat him not evil,
nor the Hireling that bestows himself wholly for thee. Let thy soul love a
good Servant, and defraud him not of liberty, neither leave him a poor man.
So loving a Master was Abraham unto his eldest Servant Eleazar, Genesis 15.2.3.
the Steward of his house that he purposed in his heart (if God gave no
child) to make him his Heir and Lord of all his substance.

Fourthly, the fourth and last care of Masters and Gouerners of families, is to
exercise household or domestical discipline, for the good government of their
families according to the rules of piety. Of this duty the Lord warns us.
Pro. 29.19. A Servant will not be chastised with words, though he understand
yet he will not answer. ver. 21. He that brings up his Servants daintely
from his youth, shall at the last be robbed of his Children. Such Servants were
Zimri to Ela king of Israel, who slew his Master and his Children. 1. Kin.
16.11. and Jeroboam to Solomon, who got from his Son Reheboam, more then half
his kingdom. 1. Kin. 11.28. and such a covetous hireling was Zibah to good
Mephibosheth. 2. Sam. 16. ver. 3.

We have many good notes for the good government of the family. Psalm. 101.
first, the Masters of families must often meditate and endeavor to temper well
together mercy and judgment. Secondly, they must walk wisely and uprightly,
giving a good example of life to all committed to their charge. Thirdly, they
must lay aside all anger and wrath. Fourthly, they may not harbor slanderers,
liars, nor the merchants of tales to infect and poison the Family. Fifthly,
they must proceed to chasticement of their Servants, evermore with mercy in the
one hand and judgment in the other.

First, they must pass by and cover many faults in good Servants. Eccles,
7.23. Give not thine heart to all the words that men speak, least thou hear
thy servant curse thee, for oftentimes also thine heart knows that thou have
spoken evil of others. Secondly, punish the lesser faults with admonitions.
Prou. 17.10. A reproof enters more into him that has understanding, then an
hundredth stripes into a fool. Thirdly, greater sins must be cured with
chasticements and corrections: for so the holy Ghost warns. Prou. 29.19. An
evil Servant will not be chastised with words, he must have stripes if his
offense so require. Of this Servant speaks the Son of Sirach in these words,
Cha. 33.23. The foder, the whip and the burden belong to the Ass, and meat,
and correction, and work, to the Servant. And again, Chap. 42.5. Be not
ashamed (says he) to beat an evil Servant to the blood.

But here proceed with judgment: first, inquire the truth diligently:
secondly, show the danger and greatness of the sin committed, by the
Scripture: thirdly, if tears promise any hope of unfeigned repentance, twice or
thrice spare and forbear stripes, then proceed with moderation: Fourthly, and
lastly, if neither admonition nor correction cause repentance and amendment:
expulsion is the highest degree in household discipline: let not the proud and
incorrigible sinner abide in thine house. Psalm. 101. ver. 5. for this form of
government and practice of household discipline we have an example in Plilemon
and Onesimus. Epistle of Paul to Philemon.


Sins of Masters and Governors of Families are these.

First, to tyrrannize over their Servants, As Spaniards use Gally-slaues, and
the poor Indians.
and to oppress them with labor and cruel usage, as Pharao did the poor
Israelites in Egypt, Exodus 1. and 2. chap.

Secondly, to suffer them to lie and live in their blindness and ignorance
without any knowledge of God and their salvation: respecting only their bodies
(as men do horses) for their ordinary labor: little or nothing regarding
their souls, 1. Pet. 3.7.
when they starve and perish everlastingly. Not considering that their
Servants, as well as they, are ioynt-heires with them of the same grace of life.

Quest. 116, And what be the duties of Servants to their Masters: and the
contrary sins forbidden in this Law?
Ans. First, the duties of Servants to their Masters are these following.

The first duty of Servants is an humble and Christian subjection to their
Masters and Governors, acknowledgeing their authority with all submission of
mind, in word and gesture: desiring to please their Masters in all things in
the Lord. The rule of this is written. Tit. 2.9. Let Servants be subject to
their Masters, and please them in all things, the reason is added, that they
may adorn the doctrine of Christ our Savior in all things. Such was Eleazar
to Abraham, Joseph to Putiphar, and Cornelius Servants. Act. 10. Without this
humble submission and lowliness of mind there is no service acceptable to God
or men.

Their second duty is actual obedience: they must not only seem lowly in
mind, and loving in word, or verbal service: They must be faithful also in
their work: they must perform that service, which their Governors, according
to Gods will, shall give them in charge to do: for thus they are commanded.
Col. 3.22. Servants be obedient to your Masters according to the flesh in all
things fearing god. The Servants which will please Christ in serving their
masters must well remember these five rules.
The Christian and believing Servants which please Christ in their service,
must look well to these notes and rules following.

First, their obedience must be tempered with fear and trembling. Ephesians. 6.5.
not a servile but a Christian and filial fear.

Secondly, their obedience must be in all simplicity singleness and truth of
heart, void of all fraud and colors, as if their service were done
immediately unto the Lord Christ.

Thirdly, they must look that their obedience must be in faith ever desiring
in all their service to please Christ. Ephesians. 6. ver. 7.

Fourthly, God requires in their obedience all cheerfulness of heart, for
this will breed in them diligence and painfulnesse without weariness and this
the Apostle requires saying: with a good will serving the Lord. Ephesians. 6.7.

Fifthly, and lastly, faithfulness is required in their service: and this is
with all care and conscience to labor in their calling for their Masters
good. And this the holy Ghost notes. Tit. 2.10. Let them show all
faithfulness, that so they may adorn the Gospel of Christ.

Examples for the practice of these rules are these: First, that religious
servant in whom Abraham reposed such confidence: when he sent him to provide a
wife for his son Isaac. Genesis 24. in him we may observe many virtues, great
submission and love to his master, a religious fear and faith, calling upon
God for a blessing on his service he had in hand. ver. 12. diligence and care.
ver. 32.33. I will not eat till I have spoken my message, faithfulness, in
returning with Rebeckah to his Lord and Master. ver. 61.67.

Secondly, the like virtues we find in Jacob in all that his long and
wearisome service unto Laban twenty years, simplicity and singleness of
heart, he was a plain man. Genesis 25.27. a religious fear and faith ever
worshipping God and trusting in his providence, not discontented with his
state, of his diligence in his service thus he testifies, Genesis 31.40. I was in
the day consumed with heat, and with frost in the night, and my sleep departed
from mine eyes: For his faithfulness thus he speaks. ver. 38.39. These
twenty years have I been with thee, thy Sheep and thy Goats have not Cast.
lost their young, and the Rams of the flock have I not eaten. The torn I
brought it not unto thee: but made it good my self, at my hands thou did
require it, were it stolen by day, or by night. The like conscience and
faithfulness shall we find in Joseph in all his service.

The third and last duty and care of Servants, must be this: to submit
themselves to rebukes and admonitions and corrections of all their Governors
with all meekness of spirit: All objections of Servants against their masters
are answered in this Scripture.

1. they are froward.

Answ. ve. 18.2. They are unjust.

Ans. ver. 19.20 This is thanksworthy to suffer such.

A good Scripture for Servants to observe.


remembering the word which Christ has sent us by his holy spirit. 1. Pet.
2.13. Submit your selves unto all manner of ordinance of man, for the Lords
sake. And ver. 18. Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not
only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward: for this is thank
worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully, for what praise is it if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye
take it patiently? But and if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and take it
patiently, this is acceptable to God: for hereunto ye are called: for Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps who
did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him
that judges righteously. Jacob and Joseph, followed this Scripture, as being
written by Gods holy spirit in their hearts.

The Sins here forbidden are these.

The first foul sin here condemned, is eye service: contrary to simplicity
and truth: desiring to please men, but not in singleness of heart. Col. 3.22.
Ephesians. 6.5.

The Second sin of Servants is to answer again in reprehensions, and
admonitions. Tit. 2.9.10.

The third sin is to reject admonitions, to refuse and to resist the
authority and corrections of their governors, as Agar and Onesimus. Genesis
16.6. Epistle to Philemon.

Fourthly, by fraud or theft to convey away their masters goods, or by
negligence to become unprofitable drones in their Masters service. Such were
Zibah. 2. Sam. 16.4. and Onesimus it is like before his conversion.

Fifthly, to obey them in things unlawful, as when Saul's men refused to obey
and serve their Masters tyranny, Doeg the Edomite was very forward to imbrue
his hands in the blood of most innocent and holy Priests. 1. Sam. 22.

Quest. 117. I pray you add something of the duties and sins of the Fathers in
Common wealth and in the Church, that is, of such as govern in the Magistracy.
Ans. First, Exodus 18.21*
it is required in the Magistrate that he be a man of wisdom, that is, that
he have knowledge to rule and to to perform the duties which belong to his
place and calling, for as in other arts he is not straight way a good
Artificer, which is a good man, so much more in this weighty calling.

Secondly, they must be prudent men, or men of experience: for like as in
other Arts men must not trust their general knowledge and wisdom which have
not had trial and experience of their profession: so much more in this calling
it is needful, that a man well experienced in those matters that are incident
to this calling.

Thirdly, they must be men of courage, for his knowledge and experience cannot
profit him, when he is to perform and execute the duties of his calling, if
either he fear the rebukes of Superiors, or the hatred and reports of his
inferiors.

Fourthly, he must be a man serving God: this will serve to te^per all his
gifts: courage, if it pass the bounds of knowledge and experience proves a
rash boldness, and wanting Gods fear, we see it often end in oppression.

Fifthly, the Lord requires that they deal truly: first, concerning
themselves, they must see that in word and deed they be found such examples
unto others, as love, truth and sincirity. Next they must carefully search all
matters they are to deal in, concerning their calling, that they may give
righteous judgment as the case requires. This they must do, and have no
respect of persons.

Sixthly, they must hate all filthy gain: and desire of riches and rewards: for
rewards blind the eyes of the prudent, and stop the ears of the righteous.

Deuteronomy. 1.13.
Seauenthly, and lastly, a good Magistrate must be a man well known, and
reputed and reported among gods people for wisdom, for experience, for
courage, for the fear of God, Duties of spiritual Fathers and their Children.
for upright dealing, for the hatred of covetousness. If they be not known
to be such they can not have that credit and reverence among the people which
is due to their place and calling. And this the Apostle requires in Gods
Ministers, that they have also a good report even of them that are without.

Sins here condemned are: in election of Magistrates to respect riches, and
favor of men, and to neglect the former virtues, and special marks of
Christian Magistrates.

Examination of the Conscience.

Superiors.
First, let all Superiors of all places and callings well examine themselves in
and by this Law, how they love and tender their inferiors, as Parents do
their Children: how they go in and out before them in all piety, sobriety and
justice: if any such neglect these duties, his conscience pleads guilty, and
he is subject to the malediction of this Law.

Inferiors.
Secondly, let all inferiors examine themselves with what care and conscience
they have respected the general duties of this Law, as to honor the aged, the
Magistrate, the Minister, and to perform unto them all the general duties
before prescribed: if they plead want of knowledge or of conscience, they are
guilty and bound up to the curse of this Law.

The natural Mother.
Thirdly, let the natural Mother here inquire with what tenderness and love
she has respected the life of her child in her womb, whether she has nurced
it with her own breasts, having strength and means given her of God hereunto:
if thou have neglected this duty, thy conscience cries guilty, and this Law
condemns thee.

The natural Father.
Fourthly let the natural Father here inquire with what care and conscience he
prouides for his family in a lawful calling, with what wisdom and judgment
he rules his wife, with what piety and religion he does instruct his family:
whether he suffer his children to grow up in idleness and wantonness,
whether he has not more regarded their bodies then their souls, whether they
be trained in an honest course and calling: if thou do not respect these
duties, thy conscience cries guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

Fifthly, The natural Children.
let the natural children here inquire with what cheerful reverence, and
fear and obedience, they have honored their Parents, how they have respected
and covered their infirmities, and provided for their wants: if thou be of
this number, and have neglected these duties, thy conscience cries guilty, and
this Law condemns thee.

Sixthly, inquire whether thou have at any time, by cursing, mocking, reuiling,
or smiting dishonored thy parents: or whether have thou desired their death for
any cause whatsoever: or have conte^ned their lawful charge, or have married
without their consent: if these, or any of these sins be found in thee, thy
conscience cries guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

Seauenthly, Masters and governors of Families.
inquire with what care and conscience thou have taught and catechized thy
Servants: what example of piety and good life thou have given them: how thou
have recompensed their labors: with what mercifulness and tenderness thou
have respected their wants: with what moderation in correction and admonition
thou have ruled them: if thou have neglected these duties, thy conscience cries
guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

Eighthly, let Servants inquire with what submission of mind, Servants.
with what fear and trembling, with what simplicity and faithfulness of heart
they obey and serve their Masters: with what meekness of spirit they receive
their admonitions and corrections: how they hate eye service, answering again,
fraud, theft, and to obey their Masters in things unlawful: if in any of
these thy conscience cries guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Ninthly, let Magistrates examine well themselves, Magistrates.
how they enter their callings, without gifts to discharge them, wisdom,
judgment, courage, and the rest before specified: what Laws and Decrees they
have enacted for Religion and Justice: how they have respected equity and
truth in judgment: how they redress enormities and sins according to their
authority and place: if in any of these thy conscience pleads guilty, this
Law condemns thee.

Tenthly, Subjects must examine themselves, how they have obayed the
Magistrates: with what conscience they have construed and obeyed the Laws and
Statutes of the Land: whether they have prayed for their Governors, and have
patiently borne the wicked set over them of God for their chastisement: every
subject not respecting these duties, his conscience pleads guilty.

The sixth Law.
Question. 118.
THe sixth Law is this: Thou shall not murder: what is the meaning of this Law:
what duties be here commanded, and what sins are forbiden?

Ans. First, these two Laws following fitly follow one an other, first, for
that the one is often the cause of the other: Adultry and Intemperancie breed
many quarrels and murders: secondly, for that Adultrie, or defiling of a man's
wife is next in degree to the sin of Murder: thirdly, for that a heart full
of compassion and love, and a chaste heart go ever together. Again, the Lord
is large in the five former commandments, but short hear: first, because the
light of nature is not so darkened in us concerning these as in the former:
therefore he uses most words where most need is: secondly, for that we are
more hardly drawn to the obedidience of the first Table: thirdly, for that the
observation of the first Table puts a new life into us for the observation of
the second. The Heathen were very blind concerning God: neither did they know
the depth of these Laws of the second Table. Our Lord and Savior Christ is
the best expositor and preacher of this Law, who himself expounds it in
these words. Mat. 5.21.22. Ye have heard that it was said unto them of old
time: Thou shall not kill: but whosoever kills shall be culpable of
judgment: But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly
shall be culpable of judgment: And whosoever says unto his brother Raca,
shall be worthy to be punished by the counsel: And whosoever shall say fool
shall be worthy to be punished with hell fire.

In this exposition of our Savior Christ we may learn many things: but first
generally let us observe these two things.

First, how he does tax and reprehend the pharisaicall gloss and
interpretation of this Law. Their interpretation was only of the external act
of murder, saying, whosoever kills shall be culpable of judgment: and this
exposition of external murder, they urge by authority of the ancients,
saying, that thus the learned Fathers understood this Law, saying, you have
heard, that is, by Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses seat, by Ancients,
that is, old Rabbis and Teachers: culpable of judgment, saying, whosoever
kills wittingly or unwittingly, willingly or unwillingly, he shall be
apprehended and adjudged in judgment, whereby is meant the inferior courts of
justice which were kept in all parts of Iewrie: and here they did qualify and
corrupt justice, and lessen punishments often contrary to Law. We see by these
few examples, how corrupt the judgment was of the Jewish Rabbines, as Mat. 15.
and how Christ calls them back* to the Law and Prophets. Thus by degrees the
Fathers since Christ fell from the Gospel, at last came the School men and
set up Antichrist.

Secondly, he gives us his own true interpretation of the Law: where he
teaches us clearly, that there are three kinds of murder, worthy of three
kinds of judgments or punishments. First, the murder of the heart, which is
anger unadvised: for all anger is not condemned: There is a Godly anger in
christian zeal, the whetstone of fortitude: this murder to say no more is
worthy your judgment, that is, your correction and punishment ye do inflict
in inferior courts: Secondly, the murder of the fierce countenance, with
addicion of some foolish word in contempt, with an evil gesture and behavior
of countenance, mouth, tongue, head, hand or such like. Now for this contempt
of thy brother says Christ, to say no more of this kind of murder, it is
worthy to be punished by a This Court was for the greater offenses: here he
means the synedrion in Jerusalem a court of seauentie two judges.
counsel, that is, in an open consistory, even in your highest courts.
Thirdly, the next kind of murder (which the Pharisees and world count light
and small) is the murder of the tongue: whosoever (says Christ) shall
reprochfully call his brother a fool, this man I tell you deserves even the
torments of hell.

We see then by the words of the best interpreter what the scope of this Law
is: namely, the preservation of the life and person of man: for this Law
strikes at the root of cruelty, a sin deeply settled in the corrupt heart of
man.

The meaning of this Law in few words is this. Thou shall not any way grieve,
offend or hurt thy neighbor in his person, part or whole, soul or body:
Neither shall thou omit any duty of mercy, or labor of love, for the good,
comfort, health, peace, and welfare and continual preservation and salvation
of thy neighbor, during life.

And that this interpretation must be of inward sins as well as of outward
(contrary to the Pharisees) the Disciple testifies with his Master saying: 1.
John. 3.
He that hates his brother, is a murderer: And God being a spirit, his Law
must needs be spiritual, for the restraining not only of the hand, but also
of the heart. Wherefore it is evident that in this Law, the Lord would cut
down all the causes, occasions and secret roots of cruelty which grow in our
corrupt nature. The Lord would have our fallow ground plowed, and the secret
thorns of hatred and malice dug up, for that these imbred evils are
deeply rooted in us.

Quest. 119. Set down a short sum of the special sins forbidden, and
virtues commanded in this Law?
Ans. The general sins here condemned are these, (for this respects all
creatures) first, want of humanity, or any cruel usage of any of the
creatures: for this cause the godly is said to have respect to the life of his
beast. Prou. 12.10. secondly, want of a provident foresight to prevent
dangers, which may be hurtful to man or beast.

The special sins here condemned are these: either cruelty against our
selves: first, soul murder, as to neglect those things which concern
salvation: secondly to neglect those things which concern the temporal state
and health of body or mind: thirdly, actual selfe-murther, condemned of the
heathen. Or cruelty against our brethren in these special branches: first, of
anger: Secondly, of a despitefull countenance and gesture: thirdly, an open
repoach and cruelty of the tongue: fourthly, actual murder of the hand,
which is the more grievous the more bands of love we break: specialls here are:
first, the murder of children by the natural parents: secondly, the murder
of parents by the natural children: thirdly, the murder of brethren:
fourthly, the murdering of any christian: fifthly, the murdering of an heathen.

Now what God commands: first, generally, we be commanded to cherish all
pity and compassion in our hearts toward man and beast. Secondly, all
special duties and signs of love and mercy are these: first, to look well
to our hearts, that we be tender hearted and merciful toward all men:
secondly, to look well to our outward beehauiour, that in our countenance and
gesture, we be loving, kind, and merciful unto men. Thirdly, to look well
to the good usage of the tongue thereby to benefit all men: fourthly to look
well to the hand, that we be ready to reach forth blessings and good things to
other men, as the Lord has enabled us.

Quest. 120. Now let us hear of the branches of the negative part in order?

An. The first is inhumanitie and cruelty against any of the creatures, as
against brute beasts, all the euillvsage of them is here condemned, this is one
of the sins of the last times. 2. Tim. 3.3. Romans 1.30. he that is cruel to
beasts will not spare the life of man when occasion is offered, we are
commanded to help our enemies ass. Exodus 22.5. Deuteronomy. 22.6. We see this in
Balaam, who in great rage would have slain the poor Ass, when the Angel
would have slain him and that most justly, his heart is discovered in his
bloody counsel against Gods people, which Balack with all speed put in
practice. Number. 22. and 23. chap. God condemns this brutish fierceness. 2.
Tim. 3.3. Ob. but we kill them daily: An. By permission since the flood. Genesis
9. and therefore when we feed on the flesh of any creature, we ought to
remember Gods free mercy, and how sin has weakened our bodies, which before
were kept strong and beautiful only with the fruits of the earth.

Secondly, the Lord here condemns all want of provident care to prevent all
dangers and evils which may be hurtful to the life of man or beast, for this
cause the Lord commanded battlements on houses to prevent dangers, that men
might walk safely on the house tops, as the custom was in Iewrie. Deuteronomy. 21.8.
for this cause the goring Ox must be stoned to death and not eaten. Exodus
22.28.30. And this is the Lords care in commanding that no pits be left
uncovered. Exodus 22.33. The same may be said of railing of bridges, and of the
mending of high ways that man and beast may travel safely without fear.

Thirdly, next there be three branches or kinds of cruelty against our
selves here condemned in this Law. And these must be first considered: for if
the love of man toward himself be the line and rule of his love toward other
men: he that is cruel to himself can not be merciful to other men.

1. Soule-murther.
First, of this cruelty the first branch is Soule-murther: Soule-murther is
when a man carks and cares continually for his carcass, and neglects the state
and life of the Soul, his Soul lies dead in sin. Ephesians. 2.1. and feels it
not, wants the life of God and he knows it not. There is a necessary diet
and food for the Soul, which if ye neglect and deny, the Lord cries in his
word that ye kill the Soul, or be Soule-murtherers. Hosh. 4.6. Idle
Ministers are soule-murtherers.

Prou. 29.18.


My people perish for want of instruction and knowledge. Prou. 10.21. The words
of the righteous feed many. Job 23.12. Thy word is better unto me then mine
ordinary food, for this cause the Lord complains also against negligent
Priests and Prophets. Ezech. 34.3. Ye feed not the sheep, but kill them that
are fed: meaning by others.

Secondly, the second branch of this cruelty against our selves, is when by
any sin or sins we be enemies to our own health and so to our life: and
herein three special kinds are condemned for that by experience they be found
daily to shorten the days and life of man: All intemperancy impaires health.
The first kind is all intemperancy, which deuoures patrimonies, brings in all
excess, reueling and uncleanness (for sins be linked and grow up together)
what a number of filthy diseases does whoredom alone breed in men, according
to the Apostles doctrine and the common experience? wherefore we justly
conclude against these sinners, they are cruel and unmerciful to themselves
for hearts be eaten up with this care: the second secret enemy of a man's life,
is that biting, eating, consuming and distracting care, which Christ
condemns. Mat. 6. This care with the sorrows which follow it, be very evil,
against this Solomon warns us saying. Prou. 17.22. a joyful heart causes
good health, but a sorrowful mind dries up the bones. The third secret enemy
of a man's health, and life is an improuident care for food and raiment,
idleness, slothfulness, condemned. 1. Tim. 5. Prou. 6.6. and 10.26. Eccles.
37.11.

Thirdly, the third kind of cruelty against a man himself is the highest
kind of cruelty that can be named against the natural life, Actual
selfe-murther.
and this is actual selfe-murther, when a man lays violent hands on his own
life, and imbrewes his hands in his own blood. First, such bloody executioners
be greatly injurious to God and men. The Lord has set forth such in his word
as terrible examples for all ages to behold, accounting them as monsters to
terrify all men from such unnatural practices: as Saul, Achitophel, Judas,
and the like. Secondly, the godly in extreme sorrows would never seek to end
their pain on this wise as these did, for they were well assured such an end
was a beginning and the entrance into everlasting sorrows. Here men must not
respect the examples of Pagans nor any suggestio^s of Satan to the contrary.
David rores for very grief of heart. Psalm. 32.5. Hezekiah chattered as a
Bird, and could not speak for anguish of mind. Es. 38. Job desired to be
strangled. cha. 8.13. but they over came all their sorrows by the spirit of
faith and patience. Thirdly, and lastly, we be not our own but Christ's. 1.
Cor. 6.19.

Fourthly, in the fourth place we be to consider of the special branches and
kinds of cruelty against other men, condemned in this Law. And here the first
kind is the inward and secret murder of the heart, Murder of the heart.
because this is the fountain and head-spring of all the rest: out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts murder, etc. Mar. 7.21. And unto this kind
refer we all inward anger, wrath, malice, hatred, envy, fretting,
contention, debate, grudge, desire of revenge, to be fierce, heady, never
appeased but a stoic in other men's harms, and such evils which break the
bands of love. The Scriptures which condemn these secret sins of the heart
are these, Leu. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart. 1. John.
3.15. He that hates his brother is a manslayer. Prou. 22.24.25. we be
forbidden to have any familiarity with, or to strive against an angry man,
reason is given of this charge. Prou. 26.21. for the contentious man is apt to
kindle strife, as the cole the coals and wood a fire. Ephesians. 4.31. Let all
bitterness, anger and wrath, crying and railing be put away from you with all
maliciousness: and be ye merciful, forgiving one another, even as God for
Jesus Christ his sake has forgiven you.

The Heathen do describe and distinguish Anger, Wrath and Envy, as follows:
Anger is the beginning of madness: Anger is a fiery hot boiling of the blood
in and about the heart which by degrees becomes wrath and then seeks revenge.
again, Anger is the drunckennes or giddiness of the Soul. Wrath admits
no good counsel. Anger is the root of malice, murder and death. Envy is a
prying into the prosperity and gifts of other men with grief of mind for our
own wants, a vice compounded of hatred against our neighbor. Number. 12.10. and
of self-love.

Anger is not always taken in the evil part. Mar. 3.5. Ephesians. 4.26. but
unadvised, and exceeding, which without grace preventing breeds wrath, hatred,
fierceness, and madness, as we see in Cain, Saul, Herod. The spawne and seed
of all these bitter and foul sins are in the heart ever since the fall of
Adam, and will never clean out till the last day: for this cause Satan finds
it no matter of difficulty by breathing into the minds of the children of
rebellion. Ephesians. 2.2.3. to swell them with wrath and malice one against another,
he proceeds in the work in this order: first, How Satan kindles anger and
wrath in men.
he works in our affections a secret misliking of men, and often for no
certain or known cause. Secondly, if we mislike, we cannot bear at such
men's hands any thing we can suffer in others: and so the fire of indignation
begins secretly to kindle within us. Thirdly, Anger continued, without grace
preventing and remedies applied, burns excessiuely and breaks out into hatred,
fierceness, wrath and malice. Fourthly, hatred and wrath are so fiery that
they can hardly be quenched before they come to revenge. Fifthly, desire of
revenge brings murder.

Implacabilitie follows in a number of fierce mad men, for by degrees they
become such as can never be appeased: as the mad Jews against Paul. Act.
21.31. and 23.12. Romans 1.30. Wherefore look well to the first motions of anger
in the misliking or despising of any man in thine heart: prevent all occasions,
and intertaine not, but fight against such affections, for they are dangerous.
Lastly, for inward sins the stoics, are here condemned: which is not to be
moved with any bowels of other men's. The carnal in his own injuries is quick,
but cold and dead in the evils of other.

The second kind of external cruelty, which Christ condemns. Mat. 5.22. is
the cruelty of the countenance, which appears more or less in the face
commonly: or by the evil gesture and carriage of our selves in any other part
of the body.

This cruelty breaks forth first in the whole countenance: either fiery and
fierce, or pale, trembling and cast down, as in Cain. Genesis 4.6. Why art thou
wroth, and why is thy countenance cast down. This outward cruelty of
countenance, has killed many a man.
or by a scoffing flering face to grieve the heart of any man. The holy Ghost
counts it very cruel persecution in Ishmael against Isaac. Genesis 21.9. Gal.
4.29. Sarah saw Ishmael scoffing and laughing scornefully, she knew forthwith
the malice of his heart, and therefore provides that both he and his mother
be cast forth, out of Abraham's family, that is, out of the Church. These
scorners are grievous sinners before God. Prou 24.9. The wicked thought of a
fool is sin, and the scorner is an abomination unto men. Pro. 9.7.8.
Judgments are prepared for the scorner, and stripes for the fools back. Prou.
19.29.

Secondly, this cruelty otherwhiles is manifested in the eyes fiery and flaming
which are common signs of contention and drunkenness as the Lord himself
testifies. Pro. 23.29.30. By this evil eye the rich scare away the poor. And
therefore the Lord commands the lender not to look on his poor brother with
an evil eye. Deuteronomy. 15.9.

Thirdly, this cruelty appears also by the knitting and bending of the brows
in a sour and lowering countenance. Mat. 6.16. by wagging and shaking of the
head and hands, gnashing of ye teeth, gaping of the mouth, thrusting forth the
tongue. David the lively type of Christ complains against this often. Psalm.
35.21. They gape on me with their mouths, saying, a ha, our eye has seen.
ver. 16. gnashing their teeth against me. And this cruelty was practiced
against Christ. Mat. 27.39. They that passed by his cross, reviled him,
wagging their heads. etc.

All kinds of jesting and scorning in word or action are condemned of God. The
Scorners jest at men's infirmities and virtues, and for not doing as they do.
1. Pet. 4.4.
Chams jesting brought a curse on him and all his posterity. Genesis 9.25. Michol
for scorning David's holiness was barren all her life. 2. Sam. 6.23. The
Philistines jest and scorn the servant of God Sampson, to their own ruin and
heavy destruction. Iud. 16.30. Shemei* scorned David to his own wrack after
for all his submission. David's messengers were scorned and evil entreated by
the Ammonites, which turned not long after to their ruin. 2. Sam. 10.1. and 7.
The Idolatrous men of Bethell taught their children to scorn the Lords Prophet
Elisha as he passed by them: God smote them with a present plague, they were
devoured of wild beasts. So the Lord smote them to testify to all ages how
his fierce wrath is ever kindled against this sin.

To conclude the wittiest kind of jesting which the heathen even in Athens,
did esteem and grace as a special virtue, the Lord condemns it as a gross
sin, and forbids it for ever unto his people. Ephesians. 5. Neither may we take
any liberty in this sin either by Esaiah or Elias example, scorning Idolaters
for their palpable blindness and gross impiety against God: for they were
acted and moved by extraordinary motions of Gods spirit both to speak and to
write against Idolatry.

Lastly, to arm our selves against this kind of cruelty: Preservatives.
first, give thy self to prayer. Psalm. 109.2. The mouth of the wicked, and the
mouth full of deceit are opened upon me. etc. but I gave my self to prayer.

Secondly, give thy self to meditation in the word. 119.51. The proud have had
me exceedingly in derision, yet have I not shrinked from thy commandments.

Thirdly, If they scorn thee for a good cause and for godliness know they
scorn thy master, and rejoice with the Apostle. 2. Cor. 12.10. I take pleasure
in infirmities and reproaches, Heb. 11.26.
etc. for then my master Jesus Christ soiourneth with me.

Christ says here is condemned the cruelty of the tongue. Here therefore unto
this place belong all sins of the tongue, which proceed from that secret root
of cruelty which lies hid in the heart: as bitter words, railing, reuiling
speeches, backbiting, slandering, clamors, cursing and such like. A clamorous
tongue argues a foolish and an evil heart, be the cause never so good: of
which the holy Ghost warns us often, that we be not deceived concerning such,
they have no portion in Christ, 1. Cor. 6 10.
neither shall they inherit, the kingdom of heaven. The Scripture compares the
evil tongue to fire, sparks, and sharp arrows, to teach us that as these be
very dangerous instruments of murder, so the tongue.

First, all bitterness of the tongue is here condemned, some men be so full of
bitterness and fiercenes, that there tongues seem to be dipped in the poison of
Aspes, or in some deadly poison. These as Solomon says. Prou. 12.18. speak
words like the prickings of a sword, but in the tongue of the wise is health.
Such men's tongues are whetted by evil spirits, and set on fire by the fire of
hell: for so Saint James speaks. Chap 3. Of this sect was Nabal as the wise
servant of Abagail reports, saying: 1. Sam. 25.14.17.
David sent messengers to salute our master, and he railed on them: now
therefore take heed, for evil will surely come on our master, and upon all
his family, for he is so wicked that a man cannot speak unto him. Of this
sect was railing Shemei who meeting David in a tumultuous time openly cursed
and cried against the king that he was a bloody and a wicked man. 2. Sam.
16.7.8. And of this followship was Ishmael, who is said to be fierce, cruel, a
bitter scorner with his tongue, and his hand against every man, and every man's
hand against him. Genesis 16.11.12.

Secondly, Cursing is here condemned: to bless God and to curse men are two
contraries: and cannot possibly be in one man as Saint James teaches. Chap.
3.9. for that one fountain cannot send forth sour and sweet, if thou can
not bless God, thou art no true worshipper: if no worshipper of god thou
stand in the state of wrath and perdicion. The Devil in this man is let in
and blows hard on the coals of wrath. Ephesians. 4.27.31. for this cause the Lord
warns often against this sin: and that his children be ready always to
bless even those which curse them. Romans 12.14. Into this sin fell Job and
Peter under the cross, and in great passions of mind, but they repented with
bitter tears. Mat. 26.74.75. Job. 3. and 42.

Preservatives and rules against these Sins are these.

First, By faith to beehold and consider wisely of Gods providence: So does
David, 2. Sam. 16.10. let Shemei alone the Lord has sent Shemei to curse David.

Secondly, pray for such and do them all the good thou may: for so Christ
commands. Mat. 5. Bless them that curse you: and his Apostle teaches the
same lesson. Romans 12. recompense evil for evil to no man, bless I say and
curse not. And Christ himself practices it, for when they cursed and railed
he prayed for them.

Thirdly, take heed of the conceit of Balack, and of many blind unbelievers
concerning Balaam, and wizards curses: I know whom thou blessest is blessed,
and whom thou cursest, he shall be cursed. Number. 22. ver. 6. for thine
unbelief and wicked fears may cause the Lord to let Satan loose to smite
thee, and then shall thou fasten thine eyes on witches, and regard the words
and deeds of lying spirits in these wicked instruments.

Fourthly, against all the cursed speeches of godless men, remember the
comfortable words of Solomon. Prou. 26.2. As the Sparrow and Swallow by flying
escape, so the careless curse shall not come.

Fifthly, and lastly, remember how the Lord has often turned the curses of the
wicked into blessings for his children as he testifies himself he did
against Balaam. Joshua. 24.9.10.

Thirdly, Slander is here condemned, as a most dangerous sin of the tongue
full of cruelty. It is discribed thus: A slanderer is one that walks about,
seeking all occasions to knit lies together, and to broch them, maliciously
intending to hurt a man in his person, goods or good name. The holy Ghost has
given us a lively description of this sin in the examples of Doeg the
Edomite, Haman, Zibah and such like in the scriptures.

These sinners may truly be said to be the sons of Belial, for they
notably resemble their father in many points. First Satan is an Job. 1.6.7.8.9.
epsy, so be they. Secondly, Satan is an Zach. Reave.
accuser, so be they. Thirdly, Satan is the Io. 8.43.44.
father of lies, so be they. Fourthly, Satan is malicious, so be they.
Fifthly, Satan is bloody, such be they. Sixthly, Satan Ephesians. 2.2.3. Psalm. 101.5.
works secretly, so do they. Seauenthly, Satan is very sweet in his
temptations, full of sugared James. 1.13.14 Genesis 3 2.3. Psalm. 52.4.
motions, such be they, they speak soft and sweet, but very deceitful words.
Eighthly, Psalm. 50.19. Io. 7.1. Mark. 3.21.
Satan in the end spares not his best friends, no more will the slanderer
spare his own mothers son.

Quest. 121. Proceed on to the fourth kind.
Ans. Actual murder is here condemned: If God give not grace to quench the
flame of anger, and to kill the seed of cruelty in the first conception of the
heart, it will assuredly break forth into the external parts, which is
dangerous, and if here it be not quenched, this fierce flame will increase and
set on fire the tongue, which is more dangerous: and if here it rage long, it
will come to the hand which is most dangerous. Let bloody men remember. Ezech.
35.6. As I live says the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood
shall pursue thee: except thou hate blood, even blood shall pursue thee. And
the cruel and bloody man shall not live half his days.

Rules for peacemakers are these.

First, provoke no man by word or gesture. Secondly, for peace sake leese thy
right. Thirdly, answer no man frowardly. Fourrhly, consture all men's doings
and sayings in the best part, as much as thou can according to the rules of
piety and christian charity. 1. Cor. 13.

Actual murder and cruelty has many degrees and different kinds. First, in
regard of persons, for the more bands of love knit men together, the greater is
the cruelty and sin committed: first, the highest degree is against Parents,
Children, or Brethren: secondly, against any Christian near unto us for his
faith and profession, or loving friendship and neighborhood: thirdly, against
any man: for the Image of God is to be respected in every man. Genesis 9.

Secondly, in the form and manner of proceeding in this action, these
differences must be respected. First, There be some close practices of
cruelty, as either to consent, counsel, or command secretly the death of any
man: as Saul in the death of Stephen. Act. 7.58. Herod for the Baptist. Mar. 6.
Iesabel against Naboth, David against Vrias. 2. Sam. 13.28. or to poison
secretly any man: as Jesuits do Princes, and witches do many, being taught by
Satan in their practices: or in judgment secretly to pervert justice for
rewards, is an exceeding great cruelty: This we see in wicked Felix against
Paul. Act. 24.25. and 28. Secondly, some open actual cruelties: first, in the
open courts of justice and judgment, to let the murderer escape with his
pardons or howsoever, this is great cruelty against the whole land: which must
then bear the wrath of God for the sin of one man. Number. 35.16.33.34.
Secondly, out of judgment there are many kinds: first, against the living:
secondly, against the dead. Cruelty against the living, is to take away the
life of any, or to hurt or wound any man in body, or in soul. Cruelty against
the dead, as not to bury the dead is a heathenish inhumanitie and a punishment
for the wicked. Ier. 22.19. 2. Chro. 36.8.

First, concerning the murdering of parents, and children, the sin is so
detestable, and against nature, that heathens being Romulus.
demanded, wherefore they made no Law for the punishment of such sinners, they
answered: first, for that they thought such evils could not be committed of
any: again the Heathen Judges made a law, that a Snake, a Dog, a Cock, and an
Ape should be bound together in a sack with the murderer and all cast into
the deep sea, for that they would have no man once think of such sins, but
with horror and trembling. If these sinners escape the hands of men, we never
read or find, that they do escape the heavy judgments of God: as we see in
Absalon and Cain, they are set forth as memorable examples for all ages.

Quest. 122. What think you of a combat, for the ending of some strife, and to
try a truth?
Ans. First, it has no warrant from God in his word, David for his combat with
Golias had an extraordinary motion. So likewise Phineas and Elias when they
slew those Idolaters and unclean persons.

Secondly, I say that the Lord in his wise providence has appointed other
Lawful means to appease strife, and to manifest a truth if he will have it
reveled.

Thirdly, and lastly, we know by experience that this is an occasion of sowing
the seed of contention and strife in many, and the cause of much bloodshed in
Children and posterity.

Fourthly, the very Pagans will deny this to be fortitude, Aristole will
condemn it for foole-hardines.

Quest. 123. Now proceed to the affirmative part: and tell me breefely what is
commanded in this Law?
Ans. The sum of this part is this: do what lies in thee to preserve the
life, body and soul of thy neighbor. And here we shall not need to dwell
long, for that having seen the deformity, darkness and danger of the former
sins, we may soon epsy and see the beauty brightness and excellency of
the contrary virtues here commended.

First, if we take some short view of Christian charity commanded in the
whole Law, we shall the better perceive what special branches of it are
commended here unto us.

Love or Charity may well be described to be a supernatural grace or gift of
God, proceeding from faith unfeigned, and from a pure heart, kindled and wrought
in us by the sight of the pardon of sins, and the feeling of the love of God
shed into our hearts. First, that it is a gift of God Saint John teaches. 1.
Epistle. Chap. 4.7. Love comes of God, and every one that loves is borne of
God, and knows God. Secondly, that it rests in a clean heart: Saint Paul
shows, saying. 1. Tim. 1.5. Love proceeds from a pure heart, Act. 15.9.
from a good conscience, and from faith unfeigned. Thirdly, that it is a
consequent and fruit of the pardon of sins, Christ assures us. Luke. 7.47.
Many sins are forgiven her, for she loves much, and faith quickens and
informs love, rather then love faith. Fourthly, and lastly that here is
required the feeling in gods love appears. Romans 5.5. The love of God is shed
into our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us.

The commendation of this grace is great in Scripture. First, it is the girdle
and band of all perfection: teaching us how to make right use of all the gifts
and graces we received for the mutual good and edification one of another.
Col. 3.14.

Secondly, it is patient and gentle. 1. Cor. 13.14. and so the mother of all
peace and concord, teaching us to pass by many injuries to continue our peace
with God and men. 1. Cor. 13.

Thirdly, It is more profitable in the Church then any of the extraordinary
gifts of the spirit: as the gifts of prophesying, of strange tongues, of
healing, and such like. 1. Cor. 13. ver. 8.

Fourthly, it is an infallible testimony unto our spirits, we are translated
from death to life, if we love the Saints. 1. Ioh. 3.14. Psalm. 16.4.

Fifthly, the Lord Christ labors to beat this into men's hearts Mat. 5.23.28.
which men will not receive without Gods special grace have seasoned them, that
no service to God is accepted without faith to God, and love to men. Es. 1.
Romans 14. Heb. 11.6.

Quest. 124. But I pray you let us hear what special branches of obedience be
here commanded?
Mercifulnes or humanity to man and beast.
Ans. First, as God condemns all cruelty to the creatures, so God commends
here the cherishing and preservation of the life of man and beast: he has here
set himself a pattern and example for us to follow. Psalm. 145.
God is good to all creatures, he gives to beasts their food, and to the
ravens when they cry. Psalm. 147.9. Pro. 12.10. A righteous man regards the
life of his beast: but the mercies of the wicked are cruel.

A holy self-love in the preservation of our own souls and bodies.
Secondly, A holy self-love is here commended: for we must with continual care
endeavor the preservation of our souls and bodies everlastingly, by the right
use of the means which god in wisdom has appointed. The soul must
continually be fed and nourished with the knowledge of God and good things.
Prou. 10.2^ The lips of the righteous feed many. The Soul must be well
dieted: and for this the book of God prescribes, teaching us to receive the
word with meekness, as babes do their milk, 2. Pet. 1.1. as the ground the
seed. 1. Pet. 1.23. as the stock the graft: for it is able to save the soul.
James. 1.19. Next the body must be preserved with all watchfulness and
sobriety, that so the whole man may be seruisable to God and men: and for
this the wise Physician is appointed of God to direct us. 1. Chro. 15.
And here we be commanded to attend Gods ordinance in physic for the
restoring and repairing of our health being lost: first, praying for the
pardon of sins, John. 5.5.
and reconciliation with God, that so his blessing may be upon the means
which hereunto by his good providence he has appointed. Mat. 9.2. 2. Chron.
16.12.

A loving tender heart.
Thirdly, loving tenderness of heart to our brethren, and all mercifulness is
here commanded: purge the heart of all anger and cruelty, and be filled with
bowels of compassion: This heart was in Joseph. Genesis 43.30. his bowels were
inflamed toward his brethren. This heart was in Moses. Number. 12.3. Exodus 32.
This heart was in Christ. Mat. 9.36. This heart had Paul. Romans 9.2.5. for thus
he testifies of himself. I am moved toward you with the bowels of Christ, or
of compassion. Phil. 1.8.9.

This heart is known by these marks following.

First, it rejoices in the good and prosperity of other men. Romans 12.15.
Secondly, it mournes for the miseries of men. Esaias. 24.16. Psalm. 119.136.
Thrirdly, it is ready to help. Io. 20.15. most chreerefully and willingly. 2.
Cor. 8.3. without delay. Prou. 3.28. Fourthly, this heart is not lightly
offended nor offending. Phil. 1.9. but ready to pardon many offenses. Ephesians.
4.32. Fifthly, this heart is careful to avoid all occasions of offense. Genesis
13.8. even with the loss of his own right. Mat. 17.26. Sixthly, this heart
ouercomes evil with goodness. Romans 12.21. and with patience. 1. Cor. 13.4.
covering infirmities with the garment of compassion. Prou. 17.9.

Fourthly, A loving cheerful countenance is required.
the loving countenance must testifiie of the affections of our hearts, a sour
countenance is the brand of an hypocrite and of an evil heart, then a
cheerful countenance must attend the merciful and good heart. Mat. 6.16. and
it is seemly in the godly, for a cheerful heart causes a good cheerful
countenance. Prou. 15.13. and they allow all true joys. Job with his grave and
cheerful countenance cheered many hearts. Chap. 29.24. All godless men are
cheered up and comforted with false joys: the true beeleeuer only knows that
the kingdom of heaven is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And
yet this cheerful countenance may not want gravity and sobriety for laughter
is a sign of folly. Sirach. 19.27. Eccles. 2.2. Jobs smiling gave none
occasion of offense. Chap. 29.24. If I laughed on them they believed it not:
Mercifulness and wisdom in the government of the tongue.
for by my cheerfulness I gave them none occasion of liberty unto sin,
Neither did they cause the light of my countenance to fall: they were so afraid
to offend me.

Fifthly, Mercy and love must be manifested in the tongue by good speeches:
first, soft, wise and loving answers, Prou. 15.1. Secondly, in being the mouth
of the poor, widow, fatherless and stranger, in judgment. When the ear
heard me, it blessed me, and when the eye saw me, it gave witness unto me, And
again, ver. 21. Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and held their tongue at my
counsel, Job. 29.11. Job again testifies of his love in these words, I
delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him, the blessing of him that was ready to perish call upon me, and I
caused the widows heart to rejoice. Thirdly, in blessing and praising God, and
in prayer for our brethren. Mat. 5. Fourthly, in feeding and winning souls by
holy admonishion. Prou. 12.10.

Our mercifulness must appear in our actions.
Sixthly, Our mercifulness and love must not only be in word, but also in our
deeds and actions: for every man shall be judged according to his works. Mat.
25.41. Es. 58.10. And yet Saint John proceeds further, saying, that we must
not only relieve them with our goods, but also, if need require for the good
of the Church, we must be ready to lay down our lives for our brethren. 1.
Ioh. 3.16. But Christ would have our love also manifested to our enemies, as in
words, so in deeds. Mat. 5.44. and 48. do good even to your enemies.

Mercifulness manifested by other virtues.
Seauenthly, our mercifulness and love is manifested also in the Church and
must be by these virtues following.

First, there must be in us a sound uprightness and purity of mind, which
as it cannot abide the neighbor to be unjustly blamed by any sinister
dealings: so it can not hide his sins and faults, for his good when occasion
is offered of Christian admonition. Leu. 19.17.

Secondly, by gentleness, which is to refrain our selves from revenge, when
just cause of offense is given us, as David to Shemei 2. Sam. 16.

Thirdly, by liberality, which is a merciful and free distribution with
judgment, giving to every man according to their special wants. Psalm. 112.4.

Fourthly, by friendship, which is a good will beetweene two equals to
perform all duties of love the one to the other. True friendship is a fruit
of Godliness, seasoned with good affection, confirmed with gravity and
sobriety, preserved with constancy, proved by sympathy, and continued with
mutual pledges of love in all well doing.

Fifthly, by concord and consent of minds: this stirs us up to all
benevolence, and causes a careful respect of all superiors, inferiors, and
equals, gladding the hearts of men, as it were with a mild, sweet and
comfortable harmony.

Examination of the Conscience.

First, here must be a careful examination of the heart and conscience: for
if the murderer lie fast bound under the curse and condemnation of God, and
was never as yet translated from death to life: and next that he which hates
his brother is a murderer: then it stands every man in hand to search
faithfully his own heart, and if there thou find any cruelty, anger,
envy, hatred, wrath, malice, or any such Serpents bred and harbored in thee,
thy conscience cries guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

Secondly, examine thy self with what cruelty, and inhumanitie, thou have
abused the good creatures of God: how improuident and careless thou have been
for the life of man and beast: if thy conscience herein plead guilty, this Law
condemns thee.

Thirdly, examine thy self how negligently, thou have respected the state and
life of thy soul, how careless for thy salvation and the means of it: and
with what sins of intemperancie and incontinency thou have impaired the
health and shortened the life of thy body: if thy conscience cry guilty this
Law condemns thee.

Fourthly, examine thy self whether thou have been a scornful Ishmaell, or a
dogged bitter Nabal with any evil gesture, countenance, or otherwise
disgracing or greeuing any man: if thy conscience plead guilty, this Law
condemns thee.

Fifthly, inquire also how thou have offended God, in the sins of the tongue:
as in bitter words, railing, reuiling, backbiting, slandering, clamors,
cursing, all which and the like testify clearly of the cruelty of the heart:
if concerning these thy conscience plead guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Sixthly, inquire also if thou have ever actually hurt, mayned, murdered, or
endangered the life of any man, by secret or open practices whatsoever, or
desired the hurt, or consented to the hurt of any man's life: if thy conscience
plead guilty this law condemns thee.

Seauenthly, inquire if thou do not in a holy self love desire and care for
thine own salvation, and the salvation of others, in exercising thy self in
the means which God in his wisdom has hereunto appointed, as reading and
hearing the word of God read and preached, prayer, meditation, conference,
fasting, and such like, if thy conscience pleads guilty this law condemns
thee.

Eighthly, inquire how negligent thou have been in showing mercy to the poor,
and in commiseration to such as thou have seen and known in any misery: if
thy conscience plead guilty, this Law comdemnes thee.

Ninthly, inquire whether thou have refused reconcilement when thy neighbor
has desired it: or have outwardly pretended reconciliation, but inwardly
intended any cruelty in thine heart: if thy conscience plead guilty this Law
condemns thee.

Ministers.
Tenthly, inquire (if thou be the Minister of Christ) how thou have respected
the souls of men, whether thou have ever poisoned the souls of men with any
false doctrine, or matter of contention: or have done the work of the Lord
negligently: if thy conscience plead guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Civil magistrate.
Eleauenthly, inquire (if god has set thee in the magistracy) how thou have
done justice, and punished cruelty and bloodshed, and protected the life and
state of the innocent: if thy conscience plead guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Twelfthly, let euere man inquire in every calling if he has grieved, or
vexed the soul of any man, if he has impaired the health, maimed or hurt the
body of any man, as Impostors unlearned presuming in the practice of physic,
and unskillful in the practice of chirurgerie to the great hurt of many, if
thou have any way been the cause of any man's death: thy conscience pleads
guilty, and this law condemns thee.

Thirteenthly, and lastly, inquire with what mercifulness thou have tendered
the life of man and beast: with what love and lenity in word and action thou
have conuersed with men, how thou have by all well doing desired to cheer and
comfort the hearts of men: for the want of these virtues thy conscience pleads
guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

The seventh Law. Thou shall not commit Adultry:
Question. 125.
NOw proceed to give us the sum and true interpretation of this Law.

Answer.

The next injury that is done to a man's person is Adultrie, Order.
because a man's wife is next to a man himself and most dear unto him, as his
life: therefore to commit Adultry is even a second murder. Sum.
The sum is this, that God does abhor all uncleanness and pollution of
body and mind, Scope. To preserve chastity.
and therefore so must we with all care and watchfulness striving to keep
and possess our vessels in holiness and honor, as meet temples for his holy
spirit to rest in. 1. These. 4.1. Cor. 6.

The best interpreter of this Law (as of the former) is our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Mat. 5.27.32. where first he rejects the Pharisaicall gloss,
and then he adds his own true interpretation. The Pharisees standing first
upon the bare letter of the Law, and next upon the authority of their
ancients did affirm and teach that this Law was only to be understood of
actual Adultrie: but our Lord and Savior assures us this Law, searches more
deeply into the most secret chambers of men hearts.

In this Law we are to consider. First, what is forbidden: All kinds of
Adultrie: either of the heart. Mat. 5.28. to lust after an other man's wife: or
of the other senses, as of the eye. Mat 5.29. in unchaste and unseemly sight:
or of the ear, in hearing of rotten and unsavory speeches. Ephesians. 4. or of the
taste, in all intemperancie, gluttony and dronkennes: or of the smelling, by
all whorish prouocations of lust in odoriferous smells: or of feeling, by all
unchaste touching or handling of women. Or the Adultrie of the tongue, is to
vent the unclean lusts of the heart, by unclean speches, Ephesians. 4. Or actual or
corporal whoredom and adultery, where we be to consider: first, of the
causes which breed this sin: secondly, of single whoredom: thirdly, of incest:
fourthly, of unnatural lusts: Fifthly, of diuorcement.

Secondly, what is commanded: we be commanded to keep our vessels in
holiness and honor, and to this end we be first, to keep the heart
watchfully exercised in holy and clean thoughts and Godly meditations:
Secondly, to watch over all the senses as Job did his eyes, Chap. 21 or Joseph
did his ears. Thirdly, to watch over the tongue, that it may utter chaste,
holy and profitable speeches: Fourthly, to look we be well fenced and guarded
with the walls and bars of a pure and chaste life, as these: First, marriage:
Secondly, temperancy and sobriety in meat or in apparall: Thirdly, Religious
fasts: Fourthly, invocation and prayer: Fifthly, the society and communion of
Saints.

Quest. 126. Now let me hear what says Christ of this Law?
Ans. Christ says that actual Adultery is not here only forbidden, but that
whosoever fastneth his eye on an other man's wife, to the stirring up of his
heart to any unclean motions has offended against this Law: Christ first
condemns here the adultrie of the heart. Christ here teaches that we must
keep the fountain clean: Prou. 4.23.
for that all the actions of life stream from it: The Lord condemns an
unchaste heart: first, for that from it proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications. Mar. 7.20.21. Secondly, for that he will have us to obey his
Laws with all the soul, all the mind, and all the heart. Deuteronomy. 6.4.5.
Thirdly, the Apostle requires chastity both in body and mind, that is,
holiness both in body and spirit, for that man is rather that in verity, which
he is in heart and mind, then what he is in outward appearance. 1. Cor. 7.34.
Fourthly, we must be like our God and put on by Christ that image which we
lost in our first parents: he reasons with us thus: 1. Pet. 1.13.
Be ye holy for I am holy. Leu. 20.26. in soul, spirit and body. 1. The. 5.23.

Rules for the preservation of the heart from Adultrie, are these.

First, make a covenant with thine eyes and thine heart, Job. 31.1. and 26.6.
not to think upon unclean thoughts: for that they are the seed and spawne of
all unclean lusts. Prou. 12.2.


Secondly, dispute not with the Devil alone, for he will soon inflame thee,
as he did Eve to lust after the forbidden fruit, and David to lust after
Vriahs wife. Genesis 3.3.2. Sam. 11.

Thirdly, if lust begin to stir in thee, James. 1.15. 1. Pet. 2.11.
let not thine heart yield, but resist the motion, and Christ by his grace
shall enable thee to overcome and to kill this enemy.

Fourthly, Be instant in prayer when the occasion is offered, and cry, saying:
O Lord turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. Psalm. 119.

Fifthly, avoid the occasions following: Christ here condemns the adulterous
eye: naming this sense for all the rest, because it is a most stirring and
quick sense, and for that by it most commonly Satan and the world infect the
heart with unclean lusts.

1. John. 2.17.
Saint John knits well three things together, The lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, for the lust of the flesh is inflamed, by
the lust of the eyes, and the common lure of this is the vanity and pride of
life, for the Devil by the world kindles the lust of the eye, and this
inflames the lust of the heart. That the eye is a most dangerous sense, both to
stir up and to feed the unclean lusts of the heart, may appear by many
examples in Gods book. Of Putiphars wife it is said that she cast her eyes
upon Joseph, and then began to lust after him, and to entice him to lie with
her. Genesis 39.7. And of David it is written, 2. Sam. 11.2.
that he cast his eyes upon a naked woman, Vriahs wife, and this inflamed his
heart: and Gods people were so snared and baited in the first age, for it is
said of them: Genesis 6.2.3.
The sons of God cast their eyes upon the daughters of men and saw that they
were fair. That is, the religious in the true Church, saw the daughters of
Cain, in the false Church did please their eyes, so they were overcome with
their beauty to break Gods covenant, and to join with them in marriage to
their own destruction. This adulterous eye causes Saint Peter to say of
unclean men, that they have eyes full of adultry. 1. Pet. 2.14.

Here then are condemned all inticements of the eye, which stir up the heart
to unclean lusts: The most common and dangerous lures of these times are these
following: First, dead pictures of naked men and women, the old lures of the
Devil in paganism. Cursed Cham iested at his fathers nakedness. Genesis 9. And
so the spirit of whoredom causes men to delight in that which is one special
cause of shame and confusion, for he that delights in the effect will delight
in the cause and occasion. Sin brought in shame and dishonor upon us: our
weakness, our shame, our frailty, God has taught us to cover with our
apparel. Such then as discover their nakedness in part, or in whole, in
living bodies or dead pictures, follow the old Pagans in practice and set up
banners for whoredom and uncleanness.

Secondly, the second lure is the banner of pride in costly and strange
apparel: the blessed voice of God in the scripture condemns in apparel two
things: first, costlinesse and wasting of our substance on apparel, above our
state, wealth, place and calling, wherein God has placed us, confer these
places. 1. Tim. 2.9. with Esa. 3. and 1. Pet. 3.2.3. Secondly, he condemns
curiosity and vanity in fantastical and strange attire: for thus the
Prophet speaks. Sophonia Chap. 1.8. I will visit the Princes, and the kings
children, Deuteronomy. 12.11. Esaias. 3. 1. Pet. 3.3. 1. Tim. 2.^.
and all such as are clothed with strange apparel. Strange it is that Satan
can make us so swell in that which ought to be unto us a special argument of
humiliation: for sin and shame brought in apparel, and this came in to cover
both. It may well be called as one says the badge of our rebellion, and the
witness of our shame. That Steward may justly be condemned and rejected that
wastfully spends his masters goods, specially in attiring himself: to be
short, this vanity in apparel, never greater then in these times, has ever
been noted an argument of pride, idleness, leuity and disorder in all degrees
of men.

Thirdly, our nature, if we knew it, has no need to be made tame, and
brought under for unclean spirits to ride us, by painting the face, laying out
the hair, curling, painting, binding, and by strange attires: for our very
natural disposition is so prone to all uncleanness, that it is a very
madness for us to give such place to the devil, that his temptations may with
more speed and ease be fastened on us: and thus wittingly and willingly we
hold Satan the stirrup to our own destruction.

Fourthlie, and lastly, the ages following will assuredly be astonished to see
the pictures of pride and vanity, which shall be reserved in our houses for
posterity.

The third and fourth lure of whoredom and adultry to feed adultrous eyes and
cares, be stage-plaies, and dancing. These unclean vanities have many
prouocations in them, and means to fill unchaste eyes and ears full of
whordome and adultrie. We know the voice of him which speaks, evil words
corrupt good manners. 1. Cor. 15.32.33. Es. 22.13.
And these vain pastimes (as they be called) are full of unclean speeches.
Again, the Lord expessely charge us. Ephe. 5.3.4. That fornication and
uncleanness be not once named among us, as becomes Saints: neither
filthiness, nor foolish talking, neither jesting (which are things uncomely)
but rather giving of thanks: And again Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying,
that it may minister grace unto the hearers. And what else find we in
stage-plaies, but a continual breach of these most sacred and holy canons in
all unclean and unseemly jesting, foolish talking, whorish gestures, rotten
and unsavory communication: so that if men see not these baits of Satan, but
will still approve these unclean cages and nurceries of whordome, so contrary
to the light of grace, so dangerous to Church and common wealth: 2. Cor. 4.3.4.
it is to be doubted that such men have their eyes as yet fast bound, and can
not see the face of God in Jesus Christ, nor the bright shining countenance of
Christ in the Gospel. The Ancients cried out continually in their times
against stage-plaies and dancing. They called theaters, Venus temples, and
means to pollute all persons and places.

Of dancing August. Melius est to to die fodere quam saltare die sabathi.
one faith, better dig all day then dance on Sunday: Chrisost. Instrumenta
luxuriae tympana et tripudia laquei sunt et scandala.
an other thus, where wanton and lascivious dancing is, there the devil
daunceth: and again, dancing is the Devils gulf, to plunge sinners in sin
at unawares. And again, says he: piping and dancing are the instruments of
a luxurious life, very snares and scandals. An other adds saying, Ambrose. De
virgin. lib. 3.
dancing is fit for adulterous women, and not for chaste matrones. Another
writing of Theophilast. Mar. 6. Saltat Diabolus per puellam.
Herodias daughters dancing, says: The Devil daunceth in or by the maid.

The late writers speak even the same words in effect: master Sermon on Job.
80.
Calvin says, that dancing is but the Devils inticement unto whoredom.
Master Mat. 14.6. Meretriciae lasciuiae turpis nota nubilis saltatio.
Marlora says, that dancing in young maids is a foul note of whorish
wantons. A very Tulli.
Heathen speaks these words, An honest man would not dance in an open place
for a great patrimony.

But here they object, that the Scripture commends dancing in David. 2. Sam.
6. and Miriam with her company. Exodus 15. The answer is this: first, we must
note the cause, it was to testify their cherefulnesse for that they saw the
religion and holy worship of God to prosper: Secondly, they had no mixture of
sex in their daunces: Thirdly, the form is to be observed, it was a modest
motion with the singing of a holy Psalm, therefore far was this action from
all lasciviousness. And as the holy Ghost commendes this dancing, so he
condemns all vain and lascivious dancing: as the dancing of the daughter of
Mar. 6.23.
Herodias, the whorish dancing at Judge. 21.21.
Shiloh, the dancing before the Exodus 32.
Calfe, and Job. 21.11.
Job notes this as a common lure to uncleanness.

Quest. 127. Now proceed on to the rest of the senses, that we may see also
how they be baited for whoredom and uncleanness.
Ans. Here also are condemned all curiosity and vanity in confection of
sweet perfumes and costly smells, which serve not only to comfort the brain,
but as prouocations to whoredom and uncleanness. The harlot is noted for this.
Prou. 7.17. I have perfumed my bed with Mirh, Aloes, and Cinnamon, and the
proud women in Esais time. Chap. 3.24.

Thus we see we be commanded also to look well to the sense of smelling:
now for the next, which is the sense of tasting: to it appertain all the
sins of intemperancie in meats and drinks. And therefore here are condemned
the gross and foul sins of gluttony and drunkenness, Gluttony and
Drunkenness.
as causes and common companions of whoredom and of all pollution. Examples in
Scripture, and the experience of all ages clear this truth, fullness of bread
and idleness did breed those unclean sins of Sodom, Ezech. 16.49. Genesis
19.33. Iud. 7.11.
and Lot standing fast on his watch-towre of sobriety, could never be lured to
any kind of uncleanness The Scriptures tie these sins together as in one
string. Prou. 23.20. 1. Cor. 6.5. and 11. Gal. 5.21. 1. Pet. 4.3.

Lastly, where the holy Ghost tells us, that it is not good to touch a woman.
1. Cor. 7.1. albeit he forbids not holy marriage, yet he notes also that this
sense may easily be allured, by touching of strange women to infect and poison
the heart with unclean lusts. And thus far of the adultrie of the senses, or
bridling the senses.

Quest. 128. What can you say of the third kind of adultrie, or of the
adultrous tongue?
Ans. The tongue is a notable instrument whereby the Devil fires and fills body
and soul with the fire and rage of cruelty (as we heard in the sixth Law) and
with unclean lusts. The word and common experience teach us that evil words
corrupt good manners, 1. Cor. 15.
and that a filthy speaker is a filthy liver, or has never truly repented of
his unclean life: for a filthy tongue is an infallible argument of an unclean
heart. Mark. 9.
Therefore be we commanded to abstain from all rotten and unsalted
communication. Ephesians. 4.29. and 5.2.3. It is also noted for one of the marks of
an harlot, an impudent face and a filthy tongue. Prou. 7.13.18. and in the
young widows which Saint Paul condemns as busy bodies, and charge to go
to their second marriage to preserve chastity, for says he, They speak
things which are not comely. 1 Timothy 5.13.

Quest. 129. Now proceed to speak of actual adultrie: but first let us
hear, if ye have any more special causes and prouocations to this sin.
Ans. Thus far then shall suffice of the adultrie of the heart, of the senses,
and of the tongue, which continually give occasion and provocation to the
outward, gross and actual sin of Adultrie.

Now here we may not forget idleness and the contagious society and
conversation of the wicked; first, for idleness the mother of many sins: the
Lord says, he that follows the idle is destitute of understanding. Prou.
12.11. It is numbered and noted as one of the special sins of ^om, Abundance
of idleness. Ezech. 16.49. And the ^^ostle notes it in the young foolish
widows. 1. Tim. 5.12.13. They were idle, pratlers and busy bodies.

Next unto this we must carefully avoid the society and familiarity of
unclean persons, for as he that touches pitch can not be clean, so he that
conuerseth with unclean persons, or haunteth unclean places can not be
clean. The charge and council of God against this, we may see. Ephesians. 5.7.
having condemned Adultrie and Whoredom as most unclean sins, he adds, Be
not therefore companions with them. And again, ver. 11. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove them rather. This David
teaches us. Psalm. 1. He that consults with the wicked, shall fall into their
ways and practices, and he that stands in their ways long, shall be come
resolute and dissolute in all evil: wherefore let us ever desire to consort
our selves with the holy and religious, and to be companions of them which
fear the Lord, love the children of God, delight in the saints, Psalm. 119. 1.
Ioh. 2. Psalm. 16.
and honor them in our hearts.

Now to speak of the first gross sin condemned by name in this Law, that
is, of actual Adultrie: First, I say the word used in the original does
signify the defiling of such persons as be in the married state, for which
cause the Pharisees restrained this Law to such only: but we have heard Christ
teach the contrary, that not only this gross actual Adultrie is here
condemned, but all causes and like companions of it.

First, actual Adultrie is the breach of Gods holy institution. Genesis 2.14. and
of the covenant of God. Prou. 2.17. Mal. 2.14. Secondly, Heb. 13.4.
a sin that God threatens often and plagueth often in this life. Thirdly,
there is no one sin that God so threatens so strangely and with such
solemnity to discover in the Church of the Jews, for the which the party
suspected was put to a most solemn purgation and trial openly before the
Priest and congregation. Number. 5.12.22. Fourthly, (...) Adulterer or adultresse
but carry within them a (...) and snake sent from God into their bosom, and
th^eth them where ever they go: or else their state is far (...), a
deadness of heart has possessed the: for as the ^^^phet Hosheah speaks Chap.
4.11. ^^^^dome and wine (...) away the heart, so that of men they ^ome very
beasts. Fifthly, God punishes this sin first in this life with a temporal
death by the hand of the magistrate. Leu. 20.10. 1. Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.22.
Deuteronomy. 22.22. after this life they are tormented of diuils in hell. Reave. 21.8.
The like temporal punishment was for parties betrothed if they were found in
sin. Deuteronomy. 22.32. Sixthly, the very Heathen did abhor this sin: and
appointed many kinds of punishments for it, and some death: as we see the
king of Babel burnt with fire Achab and Zedekiah, two false Prophets, for the
sin of Adultery Ierem. 29.23.

Quest. 130. Proceed to single whordome and the other special actual sins
here condemned.
Ans. Now that single whoredom is also here condemned is very manifest, for
the Lord often condemns it also in the old and new Testament, God teaches
us, that where whordome is, that place is full of wickedness
his words are these. Leu. 19.29. Thou shall not make thy daughter common, to
cause her to be an harlot, least the land also fall to whoredom, and the land
be full of wickedness. And again. Leu. 21.9. If a Priests daughter fall to
play the whore, she polluteth her father, therefore, shall she be burnt with
fire. Again, this is repeated. Deuteronomy. 23.17. There shall be no whore of the
daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a whore keeper of the sons of
Israel. So in the new Testament these two sins of adultry and whordome be
most commonly knit together as most common and dangerous. Gal. 5.23. Col. 3.^
1. Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.23.

Secondly, incest is here condemned: this sin yet exceedes the two former:
this sin is committed when such as be knit together and be near for
kindred or affinity defile themselves contrary to the Law of God condemning
this pollution. Leu. 18.6. None shall come near any of the kindred of his
flesh, and uncover her shame, I am the Lord. Against this sin a solemn curse
was denounced. Deuteronomy. 27.20.22.23. and the punishment inflicted upon such
sinners was death. Leu. 20.11. And how greatly the Lord abhors this sin may
appear by his curse so long continued on that incestious seed of Lot, the
Moabites and Ammonites Genesis 19.37.38.

It may be here demanded if incest be to be punished by death, wherefore was
the incestuous man in Corinth chastened only by an Ecclesiastical censure. The
answer is this: the Lord proceeds against this sin at that time no further
then excommunication only, because the Church as yet wanted christian
Magistrates.

Thirdly, wicked marriages with Idolaters, with the profane and godless be
here condemned: first, all couenanting and compacting in any league of
familiarity is condemned. Exodus 23.32. and 34.15. Secondly, Marriage is
specially forbidden in these words, Thou shall make no marriages with them.
Deuteronomy. 7.5. The reason is this, ver. 4. for they will cause thy Sons to turn
away from me to serve other Gods. And this we find true by many examples
purposely to this end recorded in scripture: as first in Solomon, who for all
his wisdom by such unclean marriages was carried away as blindfold to all
idolatries. 1. King. 11.4. Achab also being evil by such a marriage with
Iesabell was made ten times worse. 1. King. 16.31. And good Iehosaphat is taxed
in these words, Iehosaphat had riches, and honor in abundance, but he was
joined in affinity with Achab. 2. Chron. 18.1.2. Esau. by this sin did
grieve his holy Parents: of whose Idolatrous wives it is said: That they were a
grief of mind to Isaac and Rebecca: so that Rebecca, Genesis 26.35.
complaining against them says: I am weary of my life for the daughters of
Heth: Genesis 27.46.
If Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, like these of the daughters of
the land what avails it me to live? Again this was the sin of the
Israelites practicing Balaams counsel to Balaack to their own destruction.
Number. 25.1.2.3.4. This is the sin for the which Ezra and the godly with him,
so fasted, mourned and wept. Ezra 10.10. This sin is specially named to be
the cause of the first destruction of the world by the flood in Noah's time.
Genesis 6.1.2.3. verses. But we find the Jews often to match with the Gentiles,
and their marriages allowed of God: as Boaz to Ruth, Chap. 3. Ans. When the Lord
gave his Law against such marriages: he added this special exception, that if
they did renounce superstition and did embrace his holy worship they might
mary, Deu. 21.10.14. Psalm. 45.
and so did Ruth Chap. 1.16.

Fourthly, again the Lord here condemns all stealing away of the sons and
daughters of men for marriages: and this is done two manner of ways: Rape and
forceing condemned. Enticing of Virgins condemned.
first, violently against the consent both of parties and parents: secondly,
with the consent of the children but not of parents. These and the like
godless practices have crept into the Church from Paganism and Papisme: for
the Popish canonists abusing the Laws which were made against the enticeing
and defiling of Virgins with consent have made stolen marriages lawful. Deuteronomy.
22.28. Exodus 22.16.
The very words of their chief Master, be these. The consent of Parents for
marriages is not of any necessity, but serves to comeliness and honesty. But
we know the holy Laws of the Almighty require this consent in marriage, for
the Lord gives the father this authority. Exodus 22.16.17. for that children to
parents are the most special and dearest part of that substance which the Lord
has lent them for their comfort on the earth; which thing the Devil knew
right well. Job. Chap. 1 and 2. Again, if children be bound to honor parents
in all things, most of all in this solemn contract, which does so much
concern their state during life. Thirdly, this the Lord also teaches by holy
examples, which for this are commended as presidents for all ages, as of Isaac
and Rebecca. Genesis 24.4.50. and the contrary is no less condemned in Profane
Esaus marriages for the example of all posterities. Genesis 28.8. and 27.46.

Fifthly, Polyganie is here condemned: reasons against this evil are these
following: First, the Lords will is that his children in holy marriage conform
themselves to the first president which he gave in paradise. But then and there
the Lord joined one man and one woman together in marriage, therefore this form
is to be followed in the Church for ever. Secondly, the Lord has given a
manifest Law against this sin of having two wives. Leu. 18.18. where in the
original the words are thus read. Thou shall not take unto thee in marriage one
woman to another, Thirdly, Malachie and Christ charge us to look on the first
instituon of marriage and follow it. Mat. 19.8. The Prophets words are. chap.
2.15. And did he not make one? yet had he abundance of spirit: and wherefore
one? because he sought a godly seed. Therefore keep your selves in your
spirit, and let none trespass against the wife of his youth. Fourthly, the
Apostles words are without all exception. 1. Cor. 7.2.3. Nevertheless to
avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have her
own husband.

Sixthly, Diuorcements whether Jewish or Christian tolerate against the manifest
word of God are here condemned. The new Testament teaches us no cause of
diuorcement, but Adultrie. Mat. 5.12. and the wilful departure of the
unbelieving idolater. 1. Cor. 7.15.

Seauenthly, and lastly, all Popish Stews, Ezech. 16. Romans 1.
the sins of Sodom, not to be named among Gods people. Ephesians. 5.3. and all
pollutions of the marriage bed, contrary to the express charge of God. Deuteronomy.
23.11. Leu. 15.2.16. Ordinary and natural fluxes. Leu. 15.31.33. and. 20.18.
preached by Ezech. Chap. 18. by nocturnall or monthly fluxes: for the which
the Lord requires a separation of man and wife for the time, are here
condemned, for the Lords will is, that every one know and learn how to
possess his vessel in holiness and honor. 1. These. 14.4.

Quest. 131. Now proceed to the affirmative part, that we may see in like
manner, what special virtues God commends and requires in this Law?
Ans. Summarily we be commanded here as to endeavor and labor to keep our
own souls and bodies in holiness and honor, so also to preserve, what lies
in us, the chastity of our neighbor. And the deformity and darkness of the
sins before condemned, may help us to see the beauty and brightness of
the contrary virtues here commended, which are specially these following.

First, here we be commanded to keep the heart watchfully, well exercised in
holy thoughts and godly meditations. Here let no man say with the blind
heathen, that thought is free for every man: But contrarily remember what the
Lord warns often, as Pro. 4.23. Keep thine heart withal diligence, for from
it proceed the actions of life. And again. 2. Cor. 7.1. Seeing we have such
promises let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
and grow up into full holiness in the fear of God. And this he teaches by
his Prophet. Mal. 2.15. when he says, Keep your selves in your spirit. that
is, keep under and crucify your affections and lusts, even the secret motions
and desires of your hearts.

Secondly, the Lord requires the sanctification of the whole man. 1. The. 5.23.
The soul, spirit and body, for that all these parts are redeemed by Christ,
therefore they must all be kept holy and clean.

Thirdly, many not watching over their hearts have been smitten with the spirit
of jealousy, and so of madness, and so of cruelty, and murder, as we see in
Ammon and such like examples. 2. Sam. 13.

Secondly, the chastity of all the senses, is here commanded: and here a
special watch over the eye and ear is required: first, for the eye. An
adulterous eye (as we heard) fills the heart with uncleanness, and so inflames
the whole man: here then Jobs watch must be remembered. Chap. 31.1. I made a
covenant with mine eyes why then should I think on a maid? And Joseph's chaste
eyes and ears: for he could not endure to hear and see the unchaste behavior
and words of his mistress. Genesis 39.

Thirdly, the Lord here commands us to keep a continual watch over our lips,
and tongue: The Chastity of this member is noted with these marks.

First, the chaste tongue speaks nothing but that which is poudred with salt,
and that which is good to the use of edifiing, and may minister grace to the
hearers. Ephesians. 4.30.

Secondly, to speak with shame fastness and sobriety of those things which
sin has covered with the garment of dishonestie and uncleanness, as Genesis 4.
1. Psalm. 51. in the title of the Psalm. This is the Apostolical charge, Ephesians.
5.3.4. Let no uncleanness, or filthiness be once named among you, as it
becomes Saints.

Thirdly, Sobriety and Temperancie in all speech. James. 1.19. Mat. 12.19.
Contrary to this are the notes of the harlot: first, much babbling. Prou. 7.11.
secondly, She is loud.

Fourthly, the Lord here commands the chaste and sober carriage of the whole man:
and of all the members of the body: for like as the unchaste behavior of any
part of the body argues a filthy and unclean person: so the sober, grave,
and holy use of all the outward parts commends and declares the chastity of
the heart howsoever uncleanness often and hypocrisy may be covered under the
vision of sobritie. 1. Pet. 3.2.3.4.5.6. Ob. But some say albeit they be not
clean tongued, and fingred yet they be clean hearted. Ans. Si trabs sit in
oculo strues est in cord, that is, the sight is not good, if there be a beam
in the eye, and the heart is false when the outward part is corrupted.

Quest. 132. And what be the walls and bats of a pure and chaste life?
Ans. These five specially: marriage, temperancie, prayer, society, the works
and labor of our calling.

The first is Marriage, which the Lord by his own holy spirit commends as
honorable. Heb. 13.4. Mat. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
and commands all true worshippers (which have not the gift of continency) in
this Law as the most special preservative of a chaste life. In all ages God
has blessed this state as his own special ordinance for the propagation of a
holy seed, as the Prophet speaks, Mal. 2.14. commended in all the old and
new Testament in the examples of all the Patriarchs, Kings, Priests and
Prophets: in men of all degrees and conditions of life.

Object. First, but some teach that marriage does rather pollute and defile a
man then keep him chaste. Ans. It is the voice of Antichrist, who is contrary
to Christ, as in all his proceedings so in this: Contrarily we be to
remember what the spirit of Christ has prophesied of our times, saying. 1.
Tim. 4.1. that false teachers should come and disgrace holy marriage, and reject
it as an unclean thing, but we are to hold such doctrine to proceed from the
Diuill.

This scripture has been much abused by Tatianus, Montanus, Tertullian,
Origin, and after them by Hierom and Nazianzen.
Object. Secondly, but single life is preferred before marriage by the Apostle.
1. Cor. 7. Ans. Not for any holiness or purity in this kind of life, but for
an outward and worldly respect: for the Apostle so speaks, commending the
single life. 1. Cor. 7. ver 26. for the present necessity, because of the
manifold afflictions of those times, and the paucitie of true christian
believers, least they should marry with unbelievers which was a thing most
dangerous and contrary to the express charge of God unto all his people.

Object. Thirdly, it is further objected in our wretched times, that marriage
breeds beggerie and hurts the good state of the common wealth. Ans. Neither
poverty nor riches can commend or discommend any holy ordinance of God, let
the laws and rules of God, and godliness be kept, that every man labor in a
lawful calling, that all idleness and disordered life be banished, and
expelled from among Gods people. And the^ the poor man married shall be blessed
in the Church of God as well as the rich, and as for the most part as daily
experience teaches us, more comforted and blessed in his wife and children. Of
this point Master The Martyr.
Hooper speaks on this manner. They be worthily condemned, that for poverty,
foolish vows, or for easiness of life refuse matrimony, and tarry in the
present danger of fornication, and of the concupiscence of the flesh, etc.
Lastly, the old Pagan Romans commended marriage in the poorest.

Secondly, the second bar, and preservative of a chaste life, in temperancie
and sobriety in meats and apparel: how profitable this virtue is at all
times, and how needful, also the religious fast and abstinence is, for the
humbling of our souls and bodies, as often as we be called and occasioned
hereunto, all wise men know and have ever testified with God and his word in
all ages. And contrarily how fullness of meats and excess in apparel do so
carry men headlong into all looseness, that they cannot be contained by any
good means within the bounds and lysts of a chaste life.

Thirdly, the third bar and preservative of chastity is prayer: This is such
a holy work of the spirit of sanctification in us, as can never proceed from
us unto God, nor return unto us with comfort, but when the heart is purified
by faith, and our whole body and soul, and spirit be kept as chaste vessels
of holiness and honor to serve the living God. So that prayer preserues
chastity, and chastity fits and helps us unto prayer.

Fourthly, the fourth bar of a chaste life is the society and company of the
faithful. This the Apostle shows saying: flee lusts of youth, and follow
after righteousness faith, 2. Tim. 2.22.
and love and peace, how this may be done is intimated in these words, keep
with them which call on the Lord with a pure heart. And of this Solomon
speaks, Prou. 13.20.
he that walks with the wise shall be blessed, but a companion of fools
shall be afflicted. Of this the Psalmist warns us by his own example. Psalm.
119. saying, I am a companion of such as fear the Lord. And we be often
charged at no hand to converse with the wicked, Psalm. 1.1.
least we be tainted by them, for he that touches pitch can not be undefiled:
and a special prohibition is given us to avoid the company of all unclean
persons. Ep. 5.3.4.5. where the Lord assuring us that such have no portion of
inheritance with Christ in his kingdom, he concludes be not therefore
companions with them.

Fifthly, the fifth bar and preservative of a chaste life is to travel and
labor in a calling allowed of God. How dangerous idleness is, pestring the
Church and common wealth as with many gross sins, so with the sins of
whoredoms and adulteries in special manner, was before showed. Contrarily the
continual labor of an honest calling, does so exercise body and mind and the
whole man, that such men, specially having tasted of godliness, and having put
on Christ, can not so easily be baited, when occasion is offered: neither do
they take such thought as the Idle man for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of
it. Romans 13.14.

Quest. 133. Now proceed to the examination of the Conscience.
Ans. Here (for the use of all that has been taught concerning this Law)
every man must enter into his own heart for the diligent examination of his
own Conscience. And because Christ has taught us that there is an Adultrie of
the heart: as we have heard: First, inquire whether in any place or time, thou
have given thine heart leave to think upon unclean and filthy matters and
motions, how far thou have entertained, and delighted and dwelt on such
unchaste matters, if thy Conscience herein plead guilty of any consent, it is
the breach of this commandment, and this Law comdemnes thee.

Secondly, Inquire whether seeing any woman young or old, thou have burnt
inwardly in lust toward her: and in this lust have consented and practiced to
obtain thy filthy hearts desire: if thy conscience cries guilty this Law
condemns thee.

Thirdly, inquire whether thou have used any lures to fill thine eyes with
adultry, as naked pictures, an unchaste countenance, becks, signs, as painting,
laying out of hair, stage-plaies, amorous dauncings, strange and whorish
attire, drinkings, feastings, and such like; if thy conscicence cry guilty,
this law condemns thee.

Fourthly, inquire whether self-love has so beewitched thee, that thou have
thought thy self either for beauty or other gifts of body or mind to be the
very minion of the world, able to allure any to commit filthiness with thee:
if thy conscience cry guilty this Law condemns thee.

Fifthly, inquire whether thou have been infected with the lures of vanity to
fill thine ears with adultrie: whether thou have taken any delight in
reporting and remembering thine own or other men's unclean practices, filthy,
unsavory, wanton and whorish speeches, amorous looks and songs: if thy
conscience plead guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Sixthly, inquire whether thou have fed thine own senses and parts of thy
body with any other inticements unto uncleanness, as the brain by curious and
costly confections of strange perfumes to allure thy self and others to
uncleanness: if thy conscience plead guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Seauenthly, inquire whether thou have lived in a lawful calling honestly, or
followed idlnesse, or willingly consorted with such, by whom thou might be
enticed and drawn away to commit filthiness: if thy conscience plead guilty
this Law condemns thee.

Eighthly, inquire whether thou have ever committed any of the gross sins of
actual Adultrie, or of whoredom, or of incest, or of those most unnatural
sins of Sodom: if thy conscience plead guilty this Law condemns thee.

Ninthly, inquire whether thou have married for carnal respects, for riches,
beauty and to satisfy thy carnal lusts, with idolatry, Atheist, and such
like, and not in the Lord: whether without consent of parents and parties: if
thy conscience plead guilty this Law condemns thee.

Tenthly, inquire whether in the married state thou have been careful to keep
the marriage bed undefiled, carefully avoiding all bitterness and occasion of
iarres: as also all whorish and immoderate lusts: if thy conscience plead
guilty this Law condemns thee.

Eleauenthly, inquire further whether thou have given thy self any heathenish
liberty, or counseled others to fall into the sins of polyganie,
diuorcements: or practiced, or occasioned, or wincked at any pollution or
uncleanness, which thou might by authority, thy place, word or countenance
have restrained: if thy conscience plead giuiltie this law condemns thee.

Twelftly, Inquire with what care and conscience thou have used the good
helps, remedies and means which God has given thee to preserve thy soul and
body in holiness and honor: whether thou have rejected marriage either as
unclean or as an unquiet state of life: whether thou have carried thy self in
a sober course of life, and used holy abstinence for the humbling of thy soul
and body as thou have been occasioned: whether thou have delighted in the
communion of Gods Saints and children: and continued laboring in a lawful
calling: if thy conscience plead guilty this Law condemns thee.

The eight Law. Thou shall not Steal.
Question. 134.
PRoceed and let me hear something of the scope, and sense, and sum of this
Law,

Answer.

The drift of this Law is the preservation of our neighbors goods: The Lord
keeps a special order and method in this second Table as in the first. In the
first Law having ordered and set every man in his place and degree: he
commands in the next that every man so ordered endeavor to preserve the life
of his neighbor. In the third Law he commands the preservation of his
chastity, because it is most dear unto him next his life. In this fourth Law
of the second Table: because life can not be vpholden without goods and the
necessary means of this life, therefore in this law he commands the
preservation of his goods: teaching us that we can not possibly love his life,
if we do not what we may endeavor to keep him from all injuries in his goods.

To Steal, Sense. Genesis 31.20. Synecdoche.
does signify properly to get or take away secretly any part of any man's
goods: but here by a figure it signifies all manner of injuries, done to men
in their goods.

Quest. 135. Let me hear what the secret theft of the heart is, or the sin
of covetousness.
Ans. Covetousness is a secret corruption of the heart, Vice of the mind
pricking and provoking us to follow after filthy lucre, an immoderate desire of
having.
disquieting the heart in the greedy desire of getting and increasing the
riches and blessings of this life, with an affiance and trust in them when they
are possessed and gotten, whereof there are four signs: First, an eger and
sharp desire of getting: Secondly, an pinching and niggardly keeping, as in
Nabal. 1. Sam. 25. Thirdly, neglect of holy duties, for the mind is so taken
up with earthly things. Psalm. 110. Fourthly, trusting in them as if our life
were vpholden by them. Luke. 12.15. The holy Ghost fore-warneth much and often
against this sin.

First, it is an evil sign of an unclean and irreligious heart. Mar. 7.21.22.

Secondly, it is an enemy to the word for it makes the heart utterly unfit to
entertain and retain the holy word of God. Luke. 8.14. Therefore the Prophet
cries. Ps. 119.36. Lord incline mine heart to thy testimonies and not to
covetousness.

Thirdly, It is an enemy to our external peace, for this cause the Prophet
speaks. Haback. 2.6.7. how long he that lodeth himself with thick clay?
shall they not rise up suddenly, that shall bite thee, and awake that shall
stir thee, and thou shall be their pray?

Fourthly, it is the cause often of our want of our inward peace of conscience,
Esaias. 57.17. For his wicked covetousness I am angry with him, and have smitten
him: I hid me and was angry, yet he went away, and turned after the way of
his own heart.

Fifthly, it breaks the whole man with cares. Mat. 6. and many sorrows: Ier.
6.13.
and causes a man to fall away from all profession of the faith of Christ. 1.
Tim 6. and causes many foolish and noisome lusts to breed in men which drown
them in perdition and destruction. ver. 9.

Sixthly, this sin makes a man a very Idolater, for the covetous man makes his
money his God: he loves it most, and has his greatest rest, peace, and
affiance in it. Ephesians. 5.5. 1. Tim. 6.17.

Seauenthly, the Apostle forgets not to warn the Churches carefully against
this sin. The Church of Rome: Chap. 1. 29. The Church of Corinth. 1. Epistle.
6.9.10. The Church of Galatia. Chap. 5. 19. 20. 21. The Church of Ephesus.
Chap. 5.5. The Church of Philippi. 3.10. The Church of Colossus. Chap. 3. 5.
The Church of Thessolonica. 1. These. 2.5. All Churches. 1. Tim. 6.7.8. and 17.

Eghtly, this sin appears in most men by sundry marks and fruits: by their not
profiting in the word and godliness, and by their so many distractions, cares,
and sorrows in this life.

Quest. 136. Let me hear of the first kind of outward theft, in taking away
thy neighbors goods by secret practices, first in contracts?
1. These. 4.6.
Ans. All secret practices in contracts are here condemned for theft: no man
shall defraud his brother in any matter, for the Lord is the auenger of all
such things.

First, all fraud in selling to sell the badde for good: as they did in Amos
time the refuse of the wheat, for the price of good corn. Amos. 8.4. Let not
the greediness of thine affection, but the goodness of the thing thou sellest
be respected that thy gain may be reasonable: and that thou may sell good
for good, mean for mean, and refuse for refuse.

Secondly, in buying to use any deceitful words to discommend any thing
against knowledge and conscience. Prou. 20.14. It is naught, it is naught says
the buier, but when he is gone apart he boasts: and to buy of him only,
when he is constrained to sell. Nehe. 5. and then not to pay him just payment
as the commodity is worth, as near as thou can give him a peny-worth for
his penny, and a penny for a peny-worth.

Thirdly, all deceit in false weight, measures, colors, Deuteronomy. 25.13. Leu.
19.35.36.
shadows and lights, are here condemned, for very theft. Mat. 7.12. Whatsoever
ye would that men should do unto you, so do ye unto them: for this is the
Law and the Prophets. I do not love my brother when I take from him more then
I sell him, that is, more then my wares be worth: for in buying and selling
men come, as it were, to the spoil of a City, where every man catches and
snatcheth and carries away all that he can come by.

Fourthly, all secret practices of Ingrossers and Monopolists: they store up in
their own houses all commodities and goods which they can find of one kind,
that they may sell the same to their brethren at what rate and price they
please. There were such in Nehemias time. Chap. 5. but that good Prince caused
them to repent and to deal more mercifully with their brethren.

Fifthly, all fraud and vnmercifullnesse in letting house, lands, beast, etc.
as by racking of rents, ouerprizing every thing, for to raise and increase the
hire without all compassion of the poor. This sin the Lord says is this, to
beat in pieces, and to grind the faces of the poor. Es. 3.15.16. Amos. 8.6.
Michah. 3.3. and 5.8. Number. 5.6.7. Judge. 17.2. A general rule for all Contracts
is this, that we so deal herein with our brethren, as that we be seen to
have faith toward God and love toward men.

Sixthly, Theft also is secretly committed in the contracts of giving: The giver
gives his gift with purpose that it shall be ever his to whom it is given,
herein men sin against this Law. First, when they give wastfully and
prodigally any part of their patrimony or substance, without respect in what
measure, to whom, and when they give. Psalm. 112.5. A good man is merciful in
giving and lending, but he will measure his affairs with judgment. Secondly,
when men for sundry respects give that which is not their own. They will use
the purses and goods of other men to keep countenance and credit and that they
may seem bountiful: such must learn of the Apostle. Ephesians. 4.28. that if they
will be liberal, they must labor and work with their hands the thing that is
good, that so they may give unto the needy.

The seventh and last kind of secret theft in Contracts here condemned, is in
lending taking for usury, and giving for interest.

First, for taking for usury, or for the use and for the lone of any thing
lent: if there be not a damnable secret Theft committed against this Law in
the Contract of lending, called usury, then in vain has God given his Law
against it. Exodus 22.29. Deuteronomy. 23.19. In vain did the Prophets and Expounders
of the Law threatten for this kind of sin. Ezech. 18. Chap. Psalm. 15. In
vain does God require of his children a merciful lending unto their known,
religious and needy brethren. Deuteronomy. 15. Luke. 6.35. Mat. 5.42.

In the blind papacy there was none in this Land did practice usury, but
unbelieving Jews; nor to this day in the Popes dominions any dare profess
this practice, for if any be iudicially found in this sin, he shall neither
be pertaker of their Sacraments, nor be buried in their burying places, if he
dye without repentance, that is (say they) without restitution.

The Pagans abhord this sin as the very bane of a common wealth. And least
any here doubt what this sin is, howsoever such as live in it, can never be
satisfied: yet this is clear that the Lord describes this sin on this
manner, Exodus 22.29. Ezech 18. Nehe. 5.
usury is a gain by covenant, open or secret, mental or verbal, committed in
lending when the borrower is bound in any manner to repay the principal with
some advantage for the use of the thing which is lent.

Theft in giving for usury, or for the love of money to usurers is here
condemned. The wicked in borrowing are noted: first, they borrow not for want,
but to satisfy their lusts. Secondly, They pay not again. Psalm. 37.21.
Thirdly, they borrow of Usurers. If thou borrowest of Usurers, first, thou art
in bondage to a bloody and unmerciful man. Prou. 22.7. Secondly, thou can
not be free from contention, and a miserable life. Ier. 15.10. Thirdly, thou
must gain unjustly, to make an unjust payment to the Usurer. In cases of
extremity first go to God by prayer, next flee to the communion of Saints:
Lastly, sell all to preserve life. Nehe. 5.

Quest. 137. Now of secret practices against this Law out of Contracts.
Ans. First, secret theft in Courts of Justice is when either the judge does
pervert justice, or the Advocate patronize a known evil cause for filthy
lucre: concerning this the special charge of God is written. Deu. 16.18.
Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all the Cities, which the Lord thy
God gives thee, throughout the tribes, and they shall judge the people with
righteous judgment, Wrest not thou the Law, nor respect any person, neither
take reward, for the reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the
words of the just. That which is just and right shall thou follow, that thou
may live and possess the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee: delays
in Justice to the impouerishing of our neighbor is here condemned.

Secondly, here are condemned all kinds of secret thefts in the inordinate and
disordered life, which is, not to live within the bonds of a lawful calling,
to the good of others, against this the Apostle disputes. 2. These. 3. and
forewarneth us by many reasons to avoid it: To this head appertain these
branches following.

First, all the secret nests of idle disordered people, that haunt or live by
idle, vain, unseemly sports and games, in play houses, dicing, dancing,
tabling-houses, cock-pits* Beare-bayting places, dishonoring God greatly in the
abuse of his creatures, All these kinds of unlawful sports, are but very
nests of thieves, which live against God and his Laws to themselves, stealing
the bread and goods of other men secretly, more plainly these reasons serve to
condemn all thieves of this kind. First, they live contrary to the first
general decree of God. Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy
bread. Secondly, they work not that which is good, as the Apostle charge.
Ephesians. 4.28. Thirdly, they live to and for themselves, as Epicures, for pleasure.
Fourthly, they devour the bread of other men. Fifthly, they have no word, nor
example of God to allow this vain kind of life, but all the book of God
condemns it, and the practice of all ages and Churches.

Thirdly, to live by magical arts, as all Sorcerers, and Magicians do, is a
very impious kind of theft: of this kind an example is given us. Act. 16.
ver. 16. When Paul and his company went to prayer, a certain maid having a
spirit of divination met them, which gate her Masters much advantage with
divining.

Fourthly, Idleness belongs to this kind of inordinate life: a very secret
and dangerous kind of theft, and the mother of many foul sins. This sin
is against Gods general decree of labor* Genesis 3.19. one of the sins of
Sodom. Ezech. 16.4.6. Prou. 6.6. 1. Timoth. 5.
breeds many sins. 2. The. 3.

Fifthly, the profession of beggry is an other kind of theft and may well be
referred to the inordinate life, against this the Lord made his Law.

Sixthly, and lastly, the remoouing, of land-markes, is an other secret kind of
theft, which the Lord condemns in the Law and in the prophets the best
expounders of the Law. Deuteronomy. 27.17. Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbors
marks, and all people shall say, Amen. This Solomon expounds in these words.
Prou. 22.28. Thou shall not remove the ancient bounds of pastures or fields
which thy Fathers have made. Then they be accursed and condemned as ground
thieves which depopulate whole Towns and Hamlets, and so join house to house,
and field to field till there be no place for the poor ancient inhabitants
to dwell near them. Esaias. 5.8.

Quest. 138. Now come to the more open kinds of theft, here condemned.
Ans. First, Prou. 20.25. Mal. 3.8.
Sacrilege is a most wicked kind of theft here condemned, and this is to rob
God of those holy things which concern him and his divine worship. Romans 2.22.

Secondly, all oppression, extortion, robbery, and open practice of any theft
by sea and land. 1. Cor. 6.9. Know yea not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of heaven: as Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Raylers,
Extortioners. Luke. 3.14. The Baptist charge the Soldiers converted unto
Christ, That they do violence to no man. 1. These. 4.3. This is the will of God
even your sanctification, ver. 6. That no man oppress or defraud his brother
in any matter.

Thirdly, prodigality or the wastfull mispending of Gods blessings is here
condemned, many other sins are linked to this: Pride, Whoredom, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Idleness: These and the like do both breed and follow this
kind of Theft. One of these thieves consumes so much as would well serve for
the benefit and good of many of Gods people. And many unclean birds attend
this kind of Epicures, daily to suck and feed on them, as the crows do on
carions till all be devoured. Pro. 21.5.17. and 12.26. Ioh. 6.12.

Quest. 139. In the next place number those thefts that are committed in not
restoring our neighbors goods when they be in our possession.
Ans. First, the Usurer is here again condemned as every common thief, not
only for taking from any man his goods unjustly, but also for deferring
restitution, Prou. 3.28. detaining and withholding his goods at any time from
his use and possession. The like is there condition and sin, which restore
not the Ezech. 13.7.
pledge in due time, things Deu. 24.6. Exodus 23.4. Deu. 222.3.
found things Psalm. 37.
borrowed: for in all these we must be mindful and tenderly affected
toward our brethren, yea, our very enemies that we keep not from them any
the least parcel of their substance, which is necessary and commodious for
them, howsoever it is come into our possession. This is taught us in that Law
made concerning the restoring the enemies Ox if we find him going astray.
Exodus 23.4. If thou meet thine enemies Ox or Ass going astray, thou shall
bring him to him again.

Secondly, the retaining of the hirelings wages when it is due is a very theft
condemned in this place, against this theft Saint James complains in these
words. Chap. 5.4. Behold the hire of the Laborers, which have reaped your
fields (which is of you kept back by fraud) cries, and the cries of you which
have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Hosts.

Quest. 140. Proceed to the affirmative part, and let me hear what the Lord
commands us in this Law.
Sitis contenti praesentibus.
Ans. First, the Lord God here requires of us that we be contented in heart
with our present state and condition: first (I say) contentation is here
commanded. Heb. 13.5. be content with things present.

We shall never rest contented in our hearts, nor perform any branch of
obedience here commanded, until first we rest quietly in our hearts by faith
on Gods providence, being assured that because God has bound and charged
himself for us by his promises, in things necessary as well for our bodies as
for our souls, therefore he will never fail us nor forsake us: This faith
will consume many cares and fears which greatly disquiet and consume
unbelievers in this life.

Secondly, to walk in the obedience of this Law, we must labor to find our
hearts and minds contented with that which we have in present possession,
resting in it as in a rich portion with thankfulness: ever bearing our port
and countenance in all our doings accordingly, without any exceeding
whatsoever, for if once our affections shall ouerflow the banks of our own
condition, so that in mind we burn with the desire of a better state, for our
doings, then we can never be persuaded that they must so nearly be looked at
but that they may borrow a little of conscience and equity to make provision
according to the hearts desire.

Rules here to be remembered, are these.

First, we want often outward things, because we esteem no more of inward
graces.

Secondly, this is a policy of Satan, to lay before us the great benefits
which we want to cause us to murmr for them, and to disgrace the present
benefits which we have, least we should be thankful.

Thirdly, the Lord oftentimes gives his children no open riches, but his
promise made unto them, which they must wholly depend upon, until the Lord
seeing them ready for the thing in the Testament beequethed unto them, shall in
wisdom give them their legacies.

Fourthly, If we can not rest in the favor of God though we want outward
things, it is certain that we never truly esteem the favor of God: and
those never felt truly the forgiveness of sins, which having it can not be
content to forgo other things, we must then learn to rest in the favor of
God whatsoever it brings with it.

Secondly, the Lord here requires of us that with all simplicity and truth,
and justice, we give every man his own right, endeavoring the preservation of
the goods of our brethren, as of our own. To this end every man must first,
speak the truth with all simplicity as it is in his heart, for his neighbors
good. Psalm. 15.2. Secondly, in all contracts respect justice, that equity be
observed, that we do to other men, as we would have others to do unto us:
thirdly, that we observe faithfully all lawful covenants and promises, albeit
to our own loss and hinderance. Psalm. 15.4. Prou. 25.14.

Thirdly, mercifulness to our brethren is here commanded: This has many
branches: First, in releeuing the poor and needy with our goods: for we are
but stewards of them, paying the chief Lord an yearly rent for them, the
which rent he has appointed his poor children to receive at our hands: First,
this mercifulness God commands and commends often in his word. Phil. 4.18.
2. Cor. 9.6. Luke. 11.41. Mat. 6.2.3. Gal. 6.7.10.
Psalm. 112.9. Job. 29.12. Luke. 12.33. Secondly, It is a true sign of Gods
favor in the remission of our sins: Thirdly, this man gains many blessings
for many supplications are made for him.

Secondly, in lending freely to the poor distressed neighbor, according to
his necessity, with wisdom and deliberacion. Deuteronomy. 15. Luke. 6.35. Psalm.
112.5.

Thirdly, in restoring the pledge or pawn of the poor, which he can not want
but to his great hinderance. Exodus 22.26.27. Deuteronomy. 24.10.

Fourthly, restitution is here commanded of all our neighbors goods which are
come to our hands: first, committed to our trust and safe keeping. Prou. 3.27.
Withold not the good from the owners thereof, though there be power in thine
hand to do it. Say not to thy neighbor go and come again, and to morrow will
I give it thee, if thou now have it. If it be lost by our negligence it must
be restored, if stolen we are not bound to any compensation. Exo. 22.7.
Secondly, that which is found must be reserved for the true owner, and being
known it must forthwith be restored. Deuteronomy. 22.1. Thirdly, by what kind of
stealth or injury, or injustice, by word or deed howsoever we possess the
goods of other men, restitution is here commanded. The Lords will is very
manifest for this point: for by his Prophets he teaches that such as detain
the goods of other men are unmeet to worship and serve him, before restitution.
Leu. 6.1. and 7. Mat. 5.23.24. but most clearly. Number. 5.6.7. That he which
restores not shall dye in his sins. Ezechiel. 18.33.15. A servant in Master
Musculus time, having stolen seven pounds from his master: fear and shame
caused him to hide it long, to the torment of his conscience, and danger of his
life: but being penitent, restitution brought joy to Master and man. Com. 8.

Next, this we be taught by examples, that every believer must be ready to
practice, as Samuel was, if any such sin could be found in him. 1. Sam.
12.3. and the good penitent Zacheus in Christ's time. Luke. 19. and the great
Usurers, which many ways had oppressed their brethren in Nehemias time. Chap.
5. for these were taught and by their examples teach us to practice
restitution. Here the Devil casts many blocks and doubts in our way.

Object. 1. First, the shame which may follow restitution, private or public
reproach, more or less. Ans. Honor, and Peace, and Liberty, and Glory is
promised to all true hearted conuerts: and the reward of sin and impenitencie
is shame temporal and eternal. Romans 6.20.21.22.

Object. 2. Secondly, must the Son restore the goods which the father has
gotten by oppression and usury. Abac. 2. Woe unto him that gathers evil
gotten goods.
Ans. What the son knows to be evil gootten can not be well and justly
kept from the right owners, Ezech. 18.14. Prou. 28.8.

Object. 3. Thirdly, I know not the special persons whose goods I possess, by
mine own, or my parents, or my friends evil practices. Ans. Do as Zacheus
did: deal the more bountifully with the poor. Luke. 19.8.

Object. 4. Fourthly, I have nothing to pay. Ans. Offer thy service: make
manifest thy remorse and repentance with tears.

Fifthly, the trial of controversies for goods and lands in courts of Justice,
for the maintaining of equity and right, and that every man may possess his
own, is here commanded. But here men must be very mindful and careful to
keep rules, and to keep within the band of Charity.

First, go not to Law for trifles, for that bewraies an evil heart in thee.
Bear injuries and losses as much as may be. 1. Cor. 6.7. Romans 12.

Secondly, desire not to produce into public Courts of justice, that which may
well be decided by grave and godly discreet men privately. 1. Cor. 6.5. Is
there not a wise man among you? no not one that can judge between his brethren.

Thirdly, desire not to bring thy brother to such Courts as where he may be
more molested with delays and other greefes, then the truth of the cause tried
and manifested.

Fourthlie, let not the following of any cause in Law cool thy love in
performance of any duty to thy brother, or weaken thy faith in performing any
service or worship unto God.

Quest. 141. Let me hear how the Conscience may be here examined.
Ans. First, inquire and search carefully, whether thine heart be addicted to
covetousness: whether thou art carried away from God in the greedy desire of
riches, in seekeing them by unlawful means: whether thou do possess them
with distracting cares, and vexation of mind, with any affiance and trust in
them: if thy conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Secondly, Inquire whether in any contract, bying, selling, lending, letting,
giving, thou have dealt deceitfully with any man, by any colored shadow in
word or deed, doing to any man that which thou would not have done to thy
self: if thy Conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Thirdly, inquire whether thou have not an evil eye, and an evil unquiet
heart to see an other prosper by thee, imagining his commodity to be thy
hinderance, if this gnawing and biting envy be in thee: thy conscience
pleades guilty, and this law condemns thee.

Fourthlie, inquire whether thou have, being a judge, for rewards perverted
judgment, or being an advocate patronized a known evil cause for filthy
lucre sake: if thy conscience pleads gultie, this Law condemns thee.

Fiftlie, inquire whether thou have wastfullie misspent thy goods or patrimony,
or given to any man, or for any use or cause the goods of other men: if thy
conscience pleads guilty this Law condemns thee.

Sixtlie, Inquire whether thou have ever practiced usury, extorsion,
oppression, robbery, any kind of theft by Sea or Land: if thy conscience
pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Seauenthly, inquire whether at any time thou have lived, or gotten thy living
without the bounds of a lawful calling in a disordered life, as by vain,
unprofitable, unseemly sports and plays, or by any evil Art whatsoever, if
thy concience plead guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Eighthly, inquire whether thou have lived an idle or unprofitable life, or by
the profession of beggerie, being sound of limbs, able to labor, for years
and strength of body: if thy conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Ninthly, Sacrilege, Church-robbry.
inquire whether thou have gotten into thy possession or use any part of Church
goods, Tithes, Lands, and Houses, which by due right appertain to the
maintenance of Gods holy worship, and service, and for the relief of the
poor: if thy conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Tenthlie, inquire with what quiet contentation of mind thou do live and
rest in thy place and calling, and condition of life, which the Lord has given
thee: whether thou do not swell in heart, and disquiet thy mind with the
desire of a greater preferment, or seek an higher standing or function before
thou art lawfully and orderly called of God thereunto: if thy conscience pleads
guilty this Law condemns thee.

Eleauenthly, inquire whether thou have not with all singleness of heart,
truth, and justice, endeavored at all times to give and help every man to his
own right: if in any matter or cause, thy conscience pleads guilty, this Law
condemns thee.

Twelftlie, Inquire whether thou have not a merciful heart, with bowels of
compassion and commiseration to tender the necessity and wants of the poor:
if thy conscience accuse thee of any hardness of heart, or of unmercifulness
to the poor: thy conscience pleads guilty, and this law condemns thee.

Thirteenth, inquire whether thou have truly and justly restored to thy
neighbor his goods which are come into thy hands, being lent, or found, or
committed to thy custody, or pawnes or howsoever thou do possess the goods
of other men: for without restitution and before thou have restored to every
man his own, whatsoever is detained unjustly from him, thy conscience pleads
guilty and this Law condemns thee.

Fourteenth, and lastly, inquire whether thou have disquieted the peace of
any man by suites of Law for trifles, or for any cause which wise and
discreet neighbors could end without suite, or whether by any such courses
love wax cold in thee: if thy conscience pleads guilty this Law condemns thee.

The Ninth Law.
Question. 142.
Proceed to the Ninth Law.

Answer.

This Law is concerning the preservation of our brothers good name, which is
and must be dear and precious unto him.

The Sense is this, Thou shall not bear false witness, that is, speak not
any untruth, to the disgrace or hurt of thy brother for any cause in any
place, but specially in judgment. All sins whereby our neighbors good name
and credit is any way impaired is here condemned.

Quest. 143. Does the Lord here condemn hard conceits, and mistrust of heart?
Jonathan thinks well, and hopes the best of his father Saul. 2. Sam. 20.2.
An. Assuredly the Lord and searcher of all hearts, here first charge us not
to keep and hide in our hearts any hard conceits against any man: ever more
mindful of that Apostolical rule. 1. Cor. 13.5. Love thinks none evil.
Contentious and proud spirits are full of this sin. 1. Tim. 6.3.5. they cannot
want (as the Apostle speaks) Envy, Strife, Railings, evil Surmisings. And
this sin our Savior condemns. Mat. 7.1. Judge not (says he) that is, carry
not hard conceits and evil surmisings in you heart against any man. He does
not forbid considerate and wife reproof by Minister or magistrate, or any
godly admonition, but that we censure no man unjustly or hardly, or misdeeme
of that which is well done or spoken: or to cast down and condemn any man
for a light fault as for a heinous offense. Preiudicium tollit omne iudicium.
Take heed of this secret poison, for thou can hardly do good or receive
good from thy brother so long as thou art possessed with this evil sickness.

Quest. 144. And how many ways do men outwardly yet secretly disgrace their
brethren?
Ans. Principally these three ways: first, by reueling their secrets.
Secondly, by foolish jesting. Thirdly, by flattery, and fained coulored
speeches: soothing men in their sins against God and men.

First, for reueling or discovering of secrets to the disgrace of thy
neighbor, the Lords judgment of such a one is this: he wants love, and
understanding, faithfulness and judgment, he respects neither God nor man. 1.
Pet. 4.8. If love cover a multitude of sins, it is a badge of an evil heart
to discover a few infirmities. 1. Cor. 13.7. Love believes all things, hops
all things. Prou. 11.12. He dispiseth his neighbor, in revealing his secrets,
is destitue of Wisdom: but a man of understanding will keep silence: he that
goes about as a slanderer discovers a secret, but he that is of a faithful
heart conceleth a matter. The curse of Cham for this sin may be a warning for
all ages. Genesis 9.25.

Secondly, for foolish jesting to the disgrace of other men is here condemned.
This sinner for that he greeues much tender hearts is a very murderer as is
before showed in the sixth Commandment. Sarah could not bear that scornful
Ishmael in one house with her good Son Isaac. Genesis 21. And Michol she lost
David's heart by her foolish jesting. 2. Sam. 6.23. Many proud wits and vain
hearts seek praise for their pleasant conceits and jesting to the shame and
grief of others.

Preservatives against this evil are these.

First, Prayer: The mouth of the wicked, and the mouth full of deceit are
opened upon me, they have spoken to me with a lying tongue: They compassed
about me also with words of hatred and fought against me without a cause, for
my friendship they were mine adversaries, but I gave my self unto prayer.
Psalm. 109.3.4. Against such he prays instantly. Psalm. 35. complaining. ver.
15. The abiects assembled themselves against me, and I knew not they tare me
and ceased not: with the false Scoffers at bankets gnashing their teeth against
me. ver. 21. And they gaped on me with their mouths saying, Aha, Aha, our
eye has seen.

Secondly, Consolation by meditation in the word. Psalm. 119. ver. 23. Princes
also did sit and speak against me: but thy Servant did meditate in thy
Statutes. ver. 51. The proud have had me exceedingly in derision, but I
remembered thy judgments of old and have been comforted.

Thirdly, remember thy Master and Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: they railed,
they reviled, they mocked him even in his passion. Mat. 27.39.40.41. and he
endured. Heb. 12.3.

Thirdly, smooth, soft and flattring speeches to the hardening of our brethren
in their sins are here comdemned: for in so doing we hurt their credit and
estimation with God and his people. Prou. 27.6. The words of a friend are
faithful, but the kisses of an enemy are to be detested.

This evil worm of adulation eats up the hearts of the foolish, as we see
in Herod advancing himsefe. Act. 12.22. after the vain applause of the people.
But intolerable and most pernicious is it in the Ministers of Christ, who for
their own gain, glory and bellies sake handle the word of God deceitfully,
with sweet word, preaching peace to the wicked. Ier. 6.13.14. with fair speech
and flattering, deceiving the hearts of the simple. Romans 16.18.

Quest. 145. Proceed to more open sins against this Law.
Ans. All lies and untruths uttered to the disgrace and hurt of our brothers
good name: are here condemned. Mendacium et falsa sig. vocis cum intention
fallendi.
A lie is an untruth vttred with an evil purpose to hurt a man in his body,
goods, or good name.

First, the Lord forewarnes his people, and condemns this sin in all ages
by his Prophets. Moses. L^ 19.11. ye shall not steal, neither deal unjustly,
nor lie one to (...) other. David. Psalm. 5.6. Thou shall destroy them that
speak lie. The Lord does abhor the bloody man and deceitful Solomon. Pro.
19.5. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies
shall not escape. The Prince of Prophets, Jesus Christ, he teaches us that
Satan sowes and stirs up the seed of lies in men's hearts. John. 8.44. Ye
are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father you will do: he
has been a murderer from the beginning: when he speaks a lie, then
speaks he of his own, for he is a liar and the father thereof. The Apostles
they follow then Master. Paul. to the Ephesians. 4.25. Cast off Lying and
speak every man truth to his neighbor, for we are members one of another
Saint John in his Revelation assures that this sinner is cast down into hell.
Reu. 21.8. The Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers,
and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their
part in the Lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. And yet he adds that to this number and place belong all that love to
make Lies. Chap. 22.15.

Secondly, remember that as God is truth and does abhor Lies, so if his Image
be renewed in us, our tongues must ever express the truth of our hearts. Psalm.
15.2.

Thirdly, and lastly, whatsoever distinctions and differences men have found
out of this sin, as of the jesting, of injurious and pernicious Lie, the Lord
without all exception of any has condemned them altogether. The Schoolmen say
of the two first, Non sunt sine culpa, sed non cum magna, and inperfectis sunt
venialia peccata. M. S. lib. 3. D. 38. A. Six kinds there numbered: First, a
Lie in the doctrine of religion. Secondly, a Lie profiting no man, hurting some
men. Thirdly, a Lie profiting one, and hurting an other. Fourthly, a lust and
delight to lie and deceive. Fifthly, a lie to please with sweet words. Sixthly,
a Lie which hurts none, profits some.

Quest. 146. Proceed to the second kind, more dangerous and hurtful.
Ans. First, then the sin of calumniation or slander is here condemned as
the great enemy of a man's good name and credit, and this sin we may not
unjustly call a compound Lie, because this sinner knits many Lies together in
one as the Psalmist speaks. Psalm. 119. This sinner is well described to be
one that walks about seeking all occasions to broch a false report intending
thereby maliciously the hurt of any man. Again, this sinner in many respects
resembles Satan: he is a Io. 8.44.
Liar, he works Psalm. 101.5.
privately, with soft Psalm. 52 4. 2. Cor. 11.3.
words full of deceit, a Reu. 12.9.
malicious accuser, he spares Psalm. 50.19.
none that he can wound secretly for his own advantage. Examples for this
sin are Doeg the Edomite, Zibah the false and unfaithful servant of
Mephibosheth, the accusers of Christ, and such like.

Preservatives against these biting Dogs are these.

First, Prayer, Psalm. 52. and 35. Secondly, an holy affiance and trust in God.
Psalm. 37. Thirdly, the example of Christ and his Apostles. Mar. 3.21. Ioh. 7.1.
and 2. Cor. 6.11.

Secondly, the second enemy of a man's name and credit, the merchant of tales
or a talebearer, is here condemned: The Lord gives his people a great charge
also concerning this sin. Leu. 19.16. Thou shall not merchandise tales, or
walk about with tales among the people. Against these complains the Prophet,
saying of Jerusalem. In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood. Ezech.
22.9. This sinner bestirres himself much, he frequents many places, and is
acquainted with many persons. He does no sooner sell in one place his old
commodities, but forthwith in another he stores himself with new. These
merchants are of sundry forms: Some come whispering and jesting secretly to
the disgrace of other men: as cursed Cham discovering his Fathers nakedness.
Genesis 9.2. Cor. 12.20. Some come glozing and perverting the words of men: as
where as Christ had said John. 3.19. Destroy ye this temple and I will build
it in three days, speaking of his body: the malicious Jews report his words
on this wise: This fellow said he could destroy the Temple of God and build it
again in three days. Mat. 26.61. understanding his words of the material
Temple of Jerusalem, whereof he spoke not a word.

Thirdly, he that loves, likes, and intertaines lies and slanders is here
condemned: as also. Psa. 15.3. and Re. 21. and 22. Chap. Unto these sinners the
Lord speaks by his Prophet saying, howsoever they cloak themselves in his
Tabernacle the visible Church on earth, they shall never rest (without
repentance) in that mountain of God in heaven. And where as he charge us in
his Law, saying Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not receive a false tale, neither shall
thou put thy hand with the wicked to be a false witness, he teaches us that
to intertaine, or to consort our selves with liers and slanderers and such like
wicked men, is the way to seduce us to the damage and great hurt of our
brethren by false testimonies in open courts of justice.

Again, the holy Ghost expounds this Law saying. Pro. 17.4. The wicked gives
heed to false lips, and a liar harkeneth to the false tongue: where he
brandeth him that loves and receives Lies with these two marks, first, he is
an impious man, next, he is a Liar, for he that believes Lies must of
necessity utter and speak Lies. And further he warns in the same Chapter.
ver. 19. Thou shall keep thee far from a lying speech, a special reason is
added, slay not the innocent and righteous; as if the holy Ghost had said: If
thou receive Lies, thou must at one time or another give false testimony
against the life and blould of thy brother. This we may see in practice: for
Saul as soon as he received Doegs false reports, he did not only consent,
but also command the death of eighty just and holy men. And when David had
received Zibahs calumniation against his Lord and Master Mephibosheth, it was
the loss of that good man's lands, and near hand of his life.

Fourthly, and lastly, consider it well that like as this merchant of tales
talks of other men freely in thine house, so he will speak as largely of
thee with other men. With what measure you mete to others, it shall be measured
to you again. Mat. 7.1. Wherefore be advised by Solomon how to entertain all
such kind of guests. Prou. 25.23. As the North wind drives away the rain,
so does an angry countenance the standering tongue. Sirach. 11.7.
It is a shame to answer before we hear, and so to believe before we know
a certainty. Pro. 18.13.

Quest. 147. Proceed to Lies in judgment, or to the sins committed against
this Law in the public place of Justice.
Ans. First; here again the Lord expounding this ninth Commandment
condemns all such as testify falsely in place of judgment against any man,
as grievous transgressors of his Law. Deuteronomy. 19.16.17. and 21. If a false
witness rise up against a man to accuse him of trespass: Then both the men
which strive together shall stand before the Lord, even before the Priests, and
the Judges in those days: And the judges shall make diligent inquisition, and
if the witness be found false, and has given false witness against his
brother, then shall ye due unto him, as he had thought to do unto his
brother. Again, he says. Prou. 19.5. A false witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks Lies shall not escape.

All common Lies are evil, specially if they tend to the hurt of any man in
body, goods or good name: but most pernicious and damnable are such Lies as are
uttered in the public place of judgment and justice where Gods do sit, or
Gods vicegerents, his Magistrates in which assembly the invisible God sits
as the Lord chief Iusticer himself. Psalm. 82.1. This is to dare God himself
to the face and therefore this sinner can not escape unpunished. These sinners
are justly called the sons of Belial. 1. King. 21.9.10. even Iesabel her
self is of this judgment that they which will stand forth in the assembly of
the Gods on earth to testify an untruth against the life of any man must be
the very sons or Limbs of Satan. This knew the false Priests, and therefore
hired such against Christ and the first martyr Stephen. Mat. 26.60. Act. 6.10.
Again, consider it well that to a good man his name is as dear as his life
and that other blessings lost are sooner recovered then this: for a fallen
witness is like an hammer, a Sword, and sharp Arrow Prou. 25.18. which wound
so dangerously as that few so wounded can be preserved with life. And that if
thou take away a man's good name thou do not only hurt his heart and life,
but thou make him also unprofitable to many which be to receive good by him.

In giving testimony ever remember these four points* first set God and his
truth before thy face, and remember thou stand in his presence who searches
hearts. Ps. 129. Secondly, away with affections, fear, love and hatred, cast
thou far from thee. Thirdly, consider well the cause and matter and not the
person of any man. Fourthly, do neither add nor detract from the matter be
it good or evil.

Secondly, the Lord here condemns all such his vicegerents, as pervert
judgment and justice. And here to weigh rightly the greatness of this sin:
first, we are to remember that God is the Lord of all justice and true
judgment: wherefore their sin is great, if they which occupy his place and
stand in his stead, pervert justice and judgment in his name: such corrupt
Servants provoke him greatly, which defile the Lords throne and holy seat of
justice. Secondly his great charge ought ever to be remembered Leu. 19.15. Ye
shall not do unjustly in judgment for this cause make diligent inquisition.
Deuteronomy. 19.16. Do as Job did. Chap. 29.12. He sought out the truth, and plucked
out the pray out of the unrighteous man's teeth. And take heed of gifts, for
they blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. Exodus
23.6.7.8.

Quest. 148. Proceed to the affirmative part.
Ans First, here the Lord charge us that we have a religious care for the
gaining and preservation of our own good name, Phillip. 4.8.
and estimation in his Church, and among his people, hereof he warns us
often in many Scriptures, how precious a blessing our good name is. A good name
is better then a sweet ointment, it comfort the heart of him which has it,
it increases marrow and fatness in his bones. Prou. 22.1. and 15.30. And
again. The righteous shall be had in an everlasting remembrance. Psalm. 112.6.
And the memory of the just shall be blessed, but the wicked shall rot. Prou.
10.7. And Solomon assures us, it is more to be valued, then great riches, and
the price of it is above silver, and gold. Prou. 22.1. And assuredly the
faithful have so esteemed it in all ages, and serving God in faith and fear
obtained such a name, as make them shine like stars and pearls to their
great honor before God, men, and Angels. Heb. 11.2. And we are to remember
that this grace being lost, the best works of men have lost their grace,
crown, and credit. Genesis 34.30.

A good name may not unfitly be thus described: It is a good report for walking
in faith and godliness with God, Description.
in love, sobriety and justice before men without reproof. First, that this
grace is obtained by faith in Jesus Christ. Heb. 11. ver. 2. and 39. are clear
proofs: Next, that this ointment is compounded of other virtues richly prized
with God and his people, is no less manifest by the testimony of the same
spirit.

If a good name then must be purchased by faith and a virtuous conversation,
then the first step to it must be this: first, to avoid gross sins, for it
is impossible that we should have faith to please God, if we have never
repented us of dead works, Heb. 6.1.
if we live and lie in sin against knowledge and conscience. Next, we must
also carefully avoid light sins (as the world accounts them) for that is
true which Solomon speaks. Like as dead flies cause to stinck and putrify
the ointment of the Apothecarie, so does a little folly him that is in
estimation for wisdom and for glory. Thirdly, we must also with no less
watchfulness avoid all occasions of sin in our selves, and all occasions of
evil reports against our selves. The second step to a good name, is to be
rich in faith and good works, for they which shall endeavor to honor God in
both, Mat. 5.16. God will honor them. Deu. 26.19.
1. Sam. 2.30.

Secondly, the Lord gives us here a special charge to speak the truth in all
affairs and occasions of this life: but then most heedefully when we are
called into his presence into the assemby of Gods, into the place of judgment
and justice, which is a type on earth of Gods throne in heaven. Zach. 8.16.17.

Thirdly, here to keep us in the obedience of this Law, we must be mindful
of these rules following.

First, to rejoice when we hear well of any man's good name and fame. Romans 1.8.

Secondly, to show all courtesy and love to others by countenance, word and
action. Tit. 3.2.

Thirdly to give all doubtful reports of our brethren the best interpretation.
1. Cor. 13.7.

Fourthly, to reject all evil reports and flying tales tending to disgrace any
man. Prou. 25.23.

Fifthly, to cover infirmities what may be. Prou. 10.12.

Sixthly, to be ever plain and simple without color, or suck or fraud in
any matter. 2. Cor. 1.12.

Examination of the Conscience.

First, inquire diligently how thy heart is affected toward other men
specially thine acquaintance, whether thou do inwardly in heart carry any
hard conceits, and evil surmises against any man: whether in observing other
folks words and deeds thou have wrested and constrained them to the worse
part: if thy consceince plead guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Secondly, whether thou have envied, maligned, or been grieved in heart for
the graces of God on other men, Psalm. 37.
or for their welfare and prosperity: or whether thou have wished in heart
the downe-fall or disgrace of any man: if thy conscience pleads guilty, this
Law condemns thee.

Thirdly, whether thou have discovered thy neighbors infirmities, or any of
his secrets to his grief, shame, and disgrace: or whether thou have by any
sinister means gone about to learn the secrets of other men with any purpose
to lay them open to their disgrace: if thy conscience pleads guilty this law
condemns thee.

Fourthly, whether thou have sought by foolish jesting, mocking, taunting, or
gibing any way to disgrace other men: or to impair the credit and countenance
of any by such vain courses: if thy conscience pleads giuiltie this law
condemns thee.

Fifthly, whether by smoothing, soothing, flattering speeches thou have hardened
any man in his sins, or extenuated gross sins as light faults: if thy
conscience pleads guilty this law condemns thee.

Sixthly, whether thou have spoken any untruth or lie to the disgrace of any
man: or dissembled the truth, or not uttered and maintained it when and as
often as just occasion was offered, for the upholding of any man's credit: if thy
conscience pleads guilty this law condemns thee.

Seauenthly, whether thou have purposely, and wittingly depraved the good
speeches, or the good proceedings of any man: or provoked others to do the
like: or allowed and approved, or defended this practice in any man: if thy
conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Eighthly, whether thou have amplified the faults of any man, his words or
actions, making them more grievous then they were, that thereby the person
might be more odious and vile before men: if thy conscience pleads guilty,
this law condemns thee.

Ninthly, whether thou have at any time by slanders, and false reports sought
to insinuate thy self into the favors of any man to the overthrow, disgrace
or hurt of any man: if thy conscience pleads guilty this Law condemns thee.

Tenthly, whether thou have or do accustom thy self idly or vainly to
walk about to know, learn, and carry, and tell tales and news: if thy
conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Eleauenthly, whether thou have received, approved, entertained Calumniations,
Libels, false reports against any person: if thy conscience pleads guilty this
Law condemns thee.

Twelfthly, whether thou have spoken any untruth in place of judgment (for
then thy sin is the greater) or have brought any complaint or crime before the
higher power, or into any place of justice, to the hurt of any man, and not for
the just, and good causes which could not otherwise be cured and amended: if
thy conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Thirteenth, inquire all such as occupy the seats of judgment and justice, as
Judges, Advocates, and such like, whether they make diligent inquisition for
the truth, whether they have received gifts, or for any respect patronized
known evil causes: acquitted felonious persons, or condemned the innocent, or
expounded the Law against knowledge and conscience to the hurt of any man: or
given sentence without any good care of the right force of hearing and
examining proofs and testimonies: if for any such cause, thy conscience plead
guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Fourteenth, inquire whether being a Notary or Scricbe, thou have in any
writings added or detracted any thing to the obscuring or corrupting of any
good cause or truth in hand: to the breding of error, or any contention among
men: if thy conscience pleads guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Fifteenth, Inquire with what care and conscience thou have labored and
endeavored to purchase for thy self a good name, credit and estimation among
gods people, or having a good name for to preserve, or being lost or impaired
by thine own or other men's default, how thou have sought by good means to
repair it: if thou have neglected these things, thy conscience pleads guilty,
and this law condemns thee.

Sixteenth, and lastly, inquire whether thou do not study with all courtesy
and love, with all plainness and simplicity to live and converse with men to
the good of others, to the hurt of no man: if thy conscience accuse thee of any
negligence or unfaithfulness in procuring grace to any man according to his
just desert, when it lies in thy power to do it: thy conscience pleads
guilty, and this law condemns thee.

The Tenth Law. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors House, thou shall not covet
thy neighbors Wife, nor his Man-seruant nor hid Ox, nor his Ass, nor any
thing that is his.
Question. 149.
I Pray you give us first some general view of this Law.

Answer.

It plainly appears by this Law, that the love of God and of our neighbor,
and not self love is the keeping of the Commandments: and that he lives
best and most holy, that (so much as may be) lives and traueleth most for the
good of other men: and that no man lives worse and more wickedly, then he that
lives and traueleth most for him self.

The Scope of this Law is to humble us with the sight of our natural
corruption and infection, and to banish out of the heart all lusts, contrary to
the rules of piety and love: and to cause us to entertain with mind and
heart all good thoughts, godly meditations, and desires tending to gods glory,
and the good of men.

That we the better see into this Law to our profit and good let us follow
this order: first, inquire the sense of the words: next, to consider the matter
what is condemned and commanded in this Law: and lastly, let us consider the
excellency of this Law, how it differs from the other nine Commandments,
and can not well be known, much less practiced of any but of the believer
and the man truly renewed by the spirit of grace.

First, the Sense. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house. The Apostle
expounds these words. 1. Cor. 13. ver. 5. when he says that love thinks
none evil, much less desires the hurt of the neighbor in any thing that is
his.

House, Wife, etc, These specials are named, because the thoughts of men's
hearts do most run upon these things which daily meet us in this life. And
by these the Lord condemns all vain desires and wandering thoughts of the like
kind whatsoever.

Secondly, what this Law condemns and commands. The tenth Law first,
condemns in us: first, our own nature as unclean and accursed. Ephesians. 2.3.
for that we are altogether polluted with that original corruption, which by
propagation has ouerspred and infected all man kind. Romans 5.12. Secondly, for
our unclean lusts, thoughts, and secret motions, which be in our hearts,
either proceed from that corruption, which has poisoned our whole nature, or
be iniected into us by Satan or be kindled by Satan and our own flesh both
conspiring (as it were) for our perdition: Thirdly, for the want of original
justice and integrity.

Secondly, it commands us, first, to labor with God, and in all the holy
means he has given us for a pure and clean Tit. 1.15. 1. Tim. 1.15.
heart, or as Saint Peter speaks, that we may be pertakers of a Godly 2.
Pet. 1.4.
or divine nature. Secondly, to endeavor that our hearts at all times and in
all places may be filled with good motions, Deu. 6.5. Luke 10 27.
good thoughts, good desires toward God and men. Thirdly, to crucify Gal.
5.24. Romans 7.22. 1. Pet. 2.9.10.11.
and to fight all the days of our life against the flesh with the affections
and lusts.

Quest. 150. Now proceed to give us a more special and clear sight of the
first evil condemned in this Law.
Ans. First, here I say then, that this Law condemns our very nature as
unclean, and that hitherto the Lord has by the former Laws but cut down the
branches, now he smites down the root, and whole body of sin.

That our whole nature is infected: First, God himself testifies, whose
spirit in his servants speaks on this manner. Job. 14 4. Who can bring a
clean thing out of filthiness. And again. Chap. 15.14.15.16. What is man
that he should be clean, and he that is borne of a woman that he should be
just. Behold he found no steadfastness in his Saints: yea, the Heavens are not
clean in his sight: how much more is man abominable, and filthy which
drincketh iniquity like water. And again, thus he testifies of man's nature.
Ephesians. 2.3. We are all by nature the children of wrath. Jews and Gentiles, that
is, all men under the Sun, without any exception of any, but only of the
immaculate Lamb the Son of God, Jesus Christ.

Secondly the holy Saints of God have found this true by their own experience
being enlightened by a supernatural grace, for they profess and confess that
there is nothing by nature good in them. David's experience and confession is
this. Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was borne in iniquity and in sin has my mother
conceived me. Paul's experience and confession is this. Romans 7.18. I know that
in me, that is in my flesh, or nature dwells no good thing. Master Hooper the
Godly Bishop and Martirs experience and confession in this, in his holy prayers
in the dungeon he says. O God, even Hell it self is in me, meaning his very
nature was hellish, and prone to follow Satan. Ephesians. 2.2.

Thirdly, I answer that God here condemns all the unclean motions, thoughts,
and desires we have unto sin, albeit our hearts never consent nor subscribe
unto them. The mind of man is ever full of motions, and the heart of
affections, as the Sea, never at rest. Where we must be advertised that we
are not here to understand all fancies, and dreams which are in the head: but
those only which being before in our minds, bite and strike also the heart
with lust: for we never wish for any thing we affect, but our heart is
stirred up, and leapeth therewithal, giving inwardly, some signs of joy in
the possession and use of that we desire. Here then the Scripture principally
condemns the heart of man as the very fountain and head-spring of all
unclean and evil thoughts. Ge. 6.5. All the imaginations of the thoughts of
his heart are only evil continually. Again. Ier. 17.9. The heart is
deceitful and wicked above all things who can know it? Again, Christ teaches
us. Mark. 7.21. that out of the heart of man proceed evil thoughts, and how
much these first evil motions to sin displease god, howsoever men thinks
thoughts be free, attend his own words. Prou. 12.2. Prou. 21.27.
A good man gets favor of the Lord, but a man of wicked thoughts will he
condemn. To this agrees well Saint Peter's speech to Simon Magus. Act. 8.21.22.
Pray God that if it be possible the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

The author of that Apocriphal book, called the book of Wisdom Chap. 1.3.
says, that wicked thoughts separate from God. And ver. 5. that the spirit of
God withdraws himself from the thoughts that are without understanding. And
ver. 9. Inquisition shall be made for the thoughts of the ungodly.

And here we ought ever to remember what great evil follow these first
motions unto sin: for if they be not slain in the breeding they will grow up
like Serpents and in time poison and bring everlasting perdicion on the whole
man, for this cause the Apostles forewarne us of these secret and hidden seeds
of sins deceitfulness, that if we suffer our selves to be carried away by
them from God, then Satan will lay so many baits and traps for us, that he
will cause us to entertain them, and (as it were) to conceive and wax big with
sin. James. 1.13.14. and then these deceiuable lusts will break forth so
dangerously that our hearts being once softened by grace, Principijs obsta, meet
with a mischief in the beginning.
shall again be hardened by sin, which is most perilous, for few return
after such relapse but proceed on (without Gods special grace preventing them)
from evil to worse to their own endless destruction both of body and soul.
Heb. 3.12.13.

Again, whereas these special examples are here set down of House, Wife,
Man, Maid, Ox, Ass: We must be warned, that the Lord has set down these
for that at all times, and in all places we feel these to stir in us, and
to desire (as it were) to kindle in us: wherefore our charge is forthwith to
quench this flame of lust, and not suffer our hearts to be possessed with any
such motions, but so often as they offer themselves in sight to reject them as
unclean greefes.

And here for our better instruction concerning this present argument: we be
taught of God that there are three kinds of motions, which touch and stir
our hearts often. The first is an insensible impression, which Satan in a
strange manner (which we can hardly conceive nor perceive at the first, much
less express) breath or iniect into men's hearts. This kind of motion the
natural man does embrace as the motion of his own heart, yea otherwhiles
albeit his judgment and conscience fight against it, yet his heart entertaines
it and likes it as we see in Judas betraying his Master: John. 13.3.4.
he knew he was moved to betray innocent blood in judgment, yet Satan so
prevailed with his heart and affections that he ceased not till he had brought
forth the monster which his heart conceived.

This kind of motion does much disquiet Gods children, for that they fear
much it is a serpent of their own brood, and next for that they have within a
great fight of the spirit against it. But the Godly howsoever hereby they have
just cause to be humbled, to fight strongly, and to pray instantly against such
monsters, which Satan seeks to fasten on them: yet they are not to be
dismaide so long as they feel their judgment, conscience, heart, and
affections reject such motions: For I have known some godly persons, even in
their flesh and whole body to tremble at these motions, and yet not able to
recover and to be freed from them for a long season, and to groan and mourn at
the sight of such evils stirring in their hearts. The best of the Saints of God
have need otherwhiles that Satan's messenger be sent unto them not to kill,
but to cure them least they be puffed up and poisoned with spiriturall pride.
2. Cor. 12.7.

The second kind of motions which smite the heart proceed from our own
inherent corruption: These the regenerate do observe, and albeit they tickle
the heart with the lures, baits and pleasures of sin, yet by grace they are
resisted and rejected. And yet by this Law the Godly be here taught to be
humbled, and to observe well what a hidden puddle and unsavory sincke of
corruption and uncleanness they carry about with them, which sends forth and
fomes continually such unclean matter, even in the presence of the most
mighty God the searcher of all hearts. This humbled even the holy Apostle, for
he cries against his corruption, saying. Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death.

The third kind of motions works more effectually, and makes a deeper
impression in the heart: for the heart yields consent, subscribe, or as saint
James speaks, the heart so intertaines them, that there follows a
conception of sin: James. 1.14.
and when the monster is once conceived it is hardly killed in the breeding,
for it will hourly gather strength, and like a Viper break forth or burst the
heart, but it will be acted: as we see in Eues apostacy. Genesis 3.2.3.4. and
David's adultry. 2. Sam. 11.

This Law condemns us for that first kind, for having such familiarity in
nature, and acquaintance with Satan, for which cause the most perfect man on
earth has cause to be humbled, again, for the second kind because our
nature has so much secret poison in it, for the which this law does
continually and most directly charge us, as sent from God principally to this
end to give us the sight of that sin which has so blinded the mind of man,
that it can not by any discourse of reason conceive it. Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 2.3.
and 4.23.
Romans 7.7. and thirdly, it condemns us also for the third kind, for that all
actual sins condemned in the former laws, have here hence their original
and offspring.

Quest. 151. Proceed to the third evil condemned in this Law.
Ans. The third evil here condemned is the want of original justice, whereby
the learned Cathechists understand, that this Law charge us also deeply, and
that in the first place indeed (if we could so well see it) for that we want
the beauty and excellency of our first creation: for that I say, we have
clean rased out, or sin or Satan in us, the glorious Image of God given us
in our first creation.

When saint Paul had well considered himself in this glass: whereas before
he thought himself living and in Gods favor, he now thought contrarily that
he had not only lost all thee beauty of his first creation: but also that he
was as no body, even as a dead man in bondage, or as a man sold up to the
servitude of sin. Romans 7. Read advisedly this Chapter, and you shall see that
he mournes for that no good thing is in him.

Quest. 152. And what special graces be required in this Law?
Ans. First, we be here commanded of God to labor in the means of our
salvation, for a clean heart, or that the heart may be Act. 15.9.
purified by faith in Christ Jesus, and that the holy Ghost may be Luke 11.14.25
given us, to sprinckle so our consciences with the Heb. 9.14.
blood of Christ, that we may be loosed from the Ephesians. 2.2.3. 1. Ioh. 3.8.9.
bondage of Satan, freed from the works of the Devil, or dead Heb. 9.14. Heb.
6.2.
works, and from that horrible condition wherein all men lie before grace (as
children of rebellion under Ephesians. 2.3.
wrath) that so we may come to the glorious liberty of Christ, to serve the
living Heb. 9.14.
God.

Secondly, we be here charged of God to love and serve God with all our heart,
with all our mind, with all our thoughts, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luke. 10.27.
and to do our neighbor good we must carry not our hands only but our
hearts also and all our thoughts desiring to do him good, yea, to procure any
thing for his good: Romans 7.22.
so delighting in the Law of God even in the inward man. And to this end we
must spend well our times in good thoughts, and pertinent, needful,
profitable and godly meditations, desiring to redeem the time which we have
lost, even many hours and days, months and years, in tossing, turning,
debating and scanning, such vain, unprofitable, yea, wicked and devilish
imaginations, which now cause our very hearts to tremble and our hairs to
stand upright for that we have given any liking to such evil motions, or any
resting place in our minds and hearts unto them.

Thirdly, here we be commanded to look well and watchfully to the rule and
government of our mind and affections being well assured that he which has
attained this grace to rule well his own mind is better then he that wins
a City. Prou. 16.32. Here begins that noble combat. 2. Tim. 4.7. and the great
war-fare between the flesh and the spirit. Gal. 5.17. Wherefore it is evident
that in this, Law we be commanded to crucify all our unclean lusts, and to
nip in the head all the first motions unto sin as soon as they stir up in
us. To labor so for grace by the spirit that we may have strength to resist
our corruption, drawing us and luring us from Gods presence by the pleasures of
sin: And if we be drawn aside to call for grace speedely to cut of all
conference with Satan and sin that we be not baited and snared: and if we
be snared, to labor yet more instantly with God that our hearts subscribe not,
intertaine, retain, nor conceive not with sin: and if sin and Satan has
beegot a conception within us, that then the young Serpent may dye in the
breeding, before it come forth or have any birth, for then we break not only
this Law, but we violate all other Laws with it to the great dishonor of
God, and the wounding of our own poor consciences. James. 1.13. The
regenerate only keep this Law. In the former laws the hypocrite will walk
very circumspectly before men in the outward action, but here he comes short
before God in the inward affection.

The Examination of the Conscience.

First, inquire what sight, what knowlede, what feeling, thou have had in
former times of thy natural corruption, for Hypocrites and Iusticiaries think
all sure, and a good while they conform their outward actions to the Law of
God If thou have neglected, not known, not regarded the secret power of sin,
Romans 7.23.
and of that Law of thy members (as the Apostle speaks) rebelling against the
Law of thy mind: thy conscience pleads guilty and this Law condemns thee.
Romans 7.7.

Secondly, inquire what secret motions against God and his Laws, what unclean
thoughts, what vain imaginations have carried away thine heart from God, or
have possessed even thine heart the very seat of God: how they have disquieted
and distracted thine heart: if thy conscience pleads guilty, this Law
condemns thee.

Thirdly, inquire how often being lured by Satan and sin thou have been
carried away as it were from God to any secret conference and parling with the
Devil to stir and kindle in thee any unclean lusts: if thy Conscience pleads
guilty, this Law condemns thee.

Fourthly, inquire what the excellency and beauty was of thy first creation,
and how by their apostacy, our first parents lost the same: and how thy self
art but a branch of that accursed stock of old Adam, and therefore art by
nature the child of wrath no less then others: and therefore for the want of
that original justice and excellency of creation God by this Law may in
justice condemn thee.

Fifthly, inquire further whether finding thine heart so evil affected, and thy
self so addicted to sin, and in such spiritual bondage to Satan, whether
thou have (I say) sought unto Christ to be purged and healed of thy running
sores, or rather when Christ has cried in thine ears, Prou. 1. Reave. 3.
and offered himself unto thee, thou have not hardened thine heart and resisted
the heavenly calling of God and the motions of his holy spirit: if thy
conscience herein pleades guilty, this law condemns thee.

Sixthly, inquire with what inward affections and love thou have sought the good
of thy neighbor; for if in procuring his good thou have labored but in the
outward, as is for form sake, and to be seen of men, and not with inward
affection: thy conscience pleads gultie, and this law condemns thee.

Seauenthly, inquire what holy thoughts, what Godly meditations, what
profitable and pertinent discourses of mind concerning God and Godliness thou
have: how thou have divided thy times, reserving a good portion daily for the
exercises of godliness, to be spent specially in holy meditations and
prayers: for if these holy exercises be wanting, thy conscience pleads
guilty, and this Law condemns thee.

Quest. 153. Thus far have we seen the sense and meaning of the decalouge,
what the Lord commends, and what he condemns in his people, and how far
this most holy Law excels all the Laws of men: Now proceed yet a little
further, and tell me first how and in what sense this Law is said to be
abrogate by the Messiah.

Ans. The Jews had three distinct kinds of Laws given them of the Lord: The
Ceremonial, the Judicial, and the Moral. The Ceremonial did serve the
infancy and pedagogie of the old Church, Heb. 1.1.
for the Lord by shadows and pictures of heavenly things in diverse forms and
measures manifested his will unto his people. Of these the Prophets testified
they should have an end and cease at the coming of Christ, for we need not
the picture when the body is present. Daniell. 9.27. The complement of his
prophecy we see in the practice of the Apostles. Act. 15.9. and ver. 28.29.
And the Apostle assures us, they were but shadows of things to come, and the
body or substance of them was to be found in Christ. Heb. 7 and 10. Chapter.
Col. 2.16. The Judicial Laws so far as they respect that kingdom only,
began and ended with it, but so far as they have a common equity concerning
the good of all mankind, they bind all kingdoms throughout all generations.

The moral Law is not abrogate nor never shall cease to the worlds end. The
curse only annexed thereunto is abrogate to all such as are found to be in
Christ, for there is no condemnation to any one of them. Romans 8.1. And whereas
the Apostle says we are freed from the Law and be under grace. Romans 6.14.
He does plainly, express himself that he means not that we are exempted
from the obedience of the Law moral, but only from the curse of it, for so
he speaks. Gal. 3. Christ has freed us from the curse of the Law, for that
he was made a curse for us. And as touching our holy obedience to it. This is
the end of all Gods favors upon us, 1. John. 3.6.8.
and the cause wherefore Christ has losened us from the bands of the Devil,
sin and death, that we might serve him in holiness and true righteousness
all the days of our life. Luke. 1.


Quest. 154. How may the true Christian perform obedience to the moral Law,
acceptable unto God?
Ans. The question is not, who can, or how we may work perfect
righteousness? for if any could work perfect righteousness the Apostle would
soon conclude that for such Christ died in vain. Gal. 2.21. But how a man may
serve and please God in the obedience of this Law? the answer is, in and
through Jesus Christ, more distinctly: in the true servant of God these things
are required: first, John. 3. Ephe. 4.18.
that the spirit of grace and regeneration have quickened him, and put the life
of God in him: for before this grace he is reputed of God as dead. Ephesians. 2.1.
and a dead man can not work the works of God, before his first repentance and
freedom from dead works. Job. 6.2.

Secondly, if after grace received, this man fall to sin against God, he
must recover the former state again by renewing his repentance before that in
any work he can please God. This is clear in David, who during his
continuance in sin, and before his humiliation. Psalm. 51. could not please
God. The third point required in us to make us fit to serve God, is a singular
delight in the Law of God: this also is commended unto us in David's practice.
Psalm. 1.2. and 119. ver. 14.16.24.47.92. The fourth point is faith in Christ:
for without it all is but sin. Romans 14.23. Faith will find an allowance for
every thought, and judge it by the word: and desire an exceptance for every
thing in Christ. The fifth point is earnest prayer unto God, that he would renew
our strength by a new supply of grace. The very Apostles desire others to be
mindful for them in this duty that they may more faithfully serve Christ in
the ministry of the Gospel. Ephesians 6.14. Col. 4.3. Heb. 13.27. 2. These. 3.1.

Quest. 155. What are the special uses of the Moral Law?
Ans. First, we learn thereby the original justice and perfection of our
first parents, for they could observe it: and contrarily we see by our native
and inherent corruption, for there is, as it were a Law and poison rather in
our members continually rebelling against the Law of God.

Secondly, it is a glass for us, whereby we may daily view and beewaile our
deformity, that being so humbled we may run to Christ. Romans 7.7. and 3.20.
Gal. 3.

Thirdly, By it also the faithful must be directed, as by a lantern, in
every good way to serve God in soul, spirit, and body, in thought, word and
deed. Psalm. 119.

Fourthly, it forewarneth us also of judgment, and the fearful condemnation
that shall fall upon the world, that is, as many as are without Christ, for
that they lie fast bound under the curse of the Law. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.

Quest. 256. Now proceed, and tell me what the curse of the Law is, and how we
be freed from it.
Ans. The Curse due unto mankind by the Law of God for sin, implies in it
a three fold death: First, a death in sin, noted Ephe. 2.1. Secondly, the
death and mortality of the body, which by creation was immortal as the
soul, Genesis 3.15. Thirdly, the death of body and soul in hell torments, or
that final separation from the presence of God. 2. The. 1.7.8.9. commonly
called the second death.

The third part of the History of man: or of the reformed Adam, or man in
Christ, renewed by the Gospel, restored to Grace, and preserved to Glory.
Question. 1.
IF man by nature be so miserable, and so deformed, as we have seen by the
History of his fall, by the fearful consequents of his apostacy, and lastly
most clearly by the Royal Law of God: what be the means left or given of
God to reform him in this life, and to restore him to his former excellency,
and to bring him to glory?

Answer.

There is no power in men or Angels to loosen one soul from the bondage of
sin, death, and hell: nor any name in heaven or earth ordained to save us but
one, and that is the most mighty name and power of Jesus Christ. Act. 4.12.

First for that Gods justice must be fully answered even before Gods Tribunal
seat, there can be no evasion for any one of all the sons of Adam.

Seeondly, and this satisfaction, to purchase reconciliation between God and
men, and to the quieting of consciences, can not be performed by man or Angels:
so infinite is the wrath, so great is the debt.

Thirdly, and yet justice requires that man and none other creature pay all the
debt and cancel the handwriting beetweene God and us, which binds man to
endless torments. Col. 2.13.14.15.


Fourthly, the Angels are of an other nature, and therefore can not serve to
purchase any grace for us. Heb. 2.14.

Fifthly, man only must pay this debt, or the price of this redemption: and yet
can not the most righteous man pay for himself, much less purchase heaven, or
peace with God for himself: Reasons against the merits of men.

First, he that will merit any grace, must first pay his own debt which is
infinite, and that can he never do.

Secondly, a man can never merit before he has attained the perfect
righteousness of the Law, Romans 3.10. Luke. 17.10.
which no man can ever do in this world.

Thirdly, how much offense the word or name of merit contains in it, is
evident with the great hurt of the world. Surely, it is most proud, and can do
nothing, but darken the grace of God, and fill men with froward pride.

Fourthly, if a man having taken profit of a piece of ground by an other man's
liberal grant, do also claim to himself the title of propriety, he
desires to loose all the right he has.

Quest. 2. Will the Lord be reconciled by any mediator, and receive us to grace
again?
Ans. The Apostle disputes this question. Romans 5. cha. and concludes it thus.
ver. 17. If by the offense of one, death reigned through one, much more shall
they which receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness
reign in life through one that is Jesus Christ. And again the same is cleared
and amplified. ver. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many also be made righteous. And this is the
revealed will of God, and the holy Gospel preached in Paradise, and testified
by Moses and all the holy Prophets, that one man Jesus Christ should free the
elect of God from the bondage of Satan, and restore them to the glorious
liberty of the elect Angels of God. And to this end was God manifested in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, and received up to Glory. 1. Tim. 3.16.

Quest. 3. If God has promised an acceptance of his elect unto grace by the
work of a mediator, and that neither man or Angel can perform this work:
we can not be comforted nor find peace, unless we find him: and yet such
a man cannot be found among all the creatures in heaven or earth.

Ans. This Mediator must be found among men, even one of the sons of men. 1.
Cor. 15.21. for that man sinned, and man must free man from sin, even that
holy seed of the woman. Genesis 3.15. and yet this man must be greater then man
or Angel even the very Son of God, for else he could not overcome death. 1.
Cor. 15.25. very God and man. 1. Tim. 2.5. or God himself manifested in the
flesh. 1. Tim. 3.16.

Quest. 4. How may this be that God and man should make one person, or how may
these two natures divine and humane so much differing, be so united together?
Ans. by the mighty working of the holy Ghost, for the Angel answered this
question unto the Virgin Mary in these words. Luke. 1.35. The holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadow thee, therefore
also that holy one which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of
God. And thus was this most admirable union effected by the great work of the
holy Ghost, the second person in Trinity, the Son of God Jesus Christ,
assuming our nature became man and was our Immanuel or God with us manifested
in our flesh.

Quest. 5. How know you that Jesus Christ, God and man is become such a Savior
for you?
Ans. By the Gospel, as all the Elect have known him from the Gal. 3.8. 1.
Pet. 4.6.
beginning. And the Gospel it is the most joyful and glorious message which
God sent and manifested unto the world from the beginning in sundry forms and
measures unto the Heb. 1.1.
Patriarchs, and in the most sure word of the 2. Pet. 1.19.
Prophets: but unto us it is made, by the Evangelists and Apostles more clear
then the light at midday, that it is the Romans 1 16.
power of God to salvation to every one which does believe: teaching and
assuring the faith, That Jesus Christ 1. Cor. 1.30. Ioh. 3.16.
is made unto them of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

Quest. 6. How differ the Law and the Gospel?

Ans. First, they agree well together: for first as touching the Author, one
and the same God has lent both unto his Church: secondly, they are both of the
same antiquity, for both were preached in Paradise: Reu. 15.6.
thirdly, both sent for the same end, the salvation of the elect: fourthly,
both a dead letter, without the operation of the holy Ghost: fifthly, both given
by inspiration and written by holy men, as they were acted and moved by the
holy Ghost thereunto: sixthly, both confirmed and sealed by mighty and great
words: Heb. 2.3. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Seauenthly, and lastly, the contempt of both is death.

Secondly, they differ in these respects: first, the Law preaches Gods
justice, the Gospel mercy. Secondly, the Law requires obedience, the Gospel
faith. The Law came by Moses, Io. 1.17. Deu. 27.26. Romans 4.
but that grace and truth of the Gospel came by Jesus Christ. The Law
requires inherent righteousness, the Gospel offreth unto the believer an
imputative righteousness, even the righteousness of Christ because he can
not attain to the righteousness of the Law: Gal. 2.20.
for if righteousness could come to any by the Law, then Christ had dyed in
vain.

Quest. 7. Does the Gospel offer grace unto all men: or shall all men be saved
by Christ?
Ans. The answer is. 1. Tim. 2.4. That God will have all men saved, and come
to the knowledge of the truth, meaning by this general note (all) the elect,
and all degrees, and conditions of life whatsoever for all shall not be saved.
Es. 53.11. My righteous servant by his knowledge shall justify many, and shall
bear their iniquities. Ioh. 3.36. He that believes in the Son has
eternal life, he that believes not in the Son shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him for ever. If all were saved or ordained unto life,
Rom 9.10.11. Ephesians. 1.
then had God no freedom of eternal election of some unto life.

Quest. 8. I see the believers only have interest in Christ and his Gospel:
proceed on and tell us what is faith.
Ans. Faith is a gift of God, whereby we give assent, or belief to every
word of God written in the old and new Testament, or we may well discribe it as
the Apostle to the Hebrews, to be the ground of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the demonstration of things not seen, for first whereas the things we
hope for are not with us in present possession, faith gives rest and stay unto
our hearts concerning the truth of them, even of all the insearchable riches of
Chirst. Secondly, whereas the things we hope for are invisible, faith gives
unto our minds a berter and more certain demonstration of them, then we can
possibly have of any natural thing, by sense or by discourse of reason, when
our evidence is most demonstratiue from the causes: because faith is grounded
upon the infallible and most certain evidence of Gods holy truth, there is a
necessary relation between faith and gods word.

But if ye desire yet a more special definition of faith we may truly say,
that a true justifying faith, or the faith proper to the elect, is a Ephesians. 2.7.8.
supernatural grace, which the spirit of God works in the heart by the Romans
10.14.17.
Gospel, whereby every child of God does Io 1.12.
apprehend and apply Jesus Christ with all his benefits unto himself. The
special work of faith is to apprehend the promise of grace. Gal. 3.14. That
we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith, or Christ in it, for
he is the substance of the promise and whole covenant: and with him we have
all things, which concern our good in this 1. Tim. 4.8.
life, and in the life to come by the same faith.

Confidence is a fruit of faith, Ephe. 3 12.
for no man can trust in God, till first he be persuaded of Gods favor in
Christ. The property of faith principally is to apprehend Christ, but join
love to it, and it is effectual in duties to God and men.

Quest. 9. Are there not other kinds of faith spoken of in the Scripture,
besides the true justifying faith proper to the elect?
Ans. There are three other kinds common to the elect and reprobate. First, an
Historical faith, in this note even in the wicked, men and Angels: first, they
know the truth of God written: secondly, they believe the truth of Gods word,
that it is the truth: thirdly they tremble.

The second kind of common faith is the temporary faith which goes a degree
further then the historical, which is to profess the Gospel but without
sense of the power of it, or love or liking to it, this faith may proceed yet
to a great rejoicing and to some barenly fruit, and yet is it but false and
temporary: first, because it never is of long continuance, for in the heat
of afflictions it vanishes away: and it is grounded on temporary causes:
first, a light, vain desire of knowledge: secondly, praise of men: thirdly, on
riches and earthly preferments, the common motive of liking or disliking of
religion with this kind of men, the grounds of this faith then being vain and
vanishing, this faith therefore soon vanishes away.

The third kind of common faith, is the faith of miracles, when a man
grounding himself on some special promise or revelation from God, does
believe that some strange and extraordinary thing, which he has desired or
foretold shall come to pass by the work of God. This kind shall be rejected
in the last day with the reprobate. 1. Cor. 13.2.
Mat. 7.22.

Quest. 10. How is the true saving faith wrought in us, how grows it, and by
what means is it cherished and preserved?
Ans. First, the holy Ghost by the Romans 10.14.17.
preaching of the Gospel, by Act. 8.7.
reading of the same, by Ps. 1.2 and 119.
meditation, and by Act. 17. Mal. 3.
conference with the holy Servants of God works faith in our hearts. Private
reading of the Scripture and meditation gathers sticks, preaching and
conference kindles Gods fire in us, after follows prayer and the use of the
Sacraments, for the confirmation of faith in us, that the fire may grow up to a
flame, Heb. 6.2. and 9.14.
to burn up, and to censure our dead works, by the power and grace of the
holy Ghost, applying the blood of Christ unto us, which the hand of Faith
receives and retains to the renewing and reforming of the mind, of the heart,
and conscience, that the whole man after this admirable change in repentance,
as a new creature may serve the living God.

Secondly, when the seeds of this faith are first sown in our hearts by the
holy Ghost by the means aforesaid: for a time our faith is but weak, like
the hand of an infant, which can when he is called put forth his hand, but
receive little and retain less, his desire only is accepted for the deed.
So in the faithful when they are become poor in spirit, and in sight of their
spiritual poverty and nakedness mourn, Mat. 5.3.4.5.
and in mourning are so exercised that they are truly humbled: when (I say)
they are so humbled that they do not only desire to be saved, but also
hunger above all things to be at peace with God through Jesus Christ. This
hungry desire of grace with God is often commended and accepted. Psalm. 10.17.
Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor. 143.6. My soul desires after
thee as the thirsty land. Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him. Nehe. 1.11. O Lord I beseech thee let thine ear now hearken to
the prayer of thy Servant, and to the prayer of thy Servants who desire to
fear thy name.

This small beginning and weak faith, because of weak knowledge in the
mystery of salvation, does at the first yield assent to the truth of all Gods
written word, desiring to gain more knowledge and to live sincerely according
to the measure of knowledge and grace received: this faith I say, may well be
called as yet an implicit faith, because it has much folding and doubting:
but being well exercised and continuing in the mean of grace and knowledge,
preaching, reading, prayer, meditation, conference, use of the Sacraments,
singing of Psalms, mercifulness to the poor etc. grows up in time to be a
strong Faith. This I express and prove by the 23. Psalm, on this manner, When
the great shepeheard of our souls, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ shall
have fed us well in the green pastures of his word, when we have druncke well
of his sweet waters, the graces of his spirit, when by his word and spirit he
has couerted our souls, when he has well trained and schooled us in the
paths of holiness and true righteousness, then beegin we to make this
comfortable conclusion of faith in our hearts. The Lord Jesus Christ is my true
Savior and shepeheard of my soul. 3. Conclusions of faith against 3. kinds
of fears common to all the faithful. 1. Fear of wants. 2. Fear of death. 3.
Fear and doubt of election and perseverance. Psalm. 15.1.

And out of this argument we conclude three other conclusions of Faith: first,
I am well assured I shall never want any thing that is good for my body and
soul. Secondly, I shall not fear, that is, be oppressed with fear, in the
valley of the shadow of death, even when death it self approaches. Thirdly,
against all doubts of election and grace of perseverance. Doubtless kindness
and mercy shall follow me for ever, that is, I shall live in Gods favor and
Church on earth for a time, and in heaven for ever. Thus by degrees we grow
unto that comfortable assurance of Faith, and to that sweet Romans 5.1.2.
rejoicing in hope of the glory of God.

And yet when a man is come to this ripeness and perfection of faith, this man
otherwhiles may be so weak in the apprehension of Gods mercy, and in the
assurance of the pardon of sins (specially if either he has lived in gross
sins before his conversion, or has fallen to any one after grace received)
that albeit grace and peace be offered most comfortably, both by the outward
ministry of the word, and the inward working of the spirit unto the
conscience, yet the assurance of grace and the spirit of adoption seals not
the pardon till a man be well humbled, and has renewed his repentance, albeit
the Lord long before has past the grant of the pardon of those sins unto
him. David's example cleeres this unto us, The Lord pardons his grievous sins
of Adultrie and Murder: this is published by the Prophet and put (as it were)
into his hand and heart: yet he is not comforted in the assurance of the
pardon, nor receives the blessed seal of adoption, before he had long
exercised and humbled his heart in repentance. Confer. 2. Sam. 12.13. with the
51. Psalm.

Quest. 11. What are those things which a Christian must of necessity believe,
and in believing profess and confess in the visible Church of God, before his
people, and before his enemies, men and Angels?

Ans. To believe with the heart brings a man to the assurance of
righteousness, Romans 10.10.
and to profess with the mouth is the way to salvation.

We are to believe all and every word of God, specially the promises of the
Gospel, which are unto us as the legacies of the last will of Jesus Christ,
and when we shall have known and believed them, we must for our further
confirmation, and that we may be discerned from all Atheists and unbelievers,
learn to make true confession of the faith we hold, in that form we have most
excellently set down in the Creed, commonly called the Apostolical Symbol,
or the Apostles Creed.

Quest. 12. Tell me, how many Creeds be there, and which is the best, and what
they contain?
Ans. There have been many forms set down since the Apostles time, and yet
all of one and the same in substance. And they may well be referred to three
kinds. First, general Creedes, received with the authority and the general
consent of the Catholic Church, as the Apostolical and * Nicene Creed.
Secondly, particular, Ruff. 1. chapter 5.
Creedes either national, or of particular Churches, as of the Church of
England, France, Scotland. Thirdly, proper Creeds, as that of Athanasius, and
that of Constantine to the king of Persia, or of any one man: and these we may
call the confessions of private men.

The Apostolical Creed is most worthy, most ancient, most Catholic, and of
greatest authority, commonly called the Symbol of the Apostles, Symbolum
Apostolorum.
a Simbole because it is a special note to discern Christians from
unbelievers. Apostolical because it was gathered out of the writings of the
Apostles and is most consonant with all the holy Scriptures, and all other
Creedes are but an exposition and enlargement for the better clearing of this.

This Creed was delivered in this form: because the conuerts in elder ages,
which came to profess Christ in their Baptism were to make answer before the
congregation to this question. How do thou believe, or what beleeuest thou?
The answer he made was according to the form of the Creed. I believe in God,
etc. This Creed sets before in a short view to help our memories all
whatsoever we are principally to hold and beeleeue concerning salvation. And
these points here set down be so necessary and so linked together, that if ye
deny any one, ye deny all, if ye renounce any one ye can not be saved.
Again they are commonly divided into twelve Articles or branches, which for
our better edification may be set down in this form as follows.

1 I believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

2 I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

3 I believe that Jesus Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the
Virgin Mary.

4 I believe that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilat, was crucified,
dead, and buried, descended into hell.

5 I believe that Jesus Christ rose again the third day from the dead.

6 I believe that Jesus Christ ascended into heaven, and sits on the right
hand of God the Father almighty.

7 I believe that Jesus Christ shall come from thence to judge the quick and
the dead.

8 I believe in the holy Ghost.

9 I believe the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints.

10 I believe the forgiveness of sins.

11 I believe the resurrection of the flesh.

12 I believe the life everlasting. Amen.

Quest. 13 What are the special parts of this Creed?
Ans. This Confession of the Faith has two principal parts. First, the
confession of our Faith concerning God: first, the Father. Act. 1. secondly,
the Son, 2.3.4.5.6.7. thirdly, the holy Ghost. Act. 8.

Secondly, the confession of our faith concerning the Church, that first, it is
Catholic. Act. 9. Secondly, it has the communion of Saints. Act. 9. Thirdly,
it has remission of sins. Act. 10. Fourthly, that it shall have a holy
resurrection. Act. 11. Fifty, that it shall have everlasting life. and glory.
Act. 12.

Quest. 14. First, what beeleeue and profess you in this Creed, and according
to this Creed concerning God?
Ans. I profess and say in this Creed that I believe in God the Father, I
believe in God the Son, and I believe in God the holy Ghost. Neither do I
say thus for that I believe that there are three Gods, but for that there are
three distinct persons in 1. Cor. 8.6. Deuteronomy. 4.32.39.
one most divine essence ever to be acknowledged, ever to be distinguished
Mat. 28.
by their essential and incommunicable properties the one from the other.

And whereas I am to say thus, I believe, I am given to understand, that
whereas there are among men in Art two only kinds of demonstration one by
sense, and the other by discourse of reason, here the believer has a third
kind by Heb. 11.1.2.
faith far more excellent then both, for faith only and no reason of man
shall ever give us any demonstration of the mystery of the Trinity, or of any
Article of the faith. For Faith looks into the glass of Gods holy truth, and
finding that God has so revealed and manifested himself unto us, I am to
believe and rest upon his holy truth. Whatsoever we doubt of, we be to
search whether there be not any word of the Lord concerning the matter, which
being found we give our minds to rest, knowing assuredly that the least title
of the truth is more Ier. 31.36.37. Mat. 5.18.
firm then the whole frame of heaven and earth, and there shall not fall any
thing of the word of the Lord to the ground.

Quest. 15. What mean you by these words I believe in God, and what promises
respects Faith in these words?
Ans. First, I say thus much in effect that according to the measure of
knowledge and grace recieued, I profess that I rest my soul upon every truth
and promise which God has given us in his word concerning him or my self and
my salvation.

Secondly, I know, profess, and am persuaded that the true God, three in
persons one in substance is my God.

Thirdly, I profess that my whole affiance and trust is in this God alone, and
that I have wholly given up my self unto him to be taught by his word, to be
redeemed by his Son, and to be sanctified and grouerned by his holy spirit.
Here it is clear, first, that ignorant people cannot make any true profession
of Faith, albeit they repeat the Creed ten thousand times: for the believer
must have knowledge: Romans 10.14.
this the Apostle testifies saying, how can they believe in him of whom they
have not heard, how can they hear without a Preacher?

Secondly, if this be true that to believe in God requires a holy affiance in
God, I must look well to it, that I commit my soul and body, and all things I
have unto Gods providence and custody, this we be commanded by word and
example: by word. Psalm. 37.3.4. Trust in God, do good and commit thy way unto
the Lord and trust in him. Again. 1. Pet. 4.19. Let them that suffer according
to the will of God, commit their souls to him in well doing, as unto a
faithful creator. As a friend trusts his dear friend with his best things,
so must we commit our very souls unto Gods custody. By example, the Apostle
says. I am not ashamed of my sufferings, for I know whom I have believed, and
am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
against that day. Let nothing carry thee to the creature from the creator under
the cross, God does greatly respect such as trust in him. 1. Chro. 34.27. And
contrarily rejects such as distrust. Psalm. 78.21.22.
and though all the world perish stand fast under his wings. Psalm. 91.1.

Thirdly, if to believe in God be to rest upon his word and promises: then
must I look well how much I do rejoice and trust and have respect to his word
so much is my faith and belief in God. Here remember, Psa. 56.34. where David
knits these things together. When I was afraid I trusted in thee. I will
rejoice in God because of his word, I trust in God and will not fear what
flesh can do unto me. Special promises here to be respected are these and
such like. I will be God unto thee, and thy seed after thee. Genesis 17.7. The
Lord, the Lord strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity
transgression and sin. Exodus 34.6.7. This God (in whom I believe) is a spirit
eternal, infinite, most wise, immutable, most wise and most just, one in
essence, three in persons. This God fills heaven and earth: first, by his
essence, For in him we live, and move and have our being. Act. 17.28. Secondly,
by his power, of him, through him, and for him are all things. Romans 11.36.
Thirdly, by his presence and providence for he rules and disposes of all
creatures, causes and effects in heaven and earth and brings them all to that
end which in his own most holy wisdom he has appointed.

Quest. 16. Now proceed to the three titles here set down in the first article.
Ans. First, I take it in this Article I may well express my meaning and Faith
on this manner.

First, I beeleeue in that God who is the Father of Jesus Christ by nature, and
my Father in Christ by adoption.

Secondly, I believe that God the Father of Christ, and my Father in him, is
Almighty, the sovereign Lord of Lords which has all power and authority in
his own hands.

Thirdly, I believe that God the Father of Christ, and my Father in him is the
maker of heaven and earth, and so consequently, the preserver and vpholder of
all things.

First, 1. Father of Jesus Christ, first difference between the true God and
false Gods.
for this title (the Father) do not add this word to the former without a
distinction, for the father is not God only, but God is the Father, Son and
holy Ghost. If any man would conceive in mind rightly of the divine nature of
God, he must conceive of God, or of his divine essence absolutely: if he
would conceive and meditate of any of the persons, he must think and consider
of the same relatiuely with personal proprieties,

Here some have doubted because the Father is set in the first place, whether
the Son and the holy Ghost have their beginning of the Father. The answer
is, the Son and the holy Ghost have not a beginning of their nature, or of
their divine essence of the Father, but of their person only: the person of
the Son is from the Father by an everlasting government, and of the holy
Ghost is from both by an everlasting proceeding: but the divine essence of
these three persons is uncreate, unbegotten, and proceeding from none.

And we must remember to hold fast this mystery of the Trinity, first, that
we may discern this true God from all false Gods: Secondly, that we may
conceive in our minds rightly of God, We can have no faith in the thing which
is utterly unknown.
even as he has manifested himself in his word: Thirdly, and it is not
sufficient to Salvation to beeleeue in God confusedly, but we must believe that
God the Father is our Father, God the Son is our redeemer, and that the holy
Ghost is our comforter and sanctifier. And we must not worship the Father
without the Son and the holy Ghost, nor the Son without the Father and the
holy Ghost, nor the holy Ghost without the Father and the Son, for then we
worship an Idol of our own brains invention.

The first person in Trinity is called a Father in respect of nature and of
grace: first, by nature in respect of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ,
next by nature, for that all things that are, Romans 11.
have their being and moving in him and for him. Next, he is a Father in
respect of grace, because he does adopt and accept all the Elect for his
children in Jesus Christ: first, God the Father begets the Son before all
eternity: Son and the Father equal in time, but in natural generation the
Father is before the Son. Secondly, God the Father commits to the Son
his whole affairs, so does not, nor can the earthly Father, but he should
come to nothing. Thirdly, he begets the Son in himself and not without.

Comforts which follow this Faith.
First, the Devil is no more our Father. John. 8.44. but we have a
prerogative by our Faith in Christ to be Gods children. John. 1.12.

Secondly, a moderate care will serve for the things of this life: for if I be
a child in Gods family, the heavenly father will not fail me: for I know
that in a family the Father provides for all. Mat. 6.26. Heb. 13.6.7. And
Christ says, Your heavenly Father knows all your wants.

Thirdly, if God be our Father he will tenderly respect us in all our
infirmities, tentations, and grieuances in this life. Psalm. 103.13.

Fourthly, if God be our Father his love is immutable, albeit we be changed
every day, yet he is ever the same. James. 1.17.

Fifthly, if God be our Father we may freely come to his presence continually,
and acquaint him with all our greefes. Luke. 11.13. and if we call instantly
for the best things he has in store, yea even for his holy spirit, he will
grant our request.

Secondly for the title, Almighty, Almighty. 2. Difference between the true
God and the false.
here I profess that I am persuaded and assured that the true God, which I
serve and upon whom I wholly depend, is not like the weak false gods (which
perish) but as he is willing in Christ Jesus, so is he all sufficient to
perform all his promises unto me, and to deliver me, and to keep me from
all dangers both of body and soul, temporal and eternal.

Comforts which follow this Faith.
Frst, albeit thou have been a grievous sinner and of long continuance in
sin, yea, in most gross and vile sins: yet this great God is most able and
all sufficient to loosen by Jesus Christ all the works, and power of Satan, if
thou will renounce thine unbelief, and seek God in Christ by his word in
Faith unfeigned, and in repentance, sorrowing seriously, and renouncing all dead
works. Romans 11.23. Heb. 6.2.3.

Secondly, this is a singular consolation in all the troubles of this life,
that I am thus persuaded in mine heart that God is my loving Father, 1. Ioh.
5.4. Psalm. 23.4.
and an Almighty Father, most sufficient (as he is willing) for good in all
respects. John. 10.29.

The third title Maker of heaven and earth. And here I say this much in effect,
3. Difference between the true God and false: As. Esaias. 45.6.7.
that I know by the light of Gods word, and am persuaded in mine heart by the
work of Gods spirit, by whose grace I profess and confess that the true God,
which I serve, is he which created heaven and earth in the beeginning, which
preserves and vpholdeth heaven and earth, and all things therein to this day,
and shall do it to the worlds end: disposing also of all things even the least
accident, which the heart of man can think upon in any of his creatures,
according to his own most holy will and wisdom. For I do not now imagine (as
some heathens have done) that God stirs and moves the world by an universal
motion, but also cherishes, cares for, and susteineth every thing by a
singular providence. And this is that I profess in these words.

Here it may be doubted first, that it is said the father has made all things,
seeing it is certain, the Son and the holy Ghost did join in this work?

Ans. First, these words of the Creed stand distinctly thus: I believe in that
true God, which is Father, Son and holy Ghost, secondly, which is Almighty:
thirdly, which is Creator of heaven and earth,

Secondly, it may be doubted: if he has created all things, then surely he
has decreed all things: if he has decreede of all things how then comes in
sin into the world?

Ans. God does not simply will or decree sin, but in part and with respects.
First, not as it is sin, but so far forth as sin is either a punishment,
chasticement, trial, action, or has being in nature. Secondly, God can so use
evil instruments that the work done by them, being a sin, shall
nevertheless in him be a good work, because he knows how to use evil
instruments well, as Judas, Pilate, Cayphas, and the rest in crucifying of
Christ. Act. 2.23.

Thirdly, if the blessed Trinity made heaven and earth in the beginning of
nothing, only by a Psa. 148.3. Genesis 1.3.
word speaking: it may be demanded what this word was?

Ans. The word of God in Scripture is taken three ways: first, for the
substantial word which was before the creation, and this is Christ. John. 1.1.
Secondly, for the sounding, or written word of God in the Scriptures. Thirdly,
Heb. 1.3.
for the powerful word of God, which is nothing else but the pleasure, will
and appointment of God.

Comfortable meditations upon this point of the Creation of the world.
First, the doctrine of the Creation, and meditation in Gods works is commended
often: as Psalm. 111. Psalm. 147.148.
The works of God ought to be sought out of all them which fear him. And the
skillful workman thinks himself much disgraced to have men pass by and not to
respect his work: So is it with the Lord when his people pass by this
meditation, this serves much for instruction and consolation, for in the works
of God we may see Gods power, wisdom, love, mercy, providence. And how
greatly God respects this, appears in that he appointed this as a special
service done unto him in the sanctification of the Saboth. Psalm. 92.

Secondly, when I say I rest upon the Creator of heaven and earth: it yields
unto mine heart a special comfort thus: God will assuredly keep me in all
dangers, for like as no man is so tender over any work as he that made it, for
he can not abide to see it any way abused. Job. 10.3.
So God being a faithful Creator tenderly loves all his Creatures. And if the
work any way happen to miscary he will turn it every way to frame it again
to his will, as the Potter, but if no means can prevail he dasheth it all in
pieces.

Quest. 17. But what say you here concerning providence, for if God made the
world of nothing, surely by the same power he vpholdeth and preserves all
things in heaven and earth.
Ans. Providence is the mighty power of God sustaining and ordering all
creatures in heaven and earth, and disposing of all causes and effects, and
bringing all things to that end which in his own secret counsel he has
appointed, God is a faithful Creator. For God did not only make heaven and
earth, and so leave them, as Masons and Carpenters leave houses, when they are
built up, but by his providence still watches over all, governs and
disposes of all that he has made.

Testimonies of gods providence. 1. Scriptures. 2. The beautiful order of al
things in heaven and earth. 3. Conscience speaks to him secretly, 4.
Prophecies of things to come.
First, the Scriptures testify this. Psalm. 115. Our God is in heaven and does
whatsoever pleases him. Act. 14.17. God has not left himself without
witness, giving us rain and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with meat
and gladness. Act. 17.25. He gives unto all men life, and breath and all
things.

Secondly, we see a goodly order as of the whole frame of heaven and earth
continued before our eyes, So of the members and parts of it: and all to serve
God as he is wise and provident that rules all.

Thirdly, the terrors of an evil conscience in malefactors argues plainly
that there is a providence of God, respecting and governing all things: for if
conscience can so find out a sin, and so torment a man, as Nero after he
had murdered his mother, and Judas after he had betrayed his master, how much
more shall God the Lord of the conscience find out all things. 1. John. 3.20.

Lastly, the complement of all prophecies in Scripture so fitly answering in
all circumstances and respects all divine predictions from the beginning, argue
plainly that almighty God disposes all things.

Quest. 18. Do you mean that gods providence does extend it self to all
actions and motions of men and Angels, if so, what shall we say to wicked
actions, surely God has no more but a sufferance in them.

Ans. Such as say so want judgment and follow not the Scriptures of God, for
every action in it self is good: the sin which is in any work, is to be
imputed to the instrument which does it. Genesis 37.28. Psalm. 105.17.
In the sale of Joseph the brethren meant it for evil, God meant it for good.
The like is to be said of David's affliction by Achitophell and Absalon, 2.
Sam. 12.9.10.
of the death of Christ by Judas and the Jews: yea, the very Devils are Job.
1.6 7.8.
chained continually by his providence, or else it were wide with us all on
earth.

Object. Where Gods providence rules there is order: but we see but confusion
and disorder in all parts of the earth. Ans. There is confusion and disorder
since sin came on earth: and Satan and sinners continually fight for
confusion: but God in the very midst of confusion, by his providence even among
Pagans, stirs up instruments to observe order, as we see in all well
governed common wealths which have been or be among the Gentiles.

Object. It is a heavy temptation to the godly to see themselves in greatest
wants and misery on this earth: and this causes them to doubt of providence.

Ans. First, the 37. and 73. Psalms were written purposely to answer this and
the like objections of our flesh against providence.

Secondly, the Lord giving his children spiritual graces which he denies all
the unbelievers of the earth, causes them to rest more contented with the
least portion, then the wicked are or can be if they did possess all the
blessings of the earth. Psalm. 23.

Lastly, the Lord by their wants and afflictions intend nothing more then to
weane the hearts of his children from earthly things, and to settle them on the
heavenly riches which are purchased and laid up for them in heaven by Jesus
Christ. Col. 3.1.

Quest. 19. What duties and comforts follow this faith in gods providence?

Psalm. 13.9.
Ans. First, this all-seeing providence being present with us in all places and
actions, we are to look well about us in all our ways not to offend so great
a master, but to walk as hand in hand uprightly before him, as ever in his
presence: it is his charge: I am God all sufficient, walk thou before me, and
be thou upright, Gen 17.1. Job. 1.1.

Secondly, this faith in gods providence breeds contentation, the daughter of
piety. 1. Tim. 6.7. and causes patience in afflictions: 2. Sam. 16.10.
for we must say with Job and David it is the Lords providence has done this,
who dare then say, wherefore have thou done so. As body and soul during life
are ever together, albeit we see but the body only, so Gods providence is
ever joined with the thing done, albeit invisible to the eye of the body, yet
not to the eye of faith, which beholds the invisible God. Heb. 11.1.26.27.

Lastly, Faith in gods providence brings a heavenly security, wherewith Gods
Children are notably fenced after experience of Gods providence, 2. Sam. 16.22.
Romans 8.28.
as we see in David after his experience. Psalm. 23. and 91. and Paul. 2. Tim.
4. not long before his death.

Quest. 20. Now proceed on to the second branch of the first part of the
Creed, which concerns principally (as I think) our faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ.
Ans. The words first are to be read thus: And I believe in Jesus Christ, etc.
to the last words, shall come to judge the quick and dead: for all this
portion is concerning Christ and our faith in him: Where we may observe
generally.

First, his titles four in number: first, Jesus: secondly, Christ: thirdly,
his only Son: fourthly, our Lord.

Secondly, his natures: first, divine, very God, for the only begotten Son
of God, conceived by the holy Ghost: secondly, humane: Borne of the Virgin Mary.

Thirdly, his offices: first, he is Christ the king anointed by his Scepter to
rule over all: secondly, he is Christ the anointed Priest by his death to save
Elect.
all: thirdly, he is Christ the anointed Prophet by his Gospel to teach all.

Fourthly, in the great work of our redemption by him we are to note: First,
his sufferings and humiliation, and in it three degrees: first, his death:
secondly, his burial: thirdly, his descention into hell. Secondly, his
glorious exaltation, and here are three degrees: first, his Resurrection:
secondly, his Ascension: thirdly, his Session at the right hand of God, etc.

First, of the title Jesus: when we add the words, 1. An excellent confession.
I beeleeue in Jesus, we make profession and confession that we know, believe
in, and rest upon Jesus Christ: And this is an excellent profession, and to it
belong great Mat. 16.16. Act. 10.43.
promises of things temporal and eternal. Ioh. 14.1.

But first here when I say believe in Jesus, 2. Wherefore I am thus to believe.
I have good reason so to say and so to do: first, for that I find my Savior
Jesus Christ to be God everlasting of the same substance and essence with God
the Ioh. 1.14. Heb. 1. Ioh. 10.
Father, and God the holy ghost. Secondly, because the father commands Psalm.
2.12.
me to love him, and believe in him. And so the Son himself expounds his
fathers Io. 6.40.
charge, adding this also that to believe in Jesus Christ, is the very work of
God in our hearts. John. 6.29.

This name Jesus was for good cause given him of his Mat. 1.21. Luke. 1.31.
father. The Angel renders the reason when he says, for he shall save the
people from their sins. And there is none other Savior, neither ought
salvation to be sought in any other. True it is that Joshua was so called,
because he was a lively type of this Savior in leading Gods people to that
temporal rest in Canaan. So are godly Princes, Prophets, and ministers called
Obadiah. ver. 21. 1. Tim. 4.16. 3. Christ properly called a Savior.
Saviors, because they are Gods instruments both for temporal deliverances,
and eternal salvation. But Jesus Christ is truly so called and properly,
because he saues Jews and Gentiles, his elect of all nations, by his own
only merits active and passive in his life and death: and for that he applies
by his holy spirit the virtue of his death and resurrection unto every one of
his elect in his good time, both to crucify and kill the power of sin in
them, and to quicken them to serve him in all holiness and righteousness, and
to cheer their hearts in all evils of this life. So then he is the only true
and perfect 1. Cor. 1.31. Gal. 5.4.
Savior, and justly so called.

Quest. 21. Now what use is there and profit, and comfort by this faith?
Ans. First, here I do and must acknowledge, that I feel and find that
before Christ received me to mercy I was utterly lost, and in the state of
them which are under wrath: for this cause Christ says he came to save them
which are lost. Mat. 18.11. and 15.24.
Every believer feels that without Jesus he is but as a lost thing and
utterly forlorn, and to be cast away for ever.

Secondly, by this faith also must every believer be comforted all his life.
It is the greatest matter of consolation in this life that we have, that
whereas we meet continually with afflictions in this life, yet this cheereth
our hearts we have a Savior, which is faithful and mighty and who will
keep us unto his everlasting kingdom. This is that faith which cheered Adam
in Paradise, and all the believers from the beginning. And to this end the
Angels said to the shepeheards. Behold I bring you tidings of great joy that
shall be to all the people, that is, that unto you is borne in the City of
David a Savior which is called Christ the Lord. Luke. 2.10.11.

Thirdly, the papists and wizards and Exorcists which abuse this holy title and
name of Jesus in their holy water, and exorcismes, and coniuracions do greatly
blaspheme against this holy faith in Jesus Christ: because they do rely (as
their devils teach and persuade them) upon the bare name of Jesus, abusing it
in their practices: as those Jewish exorcists did in Paul's time, They took in
hand (says Luke) to name over them which had evil spirits the name of the
Lord Jesus, saying we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches. Act. 19.13.
Albeit they abuse it greatly by their false faith: yet we may have comfort
when we resting by a true Faith on Jesus, do call by this name instantly upon
him, saying Lord Jesus help, and Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Act. 7.59.

Quest. 22. Proceed on to the second title I believe in Christ: and tell me
where be you commanded so to call the Son of God, and so to believe, and
what you mean by this title?

Ans. This title is used in all the prophecies of the old Testament concerning
the Messiah, and in all Scriptures of the new Testament, where those promises
and prophecies are testified to be accomplished as by conference of these
Scriptures may be seen. Psalm. 45. ver. 6.7. and Dan. 9.24.25.26. prophesied in
the old Testament. Luke. 2. ver. 10.11. and 25. ver. 4. complement in the new
Testament. Where Jesus is called Christ.
Again promised. Esaias. 61. ver. 1. performed. Luke. 4.16.17.18. And again,
Prophesied. Psalm. 2. accomplished Act. 4.25. 26.27.

This title of Anointed among the Jews was given only to three kinds of
callings, Kings, Priests and Prophets. This title gives three callings.
Now for that this one blessed person is called, sent and anointed of his
Father a King to rule all, a Priest to make expiation for all that shall be
saved, a Prophet to teach all: therefore justly and truly is he called for his
excellency the Christ, the Lords anointed.

And whereas he is said to be anointed with the oil of gladness above all
his fellows. Psalm. 45.7. we must understand that the prophecy is truly
verified, first, Christ truly said to be anointed.
in that the Father has conferred these three offices on him only and never
upon any other man or Angel: Secondly, for that he was anointed richly and
wonderfully immediately by his father, others typicially by the hands of men:
Thirdly, for that none did ever receive the holy ointment of God in that
measure: for the Spirit of the Lord rested upon him, Esa. 11.2.
the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of council and of
fortitude, the Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord.

Our Lord Christ as he is God equal to his Father has no need of gifts, but
is the rich Lord of all, Wherefore Christ is so anointed.
and gives freely: but as he is our Redeemer and in our nature is to execute
the offices aforesaid of King, Priest and Prophet, he has need of this
ointment, that is, of all these graces, and has received them in number more
then men or Io 3.34.
Angels, in perfection greater then men or Col. 2.9.
Angels. He has received them I say, this person God and man, first, for the
execution of his offices, next, that he might confer them on his members every
one in some Ephesians. 4.7.
measure, that of his fullness we may all receive this oil of gladness to
cheer our hearts, and grace for grace, that is, for that he is full of grace,
therefore have we received this holy spirit of sanctification as derived into
us from his fullness, which we feel stirring in some measure in our hearts
called the Oil of gladness, because it descends down from him upon his
members, to the inspeakable cheering of their hearts.

1. A Prophet
So then Jesus Christ is that great Prophet anointed and sent from God to
manifest unto us his secret council and will concerning our redemtion, and
consequently our everlasting salvation: of him spoke Moses. Deuteronomy. 18.15. as it
is alleged by Saint Peter. Act. 3.22. and by Saint Stephen, Act. 7.37. Moses
said unto your Fathers, the Lord your God shall raise up unto you a Prophet,
even of your brethren like unto me, ye shall hear him in all things,
whatsoever he shall say unto you: for it shall be that every person, which
shall not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed out of the people.

2. Priest.
Secondly, he is that great high Priest which with his own only sacrifice,
offering up his soul and body unto his Father for us, Es. 53.
has made such an expiation, as has purchased an everlasting redemption and
peace for all the elect: of this office ye have the prophecy in the old
Testament. Ps. 110. the complement and verity in the New. Heb. 7.21. and
10.12. This Sacrifice albeit offered long since, yet the virtue of it as it
saved the elect from the beginning, so shall the efficacy of it continue to
the worlds end. Heb. 13.8. Again, this high Priest still executes one part of
his office, for he sits in heaven, and continually makes intercession for
us. Romans 8.34. and 5.9.10. and Ioh. 17. Chapter. and 1. John. 3.1.2.

Lastly, he is that anointed King which rules his people for ever with the
rod of his mouth: as it is prophesied of him. Esaias. 11.2.3.4. and Psalm. 2.6.
and verified. Mat. 28 18. Io. 10.28.
Luke. 1.33. He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
kingdom shall be none end.

Quest. 23. What comforts yields this faith in Christ, to the beleuer?
Ans. First, by this I rest thus persuaded in mine heart, that my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ will not leave me without some competent measure of his
ointment, that is, of his holy spirit, to guide me to heaven; of this Saint
John. says. 1. John. 2.27. Mat. 13.11.
The annoynting which ye have received of him dwells in you and teaches you
in all things, we are to look well to this teacher and to attend him both when
he speaks outwardly to our ears: Heb. 3. that his word may dwell
plentifully in us. Col. 3.16. and when he speaks inwardly to our hearts.
Esaias. 30.21.

Secondly, by this faith in Christ I rest persuaded, that the great high Priest
of God has made such a Sacrifice, that by it he has purchased an everlasting
reconciliation for me with his Father, and so loves me, 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
that he pleades at all turns, and in all occasions unto his father for me.

Thirdly, by this faith in Christ: I am also comforted for that I see and feel
that by conferring on me some measure of this admirable ointment, I am so
advanced that I am of their number, whom he has made Kings and Priests unto
his Father. Reave. 1.6. for whereas I was in bondage to Satan, sin, and
death. Ephesians. 2.1.2.3.4. he has not only loosened me out of this servitude,
but also has given me power and grace to sway and rule in some sort these mine
enemies, which before grace ouer-ruled me: and to proclaim continual war
against the flesh the Devil, and the world so long as I live on earth. Again,
I am here exceedingly comforted, for that I am now come under his protection
that rules and curbeth all men and Angels, both his and mine enemies, for I
know he can and does so bridle them, that they can neither hurt his glory nor
my salvation, but even against their will advance both: hereby, I say, I am
greatly comforted: for that I know whom I have trusted, and am persuaded that
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. 2.
Tim. 1.12. for like as it must needs be that all they be sad and heavy at
heart, that doubt or wot not under what Lord they are in this life, whether
under Christ or Satan: So it can not be but that they must be right joyful
who by their inward testimonies and seals are assured they be under Christ the
king of righteousness. Luke. 2. ver. 10.11.

Lastly, for that I have received this holy ointment, and for this cause bear
the name of a christian, I see and know that I am ever bound to perform two
duties, first, to God, next to man. To God first, for that he has made me a
Priest I am bound to offer first mine own self (as his Son did) a living
Sacrifice Romans 12.1.
unto God. And this must appear, first, by mine affiance in Psalm. 4.5.
him: secondly, by my subjection to his Romans 15.16.
word: thirdly, by calling Psalm 141.2.
upon him: fourthly, by Heb 13 15.
praising him: fifthly, by distribution to the Phil. 4.18.
Saints: sixthly, by humbling my self in repentance and Psalm. 51.19.
sorrow for sin, with such Sacrifices God is pleased, and we have good
testimonies that we be sound Christians, and truly believe in Jesus Chirst.
Secondly, I must endeavor that I make others partakers of this ointment with
me: for this is one special cause wherefore the Lord gives it us, that we
might be his instruments to conuaie and communicate the same unto his elect as
much as in us lies, for every Christian is a Prophet of God by his calling,
and therefore must do the work of a Prophet. Psalm. 51.12.13. Restore to me the
joy of thy salvation and stablish me with thy free Spirit, then shall I teach
thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. Luke.
22.32.

Quest. 24 Proceed to the third title: I believe in the only begotten Son of
God.
Ans. Here I profess two things: first, that Jesus Christ is the Son of the
living God: secondly, his only begotten Son: for the first I understand by
the light of his grace and holy word, that as he is God, he is of himself
neither beegotten nor proceeding: but as he is a son he is not of himself,
but the Son of the Father beegotten before all worlds of the substance of
the Father. And albeit this be hard to set forth the form and manner of this
generation, yet we may safely speak with the Scriptures, that the son is
the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1.1.2.
and the ingraned form of his substance: And with the godly Ancients, that
the Son is of the Father as light of lights, not proceeding but begotten. So
this generation is by an unspeakable communication of the whole essence of the
Godhead of the Father to the Son: in receiving whereof the Son does no more
diminish the majesty or godhead of the Father then the light of one torch or
great light, does the light of an other from which it is taken.

Sundry persons most impiously have taken this title upon them falsely to be
called Gods. Christ is the Son of God.
Note it well whosoever did it, from the beginning of the world to this day, he
never wanted the fearful signs of Gods wrath upon him, our first parents for
affecting divine honor, Genesis 3.
lost all their excellency, and beecame the children of wrath. Herod was
ambitiously impious this way, but suddenly the Angel of God smote him.

The conversion of the Gentiles is an argument of arguments to assure us that
Jesus Christ was the only Son of God, against all Atheists of all ages: for
how could that be that so many nations should turn subjects to his scepter,
but that the divine power of God was in this work, and that this our Lord and
God manifested in the flesh, was so mighty and powerful in and by his Gospel
to convert souls unto him. 2. Cor. 10.3.4.5.6.

Lastly, That Christ is very God.
special rules of proportion require this that Jesus Christ be very God:
first, It is a work of omnipotency to be a Savior of body and soul: such a
Savior was Christ: secondly, there must be a proportion between the sin of
men, and the punishment of sin: The sin of men being against the infinite
majesty of God, must have a punishment infinite: therefore such an infinite
Redeemer. Thirdly, there was nothing could so quench the fiery darts of
Satan, Epe. 6.
and the pollution of sin in our consciences, but the blood of such an
infinite Mediator. Fourthly, God herein does manifest his grace and love unto
us, in that he gives us such a redemption by his Son, Romans 5.
and such a satisfaction as should not only be equal to our sin, but also
by many degrees go beyond it.

And these very words that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, ye have often set
down in the Scriptures. Confer these places. 2. Pet. 1.17. Mat. 3. and 17.5.
etc.

So also is he called the only begotten Son of God. John. 1.14. Ye saw the
glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father full of
grace and truth. and ver. 18. and Chap. 3.16. And thus Jesus Christ our Lord,
is the only begotten Son of God not by creation, nor by adoption, nor by
reason of the personal union of two natures, but by nature, and as having of
the substance of the Father before all worlds.

Quest. 25. What use is there of this title, and what comforts follow this
Faith?
1. Use. Humiliation.
Ans. This serves well both for humiliation and consolation: First, for
humiliation thus: When I see that nothing could appease the wrath of God for
sin, but the hart-bloud of his only begotten Son: I see it clear that
without this Savior all the Sons of Adam were in the woeful state of
damnation, having so offended the high majesty of God, that nothing could
serve for reconciliation but the death of the Kings own Son: the
consideration and meditation of this, I say, ought to smite my heart with a
holy fear of sinning against God, for that so great a price was laid down for
my sins.

2. Use. Consolation.
Secondly, for our further consolation I am continually as to behold here the
inspeakable and infinite love of God. John. 3.16. so also to esteem and value
all the works following acted and done by Jesus Christ for me, according to
the worthiness and excellency of his person.

Thirdly, this gift of God in giving us his Son: Romans 8.5^.
in not sparing his own Son, but giving him for us all to death, this gift I
say, should move us continually to sing in our hearts, 3. Praise God always.
and to say with David, My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within
me praise his holy name, my soul praise thou the Lord and forget not all his
benefits, which forgiueth all thine iniquity, and heals all thine
infirmities, which redeemeth thy life from the grave, and crowns thee with
mercy and compassion.

Quest. 26. Proceed to the fourth title. Where is Jesus Christ called our
Lord, and wherefore?
Ans. He is so called often in the scripture: the Angel to the shepeheards so
calls him. Luke. 2.11. and Christ himself teaches it out of the 110. Psalm.
that he must be so called. And he is truly and justly so called, because
that redeeming our souls and bodies from the bondage of sin, death and
damnation, not with gold and silver, but with his own precious blood, he may
challenge us for his 1 Pet 1.12. 1. Cor. 6.20.
own by good right. And this may he do also by right of c^e^tion: as also by
right of his place and office, as being the head of the Church, which is his
body whereof I am a member.

Duties and Consolations which follow this Faith: are these.
First, I bind my self to an absolute obedience of every word of Christ,
without any exception: and that I obey all my Superiors only in him and for
him. Act. 4.19. And I must do him homage in body and soul, because he is Lord
of both. 1. Cor. 6.

Secondly, seeing he is become my Lord I must stand firm by faith in him and
rest on him in all fears and evils of this life, for he will never fail me
nor forsake me. Ioh. 1.5. he will not suffer any of his to perish. Ioh.
10.28. for that all power is given him. Mat. 28.

Thirdly, all Governors must remember to be as loving fathers to their
inferiors for if they be not so they must give an account to an higher Lord,
who is set over them: this the Apostle teaches Ephe. 6.9. Ye Masters do the
same things unto your servants, putting away threatening, and know that even
your Master is also in heaven.

Quest. 27. Thus far of the four titles, and of the first most excellent and
divine nature of the Son of God: now follows his humane nature, incarnation
and the union of both natures in one person in these words Conceived by the
holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary: Tell me first, where is Christ said to
be conceived by the holy Ghost?
Ans. In all Scriptures wheresoever he is called the Son of God: as Romans 1.4.
Mat. 3.17. Ioh. 1.14. But these very words are found set down by Saint Matthew.
Conceived by the holy Ghost
Chap. 1.19.20. Fear not to take Mary for thy wife, for that which was
conceived in her is of the holy Ghost. And Luke 1.35. The holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadow thee, therefore also
that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of
God.

Concerning the Incarnation of the Son of God, we must know that it is a
great 2. Tim. 3.16.
mystery and therefore here observe.

First, who is Incarnate? the second Ioh. 1.14. Luke. 1.35.
person in Trinity: first, for that God by him created man, and therefore by
him must he be recreated and redeemed: secondly, for that he is the
Incarnation a mystery.
essential Image of God, to restore the Image of God lost in Adam. So this I
believe the whole Godhead is not incarnate, nor any person but the Son, the
person of the Son (I say) subsisting in the Godhead.

Secondly, this I must say and believe that he was a perfect man in every
respect like to Adam, sin only excepted, subject to all unblameable and
general infirmities which appertain to the whole nature of men, as passions
of body and mind.

Thirdly, this I must believe and avouch, that it was necessary that he should
become man: first, to satisfy God in that nature we offended: secondly, for
that not one else could fulfill all righteousness which the Law requires of
us but he: thirdly, for that our redeemer must die for our sins: fourthly,
he must be a Mediator and make requests and speak to God and man for a
reconciliation, man before the fall could speak to God face to face, but now
he can not, nor may not come near, but in the face and favor of Christ,
whose face is to be found in the Gospel.

Duties which follow this Faith.
First, draw near to Christ and cleave unto him, for we see he is come near
us and become our Immanuel. Esaias. 7. Secondly, Psalm. 22. Es. 53.
here is a pattern and president for us of inspeakable humility. Phil. 2.6.7.
There is a secret pride in all the sons of Adam, till God change their heart,
and this pride the less we discern it the more it is, and the more we
discern it, the less it is.

This I observe touching this incarnation of Christ, that his conception by the
work of the holy Ghost was wonderful: for it was so done in the womb of the
Virgin, that albeit he took of her very flesh which came of sinful Adam, yet
was the flesh of Christ, I mean his humane nature body and soul without
sin. To prevent that original corruption which comes to mankind by
natural propagation, the great wisdom of God provided that his Incarnation
should be by the immediate work of the holy Ghost, without any natural
generation or means of man on earth, or Angel in heaven or earth. Heb. 2.14.

Quest. 28. Proceed on to speak of the birth of Christ: he was borne of the
Virgin Mary, and of the union of natures divine and humane in this one person.
Ans. Thus I believe indeed, for so did the Patriaches and Prophets of old,
because of the divine Oracles which God gave them concerning the Incarnation of
the Son of God Genesis 3.18. and 12.3.4. and 21. Esaias. 7. and 14. and therefore
much more ought we seeing we have in the Gospel the complement of all those
prophecies. Luke. 2.7. Mat. 1.25. so believe in Jesus Christ borne of the
Virgin Mary: that is, that he was not only conceived by the holy Ghost in the
womb of the Virgin, but also in time, and according to the course of nature
borne of the said virgin, and brought forth into the world by her.

First, a duty following this faith is this: thanksgiving for the Incarnation
of the Son of God, as we see by the examples of the Angels praising God for
this benefit. Luke 1.14. the Virgin praising God for this benefit. Luke.
1.46. And the holy Priest Zachary praising God for this benefit. Luke. 1.68.

Secondly, a consolation following this faith is preached unto us by the
Angel. Luke. 2.10. when he says, Beehold I bring you tidings of great joy
that shall be to all people: hence comes, first, peace with God: secondly,
peace with our own conscience: thirdly, with the holy Angels: fourthly, with
all the creatures of God in the frame of heaven and earth.

The proper name of Christ's mother was Mary, this is testified often in the New
Testament. Luke 2.5. etc. This name is added for a more certain and special
description of his Mother, that my faith may be the better certified of the
truth of all divine Oracles and Prophecies concerning him: A double descent
among Jews natural by generation, legal when one succeed an other in the
inheritance, being next by.
for this holy woman being (as Matthew and Luke testify) of the noble raze of
the kings of Judah, it is clear that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ came of
the seed of David, and so of Abraham according to the promise. Genesis 12. and 49.
Luke. 2.

Again, she is called A Virgin, both to let us see the accomplishment of the
prophecy. Esaias. 7.14.22. and to assure us of that is aforesaid, that is, that
he is the only begotten Son of God conceived by the holy Ghost, and not by
the ordinary course of nature.

And this blessed mother of Christ a holy Luke 1.48.
Prophetise, we do willingly honor her three ways, first, by thanksgiving
to God for her: secondly, by a reverent estimation of her: thirdly, by
imitation of her excellent virtues.

And thus having seen by clear evidence from the Lord, that our blessed Lord
and Savior, as touching his natures, is very God and very man: it rests
only that we learn also by divine demonstration that these two natures are
united in one person.

First, 2. Kinds of Unions. 1. In nature. 2. In person.
here then we must be advertised that there be two kinds of unions: union
in nature, and union in person. Union in nature is when two or more things are
joined or united into one nature, as the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost,
being and remaining three distinct persons, are one and the same in nature, or
Godhead. Union in person is when two things are in that manner united, that
they make but one person or substance: as the body and soul of man meeting
together make one man.

Secondly, this union of natures then here is this: the second person in
Trinity, or the Son of God does assume to it a manhood in such order that
the same being void of all personal being in it self does wholly and only
subsist in the second person in Trinity, or depends wholly on the person of the
Son: so that now it is a nature only and not a person, because it does not
subsist alone as in other men.

Thirdly, this then I understand and believe here, The union of natures
discribed.
that the everlasting son of God, without any putting off of his divine nature,
without any commixtion or conversion, was made that which before his
Incarnation he was not, to wit, very man by taking flesh by the power of the
holy Ghost from the Virgin, and an humane soul created of nothing, Personal
union
both which natures being united together in a most admirable personal union,
make one most blessed person, even the most sacred person of our only Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Christ very man.
Fourthly, and our Lord Christ has in his humanity so assumed all the
essential properties of man's nature, that he is become in all things like unto
us. Heb. 2.17. sin only excepted: for he has so personally united unto
himself our nature, that we can not say properly of his passion, that only
the bare humanity suffered (which yet is only passible) but this we are to
say, that the person which is very God has suffered in our nature.

Fifthly, and lastly, I must not believe that the Lord Christ assumed our nature
(as he did sometimes under the Law, before his incarnation take to him the
form of man and Angel for a time) but retains still and for ever, Christ God
and man for ever.
the very body and soul of man, howbeit now glorified: for the Apostle says
our Mediator not only was, but also is the man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 2.5.
living for ever to make intercession for us. Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.34.

Consolations following this Faith concerning Christ's pure Conception,
Incarnation, and this inspeakeable union of natures in this one sacred person:
are these.
1 Christ a comfortable and fit Mediator.
First, I understand and conceive he is a most fit Advocate to his Father being
very God, and a most comfortable Mediator for me, being very man well
acquainted with all my greuances, and one I may boldly draw near unto. Heb.
2.16.17.18. and 4.16.

Secondly, I conceive also that he has been so acquainted in our flesh with
our temptations, that he has a special experience of our infirmities in his
own sacred person: 2 Christ had experience of our infirmities
not that the Son of God had need of our affections and temptations to make
him merciful unto us, but for that we can best persuade our selves of his
mercy when we learn that he has been acquainted with our passions.

Quest. 29. Tell me now breefly what mean you by the properties of the humane
and divine nature: and by the communication or conjunction of properties?

Ans. When I say and believe that Christ did assume all the essential
properties of man's nature, I mean he took not only the soul and body of
man, but also every quality and adiunct thereunto appertaining (excepting
sin) for he had the understanding, the reason, the will and all the
affections of man (without sin) being made like his brethren in all things.
Heb. 2.17.

Secondly, again when I believe and say, Christ does retain still all the
properties of his divine nature.
that Christ did retain in this personal union of both natures, all the
properties of his divine nature, I mean these and the like, that he was, this
very person now, God and man, Eternal, Almighty, Incomprehensible, Immutable,
most Perfect, for these and the like be the properties of the divine nature.

Thirdly, Communication of properties.
the communication of these properties (as Divines speak, for the better
understanding of some Scriptures uttered concerning this sacred person) it
this, when we ascribe that which is proper unto one nature unto the other,
because of the aforesaid personal union of both natures: as when the Apostle
says. Act. 20.28. God has purchased the Church with his own blood. This
manner of speaking is with respect to this union, and herein that which is
proper to the humane nature is ascribed unto the divine: for that this sacred
person which did this great work with his own blood is very God.

But here we be also to observe that there is no communication of the
essential properties of these natures, but in concreat only (as Logicians
speak) not in the abstract, as we may say truly, and according to the
doctrine of Godliness, that God dyed for us, but we may not say therefore,
the Deity dyed for us.

Quest. 30. Tell me yet more succinctly, what divine reasons, have you to show
the necessity of this, that our Mediator must be very God and very man, and
that these two natures must thus admirably be united together, and his
conception so pure?

Ans. First, breefly for the first: he must be very God.

1. Christ our mediator must be very God.
First, because he had received a charge from his Father (which did require an
infinite power) to wit by his merits and virtue to save the elect, for it was
needful that his price should ouer-prise our sins.

Secondly, if he had not been very God, he could not have overcome death.
Romans 1.3.4.

Thirdly, for that it behooued him also to overcome and kill sin and death in
us, even in our consciences. Ioh. 5. 24.25. and to quicken us. Romans 8.11. by
giving us the spirit of faith to apprehend all his merits, and to apply the
same unto our selves. Now who can give the holy Ghost but God himself. Luke.
11.13.

Lastly, he was to loosen and to destroy all the accursed works of 1. Ioh.
3.7.8. Mat. 12.2. Christ our blessed mediator must be very man.
Satan in us.

Secondly, and for the second point he must be very man.

First, that God might declare his unchangeable justice, and hatred of sin,
and his inspeakable love and mercy to the elect: the first he shows in
punishing sin in his own Son: the second he declares in that he punishes
not our sins in our selves but in an other.

Secondly, that we might conceive rightly of the brotherly affection of our
Mediator toward us: and how that he which sanctifies and they which are
sanctified are all one.

Thirdly, for that God had confirmed it with an oath that the Messiah should
come of the loins of David. Psalm. 133. and 89. and of the seed of the woman
according to the Gospel preached in the beginning in paradise. Gen 3.15.

Thirdly, for the third point this I believe and avouch breefly that salvation
could not have been obtained for man, unless the nature of God and man were
united together in one person.

First, because otherwise this work had not been performed by the blood of the
Son of God, and so it had been insufficient for us.

Secondly, because the humanity of Christ could never have borne that
punishment for sin.

Thirdly, Salvation thus obtained could never have been maintained, but that
these natures be thus knit together: for that Christ is and must be the
pledge of our reconciliation for ever. Psalm. 110.1. Mat. 22.44.

Fourthly, by this means we have as it were kindred with God, in Jesus Christ,
who is become our Immanuel, God with us, or God manifest in our flesh. Mat.
1.1. Tim. 3.16.

Fourthly, for the fourth and last branch of the question I say and beeleeue
that it was necessary that our Lord and Savior should be pure, without the
stain of sin in his conception, and that the holy Ghost in this great work
did so provide.

First, for that the most glorious and divine nature of God could never else
be united unto the humane.

Secondly, for that a sinner could never have been accepted to make this
atonement or to offer up any sacrifice for sin.

Thirdly, for that he could not have sanctified others, unless he were the
most pure and the most holy one of God in himself. Heb. 2.11. and Chap.
10.9.10.

Thus then the Lord Jesus Christ our most blessed Redeemer has taken to
himself of the whole mass of mankind being wholly infected and poisoned with
sin, he took, I say, one portion thereof, and did perfectly sanctify it,
by the power of the holy Ghost, and out of it deriues perfect holiness and
sanctification upon all his elect, by imputation of his merits for their
justification, and by his holy Spirit working in them inherent righteousness
and sanctification that so they may serve him for ever in this life and for
ever.

Quest. 31. Now proceed to the Articles following: He suffered under Pontious
Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, and descended into hell: what think
you of these first in general?
Ans. These words contain, and set before us all the degrees of his
humiliation: first, in general in these words, he suffered under Pontius
Pilate: Next the manner how, and the degrees of his humiliation, and suffering
are specified: first, he was crucified: secondly, he dyed: thirdly, he was
buried: fourthly, he descended into hell.

First, as concerning his sufferings in general, I believe he wanted not
passions all his life, from the hour of his birth unto his death, and this
that Euangelical Prophet foretold by the spirit of prophecy. Es. 53.2.3.4.5.
He has neither form nor beauty: when we shall see him, there shall be no
form that we should desire him. He is despised, and rejected of men, he is
a man full of sorrows, and has experience of infirmities, we hid, as it
were, our faces from him, he was despised, and we esteemd him not. Surely he
has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows, yet we did judge him as
plagued of God and humbled, but he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
broken for our iniquities, the chasticement of our peace was upon him, and with
his stripes we are healed.

He suffered in all his life many sorrows, in his nativity and infancy
nakedness and poverty, as in the whole course of his life on the earth, he
suffered Satan to tempt him, he was Mat. 4.
hungry, he was Ioh. 4.
thirsty, he was weary: he suffered many indignities and reproaches, by the
Jews and Herod, by the Scribes, Pharisees, and Saduces, for all the Jewish
sectaries, and Rabbines were set up, as by the Devil to shoot their arrows
against him.

1. Christ suffered in his humanity.
And as touching his humiliation, this holy person before described was humbled
in respect of both natures: for first his humanity was subject to the
infirmities of nature, as also to the miseries and punishments due to man for
sin. 2. How Christ may be said to suffer in his deity.
Secondly, for his Godhead, albeit that can not be changed, yet was it hid as
under a cloud all the time of his abode on earth (without any great
manifestation) till he was declared powerfully by his resurrection, Rom 1,
2.3.4.
and ascension to be the only begotten Son of God.

Here observe for instruction and consolation. There is such a relation
between the head and the members, and such an agreement: that look how it was
with him, so it must be with all the faithful: first, he suffered, Luke. 24.26.
then he entered into glory, even so must they do: wherefore first note it is
a wretched case for a man to be ever in ease, as the rich man was. Luke. 16.
and the other desired to be. Luke. 12. never disquieted in body, soul, goods,
or good name: for we see by Christ's example, that through many tribulations
must we pass to heaven. Here then must be a very special consolation for the
Godly afflicted that they must be crucified with Christ in earth, before they
can be crowned with him in heaven.

Quest. 32. Descend to this special Article: He suffered under Pontius Pilate:
why do you so believe: what was this Judge and what did he?
Ans. First, I so believe, because the Lord has so recorded by the Evangelists
his passion. Luke. 23.14.15. John. 19.14.

Now as touching this Judge it is certain that he was the Roman Emperors
Luke. 3.1.
deputy for that Province in Iewrie where Christ was crucified. He did
proceed with Christ in form of Law as men are handled in Courts of justice for
capital crimes: he was cited or apprehended, he was arraigned before Pilates
tribunal seat, his indictment read, and proved by false witnesses, which were
accepted for good, after this Pilate gave sentence of death, and lastly,
execution was done accordingly.

Object. But how came it to pass that the same Judge should pronounce him
innocent and yet condemn him as an evil doer?

Ans. The first was done by Gods determitate council, that Gods Elect might
ever see it, that their Redeemer dyed not for his own sins: notwithstanding
he was condemned as an evil doer by the same eternal decree and counsel of
God, because he was to bear the iniquities of the Elect, and to make full
satisfaction for the same.

Herein then this is the meditation I have by Faith: I do by faith beehold the
Lord God himself exercising judgment by the mouth of Pilate. Jesus Christ is
set himself before the tribunal seat of God here on earth laden with my
sins, ready to receive the sentence of Gods judgment, and to bear the wrath
of God due to me for my sins: for he put himself in our person as a wicked
person, before this tribunal seat: and Pilate pronounced the sentence of God
upon him (he thinking nothing less) for that sentence was ratified by God in
2. Chro. 19.6.
heaven. For so the holy Ghost has testified that nothing was done in all this
arraignement, God has one purpose, the instruments of his providence men and
Angels have an other.
attachment, trial, indictment and execution, but by the Lords own
determinate counsel, and from him, as if all had been acted before his own
tribunal seat of justice. Act. 2.23. So then Pilate, Judas and the rest of
the Jews were but instruments to serve for the execution of Gods eternal
decrees and justice.



Secondly, this arraignement to the believer is the matter of all his
consolation. Gal. 6.14. for by this he is freed from all those evils that
daily be executed and shall be for ever, as from the just judgment of God
upon the wicked.

Quest. 33. What special things be we to observe in and before his
arraignement?
Ans. First, his preparation unto his death testified by all the John. 13.
Evangelists: for when his time drew near he set his mind and heart to it,
and signified plainly both by words and signs that his death approached, where
we are to learn that if the Son must prepare himself to death, Preparation
to dye well.
much more ought we most miserable sinners, who by reason of our manifold
weaknesses and wants, have need of a thousand preparations more then he.

Secondly, that his willingness in this action might the better appear he
makes choice of a place, well known to John. 18.2. Mat. 26.36.
Judas, where his enemies might apprehend him safely without any fear or
danger of the people.

Thirdly, in that he prayed so earnestly against the dangers and temptations
which were then so imminent, and death approaching: Watchfulnes.
we be taught to be watchful in the like case in all kind of prayers and
supplications unto God.

Fourthly, we are often to record his agonies in the garden, and all that
evening before his passion, for the Evangelists in many words testify the
same. Mark. 14.33. He took Peter, and James, and John with him, and he
began to be afraid and in great heaviness: and he spoke the very same unto
them, My soul is very heavy even unto the death. Luke. 22.43. There appeared
unto him from heaven an Angel comforting him: but being in an Agony, he
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was like clods of blood. Math. 26.37. He
began to wax sorrowful and grievously troubled. Herein by this exceeding
heaviness, most admirable sweat, and extreme passions of mind, such as never
man bare, nor can bear, by his strong cries and tears, by all these and the
like arguments, Heb. 5.7.
we see (if God open the eyes of our understanding by his holy spirit. Ephesians.
1.16.) how the burden of sin, and the heavy wrath of God upon him for the
sins of all the Elect, pressed him, and yet is he not oppressed, but cries
unto his Father, and an Angel is sent to comfort him: So ought we to do when
we are plunged in the greatest temptations.

Object. It may be doubted touching his prayer, when he cries, Father if it
be possible let this cup pass, etc. It may seem, I say, that there should
be some combat and fight in the mind, will and affections of Christ,
therefore some sin.

Ans. There be three kinds of combats: Three kinds of combats in man.
the one beetweene the reason and the appetite, and this fight is always
sinful, and was not in Christ: the second is between the flesh and the
spirit: as. Gal. 5.17. Romans 7. and this is in the regenerate, but not in
Christ. The third is a combat of diverse desires drawing a man to and fro: this
may be in man without fault, and was in Christ: he desires to do his fathers
will, striving with another desire of nature struggling, as it were, or
endeavoring to preserve it self.

Fifthly, we be here to observe in this blessed example of the Son of God,
that whereas we make so light an account of sin, as if it were nothing to
sin against God, here we may behold as in a glass, how the horror of Gods
wrath for our rebellions brought down even the Son of God himself, and
filled him with extreme agonies and heavy passions of mind.

Sixthly, and lastly, we be here to observe the long and wearisome combat he
had also with his bloody enemies the instruments of Satan in all that
conflict: first, the manner of the apprehe^sion: They came to take him as a
thief with swords and staves. Lu. 22.52. Secondly, they hurry him being taken
from Annas to Caiphas, and from Caiphas again to Annas in the night, and that
bound as a felon. Ioh. 18.13. and 24. Thirdly, in the high Priests house they
smote him with a reed on the face, they blindfolded him, they mocked him, and
smiting him they spoke scornfully, prophecy who smote thee. Io. 18.24. Luke
22.64. and they condemned him in their Counsel, and sent him bound to the
secular power, or civil Magistrate. John. 18.28. Fourthlie, bloody Pilate
having acquitted him, yet to please the Jews he scourges him. John. 19.1.
Fifthly, to fill him with reproaches, contempt and pain, as an Usurper of the
kingdom, they platted a crown of thorns upon his head. John. 19. ver. 2. and
to the same purpose they put on him a purple garment, saluting him scornefully,
Hail King of the Jews. John. 19. ver. 3. Sixthly, Pilate again to gratify
Herod sent him to him, and he with his Soldiers despised him, and mocked him.
Luke. 23.11. Seauenthly, all this tossing and harrying to and fro was after his
precious body was scourged and sore wounded all over, and his head bruised and
rent with thorns. Eighly, and lastly, they put upon his wearied body, his
cross whereon he should be crucified under which burden he fainted. John.
19.17. Luke. 23.26. And thus the Son of God was tried by the prince of
darkness, with all kinds of extreme passions that he could invent in that
short space of time before his Cross. Thus I say Jews and Gentiles crucified
him: first, the Jews they kept him all night in Caiphas hall, and at the
break of day gathered a council, and did proceed in judgment against him
and condemned him. Mat. 27.1. and forthwith lead him bound to Pilate: and he
made as quick a dispatch as they.

Quest. 35. Proceed to speak of the next Article of the passion of Christ,
which is concerning his execution, in these words: I believe in Jesus Christ,
crucified?
Ans. All the Evangelists testify with one accord that this was the form of
his execution he was crucified on a Cross, and to fill him with pain, his
hands and feet were fastened with nails unto the cross. And all this was done
to accomplish Gods eternal decree manifested before by the Prophets. The
brazen Serpent was a picture of this. Act. 3.18. Gal. 3.1. Phil. 2.8.
Number. 21. Io. 3. for so he says himself. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that all that believe
in him perish not, but may have life everlasting. And again. Ioh. 12. And when
I shall be lift up from the earth, I will draw all unto my self: of this the
Psalmist prophesied saying, they peirced my hands and my feet.

Secondly, that we might in conscience be resolved that Christ came under the
Law and suffered the curse thereof for us, Gal. 3.13.
and bare in his own body and soul the extremity of the wrath of God for us.
And albeit other punishments were notes of Gods curse, yet was the death of the
cross in special manner above the rest accursed, by virtue of a particular
commandment, and special word pronounced by God himself, foreseeing and
fore-shewing what manner of death Christ our Lord should dye.

Thirdly, the Apostle assures us that in this form of execution we may
beehold how Christ did undertake all the malediction due unto all the elect on
himself: for he says. Gal. 3.13. that he was made a curse for us, and
again, in the like phrase. 2. Cor. 5.21. He was made sin for us. By which
manner of speaking we may not fear that any manner of reproach is offered the
son of God: for both sin and the curse following, are his but by
imputation. Though in regard of himself he was no sinner, yet as he was our
surety he became sin for us, and consequently the curse of the Law for us,
in that the curse every way due unto us, by imputation and application were
made his.

Instructions and Consolations which follow this Faith.
First, we learn here with bitterness to bewail our sins, for Christ suffered
here the whole wrath of God not for any offense that ever he committed, but
all for us: and therefore just cause have we to mourn for our own sins,
which brought our Savior to this low and base estate. If a man should be so
far in debt that he could not be freed, unless the surety should be cast
into prison for his sake, nay which is more be cruelly put to death for his
debt, it would make him at his wits end (if there were left but natural and
civil humanity in him) and his very heart would bleed. And this is the case
with us by reason of our sins, we are gods debtors, yea, bankrupts before
him, yet have we gotten a good surety even the Son of God himself, who to
recover us to our former liberty, was crucified and dyed for the discharge of
our debt. And therefore as the Prophet says, we should look upon him whom
we have peirced and lament for him. Zach. 12.10.
Look as the blood followed the nails that were stricken through the blessed
hands and feet of Christ, so should the meditation of Christ's passion be as
nails and spears to draw blood from our hands and hearts for our sins.

Secondly, if thou doubtest where to see and find Christ crucified, because the
Prophet Zachary bids thee look on him: be advertised, that he is set before
thy face as nailed and fastened on a cross wheresoever his Gospel is truly
preached in thine hearing, for so the Apostle teaches us. Gal. 3.1. Oh foolish
Galathians who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, to whom,
before, Jesus Christ was described in your sight and among you crucified? we
must seek Gods face in Christ, who is the lively form or most bright glory,
wherein we behold God himself: and we must ever seek Christ's face in the
Gospel: if we find it not there we perish everlastingly. 2. Cor. 4.3.4. we
need not go to crosses, nay, we must not go, but to the glass he has
himself appointed for us. And remember it, that till such time as we come thus
by faith and meditation of the Gospel, we lie continually as poisoned by
Satan that old Serpent and as stung to death.

Thirdly, we learn to follow Christ in the pursuit and crucifying of our
sins, for so we be thaught. Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. That is they endeavor to kill
the power of sin in themselves by repentance, prayer, fasting, meditation,
conference with the Saints and by avoiding all occasions of offense.

Fourthly, we here learn in this president, that seeing the Son of God was
not only thus racked and crucified by men, but also bare the whole wrath of
God in his soul, that therefore we must bear to make so little account of
sin as commonly we do.

Fifthly, whereas the person crucified was the very Son of God, it is manifest
that the love of God unto us in our redemption is endless like the deep sea
without bank or bottom: as it is testified. John. 3.16. and if we shall not
acknowledge this to be so our condemnation will be the greater.

Sixthly, the curse of God being here once and full borne of the son of God,
not for himself but for his elect: it stands not with Gods justice to lay
any curse on them any more: wherefore when they be afflicted, their
punishments are but temporary, and not curses but crosses, chasticements which
proceed not from anger, but from a most loving Father and so ever to be
accounted. Psalm. 103. Heb. 12.5.6.7.8.

Quest. 35. Now let me hear yet a little more of the proceedings of his
enemies against him, Jews and Gentiles, and of his passions on the Cross?
what herein we be specially to observe.
Ans. First, they stone him not, as many malefactors were executed, as Achan.
Joshua. 7. and Naboth. 1. King. 21.13. but for a greater reproach, they crucify
him, and this was the most shameful death among the Jews.

Secondly, they crucify him naked after much beating, bleeding and fainting:
and so make his green wounds again to lie open even before the Sun to his
greater grief and pain: the Son of God is crucified naked: to cover our
ignominious nakedness, he bare all the punishments due to sin: nakedness
was one. Gal. 3.7.8. and couers our spiritual nakedness, which is, when a man
has his sins lying open before the eyes of God, whereby he lies open to all
Gods judgments. Again, in that Christ suffers himself on this wise to be
stripped naked of all that he has on his back, to redeem us, we must remember
that (if God call us to any trial hereafter) we must be content in like
manner to part with all for his sake that we may possess him and follow his
example.

Thirdly, they peirced his hands and feet according to the prophecy of the
Psalmist. Iraen. li. 2. c. 42. August. lib. so. hom 3. Author libri de passione
inter opera Cypriani.
Psalm. 22.16. in those parts which are most lively and sensible, and so the
weight of his body was borne up by hands and feet fastened to the Cross: but
not in that gross manner that blind Papists have imagined: but the feet
nailed a sunder with two distinct nails as godly Ancients have delivered.

Fourthly, they gave him vinegar and gall to drinck tempered with mirth. Mat.
27.34. Some think to take away his senses and memory by intoxicating (as it
were) his brain. Thus they hastened his death not having any respect at all of
his soul, whether he dyed in peace and favor with God, yea or nay. Others
think it was to hasten his death, howsoever it was, every sinner here is to
be advertised, that it was and is he as well as the Jews tempers, or has
tempered such a cup of poison for Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, they crucified him between two thieves. Mat. 27.38. for his greater
shame, Esaias. 53.6.
whereby they testify that they esteemed him no common sinner, but the
captain of all thieves and malefactors. So think thou thy self with Paul
that thou art the greatest of all sinners. 1. Tim. 1.15.

Sixthly, they all mocked him, Jews and Gentiles, wagging their heads and
speaking spiteful words against him. Mat. 27. ver. 39.45. Thou that destroyest
the temple and buildest it up in three days save thy self. And again, He
saved others let him save himsefe. The Jews paid dearly for this mocking and
for crying: his blood be upon us and our children: for their children abide
under the heavy wrath of almighty God for it unto this day.

Seauenthly, and lastly, when the Lord Christ had made an end of all things,
and had given full satisfaction to his fathers justice, after all his wrestling
with Satan and sinners, and after many passions in soul and body: he
concludes all this wearisome fight with this prayer immediately before his
death: Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Luke. 23.46. By his example
he teaches us to recommend our spirits to the father of spirits: who can
preserve any work so well as the crafts-master? and shall not the faithful
Creator of souls do this more carefully then man? In great dangers we commit
our Jewels to our best friends: so do thou thy soul unto Jesus Christ, that
thou may say with Saint Paul. 2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have believed, and
I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that day.

Quest. 36. The passion of Christ is a mirror of all virtues, which are the
more excellent for that they be set before us not in rules and doctrines, but
in his own holy practice, name some of them in order.
Ans. The Prophet Esaias names six virtues or special graces proper to Christ,
and communicate by him in some measure to all his members. Chap. 11.2. The
spirit first, of Wisdom: secondly, of Judgment: thirdly, of Council:
fourthly, of Fortitude: fifthly, of knowledge: and sixthly, of the fear of the
Lord.

First, for Wisdom and Judgment they be two special graces: differing as I
take it in men on this manner. The former is the general comprehension or
knowledge of things: the latter is the experience of that knowledge in
particular actions, experience in other things will clear this distinction.
We see in Physic and other Arts, many by much reading to have obtained
singular knowledge so that they think with themselves, they could do great
matters, yet when they come to have the use of their knowledge in some
particular matters, they are oftentimes to seek, and their knowledge for want
of experience does soon fail them. Now for the Son of God he was full of
wisdom and spiritual understanding, and yet respecting his humanity, it is
testified of him. Luke. 2.52. that he increased in wisdom. His wisdom did
appear in the whole work of our redemption: in foreseeing and fore-shewing to
his Apostles all things which should happen and be done to him by the Jews:
Christ's wisdom and judgment in his passion.
assuring them that this was his fathers will manifested by the Prophets, his
singular judgment is to be seen in his preparation to that conflict with
Satan and sinners by meditation and prayer, in choosing so fitly the time and
place for his apprehension: and in all his most apt and fit answers to all
questions and demands made unto him.

Secondly, for Counsel: The Lord Christ was full of the spirit of Counsel:
for he was able to withstand and to answer all the counsel of hell and
Satan, of Annas and Caiphas, of Pilate and Herod against him: he was ready in
all temptations to answer all doubts which the Prince of darkness was able to
object against him: he was not doubtful, nor to seek for council in the
whole work, nor in any part of the work of our redemption. The spirit of
council did appear notably in him in all his arraignement and passion.

Thirdly, the spirit of Fortitude was in him in a most rich measure: for he
wrestled not in this action with flesh and blood, but incountered with
spiritual powers and principalities, even with all the power of hell. This is
the strong Lion of the tribe of Judah: and the seed of the woman which in his
great strength breaks the Serpents head. Genesis 3.15. he was so full of might
that with one word speaking he cast down all that came to take him, even to
the ground.

Fourthly, he was full of the spirit of Knowledge to discern all his enemies,
and to discern what was in them, for so it is testified of him. John. 18.4.
Jesus knowing all things that should come unto him. etc. He knew all their
purposes, desires, persons, places, and all their designements.

Fifthly, the Spirit of the fear of the Lord, he was also replenished with it:
as appears in all his service and obedience to his heavenly father, for he
honoreth him in all his work, and faithfully performs all that service in
all respects for the which he had sent him, ever seeking his glory. Ioh.
13.31. Now the Son of man is glorified, and God is glorified in him.

Sixthly, for humility, The humility of Christ.
he is the only pattern that ever was on earth, for this cause the Apostle
wills us to carry within us the same mind that was in Christ Jesus: that
is, the same spirit of humility: for says he: He being in the form of God
and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, yet he made himself of no
reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto
men, and was found in shape as a man: he humbled himself and became obedient
unto the death, even the death of the Cross.

The meeknes of Christ.
Seauenthly, for the Spirit of Meekness: he was full of mildness and
meekness in the whole course of his life, as himself truly testifies of
himself. Math. 11.28.29. Come unto me all ye that are weary, and laden and
I will ease you; take my yoke on you and learn of me, that I am meek and
lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. This virtue did
notably appear in his passion: for the prophecy of Esaias was accomplished in
him: He was oppressed and afflicted yet did he not open his mouth. For so we
find it testified, for when false witnesses urged him, and Caiphas, yet he
was silent, because he was willing to die, and saw there was no place to
speak either for the When to speak.
glory of God or the good of men.

Eighthly, as Saint James, commends Job for patience: so much more may the Son
of God be recommended as a mirror of patience to all the world: Christ's
patience
for he was soft in his answers, and calm in all speeches to all his most
bloody enemies, to Judas betraying him with a kiss, he said. Mat. 26.50.
friend wherefore art thou come? and to the high priests officers which smote
him. John. 18.23. If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil, but if I
have well spoken why smitest thou me? Herod thought him a fool for his silence
and patience, whereby we be taught in all unjust railings and injuries not to
give rebuke for rebuke, but either to keep silence or else to speak so much
as shall be for our just defense.

Christ's love.
Ninthly, he was full of love, mercy and compassion, in the midest of his
passions, even to his enemies: he cured Malchus ear, which Peter had cut off,
with his sword: And when they were practicing against him all treachery, even
then he performs the work of a Mediator, praying for them unto his Father,
Luke 23.34.
saying: Father forgive them for they wot not what they do: for his friends
he is most mindful of them and loving unto them even in his greatest
passions: in his apprehension, he desires his Disciples might be let go
freely. Ioh. 18.8. If ye seek me let these go their way. As for Peter after
he had renounced him with bitter execrations, he turned back, and looked
graciously on him, and quickened him again. Luke. 22.61. He showed mercy on
the thief which did hang by him on the Cross: comforting him in these words.
Verily I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in Paradise. ver. 43.
Lastly, he recommends his mother to the custody of John. John. 19.26.27. where
he teaches children to give all honor, and to perform all duties of love,
care and reverence to their parents.

Tenthly, finally, we find in Christ's passion a notable president for
perseverance: for he wades through all the Sea of his temptations, he never
flincks back, nor turns aside to rest him, till he comes to the very end of
all his wearisome raze, notwithstanding all the torments and tears he had
within and without, yet he rested not till he came to the mark he set before
him, then he cried It is finished: all my work is accomplished, and so he
departed from evil men and evil Angels unto God, and unto the spirits of
righteous men and holy Angels.

Thus then we see in his passion the practice of many most excellent virtues:
whereby he did not only gain merits to save us, but also gave special
instructions to guide and direct us in the whole course of our life.

Quest. 37. Thus far we have heard your faith concerning the passions of
Christ under Pontius Pilate: do you believe also that the Son of God dyed?
Ans. I do so believe in verity, and shall profess and confess it to my
lives end by the assistance and grace of Gods holy spirit: for that I am so
taught and commanded of God to believe: The death of Christ no fained thing.
his death was not a fiction or imaginary death but a true death indeed,
according to the prophecies which were before delivered concerning him. Esaias.
53. He was cut off from the land of the living. Dan. 9. The Messiah shall he
cut off. The types and Sacrifices of lambs daily in the temple, did foreshew
and preach the death of the Lamb of God. The accomplishment and truth of the
types and prophecies are recorded faithfully. John. 1.29. and John 19. Chapter.
Mat. 26. and 27. Chapters. Mark. 15. Luke. 23.26.

First, he dyed to satisfy the justice of God for the elect, that he might
free them from death and from the fear of death: as it is written. Heb. 2.14.
forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death, him that
had power over death, that is the Devil, and that he might deliver all them,
which for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.

Secondly, he dyed to fulfill all the promises of God from the beginning. Genesis
3.15.

Death of Christ voluntary
Thirdly, I say his death was voluntary and an accursed death: first voluntary
for so he speaks. Ioh. 10.18. No man takes my life from me, but I lay it
down of my self. Secondly, it was an accursed death: for so it is written.
Gal. 3.13. Christ was made a curse for us, and how, he shows it in the words
following, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree, as if he should avouch
in effect, that Christ's death was accursed: that is, that it contained in it
the first and second death, that is, the separation of body and soul, and a
separation of both for a time from God: for that for a time he did apprehend
and undergo the wrath of God due to man for sin, yet was he never out of Gods
favor, for in the midest of his loud cries, he calls God his God. Mat. 27.46.
he was never so oppressed of death as the damned are. Christ died the first
death only suffering the pangs of the second.
He suffered the bodily death without any corruption of body, so he suffered
the extreme pangs of the second death, but not as forsaken of God, more then
in his own apprehension and feeling.

Fourthly, the comforts and use we have of this faith: or the blessings we
reap by the death of Christ are many, and very precious, never to be
forgotten of true hearted believers.

First, this voluntary and true obedience of Christ unto death, even this
accursed death is our righteousness before God, as it is written. Romans 5. As
by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one righteous many are made righteous. In this righteousness of Christ's death
lies the chief matter of all our felicity and rejoicing, as the Apostle
speaks. Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing but in the
Cross of Christ. There is no one thing more recommended in so many and so
evident prophecies then this: So by the death of Christ I am freed from the
second death.

Secondly, by this faith in Christ crucified and dead for us: I behold to mine
exceeding comfort a divine proportion between the infinite debt of Gods elect,
and the sanctification done by the death of Christ unto Gods justice for the
same as infinite as the debt.

Thirdly, I see the inspeakable love of God to his Elect continually preached
unto me and manifested as before mine eyes. Ioh. 3.16.

Fourthly, I see that Gods divine justice is satisfied by Christ's death, in the
same nature which offended him. Genesis 3.15. Heb. 2.14. to mine exceeding great
consolacion.

Fifthly, my trembling conscience by this faith is quieted and pacified, for I
feel hereby that the pollution of my conscience is done away, because my heart
is sprinkled with the blood of Christ. Heb. 9.14. and the scorching heat of
it is delayed by this water of life, which streams unto mine heart from the
side and heart of Jesus Christ. Zac. 12.10.11. and 13. Chap. ver. 1.

Sixthly, the first death which is a part of Gods curse for sin, by the death of
Christ is turned into a blessing, and made unto me a gate to life: So that now
I may truly say, that the day of death is better unto me then the day wherein I
was borne.

Seauenthly, the death of Christ does ratify his last will and testament unto
me. Thus it pleased the father to make authentical and to seal unto me the
covenant of grace. Heb. 9.15.16.

Eighthly, by his death he has not only taken away the condemnation of sin.
Romans 8.1. for us, but also has broken the power and infection of it in us. The
act of Christ's death is past, but the virtue and power thereof endures for
ever. When we have grace to deny our selves, and to put our trust in Christ,
and by faith hold him fast in our hearts: then as Christ himself by the power
of his Godhead overcame death, hell and damnation in himself, so shall we by
the same power of his Godhead and grace dwelling in us. Ephesians. 3.20. Gal.
2.21.2. Cor. 13.5. crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof.
Gal. 5.25.26.

Ninthly, the death of Christ ought to be to all impenitent sinners, the
greatest motive to move them and turn them unto Christ, and to humble them,
because they have peirced him by their sins: This I say ought to cause them
to mourn for him (as the Prophet Zachary speaks. Chap. 12.10.) whom even
they themselves, and not the Jews have wounded. Esaias. 53. wherefore if this
move them not, their case is dangerous.

Tenthly, be ready if thou be a believer to lay down thy life for Christ,
if need so require, as he has done for thee: and to dye rather then to do
any thing, which thou know manifestly to be contrary to his will: of this
mind were all the Martyrs and faithful people of God in all ages.

Eleauenthly, furthermore special instructions, if it be doubted, what the
alter was whereon Christ offered his sacrifice because the Priests avouch it to
be the Cross: I believe rather that Christ himself was the Priest, the
Sacrifice, and the Alter: the Sacrifice as he is man: the Priest, as he is
both God and man: the Alter, as he is God, for the property of an Alter is to
sanctify the Sacrifice, as Chirst says. Mat. 23.9. Now Christ as he was God
sanctifies himself as he was man. Ioh. 17.19. for their sakes sanctify I my
self: and this he did, first, by setting apart his manhood to be a Sacrifice
unto his Father for our sins: Secondly, by giving unto this Sacrifice merit
and efficacy to be a meritorious sacrifice, wherefore the wodde cross was
not his Altar, as Papists have imagined.

Twelftly, the Prophet Haggai says, that the second temple built by Zerubbabel
was nothing in beauty unto the first which was built by Solomon: for it wanted
five things which the first Temple had: first, the appearing and presence of
God at the mercy seat between the two Cherubins: Secondly, the vrim and
thummim on the brestplate of the high Priest: Thirdly, the inspiration of the
holy Ghost upon extraordinary Prophets: Fourthly, the Arc of the covenant,
which was lost in the captivity: Fifthly, fire from heaven to burn their
Sacrifices. And yet notwithstanding all this loss, the same Prophet in the
same Chapter, the tenth verse following assures that the glory of the last
house shall be greater then the first: because the Sacrifice of Christ at his
coming should give glory and dignity to it: and for that his presence,
preaching and teaching in it, gave it more glory, then the former five special
graces and gifts of God did or could give unto the first temple.

Quest. 38. The Apostle says that Christ triumphed over his enemies on the
Cross. Col. 2.14.15. I pray you how may that appear?
Ans. Two manner of ways First, by arguments which he gave then and there of
his glorious majesty and divine excellency: Secondly, by signs of victory.
The signs of a divine majesty in him then and there, so crucified, are these
following.

First, the title set over his cross: Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews:
Pilate intending hereby to aggrauate his offense, the ouer-ruling hand of God
ruling his heart and hand, caused him to write that which Patriaches and
Prophets in all former ages had taught and prophesied of him. This was done by
the provident hand of God, for the advancement and glory of Christ. So did
Caiphas, he prophesied of him, that it was necessary that one should die for
the people. God turns Balaams cursings into blessings. When a man is most
disgraced in the world, then commonly God and his children most honor him.
And the superscription which Pilate set on the Cross was in three languages
of the best note, no doubt by Gods special providence, to publish the death of
the Son of God to all nations.

Secondly, the conversion of the thief crucified with him, is a very worthy
argument of his divine excellency: for by it he gives a notable experience
unto the world of the power of his death and virtue of his passion. He gave the
thief, as great a sinner (as it is like) as the other, a penitent and
believing heart, so that albeit his hands and feet were nailed to the cross,
yet his heart and tongue were at liberty to speak good words, Luke. 23.40.
both to ask the Lord Christ mercy, and to reprove his fellow for his sin.
The grace of God in a man is like new wine in a vessel, which must have vent,
as Elihu speaks. John. 7.38.
If the life of God be in us, it will be seen in some motions or actions or
both, for Christ's spirit in him caused him: First, to reprove and to endeavor
to reduce his fellow to grace. Secondly, to condemn, humble and cast down
himself. Thirdly, to excuse Christ, even then when all accused him, Peter
denied him, and all forsook him. Fourthly, to beg mercy and grace at Christ's
hands, infallible notes of grace and sound repentance.

Eclipse of the Sun.
Thirdly, the eclipsing and darkning of the Sun from the sixth hour to the
ninth, was a miraculous sign of his divine excellency and majesty, for this
eclipse was not an ordinary eclipse (which ever happens in the new Moon by
the interposition of the body of the Moon beetweene our sight and the Sun)
for it was at the time of the Passover, Luke. 23.44.
which always was kept at the full Moon. Thus one of the best and worthiest
creatures in the world did preach Christ, when men condemned Christ.

Mat. 27.11.
Fourthly, the rending of the veil of the Temple, was one special argument
serving to the same purpose, hereby was signified: first, that heaven, which
was shut against us for sin, is now set open: Secondly, that by Christ the
mediator we have free access to God by prayer in the name of Christ, without
any stop: Thirdly, that the Iudaical and ceremonious service was then at an
end: Fourthly, that when we forsake god and his word, God will take from us the
best signs of his presence and favor, as the Temple was to the Jews.

Fifthly, his majesty was set forth by an earthquake: An earthquake. Mat.
27.51.
for the very earth trembled, and desired (as it were) to speak and preach his
power, when men denied him, and crucified him.

Sixthly, the dead bodies of the Saints, The resurrection of the Saints.
came out of their graves to preach him, the power of his death, and of his
resurrection, because of the dead silence of men and hardness of their hearts.

The signs that Christ had the Victory and triumphed over his enemies, on the
crrsse, are these.
First, the monument of the victory is this: Col. 2 14.15.
Christ took the handwriting, or debt-bill which was against his elect, ever
testifying their sin and debt, namely the ceremonial law and curse of the
moral law, and nails them to the cross.

Secondly, on the Cross he also triumphed over his enemies (as the Apostle
speaks. Col. 2.15.) for the Devil and his Angels, death, hell and
condemnation were taken prisoners, their armor, weapons, and stings taken from
them, so as they shall never hurt his elect any more. To. 8.1.1. Cor. 13.58.

Quest. 39. Proceed to speak of the second degree of Christ's humiliation, as
namely of his burial: do you believe he was buried?
Ans. That I do for so I am taught of God, Christ's burial.
and commanded: and this Faith is exceeding comfortable. And here also the
Faith of the Church before Christ is the same with the Faith of the Church
under the Gospel, for the elder ages were taught thus to believe, according to
the prophecy. Esa. 53.9. He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich
in his death, though he had done no wickedness neither was there any deceit
in his mouth. The accomplishment for our further confirmation and settling of
our hearts in this faith we have testified by all the four Ioh. 19.38. Math.
27 59. Luke. 23.52. Mark. 15.46.
Evangelists, who record the persons, time, place and manner of his burial.

First, the persons were honorable and reverend, Joseph of Aramathea, Io. 3.2.
and 19.39.
and Nicodemus that disputed with him of regeneration, and came unto him by
night. These two secret disciples that before this persecution were little
seen in following Christ, now in the heat of the persecution, when the best
professors forsook him, the Lord gave them the spirit of fortitude to
profess him openly, and to bury him honorably.

Secondly, the manner of his burial was very honorable, for the persons before
named provided richly for it, Mat. 27.59. John. 19.40.
Joseph for his part brought clean and fine linen clothes: and Nicodemus of
Aloes and Mirrh the weight of an hundredth pounds. And the body being wrapped up
in the clothes and sweet odours they laid it in a tomb hewn out of a rock,
wherein was never man before laid. Next, they make the place sure, closing it
up with a stone to cover the mouth of it. Mar. 15.43.
Lastly, the Jews seal up the stone that none might presume to open it, and
for this they set Soldiers to watch it. And all this was done that it might
more clearly yet be manifested by his glorious resurrection from the dead,
Romans 1.3.4.
that he was the Son of God.

The use of this Faith, and what consolation and confirmation we have hereby,
is this.
First, we have by his burial a further confirmation of his death: for in
that this is sufficiently testified unto us, it is most manifest that he
certainly dyed, for that he thus far humbled himself to have his precious
body enclosed in the grave. Again, his resting for a time in the grave serves
well for the same purpose, against all enemies which will deny the truth of
his death.

Secondly, we be taught here, that like as Christ being now dead for our
sins, rested in the grave: so we also (having a mystical and admirable
communion with him by faith, and the secret working of the holy Ghost in our
hearts) we, I say, must do as he did: that is, like as he by the power of
his Godhead did overcome the grave and power of death in his own person, Romans
6.3. and 8.11.
so must we by the very same power receive grace to kill sin, and bury sin
in our selves.

Thirdly, let us never fear the power of the grave any more, nor the wrath of
God in it: for that Jesus Christ by his death and burial has taken away the
power of the grave from us, yea, has made it a bed to sleep in for his elect
unto the day of his glorious appearance.

Quest. 40. What can you say of the third and last degree of his humiliation,
do you believe he descended into hell?
Ans. I do so: albeit this Article has been Ruff in exposi. Symboli.
doubted of many, and of many Churches in their confessions pretermitted, for
it seems unto me the holy Ghost speaks to this effect. Act. 2.24.25.26. Thou will not leave my soul, or my life, or my person in the hell or in the grave,
neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

Here the greatest is, what the word which is of some translated Hell, of
others Grave, here should signify, for that it has many acceptions or
signification in Scripture. First, it signifies the grave: as. Genesis 37.35. I
shall descend to the Sheolah. so. Genesis 42.38.
grave sorrowing. Secondly, by translation or a Metaphor it signifies the
place of the damned: as Psalm. 49.14. and Number. 16.33. So they and all that they
had went down into the grave, Psalm. 49.14.
or hell. Thirdly, this word signifies also extreme sorrows: as Psalm. 18.4.
Psalm. 18.5.
The sorrows of the grave have compassed me about. 1. Sam. 2.6. Fourthly, it
is also taken for the state which is in burial and which follows the grave,
as that condition of the dead, lying now as lookd up and as it were swallowed
up of death: as Esaias. 14.11. Thy pomp is brought down to the grave; speaking
in contempt of the pride of the king of Babylon.

Now I can not believe that hell in this Article signifies the grave: for that
were but to darcken and obscure that which was clearly set down before, which
is not usual with Gods spirit, specially in so short an abstract.

Secondly, I can not understand this place of the hell of the damned.

Luke. 1.3.
First, for that the Evangelists, specially Luke (promising so exactly to write
of all points) spoke nothing of local descention to the place of the damned.

Secondly, If he descended into hell it must be in his godhead or manhood:
the Godhead can neither ascend nor descend, for it fills at all times all
places: If in his manhood he descended, it was either in soul or body: the
soul was the same day in Paradise. Luke. 23.43. the body three days and three
nights in the grave: and I can not see how in either of these parts he
descended into hell.

Thirdly, there is an analogy between the first Adam and second Adam: the
first Adam the same day he sinned was cast out of Paradise, the second Adam the
same day he made satisfaction for sin went immediately into paradise.

Fourthly, many confessions of faith in former ages mention no such local
descention of Christ, yea a great number have clean omitted it, as is
aforeshewed. I know there is great strife concerning this point: but we may
not strive for that we be brethren, but ask that wisdom of God, which has
these holy properties: James. 3.15.17.
it is pure, next peaceable, sober, tractable, full of mercy and good fruits,
without iudgeing or dissembling.

The Papists endeavor to defend the local descension with traditions, and
authority of the Church: some Protestants which hold this, defend it, or
desire to do it by Scripture: And albeit both agree touching his descent, yet
they disagree touching the end of his descension.

The Popish tradicion or unwritten verity is that there be four chambers in
hell: The first is purgatory: the second is the Limbo of the fathers before
Christ: the third is the Limbo of infants not baptized: the fourth, is the
lowest place or hell of the damned.

Now they affirm forsooth that Christ went down to the Limbo, or lake where
the Fathers were before his coming, kept as it were in a barren, dry, cold
wilderness as in a prison, for they spoke of this place, as of the porch or
entrance into hell, and they say they have Scripture for it. Psa. 107.16.18.
Zach. 9 11. Es. 38.10.


I answer: first, this popish invention is far from Scripture: for we never
read of any such place, or words tending to such a purpose: Secondly, the
Scripture never speaks but of two places one for the elect and an other for
the reprobate men and Angels: thirdly, as for Abraham's bosom it can not
signify either Purgatory or any Limbo: First, for that there was joy in
Abraham's bosom, but here (as they say) is none: Secondly, for the distance of
place was so great between it and the hell of the damned. Luke. 16. that it
can not be any Limbo, which as (they say) is so near hell, as if there were
but an hedge between them. Thirdly, we say the Fathers had the same Christ
with us. He. 13. the same faith. Heb. 11. the same Sacraments in substance. 1.
Cor. 10.1.2.3. Ergo, they had the same glory: and therefore never came to
Limbo. Lastly, it is clearly avouched that the souls departed before Christ
went to God that gave them. Eccles. 12.

The Protestants which defend a local descention, are of this judgment for
that they find some Scriptures which seem to serve well for this purpose.

The first Scripture which is most cited to this end is. 1. Pet. 3.19. Christ
was quickened in spirit, by the which spirit he went, and preached to the
Spirits which are in prison. First, for this Scripture, it is like that he
alludes here to that which is written. Genesis 6. ver. 3. My spirit shall not
always strive with man. For it was the spirit of Christ which then preached by
Noah, and the ancient Patriarchs before him, against whom those Gigantine
spirits of Cains progeny did so resist to their own perdition. I say
therefore, that the spirit of Christ which is here said to preach, was not his
soul, but his Godhead, or the holy Ghost who proceeds from the Father and
the Son. And again, this is said here, that this spirit did quicken him, or
rased him from the dead.

Now it is clear that the holy Ghost quickened Christ's dead body, uniting his
soul and body again together in his resurrection and that by his own
almighty power. Romans 1.3.4. and 8.11. Further it is here said that he went to
preach to the spirits that are in prison, whereby they understand the damned. I
answer take the words following, which were disobedient in the days of Noah.
And now see what can they make of it? But that he must go preach to a few
damned Ghosts and not to all in hell. To be short, then the meaning of this
place is this, that Christ in his eternal Godhead did preach by Noah, as by
other Patriarchs unto the souls that are now in prison, which in the days of
Noah, were men living on the earth, at which time Christ did preach unto them
and never since. The same Apostle has the like speech. 1. Ephesians. chap. 4. ver.
6. Unto this purpose was the Gospel preached unto the dead.

The second Scripture most urged for this purpose is the place before cited.
Act. 2.37. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine
holy one to see corruption. I answer, Saint Peter's drift here is plain, he
alleges this Scripture to prove the resurrection: as ver. 33. He seeing this
before spoke of the resurrection of Christ, what spoke he? namely these words
his soul was not left in hell. Now I trust no man will say there is any
resurrection of the soul. The word Soul signifies often the whole person,
Romans 13.1. 1. Cor. 15.41. Reave. 20.14. 1. Co 1.15.55.
as Leu. The Soul that sins shall dye. The word here translated Hell
signifies also as often the grave. And Peter's opposition between David's grave
and Christ's hell is to be observed: for David saw-corruption in his grave, but
Christ did not, albeit he were locked up in the grave as sure as he for three
days.

Quest. 41. I pray you pass by all other arguments and controversies
concerning this Article and let me hear your judgment and belief plainly
as you can, and what use you make of this faith?
Ans. I must then pass over their judgment also which take the word Hell, for
the extreme hellish sorrows which Christ suffered on the Cross and in the
Garden. And I will do so willingly, for I trust none of them love to be
contentious. Yet to give reason of my dislike of this acceptance: I answer
such as be brethren on this wise breefly.

First, that Christ in his death and before did suffer extreme sorrows: and
therefore the same set down clearly before, may not here be obscurely
repeted.

Secondly, that his passions before death were invisible, and inexplicable, not
terrors, but hellish torments: his bloody Luke 23.24.
sweat, his Mat. 27.47.
strong crying, his Heb. 5.7.
amazedness, are clear and most evident demonstrations.

I do therefore judge these words, he descended into hell, are best
understood in the fourth acception of the word, for by the grave, or this word
Hell, that base condition of the body lying in the grave, as it were in the
dungeon and bondage of death, is often understood, and in this state was Christ
in the grave, all which time the Devil and the Jews and death, seemed to
triumph over him, for thus the Scripture speaks as of him. Es. 53.8. He was
taken out from prison, wherefore for a time he lay as swadled in the bands of
death: so of his type Jonas cha. 2. ver. 2. In mine affliction have I called
upon the Lord, and he has heard me, from the belly of Hell have I called upon
thee, and thou have heard my voice.

And albeit Christ was exceedingly humbled on the cross, and accounted as one
forlorn and forsaken of God: yet the rage and madness of his enemies had not
been satisfied, unless he had wholly lain shut up, and bound up in the grave.
For they were not quieted, nor secure touching their victory over him, Mat.
27.62.63.
till the sepulcher was sealed and kept with a certain number of armed men.

And thus the enemies of grace labored for the cutting off of the Messiah. Dan.
9. and to triumph over him. But he was soon loosened of the sorrows of death
and these bands of hell, as Saint Peter speaks, it was impossible for this
Sampson to be long so bound up of his enemies. Act. 2.24.
And like as they seemed to triumph over the Lord and head until the
resurrection: so the same enemies, Satan, death, and the grave seem to have
swallowed up all the blessed members of Jesus Christ, and to triumph over them
in like manner, but their deliverance also comes: for which cause the Apostle
teaching us to cast the eye of our faith on the resurrection, breaks forth
into this holy exclamation. 1. Cor. 15.55. O death where is thy sting, O grave
where is thy victory. And thus the Son of God humbled himself, and made
himself as nothing. Phil. 2.7.

The Comforts and Fruits which follow this Faith, are these.
First, I am comforted by this lowest degree of Christ's humiliation on this
manner. I see nothing was left undone for the full acomplishment of the whole
work of my redemption, for the Soune of God was left, as it were, for a season
fast bound in the hands and in the bands of death.

Secondly, I must be comforted in extreme dangers, and afflictions of body
and mind when I seem to be forsaken of God: for I see the Son of God pressed
but not oppressed, cast down into the danger of death, yet not forsaken of god.

Thirdly, when the fears of death and of the grave terrify me, I must record
my former experience of Gods love in mine illumination, conversion, and
sanctification. Psalm. 23. and so overcome the fears of death, but specially to
this end must I record this humiliation of the Son of God. For his grave and
burial has merited for us, that our graves shall be for us as beds of down
to keep us in safety till the day of the resurrection and glorious appearance
of the Son of God: for I must be assured that his precious body being thus
humbled and (as it were) forsaken he shall take away all shame from the bodies
of all his members, by the merit of his burial and descention into hell.

Quest. 42. Thus far shall suffice of the degrees of Christ's humiliation, now
proceed to speak of the three degrees of his exaltation: and first let me
hear what you can say of his resurrection from the dead?

Ans. First, I know and profess with mouth, and believe in mine heart that
Jesus Christ the only beegotten Son of God, being truly dead and buried,
rose again in the same very body wherein he dyed, from death to life again.
And of this I have most pregnant proof, and clear evidence to rest my faith
upon, from the Scriptures, and testimonies of holy men and Angels.

First, the testimony of Scriptures. Thus the Apostle begins to prove the
Resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.3.4. I delivered unto you, that which I received, how
that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures, and that he was
buried, and that he arose the third day according to the Scriptures. Romans 4.25.
He dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification. 1. Cor. 15.14.
If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching in vain, and our faith is also
in vain.

The prophecies are these. Esaias. 53.8. He was taken out from the prison, and
from judgment. Psalm. 16.10. For thou will not leave my soul in the grave,
neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

The accomplishment of these prophecies are often recorded in the new
Testament, namely, in these places. Act. 2.31. David knowing before, spoke of
the Resurrection of Christ, that his soul should not be left in the grave,
neither his flesh should see corruption. Again, of the same prophecy, Paul
speaking of the Resurrection of Christ alleges it. Act. 13.35. He says also
in another place, Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption,
Howbeit, David after he had served his time, by the counsel of God, he slept,
and was laid with his Fathers, and saw corruption: but he whom God raised up
saw no corruption. The sign or type of this burial and resurrection was
Jonas: The thing signified and the accomplishment of that prophecy is expressly
recorded. Mat. 12.39.40.

Secondly, the testimony of men accepted and approved of God in the Scriptures:
first, the holy women which conuersed with him in his life, saw the sepulcher,
and testified his resurrection. Mat. 28.1. and their testimony is allowed of
God.

Secondly, Peter saw him, and testified it. Act. 2. and his testimony is
accepted for a good evidence. 1. Cor. 15.5.

Thirdly, the twelve Disciples or witnesses which he had chosen, they saw him
and testified. 1. Cor. 15.5. Ioh. 20.19.

Fourthly, the Apostle assures us that he was seen of more then five hundred
holy men at once: and their testimony is good. 1. Cor. 15.6.

Fifthly, he adds, that he saw Christ himself, 1. Cor. 15.8. and his
testimony is good.

Or thus his five appearances: the first day, first, to Mary Magdalene, Mar.
16.5.9. John. 20.11. The second appearance again to Mary Magdalene, and the
other Mary. Mat. 28.9. The third appearance to the two Disciples going to
Emaus. Luke. 23.13. The fourth appearance to Peter alone. 1. Cor. 15.5. The
fifth appearance was to all the Disciples. John. 20.19. The sixth appearance in
the forty days following: first, eight days after his Resurrection to the
Disciples in a house together. John. 20.16. Secondly, to six or seven as they
went to fishing. John. 21.1. Thirdly, to James alone. 1. Cor. 15.7. Fourthly,
to all the Disciples in the mountain where he Mar. 16.6. Ioh. 20.12.13. gave
them the Apostolical commission. Mat. 28.16. Fifthly, the fifth and last was in
the mount of Olives when he ascended Act. 1.12.

Thirdly, the testimony of Angels. The Angels also as they did preach and
testify unto men, being sent from God, his conception, his birth: so they
served, attended, and ministered unto him in his life, in his passion, in his
grave, in his Resurrection and ascension: as they also testify of all these
Articles of the faith. Mat. 28.5.6.7. The Angel of the Lord said to the women,
fear ye not: for I know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified: he is not
here: for he is risen, as he said: come see the place where the Lord was laid:
and go quickly and tell his Disciples, that he is risen from the dead: and
behold he goes before you into Galilie: there ye shall see him, lo, I have
told you.

Fourthly, the fourth testimony is the testimony of every believing heart.
Every believer feels in some measure, and desires more and more with the
Apostle. Phil. 3.10. To feel and know the virtue of his Resurrection.

In things natural a man must first have experience in seeing and feeling, and
then believe: but it is contrary in religion, a man must first believe, and
then comes experience afterward. The true believer can speak after his
experience thus: like as, though I were blind and could not see with mine eyes
the body of the Sun in the heavens, yet because I feel the heat and comfort
of the Sun, therefore I believe the Sun shines upon the earth: even so I
finding the work of the Son of God in mine heart, and in my first
resurrection, must verily beeleeue his blessed resurrection.

Quest. 43. Tell me next what was the manner of his resurrection: and lastly,
what use we have of this Article, and of this faith?
Ans. First, the Lord Jesus being truly dead and buried, rose again by his
own almighty power: as is often testified. John. 18. No man takes my life
from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down and have
power to take it again. And so his Apostles Paul and Peter assure us he
quickened himself by his own spirit. Romans 8.11. 1. Pet. 18.19. Whereby he
does approve himself comfortably unto us to be the very Son of God, as
Saint Paul notes. Romans 1.4. saying, he was declared mightily to be the Son
of God touching the spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead.

Secondly, as touching the form he rose in, or how his body was qualified. I
answer that after his resurrection his body was glorified richly, yea most
gloriously qualified with supernatural graces: his body was incorruptible, and
it was made a shining body, a resemblance whereof some of his Disciples saw in
the mount: and it was endued with agility to move as well upward as downward,
as may appear by the ascension of his body to heaven, which was not caused by
constraint, or by any violent motive, but by a property agreeing to all bodies
glorified.

Yet in the exaltation of Christ's manhood we must remember two caueats: first,
that he did never lay aside the essential properties of a true body, as
length, breadth, thickness, visibilitie, locallitie, or to be in one place at
once, and no more, but keeps all these still, because they serve for the
being of his body. Secondly, we must remember, that the gifts of glory in
Christ's body are not infinite, but finite: for his humane nature being but a
creature, and therefore finite, could not receive infinite graces, etc. Christ's
body is not omnipotent and infinite: for this is to affirm he had no humane
body, and to make the creature the creator. That it might appear unto the
Disciples he had a glorious body and was changed: he was not always in their
presence, but came often suddenly into their presence, and once the doors being
shut, the doors giving place, and being opened they knew not how: he that
thickened the water to walk on, can cause doors and rocks to give way unto his
coming without any peircing or passing through them, as Papists have imagined.

Christ had a real and true body after the resurrection.
Finally, that he had a true body, a real body, the very same wherein he
suffered, and not a feigned body (as heretics have avouched) is testified by
many arguments unto us: he showed some scars, wounds, and blemishes of his
passion, in his body now glorified, as then remaining for the confirmation of
men: and to this end he conuersed with men: he did eat and drink often in the
presence of his Apostles after his resurrection.

The use of this Article concerning Christ's resurrection, and of this Faith: is
this.
First, the resurrection of Christ is a public testimony, that he has
perfect righteousness for all such as trust in him: 2. Tim. 1.12.
for if there had remained but one of our sins either imperfectly punished in
him, or not fully satisfied by him, he could not assuredly then have risen
from the death, for where but one sin is, there must be death. Romans 6.23. as
God has decreede. Like as then the father by delivering Christ to death has
indeed condemned our sins in Christ. Romans 8.3. so by rasing him from death,
he has absolved Christ from our sins, and us in Christ. 1. Cor. 15.17. Romans
4.25. As our sins are condemned and punished in the death of Christ: so our
absolution and discharge is in his resurrection: Christ was given to death for
our sins and risen again for our justification.

Secondly, the believer is truly said to be dead to sin: or to be dead with
Christ: because the virtue of Christ's death works effectually in his heart the
death of sin: and next to be buried with Christ into his death: Romans 6.2.3.4.
because of the virtue which proceeds from Christ's burial to cause him so to
bury sin, that it never can rise up any more to be so stirring in him, as it
was before he came to Christ. And lastly, The believer truly said to be dead
with Christ, buried, and risen with him.
the believer is as truly said to be risen with Christ. Col. 3.1. because a
special virtue and grace proceeds also from Christ's resurrection to the
believing heart to quicken it unto newness of life. And this is that grace,
which the Apostle desires more and more to feel and find to abound in
himself, when he desires to know Christ better, and the virtue of his
resurrection. Phil. 3.10. Wherefore we must embrace Christ risen in the arms
of our precious faith, and so apply him unto our hearts, that we may sensibly
feel virtue to come from him, not only to crucify our old affections, but
also to stir up daily, new, holy, and heavenly affections in our hearts. Col. 3.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, etc. 1. Pet.
1.3. We are regenerate to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead. As it was in the cure of the woman which had the bloody issue,
so it is in the curing and quickening of sinners, which are full of bloody
issues, all which must be stanched and cured by a certain virtue derived from
Christ into them. Mar. 5.29.30. This is the prayer. Ephesians. 4.19.

Thirdly, the third fruit which is joined with the second is the assurance of
our perseverance in grace, and of our full victory against sin and death. For
they that are ingrafted into Christ by faith draw from him such a spiritual
life and power, Romans 6.9.10.
as they shall never loose, no not in the parting a sunder of soul and body.
Romans 8.38. John. 8.51. If any man keep my word he shall never see death.

Fourthly, the last benefit of his resurrection, is the resurrection of our
bodies. The truth is this, that good and bad shall rise again, yet there is a
great difference in the rising of the one and the other, for the Godly shall
rise by virtue of Christ's resurrection, 1. Cor. 6.14. Romans 8.11. Phil. 3.21. 1.
The. 4.14.
and that to eternal glory: but the ungodly rise by the power of Christ not as
he is a redeemer, but as he is a terrible Judge, and to execute justice on
them. Now to the faithful Christ is said to be the first fruits of them that
sleep. 1. Cor. 15.16. because as in the first fruits of corn being offered
unto God, the owner had an assurance of Gods blessing on the rest: so here by
Christ's resurrection the believers have a pledge of their own resurrection.

Quest. 44. Thus far the first degree of his exaltation: now let me hear of
the second, what do you believe his ascension into heaven?
Ans. That I do: for this is not only prophesied of in the old Testament; but
also recorded and testified in the new Testament. And therefore I know, believe
and profess this to be the most sacred truth of God, that Jesus Christ the
very Son of the living God, Act. 1.2.3.
forty days after his resurrection from the dead, did ascend up into heaven.
The prophecies in the old are these. Psalm. 68.17.18.19. The Charets of God are
twenty thousand, thousand Angels, etc. Thou art gone up on high, thou have
lead captivity captive. The complement of this, in the new Testament is. Ephesians.
4.8. where the Apostle testifies plainly, that the Psalmist spoke by the
spirit of prophecy of Christ's ascension, and of his gracious blessings powered
then, as in a solemn triumph, in anguration or coronation of a mighty prince,
upon his Church and people.

Again that David prophesied not of himself, in Ps. 110. Saint Peter
avouches speaking of the resurrection of Christ. Act. 2.34. David is not
ascended into heaven, but he says, The Lord says to my Lord, sit at my right
hand, etc. And Christ himself fore-sheweth his ascension into heaven. Ioh.
16.28. I leave the world, etc. Ioh. 14. And the holy Evangelists testify with
one accord that his words proved true, for that he did in verity ascend into
heaven in his appointed time. Mark. 16.19. So after he had spoken unto them,
he was received into heaven. Luke. 24.51. And it came to pass as he blessed
them, he departed from them, and was carried into heaven. Act. 1.9. while they
beheld he was taken up: for a cloud took him up out of their sight.

I do therefore thus understand this mystery in mind, and believe it in mine
heart, and profess it with my mouth: that the very same Christ, who according
to his divine nature was always in the heavens. John. 1.3. after he finished
the whole work of our redemption on earth, and instructed his Disciples forty
days as concerning the truth of his resurrection, so concerning the
propagation of the Church, and publication, or preaching of the Gospel, for
the building up of his mystical body on earth: after all this (I say)
accomplished, he ascended up to heaven in the presence of all his Disciples,
in that very body and soul, wherein he lived, suffered and dyed on the Cross:
and in that very body which was buried and rose again: in this body and soul,
I say Jesus Christ ascended up into heaven where he must have his residence,
or bodily presence until the time of the restoring of all things. Act. 3.21.

And by Heaven here I understand not the firmament, as. Genesis 1.1. ver. nor the
air. Heb. 12.22.23. Mat. 18.10. 1 Cor. 13.2. 2. Cor. 12.2.3. Psalm. 103.19.
Mat. 6.26. but the highest heavens where God, and his Angels, and the spirits
of the righteous have their rest. John. 14.2.3. Phil. 1.23.

Again, whereas the Evangelist Saint Luke says. Act. 1. 9. that he was taken
up, the meaning is, this was done principally by the mighty power of his
godhead, and partly by the supernatural property of a glorified body, which
is to move as well upward as downward without constraint or violence.

And thus Christ ascended into heaven really and actually, and not in
appearance only. And he went also locally by changing his place, and going
from earth to heaven, so as he is no more on earth bodily, as we are now on
earth: at is before showed.

And whereas it may be doubted, if he be so departed from us, as touching
his bodily presence, how that may be true, that he said he would be with us
unto the end of the world. Mat. 28.20?

The answer is: he said also that he would leave the world to go to the
father. John. 16.28. Wherefore he must be understood to speak by a
distinction. True it is he was before Abraham. John. 8.58. and so is he with
his Church to the worlds end according to his divine nature, in majesty,
grace, Ephesians. 4.8.
virtue, power, and effectual working of his holy spirit. John. 17.11. and
14.16.17. and 16.13. but his bodily presence is in heaven.

Secondly, if any doubt further, whether the natures be not thus severed if
where the one is, the other is not always?

I answer, no: for the divinity which cannot be comprehended, must of
necessity outreach, and yet comprehend the humanity, and thereunto be
parsonally united. It is not always true that of two things conjoined, where
the one is there must be the other also. For the Sun and his beams are both
joined together, yet they are not both in all places together. For the body of
the Sun is seated and carried only in his celestial orb in the heavens,
but his beams are here beneath on the earth. In those holy phrases then we
must remember that (as divines speak) the properties of both natures must be
distinguished in Christ for in such places, properties belonging to one nature,
are ascribed unto the other, because of the hypostaticall union of both natures
in one person.

And thus far for the sense of the words of this Article, where we see breefly
that Christ's ascension is an exaltation, or a receiving up of his humanity to
sit in the highest heavens, till the glorious day of his appearance in
judgment. Heb. 1.3.

Quest. 45. What use is there of this faith, and what comforts follow it?
Ans. First, when I do thus believe the ascension of Christ, I do believe
also all the effects thereof, and all the holy adjuncts appertaining thereunto:
namely, these two principal, which the Apostle specially mentions. Ephesians. 4.8.
and 12.1. That when he ascended up on high, he lead captivity captive. By
Captivity, understand a multitude of captives, as the Psalmist does. Psalm. 68.
ver. 19. that captives here meant, are the world, the flesh, sin, Satan, and
death it self: and whatsoever engines and confederates these had against Christ
in his humiliation, and his members all their days on earth. He so triumphed
over them all on his cross. Col. 1.12. but specially in his ascension, that
howsoever they may fear us otherwhiles, and scare us to waken us from
security, yet they shall never hurt us, for Christ has taken away their
sting. 1. Cor. 15.55. and has pinioned their hands behind them as captives,
and has set us free, if we will come unto him, when he call, us by his
Gospel. Wherefore if we refuse now his call, our state is the more damnable.
A man lies bound hand and foot in a dark dungeon, and the keeper sets open
the prison door, takes off his irons and bids him come forth: If he refuse,
and and say, he is well, may it not be said he is mad, and who will pity
him in that case. This is the state of all impenitents, and contemners of the
Gospel.

Secondly, it is said also that then he gave gifts to his Church, as Kings do
in their triumph: and his gifts were these, Apostles, and Prophets, and
Evangelists, for the first planting and founding of his Church Catholic:
Pastors and Teachers, for the propagation of the same, and for the gathering of
his Elect to the worlds end. If these were Christ's principal blessings which
Christ gave his Church in his ascension, and so richly and highly to be
accounted, as being destinate and sent for so great a work as the building of
the body of Christ, which is his Church on earth. Ephesians. 4.12. then they do not
believe rightly and truly the ascension of Christ, that so basely and vilely
esteem the sacred ministry and preaching of the Gospel of Christ, and the
administration of his Sacraments, as Atheists and Papists and all carnal
Gospellers do.

Thirdly, like as our justification is ascribed unto his resurrection, and
merit of the same: so our proceeding in grace and perseverance may truly be
attributed to his ascension to heaven and intercession there for us. Ioh. 17.
And like as he could never have risen in that body wherein he was accursed for
us, unless he had been acquitted, and justified from all our sins, so much
less could he have ascended into the highest heavens, if he had not been
pure from all our spots imputed unto him, his ascension is a clear evidence of
his righteousness. John. 16.9.10. and consequently, of our righteousness in
him and by him: for which these Articles are sweetly knit together, for the
confirmation of our faith, touching our free justification by Christ. Rom,
8.33.34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that
justifies: who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and meketh request
for us. Wherefore ever remember to reject the doctrine of Antichrist, who
teaches that Christ by his death did mirit our justification, but we once
justified do further merit our salvation. Whereas thou see here not only
the beginning, but also the continuance, yea, the accomplishment of the whole
work of our salvation, in our vocation, justification, sanctification, and
glorification is wholly and only to be ascribed to the merit of Christ.

Fourthly, we receive also by his ascension, a confirmation touching our
ascension into heaven: for in believing the one, we believe the other: for the
head and members must go together. We be not now coldly to look for heaven,
but by a lively hope to possess it: for that we possess it in our head
already. For this cause it is written. Ephesians. 2.6. That God has made us to sit
together in heavenly places in Christ. He has there a pledge for us, even our
flesh, and we again by his ascension have received from him an heavenly
pledge, even his spirit. John. 6.7. I tell you the truth it is expedient for
you, that I go away: Ephesians. 1.13.14.
for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you. 2. Cor. 1.22. He
has sealed us and given us the earnest of our spirits in our hearts.

Duties following this particular faith are these.
First, that our conversation be in heaven where Christ is. Phil. 3 10.
Our hearts, our thoughts, our words, our works, our whole conversation must
be such, as if we conuersed already with the Angels in the highest heavens.

Secondly, if we believe we be possessed of heaven in Christ: we must strive to
enter into him, with all holy contention of spirit, using the means he has
appointed, that we may come unto him with all the good speed we can. If we
be assured of this purchase made for us by his blood, we must pass through
all dangers to come unto him, and unto it, and not contend to get in our
selves, but also endeavor to bring with us all we can, specially all such as
God by near bands of love has knit unto us: as our wines and children etc.
providing as much as in us lies, that they may be with us, heirs together of
the same grace of life. 1. Pet. 3.7.

Thirdly, in all greuances of body and mind, seek to no means for ease, but
only to the comforter, and the means he has appointed and ordained in the
word. If thou beleeuest the ascension of Christ, remember this was one end of
his ascension to send down the holy Ghost to work more effectually, and
comfortably in the hearts of his Children. And therefore endeavor in and by the
word and Sacraments to be comforted by him, in all afflictions of this life.

Quest. 46. Proceed on to the third degree of his exaltation: do you believe
that he sits at the right hand of God the Father almighty? first, explain
your meaning, and prove this Article by the scripture?
Ans. I do so on this manner, first, for the sense of the words here set
down: whereas it is said that he sits at the right hand of the Father, I
say, here is a borrowed speech from Princes and Kings, who set their chief
Rulers by them, and their best friends. Mat. 20.21.22. 1. King. 2.19.
Like as therefore men do with others to whom they grant or give equal
honor, or that which is next to themselves, they are wont to place them at
their right hand, and this they do that they may testify their great honor,
and love unto them: so the Lord would have us to understand that he (who has
neither right hand, nor left hand, for he is infinite) has given unto his
Son, very God and man, such inspeakable glory and majesty, that he sits
now, as on a throne of exceeding glory in the highest heavens, executing the
offices both of his kingdom and priesthood. And whereas it is added, The
Father, God Almighty, here note the person of whom Christ, God and man
received all this advancement and glory of his kingdom, namely, his Father, to
whom he is equal, notwithstanding in respect of his person, yet inferior in
respect of one nature.

Secondly, for the undoubted truth of this Article of my faith: I find it (as
all the former) manifested to the Fathers, as. Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto
my Lord, sit thou at my right hand: that is, reign as king, and rule as chief
Lord: so the best expositor testifies. 1. Cor. 15.25. Luke 24.26. Act. 5.31.
Ephesians. 1.20. Phil. 2.9.
until I make thine enemies thy foote-stoole. The Lord swear and will not
repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. And this
prophecy is accomplished, as the Evangelists and Apostles have testified: for
Saint Mark he says. Chap. 16. 19. After the Lord had spoken unto them, he
was received into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. And the Apostle
Ephesians. 1.20. He raised him from the dead, Act. 2.3.4. 1. Tim. 3.16.
and set him at his right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principality and power.

Thus then in few words I express my meaning, and faith concerning this
Article: I say, that our Lord Jesus Christ having accomplished all his work on
earth, and having committed the word of reconciliation, for the gathering of
his Elect unto his holy ministers: he does not now from hence forth after his
ascension, execute any of his offices in infirmity, as before on earth, but in
great excellency and glory in the highest heavens. I do therefore here
believe that Christ God incarnate, beegan after his ascension, and not before
to sit at the right hand of his father, and am persuaded that Christ now
sitting in heaven, Ioh. 17. Romans 8. Ephesians. 1.
both hears my prayers, and prays also to his father for me: and I am
persuaded that his virtue, grace and power is marvelous effectual in the
hearts and consciences of all the faithful, by means of his Gospel, 1. These.
2.13.
albeit his bodily presence be as far distant from us, as his seat in heaven
is from our hearts on earth: for him has God lifted up with his right hand, to
be a Prince and a savior, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of
sins.

So thus I conclude: Christ God and man does actually reign in heaven, with
the father in glory: and that the father does and will do all things by none
other: and that none other is of power to execute this office of the head of
the catholic and universal Church of Christ on earth, but only our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Now in that Christ's placing at the right hand of the Father, argues an
inferioritie in Christ because of one nature (as is aforesaid) hence it
appears that they be deceived, who avouch that Christ glorified, has such a
transfusion of the proprieties of the Godhead into his manhood, omniscience,
and omnipresence, etc. for this is to make the creature a creator, and so Jesus
Christ should have no true humane body and soul in heaven, which were not to
glorify his humanity, but to abolish it.

And whereas the word Almighty is repeted again in this Article: it is to
signify the majesty of God the father, and so the excellency of Christ, who
is so advanced, and glorified God and man, or the man Christ Jesus, by so
mighty a majesty.

Again, here I profess that by the session of Christ at the right hand, etc.
two things must be understood: first, that this blessed person of the Son
has the same equality of majesty and glory with the Father: Secondly, by
this phrase is also understood that the humane nature of Christ is exalted to a
most high excellency of glory, even to execute judgment as he is the Son of
man. Ioh. 5.27.

And it may not be here said, as in his resurrection, that like as Christ rose
only in respect of his humane nature, so also he sits at Gods right hand in
respect of the same nature: for the session at Gods right hand, is not a
property of nature, but signifies the state of the person of Christ, resting
now in the execution of his offices, as being king, and priest, and mediator
between God and his people. See, Bucanus page 260. Sedere igitur, etc.

Quest. 47. Now proceed to the fruits which follow this faith.
Ans. The benefits which follow this exaltation and session of Christ, at the
right hand of God, are either in respect of his priesthood or of his kindome.

The believer gains these benefits by his priesthood:

First, he is now, and may be truly persuaded that as the covenant of grace
and priesthood of Christ have Heb. 8.6.
none end, so his intercession for him and for all, every believer, shall never
cease to the end of the world: for all. Romans 8.34. 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. John. 2.1.
John. 17.
Christ is risen again and sits at the right hand of God, and makes
request for us, and for every one. I have praid for thee Peter that thy faith
fail not. The manner of this is this: he appears in heaven as a public
person in our stead: He appears in the sight of God for us. Heb. 9.24. and
makes the same requests he made on earth. John. 17.

The difference between Christ's passion and intercession is this: the passion
is as a satisfaction to Gods justice for us, etc. and as it were the tempering
of a plaster, but intercession applies it to the very sore.

So then the believer is hereby sweetly comforted in heart, being persuaded
that Christ Jesus God and man (now sitting in great majesty and glory in
heaven) first, hears his prayers in heaven, and secondly, accepts and
sanctifies all his sacrifice and service, which the believer offers to the
father by his hand. Heb. 13.15. Psalm. 119.106. for all our service is
imperfect, yet for his intercession sake it is accepted as perfect.

A second consolation here arises to the believing heart: he may now with
boldness go to the throne of grace. Heb. 4.16. because we have then an high
Priest, an high Priest that sits at the Throne of the Majesty in the
heavens. Heb. 8.1. And for this cause the same Apostle in the same Epistle.
Chap. 10.19.20. bids us draw near, with a true heart, and with an undoubted
persuasion of faith. And again most sweetly. Phil 4.6. Be nothing careful,
but in all things let your requests be showed unto God in prayer.

A third consolation is this: his intercession preserues every repentant sinner
in the state of Grace: that being once justified and sanctified, they may so
continue unto the end: whom he loves once in his Christ, who stands before
him, he loves him for ever. John. 10.29. If he fall the Lord will raise him
up again.

Fourthly, a most sweet consolation is this: the intercession of Christ in
heaven casts down such beams of grace into the believers heart on earth,
that it causes another intercession of the spirit in him: or causes the
spirit of prayer to be effectual and working in him. Zach. 12.10.11. Romans
8.26. He gives us his spirit, which helps our infirmities, and makes
request for us, with sighs and grows that cannot be expressed, but he which
searches the hearts knows what is the meaning of the spirit, for he makes
request for the Saints according to the will of God. The holy Ghost makes
request by stirring every repenting heart to pray with groans and sighs, which
the mouth cannot express: and this is a special fruit of the intercession of
Christ in heaven: so that a man may soon know by the spirit of prayer in his
own heart, how Christ prays for him in heaven. A man may soon find it by
his own coldness or feruency in prayer, or by the inward groans of his heart,
when he cannot so well express his grief in words before God.

Here I renounce the opinion of Papists touching intercession as being
heretical, uncomfortable and condemned of God; First, for that the Saints
departed (who be their mediators with Angels) know not our particular wants
and griefs.

Secondly, for that he that makes this intercession must bring something of
his own of price and value unto God to procure the grant of his request.

Thirdly, it is a prerogative belonging only to Christ to make request in his
own name and for his own merits.

1. Tim. 2.5. John. 15.16. John. 16.23. Es 63.16.
Fourthly, Scriptures never mention any other, but contrarily.

Fifthly, we must pray to him in whom we believe. Romans 10.14. we believe
only in one God, etc. therefore we pray only to one God.

Furthermore as touching his kingdom we are well to consider what kingdom
he has: next what the administration of his kingdom is, and how comfortable
to the believer.

First, that he is Lord and King over all in respect of creation, as also of
preservation and providence it is manifest. Col. 1.16.17. for by him were all
things created in heaven and in earth, etc. And in him all things consist: he
is the same also much more by right of redemption. And his kingdom is eternal
and spiritual, respecting the very conscience, having that only absolute
power to command and forbid, to condemn and to absolve the soul and
conscience: This is testified. Act. 2.36. Let all Israel know for a surety,
that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus (I say) whom ye have
crucified. And to testify this his excellency: when Christ went up to sit on
his throne for the government of his Church: it is said, he gave great gifts
to his Church, far excelling the gifts of earthly princes in their
coronation: for (it is said) he gave his Church Apostles, Prophets, Pastors
and teachers: Ephe. 4.11.12. Now the end and use of these gifts and benefits
given by this great king is comfortable: for there it is said, that these were
given for the collecting of his Church and the building of it. This collection
is a separation of the precious from the vile. Ier. 15.19. and a translation of
the Elect from the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of light. 1. Pet.
2.9.10.11. Ephesians. 2.2.3. by the ministracy and dispensation of the word of
reconciliation. 2. Cor. 5.18. outwardly, and the working of the holy Luke
11.13. Act. 16.9.6. Es. 11.2.3.4.5. Act. 2.32.33.
Ghost inwardly. And this is the first part of Christ's office in his kingdom.

Secondly, Christ leads his precious people as a great general does his army,
through the wilderness of this world, into his everlasting Canaan. And this
he does also by the same means, whereby he called them: his word and
sacraments outwardly, the mighty operation of his spirit inwardly. And in this
travel he does exercise them (as in Canaan) with manifold afflictions and
temptations in this life. Psa. 23. and yet defends them against the rage of all
enemies: first, giving them in their life time strength to suffer, and to fight
against all his enemies most mightily. Phil. 1. 24. Unto you it is given for
Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.
Chap. 4.13. I am able to do all things through him which strengthens me.
Romans 8.36.37. For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then
Conquerous, through him that loved us. And in death it self he never forsakes
them. Romans 8.38. 39. but then makes an everlasting separation between them and
all their enemies. Zac. 13. Luke 16.

Quest. 48. Let me hear what you can say of the last Article concerning
Christ, which is this: From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead?
Ans. First, I say this Article follows fitly after the former for
confirmation of it: for the excellency of his kingdom shall mightily and
wonderfully appear in the execution of justice, in the great day of the
general judgment which shall be in the last day of the world.

First, to judge, or to give Judgment is the proper action and function of a
Judge, in condemning, or justifying of any man. In condemning, by pronouncing
him guilty of sin, and therefore adiudging him to some punishment for his
sin: in Justifying, by pronouncing him just, or acquiting him of sin, and
so freeing him from the punishment of sin, I say then the meaning of this
Article is this: I believe that Jesus Christ does not only now exercise his
kingly office in heaven (as is before showed) but shall also triumphantly descend
from the right hand of his father in a visible form, and corporal presence to
judge all men that shall be found at his coming alive or dead.

Now to proceed in order to speak of this great judgment, these points must
be considered: first, by what arguments it may appear that there shall be a
general judgment. Secondly, what the form and manner thereof shall be.
Thirdly, how this argument serves to comfort us, and to humble us.

First, that there shall be an universal Judgment may appear thus, against
cauellers that deny it. 2. Pet. 3.3.


First, the Scriptures are most evident for this. Psalm. 50.1. The God of Gods
has spoken, See. Mat 25.31. Luke. 8.17. John. 12.48. Iud. 14.15. Luke 21.28.
2. Tim. 4.1.7.8 Ioh. 5.22.27.
and called all the earth from the rising of the Sun to the setting of the
same: our God shall come and shall not keep silence. Heb. 9.27. It is
appointed unto men that they shall once dye, and after that comes the
Judgment.

Secondly, Christ promises his coming to Judgment by himself. Math. 25.31.
and by his Apostle. 1. Thesso. 4.16.

Thirdly, for that he has charged us to wait for his coming. Luke. 21.28.
Romans 8.23. Ephesians. 1.14.
and for the redemption of our bodies. Luke. 21.28.

Fourthly, for that the justice and mercy of God requires this, to punish the
wicked and to crown the Godly, which we see is not in this life present:
therefore there is a special day and time appointed with God for it.

Fifthly, for that the Lord has often forewarned the world of this. First, by
pronouncing the sentence of death against sin even before the fall. Genesis
2.17. Secondly, by repeating the same sentence in his Law. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Thirdly, by the evidence of conscience, citing as it were men to appear at a
time appointed before the great Judge. To. 2.15.16. Fourthly, by his judgments
particular on Sodom and Gomorah, on Egypt, on Jerusalem, and all the Jews,
and generally on the world in the deluge.

Sixthly, by signs prognosticating his coming: and these be of two sorts:
first, before his coming: secondly, in his coming. The signs before his
coming are either first, long before his coming: or secondly, not long before.

Signs of the end long before are these. The first is the preaching of the
Gospel to all the world. Mat. 24.14. And the Apostle affirms this was done
even in his time, saying. Col. 1.23. The Gospel has been preached to every
creature under heaven.

The second sign before the end is the revelation and manifestation of
Antichrist. 2. These. 2.3. Before the day of Christ, the man of sin shall be
disclosed, as he is set out in the revelation to all eyes in his colors. 14.
17. Chap. who shall cause the general departing from the faith of Christ as it
is foreshewed by the Apostle Paul in the same Scripture. 2. The. 2.3.


The third sign, the Judgments following upon the world for the contempt of
the Gospel: wars, famine, pestilence. Mat. 24.6. See that ye be not
troubled, for all these things must come to pass but the end is not yet, and
persecution. ver. 7.

The fourth sign the general corruption of manners. 2. Tim. 3. Toward the
later days shall come perilous times, wherein men shall be lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, etc. much like for security and sin to the
days of Noah. Mat. 24.37.38. great deadnes of heart: They knew nothing, for
all the preaching of Noah. Genesis 6. Luke. 17.26. Most men have seen the first
kind of messengers and forerunners before Christ, and be nothing touched with
repentance by any of them: woe unto them if they stay till the last signs come
for then (says Saint Luke) their hearts shall fail them.

The second kind of signs pognosticating his coming, more near it, or
immediately before it, are these. First, in the heaven or firmament, the Sun
shall wax dark. Mark. 13.24. that is, have as it were many Eclipses, and the
Moon shall fail of her accustomed light: and the Stars of heaven shall
fall, that is, shall be seen to fall indeed, and the powers of heaven shall
be shaken.

Secondly, in earth, trouble in all nations with perplexity of mind, and
great sorrows. Luke. 21.25.

Thirdly, in the sea and waters, hideous sounds and rorings most terrible shall
be heard. Luke 21.25.

Fourthly, in the air, there shall be terrible tempests. So that heaven and
earth shall then preach Christ to unbelievers to their great horror, for their
long contempt of the Gospel.

Fifthly, and lastly before his coming, the heavens shall pass away with a
noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works
that are therein shall be burnt up. 2. Pet. 3.10.

The third and last sign is in his very coming, and this is called by the
Evangelists the sign of the Son of man, Mat. 24.29.30.
coming in a cloud with power and great glory. Luke. 21.27. This I take it to
be, the great, glorious and lightsome beams of majesty whereby the world
shall be renewed and enlightened immediately before his personal appearance,
to supply the defect of the light of Sun and Moon, like as we see in Somer
in the dawning of the day, certain beams of the Sun appear for a good
space of time before the Sun appear in sight above our Horrison, or sensible
to our eye: so shall there be a glorious evidence of the approaching of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, unto the eyes of all men before they hear his
personal and bodily presence before them. And thus far shall suffice for the
first point that there shall be an universal Judgment.

Secondly, the form of the general judgment. There is no man can well
express the admirable form of this great Judgment, yet so far as the Lord
has reveled it, and I conceive it, I shall declare it. In the form three
things are principally to be respected: First, the preparation unto the great
session. Secondly, the proceeding in Judgment. Thirdly, the execution of the
difinitiue sentence.

First, the preparation unto Judgment.

First, before his coming, preparation shall be made by fire. Psalm. 50.3. A
fire shall devour before him (as we hear before out of Saint Peter. 2. Pet.
3.7.10.11.12.) for heaven and earth must pass through a fire: not to consume
them to nothing (for then where should Christ appear in Judgment, and sinners
must be judged on the earth, and in the place where they have sinned) but to
consume their leprosy and corruption, wherewith the sin of man has infected
heaven and earth, that so being as gold purified in fire they may shine bright,
and glorious, and may be fit to intertaine the majesty of this great king at
his glorious coming to Judgment, for as the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 7.31. It
is the figure or form, not the nature or substance of the world that passes
away. The same is testified. Romans 8.21. The creature also shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
So Act. 1. and Psalm. 102.72.28. The heavens shall wax old, etc. and shall be
changed, Reu. 21.1. Esaias. 65.17.66.22.
meaning into a better state: as other Scriptures also testify.

Secondly, then shall be the appearing of the glory of the mighty God, Tit.
2.14.
and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who shall come from the highest heavens,
accompanied with an exceeding great host of mighty Angels, and Heb. 12.22. 1.
Cor. 6.1.2.
souls of righteous men.

Thirdly, then shall be heard the sound of a trumphet, a wonderful The. 4.16.
peircing, and long continued sound, summoning all men and Angels unto
Judgment.

Fourthly, the good Angels shall gather all nations, and bring all unto the
place of Judgment, all (I say) the 2. Tim. 4.1.
living and the dead, for the very dead shall first be called out of their
graves, and they shall come clothed with their own bodies. 1. These. 4.16. And
with them shall appear all that be alive changed in a moment in the
twinkling of an eye: and corruptible bodies shall be come incorruptible,
natural shall turn spiritual, living immediately by the virtue and power of
God. And then the bodies of the Saints shall be like the glorious body of
Christ, shining as the Sun. Mat. 13.43. And the wicked shall be full of
shame and dishonor. Dan. 12.2. The evil Angels also, they are reserved for
the judgment of the great Iud. 6.
day. And then Antichrist the Son of perdition shall appear in his colors,
who shall be consumed and wasted continually by the spirit of Christ, preaching
the Gospel Th. 2.7.8.
but his final abolishing and perdition shall be at the glorious coming of
Christ.

Fifthly, after all this shall Christ be set in his throne of judgment: as the
Evangelists speak, Then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. Mat.
25.31, and this throne shall be like a flame of fire. Dan. 7.9. so that the
wicked shall desire the mountains to cover them from the sight of it.

Sixthly, this done, the Lord shall make separation between the Elect and the
reprobate: as he does here on earth in the Church make separation between the
precious and the vile, Confer. Mat. 3. and Ier. 15.
by the fame of his Gospel preached: so will he by his own immediate voice,
and ministry of his Angels, make a final separation in that day between the
one and the other. The sheep which heard his voice and testified their faith
by their innocence, like lambs they shall stand on the right hand: They which
contrarily testified their unbelief by their lasciviousness and lusts like
Goats shall be set on his left hand. Ezech. 34.18.


Seauenthly, every man's particular cause shall be tried before this Judge by
the evidence which his works shall give with him or against him. 2. Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil.

Here the better to assure us of the truth and certainty of the Lords
proceeding and of his particularizing of al things in this action, the holy
Ghost tells us that the Lord has as it were, books of record to manifest
all and every work of man: and his books be three in number. First, his book
of providence, which is the knowledge of all particular things past, present,
and to come. Psalm. 136.16. Secondly, his book of judgment, which is divided,
as it were, into two parts, first, his prescience knowing every thing far more
evidently then we know any thing recorded in a book before our eyes:
secondly, the second part of the book of judgment is the conscience of every
man standing before him, which shall then be so qualified by the great power
of God, that it shall be able to record and testify so much of all his
particulars as shall serve to testify his faith and justification by Christ,
or his most just condemnation without Christ. The third book is the book of
life, which is the eternal decree of God concerning the salvation of his elect
by Christ: whose names be so written in this book, that they (being as gods
precious pearls) can never be lost. Of this book read. Esa. 4.3. and Exodus
32.32. And of this distinction of books. Revel. 20.12. And I saw the dead both
great and small stand before God, and the books were opened: and another book
was opened which is the book of life, and the dead were judged of those things
which were written in the books, according to their works.

And after that men's works are made manifest by these books, then must they
be tried whether they be good or evil: the Gentiles and Jews that never
heard of Christ, by the Law of nature, which shall prove them inexcusable. Romans
2.12.16. The rest that have heard, shall be tried by the Law and Gospel. Romans
2.16. The word of God shall serve as a bill of indictment for the just
condemnation of all such as have contemned the Law and Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Ioh. 12.48. for the sentence of the Judge in the last day of general
judgment, shall be nothing else but a manifestation and declaration of the
sentence pronounced and published before by the ministry and preaching of the
Gospel touching the justification and condemnation of every particular person.

Eighthly, after the manifestation of all things, and that every particular
conscience sees his blessed justification by Christ or his just condemnation by
unbelief, and for his works, then the Judge shall proceed to his definitive
sentence: and this is twofold.

The first is pronounced to the Elect in these words. Mat. 25.34. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world. This sentence is full of affection and love, most sweet and most
comfortable: recommending the free grace of God, their election, their
adoption, and blessedness in Christ, and not their works, for the causes of
their salvation: and then he adds the evidence of their Faith by the works
of mercy which they have done to his members here on earth: I was hungry, The
principal works of men are those which are done to the pore members of Christ.
Gal. 6.10.
and ye gave me to eat. etc. The answer of the Saints, saying, when saw we
thee hungry, etc. argues that they were far from vain glory in their works or
seeking any justification by them: and Christ's last words to them: in as much
as you did it to the least of these my brethren, etc. gives us an infallible
argument of Gods child: which is, not to love because we are loved again, but
to love for Christ's sake, and the living members of Christ, because we see his
picture and image in them renewed, this is a special grace of God: and of this
love speaks David. Psalm. 16. 1. Ioh. 3 chap.
All my delight is in thy saints which are in the earth.

The second sentence pronounced against the reprobate is, go ye cursed into
hell fire prepared for the Devil and his angels, for I was hungry and ye gave
me no meat, etc. in which sentence are contained a heap of woes, present and
to come. For the present, what can be more woeful then to see so many
admitted into the kingdom of God, and yet themselves shut out and excluded,
yea, peradventure to see such as they have hated and disdained and refused to
give any honor unto, as when the rich man shall see Lazarus received by God
into the kingdom of heaven, whom he vouchsafed not to sit among his servants:
and that which is more to see themselves separated, haled and tugged by an
innumerable sort of oughly Devils, out of the presence not only of God, but of
their fathers, mothers, wives, husbands, children, friends, lovers, and
acquaintance, who shall de^ide and laugh at them, forgetting all bands and
obligations of nature, and rejoice at the execution of God his justice in their
condemnation, so that no eye either of God or man shall pity them, nor no
tears, prayers, suites, cries, yellings, or mournings can be heard or
prevail with him which is their Judge, nor one to mediate or speak for them
to reuerse or stay judgment, but needs without mercy, without stay, without
any farewell, they shall be presently cast down to the endless, easelesse,
and remediless torments of hell. Never was there poor wretch that was
condemned at the tribunal of mortal judgment to be compared to this estate,
for there the conclusion of the Judges sentence is, Lord have mercy upon thy
soul, but here, the Lord himself shall not only not show any token of mercy
or loving countenance, but also with a voice surpassing any thunderclap to be
heard in all heaven, earth and hell, curse them bodies and souls to the pit of
hell for evermore. And if this were all the present woe, yet were not the case
so heavy, for besides this, what guilt of conscience, what biting envy, what
horror of mind, what distraction, what murmuring against the Lord, what
cursing of themselves, their day of birth, and father and mother, what
remembrance of their former lives misspent, and to conclude, what does not the
fear of hell work upon them, surely my heart dreadeth, my mind fails to
think upon, to hear, to see, to consider their wringing of hands, their
knocking of breasts, their cries filling heaven and earth and hell, and my
tongue and pen cannot express it, but must rest with the saying, There is no
peace to the wicked says the Lord.

Quest. 49. Now proceed to the comforts which arise by the expectation of the
last judgment.
Ans. First, what can be more comfortable to good men then to consider and
remember that the Lord has appointed a day to judge the world in
righteousness. When a man looks upon the sorrows and labors of Jacob, the
enemies of David, the imprisonment and martyrdom of the Prophets, the
shameful death of Christ, and ten of his Apostles, the present glory of Turk
and Pope disgracing and diriding true religion with the ostentation of
multitude, contumacie, riches, outward and visible prosperity, and with the
persecution and effusion of the Martyrs blood; besides what clearing of the
guilty, and acquiting of malefactors and punishment of the innocent, that one
example of Christ and Barabas is most demonstratiue. Why was Joseph imprisoned,
Naboth killed, Esaias sawen asunder, Paul beheaded, Ignatius torn in pieces by
wild beasts. Bishop Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Farrar, master
Bradford, Philpot, and that most blessed, victorious and constant martyr of
Christ Richard Atkins, who suffered at Rome Anno. 1588. having first of all his
tongue cut out of his mouth, and his hands likewise cut off, was set naked from
the middle upward upon a horse and so carried to execution, two men going
beside him with burning torches scorching his sides, and being carried by the
lodging of the Duke of Parma, he looked out of his window, and cried to the
torch-bearers, burn him, burn him, put your torches to the heretics sides,
and they poor persons desiring to forbear such cruelty, he with the stumpes
of his arms enclosed the torches, and kept them fast to his sides, enduring
without note of impatiencie, the burning and bleeding of mouth, sides and arms
altogether, oh, whose hearts does not melt to think upon, much more to see such
a cruelty: surely were it not for this day of judgment, the wicked were
blessed and the Godly accursed, but there is an appointed time of Joseph his
deliverance, and the king shall send and deliver him. Then shall not Noah be
mocked, Moses be afraid of Pharao, Aaron, of the idolatrous Israelites, then
shall Naboath have his vineyard, every murdered and martyred person have his
life and fame again, every empouerished and oppressed man by wrong have his
goods restored, every ravished virgin have her reputation repaired, and every
one afflicted in body or mind, see and feel the end of all calamity, oh,
Lord when shall we come and appear before thy presence. Let the world wherein
dwells no goodness take the wings of the morning and fly away, Even so Lord
Jesus come quickly and let there be no more time.

Secondly, the person that shall be Judge, namely, Christ which was dead, and
sits on the right hand of God, against whom, and for whose sake both the
wicked rage, and the Godly endure, and therefore it is said, he shall come,
viz. in the clouds, which was enterred in the earth, the sorrows of the grave
cannot hold him, no nor the heavens when the later day comes, but he makes
his clouds his charriots, his messengers flames of fire, burning up the world,
and rides upon the wings of the wind, and comes with the voices of
Archangels trumpets, Surgite mortui omnes venite ad iudiciu^. Arise O ye dead,
and let all men come to judgment. Oh, how happy shall it be that day with
them, which have served and kissed the Son, and that can say, for thy sake
have we been killed all the day long. How shall he recompense them, that
have fed him? how shall he pay them, that by alms deeds and holy works have
lent unto him? how shall he honor them, that have honored him? how shall he
revive and comfort them, that have dyed or mourned for him, and to conclude,
how shall he not give them ten thousand times more then all their evils
amounted unto in this present world: Well, O Christ, We believe (with
Athanasius) that thou shall come to be our Judge, we therefore pray thee help
thy Servants, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood. Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly and make them to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

Quest. 50. But concerning the estate of the Elect after the last judgment,
you must show the place where they shall reign, the privileges and
prerogatives where withal they shall be endowed, and other circumstances of
necessary moment, that we may conceive the meaning of Saint Paul, when he
says, I suppose that all the afflictions of this life are not worthy the
glory that shall be revealed?
Ans. First of all, the place wherein they shall live after the later day is in
the heavens above the firmament, Sun, Moon, and Stars, and not on the
earth, as the fond Millenaries have untruly conceived, and this may appear
by many testimonies of the holy Ghost. Lu. 12.32. Fear not little flock it is
your Fathers will to give you a kingdom. Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my
Father receive the kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of the world.
John. 3.4. Except a man be borne of water and the holy Ghost he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. 1. Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has beegotten us
again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. 4.
To an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in heaven for us. John. 17.24. Father I will that those which thou have given
me, be with me even where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have
given me. By all which and many more if it were needful, it is most clear
that they which shall be saved shall rest not upon earth, for that kingdom the
Saints have already, and therefore need no further promise thereof, this also
they have among the wicked without any regeneration or new birth, but that
estate which they shall inherit after the later day cannot be attained without
a second birth. The earth was not before the worlds beginning, but the place,
kingdom, and state which the Saints shall have after judgment shall be that
wherein God was before the worlds creation, and therefore an uncreated place,
and not the earth, either that is or shall be.

The inheritance whereunto we are regenerated is immortal and laid up in the
heavens, says Saint Peter, but is the earth now covered in the heavens and
does nothing appear but a bare spectre phantasme and a shadow without any
substance? or if there be no earth nor world is there any men and beasts? such
absurdity will follow upon that doctrine, as it will grieve any man's heart to
hear them, and much more to believe them. To conclude, what glory had Christ
in earth that his Disciples have not seen? surely none; but they must see his
glory given him by his father, and therefore where Christ is, thither we must
ascend, namely, to the heavens and forsake the earth, and never look to enjoy
any benefit by the renewed frame of the earth.

Quest. 51. To what use then shall there be new heavens and a new earth
according to the Scriptures, for first of all Saint Peter says 2. Pet. 3.13.
But we look for new heavens and a new earth, according to his promise wherein
dwells righteousness. Reave. 21.1. Saint John writes saying. And I saw a new
heaven and a new earth for the first heaven, and the first earth were passed
away and there was no more sea?

Ans. By these places of holy Scripture it cannot be proved that the Saints
shall live upon earth, no more then that they shall live in heaven, for the
Apostles plainly affirm a new heaven and a new earth, and therefore we as
sufficiently prove by these texts, our glorified estate in heaven as well as
upon the earth.

Quest. 52 But why should we look for a new earth after the later day? if we
shall not dwell therein?
Ans. I answer for many causes: first, for the accomplishment of his own
promise. Esa. 66.17. For lo (says the Lord) I will create a new heaven and a
new earth, and the former shall be remembered no more. Is not the promise of God
sufficient cause for us to live and dye in expectation of the performance
thereof? Has God no other ends and uses of the new earth except men dwell in
them. Paradise wherein Adam once dwelled, and from which he and we were
expelled, was it destroyed, when men did not inhabit it? or does any man
living know unto what use the Lord appointed it? surely none, and therefore if
man might be on earth and God suffer Paradise (for his secret purposes best
known to himself) not to be inhabited, much more after the judgment when
the gates of heaven shall be open, shall not any man need once to dream of
an habitation upon earth.

man had not fallen he should never have come to heaven, but enjoyed only
this worlds felicity, whereas the only difference betwixt us now in a
degenerate estate and him in a pure estate concerning life eternal, is not in
regard of place, for he should have gone to heaven as Elias and Enoch, without
leaving behind him his mortal parts, and that without pain of death or help
of a Mediator, by his own righteousness, holiness and integrity; and now
through many afflictions, pain and death by the help of a Mediator, and
after the bodies resurrection will go to heaven and life eternal.

The second error is, that the world should have needed Psalm. 19.90. and that
there is no more cause that men shall inhabit it now after the Judgment, then
if men had never sinned, and that this purpose of God shall sustain and
repair it for to be a monument of his own work for evermore.

Quest. 53. If the Lord would have it remain as a monument of his own work,
why then does not the Sea remane, for it is expressly said. Reave. 21.1. And
there was no more Sea?
Ans. The Apostle in the Revelation declares only a vision, and therefore it
cannot be certainly expounded literally in every point, he repeteth what he
saw, and not in every part what shall be, for God has reserved some things
unto himself; but forasmuch as many visions are allegorical, especially in
the Revelation, where the Angels are Ministers, or Bishops, the Churches
Candlesticks, the Beasts Governors and persecutors, the marriage of the Lamb
the last day and final end of the churches trouble, there also the sea in many
places signifies the brittle estate and troublesome generation of this world.
And for my part I can see no cause or reason to interpret that part of Saint
John's vision literally, but rather, that in the renewed estate of the world
after the later day, there shall dwell righteousness, neither men with beasts,
or one with another shall have any contention, but all things shall succeed
according to peace, constancy and pleasure. Wherefore those words being
understood of the Elect after the resurrection, like as is afterward, the new
city, her four gates, her pauement with the twelve precious stones, her
water, her fruits, her trees, her leaves, her garments all allegorical. I
conclude, that the first division which God made of waters shall stand, both
above and beneath the firmament, and that the sea shall not work nor be
tossed with winds, nor destroy any of the creatures renewed upon the face of
the earth, but unto the Saints, they shall no more look upon sea or land.

Quest. 54. But it would be much more for the comfort of men to live again in
this world, wherein they have received many wrongs, afflictions and
oppressions, by wicked men, that they might see how god has swept out all the
ungodly out of the earth, according to the promises of God, as Psalm. 37.9.
Evil doers shall be cut off, but they that wait upon the Lord shall inherit
the land. ver. 11. The meek shall possess the earth, and have their delight
in the multitude of peace. ver. 18. The Lord knows the days of the
righteous, and their inheritance shall be perpetual. ver. 22. Such as be
blessed of God shall inherit the land. ver. 29. The righteous man shall
inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever. Now how can they be said to
inherit the land which in this world are but pilgrims, and wander to and fro;
and how can they have a multitude of peace, during the first possession of the
earth in any delights? who are adjudged in this world to war, fire, and
persecution, and how short is their dwelling for evermore? if they dwell not
here again after the later day when all the workers of iniquity shall be for
ever damned to hell. The Prophet Esaias also, speaking of a second and renewed
estate of the Church alleges such things as can never (in man's reason be
applied to this world till it be changed. As Esa. 11. ver. 6. The Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kidde. And the Calfe,
the Lion, and the fat beasts together, and the little Child shall lead them.
ver. 7. And the Cow shall feed with the Bear, their young ones shall lie
together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock ver. 8. And the
sucking child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child shall
put his hand upon the nest of the Cockatrice. ver. 9. Then none shall hurt or
destroy in the mountain of my holiness, for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover the sea. ver. 10. And in that
day the root of Ishay, which shall stand up for a sign unto the people, the
nations shall seek unto it, and his rest shall be glorious. How can this
either be expounded of another estate then of this earth after the later day;
for till the later day I am sure this never was nor never will be?

Ans. First of all, the Prophet David speaking in the forenamed Psalm of the
general estate of good and evil men, as of two particular persons, describes
by many comparisons, the different ends and issues of one and other. And I will
show you that it never entered into his head, or that he dreamed of an earthly
habitation after the later day, but under the title of the lands inheritance,
of dwelling for evermore, of possessing the earth, he meant, according to the
use of all the Prophets, the accomplishment of the Lords promises to his people
Israel, for the rooting out of the Philistines and other wicked people. For so
it pleased God to entise and draw unto him that infant-church by worldly
promises, until they grew to be more perfect by the revelation of Jesus
Christ. David. Psalm. 15.24. calls the estate of salvation an ascending and
inheriting the holy hill, for whither the soul goes after the first
dissolution, thither also shall the body ascend, but I trust that there is no
man in Christendom, so paganlike minded, that he date believe or once conceive
so much as a thought, that the souls of men wander upon the earth after their
departure out of the body, and if they do, let the Parable of the rich man and
Lazarus confute them. And surely the Prophet does prophecy of the kingdom of
Christ in this world before the later day, for immediately before in the sixth
verse, he speaks of his incarnation in the flesh and offspring of Ishai the
father of David, and of his anointing by the holy Ghost, whereby he should rule
and govern his Church; and immediately after, he prophecieth the calling of
the Jews, and their collection from the four quarters of the world, and that
they shall reign over the children of Ammon, which they shall not after the
later day, and therefore that place of Scripture cannot be applied fitly to
the state of the Elect after the later day. But is an Allegory of their peace
after there return, if so be they would cleave to the Messiah, and not be
Infidels, denying his person, and not caring for all his promises: otherwise
for their faith and full confidence in God, and for their affinity with Christ
in the flesh, they should have seen an end of all hostility in the world, so
that no more a man should strive with his brother, nor beast with beast, nor
any of them against mankind, but all should be obedient to men as to their
Lord, which was the estate of Adam in Paradise; and this place of the Prophet
Esaias does lively set out unto us the loving condition of men and beasts one
with other, before the time that the Serpent beguiled our first parents.

And to return to your first speech in your objection, that it would be more
comfortable to us to be righted in this world, and here to reign where we
have endured all misery; I answer and say, alas, what joy shall there be to a
soul which is fetched down from heaven to dwell in the earth again. Would it
have been any comfort for Jeroboam after he was king of Israel, to have gone
back again into Egypt, and reigned there like a Lord? and whether were it
better to be a king among Angels in heaven, or to be a commander and Lord
among beasts of the earth: Then I will conclude, that as Abraham would not let
Lazarus go forth of his bosom, into the world again, no not to preach
repentance to sinners, then much more shall not any of the Saints, either in
body or soul come again after the later day to have their own particular
glory upon this earth refined.

So then it being clear that we shall go immediately to heaven after the
later day, and not remain here upon earth, for which cause those which shall
be then alive, shall be taken up into the air to meet with Christ. I will
conclude, that this place, of which we never heard evil word, ought to be as
the strongest motive, to strain and strive both body and soul for the
attaining thereof. For if David had rather abide in the courts of the Lords
house, which was the temple at Jerusalem, one day then in any other place a
thousand: surely one hour in heaven shall be better then a thousand years of
pleasure and glory hear upon the earth. For the sight of Christ's glory in
infirmity, I mean, Peter and John saw him transfigured in the mount: Mat. 17.
made them to forget themselves, their wives, children, meat, drink, and
return home again; and to desire to dwell with Christ transfigured and Moses
and Elias. Much more therefore shall the sight of Christ in perfect glory, and
when we also shall appear with him in glory, engender in us ten thousand
times more joy and delight, then we can have in earth, except heaven and all
the hosts both of the Trinity, Angels, and all Saints come down from heaven
for to dwell in the earth, and therefore I firmly believe that we shall be
in heaven and not upon earth after the last judgment.

Quest. 55. Now then you have persuaded me in the place of the Sanits glory,
tell me also the conditions of that life, or so much as God has recorded in
his word, and the Divines have observed thereof according to your knowlegde?
Ans. It is certain that no man with the tongue of men and Angels is able
perfectly to describe the estate of the Elect in heaven after the resurrection:
for the Apostle witnesses, that the eye has not seen, the ear has not
heard, and it never entered into the heart of man; the joys that are ordained
and laid up for us in heaven, and yet the several names given unto it in the
word of God do express in some measure according to our capacity so much
thereof, as may abundantly serve to express and allure, or to draw unto god
any well minded man, yea, though it were through all the dangers of this
present world. For if Ruth followed her mother in law Naomi upon no promise out
of her own country only for love of her; how much more ought all men to
follow God, and forsake this world, that have so many promises, hopes,
declarations and figures of their glorified estate.

First of all, in the old Testament the happiness of them which are departed
in the favor of God, is expressed by that saying of Moses. Genesis 5.24. And
Enoch walked with God, and was no more seen; for God took him away. This
taking away of Enoch is the first expressing of the estate of blessed and saved
men, for by it is represented unto us, that their first happiness is to be
rid of all the miseries and calamities of this world, which made the Apostle to
cry out betwixt heaven and earth when he considered them. Romans 7.24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And
herein also a good man might loose himself to meditate and contemplate a
little while, of this freedom, which he cannot have in this world, although
he were an Emperor or Constantine commanding the whole world. Men are
afflicted by and in themselves, by and in others, sometimes angry, sometimes
sorry, sometimes sick, sometimes weary, sometimes hungry, sometimes cloyed
with over much care of that they possess, sometime pinched, and have not what
to solace themselves, or to put into their mouths, sometimes afraid of God, of
Angels, of men, of Devils, of apparitions, of beasts, of waters, of fire, of
earthquakes, of dearth, of war, of impiety, of irreligion, of idolatry, of
blaspheming, of murders, of wrongs, of robberies, of wastings, of
prodigalities, of rapes, of temptations, of apostacies; and therefore consider
what it is for a man to be freed from all these, as Enoch was, whom God took
away. And if a man could live, and never suffer bodily pain, yet cannot he
keep his heart from disquietnes, and extreme compassionate sorrow, yea, even
to death, to see, to hear and understand the miseries of other. Nehemiah was a
great officer in the king of Media his court, and wanted nothing, but his heart
rejoiced in favor, riches, youth, garments, love, strength, plenty,
entertainment, and all the comforts that this world could afford him, so that
in regard of his outward estate, he might well have said to his soul. O soul
take thy rest, for thou have goods enough laid up in store for many years,
and no affliction does annoy thee. But mark all this light was put out by one
dampe, and all the fire of this joy quenched with one drop of water, and all
the beauty of these comforts dazeled, and distained with one letter. For Neh.
1.2. ve. Came Hanani one of my brethren, he, and the men of Judah, and I asked
them concerning the Jews that were delivered, which were of the residue of the
captivity, and concerning Jerusalem. ver. 3. And they said unto me, the
residue that are left of the captivity there in the province, are in great
afflicton and in reproach, and the wall of Jerusalem is broken down, and the
gates thereof are burnt with fire. Here is the news: but what was all this to
Nehemiah, he was wise enough to keep him from that banquet, and therefore let
them sorrow for themselves, he wanted nothing: alas, says Saint Paul, who is
offended, and I burn not? Can the winds blow upon the waters, and the reeds
not bend? can the ship be tossed to and fro on the sea, and the mast not be
moved therewithal? can old age appear in the head and skin, and the heart
and blood have no sense of the decay of vital power? Can good men leave of
compassion toward their brethren mankind, and was not all Israel moved and
sorrowed to see one common woman cut in pieces? Iud. 19. No, no, there is a
watchtower in the nature of man, wherein stands a watchman, that at the sight
and hearing of evil, ringeth a bell in their ears, that makes their hearts
to yearne and bleed, and therefore it follows of Nehemiah. ver. 4. And when
I heard these words, I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and
fasted and prayed before the God of heaven, and this he did from Chislew to
Nisau, that is, from November to March, even four months together. Such was
the sorrow and compassion of Enoch, because the wicked world went astray from
god, and did not care for Sethes posterity, but followed Caines, and therefore
because he was innocent, God took him away, that the heart which mourned might
never mourn again. What might be said of Rahel, of the women of Israel
that saw their sons destroyed, of Moses for the golden Calfe, of Hannah, the
wife of Elkanah, of Jeremy, of Daniell, of the woman which saw her seven sons
have their hands and feet cut off, and were afterward put into a seithing
caldron to be sod to death, of Mary the mother of Christ, seeing her righteous
son suffer naked the most shameful death of the world; and of many others,
both Martyrs and holy Confessors, who have been so far touched with pity
and compassion, that inward grief has distempered them even to death. This
shall be sufficient that if thou be a Magistrate and bear upon thee the
burden of the state; if thou be a Minister, and carriest in thy breast the care
of all the Church; if thou be a Father, and fear the miscariage and ill
proof of thy children and wealth; if thou be a woman, and art combred with
the unjust and ungentle sovereignty of an ungodly husband; if thou be a
Servant oppressed with the tyranny of a cruel and unconscionable master, if
thou be a good man and fear the decay of religion, or apostacy or
idolatry; and finally, if thou be sick, lame, blind, sorry, poor, wronged,
pinched, imprisoned, reproched, slaundered, threatened or endangered of a
violent death, thy estate in heaven shall be like Enochs: The Lord shall take
thee away from all these miseries.

King. 8.27.28.29.30.31. it is called the throne and habitation of God. By
which also a good man has another occasion of excellent meditation, that he
shall but see the throne of the king of heaven and earth: and the place where
his majesty is ten thousand times more bright, then the Sun in the fairest
summer day, more glorious, then all the kings of the earth in the prime of
their honor and first entrance or coronation. Now what will a man imagine that
God has treasured up for himself in that place where his own majesty
dwells. The kings of Israel, yea all the kings of the earth keep their own
dwellings replenished withal delight, and there is not in great courts any
want of outward glory and magnificence of costly garments: of abundance of
meat and drink, of diversity of wealth and riches, of eminent gifts of wit
and science, and all other things: as Solomon said of himself, he forbore
nothing whatsoever his heart desired, but gave his soul her satisfaction. Much
more is it in the Court of the Lord of hosts, for there he has gathered
together all heavenly attire, all attendance of Angels, all applause of the
souls of just and perfect men, all sufficiency of gifts and knowledge out of
all the nations of the earth, all sovereignty to command at an instant, and to
comptroll in the farthest parts of the world, so that whatsoever is iron,
brass, silver or gold in this world, that is precious pearl in the kingdom
of heaven.

It was a most noble and excellent comfort that in the old Testament, it was
prophesied that the Lord would be the holy one in the midst of Jerusalem:
Hose. 11. and that our Savior Christ desires that we should be where he is
in the kingdom of his Father. Surely princes bring plenty to their followers,
especially great and rich Princes, and therefore the content which arises to
the servants of god in this place, must needs be infinite and unspeakable: for
as in the former they were delivered from all manner of want; so in the later
they are stored with all manner of plenty that their hearts can desire. For
first of all, when a man considers, and shall sit down and think, whither
shall I go at the later day, or at my departure out of this life, to a
wilderness, where grows nothing, no surely, the place whither I shall be
conducted is a goodly heritage, my lots are fallen to me in a pleasant land,
and therefore I think it long till I be in possession thereof, there the
rivers run with oil, and the mountains drop fatness; there the brass is
silver, the silver is gold, the gold is pearl, the pearl is precious stones,
and there is not any thing wanting to content me, therefore, seeing I shall
go to see and visit the throne and place of his abode, I will neither
remember them that I leave behind me, nor be afraid to give all that ever I
have, that my eyes may but see and look upon that splendent and unmatchable
glory that there I shall behold.

Quest. 56. But do you think that the Saints and Elect shall be in the
immediate and inseparable presence of God in another world, and that they shall
see God face to face?
Ans. We are not yet come to the sight of God, but we shall anon in his due
time and place, but now I only teach that we shall be where the Lord
dwells, and that therefore we shall want no manner of content, either for
the eye with such sights as we never saw nor can imagine, or for the ear, for
that heavenly melody where the motions of the higher powers turn all things
about, must needs procure such an harmonious song as never were heard: or for
conversation where all our company shall be Angels, Archangels,
principalities, powers, thrones and dominions, saints, martyrs, men that have
been infinitely learned in all sciences; and for the heart, that whatsoever
we shall but think upon, it shall be ministered unto us without all delay. Oh,
blessed be the people that be in such a case, whose eyes do always behold that
resplendent throne before which the Angels and Elders fall down and worship,
casting down their crowns before the throne.

Ioh: Chap. 19. I know that my redeemer lives, and that I shall see him
again, not with other but with these eyes. That is, that the saints and
servants of God, shall then no longer be kept from the sight of him whom their
soul loved, and that they shall be admitted to look upon his invisible person
and see him, even as he sees them now.

Quest. 57 But Moses might not see him, and Manoah and his wife. Iud, 12. say
that never any man saw God and lived, and that therefore it is not likely that
the saints shall ever see God, but themselves and the Angels and such like they
may easily discern.
Ans. Now in this world both Moses and Peter and Paul have vailes put upon
their faces, and they cannot see God as he is, for her^ we see darkely as in
a glass or mystery, and so it came to pass that Moses might not see God
fully, but his backer parts: although God loved him dearly, and he desired it
ardently. Yet the fight of God is an inseparable property of the world to come,
and contains in it the perfection of that joy which is treasured up in
heaven: for first of all, God is to his servants, as the mother to the
sorrowing child, as the Physician to the sick patient, as the surety and
faithful friend to the imprisoned debtour, as the well and fountain which
never cease running to the thirsty soul, as the bread of life to him that is
at the point of death, and as an immortal life that can never dye, and
therefore principale principium et initiale bonitatis initium, a principal
beginning and a wellspring of all goodness. Now consider with your self what
a comfort is it after a man has languished under a long sickness to have not
only a time of refreshing but also of full restitution, after a long
imprisonment to have an enlargement and an advancement over all his enemies,
after a long continued thirst to have that water which shall be in him a well
of life, so that he that drinks shall never need more; for a man that has
lived in long famine and has been ready with his own teeth to tear of the
flesh from his hands, arms, knees and all the parts of his body: to have not
only an end of his famine, but also a perfection of his decayed members and a
banquet to last for evermore, and that at an instant at the sight of God. How
did the Israelites stung with fiery serpents desire and long to see the brazen
serpents? How did Jacob desire to dye when once he came to see Joseph again?
how did Simeon wish for death, when he saw the Lord in the temple? how did the
women mourning about Dorcas or Tabitha after her death, and Cornelius waiting
direction of life by the admonition of an Angel rejoice when they saw Simon
Peter? And to conclude, how shall the Saints of heaven rejoice to see God of
whose fullness they have all received, in whose favor they have ever
triumphed, of whose majesty, although they have heard much, yet they never
heard the tenth part of that which they shall see, for all the wonders of the
world, and virtues, and graces, and might, and comforts, and judgments, and
helps, and honors, and performance of promises shall be visible at one
instant.

Quest. 58. By this that you have said I conceive what was the knowledge and
hope of the Fathers that lived before Christ, concerning the kingdom of
heaven, but I would also feign know the titles and descriptions of this estate
also out of the new Testament; because I suppose that every thing is therein
revealed more plainly, openly, and distinctly, seeing that as Lex est
Euangelium praenunciatum, So, Euangelium est Lex impleta and coelum
praenunciatum, that is, the Law is the foretelling of the Gospel, and the
Gospel both the fulfilling of the Law, and also the foreshewing of heaven.
Ans. Indeed you conceive aright of the Gospel, and therefore it is very
profitable to express and set down the several titles of the Elects estate
out of the same, and I will begin with that of our Savior Christ. Mat. 5.3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Where you
see that Christ styles it by the name of a kingdom.

Quest. 59. But I trust he means not that they shall be all kings, and that
there shall be no difference betwixt them, but rather, they shall have a
kingdom beetwixt them in common and every one partake of some part but none of
them of all?

Ans. His meaning is, that every one shall have a kingdom and not a part, but
the whole joys of heaven shall follow him without distribution or division,
neither shall any one of them have any thing in that kingdom private, but all
shall partake with him therein. For this cause says Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 2.9.
But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, that you should show forth the virtues of him that has called
you out of darkness into this marvelous light.

And in the beeginning of the Revelation of Saint John. Cha. 1. ver. 6. And
made us kings and priests, unto God even his father, to him be glory and
dominion for evermore, Amen. Unto these I might add more testimonies if it
were needful, but I will spare them, because I know no man conceiues
otherwise of it, but that every saved man and woman shall be a king and queen
and have all royalty in the kingdom of God: although this kingdom be the
Lords and Christ's, yet it is also the peculiar inheritance of every one of the
chosen. Then this taken for confessed, what a large meditation of eternal
happiness is herein offered to every Godly man? no less then a kingdom is thy
hope and assurance my beloved brother. So that if soueraintie and rule have any
blessedness in it* there thou shall have it, if to have a large territory and
liberty, the whole compass of heaven, which is many thousand times biggar then
the earth, shall be thy dominion. If thou would have companions to further
thy joys, and to remove from thee slavish thoughts, there they shall abound
which shall flock unto thee: for thou shall have both the true and also fained
glory of a king in a true, sensible and perfect manner.

Quest. 60. Now you have made mention of that, tell me I pray you according to
the Scriptures, your opinion how their agreement stands with the royalty of
this world?
Ans. First, you must not imagine or conceive any thing carnally, but
spiritually, and that the majesty of the world to come put upon every
righteous man's head, does far excel that which is here put upon a mortal man,
for every king is a mortal man: for it stands not in meat, drink, gold,
silver, horses, arms, soldiers, courtiers, palaces, games, and such like,
but in things more glorious then these whereof these are but shadows and
resemblances of no weight or moment. And therefore the term kindome is but a
metaphor and borrowed speech to express the majesty, liberty, authority,
pleasure, dignity, power, sufficiency, and such other prerogatives of the
elect in that place. And therefore we read that as kings are so borne and
chosen to their kingdoms, so also are the inhabitants or kings in heaven,
either borne of Christian parents, under the covenant of grace, whereby in
right of spiritual blood they have direct spiritual title to that kingdom of
glory; and also if they be not borne under the covenant, but of Turks, Jews,
Pagans and Infidels, yet in the eternal council of God they are to be drawn
beside the ordinary manner into this regiment, as David to be a king which was
the Son of a Shepeheard, and as all the kings of Polonia are at this day, and
the Emperor of Germany, and the king of the Romans by election and suffrage
of others; so also does the Lord convert them daily from Iudaisme, Paganism,
heathenisme, heresy, papisme and infidelity, to be kings in this kingdom,
so that herein they may be no let or hinderance, but that by birth and descent
being baptized, and by conversion and calling out of the lost multitude, as it
were by election, God takes into this glory daily such as pertain to
everlasting salvation.

Paul. 2. Tim. 4.7.8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
and have kept the faith: from henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give unto me at that
day, and not to me only but also to all them that love his appearing. By the
crown of righteousness he means the outward and visible ornament of the
righteous, least any man should think that the glory of heaven should rest
only in the invisible content and spiritual satisfaction of the soul and
mind, the Apostle declares plainly that there shall be an outward crown of
righteousness, that is, an outward token and badge of eminent glory upon the
heads of every one of the Elect: and that of righteousness, because many of
the kings in this world wear crowns of wrong, gotten by treason, as Zimri
did, or by policy as Darius did, or by might and force as Edward the fourth
from Henry the sixth, or by any other sinister means, so as their crowns be
crowns of falsehood, blood, treason, tyranny and usurpation. But this crown of
the Saints is a crown of righteousness, that is, every way righteous and
likely to continue, not gotten unjustly, for no man can deceive God, not
received unworthily, for they that wear it, by reason that they have been the
temples of the holy Ghost, and have followed Jesus Christ in the regeneration
of this life, undergoing martyrdomes, mortifications and many travels for the
Gospels sake: are worthily rewarded with this crown of righteousness.

Thirdly, we read and know that princes have honor that there is joy in
heaven over one sinner that conuerteth, and if at the conversion much more at
the coronation.

Fourthly, we read of kings that they have thrones and also is it with the
Saints in heaven, for they have their seats whereon they fit as Judges and
kings, judging the evil Angels, and thereupon our Savior told his Disciples
that they should sit on seats iudgeing the twelve tribes of Israel. It was
not for nothing that there were six steps ascending up to Salomons throne,
whereby he was elevated and advanced above the people: so likewise in token of
our elevation, our mansions in heaven are decyphered by those ascending steps.

Jerusalem. Apoc. 21.1. And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first
heaven and the first earth are passed away, and there was no more sea. ver. 2.
And I John saw the holy city new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven,
prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband. ve. 3. And I heard a great voice
out of heaven, saying, Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
their God with them. ver. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, neither any
more pain for the first things are passed. ver. 5. And he that sat upon the
throne said; behold I make all things new, and he said unto me, write, for
these words are faithful and true. ver. 6. And he said unto me it is done, I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give to him that is a
thirst of the well of the water of life freely. The well of the water of life
is the means and provision of immortality which is already laid up in store
for the elect, and they shall receive thereof freely like guests that are
bidden to a banquet. Therefore also is it Mat. 22. compared to a wedding feast
where all them that are bidden receive entertainment at the cost of other. In
this present world it is as much as man can compass to get things necessary
for a short life, how great then shall be the happiness where all things shall
be made ready without our cost, knowledge, labor or charges.

Sixthly, kings are not subject to any comptroll except it be of almighty God,
and such is the estate of the Saints in heaven, not only to live without
rebuke, but to commit nothing worthy blame. There was never man in this present
world but he received checks and reproves by one or other, sometimes justly,
sometimes unjustly, for this world is full of the strife of tongues. Abraham was
reproved by Abimelech, David by Nathan, Ezekiah by Isaiah, his men and army
rayled on by Rahsaketh, and therefore how happy shall it be to be in such a
state, where neither a man shall be blamed or be blameable. For in this
kingdom all our thoughts, words and works shall be so refined and directed by
the immediate presence of God, that in our selves we shall reign over our
own passions, according as it is expressed in Psalm. 45. that the Churches
children or sons shall be princes in all lands. Better is a man that
overcomes himself (says Solomon) then he that overthrows a city. And
therefore this happiness which never man could attain unto in this life, now
shall he enjoy, for he shall not strive any more against the spirit, and
shall not say. The good that I would I do not, and the evil that I would not
that do I: but have in himself a quiet resolution without all inward
reluctance and resistance to follow, believe, embrace, and work those things
which concern the only pleasure of God, and the pleasure of God shall be the
joy of himself. So that it is more to reign over himself then over all the
nations of the earth, for Nabuchadnezzar a great king, yet for lack of
government became a brute beast. David for lack of government brought a
plague upon the people. Alexander for lack of this temper and rule over
himself, after he had (as he thought) won and overcome all the world, yet
fell to deifie himself and would be called a God, and at last either was
slain or else dyed in his drunkenness. Now such was our estate in the best, I
mean in innocence, that as Adam could not contain himself, no more can nor
should any of us, and if in the case we are in, clothed with this sinful and
corruptible flesh, we were in heaven, even in heaven we should loose heaven.
But now the Lord has provided for us a more endurable estate better then
Adams, because we shall not loose our selves, and better by dying, then if
without death and change we should go to heaven; for we shall never more be
able to sin, never have a check by God, man, or Angel, never more be
sorrowful in our selves, because we are reproved by and in our own
consciences, but rest in our selves and without our selves like kings against
whom there is no rising up, want, or rebellion.

Quest. 61. I would hear yet more of other titles in the word of God, and
first of all whether the Paradise wherein our Savior Christ promised to meet
the good thief be heaven, yea or no?
Ans. Is there any man so nice, curious and impious to doubt of that point?

Quest. 62. Yes, very many, for I have heard some say that it was the place of
the fathers rest which dyed before Christ. Others that it was the first
Paradise out of which Adam was driven, and that Christ by his death recovered
again, which from Adam unto that time was never inhabited, and no earthly man
could tell where and in what place it was. Some say it was upon the earth,
others that it was in the air in the East under the Sunrising, other, that it
was heaven, and therefore I would gladly know what a godly man may think
thereof?
Ans. Surely it were endless to answer all vain inventions, which by the
hearts and mouths of men are vented for the devil. For the Fathers rest which
dyed before Christ, is a figment of men's brain, if it be the Limbus patru^ a
place neither in earth, hell or heaven, for then the promise of Christ was to
no effect, in trust whereof they all died. Their martyrs which were many as
David said. Psalm. 49. which for his sake were killed all the day long, had but
a cold pull and dough take, to shed their lives for the sake of the God of
Israel, if immediately after their death and effusion of their dearest blood,
they were not assured of their rest in heaven. Besides Christ was yesterday and
to day, and the same for ever, and this was spoken of the virtue of his
redemption, therefore either he was not the same under the Law that he is
now, or else the Fathers which dyed before his death like Simeon, went all
immediately without any delay to the joys of heaven.

Quest. 63. But what say you to them which take it to be the first paradise in
the garden of Eden?
Ans. I say they place conjectures in stead of faith, and their own opinions
in stead of true divinity. The Papists which teach this to their followers,
do hold opinion that Christ suffered in that place where Adam transgressed,
and that the wood whereof his Cross was made, was of the wood of the forbidden
tree, and many of the old Fathers were of this opinion before them. Now I
think there cannot be any reasonable man so minded, for is it likely that
Christ would equivocate and dissemble with the poor man on the Cross, and say
unto him, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise; that is, this day thou
shall be with me where I am upon the Cross. Had not this been a cold
comfort, or rather a plain delusion, if this Paradise had been where Christ
suffered. Nay, rather seeing the poor man prayed him to remember him in his
kingdom, meaning the kingdom of glory and heaven, for he could not mean any
thing else at that time: I do firmly beeleeue that the same thing which
Christ called Paradise, was no other thing then that which the good thief
called his kingdom, and so as Christ went the same day to his kingdom, he
went to the true paradise, whereof the first was but a shadow and type: for as
there is a great deal of difference betwixt the kingdom of grace and the
kingdom of glory; so is there betwixt the first paradise of Eden, and the last
paradise of heaven.

And for the ending of this matter, I will add the description of Paradise out
of Saint Bernard, in his sermon of five regions. Quinta regio est Paradisus
super coelestis, says he, and so forth in latin, in English thus. The fifth
region is the heavenly paradise. O blessed region of supernall powers, where
the blessed Trinity is beheld of the saints face to face, where those heavenly
hoasts with the highest note and strain of voice cease not to sing Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbath. That is a place of pleasure, where the righteous
drink of the river of pleasure. That is a place of brightness, where the just
shine like the Sun in the Firmament. That is a place of gladness, where
everlasting gladness is put upon their heads. That is a place of abundance,
where nothing is wanting to them that see him. That is a place of sweetness,
where the Lord of heaven is sweet to all. That is a place of peace, where his
place is all peace. That is a place of wonders, where all things are admirable.
That is a place of satietie, where we shall be satisfied, with the appearing
of his glory. That is a place of vision, where we shall see the great vision
of all. O supernall region, replenished with all manner of riches, store and
content, out of the valley of tears we long for thee, where shall be wisdom
without ignorance, memory and remembrance without forgetfulness, understanding
without error, and reason shall shine for evermore without obscurity of
darkness.

It is a region wherein the Lord shall minister to the elect, that is, shall
show himself such an one as he is. There shall the Lord be all in all, where
the universality of all things together shall give glory to the Creator, and
joy to the creature. Run therefore (O my soul) and with the eyes of thy
desires through out this region, look upon the king of eternal glory,
attended by legions of Angels, honored with flocks of Saints, he puts
down the proud, and lifts up the meek, he condemns the Devils, and
redeemeth men, say unto him: Blessed are they that dwell in thy house O Lord,
for they shall praise thee for ever and ever: and so far Saint Bernard: by
which it appears that in his days there was no question of Paradise
mentioned in the Gospel, for he clearly believed that it was heaven, which
the thief prayed for, and that which Christ promised under the name of
Paradise. And therefore if heaven be Paradise a place of pleasure, wherein God
shall walk with men without terror, as he did with Adam: and they shall be
restored to their perfection and primitive purity, and such glorious content
as the first Paradise could not afford them: then I may shut up this point with
that saying of our Savior in Saint John. Apo. 2. To him which overcomes
shall be given to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the
paradise of God.

Secondly, heaven also in the Gospel is called Abraham's bosom, wherein
Lazarus rested in happiness, while the rich man was tormented in hell. Now
herein also the nice curiosity and infidelity of men appears, for that also
they feign Abraham's bosom to be a third place, wherein the Fathers sat
looking for the revelation of Jesus Christ, without light in darkness, whose
best estate was, not to be tormented: But if a man should ask them whether it
be an allegory or not, I mean, the term of Abraham's bosom, or whether it be
a plain speech, without figure; without trope, without question, of the very
bosom of Abraham. If they say this last, that it is a plain speech, then
Abraham when he was gathered to his fathers did but delude the world, and was
not buried in his sepulcher he bought of Hemor, or else he rose again
presently, like the virgin Mary her fained assumption, and that his bosom must
be so large as may hold all the souls of the world. But why do I prosecute
that? they grant a Trope* Abraham's bosom they yield signifies the hope that
Abraham dyed in for the redemption and restitution: then belike they rest in no
place, neither in light nor darkness; but only in hope: To salve this they
fly to another allegory, and say it signifies a place wherein the old Fathers
remain after death till the death of Christ: but what phrase of holy Scripture
does warrant this? we ought not to take the bare words of interpretours in a
point of this moment, and therefore either show some phrase of the word to
establish it, or else for ever be silent to think or teach otherwise, but that
Abraham's bosom is the kingdom of heaven, and it is clear by the 11. Chapter
to the Hebrews, that all the Fathers, martyrs and godly men dead before
Christ, which subdued kingdoms, quenched the violence of the fire, stopped the
mouths of Lions, and wrought righteousness, and obtained the promises, are
ascended into glory. And touching the use of this title I will omit it, leaving
every one to the particular application of it to himself.

Thirdly and lastly, I might add unto these, the great supper, the Lambs
marriage, the time of refreshing and many other such titles; but I spare them,
and will add only this one which is Saint Paul's. Romans 6. ver. 23. The gift of
God is life eternal through Jesus Christ our Lord, so that there it is called
life eternal.

Quest. 64. I pray you open unto me that term above the residue.
Ans. Life is the thread whereupon all our estates depend, for which not only
the reasonable man labors, but also the brute beasts, yea, every man's blood,
heart, brain, liver, arteries, spirits and veins desire to retain life, for
by virtue of life we move, that is, eat, drink, ride, play, labor, run,
love, hate, desire, obtain, and do all things: and for the life we beg,
crave, spend, work, travail, endure torments, medicines, ambustions,
searings, sawings, and many other miseries. Et si vita transitus tantum
diligitur, quomodo diligeretur si permaneret. If the life that is transitory
be thus much loved, how would it be loved if it were permanent and constant.
First, therefore by life we understand a perfect life without annoyance,
wherein the soul lives not only in a corner of his castle, and light shines
out but of the window, or the Sun shows weakly, but that every sense be
absolute the eye to see, and not to be dazeled with any object, the ear to
hear, both the lowest and lowdest voice, the heart and affections to desire,
love, hate, delight, know and possess without fear, want, care, ignorance,
cumberance, or any interruption: and generally there must be wanting all that
we call the punishment of sin, for they are parts of death, and therefore
enemies to life. But the just must live in most resplendent manner. They must
not be tireable with labor, nor weak, nor heavy, nor dull, nor want any
part, but life is perfect, and therefore they must be able to leap over any
wall, to pass in at any door, to overcome any beast or adversary, and
finally, to show all the spirit and noble parts together, and not successively.
And this was it which was signified by the Lord. Reave. 21.5. He shall wipe away
all tears, every sorrow and cause of lamentation is a kind of death contrary
to the true acception of life, and envy kills the bones.

An other thing which belongs to our glorified estate is, him his folly: then
said the other, if I be so foolish to endeavor to empty all the water out of
the sea into these three pits or holes, how much more foolish art thou, to
undertake a demonstration of the infinite majesty of God, which is greater
then the sea, higher then the heavens, broader then from East to West, and
every way insearchable. So indeed it is sufficient that we shall be filled
with the knowledge of God, so much as we are capeable of, and are able to
receive, for a barrel cannot contain a tonne, nor an ell cannot reach a mile.
The Prophets widow had all the vessels she brough filled with oil, and so
shall we be filled with the knowledge of him in his kingdom, for this
knowledge. John. 17.3. is life eternal, when there shall be no language, but
we shall be able to interpret it, no reason or riddle but we shall be able
to open and unfold it, no question or objection but to answer it, no article
of religion, but to believe and embrace it, no dark saying in the holy word of
God, but we shall understand it, and nothing strange in nature or any
natural thing, but we shall discuss and declare it, like as Iotham could his
own riddle. Lord how do we labor and travail even in the greatest matters
of the world without certain knowledge, especially of God, we grope at noone
days, and with all our candels and lanthornes we cannot see him but in a
glass, but then shall we know his love, his mercy, his justice, his wisdom,
his strength, his wrath, his riches, his honor and his saving health.

Quest. 65. But as we shall know God so perfectly, whom we never saw in
perfection, so I would gladly know whether we shall know one another in the
next life and take acquaintance to our mutual joy as here friends do which
meet after long absence?
Ans. I think there need not be any question of this matter, but rather we
should labor to know the means of coming to heaven, then trouble our heads
about the glory and joys we shall receive there, what a vain thing is it for
a merchant to boast what things he will do at Jerusalem when he comes
thither, and in the mean time, has neither ship nor money, nor knowledge of
the way, nor any necessary provision to carry him to Jerusalem: so it fares
with them that make these questions, whom they shall know, whether their old
friends and acquaintance? what talk and conference of worldly passed matters?
O fools first of all learn how to come thither, and be assured of the right
way, then shall thou not need to care for any other matter. I will never
trouble my self about two things, first, about the fashion, color and
brokennesse of my carkeise in the grave, without skin, without form, without
life: secondly, about the friends and acquaintance I shall have in heaven till
I come there: But to satisfy this question least any part of heavenly glory
should be omitted, which may be gathered out of the word of God, therefore I
say that we shall know one another more inwardly, more outwardly, more truly,
and more comfortably then ever we did in the world, and that I will manifest
four ways.

First, we shall know God, as has been proved, and the David to say
speaking of his child. 2. Sam. 13. I shall go to him, and he shall not come
to me, whereby he meant his own death, and ascending into heaven, vvhither
his little infant was gone before.

Peter, Saint John, and Saint James, did know Moses and Elias at the
transfiguration of Christ, which were dead at the least six hundred years
before their time, and if the just men which rose again at the death and
resurrection of Christ and appeared to many in the holy city after their
resurrection were known to their friends and acquaintance, then I conclude
that we shall know one another, confer one with another, and also them whom
we never knew in this world, and not by face only, or in progress of time
one after another, but also by name and suddenly, so as we shall be able to
say, this was David, this was Saint Peter, this was holy Abraham, this the
widow of Sareptha, this the good son of Jeroboam, this my father, this my
son, this my wife, this my pastor and occasioner of my salvation. And
therefore if this delight thee, good Christian reader, then I beseech thee lay
hold on thy salvation, and that if thou recover in thy next life thy lost fame,
goods, health, members, dignity and quietness, do not think that thou shall
loose thy acquaintance for ever and ever, or that heavens joys do not stand in
society and mutual conference and comforts one with another.

Dives and Lazarus, the rich man in torments is said to know Abraham and
Lazarus, and Abraham to know him in hell fire. Now then if the damned know
those that are saved, and if Abraham knew him that was damned, being a Jew and
of his own posterity, borne long after his death, (because he calls him
son) then I know that the glorified shall know more, and that they shall see
the wicked plagued before their eyes, to the increase of their joy, for it is a
true saying, Et memoria culpa, and visio infernalis damnarum poenae ad
laetitiam facient, that is, both the remembrance of their own sin, and the
sight of the hellish punishment inflicted upon the damned shall help forward
their pleasures.

Fourthly and lastly, the end of salvation is the perfection of all the joy
that ever entered into the heart of man, and an For that, says the Apostle,
which never entered into the heart of man has God prepared for the Elect: but
this affection is common in the hearts of men, to desire the sight, knowledge
and conference with their friends, yea, every man prays at his departure from
his acquaintance, farewell, and if we meet not on earth, God send us to meet
in heaven, which by a long continued tradition from the father to the son, by
an ancient and true persuasion of their heavenly conjunction, amity and
familiarity, to be renewed and continued for evermore, at the renewing and
resurrection of the flesh. And indeed this word Life vvhereupon we entreat,
does justify so much without enforcement, for is it not true that life is
maintained by friends, familiarity and acquaintance, not only by increasing
our new friends, but by keeping our old, and therefore heaven cannot want this
happiness, but that therein, the mother shall know the infant, and child of
her womb, and the scholar his master which brought him to heaven. Oh,
therefore sit down with thy self whosoever thou be that hear or read
this, and remember all thy friends that be dead and with the Lord, yea, all the
innumerable troops of just and perfect men, compare them with those that now
thou have living, and compare also their inequall estates, and thou shall
find, them above innumerable, these a few, those glorified, these humbled,
those able to prevail with God, these scarce able to get the favor of men,
those passed through the worlds dangers, miseries and enormities without
perishing, these sailing in the midst of perils, and therefore ready to be
ouerturned, and in hazard of destruction, and in a word, those despising all
earthly kingdoms, because they are enriched with greater matters, these
carking and caring, moyling and laboring, for a little corner in this life.
Therefore have thee, have thee to be prepared for that society, the Lord
tarrieth thy provision and amendment, the end of thy race is set and
appointed, so soon as thou have finished thy labor thou shall come to thy
iourneyes end, and therefore desire to be loosed and to be with Christ and all
his members.

Augustine writing upon the 37. Psalm, says thus, Quae erunt autem, o amator
dei delitiae tuae, O lover of God what shall be thy delights when all shall be
delighted in the multitude of peace, thy gold shall be peace, thy silver shall
be peace, thy inheritance shall be peace, thy life shall be peace, thy God
shall be peace, and whatsoever thou desire shall be peace. Here in this
world, thy gold cannot be silver, thy silver cannot be bread, thy bread
cannot be wine, and thy light cannot be thy meat, but there the Lord shall
be all unto thee, thou shall eat him that thou may not hunger, thou shall
drink him, that thou may not thirst, thou shall be illightened by him,
that thou may not be blind, thou shall be sustained by him, that thou
may not faint, he shall possess the wholly which is all in all. Thou shall
not there feel any misery, because with him through thy love thou shall
possess all. Thou shall have all and he shall have all, because thou and he
shall be one. Thus far Saint Austen.

Another property of this life is the change of bodies and Phil. 4.23. our
bodies shall be like his glorious body, and what is the fashion of his body you
may read: Reu. 14. his head and hairs white as wool or snow, and his eyes
were as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass, etc. It shall be
incorruptible and never change, immortal, and never dye, spiritual and live
of it self without corporeal helps, nothing shall rise against the soul of
a man, no fraitly, no want, no hunger, thirst, or cold, no heat, weariness or
indigence, no contention and brawling, no not that trouble arising in every one
in the kingdom of grace, Sollicita cautela and vitandi inimici and diligendi,
both of avoiding and loving his enemy. Of this estate a learned father
discourses in this manner. When this mortal has put on immortality there
shall be no opposition by diabolical policy, no evil or condemned heresy,
no impiety of infidels, but in those tabernacles of the righteous, shall be
nothing but rejoicing and exultation, because they are made the citizens of
that city which is supernall, eternal, and free, which is not covered with
darkness, shadowed with night, wasted with continuance and age, nor yet has
any need of the glittering light of the Sun, there shall not the Moon shine,
the Stars show, no candle lighted, no lamp burning: for the divine light
shall lighten it, the Sun of righteousness and the true light shall shine
upon it, the inaccessible and incomprehensible light, which is not enclosed in
any place, nor ended in any time, shines upon that heavenly Jerusalem the
mother of us all, which with her children the sons of light, the sons of the
day, the sons by adoption, the sons of God, shall be glorified in the same
for ever and ever.

Fifthly, and lastly, they shall be in heaven not only in unspeakable joy, but
also serving God in that life, for there is no to do his fathers will was his
meat. that is, the staff of his life and his joy. Now the Saints in heaven
shall both joy and do nothing but praise him, for all their time shall be a
Saboth appropriated to serve him, and sing his praises for evermore. Esaias.
66.23. and indeed this must sink deep into our hearts, in this life, not
only for our instruction what we shall do in another world, but also to
stir us up in this life to serve God, because therein we join with the
Saints in heaven, and the Church in earth is pertaker with the triumphant
glorified souls in the kingdom of Majesty, and for this cause in our daily
prayers we pray. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

But to return to the joy, our joy shall be there all of the Creator, and
not of the creature, none shall take it away, for we shall be out of danger
of loosing our happiness, and therefore better then the Angels now; but joy
taken any where else and compared to this, is but sorrow, sweetness, but pain
and bitterness, comeliness, but black and ougly filthiness, and delights but
troablesome noysomnesse. Of which estate Saint Ciprian in his sermon of
mortality, makes this meditation. We account Paradise our country, and we
have already gotten the Patriarchs to be our Parents; oh why do we not
run and make have home into our country, and salute our parents, there
expects us a great number of dear friends, of parents, brethren, sons,
sisters, mothers, and acquaintance. I say a great number expects us which are
already secured of their own glory, and are careful for ours, Oh, to come
into their sight and mutually to embrace them, how great shall be their and
our glory both together, what shall be the pleasure of those celestial
kingdoms where the fear of death cease, and we assured to live eternally,
what is that highest and perpetual felicity? there are crowned the Godly
fellowship of the Apostles, the great number of Prophets, the innumerable
troops of Martyrs. There do virgins triumph, which by the vigor of the
spirit have gotten victory of all concupiscence and lived in chastity, there
shall they see the merciful rewarded, who wrought righteousness by their
feeding, clothing and cherishing the poor, although for the obeying of Christ
they have forsaken their own patrimony.

And to conclude with the words of Saint Austen, we can more easily tell what
is not in heaven, then what is, for we are not able to tell how great a good
God is, and yet we are not permitted to hold our peace, and therefore we
cannot tell, and yet for joy we cannot hold our peace, then whether we speak
or say nothing we shall rejoice exceedingly. This is their reward to see God,
to live with God, to live of God, to be of God, to be in God, to be for God,
which is the cheifest good. And where as is the cheifest good, there shall be
the cheifest felicity, cheifest pleasure, true liberty, perfect charity,
eternal security, secure eternity: there is the true rejoicing, all
knowledge, all beauty, and all blessedness; there is peace, piety,
goodness, light, virtue, honesty, sweetness, concord, rest, praise, glory,
and life eternal: concerning which, pray gentle Reader, that Christ would say
to thee and me. Come ye blessed of my Father receive the kingdom, thy Masters
joy, prepared for you before the worlds beginning.

Quest. 66. But you have rehearsed out of Saint Paul, that this life is
eternal and the gift of God. How can it be the gift of God seeing it is the
reward of righteousness?
Ans. Indeed as it is the full promise of God it is a gift, but as it is the
hire and recompense of a good life it is a reward, and every way it comes
from the free and voluntary gift of God, for if it came any other way, woe were
it to us, which are able to do so little for so great a crown, we cannot buy
it, we cannot steal it, as Jacob did his fathers blessing: but it must be
given us, not from or by man, but by the Lord, which gives plentifully, and
casts no man in the teeth. And this is a comfort where withal I will end
this discourse, for by it I conceive that the kingdom of heaven shall be
bestowed equally, both upon poor and rich, for it is a gift, and no man can
challenge more in that gift then an other, none can be nearer then other.
Every place of the earth, stands in equal distance from heaven, and every
man and woman are alike capeable of eternal life, the wise and foolish virgins
stood in the same way and place to expect the same bridegroom. Therefore
seeing all must be bound to God for these benefits, let us not judge any that
in our opinion seem to be far from grace, for the Lords gifts and graces are
without repentance, and he that is able to call them, to graffe them, and to
win them, will cloth their naked souls with comfort. His desire is to bind
men unto him for it, and therefore let not any man despair of their salvation,
nor envy them if the Lord call them to heaven at the last gasp as he did the
good thief upon the Cross.

FINIS.

