OBSERVATIO^^ CONCERNING THE PRESENT AFFAIRS.

OF HOLLAND AND THE UNITED PROVINCES, Made by an English Gentleman there lately
resident, and since written by himself from Paris, to his friend in ENGLAND.

Printed Anno M.DC.^^^

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE TO HIS FRIEND.
WORTHY, and well-beloved Friend, you shall please to understand, that at my late
being at the Hage in Holland, I received your leter, wherein you desire me to
describe unto you the Country; and condition of the people, as also to know my
opinion of their cause and quarrel against the King of Spain, about which
they have so long troubled the world: Moreover how I find the^ in their
thankefulnes unto our State, for so long sticking unto them, and ayding them:
And what those differences are which are lately risen up among them about
matters of Religion.

This letter of yours I had no time to answer from thence, neither would the
answering it there have been convenient; I therefore deserred the answer,
until my coming into France, to which journey I was resolved before the
receipt of your letter; because (to deal truly with you) I could not any
longer endure to hear the lavish and vile speeches, which a sort of base
unbridled people daily disgorged against the Majesty of our King, whereof in
the ensuing discourse somewhat more shall be spoken. And indeed this intolerable
demeanor of theirs toward the Majesty of so great and so bountiful a Prince,
and to whom they are so much beholding, has given me good cause as well to
look into the justness of their wars against the King of Spain, as into
their in gratitude unto the King and State of England, and thereby to become the
more able to give you satisfaction to the demands in your letter.

I must notwithstanding confess, that since my aryuall here in Paris, I have
for some while deferred it: for as on the one side I had a great desire
thereunto, so on the other side, I found in my self a kind of unwillingness to
begin it; which unwillingness I protest unto you, proceeded of a conceived fear
to offend you, when in delivering you the very true and plain truth of
things as they are, you might find me altered in mind and judgment from what I
was when I was co^uersant with you in England. But considering that the true
duty of a friend is, with his friend to deal unfeignedly, I have now at last
undertaken the task so to do. And in such regard must entreat you, to excuse
me, and not to let my ignorance of the time when I co^uersed with you be put in
opposition against the better knowledge which experience of ryper years has
yielded me; for you must think that by travailing abroad in other Countries,
and conuersing with men of understanding of diverse nations, who in these parts
are accustomed to frenesse of speech; by reading the judicious writings of such
credible Authors, as have noted down the actions of State of this time; as
also by the obseruatio^s which myself have made, I have seen as it were a mist
wip^d away from before mine eyes, and thereby am come to discern that, which
truth and reason has made manifest unto me, as I make no doubt you also will
become to do, when with impartial patience you will have pleased to read, what
here for your satisfaction I have written; that thereby we may agree as well in
mind and judgment, as we do in ancient amity. And thus leaving you to God, in
all kind affection I take of you my leave.

You know the hand.
From Paris the 20. of March, after this style and computation.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
A Brief description o^ the Country, and People of Holland; with a true
relation of the beginning of their rebellion against their ^lawfu^l Sovereign
Lord, King Philip the second of Spain. Chap. I.

How dishonora^le it was, for Queen Elizabeth of England, to take the
Hollanders parts against the King of Spayn: how she oppressed and impouerished
her subjects for their sakes, and endangered her own Crown and Kingdom.
Chap. II.

Whether England has received any benefit by defending the quarrel of the
Hollanders; or whether the Hollanders have endeavored to deserve the
friendship they have received from thence, or have any way showed themselves
grateful for it. Chap. III.

Whether England can expect any benefit by continuing to take the Hollanders
parts; and whether the Hollanders do deserve the same, by wishing, or desiring
the continuance of the State and Government of England as now it stands.
Cha. IIII.

Of the present state of the Hollanders; and of the division among them about
matters of Religion: and whether respect of Religion may urge England still to
assist them. Chap. V.

CHAP. I. A brief description of the Country and People of Holland; with a
t^u^ Relation of the beginning of their rebellion, against their lawful
Sovereign Lord, King Philip the second of Spain.
HOLLAND at the creation of the world was no Land at all, and therefore not at
the first intended by God or nature for a dwelling place of men, for it was
then and long after a sea, and consequently the habitation of fishes. Had it
been meant for a habitatio^ of men, it had not only been such high ground, that
it should not have been continually subject to the inundation of the ^ea, but
also have been able to have yielded the inhabitants bread to eat, and wood,
or stone to build witha^l; and the four elements would not have conspired
together to be there all naught, and by being naught unto men, to show their
disl^ke of vsu^pers that deprive fishes of their due dwelling places.

Being then at the first wholly sea, by reason of the fla^s and shallows
thereof, ^t was partly by ban^kes raised of (...) and earth, through the labor
of m^n, and partly by sandy down^s o^ (...) driven together by the r^ge of the
waves, encroached upon and gotten from the sea, by the old Ancest^urs of the
now Inhabitants. The Co^n^rey then except these ban^kes and do^^nes, lies all
as low and leuel as water has made it. In it are neither mountains nor
fountaynes, nor has nature affoarded them within the earth the meanest of the
seven mettalles, or any mineral matter at al. But what shall I speak of their
want of mines in the earth, when they have want of earth it self; and yet
notwithstanding their want thereof, are faigne to make use of that little they
have for their fuel, and so begin to burn up their Country before the day of
Judgment.

Grass they have, and that is all the greatest good that their ground can
affoard them, and heerof butter and cheese are the witnesses: but for this one
benefit, they want many which other Countries have that have this as well as
they. To say the truth, I do not know any benefits peculiar to themselves
whereof they may boast, except only two: the one is their having of a Country
which is the fittest for rebellion in all Christendom; and the other is, that
by reason of the great lowness of their dwelling, they are the nearest
neighbors to the Devil, of any nation living upon earth.

For other singularities among the people, I have noted, that they are
generally so bred up to the Bible, that almost every Cob^er is a Dut^h Doctor
of divinity, and by inward illumination of spirit vnderstadeth the Scripture as
well as they that wrote it. Yet fall those inward illumination^ so different,
that so mety mes seven religions are found together in one family; the man of
the house being of one religion, the wife of another, and the children and
servants of others: but many more may there be in one house if the family be
greater, by reason of the great store of religions that are there daily
increasing and current; for there were not more different languages at the
tower of Bah^l, then there are different beliefs in Holland; upon which
plurality of Sects a friend of mine made this Epigramme: The first confusion
that the World besell,
Was in the many speeches variation,
When men had sought, ^igh unto Heaven to dwell,
By making on a Tower their habitation.
But to the Worlds astonishment and griese,
A new confusion now is fallen again,
Consisting not in language, but belief,
And far exceeding seauenty sorts and twain:
Which make their choice in this low Land to dwell,
Where they are nearest neighbors unto hell.
Those of Holland and the ad^acent parts rerme themselves of the United
Provinces; but never people in this world lived in a more disunited unity; so
great a confusion has this freedom brought amongst them of every Idiots
babbling out of the Bible.

Hell is nothing so odious unto this people, as is the Spanish Inquisitio^,
albeit they live in more danger of hell then of it. The reason why they so much
hate it, is because it hates the Babel of their belief But notwithstanding
their professed freedom of al Religions, they can find means without using
the name of ^n Inquisition, to depresse two Religions, to wit, the Oldest, and
the Newest, that is to say, the Catholic Religion, and the Arminian Religion:
these they let not to puni^h in body and in goods, with imprisonment also, and
banishment.

They had rather hear blasphemy uttered against God, then any word of the
abridging of any their privileges, which they conserve so inuiolably, that
they have quite broken the best, and abused all the others: so as the reason
why they stand so much upon them, appears to be, because they would have no
body to be the breakers of them, but The high powersull Lords the States
themselves.

The words of Sovereign authority Sic volo, sic iubeo, are in tolerable in
their ears, for their taking place before right and reason, as Langenes
tells us, in his book of Mappes printed at Amsterdam 1599.

It seems they much affect the Storke, because, as they say, she seeks not
to live in any Country that is governed by a King, and therefore when she coms
into Europe, she holds her residence most in Switzerland, and Holland.

The regiment of a Beast with seven heads pleases them best, because it is a
monster that ryseth out of the sea, and because possibility gives hope that
any Beer-brewer, or Basket-maker by vulgar commendation of his friends, may at
one time or other be raised to the dignity of one of The powerful Lords the
States.

One great prerogative I must confess this people to have, which they do not
brag of, and this is, that when at the day of Judgment the wicked shall say
unto the Mountains fall upon us, and unto the hills cover us; those that be
wicked in Holland because they have no hills, shall but need to cut their
banks through, and the sea of it self will straight ways over whelme them. I
am verily persuaded, that if this people had been the rebels of any other King
or Prince in the world then of the King of Spain, he would as well have made
the sea to have helped him to revenge his quarrel upon them, as they have made
it to assist them in their rebellion against him: and that this by the sea
might be brought to pass is apparent enough, and the sea it self gave proof
thereof, when not forty years before this their great rebellion, it drowned
four hundred and four of their villages. Nor would themselves omit to do the
same, if they might thereby have the like advantage against the King of Spain:
for in sundry places both of Flanders and Brabant, they have long since begone
some practice of it, to the disadvantage of the said King, and the detriment of
such of his subjects as lived under him in their due obedience.

But now to be no longer tedious unto you in this Country and peoples
description, I will come unto the beginning and original cause of their
rebellion. Yo^ shall therefore understand, that King Philippe the second
before-named, departed out of these Netherlands toward Spain in the year of
our Lord 1559. then being in full possession of all the seauenteene Provinces,
to wit, of the seven now united in rebelon, whereof Holl^nd is the chief, and
the ten others. The Sovereignty of all which Provinces, he received as true and
sole heir successively from his Father the Emperor ^harle the fifth, who in
like manner had them successively from his Father, to whom they likewise were
descended from his Ancestors.

At his departure, he left all these Countries in peace and plenty, having no
civil broils amongst themselves, nor wars with other Nations. Their
religion was the same whereunto above eight hundred years before they were
brought, when first they were converted from Paganism to Christianity: to the
maintenance of which Religion, as also of the Ecclesiastical state in all her
rig^ts and privileges, the said King was sworn, as to one of the chiefest of
all other privileges.

He left for supreme Gouernesse under him in these Provinces the Lady Margaret
Duchess of Parma his natural sister by the Fathers side: but neither left he
any Spanish Lifetenant Governor of any of these Provinces under her, nor had
he any army or troops of Spanish soldiers in all the Country, but left each
particular government to the Nobility of the Country it self, with other
benefits bestowed upon every of them. And besides the sundry benefits both in
titles of honor, and in riches which the aforesaid Emperor Charles had
bestowed upon William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange; this King Philip his son,
not diminishing but much augmenting them, left him also Lifetenant Governor of
some of these Provinces.

Thus departed the said king Philip into Spain, without giving the least cause
of coffeehouse to any of the Nobility or people of these Countries, leaving
them all in obligation of love and loyalty, and in more flourishing estate the^
ever they were before. But as prodigal servants are wont to bear themselves
in the absence of their masters, so some of this foresaid Nobility bearing
themselves far above the limits of their means, became greatly behind hand,
and indebted, and thereupon attendant for some one or other remedy (now in the
absence of their Sovereign Lord) which might keep their estates from declyning
wholly to ruin. And amongst these, there lurcked in the heart of the aforsaid
William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, as well a desire of revenge, as of remedy
for the underpropping of his decayed estate. This desire of revenge was not for
any wrongs or injuries done or suffered to be done unto him by the king of
Spain, but a revenge forsooth, because the greedy appetit of his insatiable
ambition was not fully satisfied. For knowing that the King of Spain after he
had received possession of these Netherland Provinces, must needs return
again into Spain, and leave some general Governor thereof behind him, he
labored by what means he might both by himself and such of the Nobility as
were of his faction, that this authority might be given unto the Lady
Christierna Duchess of Lorayne, and daughter unto the sister of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, who was married unto Chri^^iernus the third, King of
Denmarcke; and this Duchess had a daughter called the Lady Dorothy, and with
this Lady the aforesaid Prince of Orange meant to have married, that by this
means after the death of the Duchess Christierna he might have come to have
been Supreme governor of the whole low Countries. But by reason of the
Duchess of Parma her being preferred unto this dignity, and his designment
broken, he out of conceived revenge went and married with a daughter of
Mauritius Duke of Saxony being in religion a Lutheran; and with her returned
again into the Netherlandes, retayning still in his heart the mali^e which he
had conceived, and the expectation of some occasion of further reueng, with
reparation of his decayed estate.

Now is it to be noted, that albeit Martin Luther the New-Religio^-maker of
Germany, dyed not past three years before king Philip departed out of these
Netherlandes, yet were there already, by means of him and his disciples six
several religions risen up in these Countries, to wit, The religion which
Luther himself had first begune, The religion of the Anabapstists, The
religion of the Caluinists, The religion of the Loyistes, The religion of the
family of love, and the religion of the Georgists: of which six, for your more
satisfaction I will here give you (though briefly) some particular relation.

Martin Luther when he had made his revolt from the Catholic Roman Church,
fynding that there were some things taught, and observed in the same Church,
that were thereto descended by ancient tradition, and also deduced from the
scriptures, though not expressly therein mentioned, thought with himself that
the only way for him to draw many disciples after him, was, to proclayme in all
his sermons and writings, that we ought not to believe or do nay thing
concerning faith and religion, but that which was expressly commanded and set
down in the written Word of God. By this deuyce in the beginning he found
great applause, especially among the vulgar sort, into whose hands he had
thrust Bibles and Testaments translated by himself into Dutche, to the best
advantage of his doctrine. But it was not long after that some of these his
disciples grew so subtle, as to examine his doctrine by his own rule, and to
see if all that he had taught them were expressly to be found in the written
Word of God. In which examination, they found that the Christening of young
children was not there to be found; and thereupon esteeming the baptism of
children to be of no force, they revolted from him and rebaptized themselves,
and so began the sect of the Anabaptists.

After these, Andrew Carolostadius, one of the first and greatest disciples of
Luther, who with him allowed the baptism of children, although not expressed
in Scripture, began to dissent from (...) in opinion of the real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, albeit expressed in Scripture; which opinion being
embraced by Zuinglius and others, and afterward p^^lished by John Calvin, left
unto his followers the name of Caluinists.

The Loyists took their name of one Lo^, by occupation a Slater, and a
townseman of Antwerp, who was so confident in his right understanding of
Scripture by inward illumination from heaven, that being furnished of money by
certain rich Merchantes of that city whom he had brought to be of his Sect,
travailed to Wittemberge to dispute with Luther, and to convert him to his
religion: but Luther finding him so to interpret the Scripture as to deny the
resurrection of the dead, to hold that the souls of the good are immortal and
do go to God, and that the souls of the evil do consume away and come to
nothing, and consequently that there is neither Devil, nor Hell, except the
hell of this world, and the Men-diuels in it; Luther offered rather to dispute
with him with fistes, then with Scripture: whereupon Loy finding such harsh
entertaynment returned to Antwerp again, and left Luther unconverted. But
having in Antwerp seduced and brought many to be of his opinion, after he had
recanted his doctrine and fallen to it again, he was finally burnt.

The family of Love began by one Henry Nicholas a Mercer, or Seller of Silks,
also of Antwerp, who held among other things, that man ought to be Deifyed in
God, and God ho^^^fyed in man; and that men may have their heaven first here in
this world by living in that deifyed love they ought to do, and hereafter in
Heaven also.

The last of these six was the sect of David George a Glass painter of Delft
in Holland. This monster secretly taught his disciples, that in himself was
infused the soul of the true Messiah and Savior of the World, that he was
more then Elias, more then S. John Baptist, yea more then Christ.

These six sects beginning now to grow and spread themselves in sundry parts of
the Country, though some increased more then some, the Georgistes keeping
themselves more secret then any of the others; there was now no remedy for the
preservation of the subjects from so great confusion in religion, as also from
the daily increase of more Sects, and the great inconveniences justly feared
thereby to arise, then by putting in practice the Placarts or Ordinances of the
Emperor, being no other then consonant unto the ancient laws of all other
Countries in Christendom, as also for the preservation of the Oath which the
Emperor, and his Son the King of Spain had take in this Country, for
maintenance of the ancient established Religion and Clergy.

These laws then being now begun to be put in execution, and diverse of those
that were of these Sects put to death, but of none more then of that of the
Anabaptists; certain of the decayed Nobility aforesaid, of which faction
William of Nassaw was the chief, seeing that all this made for them, and that
something must needs come of it, whereby they might fall to fishing in a
troubled water, sought by all means to get themselves beloved of all these
Sects, that in the end they might benefit themselves by that which most
prevailed. Whereupon in the Month of April in the year of our Lord 1566. in
the Town of Bruxells they exhibited unto the L^. Margaret aforsaid a
supplication, wherein they required a repeal or moderation of all rigorous
Placartes, or Laws made concerning Religion.

Let now any man of reason or judgment consider of the lawfullnes of this
demand, and whether themselves that demanded it, could with good conscience
move the same, the very moving of the demand it self plainly arguing little
respect or conscience in the demaunders, and declaring plainly, that the thing
they sought was for their own ends; and that taking part at the last with
that Sect which came to domimere above the rest, as in the end one must needs
do, they might stick thereunto, and so by flat and open rebellion make up
their mouths by the overthrow of the ancient Clergy that was in possession of
good (...) and huinges, to which all these new Sects did bear equal hatred,
albeit each or them did nevertheless hate one another.

This request being as is aforesaid presented unto the Lady Margaret in the
month of April, she promised them to send it into Spain, and to require from
thence, resolution and answer t^ereof. The request she sent, but the answer
they attended not, but gave f^^thwith such heart and encouragment unto the
Sectaryes, that within few weeks after the request was sent away, they began to
preach publicly in sundry Towns and Cittyes, upon a self assumed authority,
even in despite of all Laws and Magistrates; and thereupon fell to robbing and
spoiling of Churches throughout all the Country.

Upon this the King of Spain as a Prince most careful of his Oath, and of the
good of his subjects, was enforced to send into these Netherlands the Duke of
Alua, to take upon him the general government, which in so troublesome a world
was too great a charge to be menaged by a woman.

This Duke ariuing in these parts in the month of August, in the year 1^67.
which was the year following; the Lady Margaret resigned unto him the
government, and departed out of the Country. The Duke now being placed in the
government, began to learn out, and inform himself what persons they were
that had conspired together in this business, and had given the onset and
countenance unto these rebellious Sectaryes, and Sacrilegious Church-robbers;
and finding the Earls of Egmont and Horn, and some other Gentlemen to be
culpable of this crime, they were apprehended, and beheaded in Bruxels But
William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, the chiefest Ring leader of this sedition,
so soon as he heard of the ariuall of the Duke, got him away into Germany, and
by his flight declared himself to be guilty, as by experience afterward it
proved.

Here now it is to be considered, whether in the sight and judgment of the
whole World, the King of Spain had not all right and reason on his side, to
use such means as he did for the punishment of such capital offenders, and to
employ the subjects of one Country, for the chastisement of the Rebels of
another, when he had no other remedy. And whether any King or Prince living in
the world, could in honor, or justice wink at, and put up such great and
capital crimes and insolencyes committed by his subjects, as is a general and
public sacrilegious Church-robbery, and the spoiling of the Clergy, for the
preservation of whose privileges he had so solemnly taken his oath, and to
suffer the dooers quietly to pass unpunished, and to let every man openly
profess and follow such new and never heard of doctrine, as his own fancy
should invent, or of his own choice he should best like; which even those
themselves that are at this day the successors of these first rebels in some
of these Netherlands, do find so inconvenient, for government, that
notwithstanding their first profession, that every man ought to have his free
exercise or Religion according to his own conscience, they do prohibit to
such, as they like not.

The Duke of Alua having caused justice to be executed, first upon some of the
principal conspiratours, and after upon other inferior offenders, did at last
in the year of our Lord 1570. by order from the King of Spain, cause a
general pardon to be proclaimed, whereof if William of Nassaw Prince of O^ange
and his adherents had taken the offered benefit, all further troubles had
ceased: but to the contrary they labored, both by secret seditious preachers,
as by other such like agents to spread abroad that the King of Spain had
broken the Country privileges; as though the Country had had privileges that
churches might forsooth be robbed, and no man called in question for it, and
that every man might profess what religion he listed, were it never so naught,
or new, the prohibiting whereof and the conservation of Ecclesiastical
privileges, to which the King was sworn, being the only cause, as to all the
world was apparent, why the said King was constrained to send the Duke of Alua,
and Spaniardes into the Country, which else had never been thought of. So as
the true blame which the King of Spain has deserved, is not for breach of
privileges, but for seeking to restore privileges which his disobedient
subjects had broken; the which if he had not done, then might he have been
thought negligent and careless of his Oath: but this, the equity of his
conscience would never permit.

I am not ignorant that some fools have made other fools believe, that the
King of Spain at his departure out of these Netherlands, did promise every
seven year to return thither again, and that the breach of his promise gave
cause sufficient for these his subjects to rebel. This foolish allegation
deserneth no answer. Yet least some wiser people might be abused by fools, I
^ill leave them to consider, that there was no cause why his Majesty should
bind himself to any such condition, his predecessors before him having been
free, and the Country coming unto him by right of succession, as it did to
them: Experience having also showed the inclination of the people to rebellion,
being grown proud by reason of their Wealth, and newfangled also by reason of
the choice of Religions; in so much that the Duke of Alua saw it necessary to
maintain certain garrisons of soldiers in castles and convenient fortifyed
frontier places in the Country; which he made known unto the King of Spain,
and sent unto him for provision of money, because he found the said King
unwilling to have his subjects of this Country burdened with any more
taxations thereabout. But what success hereof ensued, shall appear in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. II. How dishonorable it was, for Queen Elizabeth of England, to take
the Holla^ders parts, against the King of Spayn: How she oppressed, and
impouerished her subjects for their sakes; and endangered her own Crown and
Kingdom.
BEFORE I begin to speak of Queen Elizabeth of England her assisting the
rebelled subjects of Holland against the King of Spain, it is not impertinent
to the purpose, to call to mind whether there were any cause of emnity given
unto her by means of any wrongs or iniuryes offered her by the King of Spain,
in former time, in regard whereof she might now take the opportunity of revenge.

This King Philip the second of Spain having been married in England to Queen
Mary, was never known to have been disaffected to the Lady Elizabeth, for so
was she then called; but contrary wise did show himself to be the greatest
friend ^he had in the world: which hee^e in brief to declare, you must nore,
that this Lady E^izabeth, being then a subject unto her said sister Queen Mary,
chanced to fall into sundry troubles, for which she was imprisoned in the
Tower of ^on^on, and retained in durance at Woodsto^k* and other places. M. Fox
the Author of the English Protestant Martyrologe, writing of this Ladies
inprisonment, declares not any cause why; but because he puts her in his
history of others that suffered for protestant religion he intends to have his
reader imagine her to have suffered some persecution also for the same cause,
whereby he thinks not a little to honor her. But had her troubles been for
Religion indeed, Fox would then never have omitted to set down her examinations
about the same, and her answers thereunto, in defense of some such poin^s as
are in controversy between Catholics and Protestan^s; as about the real presence
of Christ in the Sacrament, or about prayer to Saints, or prayer for the Dead,
or some one or other point, as well as he has set down, the examinations and
answers of so many others, to their great glory, as he takes it: but here is
nothing found, Fox in this in silent, and leaves his reader to imagine of
himself that it was for religion. For something it was, but that it was for
religion be could not make manifest, for that this Lady in all the time of the
reign or her sister, daily did hear Mass, went usually to Confession, and in
all points showed her self a Catholic; yea three weeks after she was
proclaimed Queen she had Mass in her own Chapel in the Court, and permitted
it to be said in all Churches throughout the whole realm for the space of
seven months after, which is no sign of being so resolve da Protestant as
that she would suffer imprisonment for that religion. Her troubles, in very
deed, were for sundry offenses against Queen Mary her sister; which being
found to be such, as might perhaps have cost her her life, if they had come
unto public trial of Justice; the King of Spain was so greatly her friend
that he stayed the proceeding thereof, and so not only saved her life, but quit
her also from the public blot and stayne of treason: and heerin he was so
earnest, that on a time, when she was to have come to her answer, he did so
importune Queen Mary his wife, to let the matter pass in silence, that she
said unto him, My Lord, You speak very earnestly now for her, but I pray God
she do not one day make you repent it. A certain Spainsh Author writes that
the King was thereunto also moved upon some consideration of state: for Queen
Mary of Scotland being then married unto the french king Francis the second if
the Lady Elizabeth had dyed, there had in appearance been great possibility that
the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ir^land might come to have been annexed
unto France, the said Queen of Scotland being the next heir in blood unto
them all.

Queen Mary of England at last happening to die, King Philip her husband,
notwithstanding the caveat given him by his late deceased Queen, did so
continue his good affection unto the now Queen Elizabeth, that being then in
the Netherlands, he sent over unto her Monsieur de Assonuile, to congratulate
her advancement, and to signify his gift unto her of all Queen Mary's Jewels,
which being his own, he might justly have detayned unto himself, if he would.
These Jewels she seemed very thankfully to receive, and said unto this
Monsieur de Assonuile, that she thought her brother the King of Spain might
think much in her for change of religion; but, quoth she, there is but little
difference between his religion and ours, almost all that he has in Latin we
have in English: and we do not as others do, for we maintain a clergy of
Bishops and other Prelates, so us we are in effect, as before.

And whereas there was held a treaty of peace between the Spanish and French
Kings upon the taking of S. Quintins, the king of Spayn would yield unto no
agreement with the French, unless it were also conditioned that Callis should
be restored back unto Queen Elizabeth of England* and heerin were his
commissioners that treate^ with the French so earnest, that in the end the
french to be rid of their importunity were faygne to confess unto them, that
they knew that they took more pains then they were desired to do; for that
the English had plainly told them that they had not set them on work in any
such busynes; which was a sign that they desired not to be beholding unto the
king their master. Of which when the king had knowledge, he stood no more upon
the rendering of Callis, but concluded his peace with the french without it,
which as things did afterward fall out, proved a happy turn to himself.

These proofs of this Kings good will unto Queen Elizabeth being thus made
manifest to the world, who would have thought that she would not only have
omitted all signs of gratitude, but within a little after, become an enemy to
such a friend, yea and so great and capital a one, as seldom any History can
give witness of the like.

Seeing then that no acts of gratitude are to be sought after; let us then see
what effects of emnity ensued instead thereof. First then to begin withal
(omitting her refusal of the King of Spaynes kind endeauours for getting the
French to restore unto her the Town of Callis) we will return unto the duke
of Alua and his expected provision of money from Spain, mentioned in the
former Chapter. This provision being the sum of six hundred tho^sand Ducates,
coming out of Spain (...) the Netherlands in the month of D^cember in the
year 15^1. was on the West coast of ^ngland seized upon, and a^rested by the
English. By means of which wrongfully detayning this money of the King of
Spaynes, the Duke of Alua was forced to demand the tenth pennv of every man's
goods, that was of ability for his supply; ^ut this demand of his (caused
chiefly thorough the said English arrest) was cause of a far greater detriment
unto the King of Spain, then that wrongfully deta^ned money came unto: so as
the one great wrong was the cause of another far greater. For hereupon all the
Netherland people began to mutter, to show a general unwillingness unto the so
wide stretching of their purses; the sediously affected took Occasion by her
Forelockes, and to the fear of this tax added the faygned fear of the
bringing in of a Spanish Inquisition.

One Monsieur de Lymmay, understanding by detayning of the K. of Spaynes money
in England, what hatred that Queen began to bear him, posteth out of France
into ^ngland, where showing his readynes to any rebellious attempt, received
such encouragement by promise of aid from thence, and such fit instructions,
that he came over into Holland, and there on the first day of April in the
year 1572. he surprised the town of Briel, the first in all the Low
Countries, that set it self in open rebellion; after whose example, Flushing,
Enchusen, and others followed. Hereupon was made over out by England unto
these rebels by means of Sir Thomas Gressam threescore thousand pounds
sterling to begin withal; and presently after followed over with troops of
English forces, Morgan, Gilbert, and Che^^er; and after these again North,
(...) Ca^aish, and Norris, all made Coronels; and coming thither with whole
regiments, received from time to time great supplies of money and forces from
England, which grew afterward so heavy that for some ease in the sustayning of
the whole ^urthen, it was devised to draw the Duke of Alancon Brother unto the
French King Henry the third, into E^gland, under color of treaty of a match
between him and Queen Elizabeth: but in the end it proved an infortuna^e
match between him, and the Lady Belgica* for he was sent over into the
N^therlands, and there made Anti* Duke of Brabant, where his success was such,
as ret^ring from thence into France with dishonor, he there not long after,
dyed of grief.

In this designement, the English saw their expectation greatly deceived. For
albeit K. Henry the third of France had refused to take the Hollanders parts,
hating them for that cause which no Kings can love such people; yet they
thought by getting his own brother aforesaid invested in the Duchy of Brabant,
he must then of necessity take his part. But the matter now falling out
otherwise, the burden returned and remained heauyer upon the Queen and Realm
of England then before. And the Prince of Orange soon after the death of the
Duke of Alan^on being slain, the Holla^ders remained as a body without a head,
until the Queen of England sent over unto them the Earl of Leycester, with
great provision both of men, and money, accompanied with diverse Noblemen and
Gentlemen of good account. And albeit this Earl afterward returned into
England again, yet continued she her ayding the Hollanders, both with men and
money unto her dying day. And it is thought by such as have made calculation of
this great and long continued charge, that she so oppressed and burdened her
subjects for the Hollanders wars, that she had more money from them by Graunts
and Subsides, and such other means, then had all the Kings of England from the
time of the Conquest unto her days, who had the greatest wars with France.
And I have heard some Lawyers affirm, that she did extremly wrong her poor
Subjects, by sometimes pressing them, and sending them perforce to her service
out of the Realm; seeing, as they say, no Prince by the Laws of the Realm
can compel any of his subjects to serve in war, unless it be for the defense
of the Realm at home* or for the recovery of some lost Patrimony of the Crown
abroad; and seeing now that Holland was never known to have been any part of
the patrimony of the Crown of England, nor any pretense of just war could be
made by England to that end, it was the greater wrong and injustice.

And here by the way I must also note unto you, that at the beginning, for a
long time of her ayding the Holland^rs, though she did disguisedly make show of
friendship and amity with Spayn, and had not only her Ambassador in Spain, as
the King of Spain had his also in England; and in all her public
Proclamations, wherein any mention happened to be made of Holland and the
adjacent parts, she did always call them, The Low Countries of her loving
Brother the King of Spain, and thereby acknowledged that which she could not
deny: yet even at this very time she employed Sir Francis Drake to rob him of
his treasure in the West Indyes, Don Bernardino de Mendoca remaining
Ambassador Ledger for the King of Spain in England, both then and long after,
yea even at the very time when Drak was arrived home with his booty, (which was
in November in the year 1580.) and being all this while an eye witness not
only of the said Queens oppressing and impouerishing her own subjects at home,
for the ayding of the foresaid Hollanders abroad, and rebellious subjects of
the King his Master; but of her sending forth also to rob him, in his own
dominions, thereby to aid them unlawfully with their Lords own treasure.

If now from the first to the last, the deportement of the Queen of England
toward the King of Spain in the long continuance of so many great wrongs and
iniuryes, be but indifferently considered; what man, though but of mean
capacity can judge, but in the end, he must needs be provoked to do something
against her, were it but in regard of Honor, he being a King so great and
potent. And therefore it was no wonder, that after so many former years
patience, he was in the end (and that also with an addition of eight years
forbearance) after the taking of his aforsayd treasure (in which time al
detriments that could be done him, both by Sea and Land, besides the ayding
also of Don Antonio (the pretended King of Portugal) being put in practice)
forced to prepare that great Armada against England by sea, which he did in the
year 1588. though with no success. And therefore, as I have heard Strangers
that are indifferent to both Nations, wonder very much, why there should be
more hatred discovered now in a time of peace and amity, between England and
Spain, in the English Nation to the Spanish, then in the Spanish to the
English (the English having given more cause a great deal for Spaniardes to
hate them, then the Spainards have given to Englishmen:) So have they likewise
noted, that notwithstanding the misusage in England of the Spanish Ambassador
himself in his own person; yet the Spanish in Spain do not for all this
misuse the Ambassador of England; the cause whereof is the discreet
consideration of the Spanish Nation, who can discern this misusage to proceed
from such pure-strayned Ministers, as are possessed with the fury of the
spirit, or from the common debaushed people, that do not consider, or have not
so much wit, as to think when they see a Spanish Ambassador in England, that
his Majesty likewise has an English Ambassador in Spain: Nor yet to set
before their eyes the example of the carriage of the chief Nobility, and of
the better and wiser sort toward the said Ambassador and Nation; nor chiefly
and above all his Maiestyes amity and friendship with the King of Spain, and
the fear of his indignation and punishment due unto such barbarous insolencyes.

CHAP. III. Whether England has received any benefit by defending the
quarrel of the Hollanders; or whether the Hollanders have endeavored to
deserve the friendship they have received from thence, or have any way showed
themselves grateful for it.
TO examine and search out the benefits which England may have received by
means of the Hollanders, I know not whereor which way to begin. The
Hollanders, or their friends may perhaps say, that it was a benefit great
enough for the English to assist them, in reason of state, because thereby they
kept out war from their own Country. But what an excuse this is? when as the
English never needed to have feared war in their own country, but for their
cause, and for taking their parts: for it was for their cause that the English
seized upon the six hundred thousand ducates which were sent out of Spain to
the Duke of Alua; which was a capital cause of enmity, and indeed the only
cause that enforced the said Duke to demand the tenth penny of the peoples
goods, whereby the whole common multitude became disposed the sooner to
rebellion. For the king of Spaynes money, was not detayned by the English upon
any covetous desire to have it for themselves, but because the Duke Alua should
not have it to employ against the Hollanders, and that it might be transported
from England unto the Hollanders, and so come to be used by them against the
said Duke, to whom it was sent to have been employed against them for their
Rebellion.

But it may be further alleged in excuse of the Hollanders, that they were so
grateful, as they offered unto the Queen of England the Sovereignty of the
Netherlandes, which benefit she would not accept of, and therefore it was not
their fault that if she obtained it not. To this may be said, that the Devil
offered to have given Christ all the kingdoms of the world if he would have
worshipped him, and so was more liberal of giving that which was none of his
own, then were the Hollanders. But the Queen well knowing that by accepting
this gift whereunto they had no right, she should have been sure to have drawn
a perpetual war, and the whole charge thereof upon her shoulders, and
therefore refused this their liberality; yet was she willing notwithstanding to
aid them, without this obligation. And the reason was; because she still
retained a hop to be wholly disburdned, or at least much helped in the bearing
this charge by France, or Germany, or by bringing the Hollanders to the full
possession of the whole seuenteen Provinces, whereby they might depend upon
themselves.

It may also be alleged, that she had the Cautionary Towns of Briel, Flushing
and the other places, delivered into her hands. True it is, she had so, and
thereby enjoyed the benefit of being at more expense both of men and money.
Other benefits can I remember none; nor can there be any found, and so will
spare the labor to look any further after them: yet because ill turns, and
domages may more readily be discovered to have hereby happened to the Queen
and state of England, I shall set down what in this kind I have observed.

First then to begin with the before mentioned Cautionary Towns, it appears,
that because the Hollanders would so soon as they could, be the freer to set
the English at naught, having by means of the Truce with the King of Spain,
and the Archduke Albert, gotten together some spared money; they so labored
with their feed friend Sir Raph Winwood (a better Hollander then an Englishman)
that for paltry payment they got their bridle out of the English hands, and
thereupo^ began straightwayes to show their gratitude in forbidding the
bringing of English dyed, and dressed clothes into Holland, and their adjoined
Provinces, without ever making the king or his Ambassador Ledger at the Hage
privy thereunto.

Soon after, to make amends for this their saucy and unmannerly carriage, they
came to offer the Kings Majesty himself a more insolent affront. For whereas
the Duke of Lennox, as Admiral of Scotland, by order from the King, had sent
one M. Brown in the year 1616. to demand of the said Hollanders, then fishing
upon the coast of Scotland, a certain ancient duty, called Size herring; with
much a do they paid it, as in former times it was accustomed; but yet withsome
speeches that it was the last time, that it should be paid.

The same M. Brown coming the year following with the same authority and
commandment, with one ship of the Kings only to demand the duty afo^esayd,
and with order, that if it were denied, he should take witness of the refusal in
writing, and so peaceably depart; being come aboard one of their ships, and
demanding the aforesaid duty, he was by the Master thereof denied it, who told
him plainly that he was commanded by the States of Holland not to pay it unto
the King any more, of which he took witness according to his order from his
Majesty.

Whiles this was a doing, there comes aboard that ship, the Master of of
another ship of Holland, and demanding of M. Brown his name, he replied that
his name was Brown: Why then (quoth he) if you be the man, I have order to
arrest you, and to carry you into Holland: whereof M. Brown gave notice to the
Master of the Kings ship, requyring him to advertise his Majesty of this
insolency, and so M. Brown was arested and carried away prisoner into Holland.

About this time, as I also have heard it credibly reported, one M. Archibald
Rantkin a Scottish gentleman residing at Stockholme in Sweden, and there
soliciting for the payment of certain money due unto some London Mercha^ts;
one Van* dyke lying there also as Agent for the States of Holland, said unto
some principal persons of the Swedians, that they needed not be to hasty in
paying the king of Englands subjects any money, or to give them any respect,
for that the said Kings promises, were not to be believed, nor his threats to
be feared. For which villainous and insolent speeches, being afterward
challenged by Rantkin, he had no better excuse then to say, he was drunk when
he spoke them (for deny them he could not) and so his excuse of playing the
beast, excused him for playing the man.

But now from these insolent affronts and speeches, let us come to deeds, and
see how they have used our English Nation in the North seas, on the coast of
Groonland and those parts, about the trayn-oyle fishing, where they have
offered them sundry abuses by giving them blows, chasing them away, and doing
unto them diverse oth^^ detriments; not admitting to understand that the sea
fishing is free for every man, where it is not upon the coast of any Country,
unto which the benefit belongs by ancient prerogative.

And yet is all this but little in regard of their usage of our Nation in the
East Indyes, where they have as fiercely set upon them with open hostility, as
if before their meeting there, they had of long continuance been mortal
enemies, having slain many of our men, and sunk sundry of our ships. And
when moreover they have taken some of our men prisoners, they have used them,
in the sight of the Indians, in such contemptible and disdainefull manner, as
if at home in their own Countries, the English in respect of them were but an
abject and a slavish Nation; and that the Hollanders were either their
Superiors, and might use them at their pleasure, or the English so base and
vnpowerfull, as they durst not be revenged, but quietly put up any injury at
their hands.

And indeed the Indians might in reason conjecture that the Hollanders would
never have dared so to domineer over the English abroad, if they had not had
the maistery of them at home; after which accounpt and reckoning such actions
abroad are wont to be looked into. What think you now of our English Proverb?
Have we not bravely set beggars on horsbacke? Nay have not Englishmen (the
premises considered) great reason to love the Hollanders, and to hate
Spaniards? Yea, and to hate Spaniards only for the love of such courteous and
grateful Hollanders?

And as for the commodious trade which the English have had in Muscouy for more
then threescore and ten years, and which the Hollanders have now quite gotten
from the^^, and spoiled, what shall I say? Seeing they are about to make
recompense for the same by doing the like with our English Merchants in Turkey.
And it is a thing so natural and notorious for them to spoil the trade of
other Nations, that when they cannot find occasion to do it, they will not
stick to spoil one another, so great is their auaricious and insatiable
desire of gain; and yet all this proceeds but out of a certain covetous
wretchedness; for, let any of them arrive to what riches he will, he knows not
how to be Noble or Generous.

CHAP. IIII. Whether England can expect any benefit by continuing to take the
Hollanders parts; and whether the Hollanders do deserve the same, by wishing,
or desiring the continuance of the State and Government of England, as now it
stands.
THE end and scope whereunto the rebellious wars of the Hollanders have tended,
has been to bring themselves into as free and qu^et a State as is the
Republique of the Switzers, which they might have easily done by the help they
have had from England and France, if the King of Spain had wanted the means
or the will to have continued war against them. But admit they had arrived
unto this their design and had freely and quietly gotten the full possession
of all the seauenteene Netherland Provinces, is it not like that they would
then have gotten into their claws the Duchyes of Cleue, and Iuliers, with the
other parts thereon dependant, seeing they have already gotten fotting therein?
And having once incorporated these, is it like, that they would have suffered
the Country of Liege to have remained in quiet, under the Rule of a Bishop?
When as the color of reformation of Religion had also been sufficient for the
taking away of the Country from the true owner? Or may a man think, that they
would stand upon titles of right, who hold not the least place they possess by
any right at all? Or that they would make a conscience to detayne from their
Neighbor, when they make none to detayne from their true Lord, and Master?
Surely there is no reason to think other ways: and yet if any man should, let
him but look into their attempt upon Huys, and also upon Liege the principal
City of that Country, not long since put in practice.

Put the case then, that they had arrived unto their desired greatness, that is
to say, to have gotten the whole seauenteene Netherland Provinces with the
Duchyes of Cleue and Iuliers, and the rest thereunto dependant, as also the
Country of Liege; how would they the^ have borne themselves toward England
and France? How had they then been able to have given law to both these
kingdoms; to the one by land, from the Country of Liege co^fining upon it,
and to the other by sea, by being able to ouertop it in shipping? what doubt
may be made hereof, considering what a correspondent party they would have
found in France by their most confident friends the Huguenots, and in England
by no less friends the Puritans? Who cannot now discern that the King of
Spain, by continuance of war against the Hollanders, has highly benefited
both England and France; and that England and France by assisting the
Hollanders against the King of Spain, have labored to their own cost.

What policy might it then have proved for England and France, if the
Hollanders had by their help prevailed against the King of Spain, when they
should thereby have prepared an irremediable scourge for themselves.

Let it then be truly considered, whether it had not been greater policy, more
honorable, and more profitable, for both those Nations, and more for the
tranquillity of Christendom, that they had suffered the King of Spain to have
brought these his rebellious subjects to obedience, and so to have governed
them in peace, to the end he might have employed so many millions, as he has
been forced to spend in the Netherla^d wars, against the Turk. And that so
he would have done, if he might here have inioyed rest and quiet, who can
doubt? Seeing notwithstanding these his long wars, and all other wars thereby
occasioned, both by sea and land, he has, to his everlasting praise and
honor, never made either peace or Truce with that capital enemy of
Christendom. And if those foresaid many millions might have bin implo^ed
against this common enemy, who can make doubt, but he might thereby not only
have been driven out of Europe, but that Jerusalem, and all Palestine might
have been recovered?

England, as has been said in the precedent Chapter, has already received
proof of the ingratitude of her costly Holland friends; and France no less,
by having not long since discovered them to be more ready to take their parts
that were in arms against the now regnant King, then the Kings part against
them. And if they had been so wary as to have dissembled some what longer their
ingratitude and insolencyes toward England and France, yet their audacious
brauing of the King of Denmark (notwithstanding they must pass with all their
corn from Danske through his Sownd) were enough to have discovered their proud
contempt of the majesty of Kings; and what Neighbors they would have proved
to England and France, when they should have arrived to their expected freedom
of an absolute Republike. Let it then be considered, whether England or France,
could ever fear to be so much endomaged by Spain, as by them; or that Spain
could have so ready means to endomage the^, as the Hollanders; or could have
correspondence in either Country with two such turbulent factions.

Thus may England as well by example of the Hollanders ingratitude to France,
as by the dear purchased experience in it self, clearly behold what
appearance there may be of expectation of any least benefit by their means;
since none can be found, none be looked for, albeit they were sought after with
the lantern of Diogenes.

If therefore no benefits can appear, either past or to be expected, let us
then see what good fortune has otherwise betyded such as have been the
gretest actors in this rebellious business, whereby it may appear to the World,
how their endeauours have been pleasing to God.

The first man that began the surprise and open rebellion of Towns in Holland,
was the aforenamed Monsieur de Lymmay. This man amongst other presents which
were given him, when he was in England, one was a very fair great mastiffe
Dog, which he much esteemed; and on a time playing with him, he bitte him so
soar in the arm, that he could by no means be cured, but in the end dyed
thereof, starcke mad, and raging, in the Town of Liege. And thus came he to
his death by being bitten of a Dog, that had been a wolf unto many
Ecclesiastical persons, whose blood without all form of lustice, or any
offense by them committed, he had caused to be shed, as well in the Town of
Briel which he surpryzed, as in other places.

The next great Actor in this ill busynes was the Duke of Alancon also before
mentioned. This Duke after he had in the City of Antwerp been invested in the
Duchy of Brabant, as absolute Sovereign; fynding not withstanding that he was
to be limited and governed by such as he accounted his subjects; and seeking
thereupon to make his authority more absolute, drew certain troops of his
soldiers into the Town to have surpryzed it, himself being with his whole army
hard without, who, through the resistance of the Townsmen, were all put to the
sword. Whereupon he with his whole army (the Artillery from the walls of the
Town playing upon him) was forced to retire thence in extreme disgrace, and
melancholy, as a defeated enemy; and in the end to return into France, where
considering the tricks that had by n put upon him in England, and what disgrace
he had thereby received in Flanders, on the 10. day of June in the year 1584.
he dyed of conceived grief, in the town of Chastea^ Theiry, and so lost his
fair possibility of wearing the crown of France, unto which he was the
apparent Heir.

The next and chiefest styrrer in this busynes, was William of Nassaw, Prince
of Ora^ge, who because he was the Archrebell, or principal Actor in this great
rebellion of all other, I hold it not unfit, before I come to speak of his
death, briefly to run over the things of most note in his life.

This Prince, as in the first Chapter has been said, retired himself into
Germany so soon as he heard of the Duk^ of Alua his aryuall in the
Netherlandes; and albeit he came afterward back again to push forward his
begun rebellion; yet was he feign to fly the second time into Germany, from
whence when he heard that the Town of Briel, and one or two more were openly
rebelled, he came secretly back into Holland, and being in very poor and bare
estate, he took up his lodging in the Town of Tergow, in the house of one
Kegeling an Apothecary, keeping himself very secret, because this town as yet
held for the king of Spayn, as also did all the other Towns of the Country
except two or three. But the Duke of Alua his demanding the tenth penny
aforesaid, having bred a general disgust and auersion in the minds of the
people; certain scouts of rebellion were secretly employed abroad in the
Country to sound the people about their forwardnes to revolt. Which being done,
answer was returned that they were found to be the^unto ready enough, so they
might have a head, but who this head should be, that knew they not. The Prince
of Orange heerupo^, in whose behalf these scouts had been employed, called a
consultation of some five or six irreligicus Politikes (for such best fitted to
be his counselors) to consider what religion he were best to be of, for of
all the religions now current he could not be; and not declaring himself to be
of one, all might hold him to be of none. For he had so carried himself until
this day, that the Catholics held him affected to them; The Lutherans to them;
The Anabaptists to them; And the Caluinists also to them.

The Catholics took him for their friend, because they thought him not to
hate their religion, but indifferently well to affect it, in regard that he had
been brought up in it, long professed it, and had made as yet no open
opposition or profession against it; and for that he protested to undergo this
busynes for the mayntayning of their rightes and privileges, and to free the
Country from that terrible exaction of the tenth penny aforesaid.

The Lutherans took him for their friend, because they held him in heart to be
of their religion, since he had married the daughter of the Duke of Saxony, who
was now a Lutheran, in public profession; and that he must in reason keep
good correspondence with the Lutherans of Germany, in hope of having aid from
them.

The Anabaptists took him as greatly to favor their religion, because his
Chamberlayne being the chiefest man about him, was an Anabaptist, (called of
his fellow Anabaptists by the name of Mardochaeus) by whose means this Prince
became greatly beholding unto them, for the loan of sundry good sums of
money, which he had received of them.

The Caluinists thought him assuredly their friend, because he was an enemy
unto Spain and Spaniards, and because he could not but see them more forward
in action of Rebellion, then any of the others; seeing Briel and other Towns
were already surpryzed by those of their Nation and Religion.

The aforesaid Counselours considering that this indifferent carriage of the
Prince, could but argue a dispersed affection, and might breed many iealousies
and factions, and whereby he could not procure to himself the assured affection
of any one side to stick fast unto him; their resolution must now be taken
without longer delay, of which of these he would declare himself absotely to
be, albeit he might promise favor and protection to the rest. There was no
great need of learned Deuins to dispute the matter, Scriptures and ancient
Fathers were not important to be looked after, Faith and Conscience had heerin
no claim, and Reason of State did put the Holy Ghost to silence.

It was therefore first debated whether it were best and most for this Prince
his advantage to declare himself a Catholic, because the face of the State
was yet Catholic. To this was alleged, that if he should so do by favoring
all opposite to the Catholics, the Catholics would therefore disfavor him,
seeing the other through his favor would insult upon them: and so might there
be danger of their returning to the obedience of the King of Spain, whom thev
were sure was of their religion, and would maintain them in it. All which
considered, it was not thought fitting for him to declare himself to be a
Catholic

To declare himself a Lutheran, was also thought unfit, because the Duke of
Saxony, albeit a Lutheran, was yet a friend unto the Emperor, and the house of
Austria; and besides the Lutherans were but flegmatike and cold fellows, and
too far offto give him assistance, if need should require.

To declare himself an Anabaptist, was held less fitting, for albeit they had
showed more heat of zeal, in their greater number that had suffered for their
religion, then any of the others; yet were they but of the meaner sort of
people, not having any potent persons among them, nor any forrayne Prince or
State to take their parts.

In fine it was resolved that it was most convenient for him to declare himself
a Caluinist, in regard of their stirring spirits, whereof they had given
greater proof then any of the others, and that there was appearance of
assistance from England, and of good correspondence with the Huguenots of
France. Upon this resolution, followed straight-wayes the conversion of this
Prince of Orange unto Caluinian-Protestant religion; and his new gained
greatest friends so bestirred themselves, that Town upon Town rebelled
especially after he had by solemn Oath sworn to maintain the Catholic
Clergy in all their rights and privileges, and in public exercise of their
Religion* about which point yet the town of Amsterdam amongst others, very
precysely capitulated with him, and he very seriously also protested and swore
performance of the conditions: which Oath notwithstanding he made no more
conscience soon after to break, then he had done sundry oaths before; as the
great and solemn Oath which he took of Fidelity to the King of Spain, when
he received the Order of Knighthood of the golden Fleece; the Oath of
fidelity, which he also took at the said Kings making him Lieftenant Governor
of Holland etc. besides his sundry other perfidious breaches both of oaths and
promises.

And because there is not any fidelity or honest dealing to be expected, where
there is laid no ground of Religion and virtue it is the less wonder that this
irreligious Noble Man so carried himself in choice of religion. Certain it is,
that he was at the first a Catholic; and notwithstanding that his malice had
transported him so far, as to protect and shelter some most sacrylegious
Church-robbers; yet upon the aryuall of the Duke of Alua, and before his flight
into Germany, he sent for his eldest some Philip (who was Prince of Orange next
after him) at that time a student in the University of Louayne, and most
straightly charged him, to live and dye in the Catholic Roman Religion, as the
said Prince has at sundry times to diverse persons yet living protested; whereby
it may seem, that at that time he had yet retained some regard of religion; and
holding that for the best, commanded his son to remain still therein.

Four wives he had, the first was a Catholyke, the second was a Lutheran, the
third and fourth were Caluinists; which perchance was because he found no noble
woman fit for him to match withal that was an Anabaptist, that so he might
have had four wives of four several Religions; yet to show his great good
will unto the Anabaptists (albeit he could not match amongst them) he gave them
under his hand writing the privilege and freedom for exercise of their
religion in their own howses, which they yet in Holland enjoy.

When I consider the life and actions of this man, I wonder in my self, that
the blyndnes of the popular multitude, could be so great, as to honor and extol
him so highly, and to account him the great Patron and Protector of their
Country, that was the greatest enemy thereof that ever it had; and who was the
cause of spilling so much blood, as well of the people of his own Country, as
of other Nations; and such an one as was the betrayer, and transporter also
thereof, unto another Nation, as much as in him lay, who had no right or clay
me thereunto.

To come now to touch the end of this man, when I consider, I say, what it was,
there comes to my remembrance this saying of a Pagan Poet: Tyraennous Lords,
that cause Lands to rebel,
Without some blow, can hardly come to Hell.


About some four years before the death of this Prince, he was for his
offenses deprived by the said King of Spain his sovereign Lord, of all the
authority and power which in former times the said King had given him, and
proclaimed for a public enemy unto the King, the peace, and Weal-publike of
the Country; and his goods and person exposed to open violence by public
sentence. In the end after some attempts to that effect, the Prince perceauing,
what victorious success the Duke of Parma (that then under the King of Spain
commanded in the Netherlands) now began to have in Flaunders, and Brabant, he
fled secretly, from Antwerp (where he had layne lurcking for a time) unto Delft
in Holland, in his Armor; for it was the greatest praise (forsooth) that this
valiant Captain achieved in these wars, that he did commonly put on his
Armor when he was eight or ten leagues from any place of danger.

Being arrived at Delft, where he thought himself in greatest safety, he was
upon the tenth day of July in the same year 1584. slain with the shot of a
Pistol, by one Ealtazar Gerard (alias Serach) a Burgundian, of the age of five
and twenty years, a month after that the Duke of Alancon dyed at
Chasteau-Theiry; for the Duke dyed on the tenth of June, and this Prince was
slain on the tenth of July next following, as though his life had been
limited by lease, to last but just one month after the death of the other.

The next of the greatest Actors in this rebellious Tragedy, was Robert Dudley
Earl of ^eycester, who after he had been the chief Commander of Holland, in
these broils (in which wa^ slain his sisters Son Sir Philip Sidney, a
Knight worthy to have deserved more Honor, if he had served in an honorable
cause) he grew weary of the Hollanders, and they of him; in so much, that by a
justification of his worthless actions published in Print, he was driven to
accuse and blame them of breach of promise and performance of covenants made
unto him, that so by laying the fault upon the^, he might repair his own
reputation, and excuse of gayning so little honor among them as he had.
Returning therefore with great coffeehouse into England, he soon after
sickned and dyed, and as it is reported was poisoned, and prevented by one
whom himself had thought by such a means to have made away.

He dyed without any sign of a Christian; and being dead seemed so ugly a
corse, as even amazed the beholders. His body was opened and in his stomach
were great holes eaten through with the poison. His Lands were all presently
seized on for his debts to the Queen, whereby he was now, as much disgraced
being dead, as he would perhaps have been, if he had lived but a little
longer; and as his life was not much laudable, so was his death not greatly
lamented.

The next in this ^anke must be Queen Elizabeth her self, by whose means, as
this rebellion at the first began, so was it by her aid (even to her last end)
continued. And if a happy death be the true happynes of the precedent life, she
cannot be said to have had it, neither in regard of the good of her self, nor
yet of her subjects; for she sought not the one, and she had not the other. She
sought not the good of her subjects, which in all reason and right she was
bound to do, both before God man, because she prohibited both speech, and even
the knowledge as it were, of any successor to her Crown, as all the world well
knows. In so much, that if some of the Nobility, presently upon her death,
had not resolved to receive unto her Crown and dignity the true and lawful
Heir that now reigns, the blood of many thousands of her subjects might
have been spilt, for ought she did to prevent it. Some do report her to have
said, that whiles she lived no Heir apparent should be de^lared; and after her
death, she wished that she might for a while remain between heaven and earth,
to see how they would tugge for the Crown. Surely the desire of seeing such a
sport could little deserve the love that her subjects bo^e unto her; and heerby
may we see, upon how little cause and reason, vulgar affection is oftentimes
grounded.

That her death was not happy, appears, in that it is no happynes to dye
distracted, and not to have had, from the beginning to the end of her sickness,
the perfect use of reason, and consequently not to have been able most
earnestly to call upon God; which as it is most fit that at their end, a^l men
should do, so is it most requisite, that in the end of a life which has been
entertained with all the pleasures that the World could affoard, it should be
done with the greatest compunction and contrition of heart that may be* And I
have heard it confidently reported, that Sir Thomas Gressam, more then thirty
years before Queen Eliza^eths death, did in private discourse, tell unto some
friends of his, and namely unto Sir Philip Scidamore (then not Knight) that at
the death of Queen Mary, he then being in the City of Antwerp, a woman
coming into a house where he was, said unto him: Your Queen Mary is now dead
and Queen ^lizabeth that succeeds her, shall in the end come to dye mad.
Whether this woman had the spirit of prophesy, or no, I cannot say; but
certain it is that she seemed not in her sickness, nor at her death to be in
her perfect senses, whe^eby she could neither be careful for the future good
of her subjects, by not then declaring that which she needed not any longer to
have concealed; nor in calling upon Almighty God, for mercy, for a soul that
so greatly had need thereof.

Let us now lastly come unto the great Statesman, and Menager of this State
composed of States, the Holland-aduocate Berneuelt. This man after the death of
the Prince of O^ange aforesaid, when his son Count Mauri^e, and his other
children were but young, and the State and government wholly raw and out of
order, devised and set down the plot and means for the mayntayning of it in
the form of a Republike: he made the alliances between it, and other Princes
and States abroad, and became a most careful Tut or for the bringing up of the
Prince of Orange his children; yet in the end about realousies and wranglings
grown up among themselves, this great Advocate of Holland, and Sterne-holder of
that whole State, having deserved so well thereof as any man could, came to dye
on a scaffold, as a criminal malefactor, by the hands of the hangman; whereby
the King of Spain, and their Highnesses the Princes of the Netherlands, whom
he had most offended, and had not the means to punish him, did see him
punished by those whom himself had most served in offending them.

Some may here a^leage that the Archduke Matthias, who afterward came to be
Emperor, had been a chief Commander and governor also over this rebellious
faction, and yet came not to any unfortunate end. To this I answer, that true
it is, this Prince had such a charge laid upon him, when by reason of his
youth he wanted judgment perfectl^ to descern what he did, William of Nassaw
the unhappy Prince of Orange before mentioned, being his chief Lieftenant under
him, and the only man that disposed of al. And yet escaped this young Archduk
not without disgrace among the^, when they neither cared for him, nor much
respected him; and in their ordinary speeches gave him the name of their Foster
child, esteeming him but as a child, or as a cipher that only served to supply
a place. But in the end this noble Prince discovering their unjust courses and
his own error, left the^, and gave over that mistaken government, and retyring
himself into Germany, sought, and found means to reconcile himself unto his
Cousin the King of Spain, whose grace and favor he obtained, which none of
the former that came to unfortunate ends, ever sought for. And by this means
all former soars were salued, and this Prince by leaving to follow this wrong
course, was not only freed from coming to an unfortunate or disgraceful end,
but came to die as a good Christian Prince, and in the most high estate of an
Emperor.

Thus have I here briefly related unto you, how ill they have sped, who have
been the chiefest Actors in so ill a business as is rebellion, and the
assisting of rebels against their most just and lawful Sovereign; what may
succeed to others, that do, or intend to continue the same unjust course, must
be reserved to the manifestation of time; but apparent it is, by that which
here has been showed, that the most high and supreme Ruler of all, has, by
permitting these their disgraceful ends, showed his dislike of their actions;
and contrariwise to such as have been obedient to his will, his benediction
has been manifest in a copious manner.

The benefits then which England might expect by continuing to take the
Hollanders parts, must be understood to be, endless Charges, great Dishonor,
and the high Displeasure of Almighty God, together with the Hollanders
recompensing the same with contemptuous ingratitude; which are motives to move
mad men to be their friends.

Some may perhaps suppose the Hollanders to deserve the same in regard of a
kind of love and affection which they bear unto that State, albeit no effect
or show of good deeds to prove it, does anv way break out. This invisible
affection, must then be imagined to consist in a true desire they have to the
countiuuance of the present State and Government as now it stands. Les us
then see how likely it is, by first of al calling into consideration the
affection they manifest themselves to bear unto our Kings Majesty of England;
for this ought to give the first and best light unto this great obscurity.

Surely, if I should relate unto you what mine own ears have heard in this
point, you would stand amazed. Respect of conscience and duty, does not permit
me to repeat those most odious Epithets which without any r^spect of Majesty,
are every where common in these rebellious Hollanders mouths And I protest
unto you, that I verily think, they did never more spytefully rail against
the King of Spain, whom they hold for their greatest enemy. Their words, as
I said, I will not repeat, for fear least an alleadger of the calumnyes of
others, might be taken for a subtle calumniator himself: but if you doubt of
the truth heerof, make further enquiry of such, as since the late famous
battle fought in Bohemia, have come out of Holland into England; for there
want no witnesses to affirm this to be true. And if you shall chance to meet
with One who for affection to the Hollanders, will rather dissemble then
confess the truth, especially being demanded thereof in England; I doubt not
but you will meet with Two, who will affirm it, and withal confess that there
is not any remedy to ^h^rme their durty mouths, and much less to any purpose
for an Englishman to oppose himself against the lavish tongues of such an
unbridled multitude of cocks crowing upon their own dunghill. And who can
otherwise imagine, but that they who are in authority amongst them, be content
that the common sort do speak that which themselves also think, and in
private speak the same, as well as they, seeing in public they show no
dislike thereof.

That the Hollanders do desire the continuance of the present State, and
Government of the Realm, as now it stands, by wishing the long reign of
his Majesty of England, and of the Prince his Highness after him, who can
imagine; since all their dri^ts do wholly tend to their own ends; and that the
Count Pa^atine, by his Mothers side is of the house of Nassaw, to which house
of all other upon earth they are most devoted: and that by the said Count
Palatine his attayning to the Crown of England, diverse of the same house that
want livings as well in Holland, as in the Duchy of Bullion, as also in other
places, might come to be adua^ced in England. And no doubt, since the Count
Palatine has already had the taste of one Crown, they will the more desire the
pleasing of hi^ appetite with another.

The religion of England they also like not, and therefore in regard of a more
pure and perfect Reformation, they do out of zeal and conscience the less
desire the continuance of the State, as it is. Their freindes the Puritanes,
have long since given them to understand how ilfauour^dly the Religion of
England is now reformed; and what great want they have of a Holland-discipline,
and such a worshipfall Consistory of Church-counsellours as they have there in
every of their Towns. They have also informed them of the great lyuings that
certain men in England do possess, who bear the name of Bishopes, and whose
large revenues would fall out very fit for sundry poor Countes of the
aforesaid house of Nassaw, to begin withal, til confiscation of English
Noblemens lyuinges might be able to make them the more capable of the titles of
Dukes and Princes. And this being matter to reflect upon, I will so leave it
unto your further ponderation, and proceed to give you satisfaction according
to your demand in the rest.

CHAP. V. Of the present state of the Hollanders; and of the division among
them about matters of Religion: and whether respect of Religion may urge
England still to assist them.
THAT the Hollanders have a will to continue their wars, to the end that at
last they might in quiet possession attain to their wished great Republike, of
the whole seauenteene Netherland Provinces, with such adjacent and Anseaitcke
places as they could come to incorporate and annexe unto them, there is no
doubt: but their want of means to undergo this charge, whereof no end can be
determined, is also out of doubt. It is now about some two years ago that I
saw a note of calculation made of their debts, which then appeared to be about
six millions of florins, for the which they paid, and do yet yearly pay
interest. It is not like that this debt is diminished, but that it is rather,
since that time, much augmented; besides their yearly ch^rge of mayntayning
their presidies, and fortifications, they have been at a great deal of lost
cost in their monthly great sums of money disbursed for the ayding of the
Count* Palatine.

Their means and traffic of merchandise is well known to be nothing so good
as it has been, and daily to declyne to worse and worse; for they have not
only had ex^reme losses by pirates, but have showed themselves so impartial,
that because the English Merchants should not think them only bent to spoil
their trade* they spoil their trading amongst them selves; in so much that
Holland does not only spoil the trading of Zeland, but even in Holland they
daily study to spoil the trade one of another: so as it has been noted, that
when in Amsterdam it self, some Merchant having gotten private advice from his
correspondent else where, that in such or such a place, such and such a
commodity will be well vented, and that this Merchant thereupon fraighteth a
ship with wares accordingly; another that perceaueth him to be fraighting,
though not knowing whither his voyage is intended, will straight ways, and
with all diligence freight a ship also with the self same wares, and follow and
dog him by sea, till he arrive to the same Haven unto which the other is
bound; and so by hindering of his gain catch away the bread out of his mouth.
And as by this, so by all other ways and means, ^ch one seeks to spoyke and
hinder another; for all will be Merchants, as well the Boores in the Villages,
as the Burgers in the Town.

This then trading then thus hindered what by Pirates, what by the multitude of
Merchants, and other ways spoiled, they cannot draw sufficient means for the
maintenance of war only out of toles and customs; neither can it be raised
by taxes and impositions laid upon the people, they being already more heavily
burdened that way, then they are able to bear; and far beyond the tenth
penny which the Dulde of (...) demanded. What remedy then? (...) loanes and
borrowings be required of the best monyed Merchants* (...). The Catholics, the
Arminians, and the Anabaptists, which have the best purses, have little reason
for it. The Catholics and the Arminians are forbidden the exercise of their
religion, and they will rather go and reside out of the Country. The
Anabaptists that have exercise in their houses cannot bear the burden alone;
and if all these th^ee would be willing to lend, how could ^bis lending
continue, when they shall see their money still cast into a bottomless pit of
expenses, where there can be no hope of getting it out again; and so shall
they be sure to find, who do assist the^, if after the now approaching
expiration of the Truce, wars do begin again.

Thus having briefly delivered unto you my conceyt of their present means; I
will now also endeavor to give you satisfaction to your demand about their so
great difference in Religion. I do not mean the great difference that is
between Sect and Sect, for that is beyould all calculation; but the late great
difference risen up among the Holland-Protestants themselves.

You shall then understand that about the year 1607. one Iacobus Arminius a
Doctor and professor of Protestant Religion at Leyden (according as it is there
professed) did, after that he had, diverse years believed and taught as they
did, begin to fall into further consideration then before he had done of
certain points of their doctrine, and especially their doctrine of
Predestination, which is, That God has absolutely and precysely chosen and
ordained some people to salvation, and some to damnation, before themselves
have either done good or evil: And that to those whom God, of an absolute
will, has ordained to pe^dition, he has determined to deny, and actually does
deny, the grace which is needful and sufficient for Salvation, so as they
neither can, nor may believe or be saved.

Against this doctrine Arminius opposed himself, affirming the same to be
contrary to the Nature of God, as repugnant to his Wisdom, to his Justice, and
to his Goodness. That it also is against the Ghospel, which commands
conversion and belief, and promises the grace of the holy Ghost, Remission of
sins, and everlasting Life. And that which is more, it impugneth Free will,
with which, and in the which, man was by God created. Moreover it hinders the
diligence unto the doing of good works; for (says he) man being driven (as
these mayntayners of this Predestination affirm) by means of the safe-making
grace, then must he work, and cannot leave so to do; but not being driven by
the same grace, he cannot so do, but must leave it undone.

Thus does Arminius refute the common Caluinian opinion in the doctrine of
Predestination, and teaches plainly, that man has Free Will, and shows that
good works are needful to Salvation; affirming also that the contrary doctrine
to these points, does overthrow and quyte destroy the foundation of Religion,
as further may be seen in his declaration printed at Leyden in the year 1610.

Arminius himself dyed, before this his declaration came forth in print; but
certain Ministers that embraced his doctrine, did after his decease cause it
to be printed; and these men proceeding forward in the same doctrine, and
fynding many of the most learned ministers to embrace it, and many thousands
of people, which daily more and more increase, ready to receive it; they wrote
sundry Books in defense thereof, wherein they gave themselves the name of
Remonstrantes.

Heerupon some of the Ministers that remained in the former and direct
Caluinian opinion, writing against them, called themselves the
Contra-Remonstrants: but because the common people called those that followed
the opinion of Arminius aforesaid, by the name of Arminians, the otherside gave
unto the Contra-Remonstr^nts, the name of Gomarists; because of all other who
opposed themselves against the opinion of Arminius, one Franciscus Gomarus was
the first and chiefest. And albeit the said Gomarus taught not otherwise then
did Calvin, or do other Caluinists; yet are those of his side called by many in
Holand, and generally in all the Netherlands by the name of Gomarists, except
by themselves; for they call not themselves Protestants, but The Reformed, as
they did before this discord fell out.

About this difference in Religion there has been between them very many
bickeringes, and virulent books and pamphlets have been written on both
sides, the one against the other. But because it would perhaps be too tedious
to make but recital of their titles in ^his place, I will therefore here only
set down un to you, what I have translated out of a certain printed table,
concerning three of the points of Religion which are in controversy between
them, whereby you may see what places of Scripture are alleged about these
points by the Armintans; and what Calvin and the Gomarian Caluinists allege
to the contryry.

The first point is,
Whether God has created any people unto damnation.
Places of Scripture alleged by the Arminians to prove that he has not.

Genes. 1. verse. 27. And God created man to his own Image; to the Image of God
he created him.

And verse. 31. And God saw al things that he had made, and they were all very
good*

Psalm. 145 verse. 9. The Lord is loving unto every man, and his mercy is above
all his works.

Isay 45. verse. 22. Turn you unto me, so shall you be saved, all ye ends of
the earth.

Ezech. 33. verse. 11. As true as I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in
the death of the ungodly, but that the ungodly do turn from his wickedness and
live. Turn you therefore now from your wickedness; why will you then dye, you
of the house of Israel?

Joan. 4. verse. 10. 11. You pity the stalk of the wild grape, whereon you
have not labored, nor have nourished it, which is grown up in one night, and
is again withered: And should not I then take pity on the great City of
Niniue, in which are more then one hundred and twenty thousand souls, who know
no difference between the right hand and the left.

Matthew. 11. verse 28. Come ye to me all that labor, and are burdened, and I
will refresh you.

Marc. 16. verse. 15. 16 Going into the whole world, preach the Gospel to al
creatures; he that belieueth, and is baptized, shallbe saved; and he that
belieueth not, shall be condemned.

Luc. 2. verse 30. 31. Mine eyes (says Simeon) have seen thy salvation: which
thou have prepared before the face of all people.

Ibid cap. 9. verse. 56. The son of man came not to destroy souls, but to
save them.

Joan. 3. verse. 16. For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
son, that every one who belieueth in him perish not.

Ibid. cap. 12. verse. 47. I am not come (says Christ) to condemn the world,
but to save the world.

Act 17. verse 30. God denounces unto men, that al, every where do penance.

Romans 11. verse. 32. For God has concluded all into incredulity, that he may
have mercy upon all.

1. Tim. 2. verse. 4. God will that all men be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the Truth.

Tit. 2. verse. 12. For the grace of God our Savior has appeared unto al men.

^. Pet. 3. verse. 9. God is not willing that any perish, but that all return
to penance.

1. Joan. 2. verse. 2. He (to wit Christ) is the propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours alone, but also for the whole worlds.

These are the places of Scripture alleged by the Arminians for their opinion
in this point. Now follows the doctrine of the Gomarian-Caluinists to the
contrary, to wit, That God has created some to damnation.

John Calvin Instit l. 3. cap. 23. b. Seeing the disposition of all things is
in the hand of God, and seeing he has the power of death and of salvation, he
ordayneth then with his counsel and will, that some are borne, who from their
Mothers womb are certainly delivered over unto death, to the end that by their
destruction the name of God should be praised.

The same Calvin upon the 18. verse. of the 9. cap. to the Romans. The
destruction of the ungodly is not only foreknown, but they are also purposely
created, to the end they should come to destruction or perdition.

Idem in his book ad ^alumn. Nebulon. page 867. Say you, that it is not
permitted unto God to damn any body, but such as have done evil? There are
taken away out of this life an infinite number of young children. Cast now out
your poison against God, who takes away innocent children from the breasts of
their Mothers, and casts them into the depth of hell, in eternal death and
damnation.

The^. Beza in his little Annot upon the Romans 9. verse. 22. Let us then again
be licensed to say with Paul, that some men are of God the workmaister, created
unto destruction.

Amandus Polanus on the 9 verse of the 13. of Osee. Those whom God has
predestined to eternal perdition, he has also created unto eternal
perdition; and al those things strengthen them to ^^^^nall perdition, that
strengthen the elect unto salvation.

The same Polanus in his doctrine of the truth of Predestination, page 139.
says: Abiection is an inward, and eternal work of God, which in truth
differs not from the essence of God it self.

Fr Gomarus in his translated dispute of Predestination These. 23. says:
Abiection is Gods predestination, through which out of reasonable creations, he
has in gross, and without fore-knowne limits, according to his privilege and
pleasure, from eternity, rejected some from eternal life, an^ has also before
hand orda^ned them to eternal death, and con^empt.

The Contra-Remonstrants in the conference at the Hage, page 53. ^he cause why
God has determined to elect some and not others, is only his pleasure and
grace; and not, that he has forseene that one should believe in Christ, and
not another.

The second point.
Whether God necessarily causes man to sin.
Places of Scripture alleged by the Arminians for the negative.

Genes. caD. 4. verse. 6. The Lord said to Cayn, why art thou angry, and why is
thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not receive again? but if
thou do ill, shall not thy sin be present at the door? but, the lust thereof
shall be under thee, and thou shall have dominion over it.

Psalm 5. verse. 5. 6. 7. Thou art no God that has pleasure in wickedness: the
evil shall not converse with thee. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight:
thou hate all those that work iniquity. Thou shall destroy them that speak
lies: the lord abhors both the bloudthirsty and the deceytfull man.

Psalm. 45. verse. 8. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: Therefore
has God, thy God, anointed the with the oil of gladness, above thy fellows.

Isa. 59. verse. 2. Thy iniquities do separate thee and thy God, one from
another; and thy sins do hyde his face from thee, that thou can not be
heard.

Ose. 13 verse. 9. Israel, thou bring thy self into unhappiness, for thy
salvation stands only with me.

Matt. 1 v^rs 21. Thou shall (says the Angel to Joseph) call his name Jesus,
for he shall save his people from their sins.

Luc. 1. verse. 74. 75. That without fear being delivered out of the hands of
our enemies, we may serve him, in holiness and justice before him, all our
days.

Joan 8. verse. 44. The devil when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own,
because he is a liar, and the father thereof.

Romans 1. verse. 18. The wrath of God from heaven is revealed upon all impiety,
and injustice of Men.

Galat. 5. verse. 16 Walk in the spirit, and the works of the flesh you shall
not accomplish.

Iac. 1 verse. 13. 14. 15. Let no man when he is tempted, say that he is tempted
of God, for God is not a tempter of evil; and he tempts no man. But every
one is tempted of his own concupiscence, abstracted and allured. Afterward
concupiscence when it has conceived, brings forth sin, but sin when it is
consummate engenders death.

1. Pet. 3. verse. 12. 13. The face of the Lord is upon them that do evil
things; but who is he that can hurt you, if you be emulators of good.

1. Joan 2. verse. 16. All that is in the world is the concupiscence of the
flesh, and the concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life, which is not
of the Father, but is of the world.

Ibid. cap. 3. verse. 8. He that comitteth sin is of the devil, because the
devil sins from the beginning; for this appears the Son of God, that he
might di^^olue the works of the devil.

The affirmative doctrine of the Gomarian-Caluinists, to wit, that God does
necessarily cause man to sin.

Calvin Instit. lib. 1. cap 18. 2. I do confess, that God in the abject does
work through the service of the devil; but so, as Satan through Gods
provocation does his work.

Ibid. lib. 3 cap. 23. 9. The abject sinning willbe excused, because they
cannot avoid the necessity of sinning, seeing through the ordinance of God such
necessity is laid upon them; But we fear that they are not thereby rightly
excused, for the ordinance of God, by which they complain to be ordained to
perdition, has her justice, which albeit unknown unto us, yet it is very
certain.

Theod. Beza against Castalio. We confess to be true, that God has
predestined all such as he lists, not only unto damnation, but also unto
the causes of damnation.

Zuinglius de prouid. tom. 1. cap 6. page 366. No man can say, that the
murderer is excused, because he has killed through Gods provocation, for he
has sinned against the laws. But you will, say; he was provoked to sin: I
agree heereunto that he was provoked to sin, howbeit to the end, that one
should be saved, and another hanged etc.

Ibid. page 365. One and the self same wickedness, as for example either
Adultery, or Murder, if the same come from God, as the Author, moouer, and
prouoker, is a work, but no misdeed; but if so be it proceed from man, then it
is sin.

Zanchius de Natura Dei lib. 5. page 172. We acknowledge that the abject (with
a necessity to sin, and consequently to perish) do through the disposition of
God lie constrained and bound, yea do so ly constrained and bound, that they
cannot leave to sin, and to perish.

Ibid. These. 4. de reprobat. The elect as well as the reprobate, are unto sin
(as being sin, in as much as the honor of God thereby is advanced) before
ordained.

Io. Piscator praefat. disput contra. Schafman. page 7. The fifth principal
point that we are charged withal, is that God does secretly enforce a man to
do the sin that he forbids; but the same, being well understood, the
Scripture teaches.

In the Treatise of Predestination published by D. Pezelius, Lichae, Anno 1604.
If for an Author you understand such an one, as gives counsel, urges forward
or inforceth, or in any sort gives cause to do ought, then may you assuredly
name God to be the Author of sin.

Nicasius Vander-scheuren in his brief Institution, page 15. says: God rules
not only the body* but also the heart and mind of his creatures, as well unto
good as unto evil.

Ibid page 16. If so be God has power to ordain man to damnation before he be
borne, and being borne then presently, before he have committed any evil, to
cast him into the bottomless pit of hell; wherefore should he not then have
much more power to move the heart of man to sin, and to direct it? For whether
is more, to damn him that has done no evil, or to move and direct him to
sin? And seeing God will damn the abject, is it not all one how he damneth
him, whether after that he has moved and directed him to sin, or before?

The third point.
Whether God do inuit any man to salvation whom he has resolved in any case
not to save.
Places of Scripture alleged by the Arminians to prove, That God inuiteth all
men to salvation.

Deuter. cap. 30 verse. 19. I call for witness this day Heaven and Earth, that
I have proposed to you life and death, blessing and cursing: choose therefore
life, that thou may live, and thy seed.

Psalm. 95 verse. 8. This day if you hear my voice, harden not your hearts.

Proverb. 1. verse. 24. 25. 26. Seeing I call and you refuse, I stretch forth my
hand, and no man regards it, and you let pass all my counsels, and will not
accept of my correction: So will I also laugh in your mish^p, and deryde you,
when that happens unto you that you fear.

Isay 5. verse. 4. What might more be done unto my vineyard, that I have not
done unto it? Wherefore has it then brought forth wyld grapes, when I expected
it should have brought wyne-grapes.

Matthew. 23. verse. 37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that were sent unto thee. How often would I gather thy children as
the Hen does gather togeathe^ her chickins, under her wings, and thou
would not.

Marc. 1. verse. 15. The time is fullfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand,
be penitent, and believe the Gospel.

Luc. 7. verse. 29 30. And all the people hearing, and the Publicans justified
God, being baptized with John's Baptism: but the Pharisees and the Scribes
despised the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him.

Joan. 5 verse 40. You will not come to me, that you may have life.

Act. 7. verse. 5. You stif-necked, and men of uncircumcised hearts and ears,
you always resist the holy Ghost.

Romans 10 verse. 21. out of Isay 65 verse. 2. All the day have I held out my hands,
to a people that belieueth not, and contradicts me.

Apec. 3. verse. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man shall
hear my voice, and open the gate, I will enter in unto him, and will sup with
him, and he with me.

Ibid. cap. 22. verse. 17. He that thirsts, let him come, and he that will,
let him take the water of life gratis.

The doctrine of the Gomarian Cal^inists to the contrary, to wit, That God
inuiteth not all men to salvation.

Calvin. In^tit. lib. 3. cap. 24. verse. 12. Those whom God has created unto
eternal death, to the end they should be instruments of his anger, and become
examples of his severity; those bereaueth he sometims of the power to hear his
word; sometyms he does blind them, and makes them more ignorant through the
manifestation of his word, because they should come unto their end.

Ibid. cap. 13. Behold he speaks unto them, but to the end they should
become more deaf; he kindles his light, to the end they should be the
blinder; he declares his doctrine, but to the end they should thereby become
unintelligible; he uses means, but to the end they should not be saved.

Calvin. lib. ad calum. Nebulon. page 858. Why does God willingly let err,
(yea through a secret resolution has ordained to err) such as himself
commands to go the right way. Not to know this becomes measured modesty,
but saucely to be prying into it (as you do) is a foolish boldness.

Theo. Beza against Castalio page 398. God sends forth his servants, because
they should declare the Gospel of salvation to all people, yet keeps he
secret to himself, in whom he will that the preaching of the Gospel shall be
of force, and in what moment; and also, who he has resolved by the same
preaching to blind, and to obdurate.

10. Piscator in disput. aduersus Schafman. Page 7. It is manifest out of Gods
word that God does also call some outcasts unto salvation, and that he
notwithstanding will not that any of those outcasts be saved, as being such as
he with an unchangeable resolution, has ordavned altogether to perdition.

Ibid Page 143. God acknowlegeth, or witnesses with tongue by the ministers of
the Ghospel, that he will that the outcasts which he speaks unto in the
number of the elect, shall believe the Gospel, in as much as he commands
it; and yet will he not that they believe; for were it that he so would, then
should he affoard them the grace to believe, without the which no man can
believe.

Aug. Marloratus in his Annot. Joan. 15. So stands then this sentence firm,
that he whom God has elected before the creation of the world, cannot perish,
and that he whom he has rejected can not be saved, although he do all the
works of the Saints; So irreuocable is the sentence of God.

And now having truly translated and laid down the different opinions upon
these points, I will leave you to judge of them according as piety and reason
shall direct you. There was a Synod held, about the controversies between
these two sides, at Dort in Holland, in the year 1619. gathered together from
sundry forreyne parts, as well as out of Holland it self, as other Provinces;
but the Synod refusing to hear the Arminians, as dilinquentes condemned them
and their doctrine, being reduced into five capital articles; and heerupon, by
a severe Proclamation were the Arminia^s forbidden to preach, or hold
assemblies for the exercise of their religion; some having been killed for
attempting the contrary, some banished, some sustained confiscation of their
goods, and some imprysonment, where they yet remain; though in the mean time
their number does not diminish, but daily more and more increase throughout all
the Country, as well in villages, as in cities.

Thus have you the beginning and ground of this great controversy whereof no end
can be determined. It rests now for Con^lusion of my intended discourse, that
here I set down, whether in respect of Religion, the State of England may be
moved to continue their help and assistance to the Hollanders.

The religion therefore of Holland is first to be rightly known and conceived,
and then well to be considered: I mean that which has been, and yet is
principally mantayned by the States thereof, to wit, that which is opposite* unto
the Arminians, and does now vulgarly bear the name of Caluinian or Gomarian
doctrine, as has been sa^d. The Arminians against whom they of this religion
do contend, did in the time of their formamed Advocate Berneue't, solicit and
^abour, that the States might have the authority given them of Supreme Headship
of the Church; and some affirm that they also sought to have Bishops after the
manner of England; but herunto the Caluinian Gomarists, in all earnestnes,
opposed themselves, and especially against the having of supremacy or
superinten^e^cy in their Churches; wherein they went so far, that they
published openly in their printed books, that whatsoever they were that went
about to make men the heads of Churches, would make of men Idols, and of
themselves by so doing, Idolaters.

What think you now of the conformity of this religion, to that of England,
where by established Acts of Parliament it is death to deny the Temporal
Prince to be supreme Head of the Church? He that denies this in England is by
the law to (...) as a traitor: he that affirms it in Holland is by their
doctrine to be held for an Idolater. Our Bishops in England were wont to
persecu^e Puritanes for denying their authority; what would they say to these
professors of Reformation that make them Idolaters? These be purer then
Puritanes, being distilled into a far purer strain or quin^ essence Is not
this a religion, trow you, that deserves by English Protestants to be foug^ten
for, and to have the wealth of England consumed for upholding the cause and
quarrel thereof? What may we think of our most Royal Kings express
Commandment to have the Communion received kneeling? They would show
themselves to have legs as st^^fe as the legs of Elephants, rather then they
would find an^ knees to bow thereunto, let it be commanded by what authority
it would. And I do verily believe, they would be without communion all the
days of their life, rather then to receive it with so much unease, as of not
sitting.

And as for the Cross, which his Majesty has likewise commanded to be used
in Baptism^; how is it possible they would endure it, seeing they stick not to
say, It is the mark of the (...)? By which saying the world may ma^ke that
themselves are beasts indeed. And England may think it self very ill advised,
and very unhappy, to a first the quarrel of a people in regard of religion,
whose Religion is so opposite to theirs as this is; and the professour^ whereof,
if they were subjects of England and there resident, would by the laws of the
Realm be severely punished.

But much more unhappy should England be, if hereafter by the failing of his
Majesty, and the Prince his Highness (both whom God long preserve) such a
Sect should come to be set up and advanced there. Doubtless most welcome to
their Puritan Brethren, who then would triumph and ium^e with them to the full,
and with them bear the only sw^y in persecuting the P^ot^stants in England, as
the others now do the Armintans in Holland.

One conceyte more comes to my mind, to note unto you, before I take my
leave; and this (...) that whereas in the late Synod of Dort, some of our
English and Scot^ish d^uines, being sent thither to assist the
Ca^uinian-Comarists, about the condemnation of the opinion of the Arm^nta^s,
they could so notwithstanding piettily put to silence the ^omarists, for making
of them Idolaters, as though there had been no such matter ever by them
thought upon; and that on other side the Gomarists could be so kind, as to sit
in the company of English Idolaters, and quietly hold their peace from
challenging them to be such: yea and without all scruple of conscience, to eat
and drink with them; and to part very good friends. Surely here is in this
case a great moderation and suspension of spirit to be noted in both, seeing
the one knowing what the other kept in his bosom, no reproach of being
traitors or Idolaters did burst forth between them.

Thus having given you a brief, and true Relation, according unto your
demannd, I will not be further tedious unto you, but with respectfull
remembrance, and of as great desire of your good, as of my own, recommend you
unto him, from whom only all good proceeds.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Line Fault Correction. 17. 17. from all from him Ibid. 22. published
polished 29. 8. honorified homofied.

IFany other faults have escaped, it is desired of the Gentle Reader, to
correct them of his courtesy, the Author being far absent from the Print.


