A NEEDEFVLL, new, and necessary treatise of Chyrurgerie, briefly
comprehending the general and particular curation of Ulcers, drawn forth of
sundry worthy writers, but especially of

Antonius Calmeteus Vergesatus, and Ioannes Tagaltius, by John Banister Gent.
practiser in Physic and Chyrurgerie.

Hereunto is annexed certain experimentes of mine own invention, truly
tried, and daily of me practiced.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Marshe. Anno. 1575. Cum Priuilegio.

The Contents.
First a treatise of Chirurgerie, containing the general and particular
curation of Ulcers. Certain experimentes of mine own invention, truly tried,
and daily practiced. A general diet, necessary to be observed in the curatio^
of Ulcers, taken out of Angerius Ferrerius. A certain compendious and
profitable description of the natural temperatures, and diverse operations of
simple medicines, diligently collected, and truly practiced.
To the right worshipful master Thomas Sta^hope Esquire, and high sheriff of
Nottingham shyre, this present year of our Lord 1575. John Banister prays
prosperous life, continual health and daily increase of vvorshippe.
IN those days (right worshipful) when the world was vnfourmed, orders
unprovided, and laws not established, but al sorts of men and ages, enjoyed
and embraced their own licentious liberty: Before Princes took power,
Magistrates authority, and Rulers government: At what time art was unknown,
miseries unsearched, and studies neglected, the people of all Nations lived in
beastly and brutish manner, following their own fancy as a God, and their will as
reason. But after it pleased God (of his inestimable providence) to illumine
the shadowed sight of the world, and of his divine pleasure, to inspire and
breathe into certain of his Creatures, the prudent knowledge of sapience
skill, then wisdom begat policy, policy diligence, and diligence a desire
to know, so that the woorking of the one, found out the nature of things,
and the experience of the other, invented arts for the use and practice of the
same, whereby Laws after were confourmed, Justice feared, and raw things
ripened, Rules regarded, Sciences searched, and mysteries unfolded. At this
time the world began to bud the blossoms of a delectable fruit, and sow the
seed of a happy harvest (if worldly delights may so lawefully be termed) for
every man now delighted to excel, all sorts embraced knowledge, and each
degree labored to profit his country. Yea all men so allowed labors, and
contemned idleness, that immediately all the world flowed with liberal arts
and scientiall Artificers. As Philo Philo.
first brought into Greece, the invention of Letters. Polihimnia, Polihimnia.
had the first use of Rethoricke, Orpheus Orpheus.
found Music, Zoroastes Zoroastes.
Magic, Errato Errato.
Geometry. etc. And so far they searched, that some found out Astronomy,
some Astrology, some Cosmographie, and such like, some one thing, and some an
other, so that in few years there seemed nothing left in nature unsearched or
unknown. Among which Physic (whom it pleased God to predestinate a succor
and aid to the universal world (though not at first or presently, yet in
space of time, among many other things, as a princely pearl) was created,
the Theorick part, whereof the most do attribute to Apollos Invention of
Physic Appollo.
speculatio^, and the practicke to Aesculapius AEsculapius
proof, so that in short space it was so sought, searched, and experienced in
every Nation, and so brightlye displaied her beams to each Region, that as
Princes could not cease to praise and study it, neither could the common
people leave of to worship it, but extolled the Artistes as Gods, and
embraced the fruits thereof as incomparable. From time to time (right
worshipful) as it has increased, so has it been esteemed unto this day in
great honor, worthy fame and princely dignity, and never valued of so little
price, nor prised for so sm^^^ treasure as in this our age and pre^^^t days,
wherein al Nations are given ^re to esteem private gain, then p^^aque
commodity, and more to regarde^ ^esser profit, then favor a further vtil^^e.
Such is the property of this mutable world, and in such wise is it alte^^d by
the course of ages, that where as (in time past) all expert persons (whosoever
excelled in any quality or property) was magnified to the skies, erecting
their pictures in Cities, Towns, and Temples, as Claudius Claudius.
was in Rome, Armodius Armodius
in Athe^s, and Hanniball Hannibal
in the Temple of Pallas, with an infinite number more, whom the people thought
not enough commended in words, but extolled their fames by Pictures and
Epigra^mes, and they which with lesser skill, wit, or cunning, did their
diligence, were laudably encouraged, Contrariwyse, now a days the best that
write, reap skant commendation, but have their works skornefully skanned,
and a silly fault found, with curious Momes derided, and the younger Students
(who no less desire their Countries commodity, then hate to walk in
darkness) are flouted for trifles as doultishe dreamers, and their works
dispis^d as error holders. My meaning here is of such, ^ have and do take
pain daily (for their natural Nations sake) in pe^ning forth and openi^g unto
ot^^^ the secret mystery of Physic and Chyrurgeri^ ^euealing and publishing
forth to al people, tha^ Tale^t which God has lent to them, thinking nothing
to worthy which may profit others, nor that any thing ought to pleasure one
privately, which might benefit many openly: following the old and often recited
saying of Cicero: Cicero.
No^ solum nobis nati sumus. etc. Why should we wallow thus in disdain? and why
is amity so furiously fettered? shall Heathens surmount us Christians? and
shall Tyrauntes surpass us in enbracing the learned? Hyppocrate^ Hyppocrates.
was so esteemed of the great king Artaxerxes, Artaxerxes.
that he could never procure him self to be merry without his company.
Philip of Macedonie, Phil. Macedo.
so regarded Aristotle, Aristotle.
that he called him self happy because his son Alexander the great was
borne in his time. And Auerois Auerois.
was so beloved of that Turkishe Emperor and terrible Tyrant Bayazet, Bayazet.
that (when he had finished his bloody broiling wars, and rested at his own
palaice) he took pleasure in no company, nor esteemed any man's council like
to his Physician. A thousand more examples could I infer, wherein the very
Pagans seem to excel us Christians in lauding the learned, and encouraging
all willing favorers of learning and sciences. But affection (at this day) so
rules the roste, and disdain stirs such contempt (among the bleting babes
of Momus charm) that a slender fault, Tritu^est. Inuidia est serra animi,
or slight escape, they deride without ceassing, and a learned work does even
saw their minds asunder. For this cause right worshipful) some perhaps
would demand of me, how I dare put pen to paper to entreat of any matter
or part of Physic, considering the scrupelous state of time present,
together with the barrennes of my wit, and want of learning, or lay in my
dishe this saying of Terence. Terence.
Quid dici possit quod no^ dictum sit prius? Whereto I answer, tha^ neither
the curious crackes of the envious can stay me, nor yet the bragging boultes
of the vain glorious, are of force to hold me back, since I am moved hereto
by three notable causes. The first cause.
The first is, to pleasure my country and friends (amongst whom your worship
is chief,) and therefore some fruit of my pooer painful practice, are due
unto you, hoping also, (as other more learned do in the publishing of their
books) that these few lines (partly by the study of other good authors,
partly also by mine own experience collected) may under your worships
protection be defended against Sicophantes and faultfinders, of you, whose
wit, prudence, and authority (in this country to this respect) is of great
force among us. This little labor therefore it may please your worship to
accept, as the hearty present of a friend poor and faithful, to you offered
this present year, of your new Office, to be a monument to posterity of that
good will I bear toward you in words, and would declare the same in deeds
(if ability were correspondent to my will.) The second cause.
Another cause is, for that I protest my self to have set forward and
finished this my present enterprise, deuoyde altogether (as knows God) of
hautie mind or stout courage, but with so simple and zealous heart, that
neither ill will with all his mischievous darts, vainglorie, with his pranked
pikes, nor envy, with his sudden shot, are once able to give me repulse or
touch. The third cause.
And the last cause is, the remembrance of Aristotle Aristole.
his saying, Bonu^ quo communius tanto prestantius, So that to pleasure and
profit, other men is best, and most to be desiered, but seeing (as the
proverb monisheth,) Non datur cuique adire Corinthu^, I shall think my pen
and time well employed, if I may profit some men.

One sort of people there are (and that is the learned) who are commonly given
to disdain the reading over of such simple collections, chiefly of this part
of Physic, fulfilling the common saying, Aquila no^capit muscas and such
peradventure will little regard, or less esteem it then the meaner sort (to
whom this book is chiefly left) who (I know) will not disdain or despise the
perusing of this treatise of Chirurgerie, as necessary as the other (more
exquisite) though some of late more precise then wise have fondly affirmed,
foolishlye feined, and frantickelye faced that the Chyrurgian has not to
deal in Physic, small courtesy is it to break faithful friendship or
atonement, but it is mad dotage, to part that which can not be separated.
How can Physic be praised, and Chirurgerie discommended? can any man despise
Chyrurgerie, and not defame Physic? no sure, he that speaks evil of the
one, slaundereth both, and he that robs the one, spoileth the other. For
although they be at this time made two distinct Arts, and the Artistes
severally named, yet sure, the one can not work without some aid of the
other, nor the other practice without the help of both. For further assurance
whereof, learn of Hyppocrates, Gal. li. de tum. preter natural De mitte^do
sang. and De meth. medendi.
who practiced both together, and in reading Galenes books, you shall clearly
see how they embrace one an other with firm frendshippe and inseparable
^amitie. Without diet (I say) and purgation, Vlcus sordidum, or Cacoaethes
(with other like diseases) may not be healed. Herehence comes it diverse
times, that many men almost in every country, decaie and perish in the Art
of Chyrurgerie, by the ignorant dealinges of Chyrurgians, unskillful in
Physic. Hereby also it comes, that so many Runnagates and Idle livers, make
such daily incursions, and often entringes into those worthy and misterious
sciences, who durst not route if they were at unity, but that can not be, so
long as this error is maintained, that the one ought not to participate with
the other, for so neither of them can be perfect. Seeing that thing is only
perfect, Cui ne minima pars quidem deest. Great ruthe and pity it is, that so
many idle Idiottes and Erroneous Asses, are permitted to practice this Art of
great difficulty, that requires so many helps and su^drie knowledge of
things, as the nature and names of diseases, Simples, Roots, Plants, parts
of man's body, and a thousand things more, whereof the greatest sort of them
are utterly ignorant, whereby they ruin the body with their blind and
desperate dealing, often to the utter subuersio^ of li^e: for as the body has
need of the government of the mind, so has the mind need of the service
and ministry of the body, which is the Tabernacle of the Soul, and lodge of
the mind. ^. Pet.
A man shall have ill lodging or rest in a ruinous dropping house, and the
mind less quietness in a sickely body, which may be through the occasion of
local Plaster, or Poulder, or Cerote, unaptly applied. Therefore the Poet
wisely wished (in his prayer for a friend) Mentem sanam in corpore sano.
Iuuenal.
And Galene proves that the discrasie of the one infecteth the other: for a
solitary sad mind makes a Melancholy body; and a Melancholy body
engenders Melancholy passions of the mind. This Art therefore well
manifests the needefulnes of diverse sciences and qualities, whose subject (
Et materia circa quam) is man's body worthelie compared to a City or common
wealth. For in a City there is but one governor (if it be well ruled) and
that in man's body is reason, the Prince is placed on high, ^or peril of
rebellion, as here reason inhabi^eth the brain, the prince has his watchers
and guarde, so has the body memory as ^hief counselor with the other
senses for ^is guarde, retaining wrath in his heart and ^oncupiscense in the
Liver, like Pensioners, ^o repulse all injuries, and the mind riffe go^ng
between reason and these affections, which ^oresee, and let all commotions or
tumultes, ^ls the inferior savage members, would sone ^cale the Tower and
dislodge reason their Prince. But as that common wealth, who has ^ainefull and
circumspecte governors, can ^aue no common uproar or seditious discen^ion, so
has the body that is healthful, like ^iligent artificers, to maintain his
quiet ^ate, as the stomach to boil the meat for ^ll the body, The body his
office.
the Liver to strain and forge ^od blood, the Milte to draine the Melan^lie,
the Bledar urine, and the Gall Choler, the Veins conueighe blood to all parts
and places, the Arteries have the transporting of the vital spirits, and the
sinews, the ani^al, whereof comes all seeling and mo^ng. Discords in a
City, happens through ^ill and unruly rages, and in the body through vile
and vicious humors, which vnordinatly flow and ouerrunne their place^ and must
be corrected and chastened diversely. For even as your worship (and such like ^
Authority) punishes not all offenses wit^ one kind of pain, that is to
say, every of fence is not repaid by death, so every discrasie and grief of
the body, meriteth not extreme dealing, nor the dangerous affectes slight
respect, or slow administration. An^ as offenders often times are rebuked, and
ye^ pardoned, in hope of ame^deme^t, but again ta^ken in like crime, without
grace or repen^taunce, are shortly executed, least their graceles acts and
pernicious counselles should^ entise others to like lewdnes of living. In lik^
manner does the Art of Chirurgerie (the Artist being expert) procure and
purchas^ healthful members to the body, abating the malice of every humor,
so long as in due tim^ it is followed: but when such aboundaunc^ of rebellous
matter, has so settled it self a^mong the common or exterior labor i^
parts, and so rooted in space of time, that n^^ there nature nor medicine can
prevail, the we chose rather to separate it from the bod^ then to suffer it
further to corrupt, since the old proverb is that, To much pity m^reth a
city, and untimely pity differs little from plain cruelty. This I speak
of such Vlcered members, as may not be both cured and also preserved.
Notwithstanding, that I have known many in my time, that have most ruinously
lost their limbs by the desperate dealinges of wilful wretches, whose
ignorance has spoiled that which might have been saved, whose blindness has
marred that which the wise could have made, and whose wilful arroga^cie has
cut of, that which might safely have grown and continued: such as in me^ding
one grief, make commonly two more, and the best success they have, is chance
medley, the blind man so lays hold on the hare, but no wise man will
prefer hap before cunning, Fortune before Art, or chance before reason,
which is the infallible foundation of all sciences. To whose judgment (right
worshipful) I willingly commit these my labors, knowing that in reasons
school, neither envy reigns, parcialitie rules, nor arroga^t faultfinders
have access, but in their steedes, art, equality, and godly reformation are
in greatest authority, fulfilling the law of Christ through charity, which
enuieth not, but furthereth al me^ and hinders none. 1. Cor.13.
They therefore that are not able to swim, may here with me wade till they
have got the courage to enterprise further. And notwithstanding that Ulcers
be taken for a base part in Physic, yet (as Quintilian Quintilianus.
writes of Grammar) Plus reces^u praestat quam front promittit. Every Art is
necessary, and each part of Physic is needeful: no age can be without them,
no country miss them, neither will any nation despise the goodly creature of
God (for so is Physic in the book of Ecclesiasticus Eccle. 39.
named.) The same God therefore (who instituted this Art for the health of
mankind, as also al other sciences for our succor) preserve guide, and
govern your worship (and all other that love and encourage the professors of
good arts and godly mysteries) the right way to eternal bliss and heavenly
happiness.

Your worships alvvayes to command, John Banister.
The Author in the commendation of Physic and Chyrurgerie.
IF things which have been much esteem^
in perfect plight remain:
And profitable practices,
may commendations gain.
If things which famous me^ have found,
do most of all excel:
And that which needful is deserve,
to win and wear the bell.
If virtue thou will truly scan,
can thou ought better have:
Then that which saues a perishing man,
even from the gredie grave.
If thou would seek what most of all,
does passing things attain:
Then that regard which from the death,
so many does detain.
And Physic sith it yields such,
as thou can aptly crave:
A sightly seat above the rest,
of force it needs must have.
For if thou wander searchingly,
from East unto the West:
Thou shall perceive that every where,
for Physic there is rest.
More profitable nothing is,
(although the world abound:)
And nothing more that man can need,
in all the world so round.
For lands and livings though thou have,
aboundaunt gold and fee:
With such like plenty very huge,
which seems good to thee.
Yet if with sickness thou be grieud,
and eke to pain subject:
What will avail thy plenty store,
can it thy health direct?
Lo Physic can the so much give,
if thou unto her lore
Attentive be, and crased corpse
before her do deplore.
Hyppolitus it did revive,
and eke his life restore:
And ( AEson) young it causd to seem,
as he had been before.
It Phaon fairst of others made,
and so he did endure:
And Philip, Alexander great,
it made from poison pure.
Who else no doubt had perished,
by drinking in a Lake:
Such horror great and anguishement,
this art did undertake.
Examples many do abound,
whereby a man may see:
If that no Physic could be found,
great were our misery.
Who could the force of herbs attain,
or sickness well discern?
Who could diseases with their names,
that be so many learn?
It would exceed all human wits,
no reason could it know:
It would appear impossible,
to all that dwell on low.
Since then such wonders it does work,
of force we must maintain:
And love the same exceedingly,
as chiefest health and gain.
What men (alas) abiected are,
by wan^ing of this art:
When as they may no salve obtain,
to cure their urging smart.
And but that it does quickly help,
it daily does appear:
That many should in grave be closde,
whom yet remains here.
What number should here never live,
nor see the light of Sun:
But that this art does succor them,
er in the world they come.
It does also not only bring,
the pained from the woe:
But even the healthful sort it makes,
their state not to forgo.
What health Chyrurgerie does yield,
also in every land:
In long discourse or praise thereof,
it needles is to stand.
Since that her virtues passing rare,
in every town does flow:
And warlike armies every where,
her benefits do know.
How could Machaon and his mate,
Whom Podalirius hight:
Have spared been in Troyan wars,
and Greecians gristy fight.
When thousands there they saude alive,
in Agamemnons band:
Of worthy Greeks which else had died,
and perished out of hand.
What Ulcered parts also it does,
restore unto their kind:
I leave, the sooth let each man say,
and praise it as they find.
q. I. B.
Finis.
To the worshipful the Master, Wardens, and genenerall assistauntes of the
fraternity of Chyrurgians in London, John Banister, (a member of the same)
wishes to them a^l, the true direction in the perfect way of knowledge to this
misterious science, according to their profession.
BEfore the gracious goodness of God, had created medicine on the earth, before
(I say) he unfolded ye mystery thereof to worldly wightes, and mortal
creatures, no man knew what plants could prevail, not one could show the
nature of herbs, every man was ignorant of the properties of simples, many
mineralles were unknown, most gummes unfound, an^ all seeds unsought. (To
conclude) all natures benefits (that now so often preserve and keep man's
healthful state frihurt) lay hugely heaped in the boisterous bowels of confused
Chaos, distaunt from light, absent from knowledge, and far from doing good.
Which now (being brought to light by the same almighty his providence) not
only ministers health to the sick, ease to the painful, pleasure to the
sorrowful, and health to the healthful, but ofttimes as we daily prove (eue^
by fine force) encountreth the merciles might of fell disseases, and preuenteth
the dreadful darts of death (whilst the skillful only have her in use. But as
envy that subtle Serpent hates all virtue, contemns all good things, and
spiteth the prosperous success of famous sciences: so has she of late
procured and stirred vp^ such a sort of beastlye abusers, or diuelishe
dissemblers, as (study only to deceive the world) inuente willingly to
embase the worthy art, and seek shamefully to slander the godly students
thereof. As it is not unknown unto you (therefore needeles for me to tell) how
Physic and Chyrurgerie have in time past been renowned throughout the world:
No more is it to you ignorant, how little it is in these days regarded, which
if we compare time present with that is past, we shall see and plainly
perceive it, rather despised (as needles) then regarded as necessary, such
slender judgment and fond affection reigns at this day, and so is the
world vpside down turned: that what so before time has been best accounted of,
the same is now the basest, that which was principal, is (at this time) ye
poorest, and the chiefest become lest esteemed. In this case (therefore) as I
must needs blame the fickle state of the world and most of al accuse the
frail estate of ma^s nature (I mean the common sort of people, who are
always ready to turn with every blast of Eolus wavering wind without
stedfastnes or consideration of righteous^causes) So can I not altogether
excuse the^, unto whom authority is given, to establishe orders and reform
malefactors with the causes of offense, whose only slacknes, and untimely
clemency is the greatest encouragement that offenders have. I speak not this
as seeming to co^troll your worships (knowing you will rightly conceive, it
comes of a zealous heart) but if the love of our country, and eminent
desolatio^ (which might happen by want of this art) do not draw us all
hereunto, yet (at the least, if we love our selves) we are forste to cry out
upon abuses, deplore double dealing, and seek for spedie reformation. Uerie
hard it were for such a rowte of Rogishe livers, so boldly to practice, and
to fill all places with the slanderous shauinges of their deuelishe practices,
were they not permitted of some (in authority) and winked at of such as
should them punish. I do not a little marvel also, how and by what means
or merit, so many get their authorities or licenses to practice, when as in
examination they (not only) show them selves ignorant Asses, and in their
works bussardly beyardes, but also of them selves altogether disposed to
incontinencie, and daily dissimulation, without either fear of God, or
obedience to their Prince, I (my self) know them at this day, the most
beastly deceivers, and licentious livers that ever professed any art, (having
neither knowledge, modesty, nor honesty, and yet practice their accustomed
deceites, under the color of admittaunce from our hal, being (in deed) far
fitter for the cart the^ Chyrurgerie. Smally shall it avail ye learned to take
pains, and less encourage the willing to spend their time in opening things
obscured, and revealing mysteries unknown, when every saucie Sicophant shall
(not only by peuish permissio^) defame us with their desperate doings, and
suck our commodity with ^their chattring charms: but also wrest and construe
our labors at their poopishe pleasures, accompting the best basest, and the
worst worthiest (like spiting spiders, which turn good to badde, sweet to
sower, and bonie to poison. If therefore your worshippes would prevent these
proud practisers, and pluck up these wicked weeds, which thus pollute the
vineyard (as already you have godly begone) I doubt not but more
co^mendations will grow of the art in short space then there was in the time
that Apollo Apollo.
first found it, more estimation the^ when Aesculapius AEsculapius.
amplyfied it, and more fervently embraced then in the time of Hippocrates
Hyppocr.
who made it perfect. And you for discrete governance and politic orders
shall (not only) win a greater fame perpetually, then either ye Romans for
their hardines, or ye Lacedaemonians for their valiauut courages have gained,
but also so stimulate and prick forward the hearts of mindeful stude^tes (such
as God be praised, are of late frutefully spro^g up amongst us) so as they shall
rightly account their travails worthily taken, and their labors well bestowed.
At ye like stay stand I at this present time, offering these my loitered
labors, to the skanning eyes of the stately world, and abiding (as at a view)
to see if courage will be moved (by ye thankefulnes of such godly patro^s as you
be) to resort to me again, for recompense, which then (as I have here debated
of the curation of Ulcers, as the most necessary part of Chirurgerie at this
day) I will shortly (if God lend me life) enforce my pen to extend her
travail to the curatio^ of Tumors against nature. In ye mean time (craving
your worships assistau^ce in protecting these my first enterprises (so much as
you may) from ye te^pesteous tau^tes of such witles wisardes as always love to
find faults in the best, and them selves not amending the simplest. I
commend to you at all time, present health, and lasting joy in the world to
come.

At my house in Nottingham, the.vi. of June. 1575.
John Banister against evil and counterfeit dealers in the art of Physic
and Chyrurgerie.
Even as it can not be,
by reasons rule denied:
That Physic skill deservedly,
by trusty truth is tried.
To be the thing whereto,
dame Fame is chiefly bound:
Above all earthly arts below
that are, or may be found.
The Artistes which profess
the same, likewise are they:
Which worthiest are to wear (I guess)
the wreathed twist of baie.
Such men of honest life,
as godly gains frequent:
Without deceit, debate, or strife,
or forged fond intent.
But few of those there are,
(God knows) the greater ruth:
Among a sort whose dealings far,
distaunced are from truth.
For Roisters now do raunge,
and ruffle every where:
And men to much delight in change,
without regard or fear.
Each Jack that wants grace,
and ^dle life has spent:
And that to iet from place to place,
has fixed his intent.
Such naught have now to feign,
their fond and foolish trade:
But that they health can plant for pain,
and sickness fell invade.
Leave of you Iuglers vain,
let Physic live in rest:
Most worthily with them to reign,
that learn and love her best.
Fie fie you steine the art,
of worthy surgerie:
More fitter far to fill the cart,
then use Anathomie.
Your falsely feined grace,
is but for certain time:
You run and raunge from place to place,
and still augmente your crime.
You promise help for pence,
where as you do but noye:
O secret foes depart from hence,
poor people you destroy.
Our Auncientes often have scand,
and told that some dissease:
Cannot be curde, you take in hand,
the dead (to life) to raise.
Nothing may miss you sure,
if pence be in the ward:
O misers mad, confess some cure,
for healing to be hard.
Be warned once by fear,
and of your friend take heed:
The price of blood is passing dear,
as we in scripture reed.
quod I. B.
Finis.
Ars Chyrurgica alloquitur Lectorem.
YE learned dames that do delight,
in sciences divine:
Refuse not now to taste a while,
this sacred sap of mine.
Which I abundantly do yield,
to every man each where:
Like Tellus with her fertile fruits,
when Autumn does appear.
Or Nilus when it ouerflowes,
does fat and feed the soil:
Which after that abundant fruits,
does yield withouten toil.
Who can depaint the passing joy,
that bird and beast do taste:
In new return of Lady Ver,
when Hiems fittes are past.
Even so do I to mortal wight,
more by a thousand part:
Send sweet relief in hard distress,
To appease the pinching smart.
The woeful wounds and sundry sores,
that mortal men oppress:
And do consume the crased corpse,
by me they have redress.
Let Cronos tell (that ancient dame)
which bear all things in mind:
How bount^full lo, I have been,
always to human kind.
And these our days can well declare,
how many men I save:
Were not for me which had been shut,
long since within the grave.
My virtues they are known beyond,
the farthest part of Inde:
I help, I heal, in every coaste,
I comfort all mankind.
Since that my fountain flows so far,
and serves each degree:
How can you say that any art,
is equal unto me.
Although there be a number now,
for pleasure counted chief:
Yet none to man I dare well say,
it brings such relief.
When Atroppos to line of life,
his mortal ^aunce would lay:
Then step I in with helping hand,
and can set him to stay.
Among the sondrie skillful arts,
by hands that handled are:
Disdain me not though with the best,
my self I do compare.
My genitour is high Iehoue,
a parent without peer:
My mother hight Experience,
by tract of many a year.
As Hyblaes hill of pearlesse praise,
that swetest honey bringes:
So was I wayed in all their time,
with Emperors and with kings.
How famous was Phillirides,
that first found out my skill:
And taught me to Appollos Impe,
and he the world did fill.
With knowledge of my worthiness,
and what great fame he wan^
When that he called back from death,
Sir Virbius, twice a man.
As Phisons flood aye full I flow,
what need you any more:
I have all things that may do good.
a salve for every sore.
q. Rich. Smith.
Finis.
Tho. Land. de natura and cura Vlceris and Vulneris.
ASpicis in paruo medicamina multa libello,
scripta Banisteriae dexteritate manus.
Vlcera quot quot habet mala carnis machinae nostrae,
En facili methodo co^tinet iste liber.
Pro specie morbi, mutatur forma medendi,
dicaturque malo propria cura suo.
Vulnera continui diuortia dicimus esse:
hinc tamen vt sanies fluxerit, Vlcus habes.
Ergo mihi dices, distinguis ab Vlcere vulnus?
Tempore, qua^do alias vulnus and vlcus ide^.
Vulnera vi fiunt quae coctio vertit in Vlcus:
sic quod vulnus erat, posteaid vlcus erit.
Sic etiam virus faetens,(...)dicitur(...),
vix hoc a medicae tollitur artis open.
Namque locu^ succus vitiat, succumque vicissim
cancrosi sanies inficit ipsa loci.
Non poteris molli curare malagmate ca^cros,
et mag is hos reddes asperiore feros.
Vlcus tale animipotes appellare Papismum,
haec been sunt multis assimulata modis.
Vlcus olet, mu^dum foris, at pus gignitur intus,
multa it a dissimulans faeda Papista tegit.
Consimili ratione nequis curare Papistam:
hunc been simoneas, surdus vt Aspis eri^.
Corporeus medica cancer sanabitur art,
at mentis, solus tollere Christ potes.
Ergo precemur eum, sit men's cu^ corpore sana.
^arnis homo medicus, pneumatis ipse deus.
Thomas Newtonus.
No^ minimu^ meruisse decus laude^que videtur
Grata Banisteri cura laborque mei.
Vtile cuius opus cu^ctis, cunctisque salubre
Qui sua ab vlceribus corpora tuta velint.
F. T.
Huc citus appropera, qui corpore cu^que laboras,
Plurima sunt isto pharmaca sana libro.
Vlcera depingit, generalem artemque mede^di
Vlcera, tu Lector perlege, viue, vale.
Against the Treacherous trade of paltrie Practisers.
How can that common wealth endure,
where governance does lack?
The happy state will soon decaie,
and all things go to wrack.
How should the ships yt shreads ye seas,
in dark and trembling tide,
From perishing preserved be,
without a skillful guide?
And all things else under the Sun,
without good government:
Can not in steadie stay long stand,
but fall to languishement.
Then how should man which subject is
to all infirmity:
Without the help of Phisickes art,
in sickness saved be?
Who can of fountains dried up,
sweet waters justly crave?
Who seeks of Codrus simple soul,
a Princely gift to have?
And can a man in gryping grief,
have aid to ease his smart,
Of such as have no skill at all,
in noble Phisickes art?
A retchles rowt of doltishe dorres,
have ouerspread our soil:
Which do bereave the bees alas,
of that wherefore they toil.
Oh noble schole of conning skill,
that bears the branch of Baie:
In haste come with your helping hand,
to drive these Drones away.
They trotte about from place to place,
as Frogs hoppe in the rain:
And thus this noble art God wotte,
they do naught else but stayne.
But most of all I do lament,
to see them blind men's e^es:
In every coaste where they do come,
and give them chalk for cheese.
Such success have those in the end,
which practice without skill:
Where one or two by hap they heal,
a hundredth more they kill.
This is their trade to promise help,
and health to every one:
But when they once have cropped their coin
away they will be gone.
This g^ar must needs al good me^ grieve
and grate them on the ga^l:
To see these caterpillars spoil,
the tree, the fruit and all.
Flee, flee (I say) this hurtful kind,
much worse then furies fell:
If they do escape unpunished here,
they will be hanged in hell.
When yt the Lord shall come t'inquire,
for blood shed in the land:
I fear the blood of some will be,
required at their hand.
Leave of this lewdnes and repent,
for former fences made:
And he^ceforth look to bend your selues^
to use some other trade.
R. S.
George Baker Chyrurgian, in praise of the Author.
THe thing where any cunning lies,
to speak in praise were vain:
As that which can commend it self,
without an others pain.
And where no cunning is, to say,
that cunning does abound:
For winning credit to the thing,
is but a silly ground.
Even so the credit of this book,
does not consiste in speech:
Words therein be but spent in vain,
it has a further reach.
The matter it entreats of,
is needful both and good:
And he that pende it for thy use,
no little pains it stood.
First read it well and after judge,
upon that you shall find:
That as it needs no foreign praise,
praise should not be behind.
The book both dares and does it self,
adventure in your hands:
The author of it with his pains,
At your good courtesy stands.
G. B.
To the gentle Reader, John Banister sends salutation, in the name of the
highest.
AS no man without diligent travail, ca^ merit commendation, nor any man by
his idle living deserve to be praised: No more does it behoue such lasie
livers, as suppe gains without sorrow, and enjoy pleasure without toil, to
bark at other men's labors, to deride the diligent, scorn the skillful, and
disdaining those who never think their bodies busied in helping others, esteem
their wits weakened to further many, nor account their members martyred
(for any pains) to profit their country, but would God such (as be lulled
with the sleepie songs of selfloue, and rocked in the lustles cradle of
security) would either rise to light, and see their loathsome lives, or else
wallowe their fill in sloughtfull delights, and suffer the diligent to escape
their dreaming parts, but since no writer ever had that hap, nor any author
that fortune, since (I say) that Grecian sweet Mecaenas, and that eloquent
Roman orator, could (in no wise) shun their saucie charms: Let my
barbarous brain and wilful pen, never hope of look to purchase praise of
all men. If therefore (gentle Reader) thy modest mind be any thing addicted to
the commendation of virtue, banishement of vice, augmenting of scientiall
knowledge, or thy nature inclined to love light, and hate darkness, or desire
to know the secret shapes of nature, then praise painful practisers,
commend cunning artificers, and welwillers to worthy professions, cease
never to encourage, and that the rather, because al writers do account them
selves satisfied, if thou accept their labors with a chereful countenance and
grateful heart, rather commending then dispraising, amending then dispising,
and encouraging rather then contrariwyse by thy ingratitude to force them fly
such virtuous enterprises, as lead all men to the light of truth according
to the saying of Plato, Per argumenta multoru^ cernitur veritas, So might the
world in short space, not only decaie and barbarism, but also become more
brutishe then were the Athenians before Draco taught them, more senseles then
the Argiues, before the instruction of Phoroneus, and more Awlesse then were
the Lacedaemonians before Licurgus laws. My pen, labor and diligence,
therefore (loving Reader) shall I account worthily employed, if (according to
my expectation) thou thankefully accept my travail. And as for such ambitious
Idiottes, as neither mean to do good them selves, nor wil^ingly would suffer
others, let the^ bark ^t their own banes, and sink in their ^wne sins
(without heed of me) since I know the wise will way my good will, and the
honest my true meaning. And when thou have perused this pam^hlet comprehending
the curation of Ulcers, partly extracte from worthy ^riters, and partly by
mine own expe^^ence collected, with a general diet for Vlcered bodies, and
natural properties of simple medicines) if (by proof) thou therein find
commodity, refer the same (with humble thanks) to thy maker the giver of
goodness and no more but think well of him that herein did his diligence.

Fare well.
William Clowes Chirurgian in praise of the Auctour.
SO far as Pen and skill will guide,
this simple verse I frame:
Which may be said I roue to wide,
and strive against the stream.
Yet frindshippe bides me still,
Master Banisters works to praise:
Which deserves therefore good will,
That thus does spend his days.
Although that Zoylus would him spot,
Let him do what he may:
^o spit his spite and stay it not,
force ye not what such say.
For they I kn^w will skoffe,
as is their wonted guise:
But such they are but chafe,
and known among the wise.
I read that one Thessalus a Tesaler of woll,
despised Hippocrates, whose knowledge excelled:
But Galen in colors, so painted that fool,
for his rude rashness wherein he dealed.
Such witles heads which seeks the overthrow,
of things unknown that passes much their rea^
Does plainly there, their poverty but show,
whose skoole wants skill them better for to teach.
What humor leads my verse astray
I mean to praise the man:
Whose work right perfect is I say
if you it rightly skan.
Behold therefore and read this book,
peruse it to the end:
And mark what pains he undertook,
to show the authors mind.
He has such sweet and sugared sap
within this book compiled:
As grievous dollers will abate,
and great wounds easlye healed.
My simple skill wantes Tullies quill,
to writ of this my friend:
For barreine head my pen has led,
wherefore I here will end.
John Griffin Chyrurgian, in commendation of this Book.
Sith healthful body helps much,
to make a healthful mind:
In lusty plight to pass the days,
by God to man assignde.
Great reason wills thankfully,
to celebrate the praise:
Of skillful wightes: whose paynfull style
for man's avail and ease.
All times and tides refuses not,
such fruitful seed to sow:
As may be to the benefit,
of him and many more.
Among the rest John Banister,
of right may challenge place:
Whose travail has at length brought forth,
this work: with open face.
Of young and old to be perusde,
and learnde: if cause be such,
That loths^me Ulcers should their limbs,
infest and trouble much.
Not only this, but sundry sorts:
of other practice here
Is well set down: and may do good,
to all both far and necre.
Accept his pains, afeerd good will,
like well his Book and him:
And suffer not discourteous speech,
thy sense amiss to dim.
So thinks he his pains to be
requited: so likewise
Shall he receive encouragement,
and greater works devise.
ULCERS IN general.
The definition of an Ulcer, and the difference betvveene an Ulcer and a wound.
AS my chiefest intention is in this part, to entreat of Ulcers, so do I
purpose first to define what an Ulcer is, Vlcus quid sit.
which after the mind of Auicen, is a solution of continuitie in the flesh,
containing corruption and pu^refaction. For by the name of an Ulcer, we
understand that separation of union, which is not simple as a wound, but is
^lwaye found annexed with other dispo^itions and accidents, hindering the cure
^hereof. Quid per nome^ vlc. intelligatur.
Whereupon it comes, that in Ulcer is to be understood as a com^ound
affection, or unnatural motion: Notwithstanding, no man is so ignoran^
(bearing ye name of a Chirurgian) but he knows, that in wounds also is
contained certain dispositions necessarily chau^cing: as bigness, litlenes,
streitnes, crookednes, equality, inequality, depth and height, etc. Which
make the differences in wounds. Discrimen inter vlcus and vulnus.
To conclude therefore, that is to be called as Ulcer, where as there is
corruption. And that a wound, where (as yet) there is no putrefaction. Of the
like opinion also is Corn, Celsus, Cor. Celsus.
and in manner also Hippocrates, Hippoc.
affirming ye to be a wound which is yet new and bloody, and an Ulcer, when it
is become old or inueterate. And thus far as touching the definition of an
Ulcer, and the difference between the Ulcer and the wound: the differences
general with the acccidentes, after follows.

The differences of Ulcers and vvherof they be taken.
THe differences of Ulcers are diversely taken, but especially of three causes,
viz. from the causes provoking them, from the members, and from the accidents
or dispositions joined with the^. Other take them only of two, as from the
causes and accidents, and also from the natural dispositions them selves, to
which they are enwrapped, and pass over those differences, which are taken
of the members or labouringe parts, because they belong not to an universal
treatise. These therefore be the diverse sorts of Ulcers, and true differences
taken of the causes, that is to wit, a virulent Ulcer, a corroding Ulcer, a
filthy rotten or putrified Ulcer, a hollow and deep Ulcer, and Ulcer full of
holes and a cancred Ulcer. And the differences which do come of the accide^tes
and natural dispositions, to which the wounds them selves be joined, are also
diverse. Which of the Chirurgia^s of later time are thus described. viz. an
Ulcer with inte^peratnes, which ye Grecians call Discratu^, a dolorous Ulcer, an
Ulcer with a swelling or tumor against nature (commonly called impostumation) a
broken Ulcer, an Ulcer ouergrowen with superfluous flesh, which ye Grecians
call(...), a hard Ulcer, a cankred Ulcer, a hollow ulcer, ^n Ulcer corrupt at
the bone, an Ulcer with diverse separatio^s, and an Ulcer called Cacoethes,
which is a wicked, cruel, and very hard Ulcer to be healed, and others of that
sort. But these many and diverse differences of Ulcers, are not supposed of
Galene to be true differences of Ulcers, but only agreeings of other effects
with the Ulcer, of which sort are, the cankred Ulcer, the ouergrowen,
putrefied and hollow Ulcers. And the Ulcer with some swelling, as the Ulcer
called Phlegmonodes, and Resipelatodes, or the cankred rottennes, the
infla^mation of blood, the canker, and residue of that sort, are of the kind
of effects besides nature, corrupting the actions which severally and by them
selves may existe and be. For that thing (says Galen) which can consiste
severally, shall never be the difference of an other.

Let this therefore be as a precepte and rule, by which thou maiste discern
whether the difference of an effect be any otherthing, or the enwrapping of an
other natural motion, but after an other sort. Also the vexing and dolorous
Ulcer, and the filthy ulcer, are called (as it were certain differences of
ulcers when as in deed they are not true and proper differences, but the
joining rather of an accident with an ulcer. etc. In like sort the Ulcer
called Vlcus cacochymon, is an Ulcer replenished with evil juice, or troubled
with a rheumatick matter there caused, being joined with theffect. Many such
therefore are usurped of common Chirurgians and Phisicians, for the differences
of Ulcers which are in deed no differences, but only (as Galene says)
binding together other dispositions, or the effects of that which is
compounded. The proper and true differences of a simple Ulcer are taken of the
nature thereof. And that (says Galen) is a simple Ulcer, which does only
exist, that is, whereto no other affect or accide^t is joined. Vndepropriae vlc.
differ. sumendae.
It shall not therefore be a simple Ulcer if any other part be exulcerated, or
be ^exed with a rheumatick matter, or evil ^uyce, or altogether without
natural tem^erature, full of hollownes. etc.

Therefore the differences taken of the nature of the ulcers are most proper,
Different. vlcerum sunt magis propriae.
and ^f the substance of the thing, and coming ^utwarde. They are taken of
the substance of the thing which are brought from the form and bigness or
quantity of ye division, and from ye measure of space. Forma vlcerum.
From the form, as the straight Ulcer, the Ulcer declined or bowed, the round
or compassed ulcer, the wrythen and the crooked ulcer: from the bigness of the
division or quantity, as a great ulcer, a little ulcer of the measures or
spaces, as a long ulcer, a short ulcer, a broad ulcer, a narrow ulcer, a
high ulcer, or an ulcer in the top or height of any part, a deep ulcer, an
equal ulcer, an unequal ulcer.

And the differences of the ulcers coming extrinsecall, Diffe. vlc. extrinsec.
are taken of the time, of the way of generation, as all the ulcer or scarce
part thereof cannot be seen or beholden, the differences of the time, as a new
ulcer, or old ulcer. Of the reason of the generation, as a cut ulcer, a broken
ulcer, an ulcer partly cut, partly broken. O^ the placing in thaffected part,
as an ulcer evidently appearing or out of sight, an ulcer hidden within or not
appearing. Also an ulcer in the beginning of the muscle, in the midst, or in
the end of the muscle. The differences of ulcers taken of the affected place,
though they are to be judged. ulcers, yet not (as Gal. says) of their own
propre nature, as the aforesaid differences are taken: for the places wherein
the ulcers do consiste are similar, and organicall, therefore to show the
differences of places wherein the ulcer is, the division must be after this
sort, from thaffected place. An ulcer in the similar organick or isntrumental
part, dividing also the differences of ulcers in the similar part after this
sort. viz. Ulcers in the veins, ulcers in the arteries, ulcers in ye skin,
and ulcers in the muscles, for the muscle and the similar part, is easy to be
discerned by sense. And the differences of the affectes in the organicke part,
are of this sort. The ulcer of the ear, the ulcer in the Jaws, the ulcer in
the sharp or rough artery, ulcer of the lunges, ulcer of the breast, ulcer of
the yard, ulcer of the fundament and seat, and so forth in like order
discoursing the singular parts of the body, which we call isntrumental. And
this is the complete and absolute division of a simple and only ulcer, and of
an ulcer to whom no other affect is joined in his differences taken of his
propre nature. Also if any affect or disposition do consiste by it self, as
Phlegmon, Gangr^na, or putrefaction, there cannot the differences of ulcers be
taken thereby, or at least be so called properly. But for because it is spoken
of Galen at least in 600. places, let us not hold any contention upon the
names. Non esse de nominibus conte^dendum.
For if any man should call the putrefied ulcer, ye corrosiue ulcer, Ga^grena,
Erisipelas, the cancrous ulcer, the holed or cornered ulcer, the ulcer with
putrefaction at the bone, the ulcer called Cacoethes, the painful ulcer, and
all others of that sort: If any man (I say) should prescribe these as
differences of ulcers, we ought not to contend with him, so that he minister
right curation to every of the^. And they are called differences of ulcers
taken of that whereto they are joined, that is to say, the differences of the
things contained with the disease: the differences of the things contained
with the accidents: and the differences of the things contained with the
causes and others (if any be) of like sort.

Of the causes of Ulcers.
THe latter sect of Chirurgians have instituted two general causes throughout
all ulcers, Causae vlceris.
that is to say, the Antecedent causes named of the Greeks(...), And the
coniunctiue causes also called (...). The antecedent causes are these, viz.
cutting, breaking, tearing, and such like solution of continuitie, which
cannot even by and by stir up Sanies, Pus, or Sordicies, which are judged
necessarily to associate the ulcers, although it may be done in time, and that
in removing the antecedent and corporal causes. Therefore the antecedent
causes of ulcers is Cacochima, which is evil juice, and that is, when the
humors have only defaulte in quality and not in quantity: and also to much
abundance of those perverse humors being in the body, may at length corrupt
and putrify the said parts of the same body. Furthermore, the wickedness of
the said juice, is either engendered by a perverse kind of diet, or through
the whole body, or else some particular member: as through default, which may be
either in the liver or spleen, as Galene in diverse places has sufficiently
testified.

The coniunctiue causes is said to be that intemperature, Causae co^iunct.
which is called the malice of complexion in the wounded parts through the
antecede^t causes, or through the wounds and hurtes them selves, or other
tumors against nature, but especially through malignaunt ulcers, either broken,
opened or stirred. For eue^ the corroding ulcer is engendered Ex herpete and
miliari, called of the Greeks Cenchrias, and also of Esthiomeno, which is an
eating ulcer proceeding of choler more gross and thick, so may it also
happen of the carbuncle, chiefly if it be venomous, which makes an escharous
ulcer, full of banks, filthy, and full of deep hollowes. Tres modi aegre sana
biliu^ vlc.
Wherefore these three are accounted ulcers rebellious and hard to be cured.
First because of intemperature, which comes to the subject flesh. Secondly
through defaulte of the blood thereto resorting. And thirdly through copy and
quantity of the matter flowing, Gal. lib. 4. meth. medendi.
as Galene credibly has us enfourmed. He also affirms that the same division
may be made otherwise, that is of curable, and also rebellious ulcers, the one
for intemperature of the vlcerated flesh, and the other in respect of the
humor flowing, and the same intemperature also may be divided two manner of
ways, viz. when the flesh is subject to the only quality of nature above
measure, or otherwise when there is present some access or certain tumor. Now
also that flowing may be divided into two parts, that is as well in the
quality as also in the quantity of the humor flowing.

There shall be therefore four kinds of ulcers, Quatuo^ genesis vlc. aegre sana
bilium.
contumelious or hard to be cured: that is to wit, the only intemperature of
the subject flesh, which we call Discrasia, inte^perature with an accessiue
tumor, the humor flowing, or vicious, or much, for the humor which flows
abundantly into the grievous part of the ulcer, yea although it be not vicious,
yet (for because it engenders therein excrementes) it hinders the healing
with long detraction of time. Galen seems also to make and add hereto a fifth
kind in his Co^me^tarie upon the Aphorism of Hippocrates, Hippocra.
which begins thus. Vlc. quaecunque annua sunt. etc. which is the passion
of the corrupted bone in the vlcered place. For when the flesh which covers
the bone having applied (according to art) exiccatiue medicines) receives
cicatrice: by and by it seems perfectly restored and amended, but shortly
after some matter thither resorting from the corrupt bone, reduces in the
healed part a present infla^mation, so that after, there follows not only
generation of matter, but also erosion of the aforesaid cicatrice and
exulceration of flesh. Gal. lib. 4. Therape^t. meth.
And as we may plainly gather by Galen, among the aforesaid affectes and
dispositions, al others to be united and knit, and that many and diverse
differences of ulcers do spring of those above mentioned. Furthermore, there
must be a method of healing showed and declared, not of al together, but every
one by him self, which shall follow after, beginning only with the cure of
simple things, that thereby the way and mean to heal the compounde affectes
may the more easily be attained.

Now, seeing that as we entreat thoroughly of ulcers, these words Sanies, Pus,
virus, Ichor, Sordes, and such like, are much in use, I think it not much forth
of ye way, if in this place we show what those words do signify among the
Chyrurgians, and that in few words, how they agree and disagre. Sanies.
Sanies quid.
i. ichor, is properly yt thin humor, which the Greeks call(...), such as is in
a wound, neither new nor old, but between both, and some kind of this Ichor
is interpreted Sanies sanguinis, the matter of blood. And of Sanies Sanei spec.
duae celso.
says Celsus, be two kinds, the one named(...), and the other(...), being
thin and half white, proceading of an evil ulcer, and chiefly where as a sine
we being hurt, infla^mation is gathered. Meliceria is more gross, glewie, and
like to white honey, proceeding also of evil ulcers, where the sinews about the
joints be hurt, in which places it greatly flows.

But now amongst the new and later Physitio^s and Chyrurgia^s, who not
observing the true propriety of voice, or agreeing upon the nature of the
thing, do wrongfullye usurp the name of Pus, in steed of Sanies, Sanies vul
go pro pure male vsurpatur.
sometime they make Sanies a kind of Sordes, Virus, Virulentu^, and Purulentam
colluuiem, called of the Greeks(...), and of the Latins Pus. For the name of
Sanies being truly defined, signifies all humiditie altered above nature.
Wherefore if the humor be thin which proceeds from the ulcer, it is called
Virus Virus.
or virulentia. If it be thicker, Sordes. Sordes.
And if it be in a mean betwixt both, it has to name by proper appellatio^
Sanies. Sanies.
And it is said to be found abundantly in ulcers, and but little in deep
wounds. Sanies therefore is properlye among the vulgar Physicians and
Chirurgians, the same that Pus is among ye Latins, and(...)among the Grecians.
Celsus calls it the Genus, having under it two kinds contained called of
the Greeks(...)and(...), the which ichor of the Latin interpretors is called
and turned to Sanies and Meliceria called Pus, Puris generatio.
having the beginning of contused flesh or blood. But in the generation thereof,
there is a doubtful or half evil transmutation or alteration. Gal. lib. 5.
Simpli.
For as Galene says, there is in the bodies of living creatures three
alterations. One plain and according to nature, yt is when the meat is
digested in the belly, bowelles, or vessels, wherein the iuyces are
engendered, and from whence every part receives nourishment. Tres alterationes.
An other plainly against nature. viz. in putrefying all things, and this
(after a certain manner) is contrary to it self. The third is mixed or in a
mean doing, partly according to nature, and partly contrary to nature.

Therefore the transmutation or alteration, which does engender Pus, has the
midst place among the best transmutation, which is the nourishement of the
parts of living things, and that which is simply the worste, which is made
stinking with putrefaction. For neither of only heat against nature, neither
of heat obtained according to nature is suppuration or Pus engendered. But the
heat of the infla^mation is (after a certain manner) mixte of them both,
which whilst it gathers to suppuration, moves great pain, and by the heat
above nature of the inflamed part, fevers oftentimes are raised, and that by
extreme heating yt heart. And these two do chance (as it were of a certain
boiling or burning of ye blood, which being thoroughly exusted or burnt, the
remnaunt of it is made Pus, as by the altering of wood into ashes by burning,
as Galene has left testified in his Commentary upon Hippocrates, thus
beginning. Dum pus conficit. etc. By this now it is manifestly proved what pus
is, how it is engendered, and what is the efficient cause and matter thereof.
Now we will show in few words what Virus, Virulentia, and Sordes are
amongst the Chirurgians. Virus Virus.
or Virulentia, is a subtle superfluity begotten of abundance of watrie
humors, which (says Guydo) is of two sorts, hot and cold, whealike or
ruddie. But Sordes Sordes.
is a certain superfluity more thick, engendered of humors having a thicker
substance, which truly is of three sorts, for some is thick, unequal,
heaped, and white, and some black and like dregs mixed with ashes.

Furthermore, that which they call Virus, Galene calls it in Greek(...), in
latin Sanies. Sanies seu virus quid.
But to say at one word Sanies or Virus, is that thin excrement in ulcers
which continually moistneth them, even as Sordes thickneth the^, which
procures the ulcer named Rhyparon, that is Sordidum. Gal lib. 3. m^^h.
For even as ( Galen says) the excrementes whether they be thick or thin,
do follow every mutation of the quality of the nourishement. So is there
wont to be a double kind of excrement, and that chiefly in hollow ulcers:
that is to say a thinner, called in Latin Sanies, in Greek(...), and a
thicker also named Sordes. Of the thin excrement, the ulcer is made moiste,
and of the grosser, filchie, whereof it comes, that the said ulcer needs
two sorts of medicines, viz. to dry that which is moist, and to mundifie the
filthy, but these things do belong to an other contemplation. But Pus Pus
est me dium inter saniem and sordem.
does chose (as it were) a middle substance between thick and thin,
especially if it be that which is good. For that is best (says Hippocrates)
which is white, Boni ac mali puris notae.
light, equal, and without noisome savor. And that is evil (says Celsus)
which is thin, watrishe (especially if it be so from the beginning) also if
ye color be like whay, pale, yellowe, or like dregs, and besides that, if it
smell evil. There is an other kind of Pus Pus(...)
faieth the same Corn. Celsus, called in Greek(...), which is apparauntly
found in great ulcers beginning to heal, which is thin, half white, and as
it were vnctuouse, not unlike the white fattines of oil. That Sanies is evil
which is much in quantity, Malae saniei notae.
over thin, yellow, pale, or black, glewy, or of evil savor, or if it
corrode in the same ulcer, or the skin nere thereto, and is little better, if
it be somewhat more gross, half red or whitishe. Therefore the better that the
excrementes aforesaid appears in ulcers, the better hope is to be had in
their curatio^: even as that wound is like to be cured with expedition, which
has good and fresh blood flowing from it, wherefore the signs both good
and evil, in every of these, must of the Chirurgian be diligently wayed. So
that he may either reprehend, or pronounce what ulcers be incurable, which be
easy to be cured, and which be hard to be cured. Which thing is of no small
weight, and the Chirurgian thereby may laudably be wondered at and avoid
cauillouse slanders. And this said, shall suffice as touching Pus, Sanies,
and Sordes. Now it rests that we speak of the signs of ulcers, and
likewise of the judgments.

The signs to know the differences of ulcers taken of the definitions.
Every ulcer has his proper note or token, whereby he is diseried and known
from an other, and they are taken of the definitions of every of them.
Wherefore I suppose it to be worthy the labor here to recite by the way, the
short definitio^s of the chief differences above me^cioned, wherein doing, we
would not have the Reader to regard so much the words as the thing it
self. For we had rather use the common definitio^s allowed long ago of all
professors, though they be more rude and common, then with eloquence (though
it were more pure style) to ^ast a mist upon that thing which is obscure
enough of it self. Notwithstanding ^ have eschewed, in every place as much ^s
I might lanfully, that gross and idle ^arbarousnes. Therefore to go to the
purpose, that is a virulent Ulcer wherein is ^oyson, which is a certain
thin, and li^uid excreme^t, called properly of the La^nes Sanies, abounding
about erosion, called also by an other name Saniosum. The ulcer which by the
malignitie and malice thereof does stir up evil and biting juice, which
eats and gnaweth the affected part, and is made by the increase of humors
more ample daily, is named Corrosiuum, or Arrodens. Vlcus corrossi. sieve arrod.
But if the malice thereof do so much increase, that not only it vlcerateth the
corrupt flesh, but also wastfully consumes the sound with daily increasing,
it is the^ called Depascens. Vlcus depascens.
All the Physicians of Greece, (Galene also witnessing) do call this
affect(...), (...).
because it was wont to feed and carry to the sound parts, the corruption
of the affected, and to the affected, that which was in the sound. Whose
species or kind is Phagedena, Phagedena.
which is an ambulatiue Ulcer, which creping here and there in yt ski^ and
subject flesh, does corrode and feed^ on the top or outward parts, but it
never perseth inwardly. Wherefore it hat^ to name also Vlcus, in su^mo
residens, ^^ never Profundum. That Ulcer with Galene is cal^ed Sordidum, Vlcus
sordidum.
which hat^ more gross and viscous excrementes, which we call Sordem, but in
Greek Rhyparon but the later writers have otherwise defined it, affirming that
it has certain crustes thick and gross, or (as they say) some flesh
soft, thick and superfluous. The ulcer named Putridum, Lanfrancus sic
definit. Vlc. putrid.
is that from whence some vaporouse and evil smelling fumes do proceed like to
dead carcases, or to that which putrefieth and corrupts the flesh, having
evermore thereto annexed Sorditiem, with outward heat, superfluous humiditie,
and ofttimes a fever, and differinge from the filthy ulcer by the malice
thereof. They call that ulcer Cauernosum, Vlcus cuniculosum.
whose orifice is strict and narrow, but in the bottom larger, without sense
hid, and having many corners, and like the Cunnie, running many ways, but
without callositie or hardenes, but others call it co^trarily Cuniculosum. The
fistulous ulcer differs little from the hollow or cuniculouse ulcer, Vlcus
fistulosum.
but that the wynding and turning ways thereof are ^callouse and hard. The
cancrous Vlcus cancerosum.
ulcer is in sight horrible and stinking, having edges hard, thick, swelled,
and inuersed, the color in the midst betwixt red and black, as one should
say duskie or leadie, and about the vlcered part certain Ue^nes appearing
black, puffed up, swelled, thick, and replet with black blood. Vlcus
Vlcus(...). id est inte^peratum.
discraton, commonly called Discrasiatum, is that, wherein Quaedam discrasia
(that is inte^perature) reigns, a certain evil quality ruling above nature,
as immoderate heat, cold, moisture or drienes, or many of them together, and
such are properly called among us Vlcus inte^peratu^. That is called Vlcus
crucians, Vlcus crucians.
or Dolorosum, which in laboring, does cruelly vex or torment, or (as Guydoa
Cauliaco says) wherein Sense of the contrary thing is felt. Which may be
called in Greek(...). (...)
That (says Galen) is Vlcus rheumaticum, Vlcus rheumaticum.
which by the Flux and resort of humors, refuse to be healed. And that is
called Verminosum Vlcus veminosum.
vlcus, which auoideth Worms, called of the Greeks Scolesondes, whose
generation is putref^ct. And those Ulcers, both of Galene, as also of all the
Physicians of Greece, are called Cacoethes, Vlcus cacoaethes.
who having all things applied, and each thing diligently administered and
ordered in all points according to art, and yet refuses utterly to heal, for
because that in the vlcered or affected part, some malign and pernicious
matter, lies hid to us unknown, and hinders the healing of the^: We call
those Ulcers malign, rebelliouse, and hard to be cured. Vlcus varicosum, Vlcus
varicosum.
is that, which has certain Ueines in parts above the Ulcer appearing
swelled, and replet with thick and gross blood, which swelling, is called
Varices, which by flowing to the said Ulcers, does prohibit and hinder the
healing thereof. And the Apostumouse Ulcer Vlcus apostemosum,
is yt, which has a tumor against nature, proceeding of some humor, such as
Phlegmon or Erisipelas. All other Ulcers are sufficient easy to be discried by
these aforesaid.

The Prognostications or Judgments of Ulcers.
What Ulcers soever says Hippocrates, Aphor. 45. lib. 6.
do continue the space of a year or longer, the Orifice must needs be taken
away, and the Cicatrice made hollow. What Ulcers soever (says Galene (in
his Co^mentarie upon this Aphorism) are of long continuance, Vlcera anua and
diuturna,
or having no Cicatrice by any means coming, or once received, breaks
again, and yet nothing left in the curation that ought to be taken away, it
signifies Cacoethes, which is a certain malignitie, hard in receive
curatio^. And yt chances through the Flux of vicious humors, or through
evil disposition of humors of long time gathered, and contained in the member,
or else some affecte or corruption of the bone in that member. ( Auicen says)
that what Ulcer soever, after it be filled with Flesh and a Cicatrice enduced,
if it suddenly break fourth again, it is in danger to degenerate into a
Fistula, Vlcera dura viridia aut nigra.
and Ulcers that be hard, black, or greenishe, are evil: for in such there
is extinction of yt natural heat in the Ulcered part. Vlc. frig.
Cold Ulcers (says Arabs) are known by softnes and whytenes.

But the hot Ulcers decline to a rednes, Vlc. call.
and are eased by cold Medicines, and are discerned by feeling. Therefore, every
one are known, partly by color, partly by touching, Li. 4. Therap.
and partly (says Galene) by the sense of the pacient. Some say they feel a
burning, others, a manifest cold in the part, and do take pleasure in hoate or
cold Medicines. etc. Dry and moiste Ulcers, also have their propre Signs,
and known chiefly by feeling. For feeli^g does discern and judge dry and
moist things, and such as follow those qualities, as hardness and softnes,
sharpenes and lenity And if malign Ulcers do represent the color of the
rest of the Body. viz. white, purple, Vlc. totius corp. colorem
representantia.
duskish or citrine, it shows some defaulte worthy reproof in the Lieuer,
whereby the blood there engendered is corrupted.

Ulcers succeeding other diseases, are hard to be healed. Aliud.
Vlcera circumglabra Vlc. circu^glabra.
praua sunt, that is to say. Aliud. Apho. 4. lib. 6.
When thou see about the compass of the affected place, the Heeres to fall
away, or Scales to arise, Judge that Ulcer to be perverse and froward, for it
signifies evil humors, and malign juice to flow to the vlcered part, which
do vehemently erode. Therefore such malign juice, does neither clean
abolishe the roots of the Heeres, nor yet suffer the Ulcered place to receive
Cicatrice or Curation. But when those Heeres had fallen before, do spring anew
about ye Ulcer, it is a good toke^ or sign.

The Ulcer (says Hipocrates) whether it come before the disease, Aliud. Lib.
i. predictionum Vlcus ante morbu^ vel in ipso morbo enascens.
or in the sickness, ought diligently to be looked upon, for if the sick shall
die, the Ulcer will be dry, black, or very pale before death.

Ulcers wherein (after long emission of Sanies, and Virulentia) perfect and
laudable pus begins to appear, is a good sign, for it signifies both
strength of nature, and obedience of the matter. What are the signs of good
Pus, is before spoken of.

Ulcers in ye outward muscles of ye back, legs, or arms, are not without
danger. Aliud. Vlc. in quibus partibus periculosa.
Uerie perilous are they deemed also which occupy the inward members, or
reach unto them. In what Ulcers so ever incarnatiue medicines be applied, Vide
Hip. apud Gal. li. 4. The.
before they be well mundified: evil and superfluous Flesh will in them
increase. But contrarily, which soever be duly, and as they ought to be
mundified and made, (as it were) dry before, the Flesh in such (says
Hippocrates) can never increase superfluously, unless contusion happen thereto.
Ulcers round in compass, Vlc. rot^da.
are wont to be the worste, and not to come to a Cicatrice, but difficultly and
with much business, they bring children to utter ruin: Therefore in such, the
Chyrurgians counsel ought to apply a Cauterie actual, made after the
quantity and fashion of the Ulcer compassed. In the outward members, Artuum
vlcera.
that is to say, in the hands, feet. etc. Ulcers and Tumors against nature, as
Phlegmon and such like, do often happen, and commonly in the Glandulouse
parts, especially in those bodies that be Plethoriques, that is, given to
much repletion, for these parts, for as much as they be rare, are easy and
(as it were) ready to receive every humor flowing. For so it comes to pass,
that through an Ulcer, either in the finger of the hand, or Foot, the Kernels
about the armeholes or privy parts, do also swell or receive inflammatio^,
for when the blood flows, or other humors should have recourse to the
outward parts, straight by their losenes and raritie, part of the said
flowinges are in them retained, Colli and capit. vlc.
sometime also the glandulouse parts of the neck (either by Ulcers of the
head, or parts nighe to them, or else in them selves) do swel. And Galene
calls these glandulouse parts, which in that order do swell, Bubones.
Bubones.


When medicines applied to Ulcers, Aliud.
do profit, or (at least) do no hurt or discommoditie: Si auxilia profuerint
aut nocue ^int.
it is a sure agrument, that such medicines were rightly administered. But if
they cause any present hurt, or do make the Ulcer more dry, hot, or cold, it
is a token that the things ministered are not fit for that present grief, for
that things more dry or more moiste (as the thing requires) should be
applied.

Also if (by the things applied) the Ulcer become more soft by and by, use
things more astringent. Si vlc. arro d^tur.
Nevertheless, if the Ulcer do erode and become more deep, then beware
diligently, for that springs of sharp and vicious juice together with
malignitie of the Ulcer, else through the faculty of medicines applied, which
do more then sufficiently mundifie: Nota.
for such by arroding the vlcered part, do increase much Sanies, and make the
Ulcer very moist, whereby it happens that unskillful Chyrurgians, are so
often deceived in their purpose, for thinking the Ulcer to be Cacoethes, that
is, that ye matter therein contained to proceed of malignitie, or (as they term
it) of virulent and superfluous humiditie, and while they earnestly minister
things sharpelye to mundifie, and thereby makes not only the Ulcer more
deep, and hollow, but also more hot, and sometime makes it Phlegmonodes.
Hereby the parties affected, do feel erosion and mordication. Furthermore,
amongst many things which hurt or hinder Ulcers, says Guy do de Cauliaco, ye
South wind is unprofitable, and also a moist air joined with heat. Ve^tus
merid^onalis officit vlceribus
For they induce putrefaction in Ulcers, even as all things that putrefie,
proceed of heat and moisture. Hence comes it (says he) that Ulcers of the
Legs, are harder and difficulter to be cured in ye South parts the^ in the
North, but in wounds of the head, it is contrary. And even as many tokens and
judgments in wounds, are common to Ulcers, so likewise the judgments of
Ulcers, whereof we now speak, may be to wounds compared. Wherefor^
whatsoever is spoken before in the judgments of wounds convenient, or
agreeing to Ulcers, revoke them in this place.

Of the curing of Ulcers in general.
IN the curatio^ of Ulcers, Duo spectanda in curatione vlcerum.
there are two things to be considered and propounded unto us, that is, the
contemplation of the Ulcer it self, by what means it is an Ulcer, with
consideration of the cause of the Ulcer, of the Accidents, and every
disposition therein contained, as also what part here or there it occupies.
For every Ulcer (as we have said before) either is alone and by him self
(that is, having no other affect, neither conuersaunt with it, neither going
before, nor following it) or else is joined with one or more, of which some have
not only stirred up the Ulcer from the beginning, but also do now make it
greater. Others be of yt sort, without the which it can not obtain the reason
of the scope of curation. But every Ulcer, in that it is an Ulcer, has some
common indication of the cure (eue^ as Galene says) the way of healing Ulcers,
Vlceris sa natio mediocris siccatio est.
is by a mean drying: this indication also is common to wounds, if (at least
they be wou^des) that is, received of some stripe. This only is their
difference, this needs less: and the other (through the great humiditie)
requires greater desiccation: If the Ulcer be joined with any other affect,
curation ought not to be applied to the Ulcer, but first to cure the affect,
and lastly the Ulcer. For whether Phlegmon, Erisepelas, or ye tumor called
Oedema, or blackenes, or Ecchimosis, do besiege the Ulcered part, the cure must
be gentle. But if there be some strong intemperature (which is wont to bring
weakness to the affected part) and be joined to the Ulcered flesh, then, that
is first to be cured. And when thou have cured the intemperature, afterward
thou shall easily heal the affecte. So must we first help the tumors called
Varices, which are often above the Ulcered place, and then to cure the Ulcer.
But none of these curations (says Galene) is of the Ulcer it self, but of
some other affect, which either makes the Ulcer or nourishes it. In
tollendis dispositionibus cum vlcere co^plicat. duplex consilium esse. Gal. li.
4. Meth. med.
Furthermore, Galene affirms that in taking a way the dispositions contained
in Ulcers, there are two things to be considered: that is to say, either
utterly to take away such like affectes in the body, or else to destroy that
which is therein unprofitably contained. But this he means to be done where
affect is little and plain, for where it is great, it can not be brought to a
Cicatrice before, till the other affectes have remedy. Partic. in curandis
vlceribus scopi.
Of such like Ulcers therefore as are joined with other affectes or
dispositions, there be four particular ways of curation.

1 The first prescribes a convenient diet fit for the curation of such
Ulcers. 2 The second is to diuerte the matter antecedent. 3 Thirdly, in
correcting and removing the accidents and dispositio^s joined with the Ulcer.
4 Fourthly, those accidents being corrected, does teach and instruct us to
cure them after the manner of hollow wounds.
But we do follow the first and second intention, both by amending, emptying,
diuerting and preventing that same flowing, wherewith the body of the
affected, does abound, and flow in the vlcered part. Furthermore, the ways
whereby we may aptlye amend and divert the abundaunce of humors, and take away
their corruption is thus. viz. by Phlebotomie, Purgation, Approved diet,
Cauterie potentiall, Uomiting and others of that sort. We prevent flowinges
with hinding, washings, epithmes, ointments Exbolo armeno, and other
restrictiues. When as therefore the humor flowing in the Ulcered places, is
neither more, nor yet much worse then convenient, sufficient repercussiues, and
binding above the Ulcered place shall suffice, and which binding does shut the
pores whereby the matter should flow into the Ulcer: it is meet therefore that
the medicines applied to such Ulcers, be more dry then they that serve for
the simple Ulcer. But if it happen that this flowing can not be stayed or kept
under, the cause the^ must be searched forth, and that must first be taken
away, which if it come by weakness of the part that receives it, it must be
strengthened with proper curation of the vlcered place. But if it come by
abundaunce of blood or evil humors, either in the whole Bodies, or in any of
the parts, they are first to be cured but the imbecillitie of the part,
whereto by reason thereof more of humors then is convenient does resort, does
come altogether of intemperature, notwithstanding, not of every intemperature.
Whereupon it comes to pass, that the vlcered flesh is ofttimes only
temperate and not weak, and ofttimes both vnte^perate and weak, for strong
inte^perature brings weakness to the affected part.

The third and last intention, which is in amending and taking away the
accidents and dispositions, joined with the Ulcer, is brought to pass by due
consideration of the qualities of the humors and nature of the affected part.

The Second part.
The second discourse of Ulcers, with their particular cures.
HEretofore I have expressed the causes, signs, differences, and universal or
general cure for all kinds of Ulcers, with their Prognostications or
Judgments. Now also will I prosecute the matter without ceasing, until I have
prescribed to every Ulcer his particular distinction, and several cure,
gathered forth of diverse Authors, and especially out of Antonius Calmeteus
Vergesatus.

Of an Ulcer with intemperature.
What kind of intemperature De intemperie cu^^vlcere.
soever it be, it may be abated by universal remedies, as by diet and
convenient purgations, Calid. quo modo emendetur.
and (if it be joined with any humor) by reuulsions of all sorts. Hot in
temperature, whether it be alone, or joined with the Flux of humors, it may
be amended with Vnguentu^alb. or Rub. cum Camfora, or Vng. ex Pompholig. vel de
Plumbo, vel de Cerusa, aut aqua Rosacea, and Succis Plantaginis, Solani, and
Semperuiui.

Cold intemperature may be amended by fotibus, Frigid. vt curetur.
only of wine, heated or boiling therein Wormwoode, Mintes, Isope, Penirial,
Calamint, Organi. Rosemary, Stechados. etc. or Lee with Allom, or vngue^.
Basilic. or vng. Citrin. vel Dealthea. The moist intemperature, Quomodo humid.
intemp. ad natural. ^educitur.
is brought to a natural (by exiccatiue vnguentes, as De Po^pholi, de Plu^bo,
de Cerusa, de Gratia Dei, Diacalcitis The humors respected for yt inte^perature
happens seldom without a humor, neither must we pass ye nature of thaffected
part, which must either more or less, receive drying medicines.

The dry intemperature, may be restored natural (says Galene) by fotions of
water, or Vng. Basilico^, or vng. Sic Intemperatura ficca alteratur. Galen. 4.
Metho.
de Pice, or Diachilon dissolved in oil, to every ounce whereof is added
Pulueris Rosarum. I dragme.

Of an Ulcer with pain.
Pain in an Ulcer proceeds most commonly of hot and sharp intemperature
with corrosion. De dolor cu^ vlcere. Sic accidit dol. ex caliditate.
And then profits public medicines, as Succus Plantaginis, Solani,
Se^peruiui, Hiosciami, or their stilled waters, mixed with Uineger, and Oil of
Roses. It profits also to minister the white of an Egg, or the whole Egg,
mixed with Oil of Roses, Bolo armeno, and Terra sigillata, and Aceto.

A Cataplasme also is commodious, made with Mallows, Plantaine, and Branne,
and boiled and mixed with oil of Roses. Or it shall not be incommodious to use
the white of an Egg, with Oil of Roses, and Litharges, diligently mixed in a
Leade^ mortar, and after boiled at a gentle fire in a pound of the juice of
Housleeke, to the consumption of the said juice. Else the whole Egg mixed with
Oil of Roses, and Terebe^tine, or vng. Popillionis, half an ounce, cum oleo.
Vitelli ouoru^ one ounce. Or vng. Album Camforati, or vng de Lithargi. De
minio. de Tutia. De Plumbo. vng Rub. cum Camfora.

If the pain come of cold intemperature, Si ^l^^^ ^it ^^^^a.
wash the place with wine, wherein hoote things is boiled, such as is spoken
of before, and these or such like also are profitable. viz. Basilicon,
vnguentum Fuscum, and Citrinum.

But when the pain springs by dissolution of continuitie, Si per
dissolutione^ continuitatis.
stupefactiues then are exceeding commodious. Notwithstanding, those are much
more profitable, which increase the natural heat, Anodina. hic confe^unt,
as the yolke of an Egg, Saffron, Terebentine, and Oil of Roses, together
mixed and applied to the Ulcer. And about the circuit of the Ulcer, Ping.
Gallinarum, Anseris, Anatis, Suis etc. Muccagi. sem. Lini. Fenugreci, and
Maluae, a^e good and necessary. Also Oleo Rosa Amig. Chamomeli Aneti,
Violacei. Vulpini. etc. Or else.

Rec.
Maluae. one handful and a half. Farmae. Sem Lini, ana. half an ounce.
Fenugreci, and Hordei. Olei Camomeli, ana. vi. drag. and Lilij.

Ol. Ros. iii. ou^c. Muccag. sem. Altheae, one ounce and a half, Vitellos,
number. ii. mix them and make thereof a Cataplasme.

When the pain is great, and the precedent medicines prevail not, then Ad
Narcotica accedendum, Ad narcotic. accede^dum.
and make a Cataplasme with Far. Hordei, Oleo Ros. and Nimpheae, vel Mandrag.
cum lacte vel passo coctis, or with bread crummes infused in water with Oil of
Roses, ye yolks of Eggs, and Saffron, adding thereto Opij half a scruple. Or
a Cataplasme made with the leaves of white Poppie, Mandrag, and Henbane, with
the powder of Camomill. So is it good to apply Philonium, or Theriaca, or OI.
de Papauere, Mandrag. vel Hiosc. cu^ Opio. or Succus Hios. cu^ lact. mulie. cu^
Ouillo and Opio. And great commodity has been found ex Oleo Ranarum.

Of an Ulcer with a tumor.
IF with the Ulcer through pain, De vlc. cu^ tumore.
a tumor do chance, it must be assuaged, (ye cause of pain considered) whether
it come thy dissolutio^ of co^tinuitie or with biting, or inte^perature. But if
the swelling come by the malice or aboundaunt Flux of humors to the place,
then prescribe a diet thin and cold. Mollisie or purge the belly (respecting
the humors nature) use Phlebotomie, restrain ye humor flowing, and resolve
that which is already flowed^ which all must be considered in tumors against
nature. If the tumor proceed of hot humors, Si tumor ab hu. call.
it shall be expedient to boil in tart wine a sweet Orange bruised, or Quinces
and sower Pears, boiled with the poulder of Mirtles, else Lintels decocte with
the poulder of the rindes of Pomegranettes, mixte with Roses and Terebintine.

In the augmentatio^ the like medicines adding to, Hordei Fabaru^, Tritici,
Farinae and Camomel. In the state make a Cataplasme ex decoct. Mal. and
Absinth. in vino dulci cum Far. Sem Lini. Fenug. and furfure. But if Pu^ first
appear, make a Cataplasme ex Mal. in aqua coctis ^^ Farina Sem. Lini, Fenugr.
and axungi^^suilla, vel ex Farina Tritici, Oleo and^ Croco, boiled in water to
the form of ^ pulteise. If the ^mu^ctory places (through pain of y^ Ulcer) be
afflicted with tumor^ the matter being hot, coquito Mal iii. ounces, cum
Furfure in aqua, Respice materiae temperament.
and apply it, which also preuayleth much against the tumor in the Ulcer, but
if the matter be cold.

Rec. Mu^miae in vino ad crassitiem coctae, i. ounce. Oesipi. ii. ou^c. Fari.
Tritici, half an ounce. Boil these together, and make thereof a Cataplasme.

Of the Contused Ulcer.
AN Ulcer contused, requires things moistening, De vlcere Contuse.
and engendring Pus, as a pulteis ex Fari. triti. Oleo and aqua coct. aut
Triticu^ aqua calida diutissime maceratum, which being boiled apply it. Or one
made ex radi. altheae and caricis simul coctis ad mellis crassitiem, cu^ Fari.
triticea fiat Cataplas. and then resort to the cure of wounds.

Of Flesh excreasing in Ulcers.
THis being commonly called proud flesh, must be taken away, De carni^ in
vlcere excrescent.
either with cauterie actual, or corrosiue pouders, the weaker sort be these,
Alumen vst, hermodact. Corrode^t imbecilla.
and cu^ tartaro, Nuclei dactil, co^bustorum, aqua vitae cu^ Sulphur, vng.
Aposto. Sem. vrticae, Serpe^taria squa^ma aeris, es vstum, Radix asphodeli,
Cinis Erinacei, Stupa minutim incisa: Somewhat more vehement be these, Pull.
Paulo vehement.
Mercurij solus, vel admixtus alumine vsto ad parts equales, vng. Aegiptiacum
vel Apostolorum cum aerugine rasili: vel aqua vitae. ij. ounces, Eruginis
rasilis. ii. drag. misceantur, vel linimentum aqua sublimata ter aut quater
imbutum and exiccatum.

The strongest be these. viz. Valentissima.
Calx viua, Calcitis, Calcanthum vstum sublimatu^, Hydrargyrum, and like these
in form following.

Rec.
Hydrargyri sublimat. ii. drag. Aluminis crudi. v. drag. Aqua Ros vel plantag.
vi. ounc. Bulliant ad consumptionem quarte partis. And this water is of
marvelous operation.

Rec.
Salis nitri. Vitrioli Romani. an. half an ounce. Aluminis. Hydrargyri sublim.
half a drag. Aqua plantagi, vi. ounc. Aceti. ii. ounc. Bulliant vt dictum est.

But when this is applied, have in a redines vng. de Bol. armeno, and apply it
to the places round about, to preserve the parts nighe thereto, duly
considering the quantity of superfluous flesh.

Of the discolored Ulcer with hardenes of the edges.
When the Ulcer is discolored, and the edges hardened, note if ye hardness be
but small, it may be cured by resolutiue medicines, which be these. De vlc. de
color cu^ labiorum duritie.
Ping. Anser, Gal. Anatis, Vituli, Bouis, Vrsi, Leonis, and ^orum medullae, and
of the^, those that be newest are best, much profitable also be these viz
Ole. Lill. Amigdal. dull. Lu^bric. Vulpinu^, Oesipus, Muccag. Alth. Lini,
Fenugr, omnia gummi genera, Bafilicon, Diachilon, Emplastrum de muccagine,
Medulla cruris bouis, cum Muccag, al thee, Dragagan. and Terebent. Ole.
Omphacino and exigua cerae part.

If by gentle medicines the hardness amend not, then scarifie the edges, and lay
on them Mercury in poulder, then apply some of the aforesaid medicines, or
use a cauterie, or incision, else strong medicines, as is above mentioned, first
knowing the Pacientes mind, and then the sense and situation of the member.

Rec.
Lithargyrij. an. ii. drag. Lapid hematitis. Vitrioli To. Hydrargyri sublimati.
ii. dram. and a half. misce.

Of the Ulcer with tumor in the the Veins.
OF this we have little to entreat, De vlc. cu^ varicibus.
when (as touching this matter) we have spoken sufficiently in the Ulcer with
tumor. This only resleth, that the Ulcer can not be cured till the tumor in the
veins be taken away with often bathinges, and after a sort nourishing, the
which being taken away with the accide^tes aforesaid, either it will cure it
self, or else receive the cure of a simple Ulcer.

Of the Ulcer with putrefaction in the Boon.
IF in an Ulcer the Boon be also putrefied, De vlc. cu^ ossis carry.
the Boon is first to be bared by corrosiues, or other wise as is aforsayd,
and so much of the boon as is corrupted must be taken away, till the Boon
appear bloudye, and afterward apply this following.

Rec.
Radic. Aristolo. rotund. Ireos, Peucedani, Corticis panacis, an. ii. drag.
Corticis Pini, Thuris, Aloes.

Puluerizentur subtilissi. Which being mixed cum Melle, vng. Regis, vel
Egiptiaco, apply to the place, and lay alofte Emplastrum Diacalcitis vel
diuinu^. When the Boon putrified lies so deep that it cannot be come by with
instrumente, prepare this iniection following.

Rec.
Rad. Aristolo. vtriusque an. i. ou^c. and. s. Iridis Florentiae. Cen taurea
minor. Agarici, iii. drag. Simphitum. Hiperici, an. i. m. Pes Collumbini, Herb.
Roberti. Cortic. Pini. ii. ounces. Ros. rub. an. P. sem. Anthos.

Mel Ros. cola i quart. Infuse them all in wine, and still them in Limbecke,
and iniec^e into the Ulcer of the water thereof twice in one day.

Nevertheless if the Boon be greatly corrupted, nothing can be better
therefore then Cauterie, for safely and speedely it dries both the bottom and
top. Rationem habe ad cauterij ca lidiratem.
Notwithstanding, so order the heat of the Iron, that it serve aptly, both for
y^ depth and quantity of the Boon corrupted, for we have seen that to hot
and vehement cauteries, expels not so sone the Boon corrupted, but have
spoiled it with corruption. But if the corruption lie ye^ deep, after thuse of
your first cautery (to the end it may be more easily avoided) to make the
Boon sound and whole, Terebra erit multis foraminibus aperic^da.
it shall be most expedient to pearse it with many holes, until some blood
appear, and in those holes to apply a cauterie, by means whereof, the Boon
may be very well dried. Or else fill them with Aqua forti, so shall the Boon be
dried, and by little and little, expel that is corrupted. Sub eaque natura car
nem generabit, ne sa nu^ os aere externo iterum corrumpatur.
And under that shall nature incarnate flesh, to preserve the sound Boon
from the corruption of outward air. To conclude, the Boon corrupted shall be
excluded, and none, or very little humor shall follow it. After the Cauterie
has been applied the three first days, and the Escar removed, the^ good it is
to power into the Ulcer Ol. Ros. cum Oui albumine, and the three days
following, use a digestive made Ex Oui vitello and Rosaceo, deinde Butyrum cum
Melle. The rest of the cure for the Boon corrupt, may happily be wrought by
this water followi^g.

Rec.
Aquae vitae ter distill. an. iii. ounces. Aquae Rosaru^. Sublimati. i. drag.
Bullia^t lento igni ad sublimati dissolutionem, and keep it to thy use in pure
Uial. And after the use thereof the sequel is profitable.

Rec.
Aristolo. rotun. iii. dragmes. Cort. Pini, sing. Radi Peucedani an. ii.
dragmes. Arundinis, Agarici albi. an. i. dragme and a half Tartari. Euphorbij.
i. dragme. Powder them together very small, and put thereof into the Ulcers
orifice. Else mix it with honey, or vng. Regis cu^ melle or vng Egiptiaco, and
apply that to the Boon corrupted, after the use of the water, and lay on
alofte, Emplastrum Diacalciteos, or diuinum, or this plaster following, which
enduceth the Boon corrupted, does mundifie, and incarnate, by use whereof I
never failed.

Rec.
Corticis ouorum, Ossiu^ humanoru^, an. ii. drag. Pann. co^bustoru^, and in
pull. redact. Radi. Peucedani. an. half an ounc. Lumbric. puluerizat. Emplastri
de gratia Dei. an. ii. oun. Diachilon com. Picis naualis. Mix them together,
and make thereof a plaster, which apply after the use of the water and
poulder, or linamente as is aforesaid.

And finally, if the Boon be corrupted through vsque ad medullam, the remedy
is only to separate the member, except it be capite coxendicis, vel spina
dorsi, and the^ it is best to flee the cure.

Of the malignaunt Ulcer called Cacoethes.
IN curing these kinds of Ulcers, De vlc. malig. quae Cacoethe vocantur.
the causes must first be diligently searched, to wit whether it be Plethora,
Cacochymia, or Cachexia, else an universal intemperature, or of some inward
part, as the Liver, Spleen, Uentricle, Ulcered part, swelling of the Ueines,
hard edges, weakness of the affected part brought to pass by evil humors
therein heaped, or the causes aforesaid. Toll cau^fam ante affectum.
Therefore let us take away the causes according to their natures then by
diet, Phlebotomie, and purgation to suppress the members intemperate,
whatsoever it be, and in what part. As for intemperature, look before in the
chapter of the Ulcer with intemperature. And commonly in these kind of Ulcers,
we have prescribed to the pacient the use of Guiacum, Guiacum his procest
with happy success, after the use of common purgation, but in them whose
humors and juice is profitable, a diet is sufficient, but if the ulcer seem
bathed in humors, it is time to restrain the^. For the tumors Varices, thou
have a proper chap. but for inte^perature of the inner parts, take counsel of
the Physician. And as touching Ulcers malign and hard to receive Cicatrice,
V^l emens ^xi^^atio est summa curatio.
the sum or chief scope of curation is vehement exiccation of the biting
humors, which is brought to pass per repellentia, and discutientia. Having
good respect to re^resseth at which flows, and to take a^aye that which is
infixed. And for this ^urpose these following are most expe^ient. Aristoloch.
Corticis Radi. Caparis. Malicorium, Radix Pannacis, Sarcocol^ae, Vitrum
Combustum, Testae pisciu^ Vstae. All metalles burnte likewise are profitable,
as Cadmia, Calchitis vsta, and ^ota sub Canicula, and cum aceto trita,
Antimonium, Diaphriges, Plumbum ^vstu^ lotu^, Squamma aeris and ferri, Sco^ia
plumbi, Erugo rasilis vsta and lota, om ^nia Aluminis genera, Terra sigillata.

But a further respect must be had to the body, for that in some bodies the
metalles and such like aforenamed medicines, must be washed before they be
ministered, but in harder bodies, without danger, certain of them may unwashed
be applied, because in such parties the members sense is more dull. Habe
rationem ad corporis habitum and sensumme brorum.
Wherefore first let the Ulcer be washed with an astringe^t decoction made
with Allome water, like as follows.

Rec.
Succi Agrimoniae, an. half a pound. Solani, Plantaginis, Vinum album, iiii.
ounces. Aluminis crudi, iii. ounc. s. Auripigmenti, half a scru. Albumina
ouoru^. vi. Stir these together and distille them, let the Uler with the
water thereof ^^ washed twyse in the day, which wa^^^ also much avails to
conglutina^ wounds. Afterward.

Rec.
Olei. Rosar. vi. ounces. Cerusae. iii. ounces. Lithargyri auri. an. i. oun^
and a halfe^ Lap. Calaminaris. Tuthiae preparat. an. one ounce. Boli Armeni.
Camforae dissolut. in aqua Ros^ ii. dragmes, Olei. de Papauere. ii^ ounces.
Cerae albae. q. s. Make thereof an vnguente.

Rec.
Olei. Ros an. ii. ounces and a half. and Mirt. Succ. Solani. an. one ounce
and a half. Plantag. Semperuiui. Sepi Hircini, an. ii. ounc. and Vitulini.
Ping suillae liquefact. iii. ounces. Calcis tertio in aqua exti^ct. vi. drag.
and Lota, Malecorij. an. vii. drames. Balausti^. Mirobal. citrini. Aerug.
rasilis v. dragmes. Scoriae ferri. x. dragmes Sarcocollae. ii. dragmes. All
which being bruised, and mixed together, infuse them one whole day, and boil
them a little, adding thereto.

Litarg. vtriusque. an. x dragmes. Cerusae. vi. dragmes. Plumbi vsti. v.
dragmes. Antimonij. i. ounce. Camforae. i. scruple. Cerae. q. s.

Mix them well in a Marble mortar. Hereto also may be added Argent. viui, i.
ounce, but it profits more, first to use the poulder of Mercury, after the
water aforesaid, and after the unguent.

Of the virulent corroding and feding Ulcer.
THese kind of ulcers which differ ou^ Secundum maius and minus, must ha^ue the
Method of their cure consiste ^^ three things only. De vlcere ^
First in a diet col^ and dry, secondly by euacuation of the a^^ ^ecedent
matter, both by Phlebotomie ^ it seem profitable as also by medicines
^iccatiue, as is said in Herpes and Eri^^ pelas. Also particular reuulsions
are ^ modious, as cupping, frication, and b^^ding the contrary member, or use
of vn^ de Bolo, to beat back the matter flo^ing. Catartica Particulares
reuulsiones con^erent.
The third scope is referred to me^^cines cold and dry astringent and
dis^^tient. Convenient simples be these, Le^tes, Arnoglos a Solanum, Su^mitates
^^bi, Fol. Vlmi and Papaueris, Fol. and fruc^ Cydoniorum, Mirti, Balaustia,
Cort^^ Granatorum, Galla omphacitis, Accas^ Bolus armenus, Cortex thuris, Nucl^
Mirobal. Mastiche, Simphitum, Plum^ vst. and lotum, and all metalles mentioned
in the aforesaid chapter. Of which both fotions, linimentes, vnguentes,
cerotes and emplasters, profitable for thy purpose may be made. Sit malitia
vlc. primo extinct^.
And some use to apply the poulder of Mercury, first to take away the
malice of the Ulcer and corrosio^, and leave it the space of a whole day in
the Ulcer, applying aloft vng. de Minium, until the malice of the Ulcer be
quite extinct. Afterward wash the Ulcer and the parts nighe thereto, with
allome water, as in the chapter a foresaid, or as follows.

Rec.
Succi. rub. Sumach. Virga pastoris. an i. quart. Plantaginis. Solani.
Acetosae. Albumina ouorum. vi. Aluminis pulue. iiii. ounces.

Distill them all in a leaden still, and use it, or else these waters following,
which is right profitable for Ulcers, filthy and corrosiue.

Rec.
Cerusae. an. one ounce. Lithargyri. Plumbi. vsti. an. half an ounce. Lapid.
Calaminaris. Boli armeni. i. ounce and a half. Sang. Draconis. an. one ounce.
Terrae sigillatae. Aluminis combusti. half an ou^c. Calicum glandium, Gallarum
viridium. Baccarum mirti. an. i. m. Psidiae, Balaustiarum. Sumach. Coriandri.
an. half an ounce. Sem. Plantaginis. Rosar. rub. ii. p.

Boil all these in sufficient quantity of Smithes water, which done, in that
water wash the Ulcer, which in wonderful manner will dry. All these may be
taken to the decoction, or some of them, whereof also if it be thought
convenient, you may add more cold things, as He^bane, mandrag, and Popie, if
there be much hot intemperature joined with the Ulcer. To the addition,
further may be annexed bonie, to mundifie if thou use it to a filthy ulcer. Or.

Rec.
Aquae Rosarum, an. one quart. and Plantaginis, Aluminis, ii. ounces. Zacchari.
one ounce.

Boil them altogether til the Allome and Sugar be melted, and there with wash
the Ulcer. Whereto also if thou ad Mellis, one ounce, It shall not be a little
profitable for all filthy Ulcers.

Else.

Rec.
Aquae Plantag. vi. ounces. Hidrargyri sublim. i. dragme. Salisamonniaci. one
drag. and. s. Salis commu. ii. dragmes. Aluminis. i. dragme.

Boil them together in a glass vessel, to the consumption of the fourth part.
And this water or the other, shall be proved profitable.

After the Ulcer be washed, apply thereto vng. de Minio, or de Plumbo, or vng.
rub. cum Camfora, or vng. Album Cam^forat. or vng. de Pompholigo.

Or else.

Rec.
Vnguentu^ de Plumbo. ii. ounces. vng. Popul. ii. drag. Succi. Plantaginis. i.
ounce. Albumi. oui. i.

Mix them diligently in a leaden mortar, or if you will, this.

Rec.
Tuthiae preparat. half an ounce. Plumb. vst. an. i. ounce. and Loti. Cerusae
lotae.

Mix them in a Leaden mortar, with water of Plantaine, and ad thereto. Bol arm.
an. ii. dragmes. Terrae sigil. Olej Rosarum q. s. Cerae albae. Fiatque
vnguentum.

Or.

Rec.
Lithargyri, iii. ounces. Olej Rosa. q. s. Aceti. to be mixed, and if thou ad
to a little Ceruse, it shall better prevail for all Cancrous dispositions, but
it will be better if thou ad thereto Lead macerated in white wine. Or by putting
to Nucem cipressi, Tuthiam, Boracem, Aes vstum, and Antimonium, of it shall be
right excellent for Ulcers that be hard, to receive cicatrice.

Or.

Rec.
Olei Ros. an. ii. ounces. Mirt. Succi climeno^ depurat. ii. ounc. s. Succi
Plantaginis, i. ounce. Sepi Hircini. i. ounce s. Aluminis vsti. i. dragme.
Lithargyri auri an. one ounce. and argenti. Scoriae ferri. ii. dragmes.

Puluerizen````````````````tur tenuissime ac simul coquantur tres horas, adding
to. Cerae alb. one ounce. Terebentinae. vi. dragmes. Mercurij extinct. iii.
dragmes. Camforae. i. scruple. Erugi. rasilis, one ounce. Make thereof an
unguent.

Rec.
Ceruse, Lithargyri. Bole. armeni. an. i. ounce. Terrae sigillat. Lapid.
Calamin. Sandal. alb. and rub. an. ii. drag. Baccarum mirti. Rosarum rub. Sem
Papaueris, an. one dragme Hiosciami. Mandragora. Olei Rosarum an. iii. ounces.
and Violarum. Cerae albae, tantundem,. Camforae. one dragme. Make thereof a
cerote.

Rec.
Olei Rosar. an. two ounces. and Mirtini. Succi. Clymenon. iiii. ounces.
Succi. Plantaginis ii. ounces. Pinguedinis Vituli i. ounce. s. Foliu^
Caprifolii, an. i. m. and Climenon.

Boil them together (the herbs being first bruised) to the co^sumptio^ of ye
iuyces. Then ad to. Lithargyri. ii. ounces. Minij. i. ounce. Camforae. i.
dragme. Mastices. half an ounce. Cerusae. an. v. dragmes. Antimonij. Plumbi
vsti. Cerae alb. q. s. Make thereof a Cerote.

If the Ulcer be not overcome by these or such like medicines, but exepeth
more and more, then Cauterie is to be used, or this following.

Rec.
Hidrargyri sublimati. ii drag. s. Vng. Populionis. vel Dealtheae. (Which
represseth the sharpenes of the sublimate) i. dragme, mix them, or Sublimatum
mixed with Vng. album. And after the escar be removed, use Vnguentum de Calce
and de Pompholigo, mixte by equal portions, or the aforesaid medicines.

Of the filthy and putrefied Ulcers.
TO this kind of Ulcer, De sordido acputri vlcere.
diet, Phlebotomie, and purgation belongs, and after purgation, the use of
Guiacu^ is right excellent, to dry and expel superfluous excrementes together
with sweat, whereby they shall not resort to the affected place. Simples in
this case prevailing are these viz. Farinae Hordei. Fabaru^, Cicerum, Orobi,
Lupinorum, Aristol. Iris. Hipericon. Centaureum minus, the juice whereof mixed
with honey, is good against all filthy Ulcers. Also Marrubiu^, Gentiana,
Absinthium, Apium, Mel, and all bitter things, salce, etc. Whereof make
lotions, Imimentes, and vnguentes. Wash the filth with Hidromel, Oenomel, or
sea water, or ex Lixiuio iiii. ounc. cineris Caulium, and Cortices Fabarum, cu^
aquae pluuiae. i. li. or iiii. ounces. Lixiuij mellis. i. ounce, Precipitat.
ii. dragmes, or wash the Ulcer cum decoctione Rois, Balaust. Cortices
Mirobalani Citrini, Rosaru^ and Mellis. Whereto also it may profit to ad
Alumen. Notwithstanding, you must diligently mark least in filthy ulcers, thou
use medicines to much astringent, seeing such things does greatly harden the
filthiness, and make it after, more difficult to be removed and mu^dified. It
does profit else to wash it with Lie, in which is dissolved Egiptiacum, and
then to use Egiptiacum alone, or mixed cum vng. regis, respecting the great
store of filthiness. Else to use this mundificatiue following which is excellent.

Rec.
Succi. Apij. an. iiii. ounces. and Mellis, Terebintinae. ii ounces. Puluis
ireos exiccat. vi. dragmes. Farinae Hordei. iii. dragmes. Make an unguent
thereof.

Or,

Rec.
Succi absinthij. an. ii. ounces. Apii, Plantaginis. Farinae Hordei. an. one
ounce and a half. and Orobi. Terebintinae. i. ounce. Mellis. i. quart. s.

Make thereof an unguent, adding of Mirrhe. iii. drag. or in steed thereof the
yolks of Eggs.

Else.

Rec.
Succi Centaureae mino. v. ounces. Succi apii. iiii. ounces^ Succi Plantaginis.
ii. ounces^ Mel. half a pound. Terebentinae. ii. ounces^ Farinae Hordei, and
Orobi. an. two ounces. Pulueris iridis. half an ounce^

Let the iuyces boil with the honey, the^ add Farinas, and being mixed and
taken from the fire, ad thereto Terebentinae and iridem, And for this scope of
cure, these also are profitable, Vnguentum de Resina, or vnguentum Fuscum
Nicolai, or vng. Apostolorum, or vng. de Gummi, or vng. Diapompholi. cum
Mercurii pulu. for that does very well mundifie. So likewise avails
Emplastrum Gratia dei^ Emplastrum diuinum, Emplastru^ rub. Grec. Gal.ij. ad
Glautone^
bis coloratum, which as Galene affirms, does aptly mundifie, and draws
the filthy matter and corrupted bones from the botom to the outward part of
the Ulcer.

Or else,

Rec.
Galbani, Opopanacis, an. one ounce. Bdellij, Amonniaci. Cerae nouae, one
pound. Olei Ros. vel commu. ii. pound. Resinae, iii. ounces. Lithargy. auri.
i. pound. and. s. Olibani, Mirrhae, Aloes, an. one ounce and a half. Thuris,
Masticis, Aristolo. rotu^. Stiracis calamite. half an ounce. Succi Betonicae,
Verbenae, Caprifolij, an. one ounce. Plantaginis, Pimpenel. Cynoglos^. Lapid
Hematitis. ii. dragmes. Eruginis rasilis. i. ounce.

Dissolve the Gu^mes in vinegar, boil the Litarge with the Oil, Wax, and
Rosin, and in the end put in Eruginem Rasilem and the rest.

But if the filthiness grow to putrefaction, then must the Ulcer be washed
with Oxicrate or Muria, and then to apply ex Carnibus piscium salsorum,
Farinae Orobi. Aristolo. long. Scilla, and mel, Boiled in wine, in form of an
Emplaster, or vnguentum Egiptiacum, and in deep Ulcers, the decoccion
aforesaid, or Aenomelle or Egiptiacum Lixiuio dissolut. is to be iniected. Or
the excellent medicine of Auicen, Medicame^tum Auicennae.
made in this form.

Rec.
Auripigmenti. one ounce. Calcis viuae. an. vi. dragmes. Aluminis, Corticis
mali punici. Thuris. an. half an ounce. Gallarum. Cerae, an. q. s. and Olei.

Make thereof an unguent.

But whilst we go about thus with vehement medicines to mundifie the Ulcer,
it behooves to use Vnguentu^ de Bolo and Puluilli ex Stupis oxicrato, to avoid
inflammation, which is conuersaunt with pain, Vita^da est infla^matio qua
dolor accersitur.
which must needs be increased by such vehement medicines.

Nevertheless, if this feeding or eating do daily more and more corrode the
parts nighe thereto, then medicines that belong to malign Ulcers are here
expedient, and now and then to take away by incision, that which is
putrefied and corrupted, which may also be done by hot Iron, or sharp
medicine, such as Trochisis, Asphodeli and Trochis de arsenico, or this
following, which pearseth vehemently within the space of an hour, and causes
less pain then either Arsnick or sublimatu^.

Rec.
Calcis viuae, two pound. Cineris Ilicis, an. i. pound Caulium, Fabarum ac
tartari. Soldae ex qua fit vitru^. half a pound Axungij veteris. one quart.

Let them all remain mixed with Liee whereof Soap is made, the space of seven
days, afterward strain it, and boil it to the hardenes of a stone, or to a
sufficient thickenes and drienes, ad to (if you will) Saponis moll. one ounce.
And this not only avails to take away flesh, but also to consume Fistulous
hardenes. I^ shall be good also to use Aqua sublimata, as is in the aforesaid
Chapter, which without great pain does corrode and heal both the Ulcers of
the mouth and other parts. Or use this in liquid form following.

Rec.
Terebentinae lotae. half an ounce. Cerae albae. ii. dragmes.

Melte them together, and add thereto Hidrargyri sublimati, one ounce. So
stir them together till they be cold.

Or,

Rec.
Hidrargyri sublimati. i. ounce. Sanguis Draconis, ii. dragmes.

Make it in poulder, and strewe it into the Ulcer, else roll Bombast on thy
instrument, and fasten it in the Ulcer or Ueine, where hence the blood
flows. Which is is astringent and has power to cauterize, and then to
finishe, fly to the cure of Gangrena, or Sphacelus, and also for this purpose
many things are to be found profitable in the chapter aforegoing.

Of the deep and Crooked Ulcer.
THe method in curing deep and crooked Ulcers, De profu^do ac simi^ so vlc.
appertains to diet and other universal order, according to the disposition
of the body, and Ulcers, forseeing and preventing all pain, intemperature.
etc. associating the Ulcer, for always the causes both efficient and
favoring, must be resisted. The part affected must be so ordered, that the
Ulcers orifice, may decline downward, whereby the matter may more easily
auoyde^, but if that can not be done, incision is to be made from the orifice
to the bottom of the Ulcer, chiefly if the hollowenes be along or nere the
skin, else if the immine^t danger prohibit the same in the botome, at the
least it ought to be opened, and anointed with a mundifying unguent. The
which if it cannot be fitly applied, then in to the hollow and crooked
corners, must iniections mundicatiue be ministered, for which purpose, these or
such like, are profitable. viz. Oximel, Oenomel, of astringent wine, Aqua
alluminosa cum melle, Lixiuium, Aqua marina, Egypt. ac pulueris Mercurii.
Dissolved in honey and lie, as in the aforesaid chapter.

Rec.
Aquae Plantaginis, an. ii. ounc. Peculi rosar. Caprifolii. Vng. Egiptiacu^. i.
ounce and s. Make thereof iniection. Or,

Rec.
Aquae Plantaginis, an. four ounces. Peculi Rosarum. Vini albi. ii ounces.
Aluminis vsti. half an ounce. Baccarum mirti. an. one dragme. and Aloes. Make
iniection. Or,

Rec.
Hordei integri, i. P. s. Ceterach. an. one handful. Agrimoniae, Centaureae
minor. an. half a handful. Absinthii.

Coquantur in Mellicrato, and make thereof iniection.

And when the Ulcer is sufficiently well cleansed, then use this following to
regenerate the substance.

Rec.
Hordei. i. P. and a half. Radicis ireos. Foliorum oliuae. an. half a
handful. Plantaginis. Agrimoniae.

Boil them in water, and in half a pound of the strained liquor dissolve, Mel.
Rosar. colata. ii. ounces. Mirrhae. ii. dragmes and a half. Thuris. an. one
dragme. Masticis. Make thereof iniection. Or,

Rec.
Decoct. Hordei. one pound. Mel. Rosar. col. iii. ounces. Sarcocollae. ii.
dragmes. Mirrae. an. one dragme. Thuris. Vini. vi. ounces.

Boil them to the consumption of the third part, whereto may be added if it
seem requisite some Aloes.

Rec.
Farinae Hordei. an. one ounce. and Lupinorum. Mel. iiii. ounces. Thuris. an.
one dragme. Mastices. Mirtice. half an ounce. Terebentinae lotae. i. ounce. s.
Olei hiperici. q. s.

Make thereof an unguent, and this or the aforesaid, shall be available.
Afterward apply this cerote following.

Rec.
Nitri tenuiss. pull. i. quart. Aquae Rosar. ii. ounces and a half.

Boil them together at a gentle fire, to sufficient thickenes, ever stirring
it, and after ad to it. Rec.
Terebentinae. an. one quart. Olei veteris. Cerae. q. s.

Boil them together again, stirring them still, and make thereof a cerote.

Fit also to be applied alofte is Emplastrum de Minio, vel Apostolo.
Chirurg. vel Diacalchiteos, whereto to increse exic^ation and astriccion, we may
mingle Nonnihil calchitidis, Corticis Granat. and Gallarum Omphacitidu^ in pull.
redact.

In the mean season, let us defend the nighe parts with medicines partlye
repellent, and partly discutient, or wash it with this decoction following.

Rec.
Calamithi, Origani, Saluiae, an. one handful. Matricariae, Adsinthij,
Rosmarini, Camomeli, an. one P. Stecados, Ros. rub. Nucis cupressi. x. Salis,
ii. ounces. Aluminis, x. dragmes. Mellis. one pound.

Boil them in Lee or sower wine to the third part, and make a fotio^, or take
other astringentes, namely Sumach, Plantago, Balaust. Herb. Rosar. Mirt. And
boil the^ in wine. Also it were profitable to apply a piece of Lead in the
orifice, and to use ligatures, so that the matter may avoid, or a sponge
likewise in the orifice, that by the sucking and drawyng thereof, the Ulcer may
be dried.

Of the Fistula.
DUe diet being prescribed, De fistula.
and the body according to yt nature of humors, being prouide^tly purged, the
inner parts are next to be strengthened, and this decoc^ion following to be
given in drink. Which has been proved and tried by sundry Authors,
exceeding commodious in this kind of case.

Rec.
Osmunde regalis ana. parte^ (Filix mas, Diosc. dicitur) Scrophulariae.
Agrimoniae. an two parts. Centaurie minoris. Aristolo. an. half a part.
Gentianae. Radi. filicis. partem. Filipendulae. ii. parts.

Boil them in white wine, adding to Zacchari, q. s. and let the party take of
the decoction daily a pretty quantity. And good it were to ad to the same
decoction, Guiacum. And after Callus be removed and taken away, the use of
Guiacum in wine or water boiled, having respect to the strength and humors,
and how much or how little drying is expedient.

Iniectio^s Iniectiones conferunt.
here are also profitable, such as is before in the chap. of the crooked Ulcer,
or else make a decoction ex Radic. filicis, Agrimoniae, and foliorum Oliuae,
wherein dissolve Egiptiac. or Apostolo. as shall be needefully required.

Or,

Rec. Lixiuij ex cineribus brassicae and cortic. Fabarum. iiii. ounces, whereto
ad Mel. Rosar. one ounce and a half, Aluminis, half an ounce. Boil them a
little, then take the decoction. iii. ounces, whereto ad Pulueris Precipitati,
half an ounce. Make thereof an iniection, or use the destilled water Stercoris
humani.

Else.

Rec.
Terebintinae. one ounce. Thuris. ii. ounces. Mastic. Aloes, Gariofilorum,
Galangiae, an one ounce. Cinamomi. Nucis muscatae Cubebarum, Croci. Gummi
Hederae. vi. ounces.

Infuse them in white wine, and Aqua vitae, and distille them, and use this
distilled water for an iniectio^ to the Fistula. And after the infection,
apply one of the Emplastres aforesaid, as Emplastrum Diuinum, or Gratia Dei.
Some appoint to fill the Fistula with Hellebory, and so to remain three days,
Notwithstanding, I having proved the like once in a Fistula of the ridge of the
back, next the region of the heart, there chanced to the pacient Lipothimia.
Helleborus in aliqua part thoracis tutus non videtur.
To conclude, I judge it nothing profitable, chieflye if the Fistula be in any
part of the breast. If the Fistula be new, it is cured with the aforesaid
remedies, but if it be old, and the orifice streit, it must well be enlarged,
either with Penicillo, or a tent of Gentian, or a Sponge often prepared.

Rec.
Cerae. an. one ounce. Resinae. Hidrargyri sublimati. one drag. vel one dragme
and a half.

Melt the wax with Rosin, and then ad to the sublimate, and in that mixture
dip the Sponge, and straight take it forth least it be burned, and press it
diligently and so apply it to the orifice of y^ Fistula, the which when it is
large enough, must be rooted out, either with sharper medicines, incision or
cautery, else cut it in the botome, and apply thereto a cauterie.

Medicines which take away the Fistula are these. viz. Trochi. Asphedi
Helleboru^. Auripig. rub. sublimatum, or the sublimated water aforesaid,
Arsenicum, or Trochi. de Arsenico, but if thou minister Arsnick three or four
times, mixed and dried with the juice Solani, and Mandragorae. ii. ounces, then
use thy defensitiue round about, as Vng. de Bolo arm. etc. least perhaps by
the pain, inflammation do happen.

When the Fistula is where it may not safely be cut, nor yet any cauterie fit
to be applied, then make sharp iniections, amongst which we have often
proved this very profitable.

Rec.
Vng. Egypt. half an ounce. Sublimati. half a dragme. Arsenici. one scruple.
Lixiuij. one ounce. Aquae Ros. ii. ounces. Aquae Plantaginis. iiii. ounces.

Boil these to the half, and use these for iniection three days together.

The iniection being done, close up the orifice of the Ulcer, with wax, or
bombast, so that that within, may move and consume the Fistula, else use Aqua
forti, or the cauterie above written. After the use of the cauterie and sharp
medicines, endeavor to take away the ^skar, and after to remove Callus, and
wash the Ulcer, cum mulso, or decoctione erui cum melle. Furthermore.

Rec.
Terebint. in aquae vitae lotae^ ^ou^. Succi. Apij. an. vi. dragmes. Cinoglos.

Mel. Rosar. col. one ounce and a half. Make thereof a decoction, to the
consumtion of half the iuyces, afterward ad to Rec.
Aristolo rot. ii. dragmes. Farinae Lupinoru^. half an ounce. Whereto if thou ad
Radi peucedani, Ireos Mirrhe and Sarcocoll. It shall be profitable to regenerate
flesh. Other order is to be used like as in the chapter of the deep Ulcer.
When it seems not expedient to cut away Callus, neither to use cauterie, nor
sharp medicines, it only rests to avoid the cure. Yet purge often the
flegmaticke humors, and melancolike, and with medicines meanly drying, and
Emplastrum Diachilon Ireatum, or Diacalciteos.

Of the Vlcered Canker.
THe method of curing the Cankred Ulcer, De cancro Vlcerato.
by diet and purgation, shall be the same, prescribed in the tumor Canker. If
it be in the outward part of the body, which may be safely taken away with
the roots, must be cut wholly, and the gross blood of the veins nighe
thereto pressed out, afterward the lips of the Ulcer to be taken away, and
finishe the cure in some with medicines cauterizing, in others to consume it
with a cauterie, or after incision and expression of the veins, to apply the
cauterie. And amongst cauterizing medicines, Arsnick in this case is
principal, or the cauterie above written, but then use defensatiues to avoid
infla^mation. Then take away the eskar, and proceed as in other Ulcers. But if
the Canker be great, and have deep roots, or be near some principal member,
or inward part, or the party cannot suffer excisio^, either through weakness
or fear, or that by the cure thereof, he should incur greater danger, it
is enough then to hinder the Canker to increase, by diet, purgation of adusted
or melancolike humors, and that gently with drying medicines, without
mordication or biting. And this potion is exceeding profitable to be used nine
days before excision, taking every day two ounces thereof, which preuayleth
also though the cure be desperate.

Rec.
Radi. tapsi barbati. an. two ounces. and Scrophularie. Filipendulae, an. one
handful. Ceterach. Herb. Roberti. Agrimoniae. Turmentillae. Scabiosae.
Gariofilati. Linariae. Sem. Vrticae. iii. drammes. Florum Sambuci. an. one. p.
and Rosimarinae.

Make thereof a decoction, wherein dissolve zacchari. q. s to make it pleasant,
wash the place also with the one part thereof, and apply Magma thereto in
form of a Cataplasme, which is thought much to delay pain. And among simple
medicines, these following, do most prohibit the increase of the Cankar. The
juice of Night shade, Sorel. etc. and their stilled waters, also Plumbum,
Antimonium, and other like cold and drying things, as Vnguentum Album, vng.
Lithargyri, vng. de Plumbo pulu^r. cum vino albo aut Succo acetosae, vng. de
Po^pholig. or those mixed with the aforesaid herbs in decoction, or waters of
Camfer. Or this water following cannot be in vain applied.

Rec.
Succi solani, Semperuiui, Acetosae, Scabiosae, Caprefolij, Tapsi barbati, an.
half a pound. Scrophulariae, Fili pendulae, Plantaginis, Linariae, Agrimoniae.
Succi om^ hacij. one pound. Carnis, L^macum. an. half a pound. Ranarum,
Cancroru^ fluuiatiliu^. Albumina ouorum. vi. Aluminis. iii. ounces. Caphurae.
one dragme.

Destill them all in a Leaden still, and with the water wash the place, and
lay upon it a clothe, dipped in the same water, which water is esteemed
excellent.

Rec.
Vng. Pompholig. half a quart. Vnguentum albu^. two ounces. Litargyri. an.
half an ounce. Plu^bi vsti and loti. Succi. Scabiosae. an. two ounces.
Solani. Olei Omphacini, an. four ounces. vel de ranis.

Stir them in a Leaden mortar together to a white ointment. Or.

Rec.
Tuthiae preparat. Cerusaelotae, Plumbi, and an. one ounce and a half.
Lithargyri loti. Coriandri prepar. Amili. Cerae albae. two ounces. Olei
Rosar. vel de Ranis i. pound. Muccaginis sem^ Psilij cum succo. Scabiosae.
Herb. Roberti. iii. ounces Linariae. Tapsi Barb. extracti.

Mix and make thereof an ointment in a Leaden mortar. Or,

Rec.
Cerusae vst and five times i. ounce^ washed in Rose water. Plumbi vsti. loti.
Tuthiae preparatae. half an ounce. Lithargyri nutriti. iii. dragmes. Succi
solani, an. one ounce. Semperuiui, Hiosciami, Lactis, Sem. Papaueris, cum aq^
Rosa extract. two ounces. Lactis mulieris. i. ounce. Olei Rosar. iiii. ounces.
Cerae albae. one ounce.

Make thereof an ointment according to art. Or,

Rec.
Succi fol tapsi barbati. iiii. oun^ Mellis. half a pound. Pull. spongiae
bedega^^s. iii dra^ Pulueris Ma^ecorij, an. two dragmes. and Ossium Mirobal.

Boil them to the consumption of t^^ iuyces, and ad to the pouders.

Some use to wash the Ulcer dayl^ with wine, wherein Tapsi barb. has be^
boiled. Others with water of Nightshade, Plantaine, Roses, cum Corticae
Mirobal. and modico Aluminis, somewhat boiled, then to stir the juice of
Nightshade in a Leaden mortar, to the form of a liniment, and so apply it.

Rec.
Plumbi vsti lot. iii. dragmes. Antimonij pariter lot. ii. drag. Pomphol. iiii.
scruples. Cerusae. i. drag. s. Camforae. i. dragme. Lapid. Hematitis an. two
scruples. vtriusque Corallij. Cineris cancroru^ fluuiat. ii. drag. Succi
plantaginis, an. two ounces. and Solani. Olei Rosar. omphacini, q. s. vel de
Ranis.

Stir them in a Leaden mortar, to the form of a liniment.

Of the Ulcer containing worms.
TO prohibit the generation of worms in Ulcers, Devlce^e Verminoso.
it is requisite first to take away all moisture and putrefactio^ whereof they
may be engendered, worms are destroyed by the iuyces or decoctions, Absinthij,
Eupatorij, Centaureae, and such bitter things, so does the juice of t^^
leaves and flowers of Peaches, being bruised and applied. Or,

Rec.
Olei Absinthii. ii. ounces. Succi Absinthii. vi. ounces. Pulueris Cumini. an.
ii. ounc^^ Dictamni, Aloes, Cerae. q. s.

Boil them to the form of an Empl^ster, which thou may use in any part
where worms be. Yarrowe also is commended for the killing of worms, both men
and beasts, giving one dra^me the^^ of for worms in the belly, and that in
ch^^^dren, and to bigger folks greater qua^^titie, and an in^ection made
thereof, kille^ worms in the ears.

Of burning.
If it be great, De Combustione. i. problem.
a thin diet then, and ^^ders universally must be prescribed, a^cording to
the dominion of humor sin ^^ body. Aristotle estemeth it profitable, that the
part or member burned, may be holden somewhat to the fire, that thereby one
heat may draw forth another, and keep it from blistering. Others with the
same reason do apply Onions with salce. But the common remedies are these.
viz. Aqua Solani, Rosar. vel Endiuiae, long beaten with the white of an Egg,
but to mingle Uineger therewith, I allow not, because of the sharpenes thereof,
but vng. Album and rub. cum Camfora, Albumine Oui, and aqua Rosar. is very good
and prohibit the generation of blisters.

Or,

Rec. Butiri rece^tis, vel Olei sepe loti. iii ounces. vng. Populionis, one
ounce and a half, Oua. ii.

Mix them in four me of a li^iment, else ex Succo Solani, and Semperuiui, oleo
violarum and Cera, make a liniment.

Or take the water wherein a Limestone has been quenched, and boil it with
the Oil of Nuttes, then stir it till it be thick, and an^int the place
therewith seven days, and it is a present remedy, the seven days ended.

Rec.
Olei Nucum coct. ii. ounces. Cerae half an ounce.

Stir the^ together, which is not to be used before the generation of
blitters, but after they be opened.

Rec.
Vng. Albu^ camforatu^. an. two ounce. Vng. Popu. Mucaginis sem. Cidoneorum in
aqua Rosar. extract. one ounce. s. Make thereof an unguent.

If the burning seem very great, ad to Mucaginis, sem. Psilii, and Olei de
Nimphea. There is another unguent made of Lime, mentioned before, which
willingly I use not to the face, for that it to much draws a Cicatrice. Or,

Rec.
Calcis lot. one ounce. Cerae albae. half an ounce, Olei Rosar. iii. ounces.
Stercoris colu^bi vst. ii. dragmes. Aquae Rosar. one ounce. Albumen oui. one.

If need be to mundifie use this following.

Rec.
Terebentinae lotae, in decoctione Hordei. ii. ounces. Siru. Rosar. iiii.
ounces. Mirt. and ana. one dragme. A^oes. Hordei. q. s. To thick it.

And then to induce and excellent Cicatrice.

Rec.
Diachilon commune. ii. ounces. Vnguentum Pop. an. three ounces. Ole^ Rosar.
Muccag. sem. Cidoneoru^ in aqua Rosar, extract. iiii. ounces. Vitellos. Ouo.
ii. Make the unguent.

The Cicatrice being made, anoint it daily with y^ oil of the yolks of Eggs,
and after the combustion for the repletion of the Ulcer, This following is
laudable.

Rec.
Olei Rosar. viii. ounces. Olei Ouorum. ii. ounces. Vitri albiss, tenuis.
pulueri. i. ounce Corticis medii sambuci. i. m. Ceraealbae. one ounce and a
half.

Boil them together, and make thereof an unguent.

Of the particular cure of Ulcers.
Ulcers of the head.
THe curation of Ulcers of the head, De capitis Vlceribus.
differ not from the aforesaid method, viz. corroding Ulcers are cured by the
method of corrosiues, and the putrefied Ulcer by like medicines, save that the
outward skin of the head of natural temperature, requires strong
exiccatiues, and if Craneum be putrefied, how it shall be removed, is before
mentioned.

Of the mouth.
IN this disease is requisite a thin diet, De Achoribus seu tinea.
and such as may decay all Flegmatike and Melancholy humors, and besides that
to have euacuation of humors, partly by Phlebotomie, if strength and age do
permit, and partly by purging medicines like as is prescribed in Oedema and
Scirrho wherefore this following, also is profitable.

Rec.
Cassiae, an. half an ounce. Catholiconis. Tripherae persicae. i. ounce
Mirobal. Indorum and citrinorum confricat. an.2 dra. Olei Amigdalaru^ dulciu^.
Senae. iii. dragmes. Sirupi violaru^. q. s. fiat opiata.

Then approach to common or simple medicines, first therefore shave or powle
the head near, and wash it six days together, with the decoction ex
Fumaria, Oxilapatho, Folijs Hederae, Oleastri, Salicis, Sic^ae, Acetosae,
Herbae Roberti, or Lixiuium exciner^bus sarmentorum vitis, Fraxini and
braslicae conficito, wherein boil, Calamentum, an one handful. Fol. Lauri,
Camomel. an. ii. P. Mel^loti. Stichados.

Therewith wash the head, five or six days. Afterward.

Rec.
Olei Laurini. an two ounces. Olei sem. Lini. Pinguedinis suillae. vi. ounces.
Terebentinae. ii. ounces. Pull. Apij risarum. i. ounce. s. Elleborialbi,and an.
two dragmes. Aluminis vsti. Eruginis. Rasilis, an. i. dragme. Auripigmenti.

Make thereof an unguent. Notwithstanding, those sharp medicines are not to be
applied to Ulcers. Or,

Rec.
Nuces communes, cum corticibus assas. xx. Aluminis, an. half an ounce.
Vitrioli. Lithargyrij. ii. dragmes. Cinabrii, half an ounce. Olei luniperi,and
an. two ounces. Nucum. Resinae and Picis. q. s.

Make thereof a liniment, wherewith anoint the head, being shaven before, and
chaffed with a rough cloth till it be very reed.

Rec.
Emplastri Oxicrocei. one ounce. Ceronei. ii. ounces. Ammoniaci vino dissoluti
albo. half an ounce.

Make thereof a plaster, and apply it to the head. We have often anointed the
head (being powled) with honey, and sprincled aloft the poulder of Rosin, and
after applying Placentam ex farina Triticea, in form and manner of a cappe,
and after eight days more, taking the hear away, use this ointme^t following,
until the cure be finished.

Rec.
Aluminis vst. an. one dragme. Vitrioli. Aristologiae. an. half an ounce.
Eruginis Rasilis. Picis naualis. ii. ounces. Axungiae equi. i. ounce Butiri
veteris. one pound.

Make thereof an unguent, wherewith anoint the head, after the use as
aforesaid, and this kind of curation, is more safe and with less pain then
others, which we have proved.

To increase hears.
FIrst consider the cause of hear falling, Ad pllor^ generationem.
viz. whether through raritie of the skin, or defecte of nourishement, I es
through corruption of humors, as in Morbo Gallico. If through raritie of ye
skin, then are they to be thickened moderatly if through want of nutriment,
then apply nourishementes plentifully, but if it proceade of corruption of
humors, then prescribe a convenient diet for the same, and purge the body
according to the nature of the humors, mundifie the skin of the head, and use
after such medicines following.

Rec.
Cineru^ capilloru^ Veneris. i. drag. Labdani puri. iii dragmes. Mirrhae. ii.
dragmes. Pulueris abrotani vsti. half a drag. Olei Sesamini. an two ounces.
Olei Mirt. Vini rubi i ounce. Aceti. vi. dragmes. Adipis Vrsi, and an. half an
ounce. Anseris. Cerae. q. s.

Make thereof an unguent, and apply to the places where hear wants.

Or,

Rec. Sterco^is Muris, Cineris Apum, parts equales, cum Olei rosar.

Make thereof an ointment. Or,

Rec.
Mellis, two pound. Cineris abrotani. ii. ounces. Apum vstarum. i. ounce.
Politrici, iiii handful. Labdani. i ounce. s.

Bruise altogether, and infuse the^ nine days in red wine, and then distill them
in a double vessel.

Of the Ulcers of the eyes.
FOr the cure of these Ulcers, use the general orders, both by diet,
euacuation, and all other universal remedies prescribed in Cap. de Opthalmia,
with a special respect to the nature of humors in the body. De oculorum
Vlceribus.
As for medicines meanly mundifying and ceasing dolor, and biting, use the like
as in wounds of the eyes, viz. Sir rosar^ Mel Virgineum, Saccharum Candium,
Aloe lota, Mirrha etc.

To glutinate or join: Rec. Tuth^ae. preparat. Collirium de plumbo, Collirium
album, sieve Apio, Which being fine ground together, dissolve them in aquis
rosar. Plantag. Caudae equinae, vel^ lact. Caprino, vel muliebri.

Many mo fourmes of medicines, as wel^ simple as compounde, are diversely in
Authors prescribed, nevertheless full little commodity have I at any time by
them found.

Of the Fistula in the corners of the eyes.
THe order aforesaid. viz. De Fistula lachrimari
both diet, pu^^gation, and other universal medicines, is excellent good in
the beginning, when the Fistula is not confirmed, filling the hollownes of the
Ulcer, with a certain light or woolly substance, found about the root of
the reed, until it be clean mundified. Also a Colliriu^ made ex Thure,
Sarcocollae. Sang. Draconis, Balaust. Antimon. Alumi. mixtis ad parts equales,
whereto ad quartam partem floris aerise, and the Collirium cum aqua pluuiali.
And I my self have never founde^ more excellent medicine the^ this following.

Rec.
Aquae vitae, seu viniopt. an. one drag. and Mel. rosar. col. Mirrhae, two
dragmes.

Make thereof a liniment, wherewith evening and morning anoint the place,
Amoniacu^ also dissolved in A ceto cum erugine rasili, wastes this Fistula.

If the bone do not putrify, but only tallous flesh abound, it may be
consumed with vng. Egypt. or the poulder of Mercury, or Asphodel. Afterward
being well mundified, seek to regenerate the flesh.

But^ if there be putrefaction at the boon, Si fuerit ossis caries
use cauterie actual, for in this case it excels the potentiall, the
largenes of Caries will show the form of the cauterie, so that the eye be
safely regarded by laying upon bombase in the white of an Egg, and covered
with a silver spoone.

An old Fistula in this place, is scarsly curable, for the great default of
the bone, and if it be cured, the eye will water continually.

Ulcers of the Nose.
IN curation of Ulcers of ye Nose, De Nasi Vlceribus.
called Phagedenici, or Ca^crosi, others call the Noli me tangere, some
prescribe diet and other orders, as In curatione Cancri, and use cauteries,
Other caustiek medicines, as is written in the chapter De Polipo. Or a Sponge
dipped in Aqua Arsenici adding Olei De Euphorbio, which separateth the
putrefied flesh, but some would have those used only in the beginning. And
that wisely to be done, for ofttimes much use of corrosi^es, makes the Ulcer
worse (as experience teaches) but when the Canker is confirmed, it is best to
leau^ the cure, which if thou do, to preseru^ the party prescribed a
convenient die^ wherein all sharp things, and whatsoever shall heat the
blood, must be forbidden, opening a vein in the spring time using purgations
to au^yde burnt or M^lancolie humors, such as be in the char^ De Cancro
tumore. Letting this medicine following be in use twice in a moneth^

Rec.
Catholic. one ounce. Co^fect. Hamech an half an ounce. Diasenae solut. Elect.
de Psilio, an. iii. drames. de Citro, and de succ. Rosar. Sirup. Viol. q. s.
Fiat opiata.

To be vsed^ of the party twyse in a month. The medicines likewise expressed
in Cap. Vlc. virulent. ac Cancricuratione, ac de tumore nasi, may hitherto be
referred, and such as follows.

Rec.
Aquae Rosar. an. ii. ounces. Plant. and Solani. Mirobal. cit. an. two
dragmes. and Balaust. Aluminis. half a dragme.

Boil them all a little, then streine the^ and wash the Ulcer therewith.

Further,

Rec.
Olei rosar. one pound. Olei Mirt. an. ii. ounc. Vng. ros. mesue. Vng. Popul.
Succi plantag. solani, an. ii. ounces. and Semperuiui. Boil them to the
consumption of the juice, then ad to. Litharg. auri. v. ounces. Tuthiae.
preparat. iii. dragmes. Cerusae lot. x. dragmes. Plumb. vst. lot. vi dragmes.
Camforae. i. dragme. Cerae. q. s.

Stir them together in a Leade^ mortar, the space of one hour. Or,

Rec.
Olei rosati. v. ounces. Suc. Planta. an. one ounce. Solani, and Semperuiui.
Mali punici contus. ii. ounces. Tuthiae preparatae. half an ounce. Plumb. vst.
lot. Cerusae lot. an. three dragmes. Lithargy. Antimon. loti. Cerae. q. s.

Stir them diligently in a Lead^^ mortar. Or,

Rec.
Olei Amigdal. dulc. rece^t. an^ ou^e^ s. Vng Succi vtriusque Granati, Succi
solani. Vnguentumdeplumbo. ii. ounces.

Make thereof an unguent in a Leaden mortar. Or,

Rec.
Butiri bubulini loti, an. parts equales. Suc. Semperuiui.

Stir them together in a Leaden mortar, to ye form of an vngue^t, which
greatly asswageth pain and delaieth heat.

If the edges of the Ulcer swell, then apply diligently Pull. Mercurii loti.

Ulcers of the mouth.
LEt universal medicines be first used, (according to the nature of humors)
then further prescribe. De oris v^ ceribus. Topica. Si ab hum. call. and acri.


And if the Ulcer be corroding, proceading of hoote and sharp humors, this
following is profitable.

Rec.
Mel. rosat. col. one ounce. Suc. mali punici, vel Omphacij. ii. ounces.
Aquaru^ Plantag. an. iii ounces. Rosa^. seu Acetosae. Make thereof a gargarisme.

If the Ulcer come of Phlegmatike humors, Si abhum. pituiteo.
wash the orifice cum vino albo, and modico Aluminis vsti. Apply also the
Ulcer water sublimated.

This gargarisme following, E, quocu^que humoresit iuua^ haec decoctio.
much in this case avails, of what humor soever the Ulcer do proceed,
Calices Glandiu^; Nuces Cipressi, Fol. Oliuae, Sumach, Pla^taginem, Saluiam,
Rosemarinam, Lent^^ and Rosas. Make a decoction of these in good form with a
little Aluminis vsti, adding to Mellis vel Zacchari. q. s. an^ therewith wash
the mouth. Or, Oliuae fol. cu^ succo mali punici, and mell^ ad colluendum
coquito, and if there ^e^ great putrefaction, ad thereto Egiptiacu^.

But if the Vuula Si Vuula corrosa.
be therewith pearced^ touch or rub the Ulcered place with Linte, rouled in A
quaforti, and then v^^ the before said decoctions.

Notwithstanding, if it proceed A morbo venereo, Si a morbo Venereo.
then first begin with du^ purgation, and prescribe the party a thi^^^
diet, with the decoction of Guiacum, an^ use ointmentes requisite for that
disease^ strengthening the inner parts. Mundi^^ the Ulcer with the decoctio^s
due, and prepare it to a Cicatrice. Then restrain the flux of humors to come
from the head. Use twyse a day sublimated water, as is before written, to
touch the Ulcer with Lint rouled therein. Or,

Rec.
Aqua Rosar. an. two ounces. and Plantag. Sublimati. i. dragme.

Boil them in a glass bottell, till the sublimate be dissolved, after let him
wash his mouth with these following.

Rec.
Aqua decoct. hord. quart. 3. an. iii. ou^c. Aqua Plantag. Mel. rosar. col.
Make thereof a gargarisme. Or,

Rec.
Hord. i. p. Lentium. p s. Cort. Granatorum. half an ounce. Fol. Oliuae,
Sumach. Mirt. an. one handful. Lentisci. Balaust.

Make thereof a decoction, and take of the streined liquor two pound, wherein
dissolve, Sir. Aceto. Simpl. an. 2. ounces. ^^ Sir. rosar. and Diamoron. Succi
mali punici. iii. ounces. Mel. rosar. colat. ii. ounces. Clarify it, and make
thereof a gargarisme^

Or,

Rec.
Aquae Plantag. half a pound. Mel. rosar. colati. iii. ounces. Mirtini, and
an. one ounce. Cidoneorum. Suc mali punici ii. ounces. Dianucum. ii. ounces and
a half Miuae Cidoneorum. one ounce.

Mix and make thereof a gargarisme or use to wash it cum succo Pilosella^
vino and melle, which is excellent.

In the beginning therefore mundi^^^ it, then with astringent medicines fro^^
the weaker to the strongest, and lastly induce the Cicatrice, for which use as
follows.

Rec.
Pull. rosar. an. ii. ounces. Balaust. Gallarum. Mirob. citrin. Ciperi. half a
dragme.

Mix the^, and either blow it up or rather being rouled upon lint, apply it,
for the blowing of poulders in the mouth, does minister danger to Aspera
arteria, sometime provoking vehement coughe. And to stay defluxions from the
head, these following are available.

Rec.
Ammonia. ana. one dragme. Galbani,

Make it in form of a plaster, and apply it to the hinder part of the head.

Rec.
Auripigmenti, one dragme. Mirrhae, an. two dragmes. Thuris, Mastices.
Suffitus communis, ii. ounces.

Make thereof trochis, to be applied to the temples of the head, the party
keeping the chamber close.

Rec.
Boli armeni, two dragmes. Boli armeni, two dragmes. Gummi Arabici, an. one
drag. Tragagantae, Assatorum, Cortici thuris, half a scruple.

And with Sirup. de ros. siccis, make the^ in form of Lupines, which he
shall in the night hold in his mouth, and in the day Saccharum Candium.

If the Ulcer be in the palate, then be more circumspect, both for raritie of
the flesh or corruption at the boon, which can hardely be taken away, but by
cauterie, which as a hurt perpetual, for that they can never after speak
perfectly, least the hole which remains be stopped, which may be done with
wax, or better with an instrument of silver, made in hollow form. And
further, with the bone of the palate, the bone of the Iawe also, may easily
corrupt, and the teethe after fall fourth.

Ulcers of the Ears.
Ulcers of the Ears, De a^riu^ vlceribus
are to be cured, (both by diet and medicine) as the tumors in those parts, if
after purgation, flegmes abou^de in the brain, which may be avoided by y^
ulcer, use these following.

Rec.
Theriacae vet. two dragmes. Staphisagriae, ana. one scruple. Pirrethri,
Mastic. half a dragme.

Make thereof chewittes to be used in the morning before meat.

Rec.
Suc. anagal, Mercurialis, Sampsuci and Mellissae. q. s. Et naribus sepe
attrahantur. And the decoction of Guiacu^ profits much.

In this case (considering the nature of the party) things greatly drying and
mu^difying, are most necessary (according to the nature of the parties) and
drop in Olei de vitellis ouoru^, cum melle and tantillo sarcocollae. Else when
the pain is vehement, Olei de vitellis ouorum only stirred in a Leade^
mortar, till it be brown or black, then drop it in the ear.

Or,

Rec.
Aqua decocta Agrimoniae, and AbAbsinthij, half a pound. Vini alb. and ana.
two ounces. Mel. rosa. Drop in thereof warm. Or,

Rec.
Succi mali punici dull. an. 2. ou^c^ Succi Poligoni, and Virg. pastoris. Mel.
rosar. one ounce and a half.

Boil them, and distill thereof into the Ears, and if the Ulcer be new, that
shall suffice.

But in old and filthy Ulcers, we have need of stronger mundificatiues, in
which case Egiptiacum dissolved, is necessary. And after some detersion, ad to
Mirrhe, you may also dissolve in Uineger Trochisc. Andronij, and drop into
the ears, the composition of the which Trochis. follows.

Rec.
Balaustiae, two dragmes. Aluminis, one dragme. Atramenti Sutorij, ii.
dragmes. Mirrhae, one dragme. Thuris, ana. two dragmes. Aristo. Gallaru^
Salis Amoniaci. one dragme. Cu^mellicrato. Make the Trochis.

Scoriae ferri, five times quenched in sharp wine, then dried and ground with
fresh butter, in form of a liniment.

Rec.
Vini austeri, one ounce. Aluminis. one dragme.

When it is therein dissolved, wet therein clothes, four or five times, and
dry the^, and of them make tents, which being anointed with the aforesaid
liniment, apply them.

Rec.
Suc. Poligoni, and ana. one ounce. Hederae, Pompholig lot. in aqua rosaru^ and
Plantag. q. s.

Mix them, and drop thereof in the Ears.

First, institute diet and other general orders, De axillarum and inguinu^
Vlceribus.
according to the disposition and nature of the body, Ulcer, and humors, and
for as much as these Ulcers are commonly deep, and cornered, with hardness of
the edges, iniections that mundifie and dry, are to be used as before, in like
Ulcers.

Or,

Rec.
Lixiuij tonsoris, six ounces. Mel. one ounce. Pull. precipit. three dragmes.

Mix and make thereof in^ection, and let thereof remain in the Ulcer twelfe
hours Afterward, iniecte Lixiuium cu^ melle rosar. vel decoctum Hordei cum
sacch. or Oenomel, else strong things to mundifie, as a mu^dificatiue de Apio,
and to strengthen the part, lay aloft Stupes dipped in sower wine.

If the orifice be narrow, Si orificiu^ augustum.
enlarge it with sponge prepared, as aforesaid, or Radice gentianae.

If the lips be indurated, Si labia dura.
remove the same, either with a hot Iron, or a cauterising medicine.

Ulcers of the breast.
Ulcers of the breast are to be cured by died, De pectoris vlceribus.
Phlebotomie, and purgation, according to the nature of the body, and
disposition of the humors and part affected, wherein therefore let us have
recours to y^ curation of tumors.

Guido appoints the decoction, Virg. pasto^is cum mel. Others to drink daily
a draught of Agrimonie water.

And some give Aqua consolidae cum Rubarbari, and Mummiae. an. half a drag. If
the Ulcer pearce not to the inner part of the breest, Cur^nda sunt quae non
pene^ant thoracis inter nam.
it is curable as is spoken in the universal chapters. But those which have
perced the inner part (if they be narrow) must be enlarged, either with
sponge prepared, or the root of Gentian, put into it fastened to a thread,
lest it s^ippe into the body. Giving good heed that y^ matter may be
outwardly avoided, lest it fall into the hollow parts of the breest.

But where no ieopardie of the inner parts is eminent. Rec. Calcanthi, one
ounce, Mel, rosar. ii. ounces. Mix them and use it with the sponge. If there
be inflammation, use Vng. rosar.

Use iniections into the hollownes with Melicrato or Oenomilitae. Or

Rec.
Radic. Asari. Gentianae, ana. one ounce. Aristolo, Ireos^ Fol. Agrimoniae,
Pentaphilon, Pedis columb. ana. one handful. Ceterac. Centauree mi.
Hipericonis. Mirrhae, half a dragme.

Make the decoction in equal parts of water and wine, and in two pound of
the streined liquor, dissolve Mel. ros. col. vi. ounces. Fiat iniectio.

Rec.
Succi Apij, iiii. ounces. Succi Agrimoniae, Absinthij, ana. two ounces.
Plantag. Crassulae, Succi Cinoglossi. one ounce. Far. Hordei, and ana. three
ounces. Fabarum, Mel. iiii. ounces. Terebentinae lot. in aqua Pantag. two
ounces. Pull. Thuris, half an ounce. Mirrhae, one ounce. Olei rosar. and Cerae
alb. q. s.

Make thereof an unguent.

Rec.

Rec.
Vng. regis, iiii. ounces. Pulueris Ireos, Aristolo. ana. one dram Mirrhae,
and Aloes, Fiat vnguentu^ sarcoticu^. Or,

Rec.
Pull. rad. Arund. ana one drammes. s. and Peucedani. Thuris, ana. two
dragmes. Masticis, Mirrhae, Pulueris ireos ana one dragme. and Aristolo.
Cortic. Pini, one dragme. s. Vnguenti comitis, iii. ounces. Mel. rosat. col. q.
s.

Make thereof a liniment.

Ulcers of the Belly.
Ulcers of the nether Belly, De ve^tris infer. vlc.
which have not pearsed the hollow parts, are cured with the universal
methodes aforesaid, according to the nature and kind of the Ulcer.

But those which pearse the parts contained therein, the cure is rather to be
thought desperate then true, like the Ulcers which pearce the inner parts of
the breast, for as much as such commonly^ grow to be Fistulas, which be
either seldom, or never cured.

Ulcers of the privy parts.
THe Ulcers in these parts, De pudendi vlceribus.
do requ^^^ both diet, Phlebotomie, and purgatie due, according to the nature
of the bod^^ and humors, especially if they be great.

Ulcers in the outward parts of the yard, are to be dried Cum aqua rosar.
and Plantag. ana. ii. ounces, and Trochisc. alb Rasis. ii. dragmes, aut aqua
aluminosa, ^ vnguento alb. cum Camfora, or vngue^^tum de Plumbo, or Pull.
Balaustioru^, ^ Bedegaris: vel pull. Cucurb, sicc. and vst.

If the Ulcers be new and virulen^ creeping, and corrosiue, administer
mi^^^ralles, burnt and washed, and Aloe and cortex Pini. Or,

Rec.
Plumb. vst. and lot. iii. dragmes. Lithargy. half an ounce. Lapid. Hemat. one
dragme. Aloes. one dragme. s. Tuthiae prepar. ii. dragmes. Cortic. Pini sicci,
iiii. scruples. Sem. Anethi combusti, an. two scruples. Cucurb. sicci and
vsti. Olei rosacei omfacini. iii. scruples. Cerae alb. q. s.

Make thereof an unguent. Or,

Rec.
Corticis Camomeli vsti, ii. drag. Gallarum, Balaust. ana. three dragmes.
Malecorij, Acatiae. Erug. ras. half a dragme. Pompholig. Aloes, Thuris, an. ii.
dragmes. Sarcocollae, Corallij rub.

Make thereof a fine poulder, and cum Oleo ros. and Cera. Make thereof an
unguent.

If the Ulcers be putrefied and old, strewe thereon Pull. Mercurij, and wash
it with this water following.

Rec.
Aquae Plantag. ii. ounces. Vini alb. i. ounce and a half. Tuthiae preparatae.
ana. ii. drag. Eruginis rasilis vst.

Boil them a little, and therewith wash the Ulcer, then after sprinckle aloft
this poulder following.

Rec.
Corticis Thuris, Aloes lot. Sarcocollae, an. half a drag. Mirrhae, Gu^mi
elemi. Anethi vst. one scruple. Cortic. Pini. ii. scruples. Tuthiae preparatae,
Antimonij, ana. one dragme. Plumb. vst. Cerusae,

Make it in fine poulder, ad thereto San^^ Draconis. ii. scruples, and with that
poulder sprinckle the Ulcer. Or,

Rec.
Vitreoli, ana. ^ ounce^ Aluminis crudi, and vsti. Auripigmenti. ii. dragmes.
Aquae rosar. and ana. four ounces. Plantag. Aceti alb. half a pound.

Boil them together, then ad to Erug. rasilis, iii. dragmes, therewith wash
the Ulcer. Or,

Rec.
Vini albi, one pound, Aquae plantag. ana. one quart. and rosar. Auripigmenti,
ii. dragmes. Floris aeris, one dragme.

Grind them small, and boil them a little, and make thereof a collyrium, some
in steed of Auripig. do use Alumen vst. which I judge rather to be done in
Ulcers not putrefied.

Oua. iiii. hard boiled, and grind the yolks diligently, and put thereto
Aquae vitae, two pound, then after ad Aluminis, half an ounce, Camforae, two
drag. Eruginis rasilis, half a dragme, which being streined, wash thy
liniments therewith three or four times every day, and thou shall wonder at
the effect thereof.

Some do wash the Ulcer first with Lixiuio and melle, afterward, cum
Lixiuio and Alumine vsto, then cum Lixiuio and Ostraciorum pull. And lastly Aqua
vitae, cum pull Ostraciorum.

After lotions (if the Ulcer be filthy or virulent) the poulder of Mercury or
Egiptiacum, are commendable.

But if the danger of Gangrena be eminent, Si gangr. osculum emineat.
then scarifie it deeply, and apply thereto a cauterie, either actual or
potential, and defend the circuit of the Ulcer, cum vngento de Bolo ar.

It fortuneth many times, St balanus preputio sit obtectus
the yard does marueilouslye swell, and chiefly the skin, called Preputiu^^,
where with sometime the head of the yard is so covered, that it can not be
seen, and that the Ulcer betwixt the head and the skin, may not be
mundified, and then make a cataplasme, ex decoct. Maluae, sem Lini, ^^^ding
thereto Butyrum and ouum integru^.

Now if (by application of this cataplasme, it cease not to swell, neither may
be uncovered, and in the mean season, the Ulcer do more and more corrode
(which is discerned by doloure) then the skin longwyse is to be cut, whereby
the Ulcer may come to sight and be cleansed. And if it be but small,
peradventure it shall suffice to make iniection with the aforesaid collirie,
or such like, but if it be great, apply one day a collirie, cum Aloe and
Mirtha, and an other day, pull. Mercurij.

Notwithstanding, Si ad meatus corrodat.
if the Ulcer so corrode, that it be commen to the ways and conduites of the
urine, administer the collirie aforesaid, cum Mirrha and Aloe, and if it cease
not therewith, or grow to amendment, apply a cauterie. But if the pain thereof
do oppress, use thereto Vnguentum Pop. cum succo Solani, Pla^taginis,
Semperuiui, Fari. Hordei, and Olei Violacei, and oui albumine. And for
Cankerous Ulcers of the yard, and hard edges or lips, the lotions
aforesaid, are praise worthy. Or,

Rec.
Vini albi ciathum, Aquae plantag. and ana. ciath. s. Rosarum. Aluminis cocti,
ii. dragmes. Mel. i. quart. Rosarum, one handful.

Boil them together, and with the decoction thereof wash the place, or use it
as iniection, then further apply vng. de. altheos and aureum, to mollify the
part. And lastly the powder of Mercury, and ceratum de minio.

Ulcers of the womb and privy parts of women.
THese (as all others) do require curation, De vuluae ac vteri vl ceribus.
both by diet, and purgation, according to the disposition of humors and
natures of the body, the excrementes by the urine, are not to be brought to
that place, nor the belly vehemently to be moved, but vomites which may
profit by way of reuulsion, Phlebotomie also sometime is to be used, or the use
of Guiacum^ after purgation, and these Opiatae following, being used once in a
week, an^ very profitable.

Rec.
Cassiae extrac nouiter. iiii. ounces Tamarindoru^, ii. ounces. Pulpae
prunorum, ana.i. ounce and a half. and Sebesten, Muccaginis one ounce. Sem
psyllij, Seen Orientalis, iii. ounces. Anisi, half an ounce. Liquiritiae rasae
tenuissime pull.ii. drag. cu^ sir. rosaceo sol. fiat opiata.

Whereof let the party take once a week, the quantity of a nutte, with the
decoction of Mercury.

To prepare the humors.
Rec.
Ligni sancti, iiii. ounces. Corticis eiusdem, one ounce. s. Infuse them in
three pound of aqua Buglossi, Cichorij, and Absinthij.

Boil them at a soft fire to the half, and dissolve in the streined licour,
Syrup de Fumo terrae, one pound, and let the party take thereof morning and
evening, six ounces unto the end.

Furthermore.

Rec.
Polipodij quercini recent. half an ounce. Passularu^ mundataru^, ana. v. part.
Prunorum, Sebesten, Tamarindorum, iii. dragmes, Senae Orientalis, half an
ounce. Fol. Mercurij, and ana. half an ounce. Boraginis, Florum triu^
co^muniu^. ana. p. s.

Make thereof a decoction, and in one quart of the streined liquour, dissolve
co^fectionis hamech, ii. dragmes, electuarii diacartami, one dragme, Syrupi
rosati solutiui, two ounces. Which must be taken after the aforesaid
preparatiue.

Rec.
Conseruae radicu^ Buglossi i. ounce. Co^seruae corticis citri, half an ou^c.
Pull. Diamarg f^igidi, ana. ii. dragmes. and Diarrhodo^ abbatis, Pulueris de
gemmis, one dragme. cum syrupo capil. ^eneris, fiat opiata.

To be taken twice or thrice in the weke, drink after it a little wine.

And to conclude, those do much avail which we have prescribed in the
chapter of Ulcers of ye yard. For in those as also these things strongly
drying without biting, are most available. And in these ulcers we may use
incisions, suffi^ures, fotions, lotions. etc.

In the beginning wash the Ulcer, or make iniection with whey and Sugar, or ex
vino cu^ melle rosar. vel decoct. hord. cum syrup rosar. and melle rosa. vel
Saccharo rosat. Or,

Rec.
Hord. integri paru^ torrefacti. ii. p. Corticis gaiaci. one ounce. s. Radicis
ireos, one ounce. Passularum, one ounce. Mirobal. citrin. ii. dragmes.

Make thereof a decoction, in aqua Fabrorum, and in two pound dissolve, Rec.
Mel ros. col. and ana. iii. ounces. Syrup. iosati.

Make iniection therewith in the beginning, and also whilst the patie^t uses
the syrup preparing humors. After this following.

Rec.
Hordei integri modice assi. i. p. Ligni sancti ii. ounces. Pilosellae, ana.
two handful. Ceterac. Virgae, and ana. one handful. Bursae pastoris.
Plantag. and ana. half a handful. Absynthii. Corticis malipunici. one ounce.
Sumac, half an ounce. Rosar. rub. one p.

Make a decoction in water, wherein Lead has been quenched, and in four
pound of the decoction, dissolve, Rec.
Mellis rosati colati, and an. 3. ou^c. Sacchari rosati, vel Syrupi de rosis
siccis.

And make thereof an iniection after the use before said. Further,

Rec.
Vng. Pompholigos. iiii. ounces. Cerusae lotae, an. i. ounce. Plumbi vsti and
loti, Antimonii. Aloes lotae, ana. half an ounce. Sang. draconis, Thuris,
Mastiches, Olei rosati, iii. ounces. Cerae rubrae. ii. ounces.

Make thereof a liniment, wherewith anoint the pessarie, or dissolve it in part
of the aforesaid iniection, and use it so, but if this Ulcer do spring ex lue
venerea, ad to that liniment Hidrargyri, ii. ounces.

But if they be virulent corrosiue, or Cacoethe, by and by in the beginning use
the poulder of Mercury, or iniected with the decoction of Barley, with a little
Allome thereto added. Or if the Ulcer be filthy, dissolve vng. Egiptiacum, vel
Apostolo. or other of the aforesaid mundificatiues. But where it seems
sufficiently mu^dified, use the aforesaid iniections or liniment, then
increase the dose of astringent medicines, or with poulders prescribed in the
linime^t, sprinkle the Ulcer, to induce a Cicatrice. And for a more spedie way
of exiccation, use this suffiture following, chiefly if these aforesaid, do
not avail.

Rec.
Corticis thuris, ii. dragmes. Mastiches. Gummi hederae, and luniperi, ana.
half an ounce. Labdani puri, and Hypocistidos. Auripig. rub. vel citrini. iii.
drag. Cinabrii, one ounce. or half an ounce.

Excipiantur terebinthina, and make thereof Trochises, which must be put upon
fire, and the fume received by a funnell.

Rec.
Olei mastichini. iii. ounces. Olei de absynthio ana one ounce. and Rosarum.
Cerae parum.

Make thereof a liniment, wherewith anoint the region of the womb, and whilst
it is anointing, ad to a little wine.

When the Ulcers proceed through the French pockes, a thin diet must be used
with the decoction of Guiacum, or use vniuer sall unctions, ex Hidrargyro. Cum
vlc. sunt a lue venerea.


If infla^mation abound, wash it with the decoction of Barley, cum mucagine
psilii, and cydon. Si infla^matio saper^^nit.
Iuiubarum, Sebesten, cu^succo plantag. Portulacae, Lacte bubulo, aqua rosacea,
Oui albumine and Saccharo.

Or,

Rec.
Hordei integri, ana. two p. Lentium. Portulacae, an. ii. handful. Plantag.
Virg. pasto. Capita tria papau^ris, ana. ii. p. Rosarum rubrarum, Make thereof
a decoction in aequis part. aquae fabrorum, and rosar, and in two pound
thereof, dissolve syrup. de ros. siccis. iiii. ounces, Trochisc, albor. Rasis
sine opio (if the heat and pain be vehement) half an ounce, Croci, ii.
scruples, Passi three ounces. mix them and make thereof an iniection, whereto
may be added Vitellos two, vel Muccag. sem. psyllii.

Sharp grief is to be delaied with incessions made of wine, Camomil, Roses,
and others.

If the Ulcer be grown to a cancrous effect, the cure is to be used as
despered and ^o be fled, and then avails (as in all other Ulcers of the womb,
decoction of taps. ^arb. and the aforesaid collirie. After prepare vng. succi
Solani, stirred in a leaden mortar and pestel, to the thickenes of honey.

You may use also other vnguentes to dry and delay the sharpenes of humors,
whereof we have spoken in the chapter of the Canker before.

The Hemerhoides.
THe reason of curing y^ Hemerhoides, De hemor rhoidibus.
requires a diet sufficiently thin, and of those whereof excellent blood was
wont to be engendered, and greatly to be avoided, are all sower, Melancholy and
gross things: It shall be good sometime to open the liver vain, and use
purgation purging gross, sharp and mela^colie humors. And as touching due
purgatio^ and diet, therefore peruse the curation of tumors. Notwithstanding,
those which were accustomed to flow, and have been long stopped, are to be
opened, either with a lance aptly applied, or else a horseleach put to the
place, first anointed with blood, whereby she may the better take hold, or
open them with a plaster made ex alo^ and fell bouis cum aceto, or make a
suffiture ex decoct calamenti, origani, maluae in vino factae: Then make a
cataplasme ex Helleboro nigro, mixed cu^ succi cepae, aut lacteficus, aut ex
stercoris colu^bini, one ounce, and succi tithymali, one ounce and a half. And
it shall be far better if thou ad thereto Felbubulum, and pulueris Staphysagria,
vel ciclaminis. Or it suffiseth to use Fol. fici trita.

Rec.
Fellis taurini, an. one ounce and a half. Stercoris columb. Sem. Staphis.
iii. dragmes. Amigdalaru^ amararu^. i. dragme. Colocynthidos. half a dragme.
Succi Cyclaminis, ana. two dragmes. and Cepe. Olei de Absynthio, and q. s.
Amigdal. amararum.

Make thereof a form of anemplaster.

But when these aperitiues do sometime induce vehement pain, and the sick
party not able to abide it, there is no other counsel, but with scissoures to
cut them that appear, whereby the blood may flow. And in the mean time,
to mitigate the pain, it shall be profitable to use a fotion, ex decocto
Altheae, Maluae, Camomeli, Meliloti, seminis Lini. etc.

Or,

Rec.
Maluae, Parietariae, Tapsi barbati, ana. m. s. Chamomeli, Meliloti. Sem. Lini.
iii. ounces.

Make thereof a decoction to wash therewith the fundame^t, after mix Vitellum
oui cum Oleo rosaceo, vng. Pop. Opij, gra. ii. and tantillo Croci. and put it
into the fundament.

Rec.
Butyri recentis. one ounce. Olei de papauere. ii. dragmes. Succi Solani sensim
mixti. vnc. s.

Stir them long in a leaden mortar, or Cepe aslum cum butyro misceto, aut
oleum de sem. Lini, cum butyro and ^ouo aut oleum de vitellis ouorum, aut oleu^
de nucleis persicorum. Or,

Rec.
Olei de sem. Lini, ana. half an ounce. and Butiri recentis. Sagapeni. half a
dragme. Succi tapsi barbati. ana. one ounce. and Mali punici. Scarabeos. vi.

Boil them to the consumption of the juices, which being streined, use it
both outward and inward. Certain Imperickes apply Scrophularia, vel
Scabiosa, affirming that those herbs do profit wondrous well. Or,

Rec.
Olei Lumbricorum, i. ounce. Ouum. one. Opij. one dragme.

Mix them, and minister them with bombast. Else,

Rec.
Radicu^ tapsi barbati, ana. two ounces. and Altheae. Chamaemeli. p. i. sem.

Boil them, and add thereto Vitellos ouorum elixatorum. two. Aloes. ana. one
dragme. Mirrhae. Croci. Fari. sem. Lini. ana. fix drammes. and Foenugraeci.
Butyrum sine sale. q. s.

Make thereof the form of a plaster, which shall be much better, if thereto
you ad Opij. one dragme. But if the Hemethoides lie hidden within, they must
be drawn forth by boxing, or with the unguent applied with bomdast, else cum
oleo Lumbricorum aforenamed, to delay the ^ayne.

When the Hemerhoides do flow immoderatly, the diet must be appointed with
the use of astringent and engrossing things. Medicines also to be used
(according to the nature of the humor) which (notwithstanding though they
lose) may leave with them a certain astriction, such as is Myrobal. tamarindi,
Rhabarb. etc. The use also of this electuarie following, shall be much auailable.

Rec.
Mirobalanorum embelictiaru^, Indarum and bellericarum lotarum in aqua plantag.
donec amarore^ exu^^erint. ana. half an ounce. Radic. Tapsi barbati. iii.
dragmes. Zinziberis, Cinamomi, Nucis muscati, an. one drag. Galangae, Olibani.
Spicae nardi. ana. half a drag. Squinanthi. Ammeos. Scoriae ferri praeparatae
and in acet: coctae. iii. dragmes. Conseruae rosaru^ veteris, succi de ribes
and de berberis, ana. vnc. s. Zacchari. q. s. make thereof an electuarie in
morsels.

As touching outward medicines, wash the fundame^t with water quenched with
flint, else wherein Nuces cipressi, alumen vstum, and other astringentes have
been boiled, and let the party receive the fume thereof, or of the like things,
make a bath or incession, but in winter.

Rec.
Absynthii. one handful. Saluiae. half a handful. Matricariae, a quarter of a
ha^dful, contunda^tur in sartagine, frigantur cumoleo rosa.

And in form of a plaster apply it to the fundament, and inwardlye minister
this unguent following.

Rec.
Rosarum. an. half a dra^me. Myrtillorum. Centinodiae. Thuris. one dragme.
Sanguinis draco. ii. dragmes. Boli armeni, ana three dragmes. terrae sigilla.
Tuthiae praepar. ana. one drag. s. Lithargiri vtriusque. Farinae volatilis,
ana. two dragmes. and fabarum. Succi tapsi barbati. Caudae equinae. ana.
three dragmes. Plantaginis. Simphiti maioris. Albumina ouorum. ii.

Mix the^, and ad to the^ de pilis Leporinis, cut very short. Or,

Rec.
Psidiae, Conchillae marinae adust. Balaustiorum, Puluer. pilo. leporis vst.
an. i. drag. s. Thuris. Mastiches. Sanguis draconis. Telae araneae. Terrae
sigillatae.

Mix them cum ichthiocolla and glutine fabrorum lignariorum dissolutis aqu^
pluuiali calibeata, make thereof an e^^ plaster.

Rec.
Extremitatum rosar. ii. ounces. Albumina ouorum. ii. Lapidis haematitis. one
dragme. Gypsi. half an ounce.

Make thereof a plaster. To conclude, whosoever will retain or stay, the
immoderate Flux of terms, and in like sort, the Hemerhoides must beside
medicines use all kind of re^ulsions.

Rasis to strengthen the Liver, applied to the regions thereof Mastichen,
Spica^, Call. aromat. Ciperum, Squinanthu^, Crocum, and Mirrham.

The Fistula of the fundament.
THe fistulous Ulcer of the foundament which is only in the flesh, is cured
by the same means and method, whereof we have spoken in the chapter of the
Fistula, De any fistula.
the diet being thin and good, with other medicines and purgations, chiefly
by the upper parts, if it seem necessary, likewise with Phlebotomie, and
enlarging the Ulcers orifice, and the callous substance diminishing.

But if it have, Qua^do intestinu^ penetrat.
pierced the intrelles, put the finger anointed with oil of Roses, into the
foundament, and also Phaceolus that chances in the fistula, is in like manner
with the finger to be drawn forth, so that it may not err, least perhaps by
cutting the callouse substance, thou cut also the hemoroicall veins, yet
incision seems better in my judgment, then detraction of Callus done by
ligature. After incision apply Albume^ oui cum puluere restrictorio, and then
a digestive ex terebentina and oleo.

Notwithstanding, great heed is to be taken, that Callus pearce not above
four fingers in length into any intrell, for if it do, the cure is desperate
and to be eschewed.

Now when it comes, ad vesicam velos sacru^, passing beyond the part called
Sphincter, so that the said part named Sphincter, must be cut away:then
follows vnuolunt^rie excretion of egesrion. And then wash it twyse every
day, with the decoction of Tapsus barb. in wine, and iniecte of the decoction
inwardly.

Fissures of the fundament and other parts.
FIssures De fissuris a^, al^a^u^que partiu^.
in what part soever they be, must be anointed cum oleo de vitellis ouorum,
vel de sem. Lini, cum mellis trita tertia part. Or,

Rec.
Mellis rosati col. ana. one ounce. Olei rosarum. Cerae citrinae. half an
ounce. Mirrhae, and ana. two scruples. Zin ziberis. Lithar giri. iiii.
scruples.

Make thereof an unguent, which before it be ministered, moisten the fissures
with the spetle of the sick, it profits also for the Fissures, both of ye
breasts and lips, as experience has taught me. Else wash them with the
decoction ex radic. altheae and sem. Lini, in vino and aqua.

Furthermore.

Rec.
Olei de sem Lini one ounce. Ouum. one. Lithargiri. ii. dragmes.

Make thereof an unguent to mitigate the pain, and soften the hardness of the
Fissures.

Rec.
Olei amigd. dulc. ana. one ounce. Olei de papauere. v^g alb. rasis cu^
camfora. one ounce. s. Aloes, Mirrhae, ana. one ounce and a half. Cortic,
thuris, Aluminis. Terrae sigillatae. two dragmes. Albumina ouorum. ii.

Make thereof an unguent, which is very commodious, both to the Fissures, as
also to the Ulcers of the foundament.

Or,

Rec.
Muccag^ seminis Lini, extractae in aqua maluarum. one ounce. Butyri recentis.
ana. half an ounce. Sem. Lini. Cerae. q. s.

Make thereof a cerote.

Also Oleum Lini applied alone, or Oleu^ nucum, shall be much available.

Ulcers of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet.
Ulcers of those parts, De femorum tibiarum and pedum vle.
of what sort or kinds soever they be, are to be cured by method universal,
with the institution of diet, Phlebotomie, and inward medicines, according to
the habit of the body, and quality of the humors, with the disposition and
kind of the Ulcer, as in the cures of certain tumors has been diligently
handled.

And as touching outward remedies, the nature of the parts affected, must be
advisedly noted, and if the refuse of humors fall thereto, they are before all
things to be stayde, both by universal medicines, simple and local.

In Summer they are to be washed cu^ aqua Plantag. wherein some Alume is
dissolved, and to be anointed cum vngue^to de Minio, and if they be round,
apply thereto a cauterie of some other form and shape, and ease the parts
from time to time.

Certain Additions of diverse medicines of mine own invention, and often by me
experimented and practiced in the curing of Ulcers, as follovveth particularly.
First an Oil which I used in hollow and deep Ulcers, whereby great
commodity ensued, having not only virtue to mundifie without erosion, but also
aptly applied to hollow caued Ulcers, within the space of four and twenty
hours, obteineth Pus perfect of kind, chiefly if the body be before
prepared, and the member void of accidents and evil dispositions. The right
making thereof must be in the beginning of the year, when the force of herbs
is in them fully contained. This is the making thereof. viz.

Rec.
Olei communis, one pound. s. Olei Liliacei. ii. ounces. Olei ex floribus
Meliloti. i. ounce. Olei Ipericonis. iii. ounces. Olei Violacei. ii. ounces. s.
Terebinthinae. Venetae. ii. ou^c. Resinae purae, ana. ii. dragmes and a half.
Resinae pini. Galbani. ii. ounces. Opopanacis. one ounce. Sarcocollae. iii.
dragmes. Boracis. one ounce. Stiracis liquide. ii. dragmes. s. Olibani. ana.
three dragmes. Mirrhae. Succorum Plantag. ana. two ounces. and Saluiae. Vini
albi. one pound.

Dissolve the gummes in as much good Maluesey as will cover them, and boil
them altogether (until the wine and iuyces be consumed) at a soft fire of
Charcoale. Then streine it, and ad thereto Flos aeris. two ounces, in fine
poulder, and boil it a while after it, and then put thereto Mel. rosarum. iiii.
ounces, and again boil it four walmes, after that strain it, and stir it
till it be through cold, and reserve it.

It must be ministered warm in form and manner of an iniection, a biding four
and twenty hours, till the next dressing.

The second oil, whose making fol. lovveth, mollifieth, assvvageth pain,
moves Pus, and heals safely, if the body be orderly governed and prepared.
Rec.
Olei Rosar. half a pound. Olei Lumbrici, iiii. ounces. Olei Liliacei. ii.
ounces. Olei Nenufar. iii. ounces. Olei Aneti. one ounce. Olei communis. one
pound. Terebentinae Venetae. x. ounces. Resinae pini iii. dagmes. Sarcocollae.
one ounce. Mirrhae. i. ounce and a half Galbani. half an ounce. Olibani. vi.
dragmes. Masticis. half an ounce. Gu^mi Amoniaci. ii. dragmes. s. Euforbij. i.
dragme. Sanguinis drac. half an ounce. Suc. Malua. Violarum. ana. ii. dragmes.
Plantag. Semperuiui. Vinialbi. vi. ounces.

Put altogether in a propre vessel, to infuse the space of one and thirty
hours, with often stirring, then boil them on a soft fire until the wine and
iuyces be consumed, your gummes before being resolved in Maluesey, then in the
end put to Croci subtiliss. puluer. half an ounce. When the oil is streined,
then reserve it. Note that this oil is good, as well for wounds as Ulcers,
but before it be ministered, give good heed that the place affected, be well
mundified and made clean with line or otherwise.

An other oil follows of great force, which is not only quickly made, but
also aptly mundifieth, and largely causes the flesh to grovve in bodies of
good constitution. viz.
Rec.
Olei Balsami. iiii. ounces. Olei. com. half a pound and. ii. ou^c.
Terebentinae Venetae. iii. ounces. Galbani. ii. ounces. s. Opopanacis. one
ounce. Sarcocollae. half an ounce. Virid. aeris. pull. i. ounce and a half.

Dissolve the gummes in Uineger, and infuse them altogether twelve hours, then
boil them together on a soft fire, yt space of ten hours, and in the end
add to Mel. Rosar. opt. two ounces, and boil it again four walmes, then
streine it, and so occupy it as occasion serves.

A sparadrap to resolve, assuage pain, and moderatly cool.
Rec.
Resinae. iii. dragmes. Cerae alb. one pound. Sepi ceruiui. iiii. ounces.
Butiri recent. iii. ounces. Terebentinae. iii. dragmes. s. Amoniaci. Gu^mi
dragaganti. an. half an ounce. Arabici. Olei Anethi. ii. dragmes. Olei
Nenuphar. i. ounce. Olei Rosar. iiii. ounces, s. Olei Lili. i. ounce and a
half. Olei Violacei. one ounce. Ping. Caponis, iiii. dragmes. Vng. Rosar. one
ounce. Ping. Anseris, and ana. three dragmes. Anatis. Olei Amigd. dulc. one
ounce. s.

Resolve the gummes in vinegar, and melte them altogether according to art, and
in the end ad to Camforae puluerizatae, two dragmes, and thereof make a
sparadrap in good form, which is of an excellent efficacy.

A black plaster to be applied upon and about Ulcers, having the property of
a defensatiue, and also most easily enduceth a Cicatrice.
Rec.
Olei Rosar. omphacini. ii. pound Olei Nymph. one pound. Olei Liliacei. half
a pound. Succi Solatri. two dragmes. Succi Plantag. half an ounce. Succi
Semperuiui. one ounce. Succi Violarum, half an ounce. Terebintinae clarae,
two ounces. Cerae albae, one pound. Muccag. Altheae, two ounces.

Boil these upon a soft fire until the iuyces be consumed, then put to these
following finely pouldred. Cerusae, iii. ounces. Plumb. alb. iii. ounces and a
half. Lithargyri auri, ana. two ounces. and argenti. Lap. Calamin. half an
ounce. Boli Armeni, iii. dragmes. Corallij alb. ann. two drammes. and rub.

These poulders being put to the former things, boil them on a soft fire of
charcoale (least the flame take hold of the oil) unto the form of a
plaster, forseeing that it be continually stirred with an Iron spatter till it
be cold, in which cooling, ad to Camforae, one ounce, puluerizat. Then make it
up in roules of what bigness you will, and (together with the virtues aforesaid,
it cicatrizeth and heals excellently all excoriations or frettinges in the
skin, in any exterior part.

An other excellent plaster of small cost, and great effect for all plain
Ulcers, when the body is purged.
Rec.
Resinae clarae, two pound. Sepi Ceruiui albis. half a pound. Vini albi,
two pound.

Boil them in the wine, till they be al melted, and wash the^ in the wine,
them melte the^ again, and power it into another pint of white wine somewhat
warmed, and stir it till it be cold, then take it from the wine, and mix
withal these pouders. viz. Masticis electi, half an ounce. Merc. precipit.
one ounce. Cinabrij. iii. dragmes.

All these being well mixed, make it up in roules, and reserve it to your use,
and I refer the commendation that it deserves to the judgment of the
practizer.

An excellent unguent for Ulcers that be mundified, which swiftly does
incarnate, and that without pain.
Rec.
Cerae citrinae mundat ii. pound. Terebintinae. i. pound and a half. Resinae
clarae. one pound. Butyri recentis, half a pound. Mel ros. one pound. Sepi
ouini, vi. ounces. Vini Cretici. iii. ounces. Olei Rosacei, one pound.

Boil these on a soft fire, till the wine be consumed, then strain it into a
fair vessel, and stir it with a wooden slyce til it be cold, and in the
use, thereof you shall find it a treasure.

An other unguent to mundifie old and hollow Ulcers, the body being prepared
with interior medicines.
Rec.
Cerae citrinae, one pound. Resinae purae. half a pound. Terebintinae
Venetae, one pound. Butyri recentis. iiii. ounces. Galbani. two ounces and a
half. Bdellij.^ one ounce. Olei communis. one pound. Amoniaci. one ounce.
Mellis despumati. viij. ounces. Succi Saluiae. iij. ounces. Vini albi, two
ounces.

Dissolve the gummes in vinegar, and boil them altogether till the wine and
iuyces be consumed, then ad to Viridis aeris, one ounce and a half, subtilis
pull. Then giving in a walme or two, streyne it, and reserve it to your use,
applying it warm.

A digestive marvelous profitable for old filthy Ulcers, of me often proved.
Rec.
Terebintinae, i. pound and a half. Olei rosar. iiii. ounces. Olei Liliacei.
two ounces. Olei comm. iiii. ounces and a half. Mel^rosa. half a pound.
Vitelli ouorum. vi.

Labor them well together, and put thereto Mastices, half an ounce, Mercurij
praecipit. one ounce and a half, been pull. Mix them well together, and use it
when occasion serves.

An iniection which being astringent, does also mundifie, and must be used in
deep and filthy Ulcers.
Rec.
Hord. excorticati, three handful. Aque fontan. vi. pound. Vini alb. ii.
pound. Passul. iii. ounces. Glicyrrizae. two ounces. Plantag. one handful.
Labrusci, id est fol. vitis rosarum. ii. dragmes. Saluiae. ana. half a
handful. Chelidoniae. Gran Mirtilloru^. half an ounce. Nucum cipressi. ii.
dragmes. Aluminis, vi. ounces.

Boil these to the half, then streine it, and ad thereto Mel. rosar. half a
pound, after boil it four walmes, and so use it for an iniection to Ulcers
deep and bollowe, and to a plain Ulcer with warm Stuphes.

A fume to be used in Ulcers of the inferior parts or feet in moist bodies,
and such as be subject to putrefaction, by reason whereof, the Ulcers often become
rebellious and hard to be cured, wherefore this fume) after the body is
purged, and the Ulcer mundified) is very commodious to be used.
Rec.
Styracis liquid, iii. ounces. Masticis. one ounce. Thuris, ii. ounces.
Mirrhae, iii. dragmes. Gariofilorum, half an ounce. Terebintinae, half an
ounce. Sandracae, one dragme. Baccis Lauri. half a dragme. Cinabrij, vi
ounces. Puluerizentur puluerizanda.

Then mix and make it according to art.

The true use thereof.
Prepare a coffer for the purpose, made of Pine tree, both ends made to open
and shut closely, having in the midst a propre hole or place for the leg
to lie in at, and in the inner part of the other side of ye coffer, a rest for
the heel, then place in eiether end of the cheste, a chaffingdishe of coals,
laying upon the coals some of the fume, and the feet being duly placed,
boulster the same in close, that no smooke come forth. So let the pacient
continue yt space of time, according to their strength. viz. one hour or more,
forseeing that the body be soluble, and every third day, use this so long as
need shall require, and great commodity shall be found thereby.

An ointment which chaseth away inflammatio^s about Ulcers, and heals the
fretting of the skin, which in gross bodies often comes thereby, and of me
often practiced.
Rec.
Axungiae porc. lot. in aqua pla^tag. half a pound. Olei rosar. iiii. ounces.
Olei Liliacei. two ounces. Plumbi alb. iiii. ounces. Lithargyri auri, ana.
three ounces. and Argenti. Lapi. Calamina. i. ounce and a half. Muccag.
altheae. ii. ounces. Succi Plantag. ana. half an ounce. Semperuiui. Albumina
ouorum. ii.

Encorporate them well in a mortar, and ad thereto Aluminis vsti, puluer. i.
ounce, and reserve it.

An other for tender bodies, which asswageth pain, and mitigateth the raging
heat.
Rec.
Vng. rosar. ana. iii. ounces. Olei rosar. Olei Nenuphar. ana. i. ounce and a
half. Olei Liliacei. Olei Amigda. dulc. one ounce and a half. Plumbi albi.
vi. ounces. Cerusae. two ounces. Terrae sigillatae. one ounce. Carae albae.
iii. dragmes. Muccag. an. 3. dra. Gummi dragaganti and Arabici. iiii. sem.
Frigi. mayor. an ii. drag. Camfora. half a dragme. Aqua rosar. ana. iii.
dragmes. Plantag. Alb. vnius oui.

Poulder that which is to be pouldered, and mix it in a leaden mortar, and
reserve it to your use.

A gentle corrosiue poulder, profitable for any Ulcer, not much painful, but
very good for every expert man to have ready.
Rec.
Mercurij precipit. two ounces. Cinabrij. half an ounce. Masticis. iii
dragmes. s. Vitrioli combusti. ii. dragmes. Corallij rub. half a dragme.

Make them in fine poulder, and use as occasion serves for spongie flesh. etc.

An other more sharp and corrodeth more.
Rec.
Mercurij precipit. one ounce and a half. Masticis. two dragmes. Vitrioli
co^bust. i. drag. and a half. Aluminis vsti. ii. dragmes. Corallij rub. one
dragme.

Poulder them finelye, and make it to your use.

Trochisis corrosiue, very strong, but exceading commodious being used with
good discretion.
Rec.
Mercurii precipit. one dragme. s. Mercurii sublim. i. ounce. i. drag.
Cinabrii. ii. drag. and a half. Masticis. one dragme. Vitrioli combusti. half
an ounce. Corallii rub. two dragmes. Amyli. iii. dragmes.

Poulder these fine, and make thereof trochisis with Muscilage of gum
Dragagant and Plantaine water, dry them not at the fire, but otherwise, and to
occupy them make one in poulder, and apply it.

A resolutiue plaster to be used, where any hardness, swelling, or
inflammation, or pain, is about the Ulcer.
Rec.
Muccag. altheae. iii. dragmes. Muccag. psilii. ii. ounces. s. Muccag.
dragaga^ti. one ounce. s. Olei rosar. half a pound. Olei meliloti. iii
dragmes. Olie Chamomillae. half an ounce. Olei liliacei. iii. ounces. Olei
nenupharis. ii. ounces. Olei violacei. one ounce and a half.

Boil them together till the muscilages be consumed, after ad to, Ammoniaci,
one ounce. Bdellii. ana. half an ounce. Galbani. Gummi Arabici. iii. dragmes.
Opopanacis. one ounce. ii. drag. Sagapeni. iii. dragmes. Ping. Anseris. ana.
half an ounce. Anatis, Resinae purae. iiii. ounces. Terebintinae. ii. dragmes.
Cerae albae. one pound. Cerusae. vi ounces. Plumbi albi. vi. ounces.

Dissolve the gu^mes in vinegar, poulder that which is to be pouldred, and
make it (according to art) in form of a plaster, in roules, of what bigness
you will, and so use it.

A potion preparatiue for Ulcers.
THis I used in the curing of gross Ulcered persons, such as be engrossed and
replete with much corrupt humors, for in such bodies the Ulcers do become
rebellous and difficult to be cured, for that is one of the principal things,
which makes Ulcers hard of curatio^. Nevertheless, it must be used advisedly,
and with good discretion, that is to say, to what body it is given, for as
much as that which helps a moist body, harmeth a dry, and that which
succoureth a gross body, offends the lean. etc.

Rec.
Ligni sancti. one pound and a half. Corticis eiusdem. vii. ounces. Salxza
Parilia, ii. ounces and a half. Aquae fontanae, twelve pound. Vini albi,
four pound. Herbarum saluiae, ana. i. ha^dful and a half. Fumariae Eupatorii.
one handful, Scabiosae, ana. half a handful. Betonicae. Epithimi. Lapathi
acuti. vii. ounces. Rubarbari. iii. dragmes. Agarici. ana. one ounce. Sem.
Cartami. Senae Alexandrinae, vi. ounces. Zinziberis, half an ounce. Polipodii,
iii. ounces. Galangae. one ounce. Sem. Anisi, half an ounce. Glicyrrizae rasae,
ana. one. p. Florum cordial,

Put all these into a narrow mouthed pot, close stopped, that no air go
forth, then set it within an other vessel of water, and let it boil ye space
of forty hours, then streine and clarify it, and ad thereto Mellis rosarum,
half a pound, and let the patient take thereof morning and evening, the
quantity of four or five ounces at a time, a little warmed, ye term of three
days together, and on the fourth day, give the patient four ounces of the
decoction, adding thereto Co^fection hamech^ two dragmes and a half, Syrupi
Cichorii cum Rubarbare, one ounce. Use it in this order to your patient, so
long as you think convenient.

An excellent and most profitable ointment, which extinguisheth the heat of al
Choleric humors, flowing to any Ulcered part, and most chieflye circa vlcera
virgae, as if the heat be between Glans and preputium, it yields a
wondrous commodity.
Rec.
Axungiae porcinae purae, i. pound and a half. Pomorum dulcium scissoru^,
half a pound. Pingued. caponis, ana. four dragmes. and Cigni. Succi Limonis.
iiii. ounces.

Let them boil between two pewter ^ishes, on a chaffingdishe with coals,
the space of four hours, or until the iuyces be perfectly consumed, then let
it run through a linen cloth into a fair hasen, and ad thereto Muccaginis
psilii (extracti cum aqua Plantag.) one ounce and a half, aquae rosaceae. iiii.
ounces, aquae Semperuiui, two ounces. Labor them altogether, so long until
all be encorporated and brought to one uniform substance, and no water
perceived, then have in readiness these following, finely pouldred, viz. Boracis
one ounce and a half, Camforae, half an ounce, Plumbi albi, two ounces,
Aluminis vsti, half an ounce. Mix all these together, and labor them a
whole hour, and reserve it, the goodness whereof is sufficient to commend it
self, as the learned (who ministers advisedly) shall plainly perceive.

What meats are to be used as touching diet in Vlcered bodies.
GALENE says, that in the curing of Ulcers, Lib. de partibus artis medic. ca.1
Et lib. experiment. cap. vltimo
(which have their beginning of other matters or humors) there be three
principal ways viz. Diet, aid of medicines, and operation of the hand. Apho.
1. and 1. de ratione victus in acut. morbis.
And since diet is the most noble, and excellent instrument among the rest
(as Galene supposes) I have accounted it worthy the labor, only in this
treatise or part, to set forth the only order of diet, to be used in
curation of Ulcers: but amongst those things whereof our bodies do chance
necessarily to be altered, (as Galene says) and wherein also the whole way,
Lib. 3. artis medicinalis.
or consideration of diet does consist is (especially) the air which does
enuiron and compass us about. Whereto also Galene adding says, that which
does compass and enuiron us, 3. method. curat. ca. 8.
is that without the which, neither ye disease can be taken away, nor the
health be kept and preserved, 1. De tue^da sanitate
further he says also, that there is no small strength or force of preserving
the health by chosing the good air, and for this cause it is meet, first to
show what air the body corrupt with Ulcers, does require. It is worthy to be
noted how the disease is driven away by the changing of the air to the
sick body, and that is by changing to an other kind of temperature in the
air, which the dissease (which is driven away by his contrary) does aptly
require, as if the disease be of nature cold, the air must be hoate: and
somewhat more, that is to wit, of a greater inequality of the temperature of
the air, to the property of ye disease, whereby it may the more easelye be
driven away (as for example.)

If the disease be cold in two degrees and moist in one, Mayor inequalitas
a^ris ad proprietat. ^nor.
the air must be of greater heat then of two degrees, and of more drienes
then one degree. But how shall we be able to know, or discern exquisitely
this proportion or excess in degrees, since Galene has said, that the
certain quantity of the thing, can neither be written with pen, nor
pronounced with the tongue. The Chirurgian must therefore endeavor to find it
forth by conjecture, for it suffiseth to the driving away of the disease, if
the propulsatiue cause of the disease do obtain a certain proportion of a
greater inequality then the disease or fore. Therefore, it is good for them
that are vexed with ulcers, to inhabit y^ hoate air, both because the
naughty humors are made ready thereby, to breath forth by the pores of the
skin, and also because the sine we members, which suffer much damage by
Ulcers, do take strength by heat. As Hyppocrates and Galene affirms. Aphor.
5. tepr. and comment. 18.
Yet let not the heat be vnmoderated, or to much inequality, least the
putrefaction be thereby burned, and the disease made more sharp and fearce,
and also least the body fall the more redely into distillation, coming by
dissoluing of the strong heat, into the which distillation that body does
chieflye decline, from the which distillation also, inflammations may easelye
grow, and heap together. Let the air therefore convenient to him, be more
dry, that the Ulcers superfluities and moist excrementes, may the more easily
be consumed, and let him therefore eschew the cold and moist temperature of the
air, since the disease does proceed of such like vntemperature, as by Galene
plainly appears The affected bodies therefore shall live better in places
where Hills and Mountains are, (though not in the highest of them.) 3. Artis
medicin.
But worst of al, Gal. 5. metho-curatiuae.
in low, fennie, or plain countries, in which places moisture does abound,
but in the other drienes. Avoid therefore such places as be cloudie, mistie.
etc. by reason of pooles and marrishes which be there at hand, for that air
is corrupt, and increases superfluous moisture, whereby the Ulcers are
nourished and maintained, whereby they often purchase pain in the head, and
increase distillations, which fall to the lower parts, which is most familiar
to Ulcers. Therefore where the profitable air can not naturally be had, let it
be prepared by art in the mansio^, or abiding place of the party, for if the
place and air be not only disagreeing to him, but also the constitution of
the time, let him use gentle perfuminges with spices, because their head is
also commonly replete with evil and vicious humors, as says Hypocrates, 5.
Aphor. 18.
and if the affected body do feel hurt by receiving the fumes of sweet
spices, then let it suffice, that he behold or have them present by him, for
the breath or savor of them, is a safegarde to all cold diseases. But when as
in the winter season, Galen. 5. Apho. comment. 18.
the fire shall be agreeable to it, then burn therein ye wood of Rosemarie,
Juniper, Laurel, or of the wood called Terebinthus, or of the Larche tree, or
ye Pineaple tree. Furthermore, let ye party cover his head moderatly with
hoate things, for an extrinsicall heat is hurtful unto him, both of those
things wherewith the head is defended and covered, as also of the air which
is about it, for superfluities do issue forth from it, to the members below,
by a certain dissolutio^, by the which Ulcers are not only nourished, but also
stirred and exiccated. The bread which does little nourishe, I suppose to be
profitable for Ulcered bodies, and not their meat to be equal to their
appetite, for the concoctiue faculty being weakened in them by to much
repletion, many superfluities are engendered, greatly hurtful unto them, let
their bread be such as makes the belly soft, whereby the inner parts may
be cleansed, and deiection made of the naughty humors. Therefore let the bread
be much brannie, the finest meal boulted forth, which is proved fittest for
such, 1. De poten. alime^toru^. cap. 2
as Galene witnesses, further, let not their bread be to much leuened, for
the tartnes thereof is hurtful to the brain, and to the sinews, which suffer
much damage and anoiaunce of the Ulcers, and yet let not the bread be utterly
without leaven, for Galene says, in the same place rehearsed, that that bread
which is altogether without leaven, shall not be meet or fit for any body.

Of the wine which Vlcered bodies ought to frequent.
OF this opinion is Galene, L^^de s^^^nitatis tu^^la.
that all excess is to be eschewed especially, that which brings damage,
both to the body and mind. Wherefore, since wine does engender to small damage
to Ulcered bodies: I suppose it best, not only to counsel them to drink but
one draught, but utterly to refrain all sorts of wine, for wine hurts the
body, in so much that it sends gross vapors to the head, which being
afterward expelled by the painful travail of the brain, does ruinously fall
into the lower parts, and much hinder and endamage the healing or curation of
the Ulcered. And also for because the nature of the members is much delighting
in wine, and therefore do draw it couetously to them before it be concocted,
which then wonderfully does increase superfluities in ye body, the which
superfluous abundance, nature (not being able to redress or amend) expulseth
them to the outward members so plenteously, that in short space they engender
Ulcers of one kind or other. I therefore unfeignedly do suppose, that Hidromel
ex decoctione Hisopi, and Betonicae, should be a meet and convenient drink
for the^, the operation whereof is hoate and dry, diminishing cold, gross,
and moist humors, and aptlye strengthening the power of brain says Galene,
and whosoever reads Galene in his first book De tuenda sanitate, Li. 8.
Simplic. medicament.
and in his book Exhortationis ad bonas arts, and in his third book De
temperaturis, shall plainly see the hurt that is received by drinking of
wine. But in Ulcered bodies, where doubt is also of dropsy, and in those, who
(through vehement appetite and breach of custom by the Physicians counsel)
do wax sick for the taste of wine, to such (I say) we must be compelled to
pardon them for the drinking of a little, or as need requires. The wine that
is white in color, is least hurtful for them, the fuming force thereof being
delayed, so says Galene, Gal. lib. 1. de tuenda sanita. Et li. 5. de loc.
affect. ca. 5.
for such wine does not only little send to the head, but also makes the
stomach strong and forcible, but strong wine or vndelaide, does the contrary.

Of the flesh meats which they ought to eat.
Flesh meats which in continuance of time, do get to them the nature of
earthie food, substance or nourishment, are very evil for those that be
troubled with Ulcers, Galen. 3. De potentijs alimentorum.
because they engender a grosser blood then is convenient, so says Galene, for
that their nourishement is rebellious and stubborn, and not stre^gthening the
virtues in the body, as the flesh of Beef, Stagges, Rams, and old beasts
that be gealte, neither is Swines flesh altogether convenient for such meats
do grieve the stomach, enge^dring a gross nourishement says Galene, Gal. lib.
7. Meth. curat. cap. 6.
and nothing assistaunt to nature in digestion. Those meats therefore are
very fit which be hoate and dry in temperature, for in the first beginning
the causes of Ulcers, are judged to proceed of cold and moisture, and if any
sudden heat chance thereto, it is thought to be through putrefaction lying
aloft. As by Galene we are plainly taught. Gal. in lib. de curatione per
sanguin. missionem.
Wherefore the Thrushe, Owsell, wood Plouers, and all that get their living in
dry places, are most of others convenient. Also domestical birds, as Capons,
Hens, and household Doves, are nothing unmeet, but greatly alowable, and
together with these ye Fesaunt, Partriche, Quails, and such like, are much
agreeing. The meat of four footed beasts which is alloweable to Ulcered
bodies, are these and such like. viz. Young Conies, young Hares, which with
their moiste nourishement do cherishe and sustain the natural heat,
increasing also the strength of the whole body, which is a true mean to
restore the health of the body, wherefore by this it follows consequently,
Vlceribus infest^ aquatiles minime prosunt.
that all waterfoules by their moist temperature and hardness of digestion, are
to bodies thus affected, most hurtful and unprofitable. viz. Gese, Ducks, etc.
Neither is it doubtful to any man, that the flesh of Lambs is hurtful to
those, and that because they engender a substance to moiste, for so we be
taught by Galene. Galen. de cibis boni and mal. suc. Galen. 12. De temp. med.
sec^^dum locos
Let them also which be affected, beware of to much pouldred meat, for Galene
says, that salt is noisome, especially to Ulcers in the head.

Of Fish.
BEcause Fysshe of their own propre nature exceadeth in abundance of
moisture, Gal. 6. us. part. cap. 9
which (says Galene) is rebellious to Ulcers, they are to be eschewed, both
because they augme^t the cause of the Ulcer, and also for that they be hard
of digestion, most chiefly (says the same author) those which are full of
excrements, Gal. 3. De fac. alime^t, cap. 24.
of the which sort are the fish of Lakes, Marrishes, Muddie pooles, and
stinking Pondes, for their meat is so excreme^tal, and so slimy, that thereby
filling all the pores of the body, empaireth the strength of the members, and
greueth or depriueth their functions, whereupon, pain, lothesomenes,
rottennes, and corruption of humors are engendered. But those fishes, which are
engendered in Land floodes, and are nouryshed in hard stony and grauellie
waters, especially in quick streams, are less hurtful, the meat therefore of
those fishes which swim in the pure and clean sea, is very little hurtful
to them, chiefly being taken when the sea is at a full water, and tossed with a
quick wind, as manifestly it is to be found in Galene. 3. De pot, aliment.
cap. 24.
For by so much the fish is the worse, by how much it is less exercised
tossed, and troubled. Let them also beware of pouldred fishes, as I said even
now of pouldred flesh. And we prohibit generally al kind of fish, by what
means soever they be taken or kept, for by their slimines they corrupt the
humors, being very hard in passing, and difficult in digestion, and the more
slimie the worse.

Of Eggs.
GAlene says, Galen. li. 3 De potent. aliment. cap. 21.
that the Eggs of creatures do engendre good and perfect blood, as the Eggs
of Hens. etc. For by the reason of the equality of their te^perature, they
are judged convenient and agreeable to all bodies, as well diseased as sound,
for they do not only engender good humors and comme^dable juice, but also are
of light digestion, and easy passage, greeuing very little the natural
strength, as is evident in Galene. Lib. 3. De fac. alime^t. cap. 21.
But let the eggs be new laid, or else they be rebellious to the nature of
man, and be evil to digeste, engendring sundry accidents and evil
dispositions. Let their Eggs also be boiled in water, for the roasted are
harder of nourishement. etc Furthermore, it shall be best only to eat the yolke
of the Egg, because the white is of cold and moiste temperature. Let the
Eggs also boiled, be rere, for they be of swift transiture, enge^dring the
best juice, and stre^gthening the faculties of the body. But as Galene Gal. 3.
De fac. alime^t. cap. ^1.
says, the Eggs which are fried, of all other are most pernicious, and
hard of digestion, wherefore all meats fried with Eggs, are utterly to be
eschewed of bodies affected with Ulcers.

Of Milk.
BOth Milk, and what meat soever is compounded or made of Milk, are very
rebellious to Ulcered bodies, for the ^uming to the head, whereby gross humors
are engendered. 5. Aph. 64.
For Hypocrates says that Milk to those affected with pain, causes ache in
the head, and is evil both to fevers and pain in the belly. Also Galene Gal.
comment. 60.
says, that Milk well boiled, does nourishe well, and enge^dre good humors,
^^t in affected persons does touch the head, it is dangerous, enducing the
dropsey in Ulcered bodies, therefore all forces of meats made with Milk, must
be of such persons eschewed.

Of Cheese.
TO all that be affected with Ulcers, we forbydde the eating of Cheese, both
for the abundant slimines, which is thereby engendered in humors, as also for
that it makes them slowly to digest. Lib. 3. De fac. alime^t. cap. 16.
Galene being witness, whereby says he, the members (by the passage of those
slimie humors) are altered, Lib. 2. artis medici.
and makes often solution of continuitie, causing pain in such persons, and
that so much the more, by how much the chese is more salt, and older,
Galen. 3. De potentijs alimen toru^. ca. 16.
for thereby it is tarter, and therefore harder to digest, and makes worse
nourishment. And note that although Chese be of a diminishing faculty of
gross humors yet is it unprofitable, for by y^ naugh tines of the juice and
boiling heat, it brings more inconvenience, then the attenuation of gross
humors can profit. Since therefore there is a common fault to all kinds of
Cheese, let persons thus affected, ab stain from it.

Of Fruits.
OF Fruits (says Galene) which men do eat, Li^ 2. fac. aliment. cap. ^.
which the ancient writers call Horarios, for because they spring in the
hour of the year, which hour of the year Galene calls that time, in the
midst whereof the star (whereof the Caniculer days be named) appears.
Of the which some are called fruits of the earth, of which sort are
Gourdes, Pompions, Citrons, Mellons, Coucumers^ etc. Which because they are of
a moist nature, and endewed with large humiditie, they do not only engender a
moiste nourishement, but a slender humiditie, and that which is easily purged
forth of the body. Galene says also, Lib. 2. De pot. alime^to. cap. 2.
that that fruit both co^taine a naughty juice, increasing the disease, and
weakening the members, and almost depriving their functions, wherefore to be
taken as an usual service in Ulcered bodies we must flatlye deem. And those
fruits which Galene calls arboreous, 2. De pot. aliment. cap. 7.
are those growing upon trees. viz. Figs, Pears, Apples, Peaches,
Mulberies, together with the fruit which the Italians call Armelini, being a
fruit accounted among the Peaches, and Cheries, Plummes, etc. Whose substance
is soft and moist, not only engendring the like nourishment, but also by their
wyndines do attribute no small hurt and pain to the affected bodies, and
therefore are altogether to be forbidden. But if the body affected do fervently
desire and earnestly (as it were) long after fruit, then may we permit him
to eat Figs that be well ripened, as things less hurtful, less
engendring evil humors the^ the Autumn fruits, although they be not
altogether void of fault, for so they be not (says Galene) Notwithstanding
as is aforesaid, 2. De pot. aliment. cap. 8.
they be less hurtful then all the rest, yet now and then, an Apple roste^
under embres may be pardoned, for the fire diminishes the moiste juice
thereof, and abateth the wyndines. Whereby otherwise it comes to pass that
the eaters of fruits, do often suffer pains and torments in the belly, viz.
such as Quinces, Orenges, Medlars, Sorbes, Nuts and such like, which are not
only slow in passage, but also being gross, and gluie, do engendre astringent
iuyces, retaining the naughtines of humors. Notwithstanding, we account not
sweet Almondes unprofitable, sith in them is contained no binding force, for
y^ they do make clean and extenuate, and therefore probably allowed in
Ulcered bodies. 2. Fac. aliment. cap. 29.
And Galene also affirms that Almondes do purge the bowels, whereby it comes
to pass that virious humors (being propulsed to ye skin, and forbidden to
abide in the inner parts) are driven out by the pores of the skin, as it were
by breathing, whereby pains of the belly and other exterior inconveniences are
prevented: wherefore sweet Almondes are a convenient and fit meat for
affected bodies.

But Filberdes and Walnuttes, because of their binding strength, and the cause
aforeshewed, are most unprofitable, and very unwholesome for Ulcered bodies.

Of herbs to be used in brothes. etc.
Herbs fit for such bodies, are those which be hoate and dry. viz.
Hysope, Calamint, Watermint, Fenill, Sage, Betonie. etc. And when herbs that
do attenuate and make soft, be with these compounded, then do they easily
cleanse and expuise al gross and slymie humors, and therefore must needs be
granted commodious for such persons, and the herbs of contrary
temperature. viz. cold and moist, are as much hurtful, such as Lettuse,
Endive, Mallows, Spinache, and such like, which by their cold nature, do
compact and heap together naughty humors in thinner parts of the body,
hindering their passage or expulsion, for which cause the depth of the body is
not purged, but the disease more augmented and a great deal the more when the
patient through fond and gredie desire, shall have eaten herbs cold and dry,
with astringent faculty, which to the pacients are most obnoxious, of which
sort be these. viz. Plantain, Sorrel, Nightshade and of like sort.

Of Onions, Garlike, Musheromes, or Toade stools. etc.
ONions, Garlyke, Scalians, and Leekes, for their sharp and biting tartnes
together with the obscurity of their substance both more damage to the body
the^ their force of extenuating can pleasure again. Of the earth also
proceadeth funges, or Todestoles, which any way prepared, are to be eschewed,
since they are not only of evil juice, but their nutriment is cold and
phlegmatic, and to all accidents and dispositions (proceeding of Ulcers) most
hurtful. Of that mind is Galene, saying further, for as much as Toadestooles
can not dry, 2. De pot. aliment. cap. 60. li. de cibis boni and mali succi.
it is a manifest token that in them is evil contained. And Auicen says, that
prefocation happens to them which use to eat Toadstoles.

Of Pulse.
SInce there is no Pulse endewed with good and perfect pleasure, but do
greatly fill the body, with wind, by which means pains in the body, may
arise to Ulcered bodies, therefore vnneedefull: I do not without cause account
them unprofitable ( Galene being author) of which sort be these. viz. 1. De
potent. alime^torum.
Beans, Fitches, Rise, and such like, let us straightly command the Ulcered
patientes, clearly to eschew these kind of grains in what order soever they
be altered: but to an immoderate appetite, the broth of red Rice, may
indifferently be permitted, for that does attenuate and cleanse gross and
clammie humors and open the obstructed ways, which means are much assistau^t
to the healing of Ulcers.

Of motion and rest.
Understanding by Galene, De tue^da sanitate.
that reasonable motion is not only helthfull to the body, but also makes
the said body of a good form, and habit, and keeps it in healthful
plight. It shall be most expedient that the person affected, do moderatly
frequent the motion and exercise of his body. But yet (says Galene) I would
not have him to use it when he is full, for endamaging or hurting the head with
vapors, which by much motion may arise from the meat newely taken, and
undigested. Exercise is good before meat, for the^ it increases the force and
stre^gthe of the body (says Galene,) and thereby purges the pores of the
body, 6. De loc. affec. ca. 6.
and expels the excrementes. Galene therefore affirmed it profitable, 2. De
sanitat. tutela.
to use exercises before meat: yet it is convenient also to use exercises
sometime after meat, not always, but (as Galene says) when the meat is
entered into the second digestio^, 2. De tue^da sanit.
and the time of eating is at hand again. But if either before or after that
time, the exercise be used, it either fills the body with raw
superfluities, or else hastneth the coming of Melancholy. For (says Galene)
if the exercise after meat be not gentle and easy, 2. De tue^da sanitate
it hasteneth down the meat from the stomach before it be digested. Wherefore
the exercises before meat, must be more hasty and quick, to the end that the
superfluities which lurketh in the hollow places of the body, may more easily
be expulsed, nature being assisted by exercise.

Of sleep and watching.
GAlene says, that sleep and watching, does come on every side, 2. Aphor.
comment. 1.
according to the motions of inconstant heat, sleep to the inner parts, and
watching to the outward. The natural heat being moved forewarde, for the
which cause, when as in much sleep the natural heat (being called to the
inner parts) a great quantity of vapors does rise up to the head (whereby
fluxions do distill to the members below, I think it expedient that the
Ulcered body refrain from much sleep, least superfluities multiplied by
reason of sleep, should heap and gather to much to the members, which lie
and rest. Day sleeps must be altogether forbidden. For in watching, the
breathinges may be moved from the heart to the outward parts, they do
attenuate and dissolve the gross and clammie humors engendered in the members
(natural heat being adjoined) For the which thing, it is expedient for ye
party to use watching for ye longer distance of time. And when daily sleep
would possess an accustomed order, let it be shaken of and lost by little and
little, according to the precept of Galene.

Of Joy or Mirthe.
GAlene says, ^^De sim^^^, causis
that mirth proceadeth by motion of the mind to the outward parts of the
body. For the breath being gathered at the heart at the going forth, does
yield a comfortable heat to all the members, whereby all phlegmatic
superfluities in them hid, is scattered and put forth, therefore profitable
to Ulcered bodies. But by sadness (by reason) comes the contrary, for that
reuoketh all the spirits and heat unto the heart, so that the outward parts
are utterly destitute of heat, therefore greatly moving and augmenting the
cause of Ulcers, wherefore use myrthe, and avoid sadness.

Of repletion and Inanition.
REpletion, whether it be of meat, or of evil humors, filling the vessels of
the body, it is evil, and straightly to be reproved (as says Galene). For
when the vessels be filled above mean or measure with meats and drinks, 1.
Aphor. coment. 3.
the parties are in ieopardie of burstnes, obstruction of natural heat. etc.
I counsel therefore all those that be infected with Ulcers, to flee from
vnmoderate filling of their bodies, (according to ye causes rehearsed) for that
thereby all pains, anguishe, and perturbations with evil disposition,
accompaning the Ulcers, may be incited. Let the patientes therefore use a
slender kind of diet, and yet not an vnmoderate kind and excessive form,
spare feeding, since such may easily enge^der the falling sickness, which
when the stomach shall be inordinatly emptied, has rediest access, for so says
Galene. In lib. de ven^. sec. co^tra Erasi^trat.
But a thin diet (by moderate use observed) resists ye same. Galene
therefore has this sentence, a mean and moderate diet usually kept, Li. de
attenuante vict. ratione.
does safely cure young folks of the falling sickness newely begone, and does
metely assiste them, though they be old, and the disease inueterated.

De Coitu.
FOr as much as generally all Ulcers do proceed of intemperature, with cold
and weakness of natural heat, and that nothing more augmenteth the malice of
such affectes, nor increases their continuance, then exercises decaying
natural heat, and thuse of things that weaken, cool and dry the body. And
again since nature in such parties is sufficiently busied in strengtheninge
and sending due nourishement to the affected parts, it must needs be great
damage to the patient, and hinderaunce of the curation, to use Coiture, which
(as Galene affirms) does make the body more weak, Li. de san. tuenda. 3.
slack, cold and dry, which sure is needeles in Ulcered bodies, who are
commonly given to be of that intemperature. And Paulus Aegineta, Li. 1. art.
med. ca. 7.
says that Coiture hurts bodies sound, that be of cold and dry complexion.
Wherefore to affected bodies, which have nothing in them natural that may be
wanted, we ought without pardon, to prohibit the use of venerie.

A Table of Simples
AND since I have so narrowely touched the curatio^ of Ulcers in ye former
treatises, I think it more expedient then vnneedeful, and more worthy the
labor, then out of the way, to set forth in order the natural temperatures,
and diverse operatio^s of such simple medicines, as my slender diligence at
opportunity of time, has collected and drawn out of diverse worthy and
approved writers: and for the more easy finding of them. I have tradured and
brought them into the order of an alphabet, as follows.

Aqua, water, cold and moist, in the first degree, repercussiue. Acetum,
Uineger, cold in the first, dry in the third degree aperitiue. Aqua
aluminosa, Alom water, dry in the fourth degree, abstersive and repercussiue.
Agresta nota, Ueriuse, cold in the second degree, in the third repercussiue.
Acasia, the juice of Sloes, cold and dry in the third degree, repercussiue.
Acedula, little Sorel, cold and dry in the second degree, repercussiue.
Anthera, the yellowe of the Rose, cold and dry in the first degree,
repercussiue. Atriplex, Arage, cold and moist temperatly, maturatiue and
lenitiue. Absinthium. Wormwood, hoate in the first degree, dry in the second
degree, abstersive. Apium, Smaledge, hot in the first, dry in the second
degree maturatiue, and mundificatiue. Agrimonia, Egrimonie, hoate and dry in
the second degree, abstersive. Acusmuscate, vide pes Columbinus. Aristolochia,
Aristologie, hot and dry in the fourth degree, adustiue and attractiue.
Allium, Garlike, hoate and dry in the fourth degree, adustiue and attractiue.
Aloes, a Gum, hoate in the second, dry in the first degree, consolidatiue.
Auena, Dates, hoate and moiste temperatly, maturatiue and abstersive. Amilum,
Starche, cold and dry in the first degree, lightly binding. Axungia, fat or
grease of a swyne, hot and moist in the first degree, mollifieth and ripeneth.
Argentum viuum, Quicksiluer, the temperature whereof is diversely supposed and
judged of, for Auicen says, it is cold and moist in the second degree.
Dioscorides says, it is hoate and moiste in the fourth degree. Paulus says,
it is hoate and dry in the fourth degree, and Montanus (whose judgment I
suppose most allowable) says it is cold and moist vehementlye, it is
penetratiue. Anisum, Anysseede, hot in the third, dry in the second degree,
dissolueth and corrects windines. Anethum, Dill, hoate and dry in the
second degree, resolutiue. Asphodeli radices, Daffadil roots, hot and dry
in the second degree, abstersive, and corrosiue. Anacardus, A kind of fruit,
hoate and dry in the fourth degree, vlceratiue. Arsenicu^, Arsnicke, hoate in
ye third, dry in the second degree, mortificatiue. Auripigmentum, Orpiment;
of the property of arsnicke. Alumen rochinum, Roche alome, hoate and dry in
the third degree, stipticke. Argilla, Claie, cold in the first, dry in the
second degree, repercussiue. Antimoniu^ or Stibium, cold in the first degree,
dry in the second, mundifieth and purges with correctiues. Ammoniacu^, a
gum, hot in the third, dry in the first degree, mollifieth with attraction.
Assa foetida, a Gu^me, hoate in the third, dry in the first degree,
abstersive and attractiue. Asphaltu^, a foam hardened of a part of ye sea,
named Mare mortuu^, and it is hoate and dry, and consolidatiue. Acanthus,
Bearfoote, hoate and dry in the first degree, maturatiue. Atramentum, a
mineral, hot and dry in the third degree, corrosiue with stipticitie. Aconitum
woulfes wort, it is deadly by reason of putrefaction. Acorus Gladin, hoate and
dry in the third degree, resolutiue. Adiantum, vide capillus veneris. Aiuga,
seu abiga, Ground pine, hoate in the second, dry in the third, astringe^t.
Aizoon, vide Semperuiuum. Altea, High Mallowe dry without notable heat or
cold, loses and scatters humors. Alcibiadicu^, wild Buglosse, hoate
without manifest drines, expels venime. Alisma, Water plantaine, hoate,
abstersive. Amaracum, Fetherfew, hot in the third, dry in the second, it
mollifieth and delaieth inflammation. Amarantus, flower amor, hoate and dry
aperitiue. Ambubeia, vide Endiuia. Ammi, Ameos, hot and dry in the third
degree, aperitiue. Anagallis, Thickweede, hoate and dry, conglutinatiue.
Anagallis aquatica, Water pimpernell, hoate and dry, aperitiue. Androsemon,
vide Ipericon. Anetum vaccinum, Ox eye, hoate and dry, resolutiue. Angelica,
Angelicke root, hoate and dry in the third degree, dissolueth and opens.
Angurium, vide Cucumer. Anisum, Anise, hot and dry in the third degree,
digesteth and dissolueth. Annonis, Arkangel, hoate and dry in the first
degree, abstersive and aperitiue. Anthemis, vide Camomilla. Apium agreste,
Wild smaledge, hoate and dry vehemently, vlceratiue. Apium hortense, Garden
smaledge, hot in the second, moiste in the third degree, opens and
mundifieth. Arnoglosson. vide Plantago, Artemisia, Mugwort, hoate and dry in
the second degree, aperitiue. Aron. wake Robin, hoate and dry in the third,
it wipeth and makes tender. Asarum or Asara bacca, Hoate and dry in the
third degree, the leaf is astringent, and the root is aperitiue. Asperagus,
vide Speragus. Atractilis, vide Carduus benedictus. Auricula muris, Mouseare,
cold and moist attractiue, and mundificatiue. Agaricus, Agaricke, hoate and
dry in the first degree, resolutiue. Amigdala, Almondes, hoate and moiste in
the first degree, provoke urine. Ambra, Amber, hoate and dry in the second
degree, comfort the brain. Argentum and scoria eius, Silver, and the dross
or filinges thereof, cold and dry, conglutinatiue. Auru^, Gold, te^peratly
hot, co^fortatiue. Alcakengi, Winter cherie, a kind of nightshade, cold and
dry in the second degree, aperitiue.
B
Basilicon, vide Ozimum. Blacte bizantia, a kind of Cocles, hoate and dry in
the third degree, mundificatiue. Been, hoate and dry in the second degree,
confortatiue. Bombax, Bombast or Cotton, hoate and dry, constringent.
Balaustia, Pomegranet flowers, cold and dry in the second degree,
repercussiue. Berberi, Berberies, cold and dry in the second degree,
repercussiue. Brionia, Brionie, the root hoate and dry in the second degree,
abstersive and maturatiue. Bolus armenus, Bolarmoniacke, cold and dry in the
second degree, repercussiue restringent. Baucia, wild persenep, hoate and
moiste in the first degree, maturatiue. Borago, Borage, hoate and moiste,
temperatly, cleanses the blood. Buglossum, Bug^osse, is of like temperature,
but more dry, maturatiue. Balsamum, a Gum of a tree so called, hoate and
dry in the second degree, abstersive, attractiue, and confortatiue. Butyru^,
Butter, hoate in the first degree, and more moiste, maturatiue. Bdellium, A
gum, hoate and moiste in the first degree, mollificatiue. Bursa Pastoris,
Shepeherdes purse, cold and dry, astringent. Borax, Borase, hoate and dry,
temperatlie, consolidatiue. Bugiae, the Barberie bark, cold and dry,
consolidatiue. Berbena, Ueruaine, hoate and dry, meanly, consolidatiue.
Betonica, Betonie, hoate and dry, in the first degree, mundificatiue. Bedegar,
Eglantine, cold in the first degree, dry meanly. Ballote, vide Prassium
faetidum. Batrachium, vide Pes corui. Barba caprina, Goats bearde, hoate and
dry, abstersive, Beta, Betes, cold and moist, mundificatiue. Bellis, Little
Daisies, hoate and dry, consolidatiue, and abstersive. Blitum, a kind of Beat,
rare in England, cold and moist in the second degree. Botris, Oak of
Jerusalem, hoate and dry, resolutiue. Bulbus syluestris, wild Onion, dry,
astringent.
C
Camomilla, Camomill, hoate and dry in the first degree. resol. mollif.
Crassula, Orpin. Fuch. says, it is hoate and dry in the third degree. Vigo
and Guido, cold in the third, moiste in the second, repercussiue. Corallus,
Coral, cold in the first, dry in the second, restrictiue. Cerusa, Ceruse,
cold and dry in the second degree, consolidatiue. Caulis, Colewortes, hoate
in the first, dry in the second degree, maturatiue, and abstersive.
Centaurea, Centorie, hoate and dry in the third degree, consolidatiue. Cera,
Wax, temperate, maturatiue. Crocus, Saffron, hoate in the first, dry in the
second, resolutiue and comforta. Costus, a root, hoate in the third, dry in
the second. Cinamomum, Cinnamon, hoate and dry in the third degree,
confortatiue. Cepa, Onion, hoate in the fourth degree, abstersive, aperitiue.
Ciperus, the Cipresse root, hoate and dry in the second degree,
consolidatiue. Chelidonia, Salendine, hoate and dry in the third degree,
abstersive. Cuperosa, Coperise, hoate and dry in the beginning of ye fourth
degree, stiptick, and corrosiue. Cupressus, Cipresse tree, hot in the first,
dry in the second, consolidatiue. Cauda equina, Mares tails, cold in the
first, dry in the second, consolidatiue. Calx viua, Lime unquenched, hoate
and dry in the fourth degree, adustiue. Curcuma, the less Salendine root,
dry, consolidatiue. Cantharides, Flies, hoate and dry in the third degree,
adustiue, vlceratiue. Castoreum, Beuer stoues, hoate and dry in the second
degree, conforteth the sinews. Canabis, Hempseed, hoate and dry, maturatiue.
Capitellum, Lee, hoate adustiue. Cinis, Ashes, hoate and dry in the fourth
degree, abstersive. Cucumer asininus, wild Cow^umer, hoate and dry in the
second degree, resolutiue. Cresones, vide Nasturtium aquaticum. Ciminu^, Comin,
hoate in the third, and dry in the second degree, carminatiue. Calamentum,
Calaminte, hoate and dry in the third degree, resolutiue, attract. Caseus
recens, new Cheese, the new is consolidatiue, but the old is contrary.
Cichorea, vide rostrum porcinum. Caltha, Marigouldes, hoate and dry,
aperitiue. Candelaria, Tassill, dry in the second degree, abstersive.
Capillus veneris, Maidenhere, dry without notable heat or cold, astringent.
Caprifolium, Woodbind, hoate and dry vehement, restringent. Cardopatium,
Woulfes thistle, hot and dry in the third degree. Carduus benedictus, Our
Ladies thistle, hoate and dry, inflatiue, and moderatly pearsing. Cartamum,
garden Saffron, hoate in the second, dry in the first degree, maturatiue and
digestive. Carui, Carawayes, hoate and dry in the third degree, aperitiue,
abstersive. Castrangula, Water Betonie, dry, mundificatiue. Cataputia,
Spourge, hoate in the third degree, moist in the second, purges gross
humors. Centumnodia, Knotgrasse, cold in the second, dry in the third,
astringent. Centumcapita, Sea hollie, dry, and of a mean temperature.
Camedris, vide quercula minor. Cherifolium, Cheruell, dry astringent. Cheiri,
white Uiolet, hot, astringent. Cicer nigrum, Black fetches, hoate and dry in
the first degree, flatuous. Cicuta, Hemlocke, cold immoderatlye, a poison to
man, and stupefactiue. Cidonium malum, Quince, cold in the first, dry in the
second degree, astringe^t. Citrulli, Citrons, cold and moist in the second
degree, abstersive, penetratiue. Coloquintida, Hot and dry in the third
degree, mundificatiue. Consolida mayor, the great Comfrey, hot and dry in the
second degree, conglutinatiue. Consolida minor, little Daises, hoate and dry,
resolutiue, conglutinatiue. Coriandrum, Coriander, cold and dry, somewhat
astringent. Cotum, vide Bombax. Cresio hortensis, vide Nasturtiu^ hortens.
Cucumer, Cucumber, cold and moist in the second degree, mundificatiue.
Cucurbita, Gourdes, cold and moist in the second degree, delayeth
infla^matio^. Cassutha, Doder, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree,
mundificatiue, restringent. Ciclamen, vide panis Porcinus. Cinoglosson, Hounds
tongue, cold and dry in the second degree, restringent. Cassia fistula, of
an equal temperature, and resolutiue. Colophonia, Greek pitche, hoate and
dry in the third degree, conglutinatiue. Calamus aromaticus, hot and dry in
the second degree, aperitiue. Cardamomum, hoate and dry in the first degree,
resolutiue. Camipitheos, hoate and dry in the second degree, mundificatiue,
resolutiue. Cubebes, hoate and dry, meanly mundificatiue. Capparus, the root,
hoate in the first degree, dry in the second, mundificatiue, comfortatiue.
Cassia lignea, hoate and dry, mundificatiue, and aperitiue. Calcanthum, A
mineral constringent, adustiue. Camfora, Camphere, cold and dry in the third
degree astringent. Cinabrium, Uermilion, hoate and dry in the second degree,
stipticke.
D
Digitalis, Lady finger, hoate and dry, mundificatiue, and aperitiue. Digiti
citrini, Dogs stones, hoate and dry in the second degree, helps the
sinews. Damasonium, waterplantaine, hoate, mundificatiue. Daphnoeides, vide
Laureola. Daucus, Wild perseneppe, hoate and dry, provoke urine and
Menstrua. Dragunculus, Drago^s, hoate and dry, astringent. Dulcis radix, vide
liquiritia. Dragagantum Gu^me Dragagant, hoate and dry consolidatiue. Dactili,
Dates, hoate and moist in the second degree, resolutiue. Diptanum. Ditanie,
hoate and dry in the second degree, attractiue. Doronicum, Doronick roots,
hoate and dry in the third degree, resolutiue, attractiue. Diagredium, hoate
and dry in the fourth degree, resolutiue, mundificatiue.
E
Epatica Liuerworte, Guydo. cold and moist, repercussiue. Enula campana,
Elecampane, hoate and dry in the second degree, comfortatiue Ebulus, Walwoort,
hoate and dry in the second degree, resolutiue. Euforbium, A gum, hoate and
dry in the fourth degree, abstersive. Aeris flos, Uerdegrease, hot and dry
in the third degree, corrosiue, and stipticke. Ermodactilus, vide Asphodeli
radices. Ematitis lapis, A stone, which unquenched is hoate in the first
degree, and dry in the second, consolidatiue. Elleborus albus, white Glebor,
hoate and dry in the third degree, provoke menstrua, and vomiting. Endiuia
vera, true Endive, cold and dry, astringent. Equina mentha. Horseminte, hot
in the third degree, dry in the second, astringent. Eruca. Rocket, the seed,
hoate and dry, expelling venim and worms. Esula, Woulfes milk, hot in the
fourth degree, dry vehemently, mundificatiue. Euiscum, vide Althea. Eufrasia,
Eye bright, hoate and dry, it quickens the sight and memory. Eupatoriu^
adulterinu^, cou^terfaite Egrimonie, hoate and dry in the second degree.
Mundifieth and loses. Epithymum, hoate and dry in the third degree, purges
mela^cholike humors.
F
Flammula, vide pes corui. Fabaria. wild Mynte, hoate in the first^ degree,
dry in ye beginning of the third mundificatiue. Fumus terrae. Fumitorie, cold
in the first, dry in the second, mundificatiue. Feniculus, Fenill, the seed
is hoate and dry in the second degree, resolutiue. Frumentum, Wheat, hoate
and moist temperatly, maturatiue, and mundificatiue. Furfur, Branne, hoate and
dry in the first degree, resolutiue. Fabae, Beans, cold and dry,
resolutiue, and mundificatiue. Fex cerae, Dregs of the Wax, hoate^ then the
wax, and more mollifying. Fex olei, Dregs of Oil, hoater and drier then the
Oil. Ferrum, Iron, cold and dry in the second degree, constrictiue, and
consolidatiue. Ferrugo, Rust, hoate and dry in the second degree, restringent,
and consolidatiue. Fenugrecum, Fenugreeke, hoate and dry in the first degree,
maturatiue and resolutiue. Ficus recentes, grene Figs, hoate and moiste, the
dry be hoate and dry, maturatiue, and mollificatiue. Fermentum, Leven, hoate
and moist with mixte operations. Fuligo, Soote, hoate and dry, marueilously
drying. Farina volatilis, Myldust, cold and dry, conglutinatiue. Fraxinus,
Ash tree, cold and dry in the second degree, repercussiue. Folia Oliuarum,
Olive leaves, cold and dry, stipticke. Filex, Fearne, hoate and dry in the
second degree, mundificatiue, and resolutiue. Faba crassa, vide crassula.
Faseoli, vide Dolichi. Ficaria, water Betonie, dry, mu^dificatiue. Filago,
vide Papyrus. Filipendula, hoate and dry in the third degree, diureticke.
Flos amoris, Purple violet flower, hoate and dry, aperitiue. Feniculus
porcinus, Hogs fenel, hot in the second, dry in the third degree,
mundificatiue, incarnatiue, and cicatrifatiue. Fortis herba Dry, astringent.
Fuga Demonu^, Saint John's herb, hot and dry, mundificatiue, and aperitiue.
Fungus, Funges, cold and moiste in the third degree, constringent. Fell, Gall,
hoate and dry, more or less according to the creature, mundificatiue, and
abstersive.
G
Galla, Galls, the grene are cold in the second degree, and dry in the
third, stipticke. Glandes, Acornes, cold and dry in the second degree,
consolidatiue. Gratia Dei, Pinkenedle, hoate and dry in the second degree,
mundificatiue, and consolidatiue. Gariofili, Cloves, hoate and dry in the
third degree, confortatiue. Gluten, Glewe, hoate and dry in the first degree,
conglutinatiue. Gentiana, Gentian, hoate and dry in the third degree,
abstersive. Gallithricum, vide Speragus. Gummi Arabica, Cold, with a certain
drienes, and glewenes. Granum Tinctorum, Madder, dry, consolidatiue, and
intarnatiue. Gipsum Lyme, vide Calx viua. Galbanum, hoate in the third, dry
in the second degree, attractiue. Genista, Brom, hoate and dry in the
second degree, diureticke. Guadum, Woad, dry astringent. Galanga, Galingall,
hoate and dry in the second degree, confortatiue.
H
Hiosciamus, Henbane, cold in the third degree, stupefactiue. Herba diui
Iohannis, vide Fuga demonu^. Herba Stellae, vide pes corui. Hermodactilus, vide
Ermodactilus. Hispanach, Spinach, cold and moist in the first degree,
mollificatiue. Hordeum, Barley, cold and dry in the first degree,
mundificatiue. Humulus, Hoppes, hoate and dry, aperitiue, and mundificatiue.
Hipericon, vide fuga Demonum. Hissopus. Hissope, hoate and dry in the third
degree, mundificatiue, and aperitiue. Harmel, Some call it wild Rewe, hoate and
dry in the third degree, it cutteth^ and mundifieth gross humors.
I
Isatis, vide Dragagantum. Iposistis, Toade stools juice, cold and dry in
the second degree, stipticke. Issopus, vide Hissopus. Iuniperus, Juniper,
hoate and dry, consolidatiue. Ipericon, vide fuga Demonum. Iarus. vide Aron.
Ireos, Flower deluce root, hoate and dry in the third degree, resolves,
mundifieth and incarnateth. Iacobi flos, hoate and dry astringent. Indicum,
vide Gnadum. Iouis barba, vide Semperuiua, Iringus, vide centum capita. Iua
muscata. Ground pine, hoate in the second, dry in the third degree astringe^t.
Iusquiamus, vide Hiosciamus. Iuiubes, a fruit so called, hoate and dry in the
first degree, resolutiue.
K
Keirim. white Uiolet, hot, mu^dificatiue. Kerna. vide Catapucia. Karaba.
Amber, hoate in the third, dry meanly, astringent, confortatiue.
L
Lithargyrus. Letharge, dry, regeneratiue, and consolidatiue. Lupini. Lupines,
hoate in the first, dry in the second degree, mundificatiue. Lilium.
Lillies, the root hoate and moiste in the second degree, maturatiue. Lini
semen. Linseede, hoate and dry, maturatiue. Lac. Milk, temperate, whose
mitigatiue is water, consolidatiue. Lapathum, Docke, cold and dry in the
second degree, abstersive. Liquiritia, Licorise, te^perate, with a certain
humiditie, maturatiue. Licium. temperate and moist in the second degree,
mitigatiue. Labdanum, hoate and moist in the first degree, mollificatiue.
Lentes, Lintelles, temperate and stipticke. Lingua canis, vide Cinoglosson.
Lixiuium, Lee, hoate and dry in the third degree, abstersive. Lactuca,
Let^use, cold and dry in the third degree, loses and cools. Lactucella,
Sowthist^e, being green it is cold, but dried, has some heat and
astriction. Lappa muersa, clot burre, hoate and dry, seperateth and
mundifieth. Lappa mayor, the great burre, dry, digestive, and astringent.
Larga, the larche tree, astringent. Laureola, Ribwort, hoate and dry
aperitiue. Linaria, Toad staxe, hoate and dry, aperitiue, mundificatiue.
Lingua bouis, vide Buglossum. Lingua ceruina, hoate in the first, dry in the
second degree, astringent. Luparia, vide Aconitum. Lapis spongiae, Sponge
stones, dry, conglutmatiue. Lignum aloes, hot and dry in the second degree,
comfort the brain. Laurus, Laurel, or Baie, hoate and dry in the third
degree, abstersive, and mundificatiue. Lapis smaragdus^ The Smaragde stone,
cold and dry, drives away venim. Lapis Adamas, cold and dry in the fourth
degree, abstersive. Lapis hematitis, vide Ematitis lapis. Lapis lazulus, Asure,
cold and moist, purges melancholy. Limon, the Lemon fruit, cold and dry,
confortatiue.
M
Margarita, Pearl, cold and dry, confortatiue. Merda ferri, Iron dross,
cold and dry, consolidatiue. Malua, Mallows, cold and moist, mitigatiue.
Malmauiscus, vide Althea. Mandragora, Mandrage, cold and dry in the third
degree, stupefactiue. Marubium, Horehound, hoate in the second, dry in the
third degree, aperitiue. Mastix, Masticke, hoate and dry in the second
degree, mollificatiue. Melilotum, Melilot, hot and dry in the first degree,
resolutiue. Medulla, Marrey, hoate and moist, mollificatiue. Mel, Home, hoate
and dry in the second degree, mundificatiue. M^r^ha, Mirre, hot and dry in
the second degree, incarnatiue. Memitha, The less Salendine, dry in the first
degree, restrictiue. Mespila, Medlars, constrictiue. Mummia. Mummie, hot and
dry in the second degree, constrictiue. Minimum, Read lead, cold and dry,
cicatrix. Maiorana, Maioram, hot and dry in the third degree, digesteth.
Matter syluae, vide caprefolium. Matricaria, Mugwort, hoate and dry in the
second degree, aperitiue. Malauinzana, Mad apples, cold and mo^^^^
stupefactiue. Melissa, Balm, hoate in the second, dry in the first degree,
abstersive, congl^^^ Mentha, Minte, hoate in the third, dri^ in the second
degree, astringent. Mercurialis, the true Mercury, hoate and dry in the
first degree, solutiue. Millium, Millet, cold in the first, dry in the
third degree, aperitiue. Millefolium, Yarrowe, dry astringent. Millemorbia,
vide Ficaria. Mora vaticana. Bramble, hoate and dry astringent. Morella. Less
nightshade or Alkakengi, cold in the second degree, and mean between moist
and dry, astringent. Morsus Diaboli. Devils bitte, hoate and dry, dissolueth
and ripeneth. Morsus Gallinae. Mouseare, cold and moist, mundificatiue. Morus
Mulberie, Cold and moist, abstersive. Malum Granatum. Pomegranates, the sower
be cold and dry, the sweet cold and moist, comforting the stomach. Malum
medicum. Orange, cold and moiste in the first degree, the rind is hoate and
dry, and comfort the stomach. Macis. Mace, dry in the third degree,
without manifest heat, astringent. Manna, hoate and dry in the second
degree, constringe^t, says Paul Egineta. Mirobalani, Mirabolanes, cold in
the first degree, dry in the second, stiptickes. Malacidonea, vide cidon
Malum. Marathrum, vide Foeniculum, Marcasita, hoate and dry, consolidatiue,
and astringent. Malecoria, the rindes of Pomegranetes, cold in the second,
dry in the third, restrictiue.
N
Nenuphar, Water Lilies, cold and moist in the second degree, delaying
inflammations. Nuces auellanae, Small nuttes, hoate and dry in the second
degree, abstersive. Nux Indica, hoate and moist in the first degree,
confortatiue. Nuces cupressi, Cipresse nuttes, hot and dry, astringent. Nux
vomica, the vomiting nutte, hoate and dry, provoking strong vomit. Nux
Muscata, Nutmigges, hoate and dry in the second degree, confortatiue. Nepita,
vide Calamentum. Nux iugla^s, wall nuttes, the withered are hot in the third
degree, and dry in the beginning of the second, but the green are not so
hoate and dry, they lose the belly. Nasturtium satiuum, Garden Cresses, hoate
and dry in the fourth degree, abstersive. Nasturtium aquaticum, water Cresses,
hoate and dry in the third degree, aperitiue. Nasturtium tectoru^, wild
mustard seed, hoate and dry in the fourth degree, aperitiue. Nil, vide
Guadum. Nigella Romana, A seed so called, hoate and dry in the third degree,
cleanses the skin. Nitrum, Salt peter, subtillatiue and mundificatiue.
O
Opium, The juice of black Poppie dried, cold and dry in the fourth degree,
stupefactiue, and mortificatiue. Ordeum, Barley, cold and dry in the first
degree, maturatiue and abstersive. Oleum oliuarum. Oil Olive, temperate, and
according to the qualities of simples altered. Oleum muscelinum. hoate,
mollificatiue. Orobus. Fetches, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree,
apertitiue and abstersive. Oua. Eggs, temperate, the white cold, the yolke
hoate, mitigatiue. Opopanax, A gum, hoate and dry in the third degree,
remollitiue. Occularia, vide eufrasia. Oculus boui^. Ox eye, hoate and dry,
resolutiue. Oleander. hoate in the third, dry in the second degree,
abstersive. Opthalmia, vide Eufrasia. Origanu^. Pen^rial, hot and dry in ye
3. degrees. Os mundi A fetch, hot and dry, astringe^t Oriza. R^se, hot and dry
in the first degree, astringent. Ocimum, ^ariofilatum Basil, hoate in the
first, dry in the second degree, mu^dificatiue, and confortatiue. Olibanum. A
gum, hoate and dry in the second degree, consolidatiue. Ossa combusta.
Burnt bones, dry, astringent.
P
Plantago. Plantaine, cold and dry, repercussiue, and consolidatiue.
Portulaca. Purslaine, cold in the third, moist in the second, mitigatiue.
Populus. The Poplar tree, cold and dry repercussiue. Psilli^m. Fleewort, the
seed is cold in the second degree, and moiste in the first. Psidia^ vide
Malecoria. Polium. Wild time, hot in the second, dry in the third degree,
resolutiue. Parietaria. Pellitorie, hoate and dry in ye third degree,
resolutiue. Piper Pepper, hoate and dry in the fourth degree, attractiue,
mundificatiue. Petroleum. A stone of a rock, hoate and dry in the fourth
degree. Pix. Common pitche, hoate and dry in the third degree, maturatiue,
abstersive. Pinguedo. Fat, hoate and moist, maturatiue, moll^ficatiue. Palma^
The Date tree, cold and dry in ye second degree, astringent. Pentaphilon.
Vide quinque folium. Pimpenella, Pimpernell, hoate and dry, consolidatiue.
Porrum, Leekes, hoate and dry in the third degree, attractiue. Pinus, The Pine
tree, the Kirnels of the which be hoate and moist, but the bark is cold and
dry, with much stipticitie. Plumbum, Lead, cold and dry in the second
degree, resolutiue. Peonia, Pionie, hoate and dry, astringe^t. Pagana lingua,
great Laurel, hoate and dry, aperitiue. Palma Christi, Spourge, hoate and
dry in the third degree, mundificatiue. Panis cuculus, Cocowes meat, cold
and dry, conglutinatiue. Panis Porcinus, hot and dry in the third degree,
mundificatiue. Papauer satiuum, Garden Popie, cold in the fourth degree,
stupefactiue. Pastinaca, Persnep, hoate in the second, dry in the first
degree, aperitiue. Pastoris bursa, vide Bursa pastoris. Perforata, vide Fuga
demonum. Persica, Peaches, cold and moist in the second degree astringent.
Peruinca, vide Laureola. Pes Anserinus, Goose foot, cold in the second
degree, astringent. Pes Columbinus, Doves foot, dry, astringent. Pes Coru^,
Crow foot, hoate and dry, Uehement Ulceratiue. Pes Leonis, Lions foot,
dry, astringent. Pes Vituli, vide Aron. Petroselinum, Perseley, hoate in the
second, dry in the third degree, aperitiue. Pilosella, vide auricula muris.
Podagra lini, vide Cassutha. Polipodium, Oak fearne, hoate and dry in the
third degree, mundificatiue, attractiue. Pollitricon, vide capillus veneris.
Potentilla, Wild tansey, hoate and dry in the third degree, astringent.
Prassium, Horehound, hoate in the second, dry in the third degree, aperitiue.
Prassium fetidum, the stinking black horehounde, hoate and dry in the third
degree. Primula veris, Primrose, hoate and dry, conglutinatiue. Prunella,
Burnette, hoate and dry, co^glut. Prunu^ Damacens, cold and dry, meanly
astringent. Pseudomelanthion. Coccle, hoate and dry in the second degree,
abstersive. Pu^egium, vide Origanum. Pirethrum sy^uestrae. Wild Pellitorie,
hoate and dry in the second degree, mundificatiue. Papirus. Paper, cold and
dry, astringent. Panis. Bread, hoate and dry in the first degree,
resolutiue, attractiue. Passulae. Reasins, hoate and moist, resolut. Penidiae
Penittes, hot and moist in the first degree, conglutinatiue. Panicum. A grain
like grommell, cold in the first, dry in the beginning of the second,
astringent. Pira. Pears, the ripe are cold and moist in the first degree, the
sower or green, are cold and dry in the second degree, and the half ripe,
are cold and dry in the first degree. Pruna. Prunes, cold and moist in the
second degree, loses the belly.
Q
Quercus the Oak, hot and dry, astringe^t. Quinque folium. Five leaued
grass, dry astringent. Quercula minor. Germander, hoate and dry in the
third degree, resolutiue, aperitiue.
R
Rosae flos. Rose flower, cold in the first, dry in the second, lightly
binding, this is the white, the read is more astringe^t and less cold, the
damask is partaker of both in lighter substance. Rubus arbustus. Bramble,
cold and dry, stipticke, and consolidatiue. Rubea tinctoru^, vide granu^
tinctoru^. Raphanu^. Radishe, hoate and dry, incissiue, abstersive. Rapa.
Rapes, hoate in the second, moiste in the first degree, maturatiue. Realgar^
Roseager, hoate, mortificatiue. Rapiastrum. Charlocke, hot and dry
resolutiue, mundificatiue. Remora aratri, vide amonis. Rhabarbaru^ monachorum.
Monks Rubarbe, cold and dry in the second degree astringent. Ribes. Small
reasins, cold and dry in the second degree, astringent. Rosmarinus. Rosemarie,
hoate and dry, abste^siue, resolutiue. Rosemarinus aculeatus, Gorse, dry
astringent. Rostrum Ciconiae, Pinkenedle, dry, astringent. Rostrum Porcinum,
Suckerie, cold and dry, astringent. Ruta, Rewe, hoate and dry in the third
degree, Ulceratiue, aperitiue, digestive. Resina, Rosin, hoate and dry,
mu^dificatiue.
S
Solatrum, great nightshade, cold and dry in the fourth degree, stupefactiue.
Salix, Willowes, cold and dry in the second degree, stipticke meanly.
Siligo, Rye, cold and dry, abstersive. Sumach, cold in the second, dry in
the third degree, stipticke. Semperuiua, Houseleeke, cold in the third dry in
the first, repercussiue. Spica nardi, Spikenard, hoate in the first, dry in
the second, confortatiue. Sal, Salt, hoate and dry in the second degree,
abstersive. Sulphur, Brimstone, hoate and dry in the third degree,
attractiue. Squinantum, Squinant, hoate and dry, stipticke. Saluia, Sage,
hoate and dry in the second degree, stipticke, Sandalus, Saunders, cold and
dry in the second degree, repercussiue. Spodium, cold in the second, dry
in the third degree, consolidatiue. Scroffularia, The less Salendine, dry,
resolutiue. Serapinum, A gum, hoate and dry in the second degree,
mollificatiue. Squilia, Sea Onion, hoate and dry in the second degree,
attractiue. Stercus, Donge, hoate and dry, according to the temperature of the
creature. Sepium, Sewet, hoate and temperate according to the temperature of
the creature. Sarcocolla, Sarcocoll, hoate in the second dry in the first
degree, incarnatiue. Sanguis Draconis, Dry in the second degree,
consolidatiue, constringent. Sanguis animalium, Creatures blood, this has
temperature according to the nature of the creature. Scoria, Filinges, dry and
much consolidatiue. Sapo, Soap, hoate adusliue. Guydo. Spongia maris, Sponges,
hoate in the first, dry in the second degree, co^sumptiue, and desiccatiue.
Spuma maris, Foam of the Sea, hoate in the first, dry in the third degree,
abstersive. Sinapis, Mustardseede, hoate and dry in the fourth degree,
attractiue Staphisagria, Staves acre, hoate and dry in the third degree,
attractiue. Scabiosa, Scabious, hoate and dry in the second degree
regeneratiue. Stirax calamit. A gum, hoate and dry, mollificatiue.
Simissomis, Blessed thistle, cold, and maturatiue. Sambucus, Eldar, hoate in
the second, dry in the first degree, resolutiue. Sacerdotis virile, vide
Aron. Salicaria, Lowstrif, dry astringent. Sanamunda, Bennet, hoate and dry
in the second degree, consolidatiue and astringent. Sancti spiritus radix.
vide Angelica. Sanguisorba, A kind of Pimpernell, dry astringent. Sanicula,
Sanicle, hot and dry in the second degree, astringent. Sardiana glans,
Chestenuttes, hoate and dry in the first degree, astringent. Satureia,
Sauerie, hoate and dry in the third degree, abstersive, aperitiue. Sabina,
Sa^in, hoate and dry in the third degree, dissolueth and opens. Saxifraga,
Saxifrage, hoate and dry astringent. Scariola, vide Endiuia. Scelerata, vide
pescorui. Scolopendria, Hearts tongue, hot in the first, dry in the second
degree, astringent. Sena, S^nec, hot in the second, dry in the first degree,
abst^rsiue, and aperitiue. Serratula, vide Que^cula minor. Serpentaria, vide
Aron. Serpillum, vide satureia. Serpillum Romanum, Time, hoate and dry in the
third degree, aperitiue, dissoluing and separating. Seruilla, vide Pastinaca.
Sirutum ibidem. Sigillum Salamonis, Salamons seal, of a mean temperature,
astringent. Siler montanum, Siler mountain, hoate and dry in the second
degree, aperitiue. Simionis herba, vide Althea. Sorbes, the Sorbe tree, cold
and dry astringent. Sorgi, an Italian grain, which is cold and dry,
astringent. Sparagus, Sperage, abstersive, without manifest heat or cold.
Spatula foetida, A slagge bearing coddes with read beries, hoate and dry,
abstersive. Stellae herba, vide pes corui. Sebesten, a fruit, temperate of
complexion and lenitiue. Sal armoniacum, Salt armoniack, hoate and dry in the
fourth degree, abstersive. Sal gemmae, an other kind of Salt, hot and dry,
abstersive, mundificatiue. Siseleos, a Seed, hot and dry in the end of the
second degree, provoke brine. Scamonia, vide Diagredium.
T
Thimus, vide Serpillum Romanum. Thus, Frankincense, hoate in the second, dry
in the first degree, incarnatiue, co^solidatiue. Terebentina. Terebentine,
hoate and dry, consolidatiue. Thucia, lapis. A stone or mineral, cold in the
first, dry in the second degree, quickens the eye sight. Tartarum. Wine
Lees, hoate and dry in the third degree, abstersive. Tanacetum. Tansey, hoate
and dry, consolidatiue. Tapsus barbatus. Mollen, dry, abstersive.
Turmentilla. Turmentil, hoate and dry, abstersive. Tamarix. Brier, dry,
astringent. Taraxacon. vide Rostrum porciuum. Testiculus canis. Dogs stones,
hoate and moist, resolutiue. Tilia. A kind of Birche, hoate and dry,
astringent. Tinctorius flos. vide granum tinctoru^. Trifolium. Three leaned
grass, hot and dry in the third degree, aperitiue, abstersive. Trinitatis
herba. Jupiters flower, hoate hoate and dry, abstersive, and conglutinatiue.
Triticum. Wheat, hoate in the first degree, without manifest drienes or
moisture, attractiue, and digestive. Turcium frumentum. Turkishe corn, hoate
and dry meanly abstersive. Tela aranea. Copweb, cold and dry, astringent,
and consosidatiue. Tamarindi. Tamarindes, cold and dry in the third degree,
mundifieth and seperateth. Titimalus. A kind of spourge, hoate and dry in the
fourth degrr, abstersive. Terra sigillata. hoate and dry astringent. Tubera.
round puffes like Musheromes, they engendre gross humors. Turbita. Turbith,
hoate and dry in the third degree, mundifieth and loses the belly.
V
Vinum, Wine, hoate and dry, or moiste even according to the age there of,
maturatiue, and consolidatiue. Vua passa, vide passulae. Viola. Uiolet, cold
and moist in the first degree, ripeneth hoate impostumes, and coleth
inflammations. Vmbelicus veneris. Penigrasse, cold and moist in the second
degree, delaieth inflammations. Veruena. vide Berbena. Vrtica. Nettle, hoate
and dry, mordificatiue. Virga pastoris. Wild casill, cold in the third
degree, dry temperate, consolidatiue, and astringent. Vrina. Urine, hoate and
dry, abstersive, adustiue. Vernix. Uernish, hoate and dry in the second
degree, incarnatiue, abstersive. Vermes terrestres, Earth worms,
conglutinatiue, and conforting the sinews. Vsnea quercina. The white moss of
the Oak, hoate and dry, confortatiue. Verdetum. vide aeris flos. Vitrium^
Glass, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree, abstersive. Vitriolum.
Uitrioll, hoate and dry in the third degree, stipticke and corrosiue. Vzifur.
vide Cinabrium. Valeriana. Ualerian, hoate and dry in the second degree,
aperitiue, abstersive. Veronica. Speedewel, hot and dry, co^solidatiue,
constringent. Vinca peruinca. Perwinke, dry astringent. Viscum. Miscledine,
hoate, attractiue, resolutiue. Vitealis. Withwinde, hoate and dry, digestive.
Viticella. vide Brionia. Vngula caballina. Horsehouse, cold and moist,
mundificatiue. Volubilis mayor. vide Caprefolium. Vrinaris he^ba. Toadstax,
aperitiue, mu^dificatiue. Vua Lupina. A kind of nightshade, cold and dry in
ye second degree, repercussiue. Vua vulpina vide Aconitum. Vuularia. great
Laurel, hoate and dry, aperitiue.
X
Xilobalsamum. The wood of the tree Balsam, hoate and dry in the second
degree. Xilo aloes. vide lignum aloes. Xilon vide Bombax.
Z
Zinziber caninum. Indie pepper, hoate and dry vehemently, attractiue, and
abstersive. Zea. A kind of wheat, hoate and dry, meanly abstersive, and
consolidatiue. Zedoaria. A ^oote, hoate in the third, dry in the second
degree, conforteth, and mundifieth, and scattreth humors. Zaccharum. Sugar,
hoate and moiste, meanly consolidatiue. Zinziber. Ginger, being green, it is
hot in the third degree, and moiste in the first, but being dried, it is
dry in the first degree, it heateth the stomach, and scattreth moist humors.
Now that I have fulfilled my promise, and so brieflye handled this short
appendix of simples, I purpose next to tell the only temperatures of the
medicines aforenamed, every kind by them selfs, (for the Reader his more
easy finding of them) that is to say, which be hoate and moiste, cold and
dry, cold and moist. etc. and first these which he hot and dry, as follows
in alphabet manner. viz.
ABsinthium. Hoate in the first, dry in the second degree. Apium. Hoate in
the first, dry in the second. Agrimonia. Hoate and dry in the second degree.
Abrotanum. Hoate in the first, dry in the second. Aristolochia. Hot and dry
in the fourth degree. Allium. Hot and dry in the fourth degree. Aloes. Hoate
in the second, dry in the first degree. Anisum. Hoate in the third, dry in
the second degree. Anetum. Hoate and dry in the second degree. Asphoden
radices. Hoate and dry in the second degree. Anacardus. Hoate and dry in the
fourth degree. Arsenicum. Hoate in the third, dry in the second.
Auripigmentum. Of like temperature. Alumen. Hot and dry in the third degree.
Ammoniacu^. Hoate in the third, dry in the first. Assa fetida. Hoate and
dry in the third degree. Asphaltum. Hoate and dry. Acanthus. Hot and dry
in the first degree. Atramentu. Hot and dry in ye third degree. Acorus. Hoate
and dry in the third degree. Aiuga. Hoate in the second, dry in the third
degree. Amaracum. Hoate in the third, dry in the second degree. Amarantus.
Hoate and dry. Ameos. Hoate and dry in the third degree. Anagallis. Hoate and
dry. Anagallis aquatica. Of lik te^perature. Androsemon. Hoate hot and dry.
Anetum vaccinum. Hoate and dry. Angelica. Hoate and dry in the third degree.
Annonis. Hoate and dry in the third degree. Anthemis. hoate and dry in ye
first degree. Apium agreste. Hoate and dry vehemently. Artemisia. Hoate and
dry in the second. Aron. Hoate and dry in the third degree. Asarum. Hoate and
dry in the third degree. Asperagus. Hoate and dry. Apios. Hoate and dry.
Agaricus. Hoate and dry in the first degree. Ambra. Hoate and dry in the
second degree.
B
BRionia. Hoate and dry in the second degree. Balsamus, Hoate and dry in the
second degrees. Borax. Hoate and dry. Ballote. Hoate and dry in the third degree.
Batrachium. Hoate and dry. Barba caprina. Hoate and dry. Bellis. hoate and
dry. Botris. Hoate and dry. Betonica. Hoate and dry in the first degree.
Basilicon. Hoate in the first degree, dry in the second. Blacte Bisantia.
Hoate and dry in the third degree. Been. Hoate and dry in the second degree.
Bombax. Hoate and dry.
C
CAstoreum. Hoate and dry in the second degree. Cassia lignea. Hoate and
dry. Capparis. Hoate in the first, dry in the second. Crassula. Hoate and
dry in the third degree. Fuchsius. Caulis. Hoate in the first, dry in the
second degree. Centaurea. Hoate and dry in the second degree. Costus. Hoate
in the third, dry in the second degree. Cinamomum. Hoate and dry in the
third degree. Ciperus. Hoate and dry in the second degree. Chelidonia. Hoate
and dry in the third degree. Cuperosa. Hot and dry in the beginning of the
fourth degree. Cipressus. hoate in the first, dry in the second degree. Calx
viua. hoate and dry in the fourth degree. Cantarides. hoate and dry in the
third degree. Castoreum. hoate and dry in the second degree. Canabis. hoate
and dry. Cinis. hot and dry in the fourth degree. Cucumer asininus. hoate
and dry in the second degree. Cresones. hoate and dry in the second degree.
Ciminum. hoate in the third, dry in the second degree. Caltha. hoate and
dry. Caprefolium. hoate and dry. Cubebes. hoate and dry. Camepitheos. hot
and dry in the second degree. Cardo patium. hoate and dry in the third
degree. Cardus benedictus. hoate and dry. Cartamus. hoate in the second, dry
in the first. Carui, hoate and dry in the third degree. Camedris, hoate and
dry in the third degree. Cheiri, hoate and dry. Cicer, hoate and dry in the
first degree. Coloquintida, hoate and dry in the third degree. Consolida
mayor, hoate and dry in the second degree. Consolida minor, hoate and dry.
Cassutha, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree. Ciclamen, hoate and
dry in the third degree. Crocus, hoate in the first, dry in the second.
Colophonia, hoate and dry in the second degree. Calamus, hot and dry in the
second degree. Cardamomum, hoate and dry in the first degree.
D
DIgitalis, hoate and dry. Digiticitrini, hot and dry in the second degree.
Diptanum, hoate and dry in the second degree. Daphnoeides, hoate and dry.
Daucus, hoate and dry. Dragunculus, hoate and dry. Dragagantum, hoate and
dry. Doronicum, hoate and dry in the third degree. Diagredium, hoate and
dry in the fourth degree.
E
ENula campana, hoate and dry in the second degree. Ebulus, hoate and dry in
the second degree. Euforbium, hoate and dry in the fourth degree. Eris flos,
hoate and dry in the third degree. Ermodactili, hoate and dry in the second
degree. Elleborus albus, hoate and dry in the third degree. Equina mentha,
hoate in the third, dry in the second. Eruca, hoate and dry. Esula, hoate
in the fourth degree, dry vehemently. Euiscum, hot and dry in the first
degree. Eufrasia, hoate and dry. Eupatorium, hoate and dry in the second
degree. Epithimum, hoate and dry in the third degree.
F
FLammula, hoate and dry in the fourth degree. Fabaria, hoate in the first,
dry in the beginning of the third degree. Feniculus, hoate and dry in the
second degree. Furfur, hoate and dry in the first degree. Ferrugo, hoate and
dry in the second degrees. Fenugrecum, hoate and dry in the first degree.
Fuligo, hoate and dry. Filix, hoate and dry in the second degree. Faba
crassa, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree. Filipendula, hoate and
dry in the third degree. Feniculus porcinus, hoate in the second, dry in
the third. Fuga Demonum, hoate and dry. Fell, hoate and dry, according to the
nature of the creature.
G
GRatia Dei, hoate and dry in the second degree. Gariofili, hoate and dry in
the third degree. Gluten, hoate and dry in the first degree. Gentiana, hot
and dry in the third degree. Gallitricum, hoate and dry. Gipsum, hoate and
dry. Galbanum, hoate in the third degree, dry in the second. Genesta, hoate
and dry in the second degree. Galanga, hoate and dry in the second degree.
H
HVmulus, hoate and dry. Hipericon, hoate and dry. Hissopus, hot and dry in
the third degree.
I
IVniperus, hoate and dry. Iarus, hoate and dry in the second degree. Ireos,
hoate and dry in the third degree. Iacobi flos, hoate and dry. Iuamuscata,
hoate in the second dry in the third degree. Iuiube, hoate and dry in the
first degree.
K
KArabae, hoate and dry in the third degree.
L
LVpini, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree. Lini semen, hoate and
dry. Lixiuium, hoate and dry in ye third degree. Lappa inuersa, hoate and
dry. Laureola, hoate and dry. Linaria, hoate and dry. Lingua ceruina, hoate
in the first, dry in the second. Lignum Aloes, hoate and dry in the second
degree. Laurus, hoate and dry in the 3. degree.
M
MArubium, hoate in the second, dry in the third degree. Mastix, hoate and
dry in the second degree. Melilotum, hot and dry in the first degrees. Mel,
hoate and dry in the second degree. Mirrha, hoate and dry in the second
degree. Mummia, hot and dry in ye second degree. Maiorana, hot and dry in
the third degree. Matersilua, hoate and dry. Matricaria, hoate and dry in the
second degree. Melissa, hoate in the second, dry in the first degree.
Mentha, hoate in the third, dry in the second degree. Mercurialis, hoate and
dry in the first degree. Millium, hoate and dry. Mora vaticana, hoate and
dry. Morsus diaboli, hoate and dry. Mali medici cortex, hoate and dry.
Marcasita, hoate and dry. Manna, hoate and dry in the second degree.
N
NVx iuglans, hoate in the third, dry in the beginning of the second degrees.
Nuces auellanae, hoate and dry in the second degree. Nuces cipressi, hoate
and dry. Nux Muscata, hoate and dry in the second degree. Nux vomica, hoate
and dry. Nigella, hoate and dry in the third degree. Nasturtium tectorum,
hoate and dry in the fourth degreee. Nasturtium aquaticum, hoate and dry in
the third degree. Nasturtium satiuum, hot and dry in the fourth degreee.
Orobus, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree. Opopanax, hoate and
dry in the third degree. Occullaria, hoate and dry. Oculus bouis, hoate and
dry. Oleander, hoate in the third, dry in the second degree. Origanum,
hoate and dry in the third degree. Os mundi, hoate and dry. Oriza, hoate and
dry in the first degree. Ocimum gariofilatum, hoate in the first, dry in the
second degree. Olibanum, hoate and dry in the second degree.
P
POlium, hoate in the second, dry in the third degree. Parietaria, hoate and
dry in the third degrees. Piper, hot and dry in the fourth degree. Petroleu^,
hot and dry in the fourth degr. Pix, hoate and dry in the third degree.
Pimpenella, hoate and dry. Porrum, hoate and dry in the third degree.
Paeonia, hoate and dry. Pagana lingua, hoate and dry. Palma Christi, hoate
and dry in the third degree. Panis porcinus, hoate and dry in the third
degree. Pastinaca, hoate in the second, dry in the first. Perforata, hoate
and dry. Peruinca, hoate and dry. Pes vitul^, hot and dry in the third
degree. Petroselinum, hoate and dry in the third degree. Pillosella, hoate and
dry. Podagra lini, hoate in the first, dry in the second. Polipodium, hoate
and dry in the third degree. Potentilla, hoate and dry in the third degree.
Prassium, hoate in the second, dry in the third degree. Prassium faetidum,
hoate and dry in the third degree. Primula veris, hoate and dry. Prunella,
hoate and dry. Pseudomelanthion, hoate and dry. Pulegium, hoate and dry in
the 3. degree. Pirethru^ sylu. hot and dry in the 2. degree. Panis, hoate and
dry in the first degree.
Q
QVercus, hoate and dry. Quercula minor, hoate and dry in the third degree.
R
RVbea tinctoru^, hoate and dry in the third degree. Raphanus, hoate and dry.
Rapiastrum, hoate and dry. Rosemarinus, hoate and dry. Ruta, hoate and dry
in the third degree. Resina, hoate and dry.
S
SPica nardi, hoate in the first, dry in the second. Sal, hoate and dry in
the second degree. Sulphur, hoate and dry in the third degrees. Squinantum, hoate
and dry. Saluia, hoate and dry. Serapinum, hoate and dry in the second
degree. Squilla, hoate and dry in the second degrees. Stercus, hoate and dry.
Sarcocolla, hoate in the second, dry in the first degree. Sapo, hoate and
dry. Spongia maris, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree. Spuma
maris, hoate in the first, dry in the third. Sinapis, hoate and dry in the
fourth degrees. Staphisagria, hoate and dry in the third degree. Scabiosa, hot
and dry in the second degree. Sambucus, hoate in the second, dry in the
first degree. Sacerdotis virile, hoate and dry in the third degree. Sana
munda, hoate and dry in ye second degrees. Sanicula, hot and dry in the second
degree. Sardiana glans, hoate and dry in the first degree. Satureia, hoate
and dry in the third degree. Sabina, hoate and dry in the third degree.
Scelerata, hot and dry in the fourth degree. Scolopendria, hoate in the
first, dry in the second degree. Sena, hoate in the second, dry in the
first degree. Serpillum Romanum, hoate and dry in the third degree. Siler
montanum, hoate and dry in the second degree. Spatula fetida, hoate and dry.
Sticados, hoate in the first, dry in the second degree. Seseleo^^, hoate and
dry in the end of the second degree. Sal Armoniacum, hoate and dry in the
fourth degree. Sal gemma, hoate and dry.
T
THus, hoate in the second, dry in the first degree. Terra sigillata, hoate
and dry. Tithimalus, hoate and dry in the fourth degree. Tanacetum, hoate
and dry. Tartaru^. hot and dry in the third degree. Tillia, hoate and dry.
Turmentilla, hoate and dry. Turbita, hoate and dry in the third degree.
Trifoliu^. hoate and dry in the third degree. Trinitatis herba, hoate and
dry. Turtiu^ frumentu^, hoate and dry. Terebentina, hoate and dry.
V
Vinum, hoate and dry. Verbena, hoate and dry. Vrtica, hoate and dry. Vrina,
hoate and dry. Vernix, hoate and dry in the second degrees. Vinea quercina, hoate
and dry. Verdetum, hoate and dry. Vitrium, hoate in the first, dry in the
second degree. Vitriolum, hoate and dry in the third degree. Vzufur, hot
and dry in the second degrees. Valeriana, hoate and dry in the second degree.
Veronica, hoate and dry. Vitealis, hoate and dry. Vitecella, hoate and dry.
Volubilis mayor, hoate and dry. Vuularia, hoate and dry.
X
XIlobalsamum, hoate and dry in the second degree.
Z
ZInziber caninum, hoate and dry vehemently. Zea, hoate and dry. Zedoaria,
hoate in the third, dry in the second degree.
Simple Medicines hoate and moiste.
AXungia, hoate and moist in the first degree. Apium hortense, hoate in the
second, and moist in the third degree. Amigdala, hoate and moist in the first
degree.
Baacuia, hot and moist in the first degree. Borago, hoate and moist,
Buglossum, hoate and moist. Bdellium, hot and moist in the first degree.
Cataputia, hoate in the third, moist in the second degree. Cotifructus, hoate
and moist.
Dolichi, hoate and moist in the first degree. Dulcis radix, hoate and moist.
Dactili, hot and moist in the second degree.
Ficus recentes, hoate and moist. Frumentum, hoate and moist.
Lillij radices, hoate and moist in the second degree. Labdanum, hoate and
moist in the first degree. Lingua canis, hoate and moist in the first Lingua
bouis, hoate and moist in the first degree.
Maluauiscus, hoate and moist in the second degree. Medulla, hoate and moist.
Pinguedo, hoate and moist. Pini nucleus, hoate and moist. Passulae, hoate and
moist. Penidiae, hoate and moist in the first degree.
Rapa, hoate in the second, moist in the first
Testiculus canis, hoate and moist.
Vua passa, hoate and moist.
Zaccharum, hoate and moist. Zinziber, hoate in the third, moiste in the first
degree.
Simples that be cold and dry in Alphabet manner as follows.
ACetum, cold in the first, dry in the third degree. Agresta nota, cold in
the second, dry in the third degree. Acasia, cold and dry in the third
degree. Acedula, cold and dry in the second degree. Anthera, cold and dry in
the first degree. Acusmuscate, cold and dry. Amilum, cold and dry in the
first degree. Argilla, cold in the first, dry in the second, Antimonium, cold
in the first, dry in the second degree. Aizoon, cold in the third degree,
dry meanly. Ambubeia, cold and dry in the second degree. Arnoglosson,
cold and dry in the second degree. Argentum and scoria, cold and dry.
BAlaustia, cold and dry in the second degree. Berberi, cold and dry in the
third degree. Bolus armenus, cold and dry in the second degree. Bursa
pastoris, cold and dry. Bugiae, cold and dry. Bedegar, cold in the first,
dry meanly.
COrallus, cold in the first, dry in the second. Cerusa, cold and dry in
the second degree. Cauda Equina, cold in the first, dry in the second
degree. Centumnodia, cold in the second, dry in the third. Cidoneum malum,
cold in the first, dry in the second. Coriandrum, cold and dry.
Cinoglossum, cold and dry in the second^^ degree. Camfora, cold and dry in
the third degrees.
EPatica, (Vigo) cold and dry in the first degree. Endiuia, cold and dry.
Fumus terrae, cold in the first, dry in the second degree. Fabae, cold and
dry. Ferrum, cold and dry in the second degree. Farinae volatilis, cold and
dry. Fraxinus, cold and dry in the second degrees. Folia Oliuarum, cold and
dry.
GAllae, cold in the second, dry in the third degree. Glandes, cold and
dry in the second degr. Gummi Arab. cold, and somewhat dry.
HOrdeum, cold and dry in the first degree.
IPocisthis, cold and dry in the second degree. Iouis barba, cold in the
third, dry in the first degree.
LImon, cold and dry. Lactis aqua, cold and dry. Lapathum, cold and dry in
the second degree. Lactuca, cold and dry in the third degr. Lapis smaragdi,
cold and dry. Lapis Adamas, cold and dry in the fourth degree. Lapis
hematits, cold and dry.
MArgarita cold and dry. Merda ferri, cold and dry. Mandragora, cold and
dry in the third degree. Minium, cold and dry. Millium, cold in the first,
dry in the third degree. Malum Granatum, the sower in cold and dry.
Mirobalani, cold and dry in the second degree. Mala citonea, cold and dry
in the first degree.
Opium, cold and dry in the fourth degree.
PLantago, cold and dry. Populus, cold and dry. Psidia, cold in the
second, dry in the third degree. Palma, cold and dry in the second degree.
Pini cortex, cold and dry. Plumbum, cold and dry in the second degree.
Panis cuculus, cold and dry. Prunus, cold and dry. Panicum, cold in the
first, dry in the beginning of the second. Pirae viridae, cold and dry in
the second degree. Pirae semimature, cold and dry in the second degree.
RVbus arbustus, cold and dry. Rhabarb. monach. cold and dry in the second
degree. Ribes, cold and dry in the second degree. Rostrum porcinum, cold and
dry.
SOlatrum, cold and dry in the second degree. Salix, cold and dry in the
second degree. Siligo, cold and dry. Sumach. cold in the second, dry in the
third degree. Sandalus, cold and dry in the 2. degree. Spodium, cold in the
second, dry in the third degree. Stirax, cold in the first, dry meanly.
Sorgi, cold and dry. Sorbus, cold and dry.
THucia, cold in the first, dry in ye 2. degrees. Tamarindi, cold and dry in the
3. degr. Tela aranea, cold and dry.
Vua lupina, cold and dry in the 2. degree.
Simples cold and moist ensue. viz.
AQua, cold and moist in the first degree. Attriplex, cold and moist
temperatly. Argentum viuum, cold and moist. Angurium, cold and moist in the 2.
degree. Auriculamuris, cold and moist.
Beta, cold and moist. Blitum, cold and moist in the second degrees.
Crassula, cold in the third, moist in the second degree. Citrulli, cold
and moist in the second degrees. Cucumer, cold and moist in the second degrees.
Cucu^bita, cold and moist in the second degrees.
Epatica (Guydo) cold and moist.
Fungus, cold and moist in the third degree.
Hispanach, cold and moist in the first degrees.
Lapis lazulus, cold and moist.
Malua, cold and moist. Mala^zana, cold and moist. Morsus Gallinae, cold and
moist. Morus, cold and moist. Malum Granat, dulcis, cold and moist. Malum
medici carnis, cold and moist in the second degree.
Nenuphar, cold and moist.
Psillium, cold in the second, moist in the first degree. Persica, cold and
moist in the second degrees. Pirae maturae, cold and moist in the second degree.
Pruna, cold and moist in the second degree.
Viola, cold and moist in the first degree. Vngula caballina, cold and moist.
The properties of degrees, and what effect is contained in every degree, with
examples of simple medicines for each degree.
1 The first degree, does alter and change sensibly. 2 The second, enduceth
and infers some labor. 3 The third, woorketh with great efficacy and
much labor. 4 The fourth degree, banisheth and puts forth ye sense by his
exceeding temperature.
Temperate medicines be such, as do neither manifestly heat, cool,
moisten, nor dry.

These be vnte^perate medicines, which are plainly to be called hoate or
cold, and chiefly such as be of the first, second, third or fourth degree.

Medicines hoate in the first degree.

These do augmente an unnatural heat^, yet not fiery, and therefore are fit
for digestiues, maturatiues, and such like natural actions. viz.

Absynthium, Althea, Amigdala dulc. Aloe, Agaricum, Brassica, Buglossum,
Camomelum, Eupatorium, Lini semen, Labdanum.
Simples hoate in the second degree.

These do rarefie, open, and ateunate the ways, and begins to have a
fiery heat. viz.

Apium, Anethum viride, Artemisia, Balsamum, Calamus odoratus, Crocus.
Foenugrecum, Mastix. Nux Muscata, etc.
Simples hoate in the third degree.

These do dry, stir thirst, attract and inflame, waste the body and melt.
viz.

Abrotanum, Ammi, Asarum, Anisum, Aron, Cuminum, Cinamomum, Galanga, Nigella,
Origanum. Mentha. etc.
Hoate in the fourth degree.

These do blister, heat, burn, mortify, and extinguishe. viz.

Allium, Cepa, Costus, Euforbium, Lepidium, Tith^mali. Nasturtium, Pirethrum,
Po^rum, S^^api, Ru^a s^luestris^
Thus far is sufficient for example sake of the hot intemperature of
simples, from the first to the fourth degree, and after as orderly as I can,
shall ensue the cold, moist, and dry entemperatures, with like order of their
natural degrees, and first of such simple medicines as he cold in the
first degree.

Cold in the first degree, diminishes natural heat, and hinders digestion,
and maturation. viz.

Attriplex, Pruna, Hordeum, Malua, Mirtus, Pira, Rosa, Viola, Cotonea, etc.
Cold in the second degree.

These do thicken and manifestly delay the heat. viz.

Acasia, Blitum, Cucurbita, Lactuca, Endiuia, Persica, Plantago, Psillium.
Solanum. etc.
Cold in the third degree.

These bind the inward passages, putting forth the natural juice, hindering
distribution, astonishing the sense, and enducing leadie color. viz.

Camfora, Portulaca, Mandragora, Hiosciamus, Sandali, Semperuiuum.
Cold in the fourth degree.

Such do congeale, extinguishe heat, and interfect with poison. viz.

Cicuta, Papauer. Opium. etc.
Of the moist intemperature, there are also which do exceed in like degrees
rehearsed, as moist in the first degree, and they make the body gentle and
slipperie. viz.

Buglossum, Glycheriza, ^ndiuia, Malua, Zaccharum, Sesamium.
Moist in the second degree.

They do away the sharpenes of humors, loses, engrosseth and weakeneth the
natural motion of members. viz.

Attriplex, Cucurbita, Lactuca, Pruna, Blitum. Portulaca. Violae. etc.
Moist in the third degree.

Those make the body slow and dull, astonishing all the actions, provoking
vomittes, lothing, and the flux Lienteria. viz.

Succus Cucumeru^. Succus Cucurbitae Succus lactucae. etc.
Moist in the fourth degree.

Which are poison clean extinguyshing natural heat, as water puts
outfier.

Of the dry inte^perature with the degrees exceeding. Of those therefore which
^e dry in the first degree.

The first degree makes y^ body strong and lusty. viz.

Brassica, Beta, Camomelum, Crocus, Hordeum, Foeniculum, Faba. etc.
Dry in the second degree.

They are manifestly astringent, and do bind as the taste of sower things in
eating. viz.

Artemi^ia, Anethum viride, Balaustia, Cotonea, Plantago, Lentes, Mastix. etc.
Dry in the third degree.

These make strait passages, preuenteth the course of humors, hinders
excretion, co^sumeth the bodies juice, and enduceth a consumption. viz.

Asarum, Acasia, Anethum vst. Aloe, Acetum, Cuminum, Piper. Sal.
Dry in the fourth degree.

These do suffocate and extinguishe life. viz.

Allium, Ruta siluestris. Nasturtium, Sinapis.
Here follows the operations and workinges of the simples aforegoing, namely
which do consolidate, astringere, abstergere, mundificare, and so forth, and
first of those which do repercute, and beat back humors flowing,
restraining them to resort to that place whereto they are applied, and are
called by the name of repercussiues. viz.

Aqua pura, Aqua Aluminosa. Agresta nota, Acasia, Acedula, Anthera, Argilla.
Balaustia, Berberi, Bolus a^menus. Bursa pastoris, Crassula, Centumnodia.
Coriander.
Epatica, Fraxinus, Morella, Populus, Solatrum, Semperuiua. Sandalus, Sonchus.
Vmbelicus veris,
Astringentia.

These bind the body, and forcibly restrain the flux of subtle humors.

Amilum leuiter. Adianthum, Aiuga, Aizoon, Ambubeia, Arnoglosson, Asarum,
Attractilis, Bursa pastoris, Bulbus siluestris, Centumnodia, Cherifolium,
Cheiri, Cidoneum malu^. Coriandrum, Camfora, Dragunculus, Endiuia, Equina
mentha, Filago, Fortis herba, Guadum, Iacobi flos, Iua muscata, Karabae, Lappa
mayor, Larga, Lingua ceruina, Lappa mayor, Mentha, Milium, Millefolium, Mora
vaticana, Morus, mediocriter, Macis, Manna, Marcasita, Nuces cipressi, Os
mundi, Osatis, Oriza, Ossa combusta, Palma, Peonia, Persica, Pes anserinus, Pes
collumbinus, Pes Leonis, Podagra lini, Potentilla, Prunus, Papirus, Panicum,
Quercula, Quin^ folium, Rubarbaru^ mona. Ribes, Rosmarinus accu^ Rostrum
ciconiae, Rostru^ porcinum. Salicaria, Sanamunda, Sangui sorba, Sanicula,
Sardiana glans, Saxifraga. Scariola, Sigillu^ Salamonis, Simeonis herba,
Sorbus, Sorgi, Tamarix, Taraxacon, Tilia, Terra sigillata, Tela aranea, Virga
pastoris. Vinca peruinca.
Abstergentia.

Abstersiues have power to mundifie, and wype away gross humors, and to
cleanse the pores. viz.

Absynthium, Agrimonia, Abrotanum, Acusmuscate, Auena, Asphodeli radices. Assa
faetida, Alisma, Angurium, Anonis, Apium hortense, Asperagus, Auricula muris,
Brionia, Balsamus, Ballote, Barba caprina, Bellis, Caulis, Cepa, Chelidonea,
Cinis, Candelaria, Carui, Citrulli, Cresio hortensis, Castoreum, Euforbium,
Esula, Fell animalium, Gentiana, Iarus, Lapathum, Lixiuium, Laurus, Lapis
adamas, Melissa, Morus. Nux, Nasturtiu^ satiuu^, Ordeum, Orobus, Oleander, Pix,
Podagra lini, Prassium faetidu^, Psudo melanthio^. Rubea tinctorum. Raphanus,
Remora aratri, Rosemarinus, Siligo, Spuma maris, Sacerdotis virile, Satureia,
Sena, Serpentaria, Serpillum, Spatula faetida, Tartarum, Tapsus barbatus,
Turmentilla, Trifolium, Trinitatis herba, Turciu^ frumentu^ Tithimalus, Vrina,
Vernix, Vitrium, Valeriana. Volubilis mayor. Zinziber. Zea.
Mundificantia.

Such do mundifie an cleanse gross humors, but more weakly then abstersiues,
and stronger then lauatiues.

Apium. Betonica. Beta, Basilicon. Blacte bisantia, Castrangula. Cucumer.
Cassutha. Cubebes. Cassia lignea. Capparis, Ciclamen. Coloquintida.
Camepitheos. Digitalis. Damasonium. Diagredium. Eupatorium. Fabaria. Fumus
terrae. Frumentum. Fabae. Ficaria. Faba crassa. Fell animalium. Hermodactilus.
Hordeum. Humulus. Hipericon. Hissopus. Harmel. Keirim. Lupini. Lappa inuersa.
Linaria. Laurus. Mel. Millemorbia. Morsus Gallinae. Nigella. Occularia.
Psillium. Palma Christi. Panis porcinus. Peruinca. Polipodium. Pirethru^
siluestre. Turbita. Tamarindi. Rapiastrum. Refina. Vrinaris. Xilobalsamum.
Aperientia.

Aperitiues do open and pearce with mundifying. viz.

Acetum. Amaranthus. Ameos. Anagallus aquat. Androsemon. Angelica. Annonis.
Apium hortense. Artemisia. Asari radix. Amigdala. Cresones. Caltha. Carui.
Camedris. Ciclamen. Cubebes. Cassia lignea. Digitalis. Dolichi. Fuga Demonum.
Herba diui Johan. Humulus. Hissopus. Laureola. Linaria. Marubium. Matersilua.
Millium solis. Nasturtiu^ tectoru^. Nasturtiu^ aquat. Orobus. Pagana lingua.
Pastinaca. Pe^ forata. Petroselinum, Prassuum. Querc, minor. Remora aratri.
Ruta. Satureia. Sabina. Sena. Serratula. Serpillum. Siler montanum. Tinctorius
flos. Valeriana. Vrinaris herba. Vuularia. Xilobalzamum.
Maturatiua.

Maturatiues do open and make ripe, with a heat equal to the member, not
once altering his substance or property, and yet changes the matter and
ripeneth the same, such as follow.

Atriplex. Apium. Auena. Axungia. Acanthus. Brionia. Baucia. Buglo^^um.
Butyrum. Caulis. Canabis. Fenugrecum. Ficus recentes. Lilium. Lini semen.
Liquiritia. Lingua bouis. Maluauiscus. Morsus diaboli. Ordeum. Pix. Pinguedo.
Rapa. Semissomis. Vinu^, (secundum aetatem.) Viola,
Stupefacientia.

These do stupefacte or astonishe the members by putting the substance of the
spirit into a cold complexion, whereby the virtue animatiue loses her force
and power, which be these that follow.

Cicuta. Hiosciamus. Mandragora. Opium. Papauer satiuum. Portulaca. Psillium.
Solatrum. Semperuiuum. Succus lactucae. Succus papaueris.
Consolidatiua.

By their stipticitie and drying they have power to skin and heal, equally
incarnating flesh and skin, of which kind be also all abstersiues with
these following.

Aloes. Aspaltum. Borax. Bugiae. Beibena. Bellis. Balaustia. Cerusa. Centaurea.
Ciperus. Cipressus. Cauda equina. Curcuma. Caseus recens. Dragagantum. Ematitis
lapis. Ferrum. Glandes. Gratia Dei. Grana tinctorum. Isatis. Iuniperus.
Lithargyrus. Lac. Merdaferri. Malecoria. Mirrha. Mercasita. Olibanum. Plantago.
Pimpenella. Plumb. vstum. Rubus arbustus, Sanguis Draconis Scoriae ferri.
Sanamunda. Thus. Tanacetum. Telaaranea. Vinum. Zea. Zaccharum.
Conglutinatiua.

They have a glewie property, and being ministered to wounds, have power to
conglutinate and join the orifice together. Such be they that ensue, as.

Argentu^ and scoriaeius. Aspaltum. Anagallis. Balausti^e vstum. Consolida ma.
and mi. Cauda equina. Cerusa. Colophonia. Farina volatilis. Gluten. Gummi
Arabici. Gipsum. Hordeum vstum. Lac acerbum. Lapis spongiae. Melissa. Mala
citonia. Panis cuculus. Pilosella. Primula veris. Prunella. Nux cipressi.
Sarcocolla. Trinitatis herba.
Constringentia.

Such do restrain humors by stopping and drying, as those.

Amathites. Acetosa. Aloes. Bombax. Cauda equina. Calcanthum. Fungus. Gallae.
Gummi pini. Lutum sigillatu^. Lutu^ armenicum. Mori succus. Mespila. Nucum
cortex. Oriza. Plumbum vstum. Papyru^ vstum. Passularu^ par. lap. Pellis caprae
cinis. Querci cortex. Sumach. Salix. Scoria ferri. Sanguis draconis. Thus.
Telaaranea.
Resoluentia.

These do resolve humors by changing them intovapours, and drawing them from
part to part, of what sort be these.

Anethum. Acorus. Anthemis. Agaricus. Botris. Crocus. Cucumer asininus Capillus
veneris. Camedris. Consolida mi. Cassia fistula. Cardamomu^. Camepitheos.
Dactili. Doronicum. Ebulus. Diagredium. Foeniculus. Furfur. Fenugraecum. Filex.
Hispanach. Hissopus. Ireos. Iuiubes. Labdanum. Lapis spongiae. Melilotum.
Oculus bouis. Polium. Parietaria. Pollithricon. Panis. Quercula mi.
Scroffularia. Sambucus. Sticados. Sisamae. Testiculus canis. Verbena. Viscum.
Attrahentia.

By their attractiue property, they do exhale and draw forth matter and
other accidents unto them, like as these under named.

Aristolochia. Amoniacum. Allium. Assa faetida. Auricula muris. Allium.
Balsamus. Calamentum. Ciclamen. Centumnodia. Castoreum. Dip tanum. Doronicum.
Fer mentum. Galbanum. Lapis spongiae. Leporis axungia. Mumia. Piper. Porrum.
Polipodium. Pulegium. Panis. Sulphur. Squilla. Stercus colu^binu^. Sinapis.
Staphisagria. Stercus canis. Serapinum. Stercus lacerti. Triticum. Zinziber.
Corrodentia.

Corrosiues by their heat do consume moisture, and corrode and waste
superfluous flesh, such as these.

Asphodeli radic. Atramentum. Anacardus, Allium. Acetum. Cuperosa, Cepa. Aeris
flos. Fell animalium. Hermodactili ra. Mercurius precipi. Mercuri. sublima.
Sinapis. Sal niter. Verdetum. Vitriolum.
Adustiua.

These do wast and consume by heat, the subtilitie of humors.

Aristolochia. Allium. Anacardus. Calx viua. Cantarides. Capitellum.
Calcanthum. Parietaria. Staphisagria. Spuma maris.
Vlceratiua.

The properties of vlceratiue medicines, is to break and blister the skin, in
what places they are laid, as these beneathe.

Anacardus. Apium agreste. Allium. Batrachium. Cepae. Cantarides. Fici. Herba
stellae. Lac. Persicaria. Ruta. Squilla. Vrtica.
FINIS.

