A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT BVTTOLPHS near Aldersgate, the 26. of February,
1609.

By WILLIAM HOLBROOKE.

Entitled No gain to this.

MATTHEW. 5.6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness: for
they shall be filled.

AT LONDON. Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for ELIZABETH BVRBY, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND SINCERE PROFESSORS, and maintainers of Christ's
true religion, the Lord CAVENDISH, my very good Lord, and the virtuous Lady
his wife, my singular good Lady, Grace and peace be multiplied through Christ.
THat I should make so bold (Right Honorable) as to shrewde my self and this
my work, under your protection, having not deserved the least, of those so many
and irrequitable favors, I have from the bountiful hearts and hands of your
Honors, already received; you may justly except against, but understanding,
that I endeavor this, (the first fruits of my labors) as a token of my
thankfulness, and an earnest, of my bounden duty unto your Honors, as also,
that herein I have imitated, the holy Evangelist Luke, Luke 1.3.
in dedicating his labors, to that friend of God (noble Theophilus) in whose
stead you are to me. And that by taking the protection of this my work, you
shall not only honor God, in proclaiming your selves enemies to Momus, and al
his accomplices, but also, encourage others, to the performance of the like
duties to God, and your Honors: I doubt not, but I shall be freed, from all
imputation of boldness, both in the hearts, and by the mouths of your Honors;
whose favor herein, I only crave and respect.

Thus, doubting nothing, of your protection of this my work, bringing, and
offering such gain unto your Honors, as is no where else to to be found, but
in the word of God. I humbly leave your Honors to God, and the word of his
grace, which is able to save your souls, wishing to you and yours the increase
of faith and good conscience.

Your Honors, in all duty and service ever ready. W. HOLBROOKE.

TO THE READER.
I Dare not (gentle Reader) say the Book will perform what the title
promises, I, (as one desiring thy good, and willing to bring some thing, thoug
it be but mortar, toward the building of Gods house) have at the earnest and
importunate request of some, published this work, which I pray thee
favorably to receive, and diligently to read, be not ready to find fault,
but do better, and then thou may well find fault, else thou proclaimest
either thy envy or ignorance, if thou reap any good by the same, make thy
best use of it, give God the thanks, and let me have the help of thy prayers.
Farewell.

Thine in the Lord. W. HOLBROOKE.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT BVTtolphs near Aldersgate, upon the 26 of
February, 1609.
1. TIMOTH. 6.6. Godliness is great gain, with sufficiency.


THe Prophet long since questioned with the Lord about the matter of his
sermon, being commanded to go; agreeable unto which, I often asked the Lord in
secret, what I should unfold unto you at this present, before this venison was
brought to my hand, to dress for you. After the reiection of many, I contented
my self with this Scripture, being a doctrine so necessary to be learned, and
as yet, not of many (if of any) practiced; the want whereof only, is the cause,
of all afflictions present, and of all to come, and already threatened, for why
is our Land (a fruitful Land in comparison of others) barren? for the sins
of the people: for the which cause, that there may be no more complaining in
our streets, I have made special choice of this Scripture, which will not
only, (if we will yield thereto) lead us, to the cause of evils present, and
further threatened, but will direct us, what course to take, to turn away the
fierce wrath of the Lord, to cause his face, in favor to shine upon us again,
to continue it when we have it, and of foes, to make us friends with the
Almighty, in whose hands, we are as nothing, and less then nothing; and into
whose hands, it is a fearful thing, to fall; much more, still to blow, the
coals and sparks of his wrath, already kindled by our ungodliness.

And because I know this, nor any other direction will be tasted of you, much
less digested by you, except it bring gain with it: he which cannot (nor ever
could) lie, has told you in these words, that this will bring in gain, yea
which is more, that it is gain it self. For the unfolding whereof, that you
may have it served in, in several dishes, and not altogether, set forth in
parcels, not in gross, that you may the better carue, and make choice of the
same: observe, how Paul was occasioned unto these words, namely, by the esteem
and account, many teachers and professors, made of religion, and the doctrine
of godliness, which was this, and no more, so far they esteemed it, as it would
serve for their gain, making godliness, to stoop to gain, not gain to
godliness, and therefore, accounted gain godliness. Unto which carnal opinion,
and estimation of theirs, Paul (both for the encouragement of Timothy, to
stick to the simple and plain doctrine of godliness in teaching, and the people
in professing) does oppose himself, in these words, hereby, ironicallie
correcting their judgment, and teaching another doctrine, viz. That godliness
is great gain, making the same plain, and undeniably true, by setting out,
the waiters upon godliness, in the two last words, [with sufficiency.] So
that in this verse, are these two parts, first, a doctrine and positive
assertion, that godliness is gain, yea great gain. Secondly, the proof of
the same, which may be drawn into two reasons and arguments after this manes,
( the words [with sufficiencie] so translated according to the original, (...).
as Calvin has done) (being referred, as well they may, both to the affection
of the mind, and then the sense is according to the usual translation,
Godliness is great gain, because it makes a man to be contented, counting
that sufficient which he has; and to the thing it self, or matter of the
doctrine, and then the sense is thus. Godliness is great gain, because it
always has sufficiency following and attending it.) I say, being thus
understood, as Calvin understands them, they may be drawn into form of
reason thus.

That which does make a man contented with that he has, and to count that
sufficient, be it more or less, is great gain.

But godliness does make a man contented with that he has, and makes him to
count that sufficient, be it more or less.

Therefore godliness is great gain.

In this reason the question is, whether godliness be great gain, the answer
is affirmitiuely, yea, the tertium, whereby the Apostle proves this, is,
Contentednes, because that is caused thereby.

Arg. 2. That which does always being sufficiency with it, is great gain.

But godliness does always being sufficiency with it.

Therefore godliness is great gain.

Before we come to the words, we must not omit what Paul offers to our
consideration, in making this use of the carnal esteem of godliness, expressed
in these words, in the verse immediately praeceding, which is this.

Anticipatio.
that Christians are willingly and usually to intrude themselves into such
companies, and places, as Stage-plaies, Tauernes, Bawdie houses, and the like,
where they may have occasion offered hereof: for David teaches another
doctrine in these words, Away from me ye wicked, Psalm. 119.115.
but if occasionally, and unwillingly, they hear such, then this doctrine is
for direction unto the^; which wants no proof, if examples of the best, be
for our instruction recorded in holy writ. It was the opinion of some in Paul's
time, as it appears in his epistle to the Romans, that they might do evil
that good might come thereof. Romans 3.8.
A sentence altogether contrary to truth, and every where oppugned, by the
verity and truth of Gods word, for the whole scripture, every where, beats
against the doing of evil, upon any conditions. Now Paul surely confirms
this doctrine before propounded, by the use he made of this falsehood, carnal,
sensual and devilish, as all the doctrines of men are, for he rejects it,
and establishes the contrary truth, that we may not for any cause do evil.
And lest Paul should leave this doctrine vnconfirmed as truth, observe whether
he does not the like elsewhere, to teach us to do the like, as occasion shall be
offered. Romans 6.1.
For as it appears in the selfsame record, men were sick of the same
disease, that most are sick of in our days; the worst, and I think, the last
age of the world. Some, and not a few, thought that it was lawful to sin,
that Gods mercy and grace by Christ might abound, encouraging themselves, as
most of our days do, to sin, because God is merciful, making his mercies with
Christ his merits, a pack-horse for their sin, or rather a warrant for the
same, which opinion, comes not a jot behind the former, in untruth and
diuelishnes, if not go beyond it: Paul abhors this doctrine, and teaches,
to make a more holy use, of the mercies and grace of God. If these be not
sufficient, behold how our Savior subscribeth to this truth, by his practice,
and requires thy subscription to the same: John 4.
the woman of Samaria, begins to brawle and scould at him, when he came unto
her (as many, yea most of our age do, when he offers himself in the
ministry of his word unto them) what does our Savior? does he par pari
refer, and do her evil and railing words cause the like? I trow no; but he
rejects them, and makes use of her words, which she understood carnally, and
thereby taught her, John 6.26.
and all that City, the way to heaven. And the like he did, when he beheld
such coming unto him, as were moved so to do, respecting the feeding of their
bodies, not their souls, (as the hungry followers of Christ in these times, I
mean carnal followers of him, that only look at him so far as religion shall
go with riches) he by their carnal seeking him, taught them how to eat and
drink him, of whom whosoever eats and drinks shall never perish, hunger,
or thirst again.

This doctrine, howsoever it is, (if not unknown) unpracticed, for who takes
the advantage, he might gain by the Adam, and therefore in some sort can do,
that which is by a Father affirmed of God, that he ca^ elicere bona ex malis,
and so truly through the grace they have received, ought to suck honey out of
the most poisonable herb that may be, yea not only out of the sins of others,
but also and made more sharp and eager of bitt in sinning: yet the godly man
is clean contrary to this, being made of another metal, for that stone which
will sharpen the wicked to sin, will, and ought to dull and make blunt Gods
children thereunto, and set an edge to cut another way, upon them. So did David
find it; when he said, and without question, without boasting of himself, or
false speaking, My eyes gushed out with tears, because men kept not thy law:
and what heart, I beseech you, had Daniel or Nehemiah to sin, when the whole
multitude was on evil? surely none, but with Jeremiah betook themselves to
mourning, weeping, and wailing in secret, and to abstain from the common
abominations, as Peter wills, yea though it seem strange to them, we run
not for company sake with them into the same excess of riot.

O that this were put in practice, what sweeten that which dead flies, I mean
our sins, have made to stinck? who is he, that is godly, that daily hears not
men by their words diversely dishonoring God, and by their deeds crucifying
Christ again, as though he had not already, more then sufficiently and
enough, suffered? Oh can thou go under the name of a Christian, and not only
rejoice, and laugh to see these weeds grow where thou art, but also omittest to
gather any good from the same? Repent, yea let it grieve thee, and cause thee
to cover thy face for shame, that thou have lived so long, complaining of the
wickedness of the days, and have profited no more by them, be a better husband
for the time to come. If Magistrates, masters and mistresses, parents and
governors, would learn and put in use this doctrine, we should not have so
many tents of Kedar as we have, and so few families of Cornelius calling daily
upon the Lord.

Paul is not ashamed, to manifest, and to leave on record, that his judgment
is contrary to theirs, which was carnal, and altogether fleshly.

minded men, so Christians must not be ashamed, both by speech and practice, to
show the same, which the example of the 3. Dan. 3.
children yields proof of sufficiently. And as the Scripture every where
confirms, so Reason requires the same, for surely, the Spirit of God, whereof
all Christians (for of him, that is of Christ, we all receive grace for grace)
does alter the judgment of the parties in who^ it is, so that they can say,
and their profession does show, that by the grace of God, they are that they
are, not Carnal, as before the receiving of the spirit, but spiritual,
sanctified and set apart to do the will of God. And therefore must needs be
unlike to the carnal and worldly earthwormes, both in judgment and
profession. And surely, this suteth with the nature for what agreement is there
between Christ and Belial; light and darkness? Several and diverse masters,
give several and diverse liueries, that their men may be known one from
another, and so do Christ and the devil. Christ's liuerie is the beautiful and
white profession of the truth, a robe and garment beseeming the greatest; the
livery of the devil is sin, a black and filthy covering, unfit for, and
not beseeming any.

the light came into the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not.

be unlike, is to be like the devil, and whom to know is eternal life.

Let Christians then, not be ashamed

Godliness is great gain. Whence we learn.

godliness, namely, to get the doctrine of godliness to us, yea to every of us as
our own, and to lead our lives and walk accordingly, this is gain therefore,
says he that cannot lie.

Prou. 3.14.19.
The merchandise thereof is better then the merchandise of silver, and the
gain thereof is better then gold, It is more precious then pearls, and all
things that thou can desire are not to be compared to her. Length of days is
in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory. Her ways are ways
of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity. She is a tree of life to all them
that lay hold of her, and blessed is he that retains her. This says, as much
as the doctrine offers to our consideration, and if we will not believe him,
he tells you according to that experience he had in the world? Eccle. 12.15.
(And who went beyond the King in outward matters? or hasted thereto more then
he?) that this is the end of all, and the whole man to fear God and keep his
Commandments: whom, upon the experience, it is better to believe, then to go
and see by trial, whether he say the truth yea or no. This doctrine will
appear to be true the more manifestly: if we consider the excellency of it in
diverse respects, by which we may not only judge of the rest, but be moved to
subscribe to this as truth.

And first, let us see what the Scripture says, concerning the state and
standing of the godly man, it says that such men are blessed, as witnesses
the Psalmist. Psalm. 1.1.2. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel
of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of
the scornful, but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does
he exercise himself both day and night. Again; in Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his Commandments: which
he likewise auerreth, Psalm. 119.1.1. neither is this his opinion only, if you
cast your eyes upon the 13 verse of the 3. of the Prou. where he says, Blessed
is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding; from
which plain evidences of Scripture proving, that godliness only makes a man
blessed. (For it possesses him of all things, by it he is made capable of all
earthly benefits without usurpation, and of the kingdom of heaven, the
greatest of all.) I conclude that godliness is great gain, because it makes
man, naturally cursed and miserable, happy and truly blessed, and who would
not have this gain? for who desires not blessedness?

in whom dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and is head of the Church,
whom to know is eternal life, and whom to seek and find, all a man has is
not too great cost to be at, nor all a man's time is not too much or long to
spend, nor the greatest pains, as digging and deluing, is not too painful. By
this treasure, that is, by Christ, we are made freemen of vassals and
bondslaues, Ephesians. 2.
we are made rich, of beggars, having nothing, of aliens and strangers, we are
made free denizens, and of the commonwealth of Israel, by him we have claim
and title to all good, and freedom from all evil. If then this treasure,
namely, Christ, be attained unto by godliness, who can deny it to be great
gain, and who will not be desirous to attain and get the same?

matchable) is obtained by the least cost and charges, for no more is required,
but come and eat, so that the poor that have no house to put their heads in,
nor penny to put in their purse, may make as good a bargain here, as the
richest; yea oftentimes, and for the most part, they gain most here, which
have the least, the leanest bodies, have the fattest souls, and the thinnest
clothed bodies, have the finest clothed souls. Whereby does appear, the
difference betwixt this gain, and the gain of earthly things, to the gain of
this, all, both rich and poor, high and low, may attain, one as well as
another, and the poorest oftentimes gains the most; In earthly gain, he has
most that is richest. So then beloved, if this gain require no more but thy
labor, surely thou can not but repute it great, yea the greatest of all
gains. For do not tradesmen and merchants that traffic for commodities,
repute that the greatest gain, which comes in by least labor, industry and
cost? and of such trade does every one desire to be, how much more then must we
of necessity, confess that godliness is great gain, seeing it costeth the
least, and is attained unto, as well by the poorest as richest.

Solomon speaks of, That he saw a man had much, and had no heart to use it,
godliness changes a man, and makes his heart ready, and willing to use that
he has; it makes thee able to respect and do good to thy who so far cares,
as his sight leads him, and therefore cannot ca^e for the soul, and the good
thereof, for he has no spiritual eyes to see the same. By this, a man is made
able also to The prayer of the faithful avails much for thy life, yea when
thou art sick, ten faithful and godly men are able to keep Gods judgments
away, to cause God to repent of his anger, yea, one Lot is able to hold God. So
that beloved seeing godliness makes thee able to do good to all, though never
so great, or remote, and that without detriment to thy self, thou must needs
conclude with me, godliness is gain, yea great gain, and who desires not to
be of this trade?

every day such gain is subject to perishing, by land and sea, by storms,
robbers and pirates. But this only will abide, and never be taken from him, in
whom it is, nay the gates of hell shall not prevail against this, what gain
then is comparable to this? none surely. Who then but Salomons fools will
refuse to travel for the same?

If there be any gain free from malignant

This never comes alone, but it always thou have it bound to thee and thine,
and no mean persons neither: God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost; better are no where to be had. And he that cannot lie has told thee, if
thou be godly and fear him, he will be the God of thee and thy ^eede, O
happy gain, and thrice happy is that man that makes a journey to bring in
such gain, by which thou art made sure of Gods blessing to be upon thy
labors, Christ to redeem thee, the holy Ghost to sanctify thee, and the
Angels to attend and watch thee for thy good, nay more then all this, thou
gainest a merciful Father, provident for the good of thine here, and so will
be after thou art dead, so that thy children shall never be fatherless, for
God cares for them.

enemies at peace with thee, this the^ must needs be great gain, that brings
such favor both with God and men.

If thou have this thou can never be are not to be compared to her, they are
subject to ruin, this permanent, and thou shall never be deprived of it.

This lengthens thy life, and therefore If thou will but fear God, the plague
shall not come near thee, Psalm. 34.12.13.14.
and again, Who desires to live long and see good days. Let him refrain
from evil, and do good: and again the Wiseman says, Length of days is in
her right hand. So then it preserves from evil, thou art safe when others are
in danger, thou shall murdering thy self: so that this being true, that it is
a means to lengthen thy life, it must needs be concluded that it is gain
surpassing all others, quieting thee in adversity, in the evil day working in
thee true contentedness, not envying at the prosperity of others, nor
murmuring at thy own: so that it is true, which was prophesied of our Savior,
in the godly (for they are made like to him through the work of the Spirit)
That they open not their mouths, but like sheep dumb, are led to the
slaughter. Neither murmuring against God or men, nor grudging at their own
estate. By all which, it appears plainly, to any that has but the least
sight of the Spirit, that godliness is gain; bringing in all good, and keeping
out all evil.

For can the blind discern of colors, or the earthly minded desire heavenly
thing? No no, their belly is their god, and the world their heaven, and here
they have their happiness.

pearl, and to put out our money, and to adventure for the same: the best way
to bestow thy money, thou can think on, the gain thereof will come in,
whether thou sleep or wakest; O then come to the market, where it is to be
sold, and that is in the assemblies, where wisdoms maids have made ready, and
set before thee this pearl, if thou have any heart to buy it, there is the
garden where grows pleasant flowers. Never come, but crop the same, take some
with thee, and wear them, never leave them off, (they will be ever green) that
thou may be sweeter, to present thy self hereafter, in the midst of the
congregation, before the Lord, then heretofore thou have been. Take heed how
you hear, be good Scribes, taught to the kingdom of God, bringing forth of
your treasure, things now and old.

To teach us, with what reverence we count their field beautiful, and to yield
them honor, no merchant, or goldsmith, is worthy the entertainment and
countenance, these men are worthy of; for their pearls, are far exceeding
theirs, and the rate, no thing so chargeable. But Pharaoh, in providing for the
Idolatrous Priests, and reuerencing them, shall condemn many of our English
men, for the neglect and little regard, Gods Ministers find amongst them, who
travel to heaven for every Sermon, farther then any merchant for his
commodity.



soon prefer thy child here, as he that has most, a better trade thou
can not find, nor a better master is not to be served.

Motives to move us to traffic for this.

If any thing befall us but well, shame, may justly laugh at our destruction.
Would thou then not have thy self faulty when evil comes, and thank
thy self for the same, get godliness, a gain, whereby, thou shall be ever
rich, both in body and spirit, and never poor.

Our care, for worldly and transitory

Christ, that everlasting wisdom of good to our selves, whilst we might.
Therefore, labor for it, if thou would not have Christ to count thee a
fool, when his esteem of thee to be wise, would be more worth to thee, then
many kingdoms.

clothed with this robe, and covered with this wedding garment, thou shall not
come within heaven, nor ever enjoy the comfortable presence of God. If then
thou would not to hell, nor be kept out of the gates of heaven, get this,
and labor for godliness: for thou must bring something, and nothing but this,
else ibis for as.

Impediments to be avoided.
Think not that this is the doctrine of man, and that I make more ado then
needs, there is no such matter, think not I say, thou art well enough without
it, for without this, thou art without grace, and so without heaven; and
although thou will not see, yet I will mourn for thee, and weep, saying to
every such a one, as our Savior said to the city of Jerusalem, O that thou,
even at this day, at the least, knew thy visitation, and happiness, for
thou say, that thou art rich, and lackest nothing, but alas, thou art blind,
poor, and naked.

Dream not, that it will (as the blind to honor such, as honor him, and to
make their enemies at peace with them: who ever yet served God, and came to
disgrace by the same? not John Baptist, 2. Chro. 22.11.24.16.
I am sure, in Herod's Court, nor Iehoiada, in the days and Court of Ioash, nor
Joseph in the Court of Pharaoh.

Deceive not thy self, neither feed from tasting, to see how good the Lord
is. Avoid these devilish and carnal insinuations, weigh the former motives,
and join prayer therewith, so may thou be truly godly, and a great gainer.

Godliness is great gain: The false teachers before, made the doctrine of
godliness, a gainful art, and thought all was well gotten, that was gotten,
but he teaches otherwise, that gain must suite with godliness, else all is
naught: from whence we learn.

Paul to clear himself, from any goods gotten unlawfully, Act. 20.33.34. 2
Cor. 12.16.17.
by guile, pilling of them, or crafty dealing with them. And a usual thing it
is with the holy men of God, to free themselves, from the same, and therefore,
Zaccheus offered, yea appointed part of his goods, to make restitution, if he
had inned any thing by forged cauellation. Who required these things at your
hands? If we cannot show godliness for a warrant, how we came to our riches,
we shall prove, no better then thieves, and if we speed better, it is beyond
all expectation and possibility.

Not so much to brag and boast of Lazarus, and as bare as Job; for the more
thou have, and unlawfully gotten, the greater shall be thy account and
punishment. Dives must give account for his white clothing and delicate
feeding, the rich man, for his large and stuffed barnes.

Hereby may we see, the miserable right and title of any earthly, much more of
heavenly benefits.

With sufficiency: out of the first exposition of the same, we learn.

Genes. 12.
This made Abraham contented, at the command of the Lord to (take the next way
to beggerie, if he had consulted with flesh and blood) to leave his country
and kindred. And to do more then that, (which was against nature, (and who but
he, that believed God, could have done it?) namely, to sacrifice his first
borne Isaak; yea, his son, in whom the promise was made. Philip. 4.11.12.13.
Paul was contented, having this gain first, and assured thereof, to want, and
abound, and to be content with every estate good report, and evil report, he
patiently endured, being counted a deceiuer, and yet true: and Joseph, all
contempt, imprisonment, and injuries, causeless. And howsoever, this is
strange to flesh and blood, and the natural man cannot attain hereunto, but
is always carping, and caring, yea pining himself away, with grief, and
excessive care, for an earthworme he is. Yet that the godly man should be
suitable to this truth, Job to verify unto us, contented with much, with
abundance of cattle, children, servants and the like, and contented with all
these, yea when he was spoiled of all these, by enemies, which he testifies,
when he says, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name
of the Lord. This is more then nature and the natural man can attain unto, as
that example of Pharaoh shows, and experience teaches, if we cast our eyes
upon the godless, and profane of our days, who, if matters answer not their
expectation, swear, murmr, and grudge against God, yea, accuse God of folly.

So that godliness changing the discontented will of man, it must needs follow,
that in whomsoever it is, there is contentednes, and that which they have is
accounted by them sufficiency. And besides this, in capite, which is Christ
Jesus, whereof they are always sure, and in possession, and so, rest contented
with their tenure: which made David, to say from a feeling soul, that he found
more joy, in the light of Gods countenance, (that is, that he had a tenure in
capite, Christ Jesus, then all earthly minded men, which he means, by (they)
in that place), had, or could possibly have, of their increase, of wine and
oil, holding it not in capite, as he did. Of which mind, Paul was, not much
differing from him, nay altogether agreeing with him, when he said, and no
otherwise then he thought, That he counted all things dung, in respect of the
excellent knowledge, of Christ Jesus. Which do plainly show us the force of
this reason, that for as much, as Gods children are assured of Christ, whereby
they hold all they have, they therefore are contented, with whatsoever portion,
God bestows upon them, and count that sufficiency and enough, and can say,
that their heritage, is a goodly heritage.

To make this a touchstone, and trial,

First, there is in the truly contented, a submission of his will to Gods will,
and this is to be observed at two several times, namely, in the days of
prosperirite and adversity: in the days of prospiritie, when all things flow
in apace, can thou then submit thy will to Gods will? Not to set thy heart
upon them, can thou receive them thankefully, and bestow them to his glory;
this is Gods will and purpose, in bestowing prosperity upon thee, and the like
correspondently is in thee, if thou be truly contented, prosperity does not
lift thee up, steal thy heart from God, nor make thee swinish, to receive them
unthankfully, or use them unprofitably.

1. In words.
yea when the tide, gale and stream, are all against thee, thou can say with
old Ely, and godly Hezekiah, The word of the Lord is good, though it go never
so much against the hair: so, if thou can say, that adversity being the
Lords work, is good for thee, then thou art truly contented.

2. In actio^.
This appears, if in adversity, thou can and do, by thy actions, show
thy self to be contented with Gods will, as, to fare according to thy estate,
and to cut thy coat according to thy cloth, and not as many do, (who are by
this doctrine condemned) run themselves into debt, for apparel, over head and
ears, so that they can never shift themselves of the same, so long as they
live, and that, because they would not be suited according to their place, but
according to the fashion. Of the like rank are many gentlewomen, who not
stooping to their husbands ability, will make him to wear a bare coat, sell his
land, and stand in the mercers books, for the maintaining of their pride: like
unto whom, in the third place (who likewise are here observed for reproof)
are the gallants of our days, who wear upon their backs, not their own, but
another man's, their velvet cloak, their satin suits, and the like, for which,
they are indebted to the mercers, or tailers. And another sort of the^, which
are of the best sort too, and we have but few so good, who carry all they have
with them, not respecting old age, or the time to come, so that they may say
with Bias, omnia mea mecum porto, and so they do, honesty only excepted, for
that they carry not with them, because they have it not; the land is full of
such snailes, carrying their houses, goods, lands, and all they have, upon
their backs. Now understand me, Praeocc.
and mistake me not, I speak of such, as thus deal, not being, necessarily
occasioned thereunto, but only, because they scorn to stoop to their places,
and make their spending suitable thereunto. For I know, a man having but a
little, and his place requiring it, he may lawfully, spend it all in apparel,
the place being lawful, and such, as by the laying out of all he then has, he
is in possibility, and likelihood, to provide for after times.

Here again comes to be reproved, and to be charged deeply with this fault
and sin, ye painted Iezabels of our days, who only, not being content with
that feature, and face, God, (who is only wise) has given them, must needs,
and do, dig unto themselves, cisternes of their own inventions. A fearful
sin it is, and most used, where sin should be least cou^tenanced. For the
co^futation whereof, I will ask but this question, whether those words
[Iezabel the whore, that painted her selfe] were spoken to the praise of her,
or dispraise? if to the dispraise, whether to be imitated or no? answerable
unto which, is that place, of the damsels dancing before Herod, which was
like, to the wanton, and artificial dancing, so much used, and practiced in
these days, as I take it, that is left upon Record, to the dispraise of her,
and then not to be imitated: she did it to please Herod, without any thought,
of John's head, until Herod made so large a proffer, and she consulted with her
devilish mother. And truly, the wanton dancing of our days, is only to please
men, abominable, as the effects thereof do show. For what does it bring forth,
but wantonness in action, wanton behavior after? and often hereby, are
affections drawn to marriage, to the after grief of the parties, dishonoring
of God, and vexation of parents.

Hereby, is our Land and nation justly taxed of this sin, by being said, to be
the New-fangledest nation under the heavens. For what is the cause, of every
years, nay every months, new fashion? what is the cause, I say, that we go
beyond all others, in learning how to make and wear strange apparel, and that
we, are so full of the East manners? surely our discontentednes, if this were
not it, we should see the fruit of our own lands more upon our backs, then we
do, and not silks, veluets, and tafferies, so much in use, as we do, this is
the cause, I say, that we can hardly find that wise, whereof Solomon speaks,
That does her husband good, and no evil, and her husband is known, when he
sits in the gates with the Elders, so that, both he and she are clothed with
the works of her hands, what is the cause of this? truly discontentednes,
counting all we have at home base and nothing worthy, but what is far fetched,
and dear bought, all must be Spanish, and the like, else no bargain.



as deeply guilty of this fault, all scholars, that use simonie,
temporising, and laying of wagers, and the like, to advance themselves by, and
to climb to preferment. Those, that use false waights, deceitful wares,
calling white black, and black white, set their money to usury, take
pledges, use gaming and playing, yea sicophantising, and humouring of men in
their evil, for the bettering and enriching of their estate, are plainly told
by this doctrine, there is no godliness in them. I would this were well
weighed and and laid to heart, by such, as thrust others, to get themselves in,
out of services, houses, shops, etc. and use means, to withdraw customers from
others, not doing, as they would be done by, a common sin, and whereof many
are deadly sick; but to all such, be it known, there is little godliness,
because no true contentednes in them.

True contentednes, does not make a the success to God, and resting therewith
contented, whatsoever it be, pro or contra. By these examine thy self, whether
true contentedness be in thee, and consequently godliness; if these be not in
thee, and thou stand not according to these affected, there is no contentednes
in thee, and as little godliness.

And that this contentednes should follow godliness, surely, it stands with
all reason, though flesh and blood say not so, but is always having and
repining: but that you may be brought to this, to account that you have
sufficient, be it more or less, consider with me these motives following.

It is an argument that thou art godly, as both this place shows thee, and
the example of Job declares; for that was one proof, that God had said true,
in commending him to be an upright and just man, and one that feared God, I
say, this proved the same, namely his contentednes with much or little, and I
tell you, this is no small matter, to have a mark, to assure thy self that
thou art Gods, or rather, by this be marked in the forhead for his; it is
better to have this, then to wear a coat with the Kings arms upon it: for,
this assures thee to be servant to the King of Kings, the other, to a man,
whose breath is in his nostrils.

Whatsoever thou have is best for

If thou have any thing, it is more thou deserved, but to be a vagabond and
runagate, and to beg thy bread, and to go up and down naked? surely
nothing. If God therefore give thee any thing, thou have good reason to be
content, for thou have more then thou can any ways deserve, or challenge for
merit and due.

for humility is the way to honor, and God never aduanceth any of his, (for I
judge not such as are without) but such as he sees are truly contented with
that they have, and every such a one, is the nearest to preferment: so that
therefore we should learn to be contented, it being the next door, degree and
step, to have more.

things upon thee, and to make thee to drink thine own iniquities, yea, to be
in a far worse estate then thou wast before. For, where was it ever read or
seen, that any moved through discontentednesse, laboring to better their
estate, by their own wit, ever prospered? not any where, let the builders of
Babel speak, the now wicked angels, that would be like God, the people of
Israel, that must needs have a King: if these fared well, then be thou
discontented, murmr and grudge; but if thou would not drink of the same
sauce, as they have done, namely to be worse then thou wast before, because
thou wast well, and could not hold thee so, I say, if thou would not fare
thus, labor to be contented, and account sufficient that thou have, be it
more or less; weigh these motives, and pray to God to sanctify the same unto
thee, thou that have not yet learned the lesson of contentedness.

Out of the second sense of the words, [with sufficiencie] as they may be
referred to the matter, containing a promise, we observe and teach.

profess the same, shall always have sufficient, which God has verified
elsewhere, and left in black and white, sealed with the blood of his own
Son: if we will but consider the promises made to every godly man, in the 28.
of Deuteronomy. in the former part of that chapter, or what the Psalmist has recorded
in Psa. 34.11. or again, in Psalm. 80. That no good thing shall be wanting to
them that fear the Lord, such shall be fed with the finest wheat. Adam, and
recovered for thee, and all such as fear God, by the second Adam.

not them sufficient allowance. Then, as he is a careful God, for the good of
his, thou shall have sufficient, if thou serve him.

To allure all to come to this estate,





None of Gods children, if they cast they have sufficient for that; if poor,
(...) that: but if they consider themselves ^therwise, according to that they
are (...) but according to that they would (...) then they have not enough, but
the sufficiency must be measured by the present standing, and so there is n^
that follows the Lord in truth, but (...) has sufficient.



Thus far have I, according to the measure of grace received, proceeded in
this Scripture. Now my desire is, the all that read the same, may gain by
this doctrine. Which, God for his Christ's sake, grant. Amen.

Amen.
FINIS.

