Panegur D. Elizabethae, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Reginae.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS in London the 17. of November Ann. Dom. 1599. the
one and fortieth year of her Majesty's reign, and augmented in those places
wherein, for the shortness of the time, it could not there be then delivered.

Whereunto is adjoined an Apologeticall discourse, whereby all such
sclanderous Accusations are fully and faithfully confuted, wherewith the Honor
of this Realm has been uncharitably traduced by some of our adversaries in
foreign nations, and at home, for observing the 17. of November yearly in the
form of an Holy Day, and for the ioifull exercises, and Courtly triumphs on
that day in the honor of her Majesty exhibited.

By THOMAS HOLLAND, Doctor of Divinity, and her Highness Professor thereof in
her University of Oxford.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Bible. Ann. Dom. 1601.

IN INSIGNIA SERENISSIMAE Elizabethae Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae, Reginae, (...).
LIlia quae tria fers triplici divisa leone
Bis: Regina potens, vivito Elisa diu.
Praesidium tu dulce Scoto es: Tuque anchora Belgae es:
Floret and auspicio Gallia magna tuo.
Hispano metuenda truci, metuendaque Papae:
Ast Phoenix Anglo, Gemmaque rara tuo es.
Militat ecce tibi duplici rosa tincta color,
Lacte hinc depingens, murice at inde comam.
Dextera te Domini semper tueatur, ab omni
Liberet hostili, sanguineaque manu.
His male sit, male qui cupiunt tibi, Regia virgo:
His been, qui cupiunt singula salva tibi.
Thomas Holland.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENCE


TO AL FAITHFVL CHRISTIANS, and true hearted subjects that live under the
peaceable and flourishing regiment of Q. ELIZABETH, by the grace of God Q. of
England, France, and Ireland: Grace mercy and peace in our Lord God everlasting.
THE principal contents of this small book (loving friends and dear
Countrymen) comprehe^deth summarily, in one sermon, a perspicuous narration of
the holy, honorable, and laborious, peregrination, of the Queen of the South,
Mat: 12: 42^ 1: King: 10: 2. Chro: 9: Luke: 11:
who came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to Jerusalem to hear the
wisdom of King Solomon. This history in the old Testament, is mentioned at
large, by the sacred register thereof, inspired by the holy Ghost: and this
history is briefly and perspicuouslie alleged, by our Savior Christ,
Jerusalem etc How often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen
gathers her chicke^s under her wings, and ye would not. Mat. 24.37.
in the new Testament, by the way of comparison, and inferred most pertinently
to that end, whereunto it was by him applied; namely, to convince the
stiff-necked Jews of impious incredulity, and barbarous impiety: who at that
time, to their own confusion, and eternal destruction, refused the light of
the ^ospel offered by our Saviors ministry unto the^; preferring obstinately
darkness before the sunshine of righteousness, error before truth,
foolishness before wisdom, death before life.

This peregrination of the Queen of the South in the words before I termed
Holy, Honorable, Laborious. Holy, in consideration of the sacred matters and
divine treasures, mystically wrapped up in the letter of this History,
recapitulated out of the old Testament by our Savior in the New Honorable, in
regard of the circumstance of the action, and the condition of those persons
who are in my text mentioned and described. Laborious in regard of the long,
toilesome, dangerous, and chargeable journey that this wise and holy Queen
undertakes, and by Gods assistaunce and grace in all honor, discretion,
magnifical bounty, princely modesty, and industry performs.

This Text, how it fitted the time, place, and persons; the mutual resemblance,
by the way of comparison, in the two persons, then spoken of in the sermon,
evidently declared: the annual celebrities of the 17. of November, being in
these times yearly the day wherein this whole Realm gives thanks to God, by
public service, and shows great signs of joy, in each parish, and general
assemblies, for the happy regiment of our Q. Elizabeth, plainly demonstrateth.

Menander Plutarch (...), etc As God ^ath fixed in heaven the Sun and the
Moon, excellent resemblances of his glory so in a city God has ordained the
Prince to shine as a pattern and a ^irror of his excellent Majesty.
The person in the Text by our Sa^iour commended is a woman; by birth, vocation,
descent a Queen, by consequente thereof, (...), a living Image of God: And (as
I have by good reason proved in the sermon) a Maiden Queen. The Person for
whom we do the 17. of November according to the rule of the B Apostle make
supplication, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks is by sex a woman
by birth, ancient descent, vocation, title, right of inheritance, and regal
investure a Queen; by honor, integrity of life, grace given by God almighty
from above, a Maiden Queen.

The Queen of the South a woman of great wisdom, a woman endued with rare
learning. The demonstration and experience of the rare wisdom and skill of
tongues given by God to the Queen of England, has not bin enclosed within the
walls of her Court, neither confined within the limits of her kingdom only,
but has been sounded in foreign nations, to her everlasting honor, and
great admiration, not by the reference of her own people chiefly, but by the
testimony of many wise and grave Ambassadors sent from mighty Princes and great
states to congratulate her Majesty: with whom she has conferred in several
languages, Learning is in poor me^, riches: in nobility, it shines as gold:
in Princes, like an o^^ent pearl and glistering emeraud Mat. 12 42. 1 King 10
2 Chronicles. 9. Luke. 11.
answering them readily in those tongues, which they have chose^ of purpose to
deliver their embassadge in.

The Queen of the South enchronicled in the holy writ of the old Testament,
and honored by the testimony of our Savior in the New, for undertaking so
great and worthy a journey, as is specified in the place marginally cor^^: a
journey laborious, toilesome, perilous, chargeable, in regard of the pains,
place, person, etc. yet honorable in cause and ^ffect: a journey laborious, in
regard of the great distance between Meroe and Jerusalem, Pomp. Mel. Africa
inculta, arena sterili obducta, ob situm coeli de serta, saepe multo ac
mal^fico animaliu^ genere infesta, etc. Africa serpentibus adeo faecu^da est,
vt mali merito illi pot^ssimum palma detur. Solin. cap: 40. Serpentum largo
coquitur fecu^ da veneno Africa. Si^. Strabo. lib. 2. Herod. 4. Diodor. l. 4.
Virg. Egl: 1. Sitientes ibimus Afros Galust. bell: lug. desc. Afric.
the substance whereof is discoursed at lardge in the sermon: toilesome, in
regard of the extreme heat whereunto those countries, through the which she
was to pass, were by nature of the clymates subject unto: perilous, in respect
of the danger of those viperous, venomous, and deadly vermin, which naturally
each part of those countries ingendreth: Chargeable, in regard of the train
that she was attended and accompanied with, and in regard of the great
magnificence wherewith King Solomon was by her in all regal bounty rewarded:
Although the comparison here will not hold between the Queen of the South
and the Q of England for undertaking a journey etc. Yet nevertheless how
laborious, perilous, toilesome, chargeable the regiment of this mighty
kingdom, in these dangerous days, has been to Queen Elizabeth, al
Christendom knows to her great honor, and we her subjects do acknowledge,
glorifying God that has wrought so great works by her, for the establishment
of religion, and manifold good of this Realm.

The Queen of the South a daughter of peace; which appears partly by her
learning, partly by her long peregrination: whereof the first is not so easily
obtained without peace and quietness: The other may be verefied to be true by
the fruits of her peregrination. For it is to be presumed to be a thing
infallibly true, that she durst not have undertaken such a journey, unless
her countries had been settled in great peace at home. The Q. of England,
Cicer. pro Muren. Simul arque in crepuit suspicio tumul tus, arts illico omnes
co^ticescu^t. Bach Lyri. (...). Mr. A^^ham speaking of the Q in his School.
master, fol. 19. Besides her perfitte redines, in Latin, French, and Spanish,
she reads here now at Windsore more Greek every day, then some
Prebendaries of some churches do read latin in a whole week.
a mirror of peace in these troublesome days, at her first coming to the
crown, she came, like the dove to the Arc of Noah, with the olive leaf, a
sign of peace, in her mouth, as I have mentioned in my treatise adioined to
the sermon: and has remained ever since, a continuer of that peace which was
first brought in by Gods goodness under her regiment. For her Majesty's:
learning I refer you to Mr. Ascams testimony marginallie coted, and speak the
less of it, because it is contained in that part of the comparison, wherein
her skill in languages is mentioned.

The Queen of the Souths holy wisdom thereby was ennobled, and deserved
everlasting commendation, in that she was an embracer of true religion, and
with an holy zeal endured extreme pains and peril of a long journey, to come
to Jerusalem, to be resolved in such doubts by King Salomo^, as concerned the
grounds of her salvation. The Q. of England, a zealous imbracer of his doctrine
whom K. Salomo^ shaddowed and prefigured, a defender of that faith, which the
blood of Jesus Christ has sealed and sanctified. For the which, although she
has not undertaken any laborious peregrination, yet has she endured, for the
defense and maintenance thereof, many bitter storms, and escaped by Gods
goodness many great dangers, which for the defense of the Gospel have been
complotted against her. They that doubt of this, let them but call to memory
the fearful danger of the Northren rebellion in the year of our Lord,
Stowes Chron. An. 1569.
1569. and the 12. year of her Majesty's reign, blown up to a head by the
bellowing of Pius Quintus bloody Bull, let them remember, I say, Babingtons and
Ballards conspiracy, Hardings imagery, Par^ies treasons, and unnatural cruelty;
let them put before their eyes the attempts of the Spanish fleet, 1588. the
Popish leagues, cruel, pollitike, and unmerciful confederacy, Lopez, and
Squires poisonable and venomous treachery. In the which doubtless, we had al
perished, and had bin swallowed up quick, if the Lord had not been on our
side, Psalm. 124.
and God had not given wisdom to her, and her Counsel, to prevent the drifts
of our mighty adversaries.

The Queen of the South a rare Phoenix, and a bright star eclipsing with the
light of her virtue and knowledge all the Princes before her and after her in
Aethiopia, as farre-forth as by any record of the Aethiopians History it has
bin discovered unto us. How rare a Phoenix the Q. of England has been, and how
bright a star in these days, our own Chronicles can manifest, and the
experience of her blessed regiment this one and forty years demo^strateth more
evidently, then my pen can depaint. For in the fruits of her peace she will
shine as a star in the Catalogue of her honorable predecessors, and for her
learning and wisdom will be as a Phoenix renowned by many famous writers to the
people of that age, which shall succeed her. Not meaning to press this
similitude or comparison any further, lest I should seem to misdoubt the
discreet judgment of the intellige^t Reader, to whom one word is sufficient to
insinuate a matter of lardge discourse: and since it is a point in all learning
observed, that no comparison, reference, Nulla similitudo quatuor currit
pedibus.
or resemblaunce similitudinary should hold in each part: and for that there
are many things appropriate to the person of the Queen of the South, which
cannot to any creature else be applied by any apt relation: And since al know
that wisdom, I mean the faithful James 1.
learning knowledge, fortitude, mercy, etc. and al good and perfect gifts, as
beams from the Sun, issue, and are derived and given from and by the Father of
lights etc. and that no good nor perfitte gift shines in man, but what he
has received from above, and for the which he is bound to be thankful to God
the giver: Cirill: de recta fide ad pientiss. reginas.
etc. I end this part with this sentence of Cyrill: Vbi fides recta et
irreprehensibilis cum honorum operum honestate coniungitur, and aquo cur su
admittitur, illic omnino est in omni bono perfectio, and sanctificationis
integritas: Where a right and vnreprovable faith is conioined with the
excellency of good works, and entertained in one current with them, there is a
perfection in all goodness, and there flourishes the integrity of
sanctification.

I have adioined to this Sermon (wherein I have discoursed at lardge of each
point of the Text prefixed to it) an Apologetical discourse not impertine^t to
those things, whereunto the application of the sermon then tended wherein I
have fully and faithfully confuted al such slanders, wherewith our Native
Country, and Gracious Prince has been untruly and uncharitably charged and
traduced by diverse malicious adversaries in the greatest co^sistories of
Christendom, for that to the glory of God and honor of Q. Elizabeth the 17.
of Nove^ber is yearly celebrated in festival and joyful manner by the
subjects of this land in these times: our thanks giving to God being grounded
on the Apostles precepts the 1. 1: Tim: 2:
to Timothy and the 2. Chap. our other exercises of joy being of that quality
as by Christian people in most ages since Christ's Incarnation have been used
in the world, Eusebius: de vlt. pan. Constable. 1.2.
at set times, in the honor of their sovereigns.

The motives that induced me to undertake the treatise of these matters were
these. First for that this argument fitted the use of the doctrine which I
handled in Paul's the 17. of November Anno Domini, 1599. and was a necessary
consequent in the Application. Secondly for that by sundry things expressed in
the contents of the Apology each indifferent Reader may palpably descipher
the fruits of venomous malice, and malicious disloialty. Lastly, for that this
Apology may serve as a Caveat for all good subjects to beware of al seditious
spirits, who, in such places where they may be bold, and hope to pass away
without controlement, cease not to set abroach sclaunders of this nature:
hoping, by the intoxication of this venoum, to breed in many her Majesty's
subjects a mislike of the present government, a weariness of well-doing, a
loathing of the sincere and Apostolic religion, which by Gods blessing this
flourishing Realm enjoys in these times under the peaceable and bright
sunshine of Queen Elizabeth's Regiment.

And although the Sermon runs only in the general heads of discourse: yet I
thought it most expedient to handle the things contained in the Apology
scholastically, or after the manner of Schools, partly for that the truth or
falsehood of things of this quality will easier appear, and is sooner brought to
head and issue by questional debatement truly and faithfully collected and
alleged, then by long discoursing. Offering with all to join issues in this
Argument, or any other now professed or defended in the Church of England with
any learned or modest adversary, that shall undertake to gainesay any thing that
is laid down either in the Sermon, or in the Apology. The learned and modest
adversary only I provoke. For reviling and sclaunderous adversaries deserve no
answer, but only that which Michael the Archangel in Saint Jude his Epistle
gives to Satan (...): The Lord rebuke thee. And as holy Zachary says, (...),
72. Interp. (...)
The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem
reprove thee, etc. Partly, I say, I have entered into this manner of exercise,
for that I hope by this form of discussing, I shall provoke many of my sons,
(whom I so term, for that by my Academical service in the Chair of Divinity
it has pleased God that they should be invested in the titles of Theological
degrees) to join with me in this kind of writing since (as the proverb is) I
have begun to break the ice unto them in this matter, and say unto them,
not Ite, but Eamus, setting apart al excuses, and shaking of al impediments.
which usually are suggested by Satan's policy, and of purpose, to quench al
good sparckles that may kindle flames of light, apt to discover the paths of
Gods glory.

And although the use of discoursiue Divinity be profitable for the Church of
God, and is questionless an holy, and a fruitful labor, if it be performed by
men of learning and discretion: Yet nevertheless in these times give me leave
to think the Scholastical manner of writing more convenient, for the Church of
God. First for that in long discourses quarrels are very often piked in words
by cavilling and unconscionable adversaries, and yield many evasions to
Sophistical wranglers, as appears by Stapletons Antidot: Stap Antid Stap.
Tripl.
and his Triplic: against Doctor VVhittakers Diverse Tractes of Possevine a
Jesuit, printed Ann. Dom. 1^87. at Collen, to the which we may adioine diverse
Pamphlets printed in High Almaine in the defense of Vbiquity: many of which
books and many others entitled with monstrous names (as Calvinus Iudaizans:
Calvinus Iudaiz us Asinus Avis. Calvino-turcism.
Asinus Avis; Calvino-turcismus) do (in mine opinion) in most places resemble
the dish that Prometheus in his banquet entertained Jupiter with in derisio^,
covering the bones with skin and sinnowes, defrauding his guestes of the
flesh and fat: Of al which books and treatises I say with Saint Austin, Aug:
conf. lib. 1. ca 15.
Vae tibi flumen moris humani, quis refistet tibi? quamdiu non siccaberis?
quousque volves Evae filios in mare magnu^ and formidolo sum, quod vix
transeunt, qui ligna transcendunt? that is, Woe be to thee thou wicked wont or
common custom of mankind, who shall cross the tide with thee? how long shall
the floating of thy waters not be drained? how long will thou role the sons of
Eve to that great and troublesome sea, which they that pass them by ship can
hardly escape: Psalm. 4.
and with the holy Prophet David in the 4. Psalm. o filij hominum etc. O sons
of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? loving vanity, and seeking
lies.

The second reason why I think it most convenient, wherefore the most part of
controversies should be handled scholastically, is, for that long writing
oftentimes brings a great disadvantage to the Authors, and Readers, and
serves much the turn of the cavilling gainsayers. To the Author, for that
long discourses oftentimes enforce him to reiterate and inculcat the same
thing, and make him seem tedious to the Readers: To the Readers, long
discourse breeds inco^venie^ce. For the length of the speech, and the
overmuch heaping of things consequently one upon an others neck, causes a
forgetfulness of that which has been said before: the memory and understanding
of man being not infinite, but faculties finite infused by God to the
reasonable soul of man, and ordained to conceive knowledge and learning no^
per intuitum, sed per discur sum, not by the first insight, but by much
discoursing and debating on all sides, as the Schoolmen speak. The School
men's distinction of Intuitus and Discursus.
The gainsaiers only get advantage thereby. For at their pleasures, Here they
make an assaie, There they leave,, Here they assault, There they relinquish,
Here they wrest, There they deprave Here they inverte, There they perverte
words inveagling the^ upon each small quidditie to turn themselves like
changeable Proteus into al shapes: Homer. Odyss. 4. Plyny. de nura Saep.
and in the end encourage them to play the parts of the fish Sapiae which (as
Pliny says) is accustomed to darcken the water, where he is fished for, with
an effusion as black as incke, attempting thereby to escape the hands of the
skilful fisherman, angle he never so skilfully, and sufficiently. I am
enforced in this vehemency to utter my mind, for that many in these days, I
find in writing rather to seek glory of men then of God, and to dwell rather
upon words then matter: which course of writing (as the Apostle says) rather
breeds strife, 1. Tim. 1. c. v. 4.
then godly edifying, that is, by faith. Yet (dear sons and loving
fellow-souldiours in Christ) let not this my censure be a discouragement unto
any one (that approves this order of dealing with the Adversary) from his good
labors, since no question, (if any incline this way) this kind of writing is
a gift given him from above. Assuring him that my words herein are no causes
of discouragement unto him, or any others that shall labor in this course; but
I wish in the Lord that these admonitions may serve as caveats, and
watchwordes, and wardwordes (as some of late have written) to al such as
prefer this kind before any other, and take this the fittest field for them
to bestow their manuring of: and the best ground to til; and the ground, which
will yield greatest blessing to their labors. For their circumspectnesse
herein will do great good both to the matter, and method. This advertisement I
thought good here to inserte, as appertinent to the purpose, for that this
kind of writing unless it be managed in such sort, as I have specified
before, breeds most inconvenience to the Author, troubles most the Reader,
and least disadvantageth the adversary. But whether long discourse, or
scholastical method best serve your studies, and be most fit for controversy
writers, I will not here further discuss, but refer each man in the Lord to his
own inclination, neither am I to prescribe to any one what course to take,
only I speak therein mine opinion, as one that by Gods mercy have long
travailed in these exercises: and as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord
to be faithful. 1. Cor. 7.
Asserteining that these 2. Plutarch. Virgil. Math. 25.
ways are not like the Bivium of Hercules, neither the letter of Pythagoras,
nor the right hand, nor the left in the day of judgment. But, if they be well
handled, like the 2. Apoc. 11. Nazian. Tetrast. 1.
olive branches and two ca^delstickes which will stand before the God of the
Earth: And like those 2. goodly pearls of life whereof Nazianzene speaks in
his Tetrastikes, of which whosoever shall embrace either, he shall not loose his
labor. (...): that is, both of them are fit and lovely.

But here I find 2. sorts of people misliking my present exhortation. First
some will deem that by this discourse I mean to reduce again into the Church
the old Dunsery of the Schoolmen, long ago condemned in the world, and by
special verdit exiled out of the Church, reputed by all grave and learned
divines rather a trade of blind Sophistry, then a right course of sound
divinity; To these that object unto me in this eager bitterness, I answer on
this manner. If they mean the matters that the Schoole-me^ debate in their
dark and cloudie affected obscurity, and profane mixture of Philosophy with
divinity, let them assure themselves, this course I condemn as well as they,
and repute such schools in many places worthy to be stricken with that
thunder-bolte of the Prophets: Esaiae. 1. Ier. 2.
How is the faithful city become an harlott? Thy silver is become dross, thy
wine is mixte with water, My people has forsaken me the founteine of living
waters, and digg the^ pittes eve^, broken pittes that can hold no water: What
have thou to do in the way of Egypt to drink up the water of Nilus? or
what make thou in the way of Assure to drink the water of the river? And
that all that follow these courses in that form with them, are no better the^
those impure Philistines that filled the wells with earth, Genesis 28.
that Abraham the holy Patriarch had dug. If otherwise, I say, that noe man
of learning and judgment can justly condemn the scholastical method, Their
manner of brief distinguishing, Their short obiecting Their art of summary and
material aunswering, Their practice of short and substa^tial concluding.
Neither is this mine opinion alone herein but also the judgment of Anthony
Sadeele a man for knowledge of Divinity above al exceptions of any gainesayer,
Antonius Sadeele de vera methodo Theologice simul ac Scholastice disputa^di.
unto whose censure I do appeal herein, to whose opinion I do subscribe,
and to whose tract of this Argument I refer the Readers. Assuring al learned
Scholars, that if the dross and tin of Schoole-divinity be purged and
burned away by the true fire of Gods word, that the method of Schoole-learning
is not lightly to be rejected, neither utterly to be condemned.

The second sort of people that will take offense at this treatise are many such
as make supposal, that this persuasion of mine, if it should take effect, would
greatly hinder the unspeakable benefitte which godly preaching works in
the Church amongst Christian people. To this I answer. God forbid that this
exhortation or any other by me uttered should be any impediment, or any ways
a motion to hinder the gift of soule-saving preaching, 1. These. c. 5
concerning which the Apostle has written to the Thessalonians in this manner.
Quench not the Spirit, despise not prophesying: which, because it does co^taine
these three benefits, namely, edification, exhortation, and cosnolation, the
same Apostle prefers before the miraculous gifts of tongues, which was the
admirable treasure given to the Church after our Savior Christ his ascension
to be employed to the gathering together of the Saints, and for the edification
of Christ's body. Yet I beseech them that are of this mind faithfully and
iudicially to examine how I shall refel by Gods grace this coniecturall
supposal, and misconceiued imagination. True it is I must confess that the
gift of preaching, in our church, and in all the Churches under the cope of
heaven, is a sacred and a most beneficial gift, if it be sincerely ministered:
that the true use of it is far to be preferred before the use of tongues,
and many other gifts in the Church: that it was the sum of that commission,
which our Savior gave to his Apostles, both before and after his Ascension: 2 Timothy 1. v. 14.
that it is (...), or that worthy thing that P. commended to Timothy: and that
thing which he was by the Apostle commanded to deliver to faithful men, which
should be able also to teach others: Yet this nothing impeacheth the true
understanding of the former project, as by the grace of God it shall appear by
this sequel.

There may be numbered in this Realm at these times near 5000. Preachers,
Catechists, Exhorters, God be praised, who increase the number of the^. The
maine stream and tide of Students in Divinity is carried wholly this way, not
without some secret influence of Gods spirit, I doubt not: In the Universities
the greatest number of scholars desire to have their names in the register of
the sons of the Prophets: Now of these 5000. if there were but 50. able men
dedicated to this work, men qualified in gifts, men which like Hur and Aaron
would hold up Moses hands, Exodus 17.
whilst Joshua and Israel discomfite Amalecke: I dare boldly speak, that the
studies of these 50. faith fully employed, (so that they would not imitate the
children of Ephraim, who as it is said in the Psalm being armed and shooting
with the bow, turned themselves back in the day of battle: Psalm. 78.
) would rather help preaching, then hinder it, increase it; then diminish it;
multiply it, rather, then substract any thing from it. The master that sturreth
at the healme, and the Pilottes that by their cards and sea-markes discover the
danger of shelues, sands; and rocks, hinder nothing either the sailers, or
mariners: The scouts and tower-watchmen save both Captain and soldier from
many a danger. The kay-keepers of the little houses, the coverwel-heads, and
spring-cleansers, (so that they keep them free from poison and corruption) are
the causes why the streams of water that issue from the founteines, run more
purely; and why the rams and sheep of Gods pasture may drink of the living
waters more delight^omely and safely. So in mine opinion if this or any other
course of this quality be in these days put in practice in the church by them
that are the great overseers thereof: propheciing or preaching, Prophets and
preachers will be more multiplied, the Adversary better answered, the glory
of God more advaunced. Eight and thirty thousand 1 Chr 13. v 3. 1. Chr. 8 3 2.
San^. 7. 1 King^ ^. ^4 ^5. Ca^tie 3. v. 7 8.
Lastly to answer al in one word there were in Israel in the reign of David
nu^bred above 30000. Levits, persons ecclesiastical, Priests, musicions,
singers: and in the time of Solomon his son, I think that they were augmented,
since King David's time was a time of blood, but Salomons reign flourished
with peace: Yet the garding of the bed of Solomon, figuring the Arc the
testimony, (as it is expounded by the Chaldee Thargum and Lyra his
co^me^taries) and by co^seque^t thereof a type of the church in the new
Testament by threescore armed me^ of the valiant of Israel, Calde targum. Lira
com
me^ expert in war, of which every one had his sword upon his thigh, for the
fear of the night. Was no impediment to the Priests, Levits, musitia^s,
singers, and to thousa^ds of such as served in the ministry of the Tabernacle,
and taught Gods law to the people either in the Temple at Jerusalem, or in the
several Sinagogs in the la^d of Israel. This serving to conclude, I boldly may
aver, as one that of the Lord has obtained mercy, that 50. armed in the
studies of Divinity, furnished with skill of tou^gs, laboriously exercised in
the scripturs, studiously co^versa^t in the fathers, well acquai^ted with the
history of times, practiced in ready writing, will be no more hindera^ce of the
thousands of preachers of this land, following such a course, as I have
mentioned, then the 60. armed men, that guarded and warded the bed of Solomon
for the terrors of the night were a scandal, or a clowd either to make Israel
to fall, or to eclipse the light of the blessed countenance, of the Lord of
hosts, that shined more bright then the light of the sun, upon the
congregations of Israel. Eccle. 2.
God grant that my words may be goads unto all the godly and good subjects of
this Realm, for his Sons sake, to whom with the Holy Ghost be al honor,
glory, and praise, world without end, Amen.

T. H.

REVERENDO IN CHRISTO PAtri RICHARDO BANCROFTO, Episcopo Londinensi.
IAcobus Hussaeus Artium Magister, and Academiae nostra a libe^lis, (Reverende
in Christo Paeter) literaituas ad me dedit. 13. Calend. October. perscriptas and
^igillo tuo obsignat^^. Ex his intellexite pro tuo sancto ergeme amore a m^
po^re, v^ 19. Call. 17. Novem.
December. quae proxime accedent in suggesto Paulino Londini concionem sacram
habea. Quo die per singular huius regni Ecclesias anniversariae deprecationes,
preces, postulationes, gratiarum actiones fier^ solent, pro salute and in
columitate serenissimae nostrae Reginae, qua^ eodem die quadragesimo primo ante
anno Deus Opt. Max. pro sua infinita erga Angliam nostram misericordia, ad
imperiale huius regni Diadema foeliciter extulit. Huic tuae postulationi
libenter acquiesco, fretus Dei auxilio, quo mihi propitio, tempore in literis
const^ tuto, statuo Londinu^ adventare, ne desim officio, quod tua incredibilis
erga me benevole^tia mihi imposuerit. Et licet plus oneris in me susceperim
concessione hac, quam far me posse intelligo; and hoc concionis genus adeo
sacrum, adeo solenne, aliquibus ex his qui patres sunt Ecclesiae nostrae melius
conveniret, quorum oration robusta est ad persuadendum propter authoritatem,
suavis ad permulcendum hominum animos propter eruditionem, valida ad
perfringendos impiorum con^tus propter gravitatem, magis apta ad Demonstrati^u^
dicendi genus propter summam eloquentiam potens ad divinas lauds praedicandas
propter summam in sacris literis cognitionem, assidua^ in concionando
experientiam, and rara spiritus sancti dona: Cum tua tamen dignitas hoc dicendi
officium fidei meae commiserit, ^t divina mihi bonit as affulgeat, ei deesse
nolo, mihi conscius turpe admodum esse, and Professore in Thelogiae Regio and
Academico prorsus indignum, tale officium aut propter ignaviam negligere, vel
propter animi infirmitatem praetermitters: Faxit Deus vt labor meus in hoc
dicendi genere tua satisfaciat expectationi, serviat adificationi Ecclesia, Dei
Opt. Max. gloriae. Etiam atque etiam vale. Oxoniae, e Collegio Exon. Calend.
October. 1599.

Dignitati tuae in Christo devinctissimus THOMAS HOLLAND sacrae Theogiae
Professor Regius.

FAVLTES ESCAPED, AND certain observations.
B: 1: a: Two Benefactors to Oxford left out viz: HVMPH. Duke of Gloucester and
R. LICHFIELD Archdeacon of Middlesex. B 3. a ha^me^^d, for broken B 4 a into
Ireland for in Ireland L 3. a that watered for which watered ibid were only
fructifying for that they were etc. D 4 a. came prove him, to prove him ibid in
heart, in her heart E 1: b. as, where E 3 b. not further, not intending further,
b in that sort that, in that sort as the etc. O. 2. a. where the day of the
Coronation is laid down the 17. of November vid e 43. year, 41. l. 2. b. the
17. of September, the. 7 L. 2 b Ismolaus, Johannes Molanus. L. 4 a. After this
thing for after lothing. M. 1 a. The Collyridians: this word is used by
Epiphanius in all the Greek coppies that I have seen, the greek word is
(...) and it signifies Panis Subcinericius a cake; baked under the ashes of
this look Antoni-Nebris: cap: 13: L: 1: bquing P 1. b. Since the greatest and
strongest nation now known in the world this day For: since the greatest nation
known in the world this day among the Heathen.

Other faults escaped by overmuch hastening both to, and in the Printing, I
desire thee (gentle Reader) to amend with thy pen, as thou see cause.

Math. 12.42. The Queen of the South shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from the utmost parts of the
earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon: and behold, a greater then Solomon is
here.


THIS sentence (Right Reverend, Honorable, and in our Lord beloved) which I
have now read unto you, is a part of an answer, which our Savior makes to
the blasphemous Pharisees, and incredolous Scribes: blasphemous, because they
ascribed the works of the holy Ghost to Beelzebu^, Mat. 12.24. Athanas. in
euangel. quicunq, dix. Ioh. 15.24.
the prince of the devils: incredulous, because they would not believe the
wo^kes done amongst them by our Savior: such works as none other man ever
did, if they be considered either in number, or in nature: but thirsted ever
with an insatiable appetite to see more and more miracles, not to be edified in
holy faith, but to satisfy their curious humor, and vnperswasible minds: in
some sort resembling the senseless and seely Idiots of this world, whom God in
the justice of his judgment, has deprived of reason in this life. Who
oftentimes seek to find the day, after the sun has displaied his orient
beams in the morning; who in the Ocean Sea seek waters; and in the shore,
sands: nay, in far worse condition, then these are. For these seely ones err
through simplicity, the other through impiety. The one through want of
discretion; the other through want of grace. The one would do better, if they
had knowledge; the other wilfully will ex^inguish the eye of knowledge, which
shines in their hearts. The ones sin is begotten through ignorance; the others
sin is hatched by peevish curiosity, wilful malice, insolent presumption.
Against men of this condition, which like deaf adders, Psa. 58.4.5.
as it is Psalm. 58.4.5. stop their ears at the voice of the charmer, charm
he never so wisely. Against such men, I say, our Savior thundereth out these
threats; against such men, as have eyes to see, and will not see; which have
ears to hear, and will not hear: which have made their hearts as fat as
brawne, because they will not understand. And, to provoke these people to a
zeal, or to show the greatness and greevousnesse of their punishment, and of
the judgments of God hanging over their heads, our Savior instanceth first in
the men of Ninive, Mat. 12.41.
affirming that the men of Ninive shall rise in judgment with this
generations, and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Io^as: and
behold, a greater then Jonas is here: next, our Savior instanceth in the
example of the Queen of the south, saying, The Queen of the south shall rise
in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from
the utmost parts of the earth to bear the wisdom of Solomon: and behold, a
greater then Solomon is here. Other verses set aside, this part shall now only
be handled, God willing, as far forth as the spirit of God shall assist me,
the time limited to me not prevent me, your patience bear with me, and
vouchsafe to hear me.

In this sentence, wherein our Savior reproves the infidelity of the Jews,
and prophecieth of their judgment to come, by the way of comparison, is
comprised an example, taken out of the old testament, demonstrating thereby, 1.
Cor. 10.11. Romans 15.4.
that the stones of the old testament do serve for the instruction of the
church; and that all things, that are written, are written for our learning:
and that one jot, Mat. 5.18.
or one title of Gods word is not idle. But, that I may more orderly apply my
self to the time, and your edification, I will bind my self in this
discourse to these parts, which branch themselves naturally out of my text.
And because this sentence is a brief recapitulation of an history of the old
testament, to the two general parts I purpose, by Gods grace, to annexe the
figure, which thi^ history of the old testament shadoweth in the new. The
application either shall follow in the conclusion, or, as I shall be occasioned
by the several parts issuing out of the general, be fitted for the time and
place, if God permit, Christ assisting me: who, after his ascension into
heaven, as Saint Paul has taught, gave gifts unto men; who gave some to be
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.8.11 12 13
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and teachers, for
the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for
the edification of the body of Christ, etc. till we all meet together (in the
unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God) unto a p^rfect man, and unto
the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ.

The two general parts, before specified, contain these two heads, and
branch themselves into these two arms; first here is, by our Savior, an
instance give^ in an honorable person, a prince, which is, as an ancient Poet
has said, (...). The lively image of God. Menand.
Secondly there is in this sentence also comprised, by our Savior, her action,
whereunto is annexed a comparison between our Savior and Solomon. Of each of
these in order, by Gods assistance.

The person here, Pars 1. Luc. 11.31. 1. King. 10.1. 2 Chronicles. 9.1.
of whom the examples is inferred is a Queen; of the place termed the Queen
of the South, (...), the Queen of the South, Luc. 11.3^. In the 1. King. 10.1.
(...) and so 2. Paralip. 9.1. Malcat Sheba and so in the Thargum of Jonathan 1.
King. 10. The Queen of the South, the Queen of Sheba. b^. 1. King. 10.1. Psa.
72.10. Genesis 10.7. Genesis 25.3.
There is both Shebah, and Sebah, and Sebah. Psalm. 72.10. the kings of Shebah
and Seba shall bring gifts. Seba was one of the sons of C^sh Genesis 10.7.
Sheba was one of the sons of lokshan, whom Abraham begat by Keturah. Genesis
25.3 and l^kshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. The one is written with S^h^n in the
Hebrew. The other with Samech, but all one they be in Greek. Yet Seba and
Sheba are two diverse countries. The one in Arabia foelix the other in
Aethiopia. The one inhabited by the sons of Cush, and taking name of them:
the other of the sons of Abraham, and taking name of them. The one East from
Jerusalem: the other South from Jerusalem. Yet the names have been both
confounded (as I gather) by many writers. But more of this to be said, when we
come to discourse of the country of this Queen. In the 60. chap. of Isay. 6.
we read, Isai. 60.6.
All they of Sheba shall come, they shall bring gold and incense, and show
forth the praises of the Lord. 43.3. Bibl. Graec. Romae.
In the 43.3. of the same prophet it is Seba, but in the Greek (...): the
other in Greek of the 60. chap. is (...) whether it be Syene, whence the
second climate begin^eth, I am not now to define. In the diversity of reading,
it may be good counsel to follow that opinion, which Saint Augustine mentions
lib. de Civitat. Dei 18. cap 43. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 18.43.
that the Greek and Latin translations of the old testament are to be
corrected by the Hebrew or the Septuaginte of the old testament. Saint Jerome,
in the preface of the Pentateuch, speaks it plainly, Sic ubi in translatione
videar orrare interroga Hebraeos: and evidently vpbraideth them, who prefer
the Latin copies of the Pentateuch before the Greek, and the Greek before
the Hebrew ascribing not so much unto the septuagint as Austen does. And I, for
my part, yield unto Saint Jerome, because, Decret. Great part. 1. ^st. 9. cap. 6.
vt veterum librorum fides de Hebra^ volum^ibus examinanda est^ ita ^ovorum
grace sermonis normam desiderat. Decret. Gras. 1. part. distinct. 9. cap. 6.
And because Augustine magis crede^d^^ est in desputationibus, etc. Augustine is
worthiest of credet in disputations, Hierome in histories and translations,
Gloss.
Gregory in morals. gloss. Saint Augustines high commendation of the
septuagint loco citato in the place before rehearsed, I do om^t, preferring
Saint Ieromes opinion before his. Hither unto for the clearing of the text. Her
name is not expressed. The Queen of the south, the Queen of Sheba, she is so
named by the place and country. The Aeth^opian history does call her Makeda.
Cedre^e (...), who was called S^bylla amongst the Graecians. One calls her
Nicaula, Hug. Card. 1. Reg. 10.
alleging Herodotus for his author. Post reges dictos Pharaones successisse
illis Nicaula^, etc. after the kings which were called Pharaohs succeeded
Nicaula entitled the Queen of Egypt and Aethiopia whom Josephus supposes
to have been the same which came to Solomon. She is called by Josephus Agypt^
and Aethiopiae Regina, The Queen of Egypt and Aethiopia. But Herodotus, as
he is now, differs from that, which Josephus alleges: for in these copies
it is Nicrotis. The certainety of it in this variety I dare not define: for,
Quod D^mmus ta^cuerit, quis, etc. Aug. in Ioh.
That which the Lord has concealed who is there amongst us that can say it is
thus or thus: or if any man dare say i^, whence does he prove it. Herodot. in
Euterp.
(...) etc. The wom^n who then ruled was called N^tocris as also the Queen of
Babylon, and she is said to have revenged her brother who was slain by the
Egyptians over who^ she reigned, so soon as they after his death had
established her in the kingdom. Joseph. Antiqu. ^ib. 8. cap. 2.
Makeda Aethiopum regina (Item Aegypt^) Makeda the Queen of the Aethiopians
and Egyptians came to king Solomon from Saba an I Will of the River Nilus
afterward by Cambyses called Meroe But this may suffice, that, by our
Savior, she is named the Queen of the South: and in the old testament, the
Queen of Sheba, as for other names, Sybylla, Nicaula, Nitocris, I refer the
learned to the authors.

In that she is called a Queen, I observe this. First (...) (...): Act. 10.34.
that of a truth. God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation he, that
fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. There is no
respect of persons with God. There is no difference, before God, neither of
Jew, nor Grecian; Gal. 3.18.
bond, nor free: there is neither male, nor female, for we are all one in
Christ Jesus. Before God, the^e is no difference, neither Grecian, nor Jew:
neither circumcision; nor uncircumcision; Coll. 3.16.
Barbarian, Scythian* bond, free: but Christ is all, and in all things: and, as
I may say, noble, unnoble; subject, sovereigne; learned, unlearned: servant,
master; handmaide, mistres: people, prince: disciple, doctor: scholar, tutor:
but in every nation, 1. Cor. 1.26.
he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. For,
although Saint Paul has said, that God has not called many mighty: yet he
does not seclude all mighty: not many noblemen, yet not all noble men are
secluded: not many wise after the flesh, yet has he not secluded all wise in
the flesh: 1. Tim. 2.1.3.4
otherwise in the 1. Tim. 2.1.2. he would not that supplications, prayers,
intercessions and giving of thanks should be made for all men, for kings and
all them, that are in authority. Otherwise, he would not have affirmed in the
same chap. verse 4. that God would have all men saved, and come unto the
knowledge of the truth. Otherwise he would never have wished, Act. 26.29.
that king Agrippa, Portius Festus, and Bernice, and all the rest, that heard
him, when he was permitted to speak for himself, were altogether such, as he
was, excepting his bonds. Otherwise Saint John would never have termed the
Lady, to who^ he wrote his second Epistle, Ioh. ep. 2.
the elect Lady, whom with her children he loved in the truth Otherwise Isay
would never have said Kings shall be thy ^urcing fathers, Isay. 49.23.
and Queens shall be thy nurces. Lastly, this Queen should never have been
made an instance, that she should rise in the resurrection of the dead. Unto
this consents that of Oecumenius, Occumen.
(...), This word Many is put, Act. 17.
because there were (...) Some wise men as Dionysius the Areopagite, and the
Proconsul. And (...) (...), This word Many is annexed, to the next branch, Act.
13.
for that there were certain (...) and (...), Mighty and noble which believed.
And although they, that be wise in their own conceiptes, and rely upon their
own wisdom, Occumen.
(...) are hardly drawn from their own opinion; and they, that are Mighty,
and Noble, are (...) full of pride, the one for their riches, the other for
their nobleness of blood, yet al are nor excluded from Gods kingdom. For,
Paulinus.
if we can look into the catalogue of Gods church in this world, and to the
vain of justice derived from Adam to Christ, and so in the church militant
afterward, we may see through the caseme^t and glass, wherein the children of
God consider the state of the church triumphant, though not so many rich as
poor, yet some rich: though not so many noble, yet some noble: not many
mighty, yet some mighty: not so many kings, as commons, yet many blessed kings
and Queens: not so many wise philosophers, and wise of this world, yet many
wise men of this world, so that they rely not on their own wisdom, are
inheritours of Gods kingdom, Math. 8.11.
and sitters down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God. And
as poor E^^^ that mighty prophet was seen glorified in the mount with our
Savior: so was divine Moses, Math. 17.
that was learned in all Egyptian wisdom. And as Lazarus, in in this life,
full of sores, Luc. 16.
was seen in Abraham's bosom after his death in great glory: so, no doubt,
David the patriarch, that was so mighty and rich, enjoyed the blessings of the
Lord in the land of the living. And, Mat. 13.17. Though some learned men have
thought the contrary of king Solomon Heb. 11.
as there was place in heaven for Peter and Andrew, James and John, that were
fishermen, and left all to follow Christ: so there was place in heaven for
rich, glorious, and wise Solomon, that being a notable figure of Christ, was a
king, and that a glorious and wise king, while he lived on the earth. Neither
is there only place in the kingdom of God for such, as wandered up and down in
sheep skins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, such
as the world was not worthy of: but there is place for the great conqueror
Joshua, honorable Gedeon, valiant Ehua, strong Sampson, godly Hezekias,
zealous Josias, and just Iehosaphat, kings of Judah. There is not only place for
little Benjamin, Psalm. 108.9.
but also for Judah, that was the l^wgiver, the princes of Zebulon, and the
princes of Nephtalim. There is not only in heaven a place for stars, but for
the sun and moon. And although God has chosen the poor of this world, that
they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised
to them that love him: yet he has not rejected the rich, nor altogether
secluded them, Ioh. 14.2.
for, In my fathers house, says our Savior, be many mansions: of this
argument also Saint Ambrose speaks in this sort, Ambros ad ^emetriad. li. 1.
ep. 84.
Quamvis tota vita hominis tentatio sit super terram, etc. Although the whole
life of man upon the earth be a temptation and as well abundance, as want is
wont to be the matter of sin, when either the rich man is puffed up with pride,
or the poor man falls on murmuring, yet there have been in all times, and in
our times also as some are good Poor, so some good Rich. Neither is it in vain
that the blessed. Apostle Saint Paul counsels Timothy saying, 1. Tim. 6.
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, and
that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God which gives us
all things abundantly to enjoy. That they do good and be rich in good
works, ready to distribute and communicate. Laying up in store for themselves
a good foundation against the time to come that they may obtain eternal life.
And to come to the sex o^ women, in the kingdom of God there was not only
place for poor Martha, Luc. 10.
that ministered unto Christ, and Mary, that had chosen the better part, and the
poor widow, that cast two mites into the treasury of the temple, Luc. 21.
and the poor widows that ministered things necessary to the faithful
pilgrims and Saints of God, 1. Tim. 5.
but there is place also for Deburah the prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth,
that judged Israel, and was a mother in Israel: for Miriam the sister of
Moses, who with Moses and Aaron, Iudic. 4. and 5
when the Lord redeemed Israel out of the house of servants, was sent before
the people to their delivery. And lastly, Micheah. 6, 4.
there is a place in the kingdom of heaven for this honorable Queen, the
Queen of the South: who came from the utmost parts of the earth, to hear the
wisdom of Solomon. I might here mention Constantinus Magnus, Theodosius,
Joseph of Arimathia, that honorable counselor noble Theophilus, and, after
Constantinus the great, and his mother Helena, Theodosius Magnus and his wife
Placilla, Martian the great Emperor, and his wife Pulcheria, in whose
government the great counsel of Chalcedon was held, Carolus Magnus, and Iudeth
the wife of Ludovicus Pius, with many Kings and Queens of England, King Henry
the seventh, and Elizabeth his wife, Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond, John
Kempe Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Kempe Bishop of London, Thomas Woolsey
Cardinal Archbishop of York, King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixt^,
John Baill^^^ king of the Scotts, and Dorberguilla his wife, founders of
Bailliol College: Water Stapleton, and Edmond Stafford Bishops of Excester,
and Sir William Peter, knight, fou^ders of Excester Coll. in Oxford: But the
time will not suffer me: I will therefore return to my present text of the
Queen of the south, a figure of the coming of the gentiles unto Christ: and
one, by the testimony of our Savior, that shall rise against this generation,
and shall condemn it: for she came from the utmost parts of the earth, to
hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater then Solomon is here.

Having discovered sufficiently of the person, and having made use of such
doctrine, as fitly herein might answer this time, text, land place: the figure
and type, which this person represents, draws me to handle it. For, Exo.
25.20.
For, as in the tabernacle, the face of one of the Cherubins respected another,
and one ever with a reflexed countenance beheld the other; and as one ring of
the arc was engaged within the other, and thereby drew the other: so having
expressed the historical sense, the figure of mystical sense draws me to
show what is signified by this great person here mentioned. And this figure or
type is mystically understood of the whole text of the old testament, secretly
woven in by the spirit of God, as the thread is, which the shittle carries in
the silkemans web, by which the parts of the whole are combined together: and
although the mystical sense be not manifest to the Jews, nor yet revealed
unto them, yet for us it is to behold, 2. Cor. 3.
as in a myrrour, the face of the Lord with open face. The figure I mention often
which gives life and inlighteneth the history, as the arteries give life to
the blood in the veins: as the crown of gold imbordered the holy table of
Shittim wood, Exodus 25.
that was in the tabernacle, and as the bells and pomgranates were upon the
skirts of Aarons garments, the one sounding, the other shadowing the sweet
odoriferous holiness of the true high Priest, by the which he was made vocalis,
or sounding: for as the waters of Marah were made sweet by the tree, which
Moses cast into the^ at the Lords comma^den ent: Exo. 25.25.
so by this figure the holy history of this honorable Queen receives life,
and is enlightened, garnished, and made shining and sounding. And this is the
salt, that seasoneth the old testament, Job. 6.
without which oftentimes there is no more taste in the story of it, then in
the white of an egg. The testimony of Christ is the spirit of prophecy.
Apocalypse. 19.10.
And how p^ant this is to this purpose, you may see that this figure diverse
ancient fathers of the church do sufficiently observe. Isidore says, Isidore.
Haec regina ventura^ ^cclesiam de gentibus desidera^te^ Christum figurabat,
etc. This Queen represented the Church which should come of the Gentiles
desiring Christ, which accompanied with diverse sorts of men, Eucher. de de
regn. l. 3.
and forgetting both her own people, and her fathers house should run unto
Christ. To this is correspondent that of Eucherit^s: Sien^ haec regina venit a
sinibus terra, etc. As this Queen came from the ends of the ends of the
earth, to wit Or Aethiopia.
India, as some say, to hear the wisdom of Solomon: so the Church many ages
after came to her redeemer and teacher, that after the foolishness of her
error she might at length perceive the doctrine of the truth. This is that
Queen of whom it is said unto the Lord, On thy right hand stands the Queen
in a vesture of gold wrought about with diverse colors, that is to say,
adorned on all sides with diverse precious and comely virtues. For this is the
mother of all that believe, which regenerateth such unto salvation, as were
borne unto death, by whom Christ has restored more in Grace, then perished in
Nature. To this may be fitly annexed that of Angelomus Stromata, Angelomus
Stromata. August. Sermon. de Temp 252. Se^^. 2.
In figura hutu^ reginae ven^t ecclesia ex gentibus, etc. Under the figure
(...) to this Queen the Church of the Gentiles came from the ends of the
earth, saying aside all earthly desires and vices to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, that is to say of our peace maker our Lord Christ Jesus who in his
flesh loosed the bands of enmity betwixt God and man. She came, after her
old profane superstitions, to hear of inlightning of the faith, of the
judgment to come, of the immortality of the soul, and of the hope and glory
of the resurrection. She came into Jerusalem therefore with a great company,
not with the one only nation of the Hebrews, of which the Synagogue did
before consist, but with all kinds of men, and diverse nations throughout the
whole world. We must also think, as Saint Augustine very well observes. Aug.
co^tra Manich. li. 22. cap. 24.
Qua in re hoc pr^mum d^co, etc. In which matter first this I say, that not
only the tongue of those men, but the life also was prophetical, and that
that whole kingdom of the Hebrew nation was some great Prophet, because they
were the figure of some great prophet. Wherefore concerning them whose hearts
were instructed in the wisdom of God, the prophecy of Christ, and of the
church which was to come is to be scanned not only in their sayings, but in
their doings also: but as concerning the rest, and the whole body of that
nation the prophecy of Christ and the church to come, is to be examined in
those things which by Gods secret working were done either in them or by them.
1. Cor. 10.
Namely this I do gather of him, that not only their tongues, but also their
lives were prophetical: so that the history of the old testament is but as
the shell of the nut to the kernel, the veil to the face of Moses, the
curtain to the arc, the vain to the silver, the letter to the spirit, as the
comb to the honey, the ring of gold to the precious stone enclosed in the
base. Of this we may see more in Saint Augustine in his seventeenth book de
Civitate Dei, his first and third chapters.

The person and figure sufficiently described, and the use of the doctrine
accordingly handled, the next thing, that offers it self to my discourse, is
the action of this worthy woman here mentioned. Her action may be the better
scanned, if we will weigh what the son of God has testified of her action in
this life, and of her honor, reward and glory in the life to come: adjoining
here unto, as occasion serves, for elucidations sake, such things, as are at
large written of her 1. King. 10. and 2. Paralip. 9. to which chapters I must
necessarily refer you oftentimes: 1. King. 10. 2. Chro. 9.
because that those things, which are briefly laid down here, are amply
discoursed of in those former histories. Here they are brought in by the way of
example, there they are laid down fully in story. By this also you shall
find, that the old testament is not contrary to the new; but that the same
spirit was author of them both. Aug. co^tra Manich. August. de doct. Christian.
lib. 3. cap. 30.
Lastly that, although there are sundry second helps to open the scripture, as
the rules of Ticonius, which Saint Augustine has mentioned de doctr. Christ.
lib. 3. cap. 30. and other rules there specified and such things, as many of
the ancient fathers mentioned: Hilar. de trinit. lib. 1. Iren. contr. va^ent
li. 1. cap. 1. Apocalypse.
as Hilary lib. 1. de Trinitate. And Irenaeus against the Valentinians lib. 1.
cap. 1. Yet the best of all, that far surmounteth all other kinds of
expositions, is to open holy scripture by scripture. For the treasuries of the
house of David will only be truly and finally opened by the key of David.
Scriptures will best be expounded by that holy spirit, by which they were
endited: 2. Pet. 1.
as metal will be only mollified by fire, the adamant hammered only by tools
of his own nature, or, as some say, sanguine hircino, with Goats blood, Iron
will only be drawn by the load stone. And because I may strictly follow the
line of my discourse I will first, by the grace of God, speak of such actions,
as are mentioned of her in this life performed, and so by sequel of the rest.
Things, that are spoken of her in this life, are these two: first, her coming
to Jerusalem: secondly, what her actions were at Jerusalem, when she came to
Solomon.

And lest I should counfound both you, and my self, in the multiplicity of
these general heads, I purpose first to answer an objection, which might
otherwise through occurrence hinder me in this particular discourse. Wherein
nominately these three branches are incident to be delivered, what moved this
noble Queen to come to Jerusalem: what pains she took in her coming, or
journey: lastly, with what train she came, and how honorably she was
accompanied, and attended upon in her journey to Jerusalem. The objections, by
Gods assistance, in few words shall be dissolved. Whereas it may be thought an
unmeet thing, both in regard of the sex, which is feeble and delicate by
nature, and in regard of the vocation and place, which this woman was by God
called unto, and honored with all, namely, that a person of her sex and
estimation should undertake to perform a journey of so great travail (a
matter of so great moment, as is specificied here,) that a woman, and a woman
Queen should leave her fathers house, her native soil, and country, and
should relinquish her friends and leave them so many miles behind her, to
visit a king unknown unto her, in a foreign land, leaving her court and
kingdom, as a ship without a master, a flock without a sheepeheard an heard
without an heard man, an house without a guide; a quiver without a chaunter, a
chariot without one to be (...), or coachman, to govern it: or an horse
without a b^^sith the Apostles rule is, 1. Tim. 5.
that the womans office is (...), to govern their houses, to give none
occasion to the adversary to speak evil; moreover, that they should not go
about from house to house, much less from kingdom to kingdom; that they
should not be (...), pratlers, nor busy boa^es, unto which that sex is
oftentimes too prone and in as much as, by another rule of the same Apostle, it
is an iniunction unto women, that, Plutarch. praecept. coniugal. (...).
if they will learn any thing, they should ask their husbands at home; And
since, by Antiquity, Venus, shadowing the office of the matrone at home, is
painted sitting upon a tortoise or snaile, thereby signifying, that the chaste
matrones residence at home was her honor: and since Euripides has observed,
that Euripid. in Heraclid.
(...)
(...)
silence, modesty and residence at home are honorable jewels in women: and
since in policy that the absence of the prince might move mutinies, seditions
and rebellions at home in her kingdom: all these objections I refell in this
manner, by manifold answers. I confess, it is an absurd thing in most men's
opinions, for a shepherd to leave his flock, an heardman his cattle, the
master or Pilot his ship, the chariotman his chariot, the rider his horse, the
king his kingdom, the wi^e her husband. Will not the seely sheep then be a
pray to the jaws of the Wolf, the heard to the Lion and bears of the
forest, destitute of the heardman? the ship in danger of drowning, destitute
of the Pilot? the chariot like to that, out of which Phaeton was shaken,
destitute of the guide? the common weal left in a miserable plight, and the
kingdom without a king, the husband left comfortless, forsaken of his wife
for so long a time. And this we may see by the lamentable example of king
Richard the second, who lost his kingdom, and, in the end, his life, by the
over-vnconsiderate wars attempted in his own person into Ireland: for, by
his departure, his enemies getting head at home, Engl. Chr.
at his return by arms dispossessed him of his regal crown and dignity. Yet
these general rules do not always overthrow every particular^ neither any
such particular, as this is, that is guided by his wisdom, by whom princes
reign, and by whom the actions of the people are ruled, moderated and bridled.

First, where it is objected, Chaweer, He that suffers his wife to go to each
hallowes. Annal. Ecc. lib. 1. Ann. Christ. 9. Ioh. Nicole.
that it is unseemly for a woman to travel any long way without her husband:
and a thing justly reproved, justly misliked of our fathers, as namely the
gadding abroad in pilgrimage, heretofore rebuked even by our learned satyricals
of our own nation: and what evil in these days has come by such, that
follow the Idol of abomination, which the Italians run a whoring after at
Marcade A^cona, which Caesar Baronius would miraculously authorize: and a
Papist writing secretly in England, in a book imperfectly printed, termed the
journey of this Queen to Jerusalem, In a book secretly printed nere Henly
upon Thames.
to be a pilgrimage: and although, I say, such pilgrimages may be full of
scandals, suspicion, and impiety, and has been prooved little better then the
whoring after the calves in Dan and Bethell, condemned by the prophet, yet
nevertheless the credit, authority and necessity of the journey of this
Queen was nothing impeached or impaired by it, as I will make manifest (God
willing) by these reasons, that follow. First, I might answer by Herodotus,
Apud Acthiopas and Aegyptios.
(...), etc. With these the women use merchandise buying and selling, and the
men sit at home and spinne. Secondly, where it may be objected, that this woman
had an husband and children, I rather am persuaded the contrary; and namely
mine opinion is, that she was a virgin, because this woman had formam
synagogae, as I prooved before in the figure: Psalm. 45.
because Pharaohs daughter and the spouse in the Canticles were virgins, and
the virgins, that be her fellows, shall bear her company: Cant. 8.8.
whereunto accords that Cantic. 8.8. we have a little sister, and she has
no breasts: what shall we do for our sister, when she shall be spoken for?
where it is objected, that it is not likely, that a woman was then sole
governor, I answer, that it is most false: for it is recorded in the
Ethiopian history, Aethiopic. hist.
that women by succession had the monarchical government in those times in
Aethiopia, and long after that government did endure: and this may also be
confirmed out of Strabo, Strab. lib. 10. 17.
that lived a little after Christ. (...), etc. Some of these were the Generals
of the Queen Candaces which in our time reigned over the Aethiopians, a
vtrago, Here is confuted the want of learning in them, that have denied it to
be lawful for women to govern: and in print divulgated it. Act. 8.
but blind of one eye. But the chiefest foundation of this argument is to be
taken out of the eight of the Acts of the Apostles ver. 27. where it is
expressed, that Phillip was sent to baptize, and catechize a certain Eunuch
Cha^berlaine to the Queen Candaces. Where the danger is objected, that her
kingdom might incur; and how unseemly a thing it is for a woman to
travail, I answer these objections all in one. First, that this action was
heroical, and extraordinary: and proportionable to those actions of the
Patriarchs, and holy Prophets: wherein we may more fitly admire the wisdom
of God in the working of it in her, then censure it. And they, that judge of it
otherwise, may well be compared to young scholars, as Saint Augustine says,
Lib. 22. cap. 25.
contra faust. Manich. that suppose great Latinists miss their congruity, when
they say, Part in frusta secant, Some of them divide it peece-meale, and are
like them, that go about to judge of Esaias going barefoot, Ieremies hyding
his girdle in the river Perath, Hoseas marriage with Bat diblaij^, Ierom.
praefat. in Hoseam. Job. 8.
our Saviors going to the figtree to seek fruit near to Jerusalem, our
Savior stowping down, and writing with his finger on the ground. The censure
of which actions as far forth exceed the reach of our capacities, unless we
be enlightened from above, and daily exercised in holy meditations, as the
earth is from the heavens: as the plain is from the depth, as flesh and blood
is from Gods kingdom. To the danger or peril of the loss of her kingdom, I
answer, seeing it was the Lords doing, to stir her up to take this journey,
her country could not be rebellious: for God (no question) the^ dwelled in the
midst of her people by his mighty power, that God, that accompanied her in
her journey to Jerusalem, and was also glorified by Solomon in ^erusalem, and
spoke there out of the Mercy seat. Now, where God is in the midst of a
people, Psalm. 46.5.
how shall that nation be moved? God shall help such a prince early. This our
God will make the wars to cease, there he will break the bow, cut the
spear, and burn the chariots: he will still the rages of such seas, assuage
all fury in such people: and such seas then shall have sands from God to stop
their overflowing: all such people shall then have railes to keep the^ in: and
al such surge^ shall have shore rocks to bind them in, or to break them.
Besides, how could this woman fear any tumult or rebellion at home, or amongst
her own people, when as the text says, she came to Jerusalem beshem-Iehovah,
which thing also Rabbi Kim^y has observed. And in that her action was a figure
of the church of the Gentiles, as I have before observed out of Isidore,
Eucherius, and Angelomus; and since we find that, which Gregory has expressed
1. Moral. Greg. ^^. (...).
Vt ad ostende^dam innocentiam venit Abel; etc. As Abell came to be a pattern
of innocence; Enoch of integrity, Noe of a long-patient perseverance both of
good hope, and weldoing, Abraham of obedience, Isaac of chastity of of marriage:
Jacob of tolerancie in labor, Joseph of repaying evil with good; Moses of
mildness, Joshua of constancy in adversity; Job of patience in affliction:
and all these were as morning stars shining before the sun; and, as it were
forerunners and types of the true messiah, who succeeded them: so the church of
the Gentiles was prefigured in Rahab of Jericho, Ruth of Moab, Pharaohs
daughter espowsed to Solomon, in the little sister, which then had no breasts
Cant. 8.8. and now in this honorable princess the Queen of the south here
specified, commended, and far preferred in Gods kingdom, and received
thereinto, when incredulous Scribes, Epicureall Sadduces, blasphemous Pharisees
shall be cast into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The objection being dissolved, the internal cause, that moved this Queen to
undertake this journey, is next to be handled. But what moved this noble Queen
to come to Jerusalem? Wisd. 7.
The first thing that moved her, questionless was the secret working of the
holy Ghost, that finger of God, that spirit of understanding, which is holy,
subtle, moveable, clear, undefiled, pure, intellectual; who, as the wind,
Ioh. 18.
blows whither it lists, whose sound none hearing knows either from
whence it comes, or whither it goes, Sap. 1.
who being one can do all things, and remaining in it self renueth all
things, Pro. 21.
who enters into holy souls, and makes them friends of God, and Prophets:
this holy spirit, moved the heart of this mighty Queen, in whose power the
hearts of princes are, who turns them, as the rivers of waters, whither
soever it pleases him. If it be therefore not laborious for the influence of
the heavens not only to heat the inferior bodies, that lie in the superficial
part of the earth, and air; but also to work by a secret virtue in such
metals, as are hidden in the bowels of the earth, and are insensible in
themselves, according to that of Saint Ambrose offic. 1.14. Ambrose offic. 1.14.
Quid autem tam stoliaum, quam putare, etc. But what is so foolish as to think
that any thing as hidden from God, whereas the sun who ministers us light,
pierces into hidden corners, and the force of his heat enters into the very
foundations of our houses, and secret closets? and who can deny but that by the
temperate heat of the spring the inward bowels of the earth are warmed, which
before were fast congealed with winter frostes? Trees also have a sense of the
force of heat and cold, in so much that their very roots are either killed
with cold, or revived with the cherishing heat of the Sun. The earth also
displa^^th her variety of fruit, as soon as the air waxes moderate. If then
the beams of the Sun be able to disperse their light over the whole earth, and
can neither be hindered by iron bars, nor close wickets from making entrance
into our closest rooms: and shall not the intelligible brightness of God
diffuse it self into the inmost cogitations of men, and diue into those
hearts which it self has created? 1. Cor. 2.
Was it not easy then for Gods holy spirit, which searches al things, yea the
deep things of God, which searches the corners of man's heart, seals our
election, which is (...) the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1. Romans 8.
which cries abba father in our hearts, and bears witness unto us, that we
are Gods children: which makes request for us with sighs, that cannot be
expressed; by whom all things were fashioned; Heb. 4.
unto whose eyes all things are (...), Naked, and laid open, whose operation
is mighty and lively, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters
through even to the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the
iointes and of the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of
the heart: unto whose sight there is no creature, which is not manifest: was it
not easy I say, the^ for that holy spirit, which is infinite in power,
incomprehensible in majesty, and, because he is God, is as the Schoolmen say,
vbique praesens, Lo^b. S^nt. 1. D^si. 37.
per essentiam, praesentiam, and pot^ntiam, Every where subsistent by his
essence, praesence, and power to move the heart of this holy Queen to come to
Jerusalem, to draw her heart after Solomon, as rivers follow the spring tides,
as the orb draws the planet, as primum mobile, The first sphere which is
moved draws the inferior spheres against their own course, as Elias his
mantle cast on Elisha made him run after him; 1. King. 19.10.
in as much as by this holy spirit all things are created and moved. Hercules
Gallus and all other orators draw by the ears, but this holy Queen was
drawn by the heart in that manner of drawing, Cant. 1.3.
that the spowse in the Cant^cles is drawn after him, whom her soul loves,
in those lines of love, that our Savior speaks of in the sixth of John, Nemo
venit ad me, Ioh. 6.
nisi pater meus traxerit illum. Trahimur a Deo vel revelatione, etc. No man
comes unto me unless my father draw him. We are drawn of God either by
revelation, according unto that, Mat. 16.17. Ioh. 5.36. Ierem. 31.3. Apoc.
3.19. Hose. 11.4. Psalm. 93.6. Pro. 7.21.
Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not
reveiled it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven: Or by some miraculous
operation, as, The works which the father has given me to finish do bear
witness of me: Or by love, as, I have loved thee with an everlasting love,
therefore with mercy I have drawn thee: Or by scourges and chastisementes, at,
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: and I lead them with cords of a man,
even with bands of love: Or by benefits, as, I will sing of the Lord because
he has dealt so lovingly with me: Or by promises, as, with her flattering lips
she intised him. These means of drawing do not violence the will unwilling
to come unto Christ, but do persuade it. By which of these ways this
honorable Queen was drawn, I cannot now stand upon; only I suppose it to have
been occulta revelatione, and miraculosa operatione, By hidden revelation, and
miraculous operation: as many holy vessels are drawn unto him like as all the
faithful are drawn to be justified, sanct^fied, and saved, according to that
of Bernard De lib. arbit. Trahis voluntarios, non seruat inuitos, etc. He
draws such as are willing, and saves none against their wills: he draws, as
Paul was drawn unto Damascus: he draws spiritually, as the spouse in the
Canticles, who desired it greatly when she said, Draw me, we will run after
thee because of the sweet savor of thy good ointmentes. Cant. 1.3.
This secret working of Gods spirit made this honorable personage run after
the odor of the sweet ointment, that was in Solomon, by whom our Savior
Christ was prefigured. Ambrose.
Besides then, as Saint Ambrose says, religion was amongst the Israelites as a
sweet ointment in a vessel enclosed, whose sweet and fragrant smell though it
were diffused through many nations: yet the matter and marrow of faith was
there principally contained. Whose favor issuing then fotth by most sweet
fragrant fumes drew many out of the whole earth to see Solomon. Yet
nevertheless, as Augustine says of the sower rivers of Paradise, that watered
other countries, were only fructifying, and causing fruit to grow in Paradise:
so the name and current of Salomons virtues were sounded in other nations; but
the substance of religion, and the person of him, that Solomon prefigured, was
only then according to ordinary dispensation, and long after, soule-saving
among the Jews in Israel.

The External cause, that moved this great personage to travail so far to
see king Solomon.
The external cause, which by her attractiue virtue drew this honorable prince
after Solomon, to see him, and to confer with him, was the report of the
great graces and gifts of God, which shined gloriously in Solomon. For when
rare and excellent virtues manifest their beauty in any subject immediately the
trumpet of fame, which is, as Hesiod says, Hesiod. (...). 2. 759.
(...), Very light, and easy to be lifted up, sounds out their glory: which
glory being, as the orator says, consentiens laus bonorum, and incorrupta vox
iudicantium de excellenti virtute, The conspiring praise of good men, and the
sincere approofe of such as are able to judge of the excellency of virtue,
rauisheth the minds of most well affected persons to the admirable view and
sight of such things, as are extraordinarily spoken of, and commended. And
although every virtue be amiable, and each drop of Gods grace in his children
is to be embraced, yet properly, as Seneca says ep. 33. in aequabilitate
notabilia en inent, Sen. ep. 33.
Notable things of worth in personages of an answerable estate are most
eminent, and the highest tree in the forest has the concourse of the most
beholders. And such excellent and rare gifts draw men into admiration of the^:
and make me^ rest unsatisfied, til they see, or enjoy the^ in who^ they shine,
and, by an attractiue quality, draw the world after them, like as the
lodestone draws the needle, and the North star draws the lodestone:
nay, as I may speak more to purpose, and more significantly, l^ke as the
Orient sun, which, as Ambrose says, is oculus mundi, ^ucundi as, etc. The
eye of the world, the pleasure of the day, the beauty of heaven, the
excellency of creatures, and the grace of nature, when he discovers his
golden beams in the morning, converteth the eyes of the whole world to behold
his beauty, and to enjoy the comfort of his heat: So the virtues, that shined
then in Solomon issuing from Gods goodness; from whom, as the waters issue out
of the bottomless pit, as the rivers and floods out of the Ocean sea,
according to that of S^lomon, all the rivers go into the sea, vt hence they
return. Eccles. 1.7. Eccles. 1.7.
which Homer also did see, though as it were through a crevise in a wall,
speaking of the Ocean, Hom. Ilia.
(...). From whence flowed all rivers, and the whole Sea; these virtues, I say,
discovering themselves in Solomon drew some of all people and nations to behold
him, and to hear his wisdom from kings, princes, and rulers of the earth, as
it is evident by this, that follows, collected out of holy scriptures: for,
as naturally the heliotropium follows the sun, the shadow the body, the
superficial parts of things colors, the triumph the conqueror, the sweet
smell the oil, Eurip. Hec.
the voice the Echo, which is the daughter of the hills and woods (as Euripides
termed her) the smoke the fire, May flowers April showers, the morning the
day star: so the minds of the most part of men are stirred up to follow rare
and excellent virtues intellectual or moral, when their beams do begin to
glister in the world, and to reveal themselves by manifestation to Gods
glory, as these did in Solomon, of whom this is written, and in sacred writ
recorded. Whereby it is gathered that the fame and report of Salomons wisdom,
drew her to come and see Solomon at Jerusalem. Salomo^ having obtained, by Gods
gift, a wise and understanding heart, grew famous through all nations, and
kingdoms: for God gave Solomon wisdom and much vnderstandnig, and a large
heart, even as the sand, that is on the sea shore 1. King. 4.25. 1. King. 4.25.
and Salomons wisdom excelled all the wisdom of the children of the East, and
all the wisdom of Egypt: for he was wiser then any man, yea then were Ethan
the Ezrahite, then Heman, then Chalcol, then Darda, the sons of Mahol; and
he was famous through all nations round about. And Solomon spoke three
thousand proverbs, and his songs were a thousand, and five. And he spoke of
trees from the cedar tree, which is in lebanon, even unto the hyslop, that
springs out of the wall. He spoke also of beasts, and of fowls, and of
creeping things, and of fishes. And there came of all people to hear the
wisdom of Solomon from all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.
These things are repeated again in the 10. chap. of the same book. 1. King.
10,
So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth both in riches and
wisdom. And all the world sought to see Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which
God had put in his heart. And they brought every man his present, vessels of
silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, and armor, and sweet odors, horses,
and mules from year to year. Sap. 7.
To this consents that, which is in the 7. of wisdom. God gave Solomon true
understanding of things that are, so that he knew the world was made, and the
powers of the elements: the beginning, and the end, and the mids of the times,
how the times alter, and the change of the seasons, the course of the year,
and the situacion of the stars, the name of living things, and the furiousnes
of beasts, the power of the winds, and the imaginacions of men, the diversity
of plants, and the virtue of roots, and all things both secret and known did
he know: for wisdom the woorker of all things taught him. And heereunto
co^senteth that of Sirachs son, Eccle. 47.
chap. 47. How wise was Solomon in his youth. He was sided with understanding
as a flood. His mind covered the whole earth, filled it with grave and dark
sentences. His name went about in the Isles, and for his peace he was believed.
And this wisdom of Solomon, which was given him by God, was either
Vniversalis quaedam sapientia, A certain universal wisdom. For his heart
was large by his wisdom, which was as the sand of the sea in number: his
heart was filled with understanding as a flood: he excelled all men in
wisdom. Or else this wisdom was particularis, Particular. In natural
causes, which consisted in knowing of birds, beasts, herbs, elements, fishes,
trees, influences astronomicall, situatio^ of stars, of proverbs and dark
sentences: of music: of Divinity, which appears by his prayer in the
dedication of the temple, and by the resolution of the Queens questions, which
she proposed unto him: There were the lines and cords of admiration, which
drew people out of all nations to be desirous to see Solomon, as now what a
concourse would be to see such a man, as should excel in such gifts, that
should shine in such qualities, that should glister with so manifold and
miraculous graces?

These gifts of God, these graces and these virtues were the cords, I say that
drew the whole world after Solomon, and made all the world desirous to see
Solomon. This was that attractiue quality, that drew such a concourse of people
out of all the earth to see Solomon: this was the loadestone, that drew the
heart of this honorable Queen of the south, as it were a needle, and incensed
her with an holy zeal to come to see, and to confer with king Solomon. Yet
all this ^dome of Solomon was nothing in comparison of the wisdom of Christ,
in whom the fulness of the Godhead Coloss. 2. Co^ll. 2.9.
dwelt (...), Bodily and upon whom rested those manifold gifts of the holy
Ghost, spoken of, Isa. 11.2.
Esaias 11.2, the spirit of wisdom and understanding: the spirit of counsel
and strength: the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord; whom
Solomon in figure represented, and of whom this Queen by Solomon sought to be
instructed. Here I should enter into the figure between Christ and Solomon;
but because the time passes away speedily, I will summarily conclude. Solomon
an earthly king; Christ our Savior a king of heaven, rex regum, and Dominus
domina^trum, king of kings, and Lord of Lords: Solomon drew some of all
nations to hear him: Christ our Savior drew all nations after him to hear
him; and to believe in him. Solomon reigned in Jerusalem, and in the land of
Israel; Christ our Savior his dominion is unto the uttermost ends of the
earth: Salomons reign was but for forty years; Christ's reign for ever.
Solomon a man; Christ God and man, Salomons wisdom definite; Christ's wisdom
infinite. Solomon had plenty of silver in Jerusalem, almuggim trees etc. gold
and precious stones; Christ gave joy of souls, peace of conscience, comfort of
the spirit, and life everlasting, by pouring out his spirit upon all flesh. We
read not that Salomo^ spoke with many tongues, but Christ, sending down the
holy Ghost, gave cloven and fiery tongues, and made young men to see visions,
old men to dream dreams, and maidens to prophecy. Briefly, Joel. 2. Act. 2.
Salomons benefits were specially earthly; or, if they were spiritual, they
were infused by revelation: but upon our Savior Esaias 11.2. there resided the
spirit of wisdom, of counsel, Isa. 11.2.
etc. Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness and joy above his
fellows: and, as Saint John says, cap. 1.14. We saw the glory of him, Ioh.
1.14.
as the glory of the only begotten son of God, full of grace, and truth. And,
of his fullness have we all received grace for grace. Lastly, Solomon was but a
shadow or figure: Christ the substance figured. So of this comparison, let this
suffice. The next thing to be handled, that follows the motives, which drew
this Queen to Jerusalem, are the pains, that this noble Queen takes to come
to Solomon. Proverb. 1.
Wisdom in the book of the proverbs, utters her voice in the streets, and
she calls in the high streets among the press, and entering of the gates:
yet the fools of this world, whom she calls, refuse to come, when she
stretches out her hand, they will not regard: when she admonishes, they will
despise her correction: Proverb. 9.
when they are invited to her feast, they refuse to come: when they are charmed
by the wise charmer, they will stop their ears like a deaf adder: they will
say, villam (...), I have bought a farm, or, vxo^em duxi, I have married a
wife, etc. as the excusers of themselves in the parable, Luc. 14.18. Luc.
14.18.20.
But this noble Queen, she does otherwise; as the needle she will follow the
lodestone, as the loadstone will by secret influence follow the North star, as
the heliotropium will turn toward the sun. This may be seen in the pains
of her journey, by her coming from Mero^ to Jerusalem. Jerusalem Long. 66.
Latit 31.
The north pole is elevated at Jerusalem 31. degrees; as Cosmographers do
define; every degree contains 60. miles in earth, the distance of Meroe from
the aequinoctiall line is 16. degrees: according to Ptolomees tables: Meroe
Long. 61. Latit. 16. Ptolem. tab. geograph. The difference of longitude must
also be considered.
so Meroe from Jerusalem is distant 15. degrees: now every degree in heaven
making 60. miles on earth, we may gather therefore, that this Queen came about
1000. miles to see king Solomon. See, what pains this honorable person takes
to see an earthly Prince, and so much the greater, that a woman perfourmeth
that, which men durst not attempt: a weak vessel effects that, which a
mighty Giant durst not undertake: a Queen accomplisheth that, which inferior
persons will refuse: she, that had a tender body, undertook that, which many
strong men shunned: she neither cares to parch her beauty in the sun, which
many women are so nice to preserve: neither the fiery climate, under which she
was to pass: nor the fury of beasts, the eye of the ravenous crocodile,
neither the venomous serpents, wherewith those coasts do swarm: neither the
fell Lions, which those Climates naturally nourish: neither did she say with
the slothful man in the Proverbs, A Lion is without. Pro. 22.13.
I shall be slain in the street: but, all excuses set apart, she comes to
Jerusalem to see Solomon: and yet these Jews at home, seeing Christ, will not
hear Christ: or, if they will hear him, will not believe him: or, if they
believe him, will do it conditionally, so, as they may see a miracle: and yet
after they have heard doctrine and seen miracles, will not only not believe,
but also persecute. Such are our Recusants, Senec. ep. Lib. 15. ep. 96.
such are our licentious Libertines, such are they, that Seneca speaks of:
such are many among us, that prefer plays before preaching, a sound sleep
before a sounding sermon, Belial before God: whose hearts the Lord turn, if it
be his blessed will. But in this, that the Queen takes this great journey,
note her zeal that which the spowse utters in the Cantic. Cant. 8.8.1.2.3.
Much water cannot quench love: and that Cant. 1.2. Because of the savor of
thy good oinctments, thy name is as an oinctment powered out. Therefore the
virgins love thee. Draw me, we will run after thee Cant. 1.2. To this
accords that of Saint Paul 1. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 13.
Love suffers all things: believes all things; hops all things; endures
all things. This shadoweth how the faithful in all ages followed Christ, when
the standard was set up in Sion what a thirst was then of the word of God.
Psalm. 45.
Christ's gracious words, that he spoke in the synagogue at Nazareth, showed
that gratta was diffusa in labiis suis, Full of grace were his lips. Psalm. 45.
and, if I may so say, Suadoe medulla, The pith and marowe of persuasion sitting
in his lips. And how since he has drawn all the world after him through
peril, through danger, through fire, through flame, through life, through
death, the stories in all ages have regestred to Gods glory, and to the great
honor of all his Saints. For, Quos dei charitas trahit, nec retrahit, etc.
Who^ the love of God draws, them neither does lust withdraw, nor aff^ight.
For the saints run that they may leave the world behind the^ because they see
God before them. This zeal which shined in this honorable Queen to see
Solomon, and to hear ^^s wisdom burns in those faithful souls, who
hunger and thirst after righteousness: which, when heretofore there was a fame
of Gods word in our land, wandered from sea, to sea, Amos. 8.
from North to east to here Gods word: which ought to be more sweet unto us,
then the honey, and the honey comb. Psalm. 19.13.
God be praised, there is a great light risen in out days, and God has been
gracious unto our land: there is such a door opened in England, as was in
Philadelphia, that no force can shut, but our sins; such a light, that no
counsels of men can extinguish or eclipse, but our iniquities: such a
sunshine of the Gospel, that no interposition of any gross mass can shadow,
unless it be our own ingratitude. Our sin will be the greater, if we make not
much of this great grace offered unto us. This Queen took great pains to
see and hear Solomon: we have Christ offered in our streets, howses,
churches, and in our ears continually sou^ded: Heb. 4.
If the^ we shall yet hard our hearts while it is called Today, Proverb.
and shall despise the voice of wisdo^e crying unto us in the s^^ets, and
mu^ting us to her baker of new mingled wine, Math. 25.
and the voice of the bridegroom calling us to have our lamps prepared to
enter with him to the marriage: not only this Queen shall be a witness against
us in the day of his last coming, but it shall be more tolerable in the day of
judgment for Sodom and Gomorrah, then for us. Yea more tolerable for Capernaum
and sinful Jerusalem, who would not know the time of their visitations: and
from whose eyes repentance, by the just judgment of God, was wonderfully
hidden, and miraculously, as I may term it, with held. From the which
judgment, God for his mercy save and deliver this land both now and ever.

The third and last branch of this first part shows unto us in these words,
that this Queen came not abiectly, The third branch of the first part.
meanly to Jerusalem, but, as it was fit and seemly for a Prince, prince like
in honor, honorable in riches, rich and glorious in her train, yet
convenient for her estate, regal crown, and princely authority. And unto
this end it is laid down by the holy Ghost in the scriptures, in these
words. 1. King. 10.2.
And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, and camels that bare
sweet odours, and gold exceeding much, and precious stones. She came to
Jerusalem with a very great train, and camels, 2. Para. 9.1.
that bare sweet odours, and much gold and precious stones. By this we may
learn, that these creatures of God, which some think supers^uous have a
necessary use being well used: that God has made nothing in vain, and that in
things hid in the bowels of the earth, the wisdo^e of God is to be known, and
to be admired, worshipped: that all Gods creatures do spirare potentia^,
sapientia^, et benignitate^ Dei, Hug. de sanct. victore. Invisib. Dei.
Breath out the power, wisdom, and bountye of God: that all creatures, that
God has made, are sit for our use, service and commodity: that in a glass we
may see in all creatures ordinem mirabilem o^^^ationem efficacem, finem vtilem.
A wonderful order, a powrefull working, a profitable use and end: that every
creature says unto us, accipe benefi^tum, read seruitium, fuge supplec^u^,
Receive the benepte of us, repar thy service for us: Avoid the penal ^^ of
abasing us: that that is most true, that Pliny has, only this excepted, that
that which he speaks of nature, we affirm to be of God, to wit, that
maiestas Dei mirab^lis, Plin. li. 37.
The majesty of God is wonderfully seen in precious stones, in so much that o^e
precious stone is sufficient to carry us into a deep contemplat^o^ thereof. and
that that is true, which he has cited the 36 l^. c. 1. that al things, he had
before mentioned and discoursed of, in 35. books, yea as I may add, in all his
books following, that om^^ ^hom^^um causa genita videre possunt, All things may
seem and show to have bin made for man. Lastly that princes trains art not
taken away by Gods word, but that they are established by God and from God,
Romans 13.
as appears Romans 13. by the Worthies of David, by the description of Salomons
household, and the throne of his kingdom, by that in a show princes on earth
do represent in some sort Gods majesty in heaven, if so great a glory may be
represented in any sort by any thing in earth, according to that cited out of
the greek Poet (...). Menand. The lively image. Socr. hist. eccle. lib. 3. cap.
1.
And therefore justly. Iulia^ the Apostata is reprehe^ded by an Ecclesiastical
writer, for defacing the honor of the Roman Empire. (...).

The second general head of this sermon, or sacred discourse, contains
summarily what this honorable person did when she came to Jerusalem, what the
holy Ghost has in scripture recorded and registered of this honorable Queens
actions in Jerusalem; Mat. 12
the brief whereof our Savior has in these words delivered unto us. She
came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon.
Herein observe also, though the word Hearing be only expressed, yet
nevertheless, as one face of the Cherubim respected the other; so here I must
make reference to that also, which is written of her coming to Solomon, 1.
King. 10. and 2. Paralip. 9. 1. King. 10. 2. Chro. 9.
She came to prove Solomon with hard questions. And when she came to
Solomon, she commaned with him of all, that was in her heart, etc. Nay, these
words of our Savior comprise a great deal more. For in mine opinion it is a
summary narration of all the actions she performed at her being at Jerusalem.
Wherefore in this summary narratio^ I observe principally these 4. branches, or
pleasant streams, that naturally issue and spring cut of the general head
before specified: so that this Queens coming to hear Salomons wisdom
contains in it first her Proving of Solomon with hard questions, in Greek
thus, (...), (...): And she came prove him with hard questions. And she came
to Jerusalem with a very great train, and camels that bare sweet odours, and
gold exceeding much, and precious stones, and she came to Solomon, Tent^ret
cu^ maenigmatibus.
and communed with him of all that was in heart: in Hebrew thus, ^levusto
bekid^th, etc. Secondly, the discreet view and eye, that she made of Salomon^
court and kingdom: Thirdly the sincere testimony she gives before God and
man of Salomons wisdom speculatiue, and practick^ tending to Gods glory, and
man's instruction. Lastly, it follows, that I should briefly touch the
greatness Here unto should be annexed her return to her own country; but
because these 3. latter are not so pertine^t to that, in the new testament, I
rather will be a referendary therein, then a discourser thereof. The first thing
this honorable person does, when she comes to Jerusalem, is in these words
discovered: her coming to Jerusalem was to hear Salomons wisdom. Now
because the wisdom of men is especially discovered by their speech, according
to the proverb, Qualis vir, talis oration: Such as the man is, such is his
language, and, as another has said, Hierome.
nescio quid latentis energia habet viva vox, I know not what hidden power the
lively voice of a man carries with it: she does, as it were, elicere, that is
to say, discreetly persuade king Solomon to power out the sap of wisdom unto
her, by proving him with hard questions: so that the first mark, she aims
at by her coming to Jerusalem, is to prove whether Salomons wisdom be
correspondent to his fame; the body to the shadow, the counterfeit to the
person* yea whether the fire answer the smoke; the fruit the blossom:
Lastly, whether, as it is in the proverb, as Pythagoras learnedly collected,
whether, I say, the stature and bigness of the whole body of the giant
Hercules might proportionably be gathered by the quantity of his foot: by
which, as Gellius has collected out of Plutarch, he measured the race in mount
Olympus. By this we may gather perspicuously, that, although there be in our
days, and in times before, great abuses by travail, and by it many
corruptions have crept into flourishing nations, by which in the end they been
venimously baned, yet nevertheless, as it may be evidently gathered out of
this text, the wise and godly may suck sweetness out of trauail, as Samson found
honey in the lion, as the painful man eats the fruit of his hands, and as the
be sucketh sweetness out of foreign flowers, namely the flowers of the fields,
far from home, For, as there is a profitable, so there is an unprofitable
kind of travel or peregrination: as the one kind of travel does good, so the
other does harm: as one sort of travelers find wisdom by their travel,
so another sort learn nothing, but foolishnes. The unprofitable, dangerous,
and foolish travelers are they, that trave^le to great cities, and princes
courts, and foreign nations to see, and to be seen, spectatum veniunt, veniunt
spectentur vt ipsi, They come to gaze, and to be gazed on as says the Poet.
And especially heretofore idle women, and some men travel to learn new
fashions, some to see fair buildings, some to look upon the bravery of the
world, whereby of late our nation has been made a sink to receive the sins
of all nations, almost under the coape of heaven, by somes running to Paris,
other some to Venice, some to Genua, other some to Florence, some to Rome, (as
though we had not sufficiently drunk already of the cup of Babylon) some
into one land, other some into another. So that there are almost no Spanish
devises, no Italian devices, no Dutch devices, no Turkish nor heathenish
devices, nay vices, but our nation has swallowed them up: but if there were
any good there, we have left it behind us. And, as there was in corrupted
Jerusalem an high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, 1. King. 11.5.
for Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon, the root of which
abomination was translated out of those countries: so I fear me that our
travel into those countries has wrought the like effect among us. So that,
Exek. 23.14.15.
as it is in Ezekiel the prophet, if it were a sufficient motive to Aholibah to
increase her fornications but to see men painted upon the wall, the image of
the Chaldeans painted with vermilion, and girded with girdles upon their
loins, and with died attire upon their heads, looking all like princes after
the manner of the Babylonions in Chaldea, the land of their nativity; as
soon, I say, as she saw them, she doated upon them, and sent messengers,
unto them into Chaldea: If, I say, the very sight of these things were
sufficient to allure Aholibah to sin, how much more easy is the carnal
nature of man tainted by sin, when we live among sinners? Psalm. 1. our nature
especially being prone to be corrupted with sin as easily, as the match is to
take the fire, gu^poulder to take the sparkling, the dry stubble to take the
flame, man's nature I sa^e, being prone to drink iniqury as puddle, and to
suck up the dregs of sin, as sweet honey* Seneca thought trau^l not much
profitable in his time in regard that such men, that undertook such courses
rather undertook that charge and pains to feed their eyes, then to benefit
their minds, in these words, Senec ep. 105. ad Lucil.
Peregrinatio notitia^ dabit gentiu^, etc. Travail will teach thee knowledge
of countries and nations, will show thee strange shapes of huge hills, large
cham^ion feelds, valeys streaming with continual water, and upon due
observation perhaps the nature of some river: namely, either how the river
Nilus swells in winter by reason of the increase of waters which it gathers
in summer: Or how the river Tigris suddenly conueieth it self out of our sight,
and taking her course through the hidden parts of the earth at length
recouereth her former hugenes: Or how the flood M^ander which has exercised
the wits of the most famous poets of all times passes to and fro by often sed
to Solomon, were either natural, mathematical, musical, or such like, which
might be gathered out of scripture Canonical, and out of the book of
wisdom, and namely out of those scriptures, which I have cited already 1.
King. 4.49. and so to the end of the chap. The best judgment, that I have
seen yet given of these questions, which the Queen proposed to Solomon, may
be summarily selected out Pelican and Lavater. Verisimile est eam de rebus
divinis, etc. It is a matter of good likelihood that she desired to prove
Salomo^s knowledge in points of divinity. For now the glory of the most High
creator of all things hade been published amongst the nations through
Salomons renown. By this word (Aenigmata) are not meant those unprofitable and
curious questions which Paul condemns, but certain grave and weighty
questions concerning God, and the providence of God; touching sin and good
works; of everlasting l^fe, and perhaps also of things perte^ning to civil
government, and ordering of the affairs of this life. For howsoever it seem
probable that she was furnished with learned men, such as were her country me^
the Gymnosophists; yet they taught few truths, their words were spiced with so
much falsehood, overflowed with so many dregs, were co^fou^ded with so much
dross, that it was little or nothing in comparison to that great and holy
wisdom, that shined in king Solomon. The only general therefore in this I
follow not further herein to speak in particular of it proposing that rule of
S. Augustines for my ground, Quae ipse tacuit Dominus, etc. That which the Lord
has concealed, Aug. in Ioh.
who is there amongst us that can say it is thus or thus? or if any man dare
say it whence does he prove it?

By this experimental proof, that this Queen was enabled by God to make, and
actully makes of king Salomons wisdom, I do find and gather, that virtue and
learning may be seemly ornaments in some women, and as well become them, as
they become men, according to that of Xenophon in Symphos. (...) Women's nature
is as capable in some degree of many good gifts, as man's nature: especially. I
say, Eurip. med.
when God graceth these gifts with counsel and discretion: and also that that
may be without flattery spoken in comme^dation of that sex, which Euripides,
has spoken of it in Medea, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
We women also have our Muse, which attends on us to instruct us in wisdom:
I say not all women, but perhaps amongst many you may find a few not
altogether rude and void of learning, whereunto also I may add thus much,
that women may be endued from above with holy learning not one^y by the way of
discourse, but also that they may be endued from above with knowledge of such
points in Divinity, as are deep, scholasticall, material, fit for
disputation, learned conference, and Academicall schools. Otherwise the
spirit of God would never have given so great a testimony of holy knowledge
and zeal in this honorable Queen. Unless also some women might have excelled
in these qualities of learning in the state of the new Testament, Saint Ierom
would never have written so seriously to Lat^ de i^stitut. Fill. Hierom. ad
laet. de Just. filiae.
that she should see her daughter from her infancy brought up in the study
and holy literature of the sacred bible: if women might not have been learned,
that learned and good Father would never have advised her, that her daughter
should take heed how she read the books commonly called Apocrypha, and with
what judgment she should observe the contents of those books: if women might
not have been learned, he would never have persuaded her to bring up her
daughter in reading of Cyprians works, Athanasius his epistles, and in
pervsing hear the wisdom of king Solomon, and in that she came to hear it
is not meant a bare heating; for, as I mentioned before, she came to hear,
and to learn, and to be instructed, yea to dispute with Solomon, to have his
resolution in great questions of religion, forth words of the text import so
much. For 1. King. 10. and 2. Chron. 9. the Queen of Sheba hearing the fame of
Solomon concerning the name of the Lord came to prove him with hard questions;
Hebr. levast^ bek^doth; the ^argum of Ionatham does expound it in this sort,
^euassa ^uth te be matlin, id est, vt tentaret eum in parabolis; the Greek,
(...). The hebrew word is k^dath, Proer. 1.6.
the greek (...), Lat. obscurae quaestiones, etc. dark questions. The vulgar
of Saint Jerome, and Tremellius latinize the greek word both calling these
hard questions, aenigmata. In the first of Proverbs I do find these words also
in the consequence of one verse alleged, one as it were after the other,
mashal melitsa dibre koccanam kidoth, These four words the greek expresses
thus, (...). The vulgar in latin expresses these words in this sort,
parabela, interpretatio, verba sapientum, and aenigmati ^eorum. Tremellius
translateth them also in this manner word for word. Our English Bible reads
these four words in this sort, a parable, and the interpretation, the words
of the wise, and their dark sayings. So that I may significantly enough here
use the word kidah as it sounds in the Hebrew radical, dark sayings, for so
much in nature the root imports. For k^d is anigmatic^ loqui, seu aenigma
aut problema proponere, To speak darkely, or to propose a riddle or hard
question, neither may it be unfitly used in the sense of acuere, To sharpen the
wit, which is kadad, whence comes kidah, signifying acumen, Sharpness of
wit. So that the definition of it is not unfitly give^ in this form, aenigma
est oration obscura, etc. A ridale is a dark speech tending to some profitable
use shadowing the substance of the matter it contains in obscure terms, in
greek thus, (...), (...).
A speech hiding in obscurity that which of it self is manifest: to that these
properties are to be expected in every aenigmaticall speech; the matter of it
must be a speech profitable; the form, obscu^e words, in show demonstrating
one thing* in sense disciphering another, seasoned with witty inve^tio^, as
with salt, that it may be pithy, co^dited with sweet mixture of discretion,
that it be pleasant, sugared with a quintesse^ce of great wisdom, that it may
ravish men with the admiration of the excellency of it, and yield a testimony
that the person, by whom it is uttered, has infused from almighty God great
gifts of wisdom and understanding. The definition, which is brought in
Athenaeus his tenth book dipnosophist. Athenaeus.
I suppose not convenient for this place, and person: the holy Ghost testifying
in the words before, that she came to prove Solomon with hard questions: and
our Savior testifying thereunto, that she came to hear the wisdom of
Solomon. If any man shall here inquire, what these questions were, I am not
able particularly to d^fine, since the scripture has uttered nothing of them.

Here these considered, let us weigh the place First we must not think, that
the Queen did propose unto Solomon foolish and idle questions, such as the
Apostle condemned 2. Tim. 2.23 (...), etc. Put away foolish and unlearned
questions, 2. Tim. 2.23. 1. Tim. 4.7.
knowing that they ^gender strife. and 1. Tim 4 7. (...), etc. Cast away
profane and ol^e wives fables, and exercise thy self unto godliness: since
our Savior has taught in this chapter, that of every idle word, that men
shall speak, they shall give ^ccompteth thereof at the day of judgment. Yet
the world is full of such questions; as I might instance in many not only of
schooleme^, Compend. Hist.
but of ou^ own age, etc. Those things, that Cedren mentions, I think
impertinent, and rather consort with old wives fables, then answer to any
truth, therefore I omit them. Some think that the questions, which were
proposed windings and turnings, and often shows and bends herself as were
unto the neighbor cha^pio^, ere it enter into her own cha^nell. But such
travail will better neither thy judgment, nor thy manners. But many travailers
in these days convert their peregrination to worse purposes, I say with
grief, many travail in these days of our country men into Dutchland to
learn drunkenness; into Italy, France, and Spain to learn the wickedness of
Moab and Ammon, to Venice to learn to keep curtisans; to Genua to learn
pride; to Rome to learn idolatry, and to practice treason: but the godly,
wise, learned, honorable, and valiant minds, that undertake travail, do it
for other ends, and such travelers as in this fort benefit themselves are an
ornament to their country, enrich their native soil, are means to pla^t good
laws among their people, plant colonies, enlarge Gods church, advance Gods
honor, and fulfill in our days that precept, that God gave to Noah Genesis
9.1.2.7. And God blessed Noah and his sons, Genesis 9.1.2.7.
and said them, bring forth fruit, and multiply, and replenish the earth.
Also the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the
earth, and upon every foul of the heaven, upon all that moves on the earth
etc. Of this order of travelers are godly and painful merchaunts, godly and
valiant soldiers, godly and learned preachers, godly and grave students, godly
and wise states men, godly and faithful christians: I mention, godly and
painful merchants, because their trauail is to bring in such commodities with
the danger of their lives which may enrich their country, and desire to make
new Seminaries of churches in such countries, as the gospel to our knowledge
has not yet been preached. I mention godly and valiant soldiers, because many
of them travel into other countries to learn feats of arms and strategemes
of war, whereby at their return home they may be the better able upon any
occasion to defend their own country, and because many of them in neighbor
countries about bend the bow, anoinct the shield, furbish their spears, make
ready their buckler, watch in their trenches, stand in there sallets and armor,
oppose their lives and bodies to the bullet of the musket, to the mouth of the
cano^in the service and defense of their prince and people, wiue; and children,
laws and religion. I mention godly and learned preachers, which travel into
diverse churches beyond seas to confer with some learned men excellinge in
some heavenly gifts, by whose conference they might be the better encouraged
to run to the end of the race, which already they have undertaken to
perform. I mention godly and wise states men, which travel into foreign
nations, to find whether the government at home be correspondent, as far
forth as the ancient customs and the old good laws of the country, wherein
they dwell, will permit in policy, be, I say correspondent and agreeable to
the laws and statutes of the best governed common wealths elsewhere: and to
this end and purpose, that they may better give counsel unto their country at
home after their return, do strive and labor to see, as the Poet says,
(...), The cities of diverse people, Hom. odyss. ^. Plat. de leg lib. 12.
and to know (...) their wisdom. For, as Plato says, (...), etc. A City
which has no experience to discern between good and evil men, if it
converse not with some foreign people, cannot possibly be brought unto
civility and perfection, neither can it by custom only observe the laws,
unless it wax more politic by the knowledge of others. I mention godly and
grave strudents, that thirst after good learning, and godly and faithful
Christians, that hunger and thirst after righteousness, because the spirit of
God has marshal, led this honorable Queen to be an holy leader in this
company, and to march under these colors, and has registered her in the book
of the righteous, that her memory should be sacred and honorable in all ages
to come, for that she came from the utmost parts of the earth to Jerusalem to
using Hilarious his books inoffenso pede, Without tripping, or stumbling into
error next after the reading of holy writ. Nay, if women might not have been
learned, the Prophet Joel would never in his second Chap. have foretold, that,
in the state of the new testament, maidens should prophecy, Gods spirit being
powered out upon the church imediatly after Christ our saviors ascensio^, which
should, with a mighty flood never failing in abundance of waters to the end of
the world, water from above the whole body of the church, as the mist, that did
use out of the spring amiddest Paradise, out of which the rivers issuing
watered the garden, and made it fruitful: Secondly you must not only stay
here, but you must needs proceed somewhat further in the vnfouldinge of these
words, To hear the wisdom of Solomon, As they, that look upon the sun,
ought not only to consider the brightness of his face, when it is oriental,
but also sometimes bend themselves to consider the benefit of his reflection;
and, besides this, also him, that is the creator of this sun, by which this
material world receives light, Ambros. Hexam. 4. die 4. cap. 1
according as Sant Ambrose has taught lib. 4. hexamer. die 4. cap. 1. So in
this poinct also you are not only to consider the wisdom of this Queen in
proposing to king Solomon these hard questions; but here we are, by the way of
reflection, to consider that which is added 1. King. 10.3. and 2. Chro^. 9.2.
how well king Solomon satisfied the Queens objections and how well he resolved
her doubts: 1. King. 10.3. 2. Chro. 9.2
which follows in these words, And Saloman declared unto her all her
questions: nothing was hid from the king, which he expounded not unto her.
These things noted, as from the body of the sun we proceed to consider the
benefit of his reflection, and from the reflection to consider the creator of the
sun, namely him, that made the sun to be the great light to rule the day, to
shine upon the earth, to separate the day from the night, to distinguish
seasons, days, and years etc. so we must not here persist in considering
Solomon only, Sy^^s. Hymn 5. (...) 1. King. 10.3. 2. Chr. 9.2.
but we must with all let this action of Solomon lead us by the hand to
consider his greatness, wisdom, power, fullnes of all knowledge, whom king
Solomon in this action prefigured. O! king Solomon the text says, And Solomon
declared unto her all her questions: nothing was hid from the king, which he
expounded not unto her. Which words in opinion import thus much, such hard
questions, as this Queen proposed, Solomon answered: such dark speeches as
this

Queen objected, king Solomon cleared: such doubtful matters, as moved some
scruple in her mind, king Solomon dissolved: all manner of reasons, that she
could allege, by the way of disputation king Solomon satisfied: there was no
secret of this Queens heart, but immediately the holy and heavenly wisdom of
God, that shined in king Solomon, a upon the reference, did unfold it. Now, if
king Solomon, a mortal man, though a notable figure of Christ, could so
largely and abundantly and sufficiently answer all this Queens doubts, and
fully satisfy; how much more sufficiently is the son of ^od able to satisfy
all the doubts, that rise in the church, which this Queen here figuratively
represents: and, to the comfort of the whole church militant, fully answer
all objections, that either the flesh, the world, the devil yea man or ^ngell
can move, being the w^sedome of the father, the beloved son, whom the father
has referred us to hear; Ioh. 5.
who has received the holy ghost, not by measure: of whose fullness we have
received all grace for grace, whose name be blessed for ever. I conclude here
this part, for that I have a little before handled this point by the way of
comparison, and therefore need not to reiterate same, vide page D. The next
particular of the second general, that comes to mine hands in this text to
be discussed, is, how this honorable and wise Queen behaveth her self in king
Salomons court. Our Savior says, she came from the uttermost ends of the
earth, to hear king Salomons wisdom. The wisdom of king Solomon, as I have
sufficiently before declared, was not only speculatiue, but practical: it was
not renowned only, as it was called Sapientia but, as it was also Prudentia:
neither was king Solomon famous for his universal knowledge only, but he was
honorably spoken of for that he managed all aff^res of his country and
kingdom, and, whatsoever he took in hand, Sapientia to the root, Prudentia to
the flower of M^^y. (...). Nazian in tetrastich. Arast. Eth 6
with great prudence, wisdom and discretion, and marshalled all things
answerable to his place and honor. For, although sapience and prudence be two
precious ^ewels, and two virtues of rare and excellent effects; yet
nevertheless, as one is greater then the other, so one is more profitable to
some states and persons then the other; yea sometimes in some persons one of
them is not linked with the other: yea oftentimes one of them is like to the
herb Moly, that Homer speaks of Odyss. m. in root: the other may more fitly
be compared to the herb Molyes flower. Yet, as Naziar zeu says, (...) Both
of them are gracious and lovely. This thing Aristotle has learnedly observed,
and verily pithily by the way of comparison noted in these words. And in this
antithesis or mutual reference, Wisdom is a virtue mere intellectual,
proposing to it self things only contemplative: Prudence an active virtue
proposing to it self operation in such things, as are mere pract^ke. Wisdom
respects things most excellent in nature, yea it seeks to learn mysteries
above the compass of nature: prudence works upon such matters, as are
commodious for civil life. Wisdom regards only knowledge, and therein
reposeth her contentation: Prudence respects how she may benefit her self
and others, there is her delectation. Wisdom considers vniversals; Prudence
considers particulars, and how things are in use, and may be well used.
Wisedoms object are things always immutable (as they be in themselves, and in
their causes, as far forth as Intellectus agens, The active understanding,
which is the eye of ma^s soul, is able to reach.) Prudence is wholly exercised
in matters, deliberatiue or in civil actions to the life of man commodious or
discommodious; in such things, I say, as are often by their sundry events
particularly altered, sometimes by one occasion, sometimes by another, yet
always such, as serve man's life to some good end, or other. Wisdom is only
behouefull and good for the party that spe^deth his time in conte^platio^ but
Prudence studieth to benefit it self, and rests not til it has wrought
benefit to others. Men renowned for wisdom were Anaxa^^as, Thales, and such
like among the heathen, who studied wholely to know great things,
wonderful, and things farthest remote from sense, which knowledge, though it
were delectable to the mind, yet this knowledge was not so commodious for civil
life, whereas by nature homo animal civil, Arist. polit. 1.1. Cic. some. scip.
natum adco^munem vi^a societate^ tuendam Man is a civil creature born to
maint^ine a common and sociable life. But for prudence, Solon, Aristides,
Pericles, Themistocles, Phocion,, Nicias, Alcibiades, Scipio were famous: and
to speak more sincerely true according to holy scripture, Joseph, Moses,
Joshua, David, and such like were renowned, who governed people by counsel and
by the knowledge of learning meet for people: which were rich in might, power
and discretion, which have left a name behind them, which fought many
batteils, overthrew great armies, and were honorable in their generations. Now
although these virtues, I grant, do not allwaies concur in one subject,
according to the proverb, the greatest clerks are not the wisest men, et E
contra the wisest men are not the greatest clerks: and it being seen
oftentimes that where some me^ have been most addicted to the contemplative
life, they might have spent their times better, and have more benefited the
church, their country, and such, as by the law of nature they were bound to
provide for, and to defend; and many such, as have been prudent me^, have not
been much devoted to the contemplative life; yet, as it appears, these two
virtues through Gods blessing both at one time were infused into Solomon:
neither after this heavenly ingraffing of them into him did king Solomon bury
them by sloth in his own heart, neither did the holy spirit, by whom
immed^atly they were given him, suffer them to rust, but daiely more and more
by the same power, that they were powered upon him, did the king exercise them,
use them, and show them in the world to Gods glory, and to his own comfort,
and to the benefit of others. For by the virtue of the speculatiue habit of
wisdom he resolved the Queens doubt by her alleged: by his practike
virtues and prudence he found out, when two women strove for a live child, 1.
King. 3.26.
whether of them both was his natural mother. By the virtue of speculatiue
wisdom he was wiser then all the children of the East, yea he excelled all
the Egyptians in wisdom etc. 1. King. 4.29.
By practike wisdom king Solomon devised and perfited his glorious buildings,
ordained his burnt offerings in the house of God, disposed the service of his
table, 1. King. 10.
and marshalled his servant, watters and butlers in the order of their
waiting, in the manner of their sitting, prescribing unto each sort, how seemly
they should be apparailled, or what livery they should wear, and how they
should give their attendance. I mention these four latter especially because
this Queen principally fixes her eyes upon these things, and because they be
registered in the text, and is the second branch of king Salomons wisdom, which
this Queen came to know and to understand, behauing her self in king Salomons
court like a wise intelligencer, yea a sacred obseruer of such actions,
offices, officers and honorable orders, with which the court of king Solomon
was beawtyfied, and adorned. By this discreet observing of this wise and
mighty Queen we may learn thus much, that, when wise and discreet persons
come into princes courts or kingdoms, usually they make a survey, as far
forth, as they may in honor, without offense of state, king and counsel, of
all such orders, ^ites, ceremonies, offices, services, by which the Prince and
people floorisheth, and maintain a due reputation of honor either at home, or
in foreign countries, and that common wealth, where princes with piety,
wisdom, learning, justice, and mercy manage all their affairs, is like a
fountain of Crystal water, that yields benefit not only to the
inhabitants, where it springs, but fertilytie unto other nations also, by
which it flows: it is like a lamp, that shines, not only to the house where
it is lighted, but serves also, without impairing of ^i own light, for others
to take light of it. Nay such a state is like the sun in the firmamenl, from
whence the moon, the daughter of the night, and the stars Arcturus, Mazzaroth,
Job. 9.9.38 31.32. Amos. 5.8.
Orion, the Pleiades and the rest of that glistering and beawtifull consort
derive their comfortable beams, and light resplendent. Whereby I garher thus
much, that this honorable Queen for this second reason also came to Jerusalem,
A Phaebo Phaebe lumen capit: et a sapie^te insipiens.
desirous to water the gardens of Aethiopia by waters flowing from Salomons
fountains: desirous to light a lamp in Salomons court to illuminate her own
court in Meroe, or Saba: desirous that the sun of wisdom, which shined in
Jerusalem, might yield also some beams to the nations, countries and people,
which were subject to her scepter ^egall crown and dignity in the provinces of
Aethiopia.

But, lest I should over long persist in dilating this argument, let this
example of this Queen be an instruction to al wise and godly travailers and
states men, how they should behave themselves in foreign courts: and what
things they should especially regard and consider. On the other side we may
learn what things Christian Princes and honorable persons ought principally
in all their governmentes to have an eye to, and wisely to dispose of, all the
time of their regiment, their Pall^ces, their Tables, their Servants, the
Service of Gods church ^he greatness of their buildings demonstrateth to many
people their riches, and artificial direction in matters archit^ctonicall. The
regal service of their tables performed in sobriety and temperance
demo^strateth their magnificence Hest. cap. 1. Hest. 1. Psalm. ^01. Salomons
building of the temple, and Saltum domus Libani vide Joseph. lib. 8. cap. 2.
vide Iudeth. cap. 1. Arist Eth. lib. 4. cap. 2. (...) does respect regal and
magnificall expenses either in the service of God or in public defense of the
common wealth etc.
The good order of their servants shows how sincerely they follow and
perform that, which the holy Prophet Psalm. 101. promises unto God, in what
manner he would live in his house, when he was advaunced to the throne of his
kingdom, and how sacred a seminary of holy d^scipline his court should be.
Lastly, the care of Gods sacrifice, namely, how that should be offered,
demonstrateth how zealously governors should embrace religion, how sincerely
they should serve God, and how faithfully they should submit their scepters to
Christ's kingdom. These things strangers, that resort into Princes courts may
always lawfully ponder for their better instruction, eschewing as Crocodiles,
al things that might impeach any way this course, and which might disturb the
peace of the country or court, which they come into, and all practices that may
savor of curiosity, much less of sedition, rebellion, or treason.

Now since this honorable Queen in king Salomons court especially notes these
four things, and the second and third are of most wise men diligently marked
and noted, and the fourth in this age, if not of many mere politicians, yet of
alwise, godly, and learned are mervailously observed: and since that no
regiment can be truly blessed, where the sacrifice of the house of God is
neglected, it behooves all princes with special regard to tender all things,
which appertain to Gods glory and his service: For on this string depends
the principal point of Christian government, and the office of great governors
herein consists, as it appears Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
And when the king shall sit upon the throne of his kingdom, then shall he
write him this law repeated in a book by the Priests of the Levites: and it
shall be with him, and he shall read therein all days of his life, that he
may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this law,
and these ordinances to do them. And because of that commandment, which is
given in the second Psalm to all kings and princes in these words, Be wise
now therefore, ye kings, Psalm. 2.10.11.12.
be learned, ye judges of the earth, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in
trembling. Kiss the son, least he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when
his wrath shall suddenly burn, blessed are al, that trust in him. This which
may be illustrated also not unfitly by that place of Saint Augustine lib. 2.
Aug co^rta. liter Petil. li. 2. cap. 92.
contraliter as Petiliani cap. 92. Christian princes have a double office
imposed from God upon them, whereof the one they be bound as Christian men to
perform, the other to perform as they be Christian princes. Reges cu^ in
errore sunt, etc. Kings and princes when they are in error, make laws for
defense of their error against the truth; likewise when they are in the truth,
they establish decrees for the maintenance of truth against error: so that
both good men are tried by evil laws, and evil men amended by good
ordinances. King Nabuc hodono sor whilst he was misled by his wiseme^ made a
cruel law that his image should be worshipped: and he again being led into
the right way made a good law, that the true God should not be blasphemed. For
in this do kings perform that service unto God which is given them in charge
from above (as far forth as they are kings) if in their kingdoms they
establish that which is good, and suppress that which is evil, not only in
matters perteining unto civil society, but also in causes of religion. Aug.
Crescon. gra^. lib. 3. cap. 2.
This speak to signify these two caueats, the one for that there are in these
days, I fear me, a number crept into Christian pr^nces courts privy espials,
prying into all matters with cattes, yea with Lynceus his eyes, of whom the
Lyricall Poet thus spoke.

-- (...)
(...)
(...). --
For he had a sharper eye then any man on earth besides whosoever.

Men, that are like spiders, sucking poison, men, which like toades th^rst
after venim like envies brattes feed upon adders food, firebrands of
^edition, simple in show, devilish in action; men, lovers of lies, and
falsehood which construe good actions ill, Job. 1.10. Jude.
as the devil accused Job: which condemn things unknown, like those beasts,
that Saint Jude in his epistle lively describes: which speaks of them, that
are in authority, like cursing Shimei, and like them, that Saint Peter speaks
of 2. Pet. 2.10.11.12. 2. Pet. 2.10 11.12.
which walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise the
government; which are presumptuous, and stand in their own conceit, and
fear not to speak evil of them, that are in dignity. Whereas the angels,
which are greater both in power and might, give not railing judgment against
them before the Lord* but these, as brute beasts, led with sensuality, and made
to be taken, and destroyed, speak evil of those things, Vergestan. in Theatro
crudelitat. baereuc. excuso antverp. Catholicus quidam in vbe Dub^i correptus
pelli vrsin^ in^uti ab^nfestiffimis Ang^e molossis laceratur. Zach. 3. Psalm.
52.2.3.4.5.6.
which they know not, and shall perish through their own corruption, etc. Into
which crew and catalogue the authors of Calvino-^ur^ismus, the reporters of
many assertions of horrible lies inserted to Stapletons promptuarium morale,
the pictures of Vergestanu^ his tables, and many pamphleters of the like stamp
are to be ascribed. Al which may be answered rather in that sort that the angel
of the Lord answers the devil in the 3. of the Prophet Zachary, the Lord
rebuke thee, Satan, yea the Lord, that has chosen Jerusalem, reprove thee. Or
with the Psalm. 52.2.3.4.5.6. Thy tongue imagines mischief, and is like a
sharp rasor, that cutteth deceitfully. Thou do love evil more then good,
and lies more then to speak the truth. Thou love alwords, that may destroy,
O deceitful tongue. So shall God destroy thee for ever, ^e shall take thee, and
pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the
loving. The righteous also shall see it, and fear, and shall laugh him.
Wherein the prophet David does lively discover the actions and punishments of
such serpents, as delight to spit out against the innocent such poison. The
second caveat wherefore I note so seriously that governors every one in their
places should have great care faithfully to dispose all civil actions
committed to their regiment, and principally, to bend their studies to maintain
Gods service and holy sacrifice, is because men's eyes are not only fixed over
their kingdoms to look what is done there, but because the eyes of God do
continually watch over all regences, even the seven eyes of the Lamb, Apocal.
5. Psalm. 82.1.
which do behold all things: and for that, which the prophet says, God
stands in the assembly of Gods, he judges among Gods. Hesiodus an heathen
poet persuaded the rulers of his time to do justice because, as he says,
(...) Hesiod. (...). 250.

(...)
(...),
(...).
Omitting Hesiod, and them that only by the light of nature discourse of this
argument, I end this part with this exhortation, Ye rulers of the earth be
learned, deo justice, kiss the son, least he be angry: etc. With diligent eye
regard Gods service and sacrifice, and let my counsel herein be acceptable
unto you. For there is a great watch-ma^ over all kingdoms, yea such a
watchman as the Prophet Daniel describes, chap. 4. verse. 10. which, if the
mighty tree, Dan. 4.10.
under which the beasts of the feeld have their shadow, in whose bowghes the
fowls of heaven dwell, under whom all flesh is sed; if, I say, this tree bring
not forth good fruit answerable to his place. and neglect the sacrifice of
God^ tabernacle, this watch man, I say, which the holy prophet saw, that Holy
one which came down from heaven, Dan. 4.11. (...) chaldaice. vide Theodoret in
Dan. 4. (...). schol graec. (...). aliud schol (...) Annot. bib. graec. Romans
excus. Pererius a Jesuit has written imperfectly of this word (...) Pintus
has spoken more to purpose upon that place, yet not perfectly.
will cry a loud, H^w down the tree, and break of his branches, shake of his
leaves, and scatter his fruit, that the beasts may flee from under it, and the
fowls from his branches, I should here enter into the description of that
sacred confession, which this holy Queen makes to God, glorifying him that
for his names sake, and for Israel his peoples sake had set on the throne of
Israel such a king, as Solomon was, and had blessed him with so great a measure
of his spirit, and made him king to do equity and righteousness. But this part
cannot now be polished or amplifyed by my discourse, least I be over tedious to
you, and partly for that some things of this discourse may not vnfittly be used
in the application.

The last part.
These things sufficiently discoursed upon, the last part of my text offers
itself to mine handling, which is the action of this honorable person in
another world in the life to come, and in the day of the general resurrection,
Her action: and honor in the life to come is demonstrated in these words or
testimony of our Savior, The Queen of the S^wth shall rise in judgment with
this generation, and shall co^de^ne it. This great person was by sex as you
have heard, a woman; by vocation, a Queen; in wealth abundant; in knowledge, a
rare Phaenix; in trauail, laborious; in disputations, learned; in observation,
discreet; in behavior, honorable and wise; in train, magnificall? in
rewardinge Solomon, heroical; in religion, studious, zealous and fervent. Yet
al these, except the reward of her religion, have at length an end: her
kingdom she was to leave to her lawful successors; the abundance of her
riches to her trusty executors; her knowledge experime^tal in civil actions was
in another world unnecessary; the beauty of her face, and comlines of her body
was to turn to ashes; her magnifical train could do her no more honor, then
to see her funerals regally performed; her body imbaulmed, her bones intered;
only by her princely, virtues and rare knowledge she obtained a glorious
report in earth, and by the integrity of her faith a crown of glory in
heaven. In that she was a Queen, she was to be honored; in that she was a
learned Queen, she was to be admired; at in that she regards to keep the
decorum of her person, she was to be commended; in that she takes pains to
travel so long, and so laborious a iourny, she is to be by all lovers of virtue
remembered; in that she is able to dispute in deep questions of Divinity with
king Solomon, she is to be registered, in the book of the just, in that she
observes things done in king Salomons court, she is to be chronicled; in that
she rewards king Solomon so heroically with fames trumpet, she is to be
celebrated; in that she glorifieth Gods name for king Salomons gifts, it
shows that with the malicious mothe and rust of envy her heart was not
ca^kred; in that she was not only learned, but religiously learned, she was
to be reverenced; lastly in that she receives such a testimony of our Savior
in the new testament, she was thereby in the book of life canonized; Yet to
knite up all in one; honor, riches, peregrination, civil and humane science,
discretion, fame, bewty, body, limme, life have an end, and all worldly honor
has their catastrophe in conclusion; and incur necessarily in the end that
sentence of Esaias 40.6.7. which sounds with a cry in all our ears: All flesh
is grass, and all the grace thereof, is as the flower of the field. Wherefore
according to that of the prophet this mass of earth that we carry about us in
the end must be dissolved, the beauty thereof finally must fade, the flower
will fall and fail; yea the outward pomp and shining of king Salomo^ who^
this Queen came to consulte, that was renouned over all the world, and
glittered so gorgeouslye above all the princes of the earth, Math. 6.5.
in the end withered like to the grass of the field, which is to day, and to
morrow is cast into the oven; but the word of the Lord indureth for ever. This
testimony that our savior Christ attributes to this faithful Queen, this
testimony, I affirm, abides for ever, and shows that the glorious reward,
blessed foelicity, aeternal happiness of this renouned Queen in the kingdom of
God so far surpasses al worldly honor, knowledge and delights, Stilla muriae
Tulli de Finibus.
as far as the Ocea^ exceeds in greatness stil^a^ muriae, A drop of brine, as
far as the light of the sun exceeds the light of a rush candle shining
through a small creuis, as far as the Alps or Olympus exceed a mole hill, In
divitijs Craesi teruncij accessio.
as far as the abundance of Crassus and Craesus riches, innumerable to us,
exceed a quewe, codrant, or farthing in a beggars purse.

The world has made great reckoning of Alexander the great his foelicity,
Phillip of Macedons policy, Hercules fortitude, Julius Caesar's bounty, Traians
clemency, Marcus Aurelius wisdom, Antonius Pius care of the common wealth,
Aristotle's learning, Catoes severity, Scip^oes continency, Laelius amity,
Fabritius integrity, and such like men endued with civil virtues. Neither can
I deny but these virtues were very beneficial to the civil life of man in
those times of darkness when that thick fogge of ignorance like the 9. plague
of Egypt possessed the world, Exodus 10 ver. 21. Sap. 17. I say moreover that
these actions of the heathen, and these civil virtues of outward works God
rewarded in this life abundantly, as Saint Augustine de C^vit. Dei has
sufficiently in these words demonstrated, and by holy scripture proved. Aug. de
civit. Dei ca. 15. and 16. lib. 5.
Qui privatas suas res prore communi, etc. The heathen who set light by their
private commodities in regard of the public weal and common treasure; who
bridled avarice, and lived sincerely without breach of laws or other outrage,
have been honored almost in all nations, have brought other nations in
subjection to their country, and at this day are famous throughout the earth in
all histories. They received their reward here on earth, because they did these
good works that they might be glorified amongst men. Yet I must on the other
side confess and defend that merces Sanctorum long alta est, etc. The reward
of the Saints is far different. Who in this life run the race that is
before them without fainting, fixing the eyes of their faith, upon the crown
of eternal life, which is proposed unto them to obtain. This crown (I may
boldly say) this holy Queen principally affected in regard of the testimony,
by the which of our Savior she is in my text to her perpetual and everlasting
good honored. The Queen of the South shall rise in judgment with this
generation and shall condemn it. In which words I observe these principal
points; first her resurrection, secondly the the judicial authority that God
gives her. By the resurrection I understand not the first resurrection which
is from sin, Apoc. 1.20.5.6.
but the general resurrection of all flesh which in the day of judgment shall
be accomplished, namely in the general judgment wherein the Lord himself
shall desce^d from heaven with a shoute, Epist. ad These. Cap. 4.
and with the voice of an Archangell and with the trumpet of God; at what hour
they that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and at what hour, they shall
come forth that have done good to everlasting life, Euang. John. 5.
but they that have done evil to everlastinge condemnation. Then the glory of
this Queen shall be seen, when her body that was sowed in corruption, shall
rise in incorruption; when her flesh that was sown in dishonor, shall rise in
honor; when her outward man that was sown in weakness, shall be raised in
power, when her body natural shall be raised a body spiritual; Ad Cor. 1.15.
Ep. ad. Timoth. 2. cap. 4.
in that day wherein the righteous judge shall give a crown of righteteousnes
unto her, and to all them that love his appearance.

The second and last thing that I observe this testimony of our Savior, is
that wherewith this Queen shall the^ be honored, which is judicial power.
This Queen shall not only rise, but judicial Power shall be given unto her,
which power is expressed in these words. This Queen being risen, or rather
raised by Christ our Savior in the resurrection, shall condemn this
generation, this obstinate and rebellious people of the Jews, in whose hearts
incredulity is ingraued with an iron pen; with the point of a Diamond, Ierem.
cap. 17.
with the claw of an eagle, which have hearts that cannot repent, and know not
the time of their visitatio^, If it shall be here objected that judicial power
is only give^ to the son of God, according to that answer of our Savior the
5. of John's gospel. v. 26.
For as the father has life in himself: so likewise has he given to the
son to have life on himself. And has given him power also to execute
judgment, v. 27.
in that he is the son of man. v. 30.
I can do nothing of mine own self: as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is
just because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the father who has sent
me. Civil. in John. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Whereby Saint Cirell has perspicuously proved in his commentaries upon the 5.
of John, that by the argument of the act of exercising of judgment Christ our
savior is inuincibly demonstrated to be of the same substance with the
father in these words. Psalm. 81. Psalm. 74.
Cui orbem terraru^ iudicare convenit nisi soli Deo? etc. To whom does it
appertain to judge the world but God alone? who^ only the holy Scripture
calls unto judgment saying; Arise, O God, and judge the earth. And again,
because God is judge, he puts down one, and lif^eth up another. He says,
Judgment is given him of his father, not that he has not this power of his
own nature; but he shows that all things are in his divine power by wais of
dispensation in regard of his manhooode. Yet this argument infringeth nothing
this honor, that our Savior in this place attributes to this Queen in the
resurrection of the dead. True it is that properly to speak, only judgment,
condemnation, life, death is given by the father to Jesus Christ, in that sort
as our Savior has spoken chap. 5. Ioh. in the verses before cited; and
essentially it is due to none but only to that person which is God by nature.
And in this sense it is derogatory to the Godhead, absolutely to affirm, that
any shall judge or condemn, but only such a person as is by essence God. But
in this sense it is not understood here; wherefore I suppose that that
distinction which the Schoolmen have given though somewhat barbarbarously in
word, yet pithily in sense may sufficiently satisfy this objection, and
plainly express without al absurdity, Aquin. Suppl. 3. part. Sum. Quaest. 88.
Art. 1.
in what sense our savior has attributed in this place judicial authority to
this Queen in the general resurrection. If the word to judge or condemn which
is a part of judgment be taken principally and essentially, it is peculiar to
the three persons in the blessed Trinity, the Famther, Psalm. 96.9. Vrsin. exp.
Symb.
God comes to judge the world to righteousness, and the people in his truth.
Iudicium erit trium personarum Divinitatis quoad consensum and authoritatem.
All the three persons of the Godhead shall judge in respect of their consent
and authority. humana natura God and man in man's nature, because in that nature
he has redeemed us, and for that the final sentence in the last doom shall
be pronounced by him only: and according to this humane nature, it is said that
Christ shall judge potestate ordinata and delegata. By a subordinate power,
Thirdly the twelve Apostles of the Lamb shall judge accessoria dignitate. By
accessory dignity which then shall be given them, according to that in the 19.
of Saint Matthew v. 20. And Jesus said unto the^, verily I say unto you that
when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his majesty, ye which followed
me in the regeneration shall sit also upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve
tribes of Israel. And for that they were eye witnesses of those eye miracles
that Christ our Savior wrought, Act. 1.21.22.
and because they faithfully preached unto the Jews and all the world his
doctrine, according to the rule whereby the whole world shall be judged; and for
that in the excellency of glory given them by Christ our Savior they shall
ouershine others by diversity of glory in the day of judgment. All the
faithful shall judge iudicij approbatione, that is, all the faithful shall
subscribe to the judgment of our Savior in the general doom of all the
world, that that judgment which Christ our Savior shall then pronounce is true
and just, when the sentence shall be given for the godly venite benedicte etc.
come ye blessed, and the contrary sentence shall be uttered against the wicked
Ite maledicto etc. go ye cursed. This sentence (I say) the godly shall with
their approbation testify, such honor shall be given to al Gods Saints. And in
this sense that honor is given to the faithful to judge and to condemn
according to this judgment of approbatio^ in that place of S. John. And after
these things I heard a great multitude in heaven saying Halleluiah; Apoc. 19.
salvation, and honor, and glory, and power be to the Lord our God. For true
and righteous are his judgments: for he has condemned the great whore, which
did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his
servants shed by her hand. And again they said Halleluiah: and her smoke rose
up for evermore. And the 24 elders, and the four beasts fell down and
worshipped God that sat one the throne saying Amen Halleliuah. Ephesians. 1. 1. Cor.
6.3.
According to this form of judgment I suppose also these words may be
understood of S. Paul, For I accord with Bezaes exposition that the faithful
shall judge the Angels. 1. Diabolu^ cum suis Angelis.
Lastly, according to this judgment of Approbation this holy and Godly Q. of
the South shall judge and condemn the incredulous ewes, the hard hearted Jews,
I say, in whose streets Christ our Savior prophesied, in whose streets Christ
our Savior cast out Devils, amongst who^ he did so many good deeds, and
wrought so many miracles; who did stop their ears like deaf Adders, rather
then they would hear him who was far greater then K. Salomo^, who^ K. Solomon
shadowed, who infused to K. Salomo^ his great wisdom; who did not only stop
their ears rather the^ they would hear him, but withal did spet out venim
against him that sought to save the^; who did not only spet out venim against
him, but with their tails stung him to death, who called them of his infinite
goodness to repentance, who prayed for their conversion when they crucified him.
To which Savior with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor, power, and
dominion rendered both now and for ever. Amen.

THE APOLOGY OR DEFENSE of the Church and Commonwealth of England for their
annual celebration of Q. Elizabeth's Coronation day the 17. of November.
HAving in the Sermon or treatise going before, sufficiently (as I take it)
discoursed of each point naturally issuing out of the general fountain of the
text, wherein the Queen of the South hit holy Peregrination is summarily and
perspicuously described by our Savior, Mat. 12.42. Luke 11.31.
instanced in, and inferred by him in the way of comparison to convince the
Jews of ungrateful obstinacy, obstinate infidelity, and wilful refusal of the
light of the blessed Gospel by his ministry revealed unto the^: And having at
large in the preface of this book yielded some reasons whereby I rather bound
my self to this text then any other at that time, annexing thereunto by way of
illation such matter as I took to be pertinent to my purpose, and convenient
for the present occasion: It remains now that to these heads before
specified, I should adioine in manner of Apology a discourse of a controversy
somewhat appendent and belonging to the matter antecedent. In which Apology I
have undertaken, as far forth as God shall enable me, to defend, that the
celebration of the festivitie in these times, yearly solemnized the
seventeenth of November by the people of this Land, to Gods glory, and her
Majesty's comfort, is an office in it self sacred, religious, no ways
repugnaunt to Gods holy word, and the constitutions of the holy Catholic
Church: And that the triumphs and the signs of joy that day performed by the
faithful and dutiful subjects of this Realm, and such orderly disportes,
are things in their own nature laudable, commendable, and in no sort
disagreeable with the actions of any well governed state, or well ruled
commonwealth. I have undertaken the handling of this argument by the
assistaunce of Gods holy spirit upon these reasons.

First because this argument suiteth my former treatise, and is, Odyss 9.
as I may term it with the Greek Poet, (...) a fragment though not naturally
issuing out of it, yet necessarily by the way of consequence joined with it.

Next in this treatise all faithful subjects of this Realm may behold as in a
glass the good fruits that due obedience usually brings forth, to their
great peace and comfort, and to the good examples of many ages following: and
what offices of benevolence all true subjects owe by the law of God and man,
to their princes, superiors and governors, Romans 13.
who bear the sword by Gods ordinance for their defense, under whose shadow
they are shrouded, in whose branches they build, under whose patronage by Gods
holy institution they are shielded.

Thirdly, for that I hope by the plain and effectual handling of this present
argument, that many of her Majesty's subjects which have been contrarily
persuaded by certain seditious spirits privily lurking in this Realm, will upon
the just view and diligent reading of this discourse be reclaimed from then
former misconceipts which they had before unadvisedly made approbation of.

Fourthly for that in mine opinion, the sincere clearing of these accusations
contained in this treatise ex officio appertain to him upon whom the office of
preaching the 17. of November at Paul's is by authority imposed.

Lastly, for that the blossoms of this Apology shall I hope in short time by
Gods grace yield some fruits of gratitude, not altogether unseemly to present
her Highness with all, by whose honorable stipend I have been relieved these
many years in this famous University, and by whose magnificence when I served
the Church of God in the Netherland being Chaplain to the Earl of Leceister
his Honor, I was graciously rewarded.

Moreover I do beseech all that shall read this treatise, not rashly to
condemn at the first sight any thing that shall be inferred in the discourse,
and shall concern this present argument; this treatise being mere
Apologetical, indicted of no gal of bitterness, but only penned to this end to
justify the Church and commonwealth of England in the action of the
solemnizatio^ used yearly in these times the 17. of November, and to satisfy
them that have been contrarily persuaded by such as have not wished well unto
the state of Religion now publicly professed in this Realm, and to the
blessed peace which through Gods mercy England has long enioied, and does yet
enjoy, (and God grant it may long enjoy) under the happy regiment of Queen
Elizabeth: desiring them, that have been otherwise instructed, Tertul. Apolog.
c. 1.
with Tertullian that adversariorum infestatio non obstruat viam defension^.
But that ^^ceat veritati vel occulta via tacitarum literarum ad aures ipsorum
per venire, and that they would vouchsafe to imitate herein the commendable
example of Foelix the Deputy though otherwise a corrupt Judge, Act ^3.
who would not hear S. Paul his most just defense, neither release him upon
the testimonial contained in Claudius Lysias his Epistle, until he had heard
what his adversaries could speak against him.

I desire thee to observe herein also (Gentle Reader) that in this tract my
chief drift and intent is only to answer such accusatio^s as are objected
against our celebrities now yearly used the 17. of November in manner and form
before specified. But yet because the authors of this accusation have so
cunningly framed their speeches that it is impossible almost to defend the
solemnes of the Coronation without mention also of our thankfulness to God in
remembering the day of the Queens Nativity, very willingly in defending the one
I acknowledge my self no less armed to defend the other. And although I
mention only, or for the most part the day of the Coronation, yet understand
that the very same objections are for the most part of that nature, that
oppugning the one, they do oppugn the other: those accusations I mean that
they allege against the Coronation day, fitted by them artificially, do
serve to oppugn also our celebrities used for Queen Elizabeth's birthday:
imitating herein the skill of experimented Canoniers, who although they take
their aim directly against one part of an opposite rampire of stone which
they batter, do not only strike that part which they fix their eyes upon in
the discharge, but immediately strike the directly adverse part also by no
less violence in repercussion and rebound: imitating, I say, herein Echoes,
in which one voice does yield two sou^ds, and those brazen Cymbals in the
temple of Jupiter Dodonaeus, Chil. Eras. Cent. 1. and Suidas.
which were so artificially contrived, that if one rank were touched, the
other also sounded: resembling likewise the sound of the Lute, which if you
press in the neck with the left hand, the right hand is enforced to strike
the same strings in the belly of the Lute. And that I may the better keep my
self within compass, in few words I will lay down the state of the
Controversy, that in it you may see the substance of the matters in this
argument to be discussed.

THE STATE OF THE QVESTION.
1 Whether the sacred solemnities at these times yearly celebrated by the
Church of England the 17. of November, commonly named (QVEENE ELIZABETH'S HOLY
DAY) be repugnant to the immaculate institutions of the law of God, and to the
reverend and Christian constitutions of the holy Catholic Church?

2. Whether the triumphs undertaken and performed at Court that day ^onfires,
r^nging of bells, discharging of Ordinance at the Tower of London in the honor
of the Queen, and other signs of joy then usually and wilingly exhibited by
the people of our Land to express their vnfaine a love to her Majesty, be
laudable, convenient, and in their own natures tolerable in a Christian
Commonwealth?

The Adversaries hold the Negative as it has appeared, and does appear by
speeches, and writings: we hold and teach the contrary to the^ herein: but
because a bare Assertion is not of sufficient validity to decide a matter
controversial, and a bare Negative is not of it self in such a case a sound
and sufficient answer without the reason of our Negative; Cic. 1. de Natura De.
orum. Ipse dixit. Turpe est philosopho aliquid dicere sine ratione, qua^to
magis Theol.
and since Pythagaras his (...) is not a ground sure enough in controversies
now a days for the opponent to use, or the Adversary to rely upon, without
other probable and sufficient reasons; the particular and sincere alleging of
our Adversaries objections, and the allation of our answers, will easily
demonstrate who maintain the undoubted truth, and who deal sophistically,
maliciously, untruly.

And because in custom of Schools oppositions ordinarily are precedent to
solutions: In places of judgment, accusations are accustomably heard before
defenses; plaintifes inform, before defendantes put in their answers; I will
first lay down what exceptions our Adversaries take against the solemnization
the 17. of November in this Realm performed; who be the accusers in this
action, and what manner of persons they be that have picked this quarrel,
with what ^ile their weapons have been sharpdened, in what mould they have
been cast, on what anvilde they have been hammered.

The Accusers.
I find in this Action four accusers, three of them of our own nation, O^om.
in Macchab.
the fourth by profession a Jesuit, or as they call themselves of the Society
of Jesus, borne in Lorayne as he says himself, Sand. de schi^^m pa. 302 303.
Ra^n in Calu. Iui^^ Lib. 2. Page 347. Cap. 18.
by name Nicolaus Serrarius. The English men are Nicolas Sanders in his book
de schismat^ Page 302.303. William Raynolds in Call. Turc. Lib. 2. Page 347.
Cap. 18. according to these additions in which they are now printed, the third
also, which I take to be an English man, I term Anonymall, because those
things that he has objected come to me but at the second hand, and by the
reference of some other, the author remaining Individuum vagum. But because
Sanders, Reynolds, and Serrarius are holde^ men of greater reputation for
opinion of learning, variety of reading, and laborious penning, by them that
prefer Babylon before Syon, the traditions of men before the heavenly
inspired and purified word of light and life; I will especially insist in this
discourse upon such accusations, as they have devised, contrived, uttered, and
set abroach in the world.

Accusation.
The Church and common wealth of England transgresses against the laws, and
offends against the sacred practices of the holy Catholic Church, and by
the issue thereof against God, in that it solemnly celebrateth the 17 of
November, and ordeineth it to be a holy day, or day sacred by church service to
the honor of Queen Elizabeth.

The triumphs at Court, and other signs of joy that day usually exhibited by
the people of the Land, are foolish, ridiculous, mere heathenish, and actions
that savoure of nothing else but mere ^latteries etc.

The sum of these accusations, and the substance of these exclamations which
they have used in this debatement, may be reduced breisely to these heads, and
conveniently digested after this manner.

Objections appertaining to the first general head.
The repugnancy of these solemnizations and celebrities to Gods holy word, and
the constitution of the holy

Such public offices of any church that cannot be warranted by Gods holy
word, that have neither president therein to patronage them, not any good
consequent out of scripture; which also have neither decree, Canon, nor
constitution of the holy catholic church, neither any approved testimony of
any history, or of holy Father, are mere unlawful, scandalous, and merit
abolishing.

But the solemnization and celebrity now yearly used in the church of England
the 17. of November cannot be warranted in such sort, as it is required in the
premises of the Mayor.

Ergo The solemnization and celebrities now yeerelie used in the church and
commonwealth of England the 17. of November are mere unlawful, scandalous
and merit abolishing.

All church service, wherein all glory and honor is not

But the Ecclesiastical service some days used at these seasons in the church
of England is of this nature and quality.

Ergo the Ecclesiastical service some days used at these seasons in the church
of England is mere scandalous, impious, and intolerable.



But the solemnization of Q. Elizabeth's holy day works among Christian people
neglect etc. of a Saint canonized, namely of Sr. Hugh, sometime Bishop of
Lincoln.

Ergo the solemnization of Q. Elizabeth's holy day is not alowable.

Jesus Christ, are not to be tolerated in any Christian commonwealth.

But the church service and exercises now yearly used in England are of the
nature specified in the Mayor.

Ergo the church-services and exercises now yearly used in England the 17. of
November are not to be tolerated in any Christian commonwealth.

The objections that appertain to the second general head.
Whereas they presuppose we will deny it, that the church of England prescribes
that day to be observed as an holy day, they labor to prove by these cavils
ensuing that our denial herein is merely vnture, and contradicts our own
decrees prescriptions, and approbations.

The denomination follows the whole, or the Mayor part.

But the days of Queen Elizabeth's Coronation, and Nativity have all the
signs of holy days:

Ergo the days of Q. Elizabeth's Coronation and Nativity are observed for holy
days by us.

2 Those days must needs be reputed holy days by us, Christ's Nativity, and
then the day of his Ascension.

Ergo the days of the Queens Nativity and Coronation must needs be reputed as
holy days by us.

The sum and substance of al their obiectio^s, that I have seen or heard,
are concluded in form dialectical in these premises: it remains now that I
should examine them, answer the^, and refel the^, as far forth as, God shall
enable me: which thing I will endeavor to perform by Gods grace by trying the^
upon approved touchstones, by waying the^ in indifferent balances, and by
bringing them unto the light which discovers and proves al, Ioh. 3.20.
wherein I will labor by the fire of Gods word, to sever gold from brass,
stubble and hay from precious stones: and will do my best by the testimony of
ancient approved learning, to deal herein like as the Eagle, who willingly
nourishes such yo^g ones and acknowledges the^ to be her own which ca^ look
on the Globe of the Sun without winking, or any impeaching of the christaline
humor of the eye, excluding the other out of his nest as haggards, bastards,
and misbegotten.

By the premises the readers may easily perceive upon what terms our accusers
stand in this debate, upon what complots their accusations have been
contrived, with what cunning bitterness and disdain their discourses herein
have been compiled. Now it remains (Gentle Reader) that thou should
with as great equity and indifferency listen to the answers ensuing, and to
the sincere Apology by which the sclaunder of these accusations shall easily
(by the grace of God) be confuted; Plut. vite. Alex.
hoping that thou haste reserved with Alexander the other care for the
defendant; I briefly enter to the matter, proposing that sentence of K. Solomon
to my self to follow, Prove. 15.
desirous to perform al things with good adu^ce and meditation Cor iust^
meditatur quod respondeat, especially because I have undertaken herein to
defend the credit of our Ecclesiastical government, and the honor of this
flourishing and mighty kingdom concerning this action.

Intentio.
The solemnities and celebrities performed the 17. of November in the State and
commonwealth of England etc. are things mere unlawful, scandalous, evil,
not to be tolerated, pernicious, injurious to Gods glory, and to his Saints,
foolish, mere parasiticall, and such as open a window to reduce into the
world again heathenish abomination.

I require a reason of this Minor: It is evident that this celebrity is of this
nature, say o^r accusers. First because this office of the church of England
has no warrant out of Gods word, whereupon the Protestants in all their
disputations and writings do accustomedly rely, and entirely make their
demurre upon, as their souls sole anchor either expressiuely or by the way of
necessary illation and good consequence etc. besides that it cannot be
maintained by any sound Canon of the Catholic church neither by any testimony
approved of any of the holy Fathers, neither by any good practice of any
Christian commonwealth. I beseech thee (godly and indifferent Reader)
patiently to examine each member of this accusation, beginning with the first
head alleged in the Mayor, the other parts of the premises by Gods grace,
shall either in the sequel of the first general head, or in the parts of the
second general head be faithfully examined, opened, discussed, and debated.

Answer.
This accusation is forged of mere untruths, and has no good ground, but is
built upon the sands, and with the least puff of wind, and blast of weather is
immediately confounded. True it is these words are not registered in scripture by
so many titles and sillables; Math. 7.
The church of England shall observe the 17. of November such a celebrity, and
such a form of service, in such manner as the Lord prescribe^h the feasts of
the old Testament Memento vt diem Sabbati sanctifices Remember thou keep holy
the sabbath day. Ex. 20. Le^ 23.
The feasts of the Lord which you shall call holy assemblies, even these are my
feasts etc. yet this is true also that there is nothing used in the public
service of the church of England that day, which may not be justified and
warrantted to be lawful, religious, and each way grounded upon the infallible
truth of Gods word either explicit, or implicit, (as the schoolmen speak)
either expressiuely, or by the way of necessary illation or consequence, not
doubting but that all that are learned, and indifferent men will yield
approbation to this kind of aunswering, and so much the more because Gregory
Nazianzene syr-named the Divine has broken the ye to me herein (as the
proverb is, Greg. Pres. (...).
) and is the pattern who^ I follow. Reru^ aliae non su^t, sed dicuntur: aliae,
cu^ sint, minime dicuntur: aliae nec sunt, nec dicuntur: aliae den^que et sunt,
and dicuntur. Of things some are not contained in the scripture, and yet are
said to be: other-some are contained, and are not said to be: others neither
are contained, nor are said to be: other; both are contained, and also are
said to be. That there is nothing that day used in the church service of
England but what may be warranted by Gods word, it is manifest by this manner
of demonstration. In the Liturgy or church service of the church of England
used the 17. of November there are two things to be observed: 1. What it
participateth with other Festivities in this office: 2 What is principally
that day and by the ways of particularity performed in the church. For the
first, the general office of the church that is used upon any holy day, is
that day also according to the manner of other Festivities observed, this
office who^ely consisting upon an holy confession of sins, distinct recital
of certain Psalms, and two Chapters of the old and new Testament ordinarily,
which form is also religiously observed each Sabbath day and holy day
throughout our Realm, and every day of the year particularly in her Majesty's
Chapel, and each Cathedral (...) this land. This manner of service of God, I
think (...) can take just exception against. For the pattern of (...) we have
received out of the ancient church of the Jews, out of the acts of the
Apostles, and from the Primative church, (...).
and al ancient churches Greek and Latin.

The particular office on the 17. of November now used is an exposition of some
part of Scripture, and public prayer. The exposition of Scripture chose^ by
the Minister that day is such as is si^te to persuade the auditory to due
obedience to her Majesty, and to be thankful to God for her Majesty's happy
and flourishing Regiment these 43. years: and to excite them to prayer unto
God long to continue her Grace amongst us (if it be his blessed will) and to
deliver her Highness from all malice of her enemies. After the sermon solemn
prayers are made by the Ministers, or set forth by public authority employing
matter of this quality. Lastly if there be Psalms song, or sacred Antiphones,
either by the whole multitude, or by the Quier, (as it is used in her Majesty's
Chapel, or in Cathedral Churches,) they are composed according to this form
of prayer in the word going next before specified.

Other form of divine service I do not Apologize; besides I know none other,
and moreover I am persuaded, that our adversaries are able to justify no
other. This being the sum and substance of all the sacred office in our
church that day, very great reason had I to deny the Minor.

The reasons that I yield and build upon are two vnremovable grounds, not being
willing to trouble the reader with the multitude of them that might for this
purpose be selected out of Gods book.

The first place that serves for my purpose hereunto, is a Canon of the
Apostle contained in the 3. first verses of the 2. Chap. of the 1. to Tymothye:
1. I exhort therefore that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions,
giving of thanks be made for all men: 2. For kings and all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty: 3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

The 3. ground that I rely upon is the 20. Psalm. according to the holy prophet
David, desiring the adversaries to examine whether these things be so or not,
or serve to that purpose that I have alleged them.

The first ground pregnantly prooveth the truth of my assertion, and the 20.
Psalm no less manifestly, Titleman. Prefat Psalm ^at 20. Heb. 21.
as learnedly and pithily F. Titlema^ has proved; a man whose authority our
Adversaries neither will, neither can deny with any equity, neither do I think
that any of them will stand upon it.

For the first, namely the place alleged out of the 2. Chap. of the Ep of S.
Paul to Timothy. Some will appeal here to the Syriack text, affirming that
this Canon only concerns the private duty of the Minister herein, and in no
sort the public service and office of the church: in regard that in that
place, Syriacus context.
in their language, the Pronoune Demonstratiue is inserted in the 2. person. I
exhort Thee, therefore; or I require of Thee therefore; which Pronoune the
Greek and Latin has omitted.

Chrysostom. Oecum. Ambr. he vulgar editio. Hycron.
To this I answer, first that all the Greeks and Latins that I have seen
leave out the Pronoune; Chrysostom, Occumenius, the Comm^nt ascribed to S.
Ambrose, The vulgar edition, Itala, S. Hyerom, Erasmus Annotations and
Paraphrase upon whom I rather rely then upon the Syriack herein.

Erasm Annotat. Paraphras.
Secondly, admit the Pronoune (Te) be inserted, as Tremelliu^ has done, yet
this makes nothing against our position. For although but the Bishop or
Minister alone be mentioned, yet since this is to be done in solemn and
sacred assemblies, in the which the people are taught and bound to say Amen;
although the Pronoune be applied to the Minister yet the Amen of the people
hereunto is not excluded. 1. Tim. 3.15
Also that this Canon, and many others in this Epistle import the public
office of the Church, it may easily be proved out of the 15. verse of the 3.
Chapter and in diverse other places of this Epistle: which sense also Saint
Chrysostom follows in his expositions of these words given: id est in
quotidiano objequio, perpetuoq* Religionie ritu: and Theophilact: his Abridger
has (...). I^ daily worship. Ambrose.
For it behooves the Bishop or Min^ster being a public intercessor to God for
all manner of men, being also as it were a father to the whole world, to pray
for all men, for the faithful and unfaithful, for friends, and enemies: for
such as re^le and afflict us; for Kings. Haec regula ecclesiastica tradita a
Magistro Gentium est quae vt ^tur Sacerdotes nostri vt pro omnibus supplicent.
This Ecclesiastical or Church-rule which our Ministers use is delivered by
Paul the teacher of the Gentiles, that they pray for all men. I might adioine
also hereunto the opinion of some concerning the nature of the greek words
especially used in the ^ext by the Apostle. (...), supplications, prayers,
intercessions, giving of thanks: but since Oecumenius has not employed so much
in his definitions, I voluntarily omit to prosecute it. Occumenius.


The second cavillation or quarrel which is picked or conceived against our
practice of this Canon, is this. True, ^ay our Adversaries, this place
enforces by plain proof, that public prayer is to be made for Princes, and
all placed in authority in all assemblies of holy Church: to deny that, is an
Anabaptisticall absurdity, and an uncharitable impiety. But yet for all that,
we affirm (says the Adversary) that it savoreth somewhat of Superstition,
Iudaisme, and Gentilisme, to restrain the solemn Church-office to one day,
and to observe it in such sort as it is now performed in the Church of England.

To this I answer in this sort. First I doubt not but each day many faithful
and godly people domestically through out al her Majesty's dominions, make
fervent prayer to almighty God for her Highness safety. Secondly it is evident
that in all Cathedral Churches through all this Realm, and in each great
Parish and Congregation of the Land, where morning and evening the sacrifice of
that divine service is offered unto God, public prayers are in like sort made
for her Graces preservation. And to this purpose diverse prayers, and Collects
are ordained daily to be read in ^he places before specified, as it appears
by our Communion book: yet this nothing impeacheth the lawfulnes of the sacred
celebrity yearly performed the 17. of Nove^ber, no more then the private
prayers made by each man at home impaireth the lawfulnes of public prayer in
the like case used in our Churches; no more then the sacred prayers each week
generally used Feria 4. and 5. impeach the sacred Service in the solemn feast
of Christ's Nativity, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. or any other holy day now
solemnized in this Realm. This being a sound Maxim in Divinity: So that the
materiality of a divine precept be observed the time and order of the use of
hundreds of them are, and have been left to the disposal of the holy
Catholic Church, and most commonly to every provincial Church and Diocese of
every Christian kingdom. This is the cause why Wednesday and Friday rather
then Monday or Thursday are days appointed for divine service throughout this
Realm; This is the reason why we resort to hear divine service, and Sermons
at such and such times; why such psalms are reputed this day, others another;
why holy communions are rather ministered at such a time then at other. In which
church practice we follovv the heavenly counsel and sincere light of that
Lamp that the Apostle has lighted unto us in the 14. (...).
to the Romans Verse. 6. and the 1. to Cor. 14. the last verse. He that
observes the day, observes it to the Lord. (...). General Max.
Let all things be done honestly and in order These places being to be
understood of observations of Rites mere Adiaphorall or indifferent, and
according to this form of celebrity al is don by us herein exhibited. Which
manner of observations S. Austen has in these words following made approbation
of answering Ianuarius his Interrogatories according to this form. Three
sorts of things Ad Ianuarium. Epist. 118.
1 Those things which the authority of the holy scripture prescribes to be
done by us, (he makes no question of these but we are all The second sort of
things consists of such actions which the whole church acknowledges
dispersed far and vvide over the face of the world (to doubt to do any of
these as far forth as they concern place, Disputare.
time, and person, is a point of most insolent madness) The third sort of
things are such as are used in sudry sorts by diversity of nations, countries,
and provinces, of which kind these may be instanced in. Aliqui ieiunant
Sahbato, alij non; Alij quotidie co^municant corpori and sanguim Dominico, alij
certis diebus accipeunt; alibi Sabbato tantu^ and Dominico, alibi tantu^
Dominico; Totu^ hoc genus reru^ liberas habet observationes, nec disciplina
vlla est in hic melior Christiano, qua^ vt eo modo agat quo agere viderit
Ecclesia^ ad qua^cunque forte devenerit. Some fast on Sattursday, and some fast
not on Satursday: Some receive the Communion every day, some on certain
special days: some on Satursday, and on Sunday only, some on sunday only
etc. All things of this kind have free and arbitrary observation, and herein
there is no better discipline for a Christian, then to conform himself to do
as he sees that Church does whereon he lights.

Lastly if it be demanded what coherence the 20. Psalm. has with this place
cited out of the 2. of the B. Apostle to Timothy, Gloss S. Hierom. S. Aust
etc. 2 Samuel 21. Rab. Solomon.
and wherein they be proportionable to aver the proof of the matter
controversied, since many expound this Psalm only of Christ our Savior; other
some (as namely Rab. Solomon) of king David 2. Sam. 1 cap. 21. when David's men,
in regard of the danger that Ishi-Benob put the king unto, swear unto David
saying, Thou sh^lt got no more out with us unto battle least thou quench the
light of Israel: I answer omitting all exposition of writers on our side,
least I should seem partial in mine own judgment, and do allow and follow
herein the opinion of Fr. Titleman, which he has delivered in the proheme of
his Paraphrase of that Psalm, as most agreeable to the truth and most fitting
this purpose. Fr Titlema^ in Psalm. 19.
Most of the learned do refer this Psalm unto Christ, as making it the prayer
of the faithful, wishing al happiness and prosperity unto him; whose godly
exposition I may by no means disallow, yet must I crave pardon if in this my
illustration upon this Psalm I shall rather ascribe it to a civil Prince or
governor, because indeed it seems to me to be a prayer made by David
himself, and delivered unto the P^iests as a form of prayer and blessing for
his safety, and for his happy success, and victory against his enemies. Qua
vterentur ad cantandum and supplicandum Deo pro regis salute pot^ssimum eo
tempore quo contra hosts esset prafecturus. Which form of prayer they should
use when they did either praise or pray unto God for the safety of their king,
chiefly when he went forth unto battle against his enemies. Et quontam B.
Paulus do^et Timotheum scribens, 1 Timothy 2.1.^.
Primum omriu^ fieri obsecrationet, orationes: and seeing the B. Apostle Paul
teaches Tymothy writing unto him that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men. For Princes, and
for all that are in authority, Cumque vix alius in vniverso Psalmorum libro
occurrat quitam commode and aperte per omnia ad hoc propositum quadret, visum
fuit nobis expediens hunc psalmum, ^a elucidando, aptare, vt apta forma esse
possit ora^ li pro Rege, aut etiam alio quolibet sive in temporal bus, sieve in
spiritualib^s prasidente, vt ipsum proferant sive Sacerdotes, sieve al^ et
subiecti pro salute Regis. And seeing in the whole book of Psalms scarce may
we find another Psalm, which so fitly and evidently every way suiteth this
purpose; it seemed good unto me to proportion out this Psalm, by thus
illustrating it; to be a fit form of prayer for a king, or any other Temporal
or Spiritual Potentate to be used either by the Priests, or other his
subjects for the safety of the king.

The other parts inferred in the Mayor of the first syllogism since they
confine in nature these accusations that appertain to the second general head,
I differ the ha^dling of til it please God I come to that part of the Apology,
and until I have confuted the three maine accusations that immediately ensue
this first.

If question be yet made, what reasons we have why this Church office rather
should be celebrated and solemnized the 17. of November, then any other day: I
answer, we rather perform this office upon this day then any other, for that
as this day 41. years now expired, God of his infinite goodness gave to our
Queen Elizabeth the Crown of our Realm by lineal descent after the decease
of her Sister Queen Mary. A day registered in all our Chronicles to all happy
remembrance, Eusebius lib. 2 cap. 19. de vita Constable.
such a day as Eusebius speaks of. A day wherein our Nation received a new
light after a fearful and bloody Eclipse, and al countries subject to the
English Scepter. A day wherein God gave a rare Phaenixe to rule this land. A
day shining graciously to many poor prisoners who long had been wearied in
cold and heavy yrons, and had been bound in the shadow of death, unto whom
she came as welcome as the sweet shower comes to the thirsty land, and as
the dove that brought the ^^^ell leaf in her mouth (if it be lawful to use
this speech) came to faithful Noah, and to his family, Genesis 8.
after they had been long tossed in the miraculous deluge. I might hereunto
adioine how necessary a thing it is for kingdoms faithfully to observe record
of days this condition, in regard of the just Computation of Princes Reigns,
but that I am loath to spend any more matter in this argument, not so directly
pertaining to this present discourse.

The second Accusation.
All church service wherein all glory and honor is not given to God alone, and
wherein the office of the B. Virgin the mother of God is neglected, brought
into contempt or wilfully omitted, is mere scandalous, impious, and
intolerable.

But the Ecclesiastical service some days used at these seasons in the Church
of England is of this nature and quality.

Ergo the Ecclesiastical service some days used at these seasons in the
Church of England is mere scandalous, impious, and intolerable.

Answer.
The 1. part of the Mayor cannot be denied. For true it is that noe
church service can be good, lawful, true, or sincere, wherein all honor and
glory is not given to God. For our Savior calls (Math. 21.) the church of
God the temple of God, Mat. 21 12. Ioh. 12. Mar 11. Isa. 56. Luke 19. Act. 13.
Esaias 2.2.3 Psalm 122. Eccle 4.17.
his fathers house, mine house, the house of prayer etc. This also may be
prooved by the continual practice of the Synagogue by the prescriptio^ of the
Apostle 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 14. 1. Tim. 2. and 1. Timoth. 3.15.16. neither
needs it any proof more then the sun wants light, or the sea waters.

The sequel of the Mayor first I purpose to stand upon: next I require the
proof of the Minor This Nicol^us Sanders in his book De schismate seeks to
demonstrate the evidence of this sequel and the Minor in this sort, and in
these words, Page 302. de Schis.
First. Protestants vtcunque tenent festos pene omnes, quos antiquitus
celebravit Ecclesia, (...) ^utores solum in festum sacratissim: sacraments, et
D. Virginis, cuins Assumpt. Nativ. Concept. solennes dies abrogarunt,
Solemnislime O pure Cicetonia^.
atque ad matore^ eiusdem sanctissimae Virginis co^temptum El zabetha Natalem
diem solemnissime celebrant etc. The Protestants although they hold and allow
almost all the feasts that the ancient church observed, yet they are more
malicious against the feast of the Blessed Sacrament and of the B. Virgin; the
solemn feasts of whose Assumption. Nativity, and Conception they have
abbrogated, and, to the farther contempt of that B. Virgin, insteede thereof
most solemnly do celebrate the birthday of Q. Elizabeth.

Answer.
Note.
In this Accusation of Mast. Saunders first observe that this objection does
especially concern that Church-celebrity, which he affirms is now used in
England the 7. of September, which is the day of our Q. happy Nativity: so that
this accusation in show, and at the first sight comes not within the compass
of any public celebrity performed in England the 17. of November: so that
here I might referr this to some other discourse, as a matter mere impetiment
to this present case. Yet in regard I promised at the beginning of this
treatise to answer, as far forth as God should enable me, all such matters of
accusation, as the adversaries had artificially, though maliciously, and
impertinently infer^ed jointly with that which materially and immediately
concerns the solemn action of this Realm the 17^0 November. I will as briefly
as I can by Gods grace discover the mysteries of this sequel, and the weakness
of those foundations where upon it is grounded. And the rather for that, in
mine opinion, though in words M. Saunders does especially mention the Nativity
of Q Elizabeth; yet by sequel, and by the way of issue his speeches can bear
no sense at all, unless those things, that he has uttered in the bitterness
of his gall, be understood of the actions of this Realm now yearly
performed the 17. of November. The sequel of the Mayor is that thing which I
first demur upon; I would willingly have them prove by the warrant of Gods
word, and by the practice of the universal church, that there is any
church-office due to the ^. Virgin the Mother of God the 8. of September
yearly, and by what authority the church of Rome can make it an Holly day.

First there is no ground of it out of the Scripture. Aug de Sanct 1. Ser. 20.
Secondly S. Austine de Sanctis affirms, Post illum sacrosanctum Domini
Natalis diem, nullius hominum Nativitate legimus celebrar^ nisi solius beati
Iohannis Baptistae. In alijs sanctis and electis Dei novimus illum diem coli,
quo illos, post consummationem laborum and devictum triumphatumque mundum in
perpetuas aeterni^atei, praesens haec vita parturit. In ali^s consummata vltimi
die^ merita celebrantur: (...) hoc etiam prima dies, and ipsa etiam hominis
^^tia consecrantu^ pro hac absque d^bio causa, quta per hunc Dominus adventum
suum, ne subito homines ^^sperati m^on ag^^scerent, volu^t esse testatum.
Johannes autem figura fuit vereuis I estamenti, and in se fo^mam praetulit
legis: and ideo Johannes praenunciavit salvatorem, sicut lex gratiam
praecurrit: Besides that holy day of the Nativity of our Lord, we read of no
Saints day that is celebrated but only the nativity of John the Baptist. We
do know concerning other Saints and elect of God that day to be remembered in
honor by us wherein the last day of this present life was made a passage unto
them to eternal blessed ^esse, after they had finished their course in this
vale of misery, and triumphantly made a conquest of this world of vanitye. In
other Saints we remember their consummat merits of their last hour, but in
this Saint (that is John Baptist) his first day, and the very first fruits of
his nativity are consecrated or hallowed, questio^lesse for this cause, because
the Lord would have his coming testified by him, least upon the sudden men
should not acknowledge him, whom they (in the dullness of their hearts) did not
hope for. For John was a figure of the old testament, and carried in him self
a figure of the law: and therefore John foretold of our Savior, as the law
went before grace: and in his second sermon in eodem festo. Natalem Sancti
Iohannis fratrescharissio i hodi^ celebramus, Aug de Sa^ctus. 21. Se.
quod nulli vnquam Sanctorum legimus fursse concessum. Solius enim Domini and
beati Iohannis dies nativitatis in vniverso mundo celebratur and colitur: we
celebrate (dea^e brethren) this day the birth of S. John, which prerogative we
do not read to have been granted to any other Saint. For only the birthday
of our Lord, and John the Baptist is celebrated in the whole world. B^ronius
Ser. 8


Besides Cardinal Baronius confesses that the French Church in the time of
Carolus Magnus and Lodovicus P^us knew not of it, Con^l. Mogua Cano 55
as it appears in Co^cilio Mogunti^o celebrated about the eight hundred and
thirteenth year after Christ, Vsvardus Ma^yro. I^hannes M^tu^us Sigebe tu^
Iemblace. de v^^^ hist Ca. 85.
as it appears by the 35. Canon of that council, wherein no mention at all
is made of ^he Feast of the Nativity of the B. Virgin. In this also observe
that in Vsuardus Martyrologe this festivity is foisted in en^ by Johannes
M^a^us, who has caused this Martyrol^ge of Vsuardus to be printed a new. For
it could not be that this feast could be at that time, in as much as Vsuardus
lived in the time of Carolus Magnus, at whose command he collected his
Martyrologe.

Thirdly I do answer that the grounds of the Feasts of the Nativity of the
B. Virgin are mere repugnant to h^ly scripture, Dur^nd. lib 7 Rational di in.
offi^io c 58 Psalm 45.5.
according as they were laid down in Durandus. The Feasts of the Nativity of
the B Virgin Mary (says Durandus) is this day celebrated because the B.
Virgin was sanctified in her mothers womb. This he endeavors to verify by
a place of the 14. Psalm. according to the Latin, namely the 5. Verse.
Sanctificavit tabernaculum suum Attissimus etc. which place in no sense
approves that which Durandus affirms of the Nativity of the B Virgin
Moreover the book which was written of the birth of the Nativity of the B.
V^^g^ne is forbidden to be read in the church, Annotat in Vsuardum apud
Ioha^nem Molansi 8. Sept. Breviar secundum Vsu^ Sarum part 1. de Nativ B.V.
Durand. rational divin officiorum.
because some of the ancient Fathers have judged it Apocryphal Lastly that
cause that Durandus yields of the institution of the celebration of this
Feast is mere fabulous: namely, Quod quidam vir religiosus pluribus annis
audivit Angelos in hac ^octe solemrizantes in calis, cui causam qua renti
revelatum est, A gelos gaudere, quoniam Beata Virgo nata fuit in illa nocte;
quod Apostolicus authenticavit, et Festum celebrari praecepit, vt in
solemnizando caelesti Curiae conformemur That there was a certain religious
man, that for many years as this right hard the Angels melodiously triumphing
in heaven, to whom seeking out the cause it was revealed, that the angels did
rejoice because the blessed Virgin was borne on that night, which the power
apostolic has made authentical, and comanded that f^ast to be celebrated,
that in solemnizing thereof we might so be conformable to the heavenly company.

Fourthly I answer that that office, which that day is prescribed by the
Canons of the church of Rome to be observed in the universal church, is many
ways derogatory to the glory of the son of God; as it appears in the
Breviary secundum vsum Sarum. For what the do these words impart; Cuius vita
gloriosa lu^en dedit seculo. ipsa conteret eaput tuu^. And these: Ave regina
caloru^, ave Domina angelorum: Virgo Moria facta est imperiosa secundum
charitatem erga superos, ac super inferos per districtionem.

Alma redemptor is matter quae pervia coeli.
Porta manens, et stella maris succurre cadenti etc.
Hail Queen of heaven, Hail Queen of the Angels: the Virgin Mary is made
imperiour and Ladylike by love toward the saints in heaven, and by regorouse
severity over them that are in hell. O blessed mother of redemption, which art
the ready way and gate of heaven, and orient starr of the sea, help and
succor me that are now falling.

Or these words: Cu^ iucunditate nativitate^ B. M^riae celebremus. Vt ipse pro
nobis interceant ad dominu^ nostri^ C^^u Jesus. Let us with all ioyfullnesse
solemnize the birth of the Blessed Virgin Mary, that she may be a mediator
for us to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ

Bellar prae fat 7. co^tr. Tom. 1. Tantus est in libris and moribus hae
reticotum Sanctorum omniu^ co^temptus ta^quam, horribitesque in omnes coelitos
blasphemiae, vt ego hi^c pot^ssimum veheme^ter admi^^t divini numinis
patientiam 1. Cor. 10.
For these and such like matters implied in the feast of the Nativity, the
reformed churches have memorably abrogated the Feast of the Nativity of the B.
Virgin, as a feast of man's invention, noe ways ground upon the authority of
Gods word, neither of any constitution of the Primitive church, neither
established by any decree of the Catholic church 8. or 9. hundred years
after our Savior Christ his blessed Incarnation. But some will here object
that in this discourse I imitate my forefathers of one pretended reformation,
and tread in their steps, who long ago have proclaimed open war against
Gods saints. and especially against the Blessed Virgin the mother of God,
whom from the time of the conception and birth of our Savior (...), etc. all
generation shall call blessed Unto whom I make this answer God forbid that I
or any one that call upon the name of God, their God and ours, should speak
dishonourably of the least member of Gods house, much less of the^ that walk
with the lamb upon mount Sion, whose tears God has wiped away, who rest
from their labors, who reign with Christ, Ap^ Si^a^ (...) Har lib; To. 2.
he 68 (...) Prove. 4. Hom Ilia (...). 1. Tim. 4. (...). Iud. 11.
by whom the Lord has gotten great glory, who (as Epiphanius says) are
Sanctum honor, quies ipsorum ingloria, profectio ipsorum tunc in perfectione:
sor^s ipsorum in beatitudine in mansionibus sanctis, tripudium cum Angelis,
diaeta in caelo, conversatio tra^vines scripturis, gloria in honor
incomparabili ac perpetuo, bravia in Christo Jesus Domino nostro per quem, et
cum quo, gloria Patri cum sancto spiritu in saecula saeculorum Amen Saints in
honor, whose rest is in glory, whose departure berchence is in perfection,
whose portion is in perpetual bliss, in holy mansions, their joy with the
Angels, their diet in heaven, their conversation in the divine scriptures,
their glory and honor incomparable and everlasting, their crown in Christ
Jesus our Lord by whom and with whom be all praise to the Father with the
holy Ghost now and for ever Amen. Neither let any be seduced with any such
sinister persuasion, that any one that professes sincere religion has any
misconceipt, or will use any dispitefull, or contumelious speeches against the
mother of God, to whom the Angel Gabriell said (...). Hail thou that
artfreely beloved the lord be with the: In the Epithet of whose name the glory
of her virtues shines as Epiphanius has demonstrated in the places marginally
noted; yet herein we must ever observe this caveat in all speech, wherein
we mention her honor, that none of these attributes, titles, and dignities,
whereby she is remembered, be not ways derogatory to Gods glory, or raungingly
waver out of the limittes that Gods holy word has prescribed unto us to bound
our selves in: which thing the same Epiphanius also has in holy descretion, in
the places before specified, very sincerely delivered unto us: The nature of
man hardly stays himself in one place, and is ever endangered by his own
sl^pperinesse or lubricity, sometimes it bows to much on the right hand,
sometimes it bendes to much on the left hand, it ru^nes sometimes one point to
much upon Sylla, by and by it crosses a contrary course upon the gulf
Charybdis, not able to keep his current (...) Besides both fire and water as
the Poet has said: which thing, how true it is, this present argument
manifestly desciphereth: some sorts of people lend ear to much to the
Andicomarians, some listen to much to the Collyridians, some speak
despitefully of the B. Virgin, and that is impiety: some make her a God by
deifying her, and that is a madd fury This humor invegled certain women in
Arabia to offer sacrifice to the B. Virgin blasphemously. In which service was
fulfilled that of the Apostle: In the later times some shall depart from the
faith, and shall give heed to spirits of error, and doctrine of devils, Erunt
enim, t^quit, mortuis euitum divinum prestantes, quemadmodum etiam in Israel
coluerunt. For there shall be (says he) such as veelae the divine worship to
the dead, as there were also in Israel. This spectacle one may palpably find
in them of Sichem that have in like sort honored the daughter of Iephthe
which was once offered to God in sacrifice by her fathers vow. And in
Thermutis the daughter of the king of Egypt who was foster-mother unto Moses.
Concerning all actions of like quallity I conclude in this sort with the same,
Epiphanius (...). (...).
It is not meet to honor saints beyond that which is meet, but rather to
honor their master and maker. The body of Mary the B. Virgin was holy, but not
(...). She was a Virgin to be honored, yet not a God to be adored; but she
adored him which was borne of her flesh, which also descended from heaven out
of the bosom of his Father: let Mary the blessed Virgin be honored, the
father, the son, and the holy ghost only be adored. For if God will not have
Angels adored, much less the B. Virgin, which was begotten by Ioachim,
conceived by Anna, which was given to her parents prayers according to promise,
yet was she noe otherwise borne, then as naturally man is borne of the seed
of man, conceived in the womb of her mother.

There remains yet of this argument the discoursing of the Minor, which I
beseech you in like manner give me leave to unfold unto you.

In the Ecclesiastical service performed in the church of England the 7. of
September, and the 17. of November, at these times some rites are used
dishonorable to GOD, and to the office of the B. Virgin the mother of God.

I demand the adversaries conviction herein.

The evidence herein (says the Accuser) I demonstrate in this manner. To the
great contempt of the B. Virgin you make the 7. of September an holiday,
which is the Even of the B, Virgins Nativity. This 7. you solemnize most
devoutly: this day you significantly note in your Calender with red letters,
but the day of the Nativity of the B. Virgin you express only in black
Characters etc.

The first part of the Accusation implies thus much (omitting that which is
spoken of the noting of the 7. of September the day of Queen Elizabeth's
Nativity with red lines referring you to mine answer herein in the argument of
the second general head.) England nowe-adaies celebrateth with greater
devotion the 7. of September their Queen Elizabeth's birthday being the Even
of the Nativity of the B. Virgin, then the feast of her Nativity, namely the
B. Virgin. First I deny that the church of England celebrateth the 7. of
September as an holy day, let the adversary prove this by practice, or
president Canonical, or decree Episcopal or Archiepiscopall of the present
church of England, and let me bear the shame of it. I answer to this with the
Orator pro Muraena. Cicer. pro Mur.
Haec sivera essent, sunt severi Accusatoris, sin falsa maledici convitiatoris.
If these things were true they proceed from a spiteful Accuser, if false, they
proceed from an evill-tongued backbiter.

Besides by what grounds of Art can this Accuser prove, that if we did
solemnize the 17. of September in such sort as his words in sense importe, yet
it must necessarily follow that the church service performed the 17. of
September being the Even of the B. Virgins Nativity is the occasion for which
the sacred office that day by the Catholic Church prescribed is neglected,
and is dishonorable to Gods eternal majesty. The Illation of this point
persuadeth me to believe that this Accuser thought that Accusasse satis est It
was sufficient for him to accuse us, that nobody durst examine his writing,
that his tongue was his own, Psalm. 12.4.
that he might say what he listed without controlement, that all men when he
should speak should hold their hands on their mouths, that his auditors
were noe better then those dogboults whom the very sight of Gorgons head
tra^sformed to stones. For what can this else importe. Because on the Even
English subjects give thanks to God, and show some joy of thankfulness for
the comfortable Nativity of Queen Elizabeth, happy in regiment; Ergo on the
day next ensuing immediately they contemn to celebrate the Nativity of the B.
Virgin. Even as much as one should say: Some years the 25. of March falls
out on Easter Even: Ergo the celebration of the feast of the Annunciation of
the B. Virgin works a contempt of the solemnization of Christ our Saviors
Resurrection.

The second branch of the Accusation galleth deeper, which this Accuser joins
by the way of Addition in these words: Quodque est anditu incredibilius, in
summo vrbis Londinensis temple, et nescio an alibi, ad complementum divini
officij quod olim terminabatur Antiphona ad Diva^ Virgine^ hodic no^nunqua^
dicu^tur decantarilandes Reginae Elizabethae. Which may be englished in this
sense: Besides this before specified; In the chiefest temple in all London for
the accomplishment of the sacred office of the church that day (a thing
incredible well most to be herd) That Antiphone or Himne that was accustomably
in the end of the service song by the Quierin the honor of the blessed Virgin,
is now converted (as it is reported by common fame) to the laud and honor of
Queen Elizabeth, thereby to sound her praises.

To this I answer by negation, denying utterly that any such form of
Antiphone is used in Pawles Church at London, or in any other Cathedral church
or chapel of this Realm: Yet will I not deny but that there is an Antiphone
song in Paul's a little before the conclusion of service both at morn and
even the 17. of November, but this Antiphone is mere Eucharistical, indicted
only to this purpose to give God thanks for the happy regimente of Queen
Elizabeth, noe ways tending to her commendations, further then to glorify God
for her happy and peaceable regiment, which GGD has lent us his 41. years,
which God grant she may long continue and prosper in. Moreover observe this
(Gentle Reader) that this Antiphone is song in the church the 17. of November
only, and at no other time: wherein it is evident that the author and
contriver of this accusation has either wilfully and maliciously chardged the
church of England with an untruth. (for no other Antiphone is used in any
public place in England, as all this Realm knows, to whose censure I appeal
herein) or else that this accusation most especially concerns the Antiphone
used in the church now yearly the 17. of November: whereby I infer that those
Accusations that he has made in this Syllogism are mere impertinent, or
confounded with those things which concern the day of her highness
Coronation. Which if it be true, I must think that the accusers memory was no
better then Calvitius Sabinus memory, Seneca.
who as Seneca repo^teth forgotte in the end of a sentence what words he
used in the beginning of the same.

But this action of the Accuser may be somewhat qualified, if we consider the
word dicuntur. Which word imports so much, that his reference is, by the
voice of others. To speak merely unto him, I say thus much; Plinyes fertur is
thought commonly a lie, and so reputed among learned scholars: but least any
Spanish or Italian f^iend of Saunders should offer me the stabb, for giving
Saunders the lie in this Argument; I answer, that Saunders dicitur is of one
nature with Plinies fertur, relinquishing the consideration hereof to the
consideration of the learned Reader, desiring all not to be offended though I
shroud my self with that veil herein, Tully Orator. Exo. 22 28. (...). Quia
princeps populi capu est, cuius tu pars
wherewith the painter throwded the face of Agamemnon.

Lastly I answer this to Saunders out of Exodus 22.23. Saunders, thou shall not
rail upon the Judges, nor speak evil of the Ruler of the people: Saunders
thou shall not receive a false tale, neither shall thou put thy hands to the
wicked to be a false witness.

Having sufficiently answered the premises, I conclude in this manner.

All Ecclesiastical service wherein God is honored, and wherein the B.
Virgin the Mother of God is not dishonored is lavvfull, holy, tolerable, and
noe-vvise impious.

But the church service now yearly used in England the 17. of November is of
this quality.

Ergo it is lawful, holy tolerable, and no-vvise impious.

The Ecclesiastical service used yearly in the church of England the 17. of
November is lawful, holy, tolerable, and no wise impious.

I should here unto have adjoined the ditty or Antiphone usually and yearly
now song in Paul's the 17. of November: but partly for brevity sake I omit
it, partly I let it pass, purposing then to inserte it by Gods grace, if any
man shall reply against the truth of my answer.

The third objection Accusatory.
That church service which works among Christian people any neglect,
contempt, or forgetfulness of any one saint canonized by the church, according
to that order which the Roman consistory has prescribed, is not allowable.

But the solemnization of Q. Elizabeth's holy day works among Christian people
neglect etc. of a saint canonized, namely of Saint Hugh sometimes B^shoppe of
Lincoln.

Ergo the solemnization of Q. Elizabeth's holy day is not allowable.

In these premises the Mayor is first to be examined: secondly I acknowledge my
self bound to answer unto the Minor. But first I beseech thee (good Reader)
to give me leave in brief terms to deliver unto thee summarily, to anatomise
and recapitulate the history of the life of S. Hugh sometimes Bishop of
Lincoln. Caes in Martyro. 17 Novem. Ioh. Molan. 17 Novem. Pet. Suitor de vita
Car Lib. 2 ca. 5. Surius car. Tomo 6. de probatis Sanctorum Historijs 17
November De humanae historiae author. Lib. 11.
For the description will effectually serve to discover the weakness of each
branch of the Minor. Cardinal Baronius 17. November affirms that Silvester
Gyraldus and Adamus Carthus. have written an history of S. Hughes life, and
have digested this history into five books. This fragment Baronius borrowed
out of Ism^laus notes upon the same day etc. Besides these, one Petri^. Suitor
de vita Carthus. lib. 2. cap. 5. and an Archdeaco^ of Lincoln has at large
discoursed of many holy acts, wonders, or miracles wrought by S. Hugh in a
volume composed of this argument. Lastly Laurentius Surius has collected his
life at lardge by collectio^ of an author anonymall in the Tome of his great
Martyrologe or Lege^d, to which we may safely yield as good a testimony, if we
list, as Melchior Cane Bishop of Canary ascribed to Legendae aureae. In illo
miraculorum monstra sapius quam vera miracula legas: hanc Lege^dam homo
scripsit ferrei oris, Melch. Ca^. Lib 11 locoricom. Cap. 6. Page 337.
plumbei cordis, animi certeparum severi et prudentis. In that book you may
read oftene^ of monstrous then of true miracles. The man that wrote the legend
had a brazen face, a leaden dull heart or understanding, and an vnsober and
indiscreet mind.

But lest I stay longer in this circumstance, I will endeavor by Gods grace to
reduce the especial points of the history of his life to these points and
heads.

His Birth and Infancy.
He was borne in the year. 1141.
S. Hugh was borne in Burgundy in that part of the country which confireth
upon the Alps. By lineall issue he descended of a worshipful parentage, his
Father was a man serviceable and trained up in wars, his Mother deceased,
Hugh being but a child about 8. years old, whereupon his father immediately
took order for the educatio^ and schooling of his son in a religious house
of Canons Regulars, not far distante from that castle where his chardge say,
by this action devoting his son to Gods service according to orders of
Monastical life, his school-maisters that trained him delte with him severely
and rigorously, and in that age licensed him not to use childrens play games.
Hereupon the child profited more then a man vvoulde deem or desire in the
spirit of wisdom, Some of these words be taken out of 1 Samuel 2 26. and some
out of Luke 2. verse. 50. and are very impertine^tly applied to S. Hugh Note
legale verbum levite.
and understanding, ministering as a second Samuel in the Lords Tabernacle,
accepted to God and beloved of men.

His Youth.
At 19. years old he took the institution or degree of a Levite in the
church; which function he discharged so faithfully, that immediately a pastoral
chardge was imposed upon him, wherein he behaved himself so laboriously and
religiously, that common same prophesied of him that he would prove of rare
wisdom and holiness.

His conversation and course of life.
He passed 24. years of his age till he was made Priest. His conversation and
course of life.
After this thing those courses of life, as either to toilsome in the world,
or more occurrent to dangers, or supposing the ordes of the Regulars not to be
straight enough for that kind of life which his humor best liked; he devoted
himself wholly to be a member of some house of the Carthusian order, unto whom
he secretly fled, having given his word and oath before certain of the Canon
Regulars of the house (that had brought him up, Hugh breaker of his oath and
promise.
and were unwilling to part with him) to the contrary.

This Carthusian institution in most hearty affection he preferred before all
other orders of Religion, their custo^es most consorting his disposition, and
befitting his nature: by this action spending his times approbation in a
Monastery of the Carthusians institution in Burgundy. Having obtained his full
admissio^ he lived very rigorously in that kind of life, Col. 2.23.
and by often recital of his prayers and (...) he subdued the intemperate
heat of the flesh, which outragiouslly burned in him.

Living in the rigor of this discipline he was made Priest. His overmuch
abstinence bred many diseases, and much crudity and indigestion in his body,
and by issue thereof many dangerous malladies iniutious to his health and
life. In this he observed not the discretion that St. Basil has persuaded
wise and holy men to follow, (...).
that they may long serve Gods glory in the church, and the benefitt of the
Common wealths wherein they live, in these words: As we ought to abstain from
things, that inflame the body, and stir it up unto lust: so we must wisely
govern the body in those things that pertain to the soul: we must not turn^
as it is in deuteronomy) neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but so
nourish the body as on the one side we must have a care that it grow not to
gross, so upon the other side we must take heed (...) it not by overmuch
abstinence to an impotency. If ^epa^pe^ your coach-horses to much, and make
them to fate, they writ easily unhorse the rider, and cast out of the coach
such as be carried in it, but if ye minister the^ to little provender, they will
harder draw the coach-ma^ out of the mire. To much repletion is an enemy to the
body, and may be compared to an over heavy load of flesh, which draws the
wings of the soul downewarde, and hinders it from mounting alofie. Besides
as it is impossible that, that body which is dieted with gross meats, and
engrossed with superfluity of nourishment, should breed pure spirits, and
serve a mind which aspireth to the knowledge of heavenly things: so
contrariwise a bo^y over much weakened in diet by indiscretion, hardly runs
the race which i^ hops in the end to attain unto. For by this overmuch
abstinence it ensues that a man that follows this course is not able
accordingly to perform that office to others, whom he is bound by Gods law to
preserve. We know that Mr. condemned justly, who will not show mercy unto his
servaunt: what mercy then shall he find, that will not show mercy to his
body, that has many years served his soul, and without whom his soul can
have no action in this life profitable to his brother? Lastly if God will say
in the day of judgment to the wicked, when I was hungry ye sed me not, when I
was thirsty ye refreshed me not, when I was naked ye gave me noe clothes, when
I was sick ye visited me not; what shall be said to him that feeds not his
own body when it is hungry, that refreshes it not with drink when it is
thirsly, cherishes is not when it is sick, but wilfully suffers it to decay
and perish when it is crazed^ Certainly he hardly shows mercy to his
neighbor, John Bale in the a book of English Votaries. Page 78. Wictam a
religious house, as some say, in Wiltsh^^e: as others say, in the Dioces of
Bathe and Wells. Fabia Chro 2 Pet. 2 wi^h fair words and coveto^snesse they
shall make merchandise of you.
that shows not mercy unto himself. But to return to S. Hugh, the severity
of his life, and the report of his devotion caused him to bespoken of far and
wide, and toto be talked of in many countries and nations. Herevpo^ Henry the
2. king of England procured him to be sent for out of Burgundy into England,
and first advaunced him to be Prior of an house of the Carthusians it VVictam,
which house he greatly enriched by his often repair to the King, at whose
hands he cunningly ob^^i^ed many golden gratifications, and no small sum of
come to that use.

His advancement to his Bishopric and his demeanor therein.
After this he was advaunced by the king to the Sea of Lincoln, and was in so
great favor with him, that the king relled not at any quietness or content of
mind till he had raised him up to that dignity, and had caused him to be
invested in that Episcopal seat: and to be consecrated by the Metropolitan of
of Canterbury. Being settled it this sea of Lincoln, he severely executed al
Ecclesiastical censures upon malefactors, and namely upon lavvlesse
Forresters, whom noe church censures in those times could scarce suppress.
But in most things he crossed the kings courses by whom he was advaunced to
his dignity and honor, which with what spirit he performed God only knows:
Who lived a little before
But the world thought that he walked very near to Thom. Beckets steps and
liked over much his proceedings.

He likewise very sharply punished all such Archdeacons of his Jurisdiction
that were bribers, and would not have offenders penance commuted: his
diligence in co^ferring holy Orders upon such as sought them is specified in
few words by the author of his life: likewise his exhortations to the
Archbishops and the Fathers of the church to unity, peace, and concord: his
quiet demeanure with his Chapter and associates in Lincoln being in
disposition naturally choleric: his religious care in perfourming solemn
obsequies in funerals, his kissing of leapers, his great zeal to life
contemplative, his great pain and chardge in building the church of Lincoln
from the foundation; his carrying of of stones to this monument upon his own
shoulders, his severe administration of justice, his gift of prophecy, are with
like brevity by the same author registered.

His death and funeral.
He continued B. in the Sea of Lincoln some 15. or 16. years, 58. days, and
deceased this life at London the 17. of November in the reign of K. John as it
should seem, about the 2. or 3. year of this kings reign. Anno Domi. 1201.
being at the time of his decease of the age of threescore years, or therabout.
His body was honorably conveyed from London, where he deceased, to Lincoln:
his funerals were solemnly attended upon all the way thither with great
concourse of people through all the coasts by the which it was carried: he was
buried in a Parliament time at Lincoln, K. John and the K. of Scotts then
reigning being then present at the celebration of his obsequies, accompanied
with Arch. and Bishops of the Realm, with many Earls, Barons, Abbotts, and
great multitude of the Common people. He was canonized to be a Saint by Pope
Honorius the 3. An Do. 1280. Some 80. years or therabout after his decease his
body was taken up and shrined solemnly. The certain time and year of his
Canoniz is not noted. Honorius. the 3. Sedit. An 10 menses 8 who died ab^ut
A.D. 1227. Platina de vit Pont. O^^ph. Chr^ni^o.


Observations upon his life gathered out of Surius and the great Missall.
First in the whole discourse of his life I find little mention of Christ's
merits, and of the mysteries of the passion of our redemption, and of his
infinite graces and mercies that have been most abundantly powered upon his
church, whereas S. Paul in his 14. Epistles containing in sum of leaves a
small volume, matter inexplicable, has in each chapter in some sort expressed
sometimes at large and amply, sometimes in a word, every where pithily and to
purpose, yea 500. times at the least the blessed name of Jesus may be quoted
out of these Epistles. And yet the penner of this S. Hughes life has scarce
quoted in a long and verbal discourse the name of Jesus once, neither has he
made any great mention of Christ's merittes, neither of the great mystery of our
redemption, which should be the scope that all that d^^cribe the Sancts lives
should principally observe, and should be the work that all writers in
desciphering Sancts lives should only arm at. For, Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 13.
in comparion of Christ's glory, I safely and sincerely may say with Bernard.
Quis credat par^et^, si se dicat parturire radium, quem suscipit per ^enestram
aut si glorienter nubes quod imbres generint, quis nonirredeat? Mihi liquido
constat, nec de canalibus orir^rivos aquarum, nec de labijs vel dentibus verba
prudentiae, et si sensus vl^ra corporeus non attingat. Siqua sanc in sanctis
digna land veladmiratione intueor, clara luce veritatis discutiens, profecto
reperio laud^bile^ sive mirabilem alium apparere, atque alium esse, et laudo
Deum in sanctis eius. Sive sit Helisaeus, sieve ille magnus Helias, mortuorum
vtique suscitatores, ipsi quidem suo non imperio, sed ministerio foris exhibent
nobis nova et insueta. Deus ver^ in ipsis maneus ipse facit opera: invisibitis
et inaccessabilis ^^ se, in suis spectabilis atque mirabilis, qui facit
mirabilia solus. Nec laus cala^^ laudabilis est pictura, sive scriptura; nec
gloria linguae aut labicrum sermo boni^. Who will believe the wall that says
it brought forth the Sun beam which it receives through the windows? or
who would not scoff at the clouds, if they vaunte that they begat the
shoures? I am fully persuaded, that neither rivers of water do rise out of the
channels through which they ru^ne, nor the words of wisdom out of the lips
and teeth which utter them, although by any bodily s^nse we can reach noe
farther, and conjecture no other. If I see in the saints any thing worthy
praise and admiration, examining it by the clear light of truth, I verily
find that it is one who appears commendable and admirable, and another who
is so indeed, and so I praise God in his Saints. Whether it be Elisaeus, or
that great Elias, both raisers of the dead, they indeed exhibit and show unto
us apparently new and unaccustomed miracles, not by their own authority, but by
their ministry. But it is God who abiding in them, does these works himself;
God who in himself is invisible and vnapproachable, but in his Ministers
visible and vvonderfull, does these wonders alone. Neither is laudable
vvriting or painting the praise of the pen or (...) Nor good speech the glory
of the tongue or lips. If Iacobus de voragine, Alaysus Lipomanus, Laurentius
Surius, Johannes Molanus the Compilers of Legendes, and Cardinal Baronius now
living, had observed this sentence of Bernards, and had sailed within the
compass of this bright Cynosura, they would not have troubled the world with
so many idle, supersluous, and fabulous discourses, in nature Apocryphal, to
the Church unprofitable, derogatory to the glory of Jesus Christ (as now they
have done) Christ being the one only Sun of righteousness, in whose appearance
all the stars of heaven shine dimmely, and in some sort are ecclipsed.

^^se^va.
Secondly in all this Legend of Bishop Hughes life containing eight large leaves
in folio divided by 32. chapters I find the word Faith but seldom mentioned,
whereas S. Paul in one only Chapter to the Hebrews namely the 11. wherein he
summarily describes the life of the Patriarchs of the old Testament, and
concluding the matter of all their story only in 40. verses, has inferred the
name of faith at the least 34. times, so that in mine opinion the inserting of
it by the B. Apostle in the life of the Fathers shines more gloriously to the
eyes of the faithful, A similitude
as a precious stone enclosed in a ring of gold glistereth in the eyes of any
curious worldly beholder.

3. Observa.
Thirdly I observe in this discourse certain places of holy scripture wrested
and abused by this Legendary penner, impertinently, dangerously alleged, yea
somewhat prejudicial to the person of our blessed Savior, unless they be
construed in better sense, which thing can hardly be admitted, the Author
laying them down in such sort as he has done: which sentences here follow,
and by way of application are applied by the said writer unto B. Hugh:
Proficit puer spiritu sapientia and intellectus, (...)
ministrans velut alter Samuel coram Domino, gratus Deo, and charus hominibus.
The child increased in the spirit of wisdom and understanding, Isai. 11. v
^. Romans 1, v. 2 John 4 Missal. in die S. Hugonis. Haba. 3.13.
ministering as an other Samuel before the Lord, acceptable to God and beloved
of men. Erat et ex toto voluntas in lege Domini, in qua meditabatur die and
nocte, His whole will or mind was settled on the Law of the Lord, wherein he
meditated day and night. Meus est cibus, vt faciam voluntatem patris mei qui
est in coelis. It is my meat to do the will of my Father which is in heaven.
Egressus et in salutem populi tui, in salutem cum Christo. Thou wentest forth
to save thy people, to save the^ with thy Christ. Which thing the Missall
affirms Secundum vsum Sarum that S. Hugh did hear the first night after he
was consecrated Bishop of Lincoln. To this might be adioined certain other
things out of the Missall unto which I refer them that have leisure and are
desirous to read them.

Fourthly being advaunced to the Bishopric of Lincoln freely by Henry the
king of England and honored by his sons K. Richard the 1. and K. John,
Observa. 4.
he opposed himself to such demands, requests, impositions, tributes,
gratifications, which these Princes imposed upon the subjects of this Realm,
which how it does agree with the saying of the Apostle in the 13 to the
Romans, Rom 13. Cui tributu^, tributu^: cui honorem, honore^: cus vectig el,
v^cti gal.

Tho. Beckes Observe whether this Ve^isier regarded the precept of the Apostle
in the 2 to Timothy, and the counsel that Saint Peter gave to Christians in
this 1. Epistle 2. chapt. 13. and ver. 14 Regu^ malleus.

Idle applied and maliciously. 1. Cor 14. King La^cius. Eletheurius being Pope
An. Domi 179. Joseph of Arimathia. Greg. Mag. August in Monachus An Do. 596
Vide ^ito. Bedae Gyl. de excidio. Brit. Polydor. Virgil. historia Angliae lib.
2.


all faithful Christians may easily discern. Besides he behaved himself
roughly and very rudely in much of his demeanure to the two first of the
Princes, whereby it seems that the late memory of Thomas Becket Archbishop
of Canterbury was impressed deeply in him not without some applause of the
clergy in those days, amongst whom a vain and idle versifier affixed upon
his hearse at the time of his funeral this Distich sounding perilously and
seditiously. Pontificum baculut, Monachoru^ norma, scholarum

Fifthly whereas the author of this Legend of the life of St. Hugh has
mentioned many miracles effected by St. Hugh, partly in the time of his life,
partly by his medi^tion to God (as the author says) after the time of his
death; you may easily find by the circumstance of these actions, according to
time, place, and persons, the most of the things, if not al, specified of this
argument either to be incredible, or ridiculous, or prodigious, or such as are
monstrous, nothing resembling the nature of true miracles.

First for that the gift of miracles rather serves for the^ that do not
believe then do believe. In as much as our histories have testified and
verified that the Christian religion was received here universally in this
Realm many hundred years before S. Hugh was borne. Miracula (as Gregory
says) necessaria erant in exordio Eclesiae Vt enim ad fidem cresceret
multitudo credentium, miraculis fuerat nutrie^da: quia et nos cum arbusta
plantamus, tamdiu eis aquam in fu^dimus quosque ea in terra tam coaluisse
videamus: et si semel radicem fixerint, irrigatio cessabit. Hinc est enim quod
Paulus dicit: Linguae in signum sunt, non fidelibus, sea infidelibus. Habemus
de his signis atque virtutibus quae adhuc subtilius considerare debemus. Sancta
quippe Ecclesia quotidie spiritaliter facit, quod tunc per Apostolos
corporaliter faciebat. Miracles were needful in the Infancy of the Church.
For the multitude of the believers, the more to grow and increase in faith,
was to b^ nursed up with miracles, as men when they set grafts do so long
water them, until they see them spring up; and when once they be firmly
rooted, they leave watering: and hence it is that Paul says; Tongues serve
for a sign, not for them that do believe, but for them that do not believe
Other signs and miracles we have, which we are more diligently to mark: for
the church does now daily that spiritually, which it did then by the Apostles
outwardly. Nay in S. Austens time it seems the gifts of miracles were not so
necessary, as may be gathered by these sentences quoted in his writings. Inter
fideles signae et prod^gia non sunt necessaria, sed spes firma: Unto the
faithful signs and miracles are not needful, but a strong belief. Quisquis
adhuc prodigia vt credat inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium, qui credente
mundo non credit: Whonever does yet for the seal of his faith seek for
miracles, to himself a great miracle, or rather monster, insomuch as the
whole world believing he remains incredulous. Let this suffice for the first
note of Bishop Hughes miracles. This point I cease to discuss further in this
place, in regard I am to handle by Gods grace this Argument more at large
hereafter, which I am seriously enforced to debate, and to show my mind in
(God willing) the Vespers of the next Act, A Derectio^ of Samuel Hashnets
discourse against ^ohn Dorrel etc. Vide praefa. Anton tomo histo 1. in Bulla
canonizata Clement 7. Ant part 3 titul 22 paragraph. 3.
partly by promise, partly for that a book with a letter has secretly bin
conve^ed unto me from a friend of one John Dorrel Bachelor of Art in Cambridge
in some sort soliciting me to manifest my opinion herein.

The second reason why I give no credit to the miracles ascribed by these
Legendary writers to S. Hugh, is for that they fail in probation, and of that
form of probation, in those 1^. conditions which the Church of Rome in matters
of such quallity requires, whereby the world may infallibly be induced to
believe that they be true and unfeigned miracles.

Thirdly I think that there is no credit to be ascribed to these miracles of
Bishop Hugh, A Swanno geniall to S Hugh.
for that some of these miracles, as I said, are foolish and ridiculous, some
of them are incredible and superstitious, all: of them mere repugnant to the
sincere truth of Gods holy word in the scriptures inspired from above: as
namely the tale of a mighty big swan geniall to Bishop Hugh, for the which
fiction the Lege^dary writer deserves the title of a Doctor of the Whetstone*
which by a song prognosticated Bishop Hughs death some few dates before his
final departure. Some difference there in between this Legendary and Aristotle
in relation of the singing of swannes. De hist^ an^ mal. 9. c. 12.
It is thought generally of learned men, that Aristotle reported an untruth,
when he said the swannes did accustomably sing before their own death. (...)
swannes are by nature (...) singers etc. (...), They sing especially at their
own deaths. But th^s Swan of Lincoln singing before another death, I
think, may be reputed by most learned men a fiction, and a fable.

How superstitious those miracles are, that are ascribed to Bishop Hugh; and
how dissonant from the sound word of faith, these two examples following may
evidently demonstrat to all that love the truth. In the first whereof this
Legendary-ographer mentions that our Savior Christ vouchsafed to appear
visibly very often to B. Hugh in the shape of a most beautiful child, In the
Sacrament. Virae Hugo. Cap. 27. Aqui. part 3 Quest. 76. Art. 8.
a miracle devised by the schoole-mens invention to establish the verity of
their fained Tra^substantiation. His second miracle contained an appeara^ce of
S. Hugh after his death to one of his friends, with whom he conversed very
familiarly in his life time, who was very desirous to know his estate after his
departure out this life, unto who^ also, as this Lege^dary reports, he
resolved diverse intricate questions, which this his familiar before was not
able to conceive, until he was instructed by the miraculous apparition of B.
Hugh after his decease Who sees not, that has any taste of gods word, that
this gross sable directly contradicts the holy parable of our Savior
concerning Dives and Abraham, unto who^, as we know, Luke. 16.29.31.
the Patriarch replied, when he would have one sent from the dead in this
manner. They have Moses and the Prophets, if they will not hear Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rise from the dead again.
This fiction I say also directly contradicts the commandment of God in the
18. of Deuteronomy: Deuter. 18. V. 11.
Let not there be among you one that asks council of the dead.

I do not doubt but the godly will think that the most of those miracles,
Lucians fictions.
which are attributed to B. Hugh, are in their own natures no better for truth,
then some of Lucians fictions* or (that I may speak more pertinently to the
former name of a Mallet attributed parasitically to B. Hugh) then that fable of
a Mallet was true, who^ the L^fl^nders in the time of Paganism did
idolatrously adore: which fabulous example I do more willingly instance in,
because a writer of their own, to delight his auditory, Calvino^ Lib 1 cap. 7
Alex. Gag. indes. Lith.
has recited it in this form and order out of Alexander Gagvviu in
descriptione Lithvaniae. Some of the Lithvan^an Idolators being asked this
question, what the reason should be why they honored for a God not only
trees, serpents, starts, su^ but also an iron Mallet of huge quantity; they
made answer to them that made the demand of them in this manner: We worship
and adore this mallet for this reason. Upon a time a prince of Lithvany
imprisoned the Sun in a strong tower: for that certain days he did not
discover the beams of his light unto the people subject to that Clymate:
hereupon Aries Taurus Gemini and the rest of the 12. Signs fearing that the
world should loose the benefitt of the light of the sun, providing this
Mallet, with the force thereof brake down the walls of this prison, and so by
consequent released the sun out of prison, that he might return to the
accustomed service of the world: for which benefit effected by this Mallet as
the instrument, said these Idolators, we do yield this Mallet these signs of
divine honor, thankfully acknowledging hereby what good our country has since
entertained by it. This fable of the Mal^t may vvorthily equalize in mine
opinion most of the fabulous narrations written of B. Hugh, and may be
reported with as great credit, as many of them which this Legend, and such as
the Myssal has mentioned and proposed to the world.

Lastly lest it should be objected that I deal not charitably with the dead,
and that I censure peremptorily the writers of this Legend, and am over partial
for the Protestants glory; it remains that I should adioyne to this
Treatise, what fruits of true holiness, notwithstanding all this popish
trumpery is specified by the foresaid writers concerning B. Hugh.

Last obser. Against Symony and bribery.
It is written of him that he was advanced to his Bishopric without any
S^moniacal compact, and that in the Administration of that great office in the
Church he was not blemished with bribery and Simony, which 2. abominations not
only Rome, but other countries by profession Christians how far may be
touched with, the Lord God knows: I pray God that these two filthy worms or
Ga^grenas mar not all in the end. What things shall be required in the day of
judgment of all Christians
It seemed that he reposed not any great confidence of merit in Monastical
life, as it appears by his answer that he made unto certain that highly
commended the Carthusian institution of life, and discomme^ded life secular. In
the dreadful day of judgment God will not ask of such as shall be presented
before that glorious, righteous and just tribunal whether they have been in
profession Monks, Friars, religious persons, E^mits, etc. but this whether
they have lived like good Christians, or not: whether their hearts have been
beautified with charity, their mouths have always testified Gods verity,
whether they have kept their souls and bodies vessels to the holy Ghost in
sanctification and chastity. A comfort for all faithful women.
It is said also that he exhorted the sex of women, with fervent and holy
zeal to love the Lord, and to cleave to him, since the Savior of the world
disdained not to be borne of a woman. When the extremity of his last sickness
whereupon he deceased, The day of judgment to the faithful a day of comfort.
approached, one spoke unto him of the day of judgment: unto who^ he replied.
That day shall not be to me a day of judgment, but a day of grace and mercy.

These last observations I have adjoined to the rest not to flatter the world,
1. Cor 15.10
but to avoid all partiality in writing, not to ascribe any merit unto S.
Hugh, but only to show what the grace of God has wrought in him, exhorting
Pellagian merit-mongers always to persuade themselves that when they have done
all that they can, they be but unprofitable servants; that all things that man
has, Luke. 17. 1. Cor. 4.7. Esaias 64.6.
he has received: that, Every good thing, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of lights: that, Al our righteousness
is as filthy clow^s: that only God is holy, and all men sinners etc.

To those that shall take exception against the unprofitable tediousness of
this discourse, and perhaps will repute it nothing else but a mispending of
time, pen, and paper, both to the writer laborious, and to the reader
troublesome, I apollogize my self in this manner. Note.


By this absolute narration of B. Hughes life I have yielded sufficient reason
why I give no approbation to the Minor specified in the objection, and what
good cause I have to make some doubt also of the Mayor. Moreover by this diverse
that knew no more of B. Hughes life (I will not say as the old proverb is then
the dog that looked over Lincoln, An English by-worde. 1. Tim. 1.7. Exo.
10.22.23.

Rev. 16.10: The angel pouring his v^l upon the throne of the beast etc

The su^me of the answer to the third general Accusation.

About An. Dom. 1215 An. part 3^ tit. 22 his verbis Votuores coeli etc.

Iere. 2.13. Bell. Tom. 1. Cont general. 7. lib. 1. c. 8 9.


but) then those that the Apostle says, neither know what they speak,
neither whereof they affirm, might be better instructed and give over vain
attending and listening to old wives fables, wherewith the kingdom of darkness
in the time of darkness was vpheld. For at that time the darkness was like the
darkness of Egypt specified in the 10. of Exodus 22. and 23. ver. And lastly,
that I might show that al glory is to be given to God, and that all men are
sinners.

It rests now that I should summarily answer each point of this third
general Accusation, accordingly as they are laid down in the premises
syllogistically.

First I answer that the canonization of Saints as it was used in the time of
Honorius the third, and as it is now accustomably practiced, has no warrant
out of holy scriptures, neither out of the Synagogue before Christ our Lord
his Nativity, neither out of the ancient Primitive church. The proofs that
Antouinus alleges for it are mere allegorical, and very insufficient, no
ways able to hold wate^, no more then those broken ceste^nes, which the
prophet Jeremy has spoken of in his 2. Chapter, neither are those things of
any greater moment which Cardinal Bellarmine has newly turbished concerning:
his argument of canonization of Saints. But I omit this, partly because it does
imply diverse questions pertaining ad plenitudinem potestatis Papae, to the
fullness of the Popes sovereign power, partly for that it concurreth with
those examinations and confutations that appertain to those whosoever do
profess in writing, and have begone to answer Bellarmine his controversies:
which, God giving me life and leisure I will do my best endevor in, and
principally for that, to such that are already instructed in the grounds of
sincere religion, these doctrines of men are by one blast of Gods holy spirit
in the twinkling of an eye confounded and brought to nothing.

Secondly admit that B. Hugh was regularly canonized by Pope Honorius the 3.
yet it is no good consequent, that the solemn office Ecclesiastical of the
Church of England the 17. of November is any prejudice at all to B. Hugh: no
more then the solemnization of B. Hughes service is prejudicial to greater
Saints then he was by their own testimony. For that selfsame day there is in
the universal Church also a sacred celebrity of many other Confessors or
Saints: Baron. 17. November Vsuardus. Max.
namely, of Gregorius Thaumaturgicus, of Dionysius, Gregorius Turonensis, and
others, which are holden by the church of Rome Saints of greater merit,
learning, integrity, miraculous works then B. Hugh.

Thirdly I answer negatiuely to the Minor, and will God willing demonstrate
that this Accuser herein maliciously plays the part of a slye Sophist, namely
in this form. The solemn celebrity of Q Elizabeth Coronation day and the
sacred Church office that day performed is the cause why B. Hughes festival
day service and honor that day is neglected. And that all the force of this
malicious accusation consists of no other foundation materially, then a
sophistical fallacy termed by Aristotle (...) etc. which then is used,
Aristot. Elench.
when that which in no sort is cause of any thing, is assigned and reputed to
be cause of such an effect that it never prodvced. How true my answer is
these reasons following may perspicuously and sufficiently satisfy all
indifferent readers to their content. Ann. Regn. Reg Eliza. be hae. 12. The
time of the beginning of the celebrity of the 17 of November. D. Coop.
Vicechan. in the University of Oxford.


About the 12. year of the Reign of her Excellency was the first practice of
the public solemnization of this day, and (as far forth as I can hear, or
can by any diligent inquity learn) the first public celebrity of it was
instituted in Oxford (by D. Cooper being the^ there Vicechauncelour after B. of
Lincoln, and by remove from thence B. of Winchester) from whence this
institution flowed by a voluntary current over all this Realm, not without the
secret motion of Gods holy spirit, I doubt not, and to the great comfort of
all true English hearts. The continual observation of which ceremony sithence
has not been imposed upon the church of England by any Ecclesiastical
decree, neither prescribed by any Canon of the Church: but has bin mere
voluntarily continued by the religious and dutiful subjects of this Realm in
their thankfulness to God, and in their perfect zeal, tendering her Majesty's
preservation in desiring the continuance thereof to Gods glory, and the good of
the church and common wealth of England. Hereupon it is evident that since this
office began only to be practiced the 17. of November the 12. year of her
Highness reign, and not before; the solemn celebrities performed the 17. of
November were no more cause why B. Hughes festivity is not now remembered in
this Realm; no more cause, I say, then the drinking of Aesops Lamb of the
stream water twelve miles beneath the spring or fountain, Aesopi fabulae.
was the occasion why the woolfe at the well head did drink puddle or muddy
water especially B. Hughes superstitious festivity being abrogated at the least
12. years before by public authority of the church of England upon just
cause, Ezekias breaking the brazen serpente. 2. King. 18.4
and sufficient warrant out of Gods word: yea and all the reign of K. Edward,
and part of the Reign of K. Henry the 8 her Highness Father, who by the grace
of God now reigns, and whom I beseech God long to continue in this Regiment
to his glory, to the good of his church, and the great comfort of all true
subjects of this flourishing Realm.

Each part of the Minor having bin answered sufficiently, if any man shall here
propose to me this ^nte ^ga^^ry, what in my opinion I think of B. Hughes
salvation in regard of the premises? First I breefely answer that I find no
reason why B. Hugh in sacred Canonization should have a day designed to his
celebrity before many thousand of Christians not once noted by the church o^
Rome, since it is evident that the 13. ve. of the 14. of the Reve. may b^
a^plaed truly to many thousands of the faithful that have been, and are omitted
in the Romish Catologue.

1 Cor c ^3. v. 11.12 1. 14 15. Let the Christian Reader assure himself that
this place makes nothing for doctrine of Purgatory being rightly expounded,
and faithfully interpreted according to the analogy of faith.
Next admit that B. Hughes Canonization were in the institution tolerable to be
observed festiva^ly: yet it is no good reason that now in like manner the
office of that day, being polluted with much superstition, should also in this
light of the Gospel be remembered in like sort as it was before.

For mine opinion of his salvation I refer my self to Gods only knowledge
herein, and hoping the best, proposing to my self in all such cases to wade no
farther in a question of such quality, then the rule of the B. Apostle has
taught me in the 1. to the Cor. 3 11. For other foundation can no man lay, then
that which is laid, which is Jesus host. 12. And if any man build on this
foundation gold, silver, precious stones, timber, hay or stubble. 13. Every
man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall
be revealed by the fire: and the fire shall try every man's work of wh^t
sort it is. 14. If any man's work, that he has built upon abide, he shall
receive wages. 15. If any man's work burn, he shall loose, but he shall be
safe himself: nevertheless as it were by the fire.

Having ended the discourse of the life of B. Hugh, and having answered the
third general accusation, it remains that I should breefly repeat the su^me
of it syllogistically, thereby to establish the validity of my answer, which
in this form I propose.

That church service which works among Christian people no contempt or
forgetfulness of any Saint faithfully canonized by the true church of God, The
^eterting of the argument.
and wholy tends to no other end, but to glorify GOD, is allowable etc.

But the solemnization of Q. Elizabeth's holy day, A^ ^t is commonly called etc.
namely the 17. of November, works among Christian people noe neglect of any
Saint truly canonized etc, noe not of Hugh sometimes B. of Lincoln.

Ergo The solemnization of Q. Elizabeth's holy day name be the 17. of November
is allowable, etc.

The fourth general Accusation.
That church service, and those exercises and disportes that are materially
foolish, mere parasiticall, and spiced with flattery, which reduce men back
again to the fearful abomination of heathenish Idolatry, long since
abolished, and confounded, and hissed out of the world by the light of the
glorious gospel of Jesus Christ, are not to be tolerated in any Christian
common wealth.

But the church service, and exercise now yearly used in England are of the
nature specified in the Mayor.

Ergo the church service and exercises now yearly used in England the 17. of
November are not to be tolerated in any Christian commonwealth. Calvinotur
lib 2 P. 341 Note his word.
The contriver of this Accusation is W. Reynoldes in the book marginally cy^ed
in these words: Eadem perversitate natales Reginae and die ^ annuum, quo
primum ad regni gubernacula assumpta est, ingentibus pyrii, and laeto
publicoque campanarum sonitu per omnes regiones civitatis, and pagos festive
celebratis etc. with like preposterous aver senesse or crossing humor,
Overthwart in plain English.
the Protestants in England solemnize the 7. of September being the day of
their Queens Nativity or birth; and the day wherein she first obtained in her
right by lawful descent the honor of the crown of England, and was proclaimed
Queen With great Bone-fires, with joyful ringing of Belles throughout all
Shires, Cities, and Parishes of that Realm etc. If any one should do the
like on the feast of Christ's Nativity, the Nativity of his Mother, on the day
of Christ's Ascension, or the day of the B. Virgins Assumption, he should be
reputed by and by a person superstitious, a Papist, a man ill affected to the
Queen, and an enemy to the reformed religion, besides certainty of
imprisonment for his demeanure, Let them look whether their Carnwalls or
Bachanalia open not a window to Paganism and their Iubelies to Iudaisme.
from whence he should not be dismissed till he have paid a good fine. These
actions are very preposterously and crossely managed by that English nation at
these times. For who can by this but evidently see and find, that this church
office is no branch of true religion, but a blossom of foolish and ridiculous
flattery reducing the practizers here of back again to the broad hye way of
heathnish Paganism, derived first from such springs and fou^taines originally;
namely by subjects honoring their Princes in those days, Jupiter, Mars,
Hercules, with such outward ceremonies and ensigns of honor, by whose
industrious inventions and attemptes they attained some worldly profits, Note
that Papists do rely ever upon honor to the dead.
or advauncements. Which honors and celebrities notwithstanding with greater
reason, and with less opinion of flattery, and in better discretion might be
yielded, attributed, and performed rather to them that are dead and departed
hence, then to such as do presently live, when such celebrities are performed
to their honors or to congratulate or applaud them.

To aver the truth of this, this Accuser marginally alleges and quoteth the
14.15.16.17. verses of the 14. chap. of the book of Wisdom. 14. Wisdom^e
14.14 15 16.17. etc.
When a Father mourned greevously for his son that was taken away suddenly,
he made an image for him that was once dead, whom now he worshippeth as a God,
and ordained to his servauntes ceremonies and sacrifices. 15. Thus by process
of time this wicked custom prevailed, and was kept as a law, and ^ooles were
worshipped by the commandment of T^ants. 16. As for those that were so far
of that men might not vvorshippe them presently, they did counterfeit the
visage that was far of, and did make a gorgeous image of a king whom they
would honor, that they might by all means flatter him that was absent, as
though he had been present. Dies nativ. et inaugurationis United by the
Accuser here. Saunders de Schismate. Pa. 302. The formal day of Q. Elizabeth's
investing and coronation was in January following the 15 day. The right of her
Coronation materially, and acc^^^ng to the i^^ mutual peried beginni^g the 17
of November Ann D. 1558.
Again the ambition of the craftesmen thrust forward the ignorant to increase
the superstition.

Answer to the accusation.
Summarily I answer in this form, to this 4. general accusation.

Observe first of all that this Accuser unites and co^ioyneth together the day
of the Queens Nativity, and the day of her Highness attaining of the
Imperial crown of this Realm. Nicholaus Saunders calls the first of them
the day of her Nativity, the other the day of her Inauguratio^ or Coronatio^.
And although that the rites of her H^ghnes Coronation actually were performed
in January following yet in this discourse the 17. of Nove^ber is continually
nominated the day of the Coronation, first for that I f^^^ow Sanders de Schism.
Page 302. who does call the 17. of November diem inaugurationis R. Secondly for
that al our solemn celebrities are performed that day. Thirdly for that, that
day is called so usually by the common people ^^^las land. Fourthly and lastly
for that in lineall and lawful descent of her famous progenitors. God gave upon
that ^ay being the 17 of November. Q. Elizabeth the scepter of the Crown of
England, her fi^te Mary being deceased about 4. 2. Observation.
of the clock that present morning.

Secondly observe how cunningly this Accuser has interlaced the feast of
Christ's Nativity and Ascension with the co^troversed feasts, and by the
Protestants abrogated, to wit, the festivities of the Nativity, and Assumption
of the B. V^gine. In this imitating that custom which seditious citizens
usually practice, who to make their own parts good, Mar Tul^. Lib ^. Aca
Quaest.
blush not to abuse the names of persons of approved honesty and behavior, as
though such had been Patrons of that tumultuous sedition, whereof the said
rebels are only authors So in this action, A^st lib 1 cap 4 E^n h^so. phist
(...) Multa in vno ^ogare. 2. Reg ^ 18 v 4 Vide l^u^ censur in (...) E^le Aug.
Fest ^h^diem A^g c^ Catalog (...) 94 3 Ob^. An^ad pri^ ^uius te tij memori 2 An
3 me^bri 3 an. ^ me^
namely the celebritie of the Nativity and Ascension of our Savior Jesus
Christ, the festivity of the B. Virgin and her Assum. are a dio^ed by the
adversaries; for that they hope by this sophisme to make the one as smoothly to
run for current, as the other; knowing well that the church of England
observes the two ^i^st ordinarily and religiously, and that by good authority
the said Church has abrogated the two latter.

Thirdly observe how this Accuser takes exception against the ringing of bells
that day, the bone-fires, and other signs of joy used by the faithful people
of the land, what other exercises he means I know not, unless the triumphs
used now yearly before White Hall come into the bedroll of these signs of
joy, which for these 3. reasons he takes exception against.

First that these exercises upon a window to reduce people back again to
heathenish Paganism, extinguished already by the light of the gospel.

The second exception is, that these actions or celebrities are mere
parasitical devises, and void of religion, as they are performed in th^s
Realm.

Thirdly that these celebrities have no better ground, then the ^dolatrous
rites and pastimes exhibited by the Heathen to Jupiter, Mars, Hercules, etc.

Fourthly observe here how he proves this by places collecte but of the book
of Wisdom cap. 14. v. 14.15.16.17. 4. Observa.
wh^ I have cited before. 5. Observa.


Fift^ any Catholic should do this upon the festival daie^ (...) Savior his
Nativity, the B. Virgins Nativity, o^ stump^^, he should be thought of the
English nat^ ow^ days to be 1 A superstitious Papist. 2 A personal affected
to the Queen. 3 An enemy to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 4 That he should
therefore not only endure imprisonment, but should be seized at a great fine.


The first cavillation is concerning the ringing of Bells, If this censurer had
joined bag pipes with Bells, it might have served the former Anonymist
Lege^daryographer in his recital of B. Hughs life.

Saunders de Scismate^ Page: 302


and bonefires made that day through this Realm in diverse places.

Concerning the first I deny not but that the 17. of November in all Parishes
of thi^ Realm, or in most, there is great pract^se of ringing. This accusation
is also touched in the former place cited by Nichola^s Sa^ders, and welmost in
the same manner: Qua etia ratione etc. At the time of the alteration of religion
Bells were reserved by public authority in the Churches of England, that at
what time soever the Q. should p^sse through any cit^y or country, or parish,
she might be received with greater joy and applause of people But especially
and principally Bells were reserved, that these (...) of her Nativ^ty, and the
day of her Highness coming to the crown might be celebrated with greater
honor and triumph.

To them both I answer in this sort: and namely first to Sanders. I mervaile
how privy Sanders was to the Queens mind, and to the mind of the Convocation
and Parliament then called. Besides I mervaile what remembrance he had, when
he wrote this, Mat: ^: v: 12:
of that place specified by our Savior in the 7. of S. Matthew. Judge not, and
you shall not be judged: and how well he followed the council of those places
before specially cited out of the 1^. to the Romans 1. Tim 2.1. 1. Pet. 2.
Romans 13. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Pet. 2.

Honor to whom honor belongs. Exo. 28.34.35.

Elias Levit. Thisb He^ych. lexicon. Phavorin. Lexicon. D^ra^ ^at divine ^ffi.
lib. 1. cap 4. observerveth si^e kinds of bells. 1 Squilla 2 Cimbalu^ 3. Nola.
4. Nolula. 5. Ca^pana 6 Si (...). Vide H^pinia^ de o^ig Cum^e 14 libri (...)
eine te^plo^u^ Iosep lib. 3. c. 11. A^t^q. Iuda^ Ioh. Bel^th de expli divin
offi^ ca 24. Sop^, in A^ac


I mervaile what honor N. Saunders performed to his Sovereign, when he wrote
this, which I have briefly mentioned here.

Secondly I answer the maine accusation in this sort; which I shall more
perfectly by Gods grace accomplish, if with patience you will bear with me, if
summarily I do recapitulate some points of the things specified in this
accusation; and first of Bells. Bells in Heb^ew are named (...) radically
signifying contundi, concuti, percelli, hereupon fit^y (...) is said a
percussione nomen habere. In the Chaldee tongue it is nominated (...) ^de El^am
levitem in Thi^be. In Greek (...): yet it should seem by H^y h^u^ that it is
not always taken for a Bell, but sometimes for a subject of like condition
(...), a trumpet, or a sounding Cymbal. Phavorinus in the word (...), gives a
pretty Etymology of it, (...), when it moves, it sings, of sounds ^ome
other significations (...) has in Greek, wherein the Reader may be
instructed in the places marginally cited, where he shall find them
sufficiently described. In Latin, Bells are named Campanae, or Nolae. The one
the greater, the later the smaller sorts. Durandus defines them in this sort:
Campanae sunt vasa aenea in Nel^ Campaniae pr^mum inventa: significativa is
left out. Maiora vasa dicuntu^ Campanae, a Ca^paniae regione, minor a Nolae, a
Nola civitate. Bells are brazen vessels first invented in Nola a city in the
country of Campania. The greater vessels are called great bells, taking their
names of the whole region Campania: the lesser are called little bells, taking
their names of Nol^ a city in the said country. Another defines the^ in this
order, Campana instrumentum ad^lsandum idoneum. A bell is an instrumen^ fit for
ringing. In which note there wants also ad significandum. The time of the
invention of Bells in general is of great antiquity, as it appears by Moises
Exodus 28. and by Joseph lib. 3. Antiqui. cap. 11. This in general only, it
should seem the Greeks had them in some use. But I suppose they were only
small Bells. (...).
Sephecles in A^x attributes is ^pa^het to them (...) The br^s^n-mouth B^ll.
In S. Hieromes time it should sec^re that they were also used, whose words are
these, S Hieron. ad Eustochium. Vide Vine: spe hi^ 23. T^uc^: ^9: Phit: Symp 4:

Paulinus the inve^ er of bells as some say, and as the epithet of the name of
Nola inforceth:

Gilbertus Cognat. l: 4 Nariation: historiam lupi Epis. Aurel: perterr^ facion
in hac art exercitum Reg. Gall: Cloth: qui Aur: obser: Hug: Ca^d: 10: c: in
Nu^:


writing ad Eustochium quo^sque Campanula in claustre pulsabitur? How long shall
the bell be roung in the cloister. But concerning these huge bells now used in
Churches to call people together to divine service, and to some other rites
Ecclesiastical and Civil; the practice of them began but in the later times
of the Church in respect of Christ's Incarnation, as some say by Paulinus
Bishop of Nola Ann. Dom. 420. or about the year of the Lord 610. The invention
of them serves fitly for many Ecclesiastical and Civil uses. Gilbertus
Cognatus in his 4. book of narrations affirms, that the good B. sh. of Nola
in Italy Paulinus caused them first to be used in that sort as they be now;
namely that they should serve for signs to call all the inhabitants far
and near in a certain compass to sermons, or divine service: which opinion I
dare not gain say, only this I do asseuere by supposall, and by good
probability, and by the opinion of men of great learning, that the first use of
bells served to that end, ever since their inventio^ amongst Christians, unto
which the silver tru^pets, in Moses Numeri the 10. specified were ordained by
Gods commandment, some few particulars of time and place excepted. Those
silver trumpets prescribed to Moses in the time of the Law serving for 4.
uses: 1 Adconvocandum multitudinem. 2. Admovendum castra. 3. Ad bella. 4. Ad
festa 1. To assemble Israel. 2. To the removal of tents. 3. To proclaim times
of war. 4. Numeri: to Silver trumpets served for 4. uses.
To signify the certain seasons of the solemn feasts. Lastly, concerning
feasts in this manner they were used. Si quando habebitis gaudium, and dies
festos, and calendas cavetis tubis, etc. Also in the days of your gladness,
and in your feast days, and in the beginning of your months, ye shall blow
the trumpets over your burnt sacrifices, and over your peace offerings, that
they may be a remembrance for you before your God, Conradus Pellicanus in Numer.
I am the Lord your God. Which words Pelican learnedly paraphraseth and
expounds in th^s manner, Etiam in letitijs, aclautitijs solemnitatum vtel
antur Israelitae tubis, velut nos Campania; in sacrificijs quoque etc.
ceremonijs einsmodi non solum delect abatur populas, sed iuvab itur, and
ordinabat tur. The Hebrew reads it etc. (...) Et in die laeticia vestrae.
Which sense also the Thargum of Onchelas fol^oweth sincerely, Tharg: Ion: 72:
Interp:
the Septuaginte Interpreters co^for^ing also in materiality in this form of
reading (...). Pelican may be thus Englished: In the festival days of
solemnities, and in the festivities of their sacred celebrities, the children
of Israel did use trumpets, in such form as we do now use bells, with which,
and such like ceremonies the people was delighted, recreated, and d^sciplinally
ordered. By this I gather, that since by the validity of these places bells have
both a ceremonious, and a civil use, as the trumpets prescribed to Moses by
God had, that this adversary wrongfully charge the church and common wealth
of England for these actions before specified, namely for ringing yearly the
17. of November in these times, and in performing other outward services in
honor of her Highness Coronation, being a sign of their inward joy of heart.
And this I doubt not, by Gods grace, shall clearly appear by the issue of the
answers consequent. The making of bonefires, or any other exercises in regard
of our public joy that day demonstrated, performed, in honor of her
Highness, and namely Courtlike Triumphs, which questionless are repined at
secretly by the adverse part; I bind up al these in one bundle, and reckon
the^^ under one head: (...) since they be used by the people of this land, only
as significant arguments to express their sincere affections in joy to their
Sovereign now reigning, in regard of the manifold blessings that have been
powered ple^teously upon this flourishing Realm ever since Q. Elizabeth received
from God the regal scepter thereof: And sithence ringing of Belles, making of
bonefires, running at Tilte some hundred years ago have bin reputed to-kens of
joy in matters of like nature (as former ages report) and ar used this day by
the adversaries themselves, and such as applaude their doings in other
countries, and exhibited in the honor of those Princes, under whom they live
in far greater measure outwardly. Rome. Antwerpe. Paris and.c
Yet because their principal objection is against the English ringing in honor
of her Highness Inauguration day the 17. of November; I breefly inquire this
of the Accuser, Lib Pontifical vide John Bren. apol conf. Witen^ c.
omitting all superstitious and impious practizes concerning Bells in their
churches daily used upon cause offered concerning the baptizing of Bells, the
blessing of Bells, their hope by ringing of Belles to disperse tempests, to
extinguish lightnings, to drive away evil spirits etc. I desire the^ to
answer to this point, Du and l. 1. rationat. di. vin. offictor.
whether Belles have a civil use or not? if they have, which they cannot
deny, if Bells, I say, succeeded in the place of the trumpetts in Moses, why
may they not be runge in signum laticiae for a sign of joy, as the trumpets
were sounded in Moses time? since the nature of the affection laetitia (...) in
Hebrew is such that it must needs, M. Tullius Tusc. Laetitia vehementer
appertitus se offerens in praesenti bon^. By all convenient signs. Rupertus
Abbas.
efferri in praese^tibono triumph in her present happiness. And since, as
Rupertus has observed in the former place, it is natural to the mind of man
to be ravished with great joy by the notes and harmony of music (which thing
Belis well ru^g commonly effect in men's hearts, first being well tuned by a
skillful Artizan, and experimental practicioner) hereupon I may truly and
sincerely infer, that whereas this this Accusar, as I have observed in the
animadversion premised, terms the performances of these solemnizations and
celebrities actions or fruits not of Religion, but services of foolish
parasitical ridiculous slattery etc. that in this vehemence of bitterness he
does either unadvisedly patronize barbarous, stoicall impassibility: or that
his heart, Question. Tuscula l. 4.
when he wrote this, was possessed with the spirit of an incurable ulcer of
malice and envy. I may adioyne hereunto, how uncharitably and viperously this
adversary endeavors by these words to blemish the greatest part of this
flourishing kingdom wherein he was borne and bred, with the sour sweere
poison, and invenomed bait and by consequent blotte of servile or Gnathonicall
flattery.

Whereas in the 3. animadversion he affirms that these solemn zati^ns and
celebrities have noe better ground then those games and pastimes exhibited by
the Heathen to Jupiter, Jupiter. Mars. Hercules. O^ympia. Nemaei Iudi Martiales.
Mars, Hercules: and to heathenish Idolatry etc. I would willingly learn by
what Induction, reason, Argument, or testimony the Accuser can aver it: since
honest mirth is an affection in her self irreprehensible, which Christian
religion has ever honored, never condemned, so that extravagantly it does not
rang out of those bounds, which the holy scripture has prefixed unto it; since
these ringing of Bells, who succeeded the use of silver trumpets, had no
original in Paganism, but among faithful Christians, and has been only
used by them universally: since the greatest and strongest nation now known in
the world this day, namely the Turks, abhors from all practice of Bells,
Calvinotur. Lib. 2.
and cast them out of their Mosquyes, which thy devote to their Mahumetry (as
this Accuser has other wise insinuated in these words cited out of
Bartholmaeus George: By the Priests crying it appears they have no Bells at
all Io locus. Me^g. In ^eregrinatione Hierosolymi^ia.
Habent Turcae templa satis amplae, in quibus nullas prorsus imagines vidi etc.
luxtatemplum turris est mirae altitudinit, quam little sacerdos tempore
orationis ascendens etc, voce alia etc. haec verba repetit, Venite ad
orationem. The Turks have temples large enough, in the which I saw noe images
at all: Besides the church or temple there is a tower of a marveilous height,
the which the Priest ascending in the time of service with a loud voice
repeateth these words: Come unto prayer. To this consorteth that which
another has alleged in express words; Campanis Turcae non vinutur. The
Turks use no Bells: yet nevertheless they do use Campanitibus steeples, or
Bellfrees, in places near adjoining to their Mosquys, or temples) since also
Bonfires in signs of joy may be warranted by the ancient and daily practice
of this honorable Realm, since courtly and triumphant disp^rts well used their
own Canonists cannot ^^tly dissalow: sin^ their Carnivalles year by year, and
in their late Iubilee^ in honor of their Pope, and several Princes, at Rome,
and in other Romish Jurisdictions these or such like celebrities have been
solemnly performed, and are ready upon every small vanity to be renewed.

Yea (says the Accuser) but it shall be proved out of the book of Wisdom,
that these celebrities by you performed are of this nature, namely mere
Idolatrous. I answer to this in this sort; I desire to know by what validity
of Argument the adversary can enforce this. Lib Sapien tiae c 14. v. 14.15.16.17
Summarilie (says the Accuser) I prove it by these verses before cited.
Pardon me (Accuser) I find not that this issue may be proved out of the verses
marginallie quoted: nay, I find rather that these verses utterly confound the
Idolatrous Imagerie daily in your Church to Gods great dishonor practiced,
and defended. But, omitting that argument, I only at this time examine how
aptly the nature and circumstance of this place concerning the matter between
me and the Accuser travized does agree.

The public exercises used in the church and commonwealth of England are
either Ecclesiastical, or Civil, as it appears in the first reason. The
Ecclesiastical solemnity, (as it is proved in the answer to the first
Accusation) have warrant out of Gods word and by approved practice of the
church. The Civil exercises and celebrities public, are their ^nging of
Bells, Bone-fires, Triumphs etc. I dem^nd n^w what coherence there is between
these actions ^e^ore nominated, and those that are mentioned in the 14. of the
book of Wisdom, which in this form are specified?

Sap. 14 v 14. etc. Gr^bertu Cognat. supposes this ^ather to be N^n. that
Grant of Babilo^, who when he had lost in such manner his son Jupiter Belus,
orderned those things in this place specified. But whence cil. cor. ass vereth
this I know not. For neither Berosus has it, neither Me. ast. For they show
that Belus reigned after hi^ Father, unless Nimrod had another son of that
name. I omit here Ios. Scal censure and Posse^ Lib 1. Bibliothee of those
books: the latter borrowing it out of Melch Cane Lib de human: histor. Robert
H^^ot in his prelectio^s Pret. 164 upon that place affi^meth that this Fathers
name was Syrophants a rich Egyptian etc. Syrophants familia in adul^tione
Domini stores esserebat Idolo, coronas plectebat, odotamenta succendebat: Re^
etiam ad simulaclira fug^entes veniam sunt adepti.
The first part of that place breefly touches how a father made an image for
his son that was suddenly taken away, whom now he worshippeth as a God, and
ordained to his servants ceremonies and sacrifices.

In the 15. verse it is said, that in process of time this wicked custom
prevailed, and Idols were worshipped by the commaundent of Tirants.

In the 16. verse it is specified that such as were a far of, and might not
worship them in presence, did draw a counterfeite resembling in Phisio^nomy
the feature of the person absent, deliniating it to the gorgeous Image of a
king.

In the 17. verse. it is also specified of the Craftesmen, who thrust forwards
the ignorant to increase superstition.

I beseech thee, Christian Reader, what coherence is this between these 2.
kinds of Actions? what correspondence or resemblance? First it is manifest,
that by no direct course of Reasoning one thing here is by necessary station
consequent to the other: This place of Wisdom material^y shows, whence
originally Idolatry issued: our actions that day Ecclesiastical only are
directed to Gods service, and have sincere warrant out of Gods word etc. as I
have before proved. in this narratio^ a father prescribes Idolatrous
ceremonies and sacrifices to be performed. In our Act the 17. of Nove^b. there
is no prescriptio^ used; al things are volu^tarily done concerning the outward
performance. Theirs either effected for fear, or for flattery: ours warranted
by holy and Christian duty, and merely de void of flattery, God only being a
knower of the heart. Apoc. 2.23.
as it has been before proved, unless this Acc. were a searcher of men's
hearts, and knew their thoughts, which is only appropriate to God, and to his
infinite Majesty.

But admit that there were a Resemblance^, or a mutual correspondency
between those two Actions: yet we know in all reasoning, similitudes prove
nothing, but serve only to illustrate, as perhaps this way Rome, and Babylon
are in correspondency, the Actions of Rome, and the Actions of Babylon: the
confusion of Rome, and the confusion of Babylon: the merchants of Rome, and the
merchants of Babylon: the vpholders of Rome, and the vpholders of Babylon: the
people of Rome, and the waters of Babylon: the cup of abomination that the
whore of Babilo^ made the Princes of the earth drunk with, and the cup of
the Pope: the desolation that was in Babylon, to that that was prophetically
not many hundred years ago prophesied of Rome, and is believed of many, that
Rome shall have in fine, if Rome repent not before the end of the world. These
things, and such like perhaps may by similitude, and by mutual reference be
firly compared. But the circumstances of this historical narration specified
in the book of Wisdom can no more substantially prove the matter
controversed, then those Praedicable forms termed by the Logicians disparata
can be alleged in mutual probation: The chief things of these 2. actions
being materially as near in nature (according to the English Proverbs) as the
Chalk is to Cheese, an Apple to an Oister, H^mo to Eqnu^, a man to a horse.

Lastly, observe where it is objected that if any Catholic should ring in the
celebrity of the feasts before mentioned, namely in the feasts of the Nativity
of our Savior his Ascension, the feast of the Blessed Virgins Nativity, or
Assumption, that he should be reputed a Papist, a man evil affected to the
Religion and state, and for the which he should immediately be imprisoned, and
deeply fined.

To this I differ mine answer, til instance be given in any such one: who
for this action has be^ne dealte with in this manner, according as it is laid
down in the Accusation: until which time I repute this slander of no other
validity to blemish the grave wisdom of this Realm, and Judicial form of
proceeding in like case, ^esopi fab.
the^ Aesops Cato accusation was against the Cock for crowing in the morning,
M. Tullius pro Roscio Philip of Maced. against Demosthenes (...) Thersites
against Agamemno^.
as the tale goes: then Chrysogonus accusation was against Roscius Amerinus:
then C. Finbria his complaint was against Q. Scavola, quoa non totum telum in
c^pore recepisset: Then Phillip of Macedon was against Demostheres and the rest
of the orators, that mightily persuaded the safety of the state of Athens: then
the malicious accusatio^s of Saul's parasites contrived against righteous David;
no more the^ the accusations of robbers, when they cannot rifell Innocent
clothiers upon Salisbury plain, or any passengers painefully and harmelesly
traveling in the Queens high way.

The retorting of the argument.
That Church Service which is materially holy, and those exercises and disports
which are lawful, discreet in performance, not repugnant to Gods word, void
of all suspicion of flattery, no ways opening any window to the reducing
again of heathenish superstition, nor polluted with abomination thereof, may
^el be performed and tolerated in any Christian Common wealth.

But the Ecclesiastical service of the Church, and the triumphant exercises
used in the Church of England now yearly the 17. of Novem. are of this nature
and quallity.

Ergo, the Ecclesiastical service, and the triumphant disportes used that day
may be performed, and may be tolerated in any Christian Common wealth, etc.

Having sufficiently in any simple opinion handled the 4. maine accusations, it
remains (by the grace of God) that I should briefly touch the Accusations
that appertain to the second general head being derived from the first. Which
although they be materially confuted in the answers premised, yet because in
particularity they press near the point of the argument controversied, give
me leave I beseech thee (good Reader) severally to discuss and examine them to
thy contentation, and to the satisfying of such as have been contrarily
persuaded.

Whereas it may be presupposed by the Adversaries that the Protestants will deny
that they observe the 17. of November for an Holly day, (as they do in truth)
the Accusers do labor to prove the contrary by these 2. cavils, hoping thereby
to show that our denial herein is mere untrue.

Their first charge in this manner they endeavor to prove good against us
(namely that our denial that we celebrate the 17. of November now in the nature
of an holly day is mere untrue) by these illations.

First for that all the properties of an hollyday are given by us to this day,
and are by us upon this day performed. Sanders. page 302. 303. de sch.


These are expressed by Nich. Saunders in these words. For that Bells were
reserved in Churches by the Protestants of England in these times, Vi celebrior
a redda^tur Nativitatis and Inaugurationis Regina festa: That the festival
days of the Nativity and Coronation of the Queen might be the more gloriously
celebrated,

2. For that, Reginae i^ lest out. If a man should speak to the Pope without
Sanctissime what offense would be conceived.
Solen nissime celebrant Elizabetha Natalem diem septimum Septembris. They do
celebrate the 7. of September the birth day of Elizabeth most solemnly.

3. For that, E^us (nempe Reginae) nativitatem mainsculis and rubris l^eris
notant. They mark the day of their Queens Nativity with greatered letters.

4. For that, Antiphones and Himnes in Paul's at London used in the end of
divine service in such form as it is specified in the bandling of the second
Argument.

5. For that, Dies Nativitatis and Inaugurationis Reginae Elisabethae omnibus
alijs Christo and Sanctorum celebritatibus long devotius per vniversum Regnum
Angliae observantur. The days of the Nativity and Coronation of Q. Elizabeth
are observed much more devoutely then all the solemnities of Christ or the
Saints through the whole kingdom of England. To this may be added that before
cited out of Calvino^urcism. Hos dies festive celebratis, etc. These days ye
solemnly celibrate.

A summary collection of all their reasons.
Because
Festivitas dicta a festis dicbus quasi festiditas eo quod in eis sola res
divina fit ^sid. orig lib. ^. Cap. 18.
1 The English Church and state shows greater devotion herein, and greater
shows of festivity 2 These days in all their Cal^nders are eminently
expressed by great Red letters. 3 Of their ringing, being the usual sign of an
holly day. 4 Of the Antiphone or Antheme (spoken of before) sung that day in
Paul's in the end of divine service.
Answer.
I should here enter into a great discourse of the institution of Holly days
in the Church, but that the discussing of that requires a large volume, only
give me leave (Christian Reader) to touch some heads appertaining to this
argument, that the materiallity of my answer may be better understood.

Rabbi Kimh. Why the tabernacle was called oliel mogned.
Holly days in Hebrew are called Mognedim, gn^^sheroth, kagge, which words as
they are in order specified may thus be understood.

The first are Days wherein faithful people did come together in assemblies,
to testify or witness that they are the Lords people: namely to sacrifice, to
pray publicly, and to hear Gods word.

The second signifies a day of festival solemnityes, which the Hebrews
expressly call a Retention: because the people are forbidden upon such days
to do any work, and are admonished sacredlie to observe holy assemblies.

The 3. name is signified by the word Kaggei, and by the note of the word
shows his nature, tripudium agere, gandere, festum diem agere; to leap for
joy, to keep a holy and festival day: In diebus festis iucunde exerceri:
Exodus c: 5: Levit: 23: Psalm: 4: Esdr: 3: Zach: 14: Genef: 2:
upon holy days to use festival and pleasant recreation. By this word holy
days are oftentimes expressed in the holy scripture of the old testament.

To these I might adioyne the word Shabath which by nature being Hebrew, by
use is well-most become English, and signifies, to leave of work, or, to
rest.

In Greek the usual word is (...), although (...) etc. and other words are
used. For (...) (although the Etymologists may yield literally some other
nominall derivation) I think that this best fitteth our sense (...). i. The
word (...) in Grecke used by Hesi^od Homer, and the best ancient Greek
((...)) (...): Because by the institution of holidaies, or by the exercise
performed in them, many good blessings from above are by Almighty God powered
upon man.

The usual words in Latin are Feriae, Festidies: Holidaies, festival days in
English: Feriae by the ancient Latins were termed a ferendis victimis, from
bringing of sacrifice on these days. Otherwise also ferias antiqui fest as
vocabant, et aliae erant sine die festo, vt nundina; aliae cum festo, quibus
adiungebantur epulationes: They called there ferias, festas; and of them there
were some which they did not keep holy day, as there market days and faires:
others which they did celebrate and keep holy, and hereunto were added there
feastings and banquets. Pompei: Fest: de verb: Signif Isid lib: 5: Cap. 3:
Isidore defines them in this sort: Feriae a fando nuncupatae sunt, quod in
eis tempus sit dictionis, i. vel in divino, vel in humano officio fart: sed ex
ijs festi dies hominum causa instituti sunt seriaeli causa divinorum sacrerum.
The Feriae are so called from speaking because in them there is time of
speaking and uttering any thing concerning either other worldly affairs, or
duty toward God. ^ of these such are appointed for holy days as are only
belonging unto divine service, Dura l. 7 c. 17. Sect. 11. Isid li 6. cap. 18. I
speak not of feasts hear as Ie. iunia have the name of feasts.
because men should wholly intend that. I om^^e Durandus derivation of Feriae:
rather that his deduction is some what improper and obscure, and infer this.
Festivitas dicta a festis diebus, quasi festiditas, eo quod in festivitatibus
sola res divina fit.

This being summarily touched concerning the words, Etymologies, definitions,
or descriptions: I find in all celebrity of holy days these causes Efficient,
Material, Formal, and Final. The Efficient causes of all holy days is the
first ordainer of them. The Material and Formal cause the times and Actions
prescribed to these days ordained. The final cause Gods glory, man's good. To
these causes may be adioined certain properties tending to the discerning of
them to us issuing out of some of the species of the causes before mentioned:
Amongst the professors of the people that embrace and profess true religion
only God is the author and ordainer of all holy days, or his Spirit in his
Ministers, Exodus 20 Levit 23. Ier. 16.23. Levit ^9 3 Genesis 1 2 2. Gen ^.1. Math.
5. V^^ ^^. C^^ L^^ ^^ Conrad ^^ I^a^. Hier ab Oleast. Ly. a^n glo Aben. Ezra.
piro.
Prophets, Apostles, and Churches as it appears, wheresoever the festivals
of the old testament are specified, or any effectual insinuation of the^, ever
Gods authority is interposed, either explicit, that is, expressly, or
implicit, that is, covertly and secretly, as the School men affirm. Exodus
20. GOD spoke these words: Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day etc.
The Lord spoke unto Moses etc. Sabbata mea etc. In the institution only by
consequent and example God one^y ordains festivities and holy days: God the
7. day rested from b^^^vorke which he hade made, and blessed the 7. day, and
hallowed. The words delivered in that mood of Hebrew enforce that
signification: that God sanctified the Sabbath for man's ^^, according to that
saying that Sabbath was made for man: for God has no need of rest, who still
works in Creation, and Preservation, according to his will, Dominus
lanctificavit diem Sabbati vt animae susciperent incrementum eo die magis quam
alijs diebus.
as in the 5. of John our Savior says: Pater meus operatur vsque adhuc, et
ego operor: My Father works until now, and I work. But only this is to be
applied unto us: Sanctificavit Sabbatum. i. Sanctum et celebre esse voluit. i.
Observari instituit, sibi consecravit. i. Ceteros operu^ exercitio deputans,
illum suo cultui mancipavit. He sanctified the Sabbath, that is, he would have
it to be a solemn and sacred meeting; that is, he appointed it to be observed
and consecrated unto his own use: assigning other days for men's buysinesse
and affairs he applied this unto his vvorshippe and service.

If question be made here of the feasts mentioned in Hester, Esther. 1. 2.
Chro. 30.
the chang of the celebrity of the feast of the Passover by king Ezechias, or
any other feast demonstrated in books Canonical: I answer, that the
ordainers and alterers of these feasts did it upon sure testimony of the holy
Ghost (for many governors and teachers of the church the^ lived) as the
Prophets, Esdras, Hester, Stapletons arg. hereby confuted in his prin. doct.
lib 12. con. 7. c. 4. Ianus Numa Po^p. Orpheus. Hercules.
Mardocheus who had an infallible testimony and seal thereof immediately from
God.

The Heathens in their Idolatry and apish imitation ever had their festivalls
ordained and ordered by the inventors of their devilish superstition.

The Material and Formal ground of Holy Days are such times, works Moral,
Evangelicall ceremonial etc. as are designed to those days, and prescribed by
authority specified.

The Final ends of all Holly days are these.
Secundum Scriptura^
Hollydaies are Days
1 Dedicated to Gods service and glory. 2 Figuring the state of the new
testament and the state of future rest. 3 Intermitt^ent of all bodily labor. 4
Serving for the recreation of the mind weakened by bodily labor. 5 Serving to
excellent works of charity. 6 For distinction of times and seasons. 7
Sacramentally seperating Gods people from all people not comprehended in Gods
covenant by their observation. Numeri^o. Genes 1. Let the^ be for signs and
^easons and days and years. Vide^un. Annot. in B. b. Trem. Cap 1. Gen Austine
against Seneca. de civit Dei. Man's labor without Gods blessing nothing
avails. Seneca austere Sto^cal humor: Vide Lu^h. in 2. Genes. Sabbat Le^
scripta in ^^de (...), Iustine Martyr Apol. 2. (...), etc Vin: Lyren con: Haer:
catholicum est quod vbique, quod se^per, quod ab omnibus creditu^ est.
Vniversalis tradit Aug ad Ian: vt sup: Naz. 2. (...), etc.

The properties of Hollydaies which were noted were these in Moses law: The
sounding of trumpets, The Calends of the moon, The distinction Planetary and
Zodiacal instituted by God in the motion of the signs abo^e, as it is in the
work of the 4. day, and such like. Of our signs now adays more (God willing)
hereafter.

Observe herein the chief and most eminent ends concerning the institution of
holly days to be principally two 1. Their dedication to Gods glory: and 2. in
morality in the law of nature their designement to man's rest: whereby S. Austen
had just cause to reprove Seneca for affirming that the Jews lost the 7. part
of the benefits of their life by observing each 7. day holy, and by
observatio^ of each 7. year holy etc. Since from the beginning God ordained
this law to man's good, in prescribing every 7. day to be a day of rest for
man: and in imprinting the morallity of this law in the heart of man in his
creation for his recreation and refreshing.

Now if any man shall here demand, Wherefore the Saba^th is observed in the
New testament, and, Who altered that day from the Jews 7. day, to that which
we call Diem Dominicum or the Lords day: or, What authority the Church had to
ordain Holly days, since there is no express mention of this change, since
the observation of al holly days is only of Gods institution, and is contained
essentially under the first Table of the law of God given by Moses. To these
interrogatories: I answer briefly in this sort.

Concerning the observation of the Sabbath day, as it is now usually called by
the Apostle, (...): in other places of scripture (...), that is to say, The
Lords day, the first of the Sabbaoths, although there be no express place in
words showing the alteration or translation of it from the Jews Sabbath to
that day wherein it is now celebrated yet by the practice of that Church (as it
may be out of these places collected Apoc. 1.1. Cor. 16.2. Act. 20.7.) and by
the practice of the Church immediately succeeding the church of the Apostles (as
it appears by Justin. Martyr: in his apollogy) and by the continual practice
and example of the universal Church from thence to these times: and by that
rule of Nazianzen before cited out of his book, (...), that is, of the holy
Ghost, without all contradiction and gaine-saying it is demonstratiuely and
infallibly in my judgment confirmed, that the observation of the Lords day,
commonly called our Sabbath day, is a sacred tradition originally Apostolic,
pregnantly to be proved out of the holy scriptures, observed sacredly in the
Primitive Church, since continued and observed by continual prescription and
practice to our days. The observatio^ of which day I doubt whether the church
can now alter to any other day: yet herein I submit my judgment to the Church.

By this I affirm, that it is invincibly proved against all gain saiers, that
the observation of our Sabbath is only of God, by the infallible testimony of
his spirit demonstrated, by practice in the primitive Church in prescripte and
tradition Apostolic. This opinion though diverse Catholics now in prison have
contradicted, affirming that the institution of the Lords day or Sabbath,
according to the day as it is now observed, was some hundred years originally
afterward prescribed by the Church without immediate Apostolic warrant, Eccl.
Annal tom 1 page 610. 611. Ann. C. 58. Nic. Conc. Canon. 20. Aug. de tem ser 25.
yet shall they find this sentence confirmed thoroughly by Cardinal Baronius in
these words: Prima feria praesta^tissimis insignita mysterus dies Dominica
meruit apellari Dominica dies in ^pso exordio nascen^is ecclesiae obser vari
capta est ab Apostolis etc. Non ab alijs quam al ipsis Apostolis statutum
fuisse diem Dominicam observari (cum factum reperiatur Apostolorum temporibus)
omnes qui mente ^aleant dicturos putamus. The first holy day, as being adorned
and beawtified with most excellent mysteries, was thought worthy to be called
the Lords day. At the beginning of the church, when it did but newly spring
forth: it was observed and kept holy day of the Apostles etc. And that it was
not commanded to be observed for the Lords day of any other then of the
Apostles (whereas it is most manifest to have been done in the time of the
Apostles) we suppose cannot be denied of men that have but common reason.

Concerning the authority of the observation of Hollydaies, since by the
express word of God they are not prescribed, yet in regard some of them have
but generally or universally observed in the Church in S. Austens time, Aug. ad
Ian epist. 118
time, yea before, and ever since; as the anniversary celebrities of the
Passion of our Savior: The day of his Resurrection, The day of his Ascension,
Math 28 Vide Hosp. lib. de orig. fest apud Christian. c. 1.
the day of Pentecost, missionis Spiritus Sancti, of the sending of the holy
Ghost etc. and since the Church has a free liberty give^ by God to determine
the observation of these days, that all things may be performed in the Church,
(...) and (...), decently and in order; I doubt not to all rare that this
action of the Church herein had his authority originally, Socr. Eccl. hist. l.
1. c. 2.
if not from the Apostles, yet from their immediate successors in the Mother
Churches, wherein our faith was first taught, Antioche, Alexandria, Ephesus,
Rome, etc. Yet in such a sort that the Church of God had ever this authority,
and has of al places in all ages according to time and country to prescribe
the observation of these festivals, S Hieromes opinion is not allowed in Epist.
ad Galat.
excluding all leaven of Iudaisme, all servile boudage, all opinion of operis
operati, of the merit of the very work which is in them performed, and of all
ceremonial Sanctity. And contrariwise, upon the same foundations premised, I
determinatly infer also that the same Church has authority from God upon
sufficient ground to abrogate any festival holly day prescribed by the
Churches Antecede^t, if by corruption these festivities have been, and are
abused to superstition, 1. Cor. 14 4
polluted by loose and disordered practices, or any other ways profaned.
Petrobrunsian heresy. Anabapt.
By this opinion evidently the Petrobrunsian heresy is oppugned upon one side,
who would have no holly days in the church observed, who thought it Iudaisme
to observe any holly days: on the other side Popery, Centum gravam. Germ. Gra.
who has overcharged the world with multitude of these ceremonial
observations: thereby laying a greater yoke upon the churches of Christ then
the Synagogue had in Iudaisme. Be sides that there was in the Church no
certain law of al hollydaies, it appears by the saying of Socrates before
spoken of, and by their own divisions: Quaedam generalia sunt festa, ac
quaedam mobilia, quaedam fixa seu stativa. Vid Hospin
Quada^ conceptiva, quaedam Imperatiua, Certain feasts were General, as the
feasts before cited out of S. Austine: some were Particular, quae in vna fiunt
provincia aut p^rcohia: Which were in one only province, or parish. Moveable
feasts, Easter, Ascensio^, Pentecost, Septuagesima, etc. Conceptiva, allotted
to certain days by the ministers of Religion: Imperativa, such as upon each
occasion for the good of the church and commonwealth, and the safety of the
Prince were imposed by them that were in authority in such cases. Upon these
grounds I infer these conclusions.

First, that the ordinance of the Sabbath is from God only, or the undoubted
testimony of his holy spirit in his Church: This was manifested in these
words by God himself, Genes. 2. Exodus 20. God compassionating the mind of man
only wear^ed with labor ordained solemn feasts to remedy the tedious
greevances of all laborious pains. Plat. de leg Lib. 2.
and demonstrated by example Genes. 2. and was also Scripta in cordibus,
written in our hearts in our creation, and afterward repeated in the
promulgation of the law in mount Sinai. Yea if Adam had not fallen in
Paradise, the Sabbath should have been observed,

Secondly, that this rest was ordained to Gods glory, and man's good: the good
of man's rest, I say, therein to bridle the insatiable greediness of
unreasonable covetous persons, who willingly extend mercy neither to man,
nor beast.

Thirdly although the Sabbath were ceremonial, yet the moral works of it are
perpetual.

Fourthly, that the observation or the Sabbath precisely appertains to the
first table of the law.

5. That in the Apostles times the Sabbath of the Jews was translated to be
observed prima Sabbatorum. The first day of the Sabbath, videlicet that day
which we call Diem Dominicam, The Lords day, which was by S. John called in
the Apoc. (...), in Greek (...). the chief of all days: by Ignatius that
holy Martyr. (...), Epist. Ignat ad Mag. Just Martyr 2. Apolog.
Sunday in which God altering the darkness, and matter of the world, made the
world: and in which (...), Jesus Christ our Savior arose from the dead, by
Iustine Martyr.

Sixthly, that we are yet bound to the observation of all moral works of the
law as grounded in lege charitatis, in the Law of charity.

7. That the church in all ages from the Apostles times to these days
inviolably observed this day, as far forth as the state, and times wherein
they lived violently repressed not their public assemblies.

8. That the present church ought not to alter the observation of this day, but
upon further ground then yet is reveled; since the institution flowed
originally from the Apostles: and since it has been inviolably observed in
the church in such sort as before it was in the heat of persecution, as
before I have mentioned. Justin. Mar. Apolog 2: Math. 18. 1. Cor. 14:4: That
they concur with the Sab^oth.


9. Concerning our festivalls I have shevved that they be Equivocally only
called Holy Days, in regard namely of some correspondency wherein they
concur; that they have not any authority expressly out of Gods word, but that
some of them were ordained by the successors of the Apostles, some by later
decrees of the church, some by Provincial Metropolitans for days of hearing
Gods word, and Ecclesiastical discipline, only in certain generals received
by the prescription of the church.

10. That some Churches observe some Holi-daies, some Churches other some.

11 This caveat al churches must take heed of, that they ordain not to many of
them, that they equalize not their observation to the observation of the Lords
day: neither that they impose a greater burden then needs upon men's shoulders
by the keeping of them.

12. That we are to observe the custom of those Churches where we live
concerning Holydaies, so as the observation of that church originally be free
from all superstition: which custom the French and Duch Churches now observe
in England, to the great peace of our Church and theirs.

13. Lastly that, upon just cause of corruption, by that authority, by the
which festivities or Holly-daies were instituted, they may be altered and
abrogated.

It remains now that I should perspicuously answer the premised cavils
contained in the 2. general^ head. My answer before exhibited was Negative,
namely that the church of England has not prescribed that this Realm should
observe this day the 17. of November as a formal Holly-day: The adversary here
replieth by the conditions premised that by necessary consequense an d^llation
it is a formal Holy Day in regard of the due nature of a formal Holy Day.

This, say they, is evidently proved by the practice of our solemnization, and
by all circumstances and signs of an Holy Day that day yearly and usually
performed.

The truth of this reply give me leave (good Reader) breefly to examine: for by
that, whether I have ansvvered rightly or not, in few circumstances it may
appear.

1. First let the Accuser allege any decree Archiepiscopall or Episcopal, by
which it may appear to the world that the 17. of November is now annually
commanded to be observed an Holly-day formally; otherwise the validity of the
denial remains yet no ways impeached.

All sh^ps are open in London and the Plovve goes in each field in the country
2. Secondly whether any bodily labor that day be inhibited either in town or
country. Which is a material point to be considered in the observation of
each Holly-day.

3. Thirdly what censure or penalties are inflicted, Ecclesiastical, or Civil,
legally upon any that breaks the rites of that day. This being upon
sufficient warrant grounded, it remains that if our negation be insufficient,
as they seem to say it is, let them show wherein instance may be given against
it, and just materiallity of exception: For until the contrary of this be
evidently demonstrated, it remains vnconfuted* Yea (says the Adversary) but
yet you must needs confess it to be an Holy-daie by this consequent of
Nicholas Saunders Belles are reserved in your churches to this end especially,
Inprimis vt harum pulsu celebriora redda^tur fest a nativitatis et
Inaugurationis Reginae. First that by the ringing of the^ the feasts of the
Nativity and Coronatio^ of the Queen may the more solemnly be celebrated.
Calvinotur
Secondly in regard you solemnise these days most devoutly. Lastly in regard
ye note these times in your Calenders with great redd letters.

First note that Saunders terms the 17. of November Festum, a Feast, et diem
Nativit* festum, and the day of the Queens Nativity a feast. But merely
without proof or warrant. Now A nomine ad rem, Pla. in Cra. tylo.
to reason from the appellation and name of the thing to the thing it self
unless the word expres the materiality of the thing named formally, no^ valet
argume^tum (as the meanest Sophiste in Oxford knows) a nomine adrem; An
argument drawn from the name of a thing to the thing it self is of noe force,
or makes noe proof.

Yea but what means that outrageous ringing replieth N Saunders and W.
Reynolds, unless you have made it a formal Holy Day.

To this I answer by the right of that, that has been inferred before, that
it is no good reason that it is an Holi-day because of this ringing; Bells
serve for the ringing to sermons for ^unerals to exercises at Princes
Coronatio^s In public danger of fire, in solemn meetings, of Cities, in
Universities, in Convocations Co^gregations, and other scholasticall exercises
for C^v^^ few (...) night for (...) of the clock at morning.
partly for that not one^y all the learned of the land, but the ignorant and
simple people of this Realm knows that Belles have sundry other uses then to
signify Holly-daies, and that appears by Durandus in the place before cited,
and by that observation of mine before, wherein it has bin declared that Bells
succeeded in use of the legal silver trumpets. And for the great ringing the
17. of November is only an outward testimony of that joy which our hearts
conceive for the great happiness of Q. Elizabeth's Regiment. See the discourse
before cited of the use of Bells.

If they will prove it to be an Holly-day in regard of the Ecclesiastical
office, Sermons, and prayers that day used; The reselling of this cavil you
shall find specified in the Answer of the first general accusation, and in
the issue of the conclusion of his Apology.

Lastly, where the noting of these days with great letters is inferred for
probation by N. Sanders, I summarily answer this cavil^tion in this sort. The
vnsuffiency of this reason may palpably be found and appear evidently by this
illation. If noting with great red letters be an appropriate condition to
signify an Holy day in these times as well this Accuser may conclude that the
days of the entering of the Son into Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc. to each, I
say, Persius Sat^ 5: Preserum siquid Ma^i rubrica notavit^ Librorum tituli et
capita hac no tabantur. Columella. Lib. 2.
of the 12. Signs are Holy Days. For all the titles of these days are limmed
with red ^ke by our Astronomers direction in all our printed Calenders.
Likewise the beginning and ending of terms, Ember weckes, etc. may be
materially (as I have spoken before) accounted Hollidaies, and days sacredly
festival. For all these in our Calenders and Almanackes are in this manner
noted and described. In one word to conclude upon this sign The 7. of
September and the 17. of Nove^ber are Holly-daies. Why so? because these days
in our Calenders are noted with great redd letters: for that this is an
infallible sign of an Holly-day says Saunders. The Scribes in the Gospel
prognosticated a fair day by a redd sky in the evening: And the red by
miracle equally distinguishing the Rainebowe is a token that all the world,
Math. c. 16. Chro. Melanct. in Carionem. Genes. Tully de natu. Deorum. Apoc.
17.3. Note before the fable of the ^landers adoring a Mallet.
as it has already perished with water, (which the greenish hue in the
rainebowe represents) so in future time is a figure, I say, and a sign vt
totus tandem ignesceret mundus, that all the world should perish with fire,
And it is an infallible token of the bluddines of Rome: that the woman Apoc.
17. is seen to sit upon a scarlet colored beast. But that signing with red
letters in the Cale^der is a certain token of an Holi-day, is no infallible
property, as Saunders has alleged. The distinguishing of Aries and Taurus,
and the rest of the 12. Signs by their red letters therein will easily
dischardge me without the force of a Mallet out of the brakes of this
objection. If not (for perhaps they will not descend upon so simple a
conceit, neither leave their Zodiacall honors upon so small a quarrel, being
to entertain the Sun each month once a year into some one or other of their
houses) Yet, I hope, for a shifte the Lawyers in Westminster Hall will plead
for my deliverance here in without a Golden fee which otherwise they may easily
yearne these days being merely workendayes, and by no ceremonious rites
neither law Ecclesiastical ordained Holly-dayes.

But here finally if question be made by what good authority the Church and
Common wealth of England can warrant their solemnizations and celebrities in
these actions, to satisfy al reasonable and good Christians I summarily yield
these reasons.

First I say that all public exercises Ecclesiastical may be warranted by
the rule of the Apostle 2. Tim. and by the warrant of the 21. Psalm as it is
discussed in the second general head.

Secondly that if the Church and Christian state of England should prescribe it
to be an Holyday: that their prescriptio^ ha^^ good example for it in Canonical
scriptures, and in those scriptures which are named by the godly and learned
l^br: Ecclesiastici Ecclesiastical books, next in authority to books
Canonical, namely out of these places. First out of the book of Hester c. 9. v.
18.19.20 21. whereby Mardochai his direction letters were sent to the Jews that
were through all the provinces of king Ahashuerosh, that they should observe
the 14. Fest. Pur. sive sortiu^. cap. 7. ve. 6.
day of the month Adar every year with joy and feast^ng, and to send presents
every man to his neighbor, and gifts to the poor: A day wherein their sorrow
by God was turned to joy from mourning, in regard of the bloody massacre
contrived by wicked Hamon to the final extirpation of that holy, though
afflicted people upon which action Lavater in his Commentary upon Hester has
written this: Lavaterus in librum Hester.
Ex his quae hactenus attulimus facile videre est Christianos exempto Hesterae
and Mardochaei dies festos indicere vel acceptaere posse: Dominicum diem ab
ipsit Apostolis institutu^ diximus, propter hunc veteres Christo dies quosdam
sacros dedicarunt. Christi Natalem, Circumcisionem, Resurrectionem, Ascensionem
in coelum, Missionem spiritus Sancti, cosque coluerunt fidei confirmandae,
reique gestae testificanda gratia. Hos si qui imitentur, vt maxim probemus,
etc. In Christiana liberate, etc. Quod adritus illos solennes, qui ad publicam
reigestae memoriam atque gratiarum actionem, quae Deo sic per se, reprebendi
nec debent, nec possunt. Omni^o enim nostrum est Deo ob accepta beneficia
gratias agere, eademque perpetua memoria celebrare, and ad posteros
transmittere. Out of this which we have hitherto alleged, it is easily seen
that Christians after the example of Hester and Mardocheus man either appoint,
or accept and approve Holy Days. We have heretofore said that the Lords day
was first instituted by the Apostles themselves; and because of this our
Ancestors consecrated certain days to be kept holy unto Christ: as, the
Birthday of Christ his Circumcision, Resurrection, Ascension, his sending of
the holy Ghost; and those they observed both for confirmation of their faith,
and to testify the remembrance of the benefits performed unto men on those
days. These if any man imitate, we should greatly al owe of their
proceedings herein in Christian liberty etc. And as concerning those
ceremonial feasts which pertain to the memorial of a public benefit, and
to thankes-giving unto God alone, they neither can nor ought to be reprehended.
For it is altogether our part and duty to give thanks unto God for benefits
received, and to celebrate the perpetual memory of them, Iud. 16.3. This verse
is in the latin, but in no Greek copy that I have seen. Seratius in 16.
Judith. Aethiopica ecclesia in suo calendario habet diem f^^iu^ Iudithae.
Macchab. 4
and to transfer the same to al succeeding posterity.

Thirdly, the last verse of the Book of Judith mentions a celebrity by the
Jews yearly and continually performed in remembrance of her victory over
Holophornes. In the exposition of which place Serrarius has touched the
religion and piety of the Jews that in remembrance of this victory instituted
a solemn festivity.

The feast of the dedication by Judas Machabaeus and his brethren and the whole
congregation, ordained to be observed year by year after the clensing of the
Sanctuary, serves also for a pattern in like cases to follow. And so much the
more for that our Savior Ioh. 10. in the time of his flesh taught in this
celebrity in the Temple. John 10. Hebr 5 7. Some diver say there is about this
feast of the dedication, but he time of the writer mentioned Ioh. 10. shows
what feast it was. Nonnus in his paraphrase in greek verse upon Saint John is
ceceived. Vide Bezae Annot. in hunc Iocu^. Lib. 1. ca. 1. ca. 41. lib. 2. ca 19
Euse. de vi. Co^st. paneg. Hospinianus lib. de festo Iudaeorum c. 10. Serar
com. c. 7. Mac. 1.


To these examples may be adioined that which Eusebius has written in the
life of Constantine the great, In whose reign a panegyris every 10. year was
celebrated to Gods honor. To glorify his name for that happy regiment, for the
light of religion in Constantine the great his reign give^ to the world, and
for that great conquests given to that Emperor by God, And Halcyon peace
ensuing thereof to that mighty Empire. To this end a festivity was celebrated
in that great Empire of this quality or nature: wherein God was glorified,
Hymns were song, and Constantine and his sons Gods instruments in the
establishment of Christian religion and peace in that Empire, generally were
remembered by all that Empire with great acclamations. To these I will adioine
two other authorities, one of ours, an other uttered by a Jesuit a man of
their own.

Some feasts are observed by the Church, though not expressly ordained by God,
yet instituted to Gods honor, and of purpose celebrated to call to memory Gods
great blessings conferred upon his people. In these feasts this Author
specifieth the feast of Purim or sortium, which is in English of lots.

The other testimony is alleged by Nicholaus Serrarius commentary lib. 1.
Machab. Pessunt nova in Dei benefici. orum memoriam festa institut. New feast
days may be appointed for the remembrance of Gods benef^ics: I say in regard
of such benefi^es that God either by himself, or by his Saints has or shall
confer upon his Church at any time.

By this collection I infer this first that our sacred celebrities have
warrant out of Gods word.

Secondly that if the Church of this Realm should prescribe it to be observed
as they do observe other Holydaies, that it had sufficient warrant for it in
regard of the premised examples: Ser. li. Iud. cap. 6. com.
especially since (as the same Serrarius has noted) that the Church which now
is, is endued with that authority wherewith the Church of the Jews was
endued; Torneame^ta though they be condemned in Decret. lib. 5. tit. 13 c. 1
yet ours being not of the nature Quod duellum etc cannot in equity be so
censured especially being performed without hatred of the parties before, and
only for recreation.
namely as the Synagogue did then institute some feasts, so the Church may do
now. In the like manner the said Churches authority extends so far, that in
abrogation of festivities corrupted they may follow that authority which the
Synagogue had; time, place, and persons and every other circumstaunce
considered according to the premises.

Lastly I have evidently demostrated in handling the answer to the 4.
general reason; that the triumphant disportes used at Court that day, namely
the 17. of November, are exercises no ways heathnish, ridiculous, foolish, but
such as are laudable, comme^dable in themselves being rightly used, such as
they themselves in like form exhibit in far greater measure to their
rulers, governors, Princes, Popes.

Epilogus.
GReat alterations have bin raised in Europe this last hundred years or
Century, Anno Do. 1600. Periodically beginning in the 8. year of Alexand the 6.
Pope continued to Clem 8 regiment being Pope, ending in a Romish Iubile at
which time Maximilian was Emper. the 17. of K. Henry the 7 the 42 of Queen E.
l. z beth Rev. c. 10 Council of Nice the 6. Canon. Dan 7. Revel. 16.
and great changes through the world have issued hereupon: but omitting all
civil broils, and all bloody wars that have been managed upon other causes,
give me leave (good Reader) breefly to speak my mind of such marvelous
effects that have insued the miraculous alteration of Religion in this Century
of our age. The mysterye whereof and whole history was prophetically seen by
S. John in the Revelation the 10. Chapter in the vision of the mighty Angel
that came down from heaven clothed with a cloud, and the raignebowe about
his head, his face shining as the Sun, and his feet as pillars of fire etc.
The original of this alteration first flowed upon the revoulte of many
Christian nations from the Sea of Rome being one of the 4. Seas Patriarchichall
and Apostolical by the 6. Canon of the great Counsel of Nice established.
Which sea was in great honor over all the world, as long as the Roman Empire
monarchically ruled and triumphed, represe^ted by that ugly beast which had
^ro^ teeth prophesied of in the 7. Daniell, and held the stern of a great part
of the world, and ruled regally over the 10. kings spoken of in the Revelation.

The occasions of this revolte were the declination of the Sea of Rome from the
sincerity of the faith Apostolic, and the unspeakable corruption which had
crept into that Sea, or Papacy. For hereupon immediate^y diverse nations,
enlightened from above in the sincere light of Gods word (according to the
former prophecy seen by S. John in spirit) which had been long ecclipsed by
the dark shadow of of humane traditions, began to withdraw themselves from
the bondage of that Babylon; endevoring to restore religion in their several
kingdoms and dominions to the ancient and Apostolic for no, Imitating
heerin the going of A^l^ ^o build N^^ivch ^en. 1 1. relinquishing ^^bel, and
Abraham's le^ui^^ Vr of the Childres Ierem 51.9.
sounded upon the inf^^l^ble rule and Canon of holy scripture revealed in the
old and new testament: which separation from the Sea of Rome was not to be
misliked; partly because the sea of Rome persecuted the professors of this
reform (...) with si^e and sword, and with all bloody mass^cres: partly for
that Rome would admit no reformation of her c^^ruptions, but grew incurable
according to that of the Prophet Jeremy: We would have cured Babylon, but she
would not be healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own
country. For her iudgmente is come up unto heaven, and in lifted up to the
clawdes.

The ^ssues of this alteration has produced wonderful effects between two
sorts of people, the named Catholics, and Protestants. For although diverse
subdivisions of sects have in this last Century sprung up, yet all the rest have
been but handfuls to these two, namely to the Catholics, and Protestants:
out of these have issued the greatest lamps of learning: by these two, most
books have been written: by these two, greatest States have been ruled and
altered, greatest Regiments have been managed. The others have been but petty
Conventicles, sometimes here, sometimes there; sprowring, rising, falling,
favored of some few* in few years declining, sometimes bl^sted by the secular
power, sometimes dying by devouring one another: the better and wiser and the
chiefest part ever bending themselves to the embracing of one of these and to
no other. These 2. how they have been b^nded one against the other all the
world knows* the books written upon both the sides testify, their great
enmity in the eyes of all people has desciphered, resembling by effects in
sequel though not in original the schism of Israel from Judah originally
springing from Salomons sin, seconded by Ieroboa^s crafty policy, 1 King 12
2. Chron: 10
and K. Roboams folly, God justly punishing king Salomons Idolatry.

How fair the malice of this division shall extend it self, and how long it
shall continue, God only knows, who d^sposeth and orders al things in their
due seasons, Dan. 2.21. 2. Pet 3.8.
before whom a thousand years are but as one day, to wh^^e e^e^ all future
things are infallibly present. Only this we know, that this division has bred
in many men's minds irreconciliable hatred as we find in effect. The
manifestation whereof may be seen evidently in this short T^^atise, and is
felt sensibly through out al kingdoms of C^tendome, into which the venom of
this Gargr^na has bin dispersed. This, I say, the ^eader shall easily find in
this short Treatise, if he will but examine upon what sl^ight reasons, and how
weak grounds the honor of this flourishing ^ealme, the excellency of our
gracious Queen ((...) G^d long preserve) the sincerity of the Apostolic
Religion which we profess, are fought to be disgraced, depraved, and
sc^andered by men zealous of pretended Catholicisme.

Diverse remedies have been fou^ht to su^e the festred sores of this cankred
diverce, whereof some of them have bin touched by Iacobus Acontius in his
books de stratagemate Satan's, ^y lest^rus and others. Iac. Acont. lib. 8. de
stratagem. Sat. ^eslerus. Genes 33. Jeremy. Exodus.
But this vlceri grown to such ha^ h^ad that no b^l^ can cu^e^, no balm, I
say, but his, who reconciled Ep^^ to Jacob, which brought the people of
Israel out of the Egyptian and Babylonian bondage and thraldom to their own
land, the land of promise; which can give spirit to the rotten and dead bones
to whom Ezechiel was commanded to prophecy; Ezekiel. 37.
which ca^ioine the two pieces of wood into one, wherein the names Judah,
Ephraim, and Israel were in disiointment severally written, which can renew
our hearts, and give us grace to walk in his ways after he has discovered
unto us the greevousnes of our sins; which by his great and s^rill sounding
trumpet Saint Paul has foretold of the conversion version of the stifnecked
generation which crucifi^d the Lord of life, Roman. 11.
and is able to graf^e in again to the Olive the broken branches fallen away
through unbelief, branches not only broken, but also withered. Bese^ch we him
to perform this according to his good will and pleasure, who only is wise,
only is holy, only omnipotent and merciful, who is God almighty and blessed
for ever. To this God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost be all honor,
glory, and dominion world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

