A CHRISTIAN CAVEAT FOR ALL ESTATES.

OR A Sermon, preached by that Religious servant of GOD, Master GEORGE HOCKIN,
Bachelor of Divinity, Fellow of Excester College, and Preacher to the Town
of Totnes in Deuon.

PSALM. 105.5. Remember ye his marvelous works that he has done: his wonders
and the judgments of his mouth.



LONDON Printed by William Stansby. 1622.

TO The virtuous and truly religious, Mistress P. I. increase of all spiritual
grace and true comfort here, with assurance of eternal glory and happiness
hereafter.
THese holy and heavenly Meditations, were by the Author of them at first,
conceived upon the occasion of the decease of a religious Gentleman, with whom
he was much conversant: Good Wine needs no Garland, it will praise it self:
so I persuade my self, will this ensuing Sermon, which a learned, holy, and
faithful Servant of God, formerly, Viua voce, in public sounded in your
ears, and in the ears of many others, which it furnished with the best and
rarest things which Canaan, Greece, and Rome does yield. There is scarce in the
Book of God, a Mine, that is more rich and abundant in exhorting men to
remember their Creator, then the Text handled in this Sermon. This Treatise
will afford good help to those that will deigne, diligently to peruse the
same. For, herein the learned shall meet with some things not common, perhaps
not to increase, yet to renew his secret knowledge, and whet his judgment; and
also the godly Christian shall not want wherewith to feed his deuoutest
Meditations, and enkindle his best affections toward God. But lest I do seem
like some deceitful Broker, Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces, Horat.
to set worth on worthless Wares, by goodly words; I will leave the proof
hereof to the judicious, and not fastidious Readers. I lighting upon this
Sermon, of that both learned and godly Divine, Master George Hockin (of whose
gracious ability in preaching Gods Word, and of whose conscionable care in
performing his Ministerial office, many can witness) as a poor Orphan Babe
of a deceased Friend, for the memory of its Author, have adventured to show my
self so far on this Theater, as to set it forth to public view, and to
make it common for the benefit of others. I presume, good men will both accept
my good meaning, and conne me thanks, who have set up for them such a fair and
clear light, to light them on-ward in the way that will lead them to eternal
bliss. The Lord grant, that it may have that success in such as are
religiously affected, which, he that gave first life unto it in studying, and
brought it forth by preaching, intended, and I in consenting and causing to
have it Printed, desire: so shall young and old, the feeble, weak, and
doubting Christian, be taken by the hand, and we all shall be of the number of
them which follow Faith, to the conservation of our souls: which the Lord for
Jesus Christ his sake grant. Amen.

Yours in his best desires, I. C.

A CHRISTIAN CAVEAT FOR ALL ESTATES.
ECCLESIASTES 12.1. And remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before
the evil days come, and the years approach, of which thou will say, I have no
pleasure in them.


SOLOMON was Son unto the worthiest King, that ever swayed Scepter upon
Earth; he was the Son of a King, a King himself, and the Father of a King,
and Predecessor in the royal Line unto the Son of GOD, and for Nobility
matchless. He was King of Jerusalem, which was the City of GOD, the Lady of
the World, the holy City, the perfection of Beauty, and the joy of the whole
Earth. In speculatiue knowledge, he excelled the wisdom of all the Children
of the East, and all the wisdom of Egypt. He was able to discourse from the
Cedar tree, that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hyssope, that springs out of
the wall. He was the most fit and absolute man that ever lived, both for
ability and understanding, abundance of riches, and sufficiency of all
Creatures. This King exhorts young men to remember GOD in their youth. The
flower of youth will vanish away, therefore, Remember thy Creator in youth; it
is the best way, and the only way, to turn away anger and evil, always to
remember the power, goodness, and justice of GOD the Creator. The dependence
these words have on the former, is in this sort; Solomon having exhorted Youth
in their youth and prime-time, to remember their Maker. He said before, take
away grief out of thy heart, that is, all those things which provoke the anger
of GOD; cause evil to depart from thy flesh, that is, all punishment which
comes from GODS anger; And remember thy Creator. This Text contains two
things.

First, An exhortation to godliness in youth, And remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. Secondly, A reason taken from the manifold infirmities of
old age, Whiles the evil days come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
The sum and sense is this; Solomon, a man experienced, willed young men to
remember GOD that made them, and that in their youth; not that they should
forget him in their old age, but they should begin betime to know GOD, and so
continue, whiles they continue on earth; there is good cause so to do, for he
made them, brought them into the world, and bought them too; and they should
remember him here, that he might remember them hereafter, before old age,
weak age, and dote-age come; before weakness, sickness, sorrowfulnes, and other
infirmities happen, which accompany old age.

Or Solomon puts the dissolute young man in mind of judgment; there he
shows him, how to escape it, by avoiding the anger of GOD, namely, to remember
Jehovah.

Thus you have seen Solomon's meaning: now, to speak of some such profitable
instructions, as these words shall afford.

And remember. Text.
] The true and serious remembrance of GOD, is an especial remedy against
sin; and the forgetting of GOD, a cause of sin. GOD himself commands it
in the Scripture, saying, Remember Jehovah thy God, for it is he which gives
the power to get substance, Deuteronomy. 8.18. David, from GOD, willed the people not
to forget GODS Works, but to keep his Commandments, Psalm. 78.7. Here we may
see plainly, that the remembrance of GOD keeps us from sinning, as the wicked
do. GOD commands Ioshuah to remember him continually, that he might live
well, and prosper, saying, The book of the Law shall not depart out of thy
mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that so thou may
observe to do all things therein, and then thou shall make thy ways
prosperous, and have good success, Josh. 1.8. Remember that those are commonly
the best opportunities of mercy and pardon, which are most early offered; and
these are hardly recovered, when through wilful contempt, or slight
negligence, carnal and foolish ease, they have been long contemned. Let all
remember their Creator in their youth.

Israel a Law, to be continued to their posterity; namely, to remember God
and keep his Commandments, that so they might not be a faithless and
stubborn Generation, who set not aright their hearts, and whose spirit
cleaves not steadfastly unto God, like their forefathers; and the children of
Ephraim, who kept not Gods Covenant, forgetting God and his wondrous works,
Psalm. 78.5. to 12. Here we may see plainly, that the remembrance of God is a
means to escape his wrath. When the Lord had given the Israelites abundance
and plenty of all things, lest they should fall into pride, unthankfulness,
and other sins, he gives them this caveat, saying; When thou have eaten, and
art full, and have built goodly houses, and dwell therein; and when thy Herds
and thy Flock, and all thou is multiplied, beware, and take thou heed, thou
forgettest not the Lord thy God; and lest thy heart be lifted up, and thou
forget the Lord thy God; but remember the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 8.10 to 18. The
Apostle Jude, writing against the wicked Seducers, that lived in his time,
prescribes this as a remedy to escape Gods wrath, Remember the words of the
Apostles of Jesus Christ, Jude 17. David showing, what a combat he had with
Diffidence and Distrust, acknowledges this to be his remedy, whereby he got
the victory, the remembrance of God; and so after confession of the combat, he
says. And, I said, this is mine infirmity, but I will remember the years of
the right hand of the most High, I will remember the works of the Lord; surely,
I will remember thy wonders of old, I will meditate also of all thy works,
Psalm. 77.10. We must remember to serve and walk with God by days, not by
weeks and months only, Psalm. 90.12.

As the chiefest means to escape Gods wrath, is to remember the Lord; so, the
speediest means to draw down his judgments, is to forget the Lord. Now,
consider this, ye that forget God, that is, him and his judgments against
sin, lest I tear you, there is the greatness of their judgment, and there
be no Rescuer, that is, no hope of deliverance, Psalm. 50.22. The wicked shall
turn into hell, and all the Heathens that forget God, Psael. 9.18. When the
people forgate the Lord their God, he sold them into the hand of Sisera,
Captain of the Host of Hazor; and into the hand of the Philistims, and into
the hand of the King of Moab, and they fought against them, 1. Sam. 12.9.
Seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy children,
Hos. 4.6. If men forget God, he will forget them, forget to show mercy, but he
will remember to execute justice and wrath. Thou have forgotten the mighty God
that begat, and have forgotten God that formed thee; what then, the Lord saw
it and was angry, Deuteronomy. 32.18, 19. If Gods words can work us to his will, he
will spare his blows. He has as little delight in smiting as we in
suffering. He rejoices in his own goodness, grieueth at our wretchedness.
God amplifieth this sin of forgetfulness; Can a Maid forget her ornaments,
or a Bride her attire, yet my people have forgotten me days without number,
Iere. 2.32. as if he had said, their Ornaments, Jewels, and Rings, are but
toys and trifles. Is there any Ornament like me? Is there any Jewel amongst
them all, that can be compared with me? Men remember their friends often, and
call them to mind. An old man will remember his bag, yet he will forget
God: shall such things take up men's memories? and shall God be thrust out?

God, because he promised the Messiah, Genesis 3.15. because he has bought us
with a price, 1. Cor. 7.23. because he has preserved us, and in the end will
glorify us. If a man be sanctified with the divine Nature, in which glory is
begun, he is justified; if justified, then called according to purpose; if
called, then predestinate; if predestinate to means, then foreknowne, as one
chosen to the end, even to glory. Of God we receive every good thing, Iam.
1.17. therefore we should remember him. Every ache and pain is a memento, to
put us in mind of God. How great is our sin, if we forget him.

We should remember God, because of his all-seeing that planted the ear,
shall he not hear; or he that formed the eye, shall he not see, Psalm. 94.9.
He knows vain man, and sees iniquity, Job 11.11. Thou know my sitting
and my rising, thou understand my thoughts afar off. Thou compassest my
paths, and my lying down, and art accustomed to all my ways. For, There is
not a word in my tongue, but, lo, thou know it wholly, O Lord, Psalm. 139.2,
3, 4. We should remember his Justice, he is righteous, and must needs punish,
he is a mighty God, and is able to punish. There is nothing wanting in him,
which is fit to be in one, on whom we are to place our trust. He is able to
help us because he has power; what a power is that which keeps us to
salvation, who have so little strength, and less wisdom, whereby we might
stand; nay, he is Omnipotent, Genesis 17.1. He is willing, because he loves us so
dearly, Ioh. 3.16. Nay, to the death, Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the
death of his Saints, Psalm. 116.15. He is skillful, because all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom are hid in him, Coloss. 2.3. He is mindful, because his
eyes are always open upon us, he does neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121.4.
He is careful, because he is Lord and King over all, he is the King of Kings,
1. Tim. 6.15. And he bids us, cast all our care upon him, 1. Pet. 5.7. We
cannot search these things to the full, for to see things unvisible, and search
things unsearchable, are alike impossible.

that she can go no where, but she must needs remember him; yea, if she
have his Signet on her finger, that so, as often as she looks on her finger,
she may remember him; how great were her fault, to forget him, or how were it
possible, not to remember him. The Almighty God has thus dealt with us, in the
world, which is his House, he has left every where remembrances. If a Woman
remember her Husband, seeing his Ring, she should remember God, seeing her
finger, which his Finger made; and her hands, the work of his Hands. When I
beheld the Heavens, even the works of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars
which thou have ordained, Psalm. 8.3.

Great benefits should cause us remember God: Israelites, they forgate God, and
served Baalim; as if he should say, they never would have committed Idolatry,
if they had not forgotten God; They have perverted their way, and forgotten the
Lord their God, Ier. 3.21. The latter is the cause of the former, and so,
forgetters of God, are put for wicked men. Now, as forgetfulness of God
causes sin, witness Adulterers, Drunkards, and such like, which will
confess they forgate God: so the remembrance of God is the cause of obedience,
for he that remembers God, will fear to offend him, and endeavor to please
him.

The use of this point is for our instruction, that Lord. First, God commands
it, and Gods Commandments must be obeyed; If he consent and obey, he shall
eat the good things of the Land, Esaias 1.19. Whatsoever we ask; we receive of
him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing
in his sight, 1. John 3.22. If we read the Scriptures, hear the Word,
blessed shall we be if we keep it, Blessed is he that reads, and they
that hear the words of the Prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein; Revel. 1.3. Our Goods, Cattle, Corn, and all things belonging to us,
shall be blessed of God; if we obey his voice, and do as he would have us;
yea, our children shall be blessed after us, Blessed is the upright man, and
blessed shall his seed be after him, Pro. 20.7. Yea, as David speaks,
Blessed is the man that meditates in the Law of God day and night; For he shall
be like a Tree, planted by the Rivers of Waters, Psalm. 1, 2, 3. No good thing
will the Lord withhold from them that live uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. On the
contrary, even those things which in their own nature are the good blessings
of God, shall be accursed of God: And the Lord will in his wrath, and in his
hot anger, curse our blessings. This Commandment is for you, If ye will
hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory to my Name, says the
Lord of Hosts. I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your
blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not consider it in
heart, Malach. 2.2. Secondly, the promises which God has made to such as
remember him, should be a means to stir us up to remember him, he has
promised to be with his to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.20. Never to fail
them, nor forsake them, Heb. 13.5. He promised to give his Son, the first
begotten, and the only begotten, John 3.16. Luke 2.7. And in him what rare
matter can we wish for, which is not in him to be found. Would we have
Wisdom, he is the essential Wisdom of the Father, the object of all true
Wisdom, which tends to salvation, in him is our Wisdom, not only while
we walk by faith at home in this body, but also when we shall walk by sight
with the Lord, seeing him as he is. All the treasure of Wisdom and
Understanding are hid in him, Col. 2.3. Would we have Righteousness, he is
essentially righteous, as God in our name; habitually and actually Righteous.
He is Jehovah our Righteousness, Ier. 23.6. The Sun of Righteousness, that
person which has brought with him everlasting Righteousness. Would we have
Redemption, with him is great redemption, Psalm. 130.7. Through him have we
redemption, that is, Forgiveness of our sins, Col. 1.14. By him we do
wait for the Redemption of our bodies, Romans 8.23. Christ was powerful in the
eternal providence of God, before creation for our election; powerful in time
appointed for our Vocation, Justification, Sanctification; powerful for our
perseverance, and final consummation. He is God, what seek we? He is God,
what desire we? This Son was promised, and this Son is come. God first
promised protection from hurt in his service; he undertakes to keep damage
from his, while they are occupied in his service. When all the Males should go
up to Jerusalem thrice in the year, and none but weak women and children left
at home, yet God does undertake, that no enemy should have the heart to break
in on them, Exodus 34.24. Secondly, God promises to bestow on us every thing
that is good, nay, all good. Thirdly, God promises to his a cheerful use, of
all the good benefits vouchsafed them. Did not Josiah eat and drink, and
prosper, while he executed judgment and justice? Iere. 22.15. Godliness has
not only the promises of this life, but of the life to come, 1. Tim. 4.8. He
that gives the head, gives hair also. God gives us his Kingdom and
Righteousness, which are principal; how should he not add these inferior
things also, which are but accessarie to the other. God will not stand for
small matters with them to whom he will give heaven. This God, who is so
gracious; this God, who is so glorious; this God, who is so merciful and
liberal, must be remembered. Thirdly, the dangers which follow the
forgetfulness of God, should incite us to remember God. Such as forget God,
shall be punished. Forgetfulness, is a cause of, first, Spiritual punishment:
secondly, of Corporal: thirdly, of Eternal. It is a cause of spiritual
punishment in the soul, of corporal punishments in the body; and of eternal,
both in body and soul, at the day of Judgment.

backs; for what else do they, who swear at every word, and the more they
swear, the better men they account themselves. If they did remember God, who
says, Swear not at all, Matthew. 5.34. And the words of the Apostle James,
Before all things, my Brethren, swear not, Iam. 5.12. If they did remember
Gods Truth, Justice, and Power; his Truth, that he is a Defender of; his
Justice, that he is a Revenger of the breakers of it; his Power, that he is
able to execute his Vengeance, if they swear falsely, they would never swear
vainly. First, the matter of an Oath must be Truth. Secondly, the manner must
be in Judgment. Thirdly, the square in Righteousness; all these the Prophet
rehearses, Thou shall swear the Lord lives in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness, Iere. 4.2. If Sabbath breakers did remember God, they would not
commit sacrilege, in stealing from him three parts of his Sabbath, to their
own uses; and for the fourth, as good never a whit, as never the better. If
they did remember the Commander, God, the matter commanded, which is the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, and spending of it in holy exercises, they would
not spend it so profanely as they do, seeing it is a sign that God is their
God, that does sanctify them a solemn holiday, wherein he declares his love
and care over them; a Day, wherein he offers unto them his holy things, as
his Word, Sacraments, and all heavenly and holy riches, a principal means of
their sanctification and salvation; a Day, which he has appointed, wherein
every one should profess their Faith, Love, and Obedience, to his heavenly
Majesty. If they did remember God, which commit adultery, they would be
ashamed of such behavior, they would not do it for a world, for it is most
hurtful, most unfruitful, most shameful, most abominable, and most damnable.
It hurts, First, the body: Secondly, the soul: Thirdly, the estate:
Fourthly, the good name: Fifthly, the life. It arises, first, from an
unregenerate heart, which is the harbor of filthy lusts, for out of the heart
proceed adulteries, fornications, Matthew. 15.19. Secondly, from original
Concupiscence, which is like a home-borne Traitor, lurking secretly,
vnder-mining covertly, creeping privily, entising vehemently, betraying
treacherously into the hands of the Devil; a woman would not commit adultery
if she remembered; first, the Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery,
Exodus 20.14. Secondly, her husband to whom she is married, who is one flesh
with her, Genesis 2.24. Thirdly, the Covenant which she has made, forsaking all
others, and cleaving unto her husband, Matthew. 19.5. Fourthly, the punishment,
which is damnation, without true repentance.

Text.
Thy Creator.] As if he should say, he made thee, therefore thou must remember
him, or else thy sin will be the greater in forgetting him. The Ox knows
his Owner, and the Ass his Masters maunger, Esa. 1.3. and will not Man know
his Creator. And God said, Let us make Man, Genesis 1.26. he did not say, Let Man
be made; as he said, Let there be Light: neither did he command the Elements
to bring forth Man; as he commanded the Earth to bud forth Herbs, Grass, and
such like; or the Waters to bring forth Fish; but, as it were, consulting, he
says, Let us make Man. The Creation of Man was the work of the whole
Trinity, so was the Regeneration of Man. We are baptized in the Name of the
Father, because he adopteth us to be Sons; in the Name of the Son, because
he has bought us with his Blood; in the Name of the Holy Ghost, because by him
we are Sanctified. Our Creator must be remembered above all, because he is
above all, and before all. God is so the Creator, that he is the alone Creator.

Remember thy Creator: he did make thee an excellent Creature. Has not one
God created us, Malac. 2.10. He alone fashioned us in the womb, Job 31.15.
Unto us there is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are all things, 1.
Cor. 8.6. He that has built all things is God, Heb. 3.4. There is none besides
me, I am the Lord, and there is none other. I form the Light, and create
Darkness; I, the Lord, do all these things, Esa. 45.6, 7. I am the Lord that
made all things, and spread out the Heavens above, Esa. 44.24. He alone
spreads out the Heavens, Job 9.8. From all this we may gather, that the
creation of man, and of all things else, must be attributed to God only.
Nature binds Children to remember their Parents. Duty binds Scholars to
remember their Tutors; Charity binds Christians to remember the poor, the
Law binds men to eschew evil and sin; Sin, as it hardens, so it weakens;
the Gospel binds men to believe; and the Creation binds men to remember
the Creator.

God breathed into him the breath of Life, Genesis 2.7. that is, a living Soul,
by the virtue of the eternal Spirit, was inspired into an Elementarie body, to
use it as an instrument, should make Man remember his Creator. Man having from
God his being, and his breath, his life, and living; his motion, and moving,
should remember his Creator.

Adam, mankind was made; so in the latter, it was restored: the Elect came from
Christ by Regeneration, as all men from Adam by Generation. Though Adam did
fall grievously, yet Believers are more happy in the second Adam rising, then
in the first Adam falling; in Christ saving, then in Adam sinning. God made
Adam plain, but they sought out many conceits, Eccles. 7.31. And so do their
children in all folly. In that God made Man, and Christ regenerateth Man, and
restores that which was decayed in him; this should move Man to remember his
Creator.

The first use, may reprove such men as know not Hos. 5.15. He strikes them,
but they sorrow not; he consumes them, but they refuse his correction, Iere.
5.3. He gives to such as are unthankful, clotheth such as are proud, helps
such as are unworthy, and provides for such as are wicked. He that gives all
good things, has little or naught given him again. Where he should be
loved, he is hated; and of whom he should be honored, he is dishonored.
Gods love toward us, has been from all eternity. Some, as wine, does
receive the greater praise by the age of it: old wine is the best, and ancient
love is the most approved. How much do we esteem of such a friend, as has
borne us good will for some twenty or forty years together? The more
reckoning we should make of Gods love, which has been eternal. Before
Christ we were enemies to God, there was nothing to be seen in us, but sin
and misery, nor any thing to draw Gods affection toward us, but his own free
and good pleasure: now, that love we have deserved, we the less esteem; but
such love as is freely conferred on us, we do make more store of.

Ephesians. 1.7. To have sin forgiven, is to be redeemed, or set free from all
evil. That which Paul calls in the former words, Redemption, is afterward
called Remission of sin. What is forgiveness of sin, but an act of Grace,
acquitting us from all the guilt, and the whole punishment of all our sin;
and as men speak of Redemption, so they may speak of Remission. Secondly, the
work of Preservation, is another great benefit of God, which is a keeping men
free and safe from dangers, and from hurt by enemies: Preserve me, O Lord, for
I trust in thee, Psalm. 16.1. What shall I do unto thee, O thou Keeper of men,
Job 7.20. He preserves both Man and Beast, Psalm. 36.6. Thou preseruedst them
all, Nehe. 9.6. Thirdly, the work of Sustentation binds Man to remember God,
for God vp-holdeth his Children, that they take not a fall by sin and
calamity, or that they take no hurt by such falls. The Lord sustained me, Psalm.
3.5. He makes me to rest in green pastures, and leads me by the still
waters. He restores my soul, and leads me in the paths of Righteousness,
for his Names sake, Ps. 23.2, 3. Many other benefits are men compassed withal,
to bind them to remember God.

In the days of thy youth.] It is good for children to learn to know God,
even in youth, Text.
whiles they are young, for so much Solomon teaches here, saying, In the days
of thy youth.

weakness is the high way to wickedness, this Gods children (being regenerate)
see, which before they saw not. Hence is it, that David prays, Lord remember
not the sins of my youth, Psalm. 25.7. Of all man's life, Youth commonly is
most vain; The imaginations of man's heart is evil from his youth, Ier. 8.21.
We are all transgressors from the womb, Esa. 48.8. In sin has my Mother
conceived me, Psalm. 51.5. Even from the Belly have they erred, Ps. 58.3. For
the sins of youth, God often punishes men in their age, so making them to
inherit the iniquities of their youth Job 13.26. The Prophet says, We and our
Father (have sinned) from our youth, Ier. 3.25. Shall we think they in their
youth committed gross sins, as Adultery, Drunkenness, Murder, and such
like, which were so holy men, as Job and Jeremy: surely no, but they confessed
the sins of their youth, their wantonness and forgetfulness of God, their
too much love of pleasure, their youthfulness. Solomon says, Foolishness is
bound in the heart of a child, Pro. 22.15. therefore childhood and youth are
vanity, not in themselves, but because they are often spent in vanity. Survey
those which are more then ordinary young men, which have the best wits, and
are thought to be of the best disposition, and their youth will hardly be
found without vanity; nay, not only those young men, that are best in civil
gifts, but in spiritual graces, as Timothy, find childhood and youth to be
vanity, Eccl. 11.10. Timothy did tame his body, and bring it into subjection,
so that Paul was feign to bid him to drink wine, 1. Tim. 5.23. yet he had this
memento given him, fly the lusts of youth, 2. Tim. 2.22. Young men see not
vanity when they are young, but they may perceive it when they are old: for
now, their consciences are like water in a basin, if the water be troubled, the
face cannot be seen, but when it is settled, it may: so, all is troubled in
youth, but when maturitie of years come, then it will stand still, and they
may see their faces. David being old prayed against sins of youth. Because it
is so hard, for a young man to remember God, and to be holy; David breaks off
his meditation abruptly, into this, wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his
ways, Psalm. 119.9. And David using the word cleansing, compares the young man
to a glass, which though it be very clean, yet will gather filth in the Sun
beams. As a ricke of Hay put up wet, set it self on fire: so have the hearts
of young men enough in them to inflame them.

Young men should remember their Creator in Black-More change his skin, or
the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil, Ier. 13.23. This young men get by continuing in sin, they cannot leave
it, many cannot leave swearing, lying, stealing, when they are old, because
they practiced them when they were young. If I should be demanded, why there
are so few good old men: I answer, because there were so many naughty young
men, for youth spent in vanity, commonly ends old age in profaneness. The
Prophet calls some sins Crimson sins, sins of a double die, Esaias 1.18.
If it be right Purple, it is dyed both in the Wool and in the Thread, and then
it is deep. So, if Satan die us in our Wool, in our youth, before we be men,
before we be made cloth, it is likely to stick by us. It is in a man, as in
other things, in breaking of Horses, luring of Hawks, trayning of Dogs,
which must be done while they are young: so must man in his youth, be trained
up in the fear of the Lord. The Diseases of the Spring, are more curable then
those of Autumn: So the sins of youth are more curable then those of age,
but when a man is soaked in them, he is past cure. If Satan can make our youth
unprofitable, there cannot any good be looked for of the after ages, without
the great mercy of Almighty God. Hence comes those speeches of sins, which
a man has continued in; I would feign, but I cannot leave them, whereby it
comes to pass, that where one does recover, forty rot away. If the Devil nip
the Blossom, what hope is there of Fruit. When a man has long had a trusty
Servant, he is loath to forgo him, he will rather increase his wages: So, the
Devil will be loath to forgo him in his age, who served him in his youth. The
sins of youth stick fast by a man, he can hardly leave them, youth being
like a new Mortar, wherein if you stamp Garlic, it will a long time smell of
it; and though they repent and come home, yet they carry the smell of the
Garlic Mortar wheresoever they go. The vessel will relish of the first
liquour: What injury do men to themselves, by living profanely in youth,
when they be old, they dare not reprehend so sharply as others, nor punish so
severely as they should, because the sins of their youth are so in their
foreheads, that all men see them. God will have the first fruits, and the
first borne are due to him. The Autumn cannot see the fruit of those trees,
whose blossoms the Springtime never saw. If men begin not to love virtue in
youth, it will be a harsh thing for them for to woo her in old age, when the
thread of life shall be tentred, and drawn even to the utmost length.

Because the Devil has a special affection to this Cor. 11.14. yet he would
be like one. Though he seldom speak truth, yet he is more believed then God
the Author of truth. Though he damned many Souls, yet he is served by youth,
and followed by them in troops. He has such varieties of pleasures, which he
presents to them that they are bewitched by them, he is an unreasonable,
insatiable, usurping tyrant, yet youth will not hearken to Gods word, who
says, resist the devil, Iam. 4.7. It is lamentable, that no age does so much
despise the Word, as youth, which must stand in need of it. It is now a rare
thing to find among young men, a Joseph, or a Samuel, where they should live as
Nazarites, consecrated to the Lord, Amos 2.11. they are rather like men, who
have vowed and dedicated themselves unto Satan. As the sons of Eli despised
the rebuke of their father: So young men now (for the most part) are impatient
of of the rebukes of the Word, contemning the medicine. The prodigal son had
four prouocations; First, his portion; Secondly, his fathers indulgence;
Thirdly, ill company; Fourthly, youth, these the Devil uses as so many
baits, to take young men withal, these hurt young men much. Till the portion
was spent, the prodigal thought not upon returning home. The prodigal man,
while he spends, is magnified, when he is spent is pitied, and that is all
his recompense for his lauishing. The indulgence of the father to conniue and
wink at the faults of their Children, does breed in their Children a
forgetfulness of their Creator. Ill company hurt youth, for such are they for
the most part as they are, with whom familiarly they live, and with whom for
the most part they spend their time. All waters in temperature, in color, and
in taste, agree with the nature and the disposition of those grounds, and of
that earth, through which they make their secret passages, and their ways: In
like manner men practice those things, which by frequent custom, they have
derived to themselves, from those with whom they have conuersed. Youth is so
wanton and wild, so rude and unruly, so lose and lewd, that unless God save,
the Devil will destroy; unless God draw them, the Devil will keep them.

youth, considering their natural corruption, they are corrupt Children, Esa.
1.4. They know nothing but how to corrupt themselves, their ways, their lives,
their actions, their neighbors by evil council, and evil examples,
themselves by evil exercises. This natural corruption is most deformed, a
monster both ugly and fearful. If natural corruption will have young men eat
till they surfeite, and drink till they be drunk, you shall find multitudes
of them that will do it, though they consume goods, body, estate, and damme
the Soul. If natural corruption will have young men be wantons, there will
be some that will fit and address themselves for it, by lurking here and
there in corners; frequenting dishonest places, using idle and immodest
Exercises; corrupt and rotten communication, stuffed with vain unfruitful
Iestes, and profane passages. It is a thing most lamentable, and never enough
to be bewailed, to see many young persons, whose daily practice and trade of
life, is to corrupt their flesh in lying, deceiving, seeking unlawful and
ungodly gains; slaundring and backbiting their neighbors; spending their time
wantonly and wickedly, for which, one day they must give account to GOD.

The first use, serves for our instruction, seeing Lament. 3.17. It is good
for a man to remember his Creator in his youth. Some will say, shall youth
spend no time in pleasure? What, not half a man's youth? Not a day now and
then, not an hour? Surely, GOD will not allow a minute of time to be spent in
vain. Young men will say, we will become good, and live Gravely hereafter, and
behave our selves soberly, we will amend when we are old. This is to make a
covenant with the Devil, thou will be Gods, but not yet. As Foelix said to
Paul; Go thy way for this time, and when I have convenient time, I will call
for thee, Act. 24.26. But Foelix was removed, Festus put in his room, and
Paul continues bound still: So young men say to goodness, to grace, and to
God; go your ways for a time; and when we are old and sickly, then we will
send for you, but God will turn away, Satan will come in place, and young men
will be left in their sins. First, how know thou, thou shall live till thou
be old; do not many die in their youth? And why not thou? If thou do, what
will become of thy soul. Secondly, if thou live till thou be old, how know
thou whether then thou shall remember God or no? Is it in thy power? Noe,
because men forget God being young, he forgets them, and makes them forget him
being old. Thirdly, if thou do remember him, what great matter do thou;
offer it to thy Prince, will he accept it? That which is unfit for the World,
is it good enough for God? Will thou offer him thy old age, thy dote-age, a
bag of dry bones? Will not he have the first fruits of thy Corn, and the
fat of thy flock, and will thou give the clean corn of youth to the Devil,
and the husks and chafe of old age to God? will thou sacrifice the fat of thy
Flock to the Devils, and the lean to God? will thou forgive thy enemies, when
thou can hurt them no longer? will thou give thy goods to the poor, when
thou can keep it no longer? will thou leave sin, when sin leaves thee?
and will thou serve God when it pleases thee; is God at thy command, is he
bound to thee, not thou to him.

It is a reproof of those that are the Proctors, and Solomon was not wise, or
they are stark fools in so saying, he says, Remember God in thy youth. Let
young men learn by Elies children, how they were cut off ere age came. To put
off such things to old age, is as if a carrier having many horses, should put
all his carriage on the weakest and poorest, having many better. Young men have
many better days and years to repent in; Delaying of repentance is dangerous,
deadly, and damnable. If a wound be not cured before it rot, it becomes
oftentimes incurable. If the fire be not quenched in time, it becomes
unquenchable; and if flesh be not salted before it stinck, it becomes so
unsavory, that it cannot be mended. If a mote fall into the eye, or a thorn
stick into the foot, we take them out without delay; but in things pertaining
to the health of the soul, delay is much more dangerous. Satan seeks but a
delay: God craves present repentance. It was offered by Moses to Pharaoh, when
shall I pray for thee; and he answered to morrow, Exodus 9.10. It is offered by
the Lord to man, when will thou that I have mercy on thee, many answer, when
we are old. Miserable was Pharaoh who delayed Moses but one day: but more
miserable are many men, who delay the Lord for many years. Some will first
bury their Fathers, as the Disciple would, Math. 8.21. Some will first go and
kiss their Fathers, that is delight yet a space in the pleasures of this life.
God will have men now to turn, God will have the present time, Be wise now,
Psalm. 2.10. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him, Josh. 24.14. Therefore
also now says the Lord, Joel, 1.12. Consider this now, ye that forget God,
Psalm. 50.22. When Abraham was bid to circumcise his Family, he did not defer
it, but circumcised them the same day, Genesis 17.23. As soon as Cornelius was
willed to send for Peter, he sent immediately, Act. 10.33. That thou will do,
do quickly in thy youth, for thou know not what a day may bring forth, Pro.
27.1. He that is not now willing, may hereafter be more unwilling. I know no
difference between the wise two Virgins, and the foolish, but that the one did
it in time, which the other would feign have done out of time, and could not.
The most profane men of the world are forced, in death to make their refuge to
the Lord. Then the eye, and the hand are lifted up unto him, Then they cry for
mercy, and desire all others to pray for them. If men were wise they would do
that in time, which many would do, and do, at length when God sent laborers
into his vineyard, he that was bad go in the morning, did not defer till
noone, he that was called at noone did not defer his coming till night. Art
thou called to day, defer not till too morrow, to day if thou will hear his
voice, harden not thy heart, Heb. 3.15. To day is Gods voice, to morrow is the
devils, give God to day, that is thy youth. It is one of Satan's policies, to
persuade men to repent when they are old, till all the time be past wherein
Men should repent. This brings many to damnation, that where in their young
years they will not repent, in their old age they cannot, the affections
through long custom of sins, waxing strong, even then when the body is
weak. Mark Satan's deceit, and put not off thy remembering of God to thy old
age, for thy years may be shortened, thy faith weakened Satan aduantaged, thy
heart hardened, and it may be God in justice, and the devil in malice, will not
suffer thee to remember thy Creator. How fearful a thing is it, to fall into
the hands of God, who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. As fire consumes
stubble: so the most severe God, will consume and destroy the wicked contemners
of his Word. Think of it whiles there is hope, you young men that forget your
Creator, heaven and hell, least you miss the one, and come into the other,
where there is no redemption, no hope of ease; or end, which is that that makes
hell, hell indeed. If all the pains of hell might have an end, were it after
million and millions of years, as many as there be Sands on the Seashoare, it
might nourish some miserable comfort of a release in the long ruin. But this
night has no day, this Ague no intermission, this death no death, to end it
withal.

Text.
Before the evil days come.] The days void of all delight will come, all
joy will fail, and sorrow upon sorrow befall. There are good days, that is, a
blessed and happy life, wherein many good things befall us. If any Man love to
see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, 1. Pet. 3.10. What Man
is he that desires life, and loves long days for to see good, Psalm. 34.12.
And there are evil days, not that days are evil in themselves, but
accidentally.

Redeem the time, for the days are evil, Ephe. 5.16. Jacob said to Pharaoh,
few and evil have the days of my life been, Gene. 47 9. Evil, because they
were full of troubles, full of afflictions, full of dangers. Our Savior says,
Sufficient for the day, is the evil thereof, Mat. 6.34. That is the day brings
with it, affliction, grief, and hurts. Many discommodities enuiron old men.
Old age is a continual weakness, and a daily disease. Moses the man of God,
says, The days of our years are seventy years: and if by reason of
strength they be eighty years, yet is the strength then labor and sorrow:
for it is soon cut off, and we fly away, Psalm. 90.10. If the longest period
of days that men ordinarily live, be so short a time, and the longest time
flies so fast, then well might the Prophet say, that our days pass away as a
tale that is told, Psalm. 90.9. The more labors men undergo in their youth,
the more matter of sorrow in old age. The stronger a man has been, and the
more labors he has endured, the fuller of aches and pains will old age be.
Old age is but a death, and Death comes flying. In old age there is weakness
of body and of mind; for a man is twice a child, and then commonly they are as
children again mewed up, and their children are either Parents or Lords over
them, using them as Innocents. Old men are deaf of hearing, and cannot hear
good admonitions; dim-sighted, and cannot see to read, nor to go to the House
of Prayer; they have feeble Knees, so that they cannot go; weak Loins, and
faint Arms, the Heart is afflicted, the Head smitten, the Spirits waxing
faint, the Breath smelling ill, the Face wrinckled, the Stature crooked, the
Eyes dark, the Joints weak, the Nose running, the Hairs falling, the Teeth
rotting, and the Ears waxing deaf, insomuch that old age may be called, Evil
days. In old age the Memory fails, old men wax dull, deaf, senseless, and
speechless.

Nabal, who stricken with the fear of Death and Hell, become as insensate as
stocks and stones. Aged men fear Death, but not Hell, following Death; they
fear the Thunder crack, not the Bolt; the report of the Piece, and not the
Bullet; the Sergeants arrest, and not the Gaolers imprisonment: so, laboring
to escape Death, which they cannot; not Hell, which they might.

after death they shall rest from their labors, Revel. 14.13. They that
labored valiantly are at rest, Job 3.17. They learn in youth to know God,
they know that if they be once old, they shall shortly die, and then they can
sin no more. Death, to the godly, is an entrance into joy. Michaela
Caignoela, a noble Matron, seeing her Judges look out of the windows, said to
her fellow Martyrs; These stay to suffer the torment of their consciences, and
are reserved to judgment, but we are going to glory and happiness. And two
certain poor women weeping and crying! Oh Madame, we shall never now have
more Alms; yes, hold you (says she) yet once more, and plucked off her
Slippers, and such other of her apparel, as she could with modesty spare
from the fire. Death is to men as he comes attended; to the rich Man he came,
followed with Devils, to carry his soul to hell, Luke 16.22. to Lazarus, with
troops of Angels, to convey him to Abraham's bosom. Death is the Atheists
fear, and the Christians desire. Death is the irreligious rich man's Enemy,
but the religious poor man's Friend.

It shows the strange folly of many men, who Horses travel best homeward, or
when they are almost come home. Hounds follow the game fastest when they are
nearest unto it, finding the sent hot, they know the game is almost at an end.
They that run in a Race strive most, not at the beginning, but at the end. In
natural motions, every thing moves fastest when it is nearest his own
place. The Swan sings sweetest a little before her death: so should it be
with old men, they should then be most holy, bearning the best fruits, doing
the best works, they should with old Simeon take Christ in their arms, Luke
2.28. and with Anna serve God with fastings and prayers, night and day, Luke
2.87. It were to be wished that old men could say, as sometime Polycarpus did,
the Proconsull urging him to deny Christ; I have served him eighty six
years, and he has not once hurt me, and shall I now deny him? And with
Hilarion, Soul, get thee out, thou have seventy years served Christ, and art
thou now loath to die, or afraid of death. This is a general and solemn
Decree, published throughout the World, and pronounced by Nature her self,
that whatsoever has a beginning (so that it consist of Matter) must also have
an end: there is nothing under the Cope of Heaven (except the Soul of man)
which is not subject to change, and corruption. Man cannot always continue in
one state, but man grows old. It is dangerous to wax old in sin, for the
sinner that is an hundred years old shall be accursed, Esa. 65.20. It shall
not be well to the wicked, Eccl. 8.13. Old age has sufficient deformities of
it self, therefore they should not add such as proceed from Vice. As the
labors of old men diminish, so the exercises of the soul should increase.

Seeing no man knows what shall be, let men Thou will be willing to die, for
Death will not carry thee to prison, but to the Saints feast, Revel. 19.9. To
the participation and fellowship with Christ, in his heavenly joys and bliss,
when the Church (his Spouse) shall be fully blessed. Death will come to carry
old religious men to Paradise, a place full of pleasures. As a man riding,
takes up one behind him, and carries him to this or that banquet: so Death,
takes up the religious old man behind him upon the pale Horse, and carries him
to heaven, Revel. 6.8. Work therefore while it is day, the night comes when
no man can work, Ioh. 9 4. All that thy hand shall find to do, do it with
all thy power, for there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, in the grave whither thou go, Eccl. 9.10. Paul says, Whiles we
have time we must do good to all, specially to those which are of the
household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. We may not assign the Lord, in what place,
state, condition, or in what company we would live, but as Strangers, wait on
him, even as the handmaid on her Mistress, for whatsoever he will allow us: we
are ready most commonly to be called away by death, before we be fit, or have
learned how to live. Look what care, conscience, zeal, love, and reverent
estimation of good things thou had, when first thou embracedst the Gospel,
the same at last retain, and be sure thou keep still afterward. The more
knowledge that thou have, take heed thou be not more secure. We shall not
enjoy the grace, which we had at the first, except we be as careful now to
keep it, as we were then to come by it. All our life ought to be a providing
for a good death, and a keeping away of woe, which comes by sin. We cannot
promise to our selves one day, for Time is Gods, and Times and Seasons he has
put in his own power, Act. 1.7. therefore, every day we ought to prepare our
hearts to seek the Lord, and keep them fit and willing thereto. Take heed,
Brethren, lest at any time there be any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful,
to depart away from the living God, Heb. 3.12. Oh! that there were in them an
heart to fear me, and to keep all my Commandments always, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Our
Savior says, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Matthew.
22.37. Every day our thanks must be continued for benefits received, they are
renewed every morning, Lam. 3.23. Every day we ought to watch and pray for
steadfastness and constancy. Every day we must hold and keep our peace with
God, and lie down therein, Psalm. 4.8.

Text.
And the years approach, of which thou will say, I have no pleasure in them.]
Solomon means, before thou wax old. Old age of it self is a disease, if no
other disease beside happen. What pleasure can old men take, when strength
fails them, when they are not able to help themselves. Their life, in this
life, is nothing else but a returning back again unto death, for whiles they
are here, they walk to the house of their grave. Their days pass away in
such a manner, as if a man, being a child, should suddenly be made a man; and
after that, should presently go back again, and be a child. The more men
grow in strength and years, the nearer they draw to the place from whence they
came. Moses says, The strength of old men is labor and sorrow, Psalm. 90.10.
Their days are days of sorrow, and their strength brings nothing unto them,
but matter of labor and pain.

Such as are full of days, as Job was, Job 42.17. are full of miseries. Man
that is borne of woman is full of misery, or full of vexation, Job 14.1. The
description of the last age is admirable, and has need of a good Anatomist, to
help the true understanding of the same. Then the Sun is dark, and the
Light, and the Moon, and the Stars: And the Clouds return after the Rain,
Eccl. 12.2. The Keepers of the house tremble; the Strong men bow themselves;
the Grinders cease, because they are few; and they wax dark, that look out
by the windows, Eccl. 12.3. And the doors shall be shut by the street, with
the base sound of the grinding; and a Man shall stand up at the voice of the
Bird; and all the Daughters of Music shall be brought low, Eccl. 12.4. And men
will dread every high place, and fear will be in the way; and the Almond tree
will flourish, and the Grasse-hopper will be a burden to it self, and all
lust will be dissolved, and a man goes to his long home, and Mourners go
about in the street, Eccl. 12.5. The silver Cord is loosed, and the golden Ewer
broken, and the Pitcher burst at the Well, and the Wheel broken at the
Cisterne, Eccl. 12.6. And dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit
return to God that gave it, Eccl. 12.7. By the Sun and Stars darkened, is
meant, the days losing their light, so that all things seem dark unto them,
even the Sun it self. And the Clouds return after the Rain; that is, after
they have wept a long time, there pass before their eyes, as it were, clouds,
being nothing else but gross vapors, which grow thick and foggie. The
keepers of the House tremble, that is, the ribs and breast, which keep the
inward parts, and compasses them about. The strong men shall bow; that is, the
knees and legs shall lose their strength, which are the Pillars upon the
which the whole building is set. The grinders shall cease, they are few, that
is; the Teeth, the mouth being as a Mill, old men's teeth are few in number, and
those that are weak, and so the grinding cease. And they wax dark, that
look out by the Windows; that is, the eye in the head, like Windows in a
House, like two lovers, which give light in order. And the doors shut without,
by the base sound of the grinding; that is, the Lips shall be shut, because the
Teeth and Jaws make a base small sound in grinding the meat, grinding it badly
and weakly. And he shall rise up at the voice of the bird; that is, he shall
not be able to sleep, or sleep very little, and be awaked with every little
sound, even the singing of a Bird; this follows, their cruditie and rawnesse,
being not able to digest their meats. All the daughters of Music shall be
brought low; that is, their voices will fail them. And men will dread every
high place, and fears will be in the way; that is, they are afraid to go up
into high places, they are afraid to walk, because a plain way seems rough
unto them; a hillocke, a mountain; a hollownesse, a great valley. And the
Almond tree will flourish; that is, the head grow white. He names the Almond
tree, for that does first flower of any tree, as if he should say, old men's
gray hairs come on with haste, sometimes before they look for them. As the
flowers of trees are a sign of instant Summer; so the whiteness of the head
is a sign of instant death. And the Grasse-hopper shall be a burden; that is,
the least creature shall be a burden, light things shall seem heavy unto
them. And all lust will be dissolved; that is, all the desire to eat or
drink, or otherwise, shall decay; because all the faculties, both vital and
natural shall be weakened. For man goes to his long home; that is, goes to
his old house, from whence first he came forth. The Grave is the house where
the dead must dwell, it is the way (as Joshua says) of all the world, Josh.
23.14. that is, I shall die shortly after the custom of all other men. David
said, I go the way of all the earth. 1. King. 2.2. The Grave is the common
house and receptacle of all humane bodies. Every one shall sleep in his own
house, Esaias 14.18. that is, in the Grave. I know (says Job) thou will bring me
to death, and to the house appointed for all the living, Job 30.23. and the
mourners go about in the streets; that is, weeping for the dead, for weeping
is not to be reproved if it be moderate; our Savior wept for Lazarus his
friend, Ioh. 11.35. Abraham lamented Sarah, Genesis 23.2. The Hebrews, Moses,
Deuteronomy. 34.8. Joseph, Jacob, Genesis 50.1. The Israelites, Joseph; the Apostles,
Stephen. It is not without much reason, that Solomon does give counsel, to go
to the house of mourning, for there is performed that blessing which Christ
promises. Heathenish mourning is reproved, which is without hope, 1 Thessalonians.
4.13. but Christian sorrow is commendable. The silver Cord is loosed; that is,
the Marrow of the back, which because it is white, is called by the name of
Silver, this begins at the Brain, and goes all along the bone, this in old
age (strength decaying) is lengthned and drawn out. The golden Ewer is broken;
that is, the Brain, whose skin, which compasses it, is yellow as gold, which
being broken or hurt, man must needs die. Nor the Pitcher burst at the Well;
that is, the great Vein, called the hollow Vein, which cannot draw blood any
more out of the Liver, which is the common Storehouse and Fountain, which
waters all the body in such sort, that it yields no more service then a
broken Pitcher. By the wheel broken at the Cisterne; that is, the Head, for
that is like a wheel. And by the Cistern, is meant, the Heart, which is the
chief dwelling of Life. When all this comes to pass, then the body, which
is made of the dust of the earth shall turn into it again, through the sin of
our first parents. In death all things are recalled to their first beginnings.
And the spirit to God that gave it, hence is it, that God is called the Father
of spirits, Heb. 12.9. that is, the maker and giver of souls. He forms the
spirit of man within him, Zech. 12.1. the soul is the host in the sin of the
body, not produced from the seed of the parents, nor from the soul of the
parents but given of God, that it might viuificate the body.

There can be no pleasure where so many troubles and David would have Barzillai
come to him into Jerusalem, that he might feed him Barzillai said unto the
King, how many days are the years of my life, that I should go up with the
King to Jerusalem. I am this day fourscore years old, and can I discern
between good or evil? has thy servant any taste in that I eat, or in that I
drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and women? wherefore then
should thy servant be any more a burden unto my lord the King? Thy servant will
go a little way over Jordan with the King, and why will the King recompense it
me with such a reward? I pray thee, let thy servant turn back again, that I
may die in mine own city, and be buried in the grave of my father, and of my
mother. 2. Sam. 19 34, 35, 36, 37. Barzillai used four reasons for his
refusal to go with David; First, his age, be being fourscore was not fit for
travel. Secondly, the defect of his senses and therefore not fit for a Princes
court, he could not judge between sauourie and unsavory, between sweet and
sour; he could not discern by tasting good or evil in meat or drink, or in
any other such pleasant things, neither did he here with pleasure. Thirdly, he
was loath to be a burden to David. In Princes courts such as will not behave
themselves as others do, are burdensome, if they will not be merry companions
if not drinkers, they are a burden. Kings will have such men with them which
can discourse, but I am unable to do it, and therefore unfit to be a Courtier.
Fourthly, it was pleasant to him to return, to think rather of his grave,
then of a Princes Court; and therefore let thy servant turn back again: old
men should think not how they may live, but how they may die godly, they should
prepare in life for death, and then death to them will be a passage to life.

They desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all,
Phil. 1.23. They love to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord, 2.
Cor. 5.8. They be from home as long as they are on earth, here strangers, using
this World, as if they used it not, setting their minds upon that Country
which is above. Their affections be in heaven, though they be on earth, their
treasure is in heaven, and therefore their hearts are where their treasure is,
and death to them is a passage to life. They fear not death, having a good
measure of faith to warm them at the heart, they change not their countenance,
nor have their color any whit abated, but a^ it is recorded of Mistress Joyce
Lewis at the stake, and sundry other Christians, even of the fearfullest by
nature and sex, looked as fresh and cheerly at the hour of death as at their
marriage. But if men which are aged, do not fear God, they wish to die to be
freed from pains, but they pass from little pain to great, from easelesse to
endless, from corporal to eternal. Hell is Deaths Page and Follower,
attending him where ever he goes among the wicked sort. It is miserable to see
how boldly, and blindly such men venture on death. Theramines wrote books in
praise of Death, as the end of all calamities. Augustus dies jesting, calling
for a Plaudite. Tiberius in dissimulation. Diogenes hearing Antisthenes cry out
in his pains, who shall ease me; offers him a knife to dispatch himself
withal. Caninus called to execution, bids this fellow remember he had the
best of the game. The Earl of Kildare, seeing his Writ of death brought in
when he was at shouel-boord, throws his cast with this in his mouth,
whatsoever that is, this is for a huddle. If such men idid know the follower of
Death, they would never jest so, and use such idle mirth.

there is never a day goes over our head, but yields matter of sighing and
groaning under some act of Gods wrath, do we the best we can. If we had the
greatest causes of comfort, both for this world, and the world to come, that
the world can afford, or that ever any man had, yet when he shall sum his
accounts, he shall find the days he lives here, are but days of evil, and he
shall see more cause of sorrow and mourning then of joy. Let the bitter of Gods
wrath here, make us the more seek after the days of eternity, where there
shall not be the least cross, nor affliction. Man's life in this life is
nothing else, but a returning back again unto death. Every man whiles he is
here, walks to the house of his grave, and though he be a little longer in
going back unto the earth, then he was coming from it, yet he does nothing
while he is here, but go back to it. A tale is quickly told, a word is soon
spoken, a thought is soon conceived: so the years and days of man are quickly
spent.

David said of Aphimaaz, let him come and welcome, etc. 2. Sam. 18.27. so the
faithful Christian will say of death, he is the messenger of Christ, he is
welcome, he brings to me the joyful news of eternal life. They are blessed
which die in the Lord, Reu. 14.13. And one day of a blessed death will make an
amends for all the sorrows of a bitter life.

FINIS.

