THE ACTS OF THE DIET OF REGENSPVRGH: Held in the years 1622 and 1623.

CONTAINING THESE SEVERAL TREATISES.

1 Six Propositions made by the Emperor. 2 The Consultaes or Aduices of the
Princes upon the first three of them. 3 The Emperors Replica to their Aduices.
4 Their Answer to his Replica, with a Relation also. 5 Their Answer to the
three last Jmperiall Propositions. 6 The Emperors final Resolution concerning
the whole business.
LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter.

1623.

The propositions of his Imperial Majesty in the Diet of Regenspurg, made in
the presence of the two Archbishop Electors of Mentz and Cullen, of the Dukes
of Bauaria and Newburgh, and the Landtgraue of Darmstadt, the Bishops of
Wartzburgh, and Salisburgh, as also of the Ambassadors of the absent Electors
of Triers, Saxony, and Brandenburgh: with diverse others, as here follows.
THe Roman Emperor etc. our gracious Lord, doubts not, but that the Electors
and Princes here personally assembled, and the Ambassadors of these that are
absent, have by the Imperial Summons, dated the 29 of April, the last year,
sufficiently understood, how necessary his Majesty judged it, to call this
Diet of Regenspurg, and in it to consult with their wisdoms, about the present
dangers of the Roman Empire. But how the wars and other difficulties have
formerly hindered this meeting, his Imperial Majesty has by his Letters made
apparent to some of the Princes Electors. And for that the Electors and Princes
have upon the foresaid Summons assembled here at this time, his Majesty
returns them all most hearty thanks, for their prompt obedience herein shown
unto Caesar.

To come to the purpose for which this present Diet is assembled: his Majesty
holds it not necessary to rip up the occasions, which have brought the Empire
into this distress; for none here can be ignorant, of the diverse assemblies of
the Princes and States of the Empire, made in the reigns of Rodolphus and
Mathias our predecessors; all which, and the constitutions of them, have to the
great scandal of the Empire, and the hinderance of the ordinary Process of
Justice in the Imperial Chamber of Spyers, been disobeied and neglected.

In which calamity of the Empire, diverse turbulent Spirits, sometimes under
color of Religion, and sometimes upon other pretexts, have so far interposed
themselves, that the tumultuous Subjects of other Princes have been taken into
Protection and Leagues made with forem States: To make good which,
Protestations and Transactions have been passed, and warlike preparations
made, not without the great contempt of the Roman Empire.

And after those troubles of Bohemia (long in plotting) had broken out in the
year 1618. Of which, the Count Palatine (pretending still, That he would have
nothing to do in that business, with the Roman Emperor, but with the Archduke
of Austria only) has shown himself the chief protector; their Seconds also
were so strongly drawn in, that his Imperial Majesty's Subjects of Hungary,
did after the Bohemian example, elect the Prince of Transyluania to be their
King also; which two acts, have been the occasions of the wars even brought
home unto us in our own Austria, and in sight of our Imperial City of Vienna.

Whereupon certain of the Electors and Princes of the Empire, perceiving their
Lord in danger of losing his Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary, etc. had in
March last 1620, in their meeting at Mulhausen in Duringen, resolved the
Emperor that he might take any lawful course to recover his Estates (as their
joint Letters dated the 20 of that March can still testify) yet nevertheless
did his Majesty herin follow their advice also, that he first wrote his
Letters severally unto them, exhorting them all to desist from meddling with any
thing that was his Majesty's present and due possession.

But how little these exhortations and threatenings also, every where in the
Imperial Proclamations dated April 20, 1620. affixed, have prevailed, you well
perceive, for the wars not only after this increased, but the Turk has also
(by the mediation of Bethlem Gabor) been solicited for his aid and assistance.

Seeing therefore that the Roman Emperor for his own safety could stay no
longer, nor do no less; he has at last by the aid and valor of those
Princes who approved of the Constitutions of the Diet of Mulhausen aforesaid,
and principally of the Elector of Saxony, the House of Burgundy, and the Duke
of Bauaria, not only recovered his own possessions of Bohemia, etc. but for
the recompensation also of the great charges of the wars, seized upon the
greater part of both the Palatinates.

For which great atchiuements, obtained by the aid of the Princes aforesaid,
his Imperial Majesty, in his own Name, and in the Name of the whole
Illustrious House of Austria, returns them most hearty and condign thanks;
with promise, that his Majesty is likewise as ready to requite their loves,
even with the expense of his life and fortunes.

And seeing after these victories, the wars had not (as it was hoped that
they would) a final end; his Majesty was enforced to set out the Imperial
Ban, against Frederick the Count Palatine, and the rest of his partakers.

And although the Union of the Protestant Princes, which was at first contrived
by those of Heidlebergh, was about the same time dissolved, and the Palatine
thereby left to himself; whereupon followed the mediation of other Princes for
a perfect peace and reconciliation; yet did not he thereupon lay down Arms;
but Mansfield still kept the frontiers of Bohemia, and John George the Elder
(who writes him Marquess of Brandenburg, and who for abetting and ayding the
Palatine, was also proscribed with him) ceased not to infest those of Silesia,
and to detain some places in Bohemia also; the Palatine in the mean time
making into Holland, from thence to return to the wars again with greater
earnestness.

For which reason therefore, has his Majesty proceeded in this course of
seasing upon the Inheritances and Dignities of the Palatine, that so the head
of the Faction being disabled, he might reign thenceforth more securely, and
get in also his moneys and charges, disbursed upon the wars against him. But to
all these courses, did the Palatine aforesaid mainly oppose his whole power,
both by himself, and his great Captains Mansfield, Brunswick, and Durlach; by
whose Armies diverse Bishoprics, and Countries, about Strasburgh, Spyres, and
Alsatia, especially were infested; and in the Archbishopric of Mentz, and
other places also, in the Circles of Westphalia, the Rhyne, and the
Landtgrauiate of Darmstadt; wherein they so long proceeded, even until they
were finally beaten out, and utterly vanquished.

But how much his Imperial Majesty has ever desired to restore sweet peace
to his dear country; the Embassies for such a treaty, dispatched unto the
meeting of Brussels, and unto the King of England, may sufficiently witness.
Which how much the more he urged, by offering a present Cessation of Arms; so
much the further off were his enemies from giving over; but giving out, rather,
that it was to no purpose now, to talk of a Submission, seeing they were in
hand to gather up a brave Army.

To put an end therefore to these troubles, his Majesty has once again (as a
sovereign remedy for all) conuokt this Diet, twice before put off. And seeing
that he could not imagine, that there was any man in the Empire so unjust, who
had the boldness to mediate the restitution of the proscribed Palatine, into
the Electorall College (who could not but remember the losses he had received
by those that had taken part against him) he could do no less then to dispose
of the Electorate, now pleno Iure deuolued unto him as Emperor; That so he
might both be discharged of his word, and also fill up the number of the
Electors again; all which he had already (excepting only the Inuestiture,
which he purposed to finish also at this Diet) bestowed upon the Duke of
Bauaria, in reward of his great good services, and many victories, performed
and obtained with the expense of his treasure, and the hazard of his blood, for
him (the Emperor) against his own Nephew, the sometimes Elector Palatine, in
Bohemia, and by the Rivers of Rhyne, Neckar, and Main. And for that his
Highness (he knew) being a Prince of singular wisdom, would be still studious
of the good of the Empire; And so much the Electors and Princes of both
Religions might persuade themselves of him, that he would labor by all means
to maintain the Edicts, made for the free exercise of Religion.

Wherefore his Imperial Majesty most graciously requests of this Illustrious
presence of Electors and Princes, as those that are of his Majesty's Privy
Council; that they would please freely to give their opinions, namely, how the
Empire (which is the maine of the business) may hereafter be best governed,
and new commotions prevented or repressed, and the most wished-for peace
universally restored.

Secondly, it shall appear unto this Illustrious presence of Electors and
Princes, what has been done in the Kingdom of Hungary with the Prince of
Transyluania; and how heartily his Imperial Majesty has ever endeavored,
that by hastening on a Peace, those places, which by reason of the ill
neighborhood of the Turk, seemed most exposed to danger, Might be kept safe
from the fear of an Invasion: those often Embassies of his sent to Presburg,
and the long treaty had with the French Ambassadors in his own Court of
Vienna, about that only business, can sufficiently witness. But at length all
controversies depending between his Imperial Majesty: and Bethlem Gabor
being reduced to some terms of a fair composition; and by the treaty held at
Niclasburgh first, and by the Diet of the States of Hungary (which continued
from May till August afterward) a final peace being concluded; the Roman
Empire was both delivered from the present danger, and re-estated in her former
tranquillity. It cannot be unknown unto this Illustrious Presence of Electors
and Princes, how their never enough commended Ancestors, have been still most
careful, both in times of war and peace, to keep the bulwarks and castles
which are in the Frontiers of the Christian world, in good repair, well
manned, fortified and provided: which for his Majesty alone to do, after his
great expenses, and spoiling of his countries is most impossible. Nor is any
here ignorant, that the last Emperors his Majesty's Predecessors, have not
since the year 1603. received any such Subsidies, as might defray such a
charge. All which points this Illustrious presence of Electors and Princes
shall do well to consider of, and give their aduices thereupon; and in the
mean time, until there may be a general Parliament of the whole Empire
called, to grant his Majesty so sufficient a Subsidy, that the Fortresses
aforesaid (which it concerns the Empire so much to keep up) may not either
for want, or delay, be exposed to further danger.

Thirdly, seeing that as it is most manifest, that the States of Holland, after
the end of the last Truce, have resumed Arms against the House of Burgundy,
their natural Lords, which they prosecute to the utmost of their power;
favoring also and entertaining the open enemies of his Imperial Majesty; and
devising by all means, how to lay hold upon any occasion of removing the field
of war, out of their own country into the heart of the Empire; having
already there made themselves Masters of some places. Which proceedings of the
said States, this also has much advanced; that they have brought the greater
part of the States of the lower Westphalia Circle, within contribution; and
that they have not long since, near the city of Bonu above Cullen, raised the
most strong Fort of Papenmutz; by which they can now command all that Reach of
the River of Rhyne; in so much that the neighboring Electors and States of the
Empire (whom it most nearly concerned) have been enforced to petition his
Imperial Majesty for relief in these difficulties. Wherefore, that this so
imminent a danger, whereunto from this Fort, the Electors of the Rhyne Circle,
and that ancient city especially, (which it so much concerns the Empire to
make good) lie so open, may be prevented; his Imperial Majesty requires this
whole Illustrious Presence of Electors, Princes and Ambassadors, to give their
aduices.

Fourthly, it is unknown to none here, with what earnestness the grieuances
of the Cities and States of either party, have for these many years, and in
the year 1620. especially, in the last assemblies, been urged; and what
meetings also and Ambassies, have for these quarrels purposely been spent; and
what writings also, and Iuridicall aduices followed thereupon. Wherefore his
Imperial Majesty most earnestly requires of all the Electors and Princes, to
deliver their Aduices in this cause, how far (namely) the Emperor may
proceed to determine them, without prejudice of his Imperial Authority, or
infringing of the Jurisdiction and sacred Imperial Constitutions.

Fifthly, seeing his Imperial Majesty has understood, that by reason of the
daily Reuiewes interposed in the Imperial Chamber of Spyers, the course of
Justice has been quite hindered; he also desires the Aduices of the Electors
and Princes, how this evil may henceforth at the next assembly be remedied,
and Justice fully restored.

Sixthly, seeing every man daily feels to his cost, the great mischief which
has happened in the Empire by the minting of bad moneys, whereupon has
followed the raise of commodities to an over dear rate: His Imperial Majesty
desires this Illustrious Presence of Electors and Princes, to deliver their
Aduices, how this mischief may for a while be remedied, until a general
Parliament may opportunely be called.

And even as his Imperial Majesty persuades himself, that he has in these
propositions, touched the maine of the business, which is to be consulted upon
in this following Diet. So also, if upon the Electors and Princes informations,
any thing else shall be thought fit to be enquired of, his Majesty desires to
discuss that also with them; that so, sweet peace, love, and amity may be
restored, and re-established amongst the Electors, Princes, and States of the
Sacred Empire.

Finally, his Imperial Majesty assures this Illustrious Presence of Electors
and Princes, and the Ambassadors of those that are absent, of his Royal Grace
and favor.

Dated at Regenspurgh, the Imperial Seat appending, January 7. 1623.
To three of which Propositions of the Emperors, the Electors, Princes, and
Ambassadors, thirteen days after, that is, upon the twentieth of January,
upon mature consultation, gave in their several Aduices, as here next
follows.

Our duty it is (most gracious Lord and Caesar) to give your Majesty most
hearty thanks for that franck profession of your fatherly care of the good
and quiet of the Empire; humbly desiring your Imperial Majesty, (in these
troublesome times especially) to persevere in that gracious resolution.

We have well understood by the late Propositions, the reasons alleged by your
Majesty, for justification of your proceedings in proscribing the Prince
Palatine, and depriving him of his Electorall dignity, with your intention
also to confer it upon his Highness, the Duke of Bavaria: and that upon this
business, and upon the means withal to restore a general and a firm peace,
how earnestly your Majesty has desired us to deliver up our free Aduices, both
which we are here at this present (under your Majesty's gracious correction)
ready to do. After which, part of them spoke as follows.

Considering the weight and importance of such a business, we thought it
fitter to defer this deliberation, until the coming of the Dukes of
Brunswick and Pomeren unto the Diet: yet considering it might happen to prove
but loss of time, to expect those of whose coming we are not certain: we now
desiring his Majesty once again to solicit the coming of the Dukes
aforesaid, have in the mean time thought upon what we should now deliver up.

Although your Imperial Majesty may sufficiently seem to have had cause
enough to have published the Ban against the Prince Palatine; yet are we of
the opinion, that in this particular cause, which so nearely concerned the
disposing of an Electorate of the Empire, and so principal a person too, of
the Electorall College; the sudden doing of which might occasion such great
and tedious wars, and dangerous ruins in the Roman Empire: that Caesar should
not of himself have proceeded so rigorously, nor without the advice and
consent of all the rest of the Electors, according as it is agreed upon, in the
Capitulation Royal, which is holden for a fundamental law of the Empire.
Which course of Caesar's, even for the manner of proceeding in it, was
exceedingly distasted by diverse, seeing that the most doubted not to profess,
how that the Prince Palatine having never been sufficiently and publicly
summoned, but vncited and unheard, without all knowledge of his cause, and
contrary to all ordinary course and presidents of Law, had been condemned, and
against all equity oppressed by the publication of that Imperial Ban. We
purpose not to call the power Imperial into question, yet can we but remember
your Majesty of that promise made in your Capitulation unto the Electors, and
humbly we admonish Caesar to stand unto his own word, and not to intermit the
performance of it.

As for the disposing of the Electorate, we desire nothing more, then that we
had the power to gratify Caesar, with our suffrages, but perceiving so many
and so great difficulties in it, we cannot but admonish your Majesty of the
danger of it. This being the opinion of our Electors, that seeing your Majesty
has graciously called this Diet for the restoring of peace in the Empire; that
it were altogether necessary, first of all to remove the obstacles of peace.
And seeing that all the stirs began in Bohemia, Caesar should do well to
labor first of all for the quietting of that Kingdom, and command a stay to
be made of the severe Reformation and frequent Executions there; that so the
hearts of the Subjects being overcome with grace and mercy, might be sweetly
reconciled, and all fear and distrust (from which, little good will comes from
the people toward their Governor) might be utterly taken away: which thing
unless it be timely undertaken, we see no hope either how your Majesty can
sit sure upon the Imperial Throne, or how the Electors and Princes can be
freed of their fears; there being most evident danger, that the Bohemians and
others being made desperate by the extremity of their sufferings, will take
hold upon any occasion to begin new troubles, and to inuolue the Emperor and
the Empire, with new dangers. All the Lutheran States of the Empire likewise,
which follow the Augustine Confession, have their eyes upon this Bohemian
Reformation, which though it were given out to be for a private Justice, yet is
it so linckt with the public cause; that unless it be speedily ended, and the
two Churches at Prage (granted by Rodolphus the second, not in favor of some
private men alone, but of Christian Elector of Saxony, and which had continued
free until the 24. of October the last year) were again opened, and the free
exercise of Religion generally permitted; we see no sure peace likely to be in
the Empire, but utter ruin rather, and final desolation may every day be
feared: Seeing that it was most apparently known, how that it was not those
that professed the Reformed Religion, who begun these troubles; but the
Noblemen and great Officers, whose designs the other were compelled to obey.
There should therefore be observed an equality in punishments, but much better
it were to resolve upon a general pardon, and a forgetting of former
trespasses throughout the Kingdom of Bohemia.

And as for the Prince Palatine, likewise seeing he was already sufficiently
punished, it were far more commendable in your Majesty, that now at last upon
his submission, you would be pleased to restore him to his lands and dignities;
considering, that if process be executed according to the extreme rigor of
Law, it could never possibly be, that so long as he lived and had any pretense
at all, that ever there should be any peace, but perpetual acts of hostily
rather, in the Roman Empire.

Touching the point likewise of the transferring of the Electorate, this one
maine thing were fit to be considered of, viZ. whither, the Prince Palatine
being in his own person utterly excluded, that his children, who by the
providence of their Ancestors, had before this Act of their Father Ius
adquisitum, an hereditarie right unto the Electorate, or that the Brother of
the Prince Palatine, who has no way offended your Majesty, nor by reason of
his minority could not; or other of the kindred of the Prince Palatine, should
be, or ought to be in this case neglected: which proceeding would be but hardly
taken of other Electors and Princes, and occasion various distrusts between
the head and the members. The Princes moreover allied unto the Prince Palatine,
who had upon confidence of Caesar's clemency bin quiet hitherto, now perceiving
all hope of the restoring of that dignity unto their Family utterly taken
away; must needs have recourse unto Arms, and endeavor the recovery of it, by
maine force. Again, if Caesar should die, this controversy being not
compounded, it might well be feared, that many inconveniences would fall out,
contrary to Caesar's desire. Caesar now indeed upon the advantage of his
victories had the Law in his own hand, but if fortune should turn, he were
not sure to bring it to such a pass as he desired.

Upon which Considerations, we hold it more wisdom, to advise Caesar not to
proceed too suddenly; and hold it much better for him to accept rather of the
intercession of other Electors and Princes, as in such cases has heretofore
been done. Considering withal, that the Prince Palatine was as then but young,
and had been abused by ill counsel, and was no ways the author of those
stirs in Bohemia, all being in an uproar before his coming amongst them. And
that other offenders had likewise obtained Caesar's grace and pardon: which if
it would please his Majesty to grant unto the Prince Palatine, he should
eternally oblige the whole Electoral College, and all the Kings and Princes
any way of kin or allied unto him, and the Prince himself and all his
posterity, so often as they remembered this their exile, would be advised how they
again embroyled themselves in such businesses. Whereas otherwise if he saw the
door of mercy quite shut, and nothing left him but his life, it might be
feared, lest he should for his last refuge, apply himself unto some such
courses, as would occasion far greater troubles in the Roman Empirie, Caesar
therefore should do far righter, if for his own honor, and the good of the
Empire, he would prefer mercy before severity, and not pursue these
extremities.

To all this did the Catholic Princes answer: Caesar has shown causes enough
which he had to deprive the Palatine. And was himself resolved, that the
Palatinate was now dissolved unto him, which he might dispose of without having
regard unto the Palatines children or kinsmen, according to his own pleasure.
His Majesty could not well hold any terms of amity with him, although he were
restored: and this impunitie would give occasion unto others to offend. As for
matter of punishment, there should be no difference between the Emperor and
the Palatine, seeing that his Majesty's Lands and Dominions were no less
wasted then the others. And yet was there great difference in the cause of it,
seeing that this fell out to Caesar without his demerit; And the Palatine did
the other, having no necessity to do it. He had refused mercy, not
acknowledged his fault, nor sought for any favor. It is an unequal request
for Caesar to accept of any Reconciliation, seeing that his General Mansfield
has not yet laid down Arms, by which his Master shows, that he had rather
prosecute his cause by way of Arms, then to desire mercy. The safety of the
Empire consists in the filling up of the Electorall College, for which cause
Caesar had done very well in a speedy resolving upon it, seeing that other
Emperors had in the like causes done the same before.

To which the other party presently answered; That for the security of the
Imperial dignity, and the safety of the Empire there was no question to be
made of it, but that it consisted in the concord of the Electorall College
with the Emperor. For the preservation whereof all diligence was to be used,
left upon any dissension there should arise a division in that College, which
might now be prevented by a timely filling up of it. The Prince Palatine has
you say done amiss, But yet if Caesar shall still use rigor, the Princes of
the Lower Saxony are of opinion, that there can be no peace established in the
Empire: the good of which being most worthy to be preferred before all other
respects, Caesar should do nobly to suffer himself to be entreated, that out
of his own innate magnanimity he would now overcome himself, and change rigor
into clemency, by consenting to have the Prince Palatine reconciled unto him,
and make the Empire by that means glad with a desired peace: otherwise there
was an appearance of greater danger in it, that the end might prove far worse
then the beginning, and new flames were likely to burst forth in those places
which God had hitherto preserved from burning. Caesar had now by the aid of
the Electors and Princes, recovered his lost Provinces, wanting nothing but the
confirmation and quiet possession of them; which this desired reconciliation
was the best means to effect. The fortune of war is always doubtful, and
the victory so long uncertain, as the adverse party has power to re-enforce
his Arms. And for the renewing of this war, there was yet a fair pretense
left; for that in the bestowing of the Electorate, the Prince Palatines Sons,
Brother, and Kinsmen had bin neglected. And with these principles are the minds
of the Princes of the Lower Saxony possessed already. The King of Great
Britain besides could not but take it ill, that he should now see all his
pious endeavors take no good effect, and his only dear Daughter and
Grandchildren still left in exile. The Kinsmen also and alliance of the Prince
Palatine, might eagerly apprehend this neglect of them, to be a great affront,
and done in disgrace of them.

And as for the manner of this reconciliation, there might be a particular
Treaty and Consultation appointed for it, wherein Caesar's prerogative Imperial
being reserved, all parties might nevertheless receive satisfaction, and the
Empire once again flourish with peace.

Furthermore, seeing that the Elector of Saxony had taken that miserable
business of the alteration of Religion in Bohemia, to concern the public
cause, whereupon so many grieuances and commotions may follow; we instantly
desire your Imperial Majesty to find a remedy for these maladies, which else
will breed no good blood, but heart-burnings rather and distrusts, in the
Electorall College it self.

Again, seeing that as it appears by the diverse intercessions, petitions, and
letters of other Electors and Princes, there had as yet been nothing done for
the relieuing of the sundry grieuances and impositions of diverse of the free
Cities, we thought fit to admonish Caesar of this, that order might be taken
for them.

All these Consultaes discussed amongst us in this Electorall Session, we have
thought fit to present unto your Imperial Majesty, that out of your own
wisdom you might determine further of them. It is our humble request
therefore, that these things being considered upon, this Diet may be ended, and
the Empire freed out of all peril, may from henceforth enjoy her most desired
tranquillity.

To which Advice of the Electors and Princes, the Emperor upon the 6. of
February following adjoined this Replica.
We take it thankfully that you have taken pains, in consulting upon our
Propositions; and promise to be wanting in no one thing, that may advance the
peace and preservation of the Empire. We have in the mean time dispatched our
Letters unto the Dukes of Brunswicke and Pomeren, who I hope, will either by
themselves, or their Ambassadors, appear toward the end of the Diet. But you
have in the mean time done very well, that not staying for them, you have begun
your Consultations upon part of our Propositions. In which Consultaes and
Aduices of yours, though some have wisely heretofore resolved us, that our
proceedings in proscribing the Palatine, was both legal and necessary; yet
some there are of you we perceive to be of opinion, that according to our
Capitulation Royal, we ought not to have proceeded so far, without the
knowledge and consent of the Electors. But as we have no ways gone beyond this
our Capitulation, but even before we set out the Bann, punctually considered of
all that was necessary to be taken notice of; so did we also desire nothing
more, then that a Diet might be conuok't, for the due treating and aduising
upon this business: Which Meeting being hindered by the continuance of the
wars still prosecuted by the Palatine, we could do no less for the taking
down of his courage, then proceed by publishing the Bann against him, which
course of ours, seeing it was never intended to be prosecuted to the prejudice
any ways of the Electoral College, or against our own Capitulation, we hope
that the Electors will not take otherwise, seeing that we promise withal, so
to moderate it, that no detriment or prejudice shall result thereby unto the
dignity Electorall.

As for the translation of the Electorate, and your Advice for the restoring of
the Palatine, there is (I perceive) some difference in your opinions. One part
wisely and in favor of us, affirming the great reason we have to do it, and
that we can do nothing therein, which is not allowable by the Imperial
Constitutions, the Chamber of the Empire, and the examples of other Emperors in
like case. But for the other party, which advised his restoring, we purpose not
so far to consent unto it, as to the restoring of him to the Electorall
dignity, seeing that in the disposing of it other-where, we are resolved that
we shall do no more then we have just reason to do, as we have formerly
declared in our Propositions; nor will we defer the filling up of the
Electorall College any longer, seeing that no man can be ignorant, how much
the dispatching of it may concern the Commonweal. And as for the restoring
of the person of the Palatine, if you have any better reasons to urge, then you
have yet done, in his behalf, you shall see both in regard of his Person and
his Cause (excepting only his restoring to the Electorall dignity) how much
our mind is inclined toward clemency, and how far we will declare our
selves, to gratify the Kings of Great Britain and Denmark, the Elector of
Saxony, and other Electors and Princes interceding for him.

Now as concerning our forbidding of the exercise of the Lutheran Religion in
the City of Prage, we do not see how it any way concerns this Diet to enquire
of; our Letters have signified the causes that moved us to begin it, unto the
Elector of Saxony: nor can we think, that what we have done there, any of
the neighbor States or Territories need be suspicious of, seeing that we have
sworn oftener then once, in the word of an Emperor, that we will most
religiously observe the peace both of Religion and of civil government
throughout the Empire, nor will we suffer any others any ways to infringe it.

Lastly, as for the grieuances of the Imperial and Hans-townes, we very well
remember as yet the sincere promises, assurances, and transactions; as also of
that we agreed unto at Treaty of Aschaffenbug. All which we have hitherto been
most careful to observe most religiously, and so still shall be, unless we
find cause to the contrary, that so all cause of complaint may finally be
taken away from the Cities. And thus much we could not but advertise this
Illustrious presence of Electors and Princes, and you the Ambassadors of those
that are absent.

To this Replica (or Reply) of the Emperor, the Electors and Princes returned
this following answer, upon the 21. of February, subioyning withal a Relation
unto his Majesty.
WE have (gracious Lord and Emperor) consulted amongst us in our common
Council, upon your Majesty's Reply, which we suppose worthy your seeing. But
passing over in the mean to advise upon your three latter Propositions, we
found this to be the first and maine point; what (namely) were best to be done,
that the whole Empire might with the Emperor enjoy a solid peace; upon which
it was the advice of one party of us, that seeing the proscribed Mansfield is
the man who has so much infested the Empire, we of that party adverse to him,
have thought upon the way to auert and take him down; which is, to advise
Caesar to employ his Army Royal against him; by the force of which, and the
aid of the neighboring Princes and States, required by Caesar, he may be
driven out of the bounds of the Empire; and all his soldiers which shall
continue obstinate, may by a public Edict of proscription, and confiscation,
be deterred from Arms; and the neighbors may be forbidden any way to aid
him, and commanded to prosecute him, according to the uttermost of their power.
Which course if it be taken, and all the States of the Empire withal, put in
mind of their duty to Caesar, and of those Constitutions which may concern
either Religion or Peace; we doubt not but that every man may after that, enjoy
his own rest and tranquillity.

Further, as concerning that contribution to be employed upon the making good
of the confines of the Empire against the Turk, we would willingly follow the
pious examples of our Ancestors in that kind; and yet know we not how of our
selves to consent unto it, until the matter may more fully be treated upon, in
the next Diet. But considering withal the miserable waste that has been of
late made in your Majesty's Provinces, and that your Treasury has not for some
years been supplied by any contribution raised in the Empire, we cannot
think this request of Caesar's any way unjust; and much desire that we were
able herein to gratify Caesar. But seeing withal how apparent it is, what
continual aids we have faithfully lent unto Caesar, and what charges, far
greater then the ordinary contributions, with the hazard too of our own
Countries, we have been at, for the recovery of Caesar's dignities; and are now
still forced to be at, for the diuersion of the imminent wars; and that in
the end, so particular and small a contribution as we are able to afford,
could not much advance that design; we hope that Caesar will hold us excused
if we cannot herein afford him that content which we willingly would. But if
this Proposition might be made to all the States of the Empire, we doubt not
but they would be found very willing and ready unto it.

As concerning your Majesty's third Proposition, of the dangerous resolution of
the united Provinces for removing the field of war into the Empire, and their
late attempts in Westphalia, and their building of the Fort of PapenmutZ in the
Rhyne, betwixt Bon and Cullen; we cannot but commend your fatherly care; nor
are we ignorant that diverse consultations have been had about it, in some
former Dyets also; where it was still found that the forces of any one State
were not able to hinder the Low Countrymen, nor can we now agree upon the
means of doing it. And as for Papenmutz, your Majesty is to consider of it, as
of a piece now taken in by the Archduchesse her forces; and if it were not upon
this quite demolished, there would be much danger in it, that it would not
only hinder all commerce by the Rhyne, but also that the Hollanders would some
where else raise another to confront it, which would breed great discommodities
both to the neighbor States, and to the whole Empire. Our earnest request
therefore in this point is, That your Majesty would intercede with the
Archduchesse, for the dismantleing and utter rasing of that Castle.

And this is the effect of what was delivered, by the Catholic Electors and
Princes; what next follows is belonging unto this Answer to the Imperial
Replica also, but made apart by the Saxish and Brandenburghers Ambassadors, and
Lodowicke Landtgraue of Darmstadt, persuading rather to proceed by the way of
peace, as here follows.

Our voices and aduices (gracious Lord and Caesar) which we have given before,
See before in their advice to the Emperors Propositions.
concerning the proscribing of the Prince Palatine, and the translation of the
Electorate, we know to be founded upon the best examples, and the immovable
Constitutions of the Empire, and were meant to no other end, then that concord
and confidence being reestablished betwixt all the States of the Empire, the
wars may be laid down, peace restored, the whole State being assured to the
Emperor in the bond of Peace, all may be converted to the confirming of
Caesar, the commodity of the States, and the terror of all the Enemies of the
Empire: And we do hope that Caesar will so interpret us.

As for those other points contained in the Imperial Propositions; as the
dangerous hostility used by Mansfield, and the attempts of the States of the
Low Countries in Westphalia and other places subject to the Elector of Cullen,
we are much vexed and grieved, to see such principal members of the Empire so
much afflicted; and do confess, that unless that wholesome way of Peace be
speedily taken, and that flame of war timely quenched by the waters of
composition, there can nothing come of it, but utter ruin and combustion in
the Empire. It Is at Caesar's choice to take other men's aduices also in this
point, and we doubt not but they will all give him such counsel as may best
conduce to this purpose. But for our own parts, we hold the way of peace for
the best and safest, as we showed in our former advice, which we earnestly
wish might with all the clauses and particulars in it, be formerly called to
mind again, and rightly and timely apprehended; that all iealousies might so
be removed, and peace restored: without which, things will never succeed
rightly for the safety of the Empire. It cannot be thought but what the P.
Palatine has done might well trouble your Mtie: yet we hope Caesar will rather
respect peace, spare his loyal subjects, take into his pity the millions of
miseries which the wars occasion, and out of a magnanimity, worthy of
Caesar, add this to the rest of his victories, that he will now overcome
himself, and suffer his own inbred clemency, his love to the public good,
the safety of the Empire, and the general quiet of all men; to bear some
sway with him, and make by this means his own name immortal to all
posterities.

As for that reformation already begun in Bohemia, what danger and despair
did by reason of that, at this present hang over that kingdom, his Highness,
the Elector of Saxony, had often intimated unto Caesar, and admonisht him
likewise of the dangers redounding thence unto the neighbor Countries. We
therefore here once again most humbly sue unto Caesar, that he would please to
suffer himself to be entreated, and give way to the the most weighty reasons
brought to persuade him, and that he would forbear that work of Reformation,
set open the Protestants Churches, and permit the free exercise of Religion,
according to the Augustane Confession; that he would pardon the subject, and
universally forgive and forget, prefer mercy before rigor of law, and so most
firmly oblige the minds of the Subject, in love, duty, and devotion unto him.

As for the complaints of the free Cities, and others of the Empire, we think
it fit, that Caesar might be certified of their particular grieuances, by their
several petitions: that so they might with all speed be cased of that burden
of maintaining the soldiers, the government of the Cities, fully again
restored unto the Magistrates, all exactions left off, promises and covenants
kept, treaties ratified, and all mischief auerted; seeing that it so much
concerns the weal public to preserve these Cities in the devotion of Caesar.

What the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh thought in the point of the
proscription, appeared by their former advice upon it. But seeing that in an
after Relation of it, these words were added which were not in the former;
which were, That the Emperor might do it Absolutely and without being
prescribed the manner. The Electors could not forbear from opposing themselves
against it; for that it no ways agreed with the Capitulation Royal, seeing
that those things unto which Caesar binds himself by that Capitulation, are
not simply, absolutely, and without being prescribed the manner, in his power:
nor can the Electorall dignity for this reason be preserved safe and entire
unto the persons. The words of the Capitulation are clear: In all difficult
businesses, no process ought to be made, without the knowledge and consent of
the Electors; and that without ordinary Process, no Proscriptio^ should go out
against any one of the States of the Empire, before the cause were heard. This
is the fundamental Law of the Empire, which requires no more, but to be
constantly observed, nor is it to be drawn into further dispute or
deliberation: but it stood the Electors upon to be open eyed to see to the
observation of it; and it concerned the three secular Electors especially,
whose dignity did by an hereditary right descend unto their posterity, to
keep it safe and entire; which they hoped that Caesar would not go about to
contradict.

As for that which was advised by the Catholic Electors and Princes,
concerning the rasing of the Fort of Papenmutz, we will say nothing, seeing
that we have not before this had any relation of the taking of it: only we
desire the Catholic Electors and Princes to persuade themselves, that we no
way envy their safety.

As for that contribution, and the restraining of the States of the Low
Countries, we thus far forth agree with the rest, that it ought to be referred
to the future Diet.

To this Answer they all subioyned a Relation, wherein you have the minds of
the Catholic Princes jointly together, and that of the Electors of Saxony, and
Brandenburgh, and the Landtgraue of Darmstadt, each severally by themselves.
The Catholic Princes begin: in which they come nearer to the terms of
peaceable proceedings.
IT seemed most necessary unto us (most gracious Lord and Caesar) in our
consultations upon your Imperial Replica, to exhibit the sum of all unto
your Majesty, as follows: We have taken it into our consideration, That if
both parties in this Diet shall still persist in aduising contrary causes, and
no middle terms be found out, upon which we may both agree and conioyne our
voices, there may be much danger in it, that this so long expected Diet, must
break up at last without any good end, which will be for ever inexcusable,
seeing that so many eyes both within and without the Empire, are cast upon it,
looking after this, to see either the sure confirmation, or the utter ruin of
the Empire: we have thought it fittest to admonish Caesar to continue constant
unto that purpose of his concerning the receiving of the Prince Palatine into
grace, (excepting only the restoring of him to his Electorall Dignity) which
resolution has been created in your Majesty, by the earnest intercessions and
entreaties of so many Princes. (Provided, that his due submission and
declaration of his obedience be first manifested) that so there may be left
some hope unto the Prince of an entire reconciliation.

And seeing that the King of England has required that there might still be
some respect and consideration had to his Grandchildren, and that there have
been some motions made of the pretenses of the near kindred of the Prince
aforesaid, in our former consultations: We most humbly beseech Caesar to
consent unto the reconciliation of the King of Englands Grandchildren; and that
time and place may be set to the Princes kinsmen, to pursue their several
pretenses, either by the way of a friendly comprimise, or by course of law.

And if your Majesty be still resolute to transfer his Electorate upon the
Duke of Bauaria, and be firmly of the mind, that this proceeding shall neither
be contrary unto the golden Bull, nor to your own Capitulation Royal; yet
that you would be entreated so to moderate the business, that it may no ways
appear prejudicial unto the Grandchildren of the King of England, and unto
the Prince Palatines other Kinsmen.

And seeing that the many virtues, and heroical mind of the Duke of Bavaria,
and his care for the advancement of Justice, and of the peace of the Empire are
sufficiently known: we hope his Highness will not take it ill, to be timely
admonished of the whole business, and of the dependancies of it.

After this, the Ambassadors of the Elector of Saxony spoke as follows: How
well affected our Lord and Master is to peace, appears by the reasons laid
down in our former Advice; which reasons being so grounded upon the
Constitutions of the Empire, they Laws, Customs, and best Examples, that they
deserve not to be neglected; which if they might once take place, we do not
doubt but they would prove very beneficial. For our selves we are tied to our
instructions: so that it cannot be accounted our faults if we go no further
then we have said before. For this is the constant opinion of our Elector, That
the means of obtaining the most desired Peace, consists not in the translation
of the Electorate, but in the restitution of the Prince Palatine.

The Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandenburgh spoke next: Our former Advice
expresses sufficiently, what way our Lord and Master holds best for the
restoring of Peace. And seeing we have received no further Command, to approve
of any other course, we can now say no otherwise then what we have done in
our Advice; which was, still to urge the restoring of the Prince Elector
Palatine, and to affirm, that the translation of the Electorate, is no means
of peace. And seeing that for want of any further Command, we cannot consent to
no other Course; We hold, that the means proposed by our Elector (all being
well as yet) is the best course both to assure, the honor and obedience due
unto Caesar, and to recover the general peace of the Empire.

Last of all, spoke the Landtgraue of Darmstadt. Seeing that the Translation of
the Electorate pertaines to the whole College of the Electors to dispose of, I
therefore think it fittest to refer it thither. And seeing that the general
quiet of the Empire is disturbed by that Bohemian Reformation; it is my
opinion, that all the Electors and Princes would most humbly persuade with
Caesar, to remedy that, after which I dare assure my self, that all the rest
of our Designs, will succeed the better.

And these were the things, which the Electors and Princes had then resolved to
exhibit unto Caesar. To whom, etc.

The next day being the 22. of February; they thus gave in their Answer to the
three last Imperial Propositions.

We cannot omit (most gracious Lord and Caesar) to give up our Advice also,
upon those heads of your Majesty's Propositions, which concern the remedying
of the grievances so often complained upon, the Restitution of Justice, and the
calling in of the Coins of base allay, unto the Standard. All which, that they
may be now remedied, after so many meetings, and consultations upon them, which
have still been disturbed and broken off, by these troubles; is our earnest
Prayer.

As for the grievances of the Cities, seeing they concern so many several
States, without whose particular information and advise, they can neither be
sufficiently known, nor remedied; We think it fit, that all their Councels
were asked upon it.

As for the course of justice, now utterly oppressed almost in the Imperial
Chamber of Spyers, which having been the fountain of so many mischiefs, and
confusions, now so rife in the Empire, and which (unless Justice be timely
relieved) will no doubt breed more. It is our duties to assist our Emperor in
such a difficulty, which so nearly concerns his Crown and dignity, with
our best counsayles and helps, for the reviving of justice, which lies now a
dying. It Is well known whence this corruption of justice began, and that it
lies not in the power of a few, to remedy it. For which cause we hold it
convenient to refer this over to a general Dyett.

And yet is it nevertheless, the opinion of some of us, that this will both
much advance the Peace, and ease the Cities, and the town of Spyers
especially (which is the port of Justice, to which every man puts in) now so
overcharged with Garrison: if that Caesar would timely take it into his care,
to make a fit supply of the void places of the Judges there, which have used
still to be fetched out of the Westphalian-Circle.

And as for the embasing of the moneys and how every man seeking for his
private Commodity, takes advantage upon it, and of the irrecoverable damage
from thence redounding unto the Empire, it were but superfluous to rip up,
considering how evidently, the increase of these mischiefs was to be seen:
for which enormities if a speedy course were not taken, farewell then the
glory and wealth of the Roman Empire.

And although some Princes Ambassadors there, were firmly of the mind, that
this also belonged unto a general Diet; yet notwithstanding, seeing that
certain States of the Empire had advisedly considered upon it; and had
already done some good that way in the Empire; namely, by an Edict published
Anno 1595. whereby the gold and silver Coins of greater value, were reduced
unto their just worth; and the smaller and baser, quite called in: there is no
doubt, but if other Cities, and those especially which have yearly Marts, and
great Trading, were envited unto this course; and that Caesar also would take
the like order in his own Dominions; that this evil would be well enough
provided for.

Another part of us also think it fit to refer thus much unto Caesar's own
wisdom and liberty, that besides the calling down, and calling in of the
bad moneys, and the new Coining of others, which should be according to the
constitutions of the Empire; that a Rate may also be set upon all Commodities
and Sales, proportionable unto the value of the Moneys. For seeing that this
great abuse was first brought in by a few, which proved general by degrees; so
there is no doubt, but that if this Reduction were to be generally obeyed,
others would be wary of loosing by bad moneys; which would make the means for
the remedying of these abuses, the more facile and apparent, against the next
general Dyett. All which we submit, etc.

To this Answer and Relation, his Imperial Majesty the next day being the
23. of February, gave his final Resolution, as here follows.
OUR most gracious Lord the Roman Emperor, etc. has received the Answers of
the Electors, Princes, and Ambassadors unto his Imperial Replica, with an
humble relation besides; whereby he well understands their desires for the
restoring of the Palatine; Now his Imperial Majesty could have wished, that
the said banished Palatine, after so many admonitions, had by his submission
made himself capeable, of his Imperial favor: Wherefore his Majesty has
also taken in good part the former letters of the Electors of Saxony and
Brandenburgh, written in favor of him. But considering on the other side, the
manifold trespasses of the Palatine aforesaid, his Majesty imagines that he
cannot be thought any way to be blamed, if he executes Justice, to the terror
and example of others.

Nevertheless, that it may appear, how far his Imperial Majesty (as a
Lord that means well) is willing to condescend unto the earnest Intercession
of the Princes of the Empire, and yield unto the so much desired mercy; and how
well he is inclined to consider deliberately, of those difficulties and
dangers, which have with a good meaning been forecast by them. His Majesty
hereupon declares himself to be well enough content (so far forth as
concerns his suffering of the Palatine to be reconciled unto him) for the
sakes of those Kings, Electors, and Princes, who have interceded for him; and
to give demonstration therewithal, of his Majesty's own good and peaceable
disposition: namely, that his Majesty is content upon the due submission,
deprecation, and present demonstration of his due obedience, Faith, and
Allegiance, and his desisting withal, from any warlike preparations, to grant
him the Reconciliation, as the case shall require: Excepting only his admission
unto the Electorall dignity. Trusting, that those who have interceded for the
Palatine, will also persuade him, that not neglecting his Royal grace and
mercy, he do not again deprive himself of the benefit of it, by deferring
his submission; but that he embrace it with due thankfulness, and demean
himself accordingly.

And for as much as concerns the Palatines children, and their future issue,
as also his next kinsmen, and their pretended right unto the Electorate and
Inheritance: The Electors and Princes have well understood the reasons which
moved his Majesty to deprive them, by the Imperial Bann, which cannot now be
altered. But as it never was his Majesty's intention, to do any thing in
prejudice of the Electorall preheminencie, the Imperial capitulation, the
golden Bull, or any other of the Constitutions of the Empire: So likewise will
not his Majesty cut off or debar any man from his right. But seeing that
there be diverse pretenders, who lay claim unto it: as amongst the rest, the
Palatines children, brother, and others of his kinsmen; they shall all remain
still vnpreiudiced in their pretensions. For, (seeing that the before mentioned
Pretenders have not hither to given in their names, nor appeared in it) this
controversy cannot be determined, so suddenly as they would desire it should.
And seeing that so many chances may unexpectedly fall out, his Majesty
cannot, nor will not, bear the Electors place void and unprovided any longer,
(and is once for all much less resolved to restore it, now or at any other
time, unto the person of proscribed Palatine:) but will presently invest the
Illustrious Prince the Duke of Bavaria, with the Electorall dignity, in reward
of his many good services done unto Caesar: as has bin sufficiently shown in
the Imperial propositions.

Nevertheless, to show withal a singular favor unto the King of England, and
to diverse other Potentates, Electors, Princes and States, as likewise to those
principally that are here present, who have all interceded for the Palatine;
his Majesty is pleased to show thus much mercy to the children of the Palatine
and their future issue, and next kinsmen in their several pretensions, as well
to the Electorate, as to the inheritance of the Palatine; that there shall be a
meeting appointed at some convenient place, as namely, at Norimberg,
Franckford, Ausbugh, or Vlme; where in love and friendship the business shall
be treated upon, and there decided in the name of his Imperial Majesty. And
in case that they cannot end it in love, they shall have liberty to enter a
suite of Law, by the Assistance of the Electorall College, (whose preheminency
his Imperial Majesty will always respect and regard:) which suite, his
Majesty shall further, advance, and set forward, as much as possibly in him
lies; even in such manner, as the said interressed Pretenders can wish
themselves, and their several pretensions require; and that within a set and
certain time (which we may appoint hereafter) the cause shall be ended and
decided, according to the impartial administration of Justice. His Majesty
shall cause moreover, this clause to be inserted into the Investiture of the
Duke of Bavaria, viz. That the same shall not be prejudicial to the Emperor,
the Roman Empire, the children of the Palatine, his brother, or to the Count
Palatine Wolff-wilhelmus Duke of Newburgh, or to all or any other kinsmen of
his: and that all and every ones right and pretensions (for so much as shall
belong unto them) shall remain vnpreiudiced, and shall expressly be reserved;
and shall upon the first opportunity be ended, either by the way of friendly
comprimise, or legal proceeding. That so, whenever the Electorate shall be
adjudged unto the children or kinsmen of the Palsgraue, they shall enjoy that
which shall be adjudged: and be invested therein by his Imperial Majesty after
the death of the Duke of Bavaria. And ye said Duke of Bavaria has given his
consent to all this, and has promised to carry himself accordingly, and to
put in sufficient security for the same, by a Covenant of an Instrument
Reversall; as is used in such like cases. Whereby he has most effectually
shown how much he is inclined to the well fare of his. Imperial Majesty, the
States of the sacred Roman Empire, and to a firm peace and concord.

And hereunto is his Majesty constant; that although he would do nothing that
might be contrary to the golden Bull, or his own Capitulation Royal; but is
fully persuaded on the other side, that the Electorship is devolved unto him,
and that he accordingly may dispose of it: nevertheless, he offers; that in
regard of the children and kinsmen of the Palsgraue, to appoint a set Treaty
for it, that it may be finally decided, either by love or law, as has been
said heretofore. By which, the present Electors, Princes, and Ambassadors, may
perceive his Majesty's care for the public welfare.

Moreover, his Majesty has had a special care to supply the Electorall
college, and doubts not, but that when the Temporal Electors (with whom he
would gladly have communicated himself, if he might have enjoyed their
companies) shall be fully informed of all, as his Majesty purposes to send
them word of it; but that they will be very well pleased with his Majesty's
mild delaration, and his vnpreiudiciall disposition; and that they will
likewise confirm the same by their voices, as the Spiritual Electors have
done: Seeing that the advancement of a good and a stable peace in the Empire,
concerns them, no less then the other. To whom, with the Electors and
Princes present, and the Ambassadors of those that are absent, his Imperial
Majesty once again promises all friendship, Imperial favor, and all good
offices.

Dated at Regenspurgh, with the Imperial Seal appending, the 23. of February.
1622.

