



HOCUS POCUS JVNIOR. The Anatomy of LEGERDEMAIN. OR, The Art of Juggling set
forth in his proper colors, fully, plainly, and exactly; so that an ignorant
person may thereby learn the full perfection of the same, after a little
practice. Unto each Trick is added the Figure, where it is needful for
Instruction.

The third Edition, with many Additions.

Praestat nihili quam nihil facere.

Hiccius Doctius



LONDON, Printed by I.D. for R. M. and are to be sold by Francis Grove at his
Shop upon Snow-hill, near the Sarazens-head. 1638.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, do you not wonder? if you do not, well you may, to see so
slight a Pamphlet so quickly spent; but lightly come, and lightly go; it is a
Juglers term and it well befits the subject. Would you know whence it first
came? why, from Bartholomew Fair: would you know whither it is bent? for the
Fair again; its a straggler, a wanderer, and as I said, as it lightly comes,
so it lightly goes; for it means to see not only Bartholomew Fair, but all the
Fairs in the Kingdom also, and therefore in the front, Hiccius Doccius is the
Postmaster, and what he wants there, i will give him here, a word or two of
command, a term of art, not so much substantial, as circumstantial, Celeriter,
vade, over hedges and ditches, through thick and thin, to come to your Fairs.
Room for a Jugler: al in post, yet with a desire to give you full satisfaction.
If you like it, then buy it and read it, if otherwise, leave it for them that
list.

Farewell.
The Art of LEGERDEMAINE Discovered.
The original of Legerdemaine, and how it came first into this Kingdom.
IT came first into the Kingdom by certain Egyptians, that were transported
hither, who growing to numerous multitudes, dispersed themselves through most
parts of the Kingdom: who being most expert in this Art, and in Palmestry,
cousened the people in all parts wheresoever they came.

Now diverse vagrant English joining with them in time learnt both their
language, and cousening delusions, whereby at length they were discovered, and
thereupon the next ensuing Parliament, there was a statute enacted: that
whosoever should transport an Egyptian, should have a fine imposed upon him;
Moreover, that whosoever should assume unto themselves the names of Egyptians,
it should be imputed unto them as felony, in so high a degree that they might
not have their Book granted unto them, which statute was put in execution, and
since that time our Kingdom has been well disburdened of those Egyptian
Juglers.

The Definition of the Art of Legerdemaine, with its principal parts.
LEgerdemain is an operation, whereby one may seem to work wonderful,
impossible, and incredible things by agility, nimblenesse, and sleightnesse of
hand. The parts of this Art are principally two, The first is in the conveyance
of Balls, Cards, Dice, Money, etc. The second is in Confederacy.

The end of the Art of Legerdemain.
THe end of this Art is either good or bad, accordingly as it is used: Good,
and lawful when it is used at Festivals, and merry meetings to procure mirth:
especially if it be done without desire of estimation above what we are. Bad,
and altogether unlawful when it is used on purpose, to cozen, deceive, or for
vain glory to be esteemed above what is meet and honest.

The Definition, or description of the Operator,
FIrst, he must be one of an impudent and audatious spirit, so that he may set
a good face upon the matter.

Secondly, he must have a nimble and cleanly conveyance.

Thirdly, he must have strange terms, and emphaticall words, to grace and
adorn his actions, and the more to astonish the beholders.

Fourthly, and lastly, such gestures of body as may lead away the spectators
eyes from a strict and diligent beholding his manner of conveyance.

Of the play of the Balls.
THe Operator thus qualified must have his Implements of purpose to play
withal: and first he must have three Cups, made of brass, or Crooked lane
plate: These Cups must be all of one size, and the bottom of each of them must
be set a little within the Cup; mark the following figure, for thereby they
are truly represented, both in form and bigness: it is noted with the letter
B. Also he must have four Balls made of Cork, about the bigness of small
Nutmegs. First he must practice to hold these Cork Balls, two or three of
them at once in one hand. The best place, and the readiest to hold one Ball, is
between the ball of the thumb, and the palm of the hand; but if you hold more
then one at one time, between your fingers toward the bottomes. The place to
hold a great Ball is between your two middle fingers; Remember in your play
always to keep the palm of your hand downward: After you have once learned to
hold these Balls handsomely, you may work diverse strange, and delightful
feats.

Some I have seen sit with they Codpice open, others play standing with a
Budget hanging before them* but all comes to one end.
But whether you seem to cast your Bal in the air, or into your mouth, or into
your other hand, yet still retain it in the same hand, still remembering to
keep the palm of your hand downward, and out of sight. Now to begin.

He that is to play must sit on the farther side of a Table, which must be
covered with a Garpet: partly to keep the Bals from rolling away, Some f^^ts
may with more grace be performed standing then siting. The manner of holding
the Cups will concease the ball that you retain in your hand.
and partly to keep them from rattling: likewise he must set his hat in his lap,
or sit in such manner as that he may receive any thing into his lap, and let
him cause all his spectators to sit down: Then let him draw his four balls,
and lay three of them upon the table, (and retain the fourth in his right
hand) and say, Gentlemen, here are three Balls you see, 1. Meriden, 2. Benedic,
and 3. Presto John, then let him draw his Cups and hold them all three in his
right hand also, saying, Here are also three Cups, saying, See there is nothing
in them, neither have they any false bottoms: Then say, See I will set them all
on a row, and clap them all on a row, and in clapping them down, convey the
Ball that you retained under the middlemost cup, saying as you set them down,
Nothing there, there, nor there. Then show your hand, and say, Gentlemen, you
see here is nothing in my hands, and say, Now to begin, and take up with your
right hand one of the three Balls that you laid down, and say this is the
first, and with that seem to put it into your left hand, and presently shut
your left hand, and being shut, clap it unto your ear, saying, This is for the
purging of the brain, Presto be gone, then move both the outmost Cups noted
with A, and B. with both your hands, saying, And there is nothing there, nor
there, and in the clapping them down, convey the Ball in your right hand under
the Cup noted B. Then with your right hand take up the second Ball, and seem to
put into the left hand (but retain it) shutting your left hand in due time:
then clap your left hand unto your mouth, seem to sup the bal out of your hand,
and make a face as if you swallowed it, then say, Presto, and that is gone you
see, and with your right hand move the Cup noted A saying, And there is
nothing, and in clapping it down convey the ball you retained, under it, so
have you conveyed into each Cup a ball. Then with your right hand take up the
third Ball, and seem to put it into your left hand, shutting it in due time,
and then reach it out from you, saying, vade courageous, and open your hand,
and blow a blast, looking up as if you saw it flying away, and say passa
courageous, and that is gone: then take up the Cups one after another, and say,
nevertheless Gentlemen, there is one, there is two, and there is all three
again: Then cover them and say, see you Gentlemen, I will cover them all
again. Then say now for the first, then with your right hand take up the first
Cup, and with your left hand take up the ball that is under it, saying, see, I
take him out, and in setting down the Cup again, convey the ball in your right
hand under it, then with your right hand take the ball out of your left hand,
seem to put it into your pocket (but retain it) saying, vade, that is gone into
my Po^ket you see, then take up with your right hand the second Cup, and with
your left hand take the Ball from under it, and say see, I take this out
fairly also, and in se^ti^g down the Cup, convey the Ball that you retained
under it, and then with your right hand take the Ball out of your left, and
seem to put it into your pocket, (but retain) saying, Iu^eo, and that is gone
into my pocket: then with your right hand take up the third and last Cup, and
with your left hand take the Ball from under it, and say, here I take my last
out, and in setting down the Cup, convey the Ball that is in your right hand
under it, and then with your right hand take the ball out of your left hand,
and seem to put it into your pocket (but retain it) and say vade, it is gone into
my pocket; then take up your Cups orderly, saying, Gentlemen here is one you
see, here is two, and here is all three again, and in setting down the last Cup
noted A. convey the Ball that you retained in your hand under it.



Then take up one of the three balls with your right hand, and seem to put it
under the Cup B but retain it, and then say by the powder of experience,
Iubeo, come away when I bid you under this Cup A, then take up B, and say, see
you sirs, he scorns to tarry under this Cup, but is crept under here: then
take the Cup A, and they will wonder how it came thither. Then say Gentlemen,
and you see here is but one, and in setting it down, convey that in your right
hand under it, then with your right hand take up the second Ball, and seem to
put it into your left hand, shutting your left hand in due time: then hold your
said left hand from off you, and pronounce these words with a Revoca stivoca
(open your hand tossing it up) that is gone, then take up the Cup A. and say,
see here they are got both together: Then say here are but two, and setting it
down, convey the ball you retained in your right hand under it, Then with your
right hand take up the third ball, and seem to put it into your left hand, and
shutting it in due time, saying, this is my last ball, vade, passa courageous,
(open your hand then, tossing it up, and staring after it) and that is gone you
see, then take up the Cup A, and say, here they are all three again.

Set your cups then on a row again, and under one of them, as D, convey your
fourth Ball which you retained in your hand, and lay the other three balls by.



Then with your right hand take up the first ball, and seem to put it into
your left hand, shutting your said left hand in due time, then as if you were
at dice, cast your left hand at the cup D, and blow after it, saying, vade pas,
and it is gone, then take up the cup noted A, and clap it upon the cup D, and in
clapping it on, convey the Ball you retained in your right hand upon the top of
the cup D.



Then take up the second Ball with your right hand, and seem to put it into
your left, shutting it in due time, and as you did before: now in like manner
seem to make the same to vanish with a word of command, then take up the cup
C, and clap it upon the cup A, and clapping it on, convey the Ball you retained
in your right hand, upon the top of the cup noted A,

So then you have conveyed under each cup a bal, then take up the third ball,
seeming to vanish it as the two former, but retain it, then show them under
each cup one, which will be very strange.

Then take one cup in your right hand, and clap it upon another, saying, see
Gentlemen I will set you one cup upon another, and in clapping it on, convey the
ball you retained in your right hand upon the top of the lowermost cup: mark
the figure following.



Then take up one ball, and seem to cast it in the air, and staring after it,
say vade, that is gone, then with your right hand take up the uppermost cup,
say, see here he is crept between my cups, and in clapping it down again,
convey the ball that you retained under it.



Then with your right hand take up the second bal and seem to put it into your
left hand, shuting it in due time: then open your left hand tossing it, say,
vade, and that is gone, then with your right hand take up the uppermost cup, and
say, do you see Gentlemen, they are snug'd like a young man and a Maid in bed
together, and in seting it down, convey the ball that you retain. Then with
your right hand take up the third ball, and seem to put it in your right hand,
but retain it, shutting your left hand in due time: then hold it from you; and
then open your hand, tossing it up and gaping after it, say Mountifilede,
mount, that is gone, and then take up the cup and say, here are all three
again. Then cover them again, and say single is nothing, then clap the third
cup upon them, but double is somewhat. Then may you seem to pull all the three
corks out of the top of the upper cup, causing them to vanish one after
another, as I have sufficiently taught you before, which may be performed by
that one ball that you retain in your right hand.

And lastly, take the uppermost cup, and set it down first by it self, then
with both hands nimbly hoisting the two other cups, shuffle them one upon
another, and the balls will not fall out, and so it will be thought that you
have pulled the three bals out of the bottoms of the two uppermost cups. I
could teach you to vary these feats a hundred ways, but I leave it to those
that intend to follow the trade.

How to make a great Ball seem to come through a Table into a Cup.
SEt one of your cups upon a Table, and take a good big stoole-ball out of your
pocket, and say clapping your hand with the ball in it under the Table, My
masters would you not think it a pretty trick that I should make this bal come
through the table into the cup: Then some one or other will take up the cup to
see if it be so; then hold the ball between your two middle fingers of your
right hand, stare him in the face, and say, nay but you must not move my cup
out of its place, while I have said my words of command: with that set your cup
in its former place, and in setting it down nimbly, convey the ball under it,
and say, He^ ^ortuna nunquam credo, vade courageous: Now see (say) if it be
there or not, which when they see they will imagine was conjured into it by
virtue of your words.

Other very pretty tricks with Balls.
Retain one small ball in your hand, and lay three other small bals upon the
Table: then with your right hand take up one of the three bals, and put into
your left hand, saying, There is one, then take up the second, and put that
into your left hand also, and therewith likewise put the ball you retained in
your right hand, saying, And there is two (yet you know there is three already)
and shut your hand in due time: then take up the third ball in your right hand,
and clap your right hand unto the upper part of your left arm, retaining the
ball firmly, pronounce these words: Iu^eo celerite^, come all into my hand when
I bid you. Then withdraw your right hand (holding the palm thereof downward)
saying, That Is gone Gentlemen: then open your left hand, and say, Here are all
three together, and lay them down on the Table.

Another.
TAke up one of the Bals in your right hand, and put it into your left, holding
it firmly between your for^finger and thumb of your said left hand. Then with
your forefinger and thumb of your right hand, (but be nimble) seem to pull one
ball out of another, which you may do by slipping the ball that you retained
in your right hand between the forefinger and thumb of the said hand, saying,
Thus by activity have I learned to do, out of one little ball for to make two:
and all of a bigness, then lay all four balls upon the table.

Another.
WIth your right hand take up one of the bals and seem to put it into the left,
but retain it, shutting your left hand in due time, and say, There is one: then
hold your hand from you. Then with your right hand take up another, saying,
Here I take another. Then pronounce these words, Mercus mercurus by the powder
of experience, Iu^eo; then open your left hand saying, That Is gone, and then
open your right hand and show them both together.

How to make a stone seem to vanish out of your hand
YOu must have a stone of a reasonable bigness, such as you may well hide in
your hand, sitting in such manner as I have formerly said, that you may receive
any thing into your lap, take this stone out of your pocket, saying, You see,
Gentlemen, here is a stone, a miraculous stone: Will you have it vanish, vade,
or go away invisible, which being said, withdraw your hand to the side of the
table letting the stone slip down into your lap, in which time stare about
you, saying, choose you whether. Then reach out your hand and say: Fortuna
va^iabilis, lapis in ae^timabilis, Iu^eo, vale, vade, courageous. Open your
hand, then tossing it up, and blow a blast, and look up, saying, Do you see it
is gone. Your looking up will make them to look up, in which time you may take
the stone again in the other hand, and slip it into your pocket.

Another
TAke your ston again out of your pocket, saying, here it is once again, and I
will give it unto any of you to hold, and reach your hand out unto them, and
opening your hand, say, Lo here it is. Then when any one is about to take it,
By (...) and nimblenesse of hand you may m^ke a piece of a ha^^s skin to sti^
and run about y^u as a li^e creature, and at last to vanish away, which will
be imagined to be ^ome Familia^ that you deal withal.
withdraw your hand to the side of the table, and make your conveyance as
before, in which time say, But you must promise me to take it quickly: Then
will he say, I will, then reach your hand being shut out unto him again, and
while he striveth, thinking to take it quickly, hold fast and say, Vade
courageous, cele^ite^ vade: in which time you take up the stone in the other
hand, and hold it from you. Then open your hand and say, lo, If you can hold a
pretty Less no faster, when you have her, I will not give a pin for your skill.

How to make a Card vanish, and find it again in a Nut.
TAke what Card you will, pill the printed paper from off it, and roll it hard
up, and make a hole in a nut, and take out the kirnell, and then thrust in the
Card, afterward stop the hole of the nut neatly with wa^e, this nut you must
have in readiness about you, and when you are in your play, call for such a
Card as you enclosed in your Nut, or else have one in a readiness, and say, You
see Gentlemen, here is such a Card: then wet it, and pill off the printed side,
roll it up, and in the usual manner convey it away: Then take your Nut out of
your pocket, eand give it unto one, and say crack that Nut, and tell me if you
can find the card there, which being found will be thought very strange.

Then have another such like Not, but filled with Ink, and stopped after the
same manner that your other Nut was, and give that unto another, and bid him
crack it, and see what he can find in that, and so soon as he has cracked
it, all the ink will run about his mouth, which will move more mirth and
laughter than the former.

How to seem to eat a Knife.
DEsire any one of your spectators to accommodate you with a Knife, which when
you have gotten, hold it in such manner as that you may cover the whole Knife
with both your hands, the end of the haft excepted, and set the point of it
unto your eye, and say, some body strike it in with his fist, but no body will,
because it is so dangerous a thing: then set your hands upon the Table, and
looking about you, say, why, what will no body strike it in, in which time let
the knife slip down into your lap. Then nimbly make as if you chopped it hastily
into your mouth, or to hold it in one hand, and strike it in with the other
(but nimbly) then make two or three sour faces, saying, some drink, some
drink: or else you may say, now some one put his finger in my mouth, and pull
it out again; some will say happily you will bite me, say, no I will assure you.
Then when he has put his finger into your mouth, he will pull it out and say,
here is nothing (this time is sufficient to convey the Knife out of your lap
into your pocket) say again, why, you have your finger out again, did you
think to pull the knife out? if that should be in my mouth, it would kill me.
The knife is here in my pocket, and with that take it out, and deliver it
again.

How to rap a Wag on the knuckles
TAke a ball and lay it on the Table, and holding a knife in one hand by the
blade, desire some body to take the bal that is upon the table and lay it upon
the haft of the knif, pretending that you will blow it thence invisibly, and
when he is laying it on, take him a good rap on the knuckles.

How to seem to swallow a long pudding made of Tin.
THis pudding must be made of Tin, it consists of twelve little hoops made
Tape-wise, so that they may almost fall one through another, and have a piece of
Canvas tied over the biggest end thereof, to the end it may not hurt your teeth
by hastily clapping it into your mouth. The figure whereof follows, and is
marked with a letter A. hold this pudding (for so it is called) privately in
your left hand with the Canvas end uppermost, and with your right hand take a
Bal out of your pocket, and say, If there be any Maid that has lost her
maidenhead, or old woman that is half out of conceit with her self, because
her neighbors deem her not so young as she would willingly seem to be, let
her come unto me, for this ball is present remedy: Then seem to put the Ball
into your left hand, but let it slip into your lap, and clap your pudding into
your mouth which will be thought to be the ball you showed them: Then incline
your head, and open your mouth, and the pudding will slip down at its full
length, which with your right hand you may strike up into your mouth again: do
thus three or four times one after another and the last time you may discharge
your mouth of it into your hand, and clap it into your lap without any
suspicion, so that you make two or three sour faces after it, as if it stuck
in your throat, and if you practice to smite easily with your fist on each side
of your throat, the pudding will seem to chinke as if it were lying in your
throat. Then say, thus they swallow Puddings in high Dutch-land, they slip down
their throats before their teeth can take possession of them.

How to seem to cut ones nose half off.
FOr the effecting of this feate, you must have a knife for the nonce, made
with a gap in the midst of the blade, as it is demonstrated in the following
figure noted with the letter A. You must conceal the notch with your finger,
and then wring it over the fleshy part of your nose, Note that in such feats
as this, it were necessary to have a piece of sponge with some sheep blood in
it to be retained privately.
and your nose will seem as it were half cut off with the knife.

How to seem to pull a rope through your nose.
YOu must have likewise for the effecting of this delusion, an Implement on
purpose. The figure whereof follows. It may be made of two elder sticks,
thrusting out the pith, and afterward glued together, the ends whereof must
have a piece of cork cut hollow, and glued over them: then must there be a
little whipcord put through them, the ends whereof must come out at two holes
made on the outward side of each elder stick.



Put this Trinket over the fleshy part of your nose, then pull one end of the
rope, and afterward the other and it will be thought that the rope comes
quite through your nose.

How to make a pile of Counters seem to vanish through a Table.
YOu must have for the performing of this feate, diverse counters having holes
cut out of the midst of them, then they must be glued together so many of them
as they may make a case sufficient to contain a Die: then glue one whole
counter upon the top of them, and have a box made of white Tin to fit them,
but let it be deeper than the glued pile of Counters, and make a cover for this
box. First, put into the box three loose Counters, then put in the glued pile
of Counters with the hole uppermost, then put into the hole a Die, and lastly
three other loose whole Counters and cover it. Draw this box of Counters, and
say, Gentlemen here is a box of Barbary gold, it was left me as a Legacy by a
deceased friend, upon condition I should employ it well and honestly. Now sirs
it was my fortune as I was traveling, to be benighted, and so forced to seek
for lodging, and as it happened, I took into an house of entertainment, where
calling for my Ostesse, I drew my stock, and said, what must I give you mine
Ostesse for my meat, drink, and lodging this night? My friend, quoth she, you
must give me three French Crowns; with that I uncovered my box, and set it
upon the Table (it must be done with the mouth of the box downward) took my
box from off the Counters, and delivered her three from the top, saying, there
they are; and casting my eye aside, I spyed a pretty less coming down the
stairs; Sweetheart, said I to her, what shall I give thee to lie with thee
this night? she replied, sir, for three French Crowns you shall: then I thrust
my box forward, If you lift the Box a little from the Table bearing it from
you, the three loose counters will come forth
and deliver her three from the bottom, saying there they are. But now said I
to my Ostesse, Ostesse, what will you say if with a trick I have, I make these
six Crowns to fetch all the rest through the Table? Sir, quoth my Ostesse, you
shall have your meat, drink, and lodging for nothing, and said the Less, thou
shall lie with me for nothing. Then I uncovered them, saying, but first let us
see whether they be here or no, and show them, covering them again. Then
(taking to those six Counters in my hand, other loose Counters I have ready in
my lap) I knock my hand under the Table, saying, Virtute lapidis, miraculosi
lapidis, jubeo vade, celeritate vade. Then I mingle my Counters as if they came
tumbling through the Table into my hand, afterward throw them on the Table,
saying, there be the Counters, then I take the box up, pressing the sides of
it with my forefinger and thumb (which will keep the glued pile of Counters
from slipping out) and let slip the glued Counters into my lap, and say, there
is none but a Die, casting the empty box unto them, who shall have all now, my
Ostesse or I?



A, the figure of the Box, BB the lid of the Box, C the pile of Counters glued
together, E the hole for the Die, D the Die.

How to seem to put a ring through ones cheek.
YOu must have two rings made of bra^se, silver, or what you will, of one
bigness, color, and likeness saving that one must have a notch cut through
it as it is represented by the figure following noted with X.



The other must be whole without a notch; show the whole ring, and conceal
that which has the notch, and say, now I will put this ring through my cheek,
and privily slip the notch one over one side of your mouth, and nimbly convey
the whole Ring into your sleeve, or conceal it in your right hand: then take a
small stick which you may have in readiness, and slip the whole Ring over it,
holding your hand over it about the middle thereof, and bid some body hold both
the ends of the stick fast, and say, see this Ring here in my cheek, it
turns round, and indeed it will seem to turn round if you stroke it nimbly
with your fingers: and while you perceive them to fasten their eyes intentively
upon that Ring, upon a sudden whip it out, and smite upon the stick therewith
instantly, concealing it, and whirling the other Ring, you hold your hand over
round about the stick, and it will be thought that you have brought that Ring
upon the stick which was before upon your cheek.

How to seem ^o thrust a Bodkin into your forehead.
YOu must have two bodkins, the one made like unto the other to outward
appearance, but let the blade of the one be made to slip up into the haft: let
the other be a true Bodkin: Conceal the false one and show the true, after
that you have showed it, convey it into your lap. Then take up the false one,
and reclining your head, make as if you thrust it very stiffly, making an
ill-favored face all the while. If you hold a p^ece of sponge in your hand
filled with some sheeps blood pressing it out, the bodkin being in your
forehead, as it were up to the hilt, it will cause the more astonishment and
admiration among the beholders. Instantly put up your Bodkin, and take your
handkercher, and wipe off the blood, and say, Iubeo vade vulnus a front.

How to put a Lock upon ones mouth.
YOu must have a Lock made for the nonce, the figure whereof follows, the one
side of its bow must be immovable as that marked with A: the other side is
noted with B, and must be pinned to the body of the Lock, as may appear at E, I
say it must be so pinned, that it may play to and again with ease. This side of
the bow must have a leg as C, and then turn into the Lock; this binding must
have two notches filed on the inner side, which must be so ordered that the one
may lock or hold the two sides of the bow as close together at the top as may
be, the other notch to hold the said parts of the bows a proportionable
distance asunder, that being locked upon the cheek, it may neither pinch too
hard, nor yet hold it so sl^ightly that it may be drawn off; let there be then
a key fitted unto it to unlock it, as may appear at D. And lastly, let the
bows have diverse notches filed in them, so the place of the partition when the
lock is shut home will be least of all suspected. By this figure and
directions you may fit your self of such a Lock, if so be you are desirous of
it.

The use of it.
YOu may cause some one to hold one tester edgelong between his teeth: Take
also another Tester and with your left hand proffer to set it edgelong between
a second man's teeth, pretending that your intent is to turn both into whether
of their mouths they shall desire, and that by virtue of your words and
circumstances which he shall no sooner essay to do, but you holding your lock
privately in your right hand with your forefinger over the leg C, may
presently slip it over the left side his cheek, and single lock it, which you
may do by pressing your said finger a little down after some store o^
entreaties: the Lock having hung on a while, produce your key by some device
(as by a confederate or some careless person) and unlocke it, but immediately
double lock it, for it will seem to be a true lock, nor after sight be
suspected for other.

How to make it freeze by the fire side.
THis feate cannot be performed at every time, but only in Winter, and at such
times as snow may be had, and he that will show it, must have in readiness an
handful of salt. The time serving, and the party provided, let him call for a
joynt-stoole, a quart pot, a handful of snow, a little water; and a short
staff or stick, first let him pour a little water upon the top of the
stool, and upon it let him set the quart pot, and put the snow into the pot,
the salt also, but privately, then let him hold the pot fast with his left
hand, and take the short stick in his right, and therewith churne the snow and
salt in the pot, as if one should churne for butter, and in half a quarter of
an hour the pot will freeze so hard to the stool, that you can scarcely with
both hands pull it off from the stool: there is a natural reason may be given
for this, which he that is a Scholar need not be told, and for a common Jugler
I would not have so wise as to know, therefore I omit it.

How to breath fire out of your mouth
THe performance of this trick consists in the rolling of the towe. After
you have made a roll in readi^esse, call for a pi^e of Tobacco, light it, and
take a whiste or two, you may stop it down with the end of your roll of tow,
retaining it privately in your hand: then deliver the Pipe to some body else,
and convey the tow into your mouth: then blow gently, and smoke and fire will
come forth of your mouth, which you may continue as long as you please, by
putting in more tow as it consumes.

How to d^aw ^ilius of any color out of your m^u^h, and to deliver it by the
^a^d.
YOu must provide you diverse sorts of Ribbin^, some black, some blew, some
green, some yellow measure it, and at the end of every yard make a slip knot,
then ^owle each colored ribben into a ball by it self, and dis^ose them about
you, that you may know readily which to take in an instant. When you are called
upon for so many yards of such a color, convey a ball of the same into your
mouth, and draw it out, remembering how many knots have slipped at your teeth,
then cut it off and deliver it.

How to make two bells come into one hand, ^aving put into each hand one.
THis feate must be performed with three bel^, you must put one bell into your
left sleeve, then put one bell into one hand, and another bell into the other
hand (they must be little morris bells) withdraw your hands, and privily convey
the bell in your left hand into your right hand: Then stretch both your hands
abroad, and bid two folks hold your hands fast, but first shake your hands and
say, do you hear them. The bell that is in your sleeve will not be known by
the racling, but that it is in your hand: Then say, he now that is the
arrantest Whoremaster or Cuckold of you both, shall have both the bells, and
the other shall have none at all: open your hands then, and show them, and it
will be thought that you dea^e by art magic.

How to make a Iugling book, or a ^ook of Waggery.
YOu must provide a paper-book in octavo, of what thickness you please; first
turn over seven leaves of it, and then upon both the open sides, draw or paint
the pictures of flowers, then turn over seven leaves more, and paint the very
same; do this until you have turned the book once quite over: Then unto the
farther painted leaves, paste a little stay of paper or parchment one directly
over an other: Then turn over the book again: and having turned every sixth
leaf, draw the pic^u^e of flower-de-lu^es, and then paste stays of parchment
upon them as you did upon the first; but these stays must all of them be a
little lower than the former. Then turn over the book again, and after the
fifth leaf, throughout the book is turned, paint horns, do thus until you
have painted the book full of pictures, only let there be one part of the
leaves fair paper: having thus finished the book, when you use it, hold it in
your left hand, and with your right hand, your thumb set upon the parchm^nt
stays, show them orderly and nimbly, but with a bold and audacious
countenance, for that must be the grace of all your tricks: say, this book
is not painted thus as some of you may ^uppose, but it is o^ such a property,
that whosoever blows on it, it will give the representation of whatsoever he
is naturally addicted unto, and then turn the book, and say, see its all ^aire
paper.

Bonus Genius, or Nuntius invisibilis, or Hiccius Doccius as my senior calls it.
YOu must have the figure of a man made of wood, about the bigness of your
little finger, as may appear by the figure noted C D, the head whereof noted
with A, must be made to take off and put on at pleasure, by means of a wire
that is in the neck, marked with B: also you must have a cloth cap with a
little bag within to convey the head into. The bag must be neatly made, that
it may not easily be perceived; show your man unto the company, saying, see you
here gentlemen, this I call my Bonus Genius, then show his cap, saying, and
this is his coat, say moreover, look now as steadfastly on him as you can,
nevertheless I will cousin you, for therefore am I come. Then hold your cap
above your face, and take your man in your right hand, and put his head through
the hole of the cap, as you may see at F, saying, now he is ready to go of any
message I have to ^end him; to Spain, Italy, or whither I will: but he must
have some thing to bear his charges, with that pull out your right hand from
under the cap, and therewith the body, (but privately) ^utting your right hand
into your pocket, as if you felt for money, where you must leave the body, and
take out your hand, and say, there is three crowns: Now be gone, then turn the
head about* and say, but he will look about him before he goes. Then say
(sett^ng your forefinger upon his crown) just as I thrust my finger down, so
he shall vanish, and therewith by the assistance of your left hand that is
under the cap, convey his head into the little bag within the cap: then turn
your cap about, and say, see here he is gone: then take up your cap, and hold
it up again, drawing the head out of the little bag, and say, hei genius meus
velocissimu^, ubi, and whistle. Then thrust the head up through the hole of the
cap, and holding the head by the wire, turn it about; then presently put head
and cap into your pocket.

Boxes to change Grain.
MAke one box of Wood, Tin, or Brass: let the bottom fall a quarter of an
inch into the box, and glue thereon a laying of Barley or such like grain:
draw the box with the bottom downwards, and say Gentlemen, I met a
Countryman going to buy Barley, and I told him I would sell him a pennyworth,
also I would multiply one grain into so many bushels as he should need, then
cast a Barly-corne into your box, and cover it with a hat, and in the cover^ng
it, turn the bottom upside down: then cause some body to blow on the hat,
then uncover it, and they will think strangely of it. You may make another ^o^
of wood like unto a bell to hold so much just as your former box w^ll, and
make a bottom unto this box of shoe sole leather, to thrust into the bottom
of the bell: then fill it with barley, and thru^t up the l^ath^r-bottome, for it
will keep the barley from fa^ling out, take this box out of your pocket, an^
set it down g^n^ly upon the table, and say, I w^ll not cause a^l the ^^rly to
go out of my measure into my bell, then with a hat cover the box that has
the barley g^ewed unto it, and in cov^ring it, turn it with the barley
down^war^: then say, first let us see whether th^re be nothing under the bell,
and clap it hard down upon the table, so the weight of the barley will thrust
the bottom dow^; then bid some one blow hard on the hat, then take it up,
where they will see nothing but an empty m^asure, then take up the bell, and
all the barley will pour out. Sweep it then presently into your hat or lap,
lest their busy prying may chance to discover your leather bottom.

How to vanish a glass of Beer.
TAke a low glass, fill it reasonable full of B^^r, and take a six-pen^e and
lay it down upon the table and set the glass of Beer upon it, Your fin^er
^op^ mu^t be ru^d a l^ttle with some green soft w^x and so you may do it
cleanly
and dipping your finger into the Beer, say, whether is the sixpence in, or
under the glass. Some will say perhaps it is under: then say, let'^ see, and
take up at once both sixpence and glass (hold the glass so that both your
hands may quite hide it) and let the glass slip plum-downe into your lap, then
make as if you threw it away, looking up after it. Then seem to blow your
nose, and let ^all the sixpence upon the table, saying, I am glad I have got my
money aga^ne: but now (say) what is become of the glass? then seem to take it
out of your pocket, saying, I am a good fellow, and would not willingly lose my
liquor, then drink in up, This is an excellent trick if it be swiftly and
neatly performed. Though you spill a part of the B^ere, it is no matter,
neither is it any disgrace unto it; besides you may put it off very well.

How to seem to cut off a man's head, it is called the decolla^ion o^ John
Baptist.
YOu must have a table with two good wide holes toward one end, also a cloth
on pu^po^e to cover the table with, so that the said covering may hang to the
ground round about the table; also this covering must have two holes made in
it, even with the holes of the table; you must also have a platter of wood for
the pur^ose, having a hole in the bottom to fit also unto the holes of the
table, and it must, as also the table, be made to take in two p^eces: having
these in readiness, you must have two boys; the one must lie along upon the
table with his back upward, and he must put his head through the one hole of
the table, cloth and al; the other must sit under the table, and put his head
through the other hole of the table, then put the platter about his neck, to
make the sight more dreadful to behold, you may form some loome about the
necks of them, making small holes in them as it were veins, and besmeare it
over with sheep blood, putting some blood also and little bits of liver into
the platter, and set a chafing dish of coals before the head, strewing some
brimston upon the coals; for this will make the head seem so pale and wan, as
if in very deed it were separated from the body. The head may fetch a gasp or
two, and it will be better. Let no body be present while you do this, neither
when you have given entrance, permit any to be meddling, nor let them tarry long.

How to make the face of a child to appear in a pot of water.
YOu must get a ball made of wood, and upon one half or side of it, there must
the face of a child be artificially carved: on the backside of this face
there must be made a hole, but not very deep; this hole must be filled with
lead, to the end that it may (the ball being cast into the water) sway the face
uppermost: then paint it lively with oil colors, and it is done. Note that it
ought not to be full so big as a tennis bal. Call ^or a wine quart-^ot filled
with fair water up to the neck, having your face in a readiness, concealed
in your right hand, take the pot in your left hand, and set it on the table,
and say, see you Gentlemen, here is nothing in the pot but water, with that
clap down the po^-lid with your right hand, and in clapping it down, sl^p the
fa^e i^to the pot, this you may do without any the least suspicion. Then cause
them all to stand off, and if they please, to mark you as narrowly as they
cap: with that put your hand into your pocket, and seem to take out a handful
of powder, and to strew it over the pot, saying Sarge celeriter, by the powder
of ex^erien^e, sarge, then bid them look what is there. After ^he same manner
may you make a Toad^ to appear, which will cause no small admiration.

A device whereby you may drink a Tunnell ^ull of d^inke, and afterward s^eme
to pour the same all out of your sleeve again.
YOu must get a double Tunnell, that is, two Tunnels ^o^^red one within the
other, so that you may at the little end pour^ a quantity of wine, water, or
any liqu^r. This Tun^ell you must ^ave r^ady filled before hand with whatsoever
liquor you ^lease call for some of the ^ame kind: then dr^w your Tunnel, and
setting your middle finger unto the bottom of it, bid some ^ody* or else do
you your self pour it full, and drink it up before them, and turn the ^road
end of the Tunnell downward, saying, Gentlemen, all is g^ne, and in a trice
turn your self about, and in turning, pronounce some terms of art, withdraw
your finger from the narrow end, and let all the liquor out that was between
the Tunnels, and it will be thought to be that which you drunk out of the
Tunnell, and so you may persuade them that it is the very same.

How to seem to make a tooth drop out with a touch.
You must have some great tooth in a readiness, as the tooth of a Hog, a
Calfe, or of an Horse; this you must retain privately in your right hand, and
with the same hand take out of your pocket a small cork bal, and having used
some Rhetoric to persuade them that it is of some excellent property, incline
your head and therewith touch some one of your farther teeth, and immediately
let the tooth that you held in your hand drop down, saying, and this is the
fashion of Mountebanks, Touch and take.

Another conceit to procure laughter.
TAke your ball in one hand, and the tooth in the other, and stretch your hands
as far as you can one from the other, and if any will, lay a quart of wine with
him, that you will not withdraw your hands, and yet will make both of them come
into either hand which they please: It is no more to do, than to lay one down
upon the Table, and turn your self round, and take it up with the other hand,
and your wager is wone, and it will move no small laughter to see a fool so
lose his money.

How to make two or three eggs dance upon a staff.
PRovide a good thick staff about two yards long, three parts whereof ought
to be made scoope-wise, or half hollow, like a basting-Ladle, the fourth part
must serve for the handle. At the end of the scoope must be made a hole, and
therein put a broad pin about the length of an egg, and it is done. Rest the
handle of this staff against your right thigh, and hold it with your right
hand near to the beginning of the scoope; lay an egg then into the scoope of
the staff, and turn your self round, bearing the staff now up, and anon
down, with the scoope side of it always upward, so the egg will tumble from
one end of the scoope unto the other, and not fall out. After the same manner
may you make two or three eggs by a little practice to wamble one after
another.

A merry conceit.
DEliver one piece of money with your left hand unto one, and to a second person
another, and offer a third to another, for he seeing the other receive money
will not lightly refuse: when he offers to take it, you may rap him on the
fingers with a knife, or somewhat else held in your right hand, saying that you
knew by virtue of your bonus genius, that he meant to have kept it from you.

How to knit an hard knot upon a handkercher, and to seem to undo the same
with words.
MAke one plain loose knot, with the two corner ends of a handkercher, and
seeming to draw the same very hard, hold fast the body of the said handkercher
(near to the knot) with your right hand, pulling the contrary end with the
left hand, which is the corner of that which you hold. Then close up handsomely
the knot, which will be yet somewhat loose, and pull the handkercher so with
your right hand, as the left hand end may be near to the knot: then will it
seem to be a true and firm knot. And to make it appear more assuredly to be
so indeed, let a stranger pull at the end which you hold in your left hand,
whilst you hold fast the other in your right hand; and then holding the knot
with your forefinger and thumb and the nether part of your handkercher with
your other fingers, as you hold a Bridle when you would with one hand slip up
the knot and lengthen your reins. This done, tu^ne your handkercher over the
knot with the left hand, in doing whereof, you must suddenly slip out the end
or corner, putting up the knot of your handkercher with your fore finger and
thumb, as you would put up the foresaid knot of your bridle. Then deliver the
same (covered and wrapped within the midst of your handkercher) to one to hold
fast, and after the pronunciation of some words of Art, and wagers laid, take
the handkercher and shake it, and it will be loose.

A notable feat of Fast and Loose; namely, to pull three beadstones from off a
Cord, while you hold fast the ends thereof, without removing of your hands.
TAke two little whipcords of two foot long a piece double them equally, so as
there may appear, four ends. Then take three great beadstones, the hole of
the one of them being bigger then the rest; and put one beadstone upon the eye
or bowte of the one cord, and another on the other cord: then take the stone
with the gr^atest hole, and let both the bowts be hidden therein: which may be
the better done, if you put the eye of the one into the eye of the other. Then
pull the middle bead upon the same, being doubled, over his fellow, and so will
the beads seem to be put over the two cords without partition, for holding
fast in each hand the two ends of the two cords, you may toss them as you
list, and make it seem manifest to the beholders, which may not see how you
have done it, that the beadstones are put upon the cord without fraud: Then
must you seem to add more effectual binding or those beadstones to the
string, and make one half of a knot with one of the ends of each side, which
is for no other purpose, but that when the Beadstones be taken away, the cords
may be seen in the case which the beholders supposed them to be in before.
For when you have made your half knot (which in any wise you may not double to
make a perfect knot) you must deliver into the hands of some stand^r by, those
two cords, namely, two ends evenly set in one hand, and two in the other, and
then with a wager and terms of, Art begin to pull off your Beadstones,
which if you handle nimbly, and in the end cause him to pull his two ends, the
two cords will show to be placed plainly, and the Bead-stones to have come
through the cords.

To burn a thread, and to make it whole again with the ashes the^eof.
TAke two T^ree^s or small Laces, o^ one ^oot in length a piece: row^^ up one
o^ them round, which will be then of the quantity of a ^eas^* be^^^w the same
between your forefinger and your thum^e. Then take the other thread and hold
it forth at length betwixt the forefinger and thumb of each hand, holding al
your fingers daintily, as young Gentlewom^n are taught to take up a morsel of
meat. Then let one out asunder the same thread in the middle; when that is
done, put the tops of your two thumbs together, and so shall you with less
suspicion receive the piece of thread which you hold in your right hand unto
your left, without opening your left finger and thumb, then holding these two
pieces as you did the same before it was cut, let these two be cut also asunder
in the midst, and they conveyed as before, until they be cut very short, and
then roll all those ends together, and keep that ball of short threeds before
the other in your le^t hand, and with a knife thrust out the same into a
candle, where you may hold it until the said ball of short threeds be burnt to
ashes. Then pull ba^ke the knife with your right hand, and leave the ashes with
the other ball betwixt the forefinger and thumb of your left hand, and with
the two thumbs and two fore-fingers together, seeming to take pains to rub the
ashes, until your thread be renewed, and draw out that thread at length, which
you kept all this while betwixt your forefinger and thumb. If you have
Legerdemain to bestow the same ball of thread, and to change it from place to
place betwixt your two fingers (as may be easily done) then will it seem very
strange.

To cut a Lace asunder in the midst, and to make it whole again.
PRovide a piece of the Lace which you mean to cut, or at the least a pattern
like the same, one inch and a half long, and keeping it double privily in your
left hand, betwixt some of your fingers near to the tops thereof, take the
other Lace which you mean to cut, which you may hang about ones neck, and draw
down your said left hand to the bowte thereof: and putting your own piece a
little before the other (the end, or rather the middle whereof, you must hide
betwixt your forefinger and thumb) making the eye or bowte which shall be
seen, of your pattern, let some stander by cut the same asunder, and it will
be surely thought that the other Lace is cut; which with words and rubbing and
chafing it, you shall seem to renew and make whole again. This, if it be well
handled, will seem miraculous.

How to seem suddenly to melt a piece of Coin with words.
YOu must have a box made of brass or Crooked-Lane plate, a double box, and
not above five quarters of an inch deep: in the midst must be the bottom,
and both ends must have covers to come over them. This box might be so neatly
made, that each lid might have a small bolt artificially contrived (which
though I could make my self, neither by words nor figures I can describe)
whereby the lids of the box might be locked fast on, that none but master
Jugler himself knows readily to open. In one end of this box have always in
readiness a resemblance of moulten silver, which you may easily make by mixing
an equal quantity of linfoyl and quicksilver together, which you shall thus
do: First, put your linfoyl in a crucible or Goldsmiths melting-pot, melt it,
and then take it from the fire, and put in your quicksilver, and stir both
well together, and it is done. Now the one end of your box being ready
furnished herewith, borrow a piece of coin of some one in the company, willing
him to give it some private mark whereby he may know it again to be his
own, then put it into the other end of the box, in the bottom whereof you may
have a little wax to keep it from rattling. Thus you may seem by virtue of
words to melt his money, and afterward to give it again to the party whole as
you received it from him.

A device whereby you may draw sundry liquors out of one seeming vessel, all
which shall be put in at one hole, and all drawn out of another.
YOu must cause a vessel of indifferent bigness to be made in form of a
Tun, having two partitions, so there will be three several parts: A B
signifies the first, C D ^he second, and E F the third, upon the top of this
Tun must be fast nailed a piece of wood turned round as G H, in the center
whereof must be erected a style, whose top must be made into a screw, in this
wood must also be made three holes toward the circumpherence, each hole having
a pipe inserted into it, which may extend themselves one of either into each
vessel, as you may see by the figure. I K signifies the first pipe, which
reaches into the first part A B, L.M, the second pipe that extends it self
into the second part noted C D, N O the third pipe that extends it self into
the third part of E F, each part also must have his vent, else you can neither
fill nor empty it, these are marked with the letter P Q R, upon the top of the
foresaid wood must be fastened a piece of liquored leather having three holes
in it answerable unto the holes of the wood, then upon the wood must be served
another snout whereby to fill each vessel with a several liquor, V the
snouts, S T a brass plate whereunto the snout is sodered, W the ser^e that
serves this snout upon the style in the turned wood G H.



Lastly, each vessel must have its pipe whereout you may draw the contained
liquor, which you may see in the figure, and then must there be served over
them another plate with a taper vessel, so by turning it about from one hole
to another, you may deliver each liquor apart whither of them you please.

A very strange trick whereby you may seem to cut a piece of Tape into four
parts, and make it whole again with words.
TAke a piece of narrow white Tape about two or three yards long; first present
it to view to any that may desire it, then tie both the ends of it together,
and take one side of it in one hand, and the other in the other hand, so that
the knot may be about the midst of one side, and using some circumstantiall
words to beguile your spectators, turn one hand about toward your self, and
the other from you, so shall you twist the Tape once, then clap the ends
together, and then if you slip your forefinger and thumb of every hand
between the Tape, almost as one would hold a skeine of thread to be wound,
this will make one fold or twist as may appear in the first figure, where A
signifies the twist or fold. B the knot, then in like manner make a second
fold about the line D C, as you may see by the second figure, where B
signifies the knot, C the first fold, A the second fold. Hold then your
forefinger and thumb of your left hand upon the second twist, and upon the
knot also, and the forefinger and thumb of your right hand upon the first
fold C, and desire some one of your spectators to cut all asunder with a sharp
knife at the cross line E D. When it is cut, hold still your left hand, and
let all your ends fall you hold in your right hand, for there will be a show
of eight ends, four above, and four below, and so the string will be thought
to be cut into four parts, as may be seen by the third figure, then gather
up the ends that you let fall into your left hand, and deliver two of the ends
(seeming to take them at random) unto two several persons, bidding them to
hold them fast, still keeping your left hand-fingers upon the twists or folds:
the (...) your right and left hand seem to tumble, and (...) a^l the ends
together that you had in your left hand, tw^st out all the ^lips or pieces
which are three, as you may see at A and B in the third figure; twist them all,
I say, into a little ball, and conceal it between some of your fingers of
your left hand, and crumble thereof on another confused heap: and after some
words said, with your right hand deliver this confused heap unto one of the
company, bidding him to hold it fast, saying, Hulla passa quick courageous,
fiat conjunctio: Then bid them look on it, who while they are greedily looking
after the event, you may with ease convey the ball or roll of ends into your
pocket, so will it be thought that you have made it whole by virtue of your
words. An excellent trick if it be gracefully handled, and a trick that cost
me more trouble to find then all the rest; this I have gone purposely to
observe, but returned as wise as I went.

A device how to multiply one face, and make it seem to be an hundred or a
thousand.
THis fear must be performed by a Looking-glass made for the nonce, the
figure whereof I have fully described, with the manner of making it, which is
thus: First, make an hoope or phillet of wood, horn, or such like, about the
wideness of an Halfe-Crowne piece, in the circumference, the thickness of
this hoope or phillet let be about a quarter of an inch. In the middle of this
hoope fasten a bottom of wood or brass, and bore in a decent order diverse
small holes about the bigness of small peafe, or phitches, then upon the one
side of this bottom set in a piece of Crystal glass, and fasten it in the
hoope close to the bottom; then take a quantity of quicke-silver, and prepare
it after this manner: Take, I say, a quantity as an ounce or two of
quicksilver, and put to it a little salt, and stir them well together, then
put to them some white wine vinegar, and wash and stir all together with a
wooden slice, then pour away the vinegar, and wash away the salt with fair
water made warm, then pour away the water, and put the quicksilver into a
piece of white leather, and bind it up hard, and so twist or strain it out
into an earthen pan, and it will be very bright and pure, then put so much of
this prepared quicke-silver into the phillet or foresaid hoope as will cover
the bottom; then let into the hoope another piece of crystal glass fitted
thereto, and cement the sides, that the quicksilver may not run out, and it
is done. The figure whereof I have here under-set; A represents the one side
that gives the form of one face to the beholders. B the other side that
multiplieth the beholders face, so often as there are holes in the middle
bottom, the use whereof I shall not insist upon, ^ince he that is verst in the
former feats will better conceive of himself to use it, then my words can
either direct or assist him.

Of diverse pretty Iuggling knacks.
THere are many feats able to beguile the simple, as to deliver meal, pepper,
ginger, or any powder out of your mouth after the eating of bread, which is
done by retaining any of these things stuffed in a little paper or bladder,
conveyed into your mouth, and grinding the same with your teeth. Item, a rush
through a piece of trencher, having three holes, and at the other side in the
third hole, by reason of an hollow place made betwixt them both, so as the
slight consists in the turning of the piece of trencher.

Feats by conveyance of money.
THe best place to dispose of a piece of money, is in the palm of the hand,
and the best piece for conveyance is a Tester, but with practice all will be
alike.

A notable trick to transform a Counter into a Groat.
TAke a Groat, or some less piece of money, and grind it very thin at the
one side, and take two Counters and grind them, the one on the one side, the
other on the other side; glue the smooth side of the Groat to the smooth side
of one of the Counters, joining them to close together as may be, especally at
the edges, which may be so filed, as they shall seem to be but one piece; to
wit, one side a Counter, the other side a Groat. Then take a little green wax,
and lay it upon the smooth side of the one Counter, as it do not much
discolor the Groat; and so will that Counter with the Groat cleave together,
as though they were glewed, and being filed even with the groat and the other
counter, will seem so like a p^rfect entire counter, that though a stranger
handle it, he shall not bewray it; then having a little touched your forefinger
and the thumb of your right hand with ^oft wax, take therewith this
counterfeit counter, and lay it down openly upon the palm of your left hand,
in such sort as an Auditor lays down his counters, wringing the same hard,
so as you may leave the glewed counter with the groat apparently in the palm
of your left hand, and the smooth side or the waxed counter will stick fast
upon your thumb, by reason of the wax wherewith it is smeared, and so you may
hide it at your pleasure, provided always that you lay the waxed side
downward, and the glewed side upward: then close your hand, and in or after the
closing thereof turn the piece, and so instead of a counter (which they suppose
to be in your hand) you shall seem to have a groat, to the admiration of the
beholders, if it be well handled.

An excellent feat to make a two-peny piece lie plain in your hand, and to be
passed from thence when you list.
PUt a little red wax (but not too thin) upon the nail of your longest
finger, and let a stranger put a twopeny piece into the palm of your hand, and
shut your fist suddenly, and convey the two penny piece upon the wax, which with
use you may so accomplish as no man shall perceive it. Then say, Aili^^, cafil,
zaze, hit, mel, and suddenly open your hand, holding the tips of your fingers
rather lower then higher than the palm of your hand, and the beholders will
wonder where it is become. Then shut your hand suddenly again, and lay a wager
whether it be there or no; and you may either leave it there, or take it away
with you at your pleasure.

How to transform any one small thing into another form by folding of paper.
TAke a sheet of paper and fold, or double the same, so as one side be a little
longer than the other: Then put a Counter between the two leaves of the paper
up to the middle of the top of the fold, holding the same so as it be not
perceived, and lay a groat on the outside thereof, right against the Counter,
and fold it down to the end of the longer side: and when you unfold it again,
the Groat will be where the Counter was, and the Counter where the Groat was,
so as some will suppose that you have changed the money into a Counter, and
with this many feats may be done.

How to convey money out of one of your hands into the other by Legerdemaine.
FIrst, you must hold open your right hand, and lay therein a Tester, or some
big piece of money, then lay thereupon the top of your long left finger, and
use some words of Art, and upon the sudden, slip your right hand from your
finger, wherewith you held down the Tester, and bending your hand a very
little, you shall retain the Tester still therein, and suddenly d^awing your
right hand through your left, you shall seem to have left the Tester there,
especially when you shut in due time your left hand. Which that it may more
plainly appear to be truly done, you may take a knife, and seem to knock
against it, so as it shall make a great sound: but instead of knocking the
piece in the left hand (where none is) you shall hold the point of the knife
fast with the left hand, and knock against the Tester held in the other hand,
and it will be thought to hit against the money in your left hand. Then after
some words of Art pronounced, open your hand, and when nothing is seen, it will
be wondered at, how the Tester came removed.

How to make a sixpence seem to fall through a Table.
YOu must have an Handkercher about you, having a Counter neatly sewed in one
of the corners of it: take it out of your pocket, and desire some body to lend
you a Tester, and seem to wrap it up in the midst of the Handkercher, but
retain it in your hand, and instead of so doing, wrap the corner in the midst
that has the Counter sewed in it, and then bid them feel if it be not there,
which they will imagine to be no other than the Tester that they lent you, then
bid them lay it under a hat upon the Table, and call for a Basin of water hold
it under the Table, and knock, saying, Vade, come quick, and then let the
sixpence fall out of your hand into the water. Then take up the hat, and take
the Handkercher and shake it, saying, that is gone, then show them the money in
the Basin of water.

How to seem to blow a sixpence out of another man's hand.
TAke a sixpence blow on it, and clap it presently into one of your spectators
hands, bidding them to hold it fast: Then ask of him if he be sure he have
it, then to be certain, he will open his hand and look. Then say to him nay,
but if you let my breath go off, I cannot do it. Then take it out of his hand
again, and blow on it, and staring him in the face, clap a piece of horn in his
hand, and retain the sixpence, shutting his hand your self. Bid him hold his
hand down, and flip the Tester between one of his cuffes. Then take the stone
that you show fears with, and hold it unto his hand, saying, By virtue hereof,
I will and command the money to vanish you hold in your hand, vade, now see:
when they have looked, then they will think that it is changed by the virtue of
your stone. Then take the horn again, and seem to cast it from you, retaining
it, and say, vade, and anon say you have your money again: He then will begin
to marvel, and say I have not, say then to him again, you have, and I am sure
you have it: Is It not in your hand? if it be not there, turn down one of your
sleeves, for it is in one I am sure, where when he finds it, he will not a
little wonder.

How to deliver to one man six pence, and to another, another six pence, and to
make both the testers come into one man's hand.
DEliver into one man's hand two testers even set instead of one, shutting his
hand immediately: Your finger must be rubbed wi^h wax, so you may del^d^ him
without any susp^tion.
then take another tester, and have in readiness a piece of horn cut even with
it. Clap the said tester into his right hand with the horn under it, The hard
p^essing of the money in the hand, will seem that the money is in the hand when
it is not, f^r a moment, ^^erefore be qu^ck.
staying the tops of your two middlemost fingers stiff upon the tester; so
bending his hand a little downward, draw your fingers toward you, and they will
slip the tester out of his hand, and shut his hand presently, who feeling the
piece of horn, will imagine it is the testers: then say, he that kissed a
pretty wench last in a corner, shall have both Testers in his hand, and the
other shall have none. This may also be performed without a piece of horn,
wringing one tester in the palm of the hand, and taking it away with your
thumb being wax^d; for the hard wringing the money in the hand will make the
party believe he has it, when he ha^h it not.

Conveyance of Cards and Dice.
THere are multitude of delightful feats which may be performed by an orderly
placing, facing, shuffling, and cutting of cards usually played withal. Also a
number of other strange feats may be showed by cards and dice, such as may be
purposely made. The cards may be made half of one print, and half of another;
so by holding them diverse ways, sundry things may be presented each contrary
to other. For example, with four of the ^ame Cards purposely made, and holding
them accordingly, you shall present eight several things. Now for the Dice the
cunning is in forging them, and a ready retaining or throwing two among three,
or one with two: they must, I say, be forged bigger toward one side than ^he
other, so that the weight of one side may draw up the other. Other some may be
made flatter being furnished with such like. And having learned to retain them
handsomely and readily, you may have the game at command, and know before hand
what will be your cast, and so vi^ upon it too. Moreover, for the Cards there
are diverse other tricks, of which those that are cheaters make continual
practice, as nipping them, turning up one corner, marking them with little
spots, placing glasses behind those that are gamesters, and in rings for the
purpose dumb shows of some standers by. But I will not stand on discovering
these, for in this our cousening age there are too many so expert herein, that
they maintain themselves better than many an honest man with a lawful trade
and calling. Only take this by the way, Those that have money in their purses,
let them beware of Carding and Dicing, lest they wish they had, when it is too
late. As for my own part, I Will never play for that I am sure of already: if any
will play with me upon other terms I am sure I shall lose nothing by the
bargain.

Of Confederacy.
SOme there are that have said I writ not sufficiently of this part in the
former Edition; I rather think the cause was they thought they had too little
for their money. Nevertheless I will to give every one their desired content,
and deliver my mind more fully herein, and it may be, which I most desire, they
may learn to avoid the company of roving gamesters, cheaters. I mean that
frequent the highways, and principal Towns and places of resort thereabouts;
for they are of the same manner, though for a worser end. First therefore by
this word Confederacy is meant, a kind of Combination, or making an agreement
or covenanting among sundry persons for the accomplishment of one and the
selfsame bu^inesse: understand me aright; All these being very well known
each to other (at least the design as may appear by their agreement
thereabout) do so estrange themselves as if they had never seen each other
before. And to the end that they might perform their design, not giving any
the least suspicion to any of the beholders, I will give you an instance or
two, whereby I shall give you sufficient information for the more ready
conceiving of every particular in this nature when and wheresoever you see them
performed.

How to cast a piece of money away, and to find it in another man's mouth,
pocket, or pu^se.
THe Jugler calls for some one piece of coin, as a tester or a shilling of any
one in the company, he wills him to mark it with what mark he will, then he
takes it, and casts it away, and comes to his confederate (who is funished
beforehand with the like piece of coin marked with the very same mark) and
bids him deliver the money out of his pocket, purse, or if he say the word, his
mouth; for this is concluded of beforehand. Now this confederate to make the
matter seem more strange, will fume and fret, asking how he should come by it,
till having found the mark, he will confess it be none of his, wondering at
his skill how he should send it thither: and all the rest be taken with a real
administration of his extraordinary cunning.

How by the sound of a Counter philliped to tell what side is uppermost,
whether cross or pile.
THe Jugler draws a Counter out of his pocket, and says to the company, See
here is a Counter, take it who please, and let him phillip it up and I will by
my cunning tell you whither cross or pile be uppermost by the very found, for
you shall hood-winke me. Now there are three or four or more confederates in
the place, who seeming strangers as well as the rest, will be very importunate
to have the philliping it, and before one of these shall have it, who by some
sign of the fingers or countenance (foreknowne to the Jugler) do give him
information after he is demanded. Of the same nature is that trick formerly
mentioned in the book, and called, The decollation of John Baptist.

To make one dance naked is a trick of the same nature, for the party before
hand is agreed to do it, and also the manner and circumstances: So that the
Jugler to blind the people, pronounces sundry words to such a person, he then
begins to rave like a mad man, and put his clothes off with a kind of violent
carelessenesse, though, God knows, the party knows as well what he does, as
your self that reads it.

After the same manner shall you know what money another has in his purse, and
casting money into a pond, and finding it under a stone or threshold in another
place. Also to make a piece of money to leap out of a cup and run to another,
by means of a small hair fastened to the money, which hair the Confederate
guides, with a multitude of such like strange feats, which may seem impossible
to the judgment of the common people to be effected without the assistance of
the devil, or some familiar, which to nominate is neither needful, nor will
my occasions permit so much leisure as to do it.

How to make a bellowing noise like an Ox, of a Dog and Cat fighting
together, or of two Mastiffes fighting together.
THis I saw once or twice performed, and to my knowledge not above. It was a
lusty young fellow that did it with a cloth cast over his head which reached
down to his feet, all was to beguile the people, for he pretended that this
sound came out of his belly; he had a full and strong voice, and had practiced
a good while, and another man of the like making may easily do as much. For
his nostrils he stopped with his forefinger and thumb, and closed the other part
of his hand over his mouth as I saw him once uncased. Another man I saw at the
same time, eat half a dozen quick charcoal, but this is not to be attempted by
every one: For some cannot eat their meat very hot; others there are that
cannot away with meat except it be boiling hot, and they are of that
disposition, I should have said rather constitution, that they will not stick
to take meat as it is boiling out of a pot with their bare hands, and yet feel
no extraordinary heat.

I ^ave here set down kind Reader, not only all u^uall feats that either my
self have seen or heard of, but diverse others also which I am sure were never
in print, nor as yet performed by any I could ever hear of except my self,
and all to give thee thy full content: and take thus much from me, If thou
rightly understand this, there is not a trick that any jugler in the world can
show thee, but thou shall be able to conceive after what manner it is
performed, if he do it by a slight of hand, and not by an unlawful and
detested means. That there are such it is not to be doubted of, that do work
by unlawful means, and have besides their own natural endowments the
assistance of some familiar, whereby they many times effect such miraculous
things as may well be admired by whomsoever shall either behold or hear tell of
them. I could give an instance in one whose father while he lived was the
greatest jugler in England, and used the assistance of a familiar; he lived a
Tinker by trade, and used his fears as a trade by the by; he lived, as I was
informed, always betattered, and died for ought I could hear in the same
estate. I could here, as I have instanced in this man, so give you his name,
and where he lives, but because he has left the bad way, and chose the
better, because he has amended his life, and betook himself to an honest
calling, I will rather rejoice at his good, then do him any the least disgrace
by naming him to be such a one. If here be any ask my name, let them know I am
not bound to tell them. If they ask why I have writ this Pamphlet, it is to
delight them: let them excuse me for the one, and thank me for the other; and
it may be if time will give so much leisure, I shall hereafter spend my wits
upon some better Subject.

FINIS.

