A SANCTVARY FOR HONEST MEN.

OR An Abstract of Humane WISDOM.

Containing, A certain way leading to a perfect knowledge of MAN, and
directing to a discreet Carriage in the whole course of our Humane ^ondition.

Collected and composed By Io: HITCHCOCK Student in the Middle Temple.

Virtus est vitium fugere, and sapientia scire
Quid veru^ atque decens, quid fas, quid and vule, quid non.
LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Thomas Nort^n at the sign of the Kings
head in Paul's Churchyard. 1617.

TO THE right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of PEMBROKE, Lord HERBERT of Cardiffe,
Marmion, and S. Quintin, Lord CHAMBERLAIN to his MAJESTY, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the GARTER, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
TWo things (right Honorable) are usually the Apologicall subjects of most
dedications, the worthiness of the Patron, and the selfe-distrusting
insufficiency of the Writer; the one concerns me, the other your HONORABLE
SELF, whom each generous Spirit has so justly made the aemulated pattern of
true Nobility and Virtue that I could not easily contain my self, but was
inwardly constrained with an affectionate desire to dedicate this small mite of
my poor endeauours, this handful of Morality unto you, though no desert in my
self can ever be worthy enough to make me known to your HONOR, nor any
thing so well handled in this concise volume, but may either be controuled by
your riper judgment, or else be corrected by the integrity of your life: yet
(assuring my self that your generous and truly ennobled mind will willingly
entertain whatsoever is well intended) I presume to shelter this little
compendious Tract under your Honorable patronage, sic non Zoilum metuo, non
inuidiam.

Your Honors in all sincerity of duty most humbly affectionate, Io: Hitchcock.

To the READER.
IT was not my purpose (captious or indifferent Reader) to send this little
Antidote into the hungry jaws of the world which was prepared only for my
own diet, but the preuayling importunity of friends (which commonly serves
others for excuse) was to me a necessity: therefore since this dish is now come
to be served to thy Table, and so to be censured by thy well or ill
distinguishing palate (I mean thy rash or sounder judgment) let me advise
thee, if thou mean to be nourished by it, first to ruminate and chew it
well, and afterward to concoct it thoroughly before thou reject it as an
excrement; and then if any thing herein relish thee feed heartily, and welcome;
but if this distaste thee, either leave it friendly, or dish out thy own.
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.

The Abstract OF Humane Wisdom.
The first part of this Book teaching the knowledge of our selves.
WISDOM, Wisdom in general distinguished
(howsoever we understand it) is a singular and more than ordinary quality or
habit of the mind. And the word is diversely taken; first Vulgarely, (though
sometimes improperly) for an extraordinary measure of sufficiency in
whatsoever, be it good or evil. And in this sense a man may be said to be
wise as well in those things that are wicked and devilish, as those that are
honest and laudable.

Secondly it is taken Morally (and indeed more properly) for a discreet
government of the entire man in things that are good, honest, and profitable.

Thirdly, it is taken Theologically, for the knowledge of heavenly things, or
for a supernatural gift of grace infused by the Spirit of GOD.

So that from hence we may easily perceive three sorts of Wisdom, Divine,
Humane, and Mundane, correspondent to GOD, Nature pure and entire, Nature
vitiated and corrupted.

But (to omit the wisdom which is Divine and Metaphysicall, as also that which
is Mundane and worldly; the one as too high and above the sphaere of Morality;
the other as too base and unworthy to fill up the room in this little Treatise)
the only subject of this Tract is that which is Humane, and teaches the
knowledge and government of our selves as we are men in our humane condition.

Humane wisdom described. 1. negatiuely.
And it is not (as some suppose) an ad^ised carriage and discretion in our
affairs and conversation, for this is only outward and in action, and may be
without essential honesty or piety: nor (according to others) a singular,
strict and Stoicall austerity in opinions, words, manners, and fashion of life;
for this is rather extrauagancy and madness: 2. positiuely.
But (in a word) it is a sweet and regular managing of the soul by the law of
reason; or an exact and profitable rule by which a man is able to direct and
guide his thoughts, words, and actions with integrity, decency, and order.

And it may be attained by two means; How it is attained.
the first is Natural, consisting in the good temperature of the seed of the
Parents, the milk of the Nurse, and the first education. The second is
acquired by industry and the study of good books, and conferring with honest,
judicious, and wise men.

NOw this Humane wisdom (which is the subject of this tract, The division of
the subject.
and the excellency of man as he is man) contains two parts; the first is
Theorike, showing the knowledge of our selves, both of the inward and outward
man: the second Practike, for the well ordering of our selves after this
knowledge, by following or flying that which is good or evil.

Man two ways considered.
For the better knowledge of our selves we may consider man two ways; first
Naturally, by the composition of his parts, by his difference from other
creatures, and by his life. Secondly Morally, by his humors and conditions,
and by the difference of one man from an other.

IN the consideration of man by the composition of his parts it is easy to
understand that every man is composed of a body and a soul; The first natural
consideration of man.
therefore it is necessary and in some sort conducible to wisdom to have (at
the least) a general knowledge of our bodies, because the inclinations of the
mind (according to philosophy) most commonly follow the temperature of the
body.

But (not to stand upon the long connection of the inward and outward parts of
the body, being more pertinent to Physic and Anatomy then this present
discourse) the brain is the chiefest part that makes for our purpose, and most
needful to be known, because from hence proceeds the whole wrack or
welfare of a man according to the good or ill temperature thereof.

The brain.
For this sovereign part nature has carefully provided as the queintest piece
of her workmanship; and therefore it is curiously enclosed within two skins,
the one dura matter, something hard and thick; the other pia matter, very thin
and soft; within which is the brain composed of an oily matter delicate and
subtle, wherein if the heat and cold, dryth and moisture be well and
proportionably mixed, that man is admirably temperd, and (according to nature)
happily borne, strong, healthy, wise, and judicious: therefore as soon as the
body becomes organicall, the soul makes choice of this part for her chiefest
mansion, where she may best exercise her faculties, which are especially three,
a vegetative, The faculties of the soul.
sensitive, and intellectiue faculty.

The Vegetative has a threefold virtue, The vegetative faculty.
Nutri^iue for the attraction, concoction, and digestion of the victuals,
retayning the good and expelling the superfluous: Extensiue for the
proportionable enlarging and extending of all the parts of the body; and
Generatiue for the conservation of the kind.

The sensitive.
The Sensitive (according to the number of the senses) has a fiuefold virtue,
whereby every sense by his organ and instrument distinguishes and judges of
his own proper object, as the sight of colors, the hearing of sounds, the
smell of odours, the taste of savors, the touch of wha^soeuer is tangible.

The faculties of the intellectiue of humane soul.
The Intellectiue (which is only proper to man) has three principal faculties
seated in three closets of the brain, where (according to the most embraced
opinion) they exercise their operations not distinctly and apart, but in common
all three together; the Imagination serving to conceive and apprehend the
images of things; the Understanding to examine and try by the touchstone of
reason the verity and quality of the thing conceived; the Memory to retain and
keep whatsoever we hear, see, or read.

The Imagination is commonly The imagination.
strongest in young men, by reason of the fervent heat of the brain whereby the
humors are rarefied and purified; the Understanding ripest in old men,
Understanding.
which commonly excel in maturity of judgment by reason of the drynes of the
brain; Memory.
the Memory is most retentiue in children, by reason of the abundance of
moisture and oily substance fit for impression and retention.

The order and causes of the passions.
Now from these faculties of the soul proceed all the stormy tempests or quiet
calmes in the whole life of man; either we sail securely by the judicial
stern of the understanding, or else we are carried headlong into the turbulent
sea of passions by the furious winds of our rash imagination and inconsiderate
will. For when the imagination is corrupted, either by the miss conceit of the
senses that conceive not things aright as they are but as they seem to be, or
by a presumptuous and preiudicate opinion grounded upon the erroneous report of
the vulgar, the will is presently possessed with a rash resolution, and begins to
act and put in practice whatsoever the imagination upon the information of the
senses has conceived to be good or evil; and so (either not taking counsel
of the judgment and understanding at all, or else deceiving it with a
superficial appearance of good or evil) it begins presently to move the
power concupiscible and irascible, causing us to love, hate, fear, hope,
despair, and the like; so that all our passions arise immediately from the
will, being moved with an outward appearance and opinion of good or evil.

The will.
Now the will is sharpened and dulled by difficulty and fascility, rarity and
abundance, absence and present fruition: and when it is moved with the
semblance of good, The division of the passions.
this passion is Love; and if it be present, it is Pleasure and Joy; if to come
Desire, and stirs up in our hearts Hope and Despair: but if the will be
moved by the semblance of evil, this passion is Hate; and if it be present in
our selves it is Sorrow and Grief, in others Pity and Compassion; and if it
be to come it is Fear, and and stirs up in our hearts Choler, Envy,
Jealousy, Revenge, Cruelty.

Love (which is the first and most natural passion) is either the love of
greatness and honor, Love in general divided.
which is Ambition; or of riches, which is Covetousness; or of carnal
pleasure, which is Concupisc^nce.

Ambition.
Ambition is a thirsty and gluttonous desire of honor and preferment, yet
natural by reason of the insatiability of our nature, which is imperissemper
auida, always greedy of authority, and it is most commonly lodged in generous
spirits that are audacious to undertake high and difficult attempts.

Covetousness.
Covetousness is an immoderate care of heaping up riches, not respecting the
honesty or laudablenesse of the means whereby they are gotten; for lucri bonus
est odor ex ^e qualibet, the sent of gain is sweet though it come from a
Iakes. This passion is commonly inthroned in vulgar and degenerous minds, that
fear poverty as a serpent, and adore riches as a God; and therefore they make
haste by all possible means to be wealthy, by extortion, usury, bribery, and
what not? rather serving their riches than enjoying them, and are always poor
in heaps of gold.

Carnal Love or Concupiscence is terminated ^n the mutual pleasure of both
Sexes, Concupiscence.
a thing natural and indifferent ^n all, and neither in it self nor in the
action vicious nor ignominious, but in the unchaste and immoderate use thereof,
and the bad means of obteyning it: sic mod^ magis quam re ipsa labora mus, the
way to attain i^ does more trouble us the^ the thing it self.

Passions arising from an appearing good.
And these are the thre^ branches of the tree o^ Love, which are formed upon the
object of a^ appearing good: Now if we have the thing beloved in our present
possession we are wonderfully glad and rejoice ^ and then this passion i^
called Joy, Joy.
which is an excessive pleasure arisin^ from the delight we tak^ in the thing
obtained, making us commonly merry and iocund: But if it be not in our present
possession (being a thing in our conceit simply good) we endeavor by all
means possible to atcheiue it; this is Desire, Desire.
which is an eager care to obtain the thing that seems good unto us, making
us commonly diligent and painful in the pursuit thereof; so that if we see
any likelihood of obteyning the thing desired, we comfort on our selves with a
continual expectation of the fruition thereof; and this is Hope, Hope.
which is nothing but a credulous assurance of enjoying our desire: But if we
see no probability of getting that which we seek for, we begin presently to
droope in our affections, and desist to seek any farther means for the
obteyning thereof; and this is Despair, Despair.
which is a distrustful opinion grounded upon the impossibility of obteyning
our desire.

Passions arising from an appearing evil estate.
But contrarily when any thing presents it self unto us which seems or
appears to be evil, we presently loath and contemn it; and then this
passion is called Hate, which is a disdainful conceit of an appearing evil;
so that when upon the appearance of it we conceive it to be evil (and therefore
hate it) we happily stand in doubt that it may sometime come upon us; this is
Fear, Fear.
which is a timorous apprehension of an evil to come, causing us to endeavor
to shun and avoid it; and if we find this evil in our selves which we so
much hate and fear, we are much perplexed and afflicted; and this is Grief,
Grief.
which is a deep impression of the greatness of the evil that torments us,
upon the conceit whereof the heart is presently surprised and dejected, and
the spirit dulled and infeebled, so that we can do nothing for the present but
blubber our faces, hang down our heads, and fix our eyes upon the ground:
sometimes it is more violent, and bereaueth us of the use of discourse, reason,
understanding, and quite extinguisheth the faculties of the soul, and
sometimes life it self. But when we see any evil befall an other we are not
so violently afflicted, but are moved with a kind of passionate remorse, and
this is called Pity: Pity.
which is an effeminate fellow-feeling of the evils that befall an other.

THE other bitter streams of this troubled fountain of Hate are these,
Choler, Envy, Jealousy, Revenge, Cruelty.

Choler is a furious motion of the mind, Choler.
arising sometimes from lightness in believing, a tender niceness of nature,
ouer-precise curiosity, or a love of trifles; but most commonly from an opinion
of contempt or abuse either in word, deed or countenance. This passion is most
incident to children, sick persons, and old folks by reason of the weakness
of their spirit, for invalidum omne natura querulum est, every thing that is
weak is subject to disquiet.

Envy.
Envy is an effect of Hate, causing us to think every thing too much or too
good, that an other whom we hate, does enjoy; hinc vicinum pecus grandius vber
habet, This Envy has, that all in whom it is bred
Still think their neighbors ox is better fed.


Jealousy.
Jealousy is a doubting opinion or a mistrustfull conceit that an other
enjoys that which we fear or desire, and therefore we always lay in
garrison with a continual and euer-watchfull care to find and prevent it.

Revenge is a thirsty desire of satisfaction for a wrong done to a man's person
or reputation in word or deed, Revenge.
arising commonly from grief or choler by a conceit of the greatness of the
injury that is offered: for so tender we are of a wrong, that we esteem
revenge sweeter then life it self, and therefore we seek it amidst a
thousand dangers.

Cruelty is a thing base and inhumane, Cruelty.
and therefore by the Latins fitly called feritas, because it makes us forget
all humane mercy and compassion, and takes delight in blood and murder, not
respecting the weakness or unworthiness of the enemy, nor the equity of the
cause.

The second natural consideration of man.
IN the second natural consideration of man (which is by his difference from
other creatures) we may note his worthiness and excellency; first because man
is the image of GOD, formed upright, and always looking up to heaven, as the
only place and haven of his rest and happiness: Secondly because he is the
perfection and quintessense o^ nature, being all naked, and (by reason of the
thin and delicate temper of the humors) most beautiful; which beauty is
inthroned especially in the face or visage, the incendiary of love, the seat
of laughter and kissing, and the looking-glass of the soul, because it is ap
to declare our inward motions and passions, as joy when we look cheerful,
grief and anger when we look dull and frowning, shame when we blush, fear
when we wax pale, and the like. Thirdly we may see the excellence of man by
the praerogatiue supremacy that God has given him over the fowls of the air,
the fish of the sea, and the beasts of the field; wherefore he is endued with
reason, understanding, and judgment to govern both himself and them: So that
man being a demi-God above other creatures, it should be a shame for him to be
taught by them to moderate his appetite and pleasure in eating, drinking, and
carnal copulation, for even in these and many other things the very beasts
excel us.

The third natural consideration of man.
IN the third natural consideration of man (which is by his life) we should
take notice first of the shortness thereof, being in the course of nature but
thirty or for^y years at the most by reason of the half that is spent in
sleep. Secondly of the vices we are naturally prone unto; in our youth unto
temerity, unbridled liberty, and an insatiable desire of pleasure naturally
proceeding from the strong and vigorous heat of the blood; and in old age to
proteruitie proceeding from infirmity, superstition from curiosity, a conceit
of much knowledge from long experience, a sottish avarice from the fear of
poverty, a contempt or fear of death from the love of the world. Therefore
since these vices are naturally incident unto us, we should study to prevent
them before they come upon us, and take care to spend our life well, because it
is short, because it is uncertain.

The moral consideration of man.
TO attain yet to a more perfect knowledge of our selves we must consider man
morally, first by his humors and conditions, secondly by the difference of one
man from an other.

In the consideration of man by his humors and conditions we may note his
vanity, weakness, inconstancy, misery, presumption.

The vanity of man we may see first imaginarily in his thoughts; Vanity.
one plotteth how he may make himself famous, an other how he would live if
he were a great man, an other what kind of gesture does best become him,
another museth how men will speak of him when he is dead, with what pomp they
will celebrate his obsequies, and the like. Secondly we may see the vanity of
man really in his actions if we mark how some torment and vex themselves in
triuiall matters that are unworthy of their care, how violent they are for the
ill flying of a hawke, the running of a dog, or if they be any way crossed in
their sports; or if we consider what an age of time some men consume in
learning to sing, to dance, to manage a horse, and the like, never seeking
that which is sollid and more necessary how to live well and commodiously, but
like Aesops dog omitting the substanc for a shadow. Thirdly we may see the
vanity of man in the tickling pleasure and felicity that some men take in
things collateral and impertinent, that are ^n themselves neither vicious nor
much commendable; as some, if they can but complement with a grace, speak
mouingly, and court their Mistress with a plausible facility, O they are men
above the Moon, and as proud as Alexanders horse of his golden trappings.

The weakness or imbecility of man we may perceive first in our desires,
Weakness.
either not being able to desire and choose that which is best, or disliking
that we have chosen; Secondly in the use of things, being not able to make the
best of them, because we know not their true and simple nature; Thirdly in our
best actions, quod non bonum been facimus, in that we do not the good we do
after a good manner; Fourthly in the nice kind of life that some men addict
themselves unto; they mue up themselves at home, and never see the face of a
public assembly, but live as it were in a well or a bottle, and therefore are
unfit to be employed for the common wealth, because they see nothing clearly,
but a far off and through a hole, and understand only by tradition and report.
Fifthly in the selfedisabling fashion of most men that enthrall their judgment
and understanding under the banner of authority, and approve of nothing
without Aristotle and Plato or an ipse dixit for their opinion.

The Inconstancy of man we may easily see if we note how wavering we are in
all our actions, Inconstancy.
we desire what we rejected, and reject what we lately desired; we choose, and
we dislike our choice; we love, and presently we hate what we loved, every
hour we change our decree; so that in this respect man may well be said to be
prorsus aliud a se ipso, quite different or an other thing from himself.

Misery.
The misery of man we may note first outwardly, in our shameful coming into
the world, the feebleness of our infancy, the infinite company of diseases we
are subject to in our youth, especially hot and burning maladies, by reason
of the infla^mation of the blood; and deliration and dottage in our old age,
by reason of the languishment of the spirits; Secondly inwardly, in the
imagination that with continual expectation praeoccupateth evils ^o come; in
the understanding that is dull and ^ncapable of high and weighty affairs, and
blind in discerning the verity of opinions; in the memory that continually
retains the evils that annoy us; in the will that is headlong and rash to
execute any thing without pondering whether it be good or evil.

The presumption or arrogance of man we may note first in respect of other
creatures, Presumption.
in that we vilify and debase them too much as if they were not the
workmanship of God; Secondly in respect of man our associate and companion, in
that we scorn to learn one of another, every man thinks he can see far
into a millstone, and therefore we peremptorily believe or misbeleiue that which
at the first sight seems true or false unto us, whereupon we presently
begin to condemn or approve whatsoever we have believed or misbeleeued, and
go about to persuade others either to receive it as a maxim, or reject it as
absurd. Thirdly in respect of God and Nature, in that in the prosperous
success of our worldly affairs we attribute nothing wholly to the free gift
and goodness of God, but to our own endeauours and worthiness, and the
necessity of Nature; we think the Sun must needs shine, the rain fall,
and the earth of necessity yield her increase only for us; So that although
man in his whole life be nothing but a bundell of vanity, weakness,
inconstancy, misery, and a world of infirmities, yet he is most proudly
presumptuous, and presumptuouslie proud, like a beggar that glories in his
stinking rags, and lyce that continually annoy him.

The second moral consideration of man.
SEcondly (to know^ our humane estate the better) we must consider man by the
difference of one man from an other. Difference of men in respect of the climate
First in respec^ of the climate where they live which is powerful both in the
outwar^ complexion, and the inward nature and disposition; Some men are in
color sanguine and phlegmatike, of body strong, of stature big and tall, but
weak in mind, blockish and stupid, as commonly those in the Northern parts
of the world, by reason of the inward natural heat which in them is most
fervent because the coldness of the circumstant ^aire incloseth the heat and
drives it to the inward parts, and produces these effects; contrarily others
are black and melancholic, less of stature, but more ingenious and wise, as
those in the Southern and hotter parts of the world where the vigor of the
external heat does relaxe and open the pores, and dissipate and exhale ^he
inward heat, and causes the diversity. Therefore as Plato thank^d God that he
was an A^henian and not a Theban, because the air was ^here more thin and
delicat, and therefore the men more dexterious and witty, so we have great
cause to praise him, first that he has made us Christians and not Infidells.
Secondly that he has placed us in England in a temperate climate and fertile
soil, where we have all things in plenty and abundance.

Difference of men in respect of capacity and understanding.
Secondly we may see the difference of men in respect of their capacity and
understanding, and so we may note three sorts of people in every nation and
commonwealth; the first are but the lees and dregs of the people, vulgar and
abject spirits borne only to serve and obey. The second are a kind of men of
an indifferent understanding, but commonly seduced by tradition, and the
custom of the place where they live; the third are men of a quick spirit and
an acute judgment, not besotted with the common opinions of the world, but of
themselves able to discern the verity and causes of things.

Thirdly we may note this difference in respect of superiority and inferiority,
Difference of men in respect of superiority and inferiority.
which is either public or private; the public is for the commodious
government of the State either immediate between the Prince himself and his
subjects, or subordinate between the subjects and the officers that represent
the person of the Prince, as particular Lords, Judges, Justices, Mayors and
other inferior Officers; the Private is for the decent managing of rural and
domestical affairs between the Husband and the Wife, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants; and in these three cases a man must observe this decorum,
to use his wife neither as his Mistress nor his servant, his servant not as
his slave nor his fellow; his child neither as his servant, his fellow, nor
his master.

Fourthly we may see the difference of one man from an other by the diversity
of their profession and kind of life: Difference of men in respect of
profession and kind of life.
Some men affect a solitary and retired life, to sequester themselves from
company and the troubles both of domestical and public affairs; others
delight in a more sociable life, to talk, to reason, to discourse, to make use
of a Companion; others make choice of the country for the vicinity of the
fields, the woods, the rivers, for hawking hunting, fishing, fowling, and other
sports and recreations: others shut up themselves in Cities and Towns, and
spend their time in visitation, entertainment and company keeping: others are
encouraged with the sound of the trumpet, the noise of the drum and fife, and
delight in stratagems and warlike discipline: others delight in travel, to see
the conditions of the men, the diversity of their manners, the fashion of the
Country, and the politic government of the State; and briefly vt men's
cuiusque sic est quisque, Every man as he affects so he lives, so that in
every man we may note three kinds of lives, the first inward to a man's self
in his thoughts and imaginations, the second domestical in his private
affairs, the third public to the view of the world.

Lastly we may see the difference of men by the diversity of the favors and
disfavors of nature and Fortune. 1. Difference of men in respect of nature and
fortune.
In respect of Nobility and Honor, which is either natural by descent, or
acquired by desert; Some by blood are noble, some by their own virtues, some
by both, some by neither of these. 2. In respect of Science and knowledge both
theoricke and practicke, some are good in the one, some in the other, some in
neither. 3. In respect of riches and poverty; some are endowed with great
possessions, lands, livings, and all the favors of Fortune, others have scarce
a house to defend them from the injury of the rain and wind. 4. In respect
of liberty, which is either internal of the mind, or external of the body;
as for the first, we see some are enthralled by their passions, others carry
themselves quietly in all things without distemper; as for the second, we see
some men live (as their fancy leads them) now in one place, now in another,
and have liberty to expatiate the whole earth, while others are confined
within the narrow walls of a dark and uncomfortable prison.

The second part of this Book, containing the general instructions of Wisdom
which respect all men alike.
NOw we have attained by the natural and moral consideration of man to a
breife knowledge of our selves (which is the first and Theorike part of
Wisdom) it behooves us to make use of this knowledge, to order our selves
wisely and discreetly by (...), which is the second (...) Practicke part of
Wis^ome; for a man is not herefore honest or vir^ous, because he knows what is
virtuous or honest, but because he does ^he things that are so; Virtutis omnis
in hoc laus ^est, the praise of virtue consists in the action.

But for the more reguler ordering of our selves according to WISDOM there are
rules and praescriptions both general for all men alike, and particular for
several persons in their peculiar calling.

The general instructions of Wisdom have respect to the Praeparatiues, the
foundations, t^ offices, and the fruits of wi^dome.

The first praeparatiue unto wisdom.
The Praeparatiues unto wisdom are two; the first is to exempt and fre^ a man's
self both outwardly from popular and multitudinary errors and opinions, and
inwardly from passions: the first may be avoided by flying the vulgar rabble
and their headlong designements, and by frequenting the company of the more
judicious; the second by a discussiue praecaution or praemeditation whereby a
man flies or extinguisheth whatsoever might kindle or inflame his passions,
and by a constant resolution of mind, whereby a man (foreseeing the event) is
forearmed to bear without passion or distemper whatsoever happens.

The second Preparatiue unto Wisdom, The second preparatiue unto Wisdom.
is for a man to maintain himself in a free and generous liberty of mind:
which liberty is twofold, of the judgment and the will; the liberty of the
judgment is to judge indifferently of al things, without resolution or
peremptory affirmation or condemnation of any thing, and not to be so
foole-hardie to bind or wedde a man's self to any opinion, but that upon
sounder reason he may be ready to entertain that which is more true, honest,
profitable, accommodating himself outwardly to that which is de facto, but
approving inwardly of that which is de iure. The liberty of the will consists
in managing our affections mildly and discreetly with reason and judgment, and
without violence and passion.

The first foundation of Wisdom
The foundations of Wisdom are likewise two: the first is a true, essential,
and inward honesty, which is a firm and strong disposition of the will to
follow the counsel of reason in that which is honest and just; not for
formalitie sake, (according to the fashion of the world) nor for the
maintenance of a man's honor, credit, reputation; nor for fear of the law,
magistrate, punishment, displeasure, or any such casual or sinister respect,
for this is only a bare outward action, and no inward probitie, but this
honest wise man must both be and ardently desire to be an honest man in his
heart and mind, and p^tius eum esse quam videri.

The second foundation of Wisdom is to have a certain end and form of life,
that is, The second foundation of Wisdom
for a man to make choice of such a calling whereunto his particular nature is
most inclinable, for illud quemque decet quod suum est maxim, that becomes
every man best, to which he is naturally most addicted, therefore it behoues
every man to know two things, first his own inward disposition, his capacity
and ability, to what he is most prone, and for what he is unapt; secondly the
nature of the profession he has proposed to himself, comparing them
together, to the end he may see how his nature agrees with his profession, and
carry himself in his vocation with facility and delight.

The offices of Wisdom are six; The first office of Wisdom.
the first is to study true religion and piety, which principally consists in
the relative knowledge of God and our selves, of God for his honor and glory,
of our selves for our own salvation. Now this Religion must not be for
fashion sake, to go with a Bible under the arm, as dogs go to Church for
company; nor yet ceremonial, for so a man may be religious and wicked, and be
(according to the proverb) a Saint at Church, and a Devil at home; nor only
in word and belief, for so one may be more then a man by confession, and wors^
then a swine in his life: but this Religion must be married to an essential
honesty, causing a man to be honestly religious and religiously honest, both
inwardly in sincerity and truth, and outwardly in life and conversation.

The second office of Wisdom.
The second office of Wisdom is discreetly to govern our desires and
pleasures; not wholly renouncing them after the opinion of the preciser sort,
that endeavor silently to slide through this life like a fish in the water, and
hold their breath at all honest recreations, as if they were in a place of
infection; we must rather manage our desires and pleasures well, and learn to
make use and benefit of the world, and not enjoy it; and this we shall the more
easily attain if we desire but a little, naturally, moderately, and by
relation: 1. a little, that is, to pull in the raynes of our appetite, and to
restrain our selves from abundance and delicacie; and this is the nearest way
to content, nihil enim interest ^n habeas, an non concupiscas, not to desire
and to enjoy is one. 2. Naturally, that is, to desire not things superfluous,
artificial and pleasing to the fantasy (for these are passions, and beyond
nature) but things necessary and most expedient both for our bodies and our
humane condition 3. Moderately and without excess, both in respect of another,
without his scandal, loss, prejudice, and in respect of our selves, without
the loss or hindrance of our health, leisure, functions, affairs, reputation,
duty. 4. By relation, that is, to propose unto our selves a certain end of our
desires and pleasures, and to terminate them in our selves.

The third office of Wisdom.
The third office of wisdom is with an equal, manly, and settled countenance
to bear the smiles and frowns of prosperous and adverse fortune; hoc enim est
been sustinere, and abstinere been, this is well to sustain the evil of
adversity, and well to abstain from the sugared baits of pleasure and
prosperity: not like the vulgar, that think there is no surfeiting with honey,
no rocks able to split the floating ship of prosperity; we must rather
follow the advice of the wiser, and neque in secundis confidere, nec in
aduersis deficere, sed semper erigere animum supra minas and promissa fortunae;
we must neither presume in prosperity, nor despair in adversity, but
always eleuate our spirit above the threats and promises of fortune. We shall
the better carry our selves in prosperity, if we consider well the nature of
it, first that riches, honors, and the favors of fortune are improperly
called goods, since they are common as well to the bad as the good, and neither
make the one better, nor reform the other; secondly that prosperity is like a
honied poison, and therefore we should be then most careful and learn to
mortify our presumption, to bridle our affections, and retain our desires.
And for Adversity, quoniam ipsa vita est fortu^iae ludibrium, and omnia ad
quae gemimus, quae expauescimus, tributa vitae sunt; since our life is but the
play-game of fortune, and all things that grieve and afflict us are but the
tributes of life, and incident to our humane condition, we should therefore
make a virtue of necessity, and arm our selves with patience quietly to
endure them: and the more easily we may do it if we consider well the nature
and causes of adversities and afflictions, whether they be true and natural,
as sickness, poverty, and the like, or imaginary and fantastical. In
respect of the nature of adversity we may easily endure it, 1. because it is
in it self no evil, but in the opinion of the vulgar; 2. because it is common
to all, though after a diverse manner, to the wise and godly as matter of good
and instruction, to fools and reprobates as occasion of evil and despair; 3.
because it touches but the lesser and outward part of man, and cannot make him
vicious, nor rob him of his probitie and virtue, though it make him poor,
sick, and afflicted. In respect of the cause of adversity we must consider
that it is either our own sin, the justice and anger of God, or the policy
of the world. And now the face of adversity is thus unmasked, it will appear
with a more gentle aspect, and we may avoid or mitigate it by these two means,
first by being honest and virtuous, (for such a man is more peaceable in
adversity then a wicked man in prosperity) secondly by premeditation and
presupposing the worst, that so we may be fore-armed to bear with patience any
thing that may happen; nam quae alij diu patiendo leuia faciunt, sapiens leuia
facit diu cogitando, that which others make light by long suffering, a wise man
makes easy by long cogitation.

The fourth office of Wisdom.
The fourth office of Wisdom is to observe the laws, customs, and ceremonies
of the country; first authority, because it is a messenger from heaven,
whether it be sovereign in the Prince, or subalterne in his laws and
ordinances; secondly ceremony and the custom of the country, because by use,
approbation or toleration it is grown to be a law; therefore obey the
Magistrate and the law, but not seruilely; observe ceremonies, but not
superstitiously; and (if thou can with a safe conscience) conform thy self
outwardly to that which is in practice, though thou condemn it in thy
judgment, and lend, but not give thy self to the world.

The fifth office of Wisdom is well and plausibly to carry our selves in
company, The fifth office of Wisdom.
whether it be generally with strangers in the ordinary commerce of the world,
or more particularly in affected company; such as we embrace for profit,
pleasure, or some other respect; and herein a man must a little temporize with
the world, and not wholly captiuate himself to his peculiar inclinations, sed
vbicunque opus sit animum flectere, bend his mind as occasion shall require.
In our common conversation we shall the better carry our selves if we observe
these rules, 1. for a man to speak little and modestly; 2. not to be too
scrupulous in applying himself to the fashion of the company; 3. not to be
too forward to put out himself and show all that is in him; 4. to be honestly
curious in enquiring of al things, judging soundly of them, so to make use and
profit by them; 5. not to contest with any, especially not our superiors
because we owe them respect, not our inferiors because the match is unequal;
6. not to speak resolutely or peremptorily in any discourse: so by this means
a man shall carry himself well and debonarily toward all, and yet have his
mind secret, and keep himself to himself, according to the old precept,
frons aperta, lingua parca, men's clausa, nulli fidere. In our particular and
more private conversation it will be expedient to observe these rules, 1. for
our associates to make choice of such as are honest, wise, and dexterious; 2.
not to be amazed at the opinion of others though it oppose ours, but to judge
soundly of it, and if there be cause of contradiction, not to be bold,
obstinate, nor bitter; 3. not to be troubled with the uncivil behavior or
rude speeches of any, but to bear them manfully, and not answer a fool in his
folly; 4. in disputation and controversy to be brief and methodicall, and to
aim always at the truth, not using all the means a man may have, but the
best and most pressing; 5. in a jest to take the present occasion by the lock,
and to be facete without scurrilitie, and touch no man's person nor reputation,
for it is a bad exchange to sell a friend for a jest:

The sixth and last office of Wisdom is for a man to carry himself wisely in
his affairs; The last office of Wisdom.
and for introduction hereunto it is necessary to know well in what rank to
place the goods spiritual and temporal, which are principally eight, whereof
sour respect the body, health, beauty, nobility, riches, and four the
soul, honesty, wisdom, ability, science, and these are correspondent one to
the other, so that health, beauty, nobility and riches in the body are the
same that honesty, wisdom, sufficiency or ability, and science in the
soul; and in vain shall a man study the precepts of a good life, unless he
know well how to judge and esteem of these. Now the rules and best helps to
this wise carriage in our affairs are these; 1. To know the nature and humor
of the person with whom a man has to deal, that so he may turn his sail to
the wind, and also the nature of the business he has in hand, not
superficially, but the quintessence of it; 2. to know the true worth and value
of things, judging of them not like the common sort by their novelty,
strangeness, difficulty, or report, but estimating all things (after the
manner of the wise) first inwardly by their true and natural value, then
outwardly by their profit and commodity; 3 to choose well, which choice
consists either in good things, to choose the most honest and commodious, or in
evil to fly the most iniust, dishonest, inconvenient: 4 to consult and take
the advice of a friend, who must be first honest and faithful, then discreet
and sufficient: 5. To balance a man's self between distrust and assurance,
not to be too confident in any man, yet making no show of distrust, but
fearing to be deceived: 6. To make use of all occasions, and herein a man must
avoid two things, precipitation and rashness in apprehending, moresitie and
slacknesse for ouer-slipping the occasion, and take it neither when it is
green, nor too ripe, but just when it is offered: 7. To do nothing without a
good reason: 8. To be industrious, not relying upon fortune, nor contemning it,
in all our actions making virtue the captain, fortune the follower, virtute
duce, comite fortuna.

The fruits of Wisdom are two; The first fruit of Wisdom.
the first is to keep a man's self always ready for death; tam vtiliter
viuendum est, vt non nesciamus foeliciter desistere, we must live so
profitably, that we may know how to die happily, esteeming of death not like
the common people that she it as an evil, nor as some that contemn it as a
thing of no importance, nor as others that seek and desire it, vitam habentes
in patientia, mortem in desiderio, enduring life, and coveting death; we must
follow the wise, and neither fear nor desire death, but attend it cheerfully
as a thing natural, because it is the order of the whole Universe; inevitable,
quia omnes eodem cogimur, because we are all compeld to die; profitable, quia
dies mortis aeterninatalis est, because the day of our death is the birthday
of eternity, and the consummation of our labors. Now the means to make our
selves ready for death are these, 1. in all our actions to discharge a good
conscience, 2. every night to cast up our accounts, and to repent earnestly for
the misdeeds of that day; and so (our sins being dead before our selves) we
shall have nothing else to do at the hour of our death but to die.

The last fruit and crown of Wisdom is to maintain our selves in a true
tranquillity of spirit, The second fruit of Wisdom.
which is not (as some suppose) a vacancie from all affairs, nor a delightful
solitariness, or a profound carelessness, but a sweet, firm, and pleasant
estate of the soul, which no occasion, business, good nor ill accidents can
any way alter, trouble, or depresse. This is that whereby a wise man possesses
and enioyes himself, lives always rich, full of joy, of peace, of comfort,
and content in himself. Not besotted with vulgar opinions, nor enthralled with
the tyranny of passions, not rash in judging, not violent, not unreasonable in
willing; honest in his life, delighted in his vocation, living truly religious;
rectifying his desires, moderating his pleasures: not swollen in prosperity,
not dejected in adversity; conforming himself to the laws and customs of
his country; carrying himself wisely with others, and discreetly in his
worldly affairs; neither hugging his life, nor fearing nor desiring his death.
Now this tranquillity is that moral felicity which is acquired by many
habits: the means to attain it are the eleven last handled, and the means to
preserve it are two; 1. Innocence and a good conscience, quibus tanquam in
publico and test coelo viuimus, whereby we live as it were in public, and
have God for a witness to all our actions, 2. Alacrity and a courageous
constancy, whereby a man solaceth himself, and raises his spirit above all
chances that may happen, without perturbation or fear.

The third part of this Book, containing the particular instructions of
Wisdom, which respect particular persons in their several callings, affairs
and accidents.
IT remains now that we proceed to the last part of Wisdom, which
respects every man's particular; and the shortest way to attain it is to
guide our selves by the four Moral or Cardinal virtues, for these have
respect to all our humane condition, Prudence to the whole course of our life,
but especially to the Affairs wherein it is busied, Justice to the Persons,
Fortitude and Temperance to the Accidents.

Prudence (which is Auriga virtutum, Prudence in general described.
the Queen and guide of the other virtues) is the election and choice of
things that are to be desired or fled, and consists in consulting and
deliberating well, in judging and resolving well, in accomplishing and
executing well. And it is diversely distinguished; first in respect of the
Persons, and so it is either private in vnico indiuiduo, or sociable and
oeconomicall among a few, or public and politic among many: secondly it is
distinguished in respect of the affairs, which are either ordinary and easy,
or difficult and extraordinary.

Politic prudence distinguished.
Of all the rest the politic Prudence is most difficult, and therefore most
excellent, and it is either public or private; the public concerns the
office of a Prince, which is either Preparatiue concerning his provision for
the State, or Active for his action and government. The private Prudence
respects the carriage both of the Prince and of private men in difficult
affairs and accidents.

The preparatiue office of a Prince concerning the preparation of provision for
a State (according to the Writers of best note and choice, The praeparatiue
office of a Prince.
whom I have especially followed in this Tract) consists principally in seven
points, knowledge of the State, Virtue, Carriage, Council, Treasure, Forces
and Arms, Alliances.

The knowledge of the State consists in two things, The first head of
provision for a State
to know the nature of the people and of the State, the form, establishment,
and birth thereof, whether it be old or new, fallen by succession or election,
obtained by Laws or Arms, of what extent it is, what neighbors, means,
power it has; for according to these a Prince must diversely manage the Scepter.

The second head of provision.
The second head of provision is the virtue of the Prince, which should be
lively and exemplary, because he is most eminent and in the eye of all, and
because his actions are a law to the people. Now these virtues are principally
requisite in a Prince, Piety, Justice, Valor, Clemency, Liberality,
Magnanimity.

The Piety of the Prince is to maintain Religion, and to depresse all
innouations and controversies therein.

The Justice of a Prince respects first himself, to be (as near as may be)
the same in his life that he is in his laws; secondly his subjects, to cause
his laws to be justly executed toward all, without partiality and
protraction of suits. But in the Justice of a Prince we must not be too
strict; for (in as much as it is a matter of no small moment well to govern a
State) it is expedient for a Prince enterchangeably to assume the skin of the
Fox* and the Lion, and to do that for the good and safety of himself and
the weale-publike, which in private persons were vicious and unlawful:
therefore the Politicians have thought these eight things expedient in a
Prince, although some question the lawfulness; 1. Distrust, to be vigilant,
to believe none, to take heed of all, ne aditum nocendi perfido praestet fides,
left too much credulity make a Traitor. 2. Dissimulation, both in time of
war with the enemy, and in peace with his subjects. 3. By secret practices
and intelligences to draw unto him the hearts and services of the officers and
trustiest friends of foreign Princes and Lords, and of his own subjects at
home; and this is wrought either by persuasion, or presents and pensions. 4.
Subtletie, to obtain his purpose by equivocation, circumuention, Letters,
embassages, and to do that closely which he may not do openly. 5. To clip
the wings of any one that is like to soar too high in the State. 6. In a time
of necessity and poverty of the State to take by authority the wealth of the
richest. 7. To cancel the laws or privileges that are any way prejudicial
to the authority of the Prince. 8. To possess himself by prevention of a
City or Province commodious for the State, rather then to suffer another
dangerous neighbor to take it.

His Valor is a military and courageous wisdom, which is required in him for
the defense of himself and the State.

The Clemency of a Prince is a sweet kind of lenity, and required in him to
moderate the rigor of Justice, and to make him more beloved then feared of his
Subjects.

The Liberality of a Prince consists properly in gifts bestowed, wherein are
to be considered two things, first the person, who should be a man of desert,
or one that has done good service to the commonweal; secondly the manner of
the gift, which must not be excessive, nor at once.

The Magnanimity required in a Prince is a generositie or greatness of
courage, non leuiter irasci, sed iniurias despicere indignas Caesaris ira, not
to be easily moved, but to despise injuries that are unworthy the anger of a
Prince.

The third head of provision.
The third head of provision is the Carriage of the Prince, which respects 1.
his person, wherein should be a maiesticall and venerable gravity marching
betwixt fear and love; 2. his residence, which should be in some glorious and
eminent place, and (if it may be) in the midst of the State; 3. his
conversation and company, which should be rare, quia maiestati mayor ex
longinquo reuerentia, because the rareness of a Princes presence procures the
greater reverence.

The fourth head of provision is Council, The fourth head of provision.
wherein a Prince should make use 1. of such as are honest and faithful, 2.
such as are ancient, ripe, and well experienced in the State; 3. such as are
free from flattery, ne cum fortuna Principis potius loquantur quam cum ipso;
4. such as are constant, without opinatiue obstinacy or yielding to the humor
of another; 5. such as are secret. And these Counselors must be chosen either
by the judgment and knowledge of the Prince, or by their public esteem and
reputation.

The fifth head of provision The fifth head of Provision.
is Treasure the sinews of the State, which consists in three points, the
foundation, emploiment, reservation thereof.

For the foundation of the Treasury these are the means, 1. not to alienate
the public reuenew of the State; 2. to employ well the spoils made upon the
enemy; 3. presents, tributes, and donations of friends, Allies, and subjects;
4. Imposts upon merchandise in Dockes and Haven Towns, provided first that
there be no transportation of things necessary for life, nor of unwrought
wares, that the Subjects may be furnished and set on work, secondly that the
stranger be more charged then the Subject. And these are the means for
increasing the Treasury most just and approved; there are also other means,
but not so usual, as the emploiment of the Exchequer coin to some small
profit, and subsidies and loanes of subjects in a time of necessity; which
loanes must be levied upon the goods, and not the heads of men, and equally
upon all, for it is injustice that some should pay all, and others be
discharged.

Concerning the emploiment of the Treasury, it should be for the maintenance
of the Kings house, the pay of men of war, the wages of Officers, the reward
of such as deserve well of the Commonwealth, the succor of poor, repairing
of Cities, fortifying the Frontiers, mending highways, establishing Colleges
and public houses.

For the reservation of the Treasury against a time of necessity, the most
profitable and securest way is to lend the coin (as is aforesaid) with some
small profit to particular persons upon good security, and that for a
threefold reason; because it increases the Treasury, it gives means to
particular persons to traffike, and saues the public treasure from the paws
of the insinuating Courtiers.

The sixth head of provision is an armed power, The sixth head of provision for a
State.
which is either ordinary or extraordinary; the ordinary is of two sorts, the
one for the guard of the Kings person, the other certain companies maintained
in a readiness for such sudden occurrences as may happen: the extra ordinary
power is in a time of war, and consists in forces and arms, or a certain
number of people well experienced in the wars, to repress a sudden rebellion
or commotion, either within or without the State.

The last head of provision for a State.
The seventh and last head of provision consists in Alliances or Leagues,
which are either perpetual, or limited for a certain time, or for commerce
and traffike only, or else for amity, to be sworn friends and coadiutors one
to the other; and herein it is needful for a Prince to join in alliance with
those that are neighbors and puissant, and not to make the league perpetual,
but for certain years, that so he may either take away or add to the
Articles, or wholly forsake them, or else renew the league before it be
expired, as need shall require.

THe Active office of a Prince concerning his government of the State
consists in the acquisition of the love of the subjects, The active office of
a Prince.
and in authority; the first is attained by gentleness and clemency in
commanding, beneficence in providing plenty of come and victual for the
sustenance of the meaner people, and liberality already handled in the virtues
of a Prince, which is most needful in the entrance to a new State. The second
(which is authority) is attained not by a tyrannical cruelty, for the Prince
to make his will a law, employing all to his own profit or pleasure, not
respecting the public good, (for this breeds hatred and contempt, which both
proceed from rigor in punishing, or from avarice either in exacting too much
or giving too little) but this authority is attained and preserved 1. by a
discreet severity, whereby a good Prince in some cases may do that which
bears a show of tyranny, and crudelis esse medicus in laethali vulnere; 2.
by a courageous constancy or a stayed resolution, enforcing the observation of
the ancient laws and customs; 3. by holding the stern of the State, the
honor and power of commanding, in his own hand, not referring all to his
Council.

Now this Active office of a Prince is either Peaceable or Military; The
peaceable office of a Prince
the Peaceable (by reason of the multiplicitie of affairs) cannot wholly be
prescribed, but it consists partly in auscultation, to be well advertised of
all things by such as are faithful, wise, and secret about him, especially of
his honor and duty, his defects, and what is done in the State and among the
bordering neighbors; and partly in action, 1. to have a memorial of the
affairs of the State, of the most worthy and best deserving personage, and of
the gifts bestowed, to whom, wherefore, and how much; 2. to appoint rewards and
punishments, the one must be done immediately by the Prince, the other
subordinately by his officers. The military action of a Prince.


The Military Action of a Prince consists in enterprising, making and
finishing war.

To make an enterprise just, Rules in enterprising.
three things are required: first that it be denounced and undertaken by the
Prince: Secondly, that it be for a just cause, whether defensive for the
defense of his life, liberty, country, Allies and confederates: or offensive,
proceeding from some former injury. Thirdly, that it be for a good end, as
peace, and quietness, or the like.

To make war, Rules in making war.
three things are required, Munition, Men, and Rules of war. The principal
munitions of war are Money, Victuals, Munition.
and Arms; both defensive, and offensive. Men.
The men are to assail and defend, and are either Soldiers or Leaders: The
Soldiers are divided into footmen and horse, natural and strangers, ordinary
and subsidiary; and these must be first chosen, then disciplined. In the choice
of Soldiers five things are to be considered: first that they betaken out of
hard places, and accustomed to all manner of labor: secondly, that they be
young and lusty: thirdly, of an able body and sufficient stature: fourthly, of
a bold and resolute spirit: fifthly (if it may be) of an honest condition.

In the discipline of Soldiers two ends are to be proposed, Valor and
Manners, to make the Soldiers valiant and honest; to Valor 3. things are
needful. First, daily exercise in Arms, without intermission: Secondly,
travel and pains, to learn to dig, to plant a Pallaside, to order a
Barricado, to carry heavy burdens, and the like. Thirdly, Order: 1. in the
distribution of the troops into Battalions, Regiments, Ensigns Camerads: 2. in
the situation of the Camp, dividing it proportionably into quarters, having
the places, entries, issues, and lodgings fitted both for horsemen and foot,
whereby it may be easy for every man to find his quarter and place: 3. in the
March in the field against the enemy, that every one keep his rank and be
equally distant one from an other: And this order is most needful for securing
the Army, and for the facillity of the remoues and commands of the Captains.

To Manners (the second part of warlike discipline) three things are required:
1 Continency, to depresse gluttony, drunkenness, whooredome, and all loose
sensuality in the Soldiers: 2. Modesty in words, to shun all ostentation and
bravery of speech: 3. Abstinence to keep their hands from violence, pillage
and robbery.

This of the Soldiers. The Captains are of two sorts, the General, who must
be either the Prince himself or his deputy; and the Subalterne Leaders of
Companies. In the General this is requisite: 1. that he be wise, and well
experienced in the Art military: 2. that he be cold and stayed, free from
precipitation and temerity: 3. that he be vigilant and active, teaching by
his own example.

The rules of war (being the third thing required to make war) by reason of
the diverse occurrences cannot be perpetual and certain: but the general
aduisements respect either the whole time of war, the fight, the ranged
battles, or the battalles being joined.

Rules of war.
The rules of the whole time of war are these: 1. carefully to meet the
occasions, and to intercept the enemy in his: 2. To make profit of rumors that
fly abroad, but not to be troubled with them to alter a resolution grounded
upon good reason: 3. For neither side to be too confident in his own strength,
nor to presume upon the weakness of his enemy, for this breeds neglect and
carelessness: 4. To enquire carefully of the enemy; of the nature, capacity,
and designements of the Chieftaine; of the nature, manners, and kind of life
of the enemies; of the situation of the places, and the nature of the Country.

Touching the fight these circumstances are to be observed: 1. The time, which
must be seldom, and in necessity, the viands or treasure failing, the men
beginning to distaste the wars, or the like: 2. The place, not within his own
territories, unless the enemy be already entered, and then he must not hazard
the battle till he have an other army in supply: and for the field, it must
be considered whether it be fitter for himself or the enemy, as the Champion
is best for the Caualary, straight and narrow places set with piles, full of
ditches and trees for the Infantery. 3. The manner of the fight is to be
considered, and here the most aduantagious is the best, whether it be by
surprise, subtlety, stratagems, close and convert, fayning to fear, so to
ensnare the enemy, or by watching his ouersights, the better to prevail
against him.

For Ranges of Battles, these things are required: 1. A comely ordering of
the men: 2 A hidden supply always in a readiness to astonish the enemy
unawares: 3. To be first in the field and ranged in battle array: 4. A
cheerful countenance of the General and the Captains: 5. An oration to
encourage the soldiers, laying open the honor of valor, and the justice of
their cause.

The Battles being joined, if the Army waver, the General must animate them
by his own example, and discharge the duty of a resolute Leader, and if the
field be his, he must stay his Soldiers, least in pursuit of the enemy, they
disband and scatter themselves, and so the vanquished gather head and overcome
them. If he be vanquished, he must not be astonished, but renew his forces,
make a new Levy, put good garrisons in his strongest places, and hope to
better his fortunes.

The third head of the military action of a Prince.
The third head of this Military action is to finish War by Peace, which must
be concluded upon good and honest conditions, and without fraud and
hypocrisy; otherways it were better to die in the bed of honor then to
serve dishonourably.

The rules herein respect first the vanquished who should continue armed and
make show of security and resolution: Secondly, the vanquishers, who ought not
to be ouer-hardly persuaded to peace: 1. Because an old enemy grows cunning
and dangerous: 2. because the continuance of war is burdensome to the state:
3. Quia tutior certa pax sperata victoria Because a certain Peace is better
then a hoped for victory.

Prudence required in difficult affairs and ill accide^ts.
THe second part of Prudence is Private, which respects the carriage both of
the Prince, and of private men in difficult affairs and accide^ts, and these
affairs and accidents are either public or private, whereof some are to come
and threaten us, and are doubtful and ambiguous: other present and pressing
us, and are difficult and dangerous.

Ill accide^ts to come.
In those evils that are to come and threaten us; the best way to oppose a man's
self strongly against the accident, so to break the neck of it by his
vigilance before it come, or else to resolve with himself patiently to bear
whatsoever happens.

In those that are present and press us (whether it be some present unlucky
accident, Jll accidents present.
or the remembrance of any that is past, or some violent passion that
troubles) the best way is to divert a man's thoughts to some other object, so
he may lessen, if not extinguish his grief.

In ambiguous affair (as in the choice of two things that seem equally good
or evil, Ambigu^us affairs.
so that the inability to choose the best breeds anxiety and perplexity) the
safest way is to lean to that part that has most honesty and justice, as a
traveler doubting of the nearest way must take the straitest.

Dangerous affairs.
In difficult and dangerous affairs, a man must be both wise to know the
nature, and to foresee the event of the accident, and courageous to avoid it
by industry or aid.

Now of those accidents that are difficult and dangerous, some are secret and
hidden, others manifest and open: those that are hidden and most dangerous are
two, Coni^ration.
Coniuration, which is a conspiracy of one, or many against the person of the
Prince, and Treason, Treason.
which is a conspiracy or enterprise against a place or company, although we
commonly call them Traitors that pretend it to the crown. Now a Prince must
endeavor to prevent these two dangerous accidents by these means: 1. By
Innocence (for this is the best safeguard of a Prince:) 2. By a subordinate
vigilancie, that is, by the secret enquiry of such as are discreet and
faithful about him, who are his eyes and ears: 3 By making no show of
distrusting their plots, but attending the event without astonishment: 4. By
the rigorous punishment of the co^spirators, which punishments must be
sometimes sudden, if the number be small and known, sometimes dilatory, to
seek by tortures to know the confederates.

Popular commotions.
Of those dangerous accidents that are manifest, and open, the commotions of the
People are the greatest, and these are of many sorts; when the insurrection is
between themselves, it is either a sudden tumult or a faction; when it is
against the Prince, the State or Magistrate, it i^ either Sedition, Rebe^lion,
or civil war.

Sudden Tumults are nothing but commotions of the people raised in a heat,
Sudden tumults.
and in this case the best way to assuage the people is to procure some eminent
man, reuerenc't for his gravity, place, and reputation to speak to the people,
first in the smooth calm of mildness and persuasion, then (if that prevail
not) in the thunder of authority.

Faction or Confederacy is a complot or association of one against an other
among the subjects; Faction.
arising commonly from ambition or hatred; and in this case (if it be between
great houses, cities, or communities) the Prince himself must endeavor to make
Peace between them, either by gentle entreaties or threatening, or else appoint
his arbitrators; and if the faction be between great multitudes that will not
be appeased by justice, the Prince must employ his force to extinguish it.

Sedition.
Sedition is a violent commotion of a multitude against a Prince or Magistrate,
arising commonly from oppression, (...) fear either of oppression or
punishment for some heinous offense; sometimes from a licentious liberty,
sometimes from want and necessity. Now the best means to appease this
seditious rout are these; first (as it was advised concerning sudden tumults)
to cause men of authority to show themselves and speak unto them, who must
endeavor to dissolve them by hope and fear, drawing unto them (if that help
not) some few of them under hand by secret rewards and promises, so to have
intelligence of their carriages and purposes, yielding to the rest in doubtful
terms some part of their demand, which may afterward justly be revoked.
Secondly to astonish them with the sight of an armed power, but not to depresse
them so, unless necessity compel.

Rebellion.
Rebellion is an insurrection of the people against the Prince because of his
tyranny, either in his wrongful usurpation of the Crown, or his unjust and
violent domination and government against the Laws and customs, though
sometimes but supposed. Now if a Prince fear rebellion, the best remedy is to
shun the cause: therefore let him be wise as a Serpent, but innocent as a Dove.

Civil war.
Civil war is a press or conduct of Arms by the subjects, arising from one
of these popular public commotions, which has now fortified it self, and
gotten an ordinary train and form of war; And it has two causes, the one
secret and unknown, the other the general corruption of manners, whereby men
of base and dissolute condition care not to over whelm themselves in the ruin
of the State. Now to extinguish this firebrand of a State, there are but two
means, agreement, and victory; the latter is dangerous: And the other is not
always safe as without great caution. This is of the carriage of the Prince in
these dangerous commotions of the people. How particular persons should carry
themselves in these public divisions.
Now private persons in these popular and public commotions and insurrections
may carry themselves after a twofolde manner, either as partakers, and then
(if they be men of public charge and credit) they ought to ioyn themselves to
the better part; or else they may carry themselves as no partakers, and then
(if they be private men of a lower degree) the best way is to retire themselves
to some peaceable and secure place during the division, carrying themselves
either as commons, in their words and actions being offensive to neither
part; or as Mediators arbitrating friendly and indifferently between them: And
in this case a man must be neither a Neuter nor a Prothee.

Now in Private dissentions between man and man, How in private dissentions.
it is easy for one to carry himself loyally, if he engage not himself
more to one then the other, and report nothing but things indifferent, that may
serve in common to both parts.

Justice.
THE second virtue whereby we must guide our selves is Justice, which teaches
how to give to every one his due; this respects the Persons, and compriseth
our duty toward God, our selves, and our neighbor. Our duty toward God I
have already touched in the tract of piety. The duty of man toward himself.
Our duty toward our selves is contained thorowout this whole book; in the
first part showing the knowledge of our selves; in the second prescribing the
general rules of wisdom; and more particularly in this last part, especially
in the subsequent virtues of Fortitude and Temperance. But more exactly the
duty of man toward himself consists in governing his Spirit, his Body, his
Goods. The motions of the spirit are reduced to two, to think and desire,
proceeding from the judgment and the will: therefore we must be careful to
govern these two well. First the understanding, keeping it from sottishness
and childish vanities, and from fantastical and absurd opinions; secondly the
will, subduing it to the nod of reason, not suffering it to be led by opinion,
passion, sense.

For the Body (in as much as the Spirit is to it as the husband to the wife)
we owe it our care and assistance; we must therefore nourish, not pamper it,
making the Spirit Lord over it, not a Tyrant, not a Servant.

Concerning Goods or riches, we ought to gather, to keep, to employ them
well; 1. desiring, not loving them; 2. seeking them, but not by bad means or
the damage of another; 3. not rejecting them entering at an honest gate, but
receiving them willingly into our houses, not our Temples; 4. employing them
honestly and discreetly to the good of our selves and others; 5. not grieuing
if they be lost or stolen, but suffering them to depart by themselves, not
with our hearts.

Our duty toward our neighbor is either general containing the common duties
of all toward all, The duty of man toward man.
or particular containing the particular duties of several persons by special
obligation. Common duties.
The general duty of all toward al comprehends Amity and Friendship, and
the offices thereof, which are Faith and Fidelity, Verity and free
Admonition, Benefits and Thankfulness.

Amity and friendship.
Amity or Friendship by the Ancients is distinguished into natural, sociable,
hospital, and venereous; by the Modernes otherwise, first in respect of the
causes of it, which are Nature, Virtue, Profit, Pleasure; secondly in respect
of the persons, and that in three kinds; either in a direct line between
Superiors and Inferiors, as between Parents and Children, Princes and
Subjects, Tutors and Pupils, Masters and Servants, which cannot properly be
called Friendship, because of the disparitie and obligation between them,
which hinders familiar communication and inwardnesse; or in a collateral
line between equals, which is either Natural, between brothers, sisters, and
cousins, (which is likewise imperfect by reason of the bond of nature) or
Voluntary between friends and companions, and this is truly friendship. Or
else it is mixed and matrimonial, which is partly in a direct line because of
the superiority of the husband and the inferioritie of the wife, and partly in
a collateral line, being both companions and equals; and this is also
imperfect, both by reason of the necessity and constraint of the bond after
marriage, and the weakness of the wife, who is no way correspondent in
conference and communication, of thoughts and judgments. Thirdly Friendship is
distinguished in respect of the degrees and intention of it, and so there is a
Common and a Perfect Friendship; the Common is quickly attained, the Perfect in
a long time; that may be between many, this only between two: the one is
capable of restraints and exceptions, according to their presence, absence,
merits, good deeds, and the like; the other is always the same; the first is
attained (as some have observed) by speaking things pleasant and doing things
profitable, the latter only by a lively and reciprocal virtue: so that Common
Friendship is nothing but familiarity or a private acquaintance, but the true
and Perfect consists in a sympathy of humors and wills, with one only who
is another self, and between two that are but one. And it is a free and
universal confusion of two souls: the words are emphaticall; 1. a confusion
of fowls, importing the inseparabilitie of the union betwixt them, 2. free and
voluntary, built upon the pure choice of the will, without any other
obligation; 3. universal, without exception of goods, honors, judgments,
thoughts, wills, and life it self.

Faith and Fidelity.
Now follow the offices of Friendship; the first is Fidelity or Faith, which is
a closet of the secrets of another; and it respects first the persons, both
him that gives faith, of whom is required that he have power to do it either
of himself or by the leave and approbation of his master, and also him to whom
it is given, who must carefully keep it ^nlesse he receive it not, or the
other break first: ^econdly the subject of this faith is to be considered,
which must be of things just and possible; thirdly the manner of giving and
receiving it, which must be voluntarily and freely, and without fraud,
treachery, or surprise.

The second office of Friendship is a true and free Admonition, Verity and
free admonition.
wherein are to be considered the time, place, and manner of admonishing; 1.
the time, not in a time of mirth, for this were to trouble, nor of grief and
adversity, for this were to heap sorrow upon affliction, frangere, non
emendare; 2. the place, which must be in secret, not before company; 3. the
manner of admonishing, which must be 1. without passion, 2. without flattery
and dissimulation, out of an honest careless nature and freedom of heart; 3.
using general terms, and comprehending a man's self in the same fault; 4.
expressing the fault in better words then the nature of the offense does
require; 5. to begin with commendations, and end with profers of service and
help, and not to be gone as soon as the admonition is ended, but to stay and
fall into some common and pleasant discourse.

The third office of Friendship consists in benefits, obligation, Benefits
and thankfulness.
and thankfulness; these three are linkt one in the other, and may well be
comprised in this word Obligation, which comprehends liberality, friendship,
almesdeedes, and whatsoever is charitable and humane. For there is an Active
and a Passive obligation; the Active binds Parents, Princes, and Superiors
(either by law or nature) to do good to them that are committed to their
charge, and generally those that have means to help them that are in want.
Now there is a twofold manner of benefiting or doing good; by profiting, and
by pleasing; so are there two sorts of good turns, the one duties proceeding
from this natural or lawful obligation, the other free and voluntary good
deeds done out of pure affection: and of these benefits or good turns such are
most welcome as proceed either from one whom a man is inclined to love without
this occasion, or such as come from one that is bound to the receiver, o^ such
as may be easily requited. Now in doing a good turn these rules are to be
observed, 1. to do it willingly and from a hearty affection; 2. wisely,
without ostentation, without the offense of another; 3. speedily, when there is
need; 4. without hope of restitution; 5. according to the intent of the
receiver, and then if it be to succor his want, weakness, shame, or
necessity, it must be done privately; 6. not to repent of his good deed; 7.
not to object it to the receiver, not to twit him or hit him in the teeth with
it, as the vulgar speak.

The other part of an obligation is Passive, which is nothing but a
thankfulness for a benefit received; and herein a man must observe four
things; 1. to receive the benefit cheerfully, 2. always to remember it, 3. to
publish it, 4. to make a recompense; which must be done 1. willingly, 2. not
too speedily, but upon some good occasion; 3. with usury, surpassing the
benefit received, yet always acknowledging a man's self indebted; 4. if a man
be unable to requite, to show always testimonies of his thankfulness.

The second part of our duty toward our Neighbor is special, Special duties.
including the particular duties required between several persons by special
obligation; and these duties are either Private or Public, the Private respect
the justice observed ^n Families between the Husband and the Wife, Parents and
Children, Masters and Servants.

The duties between ^he man and the wife are ^ither common and equal ^o both,
The duty of married folks.
consisting in an ^ntire loyalty, fidelity, ^ommunitie, care and authority
over their family and the goods of ^e house, and communication of all things,
on Particular, respecting first themselves, secondly their domestical
husbandry.

The husbands duty
First of the husband this is required, to instruct his wife in those things
that concern he^ duty, her honor, he^ good; to love, to nourish to cloth
her, to cohabi^ with her. The wifes duty.
Secondly, o^ the wife this is required to honor her husban^ as her Lord, to
humou^ him, to be obedient i^ things just and lawful, t^ keep the house, to
employ her time in the practice of huswifery, and t^ be silent, that is, not
ta^katiue, but to learn ho^ and when to speak. Thirdly in domestical or
household husbandry this is expedient, Household husbandry.
1. to buy and sell all things at the best times and seasons; 2. to provide
first for necessity, cleanlines, order; 3. to take care that the goods of the
house be not spoiled nor lost; 4. to learn to make a good show with a little
cost; 5. for a man to know precisely the value of his means, and to live under
his estate; 6. to have an eye and care over all, for the eye of the Master sats
the horse and the land.

The duty of Parents and Children is reciprocally natural, The duty of parents.
and has respect first to the Parents, secondly to the Children. The duty o^
Parents respects 1^ their Infancy, 2. their Youth, 3. their Carriage toward
them at men's and women's estate.

In the Infancy of the child this must be observed, 1. the nurse must be
either the mother (which is most natural) or a woman that is young and of a
hot and dri^ complexion; 2. it mus^ be fed with cream so^ with honey and a
little salt; 3. it must be accustomed by little and little to the air, to
heat and cold.

In the Youth of the child, as soon as it is able to go and speak, and the
faculties of the mind are awakened, (which begin about the fourth or fifth
year) it is the duty of the Parent to instruct it well, and to season this new
vessel with a good and wholesome tincture. Now these instructions are either
Common or Particular; the Common are these, 1. carefully to guard the eyes and
ears of the child, that none speak or do any thing that is evil in his
sight or hearing; 2. to procure good Tutors or Instructors, who must be fuller
of wisdom then Pedanticall science, and such as accord in opinion and their
manner of proceeding, teaching mildly without severity and rigor. Now there
is no better way of instruction then often to examine the scholar, and to make
him give his opinion, and afterward a reason of his opinion: and touching the
books to be read, they must be of noble and serious matters teaching the
knowledge of our humane condition, and such as reform the will and direct the
judgment, teaching the difference between passion and virtue, what to fly,
what to desire.

The Particular instructions of youth consist in the forming of the spirit, the
ordering of the body, the ruling of the manners. In forming the spirit of the
child a man must aim both at the End and the Means of instruction. The end
of instruction is to build up the mind in knowledge, honesty, virtue,
wisdom; and the aduisements in this point are two, first not to endeavor so
much to inflame the imagination and stuff the memory, as to conform the
judgment and the will; but to study more for wisdom then science, because
wisdom is far better then science, and because these two are much different,
especially by reason of the contrariety of their temperatures, for science is
in the memory, which requires a moist temper of the brain, wisdom in the
understanding which requires it to be dry: so that science is nothing but an
accumulation of an acquired good, or a collection of what is seen, heard,
read; but wisdom is the rule of the soul, the guide of our thoughts, desires,
opinions, words, actions. The second advice in this point is this; not to
gather the opinions and knowledge of other men for ostentation or report, but
for profit, to make them his own, as the Be extracts the honey from the
flower; and in reading other men's writings not to task the memory to retain
the leaf, the place, the chapter, but the sum and marrow of the book. Now
of Sciences the best are the Natural that show what we are, and the Moral
that show what we should be, under which are contained the Oeconomickes,
Politickes, Histories.

The Means of instruction (which is the second thing to be considered in
forming the mind of the scholar) is two fold, the one by word of mouth, and
that either by precepts or conference; the other by example, both from the good
by imitation, and from the bad by dissenting from them in opinion and life. And
these two ways of profiting by speech and example are drawn either from the
living by discourse and frequentation of their company, or from the dead by
reading their books.

In ordering the Body these are the rules, 1. to keep the child from pride
and delicacy in apparel; 2. to use him to a moderation in sleeping, eating and
drinking; 3. to accustom him to heat and cold, labor and pains.

In ruling the Manners a man must take care to rate up in his child those
things that are evil, correcting in him first all swearing, lying, sottish
shame, hiding the face, houlding down the head, blushing at every question,
and weeping at every sharp word: Secondly all affectation in habit, speech,
gate, and gesture: Thirdly all obstinate sullenness, that the child never
have his will by froward or perverse means.

And as a man must extinguish the evil, so he must endeavor to kindle in his
child the sparks of goodness, ingrafting in his heart, first the fear of
God, by making him reverence his name, and admire his wisdom, his power, his
works; secondly ingenuity and integrity, teaching him to be honest for the
love of virtue, and not for any sinister respect; thirdly, modesty in behavior
toward all, whether they be his superiors, equals, or inferiors either in
condition or sufficiency; fourthly, affability in company to carry himself
courteously toward all, yet let him know even the most licentious behauiors,
but teach him to abstain, not for want of courage, but will.

In the carriage of Parents toward their children at men's and women's estate
(which is the fourth and last point of their duty) it behooues them to receive
their children (if they be discreet and capable) into their society and part
of their goods, and to admit them into their council, their opinions,
thoughts, designments, and the knowledge of their worldly affairs; not
practicing the austere fashion of some parents, that always keep their
children under their girdle; they carry themselves severely toward them,
restrain them of liberty, pinch them in allowance, and upon every displeasing
occasion ever fright, them with the bug bear of a small annuity after their
decease, so to keep them in awe and subjection: But this is the way for a man
to be feared, not loved of his children, and to show himself a Tyrant, not a
Father.

The duty of chi^dren.
Now the duty of children toward their Parents consists principally in 5.
points, 1. To reverence them both outwardly in speech, countenance, and
gesture, and inwardly in opinion and estimation: 2. To obey them in all
commands that are just and honest; 3. To succor them in want, sickness, age,
and impotency if need shall require; 4. To attempt nothing in marriage, or any
other matter of importance without their consent and advise; 5. To bear with
their testie humors and imperfections, and to endure gently their severity and
rigor.

The duties of Masters and Servants are these, The duty of masters.
1. the Master must seek to be more beloved then feared of his servants; 2. to
have an eye over them; 3. to instruct them in matters of religion; 4. to use
them gently, not cruelly; and yet it is needful for a Master of a family
sometimes to be angry with his servants observing these conditions; 1. that it
be not often, nor upon slight occasions; 2. that it be not in a murmuring or
railing manner behind their backs, nor upon uncertainties; 3. that it be
speedily in the nicke of the offense, and serious without commixture of
laughter, that so it may be a profitable chastisement for what is past, and a
warning for what is to come. And for Servants, The duty of servants.
their duty is; 1. to honor and fear their Masters; 2. to be industrious and
provident for their good; 3. to be faithful and trusty; 4. not to reply and
multiply words.

THis of the private justice required in Families, between the Husband and the
Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants: The other is Public in a
Commonweal, concerning the duty of Princes and Subjects, of Magistrates,
Great and Small.

The duty of a Prince is already sufficiently handled in the tract of politic
Prudence, showing his office both Praeparatiue and Active. The duty of subjects.
The duty of Subjects consists principally in three points, 1. to honor
their Prince as Gods vicegerent; 2. to obey his authority, to go to the wars
to pay tributes and imposts, and to conform themselves to all things that are
justly required by the laws and customs; 3. to pray for the preservation of
his person, his prosperity and happiness.

The duty of Magistrates.
The duty of Magistrates follows, in whom is required both honesty, to keep
them from avarice, bribes, and respect of persons, and courage to withstand the
commands of great men, the entreaties of friends, and the tears of the
distressed: Their duty respects the Prince and private men: their duty
toward the Prince consists in obeying his edicts and commands, either
readily, slowly, or not at all. In those commands that are just and indifferent
in themselves, or those that give to the Magistrate acknowledgment and
allowance with a warra^table clause, there the Magistrate is to obey readily.
In those that include a clause derogatorie, where the Prince by his authority
does derogate from the law, there he must also obey, but not so readily. In
those that have no derogatory clause, but are wholly prejudicial to the
Commonwealth, he ought to resist once or twice, and not obey before the second
or third command. But in those that are repugnant to the Laws of God and
nature, he must not obey at all, but rather leave his office, then shipwreck
his conscience.

The duty of Magistrates* toward private men is this; to be always at hand,
to be of easy access, to hear al indifferently as well poor as rich, and to
be impartial in the execution of justice.

The duty of great and small, The duty of the great
respects first the Great or Superiors, secondly the small or inferiors.
The duty of the great is to spend their blood and ability for the defense of
Piety, Justice, the Prince, the State, and Weale-publike, and to protect the
poor and oppressed against the violence of the wicked, for this makes them
both beloved and adored.

The duty of inferiors consists in this; The duty of the small
first to reverence their superiors, both ceremonially in outward show (which
is done as well to the bad as the good) and inwardly in love and affection; and
so they ought to reverence only them that deserve well of the comonwealth:
secondly, it is the duty, or rather the wisdom of Inferiors to insinuate by
honest means into the favor of great men, for the proverb, says well, A
friend in Court is worth a penny in purse.

THe two last virtues whereby we must guide our selves are Fortitude and
Temperance, these have respect to the Accidents, Fortitude to the evil
accidents of adversity, governing the irascible part of our soul, and
Temperance to the seeming good of prosperity, ruling the concupiscible part.

Fortitude is not (as some suppose) a love of dangers, Fortitude described.
or a desire of dreadful things (for this is temerity) neither does it consist
in the bigness of looks or words, nor in Art and cunning, nor the strength of
the limbs (for so a swaggering Braggadochio, a Fencer, a horse might be
valiant) but in the resolute courage of the heart and will, presupposing the
knowledge of all difficulties and dangers, as well military as other, and as
well the danger of the action and the discretion of the execution as the justice
of the cause. So that Fortitude is a strong resolution of the mind against all
dolorous, difficult, and dangerous accidents whatsoever, grounded upon the
honesty and justice of the enterprise.

Fortitude in outward evils
Now the ill accidents about which Fortitude is busied, are either External,
which are adversities, afflictions, injuries, or internal, which are Passions.
The externa^l or outward evils must be considered in their causes, in their
effects, and distinctly in themselves. The causes of them are either the
justice and anger of God, or the act of an other: Those that proceed
immediately from the hand of God are commonly general concerning many at the
same instant, as pestilence, famine, tyranny, and the like; these are the iron
scourges of the Almighty, therefore I omit them as coming from a supernatural
cause; But the best advise in these evils is to turn to God by speedy and
hearty repentance, and to cease our wickedness, that he may cease his plagues.
Those evils that proceed from from the Act of an other are either such as
cross a man's affairs, or wrong his Person, either in word or deed. And the
best advice in this point is to respect first our selves, to carry ourselves
honestly, wisely, and without passion, that we give an other no advantage
against us; Secondly, the person that offends us; and then (if it be a fool)
it is wisdom not to contend with him, but to leave him to his folly; if it be a
man of discretion, we must consider whether he does it out of malice or
ignorance, and use him accordingly.

Secondly, we must consider these outward evils in their effects, which are
either general or particular: their general effects are for the public good,
as pestilence and famine are like a purge or a blood letting in a corrupted
body for the preservation of the whole; Their particular effects are diverse
according to the diversity of spirits upon whom they fall: to the good they are
a school of instruction; to the penitent a fatherly rod, a bridle to keep
them from falling; to the reprobate a sickle to cut them of, confusion and
perdition.

Thirdly, these outward evils must be considered distinctly in themselves, and
so we may note seven kinds of accidents which the world terms principally
evil, sickness, captivity, bannishment, poverty, less of friends, infamy,
death.

Sickness.
Sickness is a privation of health; and herein the best remedy is to endure it
patiently, 1. because it is natural and incident to our humane weakness; 2.
because it is either short if it be violent, and then it is quickly ended; or
the pain but moderate if it be long, and then it may be easily endured: 3.
because it is but the body that suffers.

Captivity: Captivity.
imprisonment is a privation of liberty, and herein a man must likewise
remembe^ that it is but the body, the clogge and prison of the soul that is
imprisoned, the spirit remaining always free and at liberty.

Banishment or exile is a privation of home-dwelling, Banishment.
this a man may easily endure if he consider first that it is but a change of
the place, et omne solum sapienti patria, every place to a wise man is his own
country; Secondly, that in exile a man leaves behind him but the goods of
fortune, not those of the mind nor body: now a wise man carries all his goods
with him, his virtue, honesty, wisdom, sufficiency; these are properly a man's
own, from which he cannot be banished.

Poverty.
Poverty is the want of means or maintenance; now there is a twofold want, the
one of things necessary for nature, which befalls v^y few (for nature is
^tent with a little) the over of superfluities, for p^mpe, pleasure, delicacy;
And in this want of poverty, the best way is to be content with that which
necessity constrains, libenter velle quod ipsa cogit; and this a man may the
better do if he consider first that he came poor into the world (and
therefore. it is injustice to grudge if he depart so) secondly that poverty is
a secure estate, being free from the affairs, cares, encumbrances that
accompany riches.

Infamy is the impeachment of a man's honor, Infamy.
worth (...) good name; and in this case it is best to conte^ne the bad censure
of the people, because envy never speaks well, and because it is the companion
of virtue.

Loss of friends is a Loss of friends.
privation of the society of Parents, wife, children or any that are near and
dear unto us. And in this case it behooues us not to grieve excessiuely for
the loss of any, first because our plaints, our grief, our tears are
ineffectual; secondly because we may gain new friends by our honesty and
virtue: for he that has these, never wants friends.

Death.
Death is nothing but a privation of life, whereof I have spoken sufficiently in
the frst fruit of wisdom.

Fortitude in inward evils.
THis of outward evils: the other about which Fortitude is busied are inward
evils arising from the former; these are passions; fear, grief, effeminate
pity, cholor, envy, revenge, jealousy.

Against Fear the best remedies are these: first, Against fear.
not to look for the evil, nor to look for it before it come because it is
but a casual accident, and therefore uncertain to come, or not to come upon
us: secondly, to arm our selves to endure it stoutly if it come: and the
better to do this, a man must often give unto himself the false allarum of a
worse supposed danger, and think how he could bear it, and how others have
borne more difficult and grievous evils.

Against Grief.
Against Grief we must practice this, first to contemn the occasion of it as a
thing unworthy to molest us, secondly abducere animum, to lead the mind out
of the way, and to divert our thoughts from the cause of our grief to some
other object.

Against Pity.
Against Pity or effeminate compassion we must learn to respect both the
person and the cause that should move us to pity; secondly (if there be
need) to succor him, but not to suffer with him, not to trouble our selves
with the care, the grief, the misery of another.

Against Choler the remedies are three; Against Choler.
first to shun the causes and occasions thereof, especially these,
tenderness and delicateness, curiosity, lightness of belief, and a conceit
of being slighted, contemned, or abused by another: secondly to employ the
means against the occasion of choler when it is offered; that is, to keep our
bodies in a cold temper, our selves silent and solitary, and to use delay in
believing, and judgment in resolving: thirdly to consider the gracefulness of
mildness and clemency in others, and the hateful inconvenience of the
actions of them that are in choler.

Against Hatred and Envy.
Against Hatred and Envy (for these are of affinity) we must consider well
what it is that we hate or envy in another, and learn to turn our hate into
pity, our envy into rejoicing; because what we hate in another we would be
sorry for in our selves, and what we envy in other, in our selves we would
willingly embrace.

Against Revenge
Against Revenge there are two remedies, the first is to have recourse unto
Clemency to learn how to pardon, the second is a hardy and courageous
insensibilitie of suffering wrongs; which we may show either by doing good to
the offender, or by scorning him and the offense as unworthy to urge us to
impatience, to revenge.

Against Jealousy that proceeds from a man's wife the best remedies are these,
Against Jealousy.
first for a man to be honest himself, lest he give his wife a just cause to
requite him; secondly not to be distrustful of her, unless he know her
disloyal; thirdly (if he know it) to seem to the world to take no notice of
it, but to endure it patiently, because it is a common infirmity, and his
wifes fault, not his own.

Tempera^ce described.
THe last virtue whereby we must guide our selves is. Temperance, which is a
discreet moderation and government of our selves in things that please and
delight: this virtue teaches how to carry our selves well in prosperity,
pleasure, eating and drinking, apparel, carnal copulation, glory, speech.

Rules in prosperity and pleasure.
Of Prosperity and Pleasure I have already spoken in the second and third
offices of wisdom: all that I here desire to inculcate is this; In prosperity
not to forget our selves, not to be puffed up, not to presume; and concerning
pleasure, to use it like physic, and to take it as men do honey, with the tip
of the finger, not with a full hand; that is, not immoderately, not enthralling
our selves to our pleasures, not making of pleasure an occupation, not of sport
and recreation a toil or necessity.

In eating and drinking the aduisements are these, Eating and drinking.
first to use no curious diet, but mirth at meals instead of delicates and
iuncats, sine art mensa, and plus salis quam sumptus; secondly to eat and
drink moderately, not to be suffocated, stuffed, nor filled with meats and
drinks; because nature is sufficed with a little, because a full panch makes a
man unapt for any good work, and because the excess in eating and drinking
(especially in the latter) confounds the memory, duls the understanding,
distempers the body, and is the capital cause of many diseases.

Apparel.
Concerning apparel, it behoues us to use it as a covering for our nakedness,
and a shelter against the rigor of the weather, not for pride, and in a word
nec faciles and vsitatas negligere munditias, nec appetere delicatas; we must
neither neglect usual and frugall neatness, nor follow the pomp, delicacie,
curiosity, nor the fantastical extrauagancie of the fashion.

In Carnal pleasure or copulation (which is a thing most natural, Carnal
copulation.
and therefore hard to be restrained) the best aduisements are these, first to
keep our selves from the alluring baits of beauty, for this is a good help
both to a virgin and a conjugal continency; secondly to attain this pleasure
by good and honest means; thirdly to use it moderately and chastely, for a man
may commit adultery with his wife.

Glory and ambition.
Concerning Glory or Ambition (which is calcar virtutis, the prick and spur
of virtue) the best precept is this; To undertake no good, beautiful, or
honorable attempt, so much for glory as for the love of virtue; for our own
conscience is a better witness of our actions then the opinion of the people;
and virtue in it self is worthy and rich enough, and brings reward sufficient
with it self.

Speech.
Last of all, in our speech it will be expedient to observe these rules; first
to speak little, and that truly, modestly, and without affectation and
passion; secondly to speak seriously, not of frivolous things, not of things
lascivious, not of our own actions; thirdly to speak plausibly, without
offense, without detraction, without mockery; fourthly to have the tongue in
the heart, not the heart in the tongue.

The heart and tongue of wisdom show the proof.
Rule these two well, and thou art wise enough.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
The first part of this Book, teaching the knowledge of our selves.
OF Wisdom in general, P. 1 Of humane Wisdom, 4 Of man 2. ways considered,
naturally and morally, 6 The first natural consideration of man by the
composition of his parts, 7 Of the brain, which here is only handled, and the
other parts omitted, 8 Of the three faculties of the humane soul, 9 Of the
vegetative faculty, ibid. Of the sensitive, 10 Of the intellectiue and the
three faculties thereof, 11 Of the imagination, ibid. Of the understanding, 12
Of the memory, ibid. Of the Passions, ibid Of Love in general, 15 Of Ambition,
16 Of Covetousness, ibid. Of Concupiscence, 17 Of Joy, 18 Of Desire, 19 Of
Hope, ibid. Of Despair, 20 Hate, ibid. Fear, 21 Grief, ibid. Pity, 22
Choler, 23 Envy, 24 Jealousy, ibid. Revenge, 25 Cruelty, ibid. The second
natural consideration of man by his difference from other creatures, 26 The
third by his life, 28 The first Moral consideration of man by his humors and
conditions 30 Vanity, 31 Weakness, 33 Inconstancy, 35 Misery, 36
Presumption, 37 The second Moral consideration of man by the difference of one
man from another, 40 First in respect of the Climate where they live, ibid.
Secondly in respect of their capacity and vnderstanstanding, 42 Thirdly in
respect of superiority and inferioritie, 43 Fourthly in respect of the
diversity of their profession and kind of life, 45 Fifthly in respect of the
favors and disfavors of nature and fortune, 47
The second part of this Book, showing the general instructions of Wisdom.
THe Preparatiues unto Wisdom, 52 The foundations of Wisdom, 54 The offices
of Wisdom, 57 The fruits of Wisdom, 75
The third part of this Book, showing the particular instructions of Wisdom
by the rule of the four moral virtues.
OF Prudence in general, 81 Of Politic Prudence, 82 The Preparatiue office of
a Prince, 83 The Active office of a Prince, 97 Of Prudence required in
difficult affairs and ill accidents both publik^ and private, 11^ Of evil
accidents to com^ ibid. Of evil accidents present, 113 Doubtful affairs,
ibid. Dangerous affairs, 114 Coniuration, ibid. Treason, 115 Popular
commotions, 116 Sudden tumults, 117 Faction and confederacy. 117 Sedition, 118
Rebellion. 120 Civil war. ibid. How particular persons should carry
themselves in these public divisions, 122 Of private troubles and divisions.
123
Of Justice the second Virtue.
Of the justice and duty of man toward himself, 124 Of the justice and duty
of man toward man. 127 The common duties of all toward all. ib. Of Amity and
friendship, 128 Of Faith and fidelity. 132 Of verity and free admonition. 133
Of benefits and thanke^nesse. 1^^
The special dueti^ ^quired of certain by special obl^gation.
The duties of marrie^ 1^^ Of Household Husba^ ^ The duty of parents a^
children, ^ The duty of Master^ Servants. 1^ 155 The duty of Princ^ and
Subjects. ^ The duty of Magis^ ^ The duty of great and ^
Fortitude the third Virtue.
^de in outward evils, (...) 162 ^enesse. 166 ^tiuity. 167 ^shment. ibid.
^ouerty. 168 ^he loss of friends. 169 ^amy. ibid. ^ath. 170 F^itude in inward
evils. ibid. ^inst fear. 171 S^ 172 (...). ibid. ^er. 173 ^ed. 174 ^y. ibid.
^enge. ibid. Jealousy. 175
Of Temperance the fourth Virtue.
Of prosperity. 176 Of pleasure. ibid. Of eating and drinking. 177 Of apparel.
178 Of carnal pleasure. 179 Of glory and ambition. 180 Of speech. ibid.
Finis tabulae.

