MORE EXCELLENT OBSERVATIONS OF THE ESTATE AND AFFAIRS OF HOLLAND. In a
discourse, showing how necessary and convenient it is for their neighboring
Countries, as well as the Netherland Provinces, to Trade into the West Indies.
And by most urgent and good reasons, proving that by the West Indian Trade now
erected in HOLLAND, the said Company shall receive great benefit, the
Hollanders greater service, and the Spaniard more hurt, and greater
disadvantage then ever he received before. As also the great profit and
commodity the said Netherlands have reaped and received, during the time of 24.
years that the said Company has Traded into the East Indies. Faithfully
Translated out of the Dutch Copy.

Printed at London by E.A. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be
sold at their Shops at the Exchange, and the Popes-head-Pallace. 1622.

MORE EXCELLENT OBSERVATIONS OF the estate and affairs of Holland.
SIR, in conformity of my promise to resolve you of certain questions, in your
Letter lately sent unto me, set down; I thought good at this present, orderly
to make answer thereunto, nothing doubting, but that you shall thereby receive
good contentment and satisfaction.

The first question.
Whether it had not been better and more commodious for the united Netherland
Provinces, to have made a new truce with the King of Spain for twelve years
more, with leaving of the East Indian Trade, then by continuing the same, to
begin war again, and to be debarred of the Spanish Trade?

Answer.
It is true, that friendship, commerse, and conversation, are the necessary
consequences of peace, according to the general laws of nature, of all
people, and of all times, conversation and commerse, being signs of
friendship, and of peace, which is denied to no man, but to an enemy.

In such manner that there is no example extant, or to be found, that there was
ever any treaty of peace made or concluded, with the united Netherland
Provinces, upon condition that conversation and commerse should be excepted and
prohibited unto them, for that were no peace, but a certain and true
banishment, which always is deserned and excepted between enemies and evil
doers.

Therefore the proposition made by the Spaniards, to debar us from trading
into the East India, first shows and declares a manifest kind of
unreasonableness and injustice. Secondly, an open caution and deceit, by words
declaring us to be a free sovereign State, and in effect making us to be of
worse condition, then ever we were under Sovereign Princes, which is wholly
without any reason or ground: for although we had not traded into the East
Indies before the war began, yet we had reason, right, and freedom, to have
done it, Iure gentium, which was never taken from us by any man.

The King of Spain, when he was Lord of these Countries, had no lawful
power, in respect of his Spaniards, to take that from us, for that he was bound
by oath, to maintain and vpold these Countries in their freedoms and
privileges of Trading and Traffiquing, whereof without all doubt the free use
and benefit of the Sea, of the air, and of traffic throughout all the world,
is the principallest point: and doing the contrary, he should have dealt with
us contrary to his Oath, in such manner that we challenge that freedom which
from the beginning of the war wet always had, for that free traffic upon
the Sea, throughout the whole world lies open for us, whereof without war and
by force, we cannot be debarred nor hindered.

And that we that are Batauians (whose living depends upon the Seas) and
which are the best Merchants, and Seafaring men, in the whole world, should be
debarred or denied of, and from the use of the greatest part of the Seas, and
of the most notable parts and traffic of the whole world, is the greatest
presumption that can or may be imagined, specially when men will extend the
same, to other Kingdoms and countries, where they have nothing to do, and over
the Seas, over the which he has no command: the use whereof Iure gentium is
free for all men; and whereof no man in the world has any particular command
or authority.

And it is sure, that this should be an undoubted subversion of our estate,
which in this great war cannot stand and subsist, without free Trade of
Merchandise and Seafaring, as being the only means that God has appointed
for our maintenance, and the more that the quantity of our Seafaring and
traffic diminishes, according to the same proportion, the strength and power
of these Countries would also be weakened and decay, for that our Towns and
Inhabitants cannot be maintained, much less can we have any general power or
means, by the inlandish benefits, of commodities, or rents and revenues, as
other great Countries and Kingdoms may and can, because our Country is too
little, therefore we must have all that, out of the Sea and Seafaring.

Now to let you see how much we should be hindered, if we should leave off the
East Indian Trade, and the like hinderance we should consequently also fail of
touching the power and strength of these Countries. I will proceed to tell
you, but first I will discourse of the East Indian Trade, and after that of the
West Indies.

To make a true estimation of the hinderance and hurt as aforesaid: first we
must understand, what adventures and prosperity we have had by the said Trade.
In the Records of the East Indian Company it appears, that from Anno 1595. to
Anno 1601. included, they sent out 46. ships, whereof there arrived 43. again in
these Countries richly laden. Ships that brought for return, (all charges
deducted) two hundred and thirty Tons of gold, clear gaynes for the
Merchants of the said Company.

Further, by the Records and Books of the said East Indian Company: it is also
showed, that for the space of eleven years we had still about 30. ships
continually in East India, with 5000. Seafaring men, and that they expected to
receive from thence at least 300. Tons of gold in capital, besides that
which they had in the land. Now I refer it to your judgment, what the said
Company in the last ensuing ten years until this time has gained? who
within the time of six months, have had a good return of 40. Tons of gold.
I doubt not but you have heard of the rich lading that the two ships brought
hither, within the space of a month, being valued to be worth 24. Tons of
gold, in such manner, that the particular partners from Anno 1605. (every man's
full adventure being delivered in) have gained upon every hundred Gildernes,
until this day, in ready money, the sum of 200. Gildernes, and whenever
any man will sell his stock (which at this time he has in the Company) which
he may do when he will, he may for every hundred have 230. Gildernes:
whereunto are the Interest, which the partners (from the first money received)
to this present have gained, which also is half a capital, there rests to
the partners particularly, upon every hundred, if they have ventured and traded
16. years in the East Indian Company, in clear gaynes about 400. Gildernes.

I speak not this by report, but as a witness thereof, being one of the
partners, that have received my part of the gain, and may have the rest within
8. days if I will sell my stock, which I may at all times do: but at this
present I intend not to do it, for we hope, that our portions by means of our
good success in the East Indian Trade, (wherewith I will hereafter more at
large acquaint you) in few months will be much better.

But it may be, you will say, that this profit is great, and very good for the
particular partners in the said Company, but what benefit does thereby arise
unto the public Commonwealth? whereunto I answer; first, that no Merchants
in Trafficking, nor partners in Companies put in their stocks, but only for
their own particular gain; yet it is most true, that the public
Commonwealth, should be much more interressed, then the particular Traders,
by leaving the East Indian Trade: for besides this, that the public only
consists of the particular, and that the particular makes the public, and
that the public is powerful and rich, according to the proportion that the
particular has and abounds withal; yet it is most true, that the particular
without the public, and not the public without the particular may be, and
subsist, by this means, that the particular going and withdrawing it self
into other Countries, can as well venture from thence into the Indies, as in
these Countries. But the public must stay, and see it self become weak, and
decrease in force and power, as her Trade and Traffic decays. For according
to the proportion thereof, necessarily also the number of Inhabitants
decreaseth, and the power of the public likewise.

Besides this, considering that the Ships and Sailors, that are used by the
particular Company, are great and many, which without any charge to the
Country are maintained and paid, and daily employed, upon all occurrents to be
used by the Country, without the which it is impossible to have any power at
Sea; as we see and well know, that the greatest Kingdoms have no power at
Sea, according to the proportion of their puissance and might, but only
according to the proportion, of the Trade and Traffic that they have and use
in their Countries.

Secondly, we may by the Trade used by the said Company, until the year 1614.
included, declare and prove, that the custom houses of the Country, by means
of conuoyes, lycences, tolls, and customs, which the said East Indian Company
have, and pay, inward and outward, have profited and received above 35. Tons
of gold, for the which the States of the land, have at some times (as need
required) aided the said Company toward their wars in India, with money and
ships: partly to ease the said Company of some portion of their charge. Now,
what they have received in the custom houses of the Country, from Anno 1614.
to Anno 1621. without doubt it is a greater sum, and much more then the former,
noting what a rich return they have had within these seven years.

Now to show what furtherance and benefit the common people have had and gotten
by this East Indian Trade, we must note, that a Fleet of 12. ships, does cost
in money and all other things thereunto belonging, about eighteen Tons of
gold, to set and send it forth: and commonly there is not above 5. or 6.
Tons of gold in ready money sent out with it: all the rest is bought and
prepared here in the land, to the great benefit and welfare of the Country,
and gained by the Inhabitants, that sell and deliver the same. And every ship
that comes home again, one with another, pays above a Tun of gold for
monthly wages, whereby the Officers and Sailors also are enriched, which also
is gotten and spent by and among the Inhabitants: whereby it is manifest, what
the common people have profited; besides the great number of so many thousand
people, that by means of this Trade aforesaid, are set on work, and well
paid for it, to the great comfort and benefit of many poor people. In such
manner, that the last year when I was at Amsterdam, I saw not one idle
vagabond nor beggar (for such as are sick, are provided for in the Hospitalls)
go about the streets to beg, which good order is also observed in some
other Towns.

Thirdly, to show what the public Commonwealth has yet further gotten by
this Trade, you must understand, that the greatest profit of the land
consists in the most great hurt and damage which the Enemy has first and
last endured, and yet endures in East India: for since that we were
prohibited to Trade and Traffic in Spain, and other of the Spanish
territories (which not withstand against his will, by other Nations we do
continue with good profit) some of our Merchants in Anno 1595. with resolute
and good courages (which God without doubt endowed them withal) sailed
prosperously into the East Indies, and there first began our Trade. And
notwithstanding, that the Portugales and Spaniards sought by all the means
they could at the first to debar and keep us from it: nevertheless, we
abstained not the next year, happily to proceed therewith again. Whereby we
being but a small number of Partners in the said Company, brought and procured
the mightiest Potentates of all Europe, to be our Enemies: who well considering
the consequence thereof, sought all the means they could to remedy the same,
and joined the power of Castile and Portugale together, (such and so great, as
in a hundred years before the like was never heard of) not only to let and
hinder the proceeding of our happy Trade, or at least to stay it a while, but
also there-withall to be revenged on the Kings, Princes, and Countries, with
whom, in the name of the Prince of Orange, we had a contracted aliance. In
respect whereof, (the honor and reputation of the Country requiring it) it
sought to protect and defend our oppressed Company, whereby war throughout
East Indian (to the great cost and charges of our Company) began, and yet to
the great hurt and hinderance of our Enemies, which may be noted and considered
hereby, that from Anno 1596. we have overcome and spoiled eleven of his great
huge Carckets, Gallyes, and other great ships, and have made about 40. of his
ships unserviceable; besides those, that in the last ten years ensuing, we
have spoiled and taken: whereby our Enemies trade there, has been greatly
impaired, and ours, by Gods blessing (who only is to be praised therefore) to
the admiration of the whole world, is greatly increased. In such manner, that
the staple of all manner of Spices, and other rich and costly Wares, which for
the space of 200. years together was in Venice, (whereby the said Town
increased and became exceeding rich) and after that by means of their
Navigations, was in Portugale, for the space of 100. years: and lastly, for 25.
years has been in Holland and Zealand, and since that by a good agreement
made, the last year was also brought into England: in such sort, that the King
of Spaines Merchants, were forced, in the said years aforesaid (contrary to
all men's expectations) to buy Nutmegs, Cloves and Mace, of us. Now also to know
what great hinderance the King of Spain receives in his Customs and Tolles
yearly, you must remember that which I shall tell you, all Caracks and
Galleons, that are made and prepared by the particular Company, to sail
outward, must not sail to East India, without leave, and satisfying the Kings
custom, and being returned again out of East India, into Portugale, the
Factors or Partners must deliver a just note of their lading, sealed up and
signed by the Officers in East India, after that the Officers in Portugale
agree with the Company or Partners for the Kings custom, which amounts to a
great sum of money, at the least half a Capital: which Wares when they are
carried out of Portugale into other of the said Kings Kingdoms, must again pay
custom, and when they are carried from thence into other Provinces, the King
has the third and last toll of them: all this being calculated into one sum,
will amount unto yearly for the King above 100. Tons of gold, besides the
double loss which the Portugales in 24. years have had and endured first and
last in their ships and goods, and yet endure.

Having showed what the Partners have profited the Commonwealth, and the
Inhabitants thereof, by the East Indian Trade, and yet do profit them; as also
what great damage and loss, the King of Spain with his Portugale Subjects by
this means has received, and endured: now I will briefly declare, the present
state of the said Company in East India. You must understand, that matter of
Traffic is in very good terms, which we hope by Gods help and blessing,
shall from year to year still be better and better, now the Englishmen (by
means of a contract made with them a year since) join their forces with
ours, and we for our parts have in East India, that are coming home and here
in the Country, above 50. ships, double furnished with lusty Sailors, as also
all other things fit for the War, and for so long a voyage, and about 10.
strong Forts, whereof some we have taken from the Enemy; the rest have been
erected at the great cost and charges of the Company, and made defensible,
which for the security of our own people and goods, as also for the defense of
our confederates are sufficiently provided. Lastly, when they of Bantam began
to lay an extraordinary toll upon our Nation, and caused us to pay 50. pro
cento custom, and yet we could not for all that obtain license of them, to
build a Warehouse of Stone and Mortar, for the security of our Wares and
Marchandises, for that being of wood, it was twice burnt: we were constrained
to transport our Trade in Bantam to another convenient place, which is a firm
Island, and has many good and convenient Havens in it: for in my Writings I
find, that five years past, Mataram the great Emperor of Iaua, who is able
to bring 300. thousand men into the field, dwelling about 100. miles distant
from Bantam, had also sought to make some contract of aliance with us, offering
to deliver us Pepper toll free, and license to build us a Castle of Mortar and
Stone, with all things convenient in Iapara, which was not well liked of by the
King of Bantam, and his Lieutenant: At last our Nation built a convenient Town
about Iacatra, reasonably well fortified, and called it Batauia, where there
are about 1000. houses of all Nations, there to Traffic and deal in
Merchandise, which is defended and governed by a Governor, Scowt, and other
Officers, for the maintenance of good government and policy, and to administer
Justice unto every one: and to the end that before all other things, Gods
service and honor might be maintained, whereby the blind Heathens might be
brought out of their great darkness, and young children taught the knowledge
of the truth of Jesus Christ our Savior: the Company diligently and carefully
took order, to erect a Church and a School therein, to the which end they
sent thither certain learned men, as at the first also they did, which with
great benefit and increase, have taught the Heathens the Gospel of Christ in
their own language, as well as unto our men in their language: In such manner,
that a King and a Prince of Amboina, (where the Country people are much
addicted unto devilish and heathenish superstitions) sent two of their sons
into these Countries, with a Letter written unto the Prince of Orange, to have
them brought up at School, and taught our language, and Christian Religion,
that they might at their return into East India, be a means of planting the
Church of Chaist there in India, and learn how to defend their own native
Country. We are heartily to pray unto God, that he will be pleased to send
more true Shepherds thither, that willingly and out of mere love, will
undertake that long voyage, to feed the blind Sheep, that they may by means
of true faith, be brought unto the fellowship of his heavenly Kingdom and
glory: which the Company before all things ought specially to have a care of,
(which I and other of my fellow partners have heartily entreated them to
undertake, thereunto choosing such men, as by their godly lives and behauiours,
may be an example unto others, that so our Spiritual exercises, together with
our temporal Trade of Merchandise, may the better be blessed, and prosper.
This shall serve only for an advise, now that I may fully make answer unto
your first question, I will briefly speak somewhat of the Spanish Trade,
whereof in the end of your proposition you make mention.

I said before, that notwithstanding the King of Spaines interdiction against
us made, touching the same, nevertheless we enjoy it by means of other
Nations: for you must certainly be persuaded, that we were not bereft thereof
here in these Countries, if you note, that all manufacters, both for price and
dealing in other parts into Spain, is nothing lessoned. In such sort, that we
shall win nothing by the Spanish Trade, but obtain a little bettering thereof,
yet with doubtful security, for if he should grant us freedom of Trade
there, then we shall have liberty to go thither, which is more then many men
think of or conceive, for he for his part thereby, has his custom, which is
very great, and Spain would be victualed by us in time of need, and we for our
parts should put our stocks, people, ships, and Ordnance into his hands,
therewith to oppress our selves or our friends, whereunto he would want no
occasions, as we have heretofore well found, and by experience tried, whereof
it is needless here to produce any examples.

Herewith I will conclude my answer to the first question, and proceed to the
second, and having satisfied you therein, I will make a final resolution of
them both.

The second question.
For that we have no Towns nor Forts in West India, land the Spaniards for
the space of an hundred years at the least, have had and inhabited the most
part of the Country, and the Havens there, where they trade, with the Indians
that now are left therein to their great profit and advantage. It is therefore
out of hope, and no appearance at all, that our West Indian Company shall be
able with any advantage to trade there against the Enemies wills, because some
men are of opinion, that the most difficulty will consist in the erecting of
certain Colonies in unknown places, where they have no friends, without the
which Colonies, our Merchants can have no security of Trade, as you must of
force confess, for the King of Spain will not cease, by all the means he
can to let and hinder the same, and those that live securely here, will also be
doubtful, to trust their moneys out in strange elements, where the wind
blows it away, and where men shall not in long time hear of it again.

Answer.
I assure my self, when you shall have read my Letter, you will not be
doubtful as you make show of, and therefore I will not spare, to put you out
of that scruple, and also to take the like away from others. When we in Anno
1594. resolved in the year ensuing, with a small Fleet (as aforesaid) to
sail into the East Indies, we then had no sorts nor friends in those
Countries; nevertheless the Portugales then inhabited, and had strong Towns
and Forts therein, and far surpassed our power for quantity of ships, yet we
then began (in the name of God) to Trade there, and notwithstanding the same
the next year, with good success continued it, (which we must praise God
for) until the year of our Lord 1605. and then obtained a license of the
States to erect a Company, at the particular costs and charges of the said
Company, (whereof the Capital in the said Anno 1605. was fully brought in and
paid) which amounted unto about 65. Tons of gold: what notable effects (by
Gods blessing) until this time have ensued thereupon (whereat both the
Christians and Heathens themselves do wonder) In my former answer, I have
already partly declared, whereby the Spanish Trade there, by our Trade, at this
present is much decreased, whereto the contrary ours yearly increases: and it
is apparent, that at last they may be driven out of the Moluckoes Islands, where
the Cloves and Nutmegs grow, and (where they get little or no advantage being
so much hindered by us.)

Now I will speak of Guinea, where also at the first we had not one foot of
ground, and notwithstanding that the Spaniards there had some strong Forts and
friends, yet we Traded there in such manner with 20. ships, and 400. men in
them, that in time of war, we dealt there for about 12. Tons of gold.

Likewise at Punckle del Rey, in the West Indies, we sailed Southward with 100.
great ships, and 1800. men in them, which yearly traded for freight and Salt,
which cost nothing but the freight, and brought in to the value of 10. Tons
of gold.

The trade for Hides to Cuba and Hispaniola, was followed with 20. ships and
1500. men in them, and there we yearly traffic, for 8. Tuns of gold at the
least, which in all amounts unto 180. ships, 8700. men, and the return (by
Gods blessings) 130. Tons of gold, as you may see by the calculation made by
the directors Anno 1608. which was openly printed and set forth the same year.

But for that some men without knowledge or understanding, discourse and speak
of the West Indian Trade, I will briefly declare, what benefit these Countries
may reap by the said Trade; which the better to understand, we must know,
wherein the greatest part of the riches thereof consists, which is gotten
therein by Spaniards.

Secondly, by what means we may reap part thereof by Gods help, and hope of
good success.

Lastly, what furtherance, strength, and power these united Netherland
Provinces, and what good success the partners therein may thereby obtain.

The common opinion is, that the greatest riches of that Trade consists in
gold and silver Mines, which are in West India: but it is not so; for the
greatest riches at this time consists in the several sorts of Fruits, and
other things that grow therein, as Sugar, Ginger, Indico, Cocheuille, and other
drugs, as also diverse kinds of wood, hides, pearls, and precious stones: and
likewise in diverse sorts of Manufactures that are carried thither, whereby the
Merchants, Sailors, Pesants, and most part of other Handy-crafts men live. The
gold and silver has been a great profit unto the King, when the Spaniards
first entered into those Countries, where they found great quantity of gold,
that had been gathered together by the Indians in a long time: for the which,
some millions of poor innocent men, lost their lives in the Mines, so that the
gold at this time is much wasted away, and no more found in so great quantity,
and the greatest riches at this day consists in the Wares aforesaid that are
carried to and fro.

To show this, I will make no long discourse of the riches, (that besides gold
and silver) come out of the West Indies, but only speak somewhat of Brasilia,
wherein there is no Mines of gold nor silver, but only Sugar, Cotton wool,
Brasill wood, Conserues and Ginger: but Ginger may not be brought out of
Brasilia into Spame, because they of St. Domingo, (who for the most part get
their livings thereby,) may not be impouerished. Yet the trade in Brasillia is
one of the profitablest trades in West India, whereby the Portugales get most
profit, and where they (now they are almost bereft of Guinia and the East
Indies, or at least get little by them) maintain their Trade. For out of
Brasillia yearly one with another, there is brought between 40. and 50.
thousand Chests of Sugar, which may be valued (2. third parts being white, and
but 1. third part brown Sugar) at 25. pounds Flemish the Chest, then say it
were 40. thousand Chests, and each Chest but 20. pounds Flemish, it amounts to
800. thousand pounds Flemish, which is 48. Tonnes of Gold, not reckning
Brasill wood, Cotton wool, and other wares, which also are of great value: and
then the manufactures and other wares, that are carried out of Portugal
thither, which also amount unto as much as the Sugar. It is true, that there is
much money also carried thither out of Portugal, but that is by reason that
there is no other manufactures used there, then such as the Portugales
themselves have need of, but their Slaves, which are many thousands, have
nothing, because most of them go naked, and so get nothing else but their
pains for their labors, and of the wild Brasillians they get no advantage
thereby, because they esteem not of the use thereof. Where to the contrary, if
we were there, we would get great furtherance and advantage also by our
labors, and thereby trade would be much increased. By this you may easily
perceive, what great riches the wares of West India altogether amount unto, as
also what the wares that are carried thither do yield. For in Noua Spania and
Perto, in some places there are some Indians that are polliticke and wear
clothes as we do. And if the Spaniards, by means of their great strength,
had not for the most part rooted out the Inhabitants, where they command,
without doubt, they should have reaped more furtherance thereby, then now they
do, for that the Indians would have grown more civil and politic, and to
enjoy the fruits that proceed from labor, would have addicted themselves to
labor. But now those Countries for the most part are unpeopled of their
natural Inhabitants, and those that still remain therein, are had in such
subjection that they have neither hearts nor wills, but had rather dye, then
live under their government. Thus I have sufficiently showed, wherein the
riches of the West Indian trade most consists, that is in the Wares and
Marchandizes which are in those Countries, and other Countries have not, yet
Gold and Silver is not amiss therewith to encrese and augment the Trade.

The means to be perticipants in this Trade, is to erect some Colonies there,
and the better to do the same, we must suffer the West Indian Company to
proceed in their Trade.

For as in the Article of the Truce it was agreed, that we might trafique and
trade in all places, Havens, and Towns, that were not under the King of
Spaines command, then thereby we are free to deal in Terra Florida, the
Antilles, the whole Sea coast of Guiana: a great part of Brasillia, and so
forth to the Sraights of Magellanes; being 500. miles, where the Spaniards have
no command, but only in Rio de la Plata, and further through the straight De
la Maere in the rich Country of Chili, and many other Countries and Islands
lying in the South Sea. I speak not of the great riches, that are to be found
inward in the Land, which have abundance of Gold, and other costly Wares and
Marchandizes, the people whereof are somewhat polliticke, to whom the Spaniards
can have no access, where we in time might obtain their good wills: in which
Countries we might erect our Colonies, and by that means trafique there, and
without doubt better, conveniently, and with more profit then the Portugals and
Castellians do. But to tell what places at the first, were fittest to place
our Colonies in I think it not convenient, for that were a means to some to
Discover our intent, and thereby the Spaniards might be forewarned.

Now if certain Colonies were erected, by that means we would get the most
part of the Trade and Trafique in the West Indies into our hands, by reason
that we can sell and afford all Manufactures a hundred for one, better cheap
then the Spaniards can do, and those Wares that come out of India are better
cheap unto us 50. in the hundred, then unto them, because they stand us in so
much more, before we can bring them out of Spain hither, and further our
Countrymen by their industry and labor, would advance themselves more then the
Spaniards.

We must not likewise be persuaded, that the Spaniards do possess and enjoy
all the fruitfullest places in the West Indies, and that there is none resting
which they have not in their hands which are good, temperate, fruitful, and
convenient to dwell in, and to reap profit from thence, for we know that
continually he makes war to win some of them, which otherwise, by reason
of the unfitness of his great Ships, can not by him be well found out, as also
by means of the resistance, which the Indians there make against him, some of
them are yet unknown unto him.

Besides all this, the West Indies are so great and spacious, that he cannot
possess the same, whereby the fifth part of the West Indies, are not yet found
out by the Spaniards, neither is the fourth part thereof subject to to the
Spaniards.

Some will make a great doubt in the beginning of these matters, because they
are of opinion, that it will be many years before there will be any profit or
benefit gotten by this Trade: but they understand it not, for Sugar and Ginger
are all ready grown, which will be so easily done, that in a year and a half
or two years at the most, we shall reap fruits of our Plantation. And when
we have once begun, it will increase every year. I say nothing, that there
we may have Salt, Wood, diverse colors for Dying, Tobacco, and other Wares,
where by at the first we may make some profit, attending more.

If it be answered, that the Portugales and other Spaniards have better and
fitter means thereunto in these Countries then we may have, for that already
they have some Forts and places in the Country; I confess it, but when they
came first thither, then they had not so good means nor opportunity, neither
for Ships nor other things, as we now have, and the rather, for that those
Countries are now as well known unto us, as unto them, and we have good
means, out of some places bordering therein, to get and obtain all whatsoever
shall be needful and necessary.

For us to erect Colonies, which places are not here to be spoken of, but at
the beginning the Spaniard was forced to have all things out of Spain, that
he had need of, Thus I have sufficiently showed, that the means to make us
paricipants of the West Indian Trade, is that we must possess some places
therein, with people out of these Countries. Now I will also show what great
furtherance, strength, and commodity these Countries shall thereby obtain.

To show this I will not set down, the Situation, temperatenes, wholesome
air, and good and fruitful grounds, that are in the said West Indies, neither
the great store of Rivers, abundance of four footed Beasts, Fowls, and
Fishes, nor yet at large declare what Wares and Fruits grow there, but in a
word I will tell you, that the Country is fit and convenient for planting of
Oil, Wine, Sugar, Ginger, Chochenile, Cotton wool, Indigo, diverse Drugs, and
other Fruits, and to be short, all things that Spain and the West Indies
yields unto us, and these Countries have not of themselves, which then
necessarily must needs be a rich Trade.

That this Trade, is the richest trade in all Europe, I think it is without
question, for not only Spain gets great riches thereby, but all Europe
also has profited by the same. The example of the Spanish Merchants may
sufficiently prove it, who were wont to have a great Trade here in the
Netherlands, but when they began to feel and taste, what great commodity the
West Indian trade brought unto them, they left this old Trade to us, and wholly
or for most part, dealt in their West Indian trade, whereby besides the great
imposts and toles that they paid, ordinarily they used to get 50. and 100. for
a 100. gains. The Netherlanders that dwelt in Spain, and secretly had a part
in the said gain, can sufficiently witness the same, as also the great riches
which the Genouesians have gotten from thence.

The profit that these Countries might reap by our Manufactures, will be more
then that the Spaniards reap, because we know that the Wares that are sent
from Spain hither, must cost much custom and charges to be carried from hence
thither. That the Merchant was wont commonly to gain 20. procento by the same,
sometimes more, sometimes less. In Spain when it is brought in, the tolles
and other charges amount to 20. procento, and when it is carried forth, as much
more, and the charges from Spain into the Indies are rather more, then from
these Countries, and if we gained no more but that which is spared, by sending
the Wares from Spain thither, it were more then sufficient gain, and I think
the Merchants and the West Indian Company here, would be well pleased with
half thereof.

That our Manifacture may well be carried thither also, it is without all
doubt, because it is known that in times past they were much used to be sent
thither by the Spaniards and Indians, which now would be done by those of our
Nation that go to dwell there, to have them good cheap. And finding the
commodity and profit, which they should get by diverse wares coming out of
these Countries, (as the like happens in Guinea, and here without question
would be more when they dwelt among us) then also they would work, to get
something, and to do it, one would apply himself to Till the same, others to
work in the Mines, and Women would spin Cotton wool, and wind Silk, for
that by reason of the warmth of the Country, Silk worms would prosper well
there, which Cotton wool and Silk, might be brought hither into these
Countries, to make Fustians and other Wares, whereby we may see, that the same
would yield more profit to these Countries then to the Spaniards, and what
great furtherance and power these Countries might get thereby.

And for that the Spaniard knows well, that Trade of Merchandise consists in
bringing of Wares and Marchandizes, from one Country into another, and that it
is necessary, that one Country should abound in that, whereof the other has
want, Therefore he will not suffer Oil nor Wine to be planted in the West
Indies, thereby to maintain Traffic, whereunto we shall have much better
commodity, then the Spaniard or any Country in Europe. For when we shall
plant Vines, Olive trees, Orange trees, and Sugar there, we shall not only
serve the Netherlands, but also other Provinces and Kingdoms, out of India
therewith, in such manner, that by the decay of the Spanish trade,
consequently, there must ensue, a great eclipse in the King of Spaines Custom
and Treasury, whereof I will speak hereafter.

But to cause the Handicrafts men of these Countries, to have good utterance
for their wares, and that in great abundance, there shall no other
Manufactures be sent out of these Countries into India, then such as are made
here in these Countries. Whereby, and by other the like ordinances, the said
Lands will flourish, and be filled with Inhabitants.

For that many Germans, East Contrymen, Englishmen, and diverse
Netherlands would come hither, to dwell and place themselves, in these united
Provinces, some in one, some in another, where they might best get their
livings; yea, and out of Brabant and Flaunders, many would come hither, to be
released of the Spanish yoke, whereby these Countries would abound with
people. And it is credible, that many Thousands out of other Countries, would
rather go with their Wives and Children into the West Indies, then dwell under
the Popish Government, for that the voyage being short, it may well be endured
by Women and Children, as many go from thence into Spain, and few Fleets go
thither, but they take many women with them; and this in truth were no small
benefit, for honest men that fear God, who in time of bad trading, have no
great means to maintain their households, to provide a Country for them,
where they may in good manner get their livings, and dwell freely without
burden of conscience, and carne their bread.

That Seafaring also should hereby be much increased, and many Sailors thereby
made, and still entertained, it may be sufficiently auerred, by that which is
formerly set down, for that if the West Indian Trade for Salt and Hides, which
we have used, has maintained 100. ships, what would it be when we should
Traffic (besides the Salt) for Sugar, diverse kinds of Wood, Oil, Wine, and
other Wares? This being a voyage but of 4.5. or fix months to and fro, which
many times we spend in a voyage to the Straights, or into Spain, and there
would be better allowance then ordinary given to common Sailors.

Against this, first it might be alleged, that here in the land we have not
men enough to erect Colonies in India. Secondly, that our Country men by
reason of the heat in India, are not so able to endure the air nor labor, and
that by reason thereof, they could not make so much benefit as the Spaniards
do, that do it only by their Slaves. Touching the first, it is already
parrly answered, by that I have said before; that is, that by reason of the
great Trade, many Merchants and Tradesmen of other places would come hither:
whereof some would go from hence to India; and for such as are fit for
laboring, we shall have enough out of high Germany, Denmark, Eastland, and
other Northern Countries, who for the most part are industrious people, which
Countries are ten times better peopled then Spain, and there many of the
people are so poor, that they cannot live in worse state (then they do) by
changing their Country; besides this, we might get many Netherlanders out of
Spain, that know what benefit is to be made in India, who also would be
willing to go thither; as also some that are driven out of Brasilia and the
Canarie Islands; so that we should get men enough out of other Countries,
without emptying of these Countries, and thereby we might in a manner have a
twofold Netherlands, both in East and West India.

Touching the heat, which may be said would hinder us, to dwell or labor
there, show the contrary thereof, we need allege nothing but experience,
which has taught us, that the Netherlanders wheresoever they come, whether it
be in Spain, the Canaries, Barbary, Guinea, or the East and West Indies,
surpass all other men in taking pains. And if we had no other proof then of
the Salt, which is fetched out of the West Indies in a most hot climate, which
as I think, is the greatest labor that is in all the world, it were
sufficient to prove it, and yet it has not been found, that in any ships that
sailed thither, they have ever left any of their men behind them. And those
that once sailed thither, have many times gone thither again. We must also
note, that the days and nights there, are of an equal length, and that the
heat of the day, by reason of the long cold nights is much weakened, as also
by means of the continual East winds, which yearly blow there: the greatest
labor that is to be done in the Towns and Sugar Milles, may well be done in
the night time, and touching tilling of the ground, men have time to do it
from five or six of the clock in the morning, till ten of the clock: and
after that again after noone from three to six or seven of the clock in the
evening, which is eight or nine hours in a day. There also, all the year long
a man may work and labor in the fields: but here for the most part we cannot,
by reason of the cold and intemperate weather, the weather also many times is
ouercast, and then it is cold there also, and although it raines, yet that
rain hinders them not so much, as it does in cold Countries.

To think that the Spaniards with their Slaves, do more profit by their
labor then we, that also is not so, for commonly men say, that unwilling
Hounds catch bad Hares, and that unwilling labor brings little profit, when
men labor as long as you hold a stick over their backs, all that they do
is without industry, doing like Beasts with great labor: one man of these
Countries will rid more work, then three Moors shall do, which cost them
much money: and when they are unwilling to labor, either they poison
themselves, or starve for hunger to spite their Masters, as knowing no other
means to spite and be revenged on their Masters, but only to make their
masters to loose their money, and by that means often times some man that by
means of his Slaves was rich, in a short time waxes poor when they dye. And
when men look into the great charges and expenses which the Portugales and
Spaniards are put unto in their voyages too and fro, we must of force
confess, that we giving great days wages, shall get more then they, although
they should have their Slaves and Victuals for nothing.

Here I would now conclude, if it were not that the great distrust which only
is grounded upon our small might and power in respect of our mighty Enemy,
without any reason, makes you and some others discouraged, as I perceive by
your Letters, therefore to content and satisfy you herein, I will begin
somewhat higher, and yet briefly and thereby to gain better credit, and to
make your memory the fresher, I will speak somewhat of our former proceedings,
and by a true relation approve it: then I say, touching our weakness, in
respect of so powerful an Enemy, we confess the same. But we are taught, by
the holy Scriptures, That there is no difference with God to help men by great
forces, or where their is but a small power. 2. Chro. 14.11. That Israel
should not brag and say, mine own hand has set me free. Iud. 7.2.

So our valiant Ancestors in their greatest need, when the Duke of Alua sought
to destroy the flourishing Netherlands, had their recourse to the Lord of
Sabothes, which is a God of all power, and a protector of those that are
oppressed, specially of those that fear him with all their hearts, who therein
to this day, never failed in their hope, but were graciously comforted. For it
is known to every one, how that for the space of 50. years together, when all
things were at the worst, the Gentlemen destroyed, some principal Lords
beheaded, many thousands spoiled, banished, and run away, the good
Inhabitants purses drawn dry, and the good Prince of famous memory gone out of
the Country: the Spaniards being Masters over all the Country, so that in
men's opinions, we were all in a manner utterly overthrown, but that God (as I
said) put such courageous hearts and constant resolutions into our Ancestors,
that they took on them to defend the Country, with body, lives and goods,
against so mighty a Potentate, with constant perseverance and providence, as
the truth of the cause (without the which there is no blessing to be expected
at Gods hand) on our side required, expecting and hoping that God would send us
a happy issue, as at this day it is manifest unto all the world, and for the
which we praise God continually.

Now set the present state of the East Indies before your eyes, whereof I have
already spoken, and where we in the beginning had not one foot of Land, and
at this day we have strong Fortresses, and have built a good strong Town,
notwithstanding that the Enemy there, far surpasses us for power and force,
and the best and greatest Traffic, as also in Guinia, is now among us.

Wherefore then should we doubt, to set a fast and firm foot in West India,
where many thousand miles of Land are yet resting, wherein the Spaniards and
Portugale never dwelt nor Trade, and where there are yet many thousand Indians,
desire to have friendship and alliance with us, as there are among others the
valiant Chilesians enemies to the Spaniards, by whom they were yet never wholly
overcome. Think you that the Indians that remain in Perto, Mexico, etc. when
they shall have the least occasion, to make use of our friendship, that they
will neglect or ouer-slip the same? we hope therefore by Gods blessing and his
just assistance, to have a happy and good success in our proceedings.

Besides the estranging of the Indians, by means of the sharp government of
the Spaniards, there is another occasion sprung up, which may cause the
Spaniards to doubt, that the Indies shall be taken from them, if we once set a
foot therein, that is, the estranging that springs from the Marriages that
have there bin made between the Spaniards and the Indian Women, and also
between the Indians and Spanish women, from whence the Mesticos or half
generations proceed, who esteem themselves rather to be Indians then
Spaniards, and for that cause are more addicted to the Indies their native
Country, then to Spain.

To give you a better courage and liking of our West Indian Trade, I will
speak something of all the notable Victories that we in former years, (by the
help of God) have gotten in the East Indies, which I will at large set down
for the honor of God, as also to serve for a testimony of his Fatherly care
and favor toward those, that with all their hearts put their trust and
confidence in him.

Andreas de Furtado de Mendoza, General of the Spaniards in East India, having
gathered a great fleet of Ships in Goa, Cochin, and Mallacco, being 30. Ships,
whereof 8. were Gallions, and 22. Galleys and Fusts well furnished, determined
in Anno 1601. in the month of August, to besiege Bantam both by Water and by
Land, there by force to hinder our Trade, but being hindered from the fame by
storms and contrary winds that happened, he arrived before Bantam upon the
24. of December, the same day that Wolfaret Hermans, with three Holland Ships
and two Pinnaces by Gods wonderful providence, also arrived there. It is a
common use among the Netherland ships, that when they have past the Cape De
bona Sperance, they draw in their Ordnance, as thinking them from thence to the
Straights of Sunea, to be needless to be used, and by that means had bin
likely to have fallen into the hands of the said Portugal Army, if God (a
thing worthy to be noted) had not sent them an unexpected messenger before
hand, that made them acquainted with all that had bin done. This messenger was
a man of China, who with his Boat came aboard of those Ships, when they were
out of fight of the Portugales, thinking to do them a special pleasure and
good service, thereby to give them advise to shun the danger that they might
fall into by meeting with that great Army. Our Ships to whom this message was
brought, were called the Gelderland, of 500. Tonnes, the Zealand of 400.
tonnes, the Verecht of 260. tonnes, the 2. Pinnaces, the one was 140. tonnes,
the other 56. tonnes, which sailed out of the Tessell in April, 1601. who in
steed of hoysing up of their Anckers, God giving them courage, took another
resolution, for the Admiral aforesaid, as soon as he understood that news by
the man of China, willed the Anchors to be cast out, and calling the Officers
together, after they had made their prayers unto God, they took counsel
together what was best for them to do, for the welfare of their small fleet,
for the upholding in time to come of the East Indian Trade, and for the honor
of the Netherlanders: whereupon they fully determined and concluded, that
confidering the waightines of the business in hand, whereon the preservation of
Bantam consisted, or the utter overthrow thereof, whereby it was evident what
loss and hindrance the united Provinces might thereby reap and sustain,
trusting unto God for his merciful aid, they fully determined valiantly to
fall upon the Portugal army, thereby to drive them from thence, and upon the
same resolution, presently all their Cabbens and other things that might hinder
them were pulled down and cast ouer-bord, to the end that when need required,
freely use their great Ordnance, and every man personally stand to his defense
against the enemy as need required; The Ordnance being cleared, and all things
ready prepared for such a fight, being set in order, the next morning at two of
the clock before daylight, upon a sign made by fire, they hoysed up their
anchors, about Sun rising, being the 25. day of December, and about the same
time were in sight of the Portugales, and after they had fought eight days
together with them, drove them from thence, and forced them to run away, their
ships being shot through with the Ordnance, and six ships lost, whereof two we
took, they themselves setting fire on two of them, and two were shot under
ground, and for our parts lost but one man, but many hurt, and with great
honor went back to Bantam, wherein few days they repaired their ships. At
this triumphant victory, not only the Indian Kings and Princes, but also the
ghostly Father of his Highness, pater John Nay (when he in Anno 1607. was in
the Hage) much wondered, and finding occasion to speak with the General
Wolfart Hermans, he asked him what moved him to be so hardy and bold, to set
upon so mighty a Fleet of ships, which for ships and men was three times
stronger then his was, whereby it was apparent, that both he and his men were
likely to be spoiled by them. He made him answer, that he was assured of Gods
gracious aid, who endowed them with such manly courage, and that before they
would have permitted the Enemy to be Masters of them and their goods, they
would have set fire on their powder, and at one instance would have blown
their Enemies and themselves up into the air. I have written this battle
somewhat more at large, intending not to make rehearsal of the brave victory
gotten by Matelief before Malacca, and of Stephen Verhaghen before Ambyna, etc.
because I will be brief, the honor only belonging unto God, who gives his
servants courageous hearts to effect great matters, and to bring them to pass,
to whom be praise and glory for ever Amen.

Lastly, you write that some men that live here in the Country, will be
doubtful to trust their money in strange elements, where the wind blows it
away, and whereof in long time, men shall not hear again. All these doubts,
by that which is said before, are sufficiently taken away, but to such as have
not read the Letters Patents made and granted to the West Indian Company, by
the general States, I said, You know how the East Indian Company began
particularly without any aid from the Country, and with indifferent benefit,
and furtherance to the particular partners, by Gods blessing, still continue
the same, whereof the profit would have been two times greater, if they had
not been pressed with excessive great charges, touching war, for the
maintenance of the East Indian Trade, and the defense of themselves and their
allies. Whereas the West Indian Company, are granted a notable aid to be
given them by the general States, in respect of their great charges, for they
are promised, that they will defend and protect their Company in their free
Seafaring and Trade, and to that end help them with a sum of money of ten 100.
thousand Gilderns, to be paid in five years, whereof the first 200. thousand
Gilderns shall be furnished, as soon as the first payment among the partners
shall be made, and when they have furnished the half of the said ten 100.
thousand Gildernes, they shall have their benefit of the gain and profit as
all other partners in the said Company shall have. And further, when so ever
the matter within the limits of the Company, shall proceed to an open war; the
States promise to aid the same further, with twenty Ships, well mounted and
appointed of all things, as also of brass and other Ordinance, and a
convenient quantity of ammunition, together with double sails, ropes, anchors,
and other things accordingly. And that when these Countries are somewhat eased
of their great charges which now they are at, and that the said Company should
happen to be put to great charges, by reason of wars, the said Company
should have an amends made them of the said Subsidy, as much as the state of
the land would permit. Upon these benefits and graunts, without doubt many
thousands will willingly contribute thereunto, specially when they shall
understand, that the Trade to Guinea and to the Salt Countries, is also
comprehended in the West Indian Company, which trades yearly have made good
returns, as I have already partly showed, which also will partly lighten the
burden of the Company; whereof when the partners shall be well informed before,
wherein (with this discourse I would willingly aid them) they will the
readilier contribute, which by my self I have found: for being resolved, (for
the love of my Country) to put in a portion, after that I was better informed
of the matter, I doubled the same. And this is certain, that there will a great
number contribute unto the same, whose hearts are by God stirred up thereunto,
1 Samuel 10.27. in the register whereof I hope your name will be one, although
there shall not want money for the erecting of this notable Company, for the
which so many thousand good Patriots the last year did long and wish after:
for if some particular persons, at their own costs and charges (as aforesaid)
in time of war, raised, furnished and set forward 140. great ships to sail
Southward to Guinea, Cuba, and Espaniola, and still kept them in Trade. How
much greater then shall this Fleet be, (by Gods blessing) being endowed with so
great furtherances and privileges, for the ease and benefit of the partners,
by the general States: for the which preparation some other Commonwealths, and
many thousands, that are not of the united Netherlands, will participate with
us. We must also consider, that for the price that one East Indian ship does
cost to set it out, and in 17. months brings home her return, we may for the
money set out 3. or 4. West Indian ships, with hope of 2. returns in a year,
which ships may also be sent out 12. voyages one after the other, without
reparations, which will also ease us of a great part of our charges. Now to
conclude, I must answer you to your proposition, of strange elements, whereby
you understand, that we should both lose our capital and benefit all together.
In trusting to the venture of the Seas, I believe the last well, but that we
should lose both capital and profit by this Fleet, I hope that God will never
permit it, but those that deliver out their moneys for firm rents, or for any
such pawnes, are not they sometimes subject to such chances, specially in time
of war: yea, and in time of peace it often times falls out, that the honors
in twenty years do not receive their principal money laid out for their
dear bought lands, where men in time of war, by the Indian Trade, have
received five or six principal stocks, by the Spanish Trade men in time of
peace yearly gained 20. pro cento, when their Trade prospered, which profit
the Indians and other Merchants, also in time of war; by other Countries (as
I said before) got out of Spain, and yet get always the return that shall
come out of the West Indies, will far surpass others, when we shall have
planted some Colonies there (as we hope we shall) and it is apparent, that
many thousand Indians, will join with us, and deliver the hill of Potosy and
other places, (where the Mines of gold and filuer are) unto us: yet if this at
the first will not fall out so, we will gladly content our selves with the
other rich commodities and great blessings, which it shall please God to send
us, wherewith those Countries above all others are richly furnished, as we at
large have already showed.

This is that which I thought good to write, for an answer unto your questions
aforesaid, and other doubts by you made, nothing doubting but that all good
Patriots, that defire the good, benefit, and prosperity of our native Country,
will not at any time take on them, with a good conscience, to speak or give
counsel to leave off the East and West Indian Trades, that we may hold and
enjoy an uncertain Spanish Trade, not that we do not in any sort long and
wish after a godly, upright, general, and continual peace: but because we
desire not under the show thereof, to be deceived. Always the necessity of the
said Indian Trades, for two reasons is specially thought convenient. The first,
that the free Netherlands confidering their cituation, and the manner of living
used by the Inhabitants thereof, cannot continue in their flourishing state and
welfare, wherein (notwithstanding the war) they now are, if their Ships, rich
Havens, and Seafaring men, and rich Merchants Town, have not free Trade and
traffic at Sea. The second considering the King of Spaines might and riches,
in all respects, the Netherland Provinces must be persuaded, that there is no
better means in the world to be found, whereby to be released of that
continual fear, then to undermine the foundation of his great riches to
bereave him of a good deal of his East and West Indian Trade, In such manner,
that by means of the fire in the East and West Indies so kindled, the
Spaniards shall in such manner decline, that all the world shall warm it self
by that fire, for that the Merchants thereby, upon the eclipse of the Spanish
Trade, will disburse no money before hand.

And although the first necessity of the Traffic beyound Seas, may be some be
contradicted and answered in this manner, that it follows not thereupon, that
we must of force Traffic into India, but rather if we have peace, we might
again have and use our old Trade into Spain, whereunto, although before I
made answer to the same, yet for some pregnant reasons, I will again repeat
them, that it may the better be understood, and briefly said, First that the
Spanish Trade, can not be assured unto us, for that the Spaniards by a hundred
ways will find means (whereunto they will not want pretenses) to make it
unprofitable for us, as by his Impositions, Toles and Proclamations, as of late
years it appeared. Secondly, it is altogether dangerous, for that if the Enemy
has any great enterprise in hand, by that means (we having put our selves
into the hands and power of our reconciled Enemy,) he may not only have many
hundred thousand means to hinder us, but aid himself by our Ships, Ordinance
and Saylors in great numbers, to our great detriment, which Spanish Trade also,
notwithstanding, in time of War, by means of the English and Frenchmen, we
have used with indifferent good gain; therefore it is altogether to be
disliked, and not convenient for us, upon such terms to treat with the
Spaniard.

But now my Lords the States general upon premeditated ripe deliberation and
good advise, (without doubt by the good providence of God) have generally
granted the West Indian Trade to go forward, and have endowed the same with
notable privileges, whereunto many good Patriots according to their means,
have willingly begun to contribute. The Spaniards will not cease to use a
thousand practices, to frustrate and make void the said States good
resolutions, either by some Merchants or other Favorites, whom they will seek
to stroke with the golden staff of Peru, yet with those that are good and
honest, to no end, who for no worldly respect will be moved unto so hurtful
and dishonorable resolution, being assured, that at the last, thereby will
ensue the subversion of this great state, and consequently of all their Allies
and adherents.

But now some men will say, that we ought to keep in our Country, without
seeking to extend our command by Colonies beyond the Seas, that we may keep
and defend that we have. That is but a bad counsel, for his power, by our
Trade in East India (as aforesaid) is much decayed, and if God (whom we must
pray unto for that grace) will give us a good success in the West Indies, he
will without doubt desire Peace with us, which for our security he will
religiously keep and maintain, only not to lose a great part of his Indian
revenue, whereunto we have good hope, for the reasons before, at large by us
set down.

Then having showed, how these Countries, by the trade beyond the Seas, (by
Gods blessing) have even in the middle of their Wars increased in Trade,
people, and wealth, (which are the Sinews of this Commonwealth) so we must
confess that the East Indian Trade, has wrought two notable effects. It has
increased the means of our native Country, with no small decreasing of the
Spanish Trade in East India. For the which, God is eternally to be praised,
and having also showed, that yet better success by the West Indian Trade, is
(by Gods blessing) to be expected. Then all good Patriots ought to encourage
one the other, (seeing that they cannot better employ their money, for more and
greater reputation for the Country then so) liberally to contribute their
money for the setting forth of this Fleet in 3. payments, whereof the first
shall be paid the last of November, which next unto God, will be a sovereign
means to hold the Enemy in balance, and keep us and all our neighbors and
friends, in peace without any fear, if in man's Judgment and consideration,
there be any security to be had.

Tu conclude, I beseech God, to be pleased to hold his Holy hand over this
Fleet, and to strengthen it with his aid, and so to direct it, that thereby
our Enemies may be weakened and overthrown, and we strengthened and made
powerful, and yet nevertheless not to embolden our selves upon our own
power, but only to rest upon God, and with humble hearts and bended knees to
thank him for the same, and commit our selves to his Fatherly protection.
Commending the Lords the general States, his Excellency the Prince of Orange,
and all other Noble personages, and valiant Soldiers unto God.

Vale. Written in have the First of September. 1621.
And to show our Batauiaens in East India, in the beginning have bin
entertained of Kings and Princes, notwithstanding the Portugales and Jesuits,
sought to hinder the same, with some of them, by scandalous reports. You may
read the Coppie of a Letter that Signeur Arenet ten Grotenhuyse a Merchant and
partner wrote unto Mr. N. N. from Amsterdam, Anno, 1610. the 29. of July, as
follows.

GOod Friend, having read the Letters that came out of East India, and examined
the Commissioners, I thought good to make you perticipant thereof, which is,
that the Admiral Verhoeff thinking it expedient to send two Ships (namely the
Lion with piles, and the Grison, which he had left there for the Defense of
Ihoor) to the Island of Iapan, there to obtain License of the Emperor freely
to Trade, and to make a Contract with him touching the same, according to the
Letters by the Prince of Orange written unto the said King, and the
instructions of the Partners to that end also given. And as soon as those Ships
had received those Letters and Commission from the Admiral, they hoysed up
their Anchors before Booz and set sail, holding their course to Pataua, and
taking in some Silk, unwrought, Silk stuffes, and some Pepper, in the
beginning of June Anno, 1609. they sailed to Iapan, and upon the First of Inly
anchored before the Town of Firando, lying under the height of 33. Degrees,
and 20. minutes, where our men were well and friendly received and entertained
by the Governor, and Magistrates of the place, and for that the Governor of
that part of the Country was in few days after to go unto the great
Emperor to salute him, (which throughout all the Kingdom once a year is to
be done by every Governor) they persuaded our Committee, that he should also
presently go thither with him, that so the Portugales and Jesuits, that
reside in Hagesacke about eighteen miles from Furando, might not prevent them,
nor hinder in their suit, which our Committees considering of, made preparation
to go, having first gotten letters of commendation from the Gouemour of
Furando, and taking some presents with them, set forward on their journey,
accompanied with a Netherlander called Melchior van Sandtuoore, that had dwelt
ten or twelve years in that Country, and was left of Mahews Fleet, with
about ten persons more, and could speak Spanish very well, and also ten or
twelve persons of good quality, that were appointed to go with them, that no
hurt might be done unto them by the way, and so travailed for the space of 14.
days by water, and eight days on horseback by land, about 300. miles,
passing through many fair built and well inhabited Towns, where in every
place they were well and honorably entertained, till at last they came to a
great fair Town, wherein the great King or Emperor of Iapan holds his Court,
where they presently addressed themselves unto, and had audience of two great
Lords near attending upon the King, who forthwith brought them into the Kings
presence, and got audience for them, where they were most friendly welcomed
and entertained both by the said two Lords, and the King, and having showed the
cause of their coming, and business with the King, and delivered the Presents
and Letters of Prince Maurice unto him, the Emperor showed them a most
friendly countenance, telling them, that he liked well of their coming with
their Ships and of themselves, asking after the manner and cituation of our
Country, and what manner of man our Prince was, of whom by the men that were
of Machiens Ships, he had formerly-heard much speaking, and also had heard of
the valor of our men, in the battles fought by our Ships in India, against
the Portugales, specially of those of Malucco, saying that he was sorry that
our Ships arrived not in some Haven nearer unto his Court, that he might show
us greater courtesy, and so granted us our request, for free trading and
commerse in his Country and whole Kingdom, and for that he understood that no
agreement could be made between us and the Portugales, he granted us
therefore as free license to traffic and negotiate in his Country, as any of
his own people and subjects have. Three days before the arrival of our
Committees there, some Portugales and Jesuits were come to the Court, using
all the means they could to make us distasteful to the King, and to hinder us
from having access unto the Emperor, but all in vain; for that bebefore we
came, they could get no audience of the great personages, nor yet of the
Emperor: and after that our men had been 10. days at the Court, and there
seen great magnificence, riches, and glorious shows, they obtained license of
the Emperor to depart, who gave them an open Letter written unto the Prince of
Orange, in Iapan language, bravely sealed up, and to the end that we should
know the contents of the said Letter: it was by one of the Iapeners read unto
us, and put into Dutch by four or five of our Nation, the contents thereof
being as follows, I Emperor and King, etc. our men cannot sufficiently set
down the firtillity and fruitfulness of the Country, abounding in Rice,
Wheat, Goats, a great number of dried and fresh Fish: all kinds of trees, and
fruits of the earth, as Apples, Oranges, Lemonds, and many other fruits, which
are common with us. They have good policy and laws in their Country, they are
a kind of witty and courteous people, amongst them having many rich men which
are Heathens, only about Hagesar, where the Portugales dwell, there are some
Christians. This land buyeth many kind of Manufactures of our Country, and
has good store of gold and silver, many rich Mines of Copper, and still more
and more are found: the Emperors reuenew of Gold and Rice is innumerable, our
men understood by those of Iapan, and also by the Netherlands, that the Tower
in the Castle was full of Plate, Gold and Silver, in such great pieces, that
ten men could hardly lift them.

They also said, that the Country lies much more Northerly then it is set
down in our Cards, and that it reaches about 23. degrees, and 48. minutes
more Northerly, it is full of diverse Towns; so that as you travel through the
Country, every three or four miles you shall find a Town, besides the
Villages that lie between them. It is full of hills, which from the bottom to
the top are fruitful, as also fair flat valleys, many rivers, ponds and
pooles. The Emperor has 66. Kings under him, he is a man of about 60. years
old, and two years ago he caused his son to be crowned, which has his
Court at Eden, lying upon a fair river, about three miles broad.

And so having been ten days in the Court, they went again to their Ship
lying at Firando: and after they had there hired a house for our men, upon the
1. of October Anno 1609. they departed from thence, leaving one Jacques Phillips
there for their chief Merchant, one under Factor, and three more, in all five
persons, with an indifferent stock: and from thence set sail for Pataua,
where they took in more Pepper, raw Silk, and Silk Clothes, and with it
returned home into the Netherlands, arriving here with all their men whole and
sound upon the 20. of July, having lost but three men that were sick and dyed
in the voyage, from Iapan hither, etc.

FINIS.

