THE CHRISTIAN EXERCISE OF FASTING, PRIVATE AND PVBLIKE:

Plainly set forth by testimonies of holy Scriptures, and also of old and late
writers:

Wherein is showed how religious families privately, and the congregations
publicly, have humbled themselves before almighty God, making use of
judgments past, avoiding evils present, and preventing future calamities, etc.

Together with sundry abuses of fasting in three generations of hypocrites:
the first in the days of the Prophets: the second in the days of Christ: the
third in the days of Antichrist.

Hereunto also are added some meditations on the 1. and 2. chapters of Job, to
comfort and instruct all such as be afflicted with any cross, either inwardly
in mind, or outwardly in body.

By H. HOLLAND Minister and preacher of Gods word.

Psalm. 141. verse. 5. Let the righteous smite me (for that is) a benefit, and
let him reprove me, (and it shall be) a precious oil, that shall not break
mine head.

AT LONDON, Printed by the Widow Orwin for William Young, and are to be sold at
his shop in Canon lane near the great Northdoore of Paul's Church, at the
sign of the white Horse. 1596.

The principal points and questions handled in this book.
1. What kinds there be of fasting. 2. What the religious fast is. 3. How the
religious abstinence is divided into two branches: 1. Private. 2. Public.
4. What private fasting is. 5. What the public fast is. 6. The corruption and
abuse of fasting. 7. Some observations upon the 1. and 2. chapter of Job.
To the right worshipful and his very Christian good friend, master Robert
Chester, Esquier, etc. mercy and peace in Jesus Christ.
THe pure worship and service of God (right worshipful) has two dangerous
extremes, superstition is the one, impiety is the other. The people of this
age seeming wise, to avoid the unsavory leaven of popish corruption, are
fallen asleep in carnal security and prophanenes. If the prince of darkness
had not so blinded men, that they can not see the beauty of Gods house, nor
reap any comfort by his service, this exercise of fasting should little need
any letters of commendation. For the book of God so commends it in the
practice of the Saints, Patriarchs, Kings, Prophets, Apostles, and Church
stories in the fathers and servant of God in all ages: that I can think a
man but meanly acquainted with Gods worship, which does not otherwhiles
exercise himself herein. This will good Bucer testify with me in these very
words: Bu^er de regno Christi lib. 1. cap. 12.
Cum ieiunia Dominus ipse and Apostoli tantopere Ecclesiijs commendarunt: de
Christi certe spiritu, and regno gloriari non possunt, qui omnino nulla servant
ieiunia. That is, Seeing the Lord himself and his Apostles have so commended
fasting to the Churches, surely they can not glory of Christ's spirit and
kingdom which fast not at all. I have endeavored in this treatise to lay open
this exercise to the understanding of the simple, in the best manner that I
could. I must look for many adversaries, for the greatest part has ever
declined from piety to superstition and prophanenes. Therefore (right
worshipful) I come unto you for protection of Gods truth: being the more
bold to ask this favor, because I am so well assured of your love thereunto,
and full resolution to defend the same with all your might during life. Again,
I have now for many years known your Christian love toward me for the
truths sake, I desire to testify my hearts affection toward you in the best
manner that I can. The most blessed spirit of Jesus Christ guide and govern
your spirit, keep and comfort you and all yours. February. 12. 1596.

Yours assuredly ever to use in Jesus Christ during life. HENRY HOLLAND.

To the Christian Reader, mercy and peace in Jesus Christ.
I Have endeavored in this treatise (Christian Reader) to lay open this
argument of fasting plainly and truly according to the Scriptures. First, the
religious abstinence is described: next the branches of the same, the private
and the public with their special notes and differences. Thirdly, I have
showed what causes, and reasons have moved the faithful, to exercise
themselves in the one and in the other. The private fast is only commended in
the practice of the faithful of all ages. The public is both commanded by
precept, and commended by practice, and was both ordinary and extraordinary.
And first for the ordinary we have Gods great charge and law written. 1. The
10. Leuit 23.27.16.29.
day of the 7. month ye shall humble your souls. 2. Ye shall do no work at
all, verse. 29. and it shall be a feast of Kippurim, a day of reconciliation.
General ordinary fast.
4. throughout their dwellings, verse. 31. 5 an ordinance Leuit. 16.31.
for ever. The practice and obedience of this law we have noted. Heb. 9.7.
But into the second (Tabernacle) went the high priest alone, once every year,
etc. that is, this solemn day appointed. This law of a general ordinary fast
for the Jews, may seem to bind us, and might no doubt be profitable for the
Christians under the Gospel, if it were observed. The cause of this fast (says
one) was that the wrath of God might not break out, or being broken out, that
it might be a means to return it home again: the same cause remaining, wise
men will conclude the effect shall continue. Again (says he) this exercise
being a means to humble a man before his God, was there any degree of
humiliation, necessary for that people, which is not as needful for us? Nay,
we having received under the Gos^ell more benefits then they, the abuse of Gods
good gifts and graces in us, should drive us to the lowest humiliation that can
be, so it be lawful and warrantable by the word of God. General
extraordinary fast. Joel. 1. chap. ver. 14. 2. cap. ver. 16.
The extraordinary was either signified by prophet, and so commanded of God
immediately as we see by Joel: or published by Gods Vicegerents, princes and
priests, the presidents and governors of Gods people, as shall appear by
sundry examples of the Scripture in this treatise following.

Superstition has ever prevailed in the world, where Gods grace and light was
wanting, to corrupt all the pure worship of God, but never so much abused any
one exercise of religion as this of fasting. The very Heathens abuse fasting in
the worship of their false gods. The priests of Egypt ever abstained from flesh
and wine, and thought this a matter of great devotion. The wise men of Persia,
their diet was but farina and olus, course bread and herbs. The wizards of
India, when they came to the priesthood of the Sun, did ever after abstain
from flesh. The priests of Egypt fasted 3. days before they sacrificed. So the
devil commands coniurers to fast three days before any magical practice of
coniuration. And to be short, Mahomet extolleth fasting: for the Turks fasted
in the siege of Constantinople, and having won the city, ascribe this great
victory to their fasting. But to pass by these Pagans, and to come unto the
Church, for this corruption crept also into it, even from the beginning. Esaias.
58. Zach. 7. and ca. 8. Philo. Joseph.
In the days of the Prophets it was thought a service which might highly
commend a man with God. In the days of Christ, the Essees and Pharisees did
far exceed the former ages in the abuse of fasting. And to come unto the
Gospel, Superstition in time did so gather strength, where light was quenched,
that all the pure worship of God was at last quite thrust out of Church doors.
The year of Christ 220. Anno. 220.
the Montanists began to be very superstitious in the abuse of fasting, and to
set up will worship, as appears with Tertullian in a whole treatise of fasting
for herein he does Montanize daungerously, Tertul. de ^iunio.
for following their very words and phrases, he says: Fasting is a means to
purge us from sin and death, an expiation and satisfaction for sin and a
means to reconcile us unto God. Anno. 280. August. contrae Faustum. lib. 6.
cap. 5. and lib. 30. cap. 5. Anno. 360.
After these the Manichees followed, commanding and teaching men to abstain
from all flesh, eggs, wine, etc. Then were spread abroad into many parts of
the world the monastical laws and rites of fasting, which first began in
Egypt, and from thence came into Syria, and by means of Eustathius crept into
Armenia, afterward by Basil into Greece, Basil and Nazianzen did weaken them
selves to much with fasting.
and of Ambrose into Italy. About this time Basil began to exhort mightily
unto fasting, and yet were no laws made to bind consciences. But Epiphanius
anon after made Bishop of Cyprus, began not only to exhort, but also to
command laws, and the times of fasting, etc. as constitutions and traditions
apostolical, clean contrary to the doctrine, custom and liberty of the old
Church, Sociates story is to be noted.
as appears with Socrates, lib. 5. cap. 21. For there was no Scripture or
law written by the Apostles (says Socrates) concerning fasting. And
Chrysostom counts fasting a thing indifferent: Chrysostom homil, 4. ad populum
Antioch.
his very words are these: Sunt quidam ciborum inter se, etc. Many strive about
meats: so let us strive and endeavor to take away this custom of swearing
(says he) and these wicked oaths which men rap out so thick amongst us. This
is better then all fasting. The care and time we spend about abstinence from
meats, let us spend in learning and laboring to abstain from swearing. For
it is madness (says he) lightly to regard things forbidden, and to strive about
things Ieiunium est ad^aphoron. Nos concessis abstinentes, prohibita audemus?
indifferent. We be not forbidden to eat, but we be to swear, etc. If the
holy writers had well considered those words of the Apostle, Chrysostom. homil.
in Math. 47. ie^untum in choro virtutu^ extremu^ certe sortitur locum.
bodily labor profits little, but piety is profitable unto all things: they
would not so lightly have fallen into those high and hyperbolicall
commendations of fasting, which afterward gave such occasion to Antichrist, to
abuse this exercise in the Church of God. For when the man of sin came to sit
as general and universal Bishop in the seat of pestilence, then were strong
laws made to bind consciences. The Popes schoolmen did preach and write,
that fasting was a work to purchase and merit grace, August complains much
against the like in his time: Epist. 119. what would he have done, if he had
seen the the ages following.
pardon of sins, reconciliation with God, and a special work to purchase
heaven, marvelous effectual and profitable for the quick and dead. I speak
their own words, as after shall appear. Thus then thou see (Christian
reader) what an argument this is which I undertake to commend unto the Church
of God. I know it requires more strength and time then I have or can have any.
Notwithstanding, I was thus moved and imboldened to publish this small
treatise. First, for that I find but few to have done any thing in this manner
in english of this argument. I have written therefore that the ignorant might
better know and more practice fasting: trusting that the Lord will in time
supply what here is wanting. Next, my desire is to stir up the faithful
people of God, because of some dangers threatened these times against us, by
prayer and fasting to beg a general pardon of sins, and christian courage
for prince and people, and our whole army to fight the Lords battles. And to
stop the mouths of Machiuelists, Com. lib. 2. cap. 2. Ier. 38 4. 2. These. 2.11.
which are not ashamed to say, that preaching prayer and fasting be means to
cast down, discourage, and to make a people faint hearted. And this do fools
believe because they neither believe nor love the truth. But the spirit of God
speaks the contrary, testifying unto us of the courage and good success of
Joshua, David, Iehoshaphat, Ezra, Nehemias, after prayer and fasting.

Lastly, I was moved hereunto by the spiteful speeches and writings of our
common adversaries, who falsely accusing our profession, cry in the ears of
the simple, and publish in their books, that we count Rhems. T. Acts. 13.
cap. annot. Number. 3.
fasting but a moral and Christian temperance, That fasting is a matter of
policy we never held, but that abstine^ce from flesh may be commanded for
policies sake we confess.
a fasting from sin, etc. And yet a more manifest calumniation: Luke. cap. 2.
The. T. annot. Number. 17.
The heretics count fasting (say they) but a matter of policy.

To answer these accusers. First I say upon mature and deliberat consideration,
and for good policy, do the laws of this kingdom commend an abstinence
from flesh for some days in the week, etc. For maintenance of navigations: for
breeding and increase of cattle: 5. Eliz. cap. 5, title. certain politic
constitutions, made for maintenance of the navy.
and that the trade of fishing and fish markets might be continued in our land:
as by the very words of the statute may appear. Be it further enacted by the
authority aforesaid, for the benefit and commodities of this Realm, to grow
as well in maintenance of the Navy, as in sparing and increase of flesh,
victual, in this realm, etc. that it shall not be lawful for any person or
persons within this realm, to eat any flesh upon any days now usually
observed as fish days, upon pain that every person offending herein, shall
forfeite 3. pounds for every time he or they shall offend, or else suffer 3.
months close imprisonment, without bail or mainprise. To this order is yet
further added a good caution, as follows. And because no manner of person
shall misiudge of the intent of this statute, limiting orders to eat fish, and
to forbear eating of flesh, but that the same is purposely intended and meant
politikely for the increase of Fishermen, and Mariners, and repayring of
Port-townes, and navigations, and not for any superstition to be maintained in
the choice of meats: be it enacted, that whosoever shall, by preaching,
teaching, writing, or open speech notify, that any eating of fish, or
forbearing of flesh, mentioned in this statute, is of any necessity, for the
saving of the souls of men, or that it is the service of God, otherwise then
as other politic laws are to be, that then such persons shall be punished as
spreaders of false news are and ought to be. And this is the Christian
policy which our friends, of Rhemes have stumbled upon. This abstinence
commanded by our laws, is an abstinence for order sake, as the learned Jerome
speaks; which whosoever disliketh is no friend to the common wealth, Ordinis
causa, com. in Gal. cap 5.

A good rule for things indifferent.

Epist. 118. Note the word contrary.


and may well be accounted a man of weak judgment: for as Augustine speaks
wisely, Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos mores iniungitur,
indifferenter est habendum, and pro eorum inter quos viuitur societate
seruandum. Look whatsoever is enjoined by order, that is not contrary to
says, nor contrary to good manners, that we must repute as a thing
indifferent, and observe the same for that society sake wherein we live.

And yet I further answer the Rhemish adversaries that our godly wise
governors, Church, and people, do also truly and in heart embrace the
religious abstinence described and commended of God in his word, and have and
do practice the same when occasions are offered and as need requires. And
this shall well appear also by a public fast commanded by our governors,
and kept in our Church in Anno 1563. For then, first our most gracious Queen
meued with a motherly affection for the mortality of her subjects and people,
signifies her good liking of a Christian fast, by her princely and express
charge, Archbishop Canterbury, Math. Parker.
to the Archbishop then being, all which as a worthy president for all
posterities I have inserted, as follows: Most reverend father in God, right
trusty, and right well-beloved, we greet you well: Like as Almighty God has
of his mere grace, committed to us next under him, the chief government of
this realm and the people therein: so has he of his like goodness, ordained
under us sundry principal ministers, to serve and assist us in this burden.
And therefore considering the state of this present time, wherein it has
pleased the most highest, for the amendment of us and our people, to visit
certain places of our realm with more contagious sickness, then lately has
been: for remedy and mitigation thereof, we think it both necessary and
our bounden duty, that universal prayer and fasting be more effectually used
in this our realm. And understanding that you have thought and considered upon
some good order to be prescribed therein, for the which ye require the
application of our authority, for the better observation thereof, amongst our
people, we do not only commend and allow your good zeal therein, but we
also command all manner of our ministers ecclesiastical, civil, and all other
our subjects to execute, follow, and obey such godly and wholesome orders, as
you being primate of all England, and Metropolitan of this province of
Canterbury, upon godly advise and consideration, shall uniformly devise,
prescribe, and publish for the universal usage of prayer, fasting, and other
good deeds, The order of the fast commanded by the Queen, and published in
print by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Anno. 1563.
during the time of the visitation by sickness and other troubles: Given under
our Signet at our Manor of Richmond the 1. day of August, the 5. year of our
reign. The order then prescribed by this Archbishop, and practiced by the
people was commended as follows. It is most evident to them that read the
scriptures, that both in the old Church under the law, and in the primitive
Church under the Gospel, the people of God has always used general general
fasting, both in times of common calamities, as wars, famine, pestilence,
etc. and also when any weighty matter, touching the estate of the Church, or
the common wealth was begun or intended. And it cannot be denied, but that
in this our time, wherein many things have been reformed, according to the
doctrine and examples of Gods word, and the primitive Church, this part for
fasting and abstinence, being always in the scripture as a necessary
companion joined to fervent prayer, has been too much neglected. Wherefore for
some beginning of redress herein, it has been thought meet to the Queens
majesty, that in this contagious time of sickness, and other troubles and
unquietness, according to the examples of the godly king Iehosaphat, and the
king of Niniuie, with others, a general fast should be joined with general
prayer throughout her realm, 1. Chro. 20. Jonas. 3.
and to be observed of all her godly subjects in manner and form following.
1. First, it is ordained that the wednesday of every week shall be the day
appointed for this general fast. 2. All persons between the age of 16. years
and 60. (sick folks and laborers in harvest, or other great labors only
excepted) shall eat but one only co^petent and moderate meal upon every
wednesday. In which said meal shall be used very sober and spare diet, without
variety of kinds of meat, dishes, spices, co^fectio^s, or wines, but only
such as may serve for necessity, comelines and health. 3. Item, in that meal,
it shall be indifferent to eat flesh or fish, so that their quantity be small,
and no variety or delicacie be sought. Wherein every man has to answer to
God, if he in such godly exercises either contemn public order, or dissemble
with God, pretending abstinence, and doing nothing less. 4. Item, those that
be of wealth and ability, ought that day to abate and diminish the costlines,
and variety of their fare, and increase therewith their liberality and alms
toward the poor, that the same poor which either indeed lack food, or else
that which they have is unseasonable and cause of sickness, may thereby be
relieved, and charitably succored, to be maintained in health. 5. Page 5.
Item, that a Sermon be had, preached by such as be authorized, and the
preacher to entreat of such matters especially as be meet for this cause of
public prayer, etc. 6. Last of all, this day being in this manner appointed
for a day of general prayer and fasting, ought to be bestowed by them, which
may forbear from bodily labor, in prayer, study, reading, or hearing of the
Scriptures, or good exhortations, etc. And when any dulnes or wearines shall
arise, then to be occupied in other godly exercises: but no part thereof to be
spent in plays, pastimes, or idleness, much less in lewd, wicked, or wanton
behavior.

I have thus purposely set before thine eyes, Christian reader, the religious
care of our good Prince and governors, partly to stop the mouths of
adversaries, which persuade men that we despise fasting: partly to stir up
Gods faithful people of all degrees, Anno 1588.
to renew their zeal in the true profession of the Gospel. And to conclude,
we have seen some years past, 1593.
a comfortable experience of Gods blessing upon the private and public
fastings and prayers of Gods people in the land. Wherefore let us in assurance
of faith draw near unto God, and humbly cast down our solues again, in
prayer and fasting, to confute adversaries sla^ders, to euert enemies
practices, to the glory of God, protection and deliverance of his Church,
confirmation of our own faith, souls and consciences, by and through Jesus
Christ: to whom with the Father, and most holy spirit, three distinct persons,
one invisible, everliving and everlasting God, be all praise for ever, Amen.

Thine in the Lord Christ Jesus, Henry Holland.

The Christian exercise of fasting, according to the Scriptures.
Matthew. 6. verse. 16.17.18. 16 Moreover, when ye fast, look not sour as the
hypocrites: for they disfigure their faces, that they might seem unto men to
fast. Verily I say unto you, that they have their reward.

17 But when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face.

18 That thou seem not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in
secret: and thy Father which sees in secret, will reward thee openly.


Our blessed Lord and Master Jesus Christ, has knit together in the first part
of this chapter 3. special points, which cannot well be severed, Alms,
Prayer, and Fasting. For by fasting we give wings to our own prayers, and by
alms we cause the loins of the poor, Job. 31.19.20.
if their hearts can not, to bless us, to pray with us, and to speak to God
for us. The Pharisees abused all these three good exercises in a spiritual
pride and ostentation. Therefore our Savior Christ teaches us first for
alms, how to avoid the pharisaicall vainglorie, and how to please our heavenly
father, verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. Secondly for prayer, how to avoid the ambition of the
Pharisees, and how to please our heavenly father, verse. 5. and 15. Thirdly for
fasting, how to renounce their hypocrisy, and how to please the heavenly
father, verse. 16. 17. 18.

In these 3. ver. I note two things. 1. A dehortatio^ from the abuse of
fasting: this has 2. branches, verse. 16. 1. The description of an hypocrites
fast, by 3. marks. 1. They look sowrely. 2. They disfigure their faces. 3.
They desire to be seen of men.
2. The confirmation of the dehortatio^, or a testificatio^ of Christ's dislike.
1. By Christ's usual oath or asseueration: Verily, I say unto you. 2. No reward
of GOD, but shame.

2. An exhortation to the right use of fasting, verse. 17. 18. containing two
points. 1. A demo^stratio^ of the simplicity of a true fast, by 2. arguments.
1. Of adjuncts, verse. 17. 1. Anointing the head. 2. Washing the face.
2. End, verse. 18. that thou may appear to God to fast, and not to men.
2. A confirmation. 1. From the good reward following, verse. 18. 2. By
answering an objection. Ob. It is done in secret, therefore the reward is lost.
Ans. God sees in secret, and will reward thee openly.





The sense.
Verse. 16. Moreover, when ye fast. That is, I appoint ye not to fast Ieiunaba^t
bis in sabba tho. 2 and 5. die. Epip. contr. haereses. lib. 1. tom. 1. (...).
twice in the week, as the pharisees and hypocrites do, Luke 18.12. but when
ye fast, either occasioned for private respects privately, or having a charge
from God and his Church publicly, Leuit. 23. then, etc. but this instruction
concerns specially the private fast. Sour. The word signifies one that
carries an heavy countenance, or an angry face, clean contrary to this, is a
cheerful countenance, Genesis 40.7. The Septuagint use this word, whereas the
Hebrew is: wherefore look ye with such evil faces, or so sadly this day?
Tremel. ne sitis Cemarim.
The Syriac translation has another word to be noted: for that is: Be not
ye Cemarims, or as the black Cemarims. It may be the Syriac translator did
use this word, for that these pharisees did not only look sowrely, but used
also the Cemarims black attire, the more to be seen of men that they fasted.
See 2. King. 23.5. Hos. 10.5. Zeph. 1. verse. 4.

D^sfigure, or obscure, or deforme their faces, that is, they make their faces
appear worse than they be naturally. They cause that their natural
countenance may not appear. (...).


Anoint thine head, and wash thy face. That is, Verse. 17.
be cheerful: for their ointments were unto them for the same use, as our
sweet perfumes and compound waters be unto us. See 2. Sam. 12.20. etc.

Reward openly. That is, Verse. 18.
heaven and earth shall see thy reward, men and Angels shall know thee, and thy
fear and fasting, if it be in faith, and as he has prescribed in his word,
it is accepted of God, and shall be rewarded both in this life, and the life to
come: for so is the promise for all true worshippers, 1. Tim. 4.8.

Now concerning this Christian exercise of fasting, and the practice thereof
here commended by our Lord and Savior Christ I think it best we proceed to
speak in this manner following.

1. To consider what a religious fast is, and how it may be described according
to the Scriptures. 2. How a religious fast has his two branches or specials,
the private and the public: and here first what a private fast is, and how it
may best be defined. 3. What motives and reasons have caused the faithful to
practice private fasting in all ages, and whether we ought not to fast also in
the like occasions. 4. What a public fast is, and for what causes the same is
to be published, and by whom in the Church. 5. The abuse of fasting by 3.
generations of hypocrites. 1. In the old Church in the days of the Prophets,
the first generation of hypocrites. 2. Jn the days of Christ, a more detestable
generation of hypocrites. 3. In the days of Antichrist, not only abusing, but
wholly corrupting this holy exercise of fasting.

The first Question. What a religious fast is, and how described according to
the Scriptures.
OF fasting, I find there are many kinds very good and commendable all, and
needful to be known and practiced of men. First, we have a natural fast
prescribed by the learned Physician to preserve and to restore health: Hipocr.
Qui integra and constanti aetate sunt, optime far possunt ieiunium.
good to dissolve and consume raw humors, and to expel superfluous excrements
out of the body. Of this fasting speaks one learned Physician: Look what
diseases, fasting and emptines cannot help, cure them by medicine. Fernel.
meth. lib 2. cap. 20. quos morbos inedia non sustulit, medicatione curato.

Ibid. Salubris est te^pestiua abstinentia, and apprime vtilis quae per inediu^
fit curatio.


Again, Fasting and emptines, observing convenient time and season, is good
for health, and that cure which is by it, is very wholesome and profitable for
the body. Of Aurelianus an Emperor of Rome it is said, that being sick he
never sent for a Physician, but cured himself with abstinence. This is a good
and needful fast: but of this we may not pass our bounds to speak much in
this place.

2. There is also a civil fast, which may be used to good purpose, and whereof
we have some examples in the Scriptures. This fast is when men would
accomplish or perform any thing with expedition, they abstain from all meats
and drinks, because their minds are so set on, and intend their present
affairs. Such was Saul's fast in the pursuit of the Philistines, 1. Sam. 14.24.
where in pride of heart, and but rashly, he gave this charge: Cursed be the man
that eats food till night. And such was the proud fast of the Jews,
cursing, banning, and binding themselves to the devil, if they would not fast
til they had killed Paul, Act. 23.12. Certain of the Jews made an assembly,
and bound themselves with an (...).
oath, saying, that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed
Paul. That cursed bond was fearful, yet howsoever Satan dealt with them that
bond was broken. This fast may be used rightly and to good purpose, as for
dispatch of matters judicial by inquests, for the ending of controversies in
the common laws of this land. But this is not the fast we be to speak of.

3. A third kind may rightly be called the fast of Christian sobriety: This
the Scripture commends and commands Gods people to practice all days of
their life, Romans 13.13. 1. Cor. 9.25. Tit. 1.7.8. 1. These. 5.6. Tit. 2.10.11.
Of this speaks S. Pet. 1. ep. 5.7. Be sober and watch: reason is added,
knowing that your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, goes about seeking
who^ he may devour. Luxurious, and unclean men, which know not this virtue,
Christian sobriety.
are not able to strike one stroke against Satan in the spiritual battle. Be
sober therefore and watch, says Peter. Such as glut and farce themselves with
meats and drinks, cannot watch long, but you must watch in body and mind:
Job. 1.7.
for Satan is a notable watchman, and a very vigilant. B. as master Latymer
calls him. Bernard speaking therefore of this fast, wills us to look
circumspectly to all parts every day: Bernard. de quadrag. sermon.
Let the eye fast, let the ear fast, let the tongue fast, let the hands fast,
let the soul it self also fast: let the eye fast from curious sights, and all
wantonness: let the itching evil ear fast from fables and evil report: let
the tongue fast from slander, and murmuring, from unprofitable and vain
words, and railing speeches: let the hands fast from idle signs, and all
works which are not commanded: let the soul fast from sin, and doing our
own will. So far Bernard. Another yet further commending this, Cyrillus in
Leuit. Hom. 8.9.10. Ieiuna ab omni peccato, nullum sumas cibum malitiae, nullas
capias voluptatis epulas, etc.
says: Will thou that I teach thee how to fast? fast from all sin: eat not
the bread of maliciousness; feed not on the meats of voluptuousnes; be not
heat with the wine of luxuriousnes; fast from evil works, abstain from evil
words: suppress evil thoughts, touch not the stolen bread of false doctrine;
desire not the meats of evil and corrupt philosophy to deceive thee: such a
fast pleases God. Qui ieiunare non potest, studeat temperantiae, abstineat a
delitijs. Chrysostom.
This is marvelous need full in these days to be commended, for that we have
so many reuellers, gluttons, drunkards, which in few days devour and consume
all their substance and patrimonies, seldom or never able to recover to serve
God or man in Church or Commonwealth. The Lord Christ warns us carefully to
avoid the contrary sins, Luke 21.34. Take heed least at any time your
hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and with the cares of this
life. And against the contrary sins cries Ezechiel, in his time, assuring
us that fulness of meats, gluttony and drunkenness were the destruction and bane
of Sodom, chap. 16.49. Behold this was the iniquity of Sodom, pride, fulness of
bread, and abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters, neither did
she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy: but they were haughty, and
committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as pleased me.
Jerome speaking of these sins, says: Venture vino aestuans spumat in
libidinem: The belly inflamed with wine fometh forth unclean lusts. Thus
far of the fast of Christian sobriety, commended so much of divine and
humane writers, and not without cause, for that it is so good for health, for
body, for soul, for the Commonwealth, and for the poor of the land,
specially in the years of scarsitie: for then Christians are bound to be more
moderate, more sober, and sparing in all their diet. But this is not the fast
which Christ commends in our text, nor that we desire principally to commend
in this treatise.

4. A fourth kind, A constrained fast.
we may call a forced or constrained fast: which is when poor or rich or both
in famine are constrained to fast, because they cannot find any meat to feed
upon. This fast also is needful, for Epicures will never fast till they be
constrained.
This was often in Israel for the chastiseme^t of Gods people, Joel. 1. and 2.
chap. A number have perished in this abstinence in elder ages, and some no
doubt among us, because the rich are unmerciful to the poor: and yet for all
the penury of these two years past in our land, more have dyed of surfeiting
and fulness, then of want and emptines. Of this read Ezech. 4.9.7. verse. and
Joseph. Antiq. 3. lib. cap. 12. De bello. Iud. lib. 6. cap. 11.14 Boum veterem
fimum ad alime^tu^ haberent.

De bello. Iud. lib. 7. c. 7. and 8.


This fast pinched the epicures of Samaria, when an Asses head was valued at
80. pieces of silver, 2. King. 6.25. And the miserable Jews which in the siege
of Jerusalem fed upon some old ox dung, De bello, Iud. lib. 6. cap. 16.
girdles, shoes, skins, old f^stie hay, and such like, and a woman upon her
own child. This is the reward of the long contempt of Christ and his Gospel,
Atheism, Epicurisme, and the like abominations.

This fast is good for the correction of sinners: Job. 33.16.
for the Lord opens the ears of men by their corrections. But this is not
the fast we be to speak of.

5. We have a fifth kind of fast, mentioned in the Scriptures, The miraculous
fast.
which we may call for distinction sake the miraculous fast; and of this we
have three special examples set down, not for imitation, but for instruction
and confirmation of our faith. The first is of Moses, he fasted 40. days and
40. nights, M. I. Calu. vt legem tanqua^ e coelo afferret. Com. in Exodus 34.28.
to teach that rebellious people that his heavenly prophecies and divine
sermons came from God immediately, Exodus 34.28. The second is of Elias, 1. King.
19.8. he fasted also 40. days and nights as a second Moses, to seal unto the
Church of God his prophecies, and to convert that idolatrous people unto the
true faith of Christ again. The third example is of Christ, who for the same
end and purpose, as they did, fasted so many days and nights, to testify to
all the world that his holy Gospel was of like authority and came from the
same spirit, Matthew. 4.2. And here it is to be noted, that these three, Moses,
Elias, and Jesus Christ fasted but once this miraculous fast in all their days
on earth. Mad therefore are they which for imitation of the^, prescribe,
command and bind consciences to do the like yearly. But of this abuse
hereafter.

6. The sixth kind of fasting, is that which is most commended by Gods spirit
in the practice of the faithful throughout the whole Scriptures, and this for
distinction sake again, The religious fast.
we may call a religious fast: and this is the only fast our Lord and Savior
commends in our text, and therefore we have endeavored to describe it in this
manner following, according to the holy Scriptures.

The true description of a religious fast.
A religious fast is an abstinence, more then ordinary, not only from all
meats and drinks, but also from all other things which may cherish the body,
so far as nature will give leave, and civil honesty, for one whole day at
the least: proceeding from a true faith, and a cheerful willing mind,
principally to testify our repentance, and to work in us a greater
humiliation, that our prayers may be more effectual and better prevail with
God, to obtain such blessings as concern our own wants privately, For so the
poet warns, breuis esse labor^ obscurus fi^.
and the public state of the Church and people of God. I would not be
shortlest I should be obscure, for that I only desire to instruct and teach the
ignorant the truth of this doctrine according to the Scriptures.

The confirmation of this description follows.
1. An abstinence from all meats. So much does the word signify in Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, as all good writers testify. For the Hebrew word Tsome,
signifies to afflict and appaire the body with abstinence from all meats and
drinks, etc. as appears, Jonas 3.7. Let neither man nor beast taste any
thing, neither feed nor drink water. The same says David in his fast for
Abner: So do God to me and more also, if I taste bread or ought else till the
sun be down. 2. Sam. 3.35. The Greek (...), does not signify to live
sparingly and sober only, but to taste nothing at all. And as for the Latin
ieiunium, Marc. Cic. lib. 7 epist. 27.
the best Orator says the very same of it, that himself being sick of a
bloody flux, he was ieiunus, fasting so as (says he) J tasted not so much
as water.

2. From all other things which may cherish the body. So generally be David's
words, We must abstain, says one, Quantum natura far and sustinere potest,
quantumque ad excita^dos facit non extinguendos animi sensus. Eccle. 22.6.
if I taste bread or ought else, 2. Sam. 3.35. They were commanded also to put
away their best raiment, Exodus 33.5.6. Again, they were to abstain from the
marriage bed, Joel. 2.16. 1. Cor. 7.5. and from all mirth and music, Dan.
6.18. recreations, delights and pleasures, and from all joy of temporal
delights, says Augustine, quaest. Euang. lib. 2. cap. 18. and to give
themselves to mourning, weeping, and heaviness for their sins, etc. Nehem. 1.
verse. 4. J sat down, J wept, I mourned certain days, I fasted, I prayed.
And for this cause also they had their sackcloth and ashes, to signify that
they were not worthy of any attire, and that they were but ashes. This also
was meant by rending their coats. But now Christ in our text says, that we may
fast, wanting both sackcloth and ashes, yea even when we have washed and
perfumed our selves sweetly: for the Lord regards not the outward ceremonies,
but will have us cheerfully to worship him, and to rejoice even in mourning,
to rend our hearts, that we may see our corruptions, and abhor them and
ourselves, for the huge mass of sin which lies hid within us, Job. 42.
verse. 6.

3. For one whole day. This says David in the place before cited, 2. Sam.
3.35. So do God to me and more also, if I taste bread or ought else till the
sun be down. So Saul, 1. Sam. 14.24. So the children of Israel when they
went to battle against the Beniamites, they went twice forth against them to
their great loss, the first time they lost 22000. men, Judge. 20.21. the second
time 18000. men, ver. 25. but the third time it is said all the children of
Israel went up, and all the people came also unto the house of God, and wept,
and sat there before the Lord, and fasted that day unto the evening, verse. 26.
and the next day prevailed against their enemies, verse, 35.48. So for Saul and
Jonathan, etc. they wept and fasted until the evening. So Cornelius desirous
to receive that food which was better to him (as Job says, chap. 23.12.) then
his ordinary food: he fasted also until the 9. hour of the day, Act. 10.
30. The 9. hour of the day, that is about the evening, says Epiphanius.
Chemit, exam. Trid. Con. tom. 4. de ieiunio.
And when at even (says Chemnitius) they came to eat, they neither made
choice of delicate fish or fruits, neither did they fill themselves with wines
or strong drinks, or fare daintily, as Daniel says, no pleasant bread, flesh
or wine, but they fed upon such poor things as came next to hand, they fed
ever (as the Psalmist says) upon the bread of tears, Psalm. 80.5. and mingled
their drink with weeping, Psalm. 102. bread of adversity and water of
affliction, Es. 30.20. 1. King 22.27. that is, a poor portion of bread and
water. So Judith all her widowhood excepting the Sabboths: for to dine and fast
are set as opposite with August. epist. 86. And so Anna, Luke 2. they had no
dinner at all, but a light supper when they fasted: for the diet of fasting
must be contrary to feasting, which is permitted sometimes the faithful.
Nehem. 8.10. Go and eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet, In your seasting
remember the poor.
and send part for them for whom none is prepared.

4. At the least. This is added for that they continued their fast other whiles
(as occasion was offered) for more days then one. Hester three days and
nights, chap. 4. verse. 16. Go and assemble the Jews in Shushan, and fast ye
for me, and eat not nor drink in three days and three nights, I also and my
maids will fast likewise, and so will I go unto the King, which is not
according to the law, and if I perish I perish. So the holy Apostle Paul in his
conversion was so ravished with the vision, and so humbled being also blind,
that he continued three days without meat or drink, Acts. 9. verse. 9. So
Nehemias some number of days, chap. 1.1. and David seven days for his son,
2. Sam. 12. but Daniel 21. days, chap. 10.2.3. Nature can hardly bear three
days abstinence, as may appear by the story of the Egyptian, who was near
dead, because he had tasted of nothing in three days and three nights, 1. Sam.
30.12. he was sick before, but this abstinence brought him to deaths door.
These continued fasts therefore for many days, wanted but either dinner or
supper, they had but one meal, and therein, no doubt, they were very sparing,
paring away part of their ordinary, the matter also more course and common
then their ordinary, as appears by the words of Daniel, chap. 10. verse. 2.3.

5. Proceeding from a true faith. For, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans
14.23. seem it never so holy. For without faith it is impossible to please
him, and to have access unto him. Heb. 11.6. and impossible to worship him,
Romans 10.14. Seem our service never so humble and dutiful, if our prayer
cannot please him without faith, much less our fasting: for this work is but
to attend upon that: Non virtus sed gradus ad virtutem: Not a virtue, but a
step to virtue: and that we may the better serve God, adminiculum orationis,
a staff to support us in prayer, and to keep us up watchful: for fulness
makes us drowsy and to forget God. Here therefore all opinion of merit and of
the work done, must never take place with us, and we must desire this whole
exercise may be blessed, sanctified, and accepted of God in and through Jesus
Christ.

6. A cheerful willing mind. Oportet exerceri, animo volente, hilari and
prompte: We must exercise our selves in this service of God cheerfully, says
master Bullinger. And this is Christ's meaning in our text, Matthew. 6. verse. 17.
when he wills us to annoint, perfume and wash our selves in sweet waters,
to be sweet and cheerful rather then to be sour, like the hypocrites, or as
the black Cemarims. The Lord threatens to them which want this cheerefulnes
in his service many plagues, Deuter. 28.47. Because thou seruedst not the Lord
thy God with ioyfulnes, and with a good heart, for the abundance of all things,
etc. Godly sorrow will cause godly cheerefulnes of heart and mind, 2. Cor.
7.10. and delight in the Lord, Psalm. 37.4.

7. To testify our repentance, and to work in us a greater humiliation. It is
(says Chemnitius) very truly, Exam. Con. Tr. p. 4.
both testimonium poenitentiae, a testimony of repentance, and irrit amentu^
ad poenitentiam, and a means to work in us a deeper humiliation. For the
first point, fasting is called in Scripture the humbling of the soul, 1. King.
21.27.28.29. 2. Chro. 12.6.7 Zeph. 2.3.
Leuit. 23.27.16.29. Psalm. 35.13. Deuteronomy. 10.12. For the second, Ezra
testifies, saying, chap. 8. verse. 21. I proclaimed a fast, that we might
humble our selves before our God, and seek of him a right way, for us and for
our children, and for all our substance principally. Fasting is acceptable to
God, if it be done without hypocrisy, that is, if we use it to this end,
that thereby this mortal body, Master Marshs letter to his friends in
Lankeshire. Acts and Monum.
and disobedient carcass, may be tamed and brought under, the subjection of
the spirit, and again if we fast to the end, that we may spare to help and
succor our needy brethren. It has many good uses, as after shall better
appear, for our own good, for the Church, and for the poor: For what the
rich spare this day, the poor must spend, Nehem. 8.10.

8. That our prayers may be more effectual. Confession of sins and prayers
ever follow fasting: this exercise is never without prayer, for it serves in
special manner to make us fit for prayer, Nehem. 1.4.5. Psalm. 35.13. 2. Sam.
12. Dan. 9. and 10. 1. Cor. 7.5. etc.

9. Concern our wants privately and the public. This shall appear in the
descriptions following, both of private and public fast.

The second Question. What a private fast is, how it may be best described
according to the Scriptures.
The religious fast before described, is either 1. Private. or 2. Public.


First for the private, it may be thus described: A private fast is a free
exercise of a religious abstinence, performed by one, or more, in a family,
privately, that our prayers may be more effectual for private and public
respects.

The proof.
1. A private fast is a religious abstinence. This general is before showed
what it is: the private fast, I say, is not the natural fast, nor the civil
fast, nor the fast of Christian sobriety, nor the constrained fast, nor the
miraculous fast: it is that, which we have called for distinction sake, and as
it must be according to Gods truth, the religious abstine^ce.

2. A free exercise. This is the first difference and proper note of this fast:
it is a free exercise, so is not the public: for when the Lord by his Church
and Prophets shall proclayme it, it shall not be free for any man of years of
discretion to abstain from it. Leuit. 22.29. Every person that humbles not
himself that same day, shall even be cut off from his people: This shall
hereafter in place convenient better appear: But this exercise is free for any
to take or leave, See his epist. 86 Ad Cassulanu^.
as God shall give occasion. That speech of Augustine must be understood of a
private fast only: Scimus esse ieiunandum I know no such precept but one in
all the scripture.
ex praecepto, sed quibus diebus, ieiunandum sit, aut non, ignoramus, quia id
in literis noui Testamenti nunquam est definitum, ideo ieiunia relinquenda sunt
libera: that is, We know, we be commanded to fast, but what day we must fast,
and what not, we know not, because that point is no where concluded in the new
Testament, therefore this exercise of fast must be left as free, to use it when
and where the Lord shall give occasion: Yet is Epiphanius greatly offended with
Aerius, for defending this liberty and fasting on the Lords day, lib. 3. To.
1. here is. 75. Again this says M. Bullinger also, Ieiunium est disciplina
sponte suscepta: Bulling. Math. 6.
It is an exercise which we must practice of our own accord: the same also
says good Bucer, Nec pie praestari ieiunium potest, Bucer de reg. christ. lib.
1. cap. 12.
nisi vltroneo spiritu suscipiatur. There can be no religious fast, but when
that exercise is performed with a free spirit and a willing mind. There must
be also a willingness and a cherefulnes in the public fast, but then is not the
same liberty of leaving and liking, which is here granted.

3. Performed by one. This is the second difference or note of a private fast,
for the public must be performed by the whole congregation: the practice of a
private fast, by one only in a family, we have in diverse presidents of the
scripture: for so Nehemias fasted alone, Nehe. 1. v. 4. David fasted alone for
his child, 2. Sam. 12.16. David besought God for the child and fasted, and
went in, to wit to his privy chamber, and lay all night upon the earth, Then
the elders of his house arose, to come unto him, and to cause him to rise from
the ground, but be would not, neither did he eat meat with them: So then he
fasted alone, as often also his custom was to do, Psalm. 35.13. 2. Sam. 3.35.
Psalm. 69.10. So Daniel alone, Dan. 9. and 10. chap. so Cornelius alone, Act.
10. ver. 2. and 30. So Anna the Prophetisse alone night and day full often,
Luke 2.36. There was a Prophetisse one Anna, the Daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Aser, which was of great age, and had lived with an husband seven
years from her virginity, and she was a widow about 84. years, and went not
out of the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day.

4. Or more in one family: This is the third difference or note of a private
fast: this ever is kept in the compass of one family, but in the public fast
more then one, many families, as the congregation will yield, are assembled: for
this point also we be taught by other divine examples of holy scripture: For
Hester and her maids with her, humbled themselves in a fast privately, Hester
4.16. Fast ye for me, and eat not nor drink not, in three days, day nor
night, I also and my maids will fast likewise: And thus the Master and the
family may exercise themselves religiously in a private fast, as hereafter
shall yet better appear.

5. Privately: This is the fourth difference and note of a private fast: for
such as fast in a family, must fast privately in their private chambers, but the
place of the public is in the temple and public congregation; such as fast
privately must separate themselves, Zach. 7.3. because according to the time and
occasion, they give themselves to weeping, meditation, and mourning. So Christ
wills, Matthew. 6.18. That we desire not to be seen of men to fast, but that
our private fast be seen and known to God in secret, who notwithstanding
will reward us openly. So David in his private fast entered into his privy
chamber, 2. Sam. 12.16. to sequester himself from all companies, that he might
more freely give himself to mourning, meditation, fasting, and prayer. This is
contrary to the pride of the Pharisie, who must be seen of men, and known by
his sour face, and Cemarims attire, by standing and praying in the sinagogues,
and in the corners of the open streets, Matthew. 6.5. Luk 18.11.

6. For private and public respect. This is the fifth and last difference and
proper note of the private fast, for the private fast is, and may be for the
private respect of one or many, or for the public state also of Gods Church and
people far and near: but the public and general fast, is for the public
and general good of the Church only.

First for private respects. So David fasted, to see if by prayer and fasting he
might obtain of God, the life of his child: 2. Sam. 12. and for his own
humiliation often, Psalm. 35.13. as did also the Apostle Paul, as he testifies
of himself, 1. Cor. 9.27. I beat down my body, and bring it to subjection,
least by any means, after that I have preached to other, I my self should be
as a refuse, or naught worth. And to this end he fasted often for himself, and
for the Church, 2. Cor. 11.27. in Ieiunia Golunt aria interpretor. I. Call. c 8.
ibidem. They were voluntary, not constrained fastes.
fasting often, 2. Cor. 6.6. by watchings, by A voluntary exercise. I. C. 8.
ibidem. 2. Tim. 2.25.26.
fastings.

Secondly for public respects, we ought also privately, for our brethren, for
the whole Church of God, specially that Church and land wherein we live, and
have received so many of Gods sweet blessings, spiritual and temporal: and
for neighbor Churches also, as need and occasion shall so require. David
fasted privately for the common good of his enemies, that God would give them
repentance, that they might know the truth, and come to amendment of life, out
of the snare of the devil: For this cause he says, Psalm. 35.13. (speaking of
his enemies) Yet I when they were sick, I was clothed with a sack, I humbled
my soul with fasting, and my prayer was turned upon my bosom. Nehemias fasted
alone for the good estate of the whole Church certain days, and Daniel also
one and twenty days, chap. 10.2.3.12. and he was heard and comforted. And
Peter in his often fastings, had no doubt the whole Church in remembrance, for
he says, That he cares for all the Churches: 2. Cor. 11.27. and therefore he
prayed and fasted for all Churches. So good Augustine, Bishop of Hippo in
Africa, when that city was besieged by the Vandals, he gave himself to
fasting, mourning and prayer, and dyed in that siege, as writes Possidonius.

And thus far shall suffice for the confirmation of the description of a
private fast.

The third Question. What moved the faithful, (whose practice is commended by
Gods spirit for instruction and imitation) in elder ages, to exercise private
fastings, and whether we may not, and must not do the like, in the like
occasions.
NOw let us proceed to teach the ignorant, the manner how, and the time when,
and upon what occasion they must exercise themselves in this religious
abstinence: and first here Iiudge this to be a firm demonstration, for
instruction.

The same motives, arguments and occasions which moved the faithful in elder
ages to humble themselves in private or public fasting, ought to move us: These
motives and occasions following, moved them: therefore they may and must move
us: This reason I ground upon this and the like places of scripture: Hebr.
6.11.12. And we desire every one of you, etc. That ye be not slothful, but
followers of them, which through faith and patience inherit the promises.

Secondly, here remember that wheresoever in the scripture Gods spirit speaks
of sackcloth, dust and ashes, rending of their clothes, humbling of their
souls, the learned are of judgment, that the religious abstinence is there
understood, for these were special adjuncts and signs of this exercise, as
may appear if you confer these scriptures, Esaias 22.12.13.14. 2. Sam. 12.19. 1.
Sam. 4.12. Ier. 6.26.25.34. with these places, Daniel 9.2.3.4.5. Jonas 3.6.7.
2. Sam. 12.16. Hester 4.3. Josh. 7.6.7.

1. Motive and occasion of fasting, sorrowing for the dead.
The first most ancient president for instruction and imitation in this
exercise of private fasting, shall be Iaacob: of him it is said, that when he
sorrowed for Joseph, Genesis 37.34. He rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth
about his loins, and sorrowed for his son a long season: Where we see old
Iaacob gave himself to fasting, weeping and mourning for young Joseph, and
would not be comforted: and this did he not so much to vex himself in
impatiencie, as to stir up himself to prayers for himself and the rest of his
children and family, and gave himself more seriously to holy meditations
concerning death, the resurrection, and the last judgment. But least any here
doubt of this custom of fasting, when they sorrowed for the dead, because here
is no mention of it in express words, look upon the practice of the ages
following; and we shall see this was used when they lamented for the dead, as
for Saul's death, the inhabitants of Iabesh Gilead, mourned and fasted 7. days:
1. Samuel 31.13. The like does David for Abner after his death, 2. Samu. 3.35.
And again, David and his men, for Saul and Jonathan, and for the Lords
people. Then David took hold on his clothes and rent them, and likewise all
the men that were with him, and they mourned and wept, and fasted until even,
for Saul and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and for
the house of Israel, because they were slain with the sword, 2. Sam. 1.14.12.
Shall old Iaacob so fast and mourn for young Joseph, the Gileadites for Saul
the tyrant, and David for proud Abner? And shall not we also humble our selves
in fasting and prayer, for the loss of Gods Church, in the death of religious
and wise governors, of noble Ionathans, reverend Samuels, etc. 1. Sam. 25.1.
That the Lord may grant a good supply? This last December have dyed within
14. days, three most worthy men, the first for magistracy, the second for
the ministry, the third for the wars, and defense of the la^d, which have
done great service in their time, the good E. of H. Mr. W. Wh. Sr. R. W.
Aretius. loc. com. 129.
and for many thousands of the Lords people which have perished at home by
famine and pestilence, and in the wars by the sword of the enemy in all
reformed Churches round about us? Many most worthy men are fallen a sleep and
taken from us, and few have lamented, and sorrowed in the hearts. So that the
Prophets complaint is true: The righteous perish and no man considers it in
his heart, and merciful men are taken away, and no man understands, that the
righteous is taken away from the evil to come, Esa. 57.1.

This fasting is turned in these days into a feasting upon what occasion or
color of reason I know not. I find that the heathen had their conciones
funebres, funeral declamatio^s to praise their dead, and epulum publicum,
their common banquet when the funeral was ended. Thus was their mourning
suddenly changed into mirth, that all sorrows for the dead, and remembrance
of death, a meditation most needful, might the sooner be forgotten: this
abuse we find also in Christ's time.

Thus the fathers gave themselves to fasting, prayer, and meditations
concerning death and Gods judgment, etc. when they sorrowed for the dead. But
we never yet read that they prayed for souls departed.

The same reasons and occasions which moved the religious fathers to a private
and public fasting, may and must move us: But they fasted when they sorrowed
for their dead. Therefore so may and must we do in like manner.

Secondly, I find that in the conversion of sinners, The second cause of
private fasting, to humble our selves for the increase of repentance, etc. Exam.
Con. Tri. par. 4.
and when the faithful would humble themselves for the renewing of their
repentance, they exercised themselves in private fasting: for it is true that
Chemnitius says: Fasting is not only testimonium poenitentiae, a testification
of our repentance, it is also irritamentu^ ad poenitentia^, a means to stir
us up unto repentance. The ceremonies of dust and ashes are past, Christ
bids us annoint and wash ourselves: but fasting is not yet abrogated in our
humiliation. Rending of the clothes that is past, but rending of the heart that
continues still. For the first then, note the words of Christ, Matthew. 11.21.
Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if the great works
which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they had repented long
agone in sackcloth and ashes. For poor sinners in their first conversion unto
God, are often so astonished and cast down, that little joy have they to
taste any food, and it shall be good for them not to do it, as constrained,
but the more to humble themselves, and the more penitently, and effectually to
pray and to cry for grace. Of Paul it is said in his first conversion, that he
was so cast down, that being at Damascus three days without sight, all that
time he neither did eat nor drink, Act. 9.9. Fast therefore and weep all ye
sinners, for the great contempt of Gods covenant, Honor ieiunij, etc This is
the commendatio^ of fasting (says Chry.) not abstinence from meats, but to
avoid sin.
for the profaning of his name and Sabboths, etc. Rend your hearts, for except
you repentye cannot be saved, Luke 13.3.5. In elder ages (says Justin, Apolog.
2.) Docentur ante omnia: Sinners are first taught, in prayer and fasting to
cry for the pardon of their sins, and we pray with them. Secondly, the
faithful renewing more seriously their repentance for general or special
sins, they humbled themselves always in private fasting, as appears by many
examples: one for all shall be Job, whose words are these, (chap. 42. after
humble acknowledgement of his sins) I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the ear, Remember the first rule.
but now mine eye sees thee. Verse. 5. He says, Therefore I abhor my self,
and repent in dust and ashes. In his confession he says, verse. 3. I have
spoken that J understood not, and which I knew not. As if he said, I
acknowledge my frenzy and madness, chap. 3. in cursing the day of my birth, but
(such were my torments) I spoke unadvisedly with my lips, I have spoken I wot
not well what: and because they have accused me unjustly of hypocrisy, I have
too much justified mine own self, and therefore I abhor my self, Chap. 3.
I detest as all my sins in general, so the special sins I have committed
under this cross, Job. 13.15.
and I do humbly repent in fasting, weeping and mourning, trusting that thou will receive me to grace in my redeemer, chap. 19.25. Jesus Christ. Few were
Jobs sins in comparison of our daily and most dangerous downfalles: Chap.
1.5. Chap. 3.25.
for he gave himself no rest, peace or quietness, watching over himself and
his family, so careful was he to please God. If Job therefore for those few
sins committed, in great agonies and passions of body and soul does so
abhor himself, and cast himself down in fasting and mourning, at Gods
feet, accounting himself but dust and ashes: what must we do for our
negligences and ignorances, for our continual sins, general and special,
known and unknown? but ever desire to see and know our sins, that we may
the sooner abhor our sins and our selves for our sins, that we may cite
our selves, accuse, convince, and condemn our selves, and pronounce sentence
against our selves: so judging our selves we shall not be judged, 1. Cor.
11.29.30.31. So abhorring our selves for our sins, we shall be beloved and
blessed of God in his Christ. Learn therefore of Job how to confess thy
sins, and to abhor thy self in unfeigned repentance: no knowledge of God,
no knowledge of sin: no sight of sin, no sorrow for sin: no sorrow for
sin, no confession of sin: no confession of sin, no desire of grace: no
desire of grace, no pardon can be granted: no pardon granted, the seal is
denied. Therefore desire to see thy sins, and so to abhor thy self, etc.
This example nearly concerns such as in any extremities, specially in
grievous diseases and maludies of body, as the pestilence, or pestilentiall
fevers, conuulsions, and the like: or in troubles of mind whatsoever, have
spoken idly, furiously, and impiously of God in any manner, let them here
learn of Job, when GOD shall restore them to health again, how to abhor
themselves and their sins, in fasting and mourning: So cast down thy self,
and be well assured God shall advance thee. Quo frequentior est lucta, etc. The
more wrastlings we have with Satan, with our own corruptions, and with
temptations, hoc freque^tior esse debet abstine^tia, the oftener must we use
this holy abstinence. Bulling. Matthew. 6. Requiritur a itiunantibus mortificatio
carnis sine qua impium est ieiunium: Mortification of the flesh must be one end
of our fasting, otherwise our fast is an ungodly fast. Gualt. in Esai. hom.
164. And for this cause fasted David often and the Prophets, Psalm.
109.24.69.11. and the Apostles, 2. Cor. 6.6. Cornelius, Act. 10. I conclude
therefore:

The same reasons and occasions which moved the religious fathers to exercise
themselves in private or public fast, may and must move us to fast also. But
they fasted for testification and increase of unfeigned repentance. Therefore so
may and must we do in like manner.

A third cause of private fasting, the cure and comfort of the sick.
Thirdly, I find that the holy servants of God, as when they would be the more
humble and devout in prayer for themselves, to prevent or remove any
calamities, they gave themselves to fasting: so also when their brethren were
in like dangers, they prepared themselves to cry unto God for them, in a
religious abstinence. The holy man of God David fasted for his enemies when
they were sick, and prayed right humbly that God would give them repentance
unto life, 2. Tim. 2.25.26.
Psalm. 35.13. how much more then did he perform this duty for his good
brethren in the like occasion? For we be commanded of God to cherish this
Christian sympathy in our hearts. Romans 12.15.16. Weep with the^ that weep, be
of like affection one toward another. And the sick we be commanded to have
in special regard, and to consider of them as if we were in their case, for
the time present. James 5. Psalm. 41.1.2.3. Blessed is he that judges wisely
of the poor, The visitation of the sick.
etc. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of his sorrow, thou have
turned all his bed in his sickness. For this cause again we have a notable
example of ancient record in Gods book, in Jobs friends: of whom it is
written. First, that they agreed together as good friends and loving brethren,
to come to lament with Job, and to comfort him, chap. 2. verse. 11. Secondly,
when they came to that place, whether because of smell, or infection, or both,
it is uncertain, standing a far off, they lift up their voices and wept,
verse. 12. Thirdly, they humbled themselves before God in fasting and prayer for
him seven days and nights, verse. 13. In this example we may note what we are
bound to do in the visitation of the sick, and in comforting our brethren in
their afflictions. First then consider of their love, this was great, that
being such great me^ for learning and wealth, The love of Jobs friends.
yet they come to comfort a man in misery. This duty the Lord commands,
James 5. that we perform to all men: Is any sick? and God promises his
mercy and favor to such, Psalm. 41. Great must be our love to all men, but
our bowels must be full of brotherly affection to the Saints, (...).
2. Pet. 1.7. Secondly, consider their agreementt in faith and love, and good
affection, verse. 12. to perform this duty. This also is required in such as
will receive a blessing by fasting, prayer, and conference with the sick. It
is ever to be wished that the faithful, Be like minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus, that with one mind and one mouth they may praise
God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.5.6. For the Lords
promise is sure and certain to such well agreeing brethren. If two of you
shall agree on earth upon any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be
given you of my father which is in heaven. For where Vbi tres, ibi ecclesia
est, licet laici. Tertul. de exhort. cast.
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
you. Matthew. 18.19.20. For this agreement we find the faithful in the
Primitive Church commended in many places in the story of the Acts: When the
day of Penticost was come, they were all with one accord in one place. Act.
2.1. And again, (...)
They continued daily with one * accord in the temple. (...).
verse. 46. And of their sweet prayer which was forthwith heard and granted.
Act. 4.24. It is said, they lift up their voices with one accord: (...).
and verse. 32. that the multitude of them which believed were of one heart and
of one soul. That is, of one mind, will and affection. It were to be wished
always, that we proceed by one rule, and that we should mind one thing,
Phil. 3. verse. 16. But for that few be come to this perfection, and the weaker
must vary in judgment often, therefore the strong must bear with the weak,
till God reveal and teach them better things, and the weak must not be
lightly offended with the strong, for having received a greater measure of
knowledge: but howsoever they may dissent in some opinions, yet must they
consent with one accord, as knit in one heart, and as having but one soul,
when they will power forth effectual prayers before God, as the former
presidents teach us.

The simpathie of Jobs friends.
3. Thirdly, I find also in these men a christian sympathy, this appears in
their weeping, and rending of their clothes: they felt in the beginning such
passions in themselves, as if their souls had been in his souls stead: as Job
after wishes, chap. 16.4. that is, they mourned as if they had been in the
same case: such men only can minister comfort and pray effectually for the
sick. Iam. 5.5. The prayer of faith shall save the sick.

Jobs friends fast and pray together.
4. Fourthly, being thus prepared, affected and assembled, they give themselves
(I take it) to prayer and to fasting seven days and nights: for they sat
down so long upon the ground by him, 2. Sam. 12.
as David did, when he fasted and prayed for his child. They sprinkled dust on
their heads and sat down, as their manner was in fasting and mourning
And we must not imagine these reverend, faithful wise men, should pass their
time otherwise, or should come to the place to perform the lesser duty, and
neglect the greater. Therefore I say they fasted and prayed, and spoke to God
much in prayer, albeit they had not a word of conference with him, because they
saw his grief was such that it was painful for him to hear, and more
painful to answer them again.

5. Fifthly, we find also that after all this, Conference with the sick.
they labor with long speeches and conference with him, to bring him, as S.
James warns, to confess his sins, James 5.16. but being in an error, and
judging him, We must crave for wisdom to consider wisely how and what to
speak to the sick.
because of so strange a calamity, an hypocrite, and out of Gods favor, and
proceeding therefore the more vehemently and bitterly against him, as desirous
to humble him for his good, they fail of their purpose. Such therefore as will
work effectually any good in visitation of the sick, must know the patients
life and calling, his knowledge, his fear, his affections, his love, his life
and conversation: whether Satan has wounded him, and in what manner: They
must be provided of examples, to teach them the Lords proceedings with others
his dear children in like manner. But nothing comparable to our own
experience. Here therefore let them pray earnestly for the spirit of judgment,
A gracious speech heals the passions of the soul.
for that Satan has many strange and invisible delusions. And remember
always the proverb, A word spoken in his place, is like apples of gold with
pictures of silver. Prou. 25.11.

6. Sixthly, Such as will fast and pray for the sick, must be faithful and
righteous men. (...). The sick can have no comfort by wicked men in their
sickness. (...). Faith of the patient.
S. James requires that they be faithful and righteous men, that will perform
this duty: and no doubt so were these great men which came to Job. They must
be faithful men, and power forth the prayers of faith: for wanting faith,
they cannot speak one word unto God, Romans 10.12.13.14. They must be righteous
men, for otherwise their sacrifice is rejected, Prou. 21.27. and the sick can
have no comfort in them. The prayer of a righteous man (...), is of great
strength, and prevails with God, working effectually. James. 5.16.

7. Seventhly, Saint James requires also that the patient confess his sins,
and join with his brethren in faith and prayer. Verse. 16. Confess your sins
one to another, and pray one for another. Surely the Lord Christ requires also
faith and humiliation in all them on whom he wrought his miraculous cures: as
Matthew. 9.22. Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. And
so most commonly he asks of their faith, how they are persuaded of his
grace, love, power and might to do them good. Commending faith often, Matthew.
8.10. and 9.2.3. Luke 13.16. And Cyprian speaking of the visitation and cure of
the sick in his time, 4. Tract. de ido. vanitat.
says: Prout fides patientis adiuuat: That is, As the patients faith helps:
so prevail we with God, in the visitation of the sick in fasting and prayer.
And this God so wrought at the last, that these friends with Job, and Job with
them humbly confessed their sins and prevailed with God, so as Job was
restored to a better state then he had before. chap. 42.

Perseverance in fasting and prayer for the sick.
8. Eighthly and lastly, these men we see had zeal to persevere and continue
this holy exercise of fasting and prayer for many days: and to continue their
admonitions, instructions and conference yet a longer time. For albeit the Lord
hears always the prayers and supplications of his servants, in the very
beginning: notwithstanding he shows not always any full grant of them long
after, because he would have his children more earnestly to sue unto him, by
petitions and supplications, and to wait upon him. So the Apostle admonishes,
that we persevere and continue in prayer, waiting and expecting with patience a
blessing from the Lord. This Daniel teaches us by his practice and experience:
At the same time, I Daniel was in heaviness for three weeks of days. I ate no
pleasant bread, neither came flesh, nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint
my self at all, till three weeks of days were fulfilled. This was a patient
perseverance in prayer, fasting, and humiliation, for 21. days, then he
receives an answer. Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that thou
did set thine heart to understand, and to humble thy self before thy God,
thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words. Thus we see, that albeit the
Lord hears not at the first cry, yet delights he to see our submission
before him, and will grant our requests in his good time: for we must not
prescribe him his time, nor appoint him any thing. Let us remember how to visit
our brethren, as here we be taught; and this exercise first remember also to
practice, when thine own house, or any in thine house is taken with any
grievous sickness, or under any special calamity: So does David, 2. Sam. 12.
Remember James: Is any sick? send for the elders. 2. And when our brethren are
brought low with any grievous sickness of body or mind, as we heard in Jobs
friends. And lastly, this is the only way to cure the great and dreadful
Sathanicall diseases and evils, which no doubt vex often many even in these
days, incurable to the best learned Physician. Of such evils and their cure on
this wise by fasting and prayer, we have sufficient instruction with Christ,
Matthew. 17.15. where note these points. First, a mixed disease or malady in part
natural, in part Sathanicall: for the father says his son is a lunatike: so
the Physicians call this sickness, because it follows the course of the
Moon, and for that such as are borne in the change are thus lightly pained.
But note what the Evangelist adds, and we shall see the secret cause of it:
verse. 18. Jesus rebuked the devil, and he went out, and the child was healed
in that hour. Here behold then a disease in part natural, in part
Sathanicall. Of this M. Calvin says, that experience teaches us indeed, that
this disease does increase and decrease according to the course of the Moon:
Neque tamen hoc obstat quo minus Satan naturalibus medijs suos impetus
permiscuerit: 2. Note the cure of this evil in the same place: he says it is
done not by witchcrafts, sorceries, etc. but by fasting and prayer, as is
before showed, Matthew. 17. verse. 21. Therefore says Basil: De laudibus ieiunij.
I^^unium est armatura ad confligendum cum diabolo. Fasting is a weapon to
fight with the devil. And thus far for the third occasion of private fasting.
I conclude:

The same reasons and occasions which moved the religious fathers to exercise
themselves in private fasting, ought to cause us to exercise the same: but the
sicknesses of their brethren, friends, etc. did move them to this exercise of
private abstinence. Therefore the sicknesses and grieuances of brethren, etc.
must move us to this private abstinence.

A 4. cause of fasting to perform the duties of our calling faithfully. 1.
Cor. 9.27.
Fourthly, the godly did exercise themselves in this kind of abstinence also,
that they might be the more watchful, faithful, and ready in soul and
body, to perform the duties of their callings. For this cause no doubt did
Saint Paul fast often, 2. Cor. 6.6. of himself he speaks, I beat down my
body, and bring it to subjection, least by any means after that I have
preached unto other, I my self should be but as a refuse. This blessed Apostle
did watch over himself, and had a special regard to his ministry, as he
warns Timothy: Take heed to thy self, and unto doctrine: for so doing thou
shall both save thy self and the^ that hear thee. 1. Tim. 4.16. First for
himself, that he give example of life answerable to his doctrine: secondly for
doctrine, that he be both diligent and faithful therein. For these graces does
he fast and pray often. Concerning Paul's abstinence, in that place before
cited: a notable metaphor is used in the original, (...), which is borrowed
from champions, which in elder times used buffeting with fists: for these in
fight gave their adversaries all the blows and wounds they could, till they
had them at command as captives, to yield them service with all submission and
subjection. So says Paul, Galath. 5.17.
I buffet and beat down with fasting and abstinence this wretched carcass
and rebellious body of sin, which is so inclined to Satan and his service,
that I may more dutifully serve and obey my Lord and master Jesus Christ. So
says Hilarie of himself and his abstinence in the like occasion: O mi asine,
ego pascam to palea, non hordeo, ne me recalcitres: That is, O mine ass (so
calls he very fitly that which Paul calls his wretched body of sin) J will
feed thee with chafe, that is, I will beat thee so with abstinence, and not
with barlie: no pleasant bread or prouender shall thou have to fat thee, Daniel
10.2. least thou kick me. i. Hinder me to proceed and walk cheerfully in my
calling.

The like similitude uses Augustine in his Tract. Subigendo corpori, etc. We
must use fasting as a special chastisement to tame the body. Leo. sermon. 8. de
ieiunio. 7. men's.
de vtilitate ieiunij. If thou would ride a horse, which in carrying thee is
like to cast thee down, to ride him safely, would not thou take from him
some part of his prouender, and tame him with hunger, which could not be ruled
with bit or bridle? Mea caro iumentum est.
my flesh is the beast, etc. The Apostle adds the special end of his
abstinence to be this, that neither he nor his ministry and doctrine might
justly be rejected. A notable president for the ministers of Christ, for
fasting. This Timothy so followed, that no doubt by his often abstinence and
fastings, his stomach became so weak, that Paul must admonish him as a
father, to avoid too much austeritie, and such beating of his body with
abstinence, least he become unprofitable to Gods people. 1. Tim. 5.23. Drink
no longer water, but use a little wine, for thy stomachs sake and often
infirmities. And in like manner offended good Basil and Nazianzen: for with
too much fasting, they hurt themselves and the Church of God also: Pet. Mar.
class. 3. ca. 10. ser. 24. Basil complains Psalm. 15. that his people did as
it were suck blood of him in every Sermon he preached, and yet like a good
nurse he is unwilling to leave them without spiritual food for their souls.
Basilius and Nazianzenus cum viri essent doctissimi, tamen abstinentijs and
chameunijs effecti sunt ecclesiae inutiles: Basil and Nazianzen (says P. M.)
being very learned men, yet by long fasting and lying upon the ground, they
became unprofitable unto the Church of God. Thus easily do men fall from one
extremity into another. I conclude this argument briefly, as before.

We must fast as the holy Apostles of Christ have done: But they fasted to
beat down sin, and to perform the duties of their calling faithfully.
Therefore we must fast also for this end and purpose. Fifthly, the faithful
did fast also privately, when they felt the spirit of prayer, Zach. 12.10. to
wax fainte in them, to stir up their spirits, A fifth cause to be more
fervent in prayer.
and to prepare themselves to holy meditations and prayers. This is to be seen
generally in all examples of fasting, for this is one special end of all
their abstinence: for they were well assured this exercise of it self, did
neither commend, nor discommend them with God: The faithful do often find
their hearts so dry, barren and so wretched, that they cannot pray at all.
Note therefore for this point, that fasting is never exercised by the
faithful, without invocation, confession of sins and prayer. Nehemias fasted
and prayed, chap. 1. 5. David fasted and prayed, 2. Sam. 12. Psalm. 35.13.
Daniel fasted and prayed, chap. 9. and 10. Cornelius fasted and prayed, chap.
10. ver. 29. and Paul bids us knit these together when we have need of
more strength to put up our supplications in weighty affairs, which concern
us or the Church of God: abstain from the marriage bed says he, with consent
for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer, 1. Cor. 7.
ver. 5. where again, least any should think over highly of this exercise, or
conceive any opinion of holiness, merit, etc. he adds also, not unmindful
of our infirmities: and again come together that satan tempt you not for your
incontinencie. Ieiunijs preces alere, ingemiscere, Lichrimari, and mugire dies
noctesque ad dominum. Tertul lib de poenitent. Ieiunium preces nostras subuheit
in coelum: Fasting gives wings to our prayers. Basil. Homil.: de laudibus
ieiunij.
This appears plainly in the words of Ezra, that one principal end and
use of all fasting public and private, is to make us more fit for prayer, Ezra.
8.21. I proclaimed a fast that we might humble our selves, to what end, that
we might seek of him, that is, by prayer beg of God, or put up our
petitions unto God, a right way, to escape the enemy, for us, for our
children, and for all our substance: and that this seeking was by prayer,
appears in the words following, verse. 23. So we fasted and besought our God
for this, and he was entreated of us. In prayer the soul must be lifted up to
God, Psalm. 25.1. and powered forth as it were before the Lord, 1. Sam. 1.15. a
work which no natural man can perform, before he has received the spirit
of faith, 2. Cor. 4.13. Romans 10.14. and the spirit of prayers, Zach. 12.10.
Romans 8.26. Yea the faithful themselves when they have their consciences laden
with sin, or their bodies farced with meats they shall find themselves
barren and bound up in their hearts, dry and unapt for this heavenly exercise:
I conclude therefore.

Look what moved the faithful and holy men to fasting, must move us: They
fasted to prepare and to stir up their spirits and souls unto prayer:
Therefore so must we.

Sixthly, the faithful servants of God, A sixth cause of private fasting, to
bear the cross more patiently in persecution for the professon of the gospel,
etc.
when they were called to bear Christ's cross in times of persecution, for
their religion, for the gospel and their profession sake, then they gave
themselves again in special manner unto fasting and prayer, Vt ad ferendas
afflictiones, etc. That they may (says Chemnitius) accustom themselves, and
learn to bear afflictions more patiently. And this Christ teaches to be a
special time for this abstinence, answering John's disciples of their private
fast, Mat. 9.14. Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, and thy disciples
fast not? he says, can the children of the marriage chamber mourn, as long as
the bridegroom is with them: but the days will come when the bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. Where he teaches, first
that there is a time of mirth and joy, and that season is unfit for fasting,
and that there is a time of sorrow and mourning, when men ought to give and
apply themselves more humbly unto fasting and prayer. Secondly, We must fast
when we shall feel our bridegroom Jesus Christ absent from us. Cant.
that he shall depart from them, and then many evils shall follow, great
persecution for the Gospel, as came to pass under those ten bloody
Emperors: then and in those days, men must not forget fasting. The holy
martyrs therefore, as Christ admonishes, ever under the cross, gave
themselves to fasting and prayer. The Jews fasted much privately and publicly,
during their banishment and captivity, Zach. 7.(...) for (...) souls.
howbeit, after a time they became superstitious: and for this cause also,
fasted no doubt Paul often, for speaking of his afflictions, and rejoicing to
remember how many evils he past through for the gospel sake, he says, in
watchings often, in fastings often: 2. Cor. 11.27. Again 2. Cor. 6.5.6. In
stripes, in prisons, etc. by watchings, by fastings. And thus the good Martyrs
in all ages did exercise themselves: M. Bradfords abstinence under the cross.
of Master Bradford, Master John Fox writes, that Preaching, reading and
praying was all his whole life: he did not eat but one meal a day, which was
but little when he took it, Acts and Mon. 1555. Iulij.
and his continual study was upon his knees, in the midst of dinner, he used
often to muse with himself, having his hat over his eyes, M. Bradford mingled
his drink with tears.
from whence came commonly plenty of tears dropping on his trencher. So
likewise Alcibiades a good man, lived very sparingly in the primitive Church:
for he fed only on bread and water, and would have continued this diet in the
prison, for he thought it a special time of fasting: but because of his
weakness, he was taught of Attalus the martyr to do otherwise, and he received
the admonition, Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 3
and obeyed it, and used the creatures more freely with thanks giving unto God.

A seventh cause: preparation to hear the word and receive the Sacraments.
And let the seventh end of this exercise be a diligent and godly preparation
to hear the word, and for participation of the sacrament, to our edification
and comfort: for thus did the faithful in all ages receive benefit by the
public ministry of Gods word and sacraments: here we must regard principally
these three points: 1. Preparation before the word and Sacrament. 2. Attention
and reverence, in hearing the word, and participation of the Sacrament. 3.
Meditation after.


1. Of preparation before the word and Sacrament.
THe Lord for this point, warns us that we enter not rashly, nor unadvisedly
into his holy sanctuary, but with preparation and reverence: Eccle. 4.17. Take
heed unto thy foot, when thou enterest into the house of God, and be more
near to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools, for they know not that
they do evil.

This preparation is principally of two parts, 1. Of the mind, 1. By reading.
and 2. By meditation before.
2. Of the heart and spirit, 1. By fasting. 2. By prayer.



Preparation of the mind.
BEfore the mind be enlightened with some measure of the true knowledge of
God: there can be no faith, no repentance, no salvation: how can men love that
which they know not, how can we trust him whom we love not, etc. It is a
wonder to see how Satan does bewitch men in these days, to sever these two,
reading and preaching, which GOD has ever so coupled together: for some would
content themselves for their faith and salvation with reading only, and they
are many: and some would have but preaching only, and they be not a few. The
scripture indeed does ascribe most for the breeding, 1. The mind prepared.
First, by reading of the Scriptures.
increase and growth of faith and repentance, unto the preaching of the word,
Romans 10.14.17. Mal. 2.6.7. Pro. 29.18. Hos. 4.6. Matthew. 15.14. But yet they
command us full often publicly and privately to read the same, Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.
Psalm. 1.2. Act. 13.15. Daniel read the Scriptures. chap. 9. 2. David read the
Scriptures, Psalm. 119. and 19. Christ commaundes all to search the scriptures,
Ioh. 5.39. Paul warnes Timothy to give attendance unto reading, 1. Tim. 4.13.
The Eunuch was very diligent in reading the scriptures, Act. 8. and the Apostle
commands his epistles to be read publicly and privately to all the saints,
1. These. 5.27. Col. 4.16. A diligent, wise and profitable reading of holy
scriptures, helps judgment, increases faith, confirms memory, stirs
up affection, etc. and prepares a man wonderfully to the fruitful hearing of
Gods word preached. A great number not regarding this preparation, know not the
preachers text, and many know not what book or part of the bible, and some are
so rude and ignorant, that they know not whether the scriptures of God, or
apocriphall books be handled. In reading have a special regard, first unto
matter, secondly to method: first for matter, read most the holy scripture it
self: secondly, in the scripture things most profitable and needful for thy
salvation. And for method, first begin with the grounds of salvation:
secondly, labor to discern higher mysteries, which most nearly concern thy
salvation, Secondly, by meditation after reading.
Heb. 5.12, 13, 14.6. 1, 2, 3, 4. After reading must follow meditation: and
according to our love unto the word will ever be our meditation, Psalm.
119.97. Reading without this is but barren, and will breed neither sound
delight nor good learning. Psalm 37.5.
Delight thy self in the Lord and his word, and there will follow good
meditation: and apply the word to the mind by meditation, for the right
understanding of it, this will bring great delight and comfort to thine heart,
Pro. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
for this diligent searching is the way to get divine wisdom, and spiritual
understanding.

2. Heart prepared.
The heart must also be humbled and prepared, and that in special manner, when
we would receive a blessing by the word preached, or the sacraments
administered: for the good heart receives the immortal seed of regeneration and
of faith: Luke 8. verse. 15.
The honest and good heart hears the word and keeps it, and brings forth
fruit with patience. Psalm. 119. verse. 11. Hide thy promise in mine heart.
Prouer. 4.4. Let thine heart hold fast my words. Heb. 3.12. Take heed brethren,
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of infidelity to depart away from
the living God, etc. Now for that the Lord alone works in the heart,
searching and framing it as pleases him, Ierem. 17.9. 1 By prayers.
therefore here we must put up our supplications to him, to prepare our hearts
by his holy spirit, to humble and beat down the pride of our hearts. Bradford
prayed thus sweetly for a good heart: Take from us our hard hearts, our stony
hearts, our impenitent hearts, our distrusting and doubtful hearts, our
carnal and secure hearts, our idle hearts, our impure, malicious, arrogant,
envious, wrathful, impatient, covetous, hypocritical, and epicureall hearts:
and in place thereof give us new hearts, soft hearts, faithful hearts,
merciful hearts, loving, obedient, chaste, pure, holy, righteous, simple,
lowly, and patient hearts, to fear thee, love thee, and to trust in thee for
ever. 2 By fasting.
And here we be called again to the exercise of fasting: for this we heard
before is a means to humble us, and to give wings unto our prayers. This
Chemnitius says of his experience among the godly: Multi sunt, etc. The 4.
part.
A great number there is of good faithful people, when they give themselves to
the meditation of Gods word preached, and to the common prayers, and
participation of the Sacrament, the day before they fast, or eat very
sparingly. A willing desire to learn is a good grace of god. Ioh. 4.39. Heb.
4.2.
The heart prepared by prayer and fasting, must have two things: first, a
reverent fear of Gods word, Esai. 66.2.3. Hebr. 11.7.8. secondly, an earnest
desire to hear it, and to feed our souls upon it, as upon our ordinary
food. Job. 23.12.

2. Attention and reverence in hearing the word, and participation of the
Sacrament.
Our hearts and minds being well prepared before, Reverend attention in hearing
the word.
we must with diligence attend, and incline our hearts to hear Gods word
preached. This teaches Gods spirit in these words: Prou. 2.1.2.
My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments within
thee, and cause thine ears to hearken unto wisdom, and incline thine heart
to understanding, etc. And again, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O daughter, and
consider, incline thine ear, etc. For this gift and grace Lidia is a blessed
president: Acts 16.
for the Lord opened her heart, that she did attend unto these things which Paul
spoke.

The reverend participation of the Sacrament.
Again, our hearts and minds being prepared before, (as is aforesaid) we must
draw near also in as reverent a manner to the participation of the Sacrament:
at which time think of these points. First, when the Minister takes the bread
and wine into his hand, and partly by opening the institution and promise of
God, partly by prayer does consecrate the elements of bread and wine: then
meditate on this, Ioh. 6.27.
that Christ alone was given of the father, and sealed to be thy redemption.
Secondly, when the minister breaks the bread, and powers out the wine,
meditate on the passion of Christ, and shedding of his blood. Thirdly, when the
minister gives thee bread and wine into thine hands, meditate how the father
offers unto thee Christ Jesus, and all his benefits for thy salvation.
Fourthly, when thou receiuest bread and wine at the hand of the minister,
labor withal by faith to apprehend and receive Christ and his benefits.
Fifthly, As thou eatest the bread, and drinkest the wine: 2. Cor. 13.4.5. Ephesians.
3.20. Phil. 3.9.10. and 4.14. Gal 2.19.20. Heb 9.14. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
so labor by the same faith to appropriate and to apply Christ unto thy soul:
and as thou feel strength and comfort to come to the body by the outward
elements, ^o labor to feel Christ and his grace in thee, his death more and
more to kill thy sin, his blood to sanctify and purge thy heart and
conscience from dead works, his grace, power and virtue to enable thee to
stand against the kingdom of Satan and sin.

3. Meditation after the word and Sacrament.
MEditation is that which nourishes and cherishes that good in us which we
have received by the word and Sacrament.

This meditation is either 1. With our selves: and is either 1. A meditation of
the mind and reason. 2. A meditation of the heart and affections.
2. With others: this is conference.


Meditation of the understanding is when reason discourses of things heard and
read, which the wise heathen call the refining of judgment, the life of
learning: they that want this (howsoever they hear and read) shall never have
good judgment.

Meditation of the affections is, when having a thing in judgment and mind
well understood, we labor to digest it, and make it work on our affections.
This is a continual teaching of our selves, endeavoring to lay up all good
instructions in the treasury of our hearts. Let not affections go before
judgment and reason, but follow after.
The first will soon vanish away and become unprofitable in religion, if this
be not joined with it. Meditation for judgment must go before, then this
must follow after. So doing we shall attain sound judgment by the grace and
assistance of Gods good spirit, Philip. 1.9.10. Many have good knowledge and
judgment, Many false fears and false ioies have many, for want of due
meditation.
and yet have not their hearts purged, because they join not together these
meditations of the mind, heart and affections. Meditation without hearing and
reading is dangerous, and must breed errors: and reading, etc. without
meditation, is but barren and fruitless.

Meditation with others, after the word and Sacraments. This is a conference
which the faithful have both with themselves and their ministers, of things
heard, read, and preached. Examples for these are, The good people in Malachies
time after the sermon of Gods providence against Atheists, Holy meditation a
means to beget faith.
Malac. 3. verse. 6. And Act. 17.10.11. The noble Christians of Berea received
the word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those
things were so: therefore many of them believed. We must be ready to answer
and instruct one another with all reverence and meeknes, as having a good
conscience: 1. Pet. 3.15.16. Paul thought he might be edified and confirmed by
the Saints at Rome, Romans 1.12. And Job could be content to be admonished and
taught by the basest and poorest neighbor he had: for says he, Though I
could have made afraid a great multitude, yet the most contemptible of the
families did fear me: so I kept silence and went not out of door. Act. 18.24
25.26. 1. Cor. 1.12. and 3.4.5.6.
And Apollo, a very eloquent and learned man, was content to be catechized and
instructed in the grounds of religion by two poor artificers, and afterward
he did much good in the Church, and was mighty in the Scriptures.

In more weighty matters we must confer with our godly pastors: for
therefore is it written, The priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mal.
2.6.7.8.
and they shall seek the law at his mouth. Examples, see Acts 2.37. Luke 8.9.
Mark. 4.10. When he was alone, they asked him, etc.

Meditation after the Sacrament.
FIrst joyfully praise God, and be thankful for his favor and mercy in
Christ, giving thee such visible signs and feales of his covenant, in
substance the same, for the confirmation of his elect in all ages. Secondly,
strive to increase in mortification and sanctification: and to this end search
thy self, if thou did not receive an inward blessing, virtue, and strength
from Jesus Christ, when thou receiuedst the bread and wine, then by earnest
prayer endeavor thy self afterward to feel it: and search what raw humor or
evil corruption within did hinder the working of Gods grace by the holy
sacrament, and wrestle mightily again by fasting (if need so require) and
prayer against the same.

And thus came the faithful of elder ages to the word and sacraments, as often
as they could, and therefore received great comfort by both. This says
Chemnitius in these words: Veterem ecclesiam, etc. qua^do publici, etc. The
old church in solemn meetings and assemblies of the faithful, when the
people came together to hear the word, and participation of the sacrament and
to public prayers, then they fasted. And thus did they at the feast of Easter
the week before, they fasted and prayed, Ante festum paschatis propter public
panitentes and baptizandos.
when they gave themselves to the meditation of the passion of Christ: and to
earnest prayer for such conuerts as came to the public confession of their
sins, and for such as were then baptized. I conclude then.

The same motives which caused the faithful to exercise themselves in private
fastes, must move us in like manner:

But they fasted privately, that they might come the better prepared to the word
and Sacrament:

Therefore it behooves us to do the like.

Another cause which moved Gods holy ministers and faithful people to take up
this exercise privately and publicly was: some general sins, The eight
cause. Some sin or sins generally reigning in the Church unpunished.
or sin unpunished spreading it self like a contagious poison in the whole
land; for this we know is imputed to the whole Church and governors of the
people, and tends dangerously to the utter ruin and destruction of the
whole, if by Gods grace and goodness it be not prevented. When Achan alone had
sinned, the Lord says, the whole church, the children of Israel have
trespassed, Josh. 7.1. And the whole Church is plagued, verse. 5.6. and again,
verse. 11. Israel has sinned, Public sins unpunished, are the sins of the
whole Church.
verse. 12. Therefore the children of Israel cannot stand before their enemies:
against these public evils, the governors, ministers and people, must fast
publikelie and privately, for so does Joshua and the elders of Israel there,
verse. 16. and how greatly such public sins in the Church are to be feared,
read and observe diligently that which is storied chap. 22. of that book,
where that people of God sent this message unto the Rubenites their brethren,
tendering greatly the state of the whole Church, least they should by any sin
against God endanger it. Thirdly, they warn them again by Achans example: Did
not Achan the son of Zerach, Verse. 20.
trespass grieuouslie in the execrable thing, and wrath fell on all the
congregation of Israel? and this man alone perished not in his wickedness. These
sins caused David to mourn, fast and pray often, Psalm. 119.136.
Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water (says he) because men keep not thy
law: And this moved Ezra and all that feared the words of the Lord God of
Israel, Chap. 9.3.4.
to humble themselves in fasting and prayer: for that contrary to Gods law,
they had married with the gentiles. If this one sin in the Church caused Ezra
to mourn so bitterly, that he rent his clothes, plikt off the hair of his
head, and of his beard, and sat down astonished to the evening: and then fell on
his knees, and spread out his hands, crying for the Church, in a most humble
confession of sins: Verse. 6 15.
O my God I am confounded and ashamed, etc. How much are we bound to cast down
our selves as publicly, so also privately in all our families, for our Church
and people, wherein so many impieties and gross sins escape and reign
unpunished? The co^tempts of Gods holy covenant, profanation of his name, by all manner of most intolerable oaths and blasphemies, idle swearing, for
swearing, rashly, proudely, conte^ptuously, maliciously sinning against God
with a high hand, profanation of Sabbaths, contempt of the holy ministry,
with other sins, against first and second table innumerable. For these and
the like sins, the Lord threatens in his law to plague us. I will send
(says the Lord) a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my
covenant, etc. And the^ he mentions many evils and plagues which have in all
ages consumed and smitten the contemners both of the law and Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Leuit. 26.25. Deuteronomy. 26. and 27. and 28. chap.
These and the like, dearth, barrennes, scarsenes, hunger, thirst, poverty,
penury, the plagues of Egypt, pestilence, pox, fevers, collicke, heat,
emerodes, leprosy, measels, madness, loss of goods, winds, tempests, waters,
withering, wasting, burning, drought, rain, oppression, robbery, theft, rape,
captivity, exile, misery, subjection, danger, prison, sickness, stripes,
shame, cowardnes, blindness, error, an amazed heart, desperation, thought,
unquietness, war, fire, sword, fear, trembling, sorrow, short life, sudden
death both of body and soul. Fast and pray, that GOD would give all states of
men repentance and grace to believe and to obey the Gospel.

The 9 cause. Fasting and prayer for princes, their protection, etc. 1. Tim.
2.1.2.3.


These and the like miseries do follow the breach and contempt of Gods holy
covenant. Therefore I conclude.

That which moved the faithful of elder ages to fast in their days, ought to
move us:

The general sins of the Church, etc. gave them occasion of fasting, weeping
and mourning: therefore the like occasion must move us.

Again, the holy spirit of God gives us a special charge for prayer and
fasting for his vicegerents, his anointed, Kings and Queens, princes and
governors of his Church and chosen people. First for prayer, Christ speaks
by his Apostle: I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men, for Kings, and for
all that are in authority, that ye may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. And if we must pray for all princes in general, even
the bloody tyrants, the deadly arch enemies of Christ's flock, as here is
commanded, and as Tertul. says, the faithful in his time did: Tertul. in
apologet. and ad Scapulam.
how much more are we bound to perform this duty, for our Kings and Queens,
Es. 49.22.
the nursing fathers and nursing mothers of the Church of Christ? When we fast
and pray for our dread Sovereigns protection, we must also desire the enemies
conversion or confusion. Secondly, for fasting, we have also a special
president set before us by the same spirit, for instruction and imitation.
Hester 4.15.16. in these words: Then Hester (the Queen) commanded to answer
Mordecai, Private and public fasts for protection of princes.
Go and assemble all the Jews that are in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and
eat not, nor drink not in three days, day nor night, I also and my maids
will fast likewise, and so J will go unto the King, which is not according to
the law, and if J perish, I perish. So let us remember, as duty binds us, to
recommend unto almighty God, our most gracious Hester, Q. E. in fasting,
prayer and thanksgiving. First, in fasting and prayer privately and publicly,
putting up in the name and mediation of Christ Jesus our humble supplications.
1. That almighty God would multiply the comforts and graces of his most holy
spirit upon her. 2. That the Lord would still lengthen her years, Genesis 35.29.
Judge. 5.7.
that she may be full of days, and a blessed ancient mother in Israel. 3. That
God would still be such a brazen wall and tower of defense for her protection,
that her enemies may evermore be beaten back, discovered, and confounded in
their practices. 4. That she may daily be more and more strengthened and
adorned with the spirit of wisdom and of judgment, Es. 11.
with princely courage, and christian fortitude, for the good government of her
people, the Church and flock of Jesus Christ, committed and commended by him
unto her charge. 5. That her royal heart may still be humbled unto Christ, as
Hesters was, that she may power forth such prayers before him, as that both
her self and her people may still be preserved.

Secondly, we must also be mindful to offer up unto the Lord the sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving for our most noble Queen. 1. For that she has been
now these 37. years and upwards, by Gods special providence, a most tender
hearted nursing mother, not only for us, Esaias 49.23.
but also for many myriades of Gods people. 2. For that by her Graces means we
have received and do enjoy, of Gods free goodness the greatest treasure under
heaven, the most glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, and his holy ministry, the
means appointed for our salvation. 3. For that by her under God, we do enjoy
both spiritual and temporal blessings, not as neighbor Churches round about
us, with many crosses and afflictions, but in a most happy calm, quiet, and
peaceable life with godliness and honesty. 4. 1584. W. Parries disloyal
practices. 1585. Treasons discovered of 1. E Northumberland. 2. Q of Scots, 3.
Frances Throg. 4. D. Sanders. 5 D. Allen. 6. Charles Paget. 7. W. Shelleys.
1594. 8. D. Lopez.

For that the Lord has strangely, yea miraculouslie discovered and laid open,
so many most detestable and accursed trecheries and treasons of popish
atheists, most devilish and unnatural practices of bloody rebels against her
royal person, for their confusion and our most comfortable deliverance, the
almighty God be blessed, and make his people more thankful, for the burying
of such great mercies, without any sacrifice of praise unto GOD, is one great
sin in our land. 5. For that the Lord still notwithstanding our manifold
sins, spreads out his wings over her, for protection and comfort, and the
confusion of our enemies, who thirst for nothing more, then by her death for
our ruin and utter desolation. I conclude of the premises.

We must fast and pray, as the faithful have done:

But they fasted and prayed for the protection, etc. of Princes, etc.

Therefore must we so fast and pray in like manner.

The last special motive and cause of this private exercise of fasting in all
religious families, The 10. cause of private fasting for the Church.
unto all Gods faithful people to the worlds end, is the public state, and
for the good of Gods Church and people generally, as to prevent evils to come,
to remove present, or imminent dangers, etc. For thsese causes are evident in
many presidents we find in the Scripture. For every true believer and member
of Christ's Church, ought to lay to his heart the miseries of Gods people, and
to feel them as if they light upon his own soul. So Elisha does, foreseeing
what evils should come on Gods people: first he fastened his eyes so long upon
Hazael, that Hazael was ashamed: secondly, 2. King. 8.11.12.
he wept for the Church, as for his own private affliction: thirdly, he tells
bloody Hazael what evil he should do unto the people of God, first, fire
their cities: secondly, put to sword the strongmen: thirdly, dash in pieces the
very infants: 4. And as void of all humanity, rip up, and rend in pieces
their women with child. And we may not doubt but as he wept, so also he
fasted and prayed for the Church: for so did the Prophets and holy men in the
ages following. Nehemias fasted, wept, and prayed himself in his private
chamber for the Church, because of the miseries and desolations of Jerusalem in
his time. Chap. 1.
So did Ezra with a few well affected, weep and mourn, and having all day
humbled themselves in fasting, in the evening he made a most worthy
confession of sins unto God for the Church in this form and manner following:
he fell upon his knees and spread out his hands unto the Lord, Chap. 9.5.15.
saying: O my God, I am confounded and ashamed, to lift up mine eyes unto thee
my God: for our iniquities are increased over our head, Learn of Ezra how to
pray for the Church
and our trespass is grown up unto the heaven: from the days of our fathers
have we been in a great trespass unto this day, and for our iniquities have
we, our kings, and our priests been delivered into the hands of the Kings of
the lands, unto the sword, unto captivity, into a spoil, and into confusion
of face as appears this day. And now for a little space grace has been
showed from the Lord our God, in causing a remnant to escape, and in giving us
a nail in his holy place, that our God may light our eyes, and give us a
little reviving in our servitude. For though we are bond men, yet the Lord has
not forsaken us in our bondage, but has inclined mercy unto us in the sight of
the Kings of Persia, to give us life, and to erect the house of our God, and to
redress the desolate places thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in
Jerusalem. And now our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken
thy commandments, which thou have commanded by thy servants the prophets
saying: The land whereunto ye go to possess it, is an unclean land, because
of the filthiness of the people of the lands, which by their abominations, and
by their uncleanness have filled it from corner to corner. Now therefore shall
ye not give your daughters unto their sons, neither shall ye take their
daughters unto your sons, nor seek their peace nor wealth for ever, that ye
may be strong and eat the goodness of the land, and leave it for an inheritance
for your sons for ever: and after all that is come upon us for our evil
deeds, and for our great trespasses (seeing that thou our God have stayed us
from being beneath for our iniquities, and have given us such deliverance)
should we return to break thy commandments, and join in affinity with a
people of such abominations? Would not thou be angry toward us, till thou
had consumed us: so that there should be no remnant nor any escaping? O Lord
God of Israel, thou art just, for we have been reserved to escape, as appears
this day: behold, we are before thee in our trespass, therefore we cannot
stand before thee because of it. Thus far Ezra for the Church and sins of
the people of his time. So prayed David, and fasted no doubt full often for the
Church of God: for thus he speaks, Psalm. 69.9, 10. For the zeal of thine
house has eaten me, and the rebukes of them that rebuked thee are fallen upon
me, for this cause he adds: I wept and my soul fasted. And as he does
himself, so he exhorts others: 2. Sam. 24. Psalm. 25. last verse, and 15.
last verse.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love thee: peace be
within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. And to be short, this
godly zeal we find also to burn Daniels heart: for that when he understood
by Ieremies prophecy, concerning the captivity of the Church, that seventy
years must be accomplished in the desolation of Jerusalem: he turned his face
to the Lord God, Chap. 9.2.3. etc.
and sought by prayer and supplication with fasting, and sackcloth and ashes,
etc. And this Prophet adds also unto his fasting a most worthy confession of
sins for the Church, which being so needful for our instruction and
imitation, I have set down the whole as follows. Oh Lord God, Learn of
Daniel how to fast and pray for the Church
which art great and fearful, and keep covenant and mercy toward them
which love thee, and toward them which keep thy commandments, we have
sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea we have
rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, Confession of sins.
and from thy judgments: for we would not obey thy servants the prophets,
which spoke in thy name to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our Fathers, and
to all the people of the land: O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and
unto us open shame, as appears this day unto every man of Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem: yea unto all Israel both near and far off, Pray
that God would give repentance to all states and degrees of men.
through all the countries whither thou have driven them, because of their
offenses that they have committed against thee. O Lord unto us appertains
open shame, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our Fathers, because we have
sinned against thee: yet compassions and forgiveness is in the Lord our God,
Pray that Gods voice and word may be known, and may be glorified. 1. These. 3.1.
albeit we have rebelled against him, for we have not obeyed the voice of the
Lord our God, to walk in his law which he had laid before us, by the
ministry of his servants the prophets: yea all Israel has transgressed thy
law, and are turned back, and have not heard thy voice: therefore the curse is
powered upon us, and the oathe that is written in the law of Moses the servant
of God, because we have sinned against him: And he has confirmed his words
which he spoke against us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing
upon us a great plague, for under the whole heaven has not been the like, as
has been brought upon Jerusalem. All this plague is come upon us as it is
witten in the law of Moses, yet made not we our prayer before the Lord our God,
that we might turn from our iniquities and understand thy truth. Therefore
the Lord has made ready the plague, and brought it upon us: for the Lord our
God is righteous in all his works which he does, for we would not hear his
voice. And now O Lord our God, that have brought thy people out of the land of
Aegipt, with a mighty hand, and have gotten thee renown, as appears this
day, we have sinned, we have done wickedly. Lord according to all thy
righteousness, J beseech thee let thine anger and thy wrath be turned away from
the city Jerusalem thy holy mountain, for because of our sins, and for the
iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are a reproach to all that
are about us. Now therefore O our GOD hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that lies wast,
for the Lords sake. O my God incline thine ear and hear: open thine eyes and
behold our desolations, and the city whereupon thy name is called: for we do
not present our supplications before thee, for our own righteousness, but for
thy great tender mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and do
it: defer not for thine own sake, O my God: for thy name is called upon thy
city, and upon thy people. Chap. 10. ve. 3. 4. and 12.
And thus continued he fasting, weeping and mourning in prayer for the Church
one and twenty days, and was heard and comforted.

And thus far shall suffice for private fasting: the public fast follows.
The fourth Question. What a public and general fast is, and for what causes
the same is to be published, and by whom in the Church.
Joel. 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 12. Wherefore also now the Lord says,
Turn you unto me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping and
with mourning.

13. Rent therefore your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindenes, that he may repent him of this evil.

14. Who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind
him, even a meat offering, and a drink offering, unto the Lord your God?

15. Sound the Trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, proclayme the day appointed
to be solemnized.

16. Gather the people, Sanctify.
call a congregation, gather the elders together, assemble the children, and
such as suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and
the bride out of her chamber.

17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and
the altar, and let them say, spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine
heritage into reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore
should they say among the people: where is their God?

18. The^ will the Lord be jealous over his land, and spare his people.


The Argument, occasion and time of Joels prophecy.
THe interpreters do greatly vary concerning the time, when this prophet
prophesied, because the Lord sent often upon the Jews such a famine, as this
prophet mentions. In the days of Ioram there was a famine seven years
together, 2. King. 8.2.3. And again there was another, whereof Esaias speaks,
chap. 5. ve. 13.14. (as some judge) in King Vzzias time. There was a third also
for the sins of Manasseh in the days of good K. Josias: of this Jeremy did
write and prophecy, compare his 14.15. chap. ver. 1. with the 2. King. 23.26.
The best for learning and judgment refer this prophecy to that age and
time: First because Joel and Jeremy have like words and arguments: next for
that this prophet is thought to have prophesied about Josias time, after the
destruction of the kingdom of Israel: for all prophets which mention not that
kingdom, it is like the^ came after. The principal scope of the prophet is to
bring the Jews to repentance, by laying before them, all the great danger they
were in: the great wrath of God kindled against them, which did appear, not
only in the famine, which now had wasted strangely the whole land, but was
like anon after to be yet more seen in bloody wars, if they humbled not
themselves speedily in sackecloth and ashes. He warns them to turn to GOD
in truth of repentance, and to mourn humbly before God for their sins,
because the Lord has now strangly visited and consumed them with a famine,
which they must not impute to fortune, motion of planets, aspect of stars,
strange constellations, etc. but they must lift up their eyes above all these,
and look upon the high and just judgment of God, who because of their sins
has sent first an host of weak worms to famish and consume them, the palmer
worm, the grasshopper, the canker worm, the caterpiller: what is the end of
all this? verse. 14.
Girde your selves and lament O ye priests, etc. sanctify a fast call a
solemn dissemblie. If this famme yet cannot awake you, nor move you (says the
prophet) behold I will bring upon you a greater plague, the Babilonians and
the Chaldeans, Chapter 2. Verse 12. verse. 15.
a fierce, a bloody and cruel nation, they shall devour you. Wherefore
again I warn you express yet your repentance more humbly before God: verse
28. Chapt. 3. See Amos chap 9.23. Mich. 7.8.
turn unto God, and let your hearts be rent, etc. and signify also your
sorrow for sin and true humiliation before GOD in a public fast, and in a
solemn assembly, so doing, the Lord shall grant you plenty of blessings
against famine, strength against your enemies, and spiritual comforts in Jesus
Christ.

Place this Table between folio 50. and 51.

In this portion of this holy prophecy (contained in these 7. verses of the 2.
chap. verse. 12.13.14.15.16.17.18.) we may consider principally two things: 1.
How he exhorts all the people of the Jews generally to repentance, verse 12.
and 13. and here observe 3. branches: 1. That they must repent in truth
without hypocrisy: and to this end he bids them To turn to God with all
their heart, renting their hearts.

2. How this repentance must be testified: 1. By fasting and abstinence. 2. By
weeping and mourning.
3. The reasons to move them to repentance are these: 1. God is 1. Gracious. 2.
Merciful. 3. Slow to anger. 4. Of great kindness. 5. Repenting him of evil.
2. The penitent shall surely receive a blessing, verse. 14.
2. How he prescribes a form of public humiliation unto Gods people, wherein
we may observe these points: 1. What preparation is to be used before a
general fast: wherein ye Prophet requires these 4. things: 1. That a trumpet be
sounded in a special manner to signify the fast. 2. The place must be
appointed: in Sion, and so in all the cities of Judah. 3. The people must be
sanctified and prepared for this holy exercise. 4. The solemn day must be
published.
2. What persons must be assembled in this general fast: 1. The Prophet
answers: in general All the people. All the congregation.
2. He nu^breth all these specials: 1. The elders must not be exempted for
age. 2. The babes must not be excepted for their infancy. 3. The bride and
bridegroom for their mirth time. 4. The priests must be presidents for all the
congregation.

3. When the congregation is gathered, what is to be done: 1. The people yo^g
and old must verse. 16.17. 1. Mourn and weep. 2. They must fast. 3. They must
all assent in prayer with the priests.
2. The priests must principally in this action 1. Weep and mourn for Gods
people. 2. Pray earnestly for the Church of God.

4. What good effect and happy issue, this solemn fast and humiliation of the
faithful shall have: 1. The Lord will be careful and ielous over his people.
verse. 18. 2. The L. will spare his people and end their afflictions




Joel. chap. 2. verse. 12. Therefore also now the Lord says, turn you unto
me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.


Therefore also now: As if the prophet said: Sense.
I have now taught you sufficiently the causes of your misery: first of that
great dearth and famine which has wasted al your store, and greatly weakened the
whole land: you have heard that your sins were the cause of all that evil,
but you would not harken not believe. Now I come again the second time, and I
tell you how the Lord has determined already to bring upon you a merciles and
bloody people. Wherefore rent your hearts with sorrow for sins past, and
testify your unfeigned repentance by fasting, weeping and mourning.

1 This v. teaches us: The Lord is with you while you be with him: 2. Chro.
15. v. 2, 3, 4, 5.
and if you seek him, he will be found of you; but if you forsake him, he will
forsake you: then he shows them their capital sins? Now for a long season
Israel has been without the true God, and without priest to teach, and
whithout law. i. Look unto it O king and O ye people of Judah, The three
special pillars of the Church and commonwealth.
you have wanted for a long time the maine great pillars of your commonwealth,
and therefore no marvel though your kingdom were so in danger of ruin and
destruction.

2. This v. teaches us: that all the time the Lord threatens us til his
judgments be executed, Pass not the acceptable time, for that is dangerous:
now is the time, when he speaks by his holy word and chastisements. Revel.
9.20. Esa. 55.6. Hebr. 3.12.13.
is the time wherein the Lord calls us to repentance, and therefore most
carefully to be regarded, as the Lords acceptable time, and as the day wherein
God offers unto us salvation, 2. Cor. 6.1.2. Es. 49.8.

3. This verse teaches us what true repentance is: namely, a conversion unto
God with all the heart. The Lord will not be served by parts or by halfes, but
with all the heart, the Lord will not part stakes with the devil, the world the
flesh, no more the^ with Baal, he is God alone and must have the whole heart.
This is it the law commands, and Christ requires, all the heart, all the
soul, all our strength, al our thoughts, to love, worship and serve him. Deuteronomy.
6.5. Luke. 10.27. chap. 14.26. The holy spirit gives the good K. Iofias this
commendation: The mind discourses and disputes, the soul desires, the
heart lodges and embraces, etc.
2. King. 25.25. He turned to God with all his heart, with all his soul, with
all his might: according to all the law of Moses. When we do God any service,
he would have us to do it with such cheerefulnes, as that no part of us within
or without sit idle, we must the^ strain all parts, and specially these here
mentioned, the heart, soul and mind, his great chambers wherein he does erect
and set up his throne and kingdom.

4. We be taught that fasting is an holy exercise very needful and
profitable, to testify our conversion and repentance, as is before showed.

5. This verse teaches us, how the holy saints testified also their unfeigned
repentance and conversion unto God, by weeping and mourning: and how that when
they humbled themselves in their fasts private or public, they did express
their unfeigned sorrow for sin, by weeping and mourning. And surely fasting
will draw us to a more earnest searching, fight and feeling of our own
unworthiness, and so to a deeper sorrow and mourning for sin: for which cause
the exercise which the other Evangelists call fasting, Compare Mark. 2.20. Luke
5.35. Matthew. 9.15.
S. Matthew calls mourning: Because that must lead us unto this. We have many
notable examples, and presidents of the saints, Chap. 8.9.10.
to teach us how weeping and mourning follow fasting. The people in Nehemias
time, when they humbled themselves in fasting, wept and mourned so exceedingly
for their sins, that the noble captain by much entreating could not stay
their weeping. So the Levites which preached in every congregation (for the
whole multitude was divided into diverse assemblies) called upon the people to
cease weeping and mourning. Verse 11. 1. Sam. 6.6.
And in Samuels time the people fasting and mourning for their sins, wept so
much, that they are said to have drawn whole buckers of water, which the
depth of their sorrow for their sins, and the anger of God against them had
ministered. We read often of David's tears. 2. Sam. 3.31.32. So likewise of
Christ's weeping, Luke 19.41. John 11. but of his laughter never. 2. Kin.
8.12.11. Act. 20.30. Phil. 3.18.
Hezekiah wept and mourned, 2. King. 20.1.2.3. so did Elisha to Hazael, and
Paul at Miletum, because they did foresee the evils which were to come upon the
Church of God. And Joseph wept often, being occasioned by his brethren, Luke
23.62. Luke 7.38.
Genesis 50.17. 43.30.45.1.2.14. Peter in his conversion wept bitterly: and
Mary's tears were so many, 2. Kin. 22.19.
that she is said to have washed Christ's feet with weeping. Josias heart
melted, and wept before the Lord for his own sins and the sins of his
people. And the Psalmist sweetly teaches what joy follows all the crosses
of the faithful, The tears of the faithful have a happy end.
if with joint hearts they weep and mourn and cry unto God. Psalm. 126. verse.
5.6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: they went weeping, and
carried precious seed: but they shall return with joy, and bring their
sheaues. And thus we see how the faithful can shed tears plentifully for
good causes, which assuredly are never lost on the ground, Psalm. 56. ve. 8.
but be registered with the Lord, and preserved as in his bottels.

1. Quest. Do the godly weep for themselves only?

Ans. No: First, they weep for that by their sins they have dishonored and
displeased God.

Secondly, they mourn also to consider the evils which are imminent, and
ready to fall upon their enemies. Psalm. 35. verse. 13.14. For this cause David
he fasted, wept, and prayed for Saul, when that tyrant sought every day to kill
him.

Thirdly, they weep for the Church of God, when Gods people are afflicted.
These be causes of the tears of the faithful. But such as weep only
because of their own plagues, Tears of hypocrites.
they are no better then dogs, for they will cry when they be beaten, and
the devils also will rore when they must go to hell, as we hear in the
Gospel.

2. Quest. What affections and causes move tears?

Ans. First, sorrow and grief of mind, as in Ezras time: because the temple
reedified was not comparable to the first: many in great grief wept with a
loud voice, Ezra. 3.12.

Secondly, great joy of heart: example for this cause we find in Joseph, who
was filled with exceeding joy when he saw his brother Benjamin: and this
affection caused him to shed tears exceedingly: Joseph made baste, (for his
affection was inflamed toward his brother, and sought where to weep) and
entered into his chamber, and wept there. Genesis 43.30.

Thirdly, a vehement anger being a mixed affection, of joy and grief, causes
tears: for this evil affection does rejoice in revenge, and will otherwhiles
break forth into tears for very grief of mind, when it cannot revenge.

Fourthly, Compassion and mercy draw tears from the godlyfull often, because
of their sympathy and grief they have in the miseries of their brethren. Ioh.
11. verse 34.35.

Fifthly, all our earnest and vehement desires may provoke and draw tears from
us.

Verse. 13. Rent therefore your hearts, and not your clothes, and turn unto the
Lord your God: for he is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, that he may repent him of this evil.


THE first part of this verse does yet more plainly express what unfeigned
humiliation and conversion God requires at their hands: the latter part
contains notable arguments from the Lords free goodness and mercy, to move
them to attend carefully unto the former exhortation. Secondly, the Lord
promises to change his mind from their affliction, if they be changed.

Rent your hearts, etc. That is, Sense.
do not as the people of the East countries, rend their clothes in sign of
sorrow, etc. Job 1.20. Matthew. 26.65. but rent your hearts: Let your hearts be
broken and contrite, sorrow ye and lament, and this do, so as your hearts may
testify with you that you be sick for sin, and agrieued in your hearts,
for that you have grieved the almighty God and his holy spirit, Ephesians. 4.30.

For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness. That
is, the Lord is indeed such a God, as he has long since described and
declared himself to be unto his holy servant Moses: when he desired to see
his glory, and to know his majesty: he proclaimed and made known himself
first in these words: Exo. 34.6, 7, 8.
I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy, and I will have compassion, on
whom I will have compassion. And again in these words: The Lord, the Lord,
strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and
truth, reserving mercy unto thousands, for giving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin, etc. God is first Chanun, gracious: that is, one that
gives great gifts freely. Secondly, Rachun, one that like a father, has
bowels of mercy. Thirdly, Erek apajim, one that is long winded, very patient,
not soon offended. Fourthly, Rah chesed, very bountiful or beneficial.

That he may repent of this evil. That is, the Lord himself will not afflict
you with wars and other judgments, as he has threatened, if you All this is
spoken to our capacity and comfort: God is said in Scripture never to change,
alter, or to repent of any decree, his decrees are immutable, Romans 11.6.
repent unfeignedly, but he will embrace you as a father in his arms of mercy:
For as a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him. Psalm. 103. verse. 13.

This verse teaches us: First, that true repentance is no light change of
mind, opinion, or judgment only: no, says the holy Prophet, it must have a
deeper impression in the heart. The heart must feel it, and find it, as well
as the mind and reason see it, and know it: for the heart must be rent and
sick, that herein also we may be Rom 8.29. but when he is said to repent, the
meaning is that he changes his menacings into blessings, when his people are
changed. 1. Sam. 15.35. compare verse 11.29. etc.
conformed unto the image of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For his heart
also was rent, Ioh. 19.34. Never trust to any outward action, if thou feel
no inward grief nor change of mind.

2. The way to convert souls unto God in misery, is by preaching the glad
tidinges of Gods mercies in Jesus Christ. Speak to men afflicted of justice
and judgments, the more they despair and run from God. Psalm. 130.4. Mercy
is with thee that thou may be feared. Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore
brethren by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice
unto God. Christ and John began their Sermons of repentance with this argument:
Matthew. 3.2.
Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand.

3. The inspeakeable love and mercy of our heavenly father is here taught us,
where he is said to repent when we repent. There can be no greater argument
either to testify his love, or to move our affection. Is not he a most
gracious and blessed God, that when we poor forlome sinners repent and are
grieved for displeasing him, he repents also and is agrieued that he has
beaten us? And is not that God full of bowels of mercy, that when werepent and
leave off to sin, he repents also, and will cease to afflict us? We can no
sooner mourn, but he mournes; Gods repentance and ours compared.
no sooner be affected toward him, but he also is affected toward us. Nay,
he affects us before we affect him, and his affection is cause of our
affection, and his repentance cause of our repentance, and our repentance but a
sign of Gods repentance. This the Prophet Jeremy also assures us, that God
is full of A tender hearted father can mourn and weep even when he beats his
children. Ier. Lam. 3.32.33. ex animo.
heaviness even when he does chasten his people, chap. 3.32. Though he send
affiction, yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude of his
mercies: for he does not punish willingly. So then we see here a most
comfortable doctrine: that if we be truly humbled, the Lord the^ assuredly is
minded to show mercy: for he first softeneth, prepares, and inlargeth our
hearts before we can be humbled: so then where great love, humility and
repentance is in us, the Lords great love and grace went before in the
pardoning of many sins: Luk 7.47.
So speaks Christ: Many sins An argument from the consequent, and not from
the cause: as the example following testifies.
are forgiven her, for she loved much.

Verse. 14. Who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing,
even a meat offering and drink offering, unto the Lord your God?


THis verse contains the third argument, Coherence.
to move the Jews to repentance: and it is thus much in effect. Whereas the
Lord has consumed your corn and cattle, and so wasted your store, that you
have not to maintain the public service of the Lord: so that your Levites be
discouraged in the Lords service, 2. Chro. 31.4. Mala. 3.8. Notwithstanding, if
you shall unfeignedly seek the Lord by hearty repentance, be well assured, how
hard so ever it may seem unto men, the Lord shall power his blessings upon you.

Who knows if. By this manner of speaking, Sense.
the Hebrews do not mean any doubting in the speaker, but they signify the
difficulty to obtain that which is spoken of, by any natural means: as then
it might seem admirable and incredible, that after the ground had bin so long
wasted and dried up, they should receive some fruits of the earth again. q.
d. True it is (says the Prophet) man has good cause to doubt, So lift up your
hearts in wars and pestilence, and howsoever it seem hard to men, yet god will
deliver you and save you, and do you good, if you repent.
but lift up your hearts above earthly means, and look upon Gods mercies and
holy promises, if you repent he is willing, and able, doubt not, to do you
good. The like phrase we have, Exodus 32.30. I will go up to the Lord, if I may
pacify him for your sin: that is, your sin is so horrible, what man is
there but must doubt to find any favor with God for you: yet I trust, because
of his infinite mercies, I shall be heard, and that with much crying, I shall
obtain some mercy for you. Caleb speaks in like manner, Josh. 14.12. and
Jonathan, 1. Sam. 14.6.7. And Peter to Simon Magus, Act. 8. 22. A blessing for
meat offering and drink offering: that is, the Lord will power upon you such
blessings as you have need of for his service. For by meat offering, etc he
means all manner of sacrifices and rites which were commanded in the service
of the old Church: see Numb. 28. verse. 5. Exodus 29.40. Leuit. 2.1. Exodus
16.36. q. d. Because of your famine, the divine service of the Lord prescribed
in his law is ceased: notwithstanding, mourn, and lament, and humble your
selves unfeignedly, and the Lord shall grant you such blessings, as you have
need of, for the upholding and continuance of the Lords service.

This verse teaches us: First, what a hard matter it is to assuage the fire of
Gods wrath, when it once breaks forth, when he strikes with famine, wars,
or pestilence any sinful people. Surely in regard of our selves, because we
have multiplied sins against him, we have cause to doubt he will never leave
us till he has consumed us. But when we consider his promises, his goodness,
his Christ, his rich mercies in Christ, let us not doubt, but send forth cries
mightily unto him: and assuredly we shall find grace and comfort, if we
believe and repent. Consider the general and fearful sins of the land: and
when the Lords wrath breaks forth into wars, plague, famine, or
pestilence, who can look for any thing but that the Lord should consume, as
he has done the rebels in former ages, where the Lords covenant is broken,
the seals polluted and profaned, his wonderful name blasphemed, the holy
Sabboths spent in the service of Satan, Bacchus and Venus, and reserved by
unclean beasts, The revenger of the covenant is sent forth for these sins.
Leuit. 26.25.
as the only time, for drunke^nes, gluttony, surfeiting, whoredoms, and such
like abominations? Yet notwithstanding, the Lord our God being that gracious
God, so slow to wrath, so full of bowels of mercy, as the Prophet has before
showed, let Gods people, in their unfeigned repentance, be well assured, they
shall find favor and grace with God.

Secondly, here we learn the chief care and desire of Gods people, when they
be truly humbled and converted unto God: namely, how the service and pure
worship of God may be maintained. For they are well assured, this is the
chief pillar and stay of all their good state and welfare in this life, and
Gods special ordinance for their everlasting salvation. So soon as Asa was
delivered, truly humbled, and informed by Gods Prophet, he reformed his
kingdom, and set up the service of God. 2. Chro. 15.1.2.3.4.5. 2. King. 22.19.
and 23.
When Josias heart melted, having heard that holy law read, etc. he reformed
his kingdom, and set up the pure worship of God in the land.

Now the time is come upon us for to practice this holy doctrine of repentance,
which the Prophet has hitherto commended unto us in this exhortation: if we
regard it not, note the time of our visitation, certain it is the greater
shame and confusion is reserved for us. Let us not be like the Atheists of
Esaias time, who when the Lord called them to fasting, weeping, and mourning,
gave themselves to eating and drinking, and feasting, scorning his Prophets,
with let us be merry, for to morrow we shall die, Esaias. 22.12.13.14. And like
to the brazen faced Atheists and rebels of Ieremies time: of whom the Prophet
complains in these words, chap. 5. verse. 3. 4. O Lord, are not thine eyes
upon the truth? A dangerous sign if there appear no humiliation when god
strikes. Reave. 9 20.
thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed: thou have consumed them,
but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder
then a stone, and have refused to return. Therefore I said surely they are
poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the
judgment of their God.

Verse. 15. Sound the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a or Proclaim the
day appointed. Kiru gnatzarah. Indicite festu^ retentionis. Because the people
were kept in and restrained this day.
solemn assembly.


HEre begins the second part of this text, wherein as before is noted, four
things are principally to be considered: First, what preparation must go
before a general fast. Secondly, what persons must be assembled. Thirdly,
what must be done when they be assembled together. Fourthly, what blessings
they must expect assuredly, if they humble themselves, and truly convert unto
God.

First concerning our preparation unto a general fast: we learn in this
verse four special points be required: 1. The day must be known and
signified with sounding of a trumpet. 2. The place in like manner must be
appointed in Sion, etc. 3. The assembly must be sanctified, that so they may
come prepared unto this holy worship of God. 4. This assembly must be a
solemn assembly, wholly bent to consecrate this day in humiliation, and
prayers unto God.


Sense.
Sound the trumpet. That is, by the sounding of a trumpet warn the people that
they prepare themselves unto a general fast, etc. Concerning this instrument,
the diverse tunes, and measures which were to be observed in wars and peace,
to call and to dismiss the congregation, read Number. 10. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. Where we may learn, verse. 8. First, that this was the priests office to
sound the trumpet, least the people should be assembled rashly without good
cause, or unadvisedly without judgment. Secondly, that the trumpets did serve
for three special uses: first, The diverse uses of trumpets.
to call the people or the heads of the people to the public assemblies:
secondly, to prepare and to warn them to be ready for the wars: thirdly, to
publish their feasts, and their solemn times for sacrifice. Thirdly, if the
captains or chief heads only assembled, they sounded the trumpet but once
only, verse 4. if the people assembled, they doubled the sound, verse 3. But
for the wars they sound Or broken sound. The diversity of sounds in the
trumpets.
alarums, verse 5. Whereby is meant a more vehement and broken sound, which is
drawn long, and continued some space of time. Among other great signs and
soundes that were heard on Sinai (when GOD himself spoke in that most strange
manner, the words of the holy law) there was heard to call the people, The
sound of a trumpet exceeding loud. Again about the midst of September they
had a feast, wherein was great joy by sounding of trumpets, to signify their
new year to be at hand, for then began their annus ciuilis, for buying and
selling, for freedom and bondage, and then came in the tenth of that month
their feast of Kippurim, of reconciliation, etc.

And as the Lord commanded the holy priests to sound the trumpets, so must they
also and the Prophets be the Lords trumpeters, to call upon and to inform the
princes of all causes and occasions of sounding the same. So the religious
magistrates sent forth their edicts into all parts of the kingdom, for the
sounding of the trumpet for such solemn assemblies, as often as occasion
required. This we see in the good King Iehosaphat: He feared God, and set
himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah, that is,
he caused a fast to be proclaimed. So Ezra that holy priest and governor of
Gods people. I proclaimed a fast, that we might humble our selves before our
God, and seek of him a right way for us and our children, and all our
substance. So general fasts were ever appointed either immediately of God, See
Pet. Martyr de ieiunio class. 3. cap. 10. sect. 9. and Magd. hist. cent. 4.
cap. 6.
as ordinarily by his law, Leuit. 23. Extraordinarily by some prophet, as
here in Joel we see: or mediatly by men with consent and assent of the godly
princes, priests, magistrates, and rulers of the people, 2. Chron. 20.3.
Hester. 4.16. Ezra. 8.21. 1. Sam. 7.5.6. under the law: of the Apostles,
Bishops, Pastors and church governors under the gospel, Act. 13.2. and 14.23.
See Ambros. de ieiunio quid drages. sermon. 25. and 40.
Tertul. contr. phisicos. Gregor in orat de pauperibus amandis. Anno. 1563. in
the great pestilence. Archbishop Matthew. Parker.
Tertullian says, the godly Bishops did in time of calamity, Publica
vniuersae plebi ieiunia indicere, Call all the people to general fasts. And so
the christian princes also, in the ages following, as our dread sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth has done in the fifth year of her most happy reign,
August. 1. with great care commanding the reverend father, the Archbishop of
Canturburie then being, to publish a general fast in all her Kingdom.

The magistrates are Gods vicegerents and watchmen, as well as the Lords
ministers, and by this general name, the Prophets ever understand as well the
one as the other. When a common watchman, says Ezechiel, is set in any part of
the land to epsy the enemies, if he give warning by a trumpet when they come
he shall be free, but if he do not, he shall dye for it: how much more the
Lords watchmen in regard of men's souls and salvation, Ez. 33.2.3.4. Esaias.
58.1. Deuteronomy. 28.47. Esaias 57.10.11. Wherefore general fastes were published.
should sound the trumpet when need is, that Gods people might with all
expedition and ioyfulnes prepare themselves to meet the Lord, before his
great and fearful wrath were kindled? The use of all this briefly is this,
that the faithful might come advisedly and well prepared to this public
humiliation: and that all cities and towns in the land, might at one time, as
it were with one voice, send forth strong and effectual cries into the ears
of the Lord, that so the great fire of his wrath, with the tears o^ his
children may be quenched.

2. The place is Sion.
THe meaning here is not that all the Jews in the land, should at all general
feasts and fastes meet all in Jerusalem, as they were wont to do, in the
three great feasts three times in the year: but that this general fast should
first be proclaimed in Sion, that is, in Jerusalem, and in all the cities and
towns, boroughes and hamlets in the land: Throughout all their dwellings, for
so the law commanded, Leuit. 23.31. And so Iehosaphat and his people obeyed,
they proclaimed a fast through out all Judah, that is, 2. Chro. 20.3.
in all cities and towns small and great in all the kingdom of Judah. The
Jews came as they were commanded, ordinarily three times in the year, from
all quarters and parts of that kingdom, first, to the resting place of the
Arc, before the building of the temple, as in Shiloh (where some think it was
343, years, some say 300.) and else where the Lord sent it. This solemn
meeting to the arc, and afterward to that famous temple of Jerusalem, is
commanded, Exodus 23.14.17. 1. Easter. 2. Pentecost. 3. Tabernacles.
These three times in the year shall all the men children appear before the
Lord Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 12.5. Ye shall seek the place which the Lord your God
shall choose out of all tribes, to put his name there, and thither you shall
come. This commandment all the Jews obeyed, and such as feared God came most
joyfully, albeit from far and were wearied and fainted often by the way,
Psalm. 84.7. They go from strength to strength, till every one appear before
God in Sion.

Question. Wherefore did the Lord thus inioyne the old Church, to assemble so
generally from all parts of the land to Jerusalem, and what use was there of
their meeting there three times in the year?

Answer. The first cause of their meeting was, that the remembrance of Gods
great and wonderful benefits might never dye among them: Use of the Passover.
therefore in the feast of the Passover, they did celebrate the remembrance of
their miraculous deliverance out of Egypt: secondly, in the feast of
Pentecost, the remembrance of the law and holy covenant which they received in
Sinai: Thirdly, in the feast of Tabernacles, they were put in remembrance how
they dwelt forty years in the wilderness in tents, and were graciously
preserved, and thanksgiving was then used for their come and other fruits
received. So they were yearly put in mind, of these three the greatest
blessings that can be in any commonwealth. For the first great happiness of any
weal public, is to be freed from al bondage, to enjoy freedom, and to have
special liberties and immunities granted: this mercy the Lord showed them in
their admirable deliverance from Egypt. The second thing which makes a
flourishing commonwealth, is that Gods laws, and holy covenant be received,
Gods pure worship and holy religion be established. This was done by the Lord
in a most wonderful manner unto that people in the wilderness of Sinai. The
third point to be desired for the preservation of the happy state of any
people, is, that nothing to preserve this present life be wanting: this mercy
also they received at Gods hand yearly, and their fathers had received
miraculouslie in the wilderness forty years, as the holy stories have
recorded. Secondly, they were in these general meetings yearly confirmed in
their consent in holy religion, and in the form and manner of the pure worship
of God. Thirdly, then the most godly learned Prophets, Priests and Levites,
did assemble from all their colleges and schools of learning to instruct the
people of God, and to resolve them in all their doubts. Fourthly, by this
general meeting also, mutual love and affection did increase, and was ever
confirmed among the Tribes, for then they feasted and rejoiced together.
Fifthly, by this also the holy ministry and the place of Gods service was the
better provided for, and the Priests and Levites were encouraged in the
service of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 12.6.7. 2. Chro. 31.4. Because that great assembly,
multiplied sacrifices and offerings in those feasts. 6. Again this served for
the confirmation of their faith in their supplications and prayers there: for
the Lord had made a special promise to his people in that place, Deuter.
12.28. 1. King. 8.7. And the Lord would have them by this travel to testify
their obedience also unto his laws, for the place was appointed by him, and
stood not in their own election, as is before showed. 8. Lastly, this travel
was a notable exercise of their faith, for at that time they were to leave
their substance, albeit in danger of the spoil by the enemy (for all the
male-kinde of any strength went up to Jerusalem) and so they did, recommending
all things to Gods holy protection. And yet we never read that this people
were ever in damaged by their enemies, by reason of these holy assemblies unto
the place of Gods worship, the times God appointed: For the Lord most
graciously according to his promise preserved them and their land, Exodus 34.24.
I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy coasts, so that no
man shall desire the land, when thou shall come up to appear before the Lord
thy God thrice in the year.

3. Sanctify a fast.
THat is, as some think, use a holy fast, Sense.
or fast for a holy and religious end, q. d. Hitherto you have fasted for the
famine, you could not otherwise choose, now come to a voluntary fast, that so
you may be truly humbled before the Lord. Again, some fast for bodily
health, but fast you a religious fast, that so you may be better prepared for
Gods service. But I had rather give the sense thus, sanctify a fast, that is,
sanctify and prepare the people for this general fast, or command them that
they be prepared and sanctified: in this sense I find a like phrase used in
the like occasion: for when the solemn assembly was to meet in Sinai to
hear and receive the law, the Lord himself gives Moses a charge in these
words: Exodus 19. ver. 10.14. Josh. 7.15. Ignorant people can better prepare
themselves to a feast, then to a religious fast, in these days.
Go to the people and sanctify them, that is, command them to use all holy
means that they may be sanctified. The means were these: first, they must be
purified, they washed themselves: secondly, they were commanded to abstain
from the marriage bed, during that time: thirdly, they added prayer, and
fourthly private fasting, as the Apostle commands in the like special
causes, 1. Corin. 7.1, 2, 3, 4.

4. Call a solemn assembly.
Kiru gnatzarah. proclamate festum retentionis. Call a feast day to restrain
the people. Leu. 23.28.39.
THe word here used, does signify to keep in, and to restrain, because the
whole day was solemnized, and the people kept together, to confess their
sins, to pray, and give thanks, to hear, learn, and confer together, and
for other special causes which hereafter shall be showed. So they made the
whole day a solemn holy day, and did none of their ordinary works: the Lord
so commanded: You shall humble your selves and do no work at all. And surely
the Lord so prouides for us in wisdom and mercy, because our spiritual
labors this day will ask our whole strength, which will not be great because
of our abstinence. So then we see here this day must be kept The romish
sinagoug has a calendar farced full of idle holy days, for canonized saints,
of who^ it is like a great part are gone to the neather-most hell: see Bales
english votarie: but this holy day here commanded of the Lord is quite blotted
out of al their books of remembrance. Our people are to take head lest they so
abuse the saboth.
holy unto the Lord.

The Jews misspent this day many ways: for when they were commanded by their
magistrates and ministers to assemble thus together for general fasts, the
carnal worldlings were glad of it, not to make it a solemn day to the Lord,
but for their own special uses. Some thought it a fit time to meet for
quarrels and contentions with their adversaries, and to bring in false
accusations against their brethren: so did bloody Iezabel against poor Naboth
on the fast day. Some thought it a good time to meet their creditors, and to
gather their debtes: so Es. 58. ver. 3. The first cause of a general fast, to
prevent future evils and imminent dangers. ver. 3. 4. 6. 14. ver. 9.
Esaias complains.

Question. What special causes might move the Princes and priests to publish
general fastes, and to prepare the people, as is before showed, for such
solemn assemblies?

Answer. It is very expedient for all good magistrates and faithful people, to
learn out of the holy scriptures the causes of general fastes, that so the
superiors may be always ready to call and command, and the inferiors to
obey and prepare themselves for this holy exercise.

First, Gods people assembled always humbly to this exercise, to prevent some
heavy judgments ready to fall upon them, and to consume them: a notable
example for this we have in Iehosaphat, 2. Chro. 20 2, 3. First, he is
informed that the Moabites and Ammonites are ready bent to bring wars upon
him. Hereupon he is resolved in mind, first, to seek humbly for help at
Gods hand, and therefore he proclaymeth a solemn fast throughout all the
cities of Judah: And in this fast, the King in his own person, prayed
earnestly before all the people. This done, a special prophet stands up to
teach and to comfort the people, promising them a most strange deliverance, as
a good blessing from the Lord, for their humiliation before him: the
congregation was then dismissed with thanksgiving. And the event followed
according to Gods promise, for their enemies were all destroyed: and then the
people praised God so exceeding joyfully in one place, that it had ever after
the name of the valley of Beracha, Joel. 3.2.
that is, of thanksgiving, and Joel he calls it the valley of Iehosaphat.
This was the cause also of Hesters fast and her people, and God gave them a
blessed deliverance, which they desired to make memorable throughout all ages
by their feast of Purim, Hester. 4.16. ca 9 21.22.28.
which Hester and Mordecai commanded and confirmed by a statute and a law to
all posterity for this purpose.

The second cause of a general fast, to remove from us some present calamity.
Josh. 7.6. Judge. 20.20.23 26.
Secondly, the people of God were assembled in their congregations, not only
before afflictions came, but also when they were come already, as wars,
famine, pestilence, wherein Gods heavy hand was seen to consume and to
destroy his people. This cause moved that good servant of the Lord Joshua, to
assemble the people to a general fast: for when he saw Gods wrath kindled
against them, when they began to fall, and to wax faint hearted before the
Cananites: it is said, that he and the elders of Israel, cried and mourned,
and humbled themselves until the evening. The like fast we have when the
Israelites sought to avenge the villainie done to the Leuite, whereupon came
the bloody wars between all Israel and the children of Benjamin: for then
the stronger side fell twice before the weaker, because of their pride: then
they humbled themselves and fasted. So the third time they destroyed of the
Beniamites so many, that they feared a whole tribe should ever after be wanting
in Israel. This is taught in one Ex decreto Liberij. A Bishop which lived in
constantins time. cum intemperies aeris, aut fames, aut pestis, aut bellum
praecesserit, tunc conuenire vt u^unium indicatur, vt ira Dei mitigetur.

The 3. cause of a general fast is gods threatenings for some general or
special sins raining in the land.


decree of Liberius, in distemperature of weather, wars, famine, pestilenee,
let a fast be proclaimed, that Gods wrath may be pacified: and to this end
says Tertullian for the Church, Ad Scapulam, quando non geniculationibus, and
ieiuna^tonibus nostris, siccitates etiam sunt depulsae? What drought was there,
which our prayers and fastings have not driven away?

The third cause of a general fast, was Gods threatening denounced by some of
his Prophets, for some general or special sins reigning in the land. This
cause moved the Ninevites to fast, when This Prophet was of great name in the
church and land of the Jews, and his divine predictions found true: and
therefore these pagans being so near neighbors they feared and reverenced him
as they did Elias and Elisha in Damascus. 2. King, 8.7, and 2. Kin. 14.25. The
4. cause of a general fast is when the magistrates and ministers find some
special evils and sins to reign in the church: that they may cry and pray
for gods assistance to remove them. Si qui in ecclesia in grauiora sint
prolapsi flagitia. Bucer. de regno. Christi. lib. 1. cap. 12. Deuteronomy. 7.3. Ezra.
9. ver. 1.3.4.
Jonas cried unto them that for their sins, After forty days they should be
destroyed. This unpleasant news coming to the Kings ears, he proclaimed a
fast, he humbled himself in sackecloth, and sitting in the dust, he straitely
commanded reformation of manners in all estates. And the King yet adds, to
humble themselves the more, that the brute beasts should want their
nourishment, to signify that they feared Gods judgments to fall also upon the
creatures, which served them in all their sins.

The fourth cause which ought to move the religious magistrates and holy
ministers to proclayme a general fast is; if they see, find, and can well
discern that some special iniquity or iniquities call for Gods heavy
judgments, and hinder the Lords blessings in the land: A notable president for
this, is that which the holy priest Ezra, and the noble governor Nehemias have
left us in their books for the instruction of Gods people throughout all ages:
for when as the Lords house did not so prosper as good Zorobabel and the holy
Prophets Haggai and Zachary desired. These worthy watchmen of the Lords
house soon discerned what evils provoked Gods wrath against his people: For
whereas the Lord had given in charge unto his people, that they should not
join marriages with pagans and infidels: yet they, a great number Even of the
Priests, and Levites, and the rulers and Princes, had married with the
Cananites, the Hittites, the Perezites, the Iebusites, the Ammonites, the
Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites. Which thing when Ezra understood
he mourned greatly, And all that feared the words of the God of Israel
assembled unto him: So they fasted and mourned, and confessed their sins. And
so provided that the people forsook their strange wives: the covenant was
renewed between God and his people: Note. Nehe. 8. and 9. Verse 1. cap. 10.
ver. 28 29.30.31.32. The fifth cause of general fasting is the calamity of
neighbor churches. Act. 13. verse. 2.
they bound themselves also by an oath, and a curse to receive it, keep it,
and to walk uprightly in obedience thereunto.

We learn also a fifth cause of this general humiliation, to be the calamity
or misery of our brethren, neighbor Churches, being either exercised under
the cross, or afflicted by wars, famine, or pestilence. It seems unto me
that some such like cause moved those holy Prophets and teachers to assemble
that noble congregation at Antioch (where the christians prospered best, and
did first openly profess the name of Christ) to this general fasting, we
speak of: for it is most like by that which follows in the same holy story,
that they labored mightily in fasting, supplication and prayer, both generally
for the people of God dispersed among the gentiles, and in special manner also
for the poor saints afflicted in Jerusalem: and the Lord graciously heard
them both: for the Lord then mercifully provided for the Jews by Peter and
his fellows, and stirred up the gentiles to show bowels of mercy unto them, in
supplying their wants, by their often sacrifices of brotherly contribution.
Again it is storied, that then he sent also, those two worthy instruments of
his grace, Paul and Barnabas for the conversion and confirmation of the
gentiles. And they prospered exceedingly in that holy work, for the which the
Lord sent them.

The 6. cause of a general fast is that the church may call upon the Lord to
bless some special enterprise in wars and peace, or work which is taken in
hand.
To conclude this point: I find also that Gods Church assembled in this public
fast, when they did enterprise or execute any special thing which did highly
concern Gods glory, and the general good of all Gods people. As the Church
before named in Antioch, when they were to lay hands on Paul and Barnabas
(after they were separate and poynted forth by the Lord, as is before showed)
Act. 13. verse. 3. it is said they fasted again the second time, and blessed
them, and commended them to the grace of God, that the Lord might prosper their
holy ministry among the Gentiles. The like was done (says the holy Ghost,
Act. 14.23.) in all places where ministers were ordained, they did it by
election, and with fasting and prayer they commended them to the Lord, in whom
they believed. And for this cause S. Hierome gives us a notable example in
Prolog. super Math. For he says, that when John the Evangelist was desired to
write his Gospel against Ebion and Cerinthus, which denied Christ's divinity,
he answered that he would do it, if the whole Church would first fast
publicly and pray, that God would bless his labors.

Verse. 16. Gather the people, Sanctify.
call the congregation, gather the elders, assemble the children, and those
that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the
bride out of her chamber.


HEre begins the second branch of this text, another chief point to be
considered in a general fast: and that is what persons must be here assembled.
This repetition teaches us, that in such calamities the Lord would have us
careful and ready to humble our selves in such holy exercises.
The prophet speaks first in general, repeting his first charge, gather the
people, whatsoever they be, rich or poor, call every where, and sanctify a
congregation, fail not to do it. And lest that any should doubt of the
exception of some: he gives us his mind in more special terms, gather the
elders: q. d. my will is that you assemble the princes, the Magistrates, the
priests, the prophets, and all the rulers of the people, what office soever
they bear in Church or Commonwealth. The reasons for their appearance and
humiliation in this assembly: first, for that they stand more guilty then
the rest, for manifold sins and corruptions, both in regard of their offices
and of their years. Secondly, for that their example is greatly considered,
noted and followed of all sorts of men. Thirdly, their counsel and help must
be had, as for diligent inquisition and discovery, so for the punishment also
of all capital and gross sins, which are the causes of this great evil and
general calamity. Wherefore they must meet for this purpose, and come
willingly and carefully with all speed, as men assembled for the quenching of
a great fire: for the fire of Gods wrath is kindled, and is ready to consume
his people.

Secondly, he calls also for the younger sort, even the tender infants
sucking the breasts, for the Lords wrath reaches even against them, because
they are wrapped up, and defiled with the leprosy of their own natural
corruption, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 5.12. and also for the sins of their fathers.
Hoshea, warning the people of the Jews to repent, says, that for their sins
God will strike them and their children: Hos. 13.16. and. 14.1.2.3.
for he will send against them such bloody enemies, as shall dash their
infants against the stones, and be so barbarous as to rip their women great
with child: and yet here is no injustice: We know that for treason against
princes, the punishment is extended even to the children, stayning of blood,
loss of goods, loss of lands: no marvel then if for our rebellions against
the Lord and King of Kings, his ire be thus kindled even against our
posterity. And we see this anger of the Lord ready to consume also, besides
our children, even all our substance, if we humble not our selves when the
Lord calls us thereunto, Jonas chapter 3. verse. 5, 6. Ezra 8.21. Again, the
Lord would excite a dull and frosen hearted people, to mourn and weep, by
seeing and hearing the tears and cries of their infants, that so they may be
moved, if not, in regard of Gods fearful indignation and judgments, yet for
natural affection, to mourn and weep, and humble themselves before the Lord.
And this also concerning the children is commanded, that they might inure and
acquaint their children with good things, that they might in riper age love and
practice the holy exercises of religion and piety.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost yet proceeds further, and will have no sorts of men
excepted, but now they must all mourn without any exception, even of the Bride
and Bridegroom, when they have greatest cause of mirth, joy, and comfort,
Deuteronomy. 24.5.
they must turn all to sorrow, fasting, weeping and mourning. There was a
law provided of God for the new married, that they should be exempted one
year from the wars: When a man has taken a new wife, he shall not go a
warrefare, neither shall he be charged with any business, but shall be free at
home one year, and rejoice with his wife which he has taken. Notwithstanding,
when for the causes before showed, Gods people assembled unto this public
humiliatio^: there was nothing might privilege or free any man from this holy
exercise. And that which is here by the Prophet commanded, is also both
commanded by precept, and commended by the practice of Gods people in other
places of the scripture.

When the people of the Jews were to receive the holy covenant and laws of
God in that most wonderful manner in Sinai, they were commanded to be
sanctified and prepared, that they might come with reverence. One branch and
part of this preparation was this: Exodus 19.15. Be ready the third day, and
come not at your wives. The marriage bed abstained in time of extraordinary
humiliation.
And this is that which the Apostle commends, that there be a mutual consent
between man and wife, to leave the marriage bed when the time calls them to
an extraordinary humiliation, in a private or public fasting and prayer, 1.
Corin. 7.5. So Peter Martyr understands this place, Quo loco existimo eum
preces publicas, In which place (says he) I judge he understands the public
prayers and a public fast. And this we see practiced by the religious and
godly proselyte, David's man Vrias the Hittite. He could not by any means be
moved to go into his own house to his wife, because he knew the time did
rather require fasting then feasting, mourning then mirth. The Ark (says he)
and Israel and Judah dwell in tents, 2 Samuel 11. ver. 11.
and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord abide in the open fields, shall
I then go into my house, to eat and drink, and to lie with my wife? If any
desire a proof of this by examples that all were thus assembled, and no
exception of any persons, how high, how low, of what degree or condition
soever they were: 2. Chro. 20.3.4.
diverse examples of general fastes in scripture will show it. Iehosaphat he
came himself with all his nobles, and all his people to that fast he caused to
be proclaimed, when the Aramites came forth to war against him. The King of
Niniuie with all his nobles, and people young and old, Jonas. 3.5.6.
and the very beasles fasted and mourned. Ezra the good scribe of the Lord,
and the noble governor Nehemiah fasted, and all the people under their charge
at that time. Ezra. 8.21. Nehe. 8. and 9. and 10.
The impudent Atheists and profane people of Esaias time, When the Lord (by
his prophets) did call unto weeping and mourning, and to baldnes, and to
girding with sackecloth; Es. 22.13.
They gave themselves, to joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep,
and drinking wine, eating and drinking, and scornefully jesting, let us eat
and drink for to morrow we shall dye. 1. Cor. 15.32.11.
The Lords answer is, As I live says the Lord, this iniquity shall not be
forgiven unto the death, I will take from you the mirth of wine and oil Your
young men shall fall by the sword, your aged men shall be lead captives, your
delicate dames shall trot a foot over Euphrates to captivity, their buttockes
shall be naked, and their shame shall not be hid. It may be demanded says
Peter Martyr when general fasts are enjoined and commanded, by they princes
and governors of the church, whether men be bound to obey? Answer. They are
bound surely (says he) by the law of faith, and of there allegiance: for when
fastings agreeable: o Gods word are commanded, how can the true believer go
back from the same: assuredly he canaot, if he be in state and condition able
to bear fasting. Persons exempt from public fasts in elder ages: first, the
sick, secondly, men of weak complexion, thirdly, children, fourthly, old
men, fifthly, women with child and giving suck, sixthly, the poor, seventhly,
the laborers, eighthly, strangers: But this Prophet allows no such exceptions,
we see in this scripture. To some that would not come to the sermon, because
they would not fast, says Chrysostom, Homil. 9. in Genesis. Fasting is not
simply required and commanded, etc. Homil. 10. in Genes. In the fasting day,
he that cannot fast, let him give the more alms, and endeavor to be more
fervent in prayer, more cherefull in hearing Gods word, this fast pleases God
well: But to those that ca^ bear abstinence says the council of Gangren: Conc.
Gang. c. 30. Statuitur vt si quis non pareat ieiunijs quae ei imperata sunt ab
ecclesia, vt cunque iactet perfectionem, citra necessitatem corporalem, and
superbiens, and ecclesiae decreta contemnen, anathema sit. In English thus
much, It is decreed that if any will not obey the fastes enjoined him by the
Church, howsoever he boaste of perfection, having no bodily need, in pride
of heart contemning the orders of the Church, he is accursed. This canon may
well be understood of general fasts. And thus far for the second branch of
the form of a general fast, teaching us what persons must be assembled in a
public fast.

Verse 17. Let the priests, the ministers of the Lords weept between the
porch and the altar: and let them say, spare the people, O Lord, and give not
thine Or possession.
heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should
they say among the people, where is their God?


NOw follows the third and last branch of the form of a general fast: and
it tends to teach us, The third branch of the form of a general fast.
what principally is to be done when Gods people are assembled: they must
address themselves all to a general confession of their sins.

In this verse we be taught these four special points.

First, where they must assemble for the public confession of their sins:
they must come to the temple, for there this confession must be made, where it
may best be heard of all: Between the porch and the altar.

2. Who must be chief actors here, for to conceive prayer, and to speak to
God and his people: The priests the ministers of the Lord.

3. With what affection and feruencie they must pray: They must weep between
the porch and the altar.

4. The form of confession prescribed to be followed: where consider two
things.

First, the petition: Spare thy people O Lord, give not thine heritage.

Secondly, the reasons to move the Lord to mercy, and to confirm the priests
and people, that God would hear them.

1. For that we be thine heritage and people, howsoever sinful we be.

2. It concerns thy glory, for the heathen will reproachfully and
despitefully speak against us, and against thee O Lord our God.

3. The heathen will blaspheme, and say thou art no God of glory and power,
etc. able to delivers us.

1. Of the place where the priests must pray, between the porch and the altar.
FOr the better understanding of the charge of God, concerning the place of
prayer: we must consider what special parts that great and famous temple of
Jerusalem had. This great house of God, consisted of three parts, the first
was that, which this Prophet calls the porch, and so it is called, 1. King.
6.3. And the great court, 2. Chro. 4.9. and Salomons porch, Act. 3.11. For the
King came thither at one special gate, What were the prncipall parts of the
great temple of Jerusalem.
called The bewtifull gate, Act. 3.1. Ezekiel. 44.3. The people and the King past
no further, here was a stage of brass whereon Solomon prayed, that he might
the better be seen and heard of all the people, 1. King 8. verse 14 and 22.
Here was the preaching place, here Christ preached, and hence he cast out the
buyers and the sellers, which abused that holy place of Gods worship. Here was
the altar of burnt offerings and place of public and common prayers, 2 Chro.
15.8. and 2. Chro. 8.12. This part of the temple is said to be Luke. 1.10.
without, in respect of the more inward part of the same, where the people had
no access.

The second part of the Temple was the court of the priests: The second part of
the temple
for they only came therein to burn incense and to pray. In this place was
the Altar of incense, whereupon did burn Leuit, 6.13.
continually the fire which came from Leu. 10.1.2.
heaven. And here were the tables of the show bread, and the candlestickes.
Into this place went the priests to pray and to offer incense upon the brazen
Exodus 30.1.
Altar. And this does Zachary in his course: He went Luke 1.9.10.
into the temple of the Lord, that is, into this second part of the temple, and
the whole multitude were without in prayer, that is, in the porch or common
court, the place before mentioned, while the incense was burning, in that
second part of the temple where Zachary was in prayer.

The third place or part of that great Temple, The third part of the temple.
was called Sanctum sanctorum: the holiest place of all: Here the arc of the
covenant was set, as Solomon commanded the 1. Kin. 8.6.7.
priests. And therein in Salomons time, were the two tables of stone, which
Moses had put there in Horeb. There were also those goodly monuments, the
brazen serpent, Aarons rod, and the pot of Manna before the Arc, as the Lord
had commanded them Exodus 16.34.35. Number. 17.10.
by Moses. Into this place came the high priest only once a year Heb. 9.
at the feast of Kippurim, or reconciliation. And these were the parts of this
holy temple, which the Lord commanded to be made: Moses calls it the Lords
Sanctuary, David prepared the matter, and Solomon his son gave it the form,
and built it in seven years. Therein was the Lord daily worshipped in morning
and evening sacrifice, preaching, reading of Scriptures, prayer, etc. The
enemies which profaned it, the Lord ever plagued them: as Antiochus who set
therein 1. Macha. 1.23.33 and 57.
Jupiters image, he is stricken with an incurable 2. Maccha. 9.5.12.
most loathsome disease. The Chaldees they destroyed it, and anon after were
destroyed themselves. When it was again reedified, the Macedonians did pollute
it, and they also not long after came to confusion. Pompey he would enter into
the holy place: but never prospered after all his life time. Joseph ac bello
Iud. lib. i. cap. 6.
Crassus did rob and spoil it, and afterward became a man most unfortunate
and miserable. In Vespasians time it came to utter ruin and desolation, and
not one stone was left upon another, according to the prophecy of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Titus did labor mightily to save it from the fire, but by no
means could effect it. Josephus says, the Roman soldiers did fire it the
same month, and the same day the Babylonians had burnt it before. And that
from the first building thereof in Salomons time, to the second year of
Vespasian, at which time it was utterly destroyed, there had past 1130. Joseph
de bello. Iudaic. lib. 6. cap 10.
years, 7. months, and 15. days. And from the reedifying of it in Cyrus, and
Haggeis time to this final desolation, there were years 639. and 45. days.
So far Josephus.

Now for the place where Joel would have the priests to pray: he does in our
text charge them to pray between the porch and the altar, that is, the common
altar of burnt offerings, that is, in the place of the public prayers and
service of God. The Prophet would have the priests to pray, where the people
may best hear them and see them, that they also might pray and weep with
them. He speaks neither of burnt offerings upon the common altar, nor of
burning of incense within upon the altar of incense, nor of praying apart there
as Zachary did, and the other priests in their course: but of public prayers
only. q. d. The Lord regards not your sacrifices, they are abominable unto him,
Hagg. 2.14. Psalm. 50.15.16. Pro. 21.27.
because you your selves be impious and evil which offer them. Let him see
your public humiliation with tears and cries: and let the priests confess
your sins, and join with them in your hearts, every one assenting with his
heart unto their prayers, that in the end you may all sound Cor. 14.16.
Amen, as with one voice, testifying that you believe and trust the Lord has
heard your desires, and their prayers for you.

So then briefly thus it is: The porch was the place of the people, and the
altar resembled the presence of God himself, unto who^ the sacrifices were
offered: the priests which were to stand between the porch and the altar, were
lively n types of Jesus Christ. Heb. cap. 2. and 5. and 9. Doctrine.


This place teaches us this much: that Gods holy ministers they are to stand
always between God and his people, and in special manner then when his wrath
is kindled, as in famine, in wars, and in pestilence, striving with all their
might by all good means to reconcile the Lord and his people by and through
Jesus Christ. Thus we read of Aaron, that he stood between the dead and the
living, laboring to appease Gods anger, when there dyed 14700. Number. 16.45.49.
Ezech. 22.30. Esaias. 59. ver. 16.
of a plague for their rebellion in the wilderness. The Lord also teaches us
the same thing, when he complains by his Prophets, that no man would offer
himself to stand in the breach of the wall, to stop the course of his wrath,
which was already kindled against his people. A notable president for this we
have in good Ezra, who in great grief and sorrow lamented in that general
fast, which was for the marriages with pagans, etc. Ezra. 9. cap. 3.4.5.6.
He pluck off the hair of his beard and of his head, and sat down astonished,
doubting whether the Lord would not destroy them, because of their grievous
sins. And there came unto him all that feared the words of the God of Israel:
and in the evening he fell upon his knees, and spread out his hands unto the
Lord, and so made an humble confession of their general and special sins,
unto God. So do the Levites in that public fast with Nehemias. They stand
upon pulpits of wood, verse. 4. and so confess their sins, and pray for the
people, verse. 7.

3. The prayers of the faithful assembled, must be well watered with tears.
REnting of the heart is better then renting of the clothes, and weeping and
crying is better then sacrifice. The ministers of the Lord did not only weep,
the godly well affected powered forth tears in like manner, as we read often.
The Israelites being to fight against the Beniamites, for their great sin
against the Lord: fasted, mourned, Judge. 20.23. The Lord loves the tears of
his faithful children. Ezra. 10.1.
and wept all before the Lord until the evening. The like they do again
another day. They come to the house of God, they abide there till the evening
before the Lord, and lift up their voices and wept. And while good Ezra was
praying and weeping, the whole congregation consisting of men, women and
children, wept with a great lamentation. So in Samuels time in that fast they
wept abundantly. The Lord loves the tears of his Saints, he puttes them in
his bottell, they are all registered with him. David wept much and oftten: Psalm.
56.8.
so Hezekias, Ezra, with others, and Jesus Christ himself. And if we consider
our sins and our times, if they had one sin we have ten as great and as
grievous. Many buckets of tears cannot humble us, nor serve to testify our
humiliation. Were they so zealous in the revenge of the Lords covenant, for the
sin of whoredom, and for one Levites sake, that they so fought, fasted and
wept? and shall not we fast and lament for the whoredoms of thousands in the
whole land? Was Ezra and his people so full of tears for that one sin of
unlawful marriages with pagans? and shall not we much more weep, seeing that
not only our marriages are often as bad, or worse? and other innumerable
proud sins reign over us. And did the Israelites so deeply lament their
sins, when they were in danger of the Philistines? and shall not we as humbly
seek the Lord, seeing that so many bloody enemies do beset us round about,
and daily wait and expect with great confidence our confusion? The Gospel and
holy covenant (blessed be our God) is received in some parts of our land: but
the ignorant people still contemn it, and the enemies blaspheme against it,
because that our Gospellers are so wicked and so loose in their lives. So the
pure worship of God is little regarded of many. Wherefore let us often weep
and lament, and pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and say, Psalm. 122.
The Lord prosper them that love thee.

4. The form of their confession: Spare thy people, and give not thine
heritage to reproach, etc.
HEre first we are to consider the prayer, then the reasons annexed. In the
prayer two things are asked: first, pardon of sins in the word Chusah, spare
us, or be merciful unto thy people: secondly, that the Lord would preserve his
Church and people from that reproach and shame which was like to light upon them.

First here the Lord teaches us to pray, Spare thy people, and give not thine
heritage to shame. Take away the cause, and you shall so one be freed from the
effect which follows. Clean contrary we ever first cry in our hearts, Lord
take away the shame, take away the famine, remove the pestilence, wars, etc.
Note.
but our sins we will not have taken from us. We do not so mourn for our
sins, as for the evils which be upon us for our sins: so did Pharaoh, Saul,
Achitophel and Judas lament with tears: therefore we cannot be pardoned and
eased of our grieuances.

Again, we must understand that the holy Ghost requires of us in this place a
serious and a faithful confession of our sins: for without this confession
God was never reconciled with his people. We have two general confessions of
sins in Scripture recorded, as most memorable, and most singular for our
instruction and imitation, as is before showed. We have in Daniel, a most
sweet and comfortable speech unto God: wherein first he confesses his sins,
and the sins of their Kings and Magistrates, priests and people. This
confession is implied by Joel in this word spare us: for such as speak on this
manner, calling for mercy, confess their guiltines before the Lord. Secondly,
Daniel says, that open shame did belong unto them. The same says Joel, when
he bids his people pray, that reproach and shame may be turned away from
Gods people. ver. 17
Thirdly, Daniel appealeth to Gods mercy; so does Joel warn us in that word
Chusah, spare us, to fly unto Gods mercy only. Fourthly, Daniel remembers
in his confession and supplication, the mediator and Messiah Jesus Christ:
crying, Hear us for the Lords sake: that is, for the Lord Jesus Christ his
sake. The same is understood by Joel in the word spare us: for God shows no
mercy, nor spares any people, but in and through Jesus Christ. Daniels sweet
words, so full of instruction, so needful for imitation unto Gods people in all
ages, Dan 9. ver. 4.
are these following. Oh Lord God which art great and fearful, and keep
covenant and mercy toward them which love thee, and toward them which keep
thy commandments: we have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, yea we have rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from
thy judgments: for we would not obey thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in
thy name to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, etc.

The like sweet prayer have we in Esaias. 63. verse. 15.16.17. Look down from
heaven, and behold from the dwelling place of thy holiness, and of thy glory:
where is thy Zeal and thy strength, the multitude of thy mercies and of thy
compassions? they are restrained from me. Doubtless thou art our father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not: yet thou O Lord art our
father and our redeemer, thy name is for ever. O Lord why have thou made us to
err from thy ways? and hardened our hearts from thy fear? Return for thy
servants sake, and for the tribe of thine inheritance, etc. And thus far for
the first part of Ioels prayer: the second follows, which contains diverse
reasons to excite our hearts, to confirm our faith, and to persuade, as it
were, with the Lord to grant their desires.

The first reason: We be thy people. Thou art bound Lord by covenant, etc. to
spare thy people, to protect thy people, etc. And we be thy people by covenant.
Wherefore spare us for thy covenant sake.


The second reason: We be thine heritage. Thou Lord almighty and
all-sufficient, wilt not suffer thine heritage to be spoiled and destroyed. We
are thine heritage. Wherefore Lord suffer us not to be consumed or confounded.


The third reason: Give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should
rule over the^. The Lord most mighty, and most gracious, will not permit his
enemies the heathen to reproach his people, and to rule over them. We be thy
people. Wherefore let not the heathen confound us, and rule over us.


The fourth argument: Wherefore should they say among the nations, where is
their God? If the heathen people bear rule over us, they will blaspheme thy
name, thy power and might: For they will say our God is no God of glory,
power, might, majesty, etc.


Wherefore now Lord spare us, and put us not to confusion, for thy couena^ts
sake for thy peoples sake, for thine heritage sake, for thy glory sake, and
for that thou do in great jealousy regard all these things, Lord hear us,
and remember us, and deliver us. Thus prays Moses: Remember Abraham, Exodus
32.10.14. ver. 12. Deuteronomy. 9.18.
and Jsaac and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self.
Again: Wherefore shall the Egyptians blaspheme and say, he has brought them
out maliciously to slay them in the mountains. And again, when the Lord would
have slain his people with a pestilence, he prays in the very like arguments.
First, the heathen (says he) They will say the Lord was not able to bring this
people into the land which he swear unto the^: Number. 14.11.12.16, 17.18.19.
therefore has he slain them in the wilderness. And now I beseech thee let
the power of my Lord be great, according as thou spoken, saying, the Lord is
slow to anger, and of great mercy, and forgiving iniquity and sin: but not
making the (wicked) innocent, and visiting the wickedness of the fathers upon
the children in the third and fourth (generation). Be merciful, I beseech
thee, unto the iniquity of this people, according to thy great mercy, and as
thou have forgiven this people from Egypt even until now: so now also spare
thy people. And again, the same holy Prophet shows how he prayed for Gods
people, and did strive in supplications, Deuteronomy. 9.
and continued many days and nights crying, and giving God no rest. The
arguments he used were these which Joel has in this place.

Proposition.

O Lord destroy not this people.

Arguments: for

Ver. 26.
1. They are thy people, thine inheritance, redeemed from Egypt.

Ver. 27.
2. Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, anzd Jacob: that is, thy covenant
made unto them and all thy faithful.

Ver. 28.
3. The nations (that is the pagans) will blaspheme thy name, and say thou art
not able to bring them to the land which thou best proviised.

men, we must ever have our refuge unto Gods covenant, for thereby our faith
was first bred in us, and must continually be cherished.

2. We learn here, how jealous Gods people ought to be of Gods glory, which
ought to be more dear unto us, then our own welfare and salvation.

3. Note here how this wretched and sinful generation, is called Gods people
and inheritance, because they were in the visible Church and covenant. And yet
we know that among them there were gross idolaters, blasphemers, prophaners
of Sabbath, Chemarims, coniurers, murderers and adulterars, etc. For the wicked
will do wickedly in the land of vprightnes. P. M. cap. 3. clas. 10. sec 17.
Veteres totum diem ieiuni agebant vsque ad vesperam, quo toto tempore in verbo
Dei, precibus et sanctis occupationibus versabantur. Leuit. 23. ait deus, in
ieiunio quiescite ab omni opere, and affligite animas vestras sabbathu^ enim
est: sabbathum vero a vespera vsque ad vesperam durasse nemini dubiu^ est.
Again, Tertul. contra psychicos ait ecclesia prodiscere ieiunia vsque ad
nocte^.


4. We learn here a most comfortable lesson, how Gods glory and our
salvation be so knit together, that he cannot be jealous of the one, but he
must be also careful of the other.

Now we be to consider yet further, what else was done in a general fast: for
we must not imagine that they stood only upon confession of sins: they spent
also some part of the time in teaching the people, and some part in censuring
such sins, as did then most reign among them, for that whole day was
consecrate for the Lords service. August. de moribus ecclesiae contra Manich.
Vsitata ieiunia ecclesiae continuantur vsque ad noctem: toto enim die
celebrantur sacri coetus, preces publicae habebantur, sub vesperam
dimittebantur and cibum sumebant. That is, the usual fastes of the Church are
continued till night: for all day the holy assemblies are exercised, public
prayers used: in the evening they were dismissed, and did eat meat. Chemnit.
examen. Trid. Conc. 4. p. Manifest apparet tempore ieiunij, publicos
congressus, seu conuentus ecclesiasticos fuisse, in quibus admonitiones de
exercitijs poenitentia, fidei, and emendationis proposuerunt. That is, It is
manifest that in their fasts they had public assemblies or ecclesiastical
conuents, wherein they taught the people the exercises of repentance, faith,
and amendment of life. And the Church of the Jews had ever in their sinagogues
and congregations, beside prayers, if not the word of doctrine and exhortation,
yet the interpretation of the scriptures, for they read distinctly Gods word,
and gave the sense. This was done in Nehemias great fast, which was published
because of many grievous sins, and specially for their profane marriages
with Pagans. At that time after they had confessed their own sins, and the
iniquities of their fathers: verse 3. it is said, they stood up, that is, the
Levites, in their place, that is on their pulpits, which were made for them,
Nehem. 8.4. And there they read in the book of the law of the Lord their God:
and gave the sense according to the Scriptures, Nehem. 8.8. And herein they
spent one fourth part of that day, says a learned Iunius, three hours from
six a clock to 9. in the morning sacrifice, 3. hours from 9. to 12. in
teaching the people, three hours from 12. to 3. in confession of sins, 3 hours
from 3. to 6. in the evening sacrifice: so were 12. whole hours of that day
spent.
interpreter. And that the people were taught this day the word of the Lord,
it seems unto me, we may learn also of Jeremy, chap. 36. 5 27. For when
Jeremy had written his prophecies concerning that kingdom and the destruction
of it, and was therefore restrained himself from preaching (a general fast
being proclaimed because of the Babilonians their enemies approaching) he sent
Baruch the scribe the day of their fast to read his prophesies, for that he
trusted Gods word so read, might do some good unto that rebellious and
sinful people. I am shut up and cannot go into the house of the Lord,
Therefore go thou and read the roll, wherein thou have written at my mouth,
the words of the Lord in the audience of the people, in the Lords house upon
the fasting day: also thou shall read them, in the hearing of all Judah, that
come out of their cities, It is like that they had so persecuted the Prophets,
that there was but little preaching at that time.
it may be that they will pray before the Lord, and every one return from
his evil way. Some part also of this time was spent in sign of their unfeigned
repentance in examining, censuring, and punishing such sins as then reigned,
and most dishonored God, and in setting forth such orders as might make most
for the edification and good government of Gods people: for so it was in the
fast before mentioned in Nehemias time. The 24. day of the 7. month, Chap. 9.
ver. 2.
when they had fasted, they that were of the seed of Israel, were separated
from their strange wives and children. The princes and rulers were chief in
this trespass: and yet for all their high and lofty looks, they stoop here,
Ezra. 9.2. The like inquiry we find Josh. 7 in Achans story.
and must yield unto the censures and punishments inflicted upon them. And this
is taught us also in the story of Naboth, for a general fast being
proclaimed, under color of holiness and piety, that cursed Iezabel covered all
her bloody practices, Naboth was then falsely accused, unjustly condemned, and
cruelly stonied to death for blaspheming God and the King. The reason of this
diligent care for general and special sins reigning among Gods people, see
Josh. 22. the whole chapter. Again, the people of God under Nehemias in that
great fast, the chief of them, of all their families, did bind themselves by
an oath and by a curse, Nehe. 10.18.29.30.
that both they and their families should keep and obey the holy covenant of
the Lord. Lastly, because of the present necessity and wants of Gods
ministers, they bound themselves by statutes 1. Chro. 26.27.28. 2. Chro. 31.3.4.
as in David and Hezechias time, to give and contribute an annual pension for
the ministry and service of the Lord. Gods Leuits and ministers must be
encouraged by all good means in the work and service of the Lord.
And thus far we have showed in a general manner how the old Church and
people of God in former ages were exercised, when they assembled themselves for
any special cause or causes, in a public fast.

Verse 18. Then the Lord will be jealous over his land and spare his people.
The last branch of the second part concerning the happy end of a general fast.



THis is the last branch of the second part of this text: wherein the Prophet
shows what a happy end their fast should have. If they truly humble
themselves as is before prescribed, the Prophet assures them that the Lord was
never so ready to rain his plagues and judgments, as he will be to power
down his blessings and mercies upon them: For he will be jealous over his
land, and spare his people. Exodus 20.5.34.14.


The Lords jealousy is often mentioned in the old Testament: Deuteronomy. 5.9.
Nahum. 1.2 Zach. 8 2. What Iealosie is.
by this word is not meant an ill humor of suspicion, but an ardent and
fervent affection and love toward his Church. It is a metaphor and a speech
borrowed from the true love of the husband toward the wife, which is such as
there is no affection on earth among men comparable unto it. The last of the
Canticl. verse 6. This love of man and wife is compared to death for strength,
it will overcome all difficulties and lettes to do good unto the wife, yea
death it self: and jealousy is said to be as hard or cruel as the grave, it
will devour and destroy all enemies, and can be no more entreated, then the
grave or death it self. The same is said of this affection, in the husband for
the offense or injury done to his wife, in defiling his bed Solomon tells us
he can never be appeased, Jealousy is the rage of a man, Pro. 6 34.
therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. This jealousy the
Scripture ascribes unto God, not that any such affections or passions be in
him, but that it might express the greatness of his love toward us: Ephe. 5.
which is such and so great, that look what is done to his Church (whereof he
accounts as of his beloved spouse) he ever deemeth and takes as done to
himself. This he testifies by his Prophet; He that touches you, Zach. 2.8.
touches the apple of mine eye. If any man ask a reason of this the Lords
jealousy: surely there is no cause of it in any one of the creatures, nor in
any thing which has being, without himself. His own goodness is the cause of
all his love, jealousy and mercy toward his Church: for he found it black,
spotted, and a polluted mass of sin, but he has made it by the blood of his
son, Comely as the fruits of Kedar, and bewtifull as the curtains of
Solomon. Cant. 1. ver. ^.


The Lord is ever jealous over his people: first, during their obedience to
preserve them, Zachary. 2.8. says the Psalmist, This jealousy has devoured in
all ages of the world, as with a strange fire, the enemies of his church.
Touch not my people, and do my Prophets no harm: and to consume their
enemies: Zach. 8.2. I was ielous for Zion in a great wrath. 2. But when they
backslide and transgress his laws, his jealousy burns like fire against
them: Exodus 20.5. he says he is a ielous God, visiting the iniquities of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation, etc. And yet
when this heat of jealousy flameth as it were in him, he is full of heaviness
and grief. This says the Prophet: He punishes not his people willingly, but
as a tender father he strikes with the hand but not with the heart: he
repents him of all the evil he brings upon his people, full of bowels of
mercy and compassion, as is before showed, verse. 13.

Ob. But this fire of Gods jealousy in elder times burnt up always the refuse
and baggage people, idolaters, Objection. Wherefore the Lord does not so strike
the gross sinners of our times as in former ages.
adulterers, Numb. 25. blasphemers, murmurers, Numb. 11.1. Psalm. 78.20.21. with
famine, wars, and pestilence: how is it that this holy fire among us in these
days, deuoures such a number of sweet young plants, and good trees bearing
fruit, most fauourie, and comely branches in the garden and vineyard of the
Lord, and yet stand still those wicked plants and dead, rotten, and most
unsavory stocks, which the Lords hand has never planted? I mean in a word,
wherefore are the righteous afflicted and taken away: and this fire of the Lord
never touches so many monstrous blasphemers, wicked Atheists, profane beasts,
adulterers, thieves, drunkards, oppressors, usurers, etc?

Ans. First, I answer with Job, chap. 24. 1. that the times appointed for all
judgments, are hid by the almighty, he knows best, when, and how to strike,
and the wisest man cannot render a reason of his ways.

Secondly I answer, 1. Remember Lots wife, Luke 17.32.
we are not under the Gospel to look for the like temporal and particular
judgments, as under the Law: 2. If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, etc. Titus 2.10.11. 1. Cor. 11.32. Heb. 2.3.
now more fearful is the state and condition of all such proud sinners,
because greater grace is offered unto all men by the bright shining light, and
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ. Therefore says the Apostle: How shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation?

3. Lastly, the Lord is ielous over his people when they be humbled: then
says Joel, his jealousy will appear in liberal blessings, and great
bountifulnes.

In this verse first learn a singular consolation for a sinful people in
their miseries. The Lord accounts this wicked people of the Jews his people,
and assures them of his love, God loves his people and servants deerly when
he corrects them.
even when they bear his corrections. Our flesh so frets, and our souls are
so disquieted often in afflictions, that we can then hardly lift up our hearts
to think of Gods love toward us. Yet certain it is, that in his corrections he
loves us deerly, 1. Cor. 11.28. Heb. 12.
and therefore humbles us by his fatherly chastisements, least we should
perish with the wicked world. 2. Note here the happy end of all true
conversion unto God. There was never yet any of Gods people, in any age, which
did prostrate themselves in a public fast, in manner as is before prescribed,
keeping Gods holy ordinance, affected toward God, and cast down at his feet,
to ask mercy, but the Lord has been infinitely more ielous toward them, and
more affected to show mercy. Yea, we be well assured his love ever went
before their love, and his jealousy before their jealousy, and he has ever
repented before they have repented, Ver. 13.
as is before showed.

Conclusion.
The Lord has never failed to give his people, thus truly humbled, even their
hearts desire. Joshua and his people being greatly discouraged by the loss of
some part of their army, Josh. 7.
after they fasted, they were strengthened, and comfortably encouraged again
to proceed, as the Lord commanded them. 1. Sam. 7.
Samuel and his people were greatly afflicted by the Philistines, after their
fast, they put their enemies to an exceeding shame. The Israelites in the days
of the Judges, after their fasting, Judge. 20.
weeping and mourning, they beat down the pride of the Beniamites as they
desired. Iehosaphat after his fast, 2. Chro. 20.
fought against the Amorites and Moabites, and lost not one of his men: for
that godless multitude of profane pagans was utterly destroyed one of
another. Hester and the Jews after their fast, had great prosperity, peace,
and comfort: Hester. 4.5.6.
for Haman their enemy was destroyed, and so Gods people were delivered from
their enemies, and enjoyed great liberty in that land. Nehemias and Ezra,
after their fast, Nehe. 9.10.11.12.
were encouraged and comforted in the obedience of the people, the city and
temple were reedified, Ezra. 8. and 9. cap. and 10. Dan. cap. 9. and 10.
and the Church of God prospered. Daniel after his fasting, received notable
revelations concerning the deliverance of the Church, and the coming of the
Messiah. The Christians at Antioch after their fast, were greatly confirmed.
The Gospel had a more free passage, for God provided and prepared Paul, and
Barnabas, two notable organs and instruments, to communicate and preach the
same unto the Gentiles.

Finally, to come unto our selves, we have had 3. or 4. general fasts
published by the governors, but performed in great weakness in the best
assemblies of our land. The first was in a very special manner commanded by
the Queens Majesty, in the beginning of her most happy reign over us. The
cause was the pestilence: Anno. 1563.
The Lord heard his people, and they were mercifully delivered. When the
bloody Spaniards would have devoured us, some charge there was for public
humiliation: In some few assemblies Gods people were humbled, Anno. 1588.
and cried mightily unto the Lord. There followed a most memorable and
miraculous deliverance never to be forgotten in our land. Again, the Lord
smote us with the pestilence, Anno. 1593.
and many thousands were consumed. Some few were humbled and mourned, the rage
of the pestilence ceased in those months and time of the year, August and
September.
when (by long observation it is known) that this contagious and venomous
sickness does most destroy and gather strength, in all parts of the world.

Let us conclude, that because we have with the old Church the same God,
immutable, full of jealousy, love, and bowels of mercy, Romans 3.32.
and seeing that he has vouchsafed to communicate unto us his own son and
holy Gospel, that covenant of grace and mercy: we may be well assured that
what calamities and miseries so ever light upon us for our sins, famine,
wars, pestilence, or any other the Lords gentle corrections: if we follow and
obey this the Lords holy ordinance in our unfeigned humiliation, we shall
receive a happy end, a release and freedom from our crosses, so far as
shall be expedient for us in this life: and in the next the blessed end of our
faith, the everlasting salvation of our souls, by and with Jesus Christ, the
author and finisher of our faith, to whom with the father and most holy
spirit, be al praise, honor, glory, power, and principality for ever and
ever, Amen.

The fifth question of the abuse of fasting.
Coloss. 2. verse. 20.21.22.23. 20 Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the
ordinances of the World, why, as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened
with traditions?

21 As eat Touch not.
not, taste not, handle not:

22 Which all perish with the using, and are after the commandments and
doctrines of men.

23 Which things have indeed a show of wisdom, in will worship and humblenes
of mind, and in not sparing the body: neither have they it in estimation to
satisfy the flesh.

Nihil tam periculose deprauat bonum, etc. Chrysostom.
There is nothing does so daungerously deprave or corrupt a good thing as
hypocrisy, or evil dissembled and cloked under show of holiness: when that
which is evil is not known, it is not avoided.


IN the second part of this chapter the Apostle disputes against 3. kinds of
corruptions, which in his time crept into the Church of God. The first kind was
the mixture of philosophical discourses, or vain, deceitful and unprofitable
philosophy, with the pure word of God, verse. 8. The second was the mixture of
the legal and leuiticall ceremonies with the Gospel, verse. 16.17.18.19. The
third evil, was a manifest superstition bred and brought into the Church by
the traditions and doctrines of men, ver. 20.21.22.23. placing of holiness,
devotion, remission of sins, and the worship of God in certain kinds of
meat, in fasting, abstinence, etc. Against this superstition and abuse of
fasting, he warns us by three arguments. 1. Such as be freed from the
ceremonies of Gods law, ought not to bear the burden of men's vain
ceremonies: Ver. 20.
but you are freed from them by Christ in his Gospel: therefore much more from
the unprofitable ceremonies of men. 2. For declaration of the proposition, he
gives us some sight of their superstitious traditions, and opinions in their
own words: first, eat not: Ver. 21.
secondly, taste not: thirdly, handle not.

The second reason is this: The kingdom of Christ is spiritual, Ver. 22.
and does not consist in things which perish: but meats and drinks do perish
with the using. Therefore his kingdom, his worship and service does not
consist in these things.

The third argument: We must place no religion nor worship of God in
observation of men's traditions, nor in will worship: but these be mere vain
traditions, sown by Satan in the brains and minds of men. Therefore avoid
them.

Object. But these men which teach and practice this fasting and abstinence,
are wise, just, holy, devout, and religious men, not sparing their own flesh,
for the mortification of their corruptions, for pleasing of God, etc.

Ver. 23.
Ans. First, they have but a show of wisdom, and but a shadow of the sound
knowledge of God. Secondly, their worship is but a will worship, which God
abhorres. Thirdly, God regardes not this beating of the flesh, no, nor the
cutting or launcing of it, 1. King. 18. 1. These. 4.4
as wizards do, but wills us to keep our vessels in holiness and honor, and
to humble the soul, the mind, the heart and spirit before him in a sound
knowledge of his word and will, in faith, and repentance, etc.

We see then the Apostle here speaks against traditions of men, concerning
differences of meats: for even in those days the devil endeavored to thrust
into the Church certain decrees concerning meats and fasting, under pretense
and color of humility, justice, wisdom, great holiness and devotion. 1. Under
color of wisdom and holiness, etc. they decreed to keep certain set fasts,
on certain days appointed. 2. This fast consisted in abstinence from certain
meats which they commanded no man should eat, taste, etc. 3. They accounted
this fast a special work to serve and please God, being yet but their own
will worship, never prescribed of God. 4. They taught men to hold it a matter
of great holiness, to defraud the body of the honor and refreshing due
thereunto. The superstition of the 1.2. and 3. age came from one spirit of
error, and differ little, but that in corruption, the 2. does exceed the
first, and the 3. far surpass them both.
So then these words serve to admonish us against the superstitious fasts of
all ages: albeit this Scripture was written principally against the Pharisees
and Essees, blind adversaries to the truth and the pure worship of God in the
days of the Apostles.

The abuse of fasting in the days of the Prophets.
THe opinions which deprave and corrupt all this exercise, and deprive us of
all good by it, 1. Opus operatu^. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
are these and the like: to esteem highly of the work done: 2.
to account it a work meritorious: a special worship acceptable unto God: a
cause of righteousness: a cause of pardon of sins: a satisfaction for the
quick and the dead. We may not doubt but some of these opinions infected the
false worshippers, hypocrites, and unbelievers of all ages. The 1. generation
of hypocrites. Genesis 4.
Cain thought his sacrifice and service as worthy of acceptance as Abels:
scornful Ishmael as good, as religious Isaacks: profane Esaus, as holy
Jacobs. For unbelievers are so blind, But there is no access to God nor
pleasing of him in any work without faith in Christ. Heb. 11.6.
that they judge the work to be accepted, for the very works sake. Therefore
can they dream of no justice, but of that of works: or of a mixed kind of
justice lately invented in the days of Antichrist, as hereafter shall appear.

That age of the Prophets was corrupted not a little with this leaven of
superstition, as may appear by the often complaints and cries of the Prophets.
Superstitious fasts in this time. Esaias. 58.
The Lord commands Esaias to cry aloude against the superstitious fasts of his
time, and so he does, leaving to all posterities a record of the same. First
he says unto them, that they have a show of wisdom (as the Apostle speaks)
and of devotion: for they seem to seek God early. They seem to be righteous
and to do righteously. They seem to draw near to God, as desirous to learn
his laws, but they renounce his statutes, verse. 2.

Secondly, he accuses them of flat superstition, by testimony of their own
words: Wherefore have we fasted and thou see it not? Here appears the sour
leaven of that opinion, that fasting was an acceptable work, and might alone
commend a man with God. verse. 3.

Thirdly, that they thought this work meritorious: For thus spoke the blind
people: We have punished our selves, (meaning with abstinence) and thou
regardest it not: we receive no good by it. These words very fitly agree with
that the Apostle speaks: Coloss. 2.23.
They spare not the body, neither have they it in any estimation: because they
deem fasting to be a matter of great devotion, and a work greatly pleasing
unto God.

Fourthly, he adds by the way of answer to these blind hypocrites, that
albeit they hang down the head like a bull rush shaken with a tempest, a whole
day at the least, yet so long as they be empty of grace and goodness, faith
and repentance, justice and mercy and care o^ the Sabboths, their fasting and
emptines can nothing please God.

The Prophet Zachary briefly notes the same opinions and corruptions of
fasting in his time: chap. 7. and 8. Zach. 7.3. and 8.
The Jews then had their solemn set fasts certain days and months of the
year: the fast of the fourth month, the fast of the fifth month, the fast of
the seventh month, and the fast of the tenth month. The occasion of these
fasts: First, the misery of the Jews began when Jerusalem was first besieged
by the King of Babylon, in the 9. year of Zedekiah, the tenth month, the
tenth day of the month. Iere. 52.4.5. For this cause a general fast was kept
in all the land this day, and month. Their second calamity was in the 11.
year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, for the
famine was then sore in the city, the city broken up, the King taken, etc.
Ier. 52.6.12. This was the occasion of the fast of the fourth month. Their
third calamity and misery was in the 5. month, the tenth day of the month,
the miserable desolatio^ and destruction of the temple, kings palace, and the
city, the Babylonians consumed and defaced all their best buildings and
palaces with fire: The house of the Lord, the kings house, and all the great
houses burnt he with fire. Iere. 52.13. This was the cause of the third
general fast of the 5. month. The fourth and last calamity the Scriptures
have recorded, was the bloody conspiracy and death of Gedaliah, a good man,
whom the King of Babylon had left as chief governor, and ouerseer of all the
Jews which were left in Iewry, 2. Kin. 25.22.
to dress the vines and to till the land. Iere. 52.15. for Ishmael one of the
kings seed having escaped the Babylonians, in great indignation, envy, malice,
and pride of heart, with certain princes conspired his death, and slew him
with many Jews the same time. 2. King. 25.25. Iere. 41.1. This evil was
committed the 7. month. Iere. 41. verse. 1. 2. King. 25. verse. 25. And for this
cause all the Jews then fasted and mourned in like manner.

These fasts then of the 4.5.7. and 10. months had good beginnings, and were
kept for good causes, to avoid present calamities, and to prevent by prayer the
like future mischiefs. Now then it follows that we consider how these became
superstitious and vain.

Superstitious fasts in Zachacarias time. 1 fast acceptable for the work sake.
First, they thought the very work of fasting to be a service very acceptable
unto God: and therefore they continued these fasts all the days of their
captivity in those four months yearly, till 70. years were expired,
Zachary 7.5. Ne existimes inedia^ ad vespera^ vsque ad salutem nobis sufficere,
na^ notum est quod peruersis Iudaeis dicit dominus. Zach 7. Chryso. hom. 3. in
genesis Binding consciences to set fasts: yet Bellar. the sophistical Jesuit
says, the holy Ghost here commends the Jews for these fasts. Tom. 3. page.
1412. 3. The Jews thought their set fasts a special part of Gods worship. 4.
Will worship. 2. These. 2.11.12.1. Tim. 2.1.2.


Secondly, they bind men's consciences by laws and decrees to do this,
otherwise that observation would have dyed before 70. years had past.

Thirdly, when they returned from the captivity, some more wise and religious
rejected these fasts: some more superstitious then wise, would retain them
still as a special part of Gods worship: therefore the resolution of this
doubt is demanded of the priests and prophets: Should I weep in the fifth
month, etc. and separate my self as I have done these many years?

Fourthly, the Lord answers by his prophet Zachary: that their fasts were not
according to his will, they were but a part of their own will worship. Did ye
fast unto me? verse. 5. or do I approve it?

Fifthly, he warns them to give diligent heed to his holy word spoken and
written by his prophets, and so to learn not to abuse fasting in a counterfeit
and fained devotion, chap. 7. verse. 5.

Sixthly, he teaches them to know the times: and that now seeing God has given
them such a happy deliverance, it is a time to feast and not to fast, a time
to offer up unto God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving in joy and
gladness, chap 8. verse. 19.

Seventhly, and lastly, he warns them again to avoid superstition, errors,
and all false worship, that they love the truth of God, and endeavor to live
in godly peace and honesty. And thus far of the abuse of fasting in the
first age: the second generation follows.

The abuse of fasting in the days of Christ: or the second generation of
hypocrites.
IN the next age which followed from the Prophets to Christ, superstition so
grew and prevailed, The prince of darkness did then sow the seed of
superstition.
that when Christ came, this exercise of fasting was not only perverted, but
also the whole worship of God in a manner euerted. For this second generation
did far exceed the former ages in all superstition: and this shall
sufficiently appear, if we confer with the Scriptures but two Jewish
writers, Philo and Joseph, 1 Binding consciences to set fasts. Luke 18.14.
both Jews of the best name and credit. First then the Scriptures they speak
much of the pride, ambition, and hypocrisy of the Pharisees: for these blind
guides bound consciences to the traditions of men, and taught openly and
professed the doctrine of merits, commanding set fasts the second and fifth day
of the week, as a special worship and service of God. When they fasted (Christ
says) they looked sour, 2. Pharisaicall pride in fasting. Math. 6.16.17.18.
3. Traditions of men Math. 15.6.9. and 9. cap. 14.4. Fasting meritorious. 5. A
special worshipe. 6 Cause of justification and of pardon of sins. 7. Binding
consciences. 8. Legal differences of meats commanded.
that it might appear unto men that they fasted: this was pride and
hypocrisy. Again, when they fasted they disfigured their faces, to be seen
and known of men, that they were very regular and precise obseruers, of all
the rites, ceremonies, and traditions of their fathers concerning fasting. And
again, these blind guides count this work a principal part of Gods worship
and service greatly accepted and desired of God: Luke 18.11. O God, I thank
thee that I am not as other men are, etc. J fast twice in the week: a cause of
pardon of sins and justification: for it is added, that the Publican went to
his house justified, and not the Pharisie for all his fasting. This
superstitious generation continued disquieting the Church in the days of the
Apostles, binding ^onsciences to the legal ceremonies concerning meats, as
appears by Paul's disputations of this argument often, Romans 14. Acts 15.29.
Titus 1.15.16. 1. Cor. 10.25. But to thrust out of the Church door these
opinions concerning meats, he teaches and warns the Corinths, and all men
in these words: Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat, and ask no question
for conscience sake, ver. 27. Again, Whatsoever is set before you eat, and
ask no question for conscience sake.

Rhemist. Annotat.
Object. But the Baptist kept his fasting days, and his disciples followed him
in like manner.

Ans. First, it is not said, Matthew. 9.14. that John himself fasted as the
Phrisees did, but some of John's hearers so fasted. Secondly, Christ gives the
Pharisees and disciples of John no countenance nor sign of like of their set
fasts, but rather of dislike. Thirdly, John did use an austere and strict kind
of life and diet, wherein he was very abstinent continually, Matthew. 3.4.
Fourthly, Christ follows not John's austeritie, least any should ascribe any
holiness or religion to these things: therefore these superstitious enemies
blasphemed often, calling him a glutton, a drunkard, a pot companion, etc.

The Jews had yet in those days a more insolent and blind generation of
sectaries, which for their great holiness, Math. 9.11.
Philo. To. 2. page. 1181. This Philo lived much about the Apostles time and
wrote many books, a man very learned and eloquent. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 16.17.
Liber. impres. Basil. Anno 1558. Coll. 2.
were called Essaei, as writes Philo the Jew in his treatise, De vita
contemplat. Sieve supplicum virtutibus. These men would as far surpass all
the Jews in devotion and holiness, as the Carthusian Monks all the popish
sects of their time. They kept very strictly certain decrees of their own
invention concerning meats and fasting, under pretense of great wisdom,
humility, holiness, and devotion. Secondly, their fast consisted in abstinence
from certain meats, which they forbad any to eat, taste, or handle. Thirdly,
this fast they accounted a special worship and service unto God, being yet but
their own mere will worship, never prescribed of God. Fourthly, they taught
it to be a matter of great holiness, to defraude the body of the honor and
refreshing due thereunto. That scripture therefore to the Coloss. I take it was
written purposely and sent from God against these blind sectaries: which thing
shall well appear together with their superstition, 1. Phil. Ob amorem (...).
Paul. (...).
if we do confer but a little Philo and Joseph's words and phrases with that
text of holy scripture.

First, then Philo the Jew in the aforenamed treatise, writing of the Essees,
says, Ob amorem (...), for the love of wisdom, they tasted nothing, some
three days, 2. Phil. (...). P. (...).
some very little in six days: This speaks our Apostle also, They have
indeed a show of wisdom in not sparing the body.

2. Where Philo says that they neglected such necessary duties as did
concern their bodies: the Apostle says also, that they had no regard, to
spare their bodies, because they would seem only to care for their souls, for
so Philo speaks, 3. Phil. (...). P. (...).
Tom. 2. Page 1216.
Curandaeque animae per totam vitam dediti.

3. Philo says they would be called Page 1228
Therapeutae, Therapeutridesque, devout worshippers of God, because they
thought their manner of life, a holy worship and special service unto God.
This the Apostle also grants, 4. Phil. (...). P. (...).
it was a worship, but it was only a will worship.

4. Where Philo says they would be called The title of the book is de
supplicum virtutibus.
suppliants, Page. 1199.
as ever prostrate in supplication and prayer: the Apostle also notes it for
one special mark of that sect, 5. Phil. Vt (...) contemplando percipere
valiant. Tom. 2. p. 1212 P. (...).
they made a great show, in devotion, of humblenes of mind.

5. Again, the Jew says they spoke much of their traditions of wisdom: and
again (says he) when they assembled together, the speaker is Tom. 2. Pa. 1204.
dogmatum eius sectae peritissimus, one most expert and learned in their
traditions.

6. In the 21. verse, the Apostle has an imitation of the very words of their
traditions concerning meats. 6. Phil. Has a verb comp. (...).
For Philo says, Mensa eorum pura est a cruentis dapibus: Their table is
clean and free from bloody meats: meaning they abstain from flesh meats:
and Vix Pa 1205. P. The simple (...)
sexto die degustant cibum necessarium: they taste little of necessary food
in 6. days. And for their diet when they meet he says, Pro cibo panis
apponitur, bread is their meat: Pa. 1213.
sal pro opsonio: Much like these were the monks of Egypt. Eusebius. lib. 2.
cap. 17 and the popish monks their Children: duplo magis filij gehennae. 7.
These men delighted much in allegorizing scriptures, sub apertis verbis latere
credunt secreta. Tom. 2. p. 1203. and p. 1204. and 1211. and 1214. Antiq. lib.
18. cap. 2. 8. Worship of angels. 9. Antiq. 18. cap. 2. De bello Iud. lib. 2.
cap. 7. Tom. 2. p. 1211. 9. Jewish votaries. 10. No ointments say these blind
sectaries: Anoint thy self when thou fastest says Christ. Joseph. de bell.
Iud. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Their dish-meate is but salt: Et pro condimento hysopus in delicatorum
gratiam: And if any fed more delicatly, he had hysope for his sauce. They
thought wine to be a very poison to their souls, etc. and therefore they call
it, Pharmacum dementiae, a poison to cause frenzy or madness.

7. Philo highly commends their theories and deep speculatio^ in great
mysteries: he calls them the citizens of heaven ever present with God the
father and creator of all things: the Apostle says, verse. 18. They do advance
themselves into those things which they never saw, rashly puffed up with fleshly
mind.

8. Joseph says they spoke much of certain Angels, revelations, etc. the
Apostle speaks something to this purpose: verse. 18. Let no man at his
pleasure bear rule over you, by humblenes of mind and worshipping of Angels,
etc.

9. These blind sectaries were votaries renouncing the honorable state of
marriage: says Joseph, and they had their Therapeutrides, their Nuns, says
Philo, anus pleraeque, sed virgins non coactae castitatis: They were for the
most part old, yet virgins, which did vow chastity not of constraint, as the
sacrificing dames among the Greeks, (says he) but vowing continency
voluntarily for the love of wisdom.

10. Lastly, to signify what little care they had of their bodies: as not
having it in any estimation: They could not abide ointments and washings,
says Joseph, Probro ducunt oleu^, et siquis velinuitus vnctus Fuerit,
munditijs corpus ab sterget, quonia^ squalorem decorem putant, dummodo semper
in vest sint candida. The blind Essees how unsavory they were because they
would not spare their bodies as Paul speaks. 2. These. 3.1.
fuerit, etc. They thought any sweet oil or ointment to be a matter of great
reproach and shame unto them, and if any were anointed against his will, he
would purge himself carefully, for all uncleanness is great comelines with
them, so long always as their upper garment be white. And so much of this
blind sect, and the abuse of fasting in this age, the third generation
follows.

3. The abuse of fasting, in the days of Antichrist, or the third generation
of hypocrites.
THe gospel of Christ, as in the life of the Apostles, so also after their
death prevailed mightily, and was greatly glorified among the Gentiles: such
was the power and grace of Jesus Christ working by it (as Lib. contra Iudaeos.
A good argument as Tertull. well notes against the Jews. Reave. 9.2. About
Gregor. 7. time.
Tertullian writes) in most parts of the world. And yet not long after this
time, ambition, pride, corruption of doctrine, superstition and hypocrisy
began to creep again into the Church of God. The first 6. hundredth years,
(as the stories of the Church do testify) Satan's instruments strove mightily
to infect the Church with superstition and heresies, but the servants of
Christ, as faithful watchmen over his flock, in continual wars kept out
this enemy, so as the state of the Church, and the worship of God continued a
long time as tolerable, though not so beautiful as at the first. But when the
bottomless pit was opened, and that antichrist did appear in his colors,
then Gods worship was not only deformed, but also utterly defaced, and
abominable superstition set up in the place of true religion. The blind guides
and instruments of Satan, in this work were the popish schoolmen, 2. These.
2.11.
the arch-pillers of the Antichristian religion. To come then to our purpose
and to take some short view of this blind miserable age, wherein the mystery of
iniquity began to work effectually, because men did love darkness more then
light: let us consider in their own words and writings, their doctrine of
fasting, which they have not only by books commended, but also by strong
laws commanded: and we shall see that the popish fast has no more affinity
with the religious fast before described by Gods word and spirit, 2. Cor. 6.
Fasting no cause of pardon of sins, or justification
then light with darkness, or Christ with Beliall.

August. Epist. 86. I do not judge fasting to be a means to obtain the
righteousness of faith, or the righteousness which faith Supply in Christ.
obtains, that righteousness (I say) wherein consists the beauty of the
kings daughter, which is all glorious within, etc.

The Romish fast, described and taught by schoolmen, commanded by popish
laws, and practiced in the Popes dominions: is this which follows
Popish description of fasting.
FIrst, then their most detestable fast is thus described, their own very words
are these: Ieiunium est substractio cibi, facta secundum institutionem
ecclesiae, statutis temporibus, sub poena peccati mortalis, ad satisfaciendum
pro peccatis, and ad promerendum gratiam Dei, and vitam aeternam: In english
thus, Fasting is a substraction 1. Error.
or diminishing of our meat or diet, according to the institution or 2. Error.
doctrine of the Church, the times 3. Error.
appointed, under pain of 4. Error, more dangerous.
mortal sin, to make 1. Blasphemy
satisfaction for sins, and to merit 2. Blasphe.
the grace of God, and 3. Blasphe. Alexander ab Hales. Fasting a satisfaction
for sin. Fasting to purchase heaven. Johannes Bellethi rationale diuinor.
offic. Fasting a satisfaction.
life everlasting. Most detestable and intolerable blasphemies against Jesus
Christ. And that this is their Catholic profession of fasting, may appear by
another great clerk of the same school: Ieiunium est abstinentia a cibo and
potu, secundum formam ecclesiae, intuitu satisfaciendi pro peccato, and
acquirendi vitam aeternam: Fasting is an abstinence from meat and drink,
according to the custom of the Church, with intention of satisfaction for
sin, and to purchase life everlasting. A third man of this sect says thus:
Ieiunium est communis omnium membrorum satisfactio, vt singula membra
satisfaciant pro peccatis quae admiserunt, vt scilicet peccauit, ieiunet, ac
sufficit: that is, Fasting is a common satisfaction of all the members, or
parts of the body, that every of the members may satisfy for the sins they
have committed: as each part has sinned, so let it make satisfaction, and it
suffices. The same description is in a manner word for word with Durandus in
his 6. book, chap. 7. Number. 1.

And that they stick fast to this day, notwithstanding the clear
sunne-shining light of the Gospel in the same mire and puddles of
superstition, Bellarmin lib. de ieiunio.
appears by a late vpstart champion of the Romish strumpet, who writes a whole
tractate in defense of this most detestable and erroneous will worship and
corruption of fasting. His description is but short: Ieiunium est-abstinentia
cibi, Tom. 3. page. 1383.
secundum ecclesiae regulam assumpta: Fasting is an abstinence from meat,
according to the rule and instruction of the Church. Yet adds he in his
chapters following, all the former titles and commendations of fasting,
fighting with great courage, for differences of meats, and abstinence from
flesh in the fasting day, chap. 5. for laws to bind consciences to certain
meats and set fasts, chap. 6. 7. striving to prove this work to be a high and
divine service acceptable unto God, Blasphemy. Ieiunium aute^ ad meritu^
acquirendum, vel ad satisfaciendu^ pro peccatis in scripturis no^ solu^ non
reprehendi, sed etia^ probari et laudari multis testimonijs et exemplis etc.
yea (says he) Vtile ad satisfaciendum Deo, profitable to make satisfaction
unto God, page 1433. and meritorious, page 1431. a means to satisfy for
sins, and so to purchase heaven, page 1441.

We have seen before what the true fast is, and how sharply the spirit of
grace reproves the blind Jews in the days of the Prophets, and the proud
Pharisees and Essees in the days of Christ, for these opinions, wherein the
popes schoolmen their brood and offspring, far surpass them in superstition,
yet dares this impudent Jesuit with distinctions and authorities of fathers
abused, with all his strength, wit, and learning, defend them. But to proceed,
take yet a further view of this monster, as Bellarmines fathers and elder
brethren have set him forth in colors. Here remember Cyprians counsel: Non
videndum quid aliqui ante nos fecerint, sed quid ille qui ante omnes est
facie^dum mandauit: We must not regard what some have done before us, but what
he, who is before all men, has commanded to be done.

1. Their greatest care and charge is for choice and differences of meats: and
here they make strong laws to bind consciences to abstain from flesh-meates
their fasting days.

2. Arguments for differences of meats: In all ages the Church had some meats
allowed, and some disallowed and forbidden of God. In paradise the tree of
knowledge of good and evil was forbidden: Note the leaden arguments of these
blind hypocrites.
before the flood flesh was forbidden: under Moses diverse kinds of meats are
forbidden: therefore under the Gospel, etc. See August. contra Faust. lib. 32.
ca. 13. Apostolos praecepisse, etc. The Apostles commanded to abstain from
blood, etc. Quis iam hoc christianus obseruat? What Christian observes that
this day? and if some few do fear to touch such things, they are mocked of
the rest.

3. Against flesh-meate: this is not to be eaten, because the earth for Adams
sin was accursed: but the waters he did not curse, because by the Non
maledixit a ^uis quoniam per aqua^ baptismi futura erat remissio peccatorum.
Duran. lib 6. cap. 7. de 4. feria and ieiunio. Number. 22. Alexander. Idem.
water of baptism should come the remission of sins.

4. Men are not, say they, so to regard in fasting the quantity as the
quality of meats, forbidden by the Church: and therefore it is a greater
sin, the fasting day to taste a little morsel of flesh, then to devour a
great deal of fish.

5. Manifest excess in quantity, diminishes the merit of fast, but does not
break their fast: for, say they, the Church has not determined how much to
take, so that we abstain from flesh.

6. Another, differing not much in words, says: If any feed more daintily, or
greedily of fish, we think not that therefore he has broken his fast, albeit
in excess we believe he sins venially.

7. Again they say, drinking of wine will not hinder fasting: so that men
drink not till they be drunken, says Durandus: and Alexander thinks wine
very Wines work far more spedely and effectually, and fill the veins sooner
then any meat. Fernel. method medic. lib. 1. ca. 20.

Innocentius. Durand. lib. 6. de 4. feria. cap. 7. number 22. Vinu^ in ieiunio sic
bibere permittitur, vt ebrietatem omnino fugiamus Petrus de palude.


needful the fasting day, because of fish: and to feed on some figs will not
hinder fasting, says another, but we must not preach these things.

8. They appoint their times for fasting, binding men to keep the fasts
appointed under pain of damnation: Bernardinus
O quot ad inferum demerguntur, quia non ieiunant: O how many are plunged in
hell, because they fast not. And another says, It is deadly Comedere ante
horam comedendi, and ante missa^ in ieiunijs statutis mortale peccatu^ esse
sacri Canones affiomant. Durand. lib. 6. de ieiunijs cap. 7. number. 15.
sin not to keep the set fasts. But voluntary fasts be works of
supererogation, and in these to eat something before Mass, is but a venial
sin. ibid.

9. We must fast (say they) the Lenten fasts, the spring time of the year,
because Adam fell in the spring time, and because they think all men are most
subject (as they are) to their carnal lusts, this time of the year.

10. We must fast, say these blind guides, in Lent forty days: first, because
it is the But 36. days is the tenth part, and therefore here they dispute
much, but that Durand. has found this. A. ecclesia non cu^rauit de minutijs,
quamuis sit parum plus vel minus lib. 6. cap. 32. number. 1. Alexander. Thomas.
Bernandi. Durand. ibid. number, 2. The impudency of Satan in this blind age.
Durand. ibid.
tenth part of the year: secondly, because of the four disordered affections
against the Decalogue, and four times ten make forty: Thirdly, the Lenten
fast is for the general pardon of sins, like the Iubile: for the number of
50. is made of 40. by addition of 10. Fourthly, our flesh does consist of four
elements: we fight against the flesh with the 10. commandments: and four
times ten make forty: therefore the Lenten fast is 40. days. Fifthly, for that
God rayned in the deluge 40. days and 40. nights. Sixthly, for that the
Ninevites had 40. days to repent. Seventhly, for that the Jews were in the
wilderness 40. years. And Durandus adds: Per quadraginta mansiones, and by
40. stations, or standing places came to the land of promise, lib. 6. cap. 32.
Numb. 1. Eighthly, for that Elias came in 40. days to the mount of God.
Ninthly, Christ's ascension was not, till 40. days after his resurrection were
past. Tenthly, Quia Dominus venit ad nos, etc Because Christ came unto us by
42. generations. Dominus suo quadragenario, etc. Christ does descend unto us
in this number of 40. (because Matthew has 42. generations) that we might
ascend unto him in the same number. Eleuenthly, Vt perueniamus ad requie^, that
we may follow Christ to the everlasting rest: for he, after that he had
conuersed with his disciples 40. days, ten days after did he ascend up to
heaven, and sent them the holy Ghost. Duran l. ibid
Twelfthly, for that thus fasted Moses, Elias, and Christ, Et hoc pro
institutione and exemplo: And this for instruction and example, Alexander
insumma de ieiunio.
or imitation.

11. We fast (say they) that we may satisfy the breach of the Decalogue.

Blasphemy.
12. The fast of the four times, are for the sins committed in the four
parts of the year.

Blasphemy.
13. A little fast does satisfy for that sin which deserves an exceeding
great punishment.

Blasphemy.
14. Fast was appointed that thereby we might merit a perfect reconciliation
with God.

Blasphemy.
15. A voluntary fast kept in love, meriteth eternal life.

16. Fasting for the dead, a work to help and deliver souls out of Gratian.
14.2. cap. anima verba Grego. purgatorio eximu^tur animae aut precibus aut
ieiunio cognitorum. Ex Burchardo wermaciens Episcopo circa annum. 1020.
purgatory.

17. Wilful murder must make satisfaction by 40. days fast, and seven years
penance.

18. He that kills a man ignorantly or by chance, must fast 40. days, and
bear five years penance.

19. He that maimeth any man, is bound to fast 40. days.

20. Perjured men satisfy by four years fast, and seven years penance.

21. Sacrilege 120. days fast, and 7. years penance.

22. Adultery, if but one of the persons were married, has 40. days fast,
and seven years penance: but both married, 80. days fast, and 14. years
penance.

23. Rape must make satisfaction with 40. days fast, and 7. years penance.

24. Fornication with Nuns, 40. days fast, and 7. years penance.

25. For the breach of fasts appointed by the Church, penance was enjoined 20.
or 40. days.

26. Slander and railing must have 7. days fast.

And thus far of this rotten and unsavory superstition, wherein Antichrist
we see does more blaspheme and dishonor Jesus Christ, according to his name,
2. These. 2.
then all former ages.

Tertullian. Quod primum verum, adulterinum quod posterius. Truth has the
first place, and is most ancient, error and corruption come after.


Cyprian. Sicut in aquae ductibus, Note this similitude.
quando in remotioribus canalibus aqua turbida velfaeculenta apparet, etc. Like
as in water conduits, when the water is troubled and unclean in the furthest
pipes, we then search the pipes next the spring head, and at the last we come
to the spring it self: So in ecclesiastical controversies, we must have our
recourse to the testimonies of the ancient, or primitive Church, but specially
to the That is to the holy scriptures.
springs of the city of God.

August. de morib. Manichaeorum, cap. 13. Si quis existat ita homo parcus, etc.
If any man be so sparing and so frugall, that to moderate his belly and his
throat, he will not feed twice in one day, and this man in supper has set
before him a salet of herbs, with some fat bacon, the salet but a little
tempered with the fatness of the bacon, he takes so much of this as will serve
to slake hunger, and cools his thirst, for healthes sake with two or three
cups of pure wine. An other on the other side, will taste no flesh, no wine,
but feeds cheerfully about the ninth hour upon curious and strange fruits,
variety of dishes well spised, and when nights comes on, he sups with like
dishes, he drinks bastard or mixed wine, and syrupes much like wine, more
pleasant then wine, and drinks of these, not to quench thirst, but what his
lust desires, and thus feeds he on delicates with great delight and
liberty. Now which of these two think ye, in respect of meats and drinks
lives more abstinent? I trust you be not so blind but that you will prefer
him which fed on a little bacon and wine, before this foul paunch or belly
god. So truth requires to confess, and yet your ignorance speaks far
otherwise.

Socrates lib. 5. cap. 22, and of lent fast. Qui in eadem fide consentiunt.
Such as agree in one faith disagree in rites and ceremonies: So the fastes
before Easter are kept otherwise of some after one manner, Anno. 440.
and of some after another. For at Rome they fast 3. weeks before Easter, the
Sabbath and Lords day excepted. But in Greece, Illyricum, and in Alexandria,
they keep this fast six weeks, and call it their quadragesima, or forty
days fast. And others also begin to fast 7. weeks before the feast, and
albeit they fast but 15. days, and at certain times, yet they also call this
time their Or their lent time
quadragesima: it is strange that so varying in weeks and days, yet they all
agree to retain one name for this time. They differ also (says he) about
meats, for some abstain from all creatures that have life: And some feed on
fish only: Sensible things.
others eat both fish and foul: and some feed on eggs and small fowls or
beries. Some eat dry bread only: and some eat not that. And there are others
which having fasted till the ninth hour, indifferently receive any kind of
food, etc. And because no man for this matter can show any scripture or law
Note. (...).
written, it is manifest that the Apostles have left every man to follow his
own choice and judgment in this matter without fear or constraint. So
Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 16.

Sic comedas, vt statim post cibum possis legere, orare, psallere:

So eat, that thou may immediately after meat be fit to read, pray, and
sing.

Hieronim.
FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST AND SECOND CHAPTER OF JOB.

Containing some observations and meditations, very comfortable against all the
crosses and afflictions of this present life.

Whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might hold fast that hope.

Romans 15.4. Be not slothful but followers of them, which through faith and
patience inherit the promises.

Hebr. 6.12. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have known the end the
Lord made, for the Lord is very pitiful and merciful.

James 5.11. LONDON Printed by Widow Orwin, for William Young, and are to be
soulde at his shop at the sign of the white Horse, nere the great Northdoore
of Paul's Church. 1596.

To the right virtuous and godly Gentlewoman, Mistress A. St.
THE history of Job is a treasure inestimable, to teach us the doctrine of
Gods fatherly care and providence, to prepare us with patience to bear all the
afflictions of this present life. 1. Part.
The first part of this book has three chapters, wherein we be taught what
Job was, how satan was let loose against him, Cap. 1.
with what courage and constancy he bare the cross, Cap. 2.
till Christ left him to see his corruption and frailty. Cap. 3.
The second part is continued from the end of the third chapter, to the
beginning of the 32. chapter, containing a very notable disputation and
conference between Job and his friends: 2. Part.
where first from the third to the fifteenth chapter, they admonish him to
repent, 1. Branche from the 3. to the 15. chap.
and so to prepare himself for death, assuring him, because of this strange
calamity, that he must be, not only stained and spotted with some light
crimes, The error of Iobes friends Eliphas. Zophar. Bildad.
but also fowly infected and poisoned with great and grievous sins, and with
hypocrisy. Job answers their several speeches, tormented in body,
perplexed and greatly grieved in mind, yet striving mightily to avoid their
unjust accusations against him. Secondly, 2. Branch.
they reply sharply upon his first answers, from the 15. chapter to the 22.
and he answers them again with greater boldness and courage then before. 3.
Branch.
Thirdly, they begin a second reply, and here Eliphas and Bildad only spoke,
the third man fainted and spoke no more, for that Job was invincible persisting
in his apology and defense of his faith and upright conversation. This last
branch is continued to the 32. chapter, 3. Part.
where begins the third part of this book: Elihu.
and here a fifth speaker enters in with great gravity censuring both parts,
Jobs friends for want of judgment in their reproves, and Job also for his
over great boldness in justifying himself, and appealing to Gods high throne of
justice. This speech also is continued from the 32. chap. to the 38. And there
begins the fourth part of this book, 4. Part.
wherein the Lord himself speaks. And whereas Elihu did bend himself most
against Job, sometimes perverting and wresting his very words, and sometimes
repeating what he never spoke, very sparingly and lightly touching his
adversaries: the Lord on the other side, graciously and fatherly reproves his
servant Job, and sharply rebukes all the rest, teaching them to know his
power, wisdom, 5. Part.
providence, and justice by his works, chapter 38. 39. 40. 41. then follows
the last part of this book, chapter 42. wherein is showed how Job repented:
how God received him to grace, and restored him to a better state then he had
before.

Two special questions are handled in this book: the first is concerning the
justice of Whether it stands with his justice, that the wicked prosper, and
the godly be afflicted in this present life. The second is, whether we may well
judge of the faith, religion and profession of men, by their prosperity and
adversity in this present life. These questions have bred occasion of great
disputation, and grief unto the faithful of all ages, Psalm. ^3. Iere. 15.
Hab. 1.13. and caused infidels to blaspheme, Mal. 2.17. and 3.15. These doubts
are notably resolved and answered in this story: for the first, that we must
not search into the strange judgments of God, but know as Job teaches us,
chapter 24. 1. that all times appointed for prosperity and adversity, for
good and evil, are hid with the Lord, and we must as Job does, Cap. 39. 36.
37.
put our hand on our mouth, and adore his majesty in all his works and
judgments, being well assured that his will is and must be ever unto us the
only rule of justice, and that his hand and will governs all the accidents,
changes and chances of this present life. For the 2. the Lord teaches us also,
never to judge of the end, nor of the life past of the faithful, by their
present miseries: for it fares with us in our spiritual co^bates with the
flesh and the devil, as it does with wrastlers in the world: for among them we
shall see often, some one near cast down, and yet in the end gives his
adversary the foil. So is it in the spiritual battle, Gods children may
seem cast down, when desperate speeches pass from them, as we see in David.
Psalm. 77.10.22.1.2. and Jerem. 15.20. and Qui escente ad tempus in ipso
deitate, and sensibus carnis, in horendo illo iudicio quod tum subibat, penitus
occupatis, in illam petitionem eripuit.
Christ himself cries bitterly in the agonies of death, and yet in the end
they tread down satan under feet. Romans 16.20. Wherefore we must take heed
how we censure these (as the manner of some is) for albeit satan and the flesh
rage and storm for a time, et God gives his children in death it self,
strength to triumph over them by Jesus Christ, albeit this is not so
comfortablie manifested at all times to our eyes in this present world.

Secondly, we have here in Job a singular

Thirdly, the Apostle Saint James does highly commended Jobs patience, chapter
5. And surely whosoever shall well consider his condition and place, his piety
and religion, and so take a view of his most strange calamities, he shall see
a man of invincible courage and constancy, and such a president for patience
as could never be seen, J suppose on earth, excepting only in the son of God
Jesus Christ. Arguments to demonstrate this briefly are these. 1. Peter.
2.19.20.
First, Saint Peter says, If when ye do well, and suffer wrong, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable to God. What praise is it, if when ye be buffeted
for your faults you suffer it patiently?
Jf Job had been an evil man, or of that common sort of indifferent men, his
patience had been commendable in such intolerable afflictions: but being a man
most rare for all piety and sincerity, an unspotted servant of the Lord, one
that gave himself no rest in any suspicion of sin, chapter 3. 26. his
patience and courage must be the more admirable, in such extreme calamities.
Secondly, Job was exceeding rich, chapter 1. 2. 3. and chapter 29. last verse,
it were much if a poor man should so endure the heavy hand of God upon him,
for poor men are more acquainted with the miseries of this life then the rich,
or if being an vpstart from beggerie to some high pitche of dignity he could
be content to be debased and brought to his low ebb again. But a man
flowing in wealth, in great honor and estimation in the world continually,
all his life time full of prosperity, to be thus cast down, all on a sudden:
there must be in such a one, more then man's strength to hold him up, and to
keep him from desperation. Job stands with courage till they weaken his faith.


Jf we desire to know what wrought this courage, constancy, and patience in
Job, the Apostle answers, 2. Cor 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to
think any thing: and again, I am able to do all things through the help of
Christ, which strengthens me, Phillip. 4.13. There do conspire against Job
as in a league; satan, flesh, friends, wife, and all torment him, yet his
courage was invincible, Chap. 3.
till Christ left him a little to see his own frailty and corruptions, then
seems he as quite broken for a time, as a man forlorn and forsaken of God.

The last great plague I was greatly comforted with this book of God, and for
that J judged then, as yet J do, that the evil Angels, sent from God, have a
special hand and working in the pestilence, as in sundry other Consider these
places. Psalm. 78.49.50. psalm. 104 4. Luke. 13.16. Math. 17.15. Mar. 5.25.
incurable diseases, and evils of this life, wars, famine, etc. For this
cause then, desiring to comfort others with the same comforts, wherewith God
comforted me, J collected these observations and meditations following. 2. Cor.
1.4.
And now trusting that the Lord will give them some blessing for the use and
comfort of his people, I have thought it good to annexe them on this manner, as
not impertinent, to the former treatise of fasting. The first part of this
book, I have commended to a right Worshipful Gentleman, who loves the
truth, and the protection of the truth. These two parts J recommend to you
(good Mistress St.) nothing doubting of your favorable acceptance. J can no
way requite your christian love. The most merciful father so fill you with
spiritual comfort, as J desire to be comforted in my most need, and work in
your heart the true sense and feeling of his sweet mercies by the holy Ghost,
and open the eyes of your mind, yet more and more by faith to behold the
unsearchable riches of his son Jesus Christ: Amen. Pray for me, the Lord
Christ bless and keep you and all yours.

Yours ever to use in the Lord Christ, Henry Holland.

The first Chapter of Job.
This chap^ has 4. ^cial parts. The first part is from the 1. verse to the 6.
verse, and contains a description and comme^dation of this holy man:
teaching us 1. What his country was: the land of Vz in Idumea. verse. 1. 2.
What his name: Job, verse. 1. 3. What his religion and piety: he was an upright
man, and just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil, verse. 1. 4. What
children he had: they were 7. sons and three daughters. verse. 2. 5. What his
possession was: very great. verse. 3. 6. What a careful and religious life, he
and his children lived, verse. 4. 5.
The second part is from the 6. verse. to the 12. verse, containing two
branches: where is showed In the first place, how all the Angels good and evil,
stand before the Lord to minister unto him, and to do him service, verse. 6. 7.
In the second, how there past a speech between the Lord and Satan concerning
Job: where we are to note 1. How the Lord commends the religion and life of
his servant Job, verse. 8. 2. How Satan accuses him with all his might, ver.
9. 10. 11.

The third part begins at the 12. verse, and ends in the 19. verse,
co^taining a commission granted by the Lord to Satan, against Job, and the
execution of it. 1. The commission is set down, verse. 12. 2. The execution
follows: wherein is showed how Satan afflicted Job in 4. special calamities:
1. He robs him by thieves of all his oxen and asses, verse. 14. 15. 2. He
destroys al his sheep with fire from heaven, verse. 16. 3. He stirs up
thieves against him to take away his camels, verse. 17. 4. He stirred up a
tempest, which cast down the house where his children were feasting, and
destroyed them al in one instant, verse. 18. 19.

The fourth part is in the 3. last verses, showing how Job overcame Satan in
the first conflict: where consider of 1. Jobs humiliation: where we note 1. His
sorrow and grief, verse. 20. 2. His faith, patience, verse. 21. and hope,
resting cheerfully upon Gods promises.
2. His commendation: the holy Ghost commends him as a golden president for
our imitation, verse. 22. In all this Job sinned not, etc. verse. 22.



An exposition of the first chapter of Job.
Job. chap. 1. verse. 1. There was a man in the land of Vz, called Job, he was a
Heb. or unspotted or perfect.
sound, and Heb. or righteous.
upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil.

This verse teaches us generally these three points. 1. What his country
was: the land of Vz. 2. What his name: Job. 3. What special graces GOD gave
him. 1. He was sound within, simple and single hearted. 2. Upright and just
without in life and conversation. 3. He feared God. 4. He was careful and
studious to avoid evil.




THere was a man in the land of Vz. Sense.
The first thing here to be known, what country this is, which is here called
the region or the land of Vz. We find in the genealogies of the holy Scripture
3. men so named: one was Arams son, nephew to Noah, Genesis 10. verse. 23. A
second was Nachors, Abraham's brothers son by Milchah, Genesis 22.21. The third
of this name was of the posterity and kindred of Esau, The Idumeans dwelt
between Iewrie and Arabia.
as we may see in his genealogy, Genesis 36. verse. 28. Now Esau and his
posterity were inhabitants of Idumea, Malach. 1.3.4. This country was called
Edom, of Esau the first Genesis 36.9.31. He answered his name in his life. Genesis
25.30.
father of all the Edomites, for the surname of Esau was Edom, earthly,
bloody, red. This 3. Vz, therefore of the posterity of Esau, we find his
country to be Idumea, for the Edomites are said to dwell in the land of Vz,
Lament. 4.21. This Idumea bordered upon Arabia Felix, whence the Sabeans came,
which by violence took away Jobs oxen and asses. Cap. 1. ver. 21.
Job then was an Idumean, of the posterity of profane Esau, brother unto
Jacob, the sons of Isaac. When Job lived.
It is like by all good conjectures, that he lived about the time the Church of
God was in Egypt.

Remember the children of Edom O Lord, It is most dangerous to live among
idolators unless he will say as they say and do as they do. Esaias. 59.

A greater comme^dation to be religious among the profane and irreligious the^
among the Godly, for here are no such occasions of evil. Ioh. 1.46.


in the day of Jerusalem, which said, raze it, raze it, to the foundation
thereof. Here notwithstanding was this religious Job borne, brought up, and had
his continual habitation. We have at this day great wrestling within the
Church, to keep faith and a good conscience: For truth fails among us, and
he that refraineth from evil makes himself a pray: Wherefore how greatly is
holy Job to be commended, so godly among the most godless, so holy among the
profane people of Idumea. We may say more justly then Nathaniell spoke of
Nazareth, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? can there any Job come
out of Jdumea?

2. The Church of God was not lodged only in Abraham's and Isaacs family in
their days, no nor yet in Jacobs family which followed, and was far
greater. It is apparent in the story of Genesis, that the knowledge and fear
of God, was not then quite worn away out of the posterity of cursed Cham,
even in Egypt, and elsewhere thereaboute, as appears in Pharaoh, Abimelech,
and Melchisedeches story. They had some knowledge of God, and of the promised
Messiah. But the Lord did more manifest himself, and his will unto Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, then to any other in these days, and God was better, and
more purely worshipped in their families, then in any other part of the world
in that age: Job followed after them, and did inhabit an other region. The
people of God therefore in his time were not separate from among the Gentiles.
It is like that separation began at their departure and deliverance from
Egypt: confer Exodus 12.48. Acts 13.17. for then he assembled them before him
in the wilderness, and made his covenant solemnly with them, speaking in these
words: Exodus 19.5. 1 Pet 2.9. Psalm. 147. A peculiar people.
If ye will hear my voice in deed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be my
chief treasure, above all people, though all the earth be mine, ye shall be
unto me also a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation, etc.

3. Ob. Job came of Esau, whose posterity was accursed, a people says the
prophet, Mal. 1.3.4.
with whom God is angry for ever. They were cut off from Gods people, and cast
out of the borders of Canaan into mount Seir: how then is this branch of that
dead stock so blessed, and thus become a true member of the holy Church of God
as here we see?

Answ. Howsoever wicked and profane Esau was, yet is he not said to be cut off
from the covenant of God, but from the birthright, It was and is more common
for good parents to have bad children, then for evil parents to have good
children.
his heirs were not to enjoy the kingdom promised to Abraham, nor the promise
made unto him in Isaac, concerning the Messiah. The Idumeans in Jobs time were
no more excluded from the covenant of grace in Jesus Christ, then the rest of
the nations round about them. And thus albeit God hated Esau, and in Malachies
time threatened to curse all his posterity for their grievous sins against
Gods people their natural brethren: yet the Lord, (that can make of sower
sweet, and cause a fruitful branch to spring of a dry root) of his own
free will, grace, and goodness, did stir up his servant Job a chosen vessel
to serve him, out of that godless and profane generation.

His name was Job.
This name signifies a man hated, an enemy, or a man full of sorrows, because
God seemed to hate him as an enemy, howbeit he was highly in his favor, and
greatly beloved of God.

The story of Job no fained narration, or parable.
Zophar, Elihu, his special friends which came to visit and comfort him.
Again, Jobs name is twice mentioned by Ezechiel, where the Lord compares him
for his excellent graces, with Noah and with Daniell: and James wills us to
fasten our eyes upon him, as the myrrour of all patience in afflictions.

1. Job was sound, or unspotted, entire, Psalm. 51.6.
or perfect.
THe Lord loves truth in the inward affections says the Psalmist. The Lord
loves inward simplicity, singlenes and soundnes of heart. This Christ
commands his disciples, Phil. 1.9.10. 2. Cor. 1.12. Godly purity and
soundnes is a special mark of the forgiveness of sins in the faithful.
simple as doves. Unto this virtue are opposite all hypocrisy, dissembling,
fraud, deceit, inconstancy, etc. it is commended in Jacob, a plain, simple,
sound man, Genesis 25.27. and in Nathaniell, a sound Israelite void of guile.
John 1. verse. 47. we be taught also that this virtue is an especial mark of
the forgiveness of sins, Psalm. 32.2.3. for they are blessed, and have their
sins pardoned, in whose spirit there is no guile. And to be short, There is
no virtue which makes Gods children more to resemble the holy father then this,
for simplicity and truth are the special marks of his holy spirit, and
lies, deceit, and all fraud, the certain and sure brandes of the unclean
spirit of error.

2. Job was an upright man, or a just man.
Job did labor to manifest the soundnes of his heart by his upright
conversation. That he was unspotted in life, Veiashar.
appears chap. 29. 31. etc. This is the man the Psalmist calls blessed:
Blessed are they that are upright in their way, for that they walk in the law
of the Lord. And the charge to Abraham is, Walk thou before me, and be thou
upright. And this is the commendation of Elizabeth and Zachary, They were both
just before God, and walked in the commandments and ordinances of God without
reproof. Luke 1.6. And these again are pronounced blessed by the Prophet,
which watchfully regard their walking, Psalm. 1.1.
standing and sitting, that they may decline and avoid the counsel of the
wicked, the ways of sinners, and the seats of the scornful. All that
country of Idumea was full of such, therefore was Job a mirror among men, and
yet accounted, as David a monster among the wicked of those times.

3. Job feared God.
THis virtue (so often spoken of, and commended in Scripture, as Prouer. 1. to
be the beginning, or spring head of wisdom) it is not a trembling or a
quiuering arising of an evil conscience, because of the fear of some
punishments, but it is a holy and religious reverence due unto the majesty of
God, speaking unto us in his most holy and blessed word, which being of a
mighty and lively operation, and discerning so deeply the thoughts and intents
of the heart, Heb 4.12. causes us to fear and tremble, Esaias. 66.3. least we
decline from the ways which God has prescribed for us: so as by this
religious fear, he knits our hearts unto him, that we cannot depart from him,
Ierem. 32.40. This virtue gives life to the former: for without this there can
be no inward sound purity and integrity, and without this all external
justice is but a civil and philosophical sincerity of life. Here in this
scripture are understood all other christian virtues and good graces of Gods
holy spirit.

4. Job eschewed evil.
THis is an hebraisme, as Psalm. 34.14. Eschew evil and do good. Thou shall
dye and not live, 2. King. 20.1. By this manner of speaking, the Hebrews
understand a studious and diligent care to perform that which is mentioned: as
here that Job was very watchful (as himself after professes) over his heart,
over his life, his faith, his conscience, etc. that he gave himself with all
his might unto good things, and labored carefully to avoid all occasions of
evil.

A rich man which is not attired with these virtues, i^ but an ass trimmed for
the devil to (...) upon. Luke. 16.19.
The holy Ghost being to lay before us a golden president for our imitation,
having set down his name, and his country, he does not proceed to blaze and
set forth in the next place his honor, his preferments, dignities and
promotions in the world, (for Job was very honorable, and in that country
dwelt as a king in an army, chap. 29. verse. 25. full of riches, verse. 3.) but
first he commends him unto us for his inward integrity, next for his
unspotted life, thirdly for his holy fear, and lastly for his watchfulnes in
avoiding al occasions of impiety and of all evil. Learn here then how to
estimate and prize Gods graces, before wife and children, houses and lands
riches and honor, etc.

2. Now learn in more special manner, how the Lord does afflict his best
beloved children in this present life. If Job had been a bad man, a Saul, a
Judas, an Achitophel, an hypocrite, all his calamities had not been strange:
but that such a blessed and religious man should be so buffeted, such a
fruitful plant in the Lords vineyard should be so broken and torn in pieces,
that he has not one branch left him: this does astonish and amaze many of the
best in all ages.

Verse. 2. And he had seven sons, and three daughters.


THus far concerning Jobs inward graces: his outward blessings follow:

Jobs outward blessings which God gave him were 1. His children, Seven sons.
Three daughters.
2. His substance in 1. Sheep, 7000. 2. Camels, 3000. 3. Oxe^, 500. yoke. 4.
She Asses. 500.



The Lord does promise unto such as walk uprightly in his ways, that they
shall have increase and plenty of all blessings, and that he would bless the
fruit of their bodies: Thou shall be plenteous in goods, Deuteronomy. 28.11.
in the fruit of thy body, and in cattle, etc. The Psalmist also does in a
most gracious manner speak unto them which fear the Lord concerning their
wives and children: that they shall be both sweet and comfortable, pleasant
and profitable unto them. Psalm. 128.3. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine on
the sides of thine house, and thy children like olive branches round about thy
table. We have heard before of Jobs virtues, and great care to live and walk
with all reverence and fear in the ways of God. Now therefore we see Gods
blessings, according to his promise, in great measure powered upon him.

Concerning children, or the fruit of the womb, certain it is that by virtue
of that general promise and word of God in the beginning, increase and
multiply, that all families of the earth increase, the generation of godly and
godless is continued and preserved. Yet the Lord herein has ever reserved
unto himself a special hand in opening of the womb, Children Gods special
gifts, I gave Abraham Isaac, I gave Isaac Jacob. Josh. 23.3.4. Genesis 30.2.
and in giving of children. For this cause we see Job, verse. 21. he accounts
his children Gods great gifts, as well as all his substance: God has given, God
has taken away, etc. Jacob likewise is of the same judgment: Am I a God
(says he) that I can give children? Herein did the Lord bless Job
wonderfully, that he gave him religious children and wealth. Children without
religious parents, do most commonly miscarrie daungerously. Religious parents
having children without wealth, have many cares and griefs in this present
life, as the Apostle speaks. 1. Cor. 7.
Lastly, rich parents, and evil nurtured children, breed and bring up beasts
to devour their substance.



2. The inward graces and gifts of Gods spirit have the first place of
commendation: Children the fruit of the womb the second: the third and last
place, all other blessings of this present life. Let not thy principal joy be
in wife or children, houses or lands: for all these can Satan take from thee,
if God permit: but rejoice in Jesus Christ. Galath. 6.14.15. and that thy name
is written in heaven, Luke 10. verse. 20. and in the testimony of a good
conscience, 2. Cor. 1.12.

Verse. 3. His Heb. or cattle, or possession. Heb. or husbandry or revenues.
What life the ancient patriarchs lived.
substance also was 7000. sheep, and 3000. camels, and 500. yoke of oxen, and
500. she asses, and his Heb. or cattle, or possession. Heb. or husbandry or
revenues. What life the ancient patriarchs lived.
family was very great, so that this man was the greatest of all the men in
the East.


THe substance of the old fathers, did for the most part consist of sheep, and
such like beasts as here are mentioned. And the greatest Nobles then were
content with a graziers and shepherds life. Jacob and his sons when they
came before Pharaoh, being asked what their trade and manner of living was:
they answered, Genesis 47.3.
Thy servants are shepherds both we and our fathers. Such indeed were Abraham,
Lot, and Isaac, as the story teaches us: Genesis 13.2. Genesis 26.14.
yet is it said, that Abraham was rich in cattle, in silver and in gold: and
of Isaac it is said, he had flocks of sheep, herds of cattle, and a mighty
household.

The beasts here mentioned were most common and most profitable in that
country: the sheep for meat and clothing, the camels to carry burdens, the
asses to carry men, the oxen to plow and till the ground. Horses had they few,
and little in use in those parts.

The word here translated a family, is in Hebrew gnabudah, and does signify
lands, revenues, tillage, husbandry, fields, vineyards, gardens, orchards,
etc. It is used in the like commendation of Isaac: Genesis 26.14.
He had a mighty household. And where he is said to be the greatest of the
children of the East: the meaning is the noblest and best, as for riches and
possessions, so for good name and fame, etc.

1. This verse teaches us, godly as rewards of obedience, Deuter. 28. Psalm
128.

1. Ob. But the Apostles forsook all. Ans. In affection, not in deed: for
they had their houses and possessions after: as Matthew, compare Luke 5.27.29.
and Matthew. 8.14. And Peter had his house and nets, and did fish after the
resurrection, Ioh. 21. verse. 3.2. Ob. But Christ says it is impossible for
rich men to be saved, Matthew. 19. verse. 21. Ans. Mark answers this, when he
says that Christ did mean such as did trust in riches, and set their hearts
and affection upon them, chap. 10. 24. It is hard to find indeed in these
days many religious men wealthy, or rich men religious. Proverbs are not
always generally true: Unjust is the rich man or his father, or both, the one
in getting injuriously, the other in retayning goods wrongfully gotten. The
Lord we see here gives riches to good men, least they should seem to be
evil: for that they are the occasion of much evil in the world: and he gives
them unto evil men also, least they should be esteemed as his best blessings,
as they be accounted of the unbelievers in all ages of the world.

2. Thou see here Jobs wealth exceeding great: his bountifulnes and
liberality and mercy to the poor was thereafter: Few rich men religious
and bountiful.
read chap. 29. 30. It is a happy thing to see religious and bountiful men
rich, and rich men religious and liberal. I would it were a thing more common
to find these things chayned and coupled together in these days.

3. Here we see in more special manner that which generally is before noted,
that Jobs patience, courage, and constancy was wonderful great: he was by
the Lords hand advanced to a very high pitch of dignity and honor in the
world: A worthy president for noble men and great men to look upon in their
afflictions.
and being robbed, as it were in one instant of all his glory and great
dignity, yet he endured patiently Gods heavy and strong hand upon him. If he
had bin lately start up to some wealth, or before times exercised with some
wants, his downfall had been the more tolerable, and his commendation the less.

Verse. 4. And his sons went, and banketted in their houses, every one his
day, and sent and called their 3. sisters to eat and to drink with them.


WE have seen hitherto what special blessings the Lord had given his holy
servant Job: first, the good graces of his holy spirit: next, a sweet number
of children: and thirdly, substance exceeding great. Now here follows a
fourth blessing comparable to any external blessing: his children also were
religious, and did mutually, Jobs childere^ religious.
most lovingly embrace, comfort, and help one another.

This verse gives us to see how Jobs children did confirm their mutual love
by banketting together: where consider these points: 1. Who banketted, or
feasted together: Jobs sons 7. 2. Where? in their own houses. 3. When? every
one of the 7. on his day: not always. 4. Where were their sisters? they were
sent for, and came with all modesty.


The sense and meaning of this verse is this: The seven sons of Job before
mentioned, they were wonted certain times of the year to call and to inuit
one another to feasting, to the end they might admonish and comfort, and
instruct one another, that their love might be cherished, their faith
confirmed, and that so they might be mutually comforted one by another. This
meeting was not in common Tauernes, or Innes, or Alehouses, or in other places
of resort with the profane Edomites, the people of the land, but in their own
houses. For albeit as yet they were young, and as it seems unmarried, yet had
their father provided them houses and such necessaries, as did belong to their
families: as careful was Jacob in this respect, Genesis 30.30.
as his words to Laban can testify: But now when shall I travel for mine own
house also? he that provides not for his family is worse then an Infidel:
and we may procure things honest before hand: the care which is forbidden, is
(...), a distracting and vexing care, Matthew. 7. These seven sons did thus
feast together 7. days, not 7. days continuing: or if they feasted a whole
week, certain it is not every week, or every month, (for we must not
imagine, that they gave any such president of a luxurious life unto others) but
certain times, when they thought best, or had most cause of meeting, for it is
said that every one kept his day, The modesty of the Virgins of elder ages.
no more but one day. Lastly, the sisters they came also to the same banquet
from their fathers house, as it is like they were virgins yet: but withal
modesty and shamefastnes, they came being sent for, and being called, not
before, for so it became well their virginity to be sober, modest, and very
watchful over their ways.

Wherefore he mentions in the beginning of this book the banketting of Iobes
children.
1. The holy spirit here speaks of this feasting and banqueting for these
special causes: First, that we might see the religious love of Jobs children,
and by what means they desired to comfort and edify one another. Secondly,
that we might also see and consider the religious care of Job for them,
expressed in the verse following. Thirdly, that we might observe where and
when Satan murdered them: it was in their feasting time, that he might turn
Jobs great mirth, by a sudden desolation and destruction into the greater
sorrow: If his sons had died in their beds by some continuing sickness, where
he might have seen some testimony of their faith, it would not have so moved
him: sudden deaths the best do fear, and the foolish think it a great
argument of Gods great wrath, as we may see both in this book, and Luke
13.1.2.3.4.5. Lastly, this banqueting is here touched, that we might note
what men Satan so murdered: not Epicures, Satan knew the wicked would soon
take occasion to exclayme against righteous Jobs children.
nor hypocrites, extortioners, etc. as Jobs friends thought, but godly and
religious persons.

2. Note here the religious love, and happy consents of these good children
mutually comforting one another. No doubt they were no small joy and comfort
unto their father. Adam had but two sons, the one murdered the other: Noah had
three sons, one mocked his own father, and was accursed. Abraham had two
sons, the one scorned and persecuted the other. Isaac had two sons, the one
hated and desired to murder the other. Jacob had twelve sons, ten would have
murdered Joseph, and dispitefully sold him into a strange country. David's
children murdered one another, and he had great grief and sorrow by them
all: the elder despise the younger, the younger envy the elder. If such holy
men had such wicked children, what marvel is it, that our profane parents
breed and bring up such a wicked generation?

3. Feasting and banqueting is lawful unto Gods people, if that they keep the
rules appointed, and follow the godly practice here set before us by the holy
spirit. Abraham feasted at the weaning of Isaac, Genesis 21.8. Isaac feasted
Abimelech, Genesis 26.30. Joseph his brethren, Genesis 43.31. David Abner and his
friends, 2. Sam. 3.20. Solomon his servants, 1. King. 5.15. Matthew feasted
Christ and his Apostles, Matthew. 9. So did Simon the Pharisee, Luke 7. with
others many, Luke 14.

Verse. 5. And when the days of their banqueting were gone about, Job sent and
sanctified them, and he rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt
offeringes according to the number of them al, for Job said, it may be that my
sons have sinned, and Heb. blessed Or thought evil, or spoken evil.
blasphemed GOD in their hearts.


THis verse gives us to see some part of the practice of Jobs life, in the
wise and godly government of his family: thereby to teach us that his life
well agreed with his faith and profession, and justly deserved the former
commendation, verse. 1.

This verse lays before our eyes the religious care of Job for the government
of his children: where these points are to be considered. 1. When Job
sacrificed for his children: When the days of banqueting were gone about,
early in the morning. 2. How his children were prepared for the sacrifice: he
gave charge they should prepare and sanctify themselves. 3. What sacrifice he
offered: Burnt offerings according to the number of them all. 4. What reason
moved him so to sacrifice: he feared lest they had sinned in their feasting. 5.
How often did Job so? all those times in the year when they banquetted.


And when the days of their banqueting were gone about: Vaikadshem, Exodus
19.13.14. supra page
that is, when the 7. days of their feasting was past: for the 7. brethren did
feast every one his day, verse. 3. therefore here we must understand 7. days,
whether 7. days continued, or some intermission between the feast of each
brother: it is uncertain.

Job sent and sanctified them: that is, he sent a messenger unto them, to
charge them to sanctify, to wash and purify them selves, and so to prepare
themselves by prayer, etc. against their day of meeting to sacrifice. The word
here used signifies to prepare, as Numb. 11.18. but I understand it here, as
it is used, Exodus 19.10.14. verse. where we see their sanctification and
preparation to hear the Lord speak contained their purification, and their
abstinence from the marriage bed, as the Apostle also does exhort in the like
occasion, 1. Cor. 7.4.5.6. And no doubt with all these outward things they were
to pray instantly, Eccles. 4.17.
that they might be fit to appear in Gods presence for his most holy worship
and service.

And he rose up early in the morning: The morning is a precious time for all
actions, The morning a precious time for all good actions.
and specially for Gods worship and service, and so commended by Gods spirit
unto us, Psalm. 5, 3.55, 17.59, 16.90, 14. Job was very careful concerning his
children: he would let pass no time, when their feast was ended, but very
early he sought the Lord, that God might be pacified, if that by any means,
in thought, word, or deed, they had offended him in that dangerous and loose
time of feasting.

And he offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all. That is,
7. sacrifices for his seven sons: howbeit some will have 3. more for the 3.
daughters: the matter is not great. The sacrifices which he offered were burnt
sacrifices, he spared no cost in his service and worship of God: Holocauflum,
what.
for this kind of sacrifice was all consumed in fire unto God, signifying in
respect of Christ that he should be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor unto God: Ephesians. 5.2. Heb. 10.8.9.10.11.12. Job. 42.8.
And in respect of our selves, that we please not God, before we offer up and
consecrate our selves, bodies and souls, Psalm. 103.1.2.3.4.
and all that is within us, by and through Jesus Christ unto gods service and
worship, Romans 12.1, 2, 3.1, These. 5.23. Mark. 12, 33.

Q. But here it may be demanded whether these burnt offerings were known before
the law? A. It is not to be doubted the service written in the books of Moses,
and commanded in Sinai, was prescribed of God and known for the sustance and
principal parts of it, of the fathers from the beginning of the world. They
had their priests and prophets, Genesis 4 4. Heb. 11.4. The best things must be
offered unto God. Genesis 8.20.
Jude verse. 14. and their sacrifices: for Habell is said to offer a burnt
offering unto God of the first fruits of his sheep, even the fattest of them.
Again, in the time of the great deluge, they knew a distinction and difference
of clean and unclean beasts, that is, as a learned interpreter says right
well, of such beasts as might be offered, and not be offered in sacrifice
unto God: for Noah is said even then to offer a burnt offering unto God. Genesis
8.21.22.
But all this order of Gods worship and service then not written, nor Jobs time
also which followed, was afterward more fully manifested and revealed in
Sinai, and written that Gods people might no more decline from the pure worship
of God unto superstition, and false will worship. And yet how hard is it to
bridle the devilish wit of man, but that still they will worship either
false gods, or the true God in a false manner after man's invention. Wherefore
here is a most high commendation of Job, that having not the word written, but
the knowledge of God and his worship by tradition and revelation, Job. 42.5.
yet did he not decline from the true service and worship of God.

Sense. 1. Cor. 13.5.
For Job said, that is, Job thought within himself,

It may be my sons have sinned: Love is not suspicious, thinks no evil:
yet notwithstanding love is watchful. Job had no manifest cause justly to
suspect evil in his children; yet because of the liberty that commonly is
used in banquettings, he fears lest by infirmity they might fall, therefore
as a wise and a careful father, he makes all speed to pacify the Lords wrath
with a sacrifice.

And blessed God: that is, cursed God, or blasphemed god, or thought any wicked
thoughts, or intended any way to dishonor God. The Lord would have his people
to be so far from blaspheming, and taking of Gods name in vain, Note.
that albeit they had a proper word whereby they could express this, yet had
they rather use another which did not so sound in the evil part. So they use
this word of blessing, which because it is of contrary signification, Barak.
we may the better know what the sense is, and what is intended. This manner of
speaking is used often, 1, King. 21, 13, and in this chapter again, verse 11,
and chap. 2, verse 9.

In their heart: That is, at leastwise inwardly in their hearts and minds, if
not more. But if Job had known it otherwise, he would soon have broken all
their feasting, and would have turned all their mirth by sharp correction into
bitter mourning.

And thus did Job all those days. That is, he did offer the aforesaid burnt
offering always, when his children thus feasted, how often soever they thus
banquetted in the year.

1. The first thing to be observed here in Jobs example, The morning, the best
time for Gods service. Psalm. 5.3. psalm. 55.17.
They had their morning and evening sacrifices: God commanded them to
consecrate the first fruits of the day for his worship and service. 2. The
examples of all holy religious men, as David always: Hear my voice in the
morning O Lord, for in the morning will I direct me unto thee and I will
wait. 3. It is a time when the soul and all faculties thereof, when the body
and all senses and parts thereof, are most fresh and most strong because of
the nights rest, and therefore best able to perform any duty to God or man.
4. For the morning is a time, wherein the world and the affairs of this life,
have not forestallen and preoccupied our senses, our hearts, minds, and
affections, etc. and therefore most fit then are we and able to perform any
spiritual service unto God. 5. It is the first part of the day, and therefore
the best part and most worthy to be consecrate unto God.

2. We be taught here also how to sanctify our selves and our families, that
is, to prepare our selves with all reverence to the holy assemblies, to offer up
our spiritual service and sacrifices unto God. Had they need in elder times
of such preparation by prayer, fasting, etc. to come reverently to the
Sanctuary of God: Of preparation before we come unto Gods church.
and have not we as well as they? no doubt we have greater cause: for that al
our service is more spiritual, and we have greater graces, and greater means
of faith and knowledge offered us in the Gospel. Job has his children in
great obedience, he sends unto them, that is his care: they prepare themselves
with all subjection and reverence. A blessed father, godly children: The great
love and obedience of Jobs Children.
happy children, which have such a father. Adam, Noah, Abraham and Isaac,
could not so rule two or three, as Job could ten.

3. In their sacrifices, they were put in mind of many things for the
confirmation of their faith and repentance: 1. The killing of the beast put
them in mind what death they deserved. 2. The blood shed in sacrifice, put
them in mind of the blood shedding of the Son of God. 3. The fire consuming
it, signifies the fire of Gods judgment, teaching us how Jesus Christ has
past through such a fire, wherein we had been consumed to nothing, by reason of
our sins, if he had not past for us, as a blessed sacrifice most acceptable
and sufficient, that could not be consumed.

4. What moved religious Job to be thus earnest, so forward, and so early in
his sacrifice? he feared least his children, sons and daughters, had
offended God in feasting. Where observe these points. First, that in feasting
the most religious may miscarry (if they be not circumspect) either in deed
or word, or both: if wise men here offend, what shall we think of the wicked,
which like beasts abuse themselves in all gluttony and drunkenness, surfeiting
and uncleanness of life? 2. The care of godly parents over their children. Job
knew the sins of his children did in special manner highly displease God,
disgrace his profession, shame religion, offend the weak, and open the mouths
of all idolaters to blaspheme against God and his Church. Bad Children. 1
Offend God. 2. Offend his Church. 3. Grieve good parents hearts. 4. Cause
enemies to blaspheme.
Genesis 34.10.
Therefore he is marvelous watchful lest his children offend. For this cause
Jacob because of his lewd sons, complains: You have troubled me, and made
me stink among the inhabitants of the land. 3. The government of a family
will soon lay open any man, whether he be religious or irreligious, wise or
foolish: and therefore the holy spirit makes it an argument to choose a good
Minister by: 1. Tim. 3.4. One that can rule his own house will, having
children under obedience with all reverence. Clean contrary, the fear of
wicked and foolish parents is not for the sins of their children, but for the
wants of their children. Old Ely is greatly noted and punished for example, as
a bad father for his two graceles sons: the wicked fist Hophni, and the
brazen faced Phinehas, both godles and profane, 1. Sam. 1.12. for whoredom
and uncleanness: and Ely the father knew all, and feared little: Job knew
nothing by his sons, and feared much. For intolerable sins his chastisement
was but a gentle check: verse. 23. My sons why do you such things? For this
cause he received this answer from the Lord: verse. 30. Them that honor me will
I honor, and they that despise me shall be despised. Afterward his sons were
slain, and he brake his neck, 1. Sam. 4.17.18. And this also was David's sin,
and he smarted for it, 2. Sam. 16. verse. 17. 1. King. 1. verse. 5.6.

4. The holy Ghost yet further commends unto us Jobs religious care over his
childrens lives, in that knowing nothing evil in the^, neither by sight nor by
hearesay, that they were any way wickedly bent to any open sin: yet he fears
they might purpose, think, or speak some thing closely, privily, and in their
hearts desire that which might dishonor God: For he says, It may be my sons
have sinned in their Swearing and blaspheming a special mark of an impious and
Godless man. Eccle. 9.2.
hearts blaspheming, etc. Parents and masters of our time are far from Jobs
fear: for they will not fear, open, proud, and intolerable sins: and say:
it may be our sons or servants have blasphemed, broken the Sabbath, etc. but
they suffer children and servants to sin privily and openly, and give most
vile examples of Atheism, pride, whoredom, and all uncleanness. A wonderful
commendation of Job that he is careful, not only that they offend not the
open eyes of men, but also the secret eyes of God. If he were so watchful over
his childrens sins: he was no doubt, marvelous careful for his own heart
and conscience, as appears chap. 31. verse. 7. and chap. 27. verse. 6. Wicked
men swearers are not ashamed to say they love the Lord because they have him
often in their mouths: so might witches and wizards, for none have oftener the
name of God and good things in their mouth.
Mine heart shall not reprove me of my days.

5. Where Job is said thus to worship God after al their feastings, learn
perseverance in well doing, and remember now his life has testified his former
commendation, verse. 1. to be just. If this man was so humbled, as after we
see: let us that be so spotted bear it patiently, when we be beaten worthily
for our sins.

Verse. 6. Now on a certain Or when such a day was come.
day, the sons of God came that they might stand before the Lord, and Satan
came also among them.


THus far concerning Jobs description, etc. a preface to the whole story.
Now enters in Satan as one special actor of this tragical story, which
notwithstanding had a comicall and a happy end. Here begins the second
part of this chapter, which is continued to the 12. verse. This part has two
branches: the first is in the 6. and 7. verse, where is showed how the Angels
good and evil are appointed to stand and to serve the Lord, for the execution
of his will, and when and where, and how it pleases him. The second branch is
in the verse following to the 12. verse: wherein first the Lord gives his
servant Job his just commendation in a gracious manner, verse. 8. And secondly,
Satan does oppose himself against Job, vehemently accusing him of hypocrisy
before the Lord, with all his might, verse. 9. 10. 11.

Now on a certain day. That is say some, Sen^^
when such a feast came, or in one of these banketting days, Satan came among
the good Angels, etc. Rabbis how they gloss upon this text.
Others say this was the first day of the year, wherein the Lord did as it
were usually keep court, and take accounts of all things done the year past:
these be the glosses of ridiculous and foolish Rabbis. To be short, by a
certain day: here is meant that very time wherein it pleased the Lord to
reveal his will and everlasting decree unto Satan: for Satan himself knew
it not, before he was sent of God to execute the same.

The sons of God. In these words are understood the holy Angels: for we have
the like 1. King. 22.19. in the speech of Michah to Achab: J saw the Lord sit
on his throne, and all the host of heaven stood about him, on his right hand
and on his left hand: and the Lord said, who shall entise, or persuade and
deceive Achab, that he may go and fall at Ramoth Gilead? And one said on this
manner, and another on that manner: Then there came forth a spirit and stood
before the Lord, and said, I will entise him: and the Lord said unto him,
wherewith? I will go out and be a false spirit in the mouth of all his
prophets: then he said, thou shall entise him, and shall also prevail: go
forth and do so. The Angels have many names in Scripture. This name is common
to them all with all the faithful. First, Psalm. 82.6. Ephe. 1.21.
for that their adoption and confirmation is by grace, and through Jesus
Christ, for he alone is the natural son of God: secondly, they have this
name because of the excellency of their nature: for they do most resemble God
our heavenly father. So the faithful are called in many places, Genesis 6.2. Romans
8.14.

Came. Natural bodies all move and change place. So the spirits also are truly
said to go and come from place to place, as they be sent and called for by the
Lord to execute any thing. But in this place this verb of moving (as that of
standing which follows) are used familiarly, the Lord speaking to our
capacity, because we be weak and unable to conceive otherwise of spiritual
things. For the truth is this, there is no coming unto God by motion: but
when the Angels are said to come unto him and stand before him, thereby is
meant they serve him and attend upon him. He has no such need to call them to
any convent or assembly: they are always in his presence where ever they be,
and he can inform them concerning his will, and the execution thereof at all
times. And yet it is not to be doubted he does assemble them when and where it
pleases him.

That they might stand. By this standing before the Lord, is meant the readiness
of the holy Angels, to execute the Lords will, and to perform all duties
imposed by the Lord upon them. Their redines to obey the Lord, and their true
obedience, is notably commended, Psalm. 103. v. 20. Praise the Lord his Angels
that excel in strength, that do his commandment in obeying the voice of his
word. The Lord has no need of their service, as princes and great men have on
earth: but by their service he would teach us, what is the invisible power,
glory, wisdom, and majesty of our God, on whom such glorious and mighty
creatures as the Angels are, do continually attend.

And Satan also came among them. That is, like as the holy Angels they stand,
go and come to serve the Lord in their places, and all they serve him
cheerfully in doing his will: So Satan also and wicked spirits, they are
drawn albeit against their will to the Lords presence, to serve and obey him in
the execution of such things as the Lord shall please to give them in charge to
do. And their service is here signified by Satan's coming into Gods He is
said cap 2. ver. 1. to come to stand that is, to wait as it were before God.
Epe. 6. Iud. ver. 6.
presence: not that wicked spirits have any access to the highest heavens: for
the Scripture says, they be in this world and in hell only, and chayned
wheresoever they go, as Saint Jude speaks. And like as the Lord is
comfortably present by his good spirit here on earth with his people, but in
great terrors often with the wicked: so is it with good and evil Angels, his
presence and power is most comfortable unto the good Angels: but his face is
terrible unto Satan, for the Lord curbs him, chains him, and limits him
wheresoever he goes.

And whereas one spirit is here only named in the singular number, by this
name Satan: This manner of speaking is used not that we should deem that
there are but few, for no man is said to be possessed of a legion: but that we
might understand how that wicked spirits have as it were their kingdom, and
have so conspired together against God and man, and that they have as it were
one, their chief Prince and Lord, called therefore the God of the world, 2.
Cor. 4.4. the prince of ye world, etc. Ephesians. 2.2. This word here and elsewhere
signifies a sworn enemy and a special adversary: and so he is to Christ
and his members, as here in special we see against Job. Genesis 3.15
And this was ever taught the people of God from the beginning.

This verse teaches us: first,

2. We learn that the providence of our God is not tied to any secondary
causes: the heavens, the Angels good and evil, and all inferior creatures,
they do all serve and obey him, and he commits not the care of any
particular thing, no not of the basest and vilest creature unto any one of them.

3. We have here a good argument of the almighty power, and glorious empire
of our God, who has thus all Angels good and evil in subjection unto him.
They have no authority nor power to effect any thing good or evil in this
present world, 1. Kin. 21.27.
but by him and from him.

4. We learn here, that the Lord whether he use good or evil Angels as his
instruments (for they all serve him) yet all his works are good, and we ought
ever with patience to expect the good end of them.

5. This verse and all the verses going before, have a special relation to the
events following, both specially in these two mentioned chapters, Coherence.
and generally to all things storied in this whole book.

1. The first verse shows the cause of Jobs courage and constancy mentioned,
verse. 20, 21, 22. and chap. 2. 10. he did stand fast, because he was a sound
man, a righteous man, fearing God and eschewing evil.

2. The 2. and 4. verse speak of his religious children, and have relation to
the 19. verse. where mention is made of their sudden destruction by Satan, to
break Jobs heart.

3. The 3. verse mentions his substance, that we might also consider well of
his wonderful losses mentioned, verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

4. The 4. and 5. have relation to the 13. wherein is showed what time Satan
came in the first conflict against Job, the day of their feasting.

5. This 6. and the rest following to the 12. are laid before us purposely by
the holy spirit, that we might consider how Satan received his commission
and authority from God before he could do any hurt unto him or his, as after
shall appear.

6. Where the good Angels are called the sons of God, I learn 3. things: 1.
They are under God, they have no absolute authority of their own. 2. They are
most faithful and obedient unto him. 3. They love us dearly as brethren.


Verse. 7. Then the Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou? and Satan
answered the Lord saying, from compassing the earth to and fro, and from
walking in it.


This verse contains 1. A question: Satan whence come thou? 2. An answer:
From compassing the earth, etc.


WE may not think that there past such a familiar speech between the Lord and
that unclean spirit: for the Lord as he needs not that the Angels come and
stand before him, because he is every where present, so he needed no such
questions. He knew al Satan's practices, purposes, actions, motions and
inclinations whatsoever, and that he did nothing without his permission and
commission, nor can ever be out of his sight. But these things are spoken
familiarly for our instruction, that we might know what is profitable and
needful for us to know, concerning the Lords judgments, by the ministry and
service of wicked spirits.

Satan whence come thou? He asked the like question of Adam: where art
thou? Genesis 3.9. to humble him and to bring him to repentance: and of Cain:
where is thy brother Abel? Genesis 4.9. to convince him for his sin. So here he
puts forth the like question to confound Satan, and to cause him to tremble
for all his abominations, fighting and striving against the divine majesty of
God, against the Lord Jesus and all his members.

Ans. From compassing the earth to and fro, and from walking in it: that is, I
have been all abroad in all parts of the world, to execute such things as I
had in charge from thee. Here he dissembleth with God: he makes no mention of
his bloody and damnable practices in witchcraft, murder, and all unclean
sins of adulteries, fornications, Ephe 22.3. 1. Pet. 5.8.
etc. for there is no rebellion against God on earth but Satan and wicked
spirits have a hand in it.

1. This verse first teaches us again the great power of our God, as to
command the holy Angels: so to curb and bridle the rage and fury of wicked
spirits. For we must not imagine that Satan came to Gods presence of his
own accord and free will: for we see how the devils flee from Christ, they
are full of fear and trembling, when they feel his presence. Fear him that
can kill soul and body and cast both into hell fire.

2. Again, here we learn the watchfulness of our common enemy: he walks
to and fro over the face of the earth, he is swift, and flies into all corners
and parts of the world, he is marvelous painful to do evil: so ought we to
be watchful against him, and studious to do good. The Apostle Saint Peter had
no doubt respect unto this place, Satan is 1. Old Reu. 12. 2. Subtle. 2. Cor.
11. 3. Swift. Job. 1. 4. Strong. Job. 1. Ephe. 6.13. 5. Vigilant. Job. 1. 6.
diligent and painful. Job. 1. Pet. 5 8.
when he calls upon us, because of our continual combats with Satan and
wicked spirits in these words: Be sober and watch, for your adversary the
devil, as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour, whom
resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren which are in the world. That thou may be more
circumspect and vigilant against Satan and all proud sins, remember these
rules: 1. First, vow as it were to fight against that sin. 2. Chasten the
body, 1. Cor. 9.3. Resist the temptation when it comes, with all thy might. 4.
Avoid occasion, watch over the senses: custodiasensuum, Job 3, 1.5. Think upon
some scripture against it, en^ginatio gladij spiritus. 6. Tene membrum, hold
the tongue, James 1, 26.7. Pray instantly, Ephesians. 6.14.15.16. and remember him
that said, Without me ye can do nothing, John 15.5. and Phil. 4 13. 14. Satan
can make no challenge that thou art his vassal, for any sin of infirmity,
sin of error, sin of ignorance, slippes by circumuentions of men or Angels,
for all these ways sin the holy saints, but yet they war and fight
continually against these: but where any presumptuous sin reigns, there
Satan (take heed) is near at hand.

3. Again observe how Satan being brought into Gods presence, howsoever
against his will: he seateth and trembles, because of his sins, as Saint
James speaks: for he does not mention any one of his practices, he
dissembleth the^ all. And yet the Lord intends not by these questions as with
Adam, to humble him, but as then with the serpent he did proceed forthwith
to give sentence against him: So now he desires not to lay open as yet his
sins to his face, because he has decreed his everlasting perdition, which
decree is fully manifested unto us in the scriptures.

Verse. 8. And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou not considered in thine
heart my servant Job, how none is like him in the earth? an upright and
righteous man, one that fears God and escheweth evil.


TO consider with the heart, is deeply, and soundly, and advisedly to ponder
and consider of any thing: all the rest of the verse, is the same with the 1.
verse.

In that the Lord here demands Satan whether he did not well consider of
Job: we learn where Satan's eyes are most occupied and most bent, namely to
Gods people and their walking, for they are his sworn enemies: therefore the
scripture speaks so often of our spiritual warfare: The faithful ever fight
with him, and therefore he ever eyes them. 1. Pet 5.8. It is as natural for the
wicked to obey the deu^ll as to eat and drink. 2. Tim 2.26. Every poor
christian fights against a huge number of wicked spirits and through Jesus
Christ foyleth them.
warning us in the Greek verb (...), to fight and wrestle, 2. Tim 4.7. 1.
Cor. 9.25. Luke 13.23. 1, Tim. 6.12. Heb. 12.1.2. he ever prieth where they are
most ready to slip and fall, and causes them to stumble, if by any means
possible he can. Wherefore let the righteous servants of God, again and again
remember Saint Peter's words, Be sober and watch, for the devils eyes are ever
upon you. As for the wicked, like as drunken men are soon snared, and can
never escape till they be sober: so the unbelievers they are ever fettered by
Satan, till the Lord give them repentance to escape the snares of the devil,
for the Apostle says, He takes them prisoners to do his will.

2. Nothing so galls and grieves a wicked man as when he can not effect that
evil which he most desires: So Satan he burns and boyleth when he can not
work that mischief which he most intends. This the Lord knows, It is a
great torment unto Satan that he cannot hurt the faithful. The Lord
commends him not for his riches, for they were not Iob^ best weapons against
Satan. Acts. 13.22. Rich men have no such strength against Satan as righteous
men, fearing God. Psalm 147.11. Psalm. 34.15.
and therefore he thus speaks: Have thou not considered, etc. q. d. My
servant Job lives in a most profane country, where are innumerable occasions
of evil, and yet lo a righteous man, one that fears God and escheweth
evil. Thou have a long time desired his hurt and destruction, but thou can
not prevail against him.

3. Here again we see how the Lord, as it were delights, and greatly
desires to commend his righteous servants, that they may with better courage
stand constantly against all the furies of wicked spirits. That man is
praiseworthy, whom praise-worthie and wise men do commend unto us. The Lord
himself commends Job for a religious, righteous, and faithful servant: So
his holy prophet and king David, I have found David the son of Iesse, a man
after mine own heart, which will do all things that I will. And thus we see how
the Lord delights in them which fear him, and attend upon his mercy: the
Lord loves the righteous: his eyes are ever upon them, and his ears open to
their cry: and therefore he thus cheereth them in another place: Be glad ye
righteous, Psa. 32. ver. vlt.
and rejoice ye that be of an upright heart.

Verse. 9. Then Satan answered the Lord, does Job fear God for nothing, or
for naught?

Verse. 10. Have thou not set a hedge round about him, Or a wall.
and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? thou have
blessed the work of his hands, and his Or substance.
cattle is greatly increased in the land.

Verse. 11. But stretch out now thine hand, and Or smite.
touch all that he has, if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face.


These three verses contain Satan's answer unto the Lords last question
concerning Job: wherein we may consider 1. Satan's proposition and scope: it is
to prove Job an hypocrite. 2. His confirmation by bold assertions, which are
these: 1. Job fears God to the end, to preserve his state and prosperity in
this life, verse. 9. 2. He cannot be tried by temptations, because of the
hedge of Gods providence round about him, Gregor in Job cap. 1.5.5. Versuta
assertione mentiens, quod non ad vsum domini substantiam possideret, sed ad
vsum substantia, domina^ coleret. This argument might serve against Satan.
verse. 10. 3. Satan's strong asseueration: if the cross be laid upon him, he
will assuredly blaspheme, verse. 11.



Verse 9. Does Job fear God for nothing? That is, is not Job well rewarded for
his service, for his fear, for his faith, for his love and obedience? q. d.
he loves not thee, but his hire, he is a right mercenary, he loves not thee,
but for his belly sake, for his ease, for his gain and profit he reapes
daily, and receives from thee: thou have given him riches at will, ease,
children, honor, and great prosperity, therefore what cause has he to
offend thee, or what occasion to fall from thee?

Satan watches us in all places, open and secreet. James. 2.19.
ease, and welfare in this present world: no marvel then if he so fight
against our everlasting salvation. He and hs instruments have ever grudged and
spurned, when Gods people had any poor portion or blessing in this life.
Malicious and envious Satan grudgeth that Gods people have any blessings here
on earth.
And as for the wicked, the Lord fills them with the treasures of this life,
Psalm. 17.18. and yet can never be satisfied.

2. Note what a bitter and a bloody accuser he is against the holy saints of
God. Our great Lord and captain has Col 2.15. Ephe. 4.14. Genesis 3.2.
spoiled him of all his might and power, and broken all his strength, yet still
he accuses Gods children, fighting against them, albeit ever foiled by them.
Like as in the beginning he did accuse God of envy unto man: so did he ever
since accuse man unto God, Reave. 12. verse 10.11. Zac. 3.1.2.3.
The accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God
day and night: but they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. This is
also taught us by Zachary, that Satan stands impudently before the Lord
striving against Christ and his Church, and Christ prays for his people
against him. The Lord (says Christ) reprove thee O Satan: even the Lord that
has chosen Jerusalem reprove thee. This was ever his practice against the
faithful to accuse them falsely, Act. 18.13. All false accusers learn here
what spirit reigns in you.
Revel. 2.10. and Christ himself, Luke 23.10. No coherence in their
testimonies: and against Stephen, Act. 6.13.14. This man cease not to speak
blasphemous words against this holy place and the law. This spirit raged in the
Jews against Paul, before Gal. 10. This follow persuades men to worship God
contrary to the law. And in Tertullus, and the high priest before Felix:
Certainly we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mouer of sedition,
among all the Jews, throughout the world, and chief maintainer of the sect of
the Nazarites. So they did call the Christians scornefully, as if Christ came
from Nazareth, and were a Galilean, as Julian and many wretches called him: for
the Galileans were thought to be a brutish and profane people: read Io. 1.46.
and chap. 7. 52.

3. Note here the malice and poison of this Dragon, he could not deny, but that
Job was a good man, yet he dissembleth as if he saw no such vprightnes in
him, Satan dissembleth what he sees and knows to be in Job.
but such as would prove mere counterfeit, if he were well tried: he has
some show of holiness, grant it, but it is for his bellies sake: he loves his
ease, his glory, his prosperity, his 500. yoke of oxen, his 7000. sheep, his
3000. camels, and his great substance more than thee. Be careful to rule thine
affections and take heed of the corruptions of thine heart: never flatter
thyselfe by other men's sins.
Such are the practices and speeches of all dissembling and carnal hypocrites,
Satan's instruments, when they cannot deny the open and manifest truth, yet
they will oppugn it and thwart it on the one side or the other. Such be al
false professors, which compare and consider of all men's hearts, fear and
faith, by themselves, and say: let them be holy as they please, yet we know
what they be, they have no more integrity, nor purity then ourselves, etc.

4. Again, here note the impudency of Satan: if he dare be so bold in Gods
presence, and as it were to his face, so to resist his great majesty, The
impude^cy of Satan to disgrace that man whom the almighty God commends to
his face.
what is his rage and his impudency before the creatures? for having so heard
the Lord himself to commend Job, as we heard: when he does on this manner so
bitterly accuse Job, what does he else but accuse God of ignorance, and reprove
him as a liar. The Lord says, Job is sound: Satan denies it to his face, and
says he is a broken vessel. This was his impudency in paradise, that he
would so blasphemously speak evil and disgrace the Lord himself.

5. Satan here tells us, that adversity and poverty is one special means
whereby he causes Gods people to stumble and to offend against their God. An
high and rich estate is as dangerous for sinners, as a poor and base estate:
for Satan can as easily strangle and infatuate them with riches, as he can
amaze and pinch these with poverty. And yet for this cause the Prophet prays
wisely: Two things have I required of thee, Pro. 31.7.8.9.10.
deny me them not before I dye: remove far from me vanity and lies: feed me
with food convenient for me: least I be full and deny thee, and say, who is
the Lord? or least I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain. If we have not faith and patience in afflictions, let us here learn of
Satan, all our service in prosperity was but counterfeit. Prouer. 24.10. If
thou be faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.

Use. Search thine heart continually, and sound thy love, faith and fear.
1. If our heart condemn us: that we love religion, the Gospel and the holy
worship of God, 1. Ioh. 3.20.21.
but as temporizers, for our bellies sake: God is greater then our heart, and
knows all things.

2. If our heart condemn us, that we love the things of this life more then
the true God and his word: then behold here how Satan is most ready to accuse
us, and to witness against us. If he durst thus in Gods presence accuse Job
unjustly, he shall not spare hypocrites, and his testimony shall be received
against them for their confusion.

Verse. 10. Have thou not made an Or wall, heb. is Suk. which signifies
properly to hedge with thorns.
hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every
side? thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his or cattle, or
possession.
substance is increased in the land.


Have not thou made an hedge? This hedge that Satan so enuieth and stormeth
against, is the blessed protection and providence of the almighty, first
common to all Gods people, as Zachary speaks, chap. 2. 5. I, says the Lord,
will be unto her a wall of fire round about. The wicked spirits fight against
us but we have greater strength with us, the holy spirit, and blessed Angels.
The faithfull-haue a blessed protection against wicked spirits by Gods holy
Angels. Psalm. 34.7. Psa. 91.11.12.
For so it is written Heb. 1.14. The good Angels are ministering spirits, sent
forth to minister, for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation. And the
Psalmist says: The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him,
and delivers them. And again: He shall give his Angels charge over thee to
keep thee in all thy ways, they shall bear thee in their hands, that thou
hurt not thy foot against a stone. This is the hedge which keeps back
Satan from us. The like matter contain all those sweet metaphors in
Scripture, where God is called: 1. Our buckler and shield. 2. Our rampire and
bulwark. 3. Our tower and fortress: etc.

Thou have blessed the work of his hands. The meaning is not that Job did
exercise any manual trade or faculty, etc but by this manner of speaking, the
Hebrews understand all their affairs, all actions of body and mind, etc. q.
d. Thou have ever given him good success, and by thee he prospers in all
things. This is that which Moses prays for: Psalm. 90.17. Read cap. 29. and
31.
Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and direct thou the work of
our hands upon us, even direct the work of our hands.

And his substance is increased. His sheep and camels are multiplied into
thousands, his asses and his oxen into many hundreds.

In this 10. verse we may observe:
Satan will other whiles confess the truth before the Lord.
1. FIrst, the impudency of Satan in his sophistry before the Lord, for the
hurt of his holy children. What conclusion is this? Thou Lord almighty have
hedged Job round about for his protection, so that no evil can come near him:
Ergo, he is an hypocrite: Ergo, he loves thee but for his bellies sake. Arg. a
non causa ad causam. The popes argument. God made 2. great ^ighes in the
firmament, ergo the pope must have two swords the spiritual and the temporal.
Return satan's Argu. against himself. No better argument to confute the
practices of witches and wizards then Satan frames himself. 1. Sam. 12
This is Satan's Logike, he so swells in malice and envy that he is ready
to burst, and so blind in his rage, that he thinks to move and persuade the
Lord with such a sophisme. This argument is marvelous effectual against
Satan: The Lord gardeth Job, and all his family, etc. Ergo, Job is highly in
Gods favor, a righteous man, etc.

2. Learn here by the confession of Satan himself what protection and tower
of defense the faithful have against all wicked spirits in the shadow of the
almighty. They are so hedged by his providence, and so fensed that no enemy
can hurt them, without a special warrant and commission from the Lord
himself. Receive this truth of the father of lies: he is driven to confess
that he can not with all his engines break down Jobs castle and tower of
defense. And yet Satan persuades witches and unbelievers he can do all
things, yea turn the world vpside down. But here he confesses the contrary.
The charge of God is great for whoring after Satan in witchcraft, Leuit.
20.6.19.31. chap. 20. 27. Deuteronomy. 18.10.11. Esaias. 8. 19. Remember Saul and
Manasses practices with witches, 1. Sam. 28. This one place is sufficient to
teach us how Satan's power is limited.

3. We have here a singular instruction and comfort against all magical
faculties. If thou beleeuest in Jesus Christ, not only thou thy self, but
also thy children, thy house and substance and all that thou have on every
side, The Lord cares for the children and the very beasts of the faithful in
a special manner. Psalm. 91.1.2.
are under such a blessed shadow, that no wicked spirit by any art can hurt
thee or thine, without a special commission from the Lord himself. What a
singular consolation is this? If the Lord so fenseth our goods and cattle,
that Satan cannot hurt or bewitch them; how much more does he care for us? Oh
that we could yet more assuredly believe. This one place is sufficient to warn
the faithful to sleep and to rest quietly in the shadow of the almighty.

q. Of Gods providence.
THe wisdom of the world can hardly brook this blessed doctrine of Gods
providence: first, Satan speaks here notably concerning Gods providence,
far otherwise then his vassals have done or can do in the world. He confutes
al Epicures, and Stoickes Epicures. Mat 2.17. Mal. 3.15 Satan confutes the
Stoickes for he says God has a special care over Job.
because the pride of man's heart will not ascribe all good things unto God:
secondly, for that in outward judgment so many accidents cannot be ascribed
to any cause but to blind fortune. So blind and ignorant is man's heart.
Lastly, we would gladly avoid Gods presence and divine judgment for the
trial of all our actions. These and the like reasons have caused Epicures and
gross sinners to deny utterly the holy doctrine of Gods providence. They say
every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights
in them, or where is the God of judgment? And again, We count the proud
blessed, even they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are
delivered. Another sort well near as profane have dreamed of an absolute
necessity in all things: they say Gods providence is a chayning together of
many causes which bind all things, and even God himself that he can not alter
or change the effects which those causes are to produce in any part of the
world. Satan confutes the Peripatetikes, for he says God himself does not
look upon Job in a general but in a most special manner caring for him and al
his.
But Satan himself is here of another judgment. A third sort would feign
restrain Gods providence to the highest heavens, and would have us think that
all things here on earth are governed either by the influence of the stars,
or by some secret work of nature, or by the will and reason of man: or if none
of these be the proper cause: then fortune and chance must be the Lady and
mistrisse and mother of all such strange events. But for the confirmation of
our faith, and for the confutation of all such blasphemers, we must have most
strong and sufficient arguments out of the holy scripture always in a
readiness. Such as think not of Gods daily continual d^otrction aee worse we
see here then the devil.
First let Satan confirm us, that gladly would infirm and weaken us: and let
him confute his own vassals, who would feign confirm them in all their
errors. We see his conclusion in Gods presence, whatsoever he suggesteth in
their hearts to the contrary, is but error and vanity.

2. Argument.
A second argument is this: Man the creature is provident, and wise for
government: Ergo, much more the creator. Cap. 3^. 36.
This is the Lords own reason unto Job: Who has put wisdom in the reins?
or who has given the heart understanding? The answer is the Lord himself:
Ergo, he is more wise, more prudent, and more provident then man is. Psalm.
94.9.10.
And thus the Psalmist reasons: He that planted the care shall not he hear?
or he that formed the eye shall not he see? he that chasticeth the nations
shall not he correct? be that teaches man knowledge shall not he know?

3. Argument.
A third argument: If the almighty do not govern, provide for, and preserve
his people, it is either because he will not, or because he cannot. To admit
any such cause in him, is to give place to an intolerable blasphemy against
God. He that has decreed and sworn to advance his elect to such an
everlasting glory in the heavens, must have a special care of them here on
earth.

Q. What is Gods providence?

What is provided.
The providence of God is the everlasting, and immutable counsel of God, most
wise, most just, whereby God cares, provides for, and preserves all and
every one of it creatures: and effects all good, and permits evil to be
done, and turns both good and evil to his own glory, and the salvation of
his elect.

Use of the doctrine of Gods providence.
FIrst, we see by this doctrine, from what sweet fountain all good does flow
and stream continually unto the creatures, from the Lord alone, God the
fountain of all good in man.
for there is no good in any creature but by and from his grace, of his own
free will and power, effecting and working the same. Wherefore let us break
down self love, pride of wit, free will, and such fantasies and illusions of
wicked spirits, and never sacrifice unto our own net, as the prophet
speaks, but unto the author of all good the Lord himself. Heb. 1.16. 1.
Patience. The doctrine of Gods providence will teach us patience in
afflictions.

Job. 1.21. In adversity 2. Think upon the Lord principally, and seek help
of him only by mea^es appointed in affliction. 1. Sam. 14. Psalm. 147.11.




2. We learn here to be patient in afflictions, considering the hand of our
God is present with us, and his eyes are ever upon us: let our eyes, the eye of
our faith, be fixed and fastened upon him, and quietly let us say with Job, As
it pleases the Lord, so it came to pass, blessed be the name of the Lord.

3. Again, in adversity let us not so much think upon the secondary causes
and means, as upon the all-sufficient and most provident God which is not tied
unto means as carnal wits and blind hearts have imagined. It is not hard
for the Lord to save by few or by many. And for as much as our God cares for
all his creatures, and more for man, and most of al is delighted in them which
fear him and attend upon his mercy: Let us in all holiness and righteousness
strive to serve him all the days of our life, assuring our selves that he
cares for us, and seek the means, and a blessing upon such as he has
appointed.

4. If the cares of this life do molest thee, remember by what arguments in
holy scripture the God of providence does confirm his people, they are these
and the like: Math. 6. Luke. 21.34.
against that worldly care which distracteth and divides the heart, the Lord
Christ does call it therefore (...).

Proijce quae cunque cor-tuu^ laniant, quae si aliter extrahi nequirent, cor
ipsum cum illis reuellendum erat. Senec. epist 70. lib. epis. 52.
1. He that cares for the less, cares for the greater: God cares for the
fowls of the air, and for the lillies of the field: and therefore much more
for us, Mat. 6.25.

2. We must avoid such things as oppress the heart, make it dull, brutish and
profane:

This do surfeiting drunkenness, and the cares of this world: wherefore we
must take heed of them, Luke 21.34.

3. He that has given us so infinite a treasure as Jesus Christ and his
riches, will not deny us the trash and base things of this life:

Our heavenly father has given us Ask thine own heart and conscience whether
the heavenly father by his holy spirit has married thee to Jesus Christ Note
these places. 2. Cant. 2.16. 2. Cor 13.5. John 15.1.2. Doctrine.
Jesus Christ: Romans 8.32. Ergo, we shall not want the blessings of this life.

4. Again, certain it is, he that will give us the greater blessing, will
give us the less:

Our heavenly father has decreed, promised, and assured us by his spirit, he
will advance us into his kingdom in heaven, Luke 12.32. Romans 8.15. Ephesians. 4.30.

Wherefore assuredly he cares, for provides, and preserves us on earth.

5. The last argument is the experience of the Saints, Psalm. 34. verse 8.9.10.
Taste and see how gracious the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusts in him,
fear the Lord ye his saints, for nothing wants to them that fear him: the
lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall want
nothing that is good. Again, I have never seen the righteous forsaken, nor
his seed begging their dread.

3. We learn here again of Satan, speaking of Gods providence: Thou have
blessed the work of his hands: how the Lord blesses the honest and lawful
trades, No say the atheists and worldlings, riches come by fortune and by
chance. Satan denies that, affirming that riches be Gods good blessings.
Satan more religious the^ his instruments. Satan says they come by labor,
Ergo he condemns slothfulnes.
vocations, faculties, and all the good labors of the faithful in their
several places and conditions whatsoever. This is it the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 128.1.2.3. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord and walks in his
ways, yea when thou eatest the labors of thine hands thou shall be blessed,
and it shall be well with thee. There is no blessing promised to idleness; but
to the labor of the faithful: remember Saint Paul's charge, 2. These. 3.10. We
warned you that if there were any that would not work, that he should not eat.
Adam the first man was appointed to labor: Genesis 4.2. Genesis 47.3.
and so he did with both his sons, to the one he commended husbandry, to
the other a shepheardes life: and so lived their posterity which followed in
many ages after them.

4. We see here that the Lord grants not only to the wicked freely, the
blessings of this life in abundance, Psalm. 73. Job 21.18. but also to the
righteous, their cup otherwhiles runs over, Psalm. 23.4.5. God increases
their substance and store exceedingly, as we may see in Abraham, Lot, Isaac,
Jacob, David, Solomon: 1. Tim. 4.7.8.
For godliness has the promise both of this life present, and of that which is
to come. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
But as for the wicked howsoever the Lord fatteth them with his hid treasure,
yet the Psalmist assures us their portion is in this life only, Psalm. 17.
And therefore both Job and David tremble and fear when they consider Gods
present blessings, multiplied upon the godless people, and yet their terrible
end which follows not long after, Job, 21.6.18. Psalm. 37.15.16.17.

Verse. 11. But stretch out now thine hand, and Smite all.
touch all that he has, (to see) if he will not Heb. bless thee.
blaspheme thee to thy face.


THis is the last argument whereby Satan labors to prove Job an hypocrite,
and to move the Lord to smite him with some sharp and bitter afflictions.

He that blasphemeth against God under the cross is an hypocrite: Satan's
last sophistraction against Job.


Job will blaspheme under the cross: Ergo Job is an hypocrite.

The first part of this reason is not generally true, Math. 26.71. Mar. 14.69
70.
for Peter came to this when Satan wounded him, but yet was he no hypocrite.
The minor or second part is but Satan's supposition: therefore the conclusion
is false.

But stretch out now thine hand: That is, use now some special means against
him, or send me as thine hand or instrument, to afflict Job in his body or
goods: q. d. If I be sent from thee against him, Satan and his vassals are
instruments of Gods providence. So David calls theaff lictions which be upon
him Gods hand and so Samuel: 1. Sam. 5.7. and 7.13. Judge 2.15. 1. Sam. 18.10.
I shall prevail, and I shall work with efficacy, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. but
otherwise whatsoever I attempt against him is in vain: wherefore send me now
as thy sergeant to arrest him. In this respect also Nabuchadnezzar is called
Gods servant, Ierem. 43.10. and chap. 25. 9. And Cyrus his shephearde, Esaias
44.28. and other enemies of his Church and people, Gods rod, axes and hammers,
etc. and the evil spirit is called the spirit of God, because he was sent from
God.

And touch all that he has: That is, give me leave to smite all that he has
on every side: or seal me a commission that I may proceed effectually against
him, give me leave to amaze him, to take from him all his riches, all his
sheep, all his camels, all his oxen, all his asses, and all his substance.

(To see) if he will not blaspheme: That is, I doubt not, I am well assured.
The like phrase is twice used in one chapter, 1. King. 20.23. and 25 verse. Im
lo, If not, let us fight with them in the plain, (to see) if we shall not be
stronger then they: q. d. doubtless we shall be stronger. Again, some curse or
imprecation is to be supplied and understood in this and the like phrases, as
thus: God do so and so to me if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. Barack.


Bless, that is, blaspheme in a contrary sense, as before verse 5. Ephesians 4.31.
(...). Titus 3.2. (...).
This word does signify all manner of reproach or evil speaking, whereby we
do hurt or disgrace the name of God or men: it is used, Math. 9 15.19. Ephesians.
4.31. Tit. 3.2. Paul says he was a blasphemer, albeit he spoke evil of Christ
Jesus ignorantly, 1. Tim. 1.13. here Satan means that Job shall in heat and
anger against God, blaspheme and speak evil of Gods power, wisdom, goodness.

To thy face. That is, publicly, openly, and boldly, without any fear of thy
presence: the like see, Exodus 20. 3. Genesis 10 9.6.11. Satan desires two things
principally 1. to blaspheme God. 2. to destroy man.


1. In this verse Satan shows himself unto us in his colors, and how he
burns in malice against God and man. For here he points at two special
things which he most desires: first, the affliction and misery of man as here
of Job: secondly, the blaspheming and dishonoring of the great and wonderful
name of God.

2. Again, here we see by Satan's own words, that God has not only a bare
permission in this and the like actions, for Satan desires not only that God
would permit, but that the Lord would send him with a special commission, to
command and to use the creatures 2. These. 2.11. So is it said that an evil
spirit sent of God came upon Saul. 1. Sam 18.10. and 2.5 16.10. Vnus idemque
spiritus and domini appellatures malus. Gregor, in 1. Job.
effectually against Job. Thus the Lord both can and does work by evil
instruments and by Satan himself, to the praise of his wisdom, power, and
justice: he can bring light out of darkness. We must not then use any
adiurations or coniutations, or exorcismes against wicked spirits, but entreat
the great Lord which sent them, to command and drive them away from us. Satan
makes great suit for a commission to be sealed unto him before he can hurt any
of the faithful, and yet all his labor could not prevail, but yt God had
decreed it hefore Satan came in presence.

3. We learn here in special manner what bloody hearts and deadly hatred
these wicked spirits have against all the righteous and religious people of
God: Satan is not so forward to afflict the wicked, as to Plague the good
people of God. 1 King. 22.19.
for we see ^ere that to afflict this holy man, he first offers himself,
^triueth, and (as it were) persuades, and moves the Lord after his manner
against Job: But for the execution of gods ^udgements in this life upon the
wicked, he is called and ^ited before, he offers himself thereunto, as in
the story and vision of Micheas against Achab, the holy Ghost has ^est in
record for our instruction.

4. Let us learn here of Satan what witchcraft is, namely, the stretching
forth of Gods hand upon us, or any outward blessings given of God unto us:
when wicked spirits are sent with commission from the Lord against us, either
immediately by themselves, or by the secret and unknown practices of witches
and sorcerers. Wherefore again here we be warned by Satan himself, not so to
cast our eyes upon these base and vile instruments of the devil, nor upon
Satan and his arts, but in all such extremities and miseries to turn speedily
to the chief Lord, who has sent Satan with this commission against us. Such
as rage against witches, and scratch them, and adjure wicked spirits, are much
like our common hacksters and swearing ruffians, which when the Lord Majors
Sargeant shall arrest, presently they rage, swear, and drive at the Sargeant
to kill him: whereas they should labor rather to pacify the chief Magistrate,
and to satisfy laws which they have broken. Wherefore in these cases let us
weary the Lord with supplications and tears, till he withdraw his hand from
us, or grant us some special comfort to bear his fatherly corrections upon
us. So doing we shall avoid many sins, which the wicked ignorant people do
fall into by sundry illusions of Satan, but specially by witchcraft. That one
example of Saul is ordained of God, to warn and to instruct for ever all Gods
people. First in Samuels time he is a great professor of holy religion: then
after his death he does renounce the holy word. 3. He persecutes the Prophets.
4. He seeks for witches. 1. Sam. 28.7.20. 1. Chro. 10.13.14.
5. Satan by means of the witch offers himself to be adored. 6. Saul
receives the devils speeches as the holy oracles of God. 7. Lastly, Saul was
slain for consulting with Satan and witches.

5. Again here observe the deadly malice of Satan: he would not have the Lord
to smite some one thing, or some few things of Jobs substance and blessings:
for he knew a little affliction could not so amaze Job as he desired. Let
unbelievers and wicked men leese but the least part, any dram of their
substance, Satan can drive them where him list a whoring after witches, etc.
but he knows the faithful are not so soon carried away to his practices:
therefore he moves the Lord with all his might to smite both man and beast, all that he has on every side. We see daily the mercies of the wicked are cruel,
Pro. 12.10.
as the wise man speaks. Such we see is Satan their father a murderer from
the beginning. ^oh 8.44.
He has ever had a hand in all bloodshed from the beginning. Math. 8.31.
He greatly rejoices in the destruction of man and beast, 1. These. 2.9.
as we see in the story of the Gadarenites, but principally he desires man's
everlasting perdition and destruction both of body and soul.

6. Again, we are to note Satan's rage and fury against Job: he is ready to
undergo any plague, curse, Some imprecetion is to be understood necessarily.
or vengeance of God, if Job blaspheme not the Lord to his face. Hence we
learn whence come those railing and cursed speeches of men, which in their mad
fury fear not, no more then Satan to call for all the plagues and curses of
God upon themselves and others. Upon themselves: as would I were hanged, or
would I were damd in hell, but J will do so and so, etc. Cursing of others: a
plague of God light on thee, and the like horrible speeches, which pagans would
fear to utter. We have a notable example in the scripture, Acts. 23.10. (...).
They did cause themselves: or gave themselves to the devil, except they
brought their devilish purpose to pass.
how Satan's scholars imitate well their master for this point. For the wicked
bloody Jews which would have murdered Paul, they bound themselves with a
curse, (or an oath) saying, that they would neither eat nor drink before they
had killed Paul. But Satan and the Jews were deceived, for the Lord delivered
his servant, and the devil and his instruments against both were confounded in
their practices.

7. Lastly, here note diligently what the end is of all Satan's practices,
temptations, arts, faculties, and stratagems whatsoever: his only desire is
that God might be blasphemed by his elect people, that they renounce God,
renounce the holy truth, and pure religion. This Christ signifies unto Peter
when he says: Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to winow you as wheat.
Luke 22.31.
And surely Satan came near him, and gave him many great wounds, and had not
Christ mightily kept him, he had fallen away undoubtedly from the living God.
For in his second denial of Christ he Math. 26.71. Mar. 14 69.70.
began to blaspheme, and to renounce Christ with an oath, and yet weak was the
instrument which came against him, it was but the voice of a damsel. But when
he was the third time a little more pressed, he was soon near oppressed by Satan
and his instruments the wicked priests: for he began then to curse himself,
and to swear, saying, I know not the man.

Satan here considers what we are of our selves: we be indeed fleeting and
wavering as the water. But Satan forgets or knows not Gods power, Satan and
all wicked men measure other men and Judge of other men by themselves.
and the power of Christ, Phil. 4.13. dwelling in us. He sees it otherwhiles
and has experience of it in the faithful, and yet for all that he knows it
not. No more do the wicked know the graces and working of Gods spirit in his
children, and therefore they think often they be distempered with strange
humors, as themselves melancholy, etc.

Q. What special causes, sins, or evils cause the wicked to blaspheme God?

A. First, pride of heart causes a wicked man to despise and blaspheme the
glorious name of God: as in Pharaoh, Exodus 7.14.23.
a proud heart caused him so disdainfully to speak against God, saying: Who
is the Lord? And in Rabshaketh, 2. Chro 32.16.17. 2. King. 18.32.
who both spoke many blasphemies against the great God of Israel, and wrote
letters also full of blasphemies in contempt of the almighty.

2. Anger and sorrow of heart by any torture, torments or afflictions, causes
the wicked to forget themselves, and their adversaries, and then furiously to
curse, to rail, and to blaspheme the living God. Reave. 16. ver. 9. Ver. 10.11.
So says the holy spirit: Men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed the name
of God. Again in the same chapter: Men gnew their tongues for sorrow, and
blasphemed the God of heaven for their pains.

3. Sometimes desperation causes men to blaspheme: Genesis 4.13.
as in desperate Cain: My punishment is greater then I can bear: he rages
against Gods justice, as cruel in tormenting him. We see this sin too often
in desperate wretches in the world in these days.

4. But most commonly these horrible sins of blasphemy proceed of a cursed
liberty, which wicked men have given themselves to swear and to blaspheme the
holy name of God: it is an argument of great prophanenes of heart. The holy
Preacher assures us that this vile custom of swearing is a special brand of
a godles man, and the fear of an oath, Eccle. 9.2.
the special mark of Gods children. All things come alike to all, etc. as is
the good, so is the sinner, he that swears, as he that fears an oath.

Verse. 12. Then the Lord said unto Satan, lo all that he has is in thine
hand: only upon himself, thou shall not stretch forth thine hand: So Satan
departed from the presence of the Lord.


Here begins the 3. part of this chapter, which is continued to the 19.
verse: this part has 2. branches: 1. A commission granted unto Satan, as we
see verse 12. where we may consider these special points: 1. Who grants the
commission, the Lord himself. 2. To whom it is granted: to Satan. 3. How
far it reaches: his commission is very large, against all things that Job
had, man or beast, himself excepted only. 4. How ready Satan is to execute
it, with out any delay or co^sultation.
2. The execution of it, verse. 13.19.


Then the Lord said unto Satan, lo all that he has is in thine hand. That
is, thou have with all thy might moved me to try my servant Jobs faith and
constancy: I say he is sound, and yet thou art bold in my presence, to
accuse him of hypocrisy. Wherefore I give thee leave to work effectually
against all his substance (let thine own experience confound thee Satan:) See
whether all the calamities thou can bring upon him, do cause him to renounce
his religion, or to blaspheme his God, etc. I permit and give thee leave to
excite and to move all thine instruments and engines against him, to consume all
that he has on every side.

Only upon himself thou shall not stretch out thine hand. That is, thou shall
not hurt his own person, soul or body, nor take his life away from him.

So Satan departed. That is, he was right glad of this grant, he made no
long delay for further speech or consultation in Gods presence: but departs
to invent and practice against Job all the evil he can with all the expedition
that may be.

From the presence of the Lord. This is again spoken to our capacity, as
before verse. 6. for the truth is this: there is nothing out of Gods presence,
neither is there any coming into, nor going from the same. Psalm. 139.1.12. O
Lord thou have tried me, and. whither shall I go from thy spirit, or depart
from thy presence? for the almighty fills heaven and earth.

Q. It is strange that the Lord should listen to the speeches of his arch
enemy, and yet more strange that he should be moved by his arguments: but
most strange that after disputation he should any thing yield and permit his
holy servant to be thus handled by this unclean spirit.

A. The Lord neither grants nor seals his commission mentioned in this
verse to pleasure Satan, neither is he moved by any arguments or for any
favor toward him, albeit he seem to grant some such thing, chap. 2. verse
3. But the Lord gives Satan this commission, and sends him forth to work
effectually against Job for these causes following:

First, because the Lord had decreed his probation of Job, before that Satan
came to that conference, yea before Job was borne, for the glory of his name,
the instruction of his elect throughout all ages.

2. That the Lord might hereby make known in Job the power and virtue of Jesus
Christ, whereby Gods faithful people shall overcome and confound Satan
throughout all generations, Philip. 4.13.

3. That Gods people in all ages might by this James. 5.11.
example learn patience in all crosses and calamities of this present life:
for there can be I suppose no special evil in this life, but we may find in
this president some help against the same.

4. That the faithful may see with whom they wrestle in all the miseries and
evils of this present life, Ephesians. 6.12. Ignorant people think they fight
against thieves, witches, and other visible instruments of Satan, but the Lord
would have us understand that we wrestle not with flesh and blood only.

5. That we might learn that all crosses and afflictions of this life by
wicked spirits, Psalm. 66.10.
or otherwise shall turn to our great good, as in Job, they shall but pare
away our rottennes, for by the cross the heavenly father purges us, John 15.2.

This verse teaches us:

First, this doctrine most clearly: All absolute power in the Lord God alone.
that the Lord has all power in his own hand to cut short and to let loose
all wicked spirits, and to send them forth to work effectually where it
pleases him. Hence it is, that the wicked albeit they be left unto Satan in
some sort to be governed by him: Ephesians. 2.2.3. to be snared, and to be lead to
do his will, 2. Tim. 2.26. yet the Lord preserves them in this life, so as
he shall not work all his will upon them, for the^ would he speedily consume
them: so the Lord is patient and long suffering, Romans 9.22. (...).
and good also even unto the vessels of wrath prepared unto destruction.

2. Our hearts be faint when we see the means of Gods providence taken from
us: but learn here how soever Satan and his instruments, may rob us of
these outward means of life, yet they can Gods love and care is not lessened
when all outward means do fail and forsake us.
not deprive us of Gods grace, we be still as highly in Gods favor, he cares
for us more in all our afflictions, then in all the time of our prosperity.
The Lord bids Satan smite all that he has, but not to hurt him, not to
touch his person: when therefore all our blessings are taken away from us, let
us not despair, or be broken with sorrow, or fall away from the living God,
for he fatherly regards us, and cares for us, what changes soever be upon
us, yet his love is never changed. The blessings of this life, how often are
they taken away from the best beloved children we see, and yet the heavenly
fathers love never changed. Wherefore let us sleep in our fathers bosom,
howsoever things present fail us. Jacob slept at ease in the cold night in the
fields, and had but a stone under his head for his boulster, Gene. 28.11.
Elias counted himself well dieted with a cake bakte on the coals, and a pot
of water, 1. King. 19.6. John was poorly apparelled with camels hair, and
nourished with locustes and wild honey, Matthew. 3.4. The Apostles how are they
satisfied with barlie bread, two or three fishes broyled on coals with a
little water? Daniel and his companions were fed with herbs, and Jesus Christ
the Lord himself had not where to rest his head, and yet all these did live
by faith, and fainted not when outward means failed them.

3. We be taught how the Lord in afflictions has a special eye to our
strength, 1. Cor. 10.13. he first begins with Jobs substance and external
things, thereby to exercise his faith and patience, before he comes upon him
with greater assaults against his person. And out of all doubt Job was of
exceeding grace and strength, (as after shall appear) that could so patiently
bear all such crosses. This manner of proceeding we see in the Apostles:
first, We be impatient in light afflictions.

The Lord proceeds with us according to our strength by degrees.


the Lord bridled the rage of their enemies: Fear came on every soul: Act.
2.43. Secondly, Satan had authority to cast them into prison, Revel. 2.10.
but not yet to go beyond menacings and threats, Acts 4.18. After all this
Satan receives yet from the Lord greater liberty even to murder, and to shed
the blood of Gods saints, as of Stephen, Acts 7. first, and of James after,
and so of many thousands in that age and in the ages following, as the stories
of the Church have well and truly recorded: look as god deals or gives us of
his own strength, so does he exercise us with temptations, which thing we are
sure is not against our profit, albeit otherwhiles the Lord himself only
knows wherefore he tries us. Thus the Lord works where he gives greatest
graces: for like as a man can never show such workma^ship in a little shop, as
in a large and great one, where he may have stuff and store of workmen, etc.
even so the Lord in his great works in Abraham and Job, and the like: The Lord
tried them to the uttermost, to the end that when we compare our selves with
them, we maybe ashamed, seeing we be not able to suffer any affliction, be it
never so light.

4. There is great difference between this commission against Job, and that
which was granted against Achab. Wherein, or in how many points the devils
commission against Job and Achab do differ.
There the prophet sees the Lord to sit as it were in a chair of estate,
and to speak first himself, Where shall J find a lying spirit to go and
deceive Achab? So the Lord calls for a fit instrument to execute just
vengeance upon that hypocrite. First, there we see then when the Lord means
to punish the wicked, he does not expect satan's motives and persuasions, but
preuenteth him: But when he tries his children, he permits Satan first
to accuse them, for therein the devil wearieth himself. Secondly, note another
difference between Job and Achab: The Lord there calls for a spirit of
delusion to fill Achabs soul with errors, It is a fair greater plague for a
man to be blind and ignorant in his soul and to be full of error and an
fidelity as Achab and Dives was, and papists the^ to be full of botches and
boyls in his body as Lazarus and Job were.
and so to plague him spiritually: Who (says the Lord) shall entise Achab, or
persuade and deceive Achab? A wicked spirit answered, I will entise him, I will
go and be a false spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. There is no plague
or judgment sent from God, and executed upon men so dangerous, as these
spiritual illusions whereby unconstant and unbelieving hearts and minds are
carried away by unclean spirits. This plague is threatened for the long contempt
and abuse of Gods holy truth, Because they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved, therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that
they should believe lies, that all they might be damned which believe not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. If such as despise the pure light
of nature be given over to Satan's effectual working, to be confounded and
amazed, Romans 1.28. How much more they which despise that bright shining grace
which brings salvation, see Tit. 2.11. Hebr. 2.5. Ephesians 4.18.19. These be
the steps unto the reprobate sense, threatened so often unto sinners for the
contempt of Gods holy truth. And thus fearfully was Satan sent against Achab
to plague him in his soul, but here is no such thing granted unto the wicked
spirit against holy Job. Let Satan devour all our substance (if God so
please) yet if the Lord keep our persons in peace, let us lift up pure
hearts and hands to be thankful unto the almighty for his most gracious
clemency. Pray always heartely against illusions of Satan as did Agur:
Remove from me vanity and lies. Pro 30.8. 2. Chro. 21.1. 2. Sam. 11. Luke. 22.
And if Satan have liberty to proceed against our bodies, yet if the Lord
keep our souls that we be not spiritually plagued and dulled by his
suggestions, we shall through Christ give Satan the foil in the end.

Question. But Satan smites also sometimes the faithful in their souls and
minds, as well as in body and goods?

Answ. No doubt they are humbled often by wicked spirits sent purposely from
the Lord to shake and buffet them lest they swel with any spiritual pride.
For this cause the Apostle was spiritually exercised by Satan, the messenger
of Satan was sent to buffet him (says he) lest he should glory in himself
or be exalted: and this messenger he calls a prick in the flesh, whereby I
understand all the galls, greefes, and pricks in soul and mind, 2. Cor.
12.7. Number. 33.55. Judge. 2.3.
which Satan gave the holy Apostle by reproaches, wants, persecutions, and
other greeuances in the world, for so he seems to expound himself in the
10. verse following.

5. Let us learn here by this wicked spirit, to be diligent in our several
functions: his pain is great, he is restless to do evil: so let us with
all sedulitie strive to do all the good we can. The good father Latimer was
wont to propound this example of the devil to the slothful and idle B. and
watchmen of his time: showing how the devil was ever resident, teaching,
admonishing, instructing, and watching with all care possible for his flock, and
so were not the B. therefore said lie, the devil was the most careful, and
watchfullest B. in the land.

Here Satan we see makes speed to execute Gods will, but with an evil
purpose, far unlike the holy angels which are said also to have wings, that is,
to serve the Lord with all cheerefulnes and readiness, Psalm. 103.
but these do it faithfully in obeying truly the holy voice of his word.

Verse. 13. And on a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and
drinking wine in their eldest brothers house:

Verse. 14. There came a messenger unto Job, and said, the oxen were plowing,
and the asses were feeding in their Or beside them or hard by them.
places.

Verse. 15. And the Sabeans came violently, and took them away, yea they have
slain thy servants with the edge of the sword, but I only am escaped alone to
tell thee.


NOw follows the execution of Satan's commission, which is the second branch
of the third part of this chapter, and here we shall see how Satan in one day
destroyed and robbed Job of all that ever he had in all his great substance,
far or near about him. This execution upon Job, contains 4. special
calamities, whereby Satan purposed to amaze and break his heart.

And on a day. That is, when one of the days appointed for banketting, supra
verse 4. by the brethren, for their godly solace, mutual edification and
comfort, was come: then Satan having obtained the foresaid commission, he
thinks it the fittest time to play all his tragedy, and with all policy to
set forth his stratagems as it were in one instant of time, that so he might
the rather oppress Job suddenly.

When his sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine. That is, when
they were feasting after their wonted manner, as is before showed: Wine is here
used tropically for the banquet it self, part for the whole: for that wine was
no more their ordinary drink then in those parts, where was plenty of wine,
then it is with us, where we have it by transportation only; nay I think
less ordinary and usual with them then with us. Their common drink was
water, and is in those parts to this day.

In their eldest brothers house. That is, the eldest brothers day, All Jobs
calamities fell upon him in one day: Satan could have robbed him of his oxen in
one day, of his sheep another day: but he thought not that way best for his
advantage.
as verse. 5. was now come about. This was a special solemn feast day no doubt.

This verse again teaches us:

1. How bloody Satan, is full of policy, and how diligent to watch his
fittest time to do a mischief. He would not gladly spare Job one day, but
for that he is sure to do the greater hurt, and to be more like to wound
deeply Jobs heart, he prepares all his instruments and weapons, to let fly all
at once against the Lords champion; fire and winds, Chaldees and Sabeans rush
violently, and all in one special day, when Job thought least of any
calamity, when his children were solacing themselves mutually in their honest
mirth: and Job no doubt comforting himself in his own house in like manner.

2. Satan may be let loose against us in time of feasting: If these holy men,
which were so faultlesse in their feasting, and over whom their good father did
so watch and ward always carefully, were strangely murdered by Satan in their
feast day: let us at all times watch and ward, Take heed to thy self in mirth
and feasting.
and specially when our mirth is greatest, for the like evils may light upon us
more justly in these sinful days, then upon these religious men in those
times. Most truly did the preacher speak, Eccles. 7.4. It is better to go to
the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting, Dan. 5. Mar. 6.20.
because that is the end of all men, and the living shall lay it to his heart.
Remember the examples of Beltashar and Herod sporting themselves in sin.

Verse. 14.15. There came a messenger unto Job and said unto him: The Rabbis
are fabulous. The first message of Jobs first calamity. Job is here first set
upon the rack.



This messenger say the Rabbis, was a wicked spirit: but it is most like he
was one of Jobs servant, which did attend upon Jobs husbandry: he seeing
the great loss his master had by thieves made haste to tell him, to stir up
some means to pursue the thieves, etc.

The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding by them. The messenger assures
his master first of his fellow-seruants fidelity, they were carefully tending
their business, when the thieves came violently upon them: q. d. They servant
were not feasting or sporting themselves, they were not slothful or sleepie,
they were not absent about their own affairs, etc. but we were all occupied
in our several places, some plowing, some grasing and feeding our cattle
carefully when this great evil fell upon us. Again he shows how the oxen
were plowing, they were in labor, very beneficial beasts. Boues arabant
(says Gregory upon Job) vt memorato fructu operis, causa crescat doloris:
The oxen were plowing: this benefit is mentioned for the increase of Jobs
grief. And for this cause says he also, that Non solum asinae, sed asinae
faetae rapta referuntur. Apud (...).
Graecos. The Greek translation says, they were not asses only, which were
stolen, but asses great with young.

And the Sabeans: That is, that wild and savage people of Arabia, which live
by theft, robbery, and spoil of men. Hic nascitur thus, vnde virgil Centumque
Sabaeo thure calent arae.
This wicked people came of Sheba, nephew to Keturah, Genesis 25.3. and Abraham.
There is another country of like name, Sheba, of Seba, Chus son, Genesis 10.7.
nephew to cursed Cham: hence came the Queen to Solomon, 1. King. 10.1. and
Candaces eunuch up to Jerusalem to worship, Act. 8.27.

Came violently. These bloody thieves and robbers came suddenly upon us
unprovided and unarmed, yet we resisted them, notwithstanding they were so
strong, but they have slain all thy servants.

And took them away. That is, the aforesaid oxen, 500. yoke of oxen, and the
asses, 500. asses, they drove all these away when they had slain thy servants.

They have slain thy servants with the edge of the sword. That is, these
wicked thieves were all merciless, they have murdered all thy servants: like
Phrase, Luke 21.24. Psalm. 63.10. Heb. 11.34.

And I only am escaped alone to tell thee. That is, I did not fly only to
save life, but seeing all my fellows slain, and all the cattle in danger to be
lost, and mine own life endangered, to save the one or the other, or both if it
may be, I am now come by Gods good providence to tell thee, that thou may
pursue and follow after them with all the power and speed that may be.

1. The 14. verse teaches us, how near Satan may be in this world unto us,
when we think him furthest off: if this wicked spirit may thus rush upon Gods
good people when they are well occupied in their lawful vocation, place, and
charge: what marvel is it, if he be let loose against the wicked and
slothful men which lie and sleep in idleness and in sin. Peter thought
little Satan had been so near when he warned his master lovingly, Let Satan
ever find us well occupied.
to spare and to pity himself, Math. 16.23. and when he promised so
confidently that he would dye with his master, Matthew. 26.33. John 15.37.
Satan lies in wait for us every where, Satan shames David in his
slothfulnes. 2. Sam. 11.2.
he is an old serpent, 2. Cor. 11.3. Revel. 12.9.10. and by all his arts
seeks to circumuent us, to vnderprie us, 2. Cor. 2.10.11. and to devour us
(as here we see) by all the means he can, 1. Peter 5.8. Therefore let us put
on our complete armor every day, Ephe 6. 1. These. 5.

2. Here again the Lord aduertiseth us what need we have to be guarded
continually by the holy Angels of God. Psalm. 3.8.91.11.12.
Satan is our common adversary, but the Lord has appointed his good Angels
to preserve us, otherwise both we and our substance should be consumed every
day, every moment of the day.

The 15. verse teaches us: Thieves and robbers Satha^s special hands and
instruments to work by.


1. How Satan makes the children of rebellion his vassals and slaves to serve
him and to work his will. Here is no mention made of Satan, yet all this
murder and theft by the Sabeans came from him as the chief head, for that
bloody and cruel spirit, works spiritually, inuisibly, and strangely in all
the children of rebellion, Ephe. 2.2. It is hard to demonstrate in what manner
Satan works in the wicked, because the scripture, When this pack comes
against us let us remember then that Satan is let loose to prove us.

No mercy with Satan and his instruments, if the Lord rebuke them not they
murder all. Genesis 45.5.


as here so elsewhere does not so clearly reveal it. But the scriptures full
often beat into our ears that Satan is near us and works in the
unbelievers, to the end we might watch and resist him by faith and prayer, Iam.
4.7.

2. We see here there is no mercy with Satan and his instruments, if the Lord
stay not their rage. Satan had leave and commission granted, he would have
all Jobs servants murdered, thieves and robbers were ready to execute: and so
be also this crew, but the Lord often cuttes them all short. Satan would have
murdered Joseph by his brethren, but God rebuked him, and bridled them. God
(says he) sent me hither for your preservation. So Satan than and Saul his
instrument sought every day to murder David, 1. Sam. 23.14.
But GOD delivered him out of his hand. Let us learn to rest quietly by faith
in the Lords sweet protection. Psalm. 91.1.
And David himself so long as he was carried away with the spirit of
whoredom and murder, he showed himself a most merciless man, It is a great
comfort for a man in misery to have some loving friends about him, a good
wife or a good child, or some good faithful servant: but Job had none of all
these: No doubt Satan slew all the best servants and left the worst alive.
he spared not his own best beloved servant good Vriah the proselyte.

3. Satan did rob Job of all his faithful children, and best servants, which
might comfort him in his misery, but he leaves him some few hirelings which
he knew would be meet instruments to scorn him and molest him in his
afflictions. He complains of a number such wretches (which were about him)
to whom he had done good often, Children of fools or of villains, or without
name, or of an evil name, more vile then the earth, now I am their song and
their talk, (says he) they whose fathers I have refused to set with the
dogs of my flocks. And yet was he a father to all the poor and fatherless.

4. We may learn here again how artificially Satan prouides to wound Jobs
heart: he kills all this company excepting this messenger. If none had been
left to make relation of this stratageme, Satan artificially plays his parts
against Job, gives him no rest or intermission till all the tragedy be ended.
Job had not known (it may be) this evil for some days after, in which time
he might have recovered some strength by prayer, and otherwise by some good
means from the Lord. For this cause Satan strives to play all the parts of
this tragedy in such good order in one day, as that it may most amaze Job in
beholding it, and fill his heart with sorrow and grief without any ease or
intermission.

Verse. 16. And while he was yet speaking, another came and said, the fire of
God is fallen from heaven, and has burnt up the sheep, and the servants, and
devoured them: but I only am escaped alone to tell thee.


ANd while he was yet speaking, etc. Before the first messenger had ended his
message, another servant came with the like or worse news.

The fire of Like phrase. Genesis 50.8. Jonas. 3.3.
God is fallen from the heaven. That is, a strange fire, or some sudden flashes
of lightning in a grievous tempest, a fire which had some secret and divine
causes, He speaks after the common manner of speaking: the people think those
fiery meteors which are bred in the highest region of the air, come from
heaven.
God sent it, we know not how it came from above the heavens or highest
region of the air: or the fire of God, that is, a most great and strange fire,
as Psalm. 36.6. Thy righteousness is like the mountains of God: that is, most
great and mighty mountains.

And has burnt up the sheep. That is, this cruel fire has destroyed and
devoured thy 7000. sheep and servants: they be all consumed to ashes. And I
only by some divine and special providence of God am escaped to tell thee.

1. This verse again teaches us first the subtlety of our common enemy, the
great dragon that old serpent: Job is an old soldier and therefore must be
beaten down all at once, before he can recover any strength.
he will now give him no time to gather new strength. He knows Job an old
soldier which must be beaten down all at once, otherwise all his labor is
lost. For might Job have some rest to turn to God by prayer, (before he be
so broken and amazed as he knows not where to turn him) he would soon
beat back Satan with all his force. For this cause does this wicked spirit
play all his parts without any intermission: The saints of God have had some
skirmishes with him, but after a little breathing time they have ever foiled
him. This we see in David, he was often in great straites, and yet by Gods
goodness, he soon recouers strength again: in Ziklagge he and his men lost
all they had, wives, children, 1. Sam. 30.17. Act. 5. last verse.
etc. and to add unto his misery, that wicked crew which was with him, all in
a rage, would have stoned him: here was cause sufficient of inspeakable grief
of heart. But David gave himself to prayer, and comforted himself in the Lord
his God. So we see the holy Apostles and disciples in the primitive Church,
being much beaten of Satan, yet in small time they recover greater strength
again.

2. We be taught that Satan and wicked spirits are of great strength, Psalm.
103.20. and could soon set on fire all these inferior parts of the world,
Wicked spirits have great knowledge in things natural and great strength.
if they were permitted. For this cause the Apostle calls them the princes of
the air, Ephesians. 6.12. They poisoned the waters of Egypt, Psalm. 78 49. Exodus 7.
and destroyed their fish. They poisoned and infected the air of Egypt, and so
brought in the pestilence upon men, and a murrein upon beasts, Psalm. 78.50.
They poison and infect men's bodies most daungerously and diverse ways, as we
see by many examples in the Gospel, Matthew. 17.15.18. Mark. 5.25. Luke 13.16.
and by this of Job himself, chap. 2.

3. Note here the more to amaze Job, how Satan has for him variety of
plagues. He could have as well stirred up either the same Sabees, Satan has
against Job variety of plagues.
or some other men to take away Jobs sheep, but he would not now use these
base helps: he thinks it best to bring down some strange plague (as it
were) from heaven upon him. A rot or any such evil would not have destroyed
them al in an instant, as he desired: The devil must have against Job some
exquisite and strange plagues.
he must therefore have some special means to devour the sheep all at once:
and for this end and purpose nothing like some wild fire, or strange
lightning, this will destroy, we see and know by experience, without mercy.
And thus would Satan make Job believe that heaven and earth have conspired
against him for his destruction.

Be as careful to preserve life, as Satan is to destroy life.

has so prevailed, If any of our ignorant sots and unbelievers were thus
plagued in his cattle, he would straight ways cry out only upon witches, and
seek after the^ for redress.
that he has brought the greatest part of the world to worship and to adore
him as a God. For being sent of God either to correct and chasten his people
and holy servants, as here we see, or to plague unbelievers; as full often we
have seen and known, he persuades the blind people in their extremities, to
seek help of witches. And these wretched manciples of the devil, persuade
themselves and others, that what Satan does at Gods special charge and
commission, is done by virtue of their arts, enchantments, characters, and
other cursed illusions which wicked spirits have taught them. And thus the
greatest part of the world follows after Satan and his mates, because they
have not the truth, or having it, 1. These. 2.11.
have no sound love thereunto.

Verse. 17. And while he was yet speaking, another came, and said: The Chaldees
set out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have taken them, and have
slain the servants with the edge of the sword, but I only am escaped alone to
tell thee.


ANd while he was yet speaking another came. The 3. message and cause of Jobs
misery or Jobs 3. rack.
There was no intermission, no breathing or resting time for Job. Satan had
most artificially brought all his matters so about, that all his bloody
instruments were all at once in a readiness, as if they had been of a long time
of one league, heart, will, and mind, and now had so consulted together, that
they knew their time and place, and all circumstances, etc. verse. 16.

The Chaldees set out three bands. Satan has found out another sort of
thieves stronger then the first. The bloody Chaldees which lived by oppression
and robbery, these came against thy servants marching forward in battle array,
well provided against us: and they have taken away violently thy 3000. camels.
Thy servants fought against them, but being fewer in number, and weaker in
strength, they were al slain without mercy, and the Lord in a strange
providence has delivered me, I think for this end that I might come and tell
thee.

Satan is a stranger in no part of the world, but familiarly acquainted in
all parts with the wicked.
he is as well acquainted in Chalde in like manner. And so in all countries and
nations of the world, in the Church and without he can command the children
of rebellion, when and where the Lord permits him, to be his hands and
instruments to effect any mischief.

2. This nation or people of the Chaldees did serve Satan, as here in theft,
The Chaldees great men with Satan in his arts of witchcraft.
so also in all the arts of magic and witchcraft, more then any of the elder
nations, excepting the Egyptians: for that by Astrologicall speculations this
people could better veil and cover Satan's practices the^ any other people.
This appears in the 2. of Daniel, ver. 2. The King commanded to call the
Inchanters, and the Astrologians, and the Sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to
show the King his dreams. All these wizards would be called Chaldeans,
Disciplina Chaldaorum Socatur diuinatio Cicer. diuinat.
verse. 4. as if al wisdom and knowledge dwelt among them, and all other
countries no way for divination comparable unto them. The hebrew word Casdim,
Chaldeans is interpreted of some, as devils, or as robbers and spoylers. Casdim.
A fit name for such a people. This country was Abraham's native soil, as it
is storied Genesis 11. from whence he was commanded of the Lord to depart and to
come unto the promised land of Canaan, Genesis 12. verse. 1. it lies upon the East
side of Jury, between Babylon and Arabia, Iere. 50.10. and 51.4.

3. Here again as in the former verse, we may see how bloudthirstie Satan is,
and all his special instruments. Great thieves and robbers, in whom Satan
rules and rages, they have no mercy. There are some sort of base and poor
thieves in the world, which says Solomon men despise not, because they steal
for hunger and to preserve life. A number of these poor wretches dye with us:
Thieves and robbers satha^s instruments.
but the great master thieves, Satan's special instruments, which rob and
spoil and sport themselves in evil, and shed blood full often most
desperately, they will ever find some favor, and means to escape rack and
gibbet, or some one cloak or other, to cover all their bloody practices.

Verse. 18.19. And while he was yet speaking, The 4. message of Jobs calamity
and 4. rack which Satan prepared for him.
came another and said, thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking
wine in their eldest brothers house, And behold there came a great wind, from
beyond the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, which fell upon
the children, and they are dead, and J only am escaped alone to tell thee.


THe 18. verse, as before verse. 13. They banketted every one his day, verse. 4.
Now the day came by course to be the eldest sons day, which peradventure had
more substance and wealth, and therefore better provided for such a feast then
all the rest could be. Synecdoche.


Drinking wine. That is, banketting together, a part of their banquet for the
whole. Wine was not then their ordinary drink, no more then with us: but in
feasting, and meeting of friends, they drink wine for their comfort, etc.

There came a great wind. The devil stirred up a strange tempest of wind
against Job. Wicked spirits are marvelous cunning to wind themselves into all
natural causes, The wicked spirits are very artificial in all regions and
parts of the air, to stir up meteors, and such like imperfect bodies
and to effect many things by them, as the Lord shall command or permit them.
They work in the fiery region, and can stir up Comets and blasing stars
there: they work in the watrie region, and can stir up lightnings and thunder
there: and in the lowest region, and can gather together the moist vapors and
hot exhalations, and so temper them, that they may cause great winds and
tempests, as the Lord shall permit them. Senec. nature. 7. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Ventus esse fluens aer in vnam partem, etc. Like as the sea flows by some
secret instinct of nature, so the air is purged by winds breeding of hot
exhalations and cold vapors in some one part, whence they are driven also
into that part of the air which is emptiest of all such matter.

From beyond the wilderness. That is, this wind had a fit place whence it
might rush violently upon Jobs house, as in a champion and open country.

And smote the four corners of the house. This is a strange wind that can
strike four corners of a house: for no ordinary winds can hurt, It is a
strange wind that can strike 4. corners of a house at one time.
but that side of the house which has an aspect unto those points and parts of
the world where the wind is bred, and whence it blows. If from the South,
the South part of the house is most battered: if from the North, the North part
of the house is most endangered, etc. But this was such a tempest as ouerturned
the whole frame of the house in one instant.

Which fell upon the children. That is, all thy sons and daughters banketting
in the same house are dead, with the fall of that house upon them.

This plague came more near Jobs heart, and was more grievous then all the
rest. What circumstances show the greatness of Jobs last calamity.
Satan means now to dispatch him, and utterly to confound him. Circumstances
which show the grieuousnes and greatness of this calamity are these. First the
good father here has no loss, as before of beasts and mercenaries only, but
now all his most dear and sweet children are swept away from him, as it were,
with one beesome of destruction in one moment of time. Could David so weep for
a cursed Absalom, 2. Sam. 18.53.
how much more Job for his religious and godly children? Could Jacob so heavily
mourn for one good Joseph, and shall not Job have far greater cause of
lamentation for ten and for all? 2. This mischief was sudden and was strange,
and they were in their mirth, and thought little of sorrow, much less of any
death at that time. This no doubt greatly grieved his heart that they were so
straungely in their mirth time destroyed: for this made the wicked speak
freely against him and his children. 3. This event could no way be seen to
fall out for any defect, want, or weakness in the house, Job was well assured,
and therefore he sees herein a special hand of GOD set against him. 4.
Lastly, the number must grieve him, all his children, all his good and
faithful servants, four only excepted.

Here may some questions be demanded.
1. Q. It may be here demanded first, 1. Quest.
whether Satan did not proceed beyond his commission before mentioned, in
murdering so many men, and so many children?

A. Children and servants are a part of the father and masters possession and
substance, and so have been both by Gods law and man's law for many ages, Exodus
21.7. The Jews might sell their children, but not to be perpetual slaves or
bondmen, as the Pagans: see Leuit. 25.39.40. Deuteronomy. 15.12.

2. Q. This may also seem hard and strange, 2. Quest.
that the Lord to try one man, would so permit Satan to trample under feet,
and to destroy as brute beasts the lives of so many men?

A. 1. We may never prescribe unto the Lord, or circumscribe him. 2. God is
not moved hereunto, but of his own free will, and free motion, vox dei, sit
pro ratione voluntas.
and his will is the rule of all justice, other whiles secret, ever good and
just. 3. Of his own free will he does the greater: Ergo, 1. Pet. 3.17. Psalm.
44. ver. vlt.
much more the less: of election and reprobation, the only will of God is the
chief cause. And here the Apostle stops all mouths of men with this sentence:
Romans 9.15.20.
O man who art thou that pleadest against God? shall the thing formed say to
him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? 3. Ques.


3. Q. It may also be here demanded, whether these men thus destroyed by
Satan, were saved yea or no?

A. The rule of charity must cause us to be well persuaded of this point,
because of their education under the government of so religious and so
faithful a servant unto God. And in the great deluge not every one drowned in
the waters must be thought then to be damned. And the like judgment is there
of millions of Gods faithful people which perish in wars, famine, and
pestilence. The world is ready to judge most hardly of them upon whom some
strange judgments fall, even when themselves be greater sinners, and without
repentance like to fare worse then they whom they judge to be in hell, Luke
13.2. 3.4.5.

In what manner Satan proceeds by witches to deceive unbelievers.

Mark here wisely how the Lord does open and discover unto us that horrible
mystery of iniquity which is in witchcraft.


2. We learn here again what power the wicked spirits have, being let loose
against us, to stir up dangerous winds and tempests. They are marvelous
artificial and strong to work in the elements, and to breed meteors of all
sorts, and in all parts of the air. The common people say, being taught of
witches (for Gods truth they know not) in great winds and tempests, The
devils be coniured, some wicked spirits are abroad. They speak the truth but
not truly, but wickedly and superstitiously, for then they understand all such
things fall out by means of witches and by virtue of their arts: whereas here
you see the contrary, the Lord decrees and sendes Satan to work all these
things. So Satan being sent of Tempests do much good in clensing the air, and
much hurt by sea and by land, for the Lord sends Satan in the^ to chasten his
people and to plague his enemies.
God (as here we manifestly do behold) persuades first his witches, that he
can stir up tempests by sea and by land of his own absolute power. And the
witches they believe his lies and serve him in all his ceremonies. Secondly,
the witches being first most be witched themselves, they then persuade
unbelievers also that these wicked spirits fly abroad by virtue of their
inchauntments, coniurations, characters, etc. So the common people being
besotted and bewitched do hunt after wizards, and some adore Satan himself
as Saul has done.

3. Now I trust we be here sufficiently instructed of the Lord how many
servants, how many organes and instruments, how many engines Satan could
stir up against us, and how many ways destroy us, Mill arts, mill
nocendi modos.
if God gave us over into his hands. All wicked sinners upon earth, the Lords
greatest enemies are greatly indebted and bound unto God for their
preservation, What power Satan has to bring all men to death, and the wicked
to hell in a moment, if God did permit him.
for in one moment of time would Satan bring them to hell, if the Lord did not
restrain and cut short the rage of wicked spirits: how much more the saints
and faithful people are bound to be thankful, for against them all wicked
spirits have conspired and vowed as it were their destruction. If the Sabees
the first robbers had continued in all this work, and in the last place had
murdered all his children, the calamity would not so nearly have touched or
amazed Jobs heart. But now when he sees besides thieves and robbers, a strange
fire and a fearful tempest to rush altogether upon him, as from heaven, he
must here think God has decreed, Job sees as it were heaven and earth
against him.
men and Angels have conspired his destruction, and so no doubt be near hand
plunged in despair.

1. Let us make good use of all Jobs temptations: for first God no doubt here
means to seal and to confirm unto us all the promises of his providence and
protection to all the faithful, Make use of all Jobs temptations.
giving us the sight and experience of them in one man, that we should not
doubt, but that he will be as good as his word unto all that do believe in
him.

Ob. But I am a frail man, and can expect no such things as Job, etc. A. 1.
All the holy ones had their infirmities and sins in like manner, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, David, and Job himself.

2. When God said to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, etc.
I will be thy rock, were these promises made unto 2. or 3. or unto the
faithful throughout all generations? No doubt to all, wherefore let us strive
by a lively faith to apprehend them, and by continual supplication unto the
Father of lights, (with whom there is no shadow of change) let us labor
to renew strength against all new and strange temptations which shall come
upon us in this life. Iam. 1.17.18.


Whatsoever evils fall upon thee, whatsoever instruments rise up against thee,
first look upon Gods decree and providence, next fall down and worship. 2.
Cor. 12.7. Pro. 24.10.
Remember here how many ways Gods child may be beaten and buffeted of Satan in
this world, and that by a special commission from God, and yet be as highly
in Gods favor as before. The Apostle Paul was no less beloved of God when the
messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him then before, nay he says God sent
him for his good, etc.

3. Where Satan is let loose against thee to rob thee of Gods blessings, let
it not amaze thee or confound thee, or cause thee to fly unto unlawful means
distrusting the protection of the alwightie, but cry mightily unto God, vt
supra.

Verse. 20. Then Job arose and rent his garments, and shaued his head, and fell
down upon the ground and Or bowed himself, or humbled himself meaning to
worship God.
worshipped.


Here begins the fourth and last part of this chapter.
Here we have to consider of two things: 1. Jobs humiliation, wherein
appears. 1. His repentance. 2. His faith which is confirmed with patience. 1.
By Prayer worshipping God, ver. 20. 2. By two special arguments, ver. 21. 3.
By thanksgiving ve. 21

2. His commendation, verse 22.


Then Job arose. To arise is a phrase in Hebrew which signifies to begin any
work: q. d. Job whether he sat or stood in his house, he received the
first, the second and third message, howsoever with some grief of mind, yet
with great quietness of spirit and patience, till the last message came
concerning the most terrible destruction of his sweet children. Then began he
to stir up himself to prayer and humiliation.

And rent his garments and shaued his head. The Lord cares not for the renting
of the clothes, he will have the heart rent. Joel. 2.16. Mica 1. ver. 16.
Deuteronomy. 14.1.
These were usual signs of great sorrow and mourning in those times and
countries, but the Lord forbade them afterward in his law: we see the like
in Jobs friends. cap. 2.12. In Jacob for Joseph, Genesis 37.34. The prophet
Micahtels Judah and Israel of their destruction, and bids them lament. Make
thee bald and shave thee, for thy delicate children enlarge thy baldnes as the
eagle, for they are gone into captivity from thee: That is, do as the
Gentiles do in the like case, for thou delightest to follow them in their
manners contrary to the law of God. He fell down and worshipped. That is, he
worshipped God: the same word is used, Genesis 22.5. Venishtacaueh, Exodus 20.5.
lo Tishtachaueh of Shachak, to bow or to be humbled. He humbled himself in
great sorrow and lamentation, preparing himself to worship God, etc.

First, here we have set before us the wonderful grace, Jobs plagues drive him
not from God, but cause him to draw more nere and to cast himself down at
Gods feet.
that he might be a noble president for all Gods people throughout all
generations. He hard with great quietness of mind the first, second and third
message, the fourth greatly humbled him indeed, yet so as it caused him not to
go from the Lord, but to draw more near unto him according to the Lords
charge often, Psalm. 50.14.15.

We see the wicked if they lose but a crum of their great substance, what a
rage they are in, yea some soon broken witted, and broken hearted, for that
this beastly carnal sorrow breeds death of body and soul. Examples clear
this point, Nabal, that foolish worldling according to his name, 2. Cor. 7.9.10.
so was his heart: for a handful of his wealth which he knew, not to be lost,
but in his bad judgment misspent, it is said, 1. Sam. 25.37.
his heart died within him, and he was like a stone. And Achab could be sick,
because he could not unjustly and wrongfully get another man's possession, 1.
King 21.5. The wicked in extremities either break heart, wit etc. or seek
unlawful means.
He lay upon his bed, and turned his face, and would eat no bread. And in this
case the wicked are so disquieted always, that they will to witches roundly as
did Saul, and worship the devil himself for the vain trash of this life.
Nabuchadnezzar, when his heart was disquieted, he thought best ease was by
sorcerers, The afflictions of the faithful.
Dan. 2.2. even so did Pharaoh also, he sought his inchaunters, and the more
afflictions the worse was he, and the more hardened in his heart, Exodus
6.7.8.9.10. chap. The sun softens the wax and hardens the claye. Genesis 37.35.
2. Sam. 18.33. We must mourn for our dear friends departed, but we must not
follow the pagans in mourning for the dead.
The godly they bear much in their miseries, and are bettered by their
chastisementes, but none comparable unto Job for patience. The afflictions of
the faithful, and how by faith they bear the cross, read Heb. 11. 2. Cor.
11.23.30.

2. Mourning for the dead is lawful, but we must not mourn as the Gentiles,
nor follow their manners, in shauings and cuttings of the hair, launcing of
the body, etc. for the first we have both Christ's precept, mourn with them
that mourn, be of like affection one toward another, and the practice of the
faithful in all ages.

1. The fathers all mourned for the dead a certain time, and buried them
honorably, and carefully in all ages. And Job here in his mourning did as a
loving Lord and master, and as a tender hearted father, he showed his love to
God and man, his love to God in his humiliation and worship, his love to his
servant and dear children in mourning for the loss of them. The stony
hearted Stoickes which speak against these affections, speak against nature,
and the God of nature. Our Lord Christ in his own most sacred person, gives us
herein a most noble president mourning for Jerusalem, Luke. 19. and weeping for
his good friend Lazarus, Ioh. 11. To be short, if we be smitten with any of the
Lords chastisements, if we mourn not, Jeremy says flatly we be obstinate
sinners: Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed: thou have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces
harder then a stone, and have refused to return. For the second point.

2. The people of God must not follow the ceremonies and practices of the
Pagans and Gentiles, neither in their mirth, nor in their mourning, neither
must we exceed in mirth or mourning as they do. For the wicked know no
measure in mirth, nor have any hope in mourning, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13 Job the holy
servant of God did follow the people of those East parts in their mourning, he
did as they did, and according to his knowledge in those times. We be all very
prompt and ready to follow in outward life, the manners of other men be they
never so wicked. Never was this apish imitatio^ of examples more seen in the
world then at this day. But let us first hear God speaking of this argument:
Deuteronomy. 14.1. The Gentiles did exceed in mourning: Joseph and his brethren
mourn for their father Jacob 40 days but the egyptians 70. Genesis 50.2 3.
Ye shall not cut your selves, nor make you any baldnes, between your eyes,
for the dead. Leuit. 19.27.28. Ye shall not cut round the sides of your heads,
neither shall thou mar the tuffes of thy bearde ye shall not out your flesh
for the dead, nor make any print of mark upon you, I am the Lord. The Gentiles
when they mourned for their dead, that they might be seen to mourn: first
they rent their garments: secondly, shaued their heads, and misfigured their
beards and faces: thirdly, in sign of great sorrow, and that they might be
more plentiful in tears, How the Gentiles mourned for the dead.
they cut and launced themselves. These ceremonies and rites of the Pagans, the
holy Ghost in the law forbids, lest his people should fashion and misfigure
themselves like the Gentiles, and so learn also their superstition. Examples
of these practices we may find many some in Gods book. The hypocritical
Jews when they fasted, they looked sour, and did disfigure their faces, that
they might be seen and noted of men. The priests of Baal crying for help
against Elias of their false God: 1. Kin. 18.27.28.
first, they are said to leap upon the altar, 2. they cry loud, 3. they cut
themselves, as their manner was, with knives and lances till the blood gushed
out upon them. So did Cybels priests, wound and lance themselves, to show
their zeal, and if all that served not to move Satan in this idolatry, they
added the fourth ceremony, and they offered in sacrifice their sons and
daughters, as says the Psalmist, unto devils. These things the Lord forbids
his people carefully in his holy laws, Deuter. Job having in his time no such
light of God to guide him in these ceremonies, followed the Gentiles in part,
in that custom of, shauing the head: but he thought the launcing and cutting
of his flesh no doubt to be against nature and against God, and therefore
albeit he deeply sorrowed, and had as great cause of sorrow as ever had Jew or
Gentile in this world, yet he abstaineth from this wicked and devilish
practice of the Pagans.

We be naturally inclined to follow their religion and superstition, whose
lives and manners we follow. For this cause the Lord to withdraw the hearts of
his people from the Pagans religion, would have them not to fashion themselves
outwardly in anything like them. The Jews are threatened by Gods Prophet
Zephaniah, Strange fashio^s dangerous for Gods people. Zephaniah. 1.8.
for following the profane Gentiles in their Apparel: And it shall be in the
day of the Lords sacrifice, that I will visit the princes, and the Kings
children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparel.

Never was there such misfiguring of head and face, never such following of
strange attire in any age, in any part of the world as this day in this land.
It is uncertain what Gentiles and Pagans we follow, but most certain we
follow neither the old nor late Christians of this land, or any other country.
There was in S. Augustines time certain hypocritical Monks, against whom he
complains, which apishly did follow the old Nazarites, and denied themselves
to be like other men, because said they, they had chastened themselves for the
kingdom of heaven, and they professed themselves to be virgin Monks, and in
sign thereof they did wear long hair as virgins do. I can but wonder what
Monks or Nazarites, or harlots rather, this profane age follows: Lais her
self could not more whorishly attire her self, then some men and women do.

3. We learn of Job, Zach. 11.11.12. A wonderful sign of the spirit of
grace to be able to call upon God and to praise him in extreme misery. Psalm.
50.14.15.
that in our afflictions we must not only be humbled and cast our selves
down: for if we do no more, we may be swallowed up in sorrow: we must
therefore cast up the eyes of a living faith upon Jesus Christ, and so worship
God in Christ, as Job does; worshipping the true God in spirit and truth. And
this is a miraculous work of faith, even then when a man is plunged in sorrow
to be able to turn God, and to desire comfort in him, and by him only.

4. Here begins that patience to appear which Saint James so commends in Job
for our imitation. Patientia dei alumna. Tertul. de pat. Jobs patience greater
then of any the prophets etc. Heb. 6.18.19.
This daughter of God is never seen nor known what strength and growth she
has, til that men come under the cross. Patience is not a want of feeling of
our misery, as a block or a stone, or as mad men and brute beasts at deaths
door want all fear and feeling. But he is patient, which by faith in Jesus
Christ, can so moderate his affections and passions, that he will not cease to
glorify and worship God as Job does here, and can rest upon God quietly by
the anchor of hope, howsoever he be tossed with the waves of this present
world. Of this virtue the Apostle teaches us, that being justified by faith in
Christ, Romans 5.1.2.3.4.5.
and so being in peace and grace with God, our tribulations and crosses will
breed in us patience, and patience will give us an experienced knowledge both
of Gods great power, care, love, and goodness toward us, and our own frailty
and weakness, and that blessed experience will confirm the lively hope we have
of eternal life, and then hope will make us bold and constant with all good
courage to bear all crosses, Learn by thy little patience what little faith
thou have we can bear little, and we are so stirred up against our enemies
that if we had the^ in our hands we would cast them down to hell. Heb. 11.35.
2. Cor. 11. Iam. 5.
and to wait patiently upon the Lord in all our afflictions. The Apostle S.
James charge that we let patience have her perfect work: Let your patience
be well exercised, and pray to the God of patience, that this virtue may be
perfected in you. The Apostles and Prophets did wade through many afflictions
with the wonderful staff of patience in their hands: yet S. James prefers
Job before all. They had some good arguments to support them, they saw their
cross was for witnessing and preaching Gods holy truth: but Job could neither
see his calamities, nor see any reason of any such chances and evils, which so
strangely fell upon him in so short a time.

Verse. 21. And said, Naked came J out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return thither again, the Lord has given, the Lord taken away, blessed be
the name of the Lord.


This verse contains two things principally: 1. How Jobs faith was confirmed
in this first conflict. 1. By meditation of the day of his birth, and the hour
of his death. 2. By meditation of Gods providence.
2. Jobs thanksgiving: Blessed be the name of the Lord.



Naked came I out of my mothers womb. That is, when I came from my mothers
womb, Sense.
I was not only subject to all misery and shame, by reason of natural
corruption and sin, but also I was poor and destitute of al such blessings,
as the Lords holy hand afterward in an ample manner very graciously powered
upon me: q. d. yet more plainly, I see I am fallen from my rich and high estate
to mere beggerie: be it so, for no strange thing is happened, but like as in
my nativity, when my God did cover me with his blessings, then he gave me
freely that which I had not, (for naked came I out of my mothers womb) which
if he take away for some cause best known to himself, what reason have I to
speak against his providence, or to bear my correction impatiently?

And naked shall J return thither again. Not into his mothers womb, we must
refer this relative to another antecedent which is not here expressed, but
only understood, that is, the earth and grave: for the earth is commonly
called the mother of us all. Our mothers womb it is like unto the grave,
whereunto by that great decree of God, thou art dust, etc. we must all return
again: q. d. Lord I am ready not to suffer only this spoil and loss of all
the blessings which thou have given me, Heb. 9.22. Statutum est it is decreed.
Genesis 3. see Eccle. 5.15. 1. Tim 6.7. He speaks as one pinched at the heart,
he utters not his words to the full.
but even to bear patiently unto the death, whatsoever thou shall lay upon
me, considering these blessings are thine, and I am thine, and thou have a
better life for me. Therefore I am and will be I trust ever by the help of thy
good spirit, patient under thy hand, and ready to return into the earth,
even in the same plight I came out of my mothers womb: q. d. There is a time
for all things, a time for prosperity and mirth, a time for adversity and
mourning, a time to live, and a time to dye. Eccles. 4.

The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away. That is, howsoever it may seem
unto the world, that the Sabeans and Chaldeans, fire and tempest, have only
wrought against me, spoiled and robbed me of all my substance, yet I know and
am well assured, that my God had the special and chief hand in all these
calamities which are fallen upon me. These wicked instruments were sent from
him, and stirred up by Satan against me. The devil has a purpose herein no
doubt to destroy me, but the Lord notwithstanding all this correction, loves
me as dearly as ever he did before. I will rest upon him, his secret purpose I
know not, only this I know, he may justly take away that which he has given,
or rather lent me with his own hand.

Blessed be the name of the Lord. The Lord be blessed, for all his works, and
his name is wonderful, I must never forget to magnify his name as for all his
benefits past, the long rest, peace, and prosperity, I have enjoyed for many
years, so for his fatherly correction present upon me. For howsoever yet I
can not see the cause of these strange afflictions, yet I trust all shall turn
unto my good in the end.

whose heart was dead as a stone: and Achab in his passions was like affected:
or else they burst out into most horrible cursed blasphemies against God and
man, as we see in Cain and a number of his companions at this day, 2. King.
21.5.
Revel. 16.8.9.11. Job in his afflictions does show his faith in speaking
cheerfully to God in prayer and thanksgiving: the wicked rather are dead and
broken hearted or blaspheme God and men.
for when the wicked are tormented as was prophesied, They boil in great anger
and blaspheme the God of heaven for their pains, and for their sores, and
repent not of their works. But Job under the cross, he desired to comfort
himself in prayer unto God, and with good speeches unto men. For he desired to
instruct such friends as were left him in the great doctrine of Gods
providence, that they might learn to rest patiently upon God in their
afflictions: a good sign of faith and grace, to see men speak cheerfully and
with good hearts upon their bed of sorrow and sickness, the wicked be lumpish
and mute or worse, Psalm. 6. and 38.

2. We learn how Job desires to comfort his heart and to confirm his faith
with two special arguments, Jobs heart and affections not set upon his
substance. Psalm. 62.10.
which are marvelous effectual to work in us, if any thing may, in the day
of our misery. The first is the consideration of our nativity, of our birth
day: and the second is the consideration of the day and hour of our death. The
Apostle to Timoth. thinks these arguments to be effectual and special bands
to bind us and keep us in all the ways of true godliness. We must not plead
against God, for taking away his own blessings from us.
He shows what moves the godly man to be content with that he has, namely
this, he remembers his birth and his death often, and how that nothing brought
we into this world, nothing shall we carry out of this world. The Psalmist is
of this judgment that this argument will make a man wise in Gods fear, Psalm.
90.12. having showed the shortness of our life, verse 10. and the power of Gods
wrath, verse 11. Teach us to number our days, (says he) to remember our
beginning and ending, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. The Lord
wills us to record often what shall be the end of the wicked, 1. Pet. 4.17.
Psalm 73.15.16. for this is a good spur also to obedience. But a special
motive to Gods people, is the dissolution of the whole frame of heaven and
earth in the end of the world. By this argument the Apostles exhort often, 1.
Pet. 4.7. 2. Pet. 3.10.15. Titus 2.11.12.13.

Our first entrance into the world was in nakedness, misery, sin and shame.
And in the end of our days, follow these things: death, judgment, hell, and
damnation on the one hand: heaven and salvation everlasting on the other hand.
If these two arguments then can not move thee, nothing shall persuade thee.

3. Pliny a natural man, writing of man's nativity, Prooemio 7. lib. n. hist.
does exclaim bitterly against nature, or rather the God of nature: his words
be these: Nature (says he) is a stepmother unto man, but friendly unto all
other beasts, clothing them all in their kind, some with shells, some with
barks, some with hides, some with bristles, some with hair, some with
feathers, some with wings, some with scales, some with wool, from the cold
of winter and heat of summer, but man only is cast forth naked upon the bare
ground, in the day of his nativity.

Romans 5.12. Genesis 3.
A. This profane writer is utterly ignorant of the original corruption and
fall of man, and how the first Adam has brought a curse upon himself and all
creatures. For his apostasy has not only spoiled him of his imperial crown
and dignity, but also all his progeny and posterity, which like their first
parents are sent forth naked into the world: yea heaven and earth testify the
great wrath of God for that sin, and all creatures shall groan for it to the
worlds end. Romans 8.
Again this pagane blasphemes in this speech against nature or the God of
nature, for he is most just in all his works. Romans 1.
To be short, man's case in regard of this life is far better then the
beasts, for he has choice of things to cover him: but the brute beasts must
content themselves with one garment or none at all.

4. We learn of Job that which our Savior ca^efullie warns us to take heed,
That if riches do increase, we set not our hearts upon them: and that we
labor to be rich in God. Jobs patience in the loss of all his wealth,
appears plainly in that his heart and affections were not fastened to the
drossie and frail things of this life. He thought it no injury (as the
greatest part of all rich men do) that the Lord should take his own again
from him. For he says all his substance came of Gods mere liberality and
goodness. Now the^ by good reason he may call for his own at his pleasure: we
may not nor ought not to hold plea with that God for anything he does, which
feeds us every day of his own free goodness, and gracious bountifulnes, for
that were horrible unthankfulness. Therefore when he smites us in our goods, or
pareth away any part of our substance, let us with all humility, faith and
patience, learn of Job to offer unto God the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving.

5. We learn here that God must have the disposing of all such things as he
has put into our hands, seeing they be his. The chief title, right, and
claim of all things is in him, so as he may lend us, and take from us at his
pleasure every minute of an hour. This truth most men know and confess, but
for want of faith, few hear it and embrace it when the cross comes. For
this cause the Apostle lovingly warns us, that we take not such fast hold
upon our possessions, 1. Cor. 7.50.
But that we buy and use the things of this life as if we possessed not. And
again, That we trust not in and rest not upon uncertain riches, but in the
living God.

6. Whereas here we see Job to turn himself from Satan, and all Satan's
instruments, Sabees, Chaldeans, fire, and tempest, and to consider only Gods
hand and great commission sealed and sent forth against him, We must turn our
eyes under the cross from all secondary causes the Lords instruments sent
against us, and fasten our eyes upon God only.
we may learn many special instructions. First, we must ever labor to
turn our eyes from all these instruments and organs of Gods providence, which
are sent to hurt us, as we see here Job does forget all his enemies: and so
David turns him from Shimei, and both fasten the eyes of their faith upon the
Lord himself. This will breed patience in us, and greatly quiet and comfort
our hearts, whereas otherwise, if we look upon our enemies, it is the only
occasion of grief and impatiencie, as we see in the wicked every day.

2. Secondly, we learn here that the distinction of Gods free will and
permission is very vain and foolish: It was the Lords will Job should be
afflicted, before Satan knew of it.
for what a wicked folly is it here to say, that the Lord did only permit
Satan so to rage against Job, and that it was not his ^^ll that his servant
should be so chastened? We see Job himself here speak the contrary, that this
was Gods own hand, will and purpose, the Lord would have it so, and
therefore he was therewith content.

The Lord and Satan with his instruments in the self same work are diversely
inclyned.
3. Thirdly, we learn that we must ever wisely distinguish in all Gods works,
between the Lords actions and purpose, etc. and Satan's practices, and drift.
For the Lord ever entends that which is good, and for the salvation of his
elect, and will cause all his works to have that end in despite of all the
power of hell: but Satan ever intends evil, and drives at the damnation of
Gods people, but never preuailes against the elect. As for the organs whereby
the Lord works, and Satan works: like as we see in Artificers shoppes
instruments some straight, some crooked, some bending, so strangely that we
cannot conceive what use they should be good for, but the Artificer himself
can soon do it, and how not one of them in his trade must be wanting. So is it
with the Lord and his providence: he has many crooked instruments, which he
can use and permit Satan to use, and he can turn all their evil to good,
and make them serve him according to his will, howsoever they bend strongly
from him, and be inclined to the contrary. For the confirmation of all the
former points, consider and confer these holy scriptures, Genesis 45.7. Romans ^.
Exodus 4.21. 2. Sam. 12.12.24.1.16.10. Esaias. 11.5.13.6.10.15. 2. Chro. 11.4.
Nehem. 9.37. Job. 34.30. Esaias. 19.14. Exodus 7. and 9. chap. and 10. and 11. and
14. chap. Deuteronomy. 2.29. Josh. 11.20. 1. Sam. 2.25. 2. Chro. 22.7. Psalm. 105.25.
Romans 1.28. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Ezech. 14. and 9. chap. 1. King. 22.22. 2. Chro.
18.21.

7. Note here also in Jobs thanksgiving: The devil sweat much to cause Job to
blaspheme, and to renounce God and holy religion: but Job we see hitherto in
every word, has by his blessed faith overcome Satan, and in the conclusion of
his speech does burst out not into blasphemies, as Satan expected, but into
praise and thanksgiving, Job rejoices in afflictions. James. 1.2.3. Praising
God for his cross, trusting to receive some blessing by it.

Job sounds praise, and not murmuring nor blasphemies.


as if in every cross he had received some notable benefit at Gods hand. This
proceeds from a wonderful faith and trust in God: for he is persuaded God
loves him well, and that all his children be well, that the Lord will turn
all this evil to his great good.

8. Now to conclude this verse, what special causes move the Lord thus to
chasten his people by wicked spirits, and their instruments in this world.

1. One cause is, the Lord would thus make manifest unto men and Angels, their
faith and patience, and other graces of his holy spirit in them.

2. To teach the faithful how he loves them as tenderly, and cares for their
protection as fatherly under the cross as before, in adversity as well as in
prosperity. And therefore by these present blessings, and events of this life
good or evil, we must never conclude of Gods grace and favor, who is beloved
or hated of him: for as in regard of Gods kingdom, there is no difference
between male and female, so there is not between poor and rich, etc.

3. The cross serves to chasten our flesh, and to bring it so in subjection,
that we may more cheerfully serve God in all obedience, Psalm. 119. 1. Cor. 9.
last. ver.
For a number there are of Gods best children, that if they were not humbled
otherwhiles We would fall into our old sins, or into some new sins, but
that the Lord finds for us new crosses as new brydles to keep us from them.
by some cross or other, they would no doubt fall dangerously into some proud
sins, and into the sins of their youth in their old age, Psalm. 25.

4. Lastly, the cross is a most comfortable argument unto us of a better life:
for we see not in this life, subject to so many afflictions, that rest, joy and
felicity, which the Lord in his most holy truth has promised, sworn, and
sealed by his spirit, should be given us.

Verse. 22. In all this Job sinned not, neither did he attribute any Tiphlah,
any want of reason, judgment or knowledge.
folly unto God.


In this verse the Lord gives Job his just commendation: showing 1. That he
was found within in heart, and faith, as verse. 1. in all this Job sinned not.
2. That he was sound without, no evil word came from him: he did not speak
any reproachful word against the Lord, but commended his providence and
wisdom continually.


In all this Job sinned not. That is, Job did not miscarrie or offend in the
aforesaid humiliation, neither did he murmur and grudge as the wicked do in
impatiencie under the cross: q. d. his worship, his prayer, his thanksgiving
and all was in faith, void of all hypocrisy.

Neither did he attribute any folly unto God. The hebrew word Tiphlah, does
signify vnsauerines, or to want salt: this manner of speaking in all the best
languages does signify folly, because foolish words, and foolish actions, be
as unsavory, or as unpleasant unto the ears and minds of the wise, as things
unseasoned without salt, be unto the mouth and stomach of sound men. The
meaning is, Job did in no word speak evil of God, or rashly impute any want
of knowledge unto God, but highly esteemed and praised him, as for his power,
so for his wisdom, goodness, etc.

1. Note here the commendation of Jobs former humiliation: all that he did was
done in faith and truth, without all hypocrisy or dissimulation, or desire to
be seen of men. For many hypocrites under the cross, will be seen to go
far, in all the former Achab, Herod, Pharaoh, Saul, Achitophell.

A man may sin greatly even when he professes greatest humiliation.

How far an hypocryte will go under the cross, but in the end he is
discovered. Job a sound man in all his humiliation. Mica. 6.6.7.8. Psalm. 109.7.
Pro. 21.27.28.


actions. An hypocrite under the cross first will rend his garments, 2. shave
his head: 3. fall down upon the ground: 4. he will pray: 5. he will speak of
death: 6. he will commend Gods providence: 7. he will praise God: he will offer
burnt offerings and calves of a year old, he will please the Lord (if he may
gain his favor) with ten thousand rivers of oil, yea he will sacrifice his
children to escape the wrath of God. But God reiects his best sacrifice, even
his prayer: for his prayer is turned into sin. For this cause the Lord here
tells us, that Job humbled himself in every respect faithfully, he did all
in faith and sound knowledge, fear and reverence. There was no hypocrisy, or
colored fained actions in him.

2. Whereas Job is here said to think highly, to speak reverently, nothing
basely, or contemptuously of Gods wisdom, knowledge, etc. we see one cause of
our impatiencie, and wherefore foolish men do so martyr themselves under the
cross, is this, for that they know not, that the Lord does in great wisdom
dispose of all the events, changes, and chances of this life, howsoever strange
they seem to reason and to the wit of man. When thou talkest therefore of Gods
wisdom, power, works, etc. talk soberly, and not above thy knowledge in
scripture. Remember Gods wisdom in all events and seek not a reason of all
his works, but desire to rest by faith upon him and his word.
Job does not murmur against God, that thieves and robbers did now possess all
his substance, and God neither see it nor regard it: he does ascribe unto God
neither want of knowledge, nor want of power, nor want of good will to do him
good.

Job. chap. 2. verse. 1.2.3. 1 And it came to pass on a day, when the children
of God were met together to stand before the Lord, that Satan also came among
them to stand before the Lord.

2 Then the Lord said to Satan, whence co^mest thou? and Satan answered the
Lord and said from compassing the earth to and fro, and from walking in it.

3 And the Lord said to Satan, have thou considered in thine heart my servant
Job, That he has not his equal or match. Immerito.
how none is like him in the earth, a sound man, and righteous man, one that
fears God and escheweth evil? and how that as yet he continues in his
sincerity? have thou not moved me to Without cause.
devour (his substance) in destroy.
vain?


ANd it came to pass on a day. That is, while he was yet in his mourning, full
of sorrow and grief for his late losses, as appears by the 8. verse
following.

When the children of God, etc. Satan came also among them to stand. Not of
his own will, but against his will, God calls him to his accounts where ever
he be: he has no need to call him, but like as he can keep court in men's
consciences when he please here on earth, so can he also call the spirits to
their accounts where and when he please: for they tremble ever before him with
guilty consciences, and so do not a number of men which be past feeling,
verse. 19. worse then devils. All these words are besore expounded, chap. 1.
verse. 6.

How none is like him. For all were then full of corruption, specially in Idumea.

And how as yet he continues in his sincerity. That is, now thou see thy
self, a liar, and to have no strength against my righteous servant: for he
perseuereth faithful in mine obedience, notwithstanding all the evil both thou
and thine instruments can bring upon him. Do thou not now perceive what
little strength thou have against my Saints, they are able to cast thee down:
this man has foiled thee, and yet I sealed thee a commission against him, to
destroy all that he had on every side.

1 Here again the Lord teaches us his absolute authority over all creatures,
and of the execution of his will, Ver. 1. When the Lord repeates unto us the
same instructions, we are to labor more deeply to imprint them in our minds
and to believe them in our hearts, and to follow them in our lives.
by all spirits good and evil. Satan when he has done all the evil he can,
he must come anon after to his accounts to Gods presence into his court of
justice. There the Lord will ever shame him and confound him, as now in this
story we see here taught us the second time.

2 We see here again that nothing is done on earth, but the Lord first
decrees with himself in heaven, and then secondly reuealeth it in court, as
it were, of his Angels, and then thirdly and lastly, commands it to be done
and executed on a day and in the time he appoynteth. For he appoints the
time, day and hour for the execution of all his blessed decrees. This is a
lesson few can well learn and observe in scripture: for if they did they
might gather thereby great patience in afflictions. For this greatly tormoyleth
our hearts under the cross, we cannot see that God knows when our
afflictions and rods begin, how they continue, and when they shall end. And
The Lord decrees first, and then reueiles his will concerning the probation of
his childeren, he appoints the moment of time for the beginning, continuance
and ending of al their afflictions.
he it is that appoynts the very day and hour for the beginning, and
continuance, and ending of all our evils in this life. This our Lord Jesus
teaches us often in his answers: Mine hour is not yet come. And Ioh. Reu.
verse. 3. Ye shall have tribulation ten days. chap. 12. 6. The church must be
fed in the wilderness, a thousand two hundredth and threescore days.

3 Look not to sleep quietly after the first conquest, or victory had
against Satan. He must be let loose often against thee, and the next time he
comes with greater strength: For this cause thou must not give thy self to any
slothfulnes after temptations, but to greater watchfulnes, prayer, meditations,
etc. that thou may be more fresh and better provided against new assaults.
Such as make them nests in this life look for no crosses, and when they come,
cannot beat them: I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved.
But be strong, and comforted: for here thou see thy God eyes all thy
combats, and the heavenly father has given us a free gift unto Jesus Christ:
we cannot be lost, for he is a strong and faithful keeper. Only let us watch
in prayer, fasting, and godly meditations, A bad sign when men after the
cross are not more watchful then before they were. Ioh. 10.29.
when dangerous assaults of Satan come near us.

1 In this second and third verse the Lord lets us yet further see our enemies
the wicked spirits. And how that much like their instruments, they either
speak against their conscience and knowledge, as before we heard in the
accusation of Job, or else they dissemble as here we see. For when the Lord
would take accounts in special manner for the execution of his first
commission, whether Satan prevailed against Job, and therefore purposely,
asks of his coming in the first question, Whence come thou? come thou
not from Job? what can thou do? what are not my words true? art not thou a
liar confounded? He gives a general answer again as: before, and comes not to
the thesis, or question in hand, till he is provoked in special manner so to
do. For this cause in the second place, the Lord drives him to answer
directly to the question as before.

2 Here again we are to observe how the Lord delights to commend his
righteous servants even to Satan's face. Psalm. 147.11.
The Lord delights in them which fear him and attend upon his mercy. Satan
is galled and greened in nothing so much as to see Gods people prosper, and
proceed in Gods pure worship. The Lord delights to commend his servants.
And what the commendation is: Job is a sound man, righteous etc. as before,
chap. 1. 8. First, a sound man: admit a man have all virtues, yet if he have a
false heart, and wicked unclean conscience, albeit all the world clap their
hands in his commendation, yet is he but dung and filthiness before God. 2. A
righteous man: not boasting of inward sincerity, which has not the warrant
and witness of a good conversation, and righteous life. 3. Fearing GOD: not
only a righteous iustitiarie blameles before men, etc. for a number think
themselves as angels if they can boast of this, albeit they be far from the
knowledge, and furthest off all men from the practice of the pure worship of
God. Job is said therefore to fear God truly, that is, to worship God
sincerely and devoutly, albeit all the country went a whoring after false
gods. 4. He eschewed evil: he carefully avoided all occasions and shadows or
appearances of sin: 1 These. 5.
like as when we smell a stink, we turn away our face incontinently: so did
Job. 5. Lastly, he perseuered constant and faithful under the cross, an
especial sign of grace, and of the presence of Christ, Philip. 4.13. For the
holy Spirit testifies: If thou be faint in the day of adversity, Pro. 24.10.
thy strength is small.

3. When the Lord here speaks that he was moved by Satan to yield to his
former commission: we have before cap. 1. verse. 12. showed how the Lord had
decreed and purposed the same before Satan came in his presence, howsoever he
seem as it were to yield unto his accusatio^s and to hearken to his
calumniations against Job. Satan moved the Lord, that is true, but his motives
were not of force to bring the Lord to his conclusion. The Lord was moved
before Satan came in presence as we saw before.

4. We are to note here again how the Lord calls the former evil upon Job,
his own work, he says it was he that devoured his substance, etc. so
speaks Job himself, The Lord takes away: and yet we know the wicked impes of
the devil, and that tempest and fire consumed all. Wherefore let us here
learn again, and again, to fasten our eyes upon the Lord, he does all things
in heaven and earth. And howsoever things seem to us to fall out accidentally,
yet the Lord still abides in the stern, and The Lord God leads us into
temptation, as he did his own son Jesus Christ. Mate. 4.1. Lu. 4. and it is
he which delivers us from evil.
governs all things in heaven and earth: let the instruments be what may be
and intend what they list, yet God in the end will turn all to the good of his
elect.

5. The Lord tells the devil to confound him, all that ever he has done is
in vain. He has sweat much to obtain the commission, next in the execution
of it, etc. But al his labor is lost, he cannot bring Job to join in league
with him, to renounce his God, blaspheme, etc. all his labor is lost.

Verse 4. And Satan answered the Lord, and said, skin for skin, and all that
ever a man has, will a man give for his life.

Verse 5. But stretch out now thine hand and touch his bones and his flesh, (
Let me undergo any Curse.
to see) if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face.


These two verses contain Satan's answer unto the Lord: wherein he
laboreth with more new reasons for a new commission. 1. Arg. An hypocrite will
freely give all that he has to save his lite, to save his skin, as the
proverb is, that he may lie in a whole skin. Job is an hypocrite: Ergo, Job
will be content to lose all to save, etc. as the proverb is. 2. Arg. Is from
a kind of abiuration, cursing, etc. If thou touch his bones etc. if then he
blaspheme not let me undergo the curse: wherefore now grant once again I may
proceed against him to search him and to discover his hypocrisy.


Skin for skin. Guor begnad gnor.
This was an usual proverb, and signifies no doubt that a man would give the
dearest thing he has to save his life; yea a man would be glad if the evil
come near our bodies to leese some part of the skin which may be best
spared, to save the rest, and so the life. A man would hazard to bear a great
blow on his arm, leg, or thigh, rather then on his head: we ever care for
that part which is dearest unto us. q. d. As if Satan should say, Job may be a
notable hollow hypocrite for all I could do as yet, for I have not come near
his skin, let me come near his bones and then it will soon appear what is in
him.

All that ever a man has. Therefore Job can well spare all the former losses,
for he hopes to recover all soon again.

Verse. 5. But stretch out now thy hand and touch his bones and his flesh.
That is, now give me a second commission, that I may come near, and rack a
little his flesh and bones, for this is it that man most tendereth and
regards, all his cares are but to save and, preserve his carcass, let me
therefore come in a second combat, but to wrestle a little with him hand to
hand, and poison his body with some special hotches and boyles, etc.

(To see) if he will not blaspheme thee: as before chap 1. 11. He breaks off
his speech abruptly, his meaning is, if he curse thee not and renounce al
religion, Math. 8.29. Iam. 5.
and blaspheme thee not to thy face, I am ready to undergo any curse, yea
send me now presently to be tormented in chains to hell fire before my time.

Satan answers nothing to the proposition in hand: how all his former labor
was in vain and lost, and he confounded and proved a blasphemer, but like a
wrangling sophister he holds still the conclusion, albeit he be utterly
destitute of any good argument for it. Our enemy the devil is never weary nor
ashamed, let us look for him every day.
Here note again the insatiable thirst and greedy desire these wicked spirits
have to destroy us body and soul. He is nothing wearied with the former
combat, providing as it were men and armor, and yet all was lost: he is
nothing ashamed, albeit confounded by the Lord to his face. Notwithstanding
all the foil and shame he has already received, yet is he as ready to bid
the Lords servants battle again. Let us look every day for these practices
of the devil, for thus he came also to our Lord and master Christ not once or
twice, as Luke says, of that great temptation in the wilderness: When the
devil had ended all the temptations, he departed from him for a time.
Wherefore let us be watchful, and look continually for this common adversary.

1. Sam. 28. Math. 4. Satan is very learned in all sciences, but most expert
in fallacies and lies. Ioh. 8. The true mark of an hipocrite, to prefer his
carcas before all things, yea heaven it self and Gods favor.
2. How skillful Satan is in all points: he can dispute learnedly, he can
speak prouerbially, he can cite scriptures falsely, misapply, pare, and wrest
them cunningly, he is seen in all natural causes, arts, etc. He was for
good cause called mill artifex, for he can see, say, and do as much as a
thousand artificers can do.

3. Let us learn of Satan the true description of an hypocrite: he is one
that to save his carcass thinks nothing too dear, he will see all sink to
save himself, he preferres his own life before all things, he will sell
heaven, all the favor and grace of God to save his carcass, as Esau did his
birthright for a mess of pottage to cool hunger: and yet it is said that
being afraid of Gods truth, he is ready to give ten thousand rivers of oil,
yea the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul: Micah. chap. 6. 6. 7.
8. But he will not learn verse 8. to do justly, to love mercy, and to humble
himself, to walk with God.

Verse 5.
The Lords hand is on Job The devils hand is on Job The instruments of Satan,
as before.
1. Here again we see two hands about one work clean contrary the one to
the other: for the Lords hand is said to be stretched out against Job, and
Satan's hand is said to smite Job with sore boyles, ver. 7. but the Lord for
his good, satan tending to his perdition with all his might. This we have noted
before.

2. Let us learn here to bear our crosses patiently, and all sicknesses which
burn and scorch our bodies and dry our bones, for Satan here tells us that
such as storm in impatiencie, and blaspheme God in this case, are stark
hypocrites. Of the wicked in their plagues John says, 1. They gnew their
tongues for sorrow: 2. They blasphemed the God of heaven for their pains and
for their sores: Reu. 10.11. Math. 26.
3. They repented not of their works. Seek not help of the devil, as Azariah
when he fell sick of a fall through his window, he sent to Ekron to enquire of
the devil by witches how he might recover: he dies for it, verse 16.17. The
godly may fall as Peter into evil speeches, but their sin is of infirmity,
they are preoccupied by Satan their adversary before they be aware, or their
wits are ^rased with sickness, they do nothing of set purpose and malice
against God.

3. Note here Satan's horrible sins in Gods presence, Note here a notable
picture of our desperate wits in these days, how roundly they follow and
resemble their father the devil.

Ioh. 1.44. They have often like speeches as God shall save them, 2. wish to be
damned body and soul, or as God shall judge them.

Oaths and blasphemies most horrible.


first most impudently he denies that which God affirms to be true: 2. he is
manifestly convicted, and yet not ashamed. 3. He still hungreth and thirsts
to murder the innocent and righteous servants of God. 4. Being all in a rage,
he wishes all Gods curses might light upon him, or that he might sink
presently to hell, if Job be not an hypocrite. Such be his children at this
day, and have been in all ages, full of rage, impudency, cruelty, cursing
banning, etc.

Verse 6. Then the Lord said unto Satan, * behold he is in thine hand, but
save his life.


In this verse we be taught how the commission was renewed unto Satan: where
consider: 1. The commission it self: l^e he is in thine hand. 2. The special
exception or prouiso for the safegarde of Jobs life but save his life.


But save his life. That is, seek not to kill him, for thou shall not
prevail. The hebrewe Nephesh, signifies the soul, and it signifies also
usually the life of man in diverse places of scripture, Naphsho shemor.
like as the Greek and Latin names do.

Seruare dicitur Satan, irrumpere non audere. Gregor. The purposes desires and
wishes of Satan and al his instruments are granted often to their own
co^fusio^. Psalm. 55.12.13.14. 2. Sam. 17.23. Math. 26.5.
1. The Lord is ready otherwhiles to grant the wicked their desire. But like
as Satan here, so all his children are very forward, to wish and desire that
which shall turn in the end to their own confusion. * The Lord gives them
leave often to counsel and consult, and to proceed with success: but in the
end they are the very instruments of their own bane and destruction.
Examples. How earnest was that hypocrite Achitophel in that hot and dangerous
conspiracy of Absalom against David: but when he saw what issue all would come
to, he went and hanged himself. How desperate was Judas against his good
master: God decreed it, and gave him leave to effect his desire: but his
desperate rage turned to his own bane and perdition: for being not able to
bear the torments and fiery flashings of his conscience, he went anon after
and hanged himself.

Contrarily, we see the Lord otherwhiles to defer and to deny the requests of
his Saints and faithful people: first, 1. Sam. 15.10.11. 2. Sam. 12. 2. Cor.
12.17. 1. Ioh. 5.14.
either because they know not what they ask, Matthew. 20.22. 2. or else because
they ask against Gods decree, as Samuel praying for Saul, and David for his
child. 3. or because they know not what is best for them, as to Paul he says:
My grace is sufficient for thee. This is the assurance we have in him, that if
we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

2. We have before noted how fearfully the wicked are plagued by Satan, when
he is let loose against them. Far greater are Achabs plagues being farsed
with errors in soul, then Jobs plagues being filled with boyles in his body.
The Lord lets Satan proceed so far as pleases him (as here we see) in
both. He cannot hurt the hogs of the Gaderits without his commission, much
less the bodies and souls of men. Math. 8.31.32.
* And here howsoever the Lord is good and gracious to his holy servant, to
preserve his soul from Satan's snares, and his life from death: yet we know
that Satan preuailes otherwhiles in both even against Gods elect. Reave. 2.10.
Luke 13.11.12. Palsy Math. 9.2.3.
For the bodies of the Saints we know also that he has murdered many of them,
both by means of his wicked instruments in all the murders which have been in
the world. And also immediately by himself poisoning their bodies with the
pestilence, and other incurable diseases, whereby he has destroyed many, as
here he would have done Job, but that God restrained him. Now then we see here
how Job finds great favor at Gods hand in his cross: for the Lord keeps his
soul and heart from errors, and his life from death.

Let us learn it here again, that Satan cannot hurt us without a commission:
if this be true, let us never seek for help against him, but by pleasing the
same Lord which gave him commission. It is madness to seek help of witches,
the devils special instruments, when he is let loose against us, to adore him
as a God. Let us only entreat by prayer and fasting the same great Lord which
has sent him against us.

Verse. 7. Satan departed from the presence of the Lord, Bischin.
and smote Job with a scorching inflammation, Or vehement.
from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head.


This verse shows the execution of the second commission against Job; where
consider 1. The quality of this plague: a pestilentiall carbuncle, most
venomous and full of inflammation. 2. The quantity of it, how great: from the
sole of his foot to the crown of his head.


So Satan departed from the presence of the Lord, as before verse. 13. chap. 1.
and smote Job with a hot boil, a vehement or scorching inflammation. Shachan.
inde Shechin. vleus ex caliditate.
Such a venomous inflammation we read of, Exodus 9.10. to be upon man and
beast in Egypt, A scab breaking into blisters throughout the land of Egypt.
Leshin.
The hebrew word signifies such a boil as is full of a hot and venomous
inflammation. The Sorcerers in Egypt were plagued with the like, Exodus 9.11.
and could not stand before Pharaoh for this sore: it is a very terrible evil,
Deuteronomy. 28.60.

From the sole of his foot to the crown of his head. Satan makes his
commission stretch as far as ever it will go. He spares no part, that he
might make him a monster among men, a man on whom most men might judge that God
did power forth all signs of wrath that could be showed in this life.

1. We learn here how artificial our arch-enemie is to poison our bodies with
incurable diseases, when he is sent of God against us. For inward causes the
wicked spirits being more skillful then any expert Physician in the temperature
and distemperature of our bodies: They can soon poison us: he that could fill
Judas heart, and Ananias soul with infidelity, may soon breathe poison into
our bodies.

In the use of all medicines trust not to physic nor Physicians: but seek
the Lord first by prayer, Iam. 5.14. and a blessing by him upon all good means
appointed. Remember King Asa, 2. Chro. 16.12. and avoid his sin, and follow
the good practice of Hezekiah in sickness, 2. King. 20.2. He turned his face
to the wall and prayed.

2. Again we see how the Lord deals with his servants as parents do with
their children: when they be young they bear but little, when they be old
and of some strength, they will lay greater burdens upon them. Job is a tried
man: and therefore is exercised with the greater cross, Job is an exercised
champion, therefore now he bears the more. Ioh. 21.18.
1. Cor. 10.13. And of Peter Christ says: When thou wast young thou girdest
thy self, and walk whither thou would: but when thou shall be old, thou
shall stretch forth thine hands, and another shall guide thee, and lead thee
whither thou would not. Thus he spoke, signifying by what death he should
glorify God. 1. Job is now cast down from his high state of glory, If he had
been but a poor man, or a Lazarus before exercised thus, his grief had been
the less.

Job has no brething time under the cross we have often great ^est between
one evil and another.

No favor in the former commission, no favor in this, but all the extremity
that may be.


wherein he was as King among the people, he is now more like a rotten carrian,
than a living man: his best friends could not endure his presence. Between
this deadly cross and the former, Job had no long respite. We have oftentimes
given us some breathing between one cross and another, to assuage the grief
we have endured: but here Job has no moment of rest. Wherefore if God give us
to escape well one evil, let us learn to dispose our selves to the suffering
of more crosses which shall be greater then the first. So in time we shall be
better able to follow our master Christ in all the conflicts of this life.

3. Lastly, note the quantity and quality of this evil. For quality it was
Bischin ronge, the worst carbuncle, botch or boil that the devil could
invent. For quantity, he spared him not from one end to another: no place free
all over his body, hand, head and foot.

Verse. 8. And he took a Or potshard.
shell to Scratch.
rub himself: and as yet he sat down in the ashes.


This verse contains two arguments, which tend to show 1. The greatness of his
misery: he had no more to ease him but himself, no instrument but a shell or
potsheard. 2. His courage and constancy: still he continued in his humiliation
faithful.


And he took a shell. That is, his pain was so great in all parts, and his
very finger ends, that he could no way ease his itching and venomous sores but
with a shell or potsherd instead of nails.

To rub himself. That is, he had no help of any other but himself, So does
David complain. Psalm. 38. Surely that good man was often sick of grievous
diseases.
for all friends did loath to come near, and could hardly abide to see him:
for he complains, chap. 19. 13. He has removed my brethren far from me,
and also mine acquaintance were strangers unto me. My neighbors have forsaken
me, and my familiars have forgotten me: They that dwell in mine house, and my
maids took me for a stranger: for I was a stranger in their sight: I called my
servant but he would not answer, though I prayed him with my mouth: my breath
was strange unto my wife, though I prayed her for the childrens sake of mine
own body: so 18. 19. verse. And as yet he sat down in the ashes: that is,
as yet he mourned and humbled himself: as before, chapter 1. 20.

Into what a heavy pickle the Lord may bring us in a moment when we flourish
best on earth.
1. Here let us learn in all prosperity to humble our selves: for howsoever we
prosper, live daintily, and smell sweetly in the world, the Lord can, if he
give Satan the bridle never so little, soon make us filthy, sour, and
loathsome unto our best friends even to her that lies in thy bosom, even
loathsome to thine own self. So did he cast down Herod from the top of his
pride suddenly to be eaten of worms, Acts 12.23. so Beltashar, Dan. 5.7. So
Nabuchadnerzzar with all his pomp. This is a most heavy state and condition
for Gods good child to be forsaken of his best friends which seemed so
religious and so faithful unto him: as he complains chap. 19. 19. All my
secret friends abhorred me, they whom J loved are turned against me. The like
heavy state we read that David fell into once or twice. For in the 38.
Psalm, having symptoms of a most dangerous disease from the beginning to the
11. verse, there he says: My lovers and my friends stand aside from my
plague, and my kinsmen stand a far off.

2. Note how still this holy man having lost all outward help and comfort, he
thinks nothing yet better for him then to humble himself, and still to
worship God religiously. Here must be a good sound heart and faith, Here is
a strong faith that seeing nothing but signs of anger yet still does rest in
God.
that seeing no outward sign of Gods favor, seeing all friends forsake him
as an hypocrite, yet still he believes, still he hopes and hanges upon the
Lord. Here appears that the words were not fained which afterward he spoke,
chap. 13. 15. Lo though he slay me, yet will J trust in him, and I will
reprove my ways in his sight. Job fights against all his own affections, and
strives to overcome them, The wicked being scorched with such a venomous
inflammation would rore, and the best men would groan woefully. Job. 19.25.27.
and to captiuate his soul a quiet prisoner unto the Lord. He sets no great
store by this present life, he has eue^ renounced himself and his own will,
and does as it were speak unto the Lord: do thy pleasure with me, beat me
and bruise me as small as this dust, yet will I trust in thee: nay turn me to
the very dust when it shall please thee, for I know my redeemer lives, and
that I shall rise again and see him with these eyes.

Verse 9. Then said his wife unto him, Do thou continue yet in thine
Bethumatheka.
vprightnes? Barek.
bless God and die.


Do thou continue in thine vprightnes? That is, do thou yet continue
silent, as if thou werest a sound man, art thou nothing moved with this
horrible calamity? or have thou not a dead and a benumbed conscience, and
can not feel nor see by thine hypocrisy by most evident signs of Gods wrath
upon thee?

Bless God and die. That is, be not silent man, but humbly confess before God
thine ignorance, folly, and hypocrisy, (for God assuredly is angry with thee)
so give God the glory, and have care that now thou may die in a true faith
and unfeigned repentance. This is it, was spoken to men in misery, or appointed
to die as malefactors: as Josh. 7.19. Joshua speaks to Achan words to the
like effect, My son I beseech thee give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and
make confession unto him, and show me now what thou have done. q.d. These
torments can not proceed but from an angry God. Thou have assuredly provoked
Gods wrath with some close sins of hypocrisy, otherwise we could never have
suffered all this loss of our substance and children, and now thou art so
deadly wounded in thine own body, I think she is of the same judgment with
his friends which came to visit him.
wherefore confess thine hypocrisy, give glory unto God, and so depart in
faith and repentance: Thou seem to carry within thee a frosen heart so
silent. It is not like that this woman the mother of so good a family should
be so void of religion: 2. humanity, and 3. common sense, as to bid Job curse
or blaspheme God. That cannot be the meaning of these words in this place: for
it cannot be that she durst be her self such an open enemy unto God. 4. This
speech were vain to him. This is the greatest torment that Job has yet borne.

1. Let all men here learn to take heed of Satan even then when they seem
they would do good: Jobs wife like as all his friends was in this great error,
that all great calamities did ever proceed from Gods great wrath and anger:
Pro. 25.11. A word spoken in his place is like apples of gold and pictures of
silver. By good words the holy Ghost both breeds and confirms faith.
for this cause are they so vehement in disputation against Job, still
concluding him an hypocrite, that they might drive him to repentance to escape
Gods wrath, but Satan's purpose was by their hot speeches to drive him to
desperation. Now his wife makes a fair preface for this purpose, therefore
Satan begins with her, for he is well acquainted with the weakness of this sex,
and how fit they be to entrap and deceive others: again no injuries so gall
us, as those which proceed from our best friends. Lastly, this woman bearing
chief authority in that house, all friends and servants must follow her
example And so they did indeed, as appears chap. 19. 14. 15. 16. 17.

2. The greatest comfort under the cross, and that (as John says) which
overcomes all our enemies, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
is our faith accompanied with love out of a pure heart and a good conscience.
Now take from us faith and the joy and comfort of our conscience, we be soon
torn in pieces, and broken in spirit, specially when we be crucified and
tormented in body. This if Satan could persuade him by these disputations,
he thinks he might sore break him, and take his shield from him, and so
cause him to renounce his God. We have within us specially under the cross,
Satan would no doubt feign drive us to this every day, that we loose al our
labor in serving him, and being obedient unto his word, Psalm. 38.
our own carnal wisdom, lusts and affections which are stirring and
mighty: but if Satan steal into us by errors and evil persuasions of men:
then he will strangely torment us.

The wicked do thus scorn Gods people under the cross as hypocrites, and
they have no greater torment: Satan uses it often against the faithful, for
he knows there is no means more effectual to wound their hearts: First, we
see it in David being visited with some grievous sickness, verse 11. friends
stand a far off, enemies talk wicked things and imagine deceit: these
things grieved him sore. And in another Psalm. being sick again, They say a
mischief is light upon him, Psalm. 41.
and he that lies shall no more rise. See (say they) what plagues are come on
him for all his profession. Secondly, in Christ, for he complains as it were
crying against this, psalm. 22.17. I may tell all my bones, yet they behold and
look upon me: meaning scornefully, as it was verified afterward, the story
records it: Luke 22.15. The people stood and beheld, and the rulers mocked
him with them, saying, he saved others let him save himself, etc. But I take
it his wife did not so wickedly practice against him: but being in an error,
as he finds, she No greater torments to Gods people then to be scorned for
their religion, and for to be evil entreated even of their familiar friends.
would persuade him that his faith was not good, that he was not greatly sound,
because Gods hand was now so strangely sent forth against him, etc. It is a
grievous thing for the godly to have the wicked to scorn them and their
profession, as we see in David often. But if they be censured, misdeemed, and
spoken evil of by the faithful, it is the greatest torment that can be to
their souls: for they greatly desire to please Gods people, Romans 15.30.31.
Remedies, when either enemies do so scorn us, or friends persuade us amiss,
are those which we see David use and Christ: first, silence. So David: But I as
a deaf man heard not. Psalm. 38.13.
So Christ: so Job a long time. 2. By faith and hope to wait on God: On thee O
Lord do I waste. 3. Prayer and meditation. So David, so Christ, so Job. These
remedies used Job: for he spoke nothing seven days and seven nights, chap.
2. 13.

1. Keep faith and a good conscience carefully: for they are like to be thy
best friends in the evil day. 2. Remember the remedies these men used under
the cross: first, silence: secondly, hope: thirdly, prayer.

Verse. 10. But he said unto her, thou speak like a foolish woman: what?
shall we receive good at Gods hand, and not receive evil? Jn all this did not
Job sin with his lips.


This verse contains 2. things: 1. A sharp reproof of his wife: a foolish
woman, etc. 2. Arguments which testify of his faith and courage, and to bridle
her impatiencie: 1. Such as receive good must receive some scourges. We have:
Ergo. 2. Whom God commendes, they be found, etc.



Thou speak like a foolish woman. That is, albeit I think not that thou
speak of any malice or hatred against me: Stulta^ opponit sapienti, and
circumspectae.
for we have long dwelt together in the fear and worship of God, etc. yet I
see thou art not so wise nor circumspect as thou ought to be. Thou art of
judgment that great calamities and plagues proceed only for sin, and from
the wrath of God: but I think far otherwise, that whereas we have received
many blessings from God, we must also otherwhiles receive some chastisements,

Shall we accept Kabal suscipere acceptare, acqiuescere.
receive good at Gods hand, and not accept Kabal suscipere acceptare,
acqiuescere.
receive evil. That is, we receive blessings from God thankfully, and
cheerfully: so let us receive his corrections and rods in like manner as
thankfully: for these crosses be as good and as needful for us as his
blessings: his love is nothing changed, but he would have us every day by all
means bettered, etc. The same hebrew word is twice used Kabal, which
signifies to receive thankfully and with a glad heart: q.d. Shall we receive
thankfully his blessings, and shall we not receive as quietly and comfortably
his fatherly corrections, howsoever they be tart and bitter for a season? thou
have bin my companion in prosperity, will thou bear no part of mine adversity?
we had many blessings in common, the Lords chastisements are most laid on me,
thou shall bear the least part, now I pray thee let us receive Gods rods
thankfully.

In all this Job sinned not with his lips. That is, Job behaved himself as a
religious and an obedient child, in bearing patiently all his crosses, and so
also this last calumniation against him. As he bridled inwardly and overcame
his own affections and lusts by faith and godly meditations in silence, so he
overcame with good words in patience all his wives folly. He spoke not evil
of his wife, nor of any, as the manner is of the wicked to justify themselves
by condemning others: he did neither give evil speech to his wife, nor spoke
any evil words against Gods providence: far from blasphemy, chap. 1. 22.

1. Here we learn to temperate our speeches in afflictions. Doctrine.
Patience under the cross: good words or silence.
Job is patient in heart, patient in mind, and patient in words, and yet he is
provoked every way. He does not in impatiencie fret in silence, when his wife
reproues him as an hypocrite: neither does he burst out into reuiling speeches
against God or man: neither yet does he leave his wife without reproof. Thou
art not wise woman, says he, thou art weak and foolish, and thou can not
well judge of Gods most holy providence, and of his needful corrections. Wise
reproves be very needful, Leuit. 19.17. Prou. 9.8. Psalm. 141.4.5. Cain
rayles, Esau chafes, and is full of desperate and bloody speeches: he spoke
openly, My father will dye shortly, and I will kill him: The days of mourning
for my father will come shortly. Genesis 27.41.

We see God does us many good turns, and shall we endure no evil at his hand
when it pleases him?
2. When men receive blessings, no thanks, to be thankful: but how many are
there which forget not soon all the good they receive? And where shall you
find a man, which if you offend him never so little, is not ready to forget
all the good he has received? And as men do with men, so do they with God.
In prosperity they be thankful, and persuade themselves of his favor, and
praise him: but under the cross they murmur, and think upon nothing so much
as his justice and wrath. Job on the contrary he forgets not now what good
he has received, and argues by the former blessings both spiritual and
temporal which he has received from God, that for these chastisements he ought
to be thankful, they cannot proceed but from a loving father. Job here
practices that which James commands: Job does both teach and practice.
James. 1.2. Heb. 12.8.9.10.11. Job. 15.3.
My brethren, count it exceeding joys when ye fall into diverse temptations.
We must be ready at all hours to send God whom again the blessings which he
lent us, with thankfulness. In adversity, meditations of Gods love, grace and
mercy in Christ: in prosperity, meditations of Gods judgments, rods and
justice are best. So did Job, in prosperity he gave himself no rest, for
fear of displeasing his God, he so thought of his rods and anger, chap. 3. 26.
In adversity he strives to be cheerful, and to think of Gods goodness.

This argument, and the meditation of it, is a singular preservative in
adversity. Consider ever under the cross of Gods former love toward thee,
and so confirm thy self.
For whether we consider the temporal blessings of God, or spiritual, which
concern our salvation, we must needs be comforted in the due consideration
of them. Run through some particulars, in thy conception, thy birth thine
election, etc. behold his almighty power, providence and goodness, etc. But
selecting and calling thee by Jesus Christ unto everlasting glory, from endless
shame: how can thou once think of this, but thou must be exceedingly ravished
with joy and be full of thankfulness? and shall not this God send us bitter
crosses for a time on earth, which means to advance us to such endless glory
in heaven?

3. Note here the true mark of Gods faithful children: first, where it is said
he offended not with his lips: The meaning is not that he grudged inwardly,
and spoke well outwardly, but that he had such a bridle for his affections,
that he could well rule his tongue in the midst of this scorching flame of
temptations. Many inward battles had he, but by faith he overcame them so, as
they could not appear outwardly any thing at all in him. An unbeliever will
soon discover himself by an unbridled tongue under the cross.
It is a thing most rare, when a man has many conflicts within, but that some
bitter and evil words escape him without. For this cause says S. James, that
he which sins not with his In word. Iam. 3.2. and 1.26. Psalm. 15.
tongue, is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body.

Of the government of the tongue.
First consider James arguments: (1.) He that cannot bridle his tongue, has
no religion, Iam. 1.26. (2.) He that can bridle and well use it, is a sound
wise man. (3.) He that cannot bridle it, is set on a wild horse back. (4.)
He sits in a ship which wants a rudder or a helm. (5.) An evil tongue like
a flame burns up all, even all the world, the devil fires it. (6) He that
has an evil tongue, is full of sin. (7) The wicked man's tongue cannot be
tamed. (8) Full of deadly poison. (9) He cannot be a faithful man which has
an evil tongue. Blessing and cursing are contrary.

One thing be sure, till thou have a good heart thou have never a good tongue,
Math. 15.19. Learn to speak well to God, so shall thou speak well to men.
The tongue is a notable instrument well governed, the worst part if it be
evil: evil by nature, hard to be ruled: let us often pray for the good
government and good use of the tongue.

Thus far of wicked spirits: and now something would be said of the good Angels
which kept Job, and keep us every day. Psalm. 34.7. First, They are many, Math.
26.53.2. Of great strength, Psalm. 103.20.3. Faithful in their obedience,
ibid. 4. They rejoice in our good, Luke 15.7.10.5. When we dye, they carry our
souls to heaven, Luke 16. verse. 22.

Verse. 11.12.13. Now when Jobs three friends heard of all this evil that was
come upon him, they came every one from his own place, to wit, Eliphaz the
Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they were
agreed together to come to lament with him, and to comfort him.


In these me^ which visited Job in his afflictions, we are to consider: 1. What
moved the^ to visit him: 1. They heard of his calamity and misery. 2. They
were his dear friends.
2. With what sympathy and love they came unto him: 1. They agreed together to
come and perform this duty. 2. They intended in love, to come and lament
with him. 3. They came to comfort him by all means that they could best do it.
3. When they were come to the place, note 1. The signs of their true love: 1.
Weeping. 2. Renting garments. 3. Humbled in the dust. 4. Sat down by him 7.
days and 7. nights.

2. What moved the^ to be silent: 1. They waited opportunity. 2. His sore and
pain did increase.



Now when Jobs three friends. No doubt he had many, When any of the faithful
are afflicted all the the world will ring of it, how much more if they be rich.
being in that high pitch of dignity, chap. 29. but these these were his
special most wise, and faithful friends.

Heard of all this evil which came upon Job. That is, all the former
calamities, loss of substance, loss of children, these last torments in his
own body.

They came every one from his own place. These three great men which are here
named, came every one from his own country or possessions where they dwelt,
Genesis 25. and 36. not alone, but accompanied with many no doubt, which came
partly with them as attendants, and with a number which came purposely to see
Job for diverse causes.

Eliphaz the Themanite. Job and his friends al come of the same ancetors: for
it semes they came all of Esau.
These surnames some have thought were given them of the places, towns, or
cities whence they came: but the best interpreters say these were the names of
their ancesters, that Eliphaz is called a Themanite of Theman the son of
Eliphaz, Genesis 36.11 42. which was the first borne of Esau. And yet we know
Theman was a city in Edom, Ierem. 49.7. Baruc. 3.12. which did bear name of
that man, and this Eliphaz might be Lord of it: so he may bear the name of
the town and his fathers also.

Bildad the Shuhite. Of Shua the son of Abraham by Ketura his second wife,
Genesis 25.2.

Zophar the Naamathite. Some say of Zopho, son to that Eliphaz, Esaus eldest
son, Genesis 36.11. Some say his name is set down figuratively, Metathesis.
of Timna one of the Dukes which came of Esau, verse. 40. And yet it may be
this man came of a town called Naamah, which afterward fell by lot to the
tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.41.

They were agreed together to come. That is, they came not by chance, they
came purposely with one consent, they thought to join their counsel, heads,
hands and hearts together to do him good.

To mourn with him, and to comfort him. They came in love, they would ease his
sorrow if they could any way bear any part of it, and they desired to comfort
him by prayer, and conference.

1. First, behold in these three men a singular president, for love and
wisdom. For love they were dear friends, they mourned and were touched in
their hearts for the calamities of their friend, they desired to comfort him
and mourn with him: Their discourses following show they were men of rare
gifts for wisdom and knowledge. These men follow Christ's counsel faithfully.
Math. 18.18.19.
for godly wisdom, they agree together with all the best means and counsel
they can to communicate unto him all the signs of their love. So Esaias came to
Hezekiah to comfort him, and admonish, and to pray for him. 2. King. 20.1.12.

1. They agree together. They know no prayers can prevail with God, without
consent of minds. Verily I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree
together in earth upon any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be
given them of my father which is in heaven: for where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

2. They mourn with them which mourn. Romans 12.15.16. Rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep: be of like affection one toward
another.

3. They came to comfort his mind with counsel, admonition, exhortation:
Comfort the feeble 1. These. 5.14.
minded, bear with the weak, be patient toward all men. Thus they had a good
purpose and meaning. But they so failed afterward in the manner and form of
consolation and conference, that Job found no greater torment by any calamity,
then by their speeches, Job. 16.2.
howsoever wise and godly, yet indiscreetly and unadvisedly applied unto him:
insomuch that he complains against them all. Job. 16.4.
Ye pretend a good purpose, that ye came to comfort me: but miserable
comforters are you all. They came not we see to mock him, but to comfort him:
and yet in their contention and heat of disputation against him, they gave him
some hard and ironical speeches. For he says, I could shake mine head at you:
meaning, I could scorn you as you do me for my misery: but I will not
requite one evil with another.

Use.
1. When God gives us love toward our poor brethren, let us ask him
wisdom, that we may know how to relieve and comfort them: and when God gives
us wisdom to know how to do good, let us pray for love, to move and stir
up our affections to do all the good we can for them.

2. It is hard to find a man of such wisdom and love, that is a right sound
Physician to cure the sores and wounds of distressed souls and troubled
consciences: These men be so rare, that as Elihu says afterward, Chap. 33. 23.
ye shall hardly find such a messenger, such a comforter, one among a thousand.

3. The world is full at this day of such friends as will agree with you to
mirth and feasting, but few come to the house of mourning: or if they come,
they are utterly unable to speak one good word to comfort the heart of the
afflicted.

So far of their affliction before they came: Now of their love and
compassion being present.

Verse 12. So when they lift up their eyes a far off, they knew him not:
therefore they lift up their voices and wept, and every one of them rent his
garment, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.


SO when they lift up their eyes a far off. Many arguments of love.
They were told of his miserable state, they therefore before they came near
him, they look upon him a far off, and know him not: he was in such a pickle,
that he had lost all form and fashion, more like a dead beast then any living
man.

Therefore they lift up their voices and wept. These tears were not
counterfeit, they did proceed from true love and sound affection: howsoever
afterward they were so amazed with the greatness of the calamity, that they
thought him such an abject and so far from grace, The thought afterward no
word (...) be sp^ unto him but law and judgment.

2. Signs of great sorrow and lamentation.


as not worthy of any good word of comfort: for they reproved him sharply,
because they desired to humble him, for they thought him a very hypocrite.

Every one of them rent his garment. Such was the custom of those times in all
strange accidents and calamities, as Genesis 37.29. verse. 34. supra cap. 1.20.
This the hypocrites also did, and therefore Joel calls for a new rending of the
heart, chap. 2. 13.

And sprinkled dust upon their head. That is, they humbled themselves,
acknowledging that they were but dust and ashes, as Abraham, Genesis 18. and
unworthy to be above the earth, so Joshua and the elders of his time, Josh.
7.6.

1. Now such as visit the ficke may learn here what affections and love they
must carry with them to the house of mourning, if they will do good. First,
such as meet for this purpose must be of one heart and mind. 2. They must be
men known or well heard of, friends if it may be. 3. They must be wise men
and of an unspotted life. 4. They must be such as both can and will mourn and
take to heart the misery of the afflicted, Psalm. 41.1.5. These men must come
prepared and of purpose to comfort him. 6. They must make themselves ready
unto prayer, and for this cause before the sick humble themselves carefully,
that he may join with them in prayers unto God. 7. They must judge wisely of
the sick according to their knowledge of his former life, and present
afflictions. They must be thankful to God for his patience. 8. They must never
conclude of the favor of God concerning him, by the greatness or quality of
his torments, Eccles. 9.1.2. For no man knows love or hatred of all that is
before them, all things come alike to all. Eccle. 9.1.2.
By the events of this present life it cannot be discerned, who is in, who is
out of Gods favor. These points we have noted at large in the treatise of
fasting.

Verse 13. So they sat by him upon the ground 7. days and 7. nights, and none
spoke a word unto him: for they saw that his pain was Or that his pain was
inc^sed exceedingly.
exceeding great.


Behold here arguments of great sympathy and love, considering his state, for
Job infected with a most venomous and pestilenciall plague, his sent, and
lothsomnes was intolerable: and yet they sit on the ground 7. days, etc. by
him. But the meaning is not that they never departed from that place 7. days
and 7. nights: nor that they fasted so long: But that they spent the greatest
part of 7. days and 7. nights sitting and mourning in silence by him.

And none spoke a word unto him They came to comfort him by speech and prayer,
but now they stand so amazed as that they cannot speak a word to him, but no
doubt speak much to God in their hearts.

For they saw that his pain was exceeding great or did increase exceedingly.
They kept silence for a time not only for the strangenes of the evil, but also
to see if his pain would any thing decrease, that so he might the better
attend to their words: but all this time of silence they showed great signs of
love: one cause therefore of their silence was, they waited for opportunity and
time to speak, and herein they did well, Prou. 25.11. For a word spoken in
time, or a word spoken in his place is like apples of gold with pictures of
silver, etc. Another cause was, they were of a doubtful judgment concerning
him, they thought verily God had forsaken him and set marks of his anger upon
him. Therefore they doubted how and what to speak, as after appears by their
long speeches and conference with him.

1. Learn here what wisdom is required in them which would comfort afflicted
consciences. They must not only show signs of (...), they must be also very
circumspect and prudent as in words, so in gestures when they come to the
sick. They must not exceed in mourning and lamentation, they must not be so
amazed as these good friends were, because of strange afflictions: for what
will this effect in Jobs heart but astonishment, grief and sorrow, and
desperation, if God help not speedily as here we see. They should rather after
a time have reioiced with praising God for his faith and patience. This now
argues in them great want of judgment, and no marvel though Job complained
afterward, Miserable comforters are you all.

2. Lastly, note how Satan deals with Job in this sickness, we see he smites
him not all at once, but rackes him again by degrees to see what he can wring
out of Job: for it is said that his pain and torment did still increase 7.
days. and 7. nights. And besides this rack in his body, the silence and
gesture of his friends did so torment his mind, that at the last he cries out
in that bitter manner we see, ca. 3. like a man in frenzy, which through some
grievous sickness has lost his wits.

FINIS.

