HOLLANDI Post-huma.

A FUNERAL ELEGY OF KING JAMES: WITH A CONGRATVLATORY Salve TO KING CHARLES.

An Elegy of the Magnanimous HENRY Earl of Oxford.

A Description of the late great, fearful and and Prodigious Plague: and
diverse other patheticall Poemes, Elegies, and other Lines, on diverse subjects.

The Post-humes of ABRAHAM HOLLAND, sometimes of Trinity-Colledge in CAMBRIDGE.

The Authors EPITAPH, made by himself.

CANTABRIGIAE, Impensis, HENRICI HOLLAND. 1626.

The Names or Titles of the ensuing ELEGIES, etc.
AN Elegy or some Post-hume tears for King JAMES: and A Congratulatorie Salve
to King CHARLES. An Elegy on the Death of the Magnanimous HENRY Earl of
Oxford, etc. A Poem written in the late Plague-time, to diverse the Authors
endeered worthy Friends, then in the Country. A Description of the late great
and prodigious Plague. A Satyricall Poem against one that did falsely accuse
the Author to the late Lord Keeper, of a Libell against JOHN OVVENS Monument in
Paul's. A Poem of his own dear Father being Sick. A Poem to his Friends in
his own sickness, with a resolution against Death. A Letter, savouring of
Mortification, written in the time of the late Visitation of the Plague, to his
dear Brother H.H. A Confession of his sins to God, with a testimony of his
Faith. A metricall Version of part of the 73. Pslame. T. C. the Authors
endeered friend, his poetical Version of the 91. Psalm. A Meditation on the
6. Psalm, verse 4. and 5. With some other Meditations in his Sickness, and a
Prayer. His Bodies Vale to his best Part. His Epitaph made by himself.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIGH-BORNE HERO, GEORGE, LORD GORDON, EARL OF
ENGIH: AND CAPTAIN OF THE GVARDDV-CORPS (commonly called IEAN DV-GVARD) to his
Majesty of FRANCE: Son and Heir apparent, to the most Noble and Valerous
the Marquisse of HVNTLEY.
Right Honorable:
MY LORD: The Author of these Poemes and other Lines, my dear Brother, being
lately Deceased, and I loath that his Elaborate works should die, and be buried
in Oblivion, thought good rather to commit them to the Press, And do make
bold to make choice of your Noble Self, desiring you to deigne the Patronage
of them: And I am induced so to do in two respects; First, because your Honor
is the Prime Mecaenas of the Muses, of your Noble Rank, that I know, of Great
Britain: Secondly, for that I am not ignorant of you Honors favorable and
benign acceptance of some other the Authors Poemes, from his own hands. Why
shall I then doubt of your Acceptance of these? The Orphans of him, who to say
no more, whiles he had breath, as he was much obliged, so did highly prize and
honor your Lordship.

Vouchsafe therefore, most Noble Lord, not only the Patronage hereof against
the malevolent detractors and vulgar mouths (if any such there be) but the
pardoning of my audacitie herein, being altogether unknown unto you.

Now, Noble SIR, as the World knows you were one of King JAMES his Northern
WORTHIES; so, who will deny but our gracious King CHARLES accounts you no
less? And that your Honor, Name and Fame, are not confined within the Empire
of Great Britain, appears by that thrice honorable Office conferred on you by
the most Christian French King: I pray GOD give you increase of Honor on
Earth, and hereafter immortal Honor in Heaven. And so, I humbly take my leave
of your Noble Lordship.

Your Honors most obsequious to be Commanded: H. H.

TO The ingenious and ingenuous Reader, especially such as were the deceased
Authors Friends.
GENTLEMEN, I have enterprised to commit these ensuing Lines, my deceased
Brothers Orphans, unto the Press, at mine own proper Charges, not to make
them common; for I hold them better worth than to be exposed to the vulgar
View of every Ignoramus or Non-intelligit: The world already being full
fraught and farced with stuff fit for their understanding. What these are, I
need not tell you that knew the Author; And for your sakes principally have I
made this Impression, of no more Copies than I think to distribute unto ye,
his (and some of mine own) endeered and worthy Friends. I hope you will
vouchsafe them benign Acceptance, and me condign thanks: by which, I shall
be encouraged to publish other his larger Labors which I have lying by me.
And so I wish you all an hearty Vale, and of you take my leave.

Yours to Command. H. H.

MICHAEL DRAYTON Esquire, and Poet-Laureat, in Commendation of the AVTHOR and
his first published Poem, NAVMACHIA.
BY this one Lim, my HOLLAND, we may see
What thou in time at thy full growth may be,
Which Wit by her own Symetrie can take,
And thy proportion perfectly can make
At thy Ascendant: that when thou shall show
Thy self; who reads thee perfectly shall know
Those of the Muses by this little light
Saw before other where to take thy height.
Proceed, let not Apollo's stock decay,
POETS and KINGS are not borne every day.
E C. Master of Arts, upon the same.
SEnd forth, young man, from Muses womb,
Thy other Royal Births at home,
But slowly, slowly send them forth,
Lest for their number and their worth
The envious hand of Fates take hold,
And crop thee; for they will think thou art Old.
I. W. I C. Upon the same.
THat this small Piece the World should hazard first,
Of other better Works thy Muse has nursed
To wonder I was forced, unless't be done
As a small Star does usher forth the Sun.
E.P. Theologus, amico suo ARAHAMO HOLLANDO, D. PHILEMONIS F. in NAVMACHIAM
suam.
NAumachiam lustrando tuam, mihi flumine visus,
Iugenij placido desperijsse tui:
Arma virum, tabulas Guleas, and Scuta per ^^das
Aspicio, and men's est Carmine mersa simul.
Emergo! and tabulas votiuas dedico Musae,
Docte HOLLANDE tua, quae been facta canit.
FINIS.
AN ELEGY: OR, SOME POSTHVME TEARS, UPON THE ROYAL HEARSE OF OUR LATE
SOVEREIGNE JAMES, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, France, and Jreland; Defender of the
Faith, etc.

Who Died at his Manor of THEOBALDS, the XXVII. of March, 1625.

By ABRAHAM HOLLAND.

Printed for HEN. HOLLAND. M.DC.XXVI.

TO THE RIGHT HIGH and MIGHTY CHARLES, OF GREAT BRITAIN, France, and Jreland;
the first King (of that Name) and second Monarch: Defender of the FAITH, etc.
Sole Inheritor of his Royal Fathers KINGDOMS and VERTVES. AND To King JAMES
his Jmmortall Memory.
This Elegy is Consecrated by his Sacred Majesty's humblest and meanest
Subject.

AN ELEGJE: OR, Some Posthume tears, upon the Royal Hearse of our late
Sovereign King JAMES.
NOw that the Land has nigh forgot to weep,
And JAMES the Good more peaceably does sleep
In his vnblamed Vrne, and th'Vniversities,
Upon his Hearse from their lamenting eyes
Have thrown their Pearls, and through the widdow'd Town
The curious wits have jewelled his Crown,
Pardon if now poor I do spend a tear,
Though far unequal to my care, to bear
My sorrow company, if I commence
A Nania now, and end it two years hence,
I Will chide my grief, which could so soon express
It self by speech, when speech makes sorrow less.
He Is dead; if some preciser man should ask
Who it is I mean, tell him that is a task
A mortal cannot answer; let him fly
To be resolved first to Philosophy,
And there make search, what skillful nature can
Invent that is curious to produce a man
Next, and most like a Deity: and hence
Rise to a Metaphysick excellence,
And transcend Nature, let him there suppose
The soul's clear faculties, as they rose
Perfect from the Creator, and withal
Know such an one is dead, who did recall
All decayed virtues: Who had he lived that day
When wise PROMETHEUS mankind formed of clay,
He might have bin the Stamp pure and refined,
To Have molded off all future humane Kind:
But how these sparks which nature first did frame
Were ripened by Time, and made a flame
What graces did accrue unto the mind
Of Him that is dead, when it was disciplinde
And formed by Arts additions, would require
Praemeditations long and works entire,
As HOMER happly being desired to clear
What the Ithacan or fierce ACHILLES were,
Could not their well-knowne Excellence descrie
Under an Iliad and an Odyssie:
Nor VIRGILL tell what his AENEAS was,
Until his answer did make up the Mass
Of full twelve Books: had now some Poet more
And purer fancies than those Swans before
Ever enjoyed, he could but meanly sing,
And weakly tell what was our now-dead King.
He was a Man, a King, a God, above
The reach of envy feared alone for love,
And yet he is dead, he that few days ago
Had said so much, had bin Great Britains foe,
Alas it is past an Omen now, and Fate
Has given us a bad license to relate
The hated truth, nor treason is it to say
His Funeral was kept on such a day;
We need no Calculations now, or Art
of Stars to gather, when his mortal part
Will pay the due to nature, he has paid,
And She has him a full acquittance made
Of all his debt: and now much like a strong
And nimble-winged Eagle, which has long
Bin pent in some close Cage, his vn-hous'd sprite
On able Plumes has tan'e a joyful flight
Up to the Sun, while we poor men below
Gaze at the sight, and after him can throw
Only our vows: O whither Thou by this
White Soul, art crowned in a Throne of bliss
That stands on Eternity, and thence
With a new Power, as an intelligence
Do rule some Orb: or whether thou and thine,
Thy wisdom and thy Clemency do shine
As a new Constellation, in some Sphere,
Where nor the Power of winds and storms appear,
Or any Gust: that hears not the clash
Of Thunder, sees no lightnings sulph'ry flash.
But there as in a pleasing dream do lie
Bathed in bliss and fixed Tranquillity,
Having attained unto that which Thou
So sought'st on Earth, but full possessed of now
Eternal Peace, while neighboring Stars admire
To see so bright a guest increase their quire.
Or whether thou with Angels do consent
To hold an everlasting Parliament,
In robes as white as those wherein the Quire
Of surpluss'd Saints sing Carolls and admire
Their Makers glory ermin'd all with lights,
And stars that glitter in serenest nights,
The purple, not such as the Tyrian shell
Does yield, or th'high-pric'd Indian Cuchenel,
But such as decks the proud Aurora, when
She shows her blushing face to bed rid men,
Or such as is for Coverlets dispread,
To weary Phoebus on his Western bed.
Where er'e thou art, refined Soul, if so
The shades of men freed from their prison, Know
And see what is done on Earth, o understand
And view the sorrow of thy widowed Land;
Pardon our Avarice if we would feign
Enjoy our CHARLES? yet have our JAMES again,
England with one consent would gladly view
A Heptarchy again of such as You
Without division: Much I cannot blame
Those Idle Wizards, who did blindely aim
At Truth they knew not, when it is agreed,
That now Thou art an an Emperor indeed,
And far above a King; Thy Laureat soul
Being rid in triumph to her Capitol,
Nor art thou fallen, but as in purest nights,
In a full quire of Stars we see some lights
Dissemble ruin, which when man kind saw
At first, it thought that Fate had broke the law
Of Nature, and let loose those rolling eyes,
Which be the Garrison and centuries
To the brass Wall of heaven and do keep
Those golden Vaults in a still-waking sleep.
Thy Son is living, who is so misled
While he does live to say that Thou art dead?
Shall we here blame great Fate or love it, which
Has us at once made both extremely rich
And most deplored poor? which has the store
Of hidden India given us, and more
Than er'e the pale and greedy Spaniard knew
In wretched Mexico, or rich Peru,
(Where ambush'd rocks of Gold and silver found
Look pale and blush to leave the guilty ground)
But has bereaved us of a Mint, a Coin
That went for current, unto which did Join
Refined Excellence: or, shall we say
By this our loss, that Fate did but display
Her indiscretion, which does poize the States
Of men alike, and mighty Potentates?
The will of Destiny, which has snatched away
The Western Sun, and yet remains a Day
As bright as if it still did here abide,
Has stopped the Current, yet the stream does ride
In Crystal beauty; has impli'de a Change
Without an alteration, yea, more strange
Produced a joyful sadness: that the while
We are a weeping, we do often beguile
The victory of sorrow with a gleame
Of present Joy, like as a sudden beam
Strikes from a Tempest; you can pass no way,
But by th'occurrent, one may justly say
There Is a strange Conflict, a strange Monster bred,
Of Joy and Sorrow streaming from one head
The King: See, here comes on a drouping man
With anguish printed in his brow, pale, wan,
And only moving; ask him what is the cause,
And you shall hear him after a sad pause
So well as grief will give him leave, to say
The best of Kings, the best of men, this day
Has left us wretched Mortals to deplore
That bliss, that peace, that wisdom, which before
We knew not how to value, till the want
Tells us how negligent and Ignorant
We were of so great happiness: Thus he
Will make his sorry answer, or may be
Be altogether silent to descrie
Th'importance of the new calamity.
For greatest miseries which should declare
Excess of sorrow, dumb and silent are.
But do I not through all the people hear
Good Omens, and glad acclamations tear
Th'astonish'd air, so loud and shrill, that Spain
And Germany do stand amazed again:
An art of memory would little aid
To recall sorrow, when that word is said
King CHARLES: As when in some uncertain weather
Two diverse winds do join their blasts together
The wavering Forests, and the Neuter Corn
You then may see, now this, now that way borne,
Still most inclining to the conquering blast
That did prevail, and breathe upon them last.
I do confess, the gain of such a King
We now enjoy, may well some solace bring
For our dead JAMES: Yet as we often see
In a religious Grove some aged Tree,
As a long-liued Oak, or bald-head Elm,
Which not so many Storms could ouer-whelme,
So many Keen and surly Winters rage,
But there it stands respected for the age,
Although the arms and seared bough's do fade,
And that it with the trunk does make a shade
Rather than leaves: yet underneath the Faunes
And Syluan Gods from farre-remooued Launes
Shelter themselves; and when it falls the sweet
And gentle Nymphs, and horn-hoof'd Satyrs meet
To wail their loved Shed, which often did tame
The rage of July, and the Dog-starres flame.
Could we suppose another Sun would rise,
And make his Zodiac from the Southern skies
And set in the North, leaving the East as chill
As th'Orcades, yet we should think on still
Our ancient friend the former Sun, whose power
So many a Spring, so many a joyful hour
Produced before: o! it is hard to say,
When Customarie virtue's tan'e away
How great the grief is, though perhaps the bliss
That does ensue to the other equal is.
There is an old wives Proverb that the Spring
May make an Ague Physic for a King,
And God this Medicine did to him apply,
To cure him of diseased mortality,
And settle him Eternal: where, nor age
Does follow Time, as in this Pilgrimage
Of our sad life, nor sickness, pain, or fear,
Or Decrement of beauty does appear,
But health eternal, and felicities
Without impair, and Life that never dies.
What man hereafter that partaketh sense,
But much more, reason, will wish residence
In this dark vale of life, where every hour
Is spent or lost, or subject to the power
Of dominiering Sin, especially
When thus good Kings, our Gods Tutelar die*
Alas, while we in this life travail fare,
We are but wretches hovering in the air
With waxen Plumes, where fear still leads the trace,
And too much heaven brings us to earth apace,
To bring us unto heaven: we Comers are
Whose sudden luster and prodigious hair
Affrights the world with wonderment, if we
Placed too high, or too inferior be.
Ah! who would trust on the deceiving state
O^ slipperie Crowns, held at as dear a rate
As often purchased, and again resigned,
All-wayes with cares and anguish of the mind.
This great, good, wise, and learned Monarch, whom
The world affirmed the Light of Christendom:
The Northern Star and Wonder of his time,
Who was the moment of this Western clime,
And held it in just poize: who did devise,
But now the Embryo's of Policies
Which Fate is still a teeming: this good King
Alas, is come unto his Evening;
And after souls and bodies last divorce,
Lies in the Grave a cold vnlived Corse.
Good Soul sleep sweet, and quiet, and do Thou
That do reviue, our King, smoothe up that brow
That gives thy people life, do Thou appease
Thy grief, and the contagion will cease
Of too much care: But if Thou still do keep
Sorrow I Will swear he is dead that does not weep.
Almighty God assist Thee, and the Winds.
Be Champions for CHARLES, what er'e He minds.
AN ELEGY UPON THE DEATH OF THE RIGHT NOBLE and Magnanimous Hero, HENRY Earl
of Oxford, Viscount Bulbec, Lord Samford, and Lord great Chamberlain of
England.

WHO SICKENED IN SERVICE OF HIS KING and Country, in defense of the States.
And died at the Hagh in Holland. April 1625.

By ABRAHAM HOLLAND.

Printed 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND NOBLE LADY, DIANA, Countess of OXFORD, Dowager of
the Deceased HENRY Earl of OXFORD, Viscount BVLBEC, Lord SAMFORD, and Lord
great Chamberlain of ENGLAND. AND, TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND APPROVED
Soldier, ROBERT VERE, the succeeding Earl of OXFORD, Heir apparent to the
same Noble Titles and Honors.
To both their Honors, This Elegy is Consecrated.

By H. H.
An Elegy upon the Death of the right Noble and Magnanimous HENRY Earl of
Oxford, Viscount Bulbec, etc.
WHat Star was wanting in the Sky? what place
To be supplied anew? what empty space
That required OXFORD? was some Light grown dim,
Some Star Decrepit that suborned Him
To dark the Earth by his Departure? Sure
The Thracian God to make his Orb more pure
Has borrowed him; where in his fiery Carre
He shines a better MARS, a brighter Star?
Or like a new Orion does he stand
In Crystal Maile, and a bright blade in's hand
An armed Constellation, while the Quire
Of Pyrrhick dancers, with reflecting fire
Glitter on him? or like a Comets rage
Strikes he amazement on the trembling age?
Alas! these glorious fancies but express
His worth and our love to him, not make less
The rape of Fate, while we poor Mortals far
More want such men than heaven could want a Star.
Let Grief then speak, and for this woeful time
Let me nor study Number, Verse, or rhyme,
But write in fragments, so't shall be my due
Though not a Poet good, a Mourner true.
Though I should say no more but, OXFORD's dead,
That would be made an Elegy, to spread
It self as far as sorrow, the Contents
Enlarged to Volumes, by the tears, laments,
And grief in-generall, when the world affords
So vast a comment unto so few words.
Ye Powers above that look on men with eyes
Just and impartial, if in Fate there lies
Still more revenge, o let us wretches know
Our lot before, that we may weep below
A timely expiation, and prevent
The torrent of thy wrath which now is bent
To make a Deluge over us, who have found,
Though after all Great JAMES was laid in ground,
A Plague, and OXFORDS Death: it is hard to say
Which of the two does more our loss display
The ruins both being General: and can
Heaven be so angry with poor feeble man
To persecute him further? No, the rage
Of Pestilence which spreads through the age
Can scarce surpass his loss: cast fear away
Fate cannot teeme more mischief; and must stay
Now at the height of Vengeance: OXFORDS death
Has engaged heaven to spare the rest beneath.
Who, what he living was those men can tell
Who past the North and Southern Poles do dwell
I need not write it: that were but to show
What we now want, and what we once did owe
To such a man, whose like ensuing days
Shall scarce produce: Antiquity may praise
Their HECTORS, and ACHILLES, with a dim
And feigned applause, while we do but right him
In their Encomiums. Who like a Newborn Star
Bred us amazement only, and from far
Made us admire what he in time would be,
And so shut up his Early light, while we
Wonder that Fate could be so prodigal
So soon to show, so quickly to let fall
So great a glory; which we well may say
Had but an hour, a Minute, a short day
That did deserve an age: yea, some will say
As the best things, he made the shorter stay
To Express an Excellence: Yet alas, herein
We do but flatter sorrow and our sin
Which took him hence; for had he stayed till then
When there should be no memory left of men
He Had bin a Choice of heaven, and surpass't
The Annalls and the Chronicles, which vast
Uncertain times have made: do not surmize
That I herein am set t'Hyperbolize,
A strict Historian of the time that says
Less, shall be held Detractour of his Praise.
Yea, future judgments when they shall compare
Him with the rest shall call those writers spare,
Who made him not a Pattern, as the blind
Old HOMER, did ACHILLES, of his Kind.
Alas 'twas nothing in the ancient time
For Noble men to raise their names, and clime
By hauty acts unto the top of Fame,
When as obeisance to their Prince did claim,
And their own Interests, that they should show
Not more what they adventured, than did owe:
When each day almost new invasions, when
Civil disturbance did compel the men
To a forced valor: In those times to have
A TALBOT, ESSEX, or a DRAKE did save
The Country but from damage: but that now
When the now-Sainted JAMES had made a VOW
To bless himself, and us by making Peace:
That not all Spirit, and all MARS should cease
But such a flame from those still ashes rise,
Did save the Land from guilt of Cowardice.
Since OXFORD was a Youth, BELLONA never
Breathed her allarmes in this our Hemisphere,
But he pursued them, with a Noble fire
To fame his Country, and his own desire
Grounded on that: Great Venice and the Fates
Though lucklesse of Bohemia, with the States
Now fatal to him, and th'attempted Seas
Shall be his true, though Posthumes witnesses.
He sought no new-made Honors in the Tide
Of favor, but was borne the same he di'de.
Nor came he to the Elysium with shame
That the old VERES did blush to hear his Name
Brighter than theirs: where his deserts to grace
His Grandfathers rose up and gave him place,
And set him with the Heroes, where the Quire
Of ayrie Worthies rise up, and admire
The stately Shade: those British Ghosts which long
Ago were numbered in th'Elysian throng
Joy to behold him; SYDNEY threw his Bays
On OXFORDS head, and daign'd to sing his praise;
While Fame with silver Trumpet did keep time
With his high Voice, and answered his rhyme.
The soft inticements of the Court, the smiles
Of Glorious Princes the bewitching wiles
Of softer Ladies, and the Golden State
That in such places does on Greatness wait
And all the shadie happiness which seems
To attend Kings and follow Diadems
Were Boy-games to his mind: to see a Mask
And sit it out, he held a greater task
Than to endure a Siege: to wake all Night
In his cold armor, still expecting fight
And the drad Onset, the sad face of fear,
And the pale silence of an Army, were
His best Delights; among the common rout
Of his rough Soldiers to sit hardness out
Were his most pleasing Delicates: to him
A Battered Helmet was a Diadem:
And wounds, his Bravery: Knowing that Fame
And fair Eternity could never claim
Their Meeds without such Hazards: but alas
That we must say, such a Man OXFORD was,
A Hateful Syllable which does implie
Valor can be extinct and Virtue die.
O were not Profanation, I now
Could turn a stiff Pythagorist and allow
A real Metempsychosis, if so
The Soul of OXFORD might divided flow
On much Nobility: and yet my sect
Should honor find from hence, they no Defect.
This was the year of Iubile in Rome
No marvel, 'twas of grief with us at home,
England has bin Romes Sacrifice, the whiles
Our Tears and Funerals have bred their Smiles
A company of sacred Souls before
Him left Mortality, as if the skore
Of Fate were quickly to be paid: but when
He left us wretches to continue men,
While he himself did to a Crown attain
The whole Quire seemed in him to die again:
As if h' had bin the Epitome, and Brief
Of all their Virtues, and of all our grief:
But Fate did act this last and greatest theft
To see if we had any Sorrow left,
As if those loved Souls which went before
Had spent our tears, and left our Eyes no more,
Alas, now pities us and bids us sleep
Seeing when Eyes are done our hearts can weep.
Two Epitaphs upon the same Noble Earl.
EPITAPH. 1.
PAssenger that needs wilt know
Who lies here
First let me crave,
That thou, thy Piety to show
Let fall a tear
Upon the Grave:
It Is Oxford: whom when thou shall find
Entoomb'd below
Who late did live,
Thou thy self shall call unkind,
To have bin so
Jnquisitiue.
EPITAPH. 2.
TO say that OXFORD here or there
Does lie, confines a place
To his unbounded Fame,
That Body which, you balm and sear
That Image you do grace,
Js but his Shade, his Name.
What place of Heaven has his Soul
And his diviner parts,
To mortals is unknown;
This we may say without control,
Jn all true English hearts
His Toombe is made, though they be made of Stone.
FINIS.
A L'envoy to my endeared Friends Mr. R.T. Mr. W.H. Mr. T.C. and others being
in the Country. Serving for an Introduction to the Description of the Plague.
Do you not wonder that in this sad time
I still have leisure to compose a rhyme?
When as a Christian care forbids me now
The help of Poetry, that my hot brow
Should sweat with active Wine, or that my heart
Should be so free from passion to use Art
Unto my wild expressions: The mirth
That entertaines a Muse, and gives a Birth
To happy lines, is far more fit for you
Who in your Countries happiness do view
Our slaughters from a far, as men in sight
That stand remote spectators of a Fight.
Yet I would have both you and all suppose
Sorrow can speak as well in verse as prose
In this great Year of Elegies: indeed
Not with that life, that flame, and active speed.
As when Security did bid me play
With the smooth tresses of Asteria
And wander in her eyes: alas that theme
Is quelled in grief and drowned in the Stream
Of the times sorrow: those Heroic lays
That were begun have thrown away their bays
And clothed themselves in Cypress; and my brow
Expects a Nightcap, more than Laurel now.
Sirs you perhaps are chasing over the Fields
The Hare, the Dear, or what the season yields
Do Imp your Falcons wings, making it fly
A subtle ambusher about the Sky.
We are the Prey of Death and each night stay
The call of Fate, until the Morning say
We may draw forth a Noone; and so at Night
Lie down again not sure of other light
Till the great Resurrection: for may be
Death has his Writ this Night to serve on me.
Do you inquire whether we be afraid
Of Death or no which so soon does invade
So surely Kill, I answer, no: that man
That lives now and view's the storm, and can
Still be afraid of Death, I must surmize
A Renegade, or full of Cowardice:
No Penitent can fear, and he that still
Retains a heart unbroken acts more ill
Than all his life before: that soul is Steel
Which does not bleed, that hell, which does not feel
The present blow: It is with us who here
Hourly view death, as when exempt of fear
At an Ostend or such a Siege to die
The Soldiers thought it a Necessity
And so did slight it, when each hour were shown
So many others Death's t'assure their own.
Endeared Friends, I am well and better much
And in more sweet security than such
Who think of a long life, by these death's here
Being freed from what is worse than death, the Fear.
Seldom is Christian Valor better gained.
Than when it is by such misery obtained.
I doubt not but that Fame which still does use
To spread abroad more large than certain news
Has blazed our State, and happily does assure
As you suppose far more then we endure,
Thus far let me your doubts herein suffice
Rumor it self can scarce Hyperbolize
Our Real woe: Fear it self cannot vow
There is more Mischief than we suffer now:
If you shall hear of Streets wherein the Grass
Does grow for want of men that use to pass
Or Smithfield turned a meadow or a plain
Wherein the Horses, Kine, and Sheep again
May feed rather than sell: or of poor men
That in their Graves together lie by ten
By twenties or by more: or sudden Fates
Of people dying in the streets and gates,
Do not suppose it false, we wretches try
What other Ages shall hold Poetry,
A March in midst of August, and the Star
That reigns now far from Canicular
In all but the effects; not clothed in bright
And scorching Sunshine but in midst of Night
And Winter storms, as if the Plague did fly
Wrapped in those clouds to fright the troubled Sky
And blast mortality: the air the while
Scarce in a Month strikes forth one pleasing smile
Muffled in damps, so close that from beneath
We deem it hard by any way but Death
To see bright Heaven again: The Rural swains
Begin to doubt the Usury of their pains
And Prophecy a Famine: and the Earth
Choked with Carcasses threatens a Dearth
As a Revenge: The Skies the while do shower
Down poisonous tempest to augment the power
Of her pretended Malice: while the breath
Of black contagious winds do transport Death
Through the enuenom'd air: Earth, Air, and Sky
Conspiring to our great Calamity.
In what a case poor London stands, to show
Would ask a Pen and Muse that only know
How to write grief: alas it is become
A Theater of Tragedies, where some
Di'de in the first acts, and many slaughters past
God knows what murder shall be in the last*
I live not in it, but in Chelsey air
Where Death but in his Out-rodes does repair,
And thence do only hear the murmuring Bells
Disclose the slaughter by the frequent Knels.
Yet as a tender Mother though she have
A Child interred, and sleeping in the grave
Yet will she often go see the tomb, and dew
His dust with pious tears, and often renew
His Posthume exequies: so sometime I
Go to behold the City, and epsy
As I do walk along the widdow'd streets
Nothing but sorrow in each face that meets
In the Large ruin nothing but a grief
That speaks it self in silence, true and brief.
Ah dear Sirs, it is changed from the Place
Ye knew it once, when as the beauteous face
Of Gallantrie enriched the Streets, and Eyes
Of frequent beauty made it a Paradise
And the Delight of Nations, whose concourse
Thither, and the Refluxe as from the Source
Of humane Kind did make it seem to be
The Center of the World, the Worlds Epitome.
Death now alas has not begun, but led
His Triumph through the Town, and largely spread
His gloomy wings in circuit over the Walls
Attended by ten thousand Funerals
As if those Pageants raised to renown
Our dear Queens Well-come, and great Charles his Crown
Had bin of purpose made a Woeful throne
For Death and Fate to sit spectatours on
When I see these, think you I can forbear
But praise that God, who let us me still be here
And makes me not a Spectacle, as they
That now are mine, and lived but yesterday?
Dear Friends, it is not London, but the shade
And Carcass of that place in ashes laid.
Where you shall see in stead of sport and play
A false yet as it seems a Holiday,
The Doors shut up, and all the Streets about
But here and there a Passenger walk out
So solemn silence, that a man would say,
'Twere a light Night, or Seruice-time all Day:
The Bells as frequent as when often they sound
When a young Prince is borne, or new King crowned,
Which heard, a Stranger might be brought to swear
The Fifth of August or November there
Were Solemnized now: which to assure
The Bon-fires almost every night procure
A Shade of Joy; which if you right will Know
As funeral Piles not solemn Bonfires glow
The Bells in their sad language almost tell
They ring no Holiday, but speak a Knell;
The Doors so shut that one in them might doubt
Whether it were to keep Death in or out.
What Muse shall I inuoke t'indite a rhyme
That may express our miserable time?
Where the pale Visages of men express
Far above Poetry the Heaviness
Of Gods sharp Scourge, where the Red wand affrights
The Starring Passenger and troubled Nights
Are spent in Burials, when what e're we see
Is but an Argument of Misery;
The Wormwood-Nosegayes, and the trembling Pace
Of them that pass, though they have Herb of Grace
And curious Boxes to repel the air
Which might assault them, seeming to out-dare
The will of Destiny: Nor can I blame
Our weak Mortality, which thinks no shame
To show a frailty, deeming perhaps that Fate
Can yield to Sovereign Bezoar, Mithridate
Or such Death-killers, let us think so still
So we root out that weed of Sin and ill
Which taints our souls, so though for many years
It have prevailed, we will drown it in our tears
And Kill this Giant Plague, which through the town
As an unloosed Lion, bears down
What e're it meets, making no doubt to strike
The cloudie Cedar and low Shrub alike:
So quick and fast that it makes men to say
'Twill not be long until the Judgment Day
Absolve the Massacre, Death so does shrine
To bring the Universe to light again.
So few are borne to life so many Die
Lucina does not Tith Mortality,
As if Death would not leave until for all
Doomesday do make one fire one funeral.
When now the Weeke-bills almost reach unto
The sum which that of th'yeare had wont to do.
If from the Town a Stranger should but spy
How the affrighted People have to fly
In trembling heaps he could not but suppose
The ransacked City taken by the Foes,
And now possessed, and the remaining rout
On a strict composition flying out.
Enter the City you shall meet with there
A fearful Valor, an audacious Fear,
Where men do think it so difficult to escape
That they expose themselves unto the rape
While they yet tremble, as if thence to fly
Were to give wings to Death, and have to die.
A Noone in Fleetstreet now can hardly show
That Press which Midnight could not long ago;
No Proclamation needs the Gentry have
Unto their Homes, they do it now too fast
While the poor Sterued rout are taken hence
Alike by Famine and by Pestilence.
Walk through the woeful Streets (whoeuer dare
Still venture on the sad infected air)
So many Marked houses you shall meet
As if the City were one Red-Crosse street.
The Plague has spread it self so vast and far
They need not set Marks in Particular
One very Door, but to express the Loss
Not guild but red the Public City cross:
And brief for all to show the wrath of Fate
Set LORD HAVE MERCY ON's, on every Gate.
Alas the little house has lost the Name
While wretched London may the Title claim
Of the great Pesthouse: where are buried more
Than we had thought it had contained before:
That in our Judgments it may well appear
Turned from a City to a Sepulcher.
The Description of the late great memorable and prodigious Plague. 1625.
GOod God! what poison lurkd in that first fruict
Whose surfeit left us wretches prostitute
To such a world of sorrow? Not confined
Only to tear and cruciate the mind
With sad remembrance of the bliss, wherein
We might have lived, but see the cruel Sin
Spares not our souls weak houses, but does spread
From viler parts unto the nobler head
A thousand Maladies, which now alas
Through each small Inlet of the Body, pass
Remorslesse Enemies, and batter down,
The clayie bulwarks of our Mud-wall'd town.
Our throat is like that vast breach, which does bring
In like the Trojan Horse dire surfeiting;
When in the Stomach like the Marketplace
The foes let loose dare spread themselves, and trace
Through all the City, some are ready first
To break the Sluices, which do raging burst
And drown low buildings, some with flaming brands
Fire holy Temples, some with Swords in hands
Sharpe-pointed-Iavelins, Malls, and poisonous darts
Make Massacres through all the trembling parts
Of the distressed Fabric; no control
Can barre'em but they will assault the Soul
It self almost, while each small-breathing Pore
Betrays unto the foe a Posterne Door
To enter in at, every crawling vein
Affords him harbor, and does Entertain
The bloody Enemy, each Muscle, Nerve,
And Filme makes him a Fortress to preserve
His longer Durance, till the guest at last
With ruin pays his Host for all that is past.
How many such foes, think you? Secret lie
When hundreds of them ambush in one Eye?
Which is the Lantern, and the Watch, and Light
Keeps Centurie for all the Bodies Night.
As soon may I exactly number all
The fainting leaves that in an Autumn fall,
The Creatures of the Summer, or the Store
Of wilder infects, which old Nilus shore
Each year produces, as with Judgment show
How many fierce and bold diseases flow
Upon this wretched Carcass, when each year
New troops of raging Fevers domineere
That know no name, Each boy can nigh express
Diseases now to Pose Hippocrates.
Happy that age of gold, not only 'cause
It had no vice, and so no need of Laws,
When Nature was their Solon, and the want
Of Knowledge to do ill, did make them Ignorant
Of the Redress, not blessed alone in this
Although the air and earth increased their bliss,
But that an able Body was combined
In a sweet friendship with a harmless mind.
They knew no Physic (though their drugs did grow
Then in full virtue, able to bestow
Health on this age) because they Knew not how
To get those Sicknesses, which men Know now.
The Ague with a hundred names; the Aches
More than the Joints; the Palsy that attaches
The limbs with Dissolution; the wild
And Bedlem Frenzy: the Vertigo, styled
Because it whirles the giddie brains about:
The sweving Megrim; and the racking Gout:
The cruel Stone; the torturing Collicke fierce
And wringing winds, which through the lims disperse
Their ayrie torments; lingering dispense
Of pale Consumptions, which besot the sense:
The Deluge of a Dropsy: When shall I
Run through 'em all? the sleepie Lethargy;
Quick-murdring Apoplexy which does Kill
E're it makes Sick: the piteous Falling-Ill:
The Elephant-skin'd Leprosy: Iaundies stain:
Ambush'd Impostumes which surprise the brain:
With hart-assaulting Pleurisies: the tough
And clutterd Phlegm: and Rheum that breeds the Cough:
Strappado, Cramps; the sodaine-pricking Stitch;
The Nightmare: which the people think a Witch,
The All conquering Pox, to which compared the rest
Are Lady Sick-fits: this is that foreign guest
The Diuell-instructed Indies to us sold
To recompense the filching of their Gold.
All these and more innumerable powers
Lay siege unto this weake-wall'd Fort of ours
And often surprise an Out-worke, yea sometime
In desperate malice ready are to clime
The walls themselves: till that the heart much like
A strong Defendant makes good the Dike
And gives 'em a repulse: yet often alas,
This noble Champion stains the conquered Mass
With dying blood: For Sickness is a Fight,
The victory doubtful, Chances infinite.
But has that power who is all Mercy, still
More, and more cruel Punishments to Kill
Minute-liu'd man? yea, though you add to these
Pale meager Famine, Murders of the Seas,
And Wars vast Slaughters; you shall find one more
That may affright the rest we named before
The Plague, whose very naming seems t'affright
My trembling Quill, as it does have to write,
Lest as it raging flies about the land
This Instant it might seize upon my hand:
The Plague a dreary Punishment, Heavens curse,
The fatal Engine of Destruction, worse
Than we can well imagine, which does bring
Terror on mortals, Death on every thing,
And Desolation unto Cities: O
What ere thou art, dire Ill, whether thou do flow
From powerful Influence of the Stars, or rather
Do thy vast malice and contagion gather
From poisonous Southern winds, which have prevailed
Upon the sickly air, or Steames Exhaled
From The Earths enuenom'd womb: or whether 't be
Our Bodies Constitutions, which agree
With the malicious air and so contract
The quick Infection: whether 't be the Pact
Of Fate, and will of Heaven which does stand,
Or Gods immediate angry moved hand,
As it is; O pull it in, thou Gracious Power,
And let not this blind Enemy devour
The Grace of England. CHARLES implores, we
With him in zealous Orisons agree:
Hear him for us, and us for him; and stay
Thy dreadful vengeance, which does now display
Horror through all thy People, and begins
To show the ugly portraict of our sins,
Which have pulled down thy wrath. O let suffice
That world of blood in foreine Air that lies,
Of noble English souls, whose carcasses
The brutish Shores, wild Fields, and greedy Seas
Expose to Dogs, to ravenous Fowls, and Fishes;
Ah, little answering to the tender wishes
Of their poor mothers, who at home the while
Gape at their childrens Honors, and beguile
Their early fears with too late hopes: alas
They little think, that now the soyled Grass
Usurps their dear embraces, and grim Fate
Sits pale upon those Beauties, which of late
They made their Ages comforts, who now shall
Ah! be bound to them for a Burial.
O call to mind this Fatal Year, wherein
Equally and justly sent.
Thy Justice has been equal to our Sin;
Both great: O let thy blessed Goodness still,
As it is wont to do, surpass our Ill.
Those men whom we did love, whom we did trust
Should be our Shields, are turned to Shades, to Dust;
Let the in-throned Soul of JAMES implore,
That after Him, thou punish His no more:
Let the great Sprite of OXFORD, which has past
The Sentence of thy Anger, be the last
Thou plaguest us withal; and let us know,
That still thou pittiest us, poor men, below.
But never let this Land endure again
That woeful solitude, which once did reign
In our fair Cities; which, neglected left,
In a deplored ruin, showed the theft
Of angry Fate: when scarce a tenant Mouse
Was left, in many a fair unpeopled house;
But the sad Owls and Night-Ravens aloof,
Did keep their Revels on the silent roof:
When at high Noone one passing by, should meet
A Midnight Dark, and silence in the street;
When in the ways well-pav'd and worn before
By frequent steps of men, there now grew store
Of uncouth Grass; and Harvests now apace
Grew where they once were sold, i'th'Market-place:
When as no Merryments, no Sports, no Plays
Were known at all, and yet all Holy Days.
No Papers then over the doors were set,
With, Chambers ready furnished to be let;
But a sad, Lord have mercy upon us, and
A bloody Cross, as fatal Marks did stand,
Able to fright one from the Prayer. The time
Then held it an inexpiable Crime,
To visit a sick friend: Strange Stoure, wherein
Love was a fault and Charity a sin;
When Bad did fear infection from the Good,
And men did hate their cruel Neighborhood.
'Twas a deplored time, wherein the Skies
Themselves did labor, and let fall their eyes;
When one might see the Sun, with sallow hair
And languishing complexion, dull the air:
Looking eeu'n so, as when at Chryses Plaint,
He went like Night, the Grecian troops to taint
With sad Infection; when his dire shafts cast,
Killed more than Hector in the nine years past.
The Heavens were clothed with bleak mists, and the air
With the thick Dampe, was struck into despair
Of future clearenesse, or serener day,
But that the Clouds for fear ran often away.
The Night, whose dewie shade had wont to tame
The soultry relics of the Midday flame,
Distilled no Crystal Pearls upon the ground;
But wrapped in vaporous smoke, and clothed around
With poisonous Exhalations, did affright
The trembling Moon; whose dim and paler light
Looked with that countenance, as if again
Her silver horns should never escape the Wane,
So to renew her Circuit. The dull Quire
Of sickly Stars showed now no smiling fire,
But shone like un-snuff'd Tapers: as if Fate
Did give them leave now to prognosticate
Their own estate, not others; and apply
Themselves at last to sad Astrology.
The poyson-clutter'd Springs, with Plague infused,
Ran not with Crystal torrents, as they used;
But in dull streams, as them dire influence fills,
With fainting pace, scarce reached unto their rills:
And languid Rivers, which before did pass
The Crystal with their clearenesse; now, alas,
Look muddie, without stirring: and their streams,
That wont to be all spangled with the beams
Of the blithe Sun; now, in a weltring flood,
Ran not with water, but prodigious blood.
Those Trees whereof the Ancients used to raise
Their Funeral Piles, might in these fatal days
Burn at their own Death's, which in sad despair
Spread not their leavie beauties through the air,
But suffered Autumn in the Spring: forlorn
And ferall Cypress now had cause to mourn,
Poppeyes themselves this time in death did sleep,
And the Myrrhe-tree had reason here to weep
A Funeral Perfume: those gaudie flowers
Which wont to make Ghirlonds for Paramours,
Mourned in their drouping braverie, and spread
The ground at their own deaths, as for the dead.
The Corn grew not, as if it meant t'undoo
Men not with Plague alone, but Famine too.
Herbs, Physics Sovereigns, here infected die,
And for themselves could find no remedy.
The brute Beasts now, which Nature, to bestow
The Excellence on Man, did make with low
Downe-looking Postures, first did feel the rage
Of th'Earth-borne Plague, and died before their age.
The long-lived Heart this time to die began,
Before it reached unto the age of Man.
The faithful Spaniell, by his death, did try
The mischief of his well-nos'd Faculty,
And ranging with quick Sent, did soonest prove
The Infectious Malice of the Dog above.
The lusty Steed, scouring in's Game apace,
Lights on Deaths Gole, in middle of his Race:
The nimble Foul, as the air it flies around,
Flags his sick wings, and sinkes unto the ground,
Not long before to the remorselesse Sky
In silly Notes have sung his Elegy.
The lucklesse Night-Ravens, which used to groan
The death of others, now might Dirge their own:
The Snow-plum'd Swan, as it did gently ride
Upon the silver Stream, sung forth, and di'de.
Anon the Damp dares break into the Walls,
Making a way by thousand Funerals:
Who can express th'astonishment and fear,
Which does at entrance of a Plague appear?
Even so the fleeced Heard does tremble, when
An Aburne Lion, hungry from his Den,
Breaks in among 'em: then you may behold
The pale-look'd Shepherd gaze upon his Fold
With helpelesse pity, the poor Lam-kins creep
Under their Dams; the silly trembling Sheep
Stand full of cold amazement at the sight,
Small hope for mercy, and less hope in flight,
Expecting only which of all shall escape
The ready horror of the Lions rape,
Other Diseases warning give before,
That we may reckon, and acquit the Skore
Of our sins Prodigality: in this,
We scarce can be resolved whether it is
Sickness, or Death it self; so quick it tries
The strength of Nature, so soon poor Man dies:
That many to repose in th'Evening lying,
Have made their sleep true kin to Death, by dying
Before the Morn. Ah! who would then defer
A preparation for this Messenger
Of blessed or cursed Eternity? What man
Would still presume to sin, that knows the span
Of short uncertain Life? Ye gracious Powers,
That measure out the minutes and the hours
Of this our wandering Pilgrimage, restrain
These sudden slaughter-men; or, good God waine
Us from our sins, that we may neither fear
The rape of Death, nor covet to be here:
O curb this raging Sickness, which with sense
Bereaves us of the means of Penitence.
When a dire Frenzy seizes on the Brain,
Full of resistlesse flame, and full of pain;
That Madness, which no cure can well appease,
Is but a Symptom, unto this Disease.
Our blood all fire, as if it did portend
We were not here to stay, but soon ascend;
When streams of sulphur through our veins do glide,
And scarce the sense of sorrow does abide.
This time how miserable, may we guess,
Where want of sense, is chiefest happiness:
When the distracted Soul can scarce devise
How to supply the weakest Faculties
Of the disturbed Body; but presents
Unto the Eye strange objects, strange portents,
And antique shadows: when the feverish rage
Sets us on Iourneyes often, and Pilgrimage,
And entertaines our wild and wandering sight
With monstrous Land-schips, able to affright
A man in's wits: when the deceived Ears
Do apprehend what ere the Fancy fears;
The groans of Ghosts, and whispering of Sprites,
The silken tread of Faeries in the Nights,
The language of an ayrie Picture, howles
Of funeral Dogs, and warnings of sad Owls.
The Taste distasteth all things, and the same
Is sweet, and bitter, when the inward flame
Furs the swollen Tongue; and the quick Feeling marred,
Knows no difference between soft and hard:
Such a confused Error does distract
The laboring Senses, so is the Fancy rackt
By the dire sickness; when from place to place
The Body rolleth, and would feign embrace
Some Icie cooler: but alas, the heat
Asswaging, there ensues a Marble sweat
'Twixt Death and Nature, wrestling: then appear
Those deadly Characters, which th'Ensigne bear
Before approaching Fate; which notice give,
None spotless die, how ever they did live.
A sickness comfortless; when we do fear
To see those friends whom we do love most dear.
The Ministers Devotion here does stick,
By leaving Visitation of the sick,
Making the Service-Booke imperfect: when
We see a crossed Door, as 'twere a Den
Of Serpents, or a Prodigy, we shun
The poor distressed Habitation.
The Death as comfortless; where not appears
One friend, to shed some tender funeral tears:
Black Night's the only Mourner. No sad Verse,
Nor solemn flowers do deck the drearie Hearse:
Some few old folk perhaps, for many a year
Who have forgot to weep, attend the Beer;
Such, whose dry age has made most fit to keep
The Infected without fear, but not to weep;
Whose kin to death, made them not fear to die,
Whose deafness made them then fit company
Unto the sick, when they were speechless grown:
A miserable Consolation.
But had you looked about, you might have seen
Death in each corner, and the secret teene
Of angry Destiny: No sport dispells
The mists of sorrow; a sad silence dwells
In all the streets, and a pale terror seizes
Upon their faces, who had no Diseases.
So usual 'twas, before the Morn to die,
That when at Night two friends left company,
They would not say, Good Night; but thus alone,
God send's a joyful Resurrection.
If two or three days interposed between,
One friend by chance another friend had seen,
It was as strange, and joyful, as to some,
When a dear friend does from the Indies come.
Through the naked town, of death there was such plenty,
One Bell at once was feign to ring for twenty.
No Clocks were heard to strike upon their Bells,
Cause nothing rung but death-lamenting Knells.
Strange, that the Hours should fail to tell the Day,
When Time to thousands ran so fast away.
Time was confused, and kept at such a plight,
The Day to thousands now was made a Night.
Hundreds that never saw before, but di'de,
At one same time, in one same Grave abide;
That our weak Fancies, if we did not hold
It Profanation, here to be too bold,
Might wonder what, being strangers, they would say
To one another at the Judgment Day.
Some, by their fear to go to Church debarred,
Anon are carried dead unto the Yard.
The Churchyards gron'd, with too much death oppressed,
And the Earth rests not, 'cause so many rest.
And Churches now with too much burial fed,
Feared they should have no meetings but of Dead:
Death fell on death, and men began to fear
That men would want to carry forth the Bear.
The Bearers, Keepers, Sextons that remain
Surpass in number all the town again.
Friends here killed friends, womb-fellowes Kill their Brothers
Fathers their Sons, and Daughters kill their Mothers:
By one another (strange!) so many di'de
And yet no murder here, no Homicide.
A Mother great with Child by the Plagues might
Infects to Death her Child not borne to light.
So killing that which yet never lived; the womb
Of th'aliue Mother, to th'dead Child was tomb,
Where in the fleshy grave the still Babe lying
Does kill his Mother by his own first dying.
Her travail here on Earth she could not tend
But finishes in heaven her Iournies end.
To others, frolic set unto their meals
Secure of death sly Death upon them steals
And strikes among 'em, so that thence in speed
With heavy Cheer they are borne the worms to feed.
To some at work to others at their play,
To thousands death makes a long Holy Day.
Death all conditions equally inuades,
Nor riches, power, nor beauty here persuades,
Old dye with young, with women men, the rage
Of the dire Plague spares neither sex nor age.
Most powerful Influence of ruling Stars
Which with blind darts Kill more than bloody Wars
Resistlesse Famine greedy Time, or when
The threatfull hand of Tyrants strikes men
Into pale terror, more than all diseases
Ah, happy he who heaven least displeases.
FINIS.
HOLLAND his Hornet To sting a Varlet: OR, A few Satyricall lashes for one that
did falsely accuse him, to the late Lord Keeper, of a Libell against JOHN OVVENS
Monument in Paul's.

By ABRAHAM HOLLAND.

Against one that imposed a Libell on me, to the late Lord KEEPER.
Whosoever thou wast that thus
Mistaken or Malicious,
(The last I do imagine) that
Did Father on me this vile Brat
A stinking Libell, go and be
Scorned of all as much as me.
May I know thy Name in Time
Libelled in some Ballad-Rime:
May I hear thee 'bout the Street
Begging Offall for the Fleet:
May thou cry in tuned Prose
Corns have you on your Feet, or Toes,
Or Rats to catch, and in the end
Veniee-Glasses have you to mend.
May Justice make thee so to lack
To offer Lines to all in Black.
And succeed if Vengeance linger
At last the one-Legg'd Ballad-Singer.
Foul ill thy judgment, could thou find
None whom thou could think inclined
To Libelling but me, no one
That made lewd Verse but me alone.
No itching Scriuener that does make
Verses by an Almanacke?
No lazy leaden-witted, Ass
Professing Poetry (alas.)
No Latin'd Merchant, whose fine clothes
Scorn that he should write in Prose?
No parcell-Gentleman that vows
He can still the Latin towze?
No busy Lawyers Clerk, that still
Will usurp Poeticke skill?
No pretty Toy, no learned Fool?
Nor clownish Usher of a School?
Could thou find none, but must disperse
Me the Author of that Verse
So basely libellous, and durst
Me of all men pick out first
To be thy Toung-Ball? or did rather
Thy own bastard on me Father?
A Palsy take my Muse, if I
Knew how to make a quick reply
To them who did this Fame disclose,
Whether it were Verse or Prose,
A Volume, or a Pamphlet, long
Or short, Iambick, or a song
Latin, or Greek, Tuscan, or Welsh,
Or such as puffing Dutchmen belch
In their Fat Language: strange that I
Should stretch a Line from Coventry
And make it reach to Paul's, and place
It under OVVENS brazen face:
Wretch! I would have thee know, that Time
I was versed in other Rhyme
As free from malice, as from thee
And the wrong thou putst on me:
Where sweet Damsels did infuse
Flame into me, and to my Muse,
The only sting I had did rise
From the Luster of their eyes,
Where our Pastime was, to sing
By the Banks of some clear Spring:
No venom ambush'd in those Floods
Which have no Satyrs in our Woods
Only sometime in gentle Ranks
As we walked over the Banks
I a blacke-swolne Toade did see
We now I think was kin to thee:
But of a better kind, that could
Within it self it is venom hold.
Well, thou have done thy worst to me,
I Will tell thee what I think of thee,
Sure some opinionated Ass
Thou art, who in the world do pass
For a wise Man (by these rules
We best know who are best Fools)
Some bosome-creeper, fed with sloth,
A Fool, a Madman, or else both:
Some seeming Statist, who can find
By what is before, what is behind.
That had as much respect of me
As I mean to have of thee.
Yea, this I guess, and certain know it
Thou art held some Or if yo^ will Errant^
arrant Poet.
One of those about the Town
Who did scatter up and down
Naenia's on th'untimely Fate
Of the good Duke, and DORSET late.
Who in naught more lucklesse were
Than that They left thee tampring here
To soil their Ghosts, and whiter Fames
And lamentably tear their Names.
Some Fantastic Cockes-combe, who
Affects a garb with much ado.
Yea, though perhaps thou bear my Name,
At thy conditions I (...) shame:
And this I Will lay my life upon
None of my Religion,
Who as happily it is thy use
Would the People thus seduce
And Malicious draw on me
A crime so near to Heresy
That is to wrong my friends, and made
Me this uncouth style invade
To be a rayler, who do use,
The world does know, a gentler Muse.
FINIS.
TO MY DEAR FATHER, Mr. PHILEMON HOLLAND, Doctor in Physic, being Sick.
SPring of my life, by whom I first did try
This bitter-sweet of frail Mortality:
Source of my being, next to him that gives
The divine Power, by which each mortal lives:
O think not but your Children do comprize
Part of your Sickness, we all sympathize
In your Disease: let it to all be known
What e're is yours in sorrow, is mine own.
Let no ill Omen be that while I write
To yield some comfort, tears do blind my sight,
I would suppresse'em; nor vainglorious hence
Seek other witness but my Conscience
Which may to GOD bear record, how my heart,
In each disaster, with you bears a part.
Let me, dear Father, pardon here implore
If my Muse languish; never had I before
So ill a Theme: the Subject dimm's mine eyes
And makes my sickly Verses sympathize.
O, how my hautie Muse I could have strained
If I had seen your merits had obtayn'd
A due reward: if I had known the worth
Which lies in you had bin full blazed forth
About the world; and so might gladly see
Your worthy name as dear to all* as me.
And now, good Father, as I know your mind
Is with all precepts drawn from Heaven refined
Though Sickness be the calling for the Skore
The Epitome, and Bill of life before
By which as by a Sergeant God demands
Of passed life defrayment at our hands:
Yet let not us a Medicine apply
To one so fraught with good Phylosophie,
But let us them of you still borrow, giving
By living still, example of good living.
Yet if a young unstayed head may give
Precepts to die (when Fate does please) and live,
(Long may it be) it is thus: O, let not cares
That gall the troubled mind, nor sad affairs
Of this world vex you, neither think it loss
If to gain Heaven, you gain but little dross
Of fading wealth; I dare without sin swear
That wealth's unworthy you, that is scraped here.
Let it not grieve you that the vulgar crew
Have not to your deseruings given the dew;
Virtue most part is in the world despiz'd
And those that most do merit least are prized.
You know that so it has bin in all Ages,
The best Philosophers, and wisest Sages,
The greatest Poets have bin still exempt
Of present glory, drowned in contempt,
When yet their glorious Fame that could not die
Was crowned with future immortality.
God is in debt to them who here have lived
Deserving well, and little have received,
And though the Principal a while do rest
He Will pay't at last with double interest,
Heaven is not rich for nothing, but be sure
It Is treasured for the wealth-deseruing Poor.
And to your self though God defray not it
Your Childrens children shall receive it yet.
I would not have you envy them, who here
In the worlds judgment glorious appear,
On whom this Earth's abounding wealth encroaches
Who live secure, whose Heaven is their Coaches,
Long trains of Servants, and delicious cates,
Saluters, Flatterers, and delicates
For their fair carcasses: believe it true
God's scarce acquainted with thus-bless'd a crew.
His own Sonn's an example, who among
Us men, was poor, despiz'd, and suffered wrong,
To whom men scarce would means or meals afford;
O, who would grudge to imitate our Lord?
Yet know when black Oblivion shall rot
Their worthless names, their merits flourish not,
Then shall your memory unbounded fly
And never perish till the world do die.
O, do not under-value so your self
To think them richer who have greater pelf,
I Will undertake ten thousand in this Land
Who both themselves and you do understand,
Though cloyed with riches on their wealthy floores
Would willingly exchange their worth for yours.
O! that I could persuade you to think less
Of this base world, and see your happiness.
Say, this ungrateful Town, this lucklesse Cage
Wherein you have bin cooped all your age
And spent your golden years, to gain a few
Who are in nothing but dissembling true
Hollow, tongue-friends, if I may call them friends
Who have used you to their peculiar ends
A friend in title, but a slave indeed
To serve their turns: o that you had taken heed
In time of these: yet what should one expect
Of such a base-borne rabble but neglect
For good deserts: a rout that never knew
What meant morality, nor ever drew
The Sacred milk of Learning: whose chief height
Is to know yards of Draperie, and the weight
Of Grocerie and Spices, whose base birth
Life, manners, friendship, all do smell of earth
Gross vile and muddie: yet one comfort is
The time may be when you this Town shall miss
And say with grief, we once had such a one
We hated virtue present, but now gone
We long and wish for it. Thus in many places
The worthiest men's rewards have bin disgraces;
Thus Athens wont her best deseruers use
Thus Rome her noble Statesmen to abuse
With death or banishment: thus still we try
Contempt ensues familiarity:
Yea, Prophets (as our Saviors self did deem)
In their own Countries still have small esteem.
Well, whatsoever this Town do think you, let
It thus be Known, All England's in your debt.
Yet are there some (I dare avouch it) good
Ingenuous minds who having understood
Your worth and merits, love your very name,
Though far remote, yea, and admire the same.
I doubt not yet, dear Father, e're you die
By timely Fate, to see you raised as high
As your well-weigh'd ambition aims at, which
Is to be sweetly well content, not rich,
T'enioy your friends, and children, and they you
To spend your fading old years residue
In sweet tranquillity, and live with such
As will respect and honor you as much
As here they slight you, and the time from hence
Shall all your past misfortunes recompense:
All comforts fit for age shall you be given,
Your only care to make your path for Heaven.
And if my self a Poet may presage
You shall have yet an old new Golden age.
God will not end your aged days, so long
As you may still help and do good among
His people here: But as a Captain when
He means to exercise his faithfull'st men
He puts them upon dangers, makes them try
Disasters, hardness and all misery,
That when at last the foe shall be repaired
They be not found unskilled and unprepared.
Sickness is but a mustring show, wherein
We learn to fight, to skirmish and to win
At the last combat, Death: in that tide
Happy is he that oftest Sickness tried.
Such as did all-wayes in full health remain
Are often poor wretches lamentably slain
As untri'd Soldiers. Though once Fate by God
Shall of your frail make a period.
To his Friends in the Time of his Sickness.
A resolution against Death.
FRiends, if it be my lot, as some men use
To pay their debt sooner than you would choose
To harsh exacting Fate I would not have
You stand lamenting over my youthful Grave
As if it were my Prison, and I thrown
There on a desperate Execution.
I know there is no release from't yet more free
Know I this prison than your liberty.
I would not have you rail at it, and say
That it from you had closely stolen away
And treacherously betrayed your Friend: alas
They err who think they into th'graue do pass
As to a Punishment, and therefore call
It the sad Vrne, the Place of Burial,
The house of Lamentation, Life's Thief;
The Den of Sorrow, and the Cell of Grief:
You wrong it by these Names, It is my Bed,
Where Life's Day spent, I lay my wearied
And o'retoyl'd Body, in a long deep Night
Till he that gives all Day, renew my Light.
It is my sleeping chair, my chair of State,
Wherein I sit equal with conquering Fate.
And outface Death, daring him if he can
To challenge more than I have paid of Man.
Make him my Sinnes-bill cancel, and agree
That Christ's cross over it my acquittance be.
As a poor Traveler, whom the conceit
Of a long tedious Journey, thitst, and heat,
And weariness tormenteth, by the Way
Longing for home, all he can do, does Pray
For some Refreshment, at the last espies
The joyful smoke of his own Country rise
To bid him welcome: then with Pleasures Tears
He casts away both Languishment, and Fears.
And smiling takes the next Bank he does see.
So pleasing is my Grave, so sweet to me.
This piece of Ground, which you in scorn perchance
Miscall my Grave, is my Inheritance.
That it is intayl'd on me, the Law averres
By due succession from my Grandfathers.
Mine it has bin, by right, since Adam cursed
Man with this Blessing, and possessed it first.
While I have Life here, I am but Life's Ward;
And by my Nonage from my right debarred.
Death gives me that is so long kept from my Hand
I Am now at Age, and come unto my Land.
Nor think my Purchase too soon gayn'd, but call
My eight and twenty Climactericall.
My Graue's my long-sought Inn to which at most
It can be said, that I have ridden Post.
Whither retired some perhaps will fear
The saucy Worms will be intruders there
To feed upon me, whilst my Faith protests
It is not so, they be my bidden Guests.
What Man is he, that having in the Time
Of life, committed some foul heinous crime.
And knowing that the Fame of it is enrolled
In characters of Brass, yea were it of Gold,
That would not praise the hand, and friendly call
Which scratches out the sad Memorial
Wherein does live his Infamy: what soul
That knows this fleshly Table does inroll
The Memory of our Faults, that would not call
Worms and the Grave Redressers of our Fall.
The one of which does hide, the other devoures
All that was guilty, shameful, bad of ours.
Our Graue's the veyle, which shadows from the eyes
Of Posthume Malice our Iniquities.
This wretched thing you mourn for and behold
The dreary Linen, and the Earth to fold.
This thing compact of sinews, Bone and Blood
The Receptacle both of Sin, and Food
Death's ready Executioners, This
This is not Holland, but's Effigies
Which when 'twas best, and by the Soul could move
Was but a lively shape of God above
And only blessed in that, but now, alas!
That chief Ingredient of the curious Mass
That gave it Active Life is taken away
And Nothing left but ruin, and Decay:
A thing so despicable, base, and vile
That lest it should surviving Men defile
We Prison'^ first in Linen, then in Wood
Then ram it deep in Earth, and to make Good
The rest, lest it again approach the Day
Make marble Bulwarks over the wretched clay.
Egyptians hence did their dead Kings embowre
In tombs as big as their blaspheming Tower.
Raising in weaker minds sometimes a doubt
How they at th'Resurrection will get out.
Of these strong Prisons, whose unweldy Frames
Seem rather to oppress, than raise their Names.
Doubtless this wretched thing called Man whose curse
Light upon all things, is than all things worse
When once his soul is gone; The silly Flower
Though dead, and withered, yet retains some Power
Availeable in Physic; Cattle when
They Are dead themselves, nourish the lives of Men
And dead Grass theirs; And Corn is never good
Until it be cut down, and used for food.
No tree so rude, no shrub so base, no beast
So vile, but dead serves for some use, at least
For ornament, we love to see by skill
A curious limbed Picture, and stand still
To gaze upon it, yea we can endure
To see Deaths shadow, and grim Portraicture
Though never so ugly, when against a wall
Set a dead man indeed, amongst us all
You scarcely shall find one that will not fly
As at a Monster or grim Prodigy.
Do you then grieve to see this Bugbeare toy
This scarre-crow laid aside, to shun th'annoy
Of the beholders? or for my Soul is it
That you do mourn, which now do throned sit
Surfeiting with pure Joys, and holy mirth
And smiles at that for which you weep on earth
That it is dislodged from that debauched Inn
Which helped it never in ought, but only sin.
I would have given you leave to mourn if then
I had by sudden Death, bin summoned, when
Wretch'd man I labored to the height of sin
And bolder grew the deeper I grew in;
When Vice was turned to custom, and each deed
Though never so impious, did persuade with speed
Another worse, as if Despair had bin
The beastly Pander to unbrideled sin.
But Heaven be blessed, Heaven better loved my soul
Than without stay to let it headlong roll
To everlasting Death, and so did Kill
The Body sooner to retain that still.
The Soul as he inspired it pure, nor at all
Conscious of sin, no not Original.
Think you I fear those things which you do call
By such black names? The Griefly Funeral
The Fatal beer, sad Flowers and dreary Hearse
The mournful Followers, and the weeping Verse?
Think you already I do not disdain
The mighty tapers, and the sable train?
Or e're I do expire, think you my soul
Will be so cowardly, to fear the toll
Of a sad bell, whose heavy language goes
Deadly as if it did intend to close
It Is voice with mine? Think you I do not spy
The doleful silence of the standers by
As if they all were speechless, and from me
Did draw one general stupid sympathy?
Me thinks I hear the silly Women say
He is whole chested, and will go away
By dying upward, and some other try
If that my legs be cold, and straight do lie.
Here Is one does Judge my feeble Pulse, and cries
'Cause she must be the Friend to close mine eyes.
Another makes Trial of my Breath
Thus do I hear 'em furnish me for Death.
But o let me not hear them, let my sprite
Be busy then in purchasing a light:
More sweet then Life it self, may wholly I
Be fixed in thoughts of Immortality.
Let me then an audacious Client stand
Pressing to Kiss my unseene Saviors hand,
And let me be so busy in my Prayers
That not the Fear of Death, nor ougly cares
Thronged in the memory may disturb the Soul
Which now is near to Heaven her capitol
In the last Triumph, after Conquest won
Over Death and Hell; and grim Perdition.
It Is a toy to think when life is past
That Fate did lagge, or else made too much have
When we die quickly, or by tedious Age
Fulfill the circuit of Life's Pilgrimage
In my opinion a Day-ag'd Child
Has when it dies a race as well fulfilled
As Clymacterick Old men; I confess
Not with so many out-rodes, yet no less
Exactly. Nature does aver the same
And a day Rose, as well an Age may claim
As the long lived Oak: Though Time devour
The one so slowly the other in an Hour.
If'cause I dye before you, you repine
I Will think you envy at this bliss of mine
And wished your own, there is naught but sin in me
That could deserve long life, and misery:
Which Sin, the God of Mercy quelled, and checked
The cause, and after took away the effect
Long life; or if because I dye so soon
And come into mine Evening at the Noone
And full Meridian of mine age, you err
And do not know what bliss the Fates confer
On me hereby, by which I shall obtain
As I now dye to rise at last again
In fresher youth: The Mariner behold
To gather up a little Pelf and Gold
Contemned Death; If he do chance to find
A nearer Cut to China, or to Inde
Rejoices, and shall we who through this vale
And gulf of misery in Life do sail,
Grudge if the Fates do show a nearer Haven,
Our Purchase being no Gold nor Pelf but Heaven?
FINIS.
A LETTER, Savouring of Mortification, written and sent in the time of the late
Visitation of the Plague, to his dear Brother H. H. in LONDON.
Dear Brother, I am sorry your other occasions would not permit me to enjoy
your company longer, at my last being at London; especially, in this time of
sorrow, when the dearest friends are not able to say to day, we will meet to
morrow: which me thinks cannot choose but put every man in mind how careful
he ought to be, that though in our Kindred and Friendship we be separated on
Earth, we may by true repentance, and relinquishing our sins, gain that
bliss that at the reunion again of soul and body, in that happy communion of
Saints we may meet again with joy. Our small Village here as an out-member of
your great City suffers proportionably with it the heavy stroke of Gods wrath,
insomuch that whole Families of the most curious preventers have been woefully
swept away: especially a Gentleman lest to keep the Countess of Nottinghams
This house is called, the Kings Nurcerie.
House, who with his Wife a beautiful Gentlewoman, and four most sweet and
lovely Children, and their Man, are all gone, I hope to bliss, and their Maid
that is only left, lying at the mercy of God: Wretch that I am, why delay I
one minute, to cast my self prostrate at the feet of Mercy, and prepare my
self for the like passage? Within these few days most of this house in the
judgment of men were likely to out-liue me, whose wild and looser youth
threatens a too timely old age: They lived in a beauteous House, a refined and
pure Air, wanted neither Antidote nor assisting Physic, and yet alas they
now are not, they are dust, and ashes, and the food of Worms. O! the depth of
the wisdom of our great GOD: he saw that it was good for them to dye to
gain a better life, and for us, that by their deaths we may learn and
prepare our selves to dye. Ah Brother! think not this is a time Rhetorically
to set forth a sorrow, or passion, think not but my heart speaks what I
write; I know the reward of Sin, I know the value of a Soul, think not but
while it is in my power, by the merits of CHRIST, I will have a care and
providence for the price of my Saviors blood, my Soul.

Dear Brother, I doubt not but you are so well prepared and armed against this
Visitation of God, that my weak devotion is either needless, or unable to
assist you: Yet I desire you not any way to deject your self (only in the
humiliation for sin) in this great Assizes of Almighty God where we all are
brought to our Trials. For my self I thank the comforting Spirit of God, I
have not been these many years in so great security as I am in this time of
imminent danger: When every minute telling me I must die, and that God knows
how soon, I now and but now begin to live; alas the time that I spent before
was but death, and I lived but in a dream. A man in my judgment never more
lives than when he is most mortified; I persuade my self that man shall never
die who di'd while he lived. Brother, I am resolved so soon as this heavy
Storm is over to enter my self into the Orders of the Ministry, wherein I
doubt not but to find such Friends as quickly to provide my self of an honest
and competent living, God is my judge I shall not be at quiet till by truly
laboring to save others Souls I assure mine own salvation. If God lend me a
longer life, this is my resolution; if otherwise, it be his will to take me
from hence, though I could not in my Life, I beseech God that I may glorify
him in my Death. I pray you when you write to Coventry to remember my humblest
duty to my dear and aged Parents, to whom I doubt not yet but by adding some
comfort to their grey-hayres, to requite partly my former disobedience: desire
both them and my Brothers and Sisters to pray for me, as I do for them.
Brother, I must confess you have been more like a Father than a Brother unto
me; God be with you, remember me to your Wife, and let us heartily pray for
one another and be cheerful. I rest;

Your loving Brother: ABRAHAM HOLLAND.
Chelsey, August, 24. 1625.
A Confession of my Sins to GOD, and a testimony of my Faith.
TO number my sins O Lord is impossible, for they have bin infinite; to
measure them our, past humane skill, for they have bin immense, and ah! too
great: to repent truly for them not in my power, without the grace of thy holy
Spirit: to obtain pardon for them incredible, but through the infiniteness of
thy still ready mercy, and the all-sufficient-merits of my dear Savior and
Redeemer: yet (o good Lord) were my sins numberless as the Sands, or Atoms
that flit through the air; yet should they never compare in number with thy
Mercies; were they for quantity not to be comprehended, thy goodness should
surpass them: for quality not to be mentioned, foul and abominable, thy
Pureness is able to make them clean, and turns the blackest of them into
whiteness of Snow, their deepest grain of scarlet into wool. I have sinned,
I have highly sinned, (o Lord) I have long sinned, and shall still sin
unless thou help (o Lord) unless thy grace prevent. To amend my life (o
Lord) I have made many and earnest vows, when thou have but gently afflicted
me; in my health I have ever slipped back, and trodden in the steps of my
former sins, what then (o Lord) can I expect but a continual misery that I
may know thee? Yet (o Lord) knowing that thy Will is not to destroy, but
preserve, thy Glory to forgive, not punish, and my Savior as willing as able
to be a powerful Mediator with thee, for us Sinners the price of his bitter
Passion. In the name of it, in the name of thy Goodness, thy Mercy, have mercy
good Lord upon me, who require many drops of my Saviors blood to cleanse my
Sins, so shall I praise thee in the Land of the living before I go into the
Grave, and there be no more remembrance of me.

A Metricall Version of part of PSALM, 73.
SVre GOD loves Israel, and all
Whose hearts are clean, yet I
Had like to have let my feet to fall
And trodden in iniquity:
Because I did the bad ungodly see
Stand still and flourish in Prosperity.
2.
Death's peril they do never fear,
But strong and lusty do remain:
Nor like to us misfortunes bear,
Nor suffer equal plagues and pain.
This is the cause that they are swollen with Pride
And overwhelmed, in Cruelty abide.
3.
Their eyes with fatness swell, and they
Do whatsoever they can devise
Others they do Corrupt, and say
Most vile and wicked blasphemies:
Nor stick they to revile the God of might
And against Heaven power forth malicious spite.
4.
Thus all the world they do infect
Which makes the silly people go
Aside, and fall unto their Sect
Thinking that they are blessed so:
Tush how, say they, shall God perceive what we
Do here, shall he from high our actions see?
etc. etc.
Mr. T. C. the Authors endeared Friend his Poetical Version on the 91. PSALM.
1.
MAke the great God thy fort and dwell
In him, by Faith, and do not care
(So shaded) for the fires of Hell
Nor for the cunning Fowlers snare
Nor Poison of the infected Air.
2.
His Plumes shall make a Downy bed
Where thou shall rest, he shall display
His wings of Truth over thy head
Which as a Shield shall chase away
The Dreads of Night, the Darts of Day.
3.
The winged Plague that flies by night,
The Murdring Sword that kills by Day,
Shall not thy Peaceful sleeps affright
Though, on thy right and left hand, they
A thousand and ten thousand slay.
4.
Only thine eyes shall see the fall
Of Sinners; but because thy Heart
Dwells with the Lord; not one of All
Those Ills, nor yet the Plaguey dart
Shall dare approach near where thou art.
5.
When thou art troubled he shall hear
And help thee, for thy love embraced,
And knew his name; wherefore he will rear
Thy honors high; and when thou have
Enjoyed them long; save thee at last.
T. C.

A MEDITATION ON, PSALM, 6. Verse. 4.5.
Return: deliver my Soul, etc.
ALL this Psalm of DAVID is Prayer; and as one said, the very dreams of the
righteous be prayers to GOD: So the very Songs of DAVID be Prayers; In the
beginning of the Psalm he uses only a deprecatorie prayer, Rebuke me not,
etc. but afterward he comes to that Importunity of prayer, that Impudency,
that violence of prayer, as Austine says, When we earnestly Pray, Quasi
agimus facto Obsidemus Deum, and as the Mathematician said, He could devise an
Instrument would remove the whole fabric of the world, if any one could but
devise him a place where to settle it. So DAVID having as it were settled this
great instrument of Prayer upon GOD, turns and as it were steeres him which
way he will. Return: which implies that he had bin there before, for as God
first made Flowers and Trees before he made the Sun, but after a Paradise
when the Sun did vivificate it; so God makes Man before the Sun of Grace
shine upon him, but then makes him a living Paradise, when he inspires the
Sun of righteousness into our Souls; and that is one kind of returning to
us; yea, when by many relapses of sin we fall from God, he gives us again
grace to repentance, that is another returning. There be three manner of
significations of the original word Shuba, here used. The first, Redire in
locum suum, as heavy things to the Center and light to their exhausion upward;
so man returns to the dust from whence first he came; thus God returns In
terram suam, when he revisireth the soul of a sinful man. The second, in
withdrawing his judgments from us. The third, when we by his corrections
return to him; as it said Tire and Sidon would have returned in Sackcloth and
Ashes, where the same word Shuba in the Syriack translation is used. The
second, Eripe animam. The third, Salvum me sac, which implies such a Salvation
as comes by CHRIST JESUS, the Original being Iashag, whence JESUS comes.

The knowledge of God, is as Job says of his friends (to speak with
reverence) a miserable consolation, without we know him to be our Savior;
the very Atheists though they would deny it, the Lord will by the terrors of
night move them to confess there is a GOD; yea, they shall confess there is a
God, but shall not know him a Savior.

It is strange how in all the Old Testament the Ancients did abhor, distaste
and pray against Death, although they did know it was the way to their bliss;
and indeed if we consider death as it is, life and it may be put in an equal
balance, as when Paul thought with himself how good and glorious it would be
for him to be quit of this miserable pilgrimage of Life, and the glory he
should receive by Death, then fell he to his Cupio Dissolvi, and the balance
weighed on Deaths side; but considering the good that the Church was to receive
by his staying, then otherwise. So was it with them of old to whom the joys of
Heaven were but shadowed by MOSES and the rest not so openly revealed as to us.

But diverse expound this place mystically, for the death and hell of sin. For
without doubt in our natural death we praise God better than in this dying
life. Yea, it is said that DIVES knew ABRAHAM in Hell, and had a Charitable
care of his Brethren on earth, etc.

CERTAIN MEDITATIONS, By ABRAHAM HOLLAND.
Commended and bequeathed to his dearest Mother, Mrs. ANNE HOLLAND, his dear
Sisters, A. H. M. H. and E. A.
Let the words of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer.

From this hour, O Lord, I have vowed to serve thee, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life.

I believe, O Lord, help my unbeleefe.

MEDITAT. 1.
LORD! let me carefully examine my self what I was, now am, and what I may
be. I was (O Lord) before the inspiring of thy powerful breath into a dead
piece of clay, Nothing: I am by the malice of Sin in ready way to Perdition:
I may be suddenly through the reward of sin worse than Nothing: I was (O
Lord) before I was, Predestinate by thy depth of wisdom, either to eternal
Glory, or everlasting Sorrow: I am almost uncertain, poor worm as I am, by
the innumerable heap of mine own sins, and the infinite goodness, and
mercies of CHRIST, which shall light on me: I may be by a too late and false,
or a true and contrite repentance, subject to either. I was (O Lord) in my
Mothers womb conceived in the foulness of Sin: I am (O good Lord!) a daily
heaper of actual Sin upon original Corruption: What can I then expect but
that I justly may be the aim and mark of thy impartial vengeance? But (O
Sweet Lord!) I was loved of thee before I was borne: am daily preserved by thee
though in the midst of my iniquities: and am in hope that through the
all-sufficient Merits and Suffering of thy blessed Son, to be saved after
death from the power of Sin and Hell, and with him glorified eternally: Let
me then with shame remember what I was, and blush with sorrow what I am, and
repent with sorrow what I may be, and tremble.

MEDITAT. 2.
LEt me (O Lord) judicially both contemn and fear this thing called Death:
Let me (O Lord) fear it as a man may, being the separation of his best
acquaintance the Soul and Body; let me contemn the ouglinesse of it as being
a Minister to bring both soul and body to a more sweet familiarity: Let me
fear it as it is the way to Hell, but contemn it being the gate of Heaven;
Fear it, as the ways of Sin; Contemn it, being the reward and pay of a
long misery: Let me fear not the Arrest of it, but the Exetion: let me
contemn it, knowing CHRIST is my Common-Bayle: Fear it, as a Monster; but
Contemn it as being Natural. Let me not see the face of it without
trembling, but embrace with contempt, etc.

A Brief Meditation.
MY heart is broken (O Lord) and my distracted thoughts wander up and down to
find out thy Mercy, mercy I seek (O Lord;) judgment sits at thy feet
(just God) and Mercy on thy right hand, merciful Father: give her leave a
little (O God) to show her pleasing countenance unto me the most vile, heinous,
and presumptuous of all sinners.

O LORD, we have sinned, and thou have punished (O Lord) we still sin and
thou still do punish, give us Grace (Good Lord) that we may sin no more,
that thou may desist from punishing. Let us die (O Lord) that we may not
die, and so strictly by the witness of our Consciences judge and Condemn our
selves that we be neither severely judged nor justly condemned by thee: who
both can, and desire, if we will truly repent show thy Judgment mild,
and thy Mercy infinite. Lord, as of me have Mercy on all and show the light of
thy Countenance, and we shall (O Lord) be whole. AMEN.

A Meditation against the fear of Death.
ON the sudden I cannot choose but think them madmen or children, who stand
in fear of Death, and yet me thinks even thus they are wrong-named, since
neither Mad men, Fools nor Children, fear Death; alas! shall simplicity, and
senseless Folly do more with them, than reason or Religion can do with us?
Shall the Sea-tost Mariner be sorry that from ten thousand dangers of the Sea
he is arrived at his safe and long-desired Haven? Shall the sterved Prisoner
repine if after many years woeful Captivity he be at last set at wished
Liberty? Shall the tormented Sick-man grudge if from a long and languishing
Disease, a speedy medicine restore him to his former perfect health? Is not our
Life a sea of troubles? A loathsome dungeon? A lingering sickness? Is not Death
the skillful Pilot that guides us to Heaven? Is not he the good Judge that
sets us at liberty? The skillful Physician that cures our Mortality, and
restores us to Eternal life? What do we else by desiring long life, but like
the ungrateful Israelites, desire to Continue at their former Fleshpots, in
making Brick and Clay under hard taskmasters, in the Egypt of this sinful
world, and so keep from the Canaan of neuer-decaying happiness?

Is it not madness in desiring Long life to refuse Eternal life? Shall we be
such cowards to fear a shadow? the separation of the Soul from God only
indeed is Death, the separation of the Soul from the Body is but the shadow of
Death. Shall we be such fools to seek to shun that which never man could
escape? Shall we be so faint-hearted to fear a thing so common and certain?
Was ever poor Labourer sorry after his painful days work to repose
himself in sleep? Shall we then ouerlaboured by a toilesome life grudge to
go to our sweet, long and Care-ending sleep? Shall we desire still to be in
our Nonage, and not like heirs of Eternity, receive our everlasting
Inheritance? Our life is a Banishment from the heavenly Jerusalem; shall we
be grieved by Death to return from Exile? Why fear we Death which is but
the Funeral of our Vices, the resurrection of our Graces, and the day wherein
God pays us our wages. Life is never sweet to them that fear Death: neither
can he fear any Enemy that fears not death? Did some of the Heathen, but
reading an uncertain Discourse of Life hereafter, seek their own Death to
come unto it; and shall we, certain that there is a Life hereafter full of
unspeakeable felicity, be afraid of the way which GOD has ordained as a
passage to it? Death is our year of Iubile, and shall we not rejoice in it?
Let every one then (O Lord) who desires to be freed from sinning and
offending thee, cry out with PAVL, I desire to be dissolved and to be with
CHRIST.

A PRAYER Made and used with Company in the aforesaid Visitation.
O Eternal GOD! to whom by Creation we owe our Being from nothing: by
Sanctification of thy holy Spirit a better being from worse than nothing: by
Redemption and Adoption a joint Inheritance and Brotherhood with the King of
Glory JESUS CHRIST, by whom we are bold to call thee Father, neither art thou
ashamed to acknowledge us Sons. For all thy benefits (O Lord) we give thee
most humble thanks, in that it has pleased thee to preserve us to this time
from the dangers of Hell and Death: but especially (O good Lord) that thou have
given us a sense and feeling of our own sins and misery, so that we may
call for Mercy before we go into the Grave and be seen no more: We most
humbly and upon the Knees of our souls do thank thee (O Lord!) that in this
thy great Visitation, this great Assizes of thine, this fearful Plague
wherein the Grave has swallowed up so many thousands; that it has pleased
thee to command thy raging Minister the Destroying Angel but gently to touch
us, with an Arrow that was not pointed with Death, as if he had said to us:
Go away Sin no more lest a worse thing fall upon you. We confess (O Lord)
that our sins deserved equally, yea more than theirs, whom thou have taken
away, and yet (O Lord) we still remain to praise thy Name in the land of the
Living. Which if thou do continue (O Lord) thou have engaged us to a sudden
and speedy newness of life, with true Contrition for our former most heinous
sins, and a living in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our life.
But if so be this be but a gleame of thy mercy to try our Faith and
Constancy, and that thou have ordained at this time to make an end of our lives
most wretched Pilgrimage, thy will be done (O Lord.) But o speak Peace unto
our Souls that they need not tremble at this great Separation. O Lord, we
know Death is but a shadow, and the fear of it more terrible than it self.
Let neither the ouglinesse of it nor of our sins distract our minds when
they have most need to be busy in obtaining thy grant of a better life. Blot
out all our offenses (O Lord) and the manifold sins of our youths, make them
(O Lord) though they be red as Scarlet, yet, as White as the wool of thy
immaculate Lamb CHRIST JESUS. Wash them (O Lord) in his Blood and by his
wounds let us be healed from the stinking sores and ulcers of putrified and
festred Sin: So that (O Lord) we may smile at Death and embrace the very
terror of it. Repel (O Lord) the Devil and all his ministers, who in these
times of affliction are most ready to lay before our weak souls a large
Catalogue and bill of our most heinous offenses, telling us that thou art a
just GOD, and wilt not hear the prayers of such great offenders: but (O Lord)
there is Mercy with thee that thou may be feared; yea, that thou may be
loved. Grant (O Lord) that though we be even swallowed up of death and
desperation, yet we may lay hold upon the precious Merits of thy dear Son
and our loving Savior, so that either in life or death, we may cry with a
true Faith and Comfort. Come Lord JESUS, come quickly. To whom with thee the
Father and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory, now and ever. AMEN.

A Vale to his best Part.
DId not Religion control
I would say; Farewell my Soul,
But so much as may depart,
Farewell, I say, my soul and heart!
Since from thee I Am forced to fly
I Will enter no mean Heresy,
But will think it may agree
A Body without Soul, that is thee:
Thou have my soul (and so behau'd)
I am in hope it may be saved:
My heart's in thee, or me, or both,
And yet if separate, I am loath
Thou have not all, know for thy part,
I am a niggard of my heart.
Farewell I say, and though it is pain
To say this word, Farewell again,
Farewell, yea so that thou may live
A thousand Vales I will give.
That this Vale true appear
Take a Farewell, and a Tear,
From thy A. H.

Abraham Holland, Having made many EPITAPHS for others, made this Epitaph for
himself, and on his Death bed, dictated it to his Brother, H. H.
PAssenger that wilt bestow
So much time to read this, know,
Here Is one a lasting sleep does take
Till Christ's Trumpet bid him wake:
This is that Gole whereto the man
That lies here interred ran,
This the Race-end, to which at most,
It can be said that he rode Post.
Let Him sleep quiet, and do Thou
Leave Sin, not by and by, but now,
Delay not hours which swiftly glide
As a full Torrent or quick Tide.
Knowing thus much, good Christian, pass,
But with this Thought, I am, He was.
Denatus 18. Februarij, 1625.
Unto these Post-humes is added:

NAVMACHJA.

OR, A POETICAL DESCRIPTION OF the cruel and bloody Sea Fight or Battle of
LEPANTO: (Most memorable.)

BY ABRAHAM HOLLAND.

Revised by the Author, and now again Published.

Printed for HEN: HOLLAND. M.DC.XXVI.

TO THE READER, that asks, what, when, and where, was this Battle of
LEPANTO?
IN the year of CHRIST JESUS, 1571. His open Arch-Enemie the Great Turk,
having had many Victories by Land in sundry Nations, as well in subduing whole
Countries as in taking many strong Cities and Castles from the Christians,
which confined near his Territories, enforcing the Christians either to
renounce their holy Faith, or to endure unspeakeable Slavery themselves, their
Wives and Children, being daily bought and sold in open Markets, like Horses,
Oxen, and Asses.

The Turk by this time had Conquered many Islands and Cities bordering upon the
Sea: by means whereof he was greatly enriched and strengthened with Galleys
and other maine Forces. And in this year, 1571. knowing a Division amongst
diverse Christian Princes, as well for matters of Religion as for affairs of
State: Upon hope of which advantage, he assembled and furnished a mighty
Army of Galleys, presuming thereby to become Sovereign of the Sea, and Lord
of the Land, at one instant.

But such was the great Mercy of Almighty GOD that he stirred up the hearts of
many Christian Princes, (the Queen of Englands aid being not wanting) who
conjoined together, and furnished a very strong defensible Navy of Ships,
Galleys, and Galliasses: And encountered with the Turks at Lepanto (which lies
in part of Albania in Turkey:) And at the time of Battle, the Wind changed
on the Turks side, and came on the back of the Christian Navy, and carried
the smoke of all their Shot upon the Turks Galleys, Foists, and Brigandines:
so as they could not well see how to defend themselves or offend their Enemies:
which the Christians well observing, with all religious Resolution, right
bravely gave Charge and chase upon the Miscreants; and sunk and took of
Turkish Galleys full Two hundred and thirty, and at that Fight slew above
Thirty thousand Mahometists, besides a great number of Prisoners taken by the
Christians: and above Twelve thousand redeemed by force from Turkish-slauerie.
In this blessed Victory, the Christians lost not above seven or eight Galleys,
nor of them above Eight thousand persons slain.

This Overthrow to CHRIST'S Enemies was done, the Sixth day of October, 1571.

And the Ninth of November following, amongst other Christian Princes the News
being brought over land to Queen ELIZABETH (of ever blessed and immortal
memory.) She commanded the Citizens of London, to give Almighty GOD humble
and hearty thanks, Her Sacred self performing the same: The Londoners also
made Bonfires, and showed other pleasant signs of rejoicing.

Now follows the Patheticall-poeticall Description of the same:

Vale. H. H.

NAVMACHIA, Or the Poetical Description of a Bloody Sea Fight.
AS the Sun once lift up his burning Lamp
On top of hills, and fiery steeds began stamp
Along the blew-floor'd sky, the Charriotier
Made his firce horses run a full Carreir:
He whipped 'em on, so that their blood there shed,
Made the clear Balcon of the East look red.
He posted on as if he meant not stay
To make a Summer, but a winters day:
Or as if he had wager'd that his teame,
Sooner than wont should souze in western stream:
The steeds themselves with speed unusual fly,
As frighted at this sea-bred Prodigy.
There came along cutting deep Neptunes brow,
A misty mass, to called I know nor how:
Whether a running Town, or wauing Wood,
Or moving Delos tumbling on the Flood.
Which seen a far scud on the watery way,
Prodigious Afric seemd, or Asia.
Who getting Neptunes Pas-port, came to see
Their Sister Europe in her bravery.
At whose approach the curled billows rore,
And as it comes fearfully roll before.
The oppressed tower-like Whales lie bellowing under,
That Neptune seems to usurp his brothers thunder.
The silent Fish presaging future blood,
Against their kind run frighted into the mud:
And had they wings, would from the Sea have broken,
And but for churlish nature would have spoken
To manifest their fear, yet what they might,
They fled apace to shun the dreadful sight.
And flying from the Sea in trembling shiuers,
With their thick sholes pestered the lesser rivers.
The Oceans King feeling such weight on's back,
With leaning on his Trident made it crack.
Had it not been immooveable, they say,
The earth this time would feign have fled away.
The Amazed shore as the fleet near sounds,
Almost forgot to keep's ordained bounds.
The earth and shore so trembling, you would ha said,
Fear, not enclosed winds, this Earthquake made.
Fame with her feet on earth, and head in the spheres,
With wings plumed full of wonderment and fears,
Flies ore the land, and forth her rumors blazes,
And with increasing dire reports amazes.
The stoutest courages still as she goes,
Sh'augments the power and valor of the foes.
Tel's of strange engines, instruments, and whips,
Framed to act their cruelty, and ships
Prodigious big, vizards, and murdering Knives,
Butcherly malls for slaughter, Halters, Gives,
And all the men like Giants: Thus she flies
Increasing still the Terror, and with lies
Makes a true fear: and ere it was well spide,
She swears the fleet in such a place did ride.
And all the men were landed: such a town,
Was battered, and such a castle down.
Another City without doubt was taken,
And at the winning of it, more men slain
Then it contained: Thus monstrous Fame does range her,
And makes fear more fearful then the danger.
And thus as Fame her flying terror doubles,
Each diverse state is wract with diverse troubles.
Great men do fear that they here-by shall fall,
Which the poor man does hope to rise withal.
The peaceable do hereby fear annoyment,
The needy Ding-thrift hereby hopes employment.
The Coward this way fears he shall die:
The valiant look for immortality.
The loving Wife does fear her Husbands life,
And he as much is troubled for his Wife.
Stout old men wish that they were young again,
Base young men wish that they in age were taken:
Women for fear weep out their tender eyes,
Dumb Infants almost answer to their cries.
In all the disagreement, which is here,
They all agree in this, that all do fear.
The Beacons now were fired: as if the flame
Even here a contrarity did claim
Against the water, whose prodigious light,
Men feared on land, as in a stormy night
The Sailers fear Orion, which but seen,
Pronounces unto Mariners, the teene
Of angry clouds. And now those noble Spirits,
Whose only aim is by their haughty merits
To out-liue fate, and for their Countries good
Think it a glory to power forth their blood,
Meet all together, as deuote to give
Their own lives that their Countrymen may live,
Thus in all ages, and we still may try
Of life the worthi'st, readiest are to die.
Who hasting to their ships in speed, begin
To show the adverse party should not win
Without resistance, showing there were made
Men as well to defend as to invade.
Our Admiral breath's forth a stout All-arme,
The adverse fleet Ecchoed rebounding, Arm.
As when by sound of hollow brass, or tin
The scatterd bees, buzzing with murmurous din,
Throng in one heap, to some well-branched tree,
Leaving their sweet, and harmless the every;
And so by craft betrayed, are in a trice
Captived all in their narrow Edifice.
Thus at their Captains voice, the vulgar sort
To their assigned stations resort*
With quick confused have the tumult's led,
And speed, by too much speed, is hindered,
All to their charge with trembling boldness run,
With quaking hand one charges first his Gun,
Another girds his threatening sword on's side;
Some clasps their steely Helmets; sheilds are tied
On trembling arms apace, that one might then
Have thought the had been all moving Iron men.
And now the Martial steely-pointed staves
Were snatched in have: the heavy murdring Glaues:
Bows bent to slaughter: weighty Courtelaxe:
And Darts Death's Harbingers; the black bill, axe.
And other arms which before rusting stood,
But now are brought forth to be skour'd with blood.
Our saile-wing'd fleet launcheth fro'th'shore now eased
Of it is dread burden, nor was the earth more pleased
To see from her one hideous terror past,
That grieved to see another come as fast.
One might have thought the battle was begun
To see how Neptune first was thorough run,
How the stern brass his curled forehead tore,
And trembling waves were struck by cruel oar.
Each Fleet the Captains had divided soon,
Into the forms of the halfe-circled Moon;
But as their furious horns together met,
These two halfe-moones a full Moon did beget;
Which like to that in Heaven, as it did go,
Made the fleet waters strangely Ebb and Flow.
Now as with proud advance they nearer came,
Those beasts which gave the saile-rul'd vessels name,
With an aspect more grim than is their life,
As breathing naught but bate, and balefull strife,
Come fiercely forward all, as if from thence
They meant to move their painted Residence.
The Lion, Elephant, and savage Hog,
The Libard, Tygre, Ounce, and cruel Dog
Sternely affront each other, one might guess
In midst of Sea a savage Wilderness,
Wherein with admiration, one might see
So many a fierce wild beast, so many a Tree.
But now our valiant General traversing
About the fleet encouraged them, rehearsing
This speech, wherein he bravely did exhort
To the Fight, which ready cut the Oration short.
Courage brave friends, and that is all I pray,
Strength cannot want, where Courage leads the way,
But what need I the undaunted hearts excite,
Of them whose eyes me thinks already fight;
Look as ye do, and ye shall never need
Weapons, or hands to make your foes to bleed.
Your look's shall strike'em dead, and warlike sight
Shall put your fearful enemies to flight.
What ere ye aim at, here before you lie,
Honor, Revenge, Spoil, Riches, Victory:
Which if they move not, see your Native Land,
Your Nurse, your Mother, see how she does stand
A far to mark, which of you best shall render
The Meed of Nurture, who shall best defend her,
Them will she honor; bravely then drive back
This vast Sea Monster, which is come to rack
Your Nursses entrails, com't but once to Land,
The very Earth will be afraid to stand
It Is cruel brunt, whither if reach it can,
The blood and tears will make an Ocean
Deeper than this: I see'em now repair
(O let my Omen vanish into air.)
Unto our Land; see how like Wolves they rage
About the coasts, sparing nor sex, nor age.
See how they pull strong walls of Cities down,
Leaving the men as naked as the Town.
They raze your sacred Temples, and not leave
A hallowed place, where after ye may heave
Your hands for aid to heaven: Your Altars frames,
These wicked wretches, with profaned flames
Sacrifice to their anger; yea they dare
To open Ghostly Tomb's, and thence lay bare
Your Ancestors sad Coffins: whose dead ashes
In stead of tears, their Childrens blood be-dashes.
They dragge our ancient Parents unto slaughter,
Answering their dying groans with cruel laughter.
Our younger Wives and Sisters they deflour,
And basel^ make our nearest kinsmen, our
Most hated foes; our tender infants rawle
Scarce borne, being borne unto their funeral.
These things, which, heaven be thank't, I but suppose,
Unless ye help will once advance our foes.
Say that our Navy be far less than theirs,
Have not great ships, amids their swift carriers
Been staid by little Remoraes: Then on,
And let not this cold Element, whereon
We are to fight, quench those courageous flames
Which burn in every manly breast, that aims
At immortality, but strike so stern,
That the dumb fishes may hereafter learn
To speak your praises, and each wave report
Unto it is neighbor, in how valiant sort
Ye fought, till that the Oceans utmost bound,
And farthest Thule with your fame shall sound:
Yea that the Sun, when he at night shall press
This way, may go and tell the Antipodes
What acts he saw; nor yet of aid despair,
The Sea it self, if need shall ask, will spare
A thousand of his streaming arm's for you,
All fish prove sword-fish to fight for our due.
Think for no refuge here to fly, your hand
Not feet must bring you back again to land:
No longer will the time with us dispense,
What my speech wants, my sword shall recompense.
Now 'twixt a thousand lives, a thousand death's
Of time one little winged minute breath's
The loud-mouthed Gun, only expects the fire,
At touch of which, as burnt, it should expire
It Is skrieking voice, groaning that so much death
Should be accomplished by the infectious breath
Of it is dire mouth; Darts ready are to part
To hide their heads in some ill fortuned heart.
Arrows, and Muskets leuel'd, seem to kill,
Before they can in act, in fiery will.
One might have thought viewing this fearful sight,
'Thad bin the picture of a Navall Fight.
But hark the amazing signs of battle sound,
Making the lands remote, and rocks rebound:
The shrill voic't Trumpet and courageous drum,
In barbarous language bid the foes to come.
Death's horrid vizar now begins to appear,
In their pale faces; terror, and ghastly fear
In their amazed hearts does panting rise,
And future blood bath's in their fiery eyes.
Stern Cruelty aduanceth in their lids,
With headlong fury stalking in the mids:
Apelles present here or one so skilled,
Might have made pictures hence that would have killed.
The thundering Ord'nance now began to rent
The amazed air, the flames before it sent,
Seem lightning, and as deadly bullets fly:
Prodigious hail seemed to power down the sky,
Smoke made a clowdy mist, and all together
Seem on the sea to make tempestuous weather.
To call for aid here, stands as much in stead,
As in that place, when from a doubtful head.
The seauen-mouth'd Nilus, with a desperate shocke,
Headlong does tumble from the amazed rock;
Making the people on the neighboring shelues,
That hearing him, they cannot hear themselves;
Thus the fights noise made many a man to fall
In troublous death, a silent Funeral.
Alas those Elements which use to up hold
Our crazy lives, with their just heat, and cold,
Making compact our bodies constitution,
Strive now to cause it is utter dissolution
The quick and piercing fire, as it does burn
Their woeful carcasses, does freezing turn
Their minds to quaking fear, and chill despair,
The liquid, flitting, and all-searching air
Admitts remorsles shot, and murdring darts
Denying breath at last to cool their hearts.
The theevish water though it ran away
With subtle shifts, did notwithstanding slay
And swallow most, with a devouring flood,
Only poor earth, stark, still, astonished stood.
Who viewing this would not have thought a wonder
That without rain, wind, lightning, hail, or thunder
Or hidden shelues, or rocks sea-ambusht back
Or any temrest, ships should suffer wrack?
That one might here have termed it, choose you whether
A strong Calm, or calm tempestuous wether.
See winged arrows posting through the sky
How quick they have froth' battles rage to fly
The trembling spears, as soldiers do them shake,
Seem at their Masters dangrs that they quake:
The flashing swords, which sheathed once they ware,
Seem now to fear, being unarmed and bare.
But now each fleet, each ship with hope-full pride
Clash altogether, furious, side to side.
As when two winds in black tempestuous wether,
With boistrous wings impetuous meet together
With their untamed and resistles iustle,
Making high turrets shake, and cedars rustle,
Where in light shirmish they remain contending,
Till out of breath the are feign to make an ending
Now death's at hand, and night together keep
Clear life, and dreadful death's black iron sleep,
Fierce rage, sad grief, blind Fury now grow higher,
Good cause when sense of touch and hearing nigher
Men now with men contend, and ships with ships,
One body against another; here one skips
Into his enemies deck, but beaten back
He leaps to's own, of which if so he lack,
He falls in sea; much like a wave, whose head
By urging winds unto the shore is led,
And thence by breast of the oft-drowned shore
Taking a blunt repulse, for spite does rore,
And staggering runs back; and is this all
Ambition aims at, in the way to fall?
Their tired senses labored in such wise,
That they grew dull with too much exercise
Their troubled eyes, viewing such ghastly sights,
Wished that sad darkness cancelled all their hights*
That horrid noise the battle made, was such,
Hearing heard nothing, 'cavse it heard so much
Taste is of death, rank blod pollutes the smell,
What feeling felt they all did feel too well.
Such a confusion racks their senses here
The had Reason now to wish they senseless were.
Grim death in purple, stalks upon the hatches,
With pale and griesly looks see how he snatches
Hundreds a once unto him, till the dreary
Lean-face't ill-favord Death of death grew weary.
See on the sea how thousand Bodies float
From their great ships hasting to Charons Boat,
Which crabbed Skuller now might think it meet
His old-torne Boat should be new-chang'd a Fleet.
The tumults noise pierced the blew-arched sky
The crystal Air filled with a deadly cry,
Only in this was blessed, as blows abounded,
It could be ever cut, yet never wounded.
The silent Earth glad that she was debarred
From this sad Fight, yet inwardly was heard
The dreadful strokes rebounding loud, to moan
And Echo made her yield a hollow groan,
But this cause chiefly made her most to rave,
That to her due the sea should prove a grave.
Never did strong-breath't Aeolus disturb
The sea so much, When he can hardly curb
His madding pages, when they raging muster
To quarrel with the waves, or whistling bluster
Among the well-set trees, and branched bowgh's
Singing through chinks of some decayed house:
Nor stern Orion with his stormy light
Appalling shipmen, does so much affright
The soon moov'd sea, as did this battles noise,
Which Neptune answered with his bellowing voice,
Who as the Fleet's urged nearer to the strand
Which tumbling pace, ran frighted up the sand,
That had not bounds restrained his element,
His watery veil had clothed the Continent.
The fearful winds on the Ocean durst not rome,
But least they should be smothered kert at home.
And there sat sighing: Clouds their rane do keep,
Though ready at the battles sight to weep,
Least their pure drops with gore-blood should be staind
So that no winds blew, nor from heaven it rained;
Marvel not yet at tempests on the flood
So many tears streamed, and such streams of blood,
Nor without winds are waves to be admired,
So many groans and dyings brea'ths expired.
The Oceans skaly, silent wandering nation
Seeing pale armed troops invade the station
Of their vast kingdom, down the sanguine flood
Fearfully glide, fearing their future food.
The tender Nymph's who with their silver feet
Use on the plains of crisped Thetys meet,
Where tripping prettely the are wont to dance
Themselves, into a heavenly slwmbring trance
Of sweet repose, at these inhumane shocks
With hair all torn creep into the hollow rocks
Where shrouded they to meditate began,
No rock so flinty as the heart of man,
The rocks though always struck by waters fury,
The rocks yet patient bear this injury;
Yea Thetis self whose woombe enriched bare
That fearful Thunder of the Trojan war
Stubborn Achilles, who in fight did win
Such glory, wished that warr's had never bin.
So she, with all her trembling watery peers
Augment the brinish sea, with brinish tears.
Ships now begin to burn, that one might see
Neptunes and Vulcans consangunity
Yea now these ships, which free from water stood,
Strangly begin to sink with humane blood,
Which as from thence with fearful gush it ran,
Filled up the wrinkles of the Ocean,
Making with purpose ghastly gored hue,
Of one Red sea which was before, now two:
Which sea so full of Dead, it hence might come
Well to be called, Mare Mortuum.
The quaking ships with murmuring guns are rent,
Whose wounded sides the gored streams do vent
Of dead and wounded men, who lay therein,
As if they had their Beeres or coffin's bin:
They lay therein and as the ships did go
Seemed bloody, bloodles, dead, and mooving too.
The furious fire with flames does undermine
The towering Mast, made of the lofty Pine,
So that same tree which often hight's Nuptiall's,
Now Cypresse-like does burn at Funerall's.
And eaten by the galling flames, at last
Falls down the huge, high, heavy weighted Mast,
And as great things are wont, fell not alone
Killing a troop nor of it is foes, but own.
The tacklings, sail's, and cables now do burn,
And fire casts Anchors, never to return.
About their ears the whistling bullets sung,
And wandering wildfire made the affrighted throng
Crowd into corners speedily, and they
That durst stand men, to sensles fire give way.
As when with in the fat Trinacrian soil,
Inflamed Aetna does begin to boil,
When nak't Pyracmon, with his round-ey'd fellows,
Sweatinh heave up their huge strong-breathed bellows,
Thundering upon their steeled Anviles top
To furnish armor for their smoaky shop;
Their pondrous hammers, and redoubling, makes
Enceladus belch out his sulph'ry flakes
Of veng-full wrath, then may you see black smoke
Vomiring out, wrapped, in a pitchy cloak,
And the hard bowels of the mountain, torn
By setter'd fire, with a strange bounding borne
Up to the cloulds, whose fearful fall to shun,
The neighboring people with a maz'ment, run
To shroudin'g Dens, hiding them closely under,
Fearing from high, and from below a thunder.
Then did the inhumane battles fury rage,
Nor could the sea the increasing flames assuage.
And Mars himself, in Adamantine arms,
With a hoarse voice rores out against all-armes.
He that would now have travailed to hell,
Might have seen weary sweating Charon well
In fervent labor, with his mossy oars
Tugging pale shadows to the ore-swarmed shores;
Which on the bancks as they lamenting crept,
Wailing Cocytus in compassion wept.
Acheron flowed with grief, and as they say,
Lethe it self could never forget this day,
The Furies whin'd, by Plutoes Judgment cast,
Who swear their rage was far by men surpast,
One coming here might tired Clotho spy,
How she could searse her weary arm's apply
To turn the wheel; and Lachesis repine
Who swear she could not threads of mortals twine
So fast as they were cut; you might have seen
Atropos raging with remorsles teene
And seeking each where for some greetty stone
To whet her sheeres, whose edge was dulled grown
With too much cutting of their fatal thread,
Whose haples lives this gastfull battle shed.
Fire now and water did not each contend,
But seem their power so mutually to lend,
That at this time there many a one became
Burned in the sea and drowned in the flame.
This one good hap to carcasses did fall,
The had fire to burn'em at their funeral.
The mangled ships not fearing to be drencht,
Gladly take breaches, thereby to be quenched.
But now thou Tisiphonc, infernal Muse
Rouzing thy self from Stygian sleep, peruse
The various Images of dreary Fate
Happening in this sad Fight, and Intimate
Them to my mind, which well, I think, agree,
Not with a sweet, and heavenly Muse, but thee.
The Industrious Pilot sitting at the stern,
Where in a little card, he can discern
The vast uncertainty of Neptunes haunt
Ruling swift ships by powerful Adamant,
Here as he sits retired, and watchful minds
The frequent change of two and thirty winds
Comes an unruly shot, and him does force
To certain death, change his uncertain course,
So he that wont stern blasts in truce to bind,
Could not foresee when he should loose his wind,
From storms, and Mists of Death he could not free
Himself, who wont the Tempests curb, but he
Who bearding Neptune, used on the Ocean float,
Is now controlled in Charons little boat.
The Master ranging up and down the Deck,
And wounded mortally, to him does beck
His Mate, who hasting to his aid in vain
Is there together with the Master slain,
And at once ended with him his lives Date,
Proouing himself truly the Masters Mate.
The Trumpetter, with brave reviving sound
Quickening their dying hearts, is felled ^oth' ground,
And as in's mouth he still the brass did wield,
His dying breath made it a dead march yield,
And having lent his Trumpet so much breath
In's life, it turned him some again at's death.
The Drummer with his nimble hand repeating
His doubled blows, without compassion beating
His harmless drum, which seemed with groaning cry
To murmur at his Masters cruelty,
Suddenly two rash bullets rudely come
Tearing both skin of drumer, and the Drum,
Drummer of life, of sound the Drum's bereft:
So Drum, and Drummer both are speechles left.
The Gunner as with nimble have he runs
To fire his seldome-vaine-reporting Guns,
His head a leaden-winged bullet hits
And his hard braine-pan into pieces splits,
He of a thousand this alone might vaunt,
That of his death he was not ignorant,
And this true riddle might of him abide,
He lived once by's Death, by's life now did.
Here comes a Captain, with undaunted face,
Encouraging his soldiers to the Chase,
And being about to say, be brave and bold,
An untaught bullet rudely bids him hold,
And as death's mist in his dull eyes did wander,
Beseeching aid he left to be commander,
And he whose voice from fainting thought to call them,
By's dying groan does fearfully apall them:
This leader faithful to his utmost breath
Can only now lead them the way to Death.
See how to steal the wauing flagg, one climbs
Up by the cards, but being espied betimes
Tangled in the ropes, he is of life bereft,
And so is hanged for his intended Theft.
But the cords burnt wherein his legs were bound,
He gets a Pirates death both hanged and drowned.
Some under hatches closed, in despair
Mount up their foes with powder into the air,
Which done it seemed a strange prodigious sight
A troop of armed men to mask the light:
It seems yet that they no damage meant 'em,
Who the next way up into heaven sent 'em
Making them fly, beyond Dae'dalian skill,
In the vast air, without a winged quill,
Giving to them a strange unwonted death,
Who having air too much yet wanted breath.
See see the lot of sad Mortality,
Our chiefest help's, help often to Misery,
Some men who came secure from future harms
Enrolled in well-proou'd steely clothed arms.
Fall by mischance into the sea's dire hand,
Whence being unarmed they might have swom to land:
Their arms do sink, and without mercy end 'em
So killed by that which chiefly should defend 'em.
One with his Musket ready to give fire
Aims at another adverse Muskettier,
But his match missing fire, he is forced to die
By the others matches true fidelity,
By which he di'de, can scarc'ly well be known,
Whether by the others Musket or his own.
See there a Coward wanting heart to abide
The daunting face of the fierce adverse side,
Slinketh behind the next, not caring whither,
Comes a mad shot, and kill's 'em both together;
Praise him in this, for though his life outdar'd him
To equal the other, yet his death compared him.
Nevertheless if truly ye do mind him,
As in his life, in's death he came behind him.
One seeming now his side begin to fail
Shows them their colors, while himself looks pale,
Sure by this man some Omen ill was shown,
To keep their colors, who could loose his own.
Those men who chanced in the ships to fall
The cruel sea was made their buirall.
And intoth' waves without remorse were thrown,
Poor men, slain by their foes, drowned by their own.
A Fisherman who nigh them cut the Maine
Sitting in's boat was with a bullet slain,
And the bark fired wherein he dead did fall.
Which gratis, burnt, gave him his Funeral
True to thy Master, kind boat, who with him
Did often in life, and now in death do swim
With him alive in water that did tire
Thy waue-beat sides, dy'st now with him in fire.
Yet me thinks thou should not deserve this turn
Who so often plunged with him which should burn,
Yet sail with him to Elysium, sail the faster,
In Carons stead that thou may waft thy Master,
Strange Boat which thus we not amiss may call.
His Life, Death, Charon and his Funeral.
A Noble man that was a Renegate,
While he against his King does boldly prate,
A shot takes off his head, as if twere reason
That he should be beheaded for his Treason.
A baser fellow while he dares complain
And rail against his once own Sovereign,
A true Liege-man, as he thus boldly brags,
Strikes him up, and his vile body drags
About the ship, and while he vainly begs,
Remosles cutteth off his arms and legs,
And thinking then to throw him in the tide
He Is caught upon an Anchor on the side,
That one beholding rightly might have sed,
He justly was hanged, drawn, and quartered.
Some fearing swords, into the sea do fly,
And so for fear of death, fear not to die.
Some fall into the Ocean stained with gore,
Which from their former wounds had gusht before,
Which killed not them, as it from them was spil'd,
But entering into them again, they are killed.
Heeres one about to strike, his foe does fall
Into the sea, before he can recall
His erring stroke, striking the sea to stay him,
The Ocean in revenge o'th blow does slay him.
One fearing death does feign to die and bleed,
And while he is in faining, dies indeed.
Another being about to strike his foe
Loses at once his arm and threatening blow:
His left arm shiuering, reaches at the other,
But cut atwaine, lies with it is equal Brother,
Both joined, though both divided, as in spite
Of Death, they meant to part their last goodnight,
By shaking hands: the miserable truncke
As loath to part, fainting upon them sunk.
One seeing them together thus, might say,
There a whole body, all in pieces lay.
See two with sturdy grapple, striving whether
Should overcome, both fall in sea together;
Embracing both till they have lost their breath,
And seem though foes in life, yet friends in death.
Two brothers slain, as they together stood,
One then might swear, they were allied in blood.
Other two, who so nigh resembling, were
A loved mistake unto the parents dear,
(Cruel death severed them) and that one left
Poor parents knew, of error now bereft:
He left eternal cause of grief renowes,
Who still alive, still his dead brother shows:
And yet to them this comfort still he gives,
The One cannot die, so long as the other lives.
The wounded soldiers, now that all else fails,
To stop their wounds, do tear their woeful sails:
Poor men who after they were overthrown
Had torn those wings, whereby they might have flown.
One with his bleeding ready to expire,
Thinks with his blood, to quench the ship on fire:
And so in mids of flames he bleeding stands,
Tearing new wounds with his kind cruel hands.
And grieved to see his blood so little profit,
He often adds tears to help the quenching of it,
Till at last fainting he is feign to fall,
Into the sea, which made his Funeral:
And bleeding in it from each mangled lim,
He quenched it, and it extinguish't him.
See a poor wretch with both arms cut asunder,
Distracted leapt into the water under
Meaning to swim, but see the woeful wretch
With how much toil he labors to stretch
His raw-veind stumps, which for his arms before
Gush nothing now, but streams of deadly gore:
Feign would he catch t'vphold his wavering life
Some kind remain o'th ship, but all his strife
Does make him sooner to be out of breath,
And wanting arms he yet embraces death.
One gets this, by having lost his eyes,
In that he cannot see his miseries,
Another legs are gone, that who him sees
Might think he did beg pardon on his knees.
What refuge now is left? when if they shun
The Approaching sword, into the fire they run:
Shunning the fire, they into waterfall,
So no way wants a certain Funeral.
Thus after strange unheard of sort they lie,
And death, by many deaths, makes one man die.
The mangled ships no longer can with stand
Th'intruding sea, and Mars his fiery brand;
But sinking downward one might then have thought
Them gone to help Charon to waft ore his fraught.
The conquered fleet pricked now with desperate stings
Of horror, wish their army did of wings
Only consist; but now as if it stood
Tied with fast anchors to the stubborn flood
Mooues not away, but void of all instruction,
Venture their own, to hasten the destruction
Of their once Masters, who into corners creep,
As among Wolves, a flock of trembling sheep.
Much like a silly Dove, whose broken wing
Has tried the Talons of the aerie King,
And lies panting on the bloody ground
Striving to fly from's enemies rebound.
Alas poor bird, it wants that winged oar
Which should it is wonted escape to it restore:
And so at length with silent patience crouching,
It Is made a prey to the fierce bird encroching.
Thus fleet and bird lie in the same woeful plight,
Whose only wish is to be put to flight.
The Sun no longer could endure to see
Amongst humane men such inhumanity:
Therefore his Horses, bathing in their foam,
With posting speed have to their watrie home.
Where yet a while they all amazed stood,
Finding in stead of Sea, a Sea of Blood.
FINIS.
H. H. Authoris Fratis majoris (cujus cura ac impensa haec praemissa Posthuma
edita sunt,)
CHARACTER.
SI quis praenomen cupiat cognoscere nostrum,
HENRICI nomen Nympha Secrata dedit.
Jnque tuo MICHAEL festo, sum natus and ortus, September. 1583

Christiadis sumpsi nomen in Aede tua.
Jlla luce mihi dil^^ta adjungitur Vxor September. 1615

Cognovi socium nocte priore thorum.
Hi^ MICHAEL Magnus Princeps pessundabit omnes
Papicolas istis Tart^ra tetra patent.
Dei Pater Omnipotens, famulo mihi posse beatum
Sortiri in Coelo, cum MICHAELE Locum.
Aliud, CHARACTER ACROSTICON, vice EPITAPHIj.
Hic, mihi ne totum delerent Funera Nomen,
Ostendam vitae rem, Lo^a, Nomen, Avos.
Laud vigent patres, vid^t COVENTRIA natum,
Luce nova: HENRICVM nomine signat aqua.
A patriae gr^mio, LONDINVM exc^pit adultum, Anno, 1599.

N^^rit idem: C^ara cum Pare Liber ago:
Divi^ico^ est verbum: Mihi Roma perosa:
Vita quidem ten^is, sit mihi grata tamen
Solaque post Mortem Coelestia dona supersins.
Mihi Roma perosa.
FINIS.
Page 80. l. 4. (a) Plus male facta nocent quam benedicta decent: praedicat
viva voce qui praedicat vita and voce. Ib. p. l. 30. (b) Nemesis pedes habet:
Lips. de Constant. and tarditatem judicii gravitate supplicii compenset.

Page 81. l. 12. (a) Ecles. 7.18. Qui dicunt ne appropinq^es mihi quia immundus
es. Es. 65.5. Ib. p. l. 23. (b) Va vobis derisoribus, cum venerit dies judicii
and aperti fuerint libri conscientiarum: Cum dicetur vobis, ecce hos puritatis
derisores and impura eorum opera. Quid facietis tunc, cum Caeli re ve labunt
iniquitates vestras and terra adversus vos consurget. Ib. p. l. 29. (c) Dicunt
non faciunt hoc magnum Crimen habetur. In linguis, pietas pectore nulla manet.

Page 82. l. 9. (a) Mallet Deus multos: nocentes condonare quam unum innocentem
condemnare. Ib. p. l. 19. (b) Vnguentum est unguentum itsi vultures defugiant.
Theod.

Page 84. l. 3. (a) Quam bent te ambitio mersit vanissima ventus and tumidos
tumidae vos superastis aquae. Quam been totius raptores orbis avaros. Hausit
inexhausto justa vorago maris. Theod. Be^a in Psalm. 27.2.124.3.6. Psalm. 21.11.

Page 85. l. 14. (a) Job 4.8. Psalm. 27.2. Non est la^ aequior ulla, Quam necis
artifices art perire sua. Ib. page 17. (b) Anno 1602. in Londino de plaga.
38244. Consumptis tot peste viris, tot peste puellis, vix habuit nobis tum nova
plaga locum.

Ibid. page l. 21. Antigones rex amicis sun dentibus, ut si Athenas caperet,
firmis eas and validis muniret praesidiis. Nullum inquit scio praesidium
firmius aut stabilius, quam civium benevolentiam. Sic Periander summa open
commitendum esse dixit iis, qui into regnare vellent ut benevolentia potius
quam armis stiparentur. (...), Sola benevolentia subditorum firmisissima est
regis custodia. Synesius.

Errata.
IN the Eipistle to all the afflicted, page ^. line 5. for of, read and. Ib. p.
l. 11. Maccheus. 2. p. Of the Subject, l. 25. leave out still. p. 3. l. 29.
steams. p. 4. l. 7. this. p. 33. l. 5. him. p. 69 l. 25. trash. p. 79. l. 29.
if.

FINIS.

