THE BVRTHEN OF THE MINISTRY.

Gathered out of the sixth chapter of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Galathians,
the first verse.

VERY PROFITABLE TO BE read of every faithful subject, and of all that desire
to be taught in the way of truth.

By JOHN HOLME.

Math. 11.29.30. Take my yoke upon you, for my burden is light

LONDON, Printed by I. Danter for John Winnington. 1592.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE George Earl of Cumberland, Baron Clifford, Lord
Bromflet, Aton and Vescie, etc. Knight of the most noble order of the Garter:
JOHN HOLME wishes increase of all honor.
GReat no doubt (Right honorable) are the blows which our adversaries the
Papists have given us, and yet our Church not once moves or gives place to
the traditions of men: But yet in this notable victory and triumph over them,
we may well be compared to a company of soldiers, who having gotten a pray,
and falling forth amongst themselves for the division of it, in the mean time
the enemy comes, and spoils them all, and takes it quite from them. We of
England have in peace possessed the word of truth a long time, but about
unnecessary trifles we are ready to go together by the ears; a strange
matter, that out of light should spring such palpable darkness, and that our
Ministry should travel as it were of sects. Well, let us take heed, that
while we thus consume one another, he take not this jewel (for which the
Merchant sold all that he had to buy it) and give it to a Nation that will
bring forth the fruits thereof. Though the watchmen sit on the tower, and
tell us daily they epsy immineat dangers; yea, though his preachers tell us
destruction will be to Judah, and desolation to Jerusalem, yet we care not for
the safety of our country, nor for the precious Gospel which we would seem
to profess, our consciences are seared up; and the spirit of pride has got
the dominion over us, which a learned Father makes the cause of schism and
dissension.

In this little Book (Right Honorable) I have prescribed a potion to cure
such a grievous disease, the quality thereof you shall better perceive if you
read it through: and the rather I presume of your honor, for that of a child
you have been ready to benefit the Church, being a father to the fatherless
and widow, a restorer of the Levites portion, a defier of the world, and a
chief defender of our Nation, that night and day have been in the peril of
sea, in peril of robbers, yea sometime with Paul in peril of death and that
for our safety, who live at rest, eating the fruits of our labors in peace
therefore since poverty cannot give to honor the things of this world, yet
such as we have with Peter that will we give: beseeching your Honor the rather
to accept of it, because it proceeded from a willing mind, and from a
faithful Northren heart, and thus I leave it to your godly consideration, to
whom our University is bound in weightier matters.

Your Honors to command JOHN HOLME.

TO THE READER.
CHristian people strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to
eternal life, and few there be that enter into it: but broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be that find it out, and walk in it:
the one way full of pleasure and ease, the other crabbed, crooked and full of
sorrow. And this is the way of the Church and chosen people of God, Israel
must be under Egypt, the three Children in the fyrie furnace, David must be
persecuted in his own kingdom, by his own son, and Christ himself must be
crucified: No marvel therefore though the Devil sow contentions in our
minds, now we being at rest, for that even in peace we should begin to war,
for the reforming of which mischief many and sundry Pamphelets have been
written, but either we are to deaf that we can not hear, or else to negligent
in practicing those things that we hear: never so much preaching God be
praised never so little profitting, the Lord amend it, Some of us have itching
ears, to heap to our selves a number of teachers, and with some of us it is
midnight, we care for no teachers, the one sort be the Brownists, the other be
the Papists and Gesuits of our time. And though our most gracious Queen whose
life the Lord long continue, as the faithful witness in heaven, do labor and
strive, to set peace between Ephraim and Manasses, between Minister and
Ministry: yet we disloiall servant to so good a governor, flee far from
this peace. Was ever any land guided so well and wisely? yet behold the envious
sows tares in the minds of her loyal subjects, to drive them from
obedience. These and such like are the trials, which persuade my heart of the
truth of the religion of England: For this cause thou haste here (gentle
Reader) the burden of the ministry, wherein is set down the causes of
contentious and scismes, lately sprung up amongst us, desiring when thou
know them to eschew the^, and now to become true to her Majesty, if
heretofore thou have not been sound, so God will bless thee for thy true
Israelites heart, and guide thee in all thy ways, that thy foot dash not
against a stone, and at the last bring thee to everlasting life through the
merits of Christ

Yours Io. Holme.

THE BVRTHEN OF THE MINISTRY.
GAL. 6. VERSE. 5. For every man shall bear his own burden.


THE Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter exhorting the Galathians to the
spirit of lenity, that rather they should admonish a brother by infirmity
falling, then rashly to condemn him for an Atheist or a reprobate: which he
proves by four arguments.

First, because they should consider themselves how weak they were of
themselves, least the Lord also give them over to be tempted.

Secondly, because in so doing they did fulfill the law, even the law of
love, which charitably commands them to think of their brethren.

Thirdly, because it would make them have a fond conceit of themselves, to
think better of themselves than indeed they were.

The fourth and the principal reason is laid down in these short words; For
every man shall bear his own burden: and therefore be courteous, mild, and
gentle. A doctrine so necessary, that without it the man of God can never be
made perfect, nor ever come to the wished haven, but perish in the midst of the
sea by bloisterous and most troublesome tempests. And as it is impossible to
walk without a leg, or to be valiant in war without armor or weapons: so
he that is not furnished with this doctrine, let him never flatter himself,
for he will but prove a dastard in the field, and fall down before his enemies
to his own utter overthrow in helfire for ever. But I think it better for you
and me, and more profitable to set down the principles, whereof I intend now
to speak, which are two.

First I will prove unto you that every one has a burden: Secondly, that
every one must bear his own burden.

For the first it were a large theme to handle and many volumes might be
spent in writing of it: you know that all we which be the sons of Adam are
sinners, and this sin is a burden,

The latter proposition may be proved by many places: as is Esaias the first;
Onus Moab; the burden of Moab: and what is it but the sin of Moab? Judas his
sin was such a burden, so heavy that he could not bear it, but most
desperately by hanging himself, was the cause of the shortening of his days.
The like is proved by that devilish image of sin Caine, whose sin was so
grievous, that one day scarce was he able to bear it. Which thing the blind
Philosophers did know and well perceive: as Cato; Nemo sine crimine viuit: None
lives without a fault. No man is without this burden (as Iuuenal says) Nemo
sapit omnibus horis. This is proved also in Genesis 6.5. When the Lord saw that
the wickedness of man was great upon the earth, and all the imaginations of the
thoughts of his heart were only evil continually. With this agrees the
saying of David; There is none that does good no not one, for they are corrupt,
and become abominable in their doings. So that (as Augustine says) the wise
man is without his works, and the young man without obedience. We have a
figure in Rhetorike, called histeron proteron, and yet no figure now a days,
because it is the truth it self. The ship which by violence of the waves is
tossed hither and thither, and staggereth, as the Prophet says, like a dru^ken
man by contrary winds, by reason whereof the ship it self is turned up side
down, and the men that were in it, in the seas most pitifully overwhelmed.
The ship of the world by the waves of wickedness is turned up side down;
the heaven that was above, is now below, and the earth which was below, is now
above; wisdom is folly, and folly is wisdom; Love, which was a cover for
sin, and as strong as the grave, is now as weak as water, and bewrays all
sin; Charity, which was hot amongst men, is now quite frozen up for want of
heat; fleshly hearts become flintie, and as hard as steel; yea true
religion, and undefiled before God, is counterfaite religion, and goes for no
current money with some in England: so that either we have good heads to walk
with our feet upwards, or else we can but look for a sudden destruction, as
the Sodomites, who were so drunken with sin, that they could not tell where
they were, but you know their punishment, a most just judgment, and I pray
God that it light not on us for our sins here in England like unto Sodom, yea
worse than Gomorrha, who for our pride have deserved the lowest place in hell,
and for our covetousness to be punished with penury, as was the rich man in
the Gospel.

But to come a little more nearely to the matter of my text: although these
grievous sins be a burden to England, so that we had need to wash our
selves with Isope, that we might be whiter than snow, as the Prophet David his
request was, yet we will leave this, and come to more necessary matter.
Salomo^ brings in a good conclusion. 1. Ecclesiastes, 2. Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity, and what greater burden is there than vanity? Yea, what
profit has a man of all his labor under the Sun? one generation passes,
another succeeds, and the earth remains, all things are troublesome and
painful, no man can utter them. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, the
ear is not filled with hearing, and this is a burden: And to conclude (says
Solomon) I have seen all things under the Sun. But behold they are all vanity
and vexation of spirit, so that ye see the vanity of this life is such a
heavy and wearisome burden, that a man almost can take no joy in this world.
But more particularly in these our days schisms and sects are great and heavy
burdens, indeed it is necessary that there should be such, but woe unto that
man by whom offenses do come.

By which things we may gather that these be the last times, and the dangerous
days, whereof our Savior Christ and his Apostle Paul prophecieth full truly,
for the first we read in the 24. Mat. Many shall come in my name, I am christ
will they say, and shall deceive many. And in the 24. verse, false Christ's, and
faise Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were
possible they should deceive the very elect. If any man then shall say unto
yon this is Christ, believe him not, for behold I have told you before: but
consider I pray you the 3. chap. of the 2. Epistle to Timothy, where he does
describe and set the sects in their colors: for men shall be lovers of
themselves. In the 2. verse without natural affection; in the 3. Traitors; in
the 4. having a show of godliness; but have denied the power thereof, in the 5.
But in the next ver. are they most lively pictured out, for of this sort are
they which creep into houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins,
and led with diverse lusts. In the 6. and in the 8 verse he compares them to
Iannes and I ambres, who refused Moses, but they shall prevail no longer, for
their madness shall be evident unto all men,: and in the 10. verse he
prescribes a way to try their spirits, by the example of himself: but thou
have fully known my doctrine, manner of living purpose, faith long suffering,
love, patience. But indeed they sit in the chair of Moses, as the Scribes and
Pharisees did 24. Mat. All things therefore which they shall command you
observe and fulfill, but according to their works do you not at all, for they
say often and do not perform it. But to make any application of these I fear
I should loose my labor, and sing to such an Adder as will never be charmed,
though I sing never so sweetly: better is it therefore never to trouble my
self at all, than to meddle with such a matter as can hardly be brought to
pass, or to lay the ground work before I cast account whether I be able to
build or no, lest that the ground work being laid,, and I not able to finish
it my self, become ridiculous unto al, and that were a great burden for me.

Now if a man will know certainly that he has a burden, let him look into
the 7. of To. 7. Nay I knew not sin but by the Law, for I had not known
lust, except the Lord had said, Thou shall not lust. The knowledge therefore of
our burdens comes by the Law, not that we are under the Law, for now we are
delivered from the Law. But the knowledge of sin only comes by the Law,
which is the only office of the Law to drive a man to repentance.

Now that not only the children of disobedience have a burden, but also the
elect children of God: it may appear by the testimony of Paul himself in the
17. and 18. verses. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no
good thing for will is present with me, but I find no means to perform that
which is good: for I do not that good which I would do, but the evil which I
would not do, that do I. And so he concludes that even the contagion of sin
dwells in him, which is a grievous and most heinous burden.

And he that says he has no burden, dcceineth himself, and the trueh of God
is not in him, as it is in the first Epistle of John. 1. Chap. 8. ver. If we
say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. And
in the 2 Chap. He declares the means how to be eased of our burden. If any
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the just, and he
is the reconciliation for our sins, yet there is a difference between the
sinning of the godly and the ungodly. Sinning of the godly said I, there be
many parts of the scripture that seem repugnaunt to this: As first a good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. He that commits sin is of the
devil, for every one that is borne of God sins not, as the Apostle
witnesses: that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. Then how can the
former stand for a truth, that the children of God should both sin, and not
sin, have a burden, and have none, when as we know even by natural reason,
that two contraries cannot stand at one time in one subject. Now in that the
righteous do sin it is plain, There is none that does good, no not one, the
righteous sins seven times a day: and many such places. The answer is very
easy, the righteous in deed do sin, but not unto death, because he is
partly borne of God, and partly of a man, the first way he sins not, the
second way he sinueth. Nohah GOD his faithful and obedient servant although
the Lord blessed him, saying to his seed, bring ye forth fruit, and
multiply, grow plentifully in the earth, and increase therein. 9. Genesis 7. and
9. verses. Behold I even I establish my covenant with you and your seed after
you. Yet this way he sinned not, but afterward it came to pass that he
drunk of the wine, and was drunken, and uncovered himself in the midst of
his Tent: see, that no sooner he was come into the world but he was infected by
it, and fell from God most ruenously, by which we may gather, how slippery
places we men of this world, stand in, so that it is impossible for us to
walk in it without danger of our lives. No marvel therefore though we be as
blind as beetles, that we cannot see the sunshine of righteousness, though
it shine never so bright in England. O great and heavy burden, in one hour
able to crush down our shoulders, and to cast both body and soul into the lake
of destruction: we see therefore that Noah sinned not the first way, but as he
was man the second way. Abraham, although he did forsake his own country, and
all his kindred, to go to the land whereunto the Lord appointed him; in which
he sinned not because it was Gods commandment, but he lied, Genesis 12.13. in
saying that his wife was his sister for fear of the Egyptians: Say I pray
thee, that thou art my sister, that I may fare well for thy sake, and that my
life may be preserved by thee.

And this second way he sinned, because his wife by this means was ravished by
Pharao. Jacob the faithful servant of God, yet he deceived his master in
dividing the flock. Genesis 30. the second way he sinned. David the anointed of
God, yet notwithstanding he committed incest with Vrias wife, and therefore it
was a heavy burden unto him: Sod quid onus? But what is the greatest burden
Even the love of Idols. And first men make this world an Idol, especially we
of England, when we like unto Achabs wife are never content, though we had
never so much, yet still we desire more: and although (as M. Calvin says)
amongst men there be such variety of minds and desires, that as it is a world
to see them: yet do all agree in this point most plainly, that with whole heart
and mind they are occupied in the world, and the things thereof: and surely his
opinion is true and to be liked of all: for men nowadaies had rather eat the
bread that perishes, than drink the water, whereof whosoever shall drink,
out of his belly shall spring rivers of waters of life: not of such waters as
our Fathers drunk of in the rocks and died, but of the water of life, which
never shall decay from all eternities, and yet man most senseles, had rather
be in bondage than in freedom, he had rather drink of the filthy puddles
of Egypt, to be fed with butter, beef, unions, or garlic, than for to
drink of the water whose streams flow from Jacob his well, or from the river
of Eden: or to be fed with Manna from heaven.

Thus men become without understanding, degenerating from reasonable creatures
to sense less Idiots: and this is not the least burden we have to bear in
England. The Ministers themselves have their burden; Malumest nobis esse hic:
It is evil for us to dwell here, for their portion is labor, a heavy yoke
laid upon the sons of Adam to humble them thereby. If labor then be necessary
for the Minister to feed the flock, then also he must have his tools to finish
the work as well for the body as for the mind.

Now if the first sort which concerns his body be wanting, which is
sufficient maintenance, then what hope is there of the gifts of the mind. For
(as Aristotle affirms) the mind does follow the temperature of the body,
and the body it self cannot last without nourishment: then what shall we think
of those men that would destroy the foundation of our Colleges to increase
their own possessions, which be the well springes of life to the whole land,
confounding learning, and bringing in barbarism, by making the wisdom of God
inferior to the wisdom of man? The word of God (say they) is simple, and may
be understood without the Arts: which if it were true, doubtless the Lord
would never have given commandment, that his Priests lips should contain
knowledge, or that the word of God should be preached or that there should be
any Ministry at all, but these and such like be the illusions of satan, to
deceive the people in these last times.

Now they which would have done us this harm, were not our open enemies, for
then we could better have espied them, and so eschewed their malice: but it was
our own friends and familiars with whom we have walked in the house of God
together, who went out from us, but were not of us, that most cruelly are bent
against us, and like unnatural children destroy their own dear mother, by
whom they have been brought up, and cherished; yet many of them will call for a
learned ministerye: but can any gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thristles?
Can there be any knowledge where there is no labor, or labor where there is
no maintenance? No surely: for who would labor to become poor and base, and
destitute of all things? or who would be a minister to have the skin and the
bone almost for apparel, so that he must take more care to preserve life, than
to instruct his people: being other wise condemned of the most? O what a woeful
case is this? we hang our Harps upon the trees, and sit down by the waters of
Babylon weeping, when we which are young scholars remember this Sion. And
look forth of our Studies with many salt tears, when we remember the
unmerciful dealing of these that with-holde our maintenance from us. They may
well be compared to Pharaoh, for when the judgment of God was great, and
terrible in his land, that he could not deny but it was the extraordinary
work of God, yet for all this his heart was so hardened, that he could not be
content to let the people go and serve the Lord, but upon this condition, that
they should leave their substance for him, and his posterity: even so the men
of this world deal with the poote ministers of God: for though their
consciences in keeping the maintenance of the Church, do accuse the^: yet they
are content to call for a learned ministry, but provided still, they keep
their former possessions the spoil of the Church: No marvel then if no
residencye be great in this land, when scarce two livings will find a man bread
and apparel. Is there not greater fault in the gredie cormorants of this
world, who are the causes of all such mischief, than in those that for
necessity and conscience sake, are constrained to take them, and surely there
be many that cry against it, but with no ground: for God knows the
simplicity of many hearts, that have two liuinges. The Minister is said to be
a feeder. 33. Ezechiel 1. and how can he feed others, when he can scarce feed
himself? How can his life and doctrine agree together? when the cares of this
world do choke his mind.

The children of Israel made Brick by reason of their task-maisters a long
time, and our Ministers are fain to become servile: yea and as it were bond
slaves, because their cruel task-maisters withold their right, their
children cry in the streets being fatherless, what stony heart will not
bleed at this, and desire the Lord day and night till it be restored? Which if
it were, then all the outcries of our monstrous hypocrites, men that carry the
outward form of godliness, would soon cease, that we might all agree in the
spirit of truth, which is the bond of peace: that England might flourish and
be brought to all the Nations of the earth, as the Sun in perfect beauty:
for want of discretion is the cause that has caused so many libels to be
written against our ancient Fathers of the Church, who are indeed the
reformers of such abuses, if ever they be reformed.

This want of learning and Judgment, does cause them to shoot at al
aduenturs, and to discover the shame of their parents, if by any means
possibly they could: such graceless children are nourished and brought up in
the bosom of this Church, which except they be cut off betim, it will be a
destruction to the whole common wealth, for a kingdom divided against it self
can not stand. Nay, if any house be against it self it can not endure.

If our realm be the one half papists, the other Brownests, how can the
gospel take place in the hearts and conscience of men, But that destruction,
calamity, and misery, should come upon the whole body. They preach peace
indeed with their mouths, but they have swords in their hands and hearts.
They are like unto the grave, fair without, but within full of rottenness,
and corruption.

The Crocodile seeks to see a man, but it is but to dispatche him: and these
men they would bring in reformation, to deform us which live in peace and quiet
one with another.

Moses was full forty years old before it came into his heart to visit his
brethren, but our young heads will be scarce fourteen before they be medlers
with the godly Bisshops and fathers of our Church.

The Boys of Beyell must call balepate, balepate, so long till the bears
devour the^, well take heed ye that be infected with that louen, for there is a
rod prepared for you, by the wisdom of our gatious Prince, and Council. Did
Paul ever reprove by libels? or, did the Apostles sow sedicion by their
doctrine? which 2. things do argue in you the spirit of error, the spirit
of lies, withdrawing the minds of the people from their loyal obedience to
their sovereign Queen, but I warrant you, when they come to ryper years, to
try wisdom got by experience, then they sing clean another song, and turn
the backeside of the book upwards: whereby it appears, that they were brain
sick in their youth, and a little giddie of the frenzy, their whole zeal,
was but their unbridled affections, which did drive them on with cords of
vanity, to speak evil of our learned fathers: and thus many of them, the
disease being cured, have confessed.

Now where the fountains is muddye what hope is there that the river should
be clear. If the minister be infected with this heresy, then the people must
needs be in a woeful case, for such preach themselves not the substance of
the sinceere and true doctrine.

The ignorant places are full of contentions, Ephraim against Manasses, and
Manasses against Ephraim: and every Cobblers stal is full of the controversies
of the Church, and all comes by young unlearned bablers, that of good meat give
the people nothing but a bone to gnawe of, and yet they must fight for it like
dogs: yea, all the former euilles which I have named, come of one evil, namly,
the want of maintenuance for a learned ministry, which they so often call for:
would to God I had the tongue of men and Angels to mollify their hearts,
that keeps it from the Church, and to write it therein with the pen of a
Diamond. Nay, I am persuaded that the Papists with their blind devotion
toward the Church, shall rise up at the last day, and condemn us professed
Christians for our negligence herein. They were never so forward in giving to
the Church, as we are in taking from it, so that we live upon the blood of
the people, and become fat in wickedness, even in the pleasures of sin
though they endure but for a season: thus covetousness (deerly beeloued) when it
crept into England, it did swallowe up, and spoil the goods of the Church: but
hearken ye deaf Adders, it is meet for you to dwell in your seeled houses,
and the house of God to ly waste? 1. Hag.. And therefore it is that many of us
in England, have sown much, and bring in little; and have eaten, but had not
enough; drunk and were not filled; we have clothed ourselves, and yet we be
not warm; and he that earneth wages has put it in a broken bag. Ye looked
for much says the Prophet, and lo it came to little, and when ye brought it
home, I did blow upon it says the Lord, because of my house that it is waste,
and ye run every man to his own house.

The Lord has placed us here, in a friutful land, and yet for this sin of
robbing the Church, the dew of heaven did not fall upon the earth to moisten it,
and so all our riches could not deliver us from great penury: thy destruction
therefore is of thy self o England, repent therefore betime, run not a
whoring after thine own inventions, and now build a second Church, far more
glorious then the first, and go about it betime. The children of the Jews
were hindered, and had many lets, because they let slip the opportunity.

Restore the goods of the Church betymes, and you shall see if your little do
not increase to abundance, and then every student will labor for knowledge
and Religion to benefit the Church, to the confusion of Antichrist, to the
conforming and conducting of your souls through the wilderness of this world,
to the kingdom of Heaven: this burden if there were no more in England, it
were sufficient to bring fire and brimstone suddenlye to consume us, but at the
preaching of Jonas the Ninevites repented though his sermon was very short,
yet 40. days, and Niniuie shall be destroyed and turned the wreath of the
Almighty clean away from them. And it may be likewise that the reading of
this little Pamphlet will at the least make some of them blush, when they
consider how many learned men they hinder, that are fain to stay still in
Cambridge for the great want that is in the Country abroad.

The Lord in times past had a controversy with the children of Israel, because
there was no truth, no mercy, no knowledge of God in their land. Ose. 4.1.
And what will he do with this merciless nation, wherein by the wicked the
Prophets are almost stoned, yet in the best part they are scourged and whipped by
extreme penury? Will he not have a controversy with us? and has he not
showed tokens of it? These last years when a mighty nation did rise up
against us like the sands of the sea, though at that instant we had some good
motions, yet now when the peril is past, our hearts are hardened with Pharao,
and we return with the dog to his vomit.

Pharaoh had ten mighty blows at his heart, and yet would not be reclaimed,
and England has had a thousand warnings, and yet still is hardened. Moses smit
the rock, and water gushed out to the comforting of the children of Israel.
And I would to God that tears of repentance might make such men to weep day
and night for the desolation of this Jerusalem, and is it not a confusion of
our own faces, that being under such a most gracious Queen, by whose
government now this 33. years we have enjoyed all blessings both spiritual
and temporal, more than all our neighbor countries about us: that we (I say)
should deal so vngratiously in withholding the goods of the Church, which by
the bountiful hands of so gracious a Queen, and so prudent a Council is
bestowed upon us: and yet this burden does seem to us to be so light, that
we can wipe our mouths, and say we have not sinned. Let France confirm us
in this doctrine, for by this sin there came up sects and heresies, and had
increased to a great and unquenchable flame, had not the sling of David, and
the sword of Gedeon been given into the Kings hand to fight the battle of the
Almighty God for true religion, and for the establishing of the Church. Lord
prosper his journey, that through his hand Israel may be delivered from Egypt,
where it lies in bondage under the Pope or under the Turk, and that the God
of England may show himself to be the true God, and therefore that it is
impossible for them to kick against the prick, or for dust and ashes to wage
war against the immortal and everliving God, whose power indeed no
creature is able to resist.

I have dwelt long (as you may see) in setting forth one of the burdens of
this land. But I may excuse my self, for this one is all: and where this one
is removed, there all other burdens may easily be taken away. So indeed it
is a rock of offense, a stone to stumble at, which except it be taken out of
out way, it is impossible that we should pass by it; except it be such men as
will strain a gnat, and swallow up a cammell. And unto these what is it but is
possible, who can speak to the Church out of every text all things? and these
be they that condemn learning in Sermons, because indeed they have none
themselves. And this is the cause that the common people can better tell of
cappe and surplesse, than of faith and a good conscience which that sect wants
for the most part. Our Savior pronounced a woe to the Scribes and Pharisees,
because they were diligent in tything mint and rue, and every little trifle,
leaving the weightier points of the law. But what if Christ were on the earth
again, do you think they should escape with a thousand woes, because they
have been the destruction of many men's souls, driving them to desperation, as
by woeful experience we see it daily, and all for want of learning? Such deal
with our ancient Fathers writings as they that have cut a purse, who takes
the money, and casts the purse away, for fear their wickedness should be known
to the world: and they, for all that they cannot abide our Fathers, yet they
are feign to fly to their writings to relieve their necessity, yet they cast
away the purse. But all is for vaineglorie to set out themselves, as though it
were their own inventions, or their own arm which helped them. Thus they set
at varience the minds of the people: one holding of Apollo, another of Paul,
and the third of Cephas; one of this man, another of that man: which things
except they be looked too in time, do foretell the ruin of the Church to come.
And though by reason of our most gracious Queen it come not in our days, yet
it may come in the time of our posterity, and the ages that are to come to the
end of the world; and though our life be short, or lighter than vanity,
because our days are numbered, yet let us work those things in this short
life, which may bring us to immortality, where we shall never carry any more
burdens, but sing praises of the most high continually. And forasmuch as our
life while we live in this world is subject to many trials and temptations,
as also that man even against himself is always fighting, the powers of his
mind and body are always at defiance one with the other, let us therefore
labor against our flesh, that the spirit of error do not ouerturn us. Lucifer
being the chiefest Angel, because he would be equal with his maker, was cast
down into the lowest place in hell; but these men will sit in the judgment
seat of God, and cry damnation, damnation, as if they had some secret
inspiration from the Lords counsel. But will not God cast them down? Will he
not confound their pride, that pull motes out of their brothers eye, but forget
the beams which is in their own? Yet I speak not this to defend non
residencie: for as there be that may justly say, Malum est nobis esse hic: So
there are also that think it a pleasant life though they have sufficient
maintenance for their degree in the country abroad to live at ease, and so in
their life they express this saying; Bonum est nobis esse hic. It is an easy
life to live here. I muse how they blush not when men call them Ministers, when
indeed they never do minister, and these men are always learning, and never
come to any perfection: and if they take never so great pains to the outward
appearance of men, yet for all this, they are like unto the candle, which
being put under a bushel, gives small light or none at all. O what grievous
burdens are in England, whereof this is not the least: for such live upon the
blood of the slain of the people.

Those therefore that be guilty in this, I accuse none, I speak it generally
to all, let them take heed of it: and I would to God that even in this their
day they would consider the time of their visitation, and so they would
(considering the night is past, and the day is come) put away the works of
darkness, and put on the armor of light.

The husbandman of whom the parable consists in the Gospel, after he had
once dressed the trees of his garden, amongst the which, in one he had most
delight and therefore took more pains in pruning of it, than of the other,
supposing indeed to have received the most fruit at it: but when the time
came, behold there was nothing upon it but leaves. Then at the request of his
servant he let it stand another year, and at the time appointed looked for
fruit, and lo there was nothing. Then the husbandman said, the third year cut
it down, least it also make the ground barren.

The Lord our God, who by his great mercy and goodness has planted us in a
famous vineyard, and has taken great pains in pruning of us, has looked for
fruit, but behold the bitter roots of dissension. Now the Lord expecting
daily our amendment, has let us stand still in the flourishing vine, not for
three years, but for 20. or 30. and above, and yet behold no fruit but leaves
in the best part, or else wild grapes good for nothing but the furnace: Now
what judgment remains, but that we should be cut up, least we also make the
country and the people barren amongst whom we live. But I fear me this long
forbearing is but to bring a greater destruction, and as a man would say to
fetch his blow the further, that his stroke may be the greater.

By this which is spoken, you may partly perceive, that every man both by
nature, and by the course of his life, has a great burden. But there be many
mo burdens beside these, for usury is a burden. The Usurer can say for the
defense of himself, I do nothing but that which the law will allow, although
indeed under a pretense of law he mean most deceitfully. But you know that
Judas under a pretense of holiness betrayed his master, and so those Usurers
eat up the people sucking the blood of them, and all this under the color and
pretense of law: But though every one do sin, and have a great burden: yet
notwithstanding as a broken piece of gold is not to be cast away, so we
should bear with the infirmities of our brethren, helping their weakness: and
so it would follow, that we should bear one another burden; for he that
seems to stand, let him take heed that he fall not. 1. Cor. 10.12. Thy brother
fell to day, thou may fall to morrow: for there shall be judgment merciles
to him that shows no mercy, and mercy rejoices against judgment. 2. Iam.
13. Let us therefore be merciful as our Savior Christ is merciful, for Christ
has once suffered for sins. 1. Pet. 3.18. The grace of God has appeared
unto all. 2. Titus. 11. Instructing the^ with meeknes, that are contrary minded
proving that if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may know
the truth. 2. Tim. 2.25.

So that ye see the burdens of men be infinite, and yet men not to be
rejected for their burdens, for under a filthye and polluted skin may be a
full sound body, and under vice may lurk excellent virtue. Helena, as Poets
feign, had a mole in her cheek which made her more amiable: so that vice does
rather adorn, then any way dishonor the subject in some, neither is the Lord
his hand shortened, that it can not make an evil tree bring forth good fruit,
for he that made the eye, will ye not have him see? and he which made the
ear, will ye not have him hear? He which created man can he not change man
which way he will, who has even the Kings heart in his hands, as says
Solomon to dispose and turn as pleases him best.

But I will let this point pass, and come to the second thing which I promised
in the beginning to speak of, that as every one has a burden, (as you have
heard before) so every one must bear his own burden. The soul which sins
shall die. 18. Ezec. 20. The fathers shall not be put to death, for the
children, nor the children put to death for the fathers: but every man shall be
put to death for his own sin. 24. Deuteronomy. 16. So then every one of us shall
give accountes of himself to God. 14. Romans 12. By which two places it does
appear without all controversy, that every man shall bear his own burden.
But some may object (flesh and blood is ready to make obiectio^s, as did
Nichodemus, how can a man said he be borne again) alleging a place of
scripture against this doctrine, out of the 20. of Exodus 5. visiting the
iniquity of the fathers unto the children, upon the 3. and 4. generation of
them that hate me. Adam sinned, and so we all are punished. 3. Ge. Achabs
wives, sin brought destruction upon all their Kindred. Hammon sinned, and all
his house was punished.

David sinned (as I said before) and all his Realm was punished with a sore
pestilence. If this then be so, as it is most sure because the Lord has spoken
it, then how can this stand? The former is taken for eternal punishment of God
after this life, the better for temporal and momentary punishment and those the
Lord lays often on one man for the sin of another; and the schoolmen gives
very good reason for it, but especially Thomas Aquinus, quia vnus res est
alterius, 2. propter periculum imitationis. And although the school men in very
many points err, yet in these they have said most truly: for both man is
prone unto sin by nature, and also very easilye bent unto it by the example
of others, nam exemplum est alteranatura as one says very wisely. But there
is a punishment eternal, and in this every one shall bear his own burden: for
he that sins shall die.

The wicked in deed may floorishe for a time, but it can be no long space, the
chafe may grow with the wheat, but it is but til Harvest.

David at the first sight of the wicked thought that they had been the only
men, but when he went into the house of God, and there did consider the end of
these men, the^ he concluded, and said, that his foot had almost slipped: For
they shall soon be cut down like grass, and shall wither, as the green
herb. 37. Psalm. 2. The worm shall feel his sweetenes, he shall be no more
remembered, and the wicked shall be broken down like a tree. 24. Job. 20. But
wherefore do the wicked live and wax old, and grow in wealth? There seed is
established in their fight with them, and their generations before their eyes;
Their houses are peacable without fear; and the rod of God is not upon them;
Their Bullockes gendereth and failleth not; their Cow calves, and casts not
her Calfe. 21. Ioh. 7, 8, 9, 10. ve. He will divide their leaves in his wreath,
they shall be as stubble Before the wind, and as chafe that the storm carries
away. 17, and 18. ve.

Thus you see what an evil bargain the wicked make in this life, for
temporal pleasure, they have eternal pain: and for the things of this world,
they loose the everlasting joys of heaven, and this is not only a great
burden, but every man shall bear his own burden for this cause.

And thus I have in some measure fulfilled my promise, now it remains that
after the ground work laid, I should go on and finish the building, and
surely where doctrine goes not before, their exhortation ca^ take no place: for
as the building cannot stand without the foundation, no more can exhortation,
without doctrine, but like to the house builded upon the sands, which when
the rain came, fell, and the fall thereof was great: the wind blewe it down,
and why? because it was not builded upon a rock, and had no sure foundation.

The use of this doctrine serves to al estates and degrees of this life, and
seeing that every man has a burden, some greater, some less, according to their
sins; and in all some it behooves us therefore with speed to come near to the
proclamation made by our Savior Christ: Come all you that be heavy laden, and
I will ease you, for so he loved the world, that he gave himself for it. Thou
therefore that art a Minister, do thy office truly, eat not up thy flock by
making usury upon them, and consider the last words in our Saviors will:
Peter love thou me? feed my flock, or if thou love me, feed my flock. The
same he repeted three times most vehemently, which surely does argue the great
necessity of it.

And though men have arrows in their tongues, and shoot at thee by evil
reports, yet if thou be diligent, thou shall have comfort, for the day will
come, and it is not far off, wherein every man must bear his own burden.

It serves also for a singular use to the university, that care be had of
sufficient men, for the dischargeing of the duty of the Ministerye; such men,
who resemble the trees of Persia, that are always budding, and have always
ripe fruit on them, as Theophrastus witnesses: Such as would instruct the
people of God, giving them ripe and wholesome doctrine, fir for the eating. But
alas there is a great want of this, which is a heavy burden to us here in
England. The wisemen of our time are become young children, and the old
grayheaded ancient men, are become young Scholars: and what is my meaning; but
as I said before, that such are always learning, and never come to any
perfection. I mean not the Reverend fathers of our Church, who take great
pains in pruning of us, but of such as will never be pruned. But what a
fearful and dangerous thing this is, in that day will appear, wherein every
man shall bear his own burden.

Let us therefore (dearly beloved) be true hearted one to another, and pluck
the visardes of hypocrisy from our faces, wherewith we have been covered a
long time, and so speaking the truth from our hearts, we may in that day be
justified, wherein every man must bear his own burden. And let us not
suffer the people to statue, for want of teaching, as woeful experience does
show the like in this Church of England, but especially in the North parts,
who for want of preaching, live in darkness, and in the shadow of death, such
scarscitie there is of those that should guide their feet into the way of
peace.

The Lord grant that we of our Colleges, who live by the sweat of their
brows, be not plagued for it in that day wherein every man must bear his
own burden. But you that be rich, withdraw not your minds from Christ, by
reason of adversity, which is incident to the Gospel, be not content to do
only those things which you may with case, or with the commodity of this
life; for so did the young man: but when Christ came at this; Sell all that thou
have and give to the poor, then he went away from Christ sorrowful: for why,
he had great possessions.

And I fear if a trial should come, we that now are the greatest possessors,
would then be the least, and turn away from Christ, for why we have great
possessions: and so it would go evil on our parts even in the day wherein
every man must bear his own burden. And you also for whom I have caused this
little exhortation to be put in print, that burden your selves with the curse
of the Church, and with Ananias defraud his Ministers of their right; now at
the last awake out of your dream, suffer not your eye lids to sleep, nor the
temples of your head to take any rest, until you have restored that which you
have wilfully and wrongfully detracted. And now, even now kiss the son least
he be angry, and so ye perish everlastingly: If his wrath be kindled, yea
but a little, woe be unto you: it had been better for you that you had never
been borne, or that a milne stone had been tied about your neck, and been
cast into the sea; for in that day of the wrath of the Lord, the hills will not
cover you, the fire will not consume you, the water will not devour you, but
every one shall receive judgment, and no means to escape, even in that day
wherein every man must bear his own burden.

This exhortation might be enlarged further for the beating down of every
particular sin in the whole life of man, but that would require whole
volumes, and not the shortness of this Pamphlet. Here therefore I will make an
end, desiring God that he will forgive us our sins, that he would bury
them in the death of his Son, and mortify our evil affections, that so we
being dead unto sin, may live unto righteousness, and be found blameless
before God, even in that day, wherein every man must bear his own burden.

A prayer.
OPen our eyes (O Lord) that we may be turned from darkness to light, from
the power of Satan to thee our God. Open the hearts and ears of us thy people
here in England, that we may embrace this comfortable doctrine: for Paul may
plant, and Apollo water, but it is the Lord of life that gives the increase.
We therefore fly to thy throne of mercy (most mighty and most merciful
Father) beseeching thee to hear us for Christ his sake, pardoning and
forgiving us all our sins, which be the causes why thou will not hear our
prayers, and grant our requests, except they be wiped away in his blood. Build
thou Jerusalem in every one of our hearts, and gather our wicked affections
into the household of Israel. And forasmuch as this our land has lately been
troubled with great contentions, and all proceeding from the pride of our
hearts, now therefore (good Lord) after this great tempest send a gracious
calm, and after this long war send us everlasting peace toward the kingdom
of heaven, through the merits of Christ Jesus our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

