THE History of Man, sucked from the sap of the most approved Anathomistes,
in this present age, compiled in most compendious form, and now published in
English, for the utility of all godly Chirurgians, within this Realm, by John
Banister, Master in Chirurgerie, and Practitioner in Physic.

Ter. And. Si illum obiurges, vitae qui auxilium tulit,
Quid facias illi, qui dederit damnum aut malum?
If that for him that aids thy life, thou chidynges up do lay?
What can thou do to him that hurtes, or seeks thy decay?
AT LONDON, Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. Anno. 1578.

Cum gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Frauncis Willoughby, Knight, John Banister, your
most bounden, wishes the daily increase of virtuous knowledge, and happy
h^alth, both here, and euerlastyngly.
LIke as the earth was not made to lie was^e, and void, as arude congested
heap, but to bring forth copious store, and that in sundry sorts, of
creatures, corn, and fruits: neither those, as to glory in the riches of her
own proper nature, ordained, but for the special behoof, use, and v^ilitie
of mankind: even so (right worshipful) is man for man, and all things for the
cause of others, engendered. Nothing has a peculiar life. Nothing ioyeth
without society of other.

Wherefore there ought to be one purpose, and Cic. o^. Iib. 3.
inclination in all men, that a like utility, and of all things, may be to
every one. Which if any man do snatch unto himself, all humane fellowship is
dissolved.

And if nature do praescribe this, that one man should assist, and take care of
an other, if it be but only for the cause that he is a man, it is necessary,
according to the same nature, that the utility of all things be common. For no
man, of wit, or understanding Demosthenes. Orat. de. Cor.
(says Dem^sthenes) will suppose himself to be borne only to his father, and
mother, but also to his country. Why, what is between? Even this, that he, who
supposes himself only to be borne to his parents, expects afatall and
natural death: but he, that acknowledges his birth to his country, rather,
then he will see the same in servitude, shall willingly put him self into the
hands of death. Which caused that valiant young Roman Curtius to prostrate
himself, headlong, into Titus Iiu. M. Curtius.
the insatiable gulphe of the earth, which sodeinly had opened in the market
place, that (I say) he might free, and (as it were) ransom the whole City
from the terror of that monster. With no less piety have some abandoned
themselves, lest, by their own prosperity, the state of the commons might be
impaired. As Genutius Cipus, Val. Max. Ii. 5. ca. (...). G^nutius Cipus.
being Praetor, and walking forth of one of the gates of Rome, their spra^g
forth of his bead ij. horns, upon a soaaine, and answer being given, that,
if he would return into the City, he should be king: he, that it might not
come to pass, forthwith freely commanded him self into perpetual exile. If
then it be so, that a solid common wealth is most prosperous, and that is a
solid common wealth, whereof the faithful inhabitants bear themselves as the
true members of it, their natural body: of duty ought we that are the
parts, to use, invent, and communicate that (each one according to the portion
of his talent) amongst ourselves, which may procrastinate the continuance of
the healthful state of our body, that is, the common wealth.

And he that endeuoreth nothing to further it, is unnatural, like as he that
hinders the same, is, as arotten member, worthy to be cut away. To this says
the I ^an ^ib. (...). do Catone.
Poet, commending unto us the manners of Cato, that is,

servare modum, finemque tenere,
Naturamque sequi, patriaeque impendere vitam,
Nec sibi, sed toti genitum se credere mundo.
Also that divine Cicero says, that, to take away any thing from an other, or
(...) off. lib. (...).
one man to increase his own profit, by the discommoditie of an other, is
more contrary to nature, then death, then poverty, then pain, or then
whatsoever may chance to our body, or outward things. For if so we be
affected, that every one may catch unto him self, and hide from others, there
is love broken, then is humane society buried. It is more laudable therefore,
and according to nature (says Cicero) to take upon us the greatest labor, and
molestatios, for the conservation and helping (if it may be) of all nations,
imitating that same Hercules (whom fame, mindful of all benesites, has
canonized, or as it were made a God) then to live in all security: not only
without any griefs, but abounding also in all pleasures, and riches, beauty,
and strength.

Which, o so sacred a saying (right worshipful) has made me, quite forgetting
my impotencie, willingly to put on armor also against ignorance, and boldly
to march toward the castle of Art, there to offer my service to science, the
general. Of one thing being sure, that the armor, which I carry, is most
precious and costly. Wherefore, I shall humbly crave at his hands, that I may,
not as an enemy, be received into his gates: and the^, if he shall esteem me
unworthy, or unable to carry so costly and weighty armor, I shall (right
gladly) yield the same, to the use of some of his valiant Captains: to whom my
good will, now showed by endeavor, is nothing inferior.

Which good will in deed, is all that I am hable to show, and that taken
away, my burden might easily press me to the ground: for considering so ripe a
world, such plenty of Arts, such profound wits, such learned ears, and,
there withal, such Tigrish whelps of Momus pampering, if fear should have
surprised my senses, and there withal (if it had been possible) vanquished my
zeal, to the utter ruin of these my labors, the wise would not have
meruailed at all. Good will there fore may, of right, he called the bulwark of
the common wealth. For what thing is so hard, that good will makes not easy?
what is so high, that good will may not reach? what is so worthy, that good
will shall not win? It is love, it is truth, it is the author of all arts,
and the key of all treasure says Demosthenes. In sine, there (...).
is nothing so high in the heavens above, nothing so low in the earth beneath,
nothing so profound in the bowels of Art, nor any thing so hid in the secrets
of nature, as that good will dare not enterprise, search, unclose, or discover.

And this benefit I am assured my benevolence shall purchase, that either, be
it, others shal^e moved, to fall, and fashion these my rough forged labors, or
else, acce^sed with the like piety, and the rather by example hereof, which
shall move them (as it were) to aemulation, to build a new work out of the
ground, that may, in all things, perform that, which here I have wished to
have been fulfilled. Of both which, whether soever shali come to pass, my
desire shall be satisfied.

And, howsoever it be, I hope the godly minded will rather praise my
benevolence the^ discourage my want at all. As for those of Marius sect, which
ever scorn Val. Max. Li. 5. ca. 6.
Manus. Curt^us.
the noble courage of Curtius: such Syllaes, as always deride the rare virtue of
Genutius: Sylla, Genutius.
and such Cinnaes, as perpetually laugh at the marvelous piety of Aelius,
Cinna. Ath^.
what should I force at all? nay, I am far from taking care for their endless
malice, as that it shall greatly joy me, if my virtue may shorten their lives.
To the which (I hope) all the soldiers of science will hold up their hands.
For although it be so, as the Poet says,

Invidia vexantur opes: namque optima livor ^al. Lib. 2.

Quaeque malus laedens, odit foelicia semper.
Yet virtue is a sufficient spur unto us: and well it is said,

Verum age nate tuos ortus, nec bella pavescas (...). Ital. ^ib. 13.

Vlla, nec in coelum dubites te tollere factis.
There is one thing also, which ought to be a great comfort unto the godly
minded, that is, that none do persecute virtuous proceedings, save only the
enemies 4. ad ^eren.
of virtue. And envy (says Cicero) of force will accompany virtue. Wherefore,
letting Demost. 2. ^pist.
such go as retain only the figure of man, since Adversus invidiam nihil
prodest vera dicere, and especially time present cannot say well, as Martial
says.

Esse quid hoc dicam, vivis quod fama negatur, Lib. 5.

Et sua quod rarus tempora lector amat?
Hi sunt invidiae nimirum, Regule, mores,
Praeferat antiquos semper ut illa nobis.
Whereto also Ovid.

Pas^itur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit: ^ib. 1. Elig.

Tunc suus ex merito quemque tuetur honos.
He that intends in deed to bear the name of a man, must first consider his
Cic. 2. de. ^nib.
birth, and secondly his calling. For as the horse to run, the Ox to plough,
and the dog to hunte: even so man (says Aristotle) is borne to two things,
that is, to understand, and to do, or endeavor: as who should say, we are not
borne only to have understanding, but also to put it in use. For else in deed
we shall know nothing, but liu^ in silthy ignorance: that the song of the
Poet might be verisied, who says,

Denique nil sciri si quis putat, id quoque nescit Lucretius Lib. 4, d ^ not.
Re^um.

An sc^ri possit, quo nil se scire fatetur.
Then which abominable crime, what to be more unseemly in a man, cannot be
declared or thought. But he that detesteth that, and enters in unto the
understanding of him self, accordingly also employing his time, his calling
shall be to a higher step: which likewise shall be required of him. For therefore
says the renowned Athenian Orator, By how much thou have a more excellent
nature, by so much Demosth. ex. or. ama.
thou exspectest greater dignities, and so much the rather, I judge, thou will
make trial of thy self. And surely Cicero supposes it cannot be in a man to
hid his virtue 2. de. Finib.
in him self. Which moved him to say, we are driven to it of nature, to desire
to prosite many, especially in teaching, and revealing the reasons of wisdom.
Therefore it is not easy to sinde such a one, as will not be content to teach
that unto an other, which he knows him self. So that we are not only
inclined to learn, but to teach also. And truth it is in deed, for what
piety is in him, that sees another out of his way, and will not show him of
it? or what humanitic has he that carnestly uses his time, in gathering
together the goods of virtue, and at length, in one instant, causes them to
perish with his body?

As therefore (says Demosthenes) he is accounted great and mighty, whom every
(...). Olinth. 2.
one do judge to make each thing profitable to him: eue^ se, by the same
things he shall be rejected, when he is convicted to have done all for the
cause of his own utility. Which things considered, I shall not need to
render account of my enterprise, neither (I hope) to crave the further ance of
the godly learned. For although, to discuss the secrets of nature, which are
so meruatlous in ma^s body, it is the hardest point in Philosophy, yet is not
the difficulty thereof such, as ought wholly to terrisie us from the search
thereof: nay, rather it ought to spur us forward, to use more serious
diligence therein. Since the pain is not half so great, that is taken in the
winning thereof, as the utility rewaraeth of that which is obtained.

And albeit this is so worthy a matter, as needs no authors commendation,
and therefore should worthily merit the labor of the learned: yet as Darius
denounced (...).
that to be the sweetest draught that ever he drunk, which, in his weary
flight, he had drawn from a silthy standing puddle, because, it seems
before, he had never drunk thirsty: even so, I hope, my labor shall be
thankfully taken, of all honest Chirurgians, considering the barren draught,
that Chirurgerie, throughout the Realm of England, in this present age,
endures: and which can never be quenched, by the fruitful water that sloweth
from the fountains of Anathomie. Of which, I have now endeavored to turn one
cock. Which faithfully being done, according to my might, such as it is, I
offer, before all others unto you right worshipful, and my most bounden,
beseeching you, to accept the dedication of these my rude labors: which, were
they as worthy as Galens, you might of duty challenge. Notwithstanding,
whatsoever they are, good will is full in them. And that is the rest of my
hope, and that is it, which your worship never denied. Which cherishing me, I
am bold to publish this History of Man, under your name, to the benesite of my
Christian brethren, the godly, and toward Chirurgians of England.

Whereupon also if your worship, sometime in Ciceroes ocium (whereto you are
much addicted) shall chance to look, no doubt, but you shall take great
delight in the matter thereof. Which, now also, of force, co^mittyng to the
sundry judgments of infinite opinions, I cease, beseechyng unto your
worship, and all that godly shall use me, the sweet increase of all
slourishyng virtues: and unto the rest, the obtainyng of a better mind in
Christ Jesus.

Your worsh. in all I may, John Banister.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL THE Master, Wardens, Assistantes, and fellowly Fraternity
of Chirurgians in London: and from them to all godly, true and zealous
professors of Medicine, throughout this Realm of England, John Banister
wishes the testimony of a clear conscience, before the highest Auditor.
After the publication of my unpolished Book of ulcers (most grave Patrons)
withdrawyng my self into my naked study, and devising how best to perform my
promise therein, but first considering, and in deed more deeply waying
(according to the state of time, and present want) which way I might most of
all seek the aduaunceme^t of Chirurgerie in England, in the which cogitatio^
(I confess) my zeal has long time turned: At last I called to remembrance,
that the greatest want that reigns in Chirurgians at this day, is ignorance
in the subject of their work, waying also on the other side, that no English
Author, which hitherto has written, has sufficiently applied his time to the
amendment thereof. Then was I wholly overcome in this purpose, and then did I
clearly see, how that to write Methodes or means to cure the affected parts
of the body, the parts them selves being altogether unknown, or falsely
imagined of, might rather be a mean to indurate the cataract of inscience,
then to eat it through, or take it away. So thus I decreed to change my
purpose, that is, in steed of the Book of Tumors, which I had before
promised, to compile some work of Anathomy, which might occupy fufficient
scope to entreat of all the parts of man.

But as the wanton child, that cries often to handle that thing which his
strength is not able to meddle, but rather to endamage or hurt him self: Even
so did I full little understand the weight of my burden, till I had it on my
Caluisius shoulders: when as it Caluisius Sabin^.
immediately had dissolved my good enterprise, had not then the flames of zeal
accensed the courage of Hercules in my breast. By (...).
means whereof although the same be now finished, yet so, as I determine
nothing less then hereby to hinder the proceedyng of others in the like cause,
nay rather I am resolved, that hereby I shall instigate and set forward the
endeavors of such as are equally minded, to the advancement of the famous Art
Chirurgerie. For, as to the buildyng of some rich tower, or strong castle,
beside the deuisours of the work and free Maso^s, there are required sundry
inferior Officers and labouryng persons, neither all to one end, use, or
office, but some to dig, some to square stones, some to carry them to
woorkemen, etc: Even so I, not having the knowledge to devise, nor the policy
to dig for the best stone, neither the skill to temper the mortar, nor yet
the reason rightly to square the stone, notwithstanding because my zeal is
nothing inferior to the chief Masons, have had the will to gather the stones,
and lay them by the workmen, now also hopyng that some cunnyng Mason will
reach his hand to my heap, and lay of the stones of my gatheryng to the
buildyng of this famous tower of health: since I shall conceive incredible
felicity, if I may hereafter, in viewyng this renowned buildyng (for so I hope
surely to see it) cast mine eye upon those stones which my homely hands had
so rudely congested, and see them cunnyngly wrought, and aptly applied to the
buildyng.

Into which consideration of me I first beseech you (most grave Seniors and
Christian brethren) to enter, before you take any occasion to accuse me of
temeritie, which crime I had worthily incurred if zeal should not mediate my
cause, so do I hope, that you will not only favor the fruits of my labors,
and add to them your helpyng hands, but also be (in my behalf) the shield of
Pallas, against such Serpentine tounges as duly seek to profane of all godly
endeavors.

But to return to my first determination, when I had wholly given my consent
to this end, I might see first a far of, what sundry and great mutatio^s
nature has used in ye body of man since Galen wrote in Anathomy: and omitting
diverse old writers, whose works had not all equal success, I came at length
to Vesalius, whose whole work seemed as tedious as his Epitome ouerculled and
short. But when I saw Fuchsius to have extract a notable Epitome out of
Vesalius and Galen, I had thought to look no further till Collumbus appeared
in my sight: whose labors then reuoluyng, and seeing him in some things use
sufficient prolixitie, as in his Books of Bones and Muscles, and in other
causes to be somewhat brief (because Vesalius had sufficiently handled them) as
in the nutritive parts, immediately I refused to bind my self to any
peculiar translation, choosing rather to pick a posie of the chiefest flowers
from all their Gardens, the opinion of Fernelius and others not being utterly
refused, as throughout the History is diligently noted.

And so much the rather I esteemed this the best, because that way I perceived I
might both more plainly describe the parts to the judgment of the Reader, as
also use sufficient scope upon the dissension of Authors in the most notable
causes. These considerations used, I set foreward in this matter, purposing (to
speak briefly) to pen it in form of a History, least the Uolume of the
book should over hastily increase, whereby I might be inhibited to use
requisite prolixitie in convenient causes.

And now finally being finished, as I may, not as I would, I (the least of the
number) do offer the first fruits thereof unto you, the ancient fraternity
of Chirurgians in London, and conse quently from you, to all Godly, and single
professors of the Art of Chirurgerie, throughout this Realm of England: into
whose minds, I beseech God to inspire the grace of his holy spirit, that we
may all (yet at length) with one consent together, endeavor, study, search,
knock, and call at the gate of Gods mercy, for the guidyng of his holy
spirit, that, in all our proceedings, being thereby protected, we may seek
the advancement of the glory of God, in healyng our afflicted brethren,
whereto his divine power shall (so often as it pleases him) (...), and appoint
us Ministers, that (I say) with the testimony of a clear conscience, we may
render our vauntaged talentes unto the high Auditour, in the day of coming,
which, we know not how near, approaches.

As for you, O ye chafe of the earth, ye stinge of the Godly, ye Impes of
Hell, and children of wrath, you (I say) that, under pretense of the sacred
Art of Medicine, devour the sheep of Gods pasture, slay the labors in his
Harvest, and deny your Lord the fruits of the Uineyard: since no warnynges
may admonish you, no exhortation amend you, no laws bridle you, no
punishementes tame you, nor any fear of God sink into your breasts: behold,
all the true professors of Christ Jesus, and who carefully endeavor Godly to
discharge their functions, do cry for vengeance from heaven upon you. And I
(in these my labors) from the depth of my heart renounce you, hopyng assuredly,
that from none of the flowers of this Garden any of you shall take opportunity
to suck that, which may maintain the infection of your pestilent
wretchedness hereafter. If therefore I have any where frequented a phrase
above the common use of our English language, or used words little different
from the Latin, esteem the same to be done only for your cause, since (as
much as in me lies) I have endeavored every where, to shade the kernel with a
harder shell then you shall be able to crack. Away therefore you Uipers. Let
these my simple labors, whatsoever they are, be entertained in the hands of
thee true, virtuous, and honest Artistes, and professors of Chirurgerie, that
my expectation may be fulfilled, Art rightly advanced, and God duly
worshipped.

And now returnyng to you again (most Godly governors, for whose sakes I was
most encouraged to persevere in this enterprise) considering your Godly
affection toward me heretofore, and that it has ever pleased you to esteem
of me, far more, then the uttermost of my power, at any time, may merit, I
thought it not only the office of piety, by this means, to prick foreward
the minds of some of the learned sort, but also to commit this unto you, as a
pledge of my unfeigned zeal to the Art of Chirurgerie, and consequently to you
the chief pillours thereof in this Realm: which, being thankefully received of
your grateful hearts, may testify for me, that inwardly I wish, which
outwardly I am not able to manifest.

Have now therefore this History of Man, picked from the plenty of the most
noble Anathomistes above named, wherein I have earnestly, though rudely,
endeavored to set wide open the closet door of natures secrets, whereinto
every Godly Artist may safely enter, to see clearly all the parts, and
notable devises of nature in the body of man. From the Female, and that (as I
suppose) for sundry good considerations, I have wholly abstained my pe^ne:
least, shunnyng Charibdis, I should fall into Scylla headlong. No more, but
vouchsafe to accept Sinaetes faithful offer, and protect this handful of
water, from the pollution of strange beasts.

Farewell from Nottingham.
THE PROEME.
Time, the general rust of the world, which wears eats, consumes, and
perforateth all things, has denied that the precepts of the divine parents
and progenitors of Physic, should for evermore remain insoluble, or free
from all future change: else what should withstand, whereby the works of
Hipocrates and Galene should not suffice all posterities that come after? For
what thing notable have they not noted? what secret so dainty, that they have
not uncovered yea what mystery so covert, the door whereof they have not
opened? And yet notwithstanding, these divine Oracles have not taken from
posterity all occasion to write, neither shall the books which hitherto are
written, do the like to those that come after. But each age has his time, each
nation his nature, and each nature his property.

Albeit, this excellency we ascribe to Hipocrates and Galen, that never any
has been their equals, and that from their fountains flow the springyng
streams, that nourishe Physic for ever. So that what good thing soever we
have, or atcheiue, we are to consecrate the same unto their honor and praise:
and what work soever is published, if the same be worth the reading, we owe it
wholly unto them. What the^ (you will say) is the cause, that their works
suffer in these days such sundry contradictions, especially in the parts of
man's body? It is answered a little before, how that time, natures, and nations
must be respected.

For first; that the magnitude of our body is greatly diminished, it is a Iac.
Sil^. in Isag. Pre.
thing in readynes to every man, not only by the authority of ancient Ph.
Lib. 7. cap. 6.
writers, but also that daily, and (as I suppose) throughout the world, the
stature of man in all points decreaseth: especially in those regions: whereas
matrimony is over liberally, and before the just age, permitted. Who is so
ignorant; to whom the Scriptures have not ere now testified, how much longer
then in these days, the age of man has been in times past? Iac. Sil. Ibid.
how abundantly do our bodies testisie, how sundry of the inner parts both in
magnitude, number, figure, and situation, do differ from those in others of
other regions? neither are the same in all our bodies in these days, as, in
elder time the ancient Anathomistes most commonly observed: do not their
writings, and our bodies make it manifest to all living? but towhat end? that
it might not seem to us incredible, that in men of every region, like as in
beasts, yea in the plants them selves, is either some thing peculiar from
others, or else some certain mutation from the sirst nature to have chanced.

As, to come first to the examples of beasts. In Ciria the sheep have Arist.
Lib. 8. hist. ca. 28.
tails a cubite broad, and the goats ears ix. intches in length. What
marvel is it when as the ram and the ewe, which both in Africa bear
horns, in Pontus a province of Scythia, to have therefore none at all? As other
where sheep, so in Cilicia goats are clipped. The oxen, sheep, hearts, and
such others, are greater in Aegipt then in Greece: but for that the dogs,
wolves, foxes, hares, and hawks, are greater in Greece the^ in Aegipt. Oxe^ in
Scythia through cold possess no horns. Oxen in Phrygia have horns that are
mouable. The Isle Ithaca is destitute of a hare, like as the field called Ager
Lebadicus of a moule, and Sardinia of a wolf.

If histories be to be believed, then these are true: if not, what do we with
ancient testimonies? why credit we things written, or believe any thing to be
true which our own eyes have not witnessed unto us? yea let us reject the
monumentes of our elders, detract their doings, and wholly obliterate their
writings. And if the books of Aristotle, Pliny, and others most famous
Historiographers, be worthy to be opened, the^ are beasts in Asia, all more
cruel, in Europe more stronger, and in Aphrica more diversely fourmed. But, to
speak more appertine^t to the body of man, these aforesaid varieties, observed
of ancient writers, arguyng only unto us, that, as beasts are bred diversely
in each nation, and according to the nature thereof, so to be in men some
dissimilitude, and by the same reason, was not denied. Every one knows that
the Moors have only white teeth, but black skin and nails. But it is not
a thing so common that they, and also the inhabitants of such hoate Cor. Cells.
Li. 8. ca. (...).
countries, are without seames in their Sculs, which with us is a thing so much
approved.

But, omittyng those nations which differ a little among the^ selves, let us
come to those which more manifestly vary in figure. In Asia are a people named
Macrocephali, having very long heads, though first of custom Hipochr. de.
^ere.
Aquis et lo^is Lib.
then after of nature: of custom, because they kept the compressed heads of
their children, swathed so, till some consistence of years grew on them, which
thing afterward made their children beget the like, though in tract of time,
and through their negligence, nature amended that fault. The people called
Phasiani, inhabityng a marish ground and rayny region, are in figure from other
men very diverse: as, of mighty stature, and marvelous corpule^t, so that
neither veins, nor joints are in them apparaunt, always bearing a yellow
color, like persons afflicted with the iaundes, and in voice most base and
terrible.

It is strange to us that women have beardes, albeit not so every where: Hipp.
Lib. 6. Epid.
for in Caria it is a thing familiar: whereas some of them being a while
fruitful, but after widows, and for that suppressed of natural course, put
on virilitie, being then bearded, hoarie, and changed in voice. Shall it be
counted a fable that touches the transformation of one kind into an other, as
the Male into the Female and so contrariwise? surely Pliny Lib. 7. Cap. 4.
says. No: since him self to have seen a woman changed into man, in the day
of marriage, he plainly avouches. And again, a child of a year old, from a
maiden to a boy. There are certain wild men whose feet are turned backward on
the legs, and some of them having viij. P^i. I: b. 7. cap. 2.
toes on a foot. What shall we say of the Cyclopes, whose eyes have in the^
two apples or balls? I omit to speak of those that have but one eye: of those
that are both Male and Female: of such as have heads like dog^: of the people
which have no heads: of them who with one leg cover their whole body: of
those without mouths: and so forth of such sorts many, which are in Indie
very familiar.

True it is also that the Scythia^s, named Nomades, are very corpule^t, Hipp.
^ib. d^. (...).
Aquis. et. (...).
and fleshy, their inferior bellyes ever slippery, and their joints through
moisture very weak, in so much as they are ever found to have applied fire to
their shoulders, arms, hands, breasts, hippes, and loins, for no other
cause, then for the natural moisture and softenes: for thus if they should not
do, they would not be able to hold their bows, or cast their darts, for
losenes of their loints, through slippery humors so obnoxious to luxation. And
it is no more truly written of the Pygmeia^s, then marvelous Lib. ^ast. cap.
15.
to our understanding, since they are of so small stature (for they exceed not
in height the length of a cubite) that daily they are pressed to put on armor
against Cranes.

These Arguments, and sundry such others, which Iacobus Siluius Iac. Sil.
(...). (...).
has gathered together, and therefore I think them also most fit for this
place, may not lightly move us, to believe likewise that in our bodies sometime
sundry mutations do happen.

In places either very hoate, or very cold, men are in countenance Sec. 1^
Pr^b.
and manners fierce and cruel: notwithstanding they that inhabit hoate places
are more fearful, though wiser: and they which dwell in cold, stronger. The
Asians are fairer, greater, more gentle, fearful, effoeminate, and unapt to
war for the temperature of the air and laws.

The Europ^ans contrariwise are in magnitude much different among Hipp. Loc.
(...).
them selves, cruel, of hauty courage, bold, upright or honest, and given to
war. They differ (I say) in magnitude, and form, through the mutations of
the times of the year, which there are great and often: as strong heat;
vehement cold, much rain, long draught, and strong winds, whereby every
where, sundry, and many mutations are made. In Asia so the other creatures, and
all plants are more happily produced then in Europe. Many kinds of men are in
Europe, which in magnitude, fortitud^, form, and stature are much different
among them selves. The caus^ of which variety is somewhat before touched, but
Hipocrates Loc. cit.
more clearly does descriue. As they which inhabit a place or region full of
mountains, rough, high, and watery, and have with the^ many mutario^s of times
much different, it is requisite that of their own nature be mad^ many fourmes
os bodies, and such as are laboursome, exercised, and strong, and such natures
also to be fierce and cruel.

Again ^hey which reign in places more medowy, or grou^des flowyng with
herbs, and hoate, and their winds more hoate the^ cold, and use hoate, or
warm waters, these persons are not high, butrather broad, with black hears,
and they more of dusky color or brown, then are bred in other places, and of
their own nature less flegmaticke then choleric. But they that inhabit a
high and pleasant place, not rough, or windy, and have good waters, these are
large in body, straight, and like unto them selves, endewed with wit and
minds more mild and gentle: like as they of thin, barreine, and not watery
and naked places, neither have the mutations of times temperate, are hard
bodies, not great, rather yellow then black, wayward, irefull, bold, and
obstinate in opinion. For where often mutations of times are, and those also
much different, truly there also may you find their fourmes, manners, and
natures greatly disagreeyng. The regions wherein times and waters are changed,
or do vary, the bodies there also do vary: since always, or for the most part,
the manners and fourmes of the people do imitate the nature of the region.

If then the variety of times does so transmute, and change the state ^ig.
de. Me^n. ob.
of man's body, as that worthily says Virgill (although perhaps he had not
altogether this sense.)

Tempora dispensat usus, and tempora cultus,
Haec homines, pecudes, haec moderantur aves.
It is strange to see how sturdely some strive to deface those, which, full of
Natural piety, write the truth of their own times. Why, they will have it
that there were never Amazones in Scythia, because perhaps Iac. S^l. Loc. cit.
there are none now to be found. Aristotle erred, for saying there were no
Asses in France, Ponte, and Scythia, because now in those countries they
abound. Hipocrates he is reproved, for affirmyng no kings to be in Europe,
though at this day it possesses plenty. What is it, that in the time of
Aesculapius were no distillations nor inflations. Hipocrates Plat. Dial. 3. de.
Repub. Li. de. cause. (...).
saw no rigor without a fever, though in Galens days it chanced often, but
now a days most often, especially to women, through a more intemperate diet.

If we shall stand upon disseases purchased by times, yea yet daily, by the
immoderation of diet, when should we draw to an end. In the age of Galen
Eunuchs did incur the gowte, though long before, and in Aph. 28. 29. 30.
Lib. 2.
the time of Hipocrates it was notso. Also the gowte, pleurisy, and
inflammations ^ib. de. coacis prae not.
of the lunges were not wont to chance before the age of xiiij. years, but
where stands it at that stay now? who has not seen them all at younger
years? yeasome of them at x. ix. yea (though the more marvelous) at viij.
years of age. The which thing I dare boldly testify, since, in Not^ingham, in
An. 1574. it pleased God to make me the instrument of health to diverse
children, of the ages before recited, findyng no present remedy (for to diverse
in the beginning I assayed other helps in vain) but Phlebotomie,
notwithstanding their tender years, the dissease being the Plurisie, and the
time of the year the spring.

What Artist of experience in these days knows not, that women (for the most
part) do bear males as well on the left side as the right, and their females
as well on the right side as the left? the transuerse processes of the Vertebres
of the neck appear unto us always as if they were cloven, Iac. Sil. Loc. ci^.
though to Galen the last of them was seldom so. Os Sternon Galen, with the
elders, observed perpetually to consist of seven Bones, but we in these days
never invent the number so large: albeit that we never find the number
certain.

What then? shall we find the number of the Vertebres always one? he that has
so the hap, let him set it down. For my part, amongst those very few
bodies, which, also in very few years, though to my cost, yet for the very
zeal I have had thereto, I have dissected, I have found some of Galens
Sceletons in sundry points. It may fall out to be no new saying, that almost
in all bodies, some variety is to be seen.

Much marvelous shall it be to him that uses dissection, to see such sundry
and often varieties: yea, setting aside monstrous shows, the Anathomist shall
see in his own region, and in few years, sundry notes of new shapes in nature,
not so strange now, as worthy the notyng.

To praetermitte those which Vesalius observed, because they are confused, let
us come to the most notable, by others descriued and set in order.

Collu^bus, that Anathomist of worthy fame, beginning at the head, Col. Lib.
(...).
runs through the whole body, notyng what new thing he has in any particle
observed. So that first he excuses not the head, but that he has seen it
sometime without seames, sometime with sundry seames, and those keepyng diverse
orders, to have been compact together. The teeth in diverse numbers: and the
neither iawe grown to the upper. Of the neck, the first Vertebre inseparably
grown to Occiput: the number of the Vertebres of the neck sometime six, and
sometime eight with the like variety at sundry times of the other Vertebres.
Of ribs xxij. xxv. and xxvj. Os Sternon consistyng of two, three, and iiij,
Bones. The thigh to have ouergrowne the leg into an incredible tumor. But
above all these it is notable that he reports of a Sceleton, whose Bones all,
from the head to the toes, were joined together, so that the party in his life
time, being old, could move no part save his eyes, tongue, breast, bellye, and
yard. I pass with silence, the abundance, or want of Muscles whereof he
remembers, and the sundry trases of Veins, with their want, or extraordinary
divisions. Of the kidneys he saw the singular number, although that a great
one, and Splenes so large, as that each one in weight peised twenty pound,
being outwardly ouercouered with a Cartilage. So ulcers, and tumors in the
heart. So the hedge that distinguishes the Ventricles of the heart,
Cartilaginous. It was strange to behold Pericardium, the enclosure of the
heart, wantyng. What then? he observed stones in the lunges, liver, Vena Porta,
vrinarie ways, in the bleddar, Hemorroidall Veins, and in the navel of
sundry strange abscesses, in diverse bodies observed, the same author also
remembers. But among all things that he has noted, this one seems most
notable, which he reports of a woman, who had outwardly a perfect shape, and
only the neck of the matrice, but no matrice, seminary vessels, or Testicles
at all: and so often as ^he used the company of man, (which she did often) she in
marvelous sort moved her self.

But why stand I so long upon the observations of Columbus, an Anathomist of
such yeared experience? come we to them that scarce dissected two for his
twenty, for it is more rare that they have invented such novelties. Lib. de.
Var. Corp. ^ec.


Iacobus Siluius in his time saw sundry illusions of Nature, both in men,
women, and children: in the liver, spleen, kidneys, ventricle, midreif,
intrels, veins, and matrice. All which, to pen particularly, I omit, (...).
Botall. ^ib. de cat^o.
together with the strange, or rather monstrous kidneys which Botallus
mentions, and has openly depainted: as also his observation of the four
Ossicles or little Bones in the division of the brain: since it has been my
hap to see much in few dissections.

And first (touching the Sceleton) in the number of Vertebres: as sometime six
in the loins: sometime four, sometime five in Os sacrum: and sometime three,
sometime one in Cauda. Among the inner parts, I have observed the liver twice
divided into lobes. To the outside and bottom of the matrice I have found a
certain mole, or mass, white in color, and hard, or in substance
Cartilaginous, in fashion like the Testicles, as yet within their purse
enuolued: save that it wayed almost ij. pound. This bieng cut, contained
abundance of slimie matter, which at the first brust forth thinner, though at
last, very thick and slimie in deed. Once, in an aged Gentlewoman I searched
in vain for the right ve^tricle of the heart. And once in the heart of man I
found a thing notable, and which these before named have made no mention of,
that is, a bone in the heart, situated at the ends of the vessels inserted
thereinto, as in the History of Bones I have more copiously handled. Besides in
the same old man (forso he was in deed a man pressed to the ground with days) I
saw one of the vrinarie vessels, which, for the space of an intche (or more) in
length, had wholly possessed a Cartilaginous substance, which seemed still to
increase.

But here perhaps some are ready to object, and say, why what then? do you
intend to reject those authorities which fo often you have here alleged, nay,
not alleged, but rather out of whose mines all this treasure is dug? no,
but I could wish with Siluius that every one might be more zealous to search
the truth, then busy seekers to find opportunity against their elders. And
those in deed the parents of all Physic. For if in any thing they disagree
from the bodies of other regions, surely these rehearsed Arguments are
sufficient to prove the same far more worthy to be imputed to the varieties
of regions, and change of times, then otherwise, with foul obloquie to spurte
our elders, whilst we ourselves in the mean time, L^c, ci^.
as maleuolent detractours are publicly denounced. Siluius therefore wishes
him that finds any thing otherwise then Galen has written it, to ascribe the
same as a certain addition to Galens Anathomie, else friendly to admonish the
reader thereof.

As for my self, I confess I have in sundry places cited, and as it were
enrolled Galen in sundry errors, yet not by half so often as my authors have
provoked me? for Vesalius chiefly, and Collumbus (as I suppose) have spared him
in no place. Which has excited me (fre^dly Reader) familiarly thus to warn
thereof in the beginning, that when thou read them, thou may rightly know
from whence they come.

In the mean time to come to the matter proposed, I commit to thy diligence in
the beginning the History of Bones, the frame of the body, wherein (of truth)
attentiuenes ought to be used, both to carry in mind, together with thy eye,
the direct sense of the present described part, or rather (if it may be) to
confer the same with the Sceleton it self, as also because it is an
introduction to the whole History of Man, and may be called the keye of
knowledge to Anathomie: without the perfection whereof, the rest is not only
obscure, but almost vain at all to read. After the Bones, ensue the
Cartilages: then the Ligame^ts: after those the Muscles: next the Muscles the
nutritive parts: and next the nutritive the generatiue parts. Then at length
the spiritual members: and finally the animal. To these I have added a ninth,
least (otherwise) the marey, Periosteon, and the hears should have been sought
in vain in the History of Man. All these to my power, I have faithfully, and
therewithal sufficient briefly, compiled together. Now rests no more, but
read, and enjoy.

Julius Borgarucius amico suo Banisterio. S. P. D.
QVae olim de fabrica humana ab antiquis Graecis Lico, Herophilo, Erasistrato,
and ante eos Hypocrate, postea a Galeno summo viro and Philosopho
praeclarissimo graece fuerunt illustrata: tandem a recentioribus Curtio,
Sylvio, Vesalio, Fal^ppia Latin posteritati co^mendata, tu Anglice redd^disti
perspicua facilitate, ordine co^positivo, maxima doctoru^ viroru^ admiratione.
Legi integr^ tractationem de ossibus, Ligamentis, and Cartilaginibus, quam non
solum probavi, sed, ut omnes intelligerent, qui de re medica judicium aliquod
far possunt, enixe contendi, quambene de republica tum agendo tum meditando
nostra merearis: de Musculis, Venis, and Arterijs reliquum, ut audio typis
excudi, adhuc non vidi. Sed si ex unguibus Leon^ quis facile agnoscat, ex
ijsd^m tanquam sint prologomena maiarumrerum, vidro te operam and industriam
collocasse in explicandis naturae miraculis non exiguam: quam Theoricam
Anatomes partem nunquam assequi potuisses, nisi resolut ori^ methodo praxim
adjunxisses, and nocturna diurnaque manu-versatus esses in separandis,
incidendis, distinguendis partibus humani corporis, quibus non modo quo pacto
organicae a similaribus, sed qua substantia, qua connexiene, and quo vsu inter
si distinguantur diligentissime abs te fuit adnotatu^. Hoc tamen video: ut de
suis libris Physicae auscultationis Aristoteles Alexandro magno literas as
dedit, Anglicum istum opus tuum Anatomicum doctis tantum vel in art plurimum
versatis usui futurum. Nomina enim dum vertis Graeca and Latina, and dum ex
lucidissimis fontibus hauris perennes aquas, qui vel illa non callent, vel'de
Helicone nunquam degustarunt, illot is manibus accedent adperserutanda naturae
miracula, and recedent magis ac magis coinquinati. Tu probis ta^tum and silijs
artis dum studes placuisse, non est cur vulgus aut formides, aut imperitiae
malevolorum (homine imperito nihil quicquam injustius) stude as velle
satisfacere. Cura it aque valetudinem tuam, and nos ut facis ama.

Vale.

William Clowes Chirurgian, to his loving friend John Banister.
THy noble skill in Surgerie (for so we call it here,)
Thine honest life, and faithful ha^t unto thy country dee^,
Well known to me (good Banister) thy poor and loyal fiend,
I would I could in skillful Verse so cunnyngly commend,
As well I know it well deserves both praise and praise again.
And sure I am that this thy toil, and here employed pain
For paynting out the frame of man, in this our mother tongue,
Culd out of learned Latin works, heerehence has only sprung
That thou thereby thy country men mighst further much in skill:
And give them light that erst they lackt, as sure (I hope) it will.
Thou wrightst not for the learned sort (I know) that were but vain,
But hopest to help the meaner folk. And so, I trust thy pain
Shall win such praise of skillfull men, as paynfull toil may crave,
And as a mind that means well of duty ought to have.
If error ought has scapte thy pen, or paynter hapt to hault,
Let that no whit dismay thy mind. None scapes deuoyd of fault.
Where skillfull men give just reproof, with careful pain amend it.
Regard not much the rascal sort that blyndly reprehend it.
For as we know that men be men, and easily apt to stray:
So Enuyes Imps do bend them selves to sclander every way. De Mo^bo (...)

My self of late have tried in that so small a work of mine,
Wherein I sought no praise to win, nor get a name divine,
But only to content my friends, whose earnest suyte to crave it,
I could in no wise satis^e, but so, as they might have it.
Yet some I found with readyer tounges forth with to reprehend it,
Then fraught with skill to frame the like, or ought perhaps to mend it.
But who so ready to control, or fit to carpe, and clatter,
As he that has the dymmest sight, and judgment in the matter?
What if I did somewhat omit? what if the Print were lame?
What if I meant at leisure more to have enlargd the same?
How ever it be, I never meant to please each curious head,
Sith who so toils him self in that may bring a fool to bed.
Wherefore my good and honest friend refer the whole success
Of this, and all thy toils to him that will thy travails bless.
And as thou have by labors great, obtained a grounded skill,
And settled sight in Surgery, so I exhort thee still
By skillfull works the fame of such a faculty to raise,
Wherein we know most famous Clerks have, often, spent their days,
And travails great: in hope thereby immortal fame to win,
Whose worthy works do well bewray their paynfull toil therein.
I speak not of the famous Greeks, and fathers of the Arts:
Nor Guidoes works, nor Vigoes works that write of other parts:
But of the whole Anathomie Vesalius passing well.
Collumbus and Fallopius works, how much they here excel.
Whose skillful pens have painted so each part and piece of Man,
As none looks now to better it, (I think) nor ever can.
Whose lastyng fame no age shall once be able to deface.
Among the which (good Banister) I wish to thee a place.
And so Adeiwe. And thou (good Reader) pardon I thee pray
My pen that in this homely ryme has raungd to far astray.
But three fold ways enforst thereto. For zeal unto my friend.
For wrongs of mine. For my professed Art. And so I end.
The fore part of the Bones.

OF THE HISTORY OF MAN, the first Book. OF Bones, the frame of the Body.
AS the good and expert Architect, has Fuchs. li. 1. ca. ^. Ex Vesal.
a singular care, first in edifying his house, to be The reason why the Anatomy
of bones occupies the first place.
well advised of the manner of his ^oundation, and heedy framyng of his
Timberworke, before he lay on Thack, Tile, Slate, Lime, or Plaster: So it
behooves us, in searchyng the true Secrecy of this Misterious Science, and
body of Man, first, before the parts supported, distinctly, and deliberatly,
with diligent care, to consider the parts supporting. And the reason is good.
For The ^octrine of this History is most obscure, unless the bones be first
learned.
if you do not first exactely examine, and to a sufficient fulness feed your
appetite, with the diligent peruse of this History of Bones: you shall find
the rest of this book, not only in readyng unsavory, but also to your
sensible understanding very obscure. Wherefore of the Bones of man's body, what
they are, and how they are constrewed, and combinated, after all manner order
of knitting, and articular motion, the good Physician (says Galene) ought not
to Lib. de ossib. cap. 1.
be ignorant. But amongst all things to the art of Medicine appertinent,
that We must study to know and conserve that which is according to Nature.
thing that is according to Nature (as the scoape whereto we ought to cleave)
we must study to conserve and know. The Bones therefore, by very right we call
the foundation of the body, since they not only make firm the parts, but
also The Bones the foundation of the body.
sustain and support the body. Then that we in this our first enterprise
entreat of Bones, it neither seems void of much authorized maintenance,
neither yet frustrate of the splendant spark of reason, which shall light each
man's judgment Cap. 1. Epith.
into the right conducted way of truth. These therefore are the words of
General division of the parts.
Vesalius. All the parts of man's body are either Similar, or Simple with
sense, as What are the Similar parts.
are Ligamentes, Fibers, Membrans, Flesh, and Fat: or else Dissimilar, or
Isntrumental, What are the Instrume^tall parts.
as the Vein, Artery, Sinew, Muscle, Finger, and other Organs of Fuchs. li. 1.
ca. 5.
the whole body: which are made so much the more isntrumental, by how much The
nature and substance of bones All the bones except the teeth, are insensible.
the greater store of Similar parts with the isntrumental are compounded. As
for example, the hands and head etc. The Bones are of all the parts of the
body most hard, and dry, of earthy substance, cold, and void of sense, the
teeth only excepted. Col. li. 1. ca. 1.
But here you must understand, that they are not accounted void of feeling,
The cause why y^ bones are insensible.
because they are most of y^ terrestrial element, but because no portion of
sinews, which are the immediate organs of sense, is in their substance
disseminated. The Nerve is ye immediate organ of sense.


Neither was it the mighty pleasure of God (whom we call Nature) nor any
parcel of his decree, that the substance of the bones at all should be made
sensible, Note that thoroughout the History of Man, we cite nature, for God.
as any reasonable man must of force confess, if he note but how the whole
mole, and pack of members are sustained by them: who with their many motions,
do carry, and recarry all the other parts of the body with them, which argues,
The reason where fore nature (...) not the bones sensible.
that if they were (as some say) delighted with the perfection of feelyng, then
the moitiue virtue of the members would by exceedyng pain be taken away, or
else at least frustrate. Wherefore it is odious to hear them, that blushe not
Some affirm ye bones sensible, although to their great shame.
obstinately to affirm, that in bones is contained a singular sharpnes of
sense, when as neither reason can rule them, nor experience satisfy them. For
belike they will either prove that the Bones are the original of Nerves, and
so consequently The (...) of such druieth the^ to an ho^ible adsurditie, as
will needs make the bones to seele.
of the brain: or else that the Bones are produced and made of the matter of
the brain, and so to be sensible as the Nerves, which are the organs of
sense, as shall sufficiently be declared unto you in their proper description.
But yet further to confute their unshamefastness, the good Artiste, who in his
life time, and days of experience, * either scaleth, cantrizeth, or seperateth
Bones, is The experience of (...). co^^uteth this error, nothing more.
able to testify abundantly that after he passes (in his operation)
Periosteon, the party is no longer vexed, with such pain as appertains to
the sensible parts. This (...); (for so it is termed of the Greeks, the *
Latins have Periosteos.
not known it) is a certain Membrane, that enwrappeth, and cloatheth the
bones, The sens^bility of (...) not (...) was the cause of their error.
by the benefit of which Membrane, and not of their own proper Nature, the
Bones are supposed to feel, although in deed they do nothing less: for that
once * abraced, or taken of from the bone, neither can they by sense afterward
discern, P^tiousteos abraced no sense is discerned.
whether you cut, burn, divide, or otherwise at your pleasure handle the^.
Where, fore it is a shame if we otherwise affirm: but with Gal. Vesal. and Col.
conclude, that Bones of their own proper Nature are altogether destitute of
sense, except (as I said before) the teeth only which are approved sensible,
as experience o^ Scholemaistres teaches us.

Now as touching the proper differences of Bones * this is the first, that The
(...) (...) ^ce of the bones.
they differ not only in names (when as every one challenge to themselves proper
names) but also in magnitude, some being * small, and others greater. Again
The second difference of Bones, from there magnitude.
in form, as some long, some short, diverse triangled, others quadrangled, *
etc. Or otherwise according to the figure: as smooth, or rough, defended with
processes, The third difference of bones, ta^en of their use.
or having appendances: some distinguished by commissures, others also
otherwise. Moreover they are distinguished by their uses: Since to one only
function or common office, all were not ordained, which argues also the great
diversity of their fashions and fourmed shapes. For some are plainly hollow,
neither Some great Bones have no manifest hollownes, as the bones committed to
os s^crum, os sacrum it self, and the Scapple bones. Some bones are small, but
notably ^xcaued, as of the angers.
alike: but some of them with more large scope, others also straiter, yet not
proving the bone either larger or lesser thereby: when as * some being great
have ^o manifest hollownesse in them, as for example: The bones committed to os
Sacrum, os Sacrum it self, the Scapple bones, and others named in their
places. Some again are * small, but much hollow, as the bones of the fingers
contrary to Galene, as we will prove in their propper place. Andraeas Uesalius
also supposed that neither the bones of the nose; and * Sesaminae, neither the
little Ossicles that constitute the organ of hearing, should be otherwise then
made of massiue Soliditie ^b 1. de us. p^iu^.
(...) Which (notwithstanding) Collumbus doubts not to deny: for proof The
Sesaminae, the bones of yt nose, and Ossi^les of he^ryng, are (...) ly Porie,
or Solid.
whereof (says he) break one of them, either green, or dried, and you shall
find the substance thereof spongie, not unlike a thick Pummie stone. And these
bones also although they seem so Solid, show in the outward parts of
themselves certain Col. cap. and lib. praedict.
holes, some greater, and others less, as is to be seen in the Brachiall
teeth, and many other bones of the fingers: which the Divine creator has
commanded The Brachiall tooth to the Process eminent from Vina, in the wrest
of the hand.
to be Perforated. Therefore evident enough those holes are not in vain, they
giuyng place to the veins and blood for nourishment, as also to the Arteries
for their vital heat: whereas such as have no holes, to admit within them,
either The use of the holes and Porositie of Bones. How those that have no
holes without are no^rished.
veins or Arteries, such we say are nourished, and fed by the parts adjacent.

Now forasmuch as in this our narratio^ of bones, diverse strange names, and
such as to the simpler sort are altogether unknown, be here and there
scattered: It shall be very convenient before hand, briefly to table out an
exposition of them: That thereby the reading of such in their places (being now
first cracked and shaled from their obscure Husks) may be more perspicuous,
and pleasant to your contemplation: which otherwise would be loadsom, and
tedious.

And first to begin, we will say what is understood by this word Appendance,
What an Appendance (...).
which the Greeks call (...). It is nothing else, save a bone springyng to a
bone: or rather an addition or coagmentation of some bone, obteinyng a peculiar
circumscription, yet not being a true portion of that bone, whereto it is
committed. In young creatures therefore it is easily discerned, but in older and
In young persons the Appenda^ce (...) ea^ly discerned, but not (...) old.
greater more hardly: for trial whereof, if you boil the bones of a kid, or
lamb, or veale, you shall easily see certain portions, and ends of them, to
divide, either A plain show.
by them selves, or else with small constreinte. And those Particles so annexed
to the bones, are called Appendances: which (contrary to the mind of Galen) we
The substance of the ^ppendance is so^ter then of the Bones.
must needs affirm to be softer then the bones them selves: since we delight
of^ times with our teeth, to pluck the Appendances of small Bones, and to
chewe of them in our mouths: for the pleasant juice that often they retain.
Which A proof, for when we eat meat, we will often pluck of the Append^ces
of ^ones, and ch^we them.
contrariwise we cannot do to the bone. Neither are they lightly to be losed,
or divided from the bones, by every motion: for that nature has so well
provided for the turnyng of the joints, with such soft and slipperie
Cartilages, as thereby in the motion of the bones, no occasion can be given, by
any straigne to injury Why (...) ^re not wor^e of by co^^nual mo ^o (...) ^f
yt joints.
them. The use and chief commodity of them, is excellently recited of
Collumbus: or rather invented: and so as no man has fully hitherto judged:
although Col li. c. 1 2.
the thing be worthy knowing, and exceedyng necessary. And one thing among The
use of Appe^dances far otherwise then any before Col. ever (...) uented.
many others h^ testifies, that nature has made nothy^g in vain, but every
part to good purpose, and seruyng to some use. Realdus I say therefore sound,
that Appendances were in that order to the bones annexed, to the end that from
the place of their conjunction, Ligamentes might be produced and made, to
stre^gthen, hold, and stablish firmly, the composition and knittyng of the
joints: as you see the top of the thighe, with the bone of the hippe: and
the neither part of it, with the bone of the leg. Likewise the bone of the
shoulder, with the How the Bones are united tha^ have no Appendances.
scaple bone: and that which in like sort is tied to Radius, and Vlua. As for
those bones that have no Appendances, how they are united. I refer you to the
History of Ligamentes to sinde. And not only where the joints are, do these
Ligamentes, Ligamentes no^ only spryng f^o^ places n^re the joints, but also
where (...) no ioynte.
spryng, but where no Coarticulatio^ is made also; as in Ilium, the Scaple
bones, and some processes of the Vertebres. Thence also proceed Ligamentes,
necessarily chauncyng to yt sramyng of the good constitution of Muscles, as in
their proper place is to be sought. Whereby it comes, that from thence very
many Muscles often spryng ^ut of Liga^tall Cartilages.
Muscles have their begynnings, whence also Ligamentall Cartilages proceed:
for so we think it good to call them, that to strengthen the Muscles, are
amongst them disseminated: endyng also at their Tendans, Now again it is
manifest, The Ligamental Cartilages do a^ last end in (...) among the Muscles.
that Galen (for all his industrious search) failed to find the truth, in
affirmyng these Appendances to be added to the bones, for the conservation of
the marey, with in them included: but then says Vesal. How happens it, that
other bones, (...). us part li 9.
Gal. supposed the Appendances se^ued to hold in the marey.
in which are no cauities so notably allotted to the reteinyng of marey,
should (notwithstanding) also have proper Appenda^ces: even as those, that are
greatly hollowed. As for example the scapple bones, the Vertebres, and other
small bones, A plain confutation.
which not being much medullous, are nevertheless not of Appendances
destitute. But pretermittyng this convict assertion of Galen, it is sufficient,
that the Ligaments serve to the byndyng to gether of bones, and to the
constitution of tendans.
truth is touched by the aforesaid reasons of Col. prouyng how Ligame^tes by
Appendances are most engendered, and consequently the two proper gifs given unto
Ligamentes. Which, whilst they are so necessary, as we have proved, that the
There are but few places beside the ^ppe^dances, fitre for the production of
Ligamentes.
generation of Appendances be very vtile, and profitable, who ca^ invent to
deny: since their uses Sublated, but a few places can you find, whence
Ligamentes should sittly proceed. And thus much you have to understand, as often
as you read of Appendances: in what bone or part so ever it be. What a
process, called of the Greeks Apophilis, (...).


(...) which the Latin interpretours call Processus, is thus: when a bone in
any part, stretches forth his substance in excreasing manner, a^ a knot
swellyng out from the stock of a free, or as some Gibbous Tumor exceedyng the
height of The first difference between the process and appendance.
the natural places nere unto it: so such places of bones, as are apparently
to be discerned to exceed other parts; are rightly called Processes,
sufficiently differing from the Appendances: for these are right parcels, and
true parts of the bones them selves, whereto they are fastened. Also
Appendances them selves The second difference.
have Processes. As the bone of the cubite called Vlna, and the inferior part
of Tibia: Some (...) have processes.
as also other bones diverse: as will appear to you plenteously hereafter.
Again, to some processes Appenda^ces cleave, for the interior process of the
Scapple The third difference.
bone that is like the fashion of an anchor, and the ridge of the Scapple bone
How processesmay have appendances.
which in like manner is a process thereof, have Appendances: but note that the
processes of the thighe called Trochanteres, or Rotatores, are more justly to
be termed The processes Trochanteres do^ seem appendaces.
Appendances, then things with Appendances munited. For all that part that
swells forth (which therefore they call Processes) holds the place of an
Appendance, so that the Process and Appendance there, is all one thing. Yet
Vesalius made a difference between them: but when as by taking away the
Appendances, the Processes also are gone, we must Judge (says Columbus) them
in Col. loc. cit.
that place all one: and the Process, and the Appendance, the same thing, one
that the other is. Furthermore the Process and Appendance differ thus. For it
is a The fourth difference.
very small bone, out of which appears no Process, neither may it be
possible It is scarce possible to find a bone, whereon appears no process.
almost, to find such one, as exceeds in no place: but there are many bones
destitute of Appendances, as those of the head, of the upper iawe, of the
wreste, and such other. Neither do the Processes not differ in them selves,
choosing each one a What bones wat appendances.
sundry shape: for some of them are small, and like the fashion of a sharp
bookin: How the processes differ among them selves.
wherefore the Grecians call such Processes, Styloides. Others also being sharp
but not so slender, as the knagge of a hearts horn, that is to say thick and
pointyng, The processes call led Styloides.
such as are to be found in the neither iawe: Galena calls such Corona
Processus. The process called Corona.
But besides, there are some that represent the similitude of an anchor, as the
interior Processes of the shoulder blades, called Anchiroides. Others end, or
The process called Anchiroides.
leave at a head, and that two manner of ways: for some have that head
depressed, A process with a depressed.
as the bones of the middle of the hand, where they join to the wrest, and of
the insteppe, meting with the Bones of Tarsus, and Fibula, and the neither part
of tibia: Process long and prominent.
certain Processes have their heads long, and prominent, as the upper head
of the thighe, where it is knit with the Bone of the hippe: Others having round
A process with a round head.
heads, as of the shoulder, and shoulder blade, likewise the bones in the
middle of the hand, joining to the first joints of the fingers: And of such
Processes as What is meant by a neck in the description of Bones.
have long heads, we call the slender part thereof, from the body of the bone,
unto the head of the Process, a neck: forasmuch as that space is like unto
the neck: as it shall be plain unto you, in beholding the neck and head of the
upper part of the thighe, where it makes entrance into the hippe. For this
cause therefore Why in processes a head is made.
are the heads, of the Processes made, that by touching with in the cauities
of other bones adjacent, they may the better Coarticulate and join together
(...) Concau^ties are (...) answerable to the heads of the processes.
is to be noted here, that as the fashion of the heads of the Processes, are
diuet^fied according to the places, so the hollowes that receive them, must of
necessity also be diverse and different, ever answerable to their proportio^s.
A deep hole, or cauitie therefore, you shall call after the Latins Acetabulum,
after the Greeks What is the (...).
(...) or (...), our English phrase offreth no proper term for it, unless we
shall call it a cave, case, or cup, in respect of that, which into the
hollowes thereof it admits. But the plain and obscure, is called (...),
whose cauitie is What Glene is in the cauities of Bones.
so shallow as at first sight can scantly be discerned. Notwithstanding there
are certain Circular Processes, which augme^t the profundities of such Celes
as are Some cauities in Bones are enlarged by a (...) and cartilage.
largely excaued, which being placed in the upper part of them, are called
Labra, or Supercilia, as it were the lips, or brows, or as we may term them
the brinkes to those caves. These concauities are also increased by the
Gristles in some of them growyng, as appears in the cave of the Scapple bone,
where it What makes the (...) of the thighe more difficulte.
agrees with the shoulder, and in the Articulation of the hippe with the
thighe: and those Processes and Cartilages are they, which make the more
difficulty in Luxation. Further not only in figure, but also in number these
Processes Processes (...) in number also.
are diverse, and disagreeyng, some Bones being endewed with very few, and
others again with many: as shall better appear in their particular
descriptions. But now since Nature (as we have said) made nothing in vain, but
all to good purpose, and (as we may say) needfully forecasted, let us see to
what end and purpose, were these Processes ordained. You shall note therefore,
that The first (...) of the processes.
not for the commodious Articulation of Bones only, but because from them
also, The second utility
as the springs from mountains, so the Muscles are either from them produced,
The third (...)
or to them implanted: having the offices also of Propugnacles, or resistant
Gal. (...). 2. us. part.
defenses. Such as are of the shoulder blades, and the Processes of the
Vertebres. What is to be (...) (...) of Basis in the description of Bones.
(...) or basis are certain corners, after the order of a firmament, or
ground, beyond the which, and natural use of the member, the bone may not be
suffered to move: as appears by the Cauities of the arm, that is, the
Anterior corner admitting ye first Process of the Cubitte, at what time it is
extremely bowed: and the Posterior Process of the Cubitte, that coucheth in
the hinder corner, when Extension is made neither can any of the Processes
pass further in their Celles, then the utmost seat, to them by nature limited.

Thus (friendly Reader) thou shall find it expedient, before thou enter further
If these (...) be not learned, the (...) of bones is obscure.
among the description of Bones, exactly to learn, and to have in mind (as
the Proverb is) at fingers end, those few decyffered names, which the
au^ncient Anathomistes have given, according as it seemed best to their learned
opinions: and that either for the form, situation, or properties of the
parts. Which although we have so far accomplished, yet stay a while: for
before I enter The reader (...) be perfect in the (...), and (...) of (...), we
their terms, before he wade further in this History.
fully and directly to speak of every particular Bone in the body, you shall
commit unto your memory, a word or two of the manner how man's body is construed,
and combinated, as touching the frame and Coarticulation of bones: as also of
the strange, and diffused names, wherewith their kinds of knittynges, in each
respect are nominated.

First therefore we must consider, how unprofitable unto man it had been, if
Col. li. (...). ca. 3.
Why man's body was not made (...) one bone, (...), and continual,
the frame of his bones had been continual, whole, or Solid, so consequently
his motion, no otherwise then a brassen or stony Image: Whereas now to an
infinite number of Arts, that need innumerable actions, man, by natures
provident work in the construction of his frame, obtains accordingly, the
passing perfection of mouyng, sit for every one. Then so it were requisite,
that the composition of the bones should neither be dissolute, and vnioyned nor
yet altogether whole, and continual: but so made, that by the fit
Coarticulation, and knitting together by propper joints, they might as well
bow, and extend, as also remain one dependyng on an other, and together
supportyng. And notwithstanding the needfulnes of such Insoliditie, it is
otherwise as requisite, that the Bones were The (...) of the head are made for
the cause of transpiration.
not continual, but rather by proper means united, and that is for
Transpiratio^ sake: as in vnityng the Bones of the head by Sutures: and again
for the diversity of the parts, as where the more hard, are committed to the
more soft.

Since then Nature (as we say) in construing, and compoundyng the bones of
man's body, has not done it after one absolute reason, or manner, which every
man might easily comprehend, but so diuer^y, as seems sufficient, tedious for
the wise^: I will let you hear the opinions of the best learned, and famous
Anathomistes, with the meaning of the strange names, wherewith they have
entitled the diverse compositions.

First therefore understand that a ioynte called of the Greeks (...) is a
composition What is a joint.
What Hip. understood by the name of a ioynte.
of bones that is so ordained for some kind of motion. Hipocrates esteemed
simply the round part of that bone, that entered into ye hollow of another, to
be Articulus, ^b. de art. and fract. Col. ca. 4 li. 1.
and so called it. Nevertheless we give that name, to cuery natural composition
of bones, that is made for motion sake: whether ye same be evident, as
possesses ye Examples of manifest mouyng.
bone of the thighe, Articulated to the hippe, and the head above the neck,
whose mouyng therefore is manifest: or else obscure, as have the bones of ye
middle of the Examples of obscure mouyng.
hand, to set the bones of the wrest, and the bone of the heel, to that under
the ancle called Talus: with other bones also of the like sort, whose motions
are obscure, as shall be more at large other where. In respect of two kinds of
motions, two differences also of knittynges are appointed: the one, which no
man may deny to be evident, called Diathrosis, and the other, whose motion is
hard to be discerned, What is Diarthro^.
named Synarthrosis. And both are publikly divided again in tripple wise, What
is Synarthrosis.
that is each of them having three differences: and yet to both, but three
named: only different in their kinds, as Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, and
Gynglyman. Which Enarthrosis is not the same under Dia^throsis, as under
Synarthro^.
three, serve as well under Diarthrosis, as Synarthrosis, recordyng that the
motion of Diarthrosis is manifest, but Synarthrosis obscure. And this is called
Enarthrosis, with a deep and profou^d cave, or case, which we have called
Acetabulum, receiuyng Examples of E^throsis under Diarthrosis.
the long, and round head of the bone that it joins with all: as in the
hippe, with the thighe, the shoulder with the Scapple bone, the middle of the
hand, and These have most (...) (...).
instep, with the first bones of the fingers and toes. etc. These examples do
explicate the manner of Enarthrosis Articulation, under the name of Diarthrosis.
So that in these sorts, consist not only manifest motion, but also all kind
of motions, and turnings: as Extension, Contraction, Circumaction, and such
diverse sorts as we will separately show hereafter. But that you may with more
facility, gather the Examples of E^throsis under Syn^throsis.
sense hereof, that is to say, what Enarthrosis under Diarthrosis differs
from Enarthrosis under Synarthrosis, for familiar example sake, I refer you
to the beholding of the Articulation of Talus, with the botelike bone, and the
7. of the wrest, with the first and second bone of the same: which Articulation
also we call Enarthrosis. yet not under the kind of Diarthrosis, but
Synarthrosis: for as much as the mouyng These have obscure motion.
of these bones is most obscure, and hard to be judged, without diligent heed
and markyng.

Arthrodia is a coniunctio^ of bones, whereof the one has a head depressed, the
What is Arthrodia.
other a shallow or plain cauitie, called Glene as before said, aunsweryng the
the head of the other so conuectiuely, as it is hard to know the head, from the
hollow: contrary then in Enarthrosis: whereby it comes to pass, that the
moving is not so evident in Arthrodia, as in Enarthrosis. Notwithstanding in
the In Arthrodia one mouyng differs from another, according to the more or
less obs^re.
same Arthrodia is one moving more evident then an other, although every kind
of mouyng thereof, is scarce evident: yet that, that is less evident, is to be
altogether obscure, in comparison of the more evident. Wherefore the more
manifest motion in Arthrodia, shall be attributed for a kind of Diarthrosis, and
the obscure action, to Synarthrosis. Example of the mouyng of Arthrodia, under
ye kind Diarthrosis (which Examples of Arthrod^ under Dyarthrosis.
as you hear has the more manifest motion) you may take by the conjunction of
the ribs, with the Vertebres, and their Processes. Who are both co^stringed,
and Note.
The ribs do^ enlarge, and also draw together.
also dilated: as to every sensible man, appears in breathyng. But Arthrodia
you shall note somewhat more manifest, in the Articulation of ye first Vertebre
with the second, and yt bone Radius with Vlna. Contrary examples of a more
obscure Arthrodia, Examples ^f Arthrod^ under Synarthrosis.
are ye bones of the middle of yt hand, with those of ye wrest: In which also
some mouyng, after a certain manner is to be discryed. As if in bowyng, you
wish to bring the little finger and thombe together, you shall well discern
the bones in the What mouyng is propper to the bones of Po^chralis.
middle of the hand, (which otherwise the hand being stretched forth, and
straight exte^ded did show a straight figure) to be Circumduced, and obliquely
moved. Which is the motion proper to those bones. Much more aptly is the
obscure Arthrodia expressed, by the three bones of Tarsus, joined with the
shiplike bone, and the bone Cyboides, with the heel: and also diverse others,
who although they retain some kind of mouyng, yet very difficult to be
perceived.

The third kind of Articulation bath to name Gynglymos, and that is a mutual
What is Gynglymos.
Congresse, or Coarticulation of the bones, when as in either of the ends that
mete, perminent parts appear, as also cauities or little hollowes: the which
cauities of the one, admits the Processes of the other: and the Processes of
the same bone, coucheth within the cauities of the other: so either of them
into other making mutual entrance. This Articulation also has motions, both
obscure, and manifest, the one to Diarthrosis, the other to Synarthrosis
referred. That which is Examples of Ginglymus under Diarthrosis.
manifest, is to be looked for at the bone of the thighe, metyng with the
leg, the cubit with the arm, and others. For the obscure kind, regard the
knittyng of Examples of Ginglymos under Synarthrosis.
the bone Talus with the heel, and of the bones of the wrest. All which
things (good Reader) if you diligently note, you shall easily carry in mind
their manner of knitting, with the parts of joints, and differences of
Articulations.

And this doctrine of the joints, and composition of bones, I doubt not (after
you have once entered into the midest thereof) but you will be moved to thirst, in
delight of often readyng the same, and never cease, till such time, as you have
made it as perfect as the Paternoster: so may you, with more expedient
celeritie read over, the particular description of bones. Neither ca^ I judge
it tedious, or superfluous That is no mea^ for Caterpilers.
to any, save such lewd practisers, as I have spoken of before in my Preface:
who I would not (by my will) should ever lose their labor to look on it,
without grace of repentance grow on them.

To go forward now therefore, in this our journey or pilgrimage, it follows to
speak of that kind of conjunction of bones, that is called Symphysis: as when
What Symphysis is.
they are so united together that they have motion neither manifest, nor
obscure. Of these are three differences, thus called by proper names: Sutura,
Gomphosis, The differences of Symphysis.
and Harmonia. In which no man, at any time, can discern any motion. Although
some heretofore, have not been ashamed to affirm, the bones of the head, which
are joined by Sutura, to move by proper motion: whose judgments sure, are not
A ridiculous excuse for ridiculous judgments.
unworthely derided, since they will needs affirm that, which Nature never
decreed. But peradventure they might thus deceive them selves, by thinkyng
Col^. li. 1. cap. 4.
the bones of the fore part of the head to move, as often as the same Musculous
flesh Who will say the bones of the nose do move after the motions of the
nosterls, or wings of the nose?
there growyng is drawn together, upward, or downward: and so after the same
sort, the bones of the nose, which are joined by the kind of knitting called
Harmonia: when it is nothing else, but the Contraction, or Dilatation of the
nostrels, and such other parts of the nose. Let it be likewise as incredible
unto you, that the seames of the head can at any time lose, to give scope unto
the motions of the The seames of ye skull are hardly with a chisell divided.
bones: which are otherwise so fixedly compact together, as without the great
stroke and force of a chissell they cannot be divided. Much unlike then, to be
readyly None of Symphisis differences have any motion.
losed for every motion. And this proved, it is plain, that none of the
differences of Symphysis, are endewed with any kind of motion.

But now let us come to every kind by him self. What is Sutura.
First Sutura, which the The Co^missures like the nails.
Grecians call (...), is a conjunction of the bones, in such sort, as shows
like
unto the shape of a seame, or a mutual Congresse of two bones, toothed like
unto a saw: which laid together, the teeth of each, one, enters the spaces of
the other: The manner of closing, assimulated to the teeth of two sawes put
together, is most in use.
whereby they are mutually composed and one with in the substance of an other.
Some add an example of the Commissures like the nails, not for that they
mutually respect one another, but do occupy and stop the vacant places
reside^t between the nails of the fingers. Yet they seem to approach nerer, to
the nature
of the thing, which prefer the similitude of sawes, before the likeness of
nails: since those are rare to be found, these very often: Of which sort, be
three in the Thre^ seame^ in the head, in very aged persons (...) appara^.
head. And these seames, which in old men are hard to be found, (For scarce
their traces may be imitated, but rather do go together after the order of
appenda^ces:) The seame called (...) in the fore part of the head.
in younger persons notwithstanding are very conspicuous, and plain to be seen.
Whereof one of the^ is in the fore part, called (...), an other in the hinder
part, named (...), the third is straight in the midst of the top, in like
sort (of The seame called (...) in the hindee part of the head.
the Grecians) called (...), as we should say, Sagittalis, whereof in the proper
place hereafter we will speak at large. And besides these, we must needs
confess The seame called (...) or Sagittalis, along the top of ye head.
more Sutures to be in the head, if so be, you will account the scaly Bones of
the temples, to be fastened by seames: which to be found very like in some
scalpes. I deny not in deed: that is to say, tothed like a saw: as we said
even now: yet for When the (...) bones of the temples are united by a Suture,
the same Suture is ^ot deep.
all that, it is but so in few, and those also lyeng aloft of the other:
wherefore doubtless the true vnto^ of such Bones, is rather to be attributed
to that kind of Symphysis called Harmonia, then Sutura. For by Harmonia is
understood, that kind of structure in the Bones, made by a simple meetyng,
that is to say, where neither Those (...) bones are for the most part rather
v^ted by ^mo-nia then cutura. What is Harmonia.
swellyngs out, nor any cauitie, neither roughnes at all sometime is found.
Diverse ancient writers, have comprehended this kind Harmonia, often under the
name of Sutura: as when broken Bones join mutually again, by Harmonia, and
Sutura: and neither way simply: but some where concurryng even, and in Old
writers have comprehended Harmonia under the name of Sutura.
other places ronged: being therefore a mixed v^io^, participating as well with
Harmonia, as Sutura. Therefore not only to bear ye name of one of the^. For a
simple line, and Harmonicall meting, have the Bones of the nose, and such also
is that, Broad bones do knit again in fo^e, that participateth both with
Harmonia and (...).
which constituteth the Palate: or to say more truly, deuideth it long wise in
the midst. Of this sort likewise, are all the Commissures of the upper iawe,
whose Bones have only lineall distinctions.

The third of Symphysis differences, is called Gomphosis (albeit that Vesal.
deuideth ^a^ples of Harmonia.
them otherwise) and this kind of vnitio^ is, when one bone, with in another
What is Gomph^sis.
is infired: as a nail into wood, or other thing, which being pulled out, ye
place after is left vacant and empty: even so, the teth have in the jaws the
propper Example of Gomphosis.
celles, whence they may be drawn when occasion is offered. But besides the
fastenyng, that they have in the jaws, in dried bodies: in creatures yet
living, they are also clothed aptly with flesh about their roots, and
contract, and filled on each side with gowines, which flesh is made so callons,
and indurated, as that the The callo^tie of the Gowines set ueth some men in
^ead of teeth.
teeth thereby are not a little d^lited, and bow^stred: and the tooth being
drawn out, it (...) (...) the hole thereof; so hardnyng, as that it is
serviceable in stead of the tooth. But in dead bodies, where this flesh is
dried and consumed, or otherwise taken away, the ^th may with small labor, be
pulled forth. So that it is That Bones are joined together by the means of
flesh, Ligament, Cartilage: co^^-ry to (...).
most certain, all bones, by the benefit of one thing or other, to be coupled
together, though among them selves, diverse. And besides all these kinds of
Articulations rehearsed, we have yet again, to affirm the conjunction of
Bones among them selves, to be by three kinds of means. For either a
Cartilage goes between, and this union the Grecians call Synchondrosin: as else
by the help What is Syn^drosis.
of a Nerve or Ligament they are conjoined, and that they call Synneurosis:
between What is Synneyrosis.
the which, that is to say the Nerve, and Ligament, in deed old writers could
discern no differences: albeit we shall call it more rightly a Ligament, Old
writers compreheded the Ligam^t under the name of Nerve. What is Syndes^osis.
which the Greeks nominate Syndesmos: therefore this knittyng, after that rate,
Syndesmosis. Either else the union, is made, by the apposition of flesh,
therefore by the Greek name Syssaroosis. But that kind of copulation called
Synchondrosis, is to be noted by the bones of the breast, and Pubis, the
Vertebres themselves, What is (...).
and parts constitutyng Os Sacrum, as also those with Os Sacrum committed:
Examples of (...).
so are Appendances joined to their bones by a Cartilage. Examples of
Synneu^sis, Examples of (...).
are all those bones, in which are Ligamentes to be discerned, passing forth
from that part, whereas the Appendances are fastened to the bones: for with
such Ligamentes those bones and joints are clothed, and colligated. There are
also certain strong Ligamentes, springing after a certain manner, in the
middle Examples of the Ligament spri^gyng out of the head of a bone.
of the heads, of some bones, whereby, they are together more strongly holden:
as plainly appears in the Articulation of the thighe with the hippe, and
again between the leg and the thighe: neither other where to be found,
unless with these, you number that Ligament, wherewith, the tooth of the
second Vertebre of the neck, is knitte to the hinder part of the head. You
shall not dread, to find The example of Syssarcosis.
the examples of Syssarcosis very plain, in the fleshy firmi^ieng of the teeth
in their Celles, by the goumes: which flesh from them removed, they become not
only presently lose, but also not long enjoying their places. These are the
true Carolus Stephanus has (...) in the composition of Bones.
divisions of the composition of Bones, which since I have with competent
brevity touched, I will not any longer stand in admiration of Carolus
Stephanus, Who either rightly knew them not, or else doubtyng, for fear of
reprehension, gave place unto others: since that noble Galen (who verifieth
this saying Non What man is so wise as that in anythyng he s^weth (...) (...).
omnia possumus omnes) was not a little deceived, in ascribyng to Synarthrosis
these differences Sutura, Gomphosis, and Harmonia, with other like points,
whereat (notwithstanding) no man ought to grudge, if such a one as rectified
the the whole Art of Medicine, should in some points, show a little
imbecilitie. But now to our purpose: it is time we approach to the singular
description of Bones: which, this well noted that we have hitherto said, you
shall in readyng, far more easily understand. But first, if in the reason and
names of the compo sition of bones, hitherto so copiously handled, you be not
sufficiently instructed, or fully satisfied, it shall not be amiss, that now
and then, you help your self with this Table followyng.

The Bones of man's body are compounded together.
By Toynt, which is a composition of Bones with mouyng, whereof be two
differences: Diarthrosis,

Which is a knittyng together of bones to some manifest mouyng, and is divided,
into Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, Ginglymon.


Enarthrosis is, where a round or long head is inserted with in some cauitie
answerable to it: as is the Articulation of the thighe, with the hip. y^
shoulder with Sapula. and the first joints of the fingers, with y^ bones of
the back of the hand.

Arthrodia is, where a place being lightly hollow, and that in the enter part,
admits a little ex pressed head, as the first Vertebre with y^ second, and
radius cum cubito.

Ginglymos is that, where in the Bones do enter mutually one into an other,
that is, both receive, and are received: as the cubite with the shoulder bone,
y^ thighe with the leg, and the second and third ioynte^ of the fingers.

Synarthrosis,

Which is a Coarticulatio^ with obscure moving, being divided into the same
Species, or parts, as Diarthrosis is Videl. Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, Ginglymon.


In that only they differ among them selves, these having but obscure, those
manifest motion.

Neither is it any marvel, that the same things, being diuer^ considered,
may under diverse kynds in the same Praedicament be placed, for it falls out
sometime in diverse Praedicamentes.

Examples in this kind are these. of: Enarthrosis, the Bone Talus with the
botelike bone, and the third Bone of the wrest, with the first, and second of
the same. Of Arthrodia, the Bones of Tarsus among them selves, Cyboides with
the heel bone, and certain Bones of the wrest among them selves. Of
Ginglymos. Talus with the heel Bone, and some likewise of the wr^st Bones
among themselves.





or By Symphysis, which is a ioynyng together of the bones without mouyng, and
is divided in three: Videl.
Sutura, Gomphosis. Harmonia,
Sutura is that manner of composition, seen in the head, wherein the bones are
committed together and like the teeth of a saw, as is Sutura
Coronalis, Sagittalis, Labdoides.


Gomphosis, is, when one bone like a nail is fastened with in an other, as the
teeth in the jaws.

Harmonia, is a joining toge there of bones by some simple line, as y^
Co^missures of the upper iaw, and that chiefly, which is in the nose, and
runs after the longitude of the palate.


All these are connitted together by
Synchondrosis,

Which is an vnio^ of the bones made by a Cartilage: as is seen in Os Pubis,
the breast bone, and Ilium, when it is knit to Sacrum.

Syssarcosis.

Which is a conjunction of bones by the apposition of the flesh coming upon
the^, as is seen between the teeth and jaws, as also in those ioints, which
Muscles do enuiron.

Syndesmosis.

Which is a composition of Bones by the means of a Ligament, as in y^ joints
appcareth.


NOw seeing that the head of all the other parts of y^ body is most noble,
conteinyng Why the (...) (...) of the head begins first.
in his cauitie y^ brain, which (clean contrary to Aristotle's mind) we prove
the principal member of all others: we will first begin with the Bones The
brain is y^ principal ^bet of the body, contrary to Aristotle.
thereof: which to the brain, in their construction, are so safe a muniment, as
it is small thanks to say nature was most careful in constitutyng of it. And
in this A question, whether the head be for cause of the eyes or of the brain.
point by the motion of Galen, we are constrained to put forth a question: that
is, whether the head was made for cause of y^ eyes, or else of the brain. To
this the said Galen answers in his vi^. book De vsu partium, that the head
for the eyes sake was so aptly ordained: to which opinion he was slenderly
styrred, by beholding Galens opinion, the head to be made for the eyes.
the eyes of certain creatures, called Betles, Cankers, and such other, which
having no heads, to the end their eyes might possess ye highest rowme, for
furthest prospect sake, nature has limited them certain Processes, to usurp
the offices of an head. But, by the leave of so famous a Philosopher, you shall
hear the opinion of a latter practitionar Realdus Collumbus: who denies not
Galens Lib. 1. cap. 5.
opinion in this respect, that for great consideration, and requisite causes,
the eyes The (...) of Galen.
must worthily in the highest place be co^stitute, and therefore the head to be
a most necessary seat unto them, in whose propper angles they are ^eaceably
retained, and strongly munited from all externe and accidental injuries: but
therefore, and for such only uses, he grants not the head to have been made
of such quantity, neither of that figure, nor such a construction of Bones,
but rather for cause Collumbus proves rather the head to be made for cause of
the brain.
of the brain. For if y^ eyes should be the cause, (says he) could not nature
have divided the head into two prominent Processes, in which the eyes might be
placed to discern a far of? Yes truly, and to have made them after a harder
kind of constitution as appears both in those creatures that Galen names,
as also in many other: the eyes of which creatures, if the creator had decreed
to be of the like soft substance that the eyes of man are, then he would also
have prepared A sharp reason, in that the eyes of Ca^ers are has.
like munimentes, and defenses for them, to save them after the same manner,
from outward inconveniences. And surely his reasons are pithie in this respect,
to dissuade us from Galens opinion: and rather to believe, that the head was
made, especially of that shape, and figure, for the cause of the brain: so
much the Why for cause of the brain y^ head was created.
more safely to keep and defend it, being the habitation of reason: which
makes man to be accounted the divine creature: which is the mistress of all
virtues, and Reason is the Queen of all virtues.
Queen of animal faculties: whereon that the senses, continually as
ministers, and servants, attendantly should wait, in the same head also they
obtain every one their seats, as is not improperly declared in their places.

As touching the natural figure of the head, called of the Grecians (...),
Galen Cap. v. de ossib. lib. 9. Us. part. cap. 17. and (...). Artis Medicae
says it should be round long wise, on each side lightly compressed, so that
the fore part and hinder part be eminent, or out stretchyng. For as Cerebellum
(toward The natural (...) of the head.
the hinder part) lies under the brain, and the spinall marey thence slydeth
from the head: so contrarily, Processes arise from the fore part to the eyes,
and Lib. 9. de us. part. cap. 17.
to the instruments of smellyng. And therefore this he accompteth the natural
figure of the brain, and so consequently of the head. All other sorts he
judges rather vns^mely, then natural: of the chiefest, or most notable of
them, he has made a fourefold division. The first of which is quyte contrary
to that we have The first of the four figures of the head not natural.
nominated natural, wanting both ^eminences of the head: that is the former
and hinder out going: so that in deed is exquisitely round like a Sphere. Of
like sort, as Homer reports one Thersites to have had: which figure, as it is
clean contrary Iliad. b. Thersites.
to the natural fashion, so it is a token of unaptness, and folly, having
thereby the function of all virtues hindered, notwithstanding, all (for the most
part) endewed with a sharp or accuminated figure of the head, the Grecia^s
call (...) and (...). So Pericles, who, his head (as Quintilian writes) being
more long, Lib. 2. cap. 17. Pericles.
and accuminate, seemed not to speak, or in any thing to entreat familiarly,
but rather to throng and thunder out his words. And this, little agreeable to
the right measure of the head, the Atticall Poets have named (...) and (...).

The second figure of the head not natural, is that, that in the forehead has
The second figure not natural.
no eminence, but only in the hinder part. The third figure not natural.


The third, is just contrary unto this. The fourth figure not natural.


The fourth figure is this, when both the sides of the head are more promine^t,
then either the forehead, or hinder part. But this kind is so rare, as that it
is The fourth figure not natural, is rare and monstrous.
not only accounted not natural, but plain monstrous also, and against
nature. Wherefore Galen says, it is altogether to the life of man unprofitable:
and that such, beside their shape, have nothing that is proper to men. To this
witnesses Andraeas Vesalius, who in Venice, beheld a boy, that being mad,
besides many lib. 1. ca. 5.
other strange deformities of diverse members, and parts, had also this figure
of Vesalius makes mention of a boy that was mad, va uyng this fourth figure of
y^ head.
the head. Wherefore it seems, Galen rightly judged of this fourth shape, and
figure of the head, whence reason is far absent, not seemyng to know such
monstrous kinds of shapes: but is delited best in the most natural, and the
further The further of from the natural figure, the further also from the
perfection of reason.
of from that, the more distant also from her perfection.

But to our purpose, and that which is more requisite. The Bones of the Head
are neither altogether Solid, nor yet wholly fungie, rare, or like ye Pumish
What kind of bones are to the head.
stone: for that were to light and frail, subject to manifold injuries, and
the other over heavy, and to much (more then nature would) oppressiue. Neither
would Why the Bones of the head were not Fungie.
the substance of such, be any thing so transpirable as were in that case
expedient. For the head is as a certain coueryng, put above a vessel that
boyleth underneath Why the bones of the head were not made altogether Solid.
it: so the brain within it, is environed closse as a hotehouse. But so, as if
it should not have passage out, after a certain transpiratiue manner (since to
the brain many vapors and excrementes are continually ascendent) no man could
The making of the head to a pot compared.
endure, without great discrasie of health, and inco^modious life. Wherefore
provident nature willing, that as the brain had often occasion, so it should
never Wherefore y^ head is distinguished with Sutures.
want, the mean of recrementall purging. And for that cause, was the head not
made of one whole and continual bone, but of diverse, for the procreation of
Sutures, or Seames: which nature, for the behoof of the brain, decreed so
commodious. And this reason co^pelleth us to subscribe unto. Though to the
great reproach of Cornelius Celsus, who affirms, or rather dreameth that the
head, altogether Lib. 8. ca. 1.
wanting Sutures, is most safe, and the fewer Sutures that it has, the more
commodious also to the health thereof: for surely he has nothing that makes of
his side, to induce this opinion, except he deceived himself by to much
regardyng outward causes. But besides that, Hipocrates Lib. de homine has
testified against Celsus in these words: Saniores capitis sunt, qui plures
Suturas habent: and that Galen, in sundry places, commends the construction
of the head made with Sutures. I think it good also to declare unto you the
Assertio^s of Realdus Collumbus, in this Lib. 1. ca. 5.
A (...) of a young man, who dying through pain of his head, had no Sutures in
the skull (...).
respect, a man, in matters Anathomicall, not meanly experienced. Who once,
having brought unto him a certain young man, whom death, by continual
torments of the head, remediless, and in spite of Phisickes aid, had seized
on: found by Dissection, that through out his head, scarce the tract of one
Suture could be obsorued, but rather, as the head had been of one Solid, and
entier Bone, so that in the end, by the due observation of the Dissected parts
of that man, the whole multitude that were with him (as it were with him one
mouth) gave sentence, that his continual cruciable pain, and capital dolor,
was engendered of no other cause, but the streite composition of the Bones of
the head, through which no passage could be procured: whereby those gross, and
vaporous sumosities (which otherwise by the seamy Commissures, would
transpirately euaporate) being in such retentiue sort included and findyng no
passage to regurgitate the superfluities, were not only the original causes
of his perpetual dolor, and animal vexation, but also in fine inferred
death. And this not once, but often Columbus in this point (...) him self
both u^ men and women, studyng in them that were much given to pains in the
head, the Sutures to be grown up.
times he ratified by experience, both in men and women, as one, in this point,
greatly desirous to be satisfied. Wherefore it is marvelous, that so great a
man, and learned as Celsus, could so much as think that, which he has in this
point plainly published: whereas he only respectyng externe dangers, we can
prove, that the inner ought more to be feared: that is to say, the fuliginous
recrements, inwardly ascendyng without any transpiratiue vent, to procure more
eminent, Here Celsus did most respect outward dangers, when as in deed the
inner are more to be feared.
and irrecuperable perils, then outward percussions: except such, as (were the
skull all one bone) would finish the life. So that we must needs deny his
whole reason: that is to say, both that the brain is more safe, by the
inseparable coagmentation of the Bones, or healthful, by their Soliditie. For
therefore the head, being thus of bonye substance, which by the violence of
some stroke might be fractured, or con^used, it behooves to be rather construed
of diverse bones, to the A notable reason against Celsus, why the bone of head
is divided.
end, that when one part, by some such outward injury, is broken, the other
parts (notwithstanding) might wholly be reserved: since in the head one stroke,
ca^ not reach very far beyond the ends, or borders of the part percussed:
which would otherwise (no doubt) fall forth, were the head of one sole bone
constituted. As for A familiar example.
familiar example, strike a vessel made of earth or stone, so that it be of
comparable thicknes, and you shall commonly see, that by breakyng one place,
you shall In brief the reasons, why y^ head has Sutures.
commit the rest also to pieces, Therefore not injuriously, or vaynly, is the
healthful head distinct with Sutures, or seames: for of them, to transmit the
fumous recrementes The first reason.
of the brain, this is not the only benefit: but their apt construction The
second reason.
also is the cause, that outward percussions, making breach in one part, to do
the like in another, are aptly prohibited, except the stroke (as I said) be
exceedyng grievous. But besides all this, I hope, when I have revealed unto you
a third The third reason.
commodity, appertainyng to the Sutures, you will metely be satisfied, as well
as I. For unto them is Appendant the Membran of the brain called Crassa
Meninx, or Duramater, which, as shall be said hereafter more largely, being
effused Dura matter, going forth by y^ seames vegetteth Pericranium, to cover
also the outside of the skull.
by Fiberlike tyeng through the same seames, does engendre on the outside of
the scalpe, an other Membran, which inuolutio^ is ordained, for the
Extrinsecall Obduction of the capital Bones: and this coueryng is called
(...). But some perhaps will here obie^, and say, that they have found in aged
persons, the skull It is not the objection of aged persons that ca (...) this
reason.
destitute of Sutures, yet they living, were not vexed with pains of the head:
I answer, that likewise in men or women, that have lived many years, neither
Extreme age or extreme youth is not to be observed in the Anathomie.
will the Appendances of their Bones be separated: though in persons
sufficiently young, they be most manifest: but marvel not at that, since
extreme youth, or extreme age, in Anathomicall affairs are not to be observed:
or at lest to excite any controversy in Arguments. For certain parts of
infantes, till after a competent As in children some parts of bones through
softenes seem Cartilages: so in some aged persons the Seames of the head are
done away.
space of time, are by the tenderness likest to Cartilages: yet no man is so
senseless, to deny there being bones. But let us draw nearer to the matter.

By appellation of this name Head, understand you the upper part and top of
the body; created for the cause of the eyes, and brain: whose propper fig^re
should be round and long, after the similitude of a long Sphere, on both sides
depressed, What signifietly the head.
being by the name distinguished from either of the jaws: that is, sometime
called the Skull, some time the Scalpe, construed worthily of diverse bones, The
uses of the head.
and those, both within and without, having a smoth crust, and hard face, but
in The figure of the head.
the midst Fungous, and like a Pumie stone. Further, these hones are
perforated, Why the bones of the skull are pearsed with (...) (...) little holes.
here, and there, unorderly, with a sort of small holes, to the end, that by
them, the little Tendringes or Spriggie branches of veins, and Arteries,
which bring blood for nourishment, and spirit for the increase of heat, and
conservation of Why the middle part of the bones of the skull are Fungous.
life, might have pleasant passage. And therefore be the bones of the head,
between the outmost, and inner scales, cauernous, or hollow: not only thereby,
to become more light, but also to contain medullous substance for their food
and nourishment. This Pumicous substance, intersited between the said seals,
or crustes, The two walls of the (...).
is the cause that some have said, the scull to be condited and made of two
walls, which they call Tables: meaning those ij. crustes, or scales, which
being hard, and The tables of the bones of y^ head, which shut, between them
the Fungous substance.
therewith a little thick, do shut in on each side that said Spongious and
medullous substance. These bones are seiungated on each side, in their ends
and borders, obteinyng in all such places, by general appellation of the
Anathomistes, Sutures, or Seames: of which, here is so much to be spoken,
because they are expedient What are called the Su^res.
in the explication of the bones of the head. The knowledge of the Sytures is
expedi^ in the explication of the bones of y^ head.


Now therefore of seames, some be true, some false, which being rather in deed
Commissures, are more to be referred to Harmonia, then Sutura. But to recount
unto you by one intier and direct number, how many Sutures there are in the
head, The (...) of the Sutures.
Realdus Collumbus says viij. if all be accounted, whereof v. be false, and
impropper: and iij. propper, and true. Of the true, one is, that in the hinder
part of the The (...) Sutures are Harmoniae.
head, and in the foundation thereof, where, it goes on both sides toward the
ear, the going up of which in the beginning, is broad, but higher and higher
ascendyng, The number of the Sutures.
becomes narrower, like the fashion of this Greek letter L, for which Loc.
Citat.
cause it has long time, and still does retain the name accordyngly, that is,
(...): The description of the Suture called Lamdoides.
this deuideth the Bones of the temples and Sinciput, from the bone of hinder
part, or Occiput. An other, is in the foremost part of the head, co^passing the
The description and use of the Co ^onall Suture.
forehead like a kind of half circle, and is called by the name of the place
(...), in Latin Coronalis: this seperateth likewise the Bones of Sinciput, from
Os frontis.

The third Suture is that, that runs straight on the top of the head,
distinguishing the right, from the left side of the head: and for as much as it
lies straight length The names, description, and use of the Coronall Suture.
wise on the head, from Labdoides, to Coronalis, it is nominated of yt Grecia^s
(...), the Latins Sagittalis, or Recta Sutura. And this Suture is sometime,
seen (though some Anathomistes have seemed doubtful to pronounce it) to
augment his circuit, The Sagittall Suture sometime con^neth down through y^
midst of (...) frontis.
down to the neither part of the forehead, and top of the nose: which I am
not only moved to affirm by the probability of some approved authors, but
dare safely also avouch it, by that experience my self has tasted. But that
princely Peripatecian Aristotle, was much beceiued, in making a difference
betwixt the Fuch. Lib. cap. 8.
heads of men, and women: when as in deed that way, there is no kind of
difference, That the ^ense of the Sagittall Suture makes no difference between
the scalpe of man or woman.
but rather mutually in the selves, diuersified. Therefore that rule is not to
be observed, though others sinte his time have not slacked to say, that this
Sagittalis Sutura, discendeth to the nose in women, but not in men: or
contrariwise: The descense of y^ Sagittal Suture is not co^ either in man or
wo^an.
for both is false, since in either if may be found. Although in deed (as it
is) very rare, or seldom. No less is the opinion, of the same Philosopher
dissonant from truth, in that he says, that the head of a dog is continual
and without Sutures, whereas diligence shall find it most directly
distinguished with Sutures: and those, Col. Ibid.
more elegant then in men. That a dogs head is (...) with Sutures, against
Aristotle.


There are besides, two seames sited after the bended length of the head,
equally distau^t from the Sagittall (...): these are carried above the ears,
from the extremity of the diseendent Coronalis, with a certain circular
walk, and in some The description of the Seames of y^ scaly bones of the
temples.
reach down to the lowest seat of Labdoides, in others again, not passing
Mamillares. These ij. seames, that is to say, on both sides one, being as
skalie bones, and conglutinate, or laid on like seals, are accordyngly called
skalie bones: the The ioyn^g of y^ (...) bones by (...) examples.
thinner part of one, lyeng to the thicker part of an other: and so by due
proportion, joined together: like as maybe coniectured, by the sight of Fishes
skales, or the That part which lies without is harder then that which l^eth
(...) it.
iron plates of a jack, one lying on an other. And note, that of them, the
outmost is much harder then the inner: because it lies aloft, and therefore
nature ordained it as a defense for the other. These are the lincall
coagmentatio^s of the two skales, that keep the compressed sides of the head,
bordryng upon the other bones, or on their ends Superiacent: but because their
knittyng is not Suture like, that is, one mutually let into an other, like the
teeth of two sawes joined together, and as the above mentioned ar^, they are
called therefore of the Greeks Fuch. Lib. 1. cap. 8.
(...). That is, skalie Co^glutinations. Galen has named them Where these are
called temporal Sutures.
(...), or temporal Sutures. And for that these bones do represent scales, to
the sides of other bones (to make up the enclosure) adherent, they have no
other Why these bones are called Squa^mous or scaly.
nomination than; Ossa squammosa. These five are propper to the head.

Then the vj. is that, which from the extremity of Labdoides, is deduced
through the midst of the stony or hard Bones, stretchyng forthwith to the
foundation The description of the vj. Suture.
of the head, where it meteth with the first Vertebre, or turnyng joint: and
this Additions of the Suture Labdoides.
part, Galen calls additions of Sutura Labdoides. From thence again
beginning, vpwardes on both sides, it creeps to the hollowes of the temples,
even to the ends of Coronalis: whence reflected downewardes, to the extreme
^th, and Where the (...) Scame is co^^ both to the head and upper saw.
palate, it is common both to the head, and upper iawe: and comprehends in it
the whole bone called C^ale.

The vij. deuideth the bone of the head, that is numbered the viij. from Os
frontis, The description of the vij. Suture.
seperatyng it wholly from all the parts thereof.

The viij. and last Suture begins at the hollowes of ye temples, where the
vj. is The description of the viij. Suture.
reflected, and begins to descend, and creeping through the middle regio^ of
the lesser corner of the eye, as also through the midst of yr eyes ron^dell,
thence tranuersly spedeth to the top of the nose, and so seuereth the upper
iawe from the forehead: but in the inside of the head, nere the foundation or
seat, Os cuneale disioyneth it self from Os frontis. And thus much you have
to consider of the Sutures, as touching The Sutures are without conspicuous,
but (...) scarce appear.
that, that appertains to the outward view of them. For within, at all
appears the show of no Sutures, but rather Harmonia.

Galen makes relation, how in heads, varyeng fro^the natural figure,
diversity Lib. 9. us. part. cap. 17.
among the Sutures likewise shall be found. Which Realdus Collumbus denies, Lib.
de ossib. cap. ^. Lib. 1 cap. 5.
as also the not natural fashions of ye head: although some be more, or less
co^pressed, The diverse ^igures of the hea^ varyeth not the number of Sutures.
or backward, and forwards prominent, yet (says he) all are of natural form
and fashion, and the bones, with Sutures all, to be numbered: though somewhat,
by the places and greatness, discrepant. But whether it be so or no, or whether
the diverse sigure of the head (not being monstrous) show shorter, or longer
Sutures, The differences of Sutures.
or more crooked, lower, or higher, loser, or more compact: it is but folly
for us to stand in doubt of, or dismay our selves, or to detract the time with
longer discourse. For lightly, in any of them, you shall find some mention
made of the rehearsed Lib. 1. de ossib. ca. ^. Lib. xi. de us. part.
sort. And we account it sufficient, that our description, be consentyng to the
verity Bones of the head.
of the thing.

Next these viij. Sutures, remains the Bones, constituting the head, to be
decided. Collumbus ibidens vt sup.
Which Galen numbreth somewhere six, other where vij. but Uesalius, and
Collumbus, both with one consent (as it were one subscribyng to an other) have
in In the part of the head called B^gma in childrd, the constriction, and
dilatation of the brain called Sistole, and Diastole, is plainly perce (...)
ued.
uented viij. thus accomptyng. Two of the fore part, called Sinciput, or
Bregma: this Bregma, is to be understood the upper part of the head foreward,
nigh to the Coronall Suture. It is the place, that in infantes, and late borne
sucklynges, is so soft, and tender, that under it, both Sistole, and Diastole
of the brain, most evident, and with pleasant perspicuitie (so that no man
needs to doubt of the constriction and dilatation that the brain obteineth
during life) is to be discerned, Wounds in Bregma are deadly.
notwithstanding that by little, and little, daily more, and more, it becomes
in tract of time, sufficient hard, and bonye: yet wounds therein are noted
deadly. The upper seame of these bones of Sinciput, is the Sagittall Suture.
And to certify you of these Bones of Bregma, or Sinciput more plainly, those
are they, which close their Suture between Labdoides, and Coronalis, cuttyng
out the space between them: whose seame is called Sagittalis. From either side
of the same Sutura Sagittalis, where they mutually coagmentate, they descend
equally to the vnityng of the scaly Bones. Wherefore, considering their
situation on each side, you shall find them fashioned after a quadragular, or
four square manner, thus The description of these two Bones of B^gma or (...)
hemmed in on each side: in their upper parts with the straight or Sagittall
line: in the foreside with the Coronall: behynd with Labdoides, and beneath
with the scaly conglutinations.

The third bone is called Occiput, endyng at the Labdall Suture: besides that
Os Sphenoides by the sirt Suture, The circumscription of Occiput.
ouerthwartly chauncyng. And this bone is made of unequal parts: that is, in
some places thicker, then again in others thinner, but in the midst of the
seat or ground thickest of all. Neither not elegantly has nature erected a
Prominence, ^hy a Promine^ce in Occiput is made.
from that hole, whereby ye brain is derived into the spinall marey, which
vpwardes ascends to the top of the same bone: thereby to make it more able,
By a Prominence understand, what portion soever does notably (...) the parts
circumsacent in chicknes, like as a hille in the plain: and this I wish the
reader to carry in mind, for henceforth I will expon^de this word no more.
and strong, For so nature carefully impended her study, in the whole
co^struction of man's body, her notable work, that as the parts incident to
small danger, have little wherewith to defend them selves, so such as are sited
in most eminent perilles, and as it were in the forefront of irrepugnable
damages, those commonly are armed with double shielded defenses. As we see, a
man, in falling forwards, has his hands to stay or bear him up, but
backwardes, goes pronely, without all hope of recouerable stay, till the
hinder part of the head seele the weight of his body. Judge then (since this is
most true, as what soever is truest) how far good Aristotle was deceived,
that would needs, have this bone of the The (...) industry of nature.
hinder part of the head, to be, of all others, most weak, and thin. But to
come again to our matter. The other parts of this bone, beside that Promine^t
place Why the bone of the hinder part of the head is thickest.
spoken of, are but little in deed, or of small rowme: but those also
sufficiently thick, and solid, neither void of flesh, but safely covered with
Muscles, occupieng Tert. de Hist, anim.
the hinder part of the neck: and on this bone rests Cerebellum; neither
other The opinion of Aristotle is rejected who (...) the bone of Occiput to be
thinn^.
where is empty, though it pleased so great a Philosopher so to affirm.
Besides this, to demonstrate precisely the circumscription of this same bone
Occiput, it seems to be forged with five sides, notwithstanding the
authority of such as write but three. Among which, the two first begin at the
neither part of the The weakee parts of this bone are stregthned by the
Muscles of the neck.
Labdall Suture, nere to the bones of the temples, and so ascendyng with the
same Seame of either side, narrower, and narrower, till it have touched the
point of Labdoides, where these two sides meet. Two other, from the heel of
the same Suture, Col. Lib. 1. ca. 5.
stretch forth after. Os mamillar^, and downwardes, till they come to the line
or Suture Aristotle falsely imagined the hinder part of ye head to be ^ptie.
that seuereth Occiput from Sphenoidis: by benefit of which transuerse
deductio^ of the same Suture, is necessarily made the v. side to Occiput. But
this note, Occiput consists of five sides, Galen says but three.
that as this bone in the hinder part of the head, in persons of strengthened
years, is all one, and undivided: so in young children, into four or five
parts, yea sometime The description of the ^des of Occiput.
into (...). distinguished. Beyond all this, this bone has in it, the most
notable hole of all the bones of the head, made for the going forth of the
spinal marey: Note.
In which hole, appears four seperations, or divisions, so that it seems
to be Occiput in children does consist some time of v. sometime of vii. bone.
The utility of the divided Occiput children.
divided into four parts: from among whose spaces flows a Cartilage, which,
after the manner of a Ligament, connecteth the head to the first and second
Vertebre, whereby the same, being of so great quantity and weight, might more
firmly be bound and obligated, to those small bones and turnyng joints of the
neck: of which Ligamentes, we have entreated more abundantly otherwhere.
Finally, Two Prominent parts in Occiput their form, and why they were so
made.
this is to be noted, from the sides of this hole proceed two sweilynges, or
prominent portio^s, which are covered with a Cartilage, being unto them as a
crust: wherefore they are not sharp, but made so for the purpose, to be let
into the cauities of the first Vertebre, for the better constituting of the
head his articulation.

The fourth bone is Os frontis which is simply and only one (unless it be
otherwise in such Scalpes, as have the Sagittall Suture discendyng down to the
Os' frontis to a simple bone.
top of the nose, which (I say) is seldom found. Therefore, this we call ye
Circumscription When Os frontis is two.
of Os frontis, when it is found one and undivided. First, it is separate The
circumscription of Os frontis.
from the Bones of the fore part, or Sinciput, by the Coronall Suture: Next,
from the Cuneall bone, by the vj. Suture: Thirdly, severed by the vij. Suture,
from the viij. bone of the head: Lastly from the Cuneall bone, as also from the
upper iawe, by the intercision of that Sea^e, which rising from the hollowes of
the temples, pearseth, through the middle seats of the eyes, even to the top
of the nose: where the eye brows end. This bone of the forehead is (after a
certain Where Os frontis is most thin.
manner) round, and no where so thin, as where it constituteth the upper
region of the holes of the eyes, and meteth with the viij. bone of the head.
But this note that I will tell you, which Galen (as far as I have read) never
made mention A large (...) above the eye brows in Os fro^tis which Galen knew
not.
of. Above the top of the nose, where the same is committed to Os frontis,
this bone of the forehead holloweth it self, on each side, both where it makes
the upper region of the eyes, as also prominently constituteth the brows, and
seems, as if it were lined with a thin scale: between which, and the outer
Solid side The use of that cau^tie in Os frontis.
of Os frontis, these cauities run, after the manner of this figure) (, to the
conteinyng of air, as Vesalius, and Collumbus have imagined. Whereby it
appears, in Cap. 6.
this place, to be, by reason of such celles, most thick: but yet in the space
above, Cap. 5.
and between them, it is most Solid, thick, and firm, as also more infirm;
thin, Why the bone of the forehead is toward the Sa gittall Suture thumer.
and weak, where it is committed to the Sagittall Suture, and upper bones of
the head: because there it is in infantes Me^braneous, as before is spoken of
that portion of Sinciput, that bordereth upon the Coronall Suture. The bones of
the temples.


After this, follow the bones of the temples, which, in their upper part, that
is Sagittall Suture, are equally circumscribed with scaly Agglutinations. But
behynd, with the parts or additions of the Suture Labdoidis, and with the vj.
Seame, which seuereth their lower parts from Sphenoidis, and seuereth their
Anterior part from the upper iawe, and on Os frontis bordered. These The figure
of the temporal bones.
bones (whosoever says the contrary, as Galen that accounted them iij. square)
are notwithstanding most propperly to be termed Circular, or Round compassed,
for so they show most in the Superior part. Only their form is obscured by
many Processes. The first of which, are the Mamillar Processes, dependent like
The Etymology of the Mammillar Process.
unto the broken brows of banks, hangyng down, but bear their names for
representyng the fashion of Tetes in a Cowes vdder, called therefore of the
Grecians (...): which processes serve not only to the insertio^ of Muscles,
but that The uses of the Mamillar Process. The Mammillar Process is hollow,
and why.
in them also might be contained most excellently, a large cauitie, to the
Organ of hearing exceedyng necessary. Wherefore you shall ever find it void
and empty, runnyng in with diverse caves, and privy corners. Moreover not far
from this, The Process called Styloides.
brusteth forth, from the fou^dations of these two bones, two other processes
notable, which are not only very small, but also long, and hard, endewed with
many This Process has di^ers names, as Belonoides, Graphoides, Styloides and
Plectron.
names, for the diverse kinds of shapes, whereto they are likened. As (...)
after the Image of a needle: others, for the similitude of a writing Tables
pe^ne, have named it (...), or (...). or, for the likeness of a Cocks spur
(which in my opinion is of all rest nearest unto the mark) (...), although
Styloides most of all is used. And these stiliforme, or spurrelike processes
are prominent next under Mammillares, stretchyng obliquely forwards, and
poyntyng as The manner of the sputlike Process The description of the third
Process of the temporal bone.
it were to ye Anterior reslectio^ of the neither iawe, where it is called the
Chinne. The third Process of the temporal bone makes a portion of Os iugale,
wyndyng out crookedly, from the neither part of Temporale, where it makes
somewhat a slender reslection, the more aptly to mete with the iugall bone. And
more then Loco Citato.
these Vesal^s never remembered. But Realdus Collumbus, a famous man to be
remembered, The commends the industry of Realdus Collumbus
who, in these matters Anathomicall by his exploratiue indagation, seems to
have sifted a mite, and cloven a hear, has not so let slip, or wi^cked The
fourth Procelse of the te^porall bone.
at the fourth process, which beginning n^re unto the root of the
stiliformed, swells out long into the inner part of the head, in the which is
made that noble Laberinthe, resonant to the reflectyng air of every noise:
which we will hereafter, with more requisite prolixitie, decyffre. But to make
the third process recited, A more plain explication of the third Process.
better known, and more manifest to your intellection, you shall note, that
when it rises from the Anterior part of the Organ of hearing, it stretches
not directly along by the sides of the temporal bone, but crooketh up, toward
the iugall bone, in Circular sort, not unlike the arche of a Bridge, under
which, subentreth, the hollow of the temples, and to the beginning of which
process, is the bone of the neither iawe Coarticulated. For under the rising
of the process, The cauitie when to yt neither (...) is Articulate.
nere to yt auditorie passage, is a cauitie, deeply incrased with a Cartilage,
whereunto is inserted, yt longer process of the neither iawe: And thus much of
the processes, from the temporal bones, prominent. Which bones are, (toward
their foundation, and lower parts) anfractuous, rough, and stony like,
compared therefore to rough and stony, banks, whereby they obtain of the
Greeks this name Why yt Greeks call these Bones (...).
(...), for the same cause. Contrariwise, above, and in their upper parts,
light, and most thin, especially in such places as the temporal Muscles are
spread: The providence of nature in creatyng the temporal Bones.
but, together with their thinnes, nature has granted them to be sufficient
hard, so that (without great peril of life) they may not be broken.

The vij. bone of the head shows diverse fourmes and fashions, wherefore the
The seventh bone of the head called the Cuneall bone.
Grecia^s thought good to call it (...), as also (...), that is to say, Os
Cuneiforme, or Cuneale: since that between the bones of the head, and upper
iawe, What is called B^re.
it is intruded like a wedge. The barbarous sort call it Basillare, because it
substrateth the brain, no otherwise then a ground or foundation thereto. For
in the The description of this Cun^all bone or Sphenoides.
midst of the foundation or ground of the brain, it sits, compassed about
withthe vj. Suture, which comprehends in it this whole bone: beside the fore
part, where it ends at the viij. Seame. But in the same seat it is thick,
conteinyng The (...) or cave of Sphenoides.
within it a hollow cave, which is all one with the cauitie of Os frontis, in
which we have said the air drawn by the nostrels, to be retained, until it
slide from thence into this hollow place: the matter of which, helps the
brain in forgyng animal spirits, if Collumbus his opinion newly inverted, in
that respect, be A new opinion of the A^mall spirits.
any thing credible, as will more at large hereafter, when we come to the
animal History, appear. This den or hollow cave is large, and commonly
vacant in all persons, though in some (perhaps) you shall see it replete with
a certain Spongie kind of substance. The cover thereof is a hard and thick
scale, which Galen likeneth to a searse, as though it were full of holes, to
strain the moist matter of the brain: which Collumbus utterly denies. But
this note, that he Cap. supra.
says, in the midst of the inner part of the skull this bone has a certain
propper The Cell in Sphenoides.
Cell or corner, in which for the purpose, is a Glandule aptly sited to receive
The Glandule receiuyng phlegm.
the same humiditie, which thence afterward, makes recourse unto the Palate
and nostrels, the ways of which one, have sufficient scope into the other, as
shall be said. Moreover the sides of this bone, where it beholds the hollowes
of the temples, have two parts, inwardly hollow, but outwardly conuexed, or
imbossed. Finally in the outward part of this bone at the foundation of the
scull where the teeth called Grinders are fastened, are four Processes, that
is to say, on each The Processes of the C^neall bone called (...) Whence spryng
the Muscles that shut the mouth.
side two, spreadyng like unto the wings of Battes, called therefore by the
Grekish name, (...). In the midst of these processes is a deep cauitie
whence arise the Muscles that serve to shut the mouth.

The eight bone of the head is placed about the middle of the foundation of Os
The de^neation of the viij. bone of the head.
front is, seiungated from the Cuneale bone, in the inner seat of the scull, by
the vij. Suture: but outwardly endyng at the second and third bone of the upper
iawe. And besides the hedge or division of the nostrels that it makes, it
stretches no less, to the constitution of the seat of the smellyng Organs:
for the which cause Why the viij, bone is full of holes.
of smellyng, it is diversely distinct with many little holes, and of his own
substance thin. Wherefore it is called (...) for the liknes of the thing,
being The bone Ithmoides and why it is so called.
a Searse that it aptly represents: by virtue of the which, since we
naturally re ceiue the Faculty of smelling, we must gather thus the ground of
our argument, that a man loses the same, or at lest has it dully, laboring
in continual destillations The reason why in ye ^sease called Co^ the sense of
smellyng is lost.
of the head, and Coriza. For thereby these holes are stopped, and the spirits
deteyned, so that the savor of nothing can be conveyed in, or at lestwise,
sensibly discerned and judged. Galen says these holes are liker the celles of
a Lib. 8. de Us. part.
sponge, because they are crooked: affirmyng that Dura Membrana is also
accordyngly perforated. Neither (says he) is it only a servant for the
receipt of savors, but also an officer, to vnbourden the brain of Flegmaticke
excrements. Which, neither could be avoided through those holes, neither any
vapor of smell ascend, unless nature did puruey the same, both by inspiration,
and expiration. How yt sauo^ts are discerned.
For by the slyding in and receipt of inspiration, is moved the dignotio^ of
sauors, and again by the force of expiration, excretion of superfluities is
made: the vehemency How supersl^ities are purged.
of the spirits halyng out with them the noisome excreme^tes. In the middle
region of this bone, goes out a high and thin Process, seueryng that
passage into two parts or sides, where the instruments of smellyng are
situated: How the hedge or particio^ in the nose is made.
which also into the nostrels discendyng, constituteth the hedge, or partition
of the nose.

After this manner be the bones of the head naturally, and diuisibly co^strued.
But Lib. 9. Us. part.
Galen thinks not good to number this bone among the parts of the head, but
of the nostrels: if Fuchsius conjecture, in explicating this hard and depraved
place (as he terms it) of Galen, (...) etc. be acceptable. As Fuchs. Lib. 1.
cap. 10.
they that be disposed to prove may read in the x. Chap. of his first book.

BUt among the bones of the body, there are certain destitute of propper
circu^scriptions and ends, which nevertheless are of the expert Anathomistes
described, The Iugall bone is both a portion of the bones of ye head and of the
upper iawe.
even as though they were peculiar bones: neither not unworthily among the
number of the rest accounted. Of which sort, is the bone called (...), (...),
and (...), in Latin Iugale: for as much as they are the parts of two Bones,
yoked together: being constituted of two processes: whereof the one springs
Col. Lib. 1. cap. 6.
from the upper iawe, under the small corner of the eye, and the other from The
description of the Iugall bone.
that part of the temple bones, where the auditorie hole is sited. These two
processes meting after a superinflected manner, are converted and knit together
by an oblique Suture. And so fashioneth one bone, like unto a yoke, or rather a
bridge, The first utility of the Iugall bone.
as I said before. Which is (as it were) a propugnacle, decreed by nature for
the safe lodgyng of the temporal Muscle. Wherefore by bounchyng or heuyng
outward, it makes for the purpose a hollow passage underneath it, not being of
it self soft to receive injury lightly, but hard, strong, and almost Solid,
to repulse each damage boldly. Nor yet altogether in it self destitute of
hollownes. Wherein The Iugall bone wants not his marcy, and therefore has
some hollowes.
Vesalius is of Collumbus reproved, for affirmyng the hollow portion of this
bone to be void of marey altogether. And in giuyng this reprehension to
Vesalius, of necessity he biteth Galen, who says, for as much as it moves
not, neither Galen Us. part. 11.
has it need by hollownes to he made lighter: but is strong, thick, and
solid, void of marey. Leon^rdus Fuchsius speaks much of the great providence
of Lib. 1. cap. 8.
nature used, in placyng the temporal Muscle under this Iugall coagmentation.
The dangers that ensue by the hurt of the temporal Muscle.
For among all other Muscles, chiefly this (if it be hurt) causes (says he)
co^uulsions, fevers, caros, and dotage, for the vicinitie of the brain, which
only the bone and membrans parts, and of the original production of
sinews, of whose Surcles, Why such dangers are their incident.
it enjoys often the sensibilitie, as in copious order shall hereafter be said.
Beyond all this, the Jugall bone bone was framed for a second use, and
utility. The second utility of the Jugall bone.
That from him might proceed, and depend the mansorious, or eating Muscle. As
other where is noted.

BUt before we take in hand to treat of the bones of the upper iawe, whilst
yet Of the Ossicles or little Bones sited in the Organ of hearing.
opportunity is offered, let us a little discourse y^ Ossicles, and little bones
of the Auditorie organe. Of which, all the old writers before the time of
Vesalius, were either ignorant, or else neglected to write. And of these little
Bones, the later Galen knew not these Ossicles. The number of these Ossicles.
writers that have invented them, have numbered two and of them only made their
descriptions. But Realdus Collumbus, since that time, a man no less expert To
those two which (...). inverted Collu^bus has added a third.
then learned, has by his singular industry, and narrow search, found (as he
reports) a third among the rest. Which three orderly to decyffer, consider
that, among the bones of temples, there is a certain process (as I touched
before) at the foundation of the brain going forth, and extended after the
manner of a beam, Where these Ossicles are found.
with a sharp end, which is within hollow, like a cave or crooked Laberinthe,
about the middle region whereof, are these Ossicles annexed to their Membrans.
The Ossicles of y^ organ of hearing are wrapped in Membran.
The way unto them is by the Auditorie passage. Of which, the first that
appears in the Interior part of the hole, is a little long one, not unlike the
bone of the The figure of the first Ossicle.
thighe, although in consideration of the end of the thighe, somewhat unlike:
neither is the head thereof depressed, but sharp poynted: this is of the one
part. But in the other part, it has a head long, and round. Furthermore it
has two Processes, like those which in the thighe we call the Rotatorie
Processes: the sharp and slender part thereof, is fastened in a slender
Membran, which reaches both to it, and that likewise that follows. The other
part, which is thicker, and endewed with a head, serves to shake the same
Membran after ye manner of a Timpan, The use of y^ head of the first Ossicle
Wherefore y^ first Ossicle is called a Mallet.
as the authors term it. Wherefore it is called a Mallet or Hammer: not for the
likeness, but the office sake:

Even as the other that follows, they will attribute to the similitude of a
Why the second Ossicle is called a Stedte.
stedy, or anueld, for that it serves in like turn, receiuyng the motion or
stroke (after a certain strange order) of the Mallet lately declared. And
this is the second Ossicle, called by the name of a stedy or anueld: being
somewhat thick The description of the second Ossicle
in the upper part, which shows the plain part of a stedy, and ends in two
slender and sharp Processes, as it were two legs: of the which, one is sent
to the third bone (which Collumbus has added and not superstitiously invented)
being in the said Membran above recited, and to the other serving, detained,
and placed. This he compares, for the likeness of the thing, having two roots,
one longer The second is in figure like to one of the Stynders. The use of
these two Ossicles in the Organ of hearing.
and slenderer, an other thicker and shorter, to one of the teeth called
Grynders: not deprauyng it of the other name, for the office sake. Neither
rashly has nature ordained these ij. bones or rather Ossicles, so in their
thicker part to respect, and mete together. For when by the motion of the air,
hearing happens, the stroke thereof is brought in through the passage, to these
little bones: by which again is made a certain repercussio^, to the discerning
of the second that is made, by which means it is judged. Wherefore it is
requisite, that by y^ yelding of the Membran How heatyng happens.
these bones should move, and knock together. As when the first bone,
percussed by the stroke of the air, repercuteth the other in manner of a
mallet: Wherefore the second that suffers this, is endewed with the name, and
office of a stedy: and where they are knit together, a crustie Cartilage does
cover them.

The third, which only Collumbus mentions, lies in a certain little Cell
Cap. 7.
somewhat round, within the Auditorie cauitie. Wherefore it must needs also be
The situation of the third Ossicle of hearing (...) by Collumbus.
appertinent to the Organ of hearing: it is both hollow, and also notably
perforated, imitatyng the figure of a Stirrope: only in this differryng, that
it wants those holes, that Stirropes have to be bound thereby to their
saddles. But in stead The third Ossicle is compared to a Stirrope.
thereof, it bearcth out a certain round head which approaches the process of
the bone called the Stedie. Wherefore, when these little Ossicles among them
selves are conjoined, and colligated after this manner, it is no case
doubtful, to deem That these three Ossicles serve to the Organ of hearing.
them all serviceable to the Organ of hearing. Neither is there any question to
the contrary in that to be demanded. But this we must note, that whereas
Vesalius affirms them, because of their likeness, Solid: Collumbus contrarily,
will have them Concauous and hollow, according to their fashion in bigness, and
litlenes. That is, that they be inwardly Porie, or Spongie, conteinyng like
their proportion, a small quantity of marey: especially the first (...). but
the third, for the exceedyng The Ossicles of hearing are (...) Solid, the third
excepted.
tenuitie, to be Solid, he in no wise denies. If any man be desirous to
observe (...) administration of these Ossicles, we are taught to severe the
bones of the The administration of the Ossicles of hearing.
Auditorie passage lightly, and divide or cut them by little and little, so that
semblably (as it were in scrapyng sort) openyng the way, till the cauitie be
uncovered, and that you come unto the middle region (almost) of that Cell, nigh
the Membran which there covers and fills the little corners of that cauitie,
you shall see with small search, the form and manner of the thing before
described. And The description of the upper (...) promised.
this is sufficient, to certify you of the small Ossicles, or little Bones of
the Auditorie Organ. Lib. 3. de Oss.


NOw we will convert our talk to the fashion, making, and construction of Why
the upper iawe is not made of one only bone Col. Lib. cap. 8.
the upper iawe, called of the Grecians (...) or (...). Which, as testifies
Galen, consists not of one only bone, but of many, whereby the better it The
explication of the upper iawe is difficulte.
may endure, and not to be altogether afflicted by the annoyaunce of some one
part. Col. therefore says, the upper iawe is easy by the poynting of the
finger to be demonstrated, but no bone or part more difficult then it to
explicate in words: in The Crocodile moves his upper iawe.
respect of the manner and figure, how many, and with what bones it is made: as
also how it is from the other parts of the head distinguished. But first note
that the upper iawe, amongst all kind of creatures, is exe^pt from natural
motion, the Crocodile excepted: whose upper iawe is only mouable, but the
neither still Collumbus first (...) the (...) say to move either of the jaws
at rest: and the Popiniaye, who not only moves both at once, but seperately
also one after an other: which is notable truly to be observed, if we
searchyngly enquire amongst the deepest secrets of nature: since that one
kind of creature varieth from all others so plainly, and in such a notable
point. But only thus, as says the aforenamed Author, we must content our
selves to see the effect: although we be ignorant of the cause. And very vain
it were to contend upon the Why the upper iawe of man was not made to move.
upper iawe of man, for want of motion, or to search the cause why (like to
the Crocodile) it styrreth not: since no commodity (but in ridiculous manner
to defourme the face of man) might ensue by contraction, and of ugly wrinkles
appearance, which of necessity must corrupt the form of the countenance,
being now to the beholders so acceptable, and pleasant. But to our matter. In
the creatyng of (...) nature had care of the comely form.


Realdus Collumbus acco^pteth not sufficient, the reason I did lately extract
from Galen. Which is, that the upper iawe should not only be made of one bone,
but of many, lest annoyau^ce in one part might bring disturbau^ce to all the
rest. But A second cause why the upper iawe was not made of one bone only.
also (says he) to the end that by being made of many, the Ligamentes produced
from his Sutures, might enter the construction of the Muscles, to make their
beginning more firm and sure: in like sort, as in other places, they also are
confirmed by the Ligamentes, from Appendances proceedyng. Fuchsius writes thus
Lib. r. cap. xij.
that it were necessary the upper iawe should be of many Bones constitute,
because A third cause why the upper iawe is made of many bones.
it is not every where of like Soliditie and thicknes, but here gristelly,
there Solid, and in that place Spongie.

To give you an apt number, of how many Bones this superior iawe is naturally
Of the (...) of the bones of the upper iawe.
construed, I am half astonyed. For neither (as I confess) could I find at
any time to be satisfied my self therein, nor amongst authorities, such
congrue^t This (...) stands upon no deep point.
opinions as might incite me to subscribe unto: only as it is said I will set
down, take and leave at your pleasure. Besides that Galen in diverse places,
has diuersisied In introducto^io s^e Medico.
his own opinions, yet at length both he, and Vesalius after him have
consented, ^ib. 11. de V^. part. Lib. de Oss. cap. 1.
to make the number of these Bones xij. that is to say, on each side six. But
Realdus says xiij. as he has ever observed: that is v. on either side, and
one odd. Vesal. ^b. 1. cap. 9. Reald. Col. Lib 1. cap. 8.
Which is last of all to be declared: but first note how these bones by three
notab^. The description of of the bones of the upper iawe in general.
Seames, are separated from the bones of the head. First by the vj. which
downward from the extremity of the Coronall Seame, is carried under Iugale to
the extreme teeth, and ended at the Palate. The^ by the viij. Seame, which,
beginning at the hollowes of the temples, and creepyng upward, ouerthwartly
deuideth the face in the top of the nose. Last of all with that short and
oblique Seame, ^rewith those two Processes are connitted together which
co^stitute the bone placed The (...) (...) of ye the bones of the upper iawe.
over the temporal Muscle, called Iugale. These bones so seperately have their
circumscriptions after this sort.

The first, whose fashion is diverse, is connitted to the ioynyng and metyng of
The first bone of the upper iawe.
four others. For in the hinder part it sends forth a Process, which
fashioneth the one portion of the Iugall bone, being conjoined by an oblique
Suture (as we have said before) to the Process produced from the temporal
bone. Afterward, in the hollowes of the temples, by the benefit of the
Cuneiformed or Cuncall bone, it is connitted to the vj. Suture, thence again,
downwardes reflected to the hi^most teeth. It complecteth also part of the
browe, and seat of the eye in the upper Vesal. ibid.
part. But in the neither part, with a notable largenes, fastened to yt fourth
bone with a Suture evident in three places. That is to say, in the hollow of
the temples under the Iugall bone: again in the fore region of the iawe, nere
the cheek: and in the lower seat of the eye. And thus to say briefly with
shorter circumstaunce. This first bone, is first connitted to the temporal
Process in the Iugall part, secondly, to the Cuneiformed bone, thyrdly to the
bone of the forehead, and fourthly, to the fourth of the same iawe.

The second bone of the upper iawe is of all the rest smallest, and like a
thynne Col. ibid.
scale, in the inner or greater corner of the eye consistyng: where lies a
little piece The description of the second bone of the upper iawe.
of flesh, which was created for this purpose, that the pituitous excrements
expurged from the head unto the eyes, might thereby be expressed to the
nostrels. There grows those abscesses which the Grecia^s call (...), which,
being neglected Where the dissease called (...) chances.
in Chirurgicall administration, exchau^geth to a lachrimall Fistule,
penetratyng this bone. Galen says the excrementall purgyngs of the brain, are
received ^b. 10. Us. part. cap. 11.
by this piece of flesh in this angle sited: to the end they might not fall
unto the How the excre^entes of the brain fall to the ^ostrels.
cheeks, but be intruded to the nostrels. This little bone is ended in ye upper
part at the viij. Suture, which is often said to divide Os frontis from the
upper iawe: being here connitted by the intercission of that Suture, to the
bone of the forehead: from which Seame, an other likewise after the hinder side
of this Ossicle, discendeth: Vesal. ibid.
which creeping by the inferior parts of the Ossicle, speedely also ascends,
through the Anteriour side thereof upwards, to the same Suture, that deuideth
the upper iawe from the bone of the forehead. To say briefly, therefore, this
third bone meteth in the upper part with Os frontis, in the hinder part with
the third bone of the iawe, but in the inferior, and Anteriour part, it is
together with the fourth bone of the iawe.

The third, which Galen calls Os malae, is greater the^ the rest, but of
strange The third bone of the upper iawe Col. ibid.
form, and diuersty Seamed. This conteiueth and in it holds all the teeth
on the upper side. Wherein with Collumbus, we must needs reprehend Galen, who
Us. ^ut. 11.
has exempted from these, the foremost called the Incissorie teeth: as though
between (...) reproved in his descriptions of the bone of the cheek.
the Incissorie, and Dog teeth, were some interceptiue Seame recurre^t,
which, as the same Collumbus affirms, is in Apes, and Dogs only to be
found. Col. (...).
The borders of the cheek bone.
But this third bone truly is distinguished from the first bone of the iawe, by
the common Suture, creepyng through the midst of the face, under the eye
liddes^, into the roundell of the eye: where we say, the first bone recited is
connitted to this third: vpwardly it is seiu^gated from Os frontis by the viij.
Suture. In the inner angle of the eye, it differs from the second bone by the
line, that compasses all that Ossicle. But in what part it beholds the nose,
it disioyneth from the bones thereof by the Suture from the viij. deseendyng:
and under the Palate, from that bone which we will call and number for the
fifth, by a great and notable Seame, which marches ouerthwartly (says Realdus)
through ye Palate: where also you may find the line, that through the
longitude of the Palate is deduced, rising vpwardes between the incissorie
teeth unto the bottom of the nose, where the intercissio^ of the nostrels is
made: by the means of which assurgent line, this present bone is into a right
and a left part divided. In children the tra^suerse Suture in the Palate, which
ouerthwartly on both sides ends at the Dog tooth, is in The (...) Suture
vnde^ the Palate is only in childr^,
elder persons quite abolished, so that the tracke thereof may not be found.
Lastly upon Sphenoides or the Cuneall bone this bordreth, where the vj. Suture,
after it has divided the first bone from the temporalles, departs into a
large cauitie, where it is dissipated and wasted, until it approach nere to the
outer teeth. Besides all this, and that it is in diverse places Spo^gious and
perforated, this third bone The sub^asice of the check bone.
or Os malae, whereof we make this relation, conteyneth in it self a very large
cauitie, tenderly walled on each side with thin scally bones, for no other
purpose the^ The large cauitie of ye check bone and to what use.
for lightness so ordained of nature: so far as hitherto is noted. By these
Bones hitherto described we may gather: what bones do necessarily come to yt
constitutyng Of what bone^ the seat of the eye consists.
of ye seat of the eye. For Os frontis makes the upper part, and the half of
ye inner angle: the rest of it is added by a portion of the third bone, which
is joined with the Bones of the nose: the inferior, and outer corner the first
bone wholly lays. In that appertains to the interior part of the eye, the
second bone, Ithmoides, and the Cuneall bone do minister their material aid
the which seat o^ the eye, because it is exculped round, the Junior sort do
call a Roundell.

The fourth bone of the upper iawe Collumbus calls that, with Vesalius
writes Cap. 8.
Suture, which we have named to cut the Palate ouerthwartly, endyng where the
Cap. 1.
What is the iii^. bone of the upper iawe, and the description thereof.
nostrels stretch into the jaws. It is divided furthermore with the Cuneall
Processes, which we have compared to the wyngs of Battes: by the benefit of
the vj. Suture runnyng to the insides of the teeth. The Processes of Ithmoid^s
like the wyng^ of battes.


The fifth bone constituteth the upper part of the nose, which is the true bonye
part, being double, but in the lower part is gristely: wherefore neither stroke,
nor The (...) bone o^ the upper iawe.
fall, may show any such rigor thereto (although it be very incident to such
casualties) as if it had been otherwise made of bonny co^struction. Therefore
that part The utility of ye Cartilaginous constructio^ of the nostrels.
of the nose that is bonny, is by a middle Seame to a right and left part
distinguished, being connitted to Os frontis between the brows by the viij.
Seame, often before mentioned: but in departing downward on either part, it is
joined with the third bone by the common Suture of both. Again in the inner
part, where both The end of the fifth bone.
these bones are united with the common line, they cleave to that division,
which we have said to be part of the bone that assimulateth a searse. And thus
much as touching ten of the xiij. bones of the upper iawe, for according to the
description of the v. rehearsed, and appertine^t to one side, you have no less
to attribute to the other side also, by which computation your number shall be
true.

The x^. bone, which it has liked Collumbus to add, is sited above the
midst The description of of the xj. bone of the upper (...).
and inside of ye Palate, within the streites of the nose, and is severed from
that part that touches the head, after the whole longitude thereof, by a broad
cleft, whose biforked or cloven foundation, where it is thicker, lies to the
Cuneall bone, as also extended to the constitution of the lower part of the
nostrels division. Which notwithstanding (he says) is easy to be divided. The
form thereof imitateth the fashion of a plough share. The xj. bone is likened
to a plow share without a handle, and with an inde^ted or unequal edge.


To these may be added a xij. and xiij. being two spongy fashioned bones
collacated on the inside of the nose, where the filth is retained: and these
sometime through erosion (as diverse Practitioners can avouch, their patientes
labouryng with the Spanish dissease) fall down, and are ruined. The Spongie
bones in ye nose are easily eaten away with the Spanish dissease. Collumbus
always found xiij. bones in the upper iawe


I have (right willing Reader) in the delineation of these bones, imitated
somewhat narrowly the judgment of Collumbus, because, in the invention of the
upper iawe bones, he triumphs over all before his time. Nevertheless, if any
man of grave judgment, shall deem it needles to contend upon such scrupulous,
and sharp poynted division, as this or in the like respect, I will not resist:
only this I say, the truth is to be embraced, and the true inue^tor
accordyngly reverenced. Thus, the upper iawe decyffered, you note how of many
bones it is construed, and so, as the right perfect Anathomiste finds
sufficient travail to distinguish them aptly.

In the neither iawe it is nothing so: for although Galen Lib. iiij. de
Anatomicis The neither iawe is made of one bone and not two as Galen would.
administrationibus, would have it consist of two bones, as in Dogs, and
other Beasts, yet it is certain that of one bone is made the neither iawe,
without distinction, or dissolution: except in Children only, who by having in
the utmost Exception that in children it is two
part of the chinne a lineall ascense, perhaps incited the other opinion, of
the like being also in all sorts. But to be in Children Collumbus avouches it
expedient, Lib. 1. cap. 9.
only for the exiture of Ligame^tes, needful to the Muscles in those parts To
what end the neither iawe is two in children.
adjacent. The fashion of the neither iawe is Orbicular like a half long
Circle, the utmost ends whereof are ascendently reflected. Neither has nature,
as in other The figure of the neither iawe.
creatures, so long created it, since hands has man to reach at need, but
Why man's face is round.
beasts, by the length of their jaws, metely apprehend every thing with their
mouth. Correspo^dent to the comley figure of the face (also), is the rou^dnes
thereof, Why the neither iawe of beasts is so long.
whereas the heads of other beasts are more depressed, and flatted, decent
for the long shape of their jaws. Hard also it behooved this neither iawe of
man to be, for the strong use and actions that it has: yet, together with the
hardness, it Why the neither iawe consiste of an hard bone.
retayneth not such Solliditie, as might be an impediment to the light and
ready motion thereof, but has on each side propper cauities with marey
infarced, though (in man) not so much backwardes sited, as in fourefooted
creatures. And except those concaued places, the other parts are Solid, and
very durable: yeldyng before in the thynne, called (...), hollowes, propper to
the conteinyng of Muscles. Wherefore serve the cauitie of the neither iawe.
At either end of this inferior iaw are two Processes, as it were ij. horns,
whereof the first is slender, and poynted, receiuyng the tendon of the temporal
Muscle: The ij. Processes of ye neither iawe.
But the other rising with a neck, and headed, transuersly is inserted to the
The use of the sharp Process.
angle correspondent to his proportion: being so Articulated with the bones of
The description of the second Process.
the temples, betwixt the root of Iugalis, and the Auditorie hole. The head of
this Process, and the cauitie it enters, is covered with a crusty Cartilage:
and betwixt The use of ye Cartilages seruyng to the second Process, and his
cauitie.
ye hollow, and the same Process, intercideth a certain soft and mouable
Gristle, which serves not only after the manner of a Ligament, to contain and
hold the same in his propper Cell, but also makes the motion of this manner
knittyng more easy, and swift, without metyng and frettyng of the Bones. The
fore part Why the neither iawe is roughe in the fore part.
of this iawe is not only rough, whereby the Muscles there might more
cleuyngly grow, but also has his propper holes for the entraunces of veins,
arteries, The utility of his holes.
and Nerves.

Moreover as the upper iaw, so has this (beside those holes) very many Celles
and cauities, which, how propper they are to the holdyng of the teeth (so
necessary The Celles of the teeth.
instruments for the susteinyng of nature) who knows not. These Celles (
Collumbus says) in aged persons after the fall of teeth, are done away, and
shut up so, that once among many other times, he reports he found not the
places of When the Celles of the teeth do grow up.
two or three: so were they, and with such Soliditie shut up.

AS touching the teeth, it is certain, that the number of them in all persons
The n^ber of the te^h are (...) ^ame.
is not agreeable. For some men have xxxij. teeth, some 28 others 26. and diverse
diversely: the last recited Author writteth, that most commonly they are numbered
Cold (...). 1, cap. 10^
32. that is, xvj. in the upper iawe, and no less in the neither. Which we will
The number of ye teeth for the mo^ part.
speak of. These xvj. on a side (therefore) are wont to be divided into three
parts: that is to say, Molares, or Maxillares, Canini, and Incissorij. Which
more plainly The division of the teeth.
to decysfre, note that the foremost four are named Incissory, as touching
their offices, The Incisorie teeth what kind^ ones and why they are made.
so ordained to cut, and make the first bitte in taking of meat, being broad,
flat, and sharp, like the fashion of a Chissell, broader beneth then above.
Next on each side of these grows Canini dentes, being in either of the jaws
two, called The dog teeth their use and ^ymologie.
so, for that they are round, and poynted as the Dogs: these break the bitte
first, received in by the incisorie teeth.

Now of the Grinders, called Maxillares, or Molares, are five on each side,
both The teeth called Grinders.
above and beneth. Which, according to their names, are also made to grynd, and
freat a sunder finely the meat received into the mouth, no otherwise then as
the mill stones that grynde the grain, so smally these mince it in making ye
chewyng, being for the purpose broad, hard, great, and roughe: why they are
roughe Why they are toughe.
who has not the reason, since the weight and hardness of Milstones suffices
no^, without pecking and making rough, as often as they become smooth. So these
teeth (besides) are large and great the longer to endure, and the easier (by
their breadth) A reason of their bredthe.
to conteyne the meat in breakyng.

Hardness to the teeth is a most convenient property (which they have not
scantly, Why the teeth are so hand.
but plain thereby to be distinguished for all other bones in the body) not
only requiryng such exceedyng Soliditie for the swift diminishyng of the meat,
but principally, that to the bodies use they might detract a longer time. Which
neither That hardness was not sufficient to (...) the^ sau^ that they grow till
the (...) age.
would have been sufficient, had not nature prouide^tly, and right prudently
foresene the same, by enlargyng their growyng almost perpetually: that as they
daily wear, so they might daily renew, and be increased in their places.
Between every tooth are evident distinctions, or hedges, ordained in the
substance of the Gal. Lib. 5. de commed. secundu^ Loc.
bone. Wheresore (as we have said before) the manner of their situation in the
The teeth are in the jaws Articulated by Gompholis.
jaws is named Gomphosis.

It is furthermore to be considered, that the implantation of the teeth is not
in one, as an other shows. For the Incissorie, and Dog teeth are simply
rooted, but ye Grynders not so: for they of the neither iawe have two, but the
upper (commonly) Of the roots of the teeth.
with iij. roots are endewed: sometime also (though seldom) the upper have
The Incisory and Dog teeth are simply rooted.
four, and the neither iij. Those next unto the Dog teeth (I mean of the
Grynders) above, may be found with two holes infired, then, there aunswerable
mates The upper ^rinders have always (...) ro^tes then the neither, and the
reason why.
below have but one, and those shorter then the other: so that the superior,
surmount the inferior in the length, and number of roots: because those are
dependent, these ever sitting in their Celles: neither marvel though ye
hindmost Grinders Why the (...) grinders have ^orter holds.
have shorter holds then have the rest, considering that their use and labor
is less, in Leuigatyng the meat, or whatsoever is else received into the
mouth. What differences are between the teeth and y^ other bones.


But now to speak somewhat generally of all the teeth, we say, by the probable
assertions of the best forewriters, that from all other Bones (to the parts of
man's body appertinent) the teeth do plainly differ iij. manner of ways.

First in their hardness, which we have somewhat touched before, necessary to
Comminution of meat, so be more expeditely done.

For the second difference I infer their sensibilitie, wherein they exceed
them How the teeth are made sensible.
Nerves described) they obtain, by the access of certain Surcles from the
third coniugatio^ of the Sinews of the brain, disseminated. Which, creepyng
in at the Why other bones have no sense.
roots of the teeth, give unto their substance the worthy faculty of
feelyng: whereas other Bones admit no portion of Nerves into them, although
diverse pass The nerves that runn^ through y^ bones of y^ Scull and Vertebres
give them no sensibilitie.
through them as some do through the Scull and Vertebres, for the transsusion
of sense into other parts. Their sensibilitie (notwithstanding) is not to be
attributed to their universal parts, as those also that are already in sight,
and prominent forth of the Goummes: for such places of the teeth Collumbus
proves (by the How much of y^ tooth has sense. Why y^ part with in the Bumes
feleth.
testimony of his samiliar Iho. Baptista Mazzolarius) to be void of sense, and
so much as is infixed within the Goummes to be perfect sensible, by virtue of
the Nerve extended to that region. Wherefore their Assertions are odious, and
most loathsome to answer, who fantastically feign, that all Bones are
sensible, or else the teeth also destitute of any feelyng: as though it were
as much requisite for the Solid parts of the body, and such as, no otherwise
then the frame work of a house, do supporte, the other members should retain
as delicate sense as other parts and Organs of the body, whose functions
without the same, were frustrate, for who knows not (as I have also other
where said) how inco^modious a thing That it behooved not the bones to feel.
it were, if the sense of feelyng should be imparted to the bones: whilst so
no man might endure half the vigor of his bodies motion, without intolerable
pain in all parts. Contrariwise, who doteth so much as that he will not know,
the That the teeth have sense necessarily.
transfusion of sense into the teeth to be necessarily taken: that thereby they
might reveal unto the common wits each outward, or inward annoyaunce, which
might corrupt or destroy their propper substance, either by eruption,
erosion, heat, or cold, considering how needful they are to sustain nature,
and how How y^ teeth are decayed.
necessary to the comely form of the countenance. And we see it happens (many
times) that they are ruined, by such cruciable torments of Rheumaticke
incursions, or other like affectes, that no Medicin may prevail to procure the
patie^ts ease, till the same dolorous tooth be extirped and plucked up by the
roots: at which separation, and departing from the sensible Surcles or twigges
of the Sinewe aforesaid, It Nerves be inserted to y^ roots of the teeth, they
must needs have sense.
how paynfull it is, I refer it to the sentence of them that have tasted the
bitterness thereof. And if any man will wilfully run in such absurdity, as
that he will deny the insertio^ of Nerves within the roots of the teeth, to be
of nature ordained for any purpose, let him still lie drowned in dreamyng
doubts, till his senses be sopt in solitary sobbes, to pine in powting, as
the Poet feyneth the transformation of Crgnus into the shape of a Swanne: for
none are so obstinate Quid. Lib. 1.
as the ignorant: the wise are always consentyng unto truth. Wherefore this to
them. Galen (who feelyng the smart sometime him self) allows in the teeth
Lib. 5. de compsecundum Lo.
not only dolor, but also pulsation. Whereto Realdus readely agreeyng,
professes The teeth have pain and pulsation.
by public dissection to have rightly invented the cause: since to every tooth
not only a Nerve, but a Ueyne also, and an Artery, are preferred: so that by
virtue The cause of pulsation and pain how they feel and are noutished.
of the sinews the teeth feel, by the coming to of the Artery they have
pulsation, and by the fellowship of the vein are nourished: whereby they
continually The third difference between the teeth and other bones.
increase: which makes the last of the three differences, whereby I
distinguished the nature of the teeth from other bones. That is to say, that:

They are not only nourished, but also perpetually grow: whereas the bones How
long the teeth do grow.
And according to the sentence of Galen, they augment, and are nourished the
space of forty and five years. But in Lib. 5. de comp. Med. secundum loca, he
says, they increase almost the whole term of man's life. And thus much of the
triple fourmed difference. Now I will return again to the peculiar properties
of the teeth. How the roots of the teeth are ^erforated, and to what end.


Among which, it is worthy to be noted, that all the roots of the teeth are
perforated, and persed through into the Celles or Cauities within the said
roots: which are very little, but most notable, to comprehend more aptly the
parts, whereby they are nourished, for at these holes the teeth receive, both
the Vein, Artery, and Sinew lately spoken of. Which three vessels, penetrate
and pearse into yt little cauities and foundations of the teeth, where they are
complicate, and among Of the Membran in the roots of (...) teeth.
them selves beget a certain little Membran, which sometime receives of the
Rheumaticke matter that from the brain distilleth: which so often inciteth the
ingent dolours, and torments of the teeth, which seldom cease to persevere
with How vehement Pains do vapp^ in the teeth.
them, as long as that Humor in the said Membran is deteyned: or until of the
Fluxion by purging the brain, the cause be aptly consumed.

Moreover, for so much as apperteineth to the generation of teeth, it is
worthily approved, that not at that very instant when they issue forth of the
Goummes, they are engendered: but rather the root of their generation is in the
infant, whilst That the teeth a^ (...) ut the mothers womb although they
appear not.
it is swathed in the mothers Matrice, first begone, if experience may be a
testimony sufficient to satisfy us, or the authority of Collumbus credible:
the which roots, or begynnynges, preordained of nature for the after growyng
of teeth, he protests Lib. 1. cap. x.
Collumbus tried it in new borne and in such Abortures tures as came vij or
viij. mouethes ere bite time.
to have inuensed many times, and so ost as he had occasion to search in
children that never were extract, or brought to light, as also in Abortes,
bearing short the time of xij. or viij. months.

Furthermore, the first Dentition of children brings forth Appendances, The
teeth hau^ Appendaunces which fall away.
which in Process of time (for the most part) fall away, and others with more
sollisitie are produced in their places, which seldom so easily fall again.
Wherefore in persons of riper years I reckon no Appendances: Notwithstanding
that in some, the fall of teeth are renewed at many years.

It needs not to be inferred, since therein experience instructs each man
sufficiently, The last vt^litie of the teeth.
how greatly they avail to the modulation of speech. And that principally, the
Incissorie teeth: which besides the above rehearsed, have this property: How
we prove this last utility.
as in persons full of days the like example is explaned, in whom, the loss
of one or ij. (...) teeth, yeldeth a perpetual maime to their accustomed
vtteraunce. And this of teeth suffices.

BUt since in a later Writer is expected a newer style, and that I not only It
will be expected that I omitt^ nothing, since I have promised y^ whole History
of man.
profess more appertinent prolixitie then the rest of our Nation, that before
have travailed herein, but also to have for my guides the most princely
Anathomistes of latter years: If I thus for sooke, or break of my description
of the head, in professyng to open I should but shut, and in meaning to
discover I should but How necessary is the knowledge of the perforations of the
Scul^.
hyde the light. For, as touching the Holes of the head, and such Perforated
places as yield no less pleasure to the passage of Veins, Nerves, and
Arteries, then they infer delight by inducyng to those parts sense,
nourishment, although the ancient sect of Anathomistes, and Galen himself
have pretermitted occasion to Galen write not of the holes in the Scull, that
is (...).
enterlace among their other discourses the description, and offices of these
holes in the head: ^et Vesalius gives the onset in this enterprise: who^
Collumbus has followed: no less lawdyng the dexterity of his wit, and
singular invention. I therefore (findyng in them both so much matter for the
purpose as I could wish, and the tenor of their treatise to present such a
sum of excellency, as that the ignorance of this case, brings forth no
small obscurity to the understanding of the History of Veins, Arteries, and
Nerves:) concluded with my self, to imitate How incommodions is y^ ignorance
of these Perforations.
the type of their Assertions, as also (in other cases) I have written with
their consentes, as it seems worthy. Wherefore, considering that nature
created the bones for the cause of the other parts of the body, as we have
said, it was also That bones were made for y^ cause of other parts.
requisite, that so they might be fourmed, as not only the other parts might
aptly be fastened unto them, but somewhere also to penetrate their substance,
for their safer defense. Which nature wisely wayeng, no otherwise, then as her
accustomed providence is apparaunt in all things, has in the Bones diversely,
here, and there scattred Holes, for the seruictable entrau^ce of the aforesaid
Vessels: Why the bones are (...).
as in the bones of the head are to be described manifestly. Amongst which Of
the holes serving to the vij. conjugation of Sinews.
briefly to enter, it behooves first to begin at those, which serve to the
seven pair of Sinews proceedyng from the brain: for as much as, of all other
Sinews in the body, or produced from any part else, they are most noble. Col.
Lib. 1. cap. 11.


In the inner seat therefore of the scull, where Os Cuneal^ is insculped like
the The holes (...) to the (...) conjugation of Nerves.
Processes supereminent of the same seat, are two Holes forced through y^ same
Cuneall bone, that is, a left and a right, stretching into the seats of the
eyes, and into their roots penetratyng, nere to the sides of the inner angles.
Through Sphenoides like a cell or seat (...) in the foundation of y^ brain.
this hole on each side, issues forth a notable great Nerve, called the
Opticke Sinew: whereof we have made mention in the History of the Eyes: which
like unto The hole of y^ opticke Sinews.
a root, is implanted into the middle of the eye, for the transportyng of the
visible virtue thereunto. Why it is called y^ opticke Nerve.


Nere to the borders of these, is a Semicircular hole, or sometime like a
perfect Nerves: The holes (...) to the second conjugation of Suiewes.
thence deduced through the great rift, into the eyes: inspiryng the means of
motion to their Muscles. This great rift is that which in the lower part of the
rou^dell That the second conjugation of Sinews moves y^ Muscles of the eyes.
of the eye, and toward the region of y^ outer corner, beneath imitateth the
form of a round hole, but being in the upper part broken, is extended into a
long and ample cauitie, which not only yeldeth passage to the second
coniugatio^ The description of the great (...) in y^ lower corner of the
coundell of y^ ey^, and use thereof. The way of (...) ches from y^ third
conjugation.
of sinews, which are disparcled for motion sake among the Muscles of the
eyes, but also to other branches derived from the third pair, hence
disseminated among the parts of the face: going forth by y^ holes insculped in
y^ brows, above the inner angles. Furthermore this cleft is the seat, propper
to the Muscles of the eye, which thence ^etch their beginning, admittyng
Veins, and Arteries, transmitted to the eyes: and to the nourishment of the
Muscles of the eyes. The use of y^ hole in the brows.


In the inferior part also of this large cleft, where it is round, and
toward Palate, and nostrels: through which the subtle moisture of the
brain, first received by the Glandulous substance sited within the roundell
of the eye, slydeth How tears (...) engendered.
down naturally to the said nostrels, and Palate: the which liquid matter
because it falls: first into the rift pertainyng to the eyes, it may be
coniectured the mean whereby tears are engendered. The hole in Sphenoides.


Under the same rift, in a more crooked region of Sphenoides, a little space
between, is discerned a hole on either side, making a crooked recoile from the
seat The original of the muscle called Masseter or Mansorius.
of the same bone, which being after a certain manner round, is also long,
s^myng directly to stretch straight into the seat of the eye: reflecting
nevertheless toward A branch from the (...) (...) to the Masseterall Muscles.
A branch of the (...). coniugatio^ to the eyes to y^ face.
the sides where the temporal Muscle is, as also the original of the
Masseterall: through which hole, a branch of the vi^. conjugation takes
direct incurse into these Muscles, associated in like manner which part of the
third conjugation, tra^sfused through the lower part of the eyes to the face,
no less mingled with the Masseterall, and Muscles of the temples.

Beyond all this, in the same Cuneall bone is an other hole decreed, being
appertinent An other hole in y^ Cuneall bone. A branch of y^ third
coniugatio^ to the teeth and temporal Muscles.
to the before recited parts representing the wings of Battes: through which a
portion of the third pair of Nerves is transmitted to the teeth, and temporal
Muscle: but not alone, nor without the company of the fourth conjugation,
entryng the same hole down to the tunicle of the Palate, and superior part of
The iiij. conjugation of (...) (...) to y^ coat of the Palate, and (...) part
of y^ tongue.
the tongue, for the cause of tastyng.

Nere to this perforation or described hole, at the root of the temporal Bone
(which is eminent inwardly like a beam or post, the better to contain within
it the noble laberinthe of hearing, as before now we have largely touched) an
other greater hole appears, as it were broken, rough, and unequal, tendyng
downwardes, giuyng issue sufficient, for the Exiture of the third coniugations
portion: The hole (...) to a portion of the iij. conjugation and of Vena
iugularis.
whereby also no more stoppage is offered, to a brau^ch of Uena iugularis that
nourishes the Anteriour parts.

But departing a little aside, somewhat more toward the temporal bone, a
Scalpes) not found. Wherefore to speak thereof, in such A little hole which is
sometime (...).
as you shall happen to find it, note, that nature commits thereto the safe
conduict See the indust^y of nature where this little (...) (...) wanting.
of slender twigges of Veins, and Arteries, to be distributed among the parts
of the thick Membran of the brain. But being denyde of this passage in some,
with no less labor they take their way, through the large and unequal hole
before described.

From which large hole, not far, an other hole, not very conspicuous in the
Interior root of the stilifourmed Process, and obliquely evident or showing
his way toward the The hole of the (...) (...).
Anteriour parts: which ought to be the progress of the slepy Artery,
whereto nature made and prepared such passage.

In the same temporal bone a place is perforated, seemyng long in the top
The blind hole. The fifth pair of Sinews serves sense to y^ Organ of hearing.
at length in the extreme region of the ear: being called the blind hole, in
consideration of the obscure passage: herein makes entrance the fifth pair of
Sinews of the brain, as the immediate Organ to induce the faculty of hearing.

Under which hole, between the temporal bone, and the hinder part of the head,
The vi. conjugation of Nerves to the bowels.
is a large and unequal hole, through which is deduced the vj. pair of
Sinews: which stretchyng down to the bowels, make in the mean space the
recurrent The first coniugatio^ makes the (...) (...), which torme the voice.
Nerves, not meanly profitable to y^ fourmyng of speech, as we have not
forgotten in our History of Nerves. No less serviceable seems this hole to
y^ Iugular Vein, suffryng the ascense thereof for the nourishment of the
brain: the which Vein also fasteneth to Dura matter being carried forth with a
double windyng, The inner Iugularis nourishes the whole brain.
and finally falls into the Posteriour part, the bone manifestly giuyng place
to it, that is to say, conteinyngh profound cauitie toward the Labdall
Suture, crooked after this manner. (...)

In the bone of the hinder part of the head, nere to the hole of all other,
within The hole to the vij. conjugation of the brain.
seeks way: challenged partly of the tongue, partly of Larynx, and partly of
the temporal Muscles.

Now we come to the greatest hole in all the head, which being in the same The
greatest hole in the Occiput and the use thereof.
bone as is the last recited (at least wise among the holes of the inside of
the head it appears as is said, but to compare it to them on the outer side
of the scull, is to be esteemed scantly so ample and large as the roundell of
the eye) is sited in the midst, because it has no mate. And it is ordained
of nature, for the descension of the spinall marey from the brain.

Between Os frontis, and the midst of the viij. bone of the head named
Ithmoides, The use of y^ hole between Os frontis and Ithmoides.
is a cauitie rather the^ a hole, where the third Cell or Ve^tricle of the hard
Membran of the brain, is firmly settled.

Nevertheless besides this, in the same Ithmoides, nere Os frontis, are two
little The holes of Ithmoides.
long holes or riftes, rather finishyng, and fullfillyng the ends of the
Organs of smellyng. But these not all: for in Ithmoide are yet many other
little perforated places and chinkes, as it were the small siftyng holes of a
searse, ordained aptly of nature for ye purposes, which we have not in their
propper places pretermitted.

To speak of Os frontis, in the region of the brows we find two holes, on
each side one, through the which, a portion of the third coniugaton of Nerves,
is sent The holes for a portion of the (...), to the Muscles of the forehead
and eyeliddes.
unto the Muscles of the forehead, and eye lides.

In the forhead morcouer, above the top of the nose, (where the scull
disioyneth in such sort, as it seems to be efformed of two scales, outwardly,
and inwardly) The c^tties in Os (...).
circumscriptio^s of the bones of the head: which Celles, I have there noted to
represent this proportion. They have entrau^ce into the nostrels, and contain
nothing In the cauities of the forehead much ^yre, soutesyme, (...) (...) sonn^.
but a Membran: except it be sometime superfluous filthe, and ayry sometime, as
it is supposed. But surely they seem altogether vnknow^ of the ancient
Anathomistes, in so far as in all my time I have read: the use of them, in
retayning air, is other where to be declared. The holes of the (...) bone.


The bone of the cheek under the region of the neither eye liddes, has a
round hole, which begynuyng at the inner and inferior part of the roundell of
the eye A portien of the (...). condigation of (...) to the (...) of the nose
and lip.
with a long and deep chinke, ends toward the region of the first tooth of
the grinders: through which is transmitted a portion of the third conjugation
of Sinews, delated to the Muscles of the nose, and those that constitute the
lip.

There is a large issue in the lower part of the greater angle of the eye,
forged Whence y^ (...) (...) to the nostrels and eyes.
between the second and third bone of the upper iawe: and here happens the
descense of moist matter unto the nostrels, before lodged in the inner angle
of the The place where Aeg^ps called y^ (...) (...) happens.
eye, where a certain Glandule (for the purpose) is pressed to receive the same.
In this place is engendered the lachryniall Fistule, called also Aegilops.

But contrariwise in the exterior and lesser angle of the eye is a large rift,
and Why the eye (...), the ^all (...) may be affected.
long, partly perforatyng the bone of the temples, and partly of the upper
iawe. Hereto is fixed the temporal Muscle: which therefore to the eye has no
small affinity. No marvel therefore if the ^ye in dolor labouryng, this
Muscle sometime The holes in the face.
be affected also.

In the face first we note the two holes, or roundels of eyes: which for as much
The roundels of the eyes.
as they are sufficiently known of all men, to be unto the eyes most propper
habitacles, I need not long detract the time.

But somewhat lower, and between them both, are the two holes sited of the The
holes of the ^oss
nose, which have recourse unto the jaws, and to the ends of the Palate.

It is known, and easily conceived, by mention made thereof before, among the
Iugall bone, made by the reachyng over and metyng The ^ugall bone like a (...).
of two Processes, like the arche of a bridge, (as I have also compared it)
makes The seat of the t^porall Muscle.
underneath it a hole, mete for the secure situation of the temporal Muscle.

There is in like sort one hole in the middle of the Anteriour part of the
Palate, Incissorie teeth: where through not only a Vein, but also an Artery
pearseth. So also yeldeth way to the lettyng in of liquid humor, By what part
(...) (...) to the moystning of the Palate.
fit to hume^, and make moist the Membran of the Palate, which to that hole
is bound, after the fashion as Dura me^brana is knit to a little hole somewhat
above the distaunce of Ithmoides.

In the extreme end of the Palate, not far from the h^most teeth, is found on
(...) portion of the (...). (...) (...) (...) y^ (...) of y^ Palate with y^
sense of tastyng.
(...) side a hole in the fifth bone, which we call the fourth of the superior
iawe: the which hole is produced into two sharp corners, admittyng together
with a Vein, and Artery, a portion of the fourth co^iugation of Nerves:
making the tunicle of the Palate to participate with the sense of tastyng.

Yet further, the neither iawe (which although it seems needless to describe
Of the holes of y^ neither (...).
the manner of holes therein situate, for as much as so particularly I have
touched them before in speaking of the neither iawe: I will neuerthemore think
time evil spent to rehearse them again amongst the holes of the head,
because part in present occasion to be revealed, and part hid, should not
sound aptly to a perfect description): has two holes on each side, those of
the inner side being larger the^ of the outer. By which, both Veins, Arteries,
and Nerves are sent to the singular To the roots of all the teeth is carried a
Deyne, Artery, and Meru^.
roots of the teeth, with lyse, nourishment, and sense: a portion of the which
Nerve goes out unto the chinne, and Muscles of the neither lip, by these two
holes that be on the outer side mentioned: to find out the way of the which
conjugation and portion, transmitted to the temporal Muscle, it behooves to
find A portion of the v. con^ugation to the temporal Muscles.
out the double hole in the foundation of the head in that part (I mean) of
the seporall bone, which is next unto the Cuneall bone.

And in the hinder root of the Process Styloides, is easily discerned a hole,
by The hole to the Deyne and Artery for the Organ of heatyng.
which a Vein and Artery makes entrance to nourish the Organ of hearing.
Nighe to the Mammillar Process, in the hinder part, is a way for the coming
in of Veins, and Arteries: which to nourish the Bones, we account it no vain
service.

Besides all these notableholes, and evident to be described for the most part,
let it not seem tedious unto you, to consider, that in the head and scope of
the scull are yet diverse and sundry little Perforations here and there
disparcled, which for The small Perforations in the Scull are uncertain as
touching their places.
there unlike being, and variable order, it seems a thing impossible to make
of them direct description: although it can not be denyde, but their uses are
exquisite: for as touching the convent of Veins and Arteries, within the inner
scope and capacity of the head, and such as pass to the thick Membran: the
lettyngs in, and entrau^ce by the saydholes, as they are necessary, so unlike
almost in every one. It avails not much to remember unto you the seats, or
Celles of the The number of tenth ordreth the (...) of Celles.
teeth, sufficiently discoursed before. For not, for the number of holes are
made the like number of roots, in teeth, but rather that nature, for the
number of the teeth, created the number of places agreeable.

IT needs not to be doubted since the thing is most certain, that as the
frame The use of bones.
of bones in man are exceedyng requisite to the supportyng of the members, so
are they no less acceptable to the insertion of Muscles. Wherefore in the
tongue (which nature created for so many good considerations, being made of such
soft and fleshy substance) it were expedient to have effourmed fonie bone,
whereto (most Why to the (...) a boue was necessary.
aptly) the Muscles thereof might be affixed, and tied: as a ground work, or
stabiliment to sustain the whole work. Which, provident nature (whose
foresight in all things is unspeakable) perpendyng, and willing to make a
member so serviceable, indigent, or needful of nothing to maintain the
perpetuity of his action, infixed in the root thereof a bone, not fashioned
after any common proportion, but so rare, as that place required most notably.

Wherefore according to the proportion thereof, so the Grecians have named
Hyoides (...) a (...) peculiar to the tongue.
it, that is to say, for as much as not a little it resembles the figure of y^
Greek letter (...) it is called (...), but with more contractio^ of speech
Hyoides. It is not Lib. 3. cap. vlt.
wantyng (as Theophilus testifies) that some have given it to name (...), It
is more rightly called Ypsiloides then Lamdoides.
though the more injuriously: for truly it has no such streitenes in any
bought thereof, as appears in the fashion of the Greek letter l. but rather
(as Realdus Collumbus writes thereof) it may be compared to the nether iawe. I
will omit Lib. 1. cap. (...).
to speak of the diverse names, which diverse Authors diversely have thereof
imagined, and invented: and so, as it may not vntustly be surmised, the most of
them never dissected the body of man but of beasts. But to our purpose.

Nature (as I have said) effourmed in such sort this bone Hyoides, that
although The (...) of Hyoides.
it be situated to the jaws, and Organ of voice, yet so that it gives also
free scope unto inspiration, and to passage of substance, both meat, and
drink: The description of Hyoides..
the middle Ossicle thereof is connected and knit to an other greater Ossicle in
the Anteriour part toward the mouth, where it joins with a very Ob^use or
The insection of the tongue to Hyoides.
blunt corner: but the hinder part thereof, which is more inward, and toward
the jaws, is hollow in reslected or bowed manner. So above Gibbous, but in the
inferior part hollow. And thus are the parts thereto fixed: as the Anteriour,
and Superior part admits the insertion of the tongue, construct and made of
ij. Muscles, whose small difference, is ended at a certain Process eminent in
the upper part of this bone, about the midst of ye bought thereof: but ye
hinder and lower part of this bone, being hollow and round bowed, was for the
purpose fitly forged, to give place to the openyng and liftyng up of the little
tongue: which as a door or gate (...) (...) of the Epiglotte.
is serviceable to Larinx: and for that cause, called of the Greeks
Epiglottis. To the borders of the sides of the middle of this bone: are annexed
two other with two little long Processes, having also extreme Appendances:
which, with Ligaments Whence spring y^ (...) Muscles mouyng the tongue.
are fast knit unto the Superior sides of Larinx: from which Processes (no
doubt) spryng Muscles also, seruyng to the motions of the tongue. Moreover,
because the strength of this bone had not been sufficient, having but this one
single insertion to Larinx: nature added two other Processes, though not so
large as those before described: near to which, these together arise: but in
the upper part, where Why Hyoides has more Processes.
(...) the greater Ossicle sited in the midst, there it is ended. For by
these Processes, is Os Hyoides fast knit unto the Stilifourmed Processes,
proceedyng from the ^ow Hyoides is bound to the Processes Styloides.
Temporal bone on each side, with a notable strong Ligament: whereby it is so
firmified in the midst, as to neither part it easily slippeth.

And thus of five bones (...) consists: the shape, situation, and
construction Hyoides is made of (...). bones.
whereof (as it seems to every man) was so well provided for, that as it is
fastened to the jaws and to Larinx, so yet it yields ample scope, not only
to breatthyng, The utility of Hyoides construction.
and inspiration, but likewise to the transiture of meat and drink, as is
said before. Collumbus writes that sometime the Processes are found wantyng:
The wisdom of nature, the Processes being wantyng.
as for example on one side only: whose places then nature supplieth with
Ligamentes, longer exte^ded, and stretched from the ends of the middle
Ossicle, unto the Stilifourmed Processes: so as evermore her work is exactly
finished. Col. Lib. 1. cap. 12.


LArinx (I know not properly what English term to give it) is the top of
Larinx is the head of Aspera Arteria.
Aspera Arteria, or the head thereof, which reaches up unto the mouth and The
(...) of Larinx.
jaws: to the hinder part, and top, whereof, we have before affirmed the
bone Hyoides to be impla^ted, and committed. This Larinx is the Organ, by which
we The use of Larinx.
receive and put forth ^th, as also of^ making and fourmyng voice: as the
description thereof shall make it manifest unto you. For to the fourmyng thereof
comes What parts (...) to the making of Larinx.
not only bones (perhaps Reader thou will marvel that I say bones, but read
to the end) but also Cartilages, Ligamentes, Muscles, and Membrans: besides
that I omit both Veins, (...), and Nerves.

The bones that come unto the construction thereof are in number v. of which The
number of y^ bones to Larinx.
there are two the largest, (...) do, constitute almost the whole body of it.
In the How these two bones mete together in the fore part.
hinder part they are largely (...), but in ye fore part united by a sharp
creest, or corner: as we may make comparison, like the setting together of the
ribs of a Lute: the Image of it assimulateth a Shield, such as in times past,
were perhaps What part of Larinx is compared to a shield.
used in the wars: and are used as yet of the Turks, as Vesalius writes:
which caused the Anathomistes to call it, for the likeness of the thing,
Scutalem, (...). 1. Cap. 38.
or Scutiformem Cartilaginem, or Peltalem, the Gretians (...). How the
Processes of Larinx and Hyoides are committed together.


The Posteriour part thereof both above, and beneth, puts out from his sides
two Processes, that is to say, above on each side one, and beneth on each side
one: of which, the two uppermost are wont to be longer then the neithermost,
and with The (...). (...) bone (...) (...) call the (...) cartilage.
Membraneous, bands, are tied to the lower sides of the Bones representyng the
shape of (...). or Hyoides: but the inferior Processes of this same shield,
are toward the posteriour sides of that part, which other Anathomistes do
call the
sec^od unnamed Cartilage, but Collumbus makes it the third unnamed bone: the
form whereof, is like the rings, which ye Parthians use to wear on their
right Thombes, when they shoot their arrows, for the more strength they
purchasse thereby in drawing: for in the posteriour part toward the stomach,
it is broader, Col (...). 1. Cap. 13.
The (...) (...) the third (...) bone.
and is exte^ded into a sharp. Furthermore the more foreward that it goes,
the more also it is extenuated, and made sle^der, to the fourming of the
aforesaid figure, thus as in the margent depaynted. It puts sorth no where
any roughnes, but only in the hinder part some necessary Asperitie, serving
for the insertion of two Muscles there being: which from this third bone unto
the iiij. and which are directly The Asperitie in ye bone for y^ insertion of
Muscles.
carried: as in the History of Muscles shall be declared. And this same bone
nature exactly compassed, to the end it might be unto Larinx as a firmament,
and Why the iij. bone is thus (...) compassed.
foundation, as also a certain defense, and propugnacle to the rough Artery:
whose beginning it is: for unless it should join together in the inner part,
neither could it be endewed with such hardness: whereby danger might often
ensue by swallowyng any thick, or hard thing, lest it should press together
the way of respiration over stretely: whereby might come to pass suffocation.
Every where (therefore) this is made a continual bone, to defend ye rough
Artery more strongly.

The fourth, and fifth bone of Larinx, Collumbus calls that, which the rest
have Cartilage. For if as he says you shall The 4. and 5. boue is called the
(...) Cartilage with other (...).
behold this part, the Membrans being taken of, wherewith it is covered, you
shall discern it loose and divided into two: wherefore he thought good also to
distinguish it into two which rise from the top of the third bone inwardes
lookyng: for to this Tubercle, they are inarticulated and knit, and thence from
the foundation thereof put forth two (...) or wings, which are coupled to the
lower region of the shield in the fore part, and constitute the rift so ^dfull
to the modulatio^ of voice: vpwardes moreover they tend into ij. Processes,
which are mutually The (...) or (...) which (...) voice.
united the right with the left, and yield ye Image of a certain vessel, where
with we pour out water to the washyng of hands: and that chiefly (as I
suppose) the part What (...) (...).
of the (...) where water runs forth, that part therefore the Greeks call
(...). These two Ossicles are unequal, and together by a Ligament and a
Cartilage united, and, by the benefit of the Membran that so plentyfully is
added aloft, they seem to be soft^ whereas they end in two Processes: which
nature decreed The use of the ij. processes of the 4. and 5. bone of Larinx.
to use as certain little tongues, not only to close and shut the amplitude of
Larinx, and way of the rough Artery, lest any thing (especially by vometyng,
that might hurt) should slip into the inner capacity thereof, and so fall
into the lunges, but also that the same chinke might be guided, and used to the
fourmyng of diverse voices: no otherwise then as is seen in Pypes and Shalmes,
wherein are put certain little tongues, made of two Palates of reed: wherefore
the vnio^ of What is call^ (...).
these Processes constitutyng this little tongue, is called (...).

To these are added one Cartilage no more to be neglected, which is in Greek
The Epiglotte what it signifies and ye use thereof.
(...) because it goes forth in manner like the little tongue rehearsed, and
labors to the end that no meat, or drink slow into Larinx: and also is
shut and opened, for the mutual work of inspiration, and expiration. This
imitateth the The figure of the (...).
fashion of a crooked little Shield, being ample and large in the Superior
part, then by little and little waxyng narrow, ends at a point: and is inserted
to the Anteriour and Superior part of the shield, whence it has his
beginning.

HEre, in this description of Larinx, I imagine that surely the Reader will
This verily will seem a s^ge description to some.
stand as in a mase, to see that newly called a bone, which heretofore, of all
Anathomistes generally before Collu^bus, has been taken and described for a
Cartilage: but marvel not hereat so much, for neither have thou cause, but
rather to apply thy senses to the judgment of the thing it self: that thy
own eyes conferryng it with the verity of the thing, thy self also may
easily become a witness in this no doubtful matter: which by these three
points thou may easily and (...) (...) to judge of these whether they be
bones (...) (...).
quickly discuss: as it were at the first sight, and those are, Color, the
consideration and assay of their hardness, and the medullous substance that
inwardly annoyn^ them: which one thing especially (says Collumbus)
distinguishes, and differs Cap. Citato.
Cartilages from bones: for that the Cartilage altogether, and by the judgment
The principal difference of the bone and the cartilage.
of all men, is destitute of any marey. And by all those iij. thou shall prove
this description very true: wherefore if (at any thing) thou stand at a
marvel It is maruayle that a thing so manifests should be omitted of such
famous men.
let it be at this, and I will be thy mate, that Galen, and chiesly that worthy
Vesalius have not marked it: for therein neither of them may be excused: since
eue^ in Apes (which Galen most dissected) it is to be found bonney, as
Collu^bus affirms. And That in apes ^arinx is of bones.
Vesalius prosessyng the propper description of ma^s body, has nevertheless
(as it seems) neglected wholly the substance of this part, and yet, that he
sought the La Lib. 1. Cap 38.
A great likelihode that Vesal. dissected y^ (...) of man.
rinx hoth of man and woman, greatly appears, by that he proves the
Shieldlike bone (which he calls Scutiformis Cartilago) to bear out in me^
more, and in greater form the^ in women. Again, who would judge but that he
used so much diligence, as to discern the difference betwixt the Larinx of man
and beasts, and therefore would describe the right, and not the other. And yet
Col. (wherefore I cannot a little That Vesalsus dissected (...) the Larinx of
benstes.
marvel) writes that Vesa. neglected the body of man, for this part Larinx,
and dissected it of custom in beasts: yea and y^ in public Theaters, whereat
he testifies him self often times to have been present: but of this perhaps to
much, only y^ nature Nature is every where just.
in her works be not falsified: which be every where so wonderful, just, and
true.

ANd that no where in all the parts of man's body, more exactly, and clearly
manifest unto us, then in the back: the co^structio^ whereof is not so
maruailous, The structure of the back is worthy admiration.
as laudable to the high Parent, and Progenitor of all things. Wherefore,
before I go forth to describe ye singular parts thereof, it shall not be only
more pleasant, but also profitable unto thee (gentle Reader) first to
comprehend in the depth of thy cogitation, a general su^me, and brief
discourse of the creation thereof: which thou shall note to be of the Grecia^s
nominated (...), and (...), the Latins Dorsum, or Spina, which our English
phrase terms the back: which unto y^ trunk of y^ body The composition of
the Wertebres compared to the ridgbeame of a ship.
is of right a foundation, co^parable to the belly, or ridgbeame of a ship, or
boat: whereunto the chief studdes, or posts of the frame work are mortised.

No less needful to the life of man, is the strange construction of the
back, Col. Lib. 1. Ca. 14.
whereby the true ambulatiue motion of the body is obtained, forewardes,
backwardes, The effect and motions of the back.
round, or laterall reflection admitted and straight, or upright station, not
denied. All which we have by the benefit of the back, nay rather, for that
the back is construed of Vertebres or Spondilles most exquisitely: Which being
also A further note in the compositio^ of the Wettebres.
together mutually concaued, make in them selves by strict Coarticulation the
closse Cloysture, and safe Gallery for the Spinall marey: which the Grecians
call (...): which to have been created was most needful: neither could it
ootherwhere more securely have inhabited. To prove it most needful unto the
The necessity of the back proved.
body, as every where we have professed, note this short Allegation: for we
say, The ^ences which the back by this structure preuenteth.
if it had not been, one of these ij. inconveniences must necessarily have
happened. Either all the parts of the body under the head, to have remained
immovable, or else to every part of them, Nerves from the brain should have
been deduced: But if all the parts (as is said) had been frustrated of motion,
then had the What the body were if motion wanted.
body been rather as an Image pictured of clay, or stone, then a living
creature. And again if a small Nerve proceedyng from the brain, should be
divided, and How the body should be served if all Nerves proceeded from the
brain.
carried into every part, with such long and unequal distau^ces, it could not
be that their force in motion should have been sufficient, nor their
continuance perdurable. Wherefore, it was far better that the Spinall marey,
as a river issuyng from the brain his fountain, should not only be elongated
after the bodies The necessity and use of the spinall (...).
trunck, but also unto all the parts as it passes, to send propper Nerucs, as
the delectable brwkes for feeling and mouyng. And surely so it happens: for y^
uppermost How y^ Nerves are distributed.
deriuations seek not out the nether parts, neither yet do the neithermost
Nerves exalte themselves to the highest journey, but each conjugation is aptly
produced to the next parts: as in perusing the History of Nerves, you shall
easily discern.

Since that the Spinall marey unto all the parts beneth the head, is as it
The Spinall marey as an other brain.
were an other brain, it is no less behoofull that it were strongly enclosed
with some hard and resistaunt muniment, to repugne all iniuryes, offered to so
noble a part. Wherefore to commit the same to the tuition of the Spinall bones,
nature Why nature committed the ^utio^ of the Wertebres to the gardyng of y^
Spinal marey.
not rashly has decreed: exculpyng, and grauyng in their substaunces, fit
holes for the descense thereof: and for that cause is the back of man conslate,
and made of so many bones, for the more safe keeping: of the marey: and to
fulfill (with more The Spinall marey the fountain of sense to the inferior
part S.
facillitie) that manner of every motion, whereof to the neither parts, that
which they conteyne is the immediate fountain.

Besides all this, the Spinall marey could not endure every angular flextion,
Why the back does not consist of fewer bones.
nor every large and sudden motion: but if the back should have been made of
large, and lose joints, neither might they have moved, without great greuaunce
Large bones (...) largely and suddenly, but thor^ bones little and easily.
and hurt: for a Coarticulation made of long bones, is for the cause of a large
mouyng, which in such a place is requisite: but here, considering what is
contained, it was far more expedient that many should be their number: to every
which a little motion should appertain: so that every one of them styrring a
little, of necessity The Wertebres being short yet many in numbe^ make
sufficient motion for the b^cke.
by that time all have done their duty, the motion is sufficient large, and
also easy: therefore so, rather then two or iij. bones, reason requires: sor
by that number (we see by example in the Arms and Legs, the slextion is made
Angular, and not Circular: that is to say, cornered, and not compassed: so that
if the back had been in like manner, I mean of ij. or iij. bones construed,
and combinated, The arm is of ij. bones and therefore has a sharp cornered
bowing.
great hurt, ruption, contusion, and continual compression of the Spinall
marey must needs have been procured, by the daily motion of such few bones, so
outragiously urged. Neither can we otherwise conjecture, but that the small
number of Bones, should offer over readyly occasion, upon every light motion to
be dislocated, or rather Luxated: which would furthermore procure great peril
of The place of Hipo. Lib. de. (...).
life: the which kind of Luxation that divine Hypocrates well notyng, writes
How the Luxati^ of the ^etebres were to be teared.
thus, in his book De Articulis. If many Vertebres do fortune at once to be
out of order, or displaced, it will be very tedious and hurtful. But if one of
them be Luxated, and removed from his fellow, the case then is most pernicious:
and the Why the luxatio^ of one Wertebre is more perslous then of many.
reason is, that is one Vertebre be disordered, it so wresteth therewith the
Spinall marey, as that it urges it to bow into a sharp corner, whereby it is
compelled ^he Luxation of one Wertebre urges the Spinall marey into a sharp.
either to break, or be bruised: the lest of which, is pernicious in deed:
and deadly, forasmuch as the nature of this marey, is endewed with the nature
of the brain. Whereas contrariwise many Vertebres being luxated, or forced out
of course, forces it not so straightly, but into a more blunt bowyng, and
Semicircled The marey participateth with the nature of the brain.
corner: which although it inciteth great distraction, yet not so easily (of
necessity) endures death. Wherefore I say, to prevent and forestall all
perils, and Many Uertebres Luxated brin geth the Spinall marey into a half
circle.
dangerous euentes (so much as might be) for the necessary, and healthful
procrastination of life, the back was construct and made of so many, and so
short bones, to be made free, if it might be) from such like Luxation: as also
that the Why the back both consist of so many Wertebres Lib. de. Us. part. Ca,
23.
bodies of the Vertebres so effectually made, might (as I said before) not
swiftely but easily, neither suddenly but softely, be moved every way: for in
deed they are mouable, and that aptly to every side. Galen says every thing
that is vpholden Why y^ superious are less then the inferior Wertebres.
or borne by an other, ought to be lesser, and therefore lighter then that which
vpholdeth and bears: which is the cause, that evermore the uppermost
Vertebres are lesser then the neithermost. Wherefore Os Sacru^ the seat of all
the rest, Os sacrum is greater then all the other Wertebres.
likewise exceeds them all in quantity.

Hitherto how the Vertebres are a safe defense for the Spinall marey: which The
Wertebres have process^ss.
yet (beyond all that is said) we note to have Processes, and not only to
every such parts as outwardly occupy the middle regio^ of the back (which
order is a principal The row of the Posteriour Processes is called yt Spine,
propugnacle to the same marey: therefore the Grecians do term it (...), the
Romans Spina,) but also other Processes, which from the sides of them are
produced, The use of the Processes on the sides of the Uertebres.
for the cause of more ready, and greater safety: which nature (moreover)
excellently willed to serve for the fixed insertion, and due implantation of
Muscles. And as the lower bones are ye greater, so likewise the Processes of
the higher The Processes in length ^tate yt degrees, of ye Uerte^res.
in degr^, are the shortest, and contrariwise: the greatness of the Vertebres,
and Processes beneth are wonderful safegardes to Vena concaua, and Arteria
magna, The use of yt side Processes of the Uertebres under the ribs.
in their region resident.

But before I start from this general description, to talk of their
particular proportions and parts, I esteem it not impropper, to note briefly
unto you the The Division of the back.
v. parts wherinto the back is divided: whereby you may clearly account the
number of the Vertebres, both propper, and impropper. These are the v. the The
Uertebres of ye neck are vij.
Neck, the Breast, the Loins, Os Sacrum, and Coccix.. In the Neck first are
Of the Bre^ 12.
vij. in the Breast xij. to the Loins appertain 5. to Os Sacrum vj. the last
4. are Of the Loins 5.
Of Os Sacrum 6.
of Coccix: so that by co^putation of all the rehearsed together, they amount
to the Of Coccix 4.
number of xxxiij. But understand, that only xxiij. of them are propper
Vertebres: The number of all ye Uertebres. Which and how many are propper
Uertebres. Why those under Os Sacr^ are (...) amongst yt Uertebres.
by whose virtues the body is turned diverse ways, and their end is (as I said
before) at Os Sacrum. And those that are appertinent, or depend upon Os Sacru^,
are rather for the similitude, and likeness of Vertebres, numbered amongst them,
then for any office, or use that they reteyne like Vertebres: for those in
deed are right called Vertebres, that with one kind of Articulation are
together co^pounded: which is called Arthrodia: where as the other (therefore
not propper) are united The difference of the Uertebres after Ar^tulatio^. The
neck is e^de for yt cause of the roughe Artery.
per Symphysim: as most clearly we will endeuer henceforth to handle.

FIrst of all we will (as order requires) begin at the Neck, which is called
in Greek (...). Which was stretched, and elongated from the body for the cause
of Aspera Arteria, as Galen proves: saying further, that the Neck Lib. 8. De
Us. Part.
always perishes with the Lunges: wherefore every fish that wants the Lunges
The neck is not where yt Lunges are not.
is also destitute of a Neck: and contrariwise, such as have Lunges have also
a Neck: and both have inspiration and expiration, by the rough Artery.
Hitherto also efflation, which is the immediate matter of voice, is the action
of the same Efflation is the matter of voice.
Artery: without the which, voice could not be made: and the upper end of
which (being of the Latins called Laringa or Larynx) is the chief, and most
principal (...) the instrument of voice.
fourmer of voice. Wherefore it having such affinity with the Lunges, and
seruyng to so notable use, it is evident that the Neck was fourmed for the
cause Such creatures as want necks are domme.
thereof: and (going further) he says also plainly, that such creatures as
want their Necks are domme and mute. And Aristotle says every creature that
wa^teth A^stotle.
Lunges wants a Neck. Then since reason leads us, that the head is
distaunsed from the body so much in man, for the cause of Aspera Arteria, and
Why yt neck con^steth of bones. Why the neck consists of Uertebres.
voice, and that the erection of the same Neck could not be made firm and
steadfast, without the supportable ground and frameworke of Bones, neither
mouable, had the same been of such solid continuitie, as should have resisted
the mean Col. Lib. 1. ca. 15.
of motion, which nature therefore coustrued of sundry Vertebres, you shall
hear^ What is ye neck.
what space is to be understood by the name of Neck, and what bones
appertain to the construction thereof.

The Neck is all the part stretched forth between the Head and Shoulders, that
is, from the foundation of the Scull to the top of the Breast: which in that
space contains the number of vij. Vertebres, or turning Joints, each one
diverse, Seven Uertebres whereof the neck does consist and one of them
diffe^yng from another.
and different from another: that is, the first from the second, and those
again differyng from all that follow: but the iiij, that are from the second
unto the the seventh, are above all the rest most likely figured and the
seventh it self distinct from all other, as shall appear. But first is to be
noted, that the Neck The use of the neck.
was not only ordained to the end to bear, and sustain the Head, but most
especially The neck has motions propper and common.
to be auayleable to the diverse actions, and mouynges thereof: which kinds are
not all propper, nor all common: but some motions propperly appertayning ^ib.
^. Cap. 15.
to the Head, and others common, which are obtained by the mouynges of the The
neck can not move without the stirring of the head.
Neck: wherefore Collumbus says, we judge the propper mouyng of the Neck to
be common to the Head: forasmuch as the Neck cannot move, without the styrring
of the Head. Galen assigns to the Head two peculiar motions: one is Two
motions peculiar to the head.
by the mouyng of the Head forwards and backward, and the other by turnyng it
round to the sides: which may be done, the Neck remaining quiet, or not
labouryng: but when the Head is greatly moved, downward, or upward, or
vehemently How greater motions are not peculiar to the head.
inclined to the shoulders, such cannot be the propper motions of the Head:
seeing that they are done by yt labor of the whole Neck, or otherwise cannot
be. Wherefore the propper motions of the Head are brought to pass, by yt means
of By what means the propper motious of the head are made.
the first and second Vertebre: which ij. of all others, are most especially
Colligate, and bound to the Head: for from many parts of Occiput flows
Ligamentes: which Why O^put in ch^ren is mad^ of many parts.
is the cause, that in Children the same is construct of many bones, and
therefore has many riftes, whence they are in the beginning produced: but time
wears them fo far forth of sight, as not only one cannot be discerned, but
also every one acknowledges it a bone, without distinction. After this sort it
is to be gathered, the Ligamentes are in Occiput engendered: that is to say, in
diverse places: and The head is most firmly joined to the neck.
so by the^ annected to the first and second Vertebres, then consequently to
the Neck: as neither this way, nor that way, the head may suddenly or
unadvisedly slip.

And to make you more clearly conceive in your mind, the exquisite manner of
motions of the head, I will let you understand, in what sort Occiput is
Articulate How Occiput is knitte to the two fir^ Uertebres.
unto the ij. first Vertebres, as thus. In that part of Occiput, wherein nature
has insculped the large and ample hole for the descense (as is said) of the
Spinall How happens ye in^ation and re^ination of the head.
marey, there are toward the Anteriour part thereof, ij. Processes, or
outgoyng portions, that is to say, on each side of the hole one: which are
received in by What is the process called Odontoides.
the propper cauities of the first Vertebre, made in the upper part and middle
seat of the ascendent Processes thereof, by means of which Articulation, the
Head is The description of the Articulatio^ of the second Uertebre with the
first.
now inclined, and now reclined. From the middle of the second Vertebre rises
a certain rownd and long Process, indifferently thick, called in Greek
(...), and (...), and for the figure and shape thereof, likened to the kind of
tooth The industry of nature.
in man called the dog tooth: this is likewise received into the cauitie of
the first The Ligame^t of the Process called a tooth, and the use thereof.
Vertebre, provided on that side also for the same purpose, excluded larger
from the side of the common hole, whereby the marey is said to descend: and
because the whole body of the said Vertebre, for the large compass that by
this means How the circ^duction of yt head is brought to pass by the
articulation of the second with yt first Uertebre.
it is hollowed, should not be wholly priuated, nor the passage for the Spinall
marey marred. In the same place (therefore) nature has in such wise lapped,
and fastened to the tooth a solid Ligament, as that the coming down of the
marey can neither be broken, nor in mouyng compressed: and yet the Articulation
not left to strayte, but slack enough: as it behooued, for the turnyng of the
head on Gal. Lib. Us. part. (...)
each side: which is thus brought to pass by the Dentall Process of the
second Galen falsely supposed the inclimatio^ of the head to be by the composion
and knittyng together of the first with the second Uertebre.
Vertebre, wheruppon the first easily turns.

By this it is evident, which are the propper, and which are the common motions
of the head: and how with the one, the other are made also: although to their
mouyng, the conjunction of the Vertebres with the head is necessary. Wherein
Galen is much reprehended, for attributyng the inclination, and reclination of
the head, to the cause of the second Vertebres mouyng, and of the dentiformed
Process: That the head is not circumdu^ed by the articulatio^ of the head with
the first Uertebre Against Gallen.
so the side way turnyng to be brought to pass by the first Vertebres
Articulation with the head: but that is not so says Collumbus: for the first
joint makes the noddyng up and down of the head, and the second the
circumaction to each side: for else should the Dentall Process be deprived of
his right office and function: Now y^ first Vertebre turns upon the second
as the hook upon the hinge of the door.
which only nature ordained for the turnyng of the head, ^o other wise, the^
as the hook or hinge of a door serves aptly to the openyng thereof: and in
this, he excuses Galen no manner of way, but barely blames him, as in hacre
parum diligens: and Vesalius no less takes part against him, openyng the
window of Galen left bare without al eccuse Vesalius invented the right use of
the bentall Process to his perpetual praise.
light, on the clearer side, prospeaing the Sun, as manifestly appears by
that is gone before.

NOw it follows to describe orderly and particularly the Vertebres of the
neck, since thus much is said of the motions of the head.

The first Vertebre therefore of the neck is more solid, and thick, then all
the The body of the Verte^ is the corpulent and gross part the^of.
very much in form from the rest, and not having any superior Process. In
the Anteriour part thereof, where the body of the Vertebre should be, that is to
say, the engrossed part, the side is very thin, by means of the hollow
excaued The description of y^ Anterioue part of the first Vertebre.
therein for the passage of the Spinall marey. But the outer side of the same
part toward the throat Protuberating, and swelling forth, purchases as much
firm thicknes, by the round compassing thereof, as it was made thinner and
weaker, The use of the swelled or bounched part of the first Vertebre.
by the engrauyng on the inside of the aforesaid cauitie: which receives the
tooth aforesaid produced from the body of the second Vertebre, which is tipped,
or headed The use of the (...) of the first Vertebre.
with a rusty Cartilage: to which (for Articulation sake) the like is to be
observed in all other Vertebres. Besides this by diligent Annotatio^, you shall
hi^e Every Vertebre has process both ascendent and descendent.
every Vertebre endewed with Processes, both ascendent, and descendent. But in
the first they are excaued, and hollowed on each side, aloft, as the Processes
of Occiput are prominent, to mete and join with them, and beneth to admit
the Why y^ Processes of the first Vertebre are ^led on both sides.
upper Processes of the second Vertebre. So that as it seems, the upper
turnyng Joint altogether receives the insertion, both of the superior, and
inferior Bones thereto approprimate. From the sides likewise of the first
Vertebre The first Vertebre receives one both sides but is of no bone received.
are stretched two Processes, long, and Perforated, turnyng for wards, and
greater then are found in other, with larger holes for the transiturie of the
Vein, and Artery unto the Scull: deriuyng branches from themselves, to the
refreshing The lateral Processes of the first Vertebre.
of the Spinall marey. There are certain holes graven out of either side of
the Vertebres, toward the fore face of them (the first Vertebre only
excepted, for The use of y^ hole in y^ laterall Processes.
which therein you must look in the hinder part) the which holes, or
perforatio^s, as they are graven through the body of the Vertebre from the hole
ordained for The holes in the sides of the Vertebress.
the Spinall marey, so do the hindermost ascendent Processes give them place:
which going forewardes forthwith by their sides, directly aspectyng the
laterall The use of the holes on y^ syoes of y^ Vertebres.
Processes, have through them flowyng the distinct number of coniugated Nerves
from the same Spinall marey produced: where these joints are together
committed, How almost All the Vertebres of the back are (...) or cut where
they are committed together.
you shall find them in such order incised and cut, as that one participateth
or lets in of the substance of another mutually: save that I say the first
Vertebre is notable from all the rest, admittyng only, but not admitted of
any. The holes therefore of the first and between the first and second ioynte,
represents The difference of the first and second vertebres cauitie from the
other^.
the form of a long hollow chinke, and no holes: but in all others exculped
out one each side round: save those in the Vertebres of the breast: which are
excaued Of what fashion are the cauities between the Vertebres of y^ bre^.
in lengthwise. To speak briefly therefore, out of the upper holes of the
first Vertebre the first pair of Sinews is brought, and out of the
neithermost (which are also common to the second Vertebres,) does go the second
coniugatio^ The uses of the cauities of y^ Vertebres where they are committed
(...) together.
and so out of others other payres, according to their number, and placyng. And
not only Nerves, but also the branches of Veins, and Arteries, have
entrance in, and out, among these passages and holes, both to the nourishment
of the Spinall marcy, and the bones of the Vertebres.

The second turnyng joint (beside the tooth that rises in the midst thereof
to be Articulate to Occiput as is said before) has furthermore a body, and a
Process The (...) of the second Verteb^e.
insigned in the hin^er part thereof, far unlike all others of the neck, and
the body thereof stretches further backwards: from whose posteriour Process
springs The use of y^ (...) (...) of y^ second (...) (...).
ij. Muscles, which to Occiput are also inserted therefore nature willed, that
the first Vertebre should have no Process in the hinder part thereof, for
offendyng Why y^ first (...) (...) (...) posteriour (...).
the risyng of the said Muscles. Moreover the same posteriour Process of the
second Vertebre is cloven: or bifor^ed, as are the other hinder Processes of
the joints of the neck, the fitter for the knittyng to of the said Muscles.
To Why y^ (...) procesie of the second (...) (...) (...).
speak of the side, or laterall Processes of the second Vertebre, we have to
note them not only shorter by far, the^ those of the first Vertebre, but
likewise scantly ^he description of y^ Internal Processes of the second (...).
so long as the others of the neck, neither altogether so much forwardly
tendyng: which makes their holes obliquely perforated, and not directly
downwardes as the rest. Further note, that the ascendent, and descendent
Processes of these The (...) Processes of y^ second Vertebre are (...) (...)
and with (...) oblique hole.
Vertebres, are naturally coarticulate and knit together: and that in the most
of them, after one sort and order: that is, from the second Vertebre
downwardes: and the second it self also has descendent Processes, not much
unlike the rest: How the (...) and descen^ent Processes are ^tre together.
Descendent Processes.
the desce^dentes therefore (as it were) cut obliquely forwards, and somedeale
therewith hollowed, do mete with the ascendentes cut obliquely or ^opwise
backwardes, being likewise a little for the aforsayd hollowes swelled: but
neither the hollownes of the one, nor the head of the other are (for their
obscurity) to be so Ascendent Processes.
termed plainly. But by the way, you must understand their metyng to be made
The Processes are wyned by the (...) of a Cartilage.
more exactly strong, by the going between of a Cartilage, crustely coueryng
either side: so that, besides their bodies, they are united by their Processes
also. Near unto these Processes are the places of those holes before
mentioned, prepared The cauitiess made to y^ going out of Nerves are near to
the Processes.
for the production of Nerves, and the entrance of Veins and Arteries: and if
you enquire, how many Vertebres of the neck have ascendent and descendent
Processes, I witness unto you five: and one descendent: that is to say more
plainly, How many (...) of the neck have ascendent and descendent Processess.
the v. last Vertebres have both such as ascend, and also such as descend: but
the first has neither: the second only the descendent: but not one upward
tendyng, as the rest: for that could not be permitted, but by corruptyng the
Circular mouyng of the head. Every turnyng joint has his body, besides the
first and uppermost, Wherefore y^ second Vertebre nath not the (...) Process.
which has only a light compassyng proportion, being sharp bellied toward
the forepartes, to supply (as before) the loss of his substance inwardly:
Every Vertebre beside the first has (...) body.
the rest have manifestly their hodyes in length extended, with a certain
kind of flatnes in the foreface of them, not improuidently ordained, for the
nere lyeng How nature (...) with y^ first (...) wanting a body.
to of Aesophagus, and Trachea Arteria: the one of which ends at the
Vertricles, the other in the Lunges. So in committyng together the bodies of
them, nature has done otherwise then in the rest: for ever the neither part of
the higher bone, The figure of the bodies of y^ (...) in y^ neck.
stoopeth forwards, and is received into the hollow of the upper part of the
next bone: the which hollowes as they are large so have they on each side as it
were Why the bodies of the Vertebres are flat on the insyde.
banks, which I presume to compare for their likeness to a sided stool or
chair: or not very obscurely to the seat of a trunk saddle. The bodies of
the other six The bodies of y^ Vertebres of the neck committed together
otherwise then y^ rest.
Vertebres (for the first in this case is exempted) have at either end
Appe^dances, between which, thick and soft Cartilages have recourse, to give
unto them more freely, the gift of easy flexion, and turnyng. Again, only
five of them (therefore here the first and second are excepted) have this
fashion propper to them selves, What the upper part of y^ bodies of the
Vertebres of y^ neck is compared unto.
that is, that their laterall Processes are as it were cloven, or me think
more propperly guttured at their ends like a spoute, and not biforked or
cloven fully like the posteriour Processes: the which places are left for the
implantation of All the Vertebres of the neck the first (...) have (...).
Muscles. Directly toward these, aspect the holes (so often named) for the
production of Sinews: Which are not in single sort exculped in every
Vertebre, but come forth at the metyng of them, and wast the substance of
both, but not alike: for they are deeper engraven: in the upper part of the
lower bone, then in the inseriour part of the higher bone: which unto the
diligent beholders, is easy to be discerned.

Where I have spoken generally of the Vertebres, I have not there left
untouched,

Wherefore passing them, we find the seventh, (which is the last of the neck)
The vij. of the neck joins to the first Vertebre of the breast and (...) it
much.
finitimate, and next adjoining to the Vertebres of the breast: and that so, as
it seems to participate much with the nature of them: and therefore from the
superior Vertebres plainly differs: for the posteriour Processes of the
four above it, are cloven, as is aforesaid, but this is whole as I have found
yet Col. says it The posteriour Process of the vij. Vertebre is not always
solid.
is most commonly otherwise. Besides this, the inferior part of the body
thereof that meteth with the first Vertebre of the brief, extends not
downwardes so obliquely The metting of the vij. with the first Vertebre of the
breast.
as the rest, but meteth with the top of the next body somewhat with more
flat: and equal playnesse. And thus much as touching the turnyng joints of
the Neck. What part the common people most call yt back.


THat part of the back which co^stituteth the breast, being that which in deed
the common sort of people call the back, for the most part consists of The
number of the Vertebres of the breast.
xij. Vertebres, or turnyng joints: to every of the which, two ribs are
kuit: that is to say on each side one, So that the number of them is xxiiij.
though semetyme Whereto are the cibbes fastened. The number of the ribs.
one is found wantyng, or aboundyng: but that seldom, yet mo re ^ten
aboundyng, then wantyng. That sometime in the number of ribs one may be
aboundyng or one wantyng.


These of the breast do differ from the Vertebres of the neck in largenes,
although the others exceed them in thicknes, and soliditie of substance: and
their largenes was convenient: for it behooved the uppermost sustained, to bear
a less scope then the uppermost susteyning. But this mark, that those that
are augmented Of the difference between the Vertebres of the neck and yt
Vertebres of the breast.
with larger compass, are so much the more of light and hollow substance: yet
accept not this for all the difference between them, for besides they are
discrepa^t both in figure, and situation from those of the neck: that is, they
are neither Why the Vertebres of the breast are broader then of the neck.
so flat (yet I thinck good if. you will to except the two first of the
breast) nor yet so depressed as those we have spoken of (without it be the
uppermost which is most of all other like the seventh of the neck) but do
proturberate round, and The bodies of the Vertebres by how much the greater by
so much the more fungie and light.
swell inwardly in the midst. Also the bodies of these above, and beneath,
are plain, possessyng each one a thick crust of Cartilage, interiect and put
between them. Neither is their posteriour Processes (as those of the neck)
cloven, nor yet The figure of the bodies of the Vertebres of the breast.
their extremities broad, or round: but long and sharp, after the manner of a
four squared pillar, or ancient monument called Pyramid: which being broad
beneath, is squared up to the top sharpest. The bodies of the Vertebres of
the breast plain.


Neither are the transuerse Processes biforked or guttured, but long, and
great, endyng with round and thick heads: which rising also from the sides
of the What kind ones are the posteriour Processes of the Vertebres of the
breast, and whereto they are compared.
Vertebres, do erect their exorture vpwardes, but toward their heads are
reclined downward: there inner sides being hollowed: that is to say, having
propper cauities to receive yt heads of the ribs, are so ordained for the
cause of such Articulation And those cauities are in the neither region of the
first three but in the The transuerse Processes of the breast are not for^ed.
upper region of the last three, the middle iiij. admit them in the midst.
Contrariwise, the transuerse Processes of the xi. and xij. are not like: for to
them (comprehendyng but the false ribs) such strong alligation, as is unto
the rest, Where be the tanities wherein the prot^bered heads of the ribs are
settled.
was nothing so needful. Wherefore the false ribs are committed to the
bodies of the Vertebres, as ready always to give scope to the guts, but with a
mean, and single Articulation. All the rest are knit with most strong
Ligamentes: and yet more, (to the end that their tyeng might be more firm,
and steadfast) in the bodies of the Spondilles or each side, or cauities, or
hollowes, wrought (although not all after a manner nor like situation) to admit
into them the little heads of the same ribs. But their differences in this
respect be these: For the first, eleventh, and twelfth have cauities exculped
in the substance, and What ca^ties have the first 11. and 12. Vertebres.
midst of their bodies, whereas to all ye rest, they are common to the
extremities, and enter parts of them nere to the holes prepared for the
Sinews production.

As touching the substance of the Vertebres, note, that the lowest and
greatest The substance of the Vertebres.
(as is said) are rarest and most spongie above the rest, which in these of the
breast is evident: so that sufficient plainly, they are in that point, from
those of the neck What kind ones are the posteriour Processes of the Vertebres
of the bre^.
distinguished: Furthermore the posteriour Procesles (which throughout
longitude of the back proceedyng, are called the Spine) of the two last
Spondilles are not (as the rest) so sharp, neither yet so long, nor slender,
but broader, and rounder ended: and as they differ from their mates of the
breast, so are they unlike (also) those of the Vertebres of the loins:
constituted in the same row and order: The 12. and last of the Vertebres of
the breast, what kind a one.
but most unlike all others of the back, both above and beneth, is the lowest
of the three, being the xij. and last in number of the breast: which is shortest
of others, and neither vpwardes nor downwardes tendyng, but directly put sorth.
The 12. Verteber to be the middle of the Vertebres of the back in the body of
man.


Here now we are not to pretermit so notable a matter, as is yet to be spoken
of by the xij. Vertebre, which Galen describes for the tenth: though more
truly in Dogs and Apes, in which creatures the tenth in the midst of the
Vertebres The use and figure of the 12. Vertebre.
of the back, and as the point or Axletree: which wholly resting, all others
one ^ch side move, which thing shall truly be proved in the xij. Vertebre os
man, which The 12. Vertebre is on both sides (...).
purchaceth one either side an equal kind of Articulatio^: that is, both above
and beneth it has Processes putting forth, yt it might be on both sides
received, just contrary The fl^st Vertebre on both sides recesueth.
to yt first Vertebre of ye neck, which (as we have spoken before) on both
sides receives. But if any man, of ye variety of this Articulatio^ more
diligetly enquire Why one ma^et of articulation is not to all yt Vertebres of
yt breast.
the reason, let him consider, how that in ye superior Vertebres one kind of
mouyng is observed: but in those beneth ye xij. a contrary. Wherefore a contrary
manner also of articulatio^ in respect of ye inferior, is to be seen in ye
superior Processes. Now the back (...) bowed forward.
And peradventure says Collu^bus (but oh ho^u excelle^tly was that noted) the
Articulatio^ By what meaues the back is (...) toward the hinder parts.
of the precede^t Vertebres is most apt to bow the back toward ye Anteriour
parts: whilst the same again almost with ye whose body, croockyng to the
posteriour parts, that gift is purchaced from the Vertebres of the Loins.
How by Spondils both ascendent and descendent the Vertebres do also mere.


Lastly these Spo^dils are, all by asce^dent and desce^dent Processes committed
and knit together: being obliquely cut, and intercrusted with Cartilages. The
Vertebres of ye neck after Gal. 13. Us. part, have xj. Processes or produced
portio^s: which are so in The number of the Processes to the Vertebres of the
neck.
deed, if you account ye laterall Processes double, which before I have
affirmed not to be through out cloue^, but rather made like a spoute, or gutter
of lead, which from between ij. houses conueyeth ye water readely: or else but
ix. as ij. ascendently promine^t Now they may be nu^bred nu^e.
in ye upper part on each side of their bodies, by whose means (as I have
before The iiij. middlemost Vertebre seems more worcester thy then the laterall to
be accounted double.
compared the^) the neither part of ye superior sits in ye upper part of ye
inferior, like as in a sided stool: ij. ascendentes, and ij. desce^dentes,
ij. transuerse or laterals, and one backwardes, being the spine or ridge: which
reckon more worthy (if the trausuerse Processes be nu^bred two a piece) to be
double accounted: especially The number of yt Processes to the Vertebres of the
breast.
the fourth middlemost: whose ends are always biforked, and divided.

But the produced parts of the pectorall Spondilles, Vesalius witnesses to be
v. in every one: as two transuerse, two ascendentes, two descendentes and the
The transuerse Process of the 12 Vertebre appears in sum a^ though the
head thereof were divided with some vigorous (...).
spine, or posteriour Process.

Only the xij. of the breast (in such bodies as it is found as it were
confused as I not seldom have invented) has the transuerse Processes divided,
the one declinyng downwardes, and the other reclinyng vpwardes: after the same
sort as has the Spondile followyng, though not so large. Which is appertinent
unto Of the v. (...) joints of the Loins.
the Loins, which now we will speak of, whose turnyng Joints we account in
number, five: greater then all we have hitherto described, but most in
substance Of what sub (...) are the (...) of the ^yues.
puffed, and of less soliditie: the upper Processes of these comprehe^d the
cauities, whereunto the extremities of the neither, somewhat for the purpose
eminent, do (...) super tout and (...) (...) what kind of one^ so the (...).
enter: which order is in contrary sort to the Vertebres before declared. The
tra^suerse productions of these, as we find them much longer then the other of
the breast, so, less thick, and more unlike in them selves: for the first and
v. has the^ shorter then all the middlemost else: and the contrarictie they
show in them selves The (...) of the (...) are ^oyned cont^ to y^ other
because of their (...) (...).
is after this manner: the uppermost Processes downwardes bendyng, but the lower
vpwardes, and the middlemost in mean betwixt both: that is, neither upward,
nor downward. Wherein he chalengeth boldly Vesalius, whereat I may The (...)
Processes.
well wonder, if so famous and approved Anathomiste as he, should in a case so
easy, be found, either tried, to have no judgment, or else that he would
wilfully set The first and fifth Vertebre of the Loins.
down that he saw not. But with greater admiration I stand amassed at
Collu^bus, who without all manner of indifferent excusation coateth Vesalius,
whilst I How their transne^se Processes (...).
have most beholden, and have yet in my house Sceletons, by whose transuerse
Processes of the Loins Vesalius assertions is verified. Notwithstanding that,
I am Vesalius charged with (...) as touching y^ ^ddle ^rocesses.
not ignorant what diversity may be found in diverse, and that (I confess)
this is no great point to dispute upon, but in the way of discourse: to
dissolve the contra^ A (...) if Vesalius (...) be de ^meo (...) such a mat^r.
of Authors. Chiefly I write thus much for the excuse of Vesalius, because he
is so apertly reproved: as though so learned a labourer in the Art of
disseaing, should have by negligence set down that, which diligence never
inverted: The author (...) (...) point never found it contrary to Vesalius.
which might not be so much, as thought of so princely Anathomist.

Now is it to be noted, that such length in y^ Processes tra^suerse of the
Loins, It is no thank to me to (...) Vesalius. his (...) (...).
was ordained to be as propugnacles (in stead of little ribs) to the great
vessel, or spoutes, derived from the fountains of life and natural being:
and not to be produced after the just length, and magnitude of the ribs: for
their extension over The use of y^ (...) Processes of the Loins.
the region of the bellye had not been convenient, neither would have given
place to the labor of the Muscles, in making compression for the expellyng of
Why (...) were not (...) over the region of the belly as over the breast.
excrementes: but in women least of all expedient, as in the time of natural
procreation, reason ratifieth. It was sufficient therefore, that the production
of the laterall Processes of the Loins was such, as might only give defense to
the great Two Processess which Vesalius knew not.
Artery, and hollow Vein. Nere unto these Processes, and not far from the
holes of the Nerves, arises on each side one other produced portion, though
far shorter Of what kind be the ^osteriour (...) of the Loins.
then the rest. Therefore in some bodies not easily discerned: which was the
cause that Vesalius never invented them. Moreover the posteriour Processes of
the Vertebres of the Loins are neither so long and sharp, nor so much
declinyng The Vertebres of the Loins have (...).
downewardes, as the superior Vertebres before decyffered, but (though not in
rising so large) yet in proceedyng broader, throughout their length stronger,
What Cartilage is between y^ (...) of the Loins.
and their extremities compassed in circular sort. Also these Vertebres of the
Loins have Appendances, like unto the rest, but only as they surmount in
quantity, that is in magnitude above the rest, so the soft Cartilage
intersited between their The uses of their holes before the inferior and
superior Productions.
bodies, is so much the greater and thicker: their holes likewise, exculped
before the superior and inferior productions, give entrance, as well to the
nutrimentall vessels, as to the transporters of sense produced from the
Spinall marey. Notwithstanding we find not these holes so round as there
superiors, nor more The differences of the holes of y^ Vertebres of the Loins
from the others.
largely excaued in the upper side of the inferior Vertebre then in the lower
part of the superior Spondill, but much larger then the holes of the breast and
neck as their bodies we have said before are larger.

Only this is common to all the Uertebres, (the first of the neck excepted)
Col. Lib. Cap. 17.
A thing common to all the Vertebres the first of the neck euely excepted.
that in the hinder part of the body of every Uertebre (though in the Anteriour
sydeway, of the concauitie for the marey) appears the holes ordained for the
(...) if the Nerves, and ingresse of the vessels of nourishment. Finally
Collumbus notes this as a general rule in all bodies, that the posteriour
(...) That the Sp^ from the second to the last of the (...) tends downward.
of the Uertebres (which row is called the Spine) from the second of the
Neck, to the last of the Loins, are all tendyng downward. Which assertion I
could never (in those bodies that I have seen, or willyngly dissected) find
occasion to The vncet. (...) (...) of the (...) deserves not to give any ^han
reproach.
subscribe unto: but always either the xij. of the breast, or else some of the
Vertebres of the Loins, did tend either upward, though very obscurely, or else
directly straight, I mean neither vpwardes, nor downewardes. But to say truth,
you The number of the (...) of the ^oyness.
shall find but small certainty in the form of the Processes. The number of
the Processes apperteinyng to the Spondilles of the Loins are 9. that is to
say, to every Os (...).
one ij. transuerse, ij. sited by the sides of the holes and nere to the
transuerse Os Coccix.
Wherefore Os (...) is of some called Platy.
(though obscured, seen in some) ij. ascendents, ij. descendents, and lastly
the Spine.

Now it remains to speak of the two last parts or divisions of the back,
called by the Gr^kes (...), and (...): and of the Latins Sacrum, and Coccix.
Now contrary to (...) is the imagination of the ignorant.
The which Sacrum, being the higher division, and beginning at the lower end of
the before described Spondilles, for the breadth and largenes thereof, is sometime
The cause why they went about to invent to (...) it ta^e: so that only (...)
appeateth the ground of thi^ (...).
called (...). Wherein plainly it excels all other^ Vertebres: being unto
them as an ample seat and foundation. There are some, that let not to affirm
the cause why this same bone was called Sacrum, to be this, for that (say they)
in women it is endewed with a special gift above all others: in yeldyng on each
side from Os Ilium in time of bringyng forth Child, and again forthwith
closing, ^oc. Predict.
by the secret devise and unknown Art of Nature: without the help of any
Muscle: The ^logie of. Os sacrum.
but as it seems to me nothing at all agreeyng with truth, so Gal. Vesalius,
Lib. 1. Cap. 20.
Collumbus, and Fuchsius account it a fantastical fiction, and a feyned tale,
without the Now Sac^m (...) this sense is interpreted great.
ground of reason, and quyte beside the authority of ye truth: for those kind
of persons do interpret this word Sacrum, holy. But as Realdus affirms (...)
to be Homer.
Virgill.
interpreted Sacrum, so likewise Leonardus with like learned probability,
teaches Gal. (...). de Off. Cap. (...).
us (in this sense) to take and understand Sacrum, for Magnum, that is, Galen
described the Os sacrum of beasts.
great: as Homer in some places, writing Sacrum Mare, and Sacrum Piscem, for
Magnum Mare, and Magnum Piscem, has left us for true testimony. And Virgil.
Col. Fuchsi. Vesal.
(for a Latin Author) has Sacrum auri famem, for Magnam auri cupiditatem. Os
sacrum in man consists of v. or vj. bones.
Galen ascribes to Os sacrum^ iij. bones, which the later Anathomistes flatly
deny: allowing his description therein to retain and smatche of verity, save
only In young years Os. sacrum may be divided.
in Lions, Dogs, and Apes, but it consists of v. bones, and commonly of vj.
say they; which in young and tender years (in deed seem lose and separated,
as Where the traces of Commissures are observed in Os sacrum.
it were not much differyng from the other Vertebres: though afterward they
so knit and cleave together, as that they seem all to make but one bone: were
it not, that in their fore parts we find (as it were) the traces of
Commissures. Why Os sacrum has no Cartilages.
They are together committed like unto the superior Uertebres, save that (like
unto the rest) they lack the interiectur of Cart^lages, because their moving
was How Os sacrum is accom^ amongst the number or the Vertebres.
less needful. Neither are acompted among the number of Uertebres for any
other cause, then that (after a certain manner) they show a similitude of the
Spo^dilles: for of motion (whereby they should chiefly be like them) they are
altogether Why they are not true Vertebres.
frustrate. It is concluded therefore, that nature ordained this bone, not only
for the upper parts to rest upon, and stay them selves, but likewise that the
inferior The uses of Os sacrum.
bones might thereto jointly (one after another) be tied, as from their
beginning: Why Os sacrum should be one.
and (as it was) a decree from the law of nature, that one principal bone Why
it is situated in the (...) of the body.
should be made, whereto all the rest should be established: for which purpose
(this bone being in the midst of the body collocated, and most excellently
settled) Os sacrum conte^neth Spinal marey and therefore has holes for y^
transmission of Neures.
none s^eemeth more commodious, nor any so fit: being to the motions both of
the superior and inferior parts no less then as a ground, or seat
assistau^t. Neither does Os sacrum obscurely reclude, but plain, and largely
open and discover the passages on each side deseruient to the transmitting of
Sinews (as it behooved) from the Spinall marey: contained in the concauitie
hereof, as is seen The Spinall mar^y passing thorough O. ^rum t^steth of a
s^wye nature.
in other Uertebres. But here, that is being in Os sacru^, it is of thick, and
like a hard substance, as that it seems to taste more of a Sinew substance,
then of the nature of marey. Wherefore in the end, degeneratyng into many
branches of Nerves, going backewardes from the borders of Os sacrum, it is
strowed diversely The nerves from Os sacrum to the haunches and some Muscles of
the things.
in the haunches, and dissemi^ated among the Muscles of the thighs as largely
is set forth in the History of Nerves: their holes are round excaued, as much in
the substance of one side, as an other: like as before I said of the Uertebres
of the How the holes of Os sacrum are made.
Loins: and the uppermost two greatest, but the further from them the lesser:
so likewise behynd (for the holes of O^ sacrum do penetrate clean through the
substance The lower yt lesser are the holes.
thereof, as well as into the concauitie of the marey) they are nothing so The
holes on both sides O^ sac^um ^esser with, out and greate^ within.
large as in the inside before. To describe of Os sacrum the fashion, note that
ye upper part of the body thereof is plain, where it meteth with the v.
Uertebre of the Loins, but on each side, it stretches forth with a great
thicknes to the meetyng The figure of O^ s^m.
of Os Ilium: and going downward, it tends backwardes to the middle
Commissure, and so forward again: becommyng more narrow, and sharp, the
further To what use is the hollownes thereof, or the bending of O^ (...) ^ward.
from the top, descendyng to the end: whereby it is made hollow before, and
bou^ched forth behynd, in which hollow part of it the bowels is notably
contained: the posteriour Processes are short, and together committed as the
sides. At the sides Where O^ (...) is (...) to (...) and how.
of the three uppermost bones of Os sacrum being broad, sufficient Solid, and
hallowed, are affixed and knit the prominent parts of Os Ilium one each side,
which That O^ Sacrum and Ilium cannot (...).
by the interuenture of Cartilages, and Ligamentes, are so safe connected and
bound together, as very hardly they may be divided. Yea and that which is more,
The last portion of the back called Cocci^.
they are sometime found grown together, so that no instrument may disseuer
them: which is an evident token, and plain proof in deed, that neither Os
Ilium, How the 4. bones of Co^cix depend upon Sac^um.
nor Sacrum may move by any means.

The fifth and last portion of the back which heartofore we have nominated, Why
it is called Coc^x.
called Coccix, is construed and made of iij. Ossicles, or little bones, which
dependyng Why it is called Coccix.
upon the extremity and neithermost part of Os sacrum, like a tail, is
therefore The description of the first bone of Coccix.
of the latter writers (named Os caudae: which the Greclans call Coccix,
because it so much resembles the beke of a Cuckowe: being also toward the
end, The description of the last iij. bones of Coccix.
evermore sharp and narrower, together with the crookednes. The first bone of
Coccix being broader then the rest, has in the upper part thereof a cauitie,
sufficient Coccix sometime shows his (...).
to receive the extreme end of Os sacrum and so is coupled with a Cartilage:
the other iij. likewise being more round, are after such sort committed
together, Whilst Coccix is bowed the woman is panged.
as that, when need requires, they might show a certain kind of moving:
which Collumbus affirms to bow (though not without great pain) in women,
The Processes of the first bone of Coccix.
at the coming forth of the birth. Four Processes apperteine to the first
bone: as two laterall, or on the sides, and other two behynd, sharp, and
vpwardes reclinyng: Coccix contains not of the spinall marey.
these bones have no place within them for the Spinall marey: wherefore neither
have they holes, for the transmission of Sinews: their substance is hollow
The substance of Coccix.
and light, like as the Uertebres of the breast: their color is red: and in
Children as soft as grystels. The color of the bones of Coc^.


Galens description of the last two parts seems wholly rejected, in notyng
three bones to Os sacrum, and iij, to Os Coccix: so much, that no m^ believes
he The bones of (...) are in children as soft as gristells.
ever dissected the body of man: but who is so ignorant that knows not, how
even in one region, great difference, and sundry alterations in natures shapes
are found: since I have to show in my house a scleton, which were the bones
sometime of a tall man, whereby I am able to approve as much (to the admiration
of It is much doubted that (...) never diss^ the body of man.
all Anathomistes) as Galen affirmed as touching the back, for whereas the
most famous dissectors, and princes of Anathomy, have vowed five Uertebres to
the Loins, v. (but most commonly vj.) to Os sacrum, and four to Os Coccix,
mine has neither of all those true: but contrariwise, vj. to the Loins, iiij.
to A back very strange from that which is desc^ibed.
Os sacrum, and only one to the taylebone. I write not this to the defense of
any error, but that each one, dewly waying the alterations of natures, and
nations, I do not defend Galen in this, knowing that he has erred much in yt
Dettebres, but to give the sign how vn^ertem their number is in most bodies
The. breast is the mansion of the heart.
should be more studious them selves to write the truth, then greedy to
reprove, whose acts they never saw.

Thus with a sufficient prolixitie, we have entreated of the Vertebres: which
forbecause xij. of them are said to constitute the breast (which is the mansion
of the heart and spiritual parts, or (as Fuchsius says) a certain strong
enclosure, so circundated and compassed for the safe keeping of the heart and
Lunges) it is fit to describe now in what order.

IT seems nothing at all disagreeyng to truth (by the Assertions of sundry
authors, Cap. xxiij. lib. 1.
inferred on this behalf) that the co^struction of the breast consists of
iij. The construction of the breast consists of three things.
things: that is to say, of the Vertebres or Spondils, of the breast bone, and
of ribes. in which creation, the diligence of nature was meruaylous as Galen
declares in Nature in yt construction of the breast very wise and pro^ident Why
ye breast was not made all of bone.
his 7. De Usupart. in not making it altogether bonnye, or fleshy, but by the
mixture of both: for if of bones only, the breast had been utterly destitute of
moving: And contrariwise, if of Muscles without bones, it could not be but by
contractio^, to fall upon the heart, and lunges, having nothing to sustain and
hold them up: but by this means, both the breast moves, by the benefit of the
Muscles interfited Why yt breast was not made of muscles without bones.
among the bones, and the Muscles are sustained: also the strength of the
bones, which are extended with such ample scope and conuexitie, are most
expedrent for the secure being of the heart and Lunges: otherwise all the
members Now vtile is the right constructio^ of the breast.
must have yielded to voice and respiration: which by this means, are most no
If the breast had been made without bones what discommoditic had happened.
tably achieved, together with competent compass, and meet room for the
magnitude of the heart and lunges: which (as testifies Fuchsius,) imitateth
the form of the breast, but not the breast of the Lunges.

Wherefore, to the constitutyng of the frame of the breast, as the ribs are the
The lunges (...) the four^e (...) the breast.
principal parts, so Collumbus proves the aforesaid Vertebres, that is from
the last of the neck, to the first of the Loins, to be of more effi^cie to
the strength Lib. 1. Cap. 23.
Lib. 1. Cap. 19.
of the breast then the breast bone. For to the^ (says he) the ribs are
coupled (almost That the breast has more strength from the (...) then from the
breast bone.
all) with double knittyng: and therefore receive twice so much strength from the
Spondilles, as force from the breast bone: the number of these ribs are
xxiiij. that is, on each side xij. and this we account for the most part:
although (sometime) Almost all the ribs are double knit to the Dertebres.
they may be found more in number, or fewer, as well in men, as women. Wherefore
to dispute with the impudency of such, as will have the woman's side in number
of ribs, to surmount the man's, it should be extreme madness and folly: for
The number of the ribs.
more in number, or fewer, happens only by the abundance or want of the matter
The ribs are not always 24.
of generation: no otherwise the^ as sometime we find more, or less then five
That the man has as many ribs as the woman.
fingers on a hand. Also we must note, that by the extraordinary number of
Vertebres, may grow the like effect in account of the ribs.

But to speak of the number which most commonly we find: that is to say on
The reason why the ribs are (...) some more in others fewer.
either side xij. of the which number there be certain named True and
Legitimate ribs, and others false and counterfeit ribs: those that are
nominated to be the true and perfect ribs, are the uppermost vij. because
they are united, The number of the ribs is answerable to the number of the
De^tebres of the breast.
by a Cartilage going in the midst to the breast bone by the manner of
knittyng called Arthrodia, heretofore susficiently defined: five ribs
following these are the untrue ribs, because they are not conjoined in the
order of the rest to the breast bone, but are committed only to the Cartilages
of the superior frew The division of the ribs.
ribs: the xij. alone by it self refuses to be fastened with the rest, and
therefore Which be yt true ribs.
is stayed and bound to Septum transuersum: neither marvel, if sometime you
find the xj. in that sort colligate to Diaphragma. Why they are called true
ribs.


The ribs (as I said before) are with a double fyeng coarticulate to the
Vertebres, all saving the ij. last: which be in single sort committed to the
Spondilles: (...) the ij. last (...) (...).
The ends of all the ribs backwardes are prominent, like unto headed The
Processes of the ribs in the Posteriour part.
Processes, or productions, rather sharp, then round: the which heads are
immitted into the bodies of the Vertebres: There are also in the sides of them
(for the The cauities in the sides of the Vertebres.
purpose) certain cauities, diversely apparent: for nothing so deeply exeaued
are those, of the three neither most ribs seruyng also to their
inarticulation: therefore An other Process in the ribbe.
not so firmly knit to the Vertebres. They have besides this, not far from
The use of this other Process.
the head, an other Process, (the space therefore betwixt both is left
hollowed) and this Process (...) forth like a knot in a piece of wood, is a
mean to give the Whereto this other Process is tied.
ribbe an other stay: for it is fast tied also, and that with most strong
bonds, unto the transuerse Processes of the Spondilles. What ribs want the
second Articulation.


The which manner of knittyng (notwithstanding) we must not account common What
thing is common to all the ribs.
to all the ribs: for the xi. and xij. yea many times the first also, are
deprived of this second Articulation: yet this is common to all the ribs:
that is, to consist The Appendaunces of the ribs.
of bonny, and Cartilaginous substance, as also to be endewed with
Appendances, as well where they couche with the cauities of the Vertebres, as
also are How much space the ribbehath of bonye substance.
connected to the transuerse Processes. The whole space of them, from the
Vertebres, toward ye Anteriour parts, is of bonny substance: but the true,
in coming Where the Cartilaginous substance is produced (...) the ribbe.
to the breast bone: and the false, to the gristels of the others, yield forth
great store of Catrilaginous substance: to the end that the softer with the
hard, might not The use of the Cartilages betwixt the ribs and breast bone.
suddenly be compounded.

Moreover the ossey substance of the ribs is not every where alike: for the
extremities and ends of the mare tender, light, and hollow, but middle part
much Of the substance of the ribs.
harder, and also inwardly uredullous: so also, that part, that is nerest to
the Vertebres, The extremities of the ribs.
is ever more narrow, and as it were round, in comparison of the other The
middle part.
space nearer to the breast, which on each side, are made more broad, and flat.
Collumbus Toward the breast the ribs are broader.
distinguishes the right from the left, by the thicknes and thinnes of the
parts: For (says he) for certain note, that the superior part of every
ribbe, is thicker To know y^ right from the left ribs.
then the inferior: and not only in man, but likewise in all other creatures
(the Lion excepted) he allows this to sound with truth. Furthermore the
Cartilages, The ribs of a Lion are not flat but round.
which the ribs forwardly produce, are diverse, and not of equal Soliditie
in substance: for those of the true ribs, are not so soft as the gristles of
the false The Cartilages of y^ true ribs are hardec the^ of the false.
ribs, and that for good consideration: for the one is committed to a harder
substance, the other to a more (...) as is manifest in the uppermost or true
ribs, Why the (...) of y^ true ribs are harder.
whose Cartilages are fastened to the breast bone, whereas they of the
counterfeite sort are but tied to the Cartilages of the others. Wherefore, the
softer with the softer, The harder are bound to the harder parts and
contrariwise.
and the harder with the harder parts better to endure, and more safely to
knit, who is so ignorant that doubts. And that which is more, you shall
find in very old persons, those superior Cartilages belongyng to the true
ribs, The Cartilages of y^ true ribs in old persons do participate with
the nature of bones.
not as we have said before, but to be into ossye substance (that is the
nature of bones) degenerated, and changed.

Amongst the rest, the vi. vij. viij. and ix. Cartilages of the ribs, are
longest, but those of the false ribs more slender, and narrower poynted:
which is not In length the difference.
so of the true ribs. Notwithstanding the Cartilage of the last is shortest
of all, The Cartilage of the last ribbe is shortest.
like that of the first true ribbe, except in this differing, that whereas that
is sharp and slender, contrariwise this is ample and broad: no otherwise then
as it surceadeth Wherein the last cartilage differs from the first.
all others in breadth: and that principally, toward the part thereof that
nearest approaches the breast bone: and that far otherwise, then happens in
all The first Cartilage and ribbe is broadest.
the rest, whose begynnynges contraryly, are broader then any other portion of
their progress. Such Cartilages are requisite unto the ribs, yea and very
needful, not only for the easy motion of the breast, in being extended and
compressed Why the ribs have such long Cartilages.
in the sleep, after the natural motion of the Lunges, but also for the
better safety thereof, from outward, and extrinsecall anoyaunce. For by their
means, each sudden percussion, or stroke of the breast has an easy repulse,
in their yeldyng The service of the Cartilages in inspiration and expiration.
from it: which otherwise might break the ribs, or at least divide them from
the breast bone. But these, occupying the mean space betwixt the ribs and
breast bone, are by expiration infl^ted, but by inspiration extended. Likewise,
the vj. Cartilages of the superior ribs are equally distau^ced, but the
compass of ye The spaces of the ribs.
ix. viij. vij. and inferior part only of the vj. where it respects the
vij. are diverse, The tying together of the Cartilages.
and variable, and their Cartilages so cleave together, as they might seem
contitinuall: leauyng no space, where to be separated.

Beyond all this, each Cartilage appertainyng to the true ribs, has in the
How the Cartilages of the true ribbe^ are knit to the breast bone.
end thereof, as it were a certain head, or Tubercle, whereby they are
committed, and jointly knit unto the corners or cauities, exculped in the sides
of the breast bone.

To speak of the figure of the ribs, or what kind of fashion they have, no
Every man kn^^eth the fa^hion of the ribs.
man is ignorant: only this is to be noted, that ye semicircled order of the
ribs, and compassed creation of the breast were most expedient, as well for
the force and To what use the breast was m^^e compa^^^^.
strength thereof, as also for the matter conteinyng of many things: and so
consequently, for the better safety of things contained.

The first superiors, and last inferiors, being far shorter then the
middlemost, The cause why the uppermost and n^^thermost ribs are shorther and
the middle sort longer.
to the roundyng and compassing of the breast do not a little lend (as it were)
their helpyng hands. Wherefore the observation thereof is worthy: since the
uppermost are more crooked and bendyng then the neithermost, which are nothing
so bounched outward, nor strayt: the middlemost again, being more long, and
The uppermost ribs, are more crooked.
large, are also broader then the rest, except it be the first of all, which as
it is shortest, so it is also most broad: whereby we gather, that by the s^rayt
coming in and What kind of ones are the middlemost.
bendyng of the uppermost, the highest part also of the breast is made the
narrowest, and straytest of room, but again further going downwardes, where
the ribs The first ribbe is shortest and broadest of all others.
are largest, and more at liberty extended, there also the breast must needs
have greater scope, and compass, as it behooved.

Now again because the ribs, in their inner region or side, are succinged
Pleura clotheth ye ribs on the in side.
and clothed with a most sensible Membran called Pleura, and to the end that,
the asperitie and roughnes of the ribs, might not be at any time, to the
sensibilitie Why the inside of the ribs is not roughe.
of the same, offensau^t, it was therefore carefully provided for, they being
inwardly, wrought so smooth and easy for the same as may be devised. There is
a certain hollow, or long cauitie in the lower region of each ribbe, which
lyeng after the A Ueyne, Artery, and Nerve, what cau^^ie in ye ribs
receu^^^h them.
lo^gitude thereof like a gutter, yeldeth way for the course of Vein, Artery,
and Nerve, therein runnyng together. And this manner interne cauitie is
indifferently in all the ribs, only stretchyng longer and deeper in the
middlemost: but the The cauities of the ribs compared together.
first and extremest ribs, admittyng smaller vessels, for the smalnes of the
ribs, have likewise lesser cauities or gutters, to their substance engraued.
Wherefore, for this cause, we are most excellently warned, in the disease called
of the Greeks Empiema, that in making incision for the drawyng away of Pius,
we be For the disease Empiema how inscission must be made.
sure to apply our instrument to the upper region of the ribbe, but not to the
neither part thereof in any case: for fear of the great incommoditie, that
might ensue What hurt may ensue by making inscission vnd^^ ^ ribbe.
by dividing those vessels: which (as appears in the lower side of the ribbe)
are easy to be touched.

But outwardly the ribs (I mean in the posteriour part of them) are
sufficiently rough, and unequal, for the better fastenyng to of the
Ligamentes, whereby The ribs on the outsy^^ rough and why.
they are alligated to the Vertebres, in that order as we have said before. But
not far from those Tubercles or productions, which we have nominated to
articulate with the transuerse Procelles of the Spondill, the ribs are
endewed with an other The (...) y^ long^^^ of the (...)
prominent portion, whereto grows the longest Muscle of the back: and not
far thence, in a rough part of the ribs (for so is the whole space of iij.
fingers breadth from the Vertebres) is aptly inserted the vj. Muscle of mouyng
the breast: The iusertion of y^ vj. (...) (...) the breast.
and thus are the ribs committed to the Vertebres.

The brestbone, which the Grecias call (...), and (...), but in Latin Pectus,
is (...) (...). pectus, the breast bone. (...) is rather the region of the breast.
far otherwise in four footed beasts, and much alienate from the natural
construction of the same in mankind: for that in Dogs, Apes, and other such
like, it consists chiesly of vij. bones: which perhaps drew Galen to that
error, as appears Of how many bones Sternon consistech in other creatures.
in his xiij. chapter of bones: but the breast bone in man is construct and
wrought of four parts, that is to say, of iiij. or iij. bones: but not so
many as are (...) in (...).
true ribs on a side: which (I say) in beasts, and not in men, are found.
Vesalius The breast bone in (...) of what parts it (...).
found but three in aged persons. Whereof the first is very large, and also
thick, but not so thick as might surmount the largenes, and broader in upper
part then (...). (...). Cap. 19.
where it meteth with the second. The second (contrariwise) is narrower in the
beginning The description of the first bone.
then at the lower end, and exceeds also more in largenes, then in The
description of the second bone.
thicknes: but the third is a small bone, and is committed to the inferior
part of The third bone. wherefore it is (...) to the breast.
the second bone, after the like order as the second is joined with the first:
and is knit there, to the second bone, whereas the Cartilages of the vij. (...)
be Articulate (...) (...) where.
to the lower seat of the same. This bone, as it is large, so is it also
slender, Of the substance of Sternon.
and in the lower seat thereof degenerateth into a Cartilage, which has to
name by propper appellation from the Latins, mucronata Cartilago. The
substance of How the breast bones are bound together.
the bones of the breast retaynoth no certain solliditie, but are every where
soft, Spongie, and hollow, and are bound together, each one by the help of a
Cartilage: Col. lib. 1. Cap. 20.
the which manner of knittyng and Coarticulation, Galen calls Synarthrosum,
whose moving is obscure, and as plainly we have discused hertofore: The breast
bones are (...) together by Simphisis.
but Vesalius, and Collumbus do write in stead thereof Symphisis: which we
declared to be destitute of all manner motion, as the breast bones, which
(notwithstanding The breast bones move after the motion of the ribs.
they be commitid together with Cartilages,) have not any moving, but thereby
rather bow, and yield to the elation and depression of the ribs. The upper
part of the first, is much larger then any part of the rest, and also thicker,
having in The (...) yeeldyng to ye descense of the rough artetye.
the middlemost part thereof above a hollow manifestly exculped, giuyng place to
the descension of the roughe (...). On each side of the which corner, the
substance of the same bone is once again excaued outwardly, and that most
excellently, to admit the Articulation and knittyng of the canell bone on
each side. The cauities admitting ye heads of yt (...) bones.
Both the inner and outer region of the breast bone is indifferent smooth, and
even, but the top of necessity has a certain roughnes, whence springs
and exurgeth The top of the breast bone tonghe to what end.
a valiant long Muscle, stretchyng from the top of this Pectorall bone, up
to the Mammillar Process on each side, where it is worthily implanted.

At the lower end thereof (as we said even now) grows the Triangular
Cartilage, At the lower end of the breast bone grows the (...) Cartilage.
named Mucronata, because it is downewardes sharp poynted, and edged like a
sword: wherefore some also call it Ensiformis, and Gladialis: other, for that it
ha^geth like a shield, say Clypealis: some again, Malum granatu^: but the
Greeks, The figure of this Cartilage.
Xiphoides. Whereby some heretofore, have supposed ye mouth of the Ventricles to
The names of it.
be chiesty defended, as only a muniment for that end to have been created:
when Why this Cartilage cannot (...) the mouth of the stomache.
as it is evident, the mouth of y^ Ventricle to be thence not a little distaunt:
and nearer (by far) situated unto the back. Wherefore this according to the
opinion of the latter sort, the breast bone was created as a stabiliment unto
the ribs, which The mouth of the (...) is nearer the back.
Orbicularly effourme, and fashion the amplitude and largenes of the breast. But
Mucronata Cartilago (says Realdus) is principally a propugnacle unto Septum
transuersum, which in that place is much of sinewye, or tendinous substance,
whereby The uses of (...) (...).
it comes to pass, that by the vicinitie it has with Septum transuersum,
and the same Diaphragma with Pericardon (which is the Inuolucre of the heart,)
A would in (...) (...) infers death.
and so consequently with the heart, a wound that penetrateth the same
Cartilage, and hurts the midrefe, induces death, most commonly: as more at
large we have declared other where.

AS touching the Ossicle, or little bone contained within the heart, although it
Of the bone in y^ heart.
pleases Collumbus utterly to disdain the description thereof and less to
believe any such matter, deridyng ye authority of Galen so much in that behalf:
yet as tract of time (the natural nourse experience,) teaches ye paynfull
Artiste y^ ready Opportunity finds that some time which want of good occasion
long time before did darken.
way out of the doors of darkness: eue^ so truth (like unto the flames of fire)
being never so covered and damped for a space, finds issue (at length) on one
side or other: and so is clearly apparaunt to all beholders. I mean not
hereby to repugne altogether ye doctrine of so worthy a man, whose knowledge
and rare experience (as I purpose not to prove that which shall be found in all
ages but that in the last age I suppose it true for the most part although
Columbus confesses no time.
I ought) so I honor: but rather with such conjecture as stands both with
experience, and sufficient probability to stand forth in the midst. Galen
says in his vij. De Vsu partium, that in the foundation of ye heart, (about the
roots of Arteria aorta: the Arteriall Veins, and of their Membrans,) is found
a certain Ossicle, which is not plainly a bone, but like a Cartilage: but the
greater that the creature is, the more also does that Cartilage degenerate into
Ossie substance. Hereby is The beginning of the bone in the heart.
signified, that Galen meant not in the heart only of Man that a bone might be
found, who is nothing near the quantity of such creatures as he dissected
for Galen names the beasts wherein he found this bone.
that purpose: and after the invention thereof (as at Rome he found it in an
Elepha^t) he forbids us to call it simply a bone, or an Ossie Cartilage, but
a Cartilaginous It is not an O^sie cartilage but a cartilaymous bone.
bone. And notwitstandyng that he sought the same in other creatures then man,
yet I cannot think that he simply ascribed the same unto the body of Man only
of imagination: But as he said as touching beasts, the greater they be of
bodies, the more also etc. so I understand his meaning as touching men, not so
The elder y^ body the harder this Cartilage.
much as their bodies differ in quantity, but rather thus, ye elder that the
body is (especially after ye ripenes of years) the more manifestly also does
ye same Cartilage become harder of substance: so that in men full of days,
and such decrepittes as old age has long arrested, we may find (as Galen
says) this Cartilaginous bone at the roots and Membrans, of the said
Arteries, and Arteriall Vein: as it were a staff, or stay unto them and a
stabiliment to the whole body of the heart The use of y^ bone in the heart.
in the debilitie of years, and that with great perspicuitie. Does not
Collumbus himself, in his vij. book entreatyng of the heart and Arteries
confess, that in the place before mentioned does grow a Cartilaginous
substance? Which, by his words in his xxj. chapter of bones, he grants
to be a firmament and ground What age brings to pass.
to the roots of the same Artery, and Arteriall Vein? And who doubts but
as age takes away Appendances, drives out Seames, hydeth Commissures, and in
diverse places of the body transformeth Gristels unto bones, and soft substance
into harder: so likewise this in the heart, degenerateth from the nature of a
simple Cartilage, into a Cartilaginous bone. And that I seem not to run
altogether A true exployt in y^ bone of y^ heart.
headlo^g upon conjecture, I make it known unto you that the sight of mine
own eyes have testified, in dissectyng the body of an old Gentleman, of great
worship, and famous autiquitie, in Lincolneshyre. Anno Do. 1574. Whilst
imitatyng the mind of Galen, I opened ye least Ve^tricle of the heart, and
searched to Where the bone in the heart was^ found and what kind of one.
the root of Aorta, I easily discovered ye thing, wherefore I sought: findyng
there the Cartilage fastened to the Me^brans, of ye aforesaid vessels, become
vpwardes, plainly of Ossie substance, the length of iij. Barley corns, and at
the neither end gristelly, the length of one: whereto was fastened ye roots of
the great Artery, named Aorta, and the Arteriall Vein, with their Membra^s.
And this Cartilaginous That the Cartilage in many years does degenerate into a
bone though some other creatures have it in all a^es.
bone I willyngly separated from the body of ye heart, in open sight of the
worshipful, the old Gentleman his aliau^ce and friends, who I suppose have as
yet reserved it.

Thus (gentle Reader) thou have to determine of the bone in the heart: not that
I will have it found, as generally as other bones, in every age, but that I
would not neglect the description thereof, for thy easier understanding,
wheresoever thou shall happen to invent the like. The shoulder blades or scaple
bones.


NOw it follows to speak of the shoulder blades, which the Greeks call
(...), and somewhiles simple (...), but the Latins most commonly The number of
scaple bones.
Scapulae, and are two in number: that is to say, on each side one, and are
sited toward the top and posteriour region of the breast, being bound also
by the interuenture Situation.
of Muscles, to Occiput, to the Vertebres of the neck, and breast, and to the
bone Hyoides: so likewise cleauyng to the uppermost ribs behynd, do serve as
propper ^se.
propugnacles to defend the back, and give strong repulse to all outward
injuries What part of the back stands most in the way of hurt.
offered thereto: the which part in deed of the back is more in the way of
outward damages, and strokes then any other: wherefore the shoulder blades are
made after a defensive form, being inwardly toward the ribs, concaued,
(...).
and hollow, but outwardly prominent, and puttyng forth a strong ridge, like
The spine of the the scapple bone.
the rising of a hill, or rock unto the superior part: not a little to the
augmenting of their validity.

And besides those parts before named, who sees not how the shoulder blades
The scaple bones to y^ canell bones and shoulders.
are most firmly Articulated to the Canell bones, and shoulders, to the
Vertebres of the breast, neck, Hyoides, Occiput, ribs, and their Muscles:
whereby in deed The knittu^g of the canell bones.
appears how necessary is their co^struction, since not only they defend the
hinder The necessity of there co^struction.
parts, but also admit the insertion, and due growyng and rising of Muscles.

Their fashion is after a Triangular manner, although not equally sided, or
squared. The scapple bone (...) square.
For the upper part is a great deal shorter then the other two, which going
downwardes, do end at an obtused and blunt corner. And this obtused corner, is
that part which Collumbus supposes most worthy to be called the seat or
foundation Lib. 1. Cap. 21.
The foundation of y^ scaple bone.
of the shoulder blade: Albeit Vesalius judges it to be that side of Scapula,
that reaches down after the longitude of the back, next to the Spinall
Processes of the pectorall Vertebres.

But briefly, these bones are endewed with three notable productions, or
Processes: The Processes of scaple bone.
whereof the first being likewise shortest, has a broad and hollowed head,
ordained necessarily to receive unto it the top of the shoulder, being first
knit The first Process.
thereto: yet because the compass of this Process was not sufficient enough
to What amplisteth y^ hole in the first Process.
contain therein a hole agreeyng, or correspondent to the greatness of the head
of the shoulder, and because also it was requisite, that the largenes thereof
should be such, as might safely comprehend, and k^pe the same for over lightly
rushyng The use of y^ cartilage in y^ uniting of the shoulder to the scaple.
out of his place: therefore nature not only added thereto a thick Cartilage:
which coueryng the inner part and sides of the cauities, makes for it a large
and deeper hole, but also beset it excellently with the two other Processes, as
it were on The i^. other Processes, their use and situation.
the most perilous parts, and dangerous sides.

One of them compared to a Crows beke, or anchor, is therefore called
Ancyroides, Coracoides. By this y^ arm is distau^t, and deduced from the
ribs: and The Process Ancyroides.
this contains the shoulder bone in his seat, yelding thereto great
validity and The insertion of a Muscle to (...).
force on that part. No less makes it also the insertio^ of the Muscle, which
draws the shoulder blade to the Anteriour parts, and boweth the cubite.

The other, being the last of the three Processes, being that, we assimuled and
The Process Acromion why it is so called.
any of the rest. This is it which the Grecians do nominate (...), as it were
the point and top of ye shoulder. This Process (as it were houeryng over the
The use of Acromion.
top of the shoulder) worthily prohibiteth, that no sudden Luxation vpwardes
be committed, but is ever a most safe defense and propugnacle thereto: so that
the shoulder is strongly munited and fensed from sudden decay, by the two last
recited Processes, and no less bound unto his seat by the first. But this,
not all the The canell bone is ^oyned to Acromion.
office of the third: for, besides that it makes the shoulder each where more
strong and perdurable, it offreth forwardly a place, whereto the Cannell bone
is aptly knit and confirmed. And prepares a most apt seat for the insertion
of Muscles.

These bones are each where unequal, and no place fourmed like an other. The
mequalitie or ye scaple bones in thicknes and thinnes.
For all that space on the upper side, between the broad Process backwardes by
the ridge, to the extreme border, and also beneth the same ridged Process,
down to the seat or foundation aforesaid, is very thin, and unequally
hollowed, but the Processes them selves, and (principally) that part of the
bone that is next unto the arm, shows not only an excellent thicknes, but
also the substance thereof appears Where the scaple bones are (...) and
medullous.
medullous and hollow. The inner region thereof has cauities, that obliquely
stretch overthwart, made by the often mouyng of the ribs, which on the The
inner Cauities of the scapple bone.
outer side again do protuberate and give forth. And notwithstanding that some
parts outwardly, yield to the inner cauities mentioned, yet nevertheless the
The cauities on the outside.
same side, resuseth not to give place with like hollownes, to the Muscles
which are orderly in them couched: which marueilously argues the industry of
nature, The industry of nature in y^ outer Cauities.
who to the end their substance might not thoroughly be decade, would not each
where, for the insertion of Muscles, or scope of the ribs, embicill, and wast
so much of the bones: but rather outwardes, and inwardes (as such occasion was
offered) that they should bow, and yield on each side.

The number of Appe^dances attributed to these bones are v. that is to say iij.
Five appendaunces of the scapple bone.
at the inner side, near in the going down of the Spine, which are fastened to
the foundation of the shoulder blade: the which place is the original of
certain Muscles. The other ij. portions Appendant, do minister Ligamentes,
wherewith the The uses of the appendaunces.
shoulder is bound in his seat or hole, and the Cannell bones fastened to the
rehearsed Process named Acromion: that is to say, of these ij. Appendances
Acromion chalengeth one, and the hollow or seat of the shoulder the other.

Furthermore in the top of the shoulder blade, between the Process Acromion,
The use of the cauitie between the process Acromio and the head of the scaple.
and the supreme part of Scapula, is a propper round cauitie made, that by the
Muscle therein sited, might happen the circumaction and round, or wheelyng
motion of the shoulder. Much profitable therefore we must account this Process
Acromion: which both strengthens the other parts, produces Appendances, Now
vtile is the Process Acromio Such creatures as have not (...) bones ^oe want
y^ Acromion Process.
offreth it self to the insertion of Muscles, and stays in such order the
Cannell bones, as that Collumbus says, such creatures as have not those bones,
neither have they this Process Acromion.

THe Canell bones therefore, called in Greek (...), in Latin Furculae,
Clauiculae, Cle^des. 1. Clauicul^, ye canell bones The canell bones ioyn to the
top of the breast.
or Iugula, which we have not yet spoken of among the parts of the breast, are
certain bones joined on each side as well to the breast bone, as the shoulder
blade, and thus.

From the cauitie on both sides, of the top and upper part of the breast bone,
The description of the canell bones.
which we have before described, departs the Clauicles or Canell bones (as
our common English Phrase is) and being ouerthwartly conuayed, do asce^d above
the top of the shoulder unto the late recited Process called Acromio^: where
they shut Their uses.
in, and enclose the shoulder, coarticulate, and knit with Scapula, as we have
said before, in such order, as that the arm thence by no manner of means, may
slip unto the breast: but there hence holds it so steadfastly distau^t, as
greatly avails, not only to the mouyng of the hands aptly to the breast, but
also (as it seems) most serviceable to their innumerable actions: which
otherwise might move, but Why they are called Furculae.
at no time with such stabilitie, and steadfast certainty of doing: which is
the cause that some have called them Furculae: as it were little proppes, or
posts, to sustain Why they are called Clauiculae.
the shoulders: some again Clauiculae: as it were the keys of sure and
certain Why they are called Iugula.
mouyng. Others Iugula: as they say, for the fashion of yokes by them resembled.

To speak of their substance, which is fistulous, and hollow, covered with a
The substance of the clauicles.
thin bonny crust, you shall find them most easy to break, being much more
The figure of the clauicles.
round then a (...), and also thicker: save that their hollownes makes them
more ragil (...), and britle: their making is not unlike this figure. S. for
twice are the Clauicles crooked, twice bounched out, and twice concaued, or
hollowed: from the beginning at Os pectoris, unto the middle region, or half
of the bone, it is hollow inwardly, but outwardly bowed in round compass as
long a space. And contrariwise, going from that same half part, up to the
Process of the scaple bone, it is outwardly hollow, and inwardly conuexed: the
which kind of crookednes nature Why the Canell bones are crooked.
devised not in vain: esteemyng it more fit and necessary, that so the
Clauicles might occupy their places, as rather Aspera arteria, and these
needful passages of the throat might not be hindered, or pressed, then that
they should be directly Why the Canell bones are forward more (...) then
backward.
stretched so, as might both obstinately resist those, and be never the fitter
to Articulate with their places.

Again note, that for great reason the Cannell bone is rather forward, then
backwardes promine^t, and bearing out. For under that regio^ lies the
progress of principal vessels, caryeng the Animal, Uitall, and Natural
Faculties that The (...) defends Axillaris Vena and Arteria (...), and v.
Nerves.
is to say Vena axillaris, and Cephalica, with an excellent great Artery,
being accompanied with the five Nerves, unto the hand transmitted: to all
which, the incurued or crooked part of the Clauicle notably gives place, and
is a mete propugnacle for their safe passage.

The head and upper end of the Clauicle, where it meteth with Acromion, is The
heads of y^ cauell bone.
broad, and depressed, having therein a cauitie exculped, mete to admit the
side Thohead to Acromion.
of the Process, for the softer being thereto. But the other head and end is
round, after a certain manner, especially in that place, which the hole
exculped in The head to Sternon.
Sternon, receives.

Appendances notwithstanding are propper to both the heads; covered with The
Appendances of y^ clauicles. Two manner of Cartilages to the lower head of the
canell bone.
their Cartilages: but to that end, that is settled in the breast, an other
moreover is added: yet is their knittyng, but after the manner of Articulation
called Arthrodia: Finally at y^ clauicles some Muscles have their beginning,
other some there The articulation of the clauicles, refered to (...).
ending: therefore it behooved some parts of them to be rough, ridged, or
knotty: as may be seen in diverse places of the same bones, inwardly aspectyng,
for the producyng of Ligamentes, and Muscles: which may not escape untouched,
when we The Asperities and roughe lines of y^ cannel bones to what use.
come to their descriptions. Lastly note, that as no part is destitute of
nourishment, no not the Loins, but have that which is due to nourishe and
maintain them, so nature forgot not to give unto these, as also to the scaple
bones last All bones are nourished with blood.
before rehearsed, some slender surcles, and twigges of Veins, which (...)
their substance here and there, do duly feed them.

HVmerus, which in English phrase is interpreted the shoulder, is always
Humerus y^ shoulder.
taken for the Process, and large ridge or rising of the scaple Bone, or A
note to the reader what is meant by the shoulder least he be deceived.
shoulder blade called Acromion: so that all that we lay upon this Process of
the scaple bone, we say we bear it on shoulder: but note gentle Reader that
here according to the Latin description, thou may permit me to use an other
phrase, The situation of Humerus.
and to understand by name of shoulder, the highest bone of the arm, which
beneath, The cubitte consists of Vlna and Radius.
with Radius and Vlna, and above with the short Process of the Scapple bone,
is comoyned.

It is singularly numbered, and of all the bones of the arm, the greatest long,
The description of the shoulder. Galen in error.
and round, but not largest of all others except the thighe: though Galen
willed us so to esteem of it: for the great bone of the leg exceeds it
fare, and (as says Collumbus) it is neither equal to Os sacrum in magnitude,
nor to Os Ilium in latitude. The inequality of the shoulder.
And notwithstanding that it is after a sort (for the most part) round, yet it
is not of Cauities or corners, but is much unequal, for the placyng, knitting,
and rising of the Muscles: the superior part thereof is round, and great
headed, in The (...) of the shoulder.
dewed with a large Appendance: which is also, not sparyngly covered with a
Cartilaginous crust, aptly inserted in the hole or cup of the Scapple bone:
which hole with an other Cartilage is notably enlarged, supplyeng the want of
The (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...)
thicknes in the same Process: whereby the hole could be no larger, as we have
touched before. The same upper head has also two Processes, with a corner, or
gutter most evidently divided: the for most of them is less then the hinmost,
and The Processes of the (...) of the (...).
the greatest portion of them both, is within the compass of the Appendance
comprehended: and that cauitie or hollow, interiected between them, is a seat
for the The use (...) (...) (...) (...) the Processes.
Muscle, which with a double beginning flowyng from the shoulder blade, is this
way delated downward, to the bowyng of the cubitte. But the inferior part The
(...) head (...) y^ shoulder bone.
of this shoulder bone, not being round as is before said of the superior
part, is (notwithstanding) large, and variformed, each side unlike another,
both in corners, heads, prominent parts, and such like. Among the which, we
have to note The deep (...) one each (...) of the (...) head of the shoulder.
on each side a hole, that is to say, in the fore side and hinmost part:
although one of them in largenes, and depth, exceeds an other. As that in the
inner seat forwardly, which receives the second Process of Vlna, whilst the
cubit is contrahed The use of that cauitie on the (...). side.
and drawn in such wise, as the hand may touch the shoulder. But the hole in
the hinder part of this lower head, is much deeper and larger, whereunto, when
The use of the cauitie on y^ (...).
the cubit is at furthest extended, the posteriour and great Process thereof,
is roted and wheled: being a stop and stay thereto, then which, no further it
may pass. Wherefore Hypocrates calls these holes (...) being the seats, and
grounds, of the cubittes motion.

But besides, this inferior part, which we have affirmed to be large and
ample, The three heads in the inferior part.
rises as it were in iij. heads, not much in space unequal, nor in greatness
differyng, being excellently therefore (by the consent of all Anathomistes)
compared Comparion (...) to a pullye.
to a pulley, wherein gutters are carved for the course of the ropes: so between
The third head and middlemost is the least of the thrce.
these iij. heads or ridges, are two notable gutters or cauities, excellently
divided by the third ridge, being the least of the iij. In one of the which
gutters runs Vlna, lightly to the extendyng, and bowing of the cubitte: the
ends of whose How (...) (...) inserted to y^ (...) and extension of the cubit.
motions, are accomplished most exquisitely, by the Cauities before described:
into which this gutter, due to Vlna, on each side falls the other gutter,
situate in The gutter wherein (...) runs, falls from one of the deep
cauities, into y^ other.
the space between the middlemost ridge, and the outmost head, yeldyng way to
the inner side of the head of Radius, being deeply incrusted with a Cartilage,
as also the head it self: which being more round then the other, is
Articulated and knit unto Radius, although the same Radius has not a hole so
large, as might The head of (...) insert to the outmost gutter.
comprise the whole scope thereof: which (in my judgment) had been more
incommodious then needful: for the outmost part of the inferior head of the
shoolder Why y^ outmost head of the shoulder bears less then the (...) ij.
bone iutteth out more inwardly, and less outwardly, the^ any other: and the
reason is, because the upper head of Radius, lurketh more in the bosom of the
inner Why the outmost head of y^ iij. bears no compass backward.
region of Vlna: and that it should not comprehend such scope of compass
backwardes, the case is manifest, that in the extention of the cubit, when the
head of Radius stands upon the top or hinder part of this bole or turn,
then the posteriour The use of the highest head of the three.
great Process of Vlna is denied to go any further within the hole, exculped
in the hinder part of this bone. And how the highest ridge of the iij. serves
The benefit of the insertion of Radius to y^ shoulder.
notably, to hold in the exterior side of Vlna in his motion, no man is
ignorant. But this is to be noted of every one, that the propper Articulation
of Radius with What motion is archeiued by Vlnas
the shoulder bone, offreth unto us the possibility of guidyng our hand
obliquely to the sides: and when it is extended together with the arm, such a
motion is The ij. Processes of the inferior head of the shoulder and their
uses.
is brought to pass by the benefit of Vlna, Radius consentyng only.

Furthermore, beside these heads before mentioned, there are iij. Processes
exta^t at the sides of y^ lower head of Humerus, of which the inner is much the
greater: The (...) head of the shoulder has an (...).
to these productions are fastened the begynnynges of Muscles exte^ded to the
extreme part of the hand. And although neither Galen nor Vesalius, with others
in times past, have known, or acknowledged any Appendance to this head, whereto
the cubit is Articulated, yet Realdus Collumbus (whose sweatyng labors could
never appale the infatigable courage of this searching skill) has professed it
evident in young Children, neither can I esteem thereof any otherwise, in
vewyng the exterior Process for the insertion of Muscles, being the lesser of
the two The unequal form of yt space between the (...) heads of yt
shoulder, and to what end.
last described.

As touching the space between yt superior and inferior head of this bone
after the longitude thereof, you shall find it somewhere Gibbous, or bounched,
and ootherwhere hollow, and flat, the which variety of form, is required
by the sundry The inward hollownes of the shoulder contains his nouri^hment.
uses of Muscles thereto on each side adherent, as hereafter shall be said. And
since it is manifest to every one, that this bone of the shoulder is inwardly
concaued, as also all others like in the body, for the conteinyng of such due
nourishment, The cubitte what it signifies.
as Nature by the small branches of Veins conueyeth into their substance, it
shall not avail me to speak more thereof. Of what parts the cubitte does
consist.


BY the name of cubit we understand the whole scope of length, between the
shoulder bone, and the wrest of the head conteinyng two long Bones, much Lib.
1. Cap. 24.
less then the shoulder bone. Either of them are endewed with their
Appendances The cubitte has appendances in the upper part.
says Collumbus but in the superior part, where they be Articulated with the
The inferior part of Cubitus and Radius do hold their appendances long.
shoulder bone, the Appendances are but short, and transmuted into the portions
of bones. Yet neither Vesalius, nor Galen had knowledge of them but in the
inferior part, both the bones have Appendan^es evident enough.

Of these two Bones, that which is lowest situated is called Vlnae, commonly
Vlna is also called Cubitus.
Cubitus, though (after the barbarous pack) Focile minus: but the uppermost
Radius, and by the barbarous term, Focile maius: they are joined together both
among Radius.
them selves, as well as with the shoulder bone, and wrest of the hand: although
in the inferior part, Vlna be committed to Radius only: but in order, as Vlna
and Radius are committed together among them selves as also to others.
we will declare anon.

The superior part (notwithstanding) of Vlna being thicker, does end in two
Processes, long, and tria^gular, yet not sharp as Galen accounted them, but
obtused and blunt: these Processes are so attolled, and prominent, as behooved
them to follow the space, that is excaued in the midst between them after the
fashion of a half circle: the which cauitie, being shut in by these
protuberatyng Processes, The use of Sigmoi des.
represe^teth the figure of a Cin Latin, not far unlike (...) in Greek and
for that cause Galen named it Sigmoides. It was ordained, that aptly the same
Processes Lib. de. os. Cap. 17.
might complect, and embrace the hollow or rounded gutter in the lower end and
shoulder bone, as aforesaid, and to be turned about the same: Wherefore Vesalius
ca. 24
in the midst of Sigmoides, we have to discern clearly, a prominent line,
which Collumbus ca. 24
The use of ye line in the midst of Sigmoides.
in the midst of the aforesaid gutter of the shoulder bone, runs round,
like a cord in the wheel of a pullie: whereby Vlna slippeth forth on no side,
but on either side of the bones springs mutual ingresse: therefore this
articulation may The articulation of the shoulder with the cubit is referred to
Ginglimon.
be attributed rightly to Ginglimon: to the first Process, which is much less
then the hinmost, and in the inner part thereof, where a cauitis is engraue^ for
the purpose, the head of Radius is admitted sideway, and as it were leanyng to.
But departing from these Processes, Vlna is the further downward, the more
imbecilled, How (...) to (...) in the upper part is joined.
and weakened, even down to the very end or head thereof: which sometime
enclineth more toward the inner part, where in a slight cauitie, made in the
How Vlna in the neither part is settled to Radius.
side of Radius, it sleeps. Neither is it joined with the wrest of the hand,
as Galen supposed: for no portion of the wrest is found adherent to the lower
head of Vlna. Furthermore, when as outwardly from this head of Vlna, a certain
little ^ib. de. ols. Cap. 17
Lib. 1. Cap. 1^.
Process long, and sharp, is produced, which the Grecian Anathomisles have
Gal^n in err^ut.
likewise nominated Styloides, Galen therefore judged the same to be fastened to
ye The Process of (...) called (...).
outer one of ye wrest, and so, by that reason, to become a mean to move the
hand obliquely, or slopewise: the which opinion Vesalius worthily reproves,
and wholly confuteth with most probable reasons. Collumbus (again) says it is
so far The Process Stiloides ^oth not give the hand oblique moving.
alienate from the nature of the thing, and dissonaunt from verity it self,
as that the same Process, to the workyng of the like esfeat in motion, as
Galen would have it, is rather a let and hinderaunce, then any ways a meaue to
further it. Neither is this Process much distaunt from the fourth bone of the
wrest, although (...) is ^test to yt iiij. bo^e of the wr^st nor to the viij.
Galen commends thereto the viij. bone: which bears verity only in an
Ape. Notwithstanding, a certain thick and soft Cartilage is put between them,
which, By what means this Proces^e is united to yt wrest. The benesit of
Stiloides.
supplyeng the vacant rowme, where it is put, holds meetly either of them,
but therefore they are not co^ioyned. Nevertheless it may not be denied, but
that this Process: adds some strength unto the wrest, lest it should
altogether slip from that part: being therefore, so far extended from the
head of Vlna. To say briefly therefore, Vlna is in the exterior part thereof,
even, and round for the most part: but on the side toward Radius, is a
certain rough line, extendyng after the longitude The use of the (...) (...)
(...) (...) in (...).
thereof, with other light cauities: out of which places, spryng the Muscles
seruyng ye to tho^be, as also that Muscle, that carries the fore finger from
the tho^be.

The other and uppermost bone, called of the Grecia^s (...), of the Latins
Radius, Vlna, endyng at ij. thick Cer^. 1.
Radi^.
heads, that is to say, both upward, and downward: but as the highest is more
The s^ation of Radius.
round, so the lowest is much greater, and broader: which, considering how it
is above articulate with the shoulder bone, and beneath with the wrest, you
will The he^ of Radius com^ared together.
grant was not rashly devised. For the shoulder on that side endyng round,
after a certain manner, it behooved the head of Radius also to be more
depressed, and somewhat The cubite above is bound to the (...) but beneth to
the wrest. (...) moves yt hand ^bliquely upward or downward.
sinnous, to the end it might yield means to the mouyng of the hand, obliquely
vpwardes, or downwardes: which could not be, but by the round cauitie in the
head of Radius, cleauyng likewise to the round head of the shoulder: by whose
benefit, it is circumuerted, and turned round: to the which effect, the corner,
which we have said to be insculped in the inner region of the first Process
The use of the ca^tie in the inner region of the (...) Process of (...).
of Vlna, aptly obeys, the interne portion of Radius head, therein sittyng:
by the which double articulatio^ (also) of Radius, comes to pass, that it
easily helps ye flexion and extension of ye cubit. The same head of Radius is
copiously covered with The use of much Cartilage about yt head of Radius.
a Cartilage, to increase the agilitie of his motion. But from this head,
descendyng The neck of Radiu^.
with a neck, somewhat long, and round, at the outward side toward Vlna,
thrusts out a tubercle, whereat is ended the first Muscle, that to the bowyng
of the The use of his tubercle or knot nere the neck.
arm, gives occasion: and also receives a portion of an other, endewed with
the same function and office, which almost wholly, is impla^ted to the
superior part The description of the inferior part of Rad^us.
of Vlna. But the inferior part of Radius being (as we said) more depressed,
and broader then the other, and not a little augmented by the help of an
Appendance, The. cauities admittyng the ij. vpper^ost ^ones of the wrest.
is not only at the end flatted, but also ample, large, and with a double
bosom, or hollow excaued: wherein, the two uppermost bones of the wrest, are
inarticulated The wrest of the hand is tied to Radius.
and knit: to which, since all the bones of the wrest else, are with a streit
bond united, and tied, we may worthily with Collumbus say that the whole wrest
by How the hand is ^ted both upward and downward.
the means of such coupling and tyeng together, is destined to the
articulation of Radius: whence it comes, that it is not only lawful for the
hand, to turn both upward and downward, but also to be lead with liberty to
each side. Nevertheless, How the hand moves up and down obliquely, How Radius
assisteth yt slexion and extentio^ of the cu^te.
when we will our hand to be bowed either obliquely vpwardes, or downwardes,
that action is most worthily achieved when Radius only labors, Ulna
resceth. But eue^ as Radius, to help and assist the flexion of the cubit, is
above admitted into the of bosom Ulna: so it likewise (requiryng to ye like
mutual society, The principal incuing of the cubitte is from Vlna.
and deligence of Ulna in leadyng, and guidyng the hand, whilst it follows
the motion of the cubit) for the seat of the inferior head thereof Ulna
mutually ordains a corner: as before we have touched. Wherefore Radius is
above Radius is above receyned, ben^ receives.
received of Ulna, but beneath receives Ulna: and this kind of composition,
is thought most aptly to be called Arthrodia: the Anteriour part beneth of the
head The inferiou^ head of (...) why it is plain and forward (...).
of Radius, is made plain, and even, though somewhat bendyng, that so it might
give free scope and passage to the tendons of Muscles, which challenge the
bowing of the second, and third joint of the fingers. After the same manner, the
posteriour Why there be ma ny cauitie^ in the posteriour part of the interior
head of Radius.
part gives rowme to the tendous of Muscles, stretched to the exterior
joints, whereby they are extended, and holden forth; therefore unequally is
that part replet with cauities. The exterior portion of the same head,
toward the tho^be, The use of ye (...) Process in Radius.
puts forth a certain Mammillar Process, for no other cause, but to defend
the wrest, so that in that place it may not lightly be luxated, or displaced.
Moreover The outsyde of Radius.
the outer side of Radius is round, and leuigated: but within, has (as it
were) a sharp edge, extended in long progress, and distaunt from y^ region of
the other line, The live in Radius compared to the line in cubits.
described in the inner part of Ulna, very like unto this. From either of the
which lines flows a certain Membrane, to each of them mutually fastened:
whereby The use of y^ live in Cubitus and Radius.
these ij. bones, so severed one from an other, are colligated, and together in
the midst after a certain manner tied. And this Membran makes also a
division, The use of the Membran between cubits and Radius.
whereby the interior Muscles, of the cubit, are from the exterior easily
separated.

Both these bones are hollow within, and replenished with marey: both that Why
y^ bones of y^ cubit are hollow.
they might be the lighter, and also not frustrate of their necessary
nourishment.

BUt before we fall to orderly description of the wrest of the hand, this one
thing Note.
we note by the way: that by the customable manner, and frequented phrase of our
English speech, this word hand, compriseth all the space between the inferior
head of Radius, and the extremities of the fingers: which, by the order of How
the hand is be^ded by Anathomicall description.
Anathomicall description, is compounded of iij. parts: that is to say,
Brachiale, which we call the wrest of the hand: Postbrachiale, which is the
space between Brachiale.
the wrest, and the first joint of the fingers: the third part then is Digiti,
or the Postbrachiale.
fingers: whereto hereafter we will come in order. And it seems also, that
Hipochrates Digiti.
understood the like that we do by the name of Manus: although Collumbus
Hipocrates.
writes in his chapter of y^ shoulder, that Hipochrates, called the whole
length Collumbus.
from the scaple bone, unto the extreme ends of the fingers, Manus: whilst it
is otherwise evident in his book De ossium natura, M. Fabius Caluus being
interpretour: where he has these words: Manus quidem ossa septem and vigiti
sunt. and c. the Seven and twenty bones contained between the cubitte and
fingers ends.
which number, may stretch no further then from the first of the fingers, to
the last of the wrest. But that the volumes of Hipocra. are not altogether
consonant, and agreeyng together, appears not only by this, but is witnessed
in the same tra^slatio^ The volumes of Hipocrates not all (...).
of Hipocra. works, whereof Fabius Caluus, Gulielmus Copus, Nicol. Leonicen.
and Andraeas Brent. were interpretours.

AT length returnyng to the first of the three divisions of the hand, which is
called of the Greeks (...), the Latins have in stead thereof (as is said
before) Brachiale: it is to be understood the whole strewe, and pack of
bones, What (...) y^ wrest of the hand.
intersited between the cubit, and Postbrachiale: which is ye middle of ye
hand, (whereto I can give no propper English, except I shall call that part the
back of the hand, or after the Latins the Postbrachiall bones.

The number of the bones that constitute the wrest of the hand are vi^.
distinct, The wrest con^steth of vi^. bones.
and joined in double order: that is to say ij. rows, conteinyng in each iiij.
bones, all diversely fourmed, not one like an other either in magnitude form,
or situation. The bones of the wrest are all unlike one another.


The first row of these bones are vpwardly, so committed to the head of Radius,
as that the first, and second thereof, are fastened within the hosome of it, the
third The first row (...) y^ bones (...) y^ wrest.
seems a little to enter, but the fourth seems to be joined to no other bone
but The second row of the bones of y^ wrest.
the third: whereto it is stiffly annected. The second course or row, is
articulate in their posteriour part, to the Postbrachiall bones, but in the
forepart, with the Now the bones of the wrest seem to grow together.
other bones of the wrest: which among them selves, are so connected and knit
together with Cartilaginous Ligamentes, as that they seem to grow together.

As I said before, they are so strange, and diversely fashioned, that a man can
not rightly invent, whereto to compare them: yet notwithstanding, and although
they are not endewed with propper names, they are sufficient (...) to be
discerned, (...) of the wrest.
judged, and known, by their number, and order: which is after this sort.

The first bone of the wrest is that, which appears unto us in the inner side

The second succeeds the first.

The third, is with the second coherent, at the outer side toward the little
finger,

The fourth and least of all is knit unto the third.

The fifth is the first of the second rank, and next unto the thombe.

And so thence the vj. vij. and viij. do follow in order.

And thus, as you see in number, and figure, they are different, so also in
greatness, and litlenes. For the greatest of all are the first, and vij. of
which ij. it is hard to judge the greatest: the second is less the^ these but
bigger then all the remnau^t: then chalengeth the viij. and after him the fifth,
the sixth next, so then the third: the fourth of all others (as we said before)
is least.

Now as touching their union, and order of composition: which ought as well to
The union of the brachiall bones.
be known, and considered, as all that we have hitherto, spoken of them.

The first bone therefore (besides that it is articulate with Radius,) in the
superior

The second, not only upward, enters the hollow of Radius together with the

So likewise the third is joined with the second, and in the lower side
touches Vlna, meteth the fourth.

The which fourth we find committed to none other.

The fifth next, in the upper part with the first, in the hinder part with the
vj. and Process of the second bone of Postbrachiale, (if by the way, we
constitute, as Collumbus would, v. bones thereto, whereof more hereafter) the
inferior portion thereof the first bone of Postbrachiale, which Galen makes
Galen.
the first joint of the thombe, receives.

The vj. is knit to the first, fifth, and seventh, on that side where it
respects them: Postbrachiall bones, from thence respecting the third also of
Postbrachiale, whose first, and longer produced portion it susteyneth.

The seventh ends at the first, second, sixth, and vi^. but not equally, or in
like Postbrachiale.

Lastly the viij. which is highest, on the other sides is coupled with the
second, The bones of the wrest have obscure moving.
of Postbrachiale: to which also it is coarticulated, and knit.

Thus to speak briefly of these bones of ye wrest, although there comes no
peculiar Muscle unto them, as the author of action, whereby we judge it obscure:
The wrest (...) y^ had down up, and to y^ sides.
yet are they not immovable, or wantyng motion in deed, but yield to the
styrring of the hand, both upward, downward, and to the sides.

Moreover in the interior part of the wrest, we find a broad, and deep
cauitie, The description and use of y^ whole wrest.
or bosom, through the which are concurrent, not a small number of tendons The
vawlte on y^ inside of y^ wrest.
of Muscles, to be inserted to the joints of the fingers. And in this vawte,
or hollow, they seem as it were included, or locked up, for ouerflowyng their
seats The use of the Ligament from the Process of y^ (...).
with a strong Ligament, produced from the Process of the viij. bone, and
inserted ouerthwartly to y^ side of the fifth. For which purpose, that their
beyug might The use of y^ Process of the viij. bone.
be more safe, and their scope more free, nature caused the same Process of
the viij. bone, to hang, and houer inwardly like a seeled vawlte: so that the
space, or distaunce, between the head or extremity of the same Process, and
the fifth Ossicle How the (...) in the wrest of y^ hand is made.
(which with the side somewhat also leans toward it) is nothing so much, as
we discern in the compass of the hollow under.

But the exterior part of the wrest, is the way for the tendons on the outside
The outsyde of y^ (...) how it is, and why such.
runnyng to the fingers: yet notwithstanding, it has no notable cauitie, but
rather is boled, or rounded outward: for as much as those tend^ns are much less
the^ they of inner side, and therefore (also) occupy less space. So accordyngly
therefore it was decent, that the extreme region of the wrest of the hand,
should carry a circular kind of form, and the interne, plain. Yet albeit
the inner side by the aforesaid valley, or vawlte, seems to make a most apt
way, and safe conduction for the tendons, produced in that region: so must we
consider, that they of the extrinsecall region of the wrest, are not rashly
left, or inordinatly given over to liberty: for so in vain had grown forth
the four Ligamentes on that side, which The use of the four Ligametes (...)
the outside of the wrest.
clothe, and so surely bynd them in. Galen in his xviij. chapter of bones,
affirms these Ossicles of the wrest of the hand to be hard, and solid, but
not any thing medullous: The bones of the wrest are not (...) The fourth bone
(...) almost altogether solid.
as Collumbus (not rashly) since his time has assured us: though amongst all
the rest, he says, the most hard, and almost altogether solid bone, is that,
which in the fourth place we have here before numbered.

But if any industrious Artiste, shall at any time fortune to find the
contrary, The fourth bone for his proportion is no more solid then the rest.
I for my time am forced to confess, me never to have inverted, or proved the
like Soliditie in the fourth, and little Ossicle: neither any more (considering
the quantity thereof) then in the rest, albeit it may seem very likely to
some, by the litlenes thereof. That it should also have a certain Celle or
corner, au^swerable to The fourth Ossicle has no (...) as Galen says.
the Process Styloides, produced from the inferior head of Vlna, let no man
believe, although Galen him self have written it. For neither has the same
Ossicle any such cauitie, neither does the same Process in the wrest of a man,
reach, or extend so far: as unto it, wherefore in Apes Collumbus verisieth
this his Assertion, in me^ Cap. 25.
In Apes Galens assertion is vertsted.
the truth stands otherwise. Vesalius notes the composition of these bones,
to be so excellently compact, and wrought together with Ligamentes, as, unless
they be diligently cut, and fret away, together with the Membrans, we might
suppose The ignorance of Co^n. (...) in the bones of y^ wrest.
them to be all one bone, and altogether uncertain to judge how many, as
Cornelius Celsus in his viij. book, and first chapter, confesses himself
inscient, by accomptyng I^b. 1. Cap. 3.
their number uncertain. Their mutual coniunctio^ (says Fernelius) How these
bones are conioy^ed among the^ selves and with others.
is Synarthrosis: their joining with Radius (says Collumbus, confessyng
likewise the other) by Diarthrosis: and with the bones of Postbrachiale, partly
by Synarthrosis, and partly by Diarthrosis.

THis Postbrachiale (as partly we have touched before, called of the Grecia^s
What is (...).
(...)) is that part of the hand, which inward we call the palm, but ^ap. 26.
Us. (...). lib. 2.
outward the back of the hand. Whereto accordyngly, Fuchsius says, some of
Galens The Postbrachiall bones.
interpretours have called it Palma, others Manus Pectus, and so forth.
Uesalius says, and before him Galen, that this part of the hand, namely
Postbrachiale, Cap. 26.
The first bone of the thombe a bo^ of the (...) of the han^.
the Thombe, which Collumbus would (most propperly in my opinion) have added:
and that not without good stay of reason: since it as nearely succeeds the
bones The (...) (...) of the tho^be, how joined to the (...) bone.
of the wrest, as the other: being also after the same rate committed to them,
saving that the Articulation thereof, is more slack then in the rest: whereby
(also) it purchases a more evident motion. It is fastened unto the fifth bone
of the wrest, by Arthrodia under Diarthrosis although (by reason of those bones
which be s^all) such manner of Articulation may be referred unto Enarthrosis.
For the ^ift bone of the wrest has a cauitie sufficient plain, as a corner
excaued, whereunto, the head of the joint, after a certain manner long, and
forward protensed, or stretched, is innitted.

The second Postbrachiall bone, which Galen numbreth the first, ends at a
Brachiall bone, and joins his side to the side of the fifth: whereto, in that
manner it seems to claue.

The third has also a hollow end, and in the inner part, toward the thombe,
Process, whose face, or outer border is settled to the vj. bone of the wrest.
The re^naunt of his Sinews, or hollowed head, admits the viij. Bone.

The head of the fourth is four squared, being joined with ij. bones: that is,

The last has likewise a four squared head, but somewhat toward the outer

After this sort are the Postbrachiall bones committed to them of the wrest:
whereas Their Composition.
also you have to note, that as their ends are squared, and flatted of
sufficient compass, toward those bones, whereto they are set, and joined: so
their sides also, do mutually yield one toward an other: as the last to the
fourth: the fourth to the fifth and third: the third to the fourth and second:
and the seto^d to the third on that side and to the side of the fifth bone of
the wrest outward: only except the first, which supporteth the thombe, and
has more ample scope, and distaunce from the rest, then the other have among
them selves. But again, beneth in the lower ends of the Postbrachiall bones,
where they be together with the joints of How the Pos^ (...) bones are beneth
joined to the ^ist joints of the singers.
the fingers Articulated, all end with one manner of head: which being round, do
enter the holes, or hollowes in the ends of those joints, lightly excaued,
and that (as was requisite) with aslacke, or romthy kind of knittyng.

To describe them after their longitude: the other iiij. Postbrachiall bones
beside Postbrachial bones their longitude, y^ thombe exceptco.
the first of the thombe, from their first heads, going forward, toward the
fingers, become smaller, and slenderer, until their middle part or region
where (being smallest of all, and their substance most lightened) they begin
again, from thence afterward, to augment, and engrosse their substance: so
that, to speak clearly, as they first decreased to the midst, and waxed
weaker, so now also from the midst downewardes they increase, more, and more,
in thicknes and strength, and that more appara^tly in those ij. which admit
the middle, and the ryngfinger: the other ij. for the foremost, and little
finger, have in mean sort the like delineation.

In the inner side of these bones, all after their length, runs an angulare,
The use of the an gularline.
or cornered line in the midst of them: made for the cause of the Muscles to
them adjacent, as also does the attenuation of them, toward to the midst as
aforesaid. For so the Muscles have commodious scope, and room to cleave unto,
and Why these bones are (...) in the midst.
between them: or else the palm and hollow of the hand, should have been more
hugely heaped, and stored with them, then had been conuient for the prompt
tractation, and handlyng, that now appersai^eth to the hand.

Besides, the Postbrachiall bones are above, and beneth, defended with
Appendances: The (...) of the (...) bones and the^ use.
from whence Ligamentes customably are produced: by whose benefit (also) these
bones among them selves, are together connected, and bound. Neither are they
inwardly distitute of their propper hollownes, to maintain their substance,
with dew medullous nourishment.

It rests now to speak of the fingers: which once discoursed in that order
we have begone, we shall leave the hand, with the parts thereof, sufficient
plainly, and also narrowly touched, as far as the description of Bones may
extend: for thoroughly to explicate the manner of their motion, it behooves not
here to expect, but only in the History of Muscles: where their propper
actions to decyffer, we have wholly determined.

NOw the Bones that constitute the fingers are in number xv. that is to Bones
of the fingers. 15.
say, iij. in every one. In the which account (lest I should seem to repugne
the sentence of most famous writers, and Anathomistes of rare experience) the
first bone of the thombe is comprehended: which Collumbus would have numbered
among the bones of Postbrachiale, as before is touched. Nevertheless if reason
in your selves, shall cause you consent also to Realdus his judgment, and to
attribute the first of the thombe to the number of the Postbrachiall bones:
the^ there How the number of the bones of y^ fingers are but 14
remains but ij. the thombe, and consequently xiiij. to the number of the
fingers: for the Sesamine Ossicles, which hereafter we will declare, are never
numbered amongst them: but how soever they are numbered, it behooves us now to
appropinquate, and touch the effect: and of their quantity, form, and
combination to say as it is.

The substance therefore of the bones constituting the fingers, is hard, to y^
end, Collumbus Cap. 27 The substance of y^ fingers of what sort and why.
that without danger, they might pro^ptly be applied to the innumerable
functions, whereto they are created: yet, notwithstanding their hardness, they
are with in replenished with the like nourishment dew unto Bones: as lately we
described The bones of the fingers are not Solid.
in the Postbrachiall, therefore are not Solid, howsoever Galen judged them.
The difference of the bones of the fingers.
Nether are they all of like quantity, in length, or in thicknes. But some
longer, others shorter, some thicker, others more sle^der: that is to say, ye
thicker or longer fingers, merit also the thicker and longer bones. In like
sort, the first joints, are greater then the second, the second, greater then
the third, and so the third, being last, are also least in all the fingers.

Furthermore a double, or ij. fold form remains to these bones: in one of
The form of ye bones of the fingers.
which, all the joints agree: but the other, much unlike the first, the last
joints obtain common to them selves: for their bones are more depressed then
the rest, and being in the beginning somewhat broad, the further forth they
stretch, the more also are they attenuated, and stretened, until they have
prepared as it were a neck: whereto is annexed, and supposed a little head,
whereat they end. The The bones of the fingers, end at a head.
same head is round and long: but the first joint of the thombe, and also the
first, and second of the other fingers, have both their beginning, and end more
gross, The figure of the first and second bones of the fingers.
and thick: that is, both their extremities are consistent in heads: whereof,
the uppermost, is greater then the neithermost: and all the whole space, from
the uppermost head, to the nether, is made more slender, and slender.

Furthermore these bones outwardly, are made (as it were) crookyng, or bending
inwardes: but on the inside flat, and rather sinuous, or hollow: because there
Why the fingers are somewhat hollow one y^ inside.
ought to run no small, but round tendons, which with their magnitude, and
rotunditie, fulfill the flattenes so on that side, that the form of the
fingers (nevertheless) is left round: whereas otherwise, to great a heaped
ridge should have been couched on that side, to no less hinderaunce, and
hurtyng of the action of handlyng, and apprehendyng, then unapt, and
incommodious, for the quiet situation of those tendons: which, the bones being
round, could have had no certain seat: but in the extension, and st^rring of
the fingers, to slip on this side. On How y^ tendons one the outside of the
fingers are cacled.
the outside of the fingers it is otherwise: for their subtle tendons are
produced after the manner of Membrans: so, that that part be round, they hinder
not, for the more elegancie of the fingers form.

Likewise in the inner region of the singers on each side, are certain lines
carried The uses of the ^ynes in y^ (...) of the singers.
after their longitude: whence the Ligame^tes, which complect and hold those
tendons in their places sirmely, have their original. The (...) of the (...).


To speak of their manner of knittyng, and composition, some receive only:
(...). de (...). 19.
other again both receive, and are received: (although Galen says, the head of
the (...) in error.
first bone, ever enters she cauitie of the other following) for the first
bones of the fingers are joined above, with the Postbrachiall bones per
Enarthrosim: because their heads being situated, and incrusted with a
Cartilage, do admit into them the round head of the Postbrachiall bones: which
is Enarthrosis Articulation: being in this place right requisite that fingers
might have free scope to all sides, and turns: though Vesalius denied them
their circular motion, or round turnyng, as Collu^bus notes.

In the inferior part of these bones, are prominent two heads, between which,
one angular, or cornered cauitie is engraven, into the which enters the middle
portion of the head of the bone followyng, being, for the purpose, lightly
proturbered, or swelled forth: and those heads again, are likewise inserted
to the cauities, exculped on either side in the other. Whereby it is manifest,
that these joints both receive, and also are received: the which manner of
Articulation is called Ginglymon, and that is to be observed in the other
joints also. But Why their (...) are ^telayd with Cartilages.
between them all are interiected Cartilages, to make their ^ttyng easy,
neitheir not their actions prompt: Appendances are not wantyng, which at each
end, are wont to guard them: except the extreme ends of the last bones, which
What Bones have the (...), which not, and why.
needyng no articulatio^, neither are Appendances to the^ acceptable: for there
the fingers are notably munited with nails: which here we omit to speak of,
but are not forgotten among the Cartilages.

THus if we well perpend the construction, and composition of the parts, and Of
the exquisite structure of the hand.
bones of the hand, our senses shall soon conceive the manner of the action,
with no less admiration, in beholding the handy work of the incomprehensible
Creator: who not one mite, or portion of a part has sited any where, that
serves The actio^ thereof.
for no end, or utility to the body: for how fit to apprehe^d are the hands,
and how prompt to move are the fingers, who is it that knows not? which made
Aristotle It is an Organ v. fore all organs.
call them instruments, or organs, before all organs, or instruments: and they
are pressed, necessary, and exquisite: wherefore says Galen in his first De vsu
Fingers why composed of bones, and ^oyntes.
partium: as they might not be created without bones, neither had it been
requisite for the^ to have been made of one bone: but to every one iij. knit
together by joints: thereby to become prompt to every actio^. For often, we
need not to extend, or to reflect, and bow all at once, but sometime the
first only, or second, or third ioynte, sometime the first together with the
second, or the second and the third, else the third, with the first extendyng,
or bowyng: by the which, Galen expresses the v. general differences of the
figures in apprehendyng, or holdyng: (...) differences of Apprehension are v.
but the particulars, which are brought to pass as occasion is offered, either
more, or less, he accompteth innumerable: so (says he) if the hand had not
been d^uided, Why the had divided into singers.
it had also behooved each thing we should handle, to be of equal bigness: but
now being (in deed) divided into many parts, we are no less able to
apprehend with facility greater things, then ready, and nimble to touch each
little substance.

Nature therefore (as Galen in the place before cited says) finely framed fine
Why Nature made v. fingers.
fingers in either hand: so that as nothing might be wanting, neither should
any thing be to much. For think not, that rashly nature created one finger
longer the^ Why one singer was (...) longet then another.
an other, since thereby they obtain this notable property: that although,
when they be at liberty extended, some surmount their mates clearly in
length, yet When co^prehension is made the fingers are all of one length.
that is won again, when we comprehend any thing within the compass of of
them, or hold any liquid substance within the palm of the hand: for then you
will confess this inequality of the fingers, to present a most manifest
utility, and decent kind of form. Finally this his saying is also worthy to
be noted. As man, of all other creatures, is the most sapient, and wise: so
also has he hands, The hands are organs most conuement for a wise creature.
the most convenient instruments to a sapient Creature: yet not in that he
has hands, therefore he is the wisest, but because he is wisest, therefore he
has hands: for not hands, but reason instructs man in Arts. So likewise,
the hands are The hands are the organes of (...).
the instruments of Arts: and thus much of the fingers, the last part of the
hand.

THe next that follows in order to entreat of, after the parts, which we
have already gone through, is that bone, which is committed, and joined to O^
Ilium.
the transuerse Processes of Os sacrum. In persons of full grouth, and ripe
years, O^ (...) in children three, in me^ one.
although it seem one bone, yet is it esteemed of, as if it were iij. and the
reason is, because in children and youthful years, it is by a Cartilage
intersected with iij. lines: therefore (also) it is divided by Anathomistes into
iij. parts choosing O^ Ilium.
iij. diverse names: for the supreme part thereof being the broadest of the rest,
and committed to Os sacrum, is called Ilium os: an other part is that, which
being not so broad: as the superior, is thorowed on each side, with a large and
ample hole, and is called Os pubis: then the middle part, which is streter, and
thicker, and outwardly Os pubis.
engraven with a deep and large cave, is called Coxendicis os. These bones Os
(...).
are ij. in number: that is to say, on either side one: which although they be
joined to Os sacrum, yet their proportion seems to answer no less use,
then the scaple bone unto the shoulder: for these after the same rate receive
the thighe, as those do the shoulder: and also the original, and diverse
insertio^s of Muscles. But The seat or foundation of boues.
as before we have said, they being joined to Os sacrum, do minister to all the
composition of bones, that most necessary seat, and ground: for these being
thereto All bones above and beueth Ilium, and Sacrum, do move, but they only
not moved.
perpetually abidyng, are never required of any motion: when as all other
members about them, of very right, do stir and move: which most evidently we
may discern, in seeing all the motions both of the superior, and inferior
parts excellently percurrent, and yet at length to cease, or end at these
bones: as it were, there certain center, and prick: for Ilij ossa, are so
firmly to the same Sacrum, committed, as that they seem wholly grown
thereto: wherefore Collumbus records Ilium sometime grows to Sac^u^
inseparably.
of a Sceleton he has, whose Ilium on the left side, is so connated, and
grown to Sacrum, as that it may not, by any means, be disseuered. These same
bones Where these ij. bones join.
likewise in the fore part, do meet, and join together. Their bearyng
outward, is esteemed to represent the figure of a basin: which nature so
ordained, for the safer conteinyng and holdyng of the matrice, bleddar, and
intralles: to the safety of the which, these bones are chiesly pressed. The
figure of these bones is diverse, for The figure of Ili^.
on the hinder part they be broad, and insigned with ij. cauities, which
rather seem crooked, or bowed, then hollowly excaued, or engraven: since it is
evident, that the same parts on the contrary side, are as much conuexed, and
Gibbous: The use of the asperities in these bones.
whereas also much asperitie and roughnes is, chiefly outwardes, and seruyng to
the insertion of Muscles.

The upper region of this part of Ilium, being drawn after a Semicircular
Appendance all a long the same compass. And because it The description of yt
superior part of Ilium.
is somewhat prominent outward, therefore it is called the spine, or ridge: from
whence especially flow Ligamentes, and the exorture of these Muscles, that
constitute The spine in Illi^ what and the use thereof.
the buttockes: as also, those that downwardes to the thigh, and leg, and
vpwardes to the breast and back, are carried. As touching their fastnyng unto Os
sacrum. nature has decreed a mutual congresse, whereby their composition is
Joined by nature
made more strong, and pertinatious: wherefore, the transuerse Processes of Os
sacrum, as they are excised, and engraven, somwhere with large and deep, other
where, with light and shallow concauities: so likewise are these Bones in the
setting to both, endewed with convenient cauities, as also other meet portions
bounched forth, and proturberated. So that in meetyng together, the hollow
places The (...) (...) this (...) c^e.
of these, receive the roughe knottes, or eminences of Os sacrum, and in like
manner, their protubered or swelled portions, are admitted into his agreeable
cauities. The Cartil^ge i^ (...) (...) (...).
And this congresse is mutual: to the which union, a Cartilage also is
intercedent, which, after the manner of glue, holds, and joins them
together. ^l. (...). 28.
^hy yt (...) of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^ther to (...) t^en to (...).
Whereby there Articulation may be thought like Ginglymon: but, since no kind
of motion is achieved thereby, we account it more like unto Symphisis: and
thus far the description of the superior part.

Now, that portion thence declinyng toward the Anteriour parts, occupieng
The description o^ O^ (...).
the middle space of the bone, and endewed with the name of Coxendicis os, is
most thick: that the more commodiously therein (and without to much weakenyng,
Why it i^ yt thicke^t.
or decaying the bone) might be made the large, and deep hollow, or cup, The
use of yt cup or con^ (...) (...).
into which is immitted the long and round head of the thigh. Wherefore it is
called a cup, or bowl: which although (in deed) it be of it self very
large, yet because it could not be so deep as wholly might contain the head
of the thighe, a The Cartilage (...) (...) co^ca^tie.
Cartilage is thereunto added, as is betwixt the scapple bone and the shoulder:
whereby the hollownes thereof is fulfilled at large. And this cup, or
co^cauitie, not only occupyeth part of Coxendicis os, but of Os ilium also,
and Pubis. And besides In what parts this concauitie is made.
that Cartilage, which in manner of a crust circundeth and compasses as well the
head of the thigh, as the cup wherein it is contained, there rises about the
The articulation of the thigh with the hippe answers in proportion to the (...)
with the se^ple bone.
borders and edges of the same hole, a certain thick, and circular Cartilage:
which nobly augmenteth the capacity thereof: and so complecteth the deep head
of the thighe, that, not without great rigor, and extreme violence, it may be
from his seat luxated. And further, to the end yt head of the thighe might yet
more sirmely, and A (...) Cartilage augmentyng the co^cauitie and why.
safely rest, within the same acetable, or cup: out of the midst of his
crustie Appendance, grows a round, and most strong Ligament, which is
likewise Of the Ligament within the concauitie the s^tuation and use.
fastened in the midst of the same cauitie: and in this manner is sirmified
his Articulation, which otherwise was stacke and lose.

The inferior part, which is intersited betwixt Ilium, and Coxendix, is
endewed The hollow corner between (...) (...) and (...) os. The use of yt
hollow corner.
with a notable kind of hollownes, brustyng out, or cut through in the lower
part: so that it is a way evident, and open on each side, or common to both the
bones, ordained (as we may easily suppose) as a way, for the subduction of very
many, and large surcles, and branches of Sinews, profluent from the spinall
The beginning and journey of yt greatest ^ie.
marey, through the holes in Os sacrum: the which, after, not fare thence, do
coite and join together in one, the greatest of all the Nerves in the body:
which downwardes is dissemi^ated, amongst the Muscles of the thighe, and
leg: as The sharp Process and the use thereof.
more in the history of Nerves. But, departing from this corner, or deep
nicke, more forwardly, there ^iseth a certain sharp Process, whence is
produced a The use of the hol low about yt sear of co^.
Ligament to be inserted unto Os sacrum, prepared to enclose the fundame^t, and
that greatest Nerve lately cited. Again, besides this Process, near to the
botome or seat of Coxendix, there is an other hollowed corner, being broad,
but Four tendons in their (...) as in a purse co^ned.
more shallow then that before said: and is (as it were) cut here and there in
the midst, with certain chinkes, to the which are inherent four tendons:
recondited, Why yt infericu^ part or (...) is thickest.
and hid in their Muscle, as if they were in a purse imposed: which at
length also do agree together in one, to be sent, and sowed in the thighe. The
inferior portion of the thighe is most thick, which therefore is nominated the
seat, Why the seat of (...) (...) has an appendaunce.
or foundation thereof. This one amongst all other parts of Coxendicis os, is
endewed with one Appendance, whence spryng the iij. Muscles, that serve to bow
Of the bones of Pubis.
the leg. And now it rests to speak of the Anteriour part which is named
Os Col. Ibid
pubis: being thinner both above and beneth, then the rest: these, the nearer
toward their midst, are the more also attenuated, until they become clean
The holes of (...).
through perforated, and that with a most large hole: above they are joined
together, the right meetyng with the left, by the interuenture of much
Cartilage: the How the bones of P^bis the right and yt lest are joined together.
which knittyng is so firm, and Solid, as hardly with the knife, it may be
separated. Wherefore, great occasion of laughter is offered by such as have not
been ashamed, To say that these bones in childbirth do open is a laughing
matter.
openly to publish so much, that these same bones, should in women bryngyng
forth, be losed, and departed one from an other, thereby, that more easily, the
birth might be extrahed. Notwithstanding, it is verified in the tail bone, as
we have said before in his propper place. For that is certainly retrahed in The
bones of Cocci^ are in childbirth retrahed.
women, helpyng greatly to the bringyng forth of child: but to affirm the
departing asunder of these bones in such seasons, is, no doubt, a saying so
absurd, as what to be more, I know not: since it seems nature was nothing
forgetful of yt In the largenes and ^arrownes of Pubi^ men ditfer from women.
How the bones of Pubi^ in women are distinguished from those in men. The bones
of Pubi^ are not dilated.
bringyng forth, and increase of young children in making the woman's mould: but
if it were so, why then in vain, did she constitute these bones in women of
far larger scope, and compass then in men? A thing notable to be marked. By
this therefore, it is nothing difficult, to descerne these bones in women, from
those in men: for in men they be more streit, and narrow, both above, and
beneth: but in women much more ample, and romthy: wherefore let no man believe Os
pubis to be dilated or opned in child bearyng. Why yt bones of Pubis are
downwa^d dis^oyned. What Muscles spring from the s^periour part of Pubis.


But now again from the same conjunction in Pubis, which we have said to be
confirmed by a Cartilage, the more downwardes they go, so much more and more
also one side seuereth from an other till they have left a void, and empty
corner, for the subsistyng of Penis, and the Testicles. And in the superior
part, The inferior part of Pubis has an appendance.
where these same bones of Pubis are conjoined, as is aforesaid, they are one
each side roughe, and aboundyng with a double Tubercle, or proturbered, and
bounched The situation and original of the Muscles sustainyng the yard.
portion: from the which have sprung both the straight Muscles of the belly, as
also, those that be deferred down to the thighe, and leg: and abide the
insertion of the oblique descendentes of the bellye. But from the inferior
part, so armed The hole in the midst of the bones of Pubis why it is made. A
^embran between the Muscles that turn about the thigh.
with an Appendance, are produced the Muscles susteinyng Penis: whose body is
situated, immediately, after the union of these bones. That large hole in the
midst, being supposed rather for lightness sake, then for other cause to have
been made, two Muscles, an outer, and an inner do fulfill: which stretching
thence downwardes, and implanted in the thighe, minister thereto the power of
circumaction, The iourny of the se^inary vessels. By this guttered cauitie
R^ldus distinguishes the bones of a man and woman yet I have seen them absent
in yt bones of a man.
or turnyng about: between which, runs a tough Membran, both shuttyng the
way of the same hole, and distinguishing the one Muscle from the other. Then
(henceforth) let them with more modesty advise them selves, that heretofore,
have rashly affirmed ye seminary vessels, by these holes, to descend unto the
Testicles: when as it is most evident, they perforate the Muscle of Abdomen,
and above these bones are carried. In which on each side is a certain little
hollow gutter, in their top obliquely decliued, or bendyng over, by the
which covertly Holes in these bones for the delation of nourishment.
run, as well Deferentia, as Praeparantia vasa. But this cauitie in women is
not found: which is the chiefest difference, betwixt those bones in men, and
women. Man only and the Ape has the bone in the thigh greater then the other
bones.


And thus judge of the bones committed to Os sacrum, being not much different
from the same in substance: for they be fungie, and light for the most part,
not very hard, but replenished with holes, or little porie places for the receipt
of nourishment perpetually to cherish them. The thigh is shorter then the leg
in other creatures.


THe thighe bone neither in birds, neither almost in any four footed beast,
is in length comparable to the bones of the leg, exceptyng the Ape: but in
man, it most plainly exceeds all other in magnitude, and is Articulated above
The figure of the thigh.
with Coxendix, Ilium, and Pubis, but beneth, with Tibia. The figure of the
thighe is long and round, but not every where straight: for near unto the
midst it The head of the th^h.
crooketh, being therefore in the fore part Gibbous, but in the hinder and
exterior part Sinnous, and (as it may be said) backwardes bendyng: the
uppermost head The neck of the ^igh.
is thick, round, and over crusted with a Cartilage, having the neck thereof,
which is long, much inwardly pretended. And this same head to that neck
supposed, is almost wholly affourmed by an orbicular Appendaunce, and is
admitted within the acetable or cup of Coxendix: wherein (as before I have
largely declared) it makes Now and why the thigh has so strong a^ticulation.
a most firm, and strong Articulation, being no less needful, for the
exceedyng great weight that the thighe ought to sustain. Wherefore nature, not
acco^ptyng it sufficient to make a large hole for the entrance thereof, nor
inwardly to cloth it The Cartilage.
with a Cartilage, and in like sort to augment the borders thereof, whereby
sufficient room might be offered to the same head, has prepared likewise a
round, The Ligament.
and strong tyeng, to proceed almost from the middle top of the same head,
and fastened the same again in the botome of the acetable, or cup, as a stable
ground, The error of those coniut^d which suppose the ^ut ^uer playnty to be
luxated.
and strong firmament. Which being so, their opinions, are accounted vain,
which, iudgyng this joint never plainly luxated, do term it only a bastard,
or false and counterfaited luxation, when as (in deed) it is perfect and true:
since it often times falls out, that this Ligament, whereof we last made
mention, is How the luxatio^ of yt joint of the thigh is made dis^culte to
restore.
relaxed, and slacked, to the great ruin of the member, and difficulty of
ressitution.

This same bone, immediately after the neck, descends with a certain little
broad portion, out of which are carried two Processes like knottes, which in
Col. lib. 1. Cap. 29.
The proc^sses of the t^igh in n^w borne children seem appendau^ces.
infantes hold the nature of Appendances, and may be taken of, though in
process of time they cleave so close, and are so rooted in the parts wherein
they are prominent, that no sign of Appendance is presented by them. Their
seats are (for the most part) on ye hinder parts, and one higher then an
other. The uppermost The description of the Processes of the thigh.
being greater, looks outward, but ye neithermost being much less,
possesses rather ye inner seat. The greater ye Grecia^s call (...): but both
are to be named Glouton what.
(...), that is to say Rotatores, because they seem to be ordained for
Trocante^es what.
the turnyng, and wheelyng about of the thighe. For they admit the insertion of
The utility of the Processes of the thighe.
those Muscles, by whose benefit both the thighe is outward slected, moved,
and carried, as also circumuerted or round turned: yeldyng an apt b^ynnyng: to
the viij. Muscle of bowyng the leg.

In the posteriour part is eminent a certain line, carried from the outer
Process Now the Processes of the thigh are ^oyned.
to the inner, and as it were joining, or tyeng them together: and from hence
begins the thighe to take on him the shape and form of roundenes: whence
Whence the thigh is round.
forward, being gone beyond the middle region, the more it descends the more
The description of yt thigh in length. The appendau^ce. The ch^ or gutter that
de^eth the inferior heads.
also it engrosseth, and enlarges, being inwardly slatter, and at length goes
forth in two great heads, roughe on the outside, and altogether uneven: but
their ends, or extreme faces be smooth, covered with a smooth crust, and are
constituted, and finally made, by the interuenture of a mighty Appendaunce. In
the posteriour The place for the rot^le o^ thelinoe. The ij. inferior heads
of ye thigh compared together.
part, these heads are divided with a great, and large chinke, or hollow
space, but before, more lightly depressed with a common cauitie, wherein lies
the hole, or rotule of the knee.

But as touching the several description of these, we cannot affirm one, in
The leg how it boweth to yt ^utside.
fashion like an other: for the innermost is thicker, and the outmost plainly
broader, and more depressed, least both should be alike Articulated unto the
leg, for The original of the muscle under the hamme.
the oblique motion sake: especially when the leg should be bowed to the
exterior parts: to the which motion is destined the Muscle lurking under the
ha^me, The composition of the thigh with the leg is by Gingl^on, but with the
hippe by (...).
whose original is srom this outermost head, toward the posteriour parts,
eue^ there, whereas it is rough, and impressed with certain little corners, or
cauities.

The composition of the thigh with the leg is called Ginglymon, because one
mutually receives, and is received of an other: as the upper head of Tibia, or
the bone of the leg, having ij. cauities, or hollowes. For the ij. lower
heads of the How the articulation of yt thighe with the leg is done also
with a Ligament.
thighe, has also between those two cauities, an eminent portion protubered,
which is also received into the posteriour hollow, or gutter of the thighe:
from whence flows a most strong Ligament, to bind together the thighe with
the leg, in like sort, as is lately said by the knittyng of the thighe, with
Coxendix. Wherein the articulatio^ of yt hippe is notable from all other joints.
And for this kind of Articulation, that is to say, so noted with a strong
Ligame^t within the joint, as is this thighe, both above, and beneth, beside
the outward obductions, and clothynges with Ligamentes, which is also common
to other joints, it is odd, and unlike to all others: and therefore is notable
to be spoke of.

Furthermore in this bone of the thighe, is to be noted a certain evident, and
The line in the posteriour region of the thigh.
roughe line in the posteriour region, beginning not far from the innermost
of the upper Processes, called Rotatores, and so, on the same region or side,
brought down after the longitude of the thighe: and, beyond the midst,
deuidyng into The use of yt line of the thigh.
two parts, or courses, seems to reach unto both the heads, but most
apparau^tly ends at the outermost. This noble line, least you over lightly
way it, consider, The greates^ muscle in the body.
and know how firmly, the eight Muscle of the thighe, which is the greatest
How we purchase strayg^t standing. The benictte of Asperities in the thigh.
of all the Muscles in the body, and by whose benefit our straight standing is
made, is thereto fixed and knit. There be also diverse other Asperities, and
rough parts, not without some impressions, all made for the cause of Muscles
seats, The use of the thigh.
insertions, and so forth, as hcreafter shall be more fit to say how.

By the thighe, we both sit, and stand upright, as also move toward every Why
the innec concauitie of the thigh is large.
thing. For, from the Articulation thereof in the hippe, no manner of motion is
exempted. The concauitie therein, for lightness and the conteinyng of medullous
nutriment, is very large: not unfit for the largenes of the bone. As for
Heynes, Deines.
that perforate the substance thereof at either end, let no man doubt of: for
besides that they are evident, know that Nature wills no part in the body to
Tibia comprehenbeth all that space between the kn^ and the foot, called the
leg, containing ij. bones, of which the greatest chiefly bears the name.
Tibia and Fibula compared in proportion to Radius and Cubitus.
live without blood.

ANd thus this large bone of the thighe ends, above, at Coxendix, and beneth,
at Tibia: which we call the leg: wherewith alhough there by an other bone
joined, that is to the side thereof, all a long the length of the leg, yet
this bears the name, as it is in deed most notable. For in the leg are two
bones, like as is said in the cubite: but the one far greater then the other,
and that therefore possesses the hole name of Tibia, or Crus. The lesser has
sundry names as Sura, Fibula, and of the barbarous sort, Focile minus.

This Tibia is clothed with an Appendance at either end: but the superior The
names of the lesser bone of the leg.
part thereof is both broader, and also thicker, having in the top, two
cauities Appendaunce.
lightly exculped: between which, rises a prominent, and rough tubercle, as I
The description of the superiou^ part of Tibia.
touched even now, in describyng the Articulation of the thighe with the leg.
Those cauities admit the heads of the thighe: wherein Nature well foreseyng,
The industry of nature.
has provided, least for the quantity of the heads the cauities should be to
much The mouable cartilages of yt knee. The use of the ij. in the upper part of
Tibia.
depressed. Therefore besides the common Cartilage, wherewith either of them are
incrusted, nature alost has laid another, mouable, and soft, representyng the
figure of the Moon or the similitude of this letter C. About the borders
thereof the same is thicker, but the more toward the center or midst, the
thinner: The mouable cartilage of the knee uses the room of a Ligament.
and endyng first before, it touches the center: thus the profu^ditie of the
cauities of Tibia, are left sufficient great. Wherefore chiefly it seems this
Cartilage, for that purpose to have been ordained. Which as it is light, soft,
and unctuous, or The tubercle or Process between the cauities.
full of humiditie: lo does it serve as the turn of a Ligament, and much
avail to the active moving of the ioynte. Likewise that bounched, or;
proturbered part, that emergeth from between those cauities exculped (as
aforesaid) in the upper How the process of Tibia is in posteriour cauitie
between the ij. heads of the thighe.
extremity of Tibia, makes not a little, to the confirmation of this joint by
being immitted into that large cauitie of the thighe: and not only so, but
also bound thereto by a strong Ligament proceeding from the top of the same
knot, or tubercle: and thus strongly is this joint armed, and holden in on each
side. The leg downward is as it were iij, square.


After, proceedyng downward from the superior part of the leg, we find the
same here, and there, attenuated, and lighted with long lines, and flatted
sides, in such sort, as that the whole proportion between the ij. heads, or
ends Why the leg is (...) pr^ ^lly in t^ places.
thereof, is (as it were) iij. square, obliquely stretching and incuruated
principally in iij. places: easily giuyng place to the Muscles thither
discendyng. ^ut on the outside toward the hinder parts, there lies a
certain light cauitie spread over with a Cartilage, whereto leans the inner
part of the head of Fibula, and ^ul how it is joined to yt le^ (...). The (...)
re^uing the vessel^.
so in the upper part it is joined with Tibia. From the middle top of the
posteriour part thereof, is drawn out a decliued, or crooked cauitie, for the
transiture of a Vein, Artery, and Sinew, which that way downewardes are
entrenched, to do (as others) that they owe to the lower parts.

And in the fore face, and upper part, not far from the end of the Appe^dance
which is said to be so largely plated upon the top of the leg, is a
certain The insertion of the (...) (...) that (...) the leg. The spine or
the leg.
rough eminence, admittyng the insertion of Muscles, such as extend and stretch
forth the leg. From whence, all after the middle region, is produced a sharp
line comparable to the ridge of any thing: wherefore of some it is so named.

And this inner side of the leg is the part we call the shinne, accounted to
be What is called the ^ne.
without flesh, whereas all others, and chiefly the posteriour part is opplet,
and filled with much store of flesh.

The second line which licth under Fibula, directly toward it, is made, to
the The use of the secon^ (...) in (...).
end that there hence might a Ligament be produced, whereby Fibula i^ with
Tibia connected, and knit: and (like as is said in the cubit) the auteriour,
from the posteriour Muscles are thereby distinguished.

Again the inferior part of Tibia toward the end wareth also thicker, but
The description of the (...) part o^ Tibia.
the head thereof, less then that in the superior part, and the extreme end
excised, and cut into one only large concauitie, which is not frustrate of the
benefit of a Cartilage: whereunto is admitted the insertion of the bone Talus.
The inner side of this neither head of Tibia goes forth like a thick
Procesle, ouerreachyng The use of the inner Proce^e of the neither head of
Tibia.
on that side the late said cauitie: by reason whereof, Talus seems as though
it were underset, on that side, for slippyng out.

Contrariwise the other side, not being able to yield the like, for that it
behooved it rather to offer a long hollowed corner wherein to lodge the lower
part of Fibula: and again, since it were as well expedient for that side to be
defended from each light luxatio^ as the other: see the devise of nature, in
stretchyng forth the head of Fibula, as far beyond the head of T^bia in this
lower part, as upward the leg See the matuellous art of nature
surmounteth it in longitude: whereby is fulfilled in it, that which might not
be one that side brought to pass in Tibia. For here it becemmeth as
au^swerable to the outside of Talus, as the Process one the inner side
extended from Tibia. These Col. lib. 1. Cap, 30.
are they which commonly in our English phrase we call the Aneles. The Process
The ij. ancles which be they.
of Tibia being the inner ancle, and the outer head of Fibula, these ij. make
strong Why luxation of ye foot rather enclineth to yt inner ancle then to the
outer.
resistaunce, least Talus to Tibia articulated should on any side slip from
his seat. But when such luxation happens at any time, we see it more commonly
to the inner side, then the outer side: because the outer is longer produced
then the inner.

Moreover that Process of Tibia which we call the inner ancle, in the
posteriour The ^gure and use of the in^er ancle.
part thereof, has a cauitie, whence is extract a Ligame^t, wherewith Talus to
Tibia besides is alligated, and bound. And further, that this knittyng might
be more firm, no small aid yeldeth that little long and rough corner,
transuerly carried, which the Anteriour seat of the Appendance of this
inferior head of Tibia puts forth: for hereto springs a Ligament knittyng
the neck of Talus The neck of Talu is knit to Tibia.
to Tibia.

But here you must understand, that the joining of Fibula with the leg is
after Fabula touches not y^ thigh above
no other order, then as we have declared before, in the knittyng (in the arm)
of Radius with Cubitus: yet ascends no^ so high, as that it any thing at all
touches (...) v^der (...) (...).
the bone of the thigh: and downwardes contrariwise, discendeth lower the^ the
leg, for what end and use, we have said: each structure, and combynation
thereof, being by Arthrodia, under Synarthrosis.

Both the heads of Fibul^ stretch forth into a sharp Process, endewed, and
The uses of the asyeritie^ of the Processes of (...).
shaped with certain roughnes, to the uppermost of which, being more round,
are inserted the Muscles moving the leg, but the inferior, which is more
depressed and also outwardly more Gibbous, sends forth Muscles seruyng to the
extreme part of the foot. And both these heads, insomuch as they are received
into (...) to Fibula.
there propper cauities, are clothed with a Cartilage.

To speak therefore wholly of this same Fibula, the small bone of the leg,
although it be straight, or at least but a little crooked, yet a great space of
it departs The distaunce between (...) (...), and why.
from the same Tibia, but farthest of all in the superior region thereof:
because there also Tibia is more hollow slected, then in the whole space
besides.

And in this distaunce, may you discern the Ligament lately spoken of,
compleityng together the leg and Fibula, in the middle space, and separatyng
the Muscles, by which, those spaces of the leg on each side are fulfilled: to
whose insertions, The lines and inequality of Fibula to what use. Their inward
hollownes.
and situations, much serviceable is the inequality of Fibula, ensigned so
with apt cauities, and lines, whereby it is in like sort trianguled, or three
squared: and as Tibia reteyneth a safe room for the marey, so Fibula wants
not wherein The whitlebone of the knee to common in use both to the tht^h and
(...).
to carry this nourishment.

In the sore part of the knee, at the joining together, or coarticulation of
the leg with the thigh, is a certain bone divided from them both, yet not
refusing The ^plication of the names of this bone.
service, but is common to either of them: and called of the latins diversely:
as Patella. genu mola, scutiforme os, and Rotula genu, in English the Patell,
the The substance of the rout^e of the knee.
Rotule of the knee, the shieldlike bone, the eye of the knee. etc. the
substance thereof is not Cartilaginous as some have thought good, neither yet
altogether hard, Col. Cap. 31.
and Solid, as others would affirm, but rather as it were the substance of
some Why the ton^e of the knee to not Solid.
hard Appendance: to the end it might be apt to receive nourishment into all
the parts thereof. Notwithstanding that, it is inuolued, and wrapped about with
a Where it is lapped in a slipperie Castilage.
slippery Cartilage, especially on the side toward the thighe and leg, the
other as clothed with the tendons of Muscles. This Patell was ordained to cover
the The first (...) of the (...).
joint between the thighe and leg, which otherwise had been to open, and
prone Why it is mouable.
to be luxated forward. It yeldeth also that the knee might directly be bowed
to a The Rotule has his propper (...) (...) agay^t the common opinion.
corner. So it ought to be mouable, and not stubburnly cleauyng, for making the
motion hereof difficulte, but with his Ligamentes, and those of the thighe, it
is knit unto the leg though others say it is only holden thereto by the
tendons of The visinge of his proppec ligamentes from whence.
Muscles. For from the Appendances of the thigh, and leg, arise Ligamentes,
wherewith manifestly the Patell is bound on each side, but to the thigh it is
Articulated by Ginglymon. For the inferior part of the thigh having two
heads, as I have said, leaves the midst a hollow corner, into which the
middle protuberant The Patell is articulated to the thigh by (...).
part of the Patell is immitted: which, that it might the better fulfill, and
more commodiously cleave unto it, it is here and there noted with cauities,
aunswerable The ^igure of the patell what kind of one.
to the protubera^t portions of the head of yt thighe, wherefore according to
that kind of Articulation named, the Patell both recciueth, and is received of
the thigh, the fashion thereof is almost round, going out somewhat sharp (as
Where the Patel is (...), and (...) forth like the (...) of a (...).
it were) where it sits to the leg, and therefore it obteineth the name of
a shield. In the sides or extreme parts it is more light, and thin, but the
more nearer the middeit the thicker, and bosseth out the more evidently. It
preuenteth an incommoditie (says Galen) least in bowyng the knee, the thigh
should flippe over The notable use of this ^arell bone or (...) of the knee.
the cauities in the top of Tibia. And not meanly stays us from falling
whilst we descend down some hill, or crooked place: when as the whole body
beside is (...). 3. (...) (...). Cap. 15.
wayed backward. And thus much of the superior members.

NOw it rests to speak of the bones appertainyng to the foot; and whereof
The number of the (...) in the (...) (...). one (...) then (...) (...). (...)
(...) of (...) (...) yt (...). The (...). (...) of (...) in the (...) (...)
(...) to the (...). (...) of bones (...) y hand. The (...) between the (...) of
the hand (...) of the foot.
the foot is estour^ed and made: The number of them is xxvj. obseruyng iij.
orders in the foot, like as in the hand. For, the first part, which
immediately succeeds the leg and Fibula, being called Tarsus, is
aunswerable to the wrest of the hand. The second, called Pedium, is co^parable
to the Postbrachiali bones. The third order is destined to the joints of the
fingers. Only this difference is between them: that the bones of Tarsus are
but by. in number, and they of the wrest are viij. whereby it happens that the
hand surmounteth the foot by one in number, but to Pedium, are v. belonging,
as many as are numbered of the Postbrachiall bones, the other xiiij. are divided
among the joints of the fingers, as well The number of the bones to (...).
in the foot, as the hand.

NEither (says Collumbus) do I see, why from the bones of Tarsiu the three
first should be disioyned, as other Anathomistes have thought (...), grauntyng
The number of bones to pedium. The bones of the singers both of teete and hand
are ^uy.
that the iiij. last bones, which alone (say they) merit the name of Tarsus,
ought only to be compared to the wrest, without mention of the other iij. He
therefore thinks good to complect both those iij. as also the other four
followyng under the name of Tarsus: as when we depart from Tibia, and Sura,
descending, Col. Cap. 32.
forthwith we come unto one manner of joining together of bones, as it were Why
in yt bones of (...) Col. differs from other (...).
a navy, which we compare unto the wrest followyng Cubitus and Ulna. But every
one of these bones belongyng to Tarsus, have not peculiar names given the^:
(...).
for the first three are of some (in their division) removed from Tarsus, and
one of C^ls.
the four followyng obteineth a propper name, but the three last are hitherto
altogether Staphordes.
unnamed. The first of all therefore is named Talus, the second Calx, the
Cybordes.
third Scaphoides, the iiij. Cyboides, the other iij. although they go unnamed,
yet by number, form, and situation they are distinguished.

And now to describe them all in order, Talus being first, prostrated under
Tibia, Fibula, and subject to their Appe^dances, although it seem only
substrated The description of Talus.
to Tibia, is in form bossyng out above like a round heaued, or swelled
thing, imitatyng in compass the fashion of half a wheel, or if I may to
licken it to the wheel of a pulley: for in the midst it is guttured, or
hollowed, though not so deep, but lightly, so that the sides only may be
discerned higher whereby it is coupled with the bone of the leg. For the
Appendance thereof is so for the purpose engraven, to admit this head of Talus
into his fit seat, after the kind of articulati^ Talus to Tibia articulated
by (...).
called Ginglymon. And this manner of the joint serves to the bowyng, and
reflectyng of the foot: the which motion each walkyng creature continually The
use of the a^ticulation to the foot.
makes: which, to the end it might be made more easy, and with less labor
to yt member, or lest the bones by much wearing, should be wasted, either part,
both The use of the ca^tilage to Talus.
of Tarsus and Talus, are plentyfully encrusted with an Appendance, perpetually
to endure the foetes incessant motion. Talus is on each side decliued, and as
it The sides of Talus declined and even.
were co^pressed, where the Ancles are placed, neither yet without the over
spreadyng, or deffensine clothyng of a Cartilage, although not on each side of
like sort. For the inner side is only co^pressed above in small scope and
amplitude, because What co^stituteth the inner ankle.
the Process of the inferior Appendance of Tibia coustitutyng the inner
ancle, and comprehendyng this si^e of Talus, is not in such ample space,
encrusted with a Cartilage: but the outer side of Talus is largely sinuated,
and in greater space bearyng the obduction of a Cartilage, to the apt
constitutyng of a seat congruent to the inner side of the lower Appenda^ce of
Fibula, which makes the outer Ancle: and discendyng lower then the inner, the
inferior part of Talus is hollow, and clothed The (...) part of (...).
with a Cartilage, and lyeng wholly upon the face of the heel bone: but so
notwithstanding, as that the same obteineth a half compassed cauitie: which
admits the middle regio^ of ye heel bone thereunto preassing, and
accordynly fourmed. And as the interior side of the inner Ancle possesses a
rough cauitie, out of Vesal. (...). (...). p. (...).
which spryngeth a Cartilaginous Ligament, for the binding together of Talus,
How (...) is bound to the (...).
and Tibia: even so, for the receiving of the same Ligament, the inner side of
Talus has a rough cauitie, or hollow, even as the outer side thereof is
likewise hollowly The use of the aspetites in (...).
engraven, that thereto might be inserted the Ligament brought from the inner
side of the outer Ancle. For the like cause also is the hinder part of Talus,
about the root thereof rough, to admit and receive the Ligamentes whose
begynnynges The use of the (...) in (...).
are in Tibia, reaching others to the heel. But besides this said asperitie or
roughnes, the posteriour seat of Talus shows also hollow or concaued places
to the tendons of Muscles that are carried to the foot, and go under the
inferior parts thereof. And in this manner is Talus articulated to Tibia, as
also, the superior posteriour parts and sides, are fourmed as is said. The
Anteriour The figure and use of the anteriour part of (...).
part of Talus strecheth forth his portion like a neck, which ends at a
round head, not vestitute of his crusty cover, which is admitted into the
large, and Col. ^ib. 1. Cap. 32.
round sinuated side of the Boatelyke Bone: by the benefit of the which How
the foot by obscure motions is moved.
ioynte, the foot (although obscurely) moves outward, and inward, as also
does as (it were) somewhat turn about. But in the posteriour part it is aster
a manner prominent, that is, where it is received of the inner and posteriour
part of the What is understood by y^ anteriour and posteriour part.
heel. We call that the posteriour part, which, descendyng down from the head,
first offreth it self unto us: and that further from the removed, the
posteriour. But in y^ inferior part on the outside of Talus is a profound
cauitie, augmented by an a^swerable cauitie on the same side of the heel bone.
In this cauitie is contained a certain murous, or (...) substance, together
with fatnes, so prepared to the moystnyng and annoynting of those bones: lest
else much moving should dry them, and they dried, consequently their office
frustrate. Finally Talus syeth down in the fore part, and is extended upon the
heel bone, as it were into a double Process, The use of y^ large (...) in
(...).
that is to say, where it respects the inner region. And thus is showed the
The (...) of the fore part of Talus.
first bone called Talus, which (notwithstanding) is likewise so sinuated, and
hollowed, as not only it admits the insertion or rising rather of
Ligamentes, The substance of the bone Talus.
but also aptly gives place to the tendons of Muscles, brought thither for the
mouyng The error of those that esteem the bone Talus to be Solid.
of the toes as is before: only this more we have to say, that the substance
thereof meriteth nothing less then to be called Solid, for as much as (though
contrary to the opinions of some) we sinde it spongie, and replete with many
holes.

The second bone in order ensuyng is called the heel, or heel bone, or of
others The heel bone and names thereof. The magnitude. The substance. The
description of the upper part of the h^ele bone where it to committed to Talus.
the Spur of the foot. In magnitude it far exceeds all others of the
foot, neither differing in substance much from Talus, unless it seem
somewhat more Fungous, and not with so hard a crust munited. A loft, it is
committed to Talus in manner aforesaid: that is to say the middle region
toward the fore parts swellyng round, has also more forward a great cauitie
to receive Talus, so that one receiuyng an other, the manner of Articulatio^ is,
called Ginglymon. But notwithstanding The articulation of (...) with Talus to
by Ginglymon. The (...) of the first part of the heel.
the first part of the heel tends backwardes, being somewhat (...), and
round, with a head as it were in the outer side thereof: in that region neither
negleayng his propper Appendaunce, but departing wholly from the straight Why
the heel backwards exceeds the certitude of the legg^.
line, or rectitude of Tibia, left the foot, together with the leg in going,
should have been over prompt to slide backward to the no small uncertainty in
going, and setlyng the foot to the ground. The inferior part of the heel
bone, whereby Why y^ inferior part of the heel bone is broade^. Why it is
rough (...) trasuerse (...).
we tread, and go forwards, was requisite to be somewhat bro^d, for the (...)
setting of the foot. As also to be rough, and endewed with a transuerse
Process, that thence might have his being the Muscle, that serves to bow the
fourth joint of the toes. Where beside springs that Musculous matter, whence
A (...) matter whence (...) Muscles spring.
the four Muscles proceed, which with a long te^don, be implanted to the
interne region of four toes, and therefore by these eminent Processes is left a
certain cauitie, or hollow place, wherein more fitly might lie both that
Muscle, and Musculous substance, lest that the foot being strongly set to the
ground, the heads of the same Muscles might be, by to much compression,
offended. Now also the heel, in that part which is said to go forth backwardes
in form of a head, with a certain flatnes, is also lightly made roughe: for
the more fit, and easy insertio^ The asperitie in the head of y^ heel and y^
use thereof.
of that tendon, of all others the greatest, and strongest, which is made by
the conioynyng of the iy. Muscles, mouyng the foot, in one. In that part
which is toward the little toe, this bone is joined with that called
Cyboides: and so in deed How Calx is articulated with Cyboides.
the manner of his Articulation is supposed most rightly to be Ginglymon
referred under Synarthrosis.. Again where it respects the greatest finger
(which part A Process and the use thereof.
notwithstanding seems more rightly to be accounted the inner side of the
heel bone) it sends out no small Process, which is augmented by the hollow
in the inner side engraven, and for that cause was ordained as a propper
propugnacle, both to the tendons of Muscles, as also to the Ueyne, Artery, and
Why the inside of the heel is so notably exca^ed.
Nerve thereby passing. Neither for any other consideration was that side so
notably excaued and hollowed, then to give place to these vessels, and tendons:
to all which as well this same Process is profitable, as requisite also for the
fit setting The outside of the heel described.
to of Talus with the heel bone. In fine, the outer side of the heel is
depressed, rough, and unequal: having near to the posteriour part, a little
cauitie founded The insertion of the 7. (...) ^uscles excending y^ foot.
under a small Process: and herein rests a Cartilaginous crust, visited by
the tendon of the vy. Muscle seruyng to the extension of the foot.

The third bone, called the shyplike, or boatelike bone, because it somewhat
The 3. bone of the foot called (...), and (...) in English the (...) or
boatelike bone. The situation of the boa^elike bone.
foot: in whose former seat is insculped a deep cauitie, wherein the round
head of Talus is settled, and this Articulation is put most meetely under
Enarthrosis, because in it (but very obscurely) no motion is seen. The
posteriour part thereof is committed to the first seat of the fifth, sixth, and
seventh bones without names, and that in such sort, as it is not easy to judge
whether it receives, or is received of those The articulation of the boatlike
bone with Talus by Enarthrosis.
bones. But notwithstanding that some obscurity must needs be granted (here
reverence being added) I have hitherto observed the Articulation thereof with
less obscurity. For although the vy. bone seems neither to receive, nor to
be The description of y^ posteriour part of the boatelike bone.
received, (yet rather received) y^ vj. (notwithstanding) not very obscurely
admits, and the fifth to all men's eyes, more evidently is hollow, and
excaued. And as touching the outer side, it is round, large, and sinuated where
it is joined with Col. Ibid.
The description of the outside of the boatelike bone.
the vij. bone: but thence (on the inside) as it departs, it gathers by
little and little to the fashion of a corner, and inwardly endyng with a
Process, like the neb The description of the inner side of y^ boatelike bone.
of a ship or boat: and so prominent is the inner side, as that it makes a
notable bone, or round increasing, by means whereof the right, from the left,
is easily The refle^ion of the tendon of the 5. muscle (...) the foot.
distinguished, and known. And thereby is the cauitie underneath made greater,
by the going forth of this part thereof: wherein is fittely reflected the tendon
of the vi. Muscle moving ye foot. The roughnes of this same bone is not
reside^t in some The asperitie of this third bone and use thereof.
one part only, but abundant each where, both above and beneth forth fast
placyng of Ligamentes, as behooved to the co^nectyng and knitting together of
these Bones. The fourth bone called Cibordes.


The fourth is Cyboides, or after the Latins Cube^forme os, as it were squared
Cibordes is nothing less then four squared. why C^bordes is called
Polimorphon.
like a dye: yet is it not so, but rather made after a strange and diverse
form: and therefore (...) most rightly it is named, as a thing diversely
fourmed. It sits in the outside of the foot, and in the fore part, is
joined in that order with the heel bone, as it seems no more to receive,
then thereof to be received. The situation of Cibordes.
In the posteriour part of it, there be ij. as it were cauities evident, to
receive the The description of y^ posteriour part of the 4. bone.
ends of the outer bones of Pedium, thereto rooted, as their ground and
foundation. But to speak of the inside thereof, that is coherent with the
outside of the The inside of Cibordes.
seventh bone, on which side, no otherwise then in each place where it is
coupled with other bones, it is lightly incrusted with a Cartilage: but in no
place else: lest by overmuch loadyng of the bones, their motion (which at all
is but obscure) The outside of Ciboides.
might be resisted. Further, the extreme side of this bone is as it were
forked, or going forth with two Processes, distinguished with a hollow cauitie
runnyng between them, stretchyng obliquely as a gutter after the inferior
parts of the The cauitie yelding way to the tendons of the 7. Muscle moving
the foot.
same bone: being the perfect way for the course of the vij. Muscle, his tendon
mouyng the foot. The superior part is playner, and outwardly declined, for so
is the fashion of the rest of the foot; that is to say, in the midst most
elated, The upper part of Cyboides.
and vpwardes heaued, again, declinyng by little and little toward each side,
but most toward this outside. And this manner of form in the foot, to be
above The fourm and use of ye inferior part of the foot.
conuexed or embossed round, and beneth concaued or hollow, is not only
prouidently provided of nature, for the stronger construction, and suror
setting the foot to the earth (which is so notable, as may not be neglected)
but also that the The figure of the foot is hollow underneath and bounched
aloft.
passage of the tendons and Muscles underneath the foot, might be more perfect,
and void of offense. The other bones of Tarsus, which yet remain vnspoke^ of,
are iij. in number namelesse.

Of which, the fifth is sited in that part of the foot over against the great
toe. It The description of the fifth bone of the foot.
boatelike bone: but in the hinder part, makes a seat for the first of the
Postbrachiall Col. Ibid.
bones of the foot, that susteineth the great toe: which part (says
Collumbus) The bones of the second part of the foot called pedium are
comparable to ye postbrachiall bones of ye hand, which word I therefore use
hear for yt more ready phrase of speech. Not it well.
is hard to be judged, whether it be sinuated, or prominent, yet sure it is in
some plain enough prominent, and received of the first Postbrachiall bone.
Albeit this case seems common to these four last bones of Tarsus, that their
cauities in the sides where they join, are most obscure, and lest evident of
all others: committed therefore together by Glene, or at least they may seem
so: but a little after wards Collu^bus most propperly describes that same end
of ye first Postbrachiall, to have a double cauitie, and consequently the fifth
bone a double tubercle. For else it were The articulation called Gl^^e.
a jest, to affirm one cauitie to be unto an other cauitie committed, or
contrariwise. The upper part of this bone is very narrow, and desce^deth after
the inside which Plain to plain, or hollow to protubered parts are committed
not contrariwise. Why the inferior part of yt fifth bone is thicker.
is broadest. And this part is after a sort Gibbous, by reason of that cauitie
that is to be discerned in the outer region thereof: whilst the inside in the
upper part of it, falls to the side of the vj. bone with a small kind of
cauitie: yet the inferior part of this bone is more thick, that more firmly
it might set to the ground.

The vj. bone is iiij. squared, if we mark the upper face thereof: which as it
is The description of the vj. bone of Ta^sus unnamed.
and as it were edged, very propperly compared to a wedge, and so the vij. bone
which is next to it. But ye Anteriour part of this vj. bone with ye boatelike
bone, The vj. bone compared to a wedge.
the hinder part (lightly prominent) with the second of the bones compared to
the Postbrachiall, the inside with the outer of the v. and the outer side with
the inside of the vij. is joined: which parts neither are they frustrate of
the Cartilaginous The universal articulation of the 6. bone.
crustes. The vij. is in the midst between the vj. and iiij. called Cyboides,
this seems also iiij. squared: but with a head somewhat longer then the vj.
The fore part The situation of the 7. unnamed bone.
rests upon the boatelike bone, whose shallow sinuated side admits the
small tubercle that this shows forth: but the hinder part of it admits the
iij. Postbrachiall bone: the sides are attingent to the sides of ye vj. and
iiij. bones. Netherto Epilogue.
of the bones of Tarsus: which are in number vij. constitutyng the half length
of the foot, accomptyng from the extreme point of the heel, and so forward
(all which space may be accounted the Brachiall, or wrest bones) to the bones
susteinyng The substance of the bones of Tar^^s.
the toes, aunswerable to the Postbrachiall bones of the hand. As touching
their substance although they be hard, yet not altogether Solid, but yeldyng
way for nourishment as behooves such bones.

NOw follow the Bones aunswerable to the Back of the hand, heretofore Planta,
or Uestigium, as it were the footesteppe, hold, or chief guard of the pace:
consisting The plant (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) to the (...) or (...)
(...) of the (...).
of sieve Bones, long, and round, imitatyng the joints of the fingers, the
greatness of whose extreme heads, leaves the middle parts much more light,
and slender. For their begynnynges are gross, and sinuated, where they are
compounded with the iiij. last Bones of Tarsus, in manner as before is
declared. But where they meet with ye first joints of ye Toes, they swell
forth in rounded heads, like as the Postbrachiall bones of the hand where they
are set to the fingers. The greatest of these in thicknes is ye first, although
in length it gives place Number. (...)
to the rest, that is, of all the other it is shortest, and of all others
therewith the (...).
thickest: the inferior part whereof, which is under the Anteriour head, putt^h
(...) (...) of the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
forth a tubercle, wherewith it separatech the ij. Sesamine Ossicles there
resident, whereto is inserted the seventh Muscle mouyng the foot. And the
posteriour part (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of the (...) (...) in the
(...) part.
also is beneth prominent, which in mouyng the great Toe (comparable to the
thombe) runs into the division of the two Sesamine Bones, whereof we (...)
lib. 1. C^p. 37.
speak more anon.

Even so the last bone susteinyng the little toe, where it is coupled with
Cyboides The (...) of his (...) part.
has a notable Process, going forth on the outside of the soote, which,
augmentyng so the length of the same bone, makes it comparable to the longest:
The (...) (...) the lost bone ^f the (...) (...) the (...).
which else had been that bone that susteineth the second toe of the foot, that
is, that next the great toe. The which Process, lest it might be thought to
serve for no other (...). (...) (...).
purpose, note that to it is inserted the tendon of the viij. Muscle of the
foot, The use of the processed: the last bone of (...) (...). The (...) of the
viij. muscle of the (...).
as more at large in the history of Muscles is declared.

Briefly all these bones, in their fore parts, are united to the bones of
Tarsus, as also mutually inherent one with an other, but further in their
progress they are a sunder by little and little divided, becommyng more slender,
for the constitutyng Col. (...) (...). C^p. 34.
of sufficient spaces between them, for the meet lodgyng of the Muscles
seruyng The use of the slendernes in the middle of these bones.
to bow the first joints of the Toes, accordyngly as I also touched in the
description of the Postbrachiall bones of the hand. The situation of the
Muscles ser^yng to bow the first joint of the (...).


Appendances are appertinent both to their Anteriour, and posteriour parts,
Gristelly covered: but in their posteriour parts the heads of these Bones are
sourmed round, which are committed accordyngly, to the deep cauities of the
first Appendaunce.
joints of the toes. Hollow are these within, and replenished with marcy,
neither Appenda^nce.
Demes.
have they not little h^les, by which, both surcles of Veins and Arteries with
Arteries.
nourishment, make entrance.

The third part of the foot, the Toes, represe^tyng fingers, do supply:
followyng Postbrachiall bones. The number of them is xiiij. in every toe iij.
except The toes are the 3. part of yt foot.
the great toe or thombe, which has only two as is also in the hand to be
The number of the bones of the toes.
observed. For that which should be the first joint of ye great toe (like as
Galen in the Postbrachiall Bones of the hand, accompteth that to be the first
joint of the The tho^be has ij. loyntes in the hand and foo^.
thombe, which Collumbus (contrarily) affirms the first bone of
Postbrachiale) is reckned amongst the bones of the Planta last spoken of, and
that with greater perspicuitie A Colla^ of the bones of the toes with the bones
of the singers.
then in the hand: whose motion there is manifest, but here as obscure as the
rest of that account.

And even as the number of the bones of ye toes in the foot, are agreeable to
those of the hand, so likewise they are little different in substance,
construction, and situation: Where the benes of the ^oes be Articulated with
the bo^ of ye plan^ by (...).
save that in the foot, the Anteriour parts of the first joints have deeper
concauities, for the couchyng in of the greater swelled heads of the bones of
the Plant, which kind of Articulation is called Enarthrosis, but every of
their What is (...).
mutual Articulatio^s, Ginglymon. The space between the knots of the joints
in The (...) Articulation of the bones of y^ plant and toes is do^ by (...).
the foot, are shorter then in the hand, and round bounched above, but beneth
hollow, and sin^s, for the safe admittaunce of the tendons of Muscles seruyng
to how the second, and third joints of the toes. As for Appenda^ces, every of
their heads taste of their benefit, with the slippery clothyng of Cartilages,
for Articulation, and motion sake, erceptyng the extremities of the toes: where
is neither ^he vttlitie of (...) in (...).
Appendance, nor Cartilaginous crust to be invented: for that to no other Bones
they are coarticulated, and knit. Their substance (inwardly) is endewed with
Why the extre^ied of y^ (...) have neit^r Appendaunce nor Cartilage.
fit cauities, for the conservation of Ossie nourishment, wherewith they are
filled.

THus is finished the last part of the foot, but before I altogether cease to
speak of bones, according as I have heretofore promised, the small Ossicles,
or Sesamine bones shall occupy a little space of time, least (peradventure)
(...).
they be deemed forgotten: which crime, in this discourse, I would not be
accused of. Under the joints therefore of the fingers, as well of ye hands, as
feet, are little The situatio^ and figure of the Sesamme bones.
round bones, which although they were created of nature to fulfill the void
places, left to those joints where they grow, yet serve they to other far
greater The use of the Ses^e bones
uses: being no otherwise, as propugnacles to the joints, then the rotule of
the knee for the defense of that region: not a little also strengthnyng the
joints to the apprehendyng, and holdyng of any thing, and in the foot, to the
equal passing one the ground. So also, that the joint in bowing, should not
yield too sharp a corner, they are in substance almost Solid, yet within
replete with pores, to Their substance. Medullons ^yce contained in the
sesa^es.
conserve ye ^yce of medullous nutriment. They are called Sesamina Ossicula for
their litlenes, and likeness to the Sesamine seed, these make sometime the
first joints of the toes being lurated, hard to be rightly restored but by a
skilful Artist Why they are cal^d (...).
who knows the reason of such difficulty. The number of them is not
certain, Why ^uxation in the toes is son hard to be reposed.
sometime x. sometime xv. and in some xx. but in aged persons more great, and
notable. Enough different also are those ij. reposed under the first bone of
'Planta where The number of the Sesa^e bones to uncertain.
it is Articulated unto the first ioynte of the great toe, where they cleave,
and are much greater then all others, yet the inner of these exceeds the
other in largenes. Which the followers of hidden, and Philosophical mysteries,
have affirmed The difference of ij. Sesa^e bones from the rest.
subject to no corruption: feinyng that it is kept in the earth until the day
of resurrection, when, as a seed it shall spryng, and renew the body again,
So that I perceive the godly Martyrs, whose bodies, for the professsion Fuchs.
Cap. 37.
of Christ have been burnt to death, shall never rise again. The diue^ comment
of Magitia^s.
for well I am assured, that what seed soever is once confounded by the force
of that element, the same shall no where after be found to take root: which
doctrine, together with the Doctors, is to be shunned, and detested of all
true beleuers of Christ, his death, and resurrection. But here of the
description of the Bodies frame work, the glass is run and other parts
require to be spoken of.

An end of the History of Bones.
The Sceleton of the Back.

The second Book of the History Man, discoursing the Cartilages.
A Cartilage is a Substance, mean betwixt the The description of a Cartilage.
bone and the Ligament, (...) so much the more Collumbus. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
softer then the Bone, by how much again it is harder the^ the Ligament. In
whitenes it (...) It behooved (...) a cartilage to have sense.
with them both, and of sense wholly bestitute: for so it was requisite, whether
they be placed in the The sundry uses of Cartilages.
office of susteinyng and enclosing, or serve in stead of propugnacles: else
prcue^t the wearing of bones by mouyng: or make that they cleave together more
firmly: or augment concauitie: or yield to Nature marvelous in creating the
Cartillages.
each action more facility. And so has Nature disposed their substaunetall
property; as by yeldyng each where with their sustenes, they may not be
broken, in that they resist not, as the bones, neither do they slip away by
any force, or be extended by Attraction, as do the Ligamentes for the most
part: but always returning to them selves, are not s^e displaced, nor easily
changed in form. But because I purpose to speak of them more particularly,
as tofore I have traveled in the bones, it should some supersluous to speak
more of their properties, since to what end they were created each one shall
declare it self.

Wherefore to begin with the first, it should some most worthy that the
Cartilages The Cartilages of the cyely^. In what creatures the Cartilages of y^
upper eye lyddes ate greater, (...) what also they are lesser.
of the eye lyddes be no longer deferred, which are in number as many, as the
very lyddes of the eyes, that is two to either eye, one above, which in me^,
and such creatures as only move the upper lyddes, are greater then the
neither: but in others, as birds, the nether exc^de the uppermost in quantity.

These Cartilages are situated to the extreme borders of the eye lyddes,
clothed Their situation. Why they are placed in the placed of the eye l^ddes.
within with a Membran, and without with skin. Their situation thus in the
extremities for great consideration was ordained of Nature. For more straightly
by them are the eyes hable to winck and close together, proferyng them selves
likewise as propugnacles to the eyes by the susteinyng of hears unto them. The
utility of the Cartilages in the (...) (...).
Which by their means are stiffly supported, and not slackyngly or losely
borne: also one lineally distant from an other and forwards tendyng, lightly
preuentyng ^al. Lib. (...) de Vsn p^.
every injury offered by dust, or each flyeng little creature. As also that for
the more The use of the heare^ in the (...) liddes.
firm mouyng of the eye lyddes, the Muscles might be to them inserted, these
Cartilages are there justly reposed.

NCrt to these are those two constitutyng either ear, so annexed to the hole
The cartilages of the caves.
of hearing, to dilate, and k^pe open the same continually, to the perpetual
promptitude of hearing each sound and voice. These Cartilages are made Their
uses.
more thick ab^ue, and chiefly near the hole whence they have their
beginning, Why they are thicker above.
and are more hard then, because of their vicinitie which the temporal bone.
Further, about the auditory passage is this bone made rough, for the generation
of Where they are harder and why.
Cartilaginous matter, which is to that place affixed, so that by no weight it
may slip down, or otherwise be drawn upward. Both within, and without they
are Where the bone of the temple is rough and why.
endewed with hollow, and also Gibbous places, the prominent parts outward
being respondent to the hollow cauities inward. Again, they are above round,
The figure of the Cartilages of the cares.
and beneath prolonged with a little lap, or (as we may term it) a fleshy
Appendance: which although it depend upon the borders of these Cartilages yet
is it altogether Their (...) (...).
^yde of Cartilaginous matter, neither stands it in n^de thereof, since it Why
y^ (...) of the cares was not (...) (...).
only depends, that is, is sustained, but susteineth not: for the parts
that most sustain are most strong. To who^ should it some doubtful to judge
why the ears were not formed for stifues, rather of the substance of Bones
then Gristles, ^then that substance being made subtle and thin should easily
have broken: or thick, massiue or Solid to have combred the head with the
ponderous weight thereof. Therefore of best right their substance was light, and
Cartilaginous, to be Why y^ cares are Cartilaginous, Why the c^res are covered
with a (...) (...).
less endammaged by outward force. And more for comelynes, then for defense
sake they are closely enwrapped with a skin, which is (excepting the borders)
hard, and tough.

ALso the extreme portion of the nose is made Cartilaginous by the great
providence Why the (...) (...) of yt ^ose is Cartilaginous.
of nature, both to be shut, whereby to restrain and forbid the ascense of
evil savors, as also again to open and be dilated, for ye attractio^ of
breath and air. Furthermore this reason of ye substance of the nostrels was
expedient (even as we Why the whole nose was not (...) (...).
said lately of the earen) that hardly it might be hurt of outward things,
which is most often practiced. For being pressed, it yeldeth but never
breaks, which so necessary vtilities had perished had the nostrels been
otherwise made, or of the substance of bones fabricated. Wherefore most
sapiently has the divine artificer decr^d this part, as also all other, that
is, as the lower parts of the nose were made Cartilaginous, so also to be knit
unto the superior (...) parts, whereon Why the upper part of the nose is ^nye.
they depend as their seat and foundation. With thr^ Cartilages is made the
extreme parts of the nose, whereof two constitute the sides called the wings,
(...) extreme cartilages of yt nose.
between which intercedeth the third Cartilage: whereby are formed two holes in
the nose: and this middle Cartilage is to the bony hedge, or division of the
nose Why the wings only of ye muscls move.
aunswerable, and very finitimate. But it is only the wings of the nose which
have any motion, being endewed with propper Muscles, as well to pluck them
outward, as inward says Uesalius: but that in no wise consents to Collumbus
Lib. 1 cap. ^7.
saying: Outward they have proper Muscles to lead them, but inward no peculier
(...) in (...).
Lib. cit. cap. 3.
Muscle: affirmyng that they are shut by the benefit of the lip. Whose
judgment truly, if with the thing it self you do co^ferre you shall find it
aptly How the wings of the nost^ls are shut.
consonant with verity, if my body be like to other men's, or others like mine.
But now forward with the Cartilages.

WE recited in the former History in speaking of the neither iaw two
Cartilages, The Cartilages in the seat (...) (...) of the neither saw.
which are found betw^ne the superior Processes of the same iaw, and the bones
of the temples. They are moveable, and for no other cause ordained then for the
perpetuity of his action, for although the Articulatio^ thereof is with Their
situation.
sufficient scope, and slackenes: yet with often speak^ng, eaty^g, and gapyng the
bones must n^des wear, or atleast leave of to move by wearynes, were these not
moveable Their use.
Cartilages their sited, by whose benefit, when soever n^de requires, the iaw
readely moves, never (almost) requiryng time of rest.

NOw again, not a little wondryng that so many of old, and sundry of late
Larinx has been described as a thing consisting of Cartilages.
years have deceived them selves, and erred in their writings, Realdus
Collumbus notes that Larinx is (...) and made of the substance of Bones lib.
2, cap. 5.
wholly, unless it be the Epiglot, which (...) of right to be Gristely, that it
might How Larinx is all of venes, the Epiglot excepted Why the Epiglot ought to
be (...).
without hurt admit continual mouyng, which is caused by continual
exspiryng, and inspiryng: besides that it was n^deful for it also to move,
whtlest we swallow any thing or speak, there sometimes to be lifted up, and
otherwhiles depressed down, as also in vomityng contrarily pulled, which
motions it easily follows, the Cartilage yeldyng on either side.

BUt under Larinx all Aspera arteria is Cartilaginous, distinguished with very
The substance of the (...) of (...) (...).
many Gristly rings: which ringes (notwithstanding) are not wholly
Cartilaginous: for backwardes toward the Vertebres where it glideth down by the
stomache or Aesophagos, they are intersected with a Membran, there nevertheless
The necessary (...) of these (...) (...).
bindyng them together. Broken they cannot be, yet was it expedient they were
so fashioned, as to give place to Aesophagus, least otherwise it should suffer
compression by them in swallowyng the sustenaunce, the which Membran The (...)
of the (...) the membran being taken away.
if you take away wholly, the ryngs appear vnioyned representyng the figure of
this letter C. But now they are together by the inwrappyng of this Membran,
which, in that sharp disease called Angina, may perhaps sometime be taken or
In Angina sometime y^ membran that covers these ringes may be taken of, or is
cut away.
cut away. The journey of this rough Artery ends under the canell Bone,
where it is cut into two parts or bows, which are after separated into other
two, and those again into others, and so at the length dispersed throughout
all The progress of (...) (...).
the substance of the lunges, to transport the air inspired and expired.

NExt, we speak of the thick Cartilages, whereby the bodies of the Vertebres
Of the cartilages. Of the vertebres. The first vertebre wants a cartilage.
are committed together: the first excepted, which as it has no body, neither
any Cartilage. But to speak of the benefit which here these Cartilages give:
we find that by them the Articulation and knitting-together of the Vertebres
The use of the cartilages of the vertebres.
is made more slack, and easy, whereby they can bow forward, backward, and
to the sides, aptly, after the will of the creature. Their breadth is
au^swerable to the bodies of the Vertebres, leueyling, or making even their
ends where they meet. Therefore, as the turnyng joints of the back do
still, in going The quantity of too ^ertebres changes the quantity of the
Cartilages.
downward, increase in quantity: so accordingly these Cartilages are made
greater and thicker, to the end they might not want wherewith to endure the
greater increase, and weight of bones.

Under Os sacrum also, where the tale bone is fastened, a Cartilage lies: and
The Cartilage under Os (...). The Cartilage between the bones of Coccix.
much of a Cartilage is put between the first and second bone thereof, but
especially in women, because in bringyng forth the birth, the tail bone (as we
have declared heretofore) yeldeth backward, but in men it is never moved Why
in women there is much of a cartilage between the first and second bone of
Coccix.
from his seat.

SO likewise the top of Sternon has on each side a Cartilage, where it
admits the knittyng to of the Cannell Bones, and these also mouable
according The situation of the Cartilage in y^ top of Ste^non. The di^ers use
of the Cartilage in the top of Sternon.
to the uses of the Cartilage of y^ neither iaw before expressed, although
these have nothing so apt, and often mouynges as that has. Notwithstanding in
great cryinges, and swallowyng of the meat, as also to expiration and
inspiration, those are much conducent, whilst the breast is some whiles drawn
together, and other times rises: so is the expedite mouyng of the arms
procured thereby.

Again, between the first, or second bone of the breast is sited a certain
Cartilage, The use of the Cartilage in the middle of y^ breast.
which is soft, and usurps the office of a Ligament: whereby the superior
part becomes more apt to move.

TO the ribs also grow Cartilages like unto Appendaunces, in so much as Both
the true and false ribs have Cartilages.
respectcth their anteriour parts, as well in the true ribs, where they are
committed to the breast bone, as in the false ribs not adherent to the breast
bone The shorter ribs have shorter Cartilages and contratiwise.
otherwise then by the Cartilages of the true ribs. Wherefore in the ribs
this more is notable, that the shorter ribs have shorter Gristles, and the
longer ribs, the longer Cartilages: so to the uppermost ribs are round
Cartilages, The figure of the Cartilages of the ribs.
but to the neithermost much broader. Their uses we have almost sufficiently
touched in the description of the ribs. For according to the mouyng of the
lunges they make the ribs to yield: since it behooves the breast to be often
lifted up, The vtilities of the Cartilages of the breast.
and often depressed. Which mouyng although it be natural, yet should it not
be so free, if all the ribs were of the substance of bones: neither might
nature long The breast is naturally monyng.
endure the voluntary mouynges of the breast, which are requisite in putting
forth yt voice, but that the Cartilages minister an ease to the laborious
dilatatio^ of the breast. Besides this, the false ribs yield an exellent
effect unto the body, and not The moving of the bre^t is voluntarye.
to be neglected, in giuyng scope unto the Uentricle when it swells by
repletio^. Which gift is not small, since all do know what great incommodities
to the body, compression at that instant might infer. The use of y^ false
ribbe^.


THe breast bone, called also Sternon, in the neither part thereof has a
Cartilage The figure of the Cartilage in the lower part of the breast.
of a trianguler form, although sometimes four square, and in others cloven
in two. Some therefore have called it a little sword, others the shieldlyke The
names of this Cartilage. The use of (...) (...) after the popular judgment.
Cartilage, others Mucronatum, that is to say, sharp pointed or edged, the
Arabians, Malum Granatum, the Grecians (...). But what soever name it meriteth,
yet nature made it not to that end, as it is commonly judged: that is to say,
for a defense, and propugnacle to y^ mouth of the Tlentricle, which far
distant from this, ^he true use of mucronata Cartilago.
lies in the left side. But more rightly they might judge, that it gardeth the
heart, and defends Septum transuersum, whose tendon is knit thereto. Wherefore
it happens, ^hy a wound received in mucron^ta Ca^tilago iss deadly.
that a wound in this place is dangerous, and deadly: for because nature
placed there this Cartilage, as a shield unto it. Which grows so fast unto
the lower part of ye breast bone, that without great force it may not be plucked
away. (...) cartil^go st^ppeth not from the breast as (...) suppose.
Wherefore they are worthy derisio^ that suppose it to slyppe from ye seat
sometime.

IN the head of the shoulder blade, or scaple bone is an hollow or co^caued
place The Cartilage in the head of the shoulder blade and use thereof.
whereto is annexed a Cartilage for the augmentation thereof: for in that part
(else) the compass of the shoulder blade could not have suffered so deep a
hollow as might have been sufficient to the receiuyng of the head of the
shoulder. Nature therefore for the augmentation thereof devised a Cartilage
wherewith to contriue a deeper profunditie, which also so artificially is
wrought, as that the same The shoulder to (...) (...). The (...) of the
shoulder has difficulte ^estitution.
joint by the mobilitie of this Cartilage is made more agile, casie, and
active: and by the altitude and depth of the same cauitie, at no time is easily
displaced. Which, when it happens, is not without great diligence repaired.

THe like Cartilage we find in the cauitie of the hippe, which admits the
The Cartilage in the Concaurtie of the hippe is not mouable.
long, and round head of the thighe bone. But that is not made there any thing
moveable, but only to that end prepared, that the borders of the same
co^cauitie might more highly be augmented, and so the profunditie be made
greater: The use of ye cartilage in the concaurtie of y^ hippe
because the huckle bone else might not be so deeply excaued, as should seem
sufficient to admit the longitude of the head of the thighe.

FUrther more from ye lower heads of ye thigh, to the upper regio^ of the
leg, Two Cartilages in the inferior heads of y^ thigh
are two Cartilages like half circles, the one on the inside, the other on ye
out side. I can easily compare their figure to the fashion of a sickle, thicker
on the out side and thinner on the inside, and inwardly endyng at that
tubercle, which in the Their uses.
middle upper face or end of the leg rises, where they are joined together.
And they are made to increase the cauities there in the top of the leg
exculped: wherein more fitly are inserted the lower heads of the thighe,
neither that the moving of the joint should be hindered. The Cartilage in the
wrest of the hand.


TO come unto the wrest of the hand, near to the poynted Process extended
from the extreme head of the cubite, which Galen in vain believed to be knit
to the fourth bone of the wrest, is a Cartilage put, which fulfilleth the same
place being otherwise void and empty: preuentyng likewise, lest that part of
The use thereof.
the hand, whilst it is bowed to that sive, should strike upon that sharp
Process to the great greuaunce, and hurt thereof.

Moreover, betwenethe bones of Pubis cleaves strongly a notable Cartilage, The
substance and figure of the cartilage between (...) Pubis.
which in the superior part is broad, and thick, but going downewardes,
decays by little and little, endyng at a sharp, in that place committyng
together those bones, like most hard and cleauyng glue, so fast in deed
holdyng The use thereof. (...) Pubis seem rather to gro^ together then to join
together.
them together, as that more rightly growyng, then ioynyng together they may be
termed. And for that cause in the former treatise, we have reproved the
opinions of such, as are not ashamed to affirm these bones to open in the time
of That the bones; of pubis do open in child birth is false.
child bearyng, whilst with a knife, without great labor (as often has been
assayed) they utterly refuse to be separated.

ALso there are Cartilages bestowed on every joint, whether the (...) thereof
^hy the bones in their wy^tes are incrusted with ^artilages.
be obscure, or manifest. For in the joints it behooved the bones to be
cucrusted with such Cartilages as be light, and slippery, sor the easy
prouekyng of motion: and that by mutual construction they be not worn.
Wherefore you Why in the Cartilages of the (...) (...).) a certante (...). Here
^s supposed the ^erest place to write the (...). The substance of the nails.
find always added unto them a certain moist matter, wherewith, as with a
certain fatnes the joints are continually noynted.

ANd this I hold fully sufficient for the declaration of Cartilages through out
the body. Notwithstanding it is best determined in this place to speak
somewhat of the nails, before I make an end. Which, although it be truly said
that their substance is mean betwixt bones and Cartilages, being neither The
dif^erence (...) y^ nails and Cartilages. The use of the nails. The nails
can (...) but not break.
so hard as bones, nor so soft as Cartilages, from which in color also they
differ much: yet we have joined them unto the treatise of Cartilages, as more
appropriate to the nature of them. They of right defend the most soft parts,
the ends of the fingers, l^st they be lightly hurt by every outward occasion.
Wherefore their hardness establishes firmly the ends of the fingers, and to
the apprehendyng of harder things, are approved most necessary, so made to bow
and give place, but (...). (...). (...). 1. The nails are hard in a notable
mean.
not to break. Likewise nature (says Galen) was circumspect, that in making
them hard they should neither lose the utility for which they were made, nor
they The (...) art of nature.
them selves suffer any thing easily: according to her custom, in making in
each creature every prominent particle of such substance, as that neither for
softnes Why the nails are or (...) ^igure. The nails do grow always whilst
the body cease.
they may be crushed, nor yet for drines broken. Likewise for security sake
the nails are of round figure. For of all other figures the round offreth
lest advantage whereby to be hurt, because it has no corner standing forth of
power to be broken. But because by stretchyng, and every other action of the
nails, In what order the nails do grow^.
their extremities must needs be worn, to their growyng was annexed
perpetuity, although the whole body else be driven to the defect of grouthe.
But how? Cap. 38.
Says Fuchsius, they grow not as other members together both in breadth,
length, The new part of ye nail that springs thrusts forward the old.
and thickenes, but only in length: the new (says Galen) cuer driuyng
forwards, and thrustyng out the old. So that ever in place of that, which in
the extremities of the nails is daily worn, new comes forward, and
supplieth the rowme.

Realdus Collumbus proves the original beginning of the nails to come Cap.
15.
The original of the nails.
srom the skin, and the tendons extending the Muscles of the fingers,
although under the nails the tendons are carried to the extremities of the
fingers: for hear they are afterward dilated, Why under the nails is such
exquisite sense.
as shall seem likely to each sound judgment, since under the nails
lurketh such exquisite sense.

An end of the Hystory of Cartilages.
Of the History of Man, the third Book, of Ligamentes.
HAd not the joints of the bones, and Cartilages Vesal. lib. 2. Cap. 1.
by Ligamentes been compact and bound together, nothing might have prohibited
the bones, and Why nature created (...) (...) to the body.
Cartilages by every motion to be loosed, and from their natural seat one
from an other removed. Which that it might not come to pass, the creator of
all things commanded that all the joints of the bones, and Cartilages, should
be clothed about with Ligamentes: by whose benefit, the bones might safely be
bound together, and in their joints contained: neither readyly by every
violent motion to be broken one from an other. For, that their substance by
the strong force thereof denies. And again by their hardness, go free from
receiuyng hurt by the continual, and incessant motions that be used. Colum.
Lib. 3. Cap. 1.


But to begin at the interpretation of the name: A Ligament is called of the
The name of a Ligament.
Greeks (...), the Latins Vinculum, which we translate a Bond. It is in The
substaunc of a Ligament.
substance, hard, white, and of sense, and hollownes void, yet not so hard as
the Cartilage is. The beginning thereof is at the bone, and the end thereof is
at the The situation of the Ligament every where.
bone, except a certain, which more particularly shall be touched in their
places.

A Ligament is made to bind together our members, and therefore chooses the
The use of the Ligament.
name of a bond, and without them our parts were lost, and might not move.
Why the Ligament wants sense.
void of sense even as the bone, and Cartilage: in which point, with
wonderful praises the providence of nature is to be extolled. For if the
Ligamentes had been endewed with sense, what pains should we labor in at
every motion of the bones?

Beside, the Ligamentes are made for the production of Muscles, as somewhat
Appendances.

Again if you mark, you shall find every Ligament so hard, as that it has
The second use of the Ligamentes after Vesalius.
hindered. And this is the first and chief use of the Ligame^t (says Vesalius.)
All, which belongs to their second use, is that they in their proper places
contain the tendons, lest they from their states decline, or be elevated in
their action.

They are nourished notwithstanding by a thin medullous matter. Wherefore, The
nourishment of Ligamentes.
between the bone and the Appendance nature placed the Ligament, to the end
they might more aptly draw their nourishment to them.

And although the situation of all the Ligamentes is almost after one kind of
order, yet much in them selves do they disfer. For of them, some are thick,
some The difference of Ligamentes.
slender, others great, some small, some broad, some narrow, some round, and
some not round: and other disferences diverse of them choose, as more expressly
shall be declared in their particular explications. Which that it may be done
in order we The head is the prince of all other parts whatsoever philosopher
(...).
will begin at the Ligamentes of the head, which is the principal part, all
Philosophical opinions notwithstanding.

FRom the bones of the head and upper iaw, between the seames and commissures,
The Ligamentes of the head.
springs Ligamentes thynne and broad: which, beside that they bynd together
these bones with a most strong tyeng, are made for the original of those
Muscles, Situation, Use.
which from those parts have their begynnynges. As be the Muscles of the face,
neither iawe, and eyes, all which arise from the scames or Cemmissures. And
because the Articulation of the head with the Vertebres is more excellent, and
The articulation of the head with the Vertebres is most noble.
of greater value the^ the rest, divine nature ye mother of humanc sect, has
showed therein more care, and greater diligence then in all others. For, when so
great weight as is the head must needs be knit unto so small bones, as be the
Vertebres, or rather if it be lawful thus to say: when nature copacted the
frame work of bones, and in comparyng the head with his seat, found, in
respect of the weight of the head, the Spondils of the neck to be very small,
determined to mende the miss by Processes fit for tyenges, and annexyng to the
cauities of the bones stronger Ligamentes, then in all other parts of the
body. And sithe^s this Articulatio^ might Why the Ligamentes of the head with
y^ first Vertebres are most strong.
suffer in no wise to be Luxated (because every Luxation of the head is deadly)
it was provided that these Ligamentes should so strictly, and faithfully
co^teine, and hold together those parts, as that Luxation there should be most
difficult. Although Luxation of the head is deadly.
it be supposed among the common sort, that the heads of such as be hanged The
heads of those that be hanged are not Lu^ated according to the common opinion.
having a great impressed circle left in the neck, are Luxated. Others say
their necks are broken. Which to be true each one that laboriously shall
dissect, or willingly see Anathomy, shall deny. For of such invincible force is
this Ligament, as that the first and second Vertebre (to which the head by it
is bound) shall The first Vertebre sooner brea^eth then is Luxated.
more easily at any time break, then be Luxated.

From the foundation of the hinder part of the head rises this Ligament, which
that it might be the better nourished and more firmly stand, Nature makes the
The original of this Ligament.
hinder part of the head in children with many parts and divisions, to be
hereto Why the hinder part of the head or Occiput is in children in many parts.
the better stay. This bond is round compassing, and downewardes descendyng
between the first and the second Vertebre, not fastened, as some have supposed,
but every where, and round about them most strongly cleauyng, so that to
separate the same in dead bodies them selves, is a thing most difficult. For it
cleaves to Figure.
The true place of this Ligament. The Ligament k^itte to the tooth of the (...)
Ver^ebre.
those bones both before, behynd, and on each side.

Besides this Ligament hitherto described, there is another also sufficient
strong and hable, which firmly is knit unto the tooth of the second Vertebre.

Again, besides that, their is a third, which springyng from the inner part of
The (...) Ligament.
the first Vertebre, contains fast the tooth of the second (the which tooth
is mentioned The use of y^ third Ligament.
before in the treatise of bones) being round: but the sides thereof by
marvelous art so made, as that the tooth, when the head is much inclined, ca^
by no means hurt the Spinall marey, which that way passes. And in this sort
are the Ligamentes seruyng to the actions of the head.

BUt because we should offend in to much prolixitie, if all the Ligamentes of
Why he entreats not of every Ligament.
every ioynte we should particularly descriue, we therefore comprehend all them
of the head together, and those especially which differ no otherwise among them
selves then in greatness or litlenes. And for that cause, we will walk in
silence forward with the neither iawe, whose Ligamentes else should be spoken of
after those of the head. Of others therefore we will speak, that by some means
do vary from the rest. He determines of such as in some thing differ from
others.


And for because Galen writes in his book of Bones, that the Vertebres are
not conjoined in the midst with any proper Ligament, but by the third tunicle
Gallen in error.
only, which ensurappeth the Spinall marey, and (says he) is carried in the
midst between the Vertebres, to connect and knit them together: Collumbus
Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
accompteth it unworthy to be the sentence of so worthy a writer: For by what
means (says he) could it seem unto him that the Vertebres, being no little
bones could be holden together, of so slender a Membran as that, which is in
the The true use of the Membran in the hole of the Vertebres.
hole of the Vertebre where the Spinall marey runs. But the true use of that
Membran is to prevent the Spinall marey, which, by to nigh being to the bones,
might be hurt easily, by the which great incommoditie might ensue. It is
therefore notable, that all the Vertebres (only the two first excepted) are
endewed All the vert^^res save the (...) (...) have appendaunces.
both above, and beneth with Appendaunces, as we somewhat remembered heretofore:
out of which rises strong Ligamentes, bindyng together the Vertebres Out of
the appendaunces spring the Ligamentes of the vertebres.
among them selves, and deteinyng the Cartilage in the midst between the
Vertebres. And it behooved them to be sufficiently strong, considering the great
weight which the Vertebres must bear, and the strong motions which they Why
the Ligamentes of the Vertebres are strong.
ought to resist.

After this order these Ligamentes are deduced, that is to say, from the
inferior The deduction of these Ligame^tes.
part of the second Vertebre even to the extreme end of the tail, about whose
body these are sited.

Furthermore, from their transuerse Processes others also are produced, for The
use of these Ligamentes (...) the transuerse Processes.
the joining to of ribs and Muscles.

Others issue out again from the hinder part of the Spondilles, both to
confirm the Vertebres, and also to give beginning, to some Muscles.

NOw to leave these sufficiently spoken of, it shall not seem unorderly to Two
Ligaments to y^ top of the tongue.
prosecute and go forward with the Ligamentes of the tongue, and Hyoides. For
between the bones constituting Hyoides, pass Ligamentes for the construction
Two ligamentes from the Processes called ^uloid^ that suspend the bone Hyoides.
of the tongue. Two are brought from the two greater Processes, with which it is
knit to the top of the tongue. Other two go forth from the stiliformed
Processes of Hyoides, holdyng it so up as if it were hanged in two chains: The
arc of Mahomet.
like as Historiographers write the iron Tomb of Mahomet, to be suspended in
the air by the attractiue force of the Adamante. Lastly there is under the The
ligament under y^ tongue.
tongue a Ligament, which in many children that we call tongue tied, cleaves
to sundry places toward the fore teeth, not suffryng the tongue to be up, nor
the How children become tonguetyed.
lips to go out, and not being cut shall corrupt the speech, the child
having power to make distinction of words.

NExt, for because the Brachiall Ligament, or that of the wrest is diverse Of
the Ligament of the wrest.
from those of other joints, we will speak thereof particularly. The Ligament
The ris^^g of this Ligament.
therefore seruyng to the wrest of the arm, begins at the inferior
Appendaunce of Radius, and Cubitus, whose office seems to be like as of other
The use thereof.
joints, to bind together the two distinct orders of Brachiall bones, lest in
every motion they slip out from their seats.

Prudent Nature therefore prepared a Ligament sufficiently strong, which The
insertion of the Ligament of the wrest.
so byndeth together these Ossicles, as that they are always ready to the
executyng, and fourmyng each propper motion: but at length is emplanted to the
Appendaunce of the Postbrachiall bone, and serves to the articulation of the
wrest.

In this same region are also other Ligamentes, not seruyng to the Articulation
The Ligamentes of the tendons of the fingers and extreme part of the hand.
of Bones, but only to contain those tendons which serve both to the
fingers, and extreme part of the hand, least whilst the fingers move they
should suddenly slide to this place or that place.

In the inside of the wrest, is a forcible Ligament, and that ouerthwartly
lieng, The use of the Ligament on the inside of the wrest. These vj. Ligamentes
seem as though they were but one.
which contains the tendons of the fourth, fifth, and sixth Muscles bowyng the
fingers. Nevertheless on the outsyde there be six Ligamentes evident,
containing in like sort the Muscles extending the fingers.

Among other things it is notable to be marked, how all these Ligamentes at
the first sight seem to be but one. Albeit if we diligently follow the
tendons, six transuerse Ligamentes beginning at the two aforesaid Appendances,
come plainly to our sight.

But now we are comen to this place, it shall not be amiss to entreat of Of
y^ Ligaments containing the tendons after the longitude of the fingers.
those Ligamentes which contain the tendons after the longitude of the
fingers. It is therefore to be noted, that in the inner sides of the bones of
the fingers, and after their longitude are lodged Ligamentes reachyng even unto
the extremities of the tendons: which nature there has prudently placed, lest
in their bowynges the tendons might be lifted from their places.

IN the knittyng together of the thighe with the bone of Coxendix, Ilium and To
all joints a thick membraneous bond is common.
Pubis, beside that Membraneous bond, but thick, which is common to all
joints, there is a round Ligament, which rising from the depth of that great
The round Ligament (...) to the Articulatio^ of the hippe.
concauitie, or acetable, so largely graven out of the aferesayd Bones, is
inserted to the head of the thighe: being of such strength, as that often times
it is broken whilst that part is Luxated, and so, that although the bone be
restored to his The rising of it.
wonted place, yet being displaced the party is always lamed: because this
Ligament The insertion.
This Ligament in the (...) of the hippe may be broken.
still hinders the knitting together of the bones.

Also between the inferior heads of the thighe, and the top of the leg in
the inner part of the knee, is a thick Ligament rising from their Appendances,
Why through lucation of y^ hippe the patient is after lame.
and ending in the leg, made for the holdyng together of those parts. For,
there being in the body no greater joint then these two last recited, no
marueil The joints in y^ thigh are greater and have therefore greater
Ligamentes then all others in y^ body saving the head.
that nature adds to them such Ligamentes, as to no other, save only between
the head and the two first vertebres.

Besides the third Ligament, there is yet another, which almost compasses
about the Articulation of the knee, and here and there wrappeth about the
Rotule, of the which it is only detained. If any think such a round Ligament
(as The Ligament compassing the Rotule (...) y^ (...). Between y^ scaple bone
and shoulder is no round Ligament.
has been before mentioned) is fastened so between the head of the shoulder and
the scaple bone, he is much deceived.

But to speak more of Ligamentes, let us yet go further, whilst we find
apt cause, and commodious occasion. Therefore between Os sacrum and Coxendix
The Ligament between Os Sacrum and Coxendix. The risinge. Insertion. (...).
is a Ligament, not so much round, but rises from the extreme part of Os
sacrum, and ends ouerthwartly at the sharp part of Coxendix. It gathers
together these bones, and therefore is made to deteine them, being knit
together: although it may be put to other use, as preparing passage to the
great Nerve which in man is found.

IN the setting to of the foot, between the same, and the two bones of the
leg vj. Ligamentes in the foot answerable in proportion to the vi. in the
wrest of the hand.
Tibia, and Fibula, beside the bond which is common to all joints, there are
sir other to be discerned, such as in the outside of the wrest were lately
spoken of. Their uses are these, to contain those tendons which serve to the
extreme foot Their use.
and toes: which tendons, if these were not here placed, would for every small
occasion be perverted from their seats and places.

THere lie also under the toes of the feet Ligame^tes, even as in the singers
of The use of the Ligamentes vnbee the toes.
the hand, made to contain those tendons in their offices which bow the
toes, that is to say, the second and third ioynte.

TO all joints there is one common Ligament, and that has his beginning What
is common to all joints.
from one bone, that is to say from one Appendaunce, and ends in another.
These amplect and inwrappe them round: so have they others more slack, and
others again more straight, according to the greatness and litlenes of the
Bones. Therefore esteem that I speak in this place generally of all the The
numeration of certain parts (...) with Ligamentes.
Ligamentes, what soever they be, that bind the breast, scapples, Cannell
bones, nether iawe, shoulder, cubite, fingers, the small bone of the leg
called Fibula, The Ligamentes of (...) and Pubis how (...) differ from others.
that part of the foot called Tarsus, which (as appears before in the
History of bones) may be compared to Brachiale, and therefore esteemed for
nomination sake as the wrest of the foot, and the bones of Pedium aunswerable
to the Postbrachials. Of the Ligament between (...) and (...) and Tibia and
(...).
But if you enquire of the Ligamentes of Ilium, and Pubis, I will answer,
that they differ from others in nothing but mouyng.

Between Cubitus and Radius, and so between Tibia and Fibula after their The
use of this Membraneous Ligament.
longitude, is a Membtaneous Ligame^t, sited between those spaces. Whose
utility is not only to unite, and bind those Bones together, but also like
an hedge, deuidyng the interior from the exterior Muscles. After which sort
are The utility of the Ligament in the holes of Pubis.
the Ligamentes set in the holes of Pubis, to distinguishe the ninthe from the
tenth Muscle.

THe Liver is contained with two principal Ligamentes, whereof the one Of y^
Ligaments of the (...). Situation. (...).
is toward the right part, the other toward the left, the left being thicker
then the right. These knit the liver to Septum transuersum, lest downward it
should be forced to fall by the weight thereof. The right of these two
Ligamentes The Ligament named a suspensorye.
is called a Suspensorie, but the left has no propper name.

Now that I have waded thus far in the description of the Ligamentes,
touching such particularly as differ in proportion notably, and comprehendyng
the common sort in briefer order, I will here end, omittyng to speak of
Mediastinum, Mediastinum, Pleura Pericardium, and Peritoneum are Membrans, not
Ligamentes.
Pleura, Pericardicon and Paritonaeum, (although they might seem worthy to be
spoken of among the Ligamentes) because else where findyng fitter occasion to
touch them in approaching so near, whilst other parts are showed, I have
largely enough revealed their properties. Which notwithstanding are no
Ligamentes worthily to be called, but Membrans, having perfect sense, which
Ligamentes never The Ligamentes of y^ (...) are not wholly (...) of sense.
possessed. Although amongst all other, the Ligamentes of the Liver are not
altogether of sense frustrate. Hereafter be attentive how the members are moved
by Muscles.

An end of the History of Ligamentes.
The forepart of the Muscles.

Of the History of man, the fourth Book. Of Muscles to every member.
A Muscle which the Grecians call (...) the Latins What a Muscle is and y^
description thereof.
Musculus, is an isntrumental part of the body, and in deed the instrument of
volu^tary moving, Vesal. Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
without which, no part of our body could move at our will and desire. When
Nature therefore had construed the frame work of the body, with The marvelous
workmanship of nature and foresight.
the Cartilages, and swathed them every one in Ligamentall bonds, according as
to every part she called dew, it followed then necessarily, that some
instrument were devised whereby those parts should be drawn mutually one to
an other according unto the will of the creature. In consideration of which
necessities, nature Why voluntary motion could not be by Ligaments Why not by
Nerves.
easily did foresee, that only by Ligamentes she might not use voluntary
motion, because they were neither with sense nor moving endewed, not being
continually with the virtue of the animal power: neither yet of Nerves only
actio^ might be made, since they have not the force, thorough their softnes,
and tenuitie, to draw, and use so great a weight as behooved. Wherefore she
devised at length, of both to make an instrument of mouyng, which What
i^strume^t at length was concluded upon.
might be in conclusion harder then the Nerve, and softer then the Ligament:
therewith also to participate of sense less then the Nerve, but more then the
Ligament. The Muscle has less sense then the Nerve and more then the Ligament.
So that of the Ligament the Muscle has his strength, and of the Nerve whereby
to feel and move. Collumbus to this purpose has these words.

A Muscle (says he) is construct and made of Fibrous flesh, Ligaments, Nerves,
Veins, Arteries, and Me^bra^s. With flesh that the body there of might be
large, or to Which do constitute the Muscle, and the effects of those parts
in the Muscle.
confirm and hold together those parts as says Fernelius: with Nerves, that it
might carry with it the moitiue virtue that springs from the brain: with the
Ligame^t, that in mouyng it might be the stronger: with the vain, to be
nourished: with the Fer. Lib. Cap. 5.
Vesal. Lib. 2. Cap. (...).
Artery to possess vital caliditie: and the Membran enwrappeth, and holds
all these together, seuering also one Muscle from another.

So, some suppose it to be called a Muscle after the likeness that it shows of
a Whence it is called a Muscle after the opinion of some.
Mouse, whose head is small, the bellye broad, and tail long and narrow:
others likewise imaginyng of the likeness of the little beast called a Laserte,
do nominate the Muscle Lasertus. Diverse do again think it liker a Fish, and
therefore The fourmes of Muscles are diverse.
call them little Fishes. But truly none of these fourmes are to be found in
all muscles. For some are broad, some three square, some four square, others
round compassed, many thick, diverse sclender and small, certain of them
short, and sundry long: here, some containyng one manner of Fibers: there,
others mixed with all kinds: in this place, some are endued with two kinds of
Fibers: and in that place many are interwonen with three. Thus being diversely
fourmed, and diversely composed, there is no certain comparison to be made unto
them, according unto the likeness of any thing, but if it represent one, it is
diverse from others, Muscles end at tendous, but not all.
and showing the shape of some perfectly, and is reproved of others immediately.

THe ends of Muscles are in te^dons, or as we commonly say, chordes: yet not
all, for you shall see many without the^. Contrariwise some Muscles have
te^dons What Muscles receive their tendon in the midst.
in their begynnings, and some in the midst: although Galen makes me^tio^ of
the fourth Muscle only that opens the neither iaw, whereas taking occasion to
speak thereof, he gives great praises, and commendatio^s unto Nature: but he
might also have (...) (...) (says Collumbus) the fourth Muscle, which draws
Hyoides downewardes, and receives his tendon of Nature in the midst.

There are yet some Muscles which have but only one tendo^, others ij. some
The number of (...) (...) Muscles.
iij. or iiij. or more. As the long Muscle of the back, and the fifth of the
breast. Some have long and round tendons, some have round but shorter tendons,
others have The figures of tendons.
tendons both long and broad: others likewise broad and short: so that many,
and sundry are the differences of Muscles, as lately I said, and more aptly
shall appear in the peculiar History.

Moreover Muscles, although commonly they have their beginning from the The
ri^g and in (...) o^ Muscles.
Bones, and also end at Bones, yet not all of them observe that rule: for some
spryng from Cartilages, others from Membrans, having their beginning, and have
likewise decreed in Membranes even so to have their endynges: diverse after
their exorture descend: diverse so contrarily ascend: many are sited
ouerthwartly, and many in crooked, or oblique sort are placed. Neither do the
Muscles observe one rite or order in their exorture or beginning, but some
long, some short, some sclender, some thick: some tendinous, some fleshy: and
some showing the tendons mixed with slesh. Again of the tendons of Muscles,
some be perforated, The perforatio^ of tendons.
some not, others with one hole, many with more.

But hear perhapes, so often namyng this word Tendon some will be desirous to
know what a tendon is, which I have no where hitherto declared. Note therefore
What is a te^don.
that a tendon is the white part in the Muscle being hard, thick, and
shynnyng: and newly uncovered, draws the beholders into admiration of the
fair and pleasant form thereof, And although a te^don be endued which much
sense, The difference between the Muscle and Nerve.
as daily experience approves unto us, yet is if not the same matter as is a
Nerve, but differreth much: for, although the Nerve be, white, yet is it
nothing so hard as the tendon but rounder, and not so shynnyng, and being cut,
the body is endewed with many stryngs, and clothed with a Membran: as also
being cut, is very hard and Solid, but the Nerve contrariwise. Furthermore a
Muscle (eue^ A Muscle is the organ of (...) moving.
as lately we said) is the Organ of voluntary mouyng brought unto them by the
benefit of Nerves, and this power is given unto the Nerves from the brain:
^ence y^ Muscle receueth his ^ng.
which is the fountain of feelyng and moving, as thoroughly in this our History
of man's body is alleged, and approved. Although that renowned Peripatecian
Aristotle (who in Anathomaticall assertions wandered wide) says in his book De
Aristotle much (...) in the parts of man's body.
somno and vigilia, that the heart is author of feelyng and mouyng in every
creature: which is as certain as that the heart is the fountain of blood also.

BUt to return again, it is most necessary that every Muscle in consideration
Nerves to be disse^ (...) into the sub^unce of Muscles.
of his office have a Nerve, although that a small one, and some time Nerves.
And here note, that when we describe a Nerve carried to a Muscle, we (...). 2.
C^p. 3.
mean not that it is brought near unto the Muscle, neither yet to pass
straight through the midst of it, but such Nerves understand to be
disseminated, and sown through such Muscles substance. Wherefore in that
Vesalius would needs affirm, that there were some Muscles destitute both of
the Ueyne, Artery, and Nerve, and namely the four square Muscle nighe the
wrest, which moves Radius The error of Ves^ius in the distributio^ of Nerves
through the muscles.
directly downward, to know no ^ewe at all, Collumbus not unworthily reproves
him (in my ^gement) as one, that having sclender skill in this, resists
reason: for (says he) I am certain, that in this Muscle is a Nerve as
evident, and perspicuous as in any other, and not difficult at all to be found.
The like also he wills to esteem of that Muscle which makes the broad
tendon and of others Columbus against Ve^lius.
that Uesalius excepteth. Wherein he seemed rather willing to deride Nature,
then to open his own no obscure negligence.

BUt to prosecute the particular treatise of Muscles, and to speak of them
orderly, What part to called the ^ce.
let us begin with the face: which is meant that whole space between the hear
of the head and the chinne.

It is declared in the proper place how the fleshy Membra su^ected under the
skin through out the body, is somewhere increased with fleshy Fibers, and
degenerateth Of the Musculons (...) of the Membra (...) of the (...).
as it were into a Musculous substance, all which is now to be approved and
verified in the skin of the forehead, which to be endewed with voluntary
mouyng who doubts to be needful. For the eyes open largely by Gal. (...).
2. (...) p^t.
drawyng upward the brows, and that when the party at one instant desires to
see many things, and do shut again by the constrainyng and bindyng together
of all the parts circumiacent. To both those uses therefore nature has
bestowed The ^litie of the (...) (...) in the face.
voluntary mouyng, each where on the skin both above in the forehead, and
beneath in the cheeks, to the end that sometime by extension and stretching,
otherwhiles by replication and enfoldyng thereof, within it self, the eyes may
both open and shut, which that it might be done, because no part without Muscle
has voluntary mouyng, by Natures benefit the substance being under the
skin Gal. Lib. 9. us. p^rt.
of the forehead and nose, is made Musculous. For the fleshy Membra^ (as is
said) The flesh^ membran in the face has (...), and branches of ^ues.
being here made Musculous, is also increased which very many fleshy Fibers,
and store of braunching sinews lent from the brain, as is not obscurely
taught in the History of the Nerves. Furthermore this Membran of the nose and
forhead is to the skin more fast, and holding (without the interuenture of
any fat or very small) then in any other part of the body: so that it seems
as if the Membran Vesal. lib. 2. Cap. 8.
Col. Lib. 5. Cap. 3.
and skin there were made one body. Which is so put into the minds of some
Anathomistes, The Muscles of the forehead.
that they suppose the skin of the forehead to be of carneous and Musculous
substance and the seruyng Muscles to those parts are many.

First, ij. sited in the forehead, rising from the superior part, do end in
the Vesalius.
inferior part, in the common seame that seuereth the bones of the head from
the Bones of the upper iawe. Moreover the Fibers of that Musculous stock,
mutually lying to the sides, that is from the top of the nose to the midst
of the forehead, that consists between the first roots of the hears and the
eye brows, and unto the sides therefore of this place they seem more fleshy,
all runnyng upward (says Uesalius) with a straight pathe: except a very few
that choose an oblique raze. But here I marvel how he was deceived, for
Collumbus has against him Collumbus.
The (...) of the ij. first (...) are oblique.
these words. The Fibers of these Muscles are no where straight as Vesalius
holds, but oblique, that is to say from the top of the nose toward the
temples, and their action is to lift up eye brows: although neither Galen so
well deseruyng in the Art of Medicine, nor yet Vesalius in our time a man of
great name in the Art of dissectyng, neither any that write before me have
acknowledged it. Who, if they had used greater viligence, might as easily also
have found it. These ij. Muscles occupy the whole forhead, and as much of the
temporal Muscles, There situation.
as how much they obliquely asse^de beside the midst of the forehead, where
we contract and wrinckle the skin, as often as we are much styrred to anger, or
sudden admiration: and that so much in some men, as that the eye brows seem
mutually to touch together. Which contraction of the forehead might by no
There are ij. muscles of the forehead and not one only.
means be, if there were but one Muscle only. For the more perspicuous proof
whereof, Collumbus makes mention of a certain Cardinal, in whose forehead
these Muscles might evidently been seen: of which, the least sufferyng
co^uulsion One of these muscles wounded half the forhead moves not.
by the means of a wound, half of the forehead moved, the other half
refused. But lettyng this pass, let each man judge according to truth and
reason, since it is aptly to be found without any great a do. For if you take
away the whole skin of the forehead, in the midst of the forehead you shall
see no Muscle, but in the top of the nose, where the right with the left
Muscle is so conjoined, as that How the eye brows are drawn upward.
they seem there but one, being also more sleshy then any where else. Likewise
the higher that those Muscles ascend, by so much the more thin and sclender
they become, yet are not the eye brows drawn upward by the means of these
The Muscles of the nose.
only, but also by the help of ij. Muscles, which hereafter we will describe:
being not well known (as I suppose) of any other Anathomist save Collumbus.

Also there are ij. dilatyng the nose. And although Galen and others have man
Vesalius describes ij. that serve to shut the nose, and that he imagines them
(...) lie in the inner part of the no^rels under the tunicle that compasses
them within. There are not ij Muscles seruyng to shut the nose.
Which to be so, Collumbus by no means may acknowledge: for how (says he) may
that be seen, which can no where be found?

THe ij. Muscles therefore that dilate the nostrels, spryng from the aforesaid
seame, so that the rising of them is sharp and fleshy, mixed with the end of
the The (...), progress, four^e and end of the Muscles of the nose.
Muscles of the forehead and downewardes stretchyng or made broader, and carried
aloft on the Bones of the nose, to end at the pi^es or wings of the nostrels.
It is almost made iij. square, whereof (...). sides are long, but the third
short. These draw upward ye said wings of the nostrels, and have straight
Fibers, therefore they dilate: but those which other Anathomistes have described
are a portion of those Muscles which are placed in ye upper lip. As by and by
shall be said. The nose is shut by ye muscles assistau^t to ye upper lip,
therefore not of any proper muscles addicted to no other use. Which the more
manifest to make you understand, note, ye whensoever we are willing to draw any
thing unto our nostrels, or unto us by ye nostrels: we are constrained
immediately to pull and draw together ye upper lip.

THere are besides, others almost four squared Muscles sited in ye neck,
which ^ow the nose is shut.
bear their office to the lips seruyng to draw them obliquely downward, and
of these Galen was the first inuentor. The substance of them is a carneous Two
broad Muscles in the neck.
or fleshy Membran, begone about the region of cannell bones, and posteriour
part of the neck, so as that their Fibers obliquely ascend, and there at
length do meet Substance.
and touch whereas the superior with the inferior lip is joined. Wherefore
since that these broad Muscles are serviceable unto the face, yea although
their chief situation be in the neck, yet are they to be numbered among the
Muscles of the face, being much coherent with the chinne. And therefore to the
openyng (...).
of the mouth seem much assistaunt.

THe number of the Muscles seruyng to the lips are iiij. that is, ij. in the
upper, The four Muscles of the lips Ri^ng.
and as many in the neither. The original of the superior Muscles is four
manner of ways, rising from the extreme Suture of the iugall bone, as also from
the same that distinguishes the first bone of the upper iawe from the third:
the other ij. are brought from the bone of the cheek, and all go obliquely
toward The cause of (...) in such as would have the nose dilated by a Muscle.
the lip, among which there is one that cleaves to the wyng of the
nostrels: and for that cause, they would have it the Muscle, that should dilate
the nose. But Collumbus calls it a portion of the Muscles aforesaid mouyng
the lip. Notwithstanding Four Muscles of the nose.
says the same author, because I will not seem s^bburne in my one opinion,
for that I have always abhorred, if any man please to separate this, and esteem
it to be in the place of a peculiar Muscle, it shall be lawful unto him for me,
which being granted, then there shall be iiij. Muscles of the nose, which all
shall serve to dilate the same.

The other ij. constitutyng the neither lip, do spryng from that part of the
The exor^ce of the ij. Muscles constituting the nether lip.
chinne, where is a certain conspicuous asperitie, or roughnes in the bone.
But now the Fibers of these four Muscles are diverse myxed, and enfolded within
The va^ietie of Fibers mak^th variety of motion.
them selves: and therefore (as Galen rightly has noted) show diverse sorts of
mou^nges being for the most part mingled with the skin.

Unto the said Muscles come other ij. of the cheeks, sited between both the
Two Muscles of the cheeks.
jaws, both springyng from the gummes, and also endyng in the gummes. Therefore
where it pleases you it is lawful to appoint the beginning, that is to say,
whether above, or beneath, it forces not. They be sufficient sclender, and in
the manner of a circle intersected with diverse Fibers, and therefore endewed with
The ex^rture and end of the Muscles o^ ye cheeks are con^sed.
diverse gifts: for like hands they serve to thrust the meat hither and
thither, not unprofitable in time of speech, when we will either puff up the
cheeks, or Form.
blow forth the breath. A further utility of these Muscles, is daily proved of
the^ (...).
that with trumpets, and shalmes do daily exercise their blast. ^se.


THere are ij. Muscles, yet hither to be revoked and brought to light which
negligence Collumbus ^auded. The Muscles to the eye brows of none before
Collumbus noted.
(before my authors time) has passed. They are to be seen in the posteriour
part of the head, rising above the Mammillar Processes at the Labdal Suture.
They are inform triangled or iij. square, and endyng in the fleshy Exorture.
Membran, which also admits the Muscles of the forehead. Neither are their
Form.
^se.
uses and vtilities (in drawyng the forehead and skin of the head toward the
hinder parts) to be neglected, as I suppose it does in every man. And
Collumbus (besides Johannes Anthonius Platus his master, whose skin of the
head he reports every where and evidently to move) says likewise, that in
him self being bald it is most porspicuous. The Muscles of the eye ^des are ^e.


BUt to come unto the eyes, the Muscles of the eye liddes are vj. in number,
that is to say iij. on either side. Whereof ij. are situated without the
compass of the eyes which most certainly may be supposed to be the only
cause, why all Anathomistes The cause of e^rour in other (...).
(before Collu^bus) were so deceived; in supposing those sited within the
compass of the eyes to serve not to the eye liddes, but the eyes.

The first therefore are r^d co^passing having also circled Fibers. They spryng
Form.
Fibers.
in the great corner of the eye, in the common ^uture both to the head and
upper iawe. Situation.
Their beginning is sharp, but are dilated upward toward the forhead, in which
place they are mixed together with the Muscles of the forehead. Afterward
stretchyng toward the ear; the nearer they come to the lesser corner of the
eye, the more they are amplified, and downewardes reflected about the roundell,
of the eye, that at length near to there beginning they might finish with a
sharp end. And these are made strongly to shut, and bind together the eye
liddes, whose The Muscles shutting the eye^
force we daily prove when we wink, to prevent any outward injury.

The second are ij. straight Muscles, broad and fleshie in ye superior region
of the eyes, beginning within the roundell at the visible Nerve like unto the
other Muscles opening the eyes.
Muscles of the eyes. These Muscles do cease with a little broad end in the
upper eye lidde, and their office, by drawyng the eye lidde upward, is to open
the eye.

The third Muscles serving to open the eyes, are in figure round and sclender,
springyng from the same place as the aforesaid: do end toward the great
corner of the eye obliquely in the eye lidd^ with a tendon almost round. Though
a The Muscles drawyng the eye lidde.
portion thereof in some men is inserted to the tunicle corner, for that they
are thought to help the ^ouing of the eye upward: but for this use they are
especially ordained, that is, to draw the lidde up, and open the eye.

Herein rashly judge me not (gentle Reader) that I seem^ wholly to subscribe
unto the sentence of one man's opinion, for therein thy self shall, but seem
more affectionate to Vesalius, then equal in judgment, and more ^orne to
Galen his authority, then desirous of the true light. For I follow not
Collumbus fanta^cally, but omittyng to say what due proves I have often made of
many his assertio^s, I am forced to subscribe unto him in sundry places, since
nothing then truth may be truer. And other places as this which I was not able
to search, I have followed for his likely reasons. And sure my hope is, that
thou shall reap as much commodity (friendly Reader) by the description of such
parts as here by him I have inferred, as by any Anathomist that ever writ
before him. For among the Muscles of the eyes all the Anathomistes before
acoumpt the four last recited. Which he approves serviceable to the eye
liddes, as you have hard, although The er^r of Gal.
Vesal, and ye oth^ Anatho^stes.
they by situated within the compass of the eye, which he suspected to be the
only cause of their error.

But to make regresse, it follows yet further to prosecute the eyes, I mean,
The Muscles of the eyes.
to describe the Muscles appertaynyng unto the mouyng. For no man may deny the
eyes (which are so copiously endued with voluntary mouyng) to have Muscles No
virtue without his propper organ.
to them at each point serviceable, since no virtue is void of his propper
organ. But contrariwise if the eyes were without Muscles, so were they also How
necessary (...) is to the eyes.
without moving, and being immovable, we should perfectly see but few things,
and those straight forewardes. For perfect sight is had of nothing neither
vpwardes, Gal. Lib. 10. us. part.
downewardes, sidewayes, nor obliquely, but the rectitude of the apple The
motion of the eyes is arbitratious.
of the eye guided and moved according to the will of the body which is
voluntary: as each motion else of every exterior part and visible member.

But to say what Muscles, and what number of them are serviceable unto the
Authors in the muscles to y^ eyes not agreeyng.
eyes, for as much as neither in this do the Authors accord, I shall be perhaps
misliked again for swaruing so much from the ancient Authors: yet unto the
wise The intent of the author.
I mean to give no such occasion. For in expressing of both, I leave unto
every Truth is y^ most ancient authority.
one that reads the best to be chosen. The circumstau^ce therefore equally
wayed, yield auncientie unto the truth whether the Author thereof was first or
last.

The eyes therefore having four manner of mouyngs voluntary (says Galen) Gal.
Ibid.
The descriptio of the Muscles of y^ eyes after Galen and (...).
as one upward, an other downward, and other into. to either side, it is meet
they had as many Muscles also as guides of their mouyng. Wherefore there is one
resident in either side of the eye, and the other two placed one above, and an
other beneath: for all these being dissolved into Sinewy Filamentes, make one
circle of a broad te^don endyng in Iris. But besides, that the circumaction of
the eye might be the surer, Nature made two other Muscles and placed them in
oblique sort, one in one eye lidde, and the other in an other, extended both
above, and beneath toward the lesser angle or corner.

Furthermore of these vi. Muscles the first iiij. even as they yield straight
motions (...). (...). 2. Cap. 11
to the eye, eue^ so are their seats accordyngly set straight, and all each
where answerable one to an other. The heads of them have their beginning, as
from the hard Membran of the brain, coueryng the visible Nerve, and from the
Sinew of the second payse of the brain, immediately after the coming forth of
the visible Nerve out of the Scule. Moreover their belly is more ample and
large, then deep and profound, yet in sight is most round, lying to the
posteriour region of the eye and visible Nerve, after the longitude of it in
going from the Scule unto the root of the eye: and whereas the same belly
approaches near the middle seat of the eye where it is broadest, there it
makes an end with a broad Membraneous eneruation. Which is in deed beyond the
middle part of the eye, and directed to the hard tunicle thereof, like as if it
were to the moving of a bone: but being brought after the longitude of the body
of the eye: it is settled to the line near Iris or the greater circle of eye,
as in the former part of the eye appears separatyng the black from the white.

Again, the Muscles of circumduction, or they that lead the eye about are in
fashion like to the first, and also in beginning, yet less, and in the manner
of their situation and insertion differyng from them. For the first has his
beginning from Dura Membrana clothyng the visible Nerve from the region of the
lesser corner, and is inserted to the lower seat of the eye with his sinewy
thinnes, and with an oblique line near to Iris after the manner of the rest.
The other spryngeth from the Membran of the visible Nerve, out of the region of
the greater angle of the eye, and sustayneth his sinewie tenuitie to the hard
tunicle of the eye, with a more (...) line, at the upper seat of the eye.
Hereby it appears, that the Muscles of the eye do vary among them selves
only in situation, and by insertion to the hard tunicle of the eye. For the
iiij. first (as is said) are wholly straight, and with a more straight line
inserted. The other ij. more cross, or slopwise, attempt their insertion with
an oblique line. Which although they are auayleable for circumuertion, yet
besides they move the eye both upward and downward.

Further those Muscles together whilst yet they observe their propper place,
are reckned in figure like a Pear made sharp beneath and broad above: whose
sharp end is their beginning, but the broad part or seat, their insertion. In
their short space they are knit together to the visible Nerve, containing in
the capacity (which by meetyng together they make) much hard fat, which
other where, in the description of the eyes we have spoken of at large. Briefly
all these said six Muscles, produced from the hard Membran of the brain,
coueryng the visible Nerve, or in compassed sort inserted with Membraneous
tendons in the anterior seat of the hard tunicle, near to the sides of Iris.
The first therefore, which is in the great corner, draws the eye inward
toward the nose: the second lying in the lesser angle, leads the eye there
toward: the third lying beneath, brings it downewardes: the fourth above,
toward the eye brows: and the fifth, and sixth circumuerte, and turn the eye
about each way.

Besides those vj Muscles, there is yet an other great one hid on each side by
Galen. Ibid
the others, and compassed about with the aforesaid fat. This shows the same
likeness that the other vj. do figure together: for from the hard Membran
mouyng the visible Nerve, it has his beginning, but somewhat more forward the^
the first six. His beginning is fleshie, as the rest of the body thereof, that
round compasses the visible Nerve, and being stretched forth from the
beginning to the four parts like a Pear or pine apple, increases, and
enlarges by little and little until it touch the posterior part of the eye,
whereto it is emplanted as a circle. Neither does it assay this insertion near
this visible Nerve, but almost where the eye begins to increase the largest.
This Muscle lifts the eye upward, and downward, and therewithal turns it.

Netherto (as briefly as I might) thou have to consider of the Muscles of the
eyes, abstract sensibly from Galen, Uesalius, and the rest of Anathomistes,
(...) all described the eyes of beasts, and not of men. Because I will be purged
of all superstition of partial judgment, thou shall thy self (friendly
Reader) discuss the case, and since both the ways are laid before thy face,
see if thou caust separate the eye of man from beasts: the worthiest of both
being most diligently practiced by Collumbus.

Who in steed of xiiij. Muscles which they attribute to the eyes, accompteth
Col. Lib. 5. Cap. (...).
The description of the Muscles of the eyes after Realdus Collumbus.
x. sufficient to them both, that is, for seven, five in every eye: neither are
those iiij. placed (as appears) most fit for the opening of the eye liddes,
to be numbered at all amongst the Muscles of the eyes. But there are iiij. long
Muscles, which appear toward the root of the visible Nerve, having straight
Fibers, and end in sinewy tenuities, and are knit in round compass to the
Membran corner, How y^ Muscles of y^ eyes ate situated to (...).
there constitutyng an other Membran, which is not so far extended as to
touch Iris. They are placed like four corners, whereof ij. above, the rest
beneath. And these Muscles either upward, or downward, from the right side, or
from the Subsequent moving that is, one Muscle following another.
left do turn the eye, that is to say, when any of them by them selves, or a
sunder do labor, else ij. at once. But if altogether work with a subsequent
mouyng How the circled moving is made.
then turns the eye in circular sort. Neither esteem this as a new saying,
since the like is proved in the iiij. Muscles seruyng to the wrest of the hand.
Moreover How the eye is stayed.
they are mad to stay the eyes, that is, when (...) and at one time do work
together.

And the fifth Muscle, which only he and first of all invented, is thus
described. The (...) Muscle of the eye newly (...).
It is sited under the other iiij. between which, and this, the fat is
entercedent. It is placed ouerthwartly, and complecteth the half of the eye:
it springs from the Membran corner, and also ends in the same. So that,
which is the end, or which is the beginning, it is not easy to find. He
therefore judges it a Muscle marvelous, both beginning at the eye, and also
endyng in the same: so that it is hard to say what is the propper moving of
this Muscle of the eye. Yet A con^ectirall knowledge of the motion of the fifth
(...).
(says he) if the begynnynges of Muscles should proceed from Nerucs. I durst
then truly affirm the beginning of this Muscle to be in the midst, for
there goes in a notable branch sufficient thick (if it be compared unto the
Muscle) brought from the second conjugation of the brain, which Nerve I grant
me to have often suspected to be the te^don of this Muscle: and this Nerve if
that you draw, the eye turns upward and round about, although the Muscle be
under it. And peradventure this is the use of that marvelous Muscle, that by
the help thereof we behold the heavens, and work of his Divine majesty,
whereto we be borne, to the fulfillyng whereof, this said Nerve is no little, or
mean help. This same Muscle thus described, has on the side (for it forces
not now whether you call it the side end or beginning) a little broad tendo^,
wherewith it cleaves to Cornea.

Truly I could now wish that some great searcher of natures secrets were
Collumbus here bursteth (...) a ve bement desire to know this (...) Muscle.
given unto me, of whom I might learn the utility of this excellent muscle.
In the mean time it is sufficient, that I have invented and described it. I
speak now of man; for Vesalius, and Galen have described the eyes of beasts,
and not of men. As whosoever conferveth their descriptions with the thing it
self, shall Vesalius and Galen described the eyes of beasts.
easily know.

Between this and the other iiij. is fatness, like as between it and the
visible Nerve: but that the muscle which Galen, Vesalius, and others have
described, accomptyng it now in the first, and then in the seventh place, is no
where in the eye of man to be found, and may be divided into iij. muscles or
more: yet not withstanding they have elega^tly described it, and so, as in Oxen,
Horses, Weathers, and such like fourefooted beasts is easy to be seen and
found. Thus far Collumbus of the muscles of the eyes, which I now commit to
judgment, having doste my part therein with sufficient prolixitie.

NOw it seems time to go forwards with the Muscles of other parts, there
fore those of the another iawe let us see how they may be deciffered. For the
ears have no propper mouyng but in beasts, neither therefore any muscles
bearyng Muscles of the ears.
duty unto them. Albeit Collumbus reports in a certain man to have found a
muscle springyng from the cheeks, and endyng at the lap or wyng of the ear,
to give voluntary moving toward the Anteriour parts, an other also some time
in the posteriour part, proceedyng from the Mammillar Process. But surely The
Muscles of the ears in man are very rare.
these in men are so rare as that they deserve no notable description.

The nether iawe not only in man, but also in all creatures moves, and not
the upper iawe, exceptyng the Crorodile: who (as Pliny says) deuoureth with
Pliny. Lib. XI. Cap. 37.
the upper iawe without any mouyng propper to the nether: and the Popiniaye The
Crocodile mo^eth the upper (...) only.
whom Collumbus first espied to move both at once. In figure the nether iawe
and upper in man differs from beasts, the one for the shortness, the other
for the Col. ^ib. 1. Cap. 8. ^ib. 5. Cap. 2.
length thereof: because so it behooved that beasts in not having hands, should
to Col. ^ib. 1. Cap. 9.
help them, for the receipt of meat in their mouths, have longer jaws,
nature The (...) stureth both at (...).
not being careful for their proportion: which contrariwise in man be most
round and short both for the bewty of the face aunswerable to the rest of the
body, as also Three boluntary mouynges of the nether ^awe.
that he has hands to reach, and put forth at his pleasure, albeit that the
Ape somewhat nearely counterfaiteth the same: with hands, and all after a
sort. The Muscles to the nether ^awe.
And there be iij. voluntary mouynges chauncyng to the nether iawe, that is, it
opens, shuts and turns round. The Muscles thereof are iiij. on both sides.

The first of them is called the temporal muscle, being so strong, and famous
The temporal Muscle.
because it is next unto the brain, and has many Nerves inserted thereunto,
and therefore that divine Hipocrates in his books of Wounds in the head, says
Hippociates.
Dextro Temp ore vulnerato, sinistrum conuellitur. That is, the right temple
being wounded, the left is drawn together. Wherefore Nature, not unadvisedly
used such deligence, and care toward this Muscle. It springs therefore from
the The rising of the te^porall Muscle.
first bone of the upper iawe, from the Cannell bone, from Frons, from
Sinciput, and from the bone of the temples called Lapidoides, and occupies the
side of the head even to the posterior part of the ear, and ye superior part
also by the breadth of iiij. fingers ends. The beginning thereof is broad and
half circle like: and albeit the beginning is broad as is said,
notwithstanding it finally ends sharp, The Procese called (...).
and in a strong tendon, fastened to the sharp Process of the nether iawe
called Coronon, which tendon begins sufficient deep, and inwardes. There is
beside an other Membraneous te^don, which makes the exterior part of the
Muscle black, and is carried under the Iugal bone. This Muscle has one office,
that is to shut the inferior iawe, and the Fibers of it run from the outer
borders to the A (...) to Chirurgians.
centree or middle prickle thereof. Which thing is diligently to be noted of all
Chirurgians, whtlest in this part they enlarge wounds, or cut any other
abcesse that infecteth the part, least they happen transuersly to separate his
Fibers: which being done, the use of them ceasseth: which taken away, the life
defecteth.

And because that kind of mouyng which is to shut and break each hard thing,
The Muscle (...) king in ye mouth.
needed force and dew strength, prudent nature besides the temporal, made an
other Muscle to lie in the mouth, which is susficient strong, and springs
from the cauitie contained in the wings of the Cuneall bone, and ends in the
anteriour part of the inferior iawe, where the roughness is. The Fibers
thereof are straight, having likewise a tendon strong sufficiently, which is
endewed with the same office as the temporal Muscle, and is thick and short.

The third Muscle is that which is called Massetores or Mansorius, which moves
The Muscle call: led Mansorius or Massetores.
the nether iawe. In circled sort it springs from the Iugall bone, and from
the first Bone of the upper iawe, but not from the third and fourth Uertebre of
the neck, as Galen would. It has both a fleshy and tendinous beginning, but
the end in the inferior iawe is almost iij. cornered. Furthermore it cleaves
to the sharp Process of the same, where it seems to join with the
temporal bone. This has diverse Fibers, and therefore moves the iawe forward,
backward, to the sides, and in compassed sort, being of it self sufficient
thick.

The fourth muscle opens the mouth and iawe, and is very propper choosing The
fourth Muscle openyng the mouth.
two fleshy bellyes, the beginning and endless, for the middle part thereof is
tendenous: the beginning thereof from the Process called Stoides is fleshy: it
is carried under the iawe, and under the ear: it is in figure round, and long,
but not very thick: it leaves at a fleshy substance in the midst of the
chinne, where a certain roughnes is inwardly discerned. Nature made not this
so thick, as those Why nature made not the Muscle to open the mouth so large
as those to shut it.
that are chosen for the shuttyng of the iawe. For those two muscles of the
iawe being relaxed, which we have said to be sited above on both sides, by
reason that the nature thereof is sufficient heavy it enclineth or falls
downward, easily therefore contented with a smaller muscle to open, then were
behofull to shut. But the middle part thereof is made as a te^don, least it
should take to great a rowme: for the place was streite having therein many
organs placed. To conclude, this muscle, when it is gathered together of it
self, the mouth thereby opens, and it is therefore the Author, of moving ye
nether iawe to the inferior parts, as is said.

WHere Hyoides is placed, how it is ^ourmed, and to what end and use it was
created, we have not spared to express at large in the Hystory of bones. It
shall therefore not be in vain, when thy eye is here, the finger be there. I
mean that thou confer the insertion and situation of the muscles thereof,
unto the manner, form, and fashion of the thing it felfe, neither in this
only, but throughout also the whole discourse of Muscles I wish the (Reader)
to observe the same The Muscles of Hyoides.
rule, for the more assured perfection. The muscles therefore that make the
(...) of Hyoides are in number viiij. that is, iiij. on each side.

The first that appears is fleshy, thin, and straight, springing from the
inside The (...) Muscle of Hyoides.
of the top of Sternon. It iourneth above Aspera Arteria and Larinx, and
ends in the inferior part of the said bone without a tendon, having straight
Fibers, and therewithal draws directly downward. The second Muscle of
Hyoides.


The second goes out from the chinne, and ends in the upper part of Hyoides.
This has no tendon, but is wholly carneous: having straight Fibers also,
moves straight vpwardes aunswerable in the contrary part to that, which next
before I named.

The third muscle is subtle, and little, beginning at the Process Styloides,
and Hyoides: sited obliquely, and serves to draw vpwardes The third Muscle of
Hyoides.
obliquely. But the iiij. Muscle comes from the upper part of the scaple The
fourth Muscle of Hyoides.
long, yet neither longer nor leaner then other muscles, if we may credit
Collumbus. Albeit Uesalius says there are no muscles in the body longer or
leaner. It Lib. 5. Cap. 12.
is ended in the lateral parts of Hyoides. It obtayneth the tendon in the
midst Lib. 1. Cap. 17.
like as the fourth Muscle of the inferior iaw, although Galen would grant
only to that, a tendon in the midst, and to no other, extollyng therefore
nature as though she had wrought in the Muscle a rare and notable point, which
she had denied to all others. Only this cannot be denied, that the tendon of
this muscle, which we now describe, is not so long as of the other. But the use
of it is to draw The use of the 4. Muscle.
this bone obliquely downwardes (...) with a contrary moving to the third
muscle. Galen supposed, it lifted up the shoulder blade, when as (says
Collu^bus) he slightly The fourth Muscle serves not to lift up y^ shoulder
blade. Witnessing also (...).
marked how impossible it was to be done, or that so small a Muscle springyng
from Hyoides (as he faith) which bone is moveable, should draw or lift up the
great weight of the scapple bone. And these be the iiij. pair of muscles
propperly seruyng to Hyoides. The muscles not (...) thereto have thence their
beginning. Of Muscles not propper to Hyoides.
Whereof some to Larinx, the rest are streched to the tongue.

THe tou^g is the worthy organ of vttera^ce, yet, that not all the vtilities
(...) The vtilities of the tongue.
appertainyng. For in eating, drinckyng, and tasting ye office thereof is
notable, Substance.
and most exquisite, the flesh of it is rare, Fistulous, and soft. The
magnitude thereof Galen. (...) (...). us. (...).
agreeable to the greatness, or litlenes of the mouth. The actiuitie thereof
therefore Magnitude. (...). Figure.
sauereth rightly of the Muscles, thereto serving. Of the place no man is
ignorant: the fashion thereof is long, and more broad then profound and thick
(albeit that the tongue in thrustyng directly forth becomes almost or
altogether round) the root of the tou^g is thicker then the end: which was
prouidently done of nature, because it behooved it to move swiftly. To the
furtherau^ce whereof are ix. Muscles accordyngly bestowed, besides his own
peculiar substance, which, in The Muscles of the tongue are nine, or as some
account xj.
consideration of the substance before rehearsed, seems not proper to be
nu^bred amongst Muscles: yet, by an other reason, which is because it moves
volu^tarily, it seems not worthy to be severed from among their number. Which
if it be not, ij. more must be added to the number aforesaid, so that then we
must accoumpt xi.

For it seems (if so it must be described) ij. muscles, the tongue having in
the The Ligament which is in infantes to (...).
midst a white line, to distinguish the right from the left part, under which
is a Ligament in children (often times) requiryng to be cut, because it is an
impediment to their speech, and at first to suckyng. These ij. muscles
attributed to the The ij. Muscles attributed to the tongue
tongue or rather fourmyng the same, rise from the ground of Hyoides, and end
at the extremity of the tongue, tasting the force of every kind of Fibers:
which The (...) clothing the tongue.
also are so intertexed and wouen together, as that one from another, as in
other Muscles, cannot be disioyned. There bewrappeth the tongue a certain
tunicle, which receiuyng of the virtue that is propper to the fourth pair of
sinews of Whence y^ tongue has the sense of tasting.
the brain, purchases thereby most elegantly the faculty of (...). Thereof in
like manner is stretched to the funicle of the Palate, as shall be declared
hereafter, the which tunicle is both common to the Palate, Aesophagus, and
Larinx.

The third and fourth Muscle of the tongue which Collumbus says was not Fibers
are straight, the Muscles them selves round, and it appertains to their
office to thrust out the tongue beyond the teeth and lips. Neither is it any
miracle (as some suppose) that the tongue can do this without the help of any
Muscle.

The fifth, and sixth are sclender, beginning at the Process Styloides, and end

The vij. and viij. go forth from the Processes of Hyoides, and are inserted to
the

But the ix. and x. rise from the iaw, and are fixed to the sides thereof. And
have

The last muscle is more rightly to be called a consused muscle of flesh, fat,
and Hyoides. Being in eating pleasant and sweet: as The (...) in beasts is
sweet in eating.
is proved in such creatures, whose tounges are unto us among the rest,
acceptable (...). Neither shall it be here denied the name of a muscle, for
description sake, although (as witnesses Collumbus) it be a particle of small
price: wherein therefore we will lose no time, least the speech of other matters
should be over long detracted, which are more necessary.

Besides the xi. (therefore) which we have hitherto declared, besides these
Nerves, Ligamentes, and membran, there are Ueynes, Arteries, and two other
Nerves begotten of the vij. conjugation, and addicted to this part for motion
The parts constituting y^ tongue,
sake: which for as much as they be collocated worthily in the inferior part,
great care must be used lest together with the Ligament (as often as it is
requisite to be cut) those also be unwittingly divided.

By the Ligament is meant that, which by openyng the mouth, and reflectyng In
cutting the Li gament of the (...) what is to be heeded.
the tongue unto the palate, is to be descerned under the same, being made for
great use and purpose. For hereto are firmified the Fibers of the tongue, being
in use as if a bone were given to the tongue, and no less to them a
stabiliment stay, What is the Ligame^t of y^ tou^ge.
or ground. Moreover were it not for the Ligament, the tongue sometimes would
Vesal. Lib. 2. cap. 19
be gathered to much backward in it self, neither being once put forth would
it The use of the Ligame^t of y^ tou^ge.
be easily drawn back again. Wherefore it is worthily a bridle unto the
tou^g, both forcyng it, and temperyng the same, least it should be either to
much plucked The bridle of the tongue.
together by the muscles (not having therein any bones or other stay) or else
Galen (...) (...). vsu part.
being slaked more then meet, might stray out of course. Besides if in the
tongue it had been stretched but a little way foreward, or occupied but a small
portion, it The (...) of nature in creating this Ligament.
should have pleasured the tongue as little as if it had not been made at all.
Contrariwise again, if further toward the end it had been extended, then
neither to the palate, upper teeth, nor to diverse places in the mouth, the
tongue could have been stirred. So exact therefore is the making thereof, and
with such commoderation is it measured, that if you either add a little, or
diminish a little, you With (...) measure is (...) (...) (...).
corrupt the action of whole instrument. Col. (...). (...). (...).


L Arinx being the head of the rough Artery, is the instrument wherein first
What ^arinx (...).
the voice is formed, which God the worker of all things, has by marvelous
Where voice ^s fust f^urmed.
art compounded. The place thereof is in the jaws, under the tongue and bone
Hyoides. But since the bones thereof (for so Collumbus calls them rather then
Cartilages) are before expressed in the History of bones, there remains now
(because this so necessary instrument, of inspiration, and expiration, as also
to the restraynt of every efflation after the will of the body, stood in need
of Of the Muscles (...) to (...).
voluntary mouyng) to speak of the muscles given thereto for the mainteinance
of his worthy office.

Wherein (that from these my simple labors I may clearly wipe the blotte of
Why the author som^tyme forsakes Galen and (...).
error, least by such means or infection, they become odious to the hearers,
and to me as to the unhappy husband men: who taking gladly great toil with his
ground and tillage, in hope of the harvest recompense, reapeth a sort of
blasted ears mingled with that cursed coccle, in stead of the finest flaxen,
and whytest wheat which he trusted surely to had sown), I am forced to
abstain a while both from Vesalius and Galen. Who whilst herein they
dissected not the body of man, I know not whether we have more cause to shun
both their opinions in this respect, or condyngly to commend Collumbus, for his
integrity: not in findyng the fault but for hatyng the fault, neither for
reprouyng those authors, but for his endeavor to amend the miss. But of the
ij. it appears he most marueileth at Vesalius, not because his opinion herein
is scarce approbable (for who Galen and (...) have described (...) according as
it is in beasts, and not in men.
knows not the best may sometime be deceived) but for that Vesalius never
wared weary to reprehend Galen for cuttyng Apes and not men, and showing him
self herein but a ridiculous carper, to describe ye throat of a beast and not
of man: neither at all admonishes the Reader thereof. The like negligence is
imputed unto him, where he describes the eyes, which in man (although the more
difficult) Collumbus protests only to have followed. Wherefore these be his
words. Marvel not that I (speaking only of ma^kynd) do differ from the
writing Collumbus.
of the rest that have described ye wyndpype of beasts: neither that I mean
to resist such excellent men otherwhere, but only that I might take away those
errors (truth being my guide as much as in me lies) I am forced chiefly in
this argument, to depart from their opinions.

The throat therefore or Larinx has muscles both propper and impropper, but
Col. Ibidem.
Lib. 2. cap. xij.
those not in number as other have accounted them, although Fuchs. (imitatyng
The number of the Muscles of (...).
the minds of Galen and Vesalius) would seem to speak of the humane Larinx.
For there be but of propper Muscles ix. and of the common v. being a sentence
very dissonaunt from those that say xij. propper, and viij. common.

Of which the first two spryng from the top of the breast, whence also the ij.
The (...) ij. Muscles of Larinx being of the (...) Muscles.
first of Hyoides had their beginning: they are fleshy every where, but without
tendons, and endued with sharp begynninges. They are extended above the rough
Artery, and are inserted to the nether parts of the two shield like bones,
drawyng downwardes: and are much profitable, for that whilst they move, they
bynd beneth, and dilate the wyndpype above.

The second common from the sides of Hyoides, being likewise fleshy, and Fibers
in like manner straight. These can dilate the nether part, and bynd together the
upper: and contrary to The muscle (...) (...).
the mouyng of the first, do lift the wyndpype vpwardes.

Of these (which we have called comen) the last muscle complecteth Aesophagus:
The (...) of (...) (...) from Galen, and Vesalius.
ay^yng the deglution, and swallowyng of meat and drink. It rises from the
shield like bone, and has transuerse Fibers followyng the form of a half
circle, wherewith the laterall part of the wyndpype is coarcted, and stretned
together. ^uch. ex Gal. et ves.
And this is one muscle and not ij. as Galen and Vesalius esteemed, who when
they had considered diligently, imagined that those muscles sprung from the
posterior part of Aesophagus, which is membraneous, and soft, and had force to
draw together ye posteriour parts of the wyndpype: which is a thing hard, and
heavy. Wherefore (says Collumbus) there is nothing in this left whereby to
excuse them, when as a great absurdity should be followed, if we should also
affirm those muscles to proceed from thence, whose Fibers only well marked,
shall discrie them to be one, and not ij. deuisible muscles.

Beside those, Vesalius writes of other ij. common muscles, which being almost
Lib. 2. Cap. 20.
The other ij. common Muscles which (...) writes are not in man.
round, should spryng from the midst of the interior part of Hyoides, and
either of them on both sides inserted to the root of the body of the lidde, or
cover of Larinx: having the proppertie, and office, as often as it depressed with
meat and Col. Ibid.
drink, to lift it up again immediately. Which in an Ox, Cow, or such like
creaturess iss very true in deed, but not in man, look thou never so
diligently. Why they are called common Muscles.
Thus of the eight common muscles iij. being taken away, there remains but v.
common they are called, because their begynnynges are otherwhere, and their
ends in this part.

The other ix. which are called propper muscles, because they begin, and also
The nine Muscles of Larinx.
end in Larinx, seruyng therefore thereto only: are made for this cause to open
Which are called the proper Muscles thereof.
and shut the Epiglotte. For Glottis is a long rift placed in the midst of
Larinx, the^ which (says Galen) the like substance is not to be found in all
the creatures. What Glottis is and where it is.


Of these ix. muscles the ij. first go forth from the Anular bone, the rest
from Cartilage. They be small, and have oblique or croocked Fibers, and Of the
nine Muscles of ^arinx whence the first do spring.
end at the nether part of the shieldlike bones. They serve to bynd together
the nether part, and dilate the uppermost. Neither in this place is to be
imagined The Anular or (...) bo^e.
of any contrary mouyng: for the bones be hard, and being bound together
beneath, it follows that they dilate and open above. The like does ye
shieldlike Gristles in beasts. But of these Muscles you shall find one on the
right side, an other Vesalius e^reth in the ij. first Muscles of Luinx.
one the left, albeit Vesalius notes iiij. proper Muscles in this place: of
which he believed the first two to come from the shieldlike Cartilage, and to
end in the nameles Gristell. Whereat Collumbus cannot maruail enough, since
(says he) Every Muscle works towar^ his beginning.
the unnamed Cartilage has no mouyng at all, but must needs have had if these
should come to it: for every Muscle works toward his beginning. These iiij.
Vesalius. Ibidem.
Muscles (says Vesalius) that is two on each side, are very like the muscles
called Collumbus denies them to be like ye intercosta^ Muscles.
Intercostales. But that is denied not only in man, but also in heastes to he
found true.

But those second Muscles sited in the hinder parts toward Aesophagus, are
Anular bone, and end directly at the fourth and fifth bone by a Tendon: that is,
in the inferior part: where it is coarticulated to the third bone. The end
wherefore they were created How grave or ^ase voices are uttered.
having straight Fibers, was to draw straight, and to dilate the aforesaid rift
called Glottis toward the laterall part. Which is often showed by the benefit
of these ij. muscles. Wherefore by their office, each grave or bace voice is
uttered.

The third muscles came from the fore part of the Anular bone, and being
oblique, Cartilage, as Vesalius would. These have power to bynds the fore
parts of the rift, and dilate the hinder parts.

But the fourth muscles begin at the inner parts of the shieldlike bones, with
The 4. muscles o^ Larinx.
which they coarticulate, and go obliquely, until they are entered into the
said The constitution of Arytaenoides expressed in ye historye of bones when
Larinx is described.
bones which construe, and make Aritenoides, that is to say, in the laterall or
side parts. These also when they make streite the anterior parts, do amplify
and enlarge the posteriour.

The last muscle of Larinx is so small, that a less in the whole body besides
may not be found, it is placed ouerthwartly in the root of those ij. bones
which The last And least of all ye Muscles of (...).
we last remembered, having overthwart Fibers also, like those of the last of
the common muscles which embraces Aesophagus. This muscle thus described, has
liberty in bindyng together the posteriour part, there withal to dilate the
Anteriour.

But Vesalius by accomptyng the first ij. propper, iiij. and this last one, ij.
made ^owe (...) (...) 1^. Muscles to (...).
up the number of his xij. But since that, Collumbus firmly avouches it to be
but one muscle and to have continual Fibers. As for my peculiar Ligamentes to
this part, there is none, beside membranes enwrappyng round the joints.

THus far of the vocal organ, in describyng whereof as appears, is great
The authors good will to his country and or (...).
dissension among the Authors. But for my part, and that my labor might be more
frutefully employed, I have endeavored to follow him that shoots likeliest at
ye mark. Be sapient therefore Reader in judgment, and not captious in caruing
a Suspend your indgment till you (...) the truth.
fault, least it, being not acceptable to his appetite thou geuest it unto, be
restored to thee again with blame.

IT has pleased others to entreat next of the muscles mouyng the head, but Of
the Muscles of the shoulder binds called else the scaple bones.
Collumbus, because the greater part of them is contained under the muscles of
the scaple bones, determined first to speak of these, and after them of the
muscles of the shoulder, before he declared how the head is moved.

TTe muscles therefore of the scaple bones (after Galen) be in number vij. on
Col. ^ib. de Musc.
Col. ^ib. 5. Cap. xv.
each side. Albeit the truth is (if Collumbus and Vesalius were worthy
professors) Vesal. Li. 2. cap. 26.
that by four, each shoulder blade is moved. And iiij. manner of mouynges are
The number of the Muscles of ye shoulder blades. The 4. motions of the shoulder
blades.
appertinent to the scaple Bones, as upward, or toward the head, downward,
forward, and backward. That which Collumbus wills to be the first, Vesalius
describeththe second, and the second after Collumbus, is the first with him:
but it forces not it is sufficient only that they agree in their propper
descriptions.

The first therefore has the most rare and notable figure of all others in the
The first Muscle of the shoulder blade, like a Monks hoode.
to a monks hoode, and is therefore without any absurdity called Cucullaris
Musc. It comes forth from Occiput, and from the tops of the ridge of all
the Vertebres of the neck, and down to the viij. Spondill of the breast: but
in the hinder part of the head it has an overthwart line, occupying the whole
space that lies between Occiput and the ear: the beginning thereof is
scle^der, and so far from Occiput, as to the viij. Vertebre of the breast, and
ends in the Process Acromion, and to the broader part of the canell bone.
This muscle being compounded with diverse kinds of Fibers, shows likewise
diverse manner of mouyngs. For, by the The diverse motions of this oblique Muscle.
means of the oblique Fibers of the upper part, it draws the shoulder blade
obliquely vpwardes: by those in the midst, the same is led toward the
back: but by the inferior Fibers, it plucketh downewardes. It is very notable
in figure, The hoodlike mus cle in man is not divided, as in (...).
and according to the raritie of his shape obtains a rare and peculiar name,
that is a hoodlike Muscle, or more seemly in Latin Cucullaris Musculus as
before said. Which Galen divided into i^. for so it is reported to be in Apes.

The second Muscle dedicated to the scaple bone, lies underneath the first
Muscle Process of the scaple called Ancyroides, both fleshy, and tendinous.
Nature begat it to this use, that by means thereof the scaple bone might move
forwardly toward the breast bone Sternon: Collumbus Ibid.
but is nothing serviceable to the shoulder, what soever Galen thought therein.

The third Muscle is reached from the ouerthwarte Process of the second,
Vertebre of the neck: and as it fleshy descends, so it wareth By the
benefitte of the third Muscle the shoulder blade is lifted up.
thicker and stronger, and finally is inserted to the upper and inner part of
the scaple: almost all the Fibers thereof are straight, except a few that stand
obliquely, or stopwise. And this is used to lift up the shoulder blade, and to
give help unto the first. For great and heavy is the scaple bone.

The fourth is a broad Muscle thine, and fowersquare, brought from the ridge
Vertebres of the neck, and from the iiij. uppermost of the breast: it begins
fleshy, and parts tendinous, with oblique Fibers: the end thereof is after
the hole longitude of the shoulder blade, which is thereby carried backwardes.

FUrther, the shoulder has every kind of voluntary mouyng, as for example,
Collumbus.
Collumbus.
vpwardes, downwardes, forward, backward, and round about, to the perfect
rulyng whereof nature addicted vij. Muscles,

The first whereof is great and fleshy, occupying the anteriour part of the
breast, The Muscles of the shoulder and the manifold motions thereof.
and marches forewardes from the midst of the Cannell bone toward the
breast Bone, followyng almost the whole length thereof, and from the Gristels of
the vij. and viij. ribbe. The beginning hereof is large and great, but it ever
after diminishes, and at length ends at a Tendon short and broad: which is
inserted in the anteriour part of the shoulder under the neck thereof. This
Muscle has diverse Fibers, and therefore leads the shoulder diversely unto the
breast, that is to say, higher, lower, and in the midst between both. Galen
supposed this This Muscle is not to be divided into 4. as Galen would.
muscle to be divided in iiij. but that is denied, albeit sometime that in the
nether part thereof (as says Collumbus) a certain portion sharp stretching
out, is found in some men as though it were a muscle, when as in deed it is
none. But (says the same Author) to this absurdity he has added another more
absurd, by thinckyng the arm to be moved obliquely by means thereof: which in
Apes, and not in man is proved true.

The second muscle of the shoulder is iij. square, thick, and intertexed with
Fibers, and is called by Anathomistes (...), and (...), and Humeralis. It
springs out of the midst of the Cannell bone, from Acromion, and the whole
great Process of the shoulder blade: it has a broad and tendinous beginning,
but the end of it is sharp: it is carried above the head of the shoulder, and
ends in the midst of the shoulder at a strong and ouerthwarte tendon, which
^e^don embraces the middle thickness of ye shoulder: it consisseth of many
Fibers, wherewith the arm is lifted above, forward, in the midst, and
backward.

But the third muscle of the shoulder is carneous and round, which from the
Fibers straight, from the beginning unto the very end: and being situated
obliquely, goes foreward above the anteriour and bounched part of the shoulder
blade, and goes out into a broad and strong tendon, which planteth it self in
the posteriour part of the shoulder: and it is the part of this muscle to draw
the arm downward toward the posteriour parts.

The fourth muscle is great and broadest beginning at the point of the ridge
Vertebres, even to the half of Os sacrum. And this so long a beginning is each
where sinewy, but sclender, and ends at a broad, strong, and short tendon
under What Muscles do constitute the arm hole.
the head of the shoulder, near that place whereto we have said the first
muscle cleaves, that leads the arm unto the breast: between which is left
the cauitie which we call the armehole. Diverse Fibers has this muscle, and
therefore it is a mean to move the arm diverse ways downward, and that rather
in oblique sort then in any other kind of position. It has iij. corners
unequally sited, for Col. ^ib. 5. Cap. 16.
of them the one is short, the other ij. long, and their original is thus. The
short corner is from the sixth Vertebre, unto the end thereof: and of the long
ones, one The description of the sides of this fourth muscle.
stretches from this Vertebre, to the half of Os sacrum: and the other from
that place unto the end thereof.

The fifth Muscle occupies all that cauitie which is betwixt the top of the
Process thereof, springyng from the posteriour part of it. It is fleshy, and
ends at a strong tendon, whilst it is carried under the Ligament that
knitteth the shoulder and the scaple bone together. It ends in the head of
the upper part of the shoulder, much cleauyng also to the shoulder blade it
self.

The sixth Muscle co^passeth about the hole Gibbous part of the shoulder blade,

To the seventh is dedicated all the inner cauitie of the shoulder blade, where

And finally these iij. Muscles, which I have last made mention of, were
ordained The arm turned about by the sift, sixte, and seventh Muscles of the
shoul^er.
to the end that the arm might not want the power of circumaction, although
the sixth (says Vesalius) seems somewhat to help the elevation, or liftyng
up of the arm. Vesa^. 2. Cap. 23.


Thou have (Reader) to understand by this word, shoulder, lately described,
What is meant by ye shoulder as also in the history of bones is not omitted.
the mouyng that is given to the upper bone of the arm, and that is the most
propper term for it, for the same bone in Latin is called Humerus, which in
English is shoulder, although in our domestical phrase, we say the shoulder,
when we mean the highest part above the arm, which in deed is the Process
of the scaple bone called Acromio^, in like sort, as by the arm we mean both
the shoulder bone, and cubite. Thus for thy better satisfaction.

NOw as it follows. The head is moved by a first, and secondary mouyng. The
Muscles of the head.
By the first mouyng is understood the mouyng of the head with the first and
The head is moved with a first and secondary mouyng.
second Vertebre, but the secondary mouyng is when it styrreth together with
the whole neck. It has iij. propper mouynges, as one forward and backward,
an other to each side, and the third when it turns round, albeit these may
fitly be The propper mou^nges of y head.
reduced into two, as into a straight, and an oblique mouyng. The straight with
the first Vertebre, the oblique under the second is brought to pass: what
soever The sall of Galen.
Galen says to the contrary, of whose confutation in this matter for the
mouyng Col. Lib. 5. cap. xvij.
of the head, read before in the History of bones: where is described the
first, and second Vertebre of the neck.

The Muscles seruyng to his propper mouynges are seven on each side.

The first spryng from the Spine of the superior Vertebres of the breast,
ascendyng The number of the Muscles to the propper moving of the head.
up the Vertebres of the neck, unto the third, are afterward divided, and
run stopwise toward the hinder part of the head, where they end between the
posteriour part and the ears. Their Fibers are straight from the beginning,
until they come to the place where ye Muscles are divided: but afterward as
they stretch upward, so far their race is a slope, or oblique, and sufficient
fleshy are these Muscles. Their office is when both labor with one consent
together, that ye head might be drawn backewardes to the posteriour parts,
but when the one works only, then is the head compassingly turned to the one
side. To those Muscles are three sides, one from the beginning to the place
whereas he is divided from his fellow, an other from thence to the hinder part
of the head, and the third from the hinder part of the head unto their
beginning.

The second Muscles are diverse, because they have diverse figures and
impressions, Muscles. Although in deed it is but one pair, as one would say
the right, and the left. They spryng with a sharp beginning from the
transuerse, or ouerthwarte Process of the fourth and fifth Spondiles of the
breast, and ascendyng upward, are at length fastened in the midst of the hinder
part of the head. Their situation is directly straight, and their office is to
draw the head to the posteriour part straight.

The third Muscles are sclender, which spryng from the ridge of the second
Vertebre of the neck, and end at length in Occciput, which is the hindermost
bone of the head, but by the way, they go somewhat disioyned. The Fibers which
they possess are straight, therefore do they lead the head directly backewardes.

The fourth Muscles are hidden under the third, and are all fleshy even as the
Vertebre, where should have been a ridge or Spine unto the same Vertebre, but
that nature took it away because it might be no impediment or greuaunce unto
the essence of the third Muscles. In the midst of Occiput is their end, and
their office is to draw likewise the head backewardes directly. Neither is it
any marvel, why nature ordained so many Muscles only to draw the head
backwardes, for so it was necessary: Why nature appointed so many Muscles to
the drawing of the head backward.
since the Anteriour part of the head is much more heavy because thereto is
joined both the face and nether iawe. Whereby the forepart becomes of right
heauyer then the hinder.

In oblique sort are situated the fifth pair of Muscles mouyng the head being
Vertebre, and ended in the ouerthr warte Process of the first. These Muscles
are sclender and all fleshy, seruyng to pull the head in round compass
together with the first Vertebre.

The vi. are also oblique, but contrary ways they make ye form of a
tria^gle, Process of ye first Vertebre, so do they end in ye hinmost bone
(Occiput) of the head, and that in the midst: these draw to the fore parts.

So these ij. last recited the v. and the vj. are the proper Muscles which move
the head round or in compassed sort, by the help of ye first Muscles, and the
last which yet are to describe. But now therefore they which are in the vij.
place are long. Fibers spring from the top of the breast and Cannell bone.
They have ij. begynnynges, between which lies a concauitie, or spare hollow.
They are sinewie and broad in their beginning, after also fleshy, and are
planted to the Mammillar Process, which they embrace. When both of them labor,
the head enclineth forward, but as often as only one of them moves, the head
goes to the side. They are further very strong, and able also to how the head
directly downward. But this more over is to be noted, that these What Muscles
do make a cross in the head.
Muscles together with the iiij. Muscle of Hyoides, do make a great cross in
the neck. These hitherto are propper Muscles serving to ye first moving of the
head.

NOw to the secondary mouyng, which is achieved by the Muscles of the The
secondary moving of the head.
neck, which mouyng, the head cannot but move. And the neck it self moves
both forward, and backward, and to each side: and the Muscles thereto The
Muscles of the neck.
are on each side four. Their number.


The first being placed in the forepart, produced straight from the body of the
Vertebre, of the breast, near to the place where as it is knit with the ribbe,
and in ascendyng it is (...) to all the bodies of Vertebres, save that the
middle part by which Aesophagus iourneyeth they leave vnseuered. These are the
Muscles The Muscles lucking under Aesophagus.
which are called Latitant es sub Aesophago, that is lurkyng under the
stomach: and these bow the neck toward the Anteriour parts. And note that
these last recited Muscles are sometime (though that very seldom) knit unto
the hinder part of the head, or Occiput, where the hole is, through which the
(...) (...) desendeth.

The second being large and fleshy, spryng from the first ribbe, but ascendyng,
becommen so narrow as that they fashion not so much as a triangle. They are
supported by the transuerse Processes of the Vertebres of the neck in the
Anteriour part.

The third pair has his original from the root of the transuerse Processes
Vertebre of the breast, and ascendyng vpwardes also from the other tra^suerse
Processes of the Vertebres of the breast, are at length knit to all the
Processes of the Vertebres of the neck, in ye posteriour part. Their office is
the like with the second before named, that is, to bow the neck directly to
the shoulder blades, or sides: as when both of them move at one time: but
only, styrreth it obliquely. Between these two Muscles go forth the Nerves,
produced from the Spinall marey, betwixt the Vertebres of the neck.

The fourth beginning at the vij. Vertebre of the breast, going above all the
Vertebre of the neck, and ordained they were to the drawyng of the neck to
the posteriour parts.

NExt now follows the back, which is moved with diverse motions, and Vesal.
li. 2. cap. 3. 8.
(generally) that is four simple: as flection, extention, and inclination to
The Muscles of the back.
the right, and left side. To the atcheuyng of which motions it behooved that
nature Col. lab. 5. cap. 19.
created viij. Muscles. That is four on each side. The number is viij.


The first come from the superior cauitie and the posteriour part of the bone
Ilium, as also from the superior, but interior part of Os sacrum. Their
beginning is broad, and fleshy, ascendyng in the inner part of Abdomen, and
cleave to the transuerse Processes of the Vertebres of the loins, and to the
lower ribs: they Their use.
are all fleshy, and in figure four square: and when both of these move
together, they can bow the back forward, but severally laboryng, do draw it to
a side.

The second Muscles are longer then all the Muscles of our body. For they are
Os sacrum even up to the head: their original is from the extreme part of Os
sacrum, with a sinewy beginning and strong, then after degenerate into flesh,
and cleave to the tra^suerse Processes of the Vertebres of the loins, toward
the posteriour part, afterward to all the transuerse Processes of the
Vertebres of the breast, even unto the first, to all which tra^suerse Processes
they send a tendon or sinewy hold, in which place Vesalius supposed this Muscle
to end, but departing from those Processes, and ascendyng above the Mammillar
Process, it ends in the temporal bone: which part Uesalius ^eekened among
the Muscles of the head, albeit thus Collumbus accompteth it to ye How the body
is bowed like a half circle.
second pair of the back, nether are these made without use: but bow the
whole back and head also to the posteriour part, whereby the body may imitate
the figure of a half circle.

The third Muscles spryng from the posteriour part of Os sacrum, beginning
Vertebres of the loins, and sharply also end in the ridge of the xij.
Vertebre of the breast: though sometime in the xj. furthermore they are endewed
with sinewy holds, as before in the other, and they are authorized to bow the
loins.

The fourth likewise having a sharp beginning, spryng from the ridge of
Vertebre of the breast, and are fastened to all the Spines of the Vertebres The
use of the 4. Muscles of the back.
of the breast, and sharply also end in the first: being broad in the midst
about the vj. Vertebre: and have power to erect the breast. And when the third
aforesaid When the whole body to turned to a side.
do labor together, they hold straight all the whole back. But if four
stir together, as one would follow an other, they move it in compassed sort.
And the The three Muscles called (...) in (...) (...).
Muscles mouyng that be only on one side, the body then is turned to a side.

The three Muscles are of the loins, which the Grecia^s call (...) the three
last are annexed much unto them, whereby it comes to pass, that if the
Anathomist be not excellent diligent, they are neither easily found, nor
distinguished. Of Muscles mo^ing the breast.


NOt natural but voluntary (says Galen) is the respiratiue motion. The The
description of the breast.
breast therefore is a part within hollow like an egg, wherein are put the
instruments serving to life, and consequently to respiratio^, and inspiration:
without The breast has both natural and volu^tary mo^ing. When ye breast moves
naturally.
the which the life it self by no means could exist, or stand. But (contrary
to the aforesaid Author) this moves by nature, as well as by election or
choice: as for example when we sleep, the^ sure of nature the breast moves,
and not of will, When the breast month voluntarily.
to the which purpose, between the ribs and breast bone are Cartilages put,
which easily give place to the natural mouyng of the lunges: which cease not
of their What malteth the volu^tary mo^ing. What makes the natural moving.
labors, whether the body sleep or wake. Besides, when we talk or call, then
they are more largely moved, because the breast by the Muscles is also more
dilated. The propper Muscles of the breast are 81. the common 8.
Of these motions the voluntary is made by Muscles, but the other only by
dilatation and construction of the lunges. Wherefore to this end there are of
proper Muscles 81. and 8. common. Which although they be put in Abdomen, and In
Inspiration ye inferior parts of the breast are dilated and the superior
contringed.
serve thereto, yet are they serviceable to the breast also. But hear by the way
a notable thing, when we inspire or let in breath, the lower parts of the breast
are then dilated, and the uppermost compressed. Contrariwise whilst we expire
or brethe the nether parts are constringed, and the uppermost dilated. In
expiration co^trarywise.


Of the Muscles of the breast the first two that come to hand, that is on each
side The (...) muscles of the breast.
and with a long end are inserted to the superior part of the first ribbe:
which they serve to dilate.

The secend Muscle is great, broad, and all fleshy, beginning at the seat of
the Cartilages. The ends of this Muscle are like unto fingers. and was made to
dilate these viij. ribs.

The third is a small one, coming from the Spine parts of the three last
Vertebres of the neck, and first of the breast, in the beginning broad and
Membraneous, but ends at the first ribbe of the breast and sometime in the
posteriour part of the fourth. And thus was it made of nature to dilate those
ribs.

The iiij. Muscle is also small and iiij. square, brought from the Spine of the
ij. Vertebres of the breast. And sometime from the first of the loins. In the
beginning it is broad, sinewy, and Membraneous, but after becomes fleshy, and
ends in the iij. last ribs, after the manner of fingers: so can they dilate
those ribs.

The fifth carneous, rises from the hinder, and upper part of Os sacrum, and
Ilium, cleaning so fast to the second Muscle of the back, as it may be thought
a portion thereof. Nevertheless when it comes to the ribs, it shows
plainly it self to be diverse from the Muscle of the back The higher it
ascends the slender it waxes, being at length inserted by the stay of sinewy
holds, to all the ribs in the posteriour part, not far from the transuerse
Processes of the Vertebres, where the ribs have their eminent asperittes.
These parts constrain and bind together the hinder parts of the breast.

The sixth is put within the hollow of the breast all after Sternon, and the
viij. Cartilages of the true ribs, it is fleshy, long, and but small: to this
use ordained, that is, to straiten the anterionr parts of the breast.

AFter follow the intercostall Muscles, so called, because they occupy and The
Intercostall Muscles are on (...) (...) 34.
possess the space places between the ribs, and are one each side four and
thirty. For the spaces be xi. vj. of the true ribs, and five of the false
ribs, ij. in the spaces of these, and four in every one of those. This
difference makes, that the Cartilages may be turned toward the breast. In
these Muscles the course of the Fibers is turned. For the outer and inner have
obligue Fibers but in contrary sort, for the outer and inner make together the
figure of this letter X.

The beginning of the exterior Muscles is from the lower part of the ribs,
The outer Interco^ Muscles.
and end in the upper parts of the next followyng, so that beginning toward
the back, they end at length in the breast bone.

But the inner begin from the upper part of the lower ribs, and end at the
The Intercostall (...) on the inside.
nether part of the superior ribs.

The Fibers of the exterior Muscles proceed from the back, slopwise toward
(...).
the breast, as it were from above descendyng, but in contrary manner be the
Fibers of the interior Muscles, so that they join, and meet together like
crosses.

Uesalius has written that Nature made these xxxiiij. Intercostall muscles on
The error of other (...) in the use of the intercostall Muscles manifested by
Collum^.
either side and all to one end and straitnyng of the breast. But for that he
goes not untouched of Collumbus, who proves how also they can dil^ the breast:
that is when either the interior or exterior separately work alone. But in
deed when all move at once, then they coact, and make strait the breast
strongly. For the exterior pull vpwardes, and the interior downewardes so
drawyng, and constrainyng them very hard together. For so ought the force of
constriction to Why the constriction of the breast ought to be strong.
be strong, being often forcebly put in ure by sudden efflation, speech, and
vociferation. The cause of the (...) of (...) y^ vie of the in^costall Muscles.
The same Author infers also by what means Uesalius was deceived. For
(says he) he supposed in this motion that the first ribbe remains not moved.
But the matter is plainly otherwise. For it is styrred by the first Muscle of
the breast, which springs from the Cannell bone: so that when it is lifted up,
How the ribs are moved.
it draws the ribs after in order: whereto the Intercostall muscles are
assistaunt: and so they are outward extended, the exterior Muscles helpyng
them: but downward contrarily by the help of the inferiors. For because the
last ribbe is drawn downward by the oblique ascendent Muscle of Abdomen: And
after this order aforesaid they are dilated. Notwithstanding when that both do
work together, that is the outer and inner, then follows construction of
the^ breast generally, as somewhat before is written.

THere is yet an other Muscle common to both sides, which the Grecians call
(...) or S^p (...) (...).
(...), the Latins Septum transuersum. This deuideth the vital from the
natural parts. Aristotle believed this division to be made of nature, to the
The false opinion of Aristotle.
end that the vapors of meats and substance received, might not ascend up by
fumes to the heart, and annoy the same. But that opinion is altogether
overthrown by Collumbus. For as touching that matter, if Septum transuersum
were Lib. 5. cap. Ri.
away it forces not, since the meat has a close entrance, and passage into
the Uentricle, neither may it by any means send, or let pass vapors to the
heart: for the substance of the stomach is not so light and Spongy. Again if
it might, it appears the heart should not be offended at all thereby, seeing
(for proof,) in birds, and diverse creatures, it is naturally wantyng. But to
the purpose.

This Muscle differs from all other in the body both in situation, form, and
The Muscle diaphragma how it differs from all others in y^ body. Siniation.
noblenes: In situatio^, as lying ouerthwarte the lower part of ye breast: In
figure, being round compassed, having in the midst a sinewy tendon, compassed
about with fleshy parts, and dispersed with Fibers from the midst round
about, as a Figure.
thing most comely to behold: the noblenes thereof is such as being wounded,
Noblenes.
the party seldom, or hardly escapes. And it is said that the ancient
Anathomistes (...). li. 2. cap. 21.
and Grecians called it 'Phrenes which is by interpretation the mind. (...).
Pliny, and others after him named it (...).

But besides the sinewy tendon, which before we have spoken of, and whereby The
parts entering into (...) (...).
it is partaker of much sense, it possesses also both Ueynes and Arteries, and
those not small, but large.

No less moreover obtains it the sorts of diverse Nerves, which between the
spaces of the ribs do come unto it from the Spinall marey. Among y^ which are
(...). coming down from between the fourth and fifth Spondill of the neck are
sown above Per^rdium, where the fleshy part of Septum does degenerate into a
Te^on, or rather where the tendon ends at a fleshy nature.

^uchsius not in vain (as it seems) describes therein two circles, which
are Fuchs. Ibid.
The circles of Septum.
thus: the midst being Me^braneous, and the outer parts which compass that
same more fleshy. And as it is the nearer to the ribs ye more fleshy, so ye
nearer to the centree of midst, so much the more me^braneous. In which words
he means not any dirision therein, but only speaks of the midst and
outward parts: as the one more Membraneous, and the other more retainyng of a
fleshy nature.

Moreover this Muscle of the breast ministers both to expiration and
inspiration, that is, puttyng forth the breath, and receiuyng it in. Who in
using this his Col. lib. 5. cap. 21.
propper natural function withdraws him self toward the Vertebres, and
Septum (...) serves both to inspiration, and expitation.
asendyng, draws to him the extreme parts of the breast, and byndeth together
all the inferior part: all which effect it works whilst we expire, or
breath forth. But when we receive in the breath, it takes a clean contrary
labor in hand: for then being relaxed, and saggyng downward, it suffers the
inferior parts of the breast to be dilated. And this is the notable utility
of Diaphragma, as the same Author reports to have beholden in quick
dissections.

Whereby very fitly (meseemeth) it may be supposed, that whilst in retaynyng
the breath it declineth downewardes, the holdyng or straying then of the Now
Septum auat^th to the excludyng of excrementes.
breath received, compresseth it hard upon the subject parts, very forcibly
therewithal compellyng the expulsive faculty: as when we draw together the
bellye to the expulsing of excrementes, we cannot sitly accomplish the same
only by straying the lower parts, but by enlargyng the breast, and compressyng
the midreif together with forcibly retayning of breath. By which means
Diaphragma thrusts upon the lower parts: to the end, that in straynyng the
nether bellye by the assistaunce of the strong Muscles of Abdomen, none of the
intrels might seek to have scope or recourse vpwardes, but altogether
consentiuely forcyng one an other downward, to make a most strong, and certain
exclusion of the supers^uous dregs of the third digestion.

To the better confirmation of this my conjecture Fernel. Ambian has these
(...). Ambianus. Cap. 8. (...) Partibus (...).
words: The midrief called also an ouerthwarte division, and a girdle to the
body, besides that it is the first instrument of inspiratio^, it helps also
very well to the vnloadyng of the belly, and driving out dregs.

This Muscle is clothed both above and beneath as with a garment: above with
Pleura, and beneth with Peritonaeum. It springs from the Vertebres.

Others esteem the sinewy part to be the beginning thereof. Notwithstanding
Col. Ibidem.
Collumbus ascribes the beginning thereof unto the ij. little long parts
thereof, The beginning of Septum transuersum.
which Vesalius calls Ligamentes, which little bodies, come from the side of
the body of the xij. Vertebre of the breast, and from the upper joints of the
loins, and from thence afterward does the sinewy part take his beginning,
which is joined to the Cartilage, called Gladialis, or commonly Mucronata.
Which in the Mucronata Cartilago.
History of Cartilages is fully described: being begotten as a propugnacle to
this aforesaid Muscle, but not to the mouth of the Uentricle as the commen crew
of Physicians do suppose. And to this part also the heart lies.

Finally the midrief is fleshy on both sides, and is implanted at length to the
Ca^tilages of the false ribs, embracyng the last. The perforations of this
noble Muscle.


Uesalius has affirmed the perforation of this noble member to be made three
(...). And it is certain, that it yeldeth way to the transiture and course of
other Col. Lib. 5. Cap. 21.
Septum transuersum is not iij. tunes pearsed against the opinion of Vesalius.
needful parts, for the communion of the vital with the natural, and the
natural with the vital members. Yet it is but twice pearsed, or bored
through, as once by the hollow Ueyne, which forthwith marches into the breast:
and the second time, by the stomache, or neck of the Uentricle called also
Aesophagus, wherewith likewise do descend two Nerves from the vj. pair of
sinews of the brain. But the journey of the great Artery perforateth not
this Muscle: for as much as whilst it amplecteth the Vertebres, it embraces it
also, but therefore Lib. 2. Cap. 21.
makes no hole. To this end (therefore) Fuchsius says that the way of the
great Artery deserves not the name of a hole, but rather a half circle
carved out of the compassing part of the midrief, that is when it embraces the
inner side of the Spondiles, there lying the way of the same great Artery,
called in Greek (...) (...).
(...).
and not the same hole where through Aesophagus passes. For flat against that
lies the testimony of verity, had it been the sentence of Socrates him self,
as it The fall of Hipp. and Galen.
was of Hipocrates and Galen: though no man can say they were men of no Divine
understanding.

Thus Septum transuersum is accounted among the Muscles of the breast, whereby is
showed how much, and of what efficacy it is in respiration.

But so much as is said in that behalf, tends to the sense of natural
respiration. Galen Lib. de Mot.
Muse. (...).
For whatsoever is vehement, or violent, the same is contrary thereto. For if so
the quality of the heat of the heart do increase, or occasion serve that, for
the speech, or other like, larger breathyng is required, then else could well
suffice nature, by and by the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth, together
with the interior Septum tra^su^sum is only y^ author of natural respiration.
muscles called Intercostales on both sides, do labor with Septum transue^ sum.
But if further by bodily causes or sudden occasion, great and larger
respiration be required, as for example to the use of hollowyng, crying,
blowynges of trumpets, shalmes, or other vehement efflations, then the
exterior Intercostales are provoked Natural ^respiration.
to move, which be motions not natural. For natural respiration is that which
is brought to pass without the help of the Intercostall Muscles, and that is
it which this worthy member sufficiently brings to pass: and whatsoever
E^tation.
is more, the same has more help, and is natural, but rather we may term
them necessary for seruyng at needful times.

As to be plain, this is not natural, but a very necessary kind of
respiratio^, when a man by earnest study ormuse unto him self, upon any
earnest or weighty matter, by tossyng and turmoyling of his wits, with
continual inward cogitation of the heart, accenseth and heateth more the spirit
then natural respiration is able to temper: then he at a sudden makes a
vehement inspiration, and after as large efflation, which with indifferent
intermission, proves profitable to cool the kindlyng heat of the heart: a
more vehement then that is proved in trumpettors, pypers, hunters, and such
like exercises. And therefore necessary, though not accounted of Galen natural.
Which argues that nature has created our bodies so carefully, that
whatsoever is either natural, or necessary, it is not wantyng. Wherefore these
Muscles Intercostales, little used in natural breathyng yet not to be wanted in
extreme efflations, provoked by needful causes such as are rehearsed. It is
not obscurely proved by this before going, that the noblenes, and worthy nature
of this Muscle may evil be spared in man's body, both for the natural use of
respiration, as also eiection of excrementes, and it being wounded The midrife
wou^ ded, death ensues.
the heart smoldreth, like the lamp that dies for lack of oil.

THe Muscles of the lower belly, that is of Abdomen, wherein are contained yt
Gal. Lib. 5. An^t. ad.
Vesal. (...). 2. cap. 3. (...)
nutritive and generatiue parts, are in number viij. addicted to the use
thereof, Col (...). 5. (...) 22.
although they help the breast, in dilatyng the same. But if they compresse and
The Muscles of Abdomen.
strain together, then serve they to the expulsion of childbyrth, urine, and
excrementes, thiesly by the help of the last Muscle described. And these viij.
Muscles lie iiij. on oche side, and are thus namely distinguished, iiij.
oblique, two straight, Number.
and two transuerse or ouerthwarte, and of the oblique two are ascendent, and
as many descendent.

The ij. first to be described are the oblique descendentes so called, for that
their The ij. fust Muscles of (...) cal'ed the oblique (...).
original is from above, and end obliquely, or slopwise in the inferior
parts, their Fibers running the same race: therefore are they called oblique
descendents, being broad, and situated in the side parts. They issue forth
from the sixth, seventh, eight, and ix. ribbe, before they begin to end in a
Cartilage, and further from the ribs followyng, and the top of the
transucrse Processes of the Vertebres of the loins, and from the half of the
Appendaunce of Os Ilium: they have most broad beginning and fleshy, set out
like the fashion of fingers, between which ends the second Muscles of the
breast do enter, which dilate the viij. ribs. But after they have gone a good
space foreward, they degenerate into a broad, sinewy, and Membraneous tendon,
which cleaves to the other part of the Appendaunce of Ilium and Pubis:
Fuchsius says in the hucke bone, but Collumbus Fuch. Li. 2. cap. 22.
The errout of Fuchsius.
holds that opinion as false. In the midst of the belly they end, that is
to say from Mucronata Cartilagine directly down to Os Pubis, in which place,
is to be discerned the white line, where the te^dons of these Muscles together
with the oblique asce^dentes, and the tra^suerse are joined together. But this
part therefore becomes white because there lies no flesh under it. Wherefore
ye white line is the Col. Ibidem.
end of these aforesaid Muscles says Reaidus, although Vesal. has certified a
number Vesalius (...) by Collumbus.
that their insertio^ should be in Os Pubis. But such is their union of their
tendo^s, as it seems to be only one Muscle having ij. fleshy parts. But if
any man diligently mark the end of their Fibers, he shall plainly find the
ij. Muscles knit together in the midst, and lying above the other six
Muscles of the bellye.

The second are the oblique ascendentes, whose Fibers are coursed in contrary
The second ij. Muscles of Abdomen called the oblique ascendentes.
and like as is said of the Muscles Intercostales they cross one another,
making the figure of this letter X. These spring fleshy from the Appendaunce of
Os Ilium, and of the transuerse Processes of the Vertebres of the loins, in
the beginning like a Me^bran, and going vpwardes sleshy, as knit unto the lower
ribs. Then afterward end in a broad, sinewy, and Membraneous tendon, which
in ascendyng, as it comes to the straight Muscles, deuideth in two, whercof
the one goes above the straight Muscle, the other under it: wherein the
policy, and wonderful The marvelous art of nature.
wisdom of nature is able to astonishe man's minds. For the straight muscles,
by being embraced between these two, are made by that means stronger, and in
the midst of iij. are constituted. And unless this said te^don had been so
divided, the strait muscles in no wise could have been placed in the midst.
But these Iendons are united together again at the white line, and here do
end after the same manner, as did the descendentes cleauyng to the sinewy parts
The use of the ascendent and (...) dent Muscles.
of the straight Muscles. The office whereto the ascendent and descendent
Muscles do serve, is to compresse and strain the intrelles, as also by drawyng
the ribs downwardes, to dilate the breast.

The iij. Muscle of Abdomen are these, called the strait Muscles, because they
The third Muscles of Abdomen called straight.
lie after the rectitude, and length ways of the body, being replenished also
with straight Fibers. The sentence of Galen as touching the straight Fibers is
denied: Gal. us. part. Lib. 5.
in that their beginning (says he) is from the breast, which in deed was of
Lib. 5. de. Anat. ad. Col. Ibidem.
latter time proved to be from Os pubis, having ij. beginninges for the most
part, the one sinewy, the other fleshy, from the upper part of Pubis:
nevertheless sometime they have but one fleshy beginning. They are ended in
Sternon, and in the Cartilages of the last true ribs, with a broad endyng,
without tendons: yet have they three tendinous, and sinewy intersections,
whereto the ascendent oblique Muscles cleave. And these divisions Galen in no
wise has marked, The use of the intersections of the straight muscles.
although they were made greatly to strength these Muscles, lest that they
should be to deeply drawn into Abdomen. To the end yt belly might be left
more round they are in rising very near together, but the higher they ascend,
the ^rther they are separated. Them also being sufficient thick, and streng,
nature made to the compression of the Anteriour parts of Abdomen: although
more evidently they draw the breast downward, to dilate it above.

The last are called transuerse or ouerthwarte Muscles, because oue^ thwartly
The transuerse Muscles o^ the (...).
in the body they take their places. They come sincwy from the transuerse
Processes of the Vertebres of the loins, although afterward they go forward
fleshy, and having likewise transuerse Fibers, are coherent to Os Ilium, and
the lower ribs. But finally their end is at a broad, sinewy, and Membraneous
tendon in The use of the tran^se Muscles.
the white line, and cleauyng to Os Pubis, as the oblique ascendentes, and
descendentes, though not so adherent. So do they cleave to Peritonaeum. Their
duty is to compresse the belly, and bynd together the Hipogunder.

Furthermore you ought to note that the tendons of the oblique descendent
ascendentes, The (...) of the ^uscles of (...).
and of the transuerse Muscles are perforated. First, at the navel, secondly
near to Os Pubis, and through those holes do descend the vessels preparyng The
(...) (...) ^de.
(...) to the testicles, and do ascend the vessels bringing (...) called
Deferentia The vessels bringing (...).
vasa: which at last are settled into the Glandules called Parastatae. And these
be ^ence the Rupture happens.
the holes by which the ruptures happen.

Thus the viij. Muscles of Abdomen, besides the ce^mon use of Muscles which
(...). (...). 5. de us. Part
is to warm the body, are propugnacles, and defenses to the subject parts,
and The use of the 8. ^uscles of Abd^n.
help the motions of the breast by their first use. For if the oblique
ascendentes be stretched, in compressing the lower state of the breast, they do
streiten the same. But the strait, together which the oblique ascendents,
whilst they draw downward the ribs, they bynd the breast together not a little.

The overthwart, or transuerse Muscles do bow inward the ribs, thereby
(...). Li. 2. cap. 22.
to straighten the breast. Seruyng also to the body most notably, for the
expulsion of hard excrementes. But when all of them labor together, the
midreife also by by retainyng of the breath being depressed, they so constrain,
and press the intrels together, as out of a strait place into a larger, which
is lower, they thrust and expel the dregs, wholly resistyng their return
again into the Uenticle. Gal^ Ibi^.
And as touching generation of voice, great efflation, restrainte of breath, and
propulsation of the birth in women, nature receives by them a large benefit.

BUt here perhaps some (only Englishmen) will object, that I leave out the The
use of the muscles of Abdomen according to our English writers before time.
principal properties of these Muscles: in that they retain such worthy
faculties as to attract, retain, and expulse. In deed I confess that our
meaner sort of Chirurgians, who are not able to dispense with the Latin
Author, have learned to many such fantastical imaginations of sundry English
works, which heretofore have been Imprinted, whose authors whence they drew
their labors for the most part, are not comparable to the founders of this
buildyng: and albeit their good wills were commendable ^et this much must I
needs The authors of this history commended.
say, if all of them had sweat more in the works of Gal. in his administration
of Anathomy and use of parts, their works had not at this day remained so
reprehe^sible, Galen sometime failed in y^ parts of man's body.
although Galen we see himself, was in Anathomie now and the^ deceived.

But I much marvel whence they took this fond opinion, that the straight
Muscles made the attractiue power in the body, the transuerse the retentiue
sacultie, and the oblique an expulsive operation. Which singular offices,
every of these should orderly baire unto the body, without any other cause of
their creation. Gemini the principal in this error.
And namely Gemini, after he had thus fallen upon him self, immediately is
about to allege Galen for his purpose otherwise, who^ if he had followed in
this (...). (...). (...). (...). 1. cap. 22.
point, he should have missed to commit this so great an error. Or else
Auicen, who in this point is agreeable with Galen, as appears in his Chapter
of the Muscles of the belly. Wherefore I answer, that for as much as no worthy
writer would baire me out therein, except Mundinus, whose works are generally
arested The cause why y^ author writes not these offices to the Muscles of
Abdomen.
with error: I willingly, by thy patience (genlte reader) do abstain from
such an infamous kind of description. And if thou desire somewhat to reason
with me, and should say? why? is it not likely that the strait Muscles,
ly^g after M^nus Anatomy for the most part ouergrown with (...).
the re^tude of the body, should make the power attractiue, whereby the
concoction made in the stomach, and put forth into the intrelles, is drawn
downward Thus Render thou have been taught heretofore by Gemini.
till it be dreined by the mesericall veins of all y^ best juice, and
afterward the refuse gathered to the lower parts, by being still drawn
downward, till nature be ready to eiect them? So likewise, the transuerse do
retain, and hold back, till nature have done to them her kind and office of
digestion, and that to every part be given his duty? Again, that the oblique
have expulsive property, which is to put forth, and expel such things as
nature commands and provoke to be done?

I answer unto thee briefly, that as the Uentricle has oblique Fibers to
retain, Col. Lib. 11. Cap. 4.
so also transuerse Fibers to expulse the digested matter, which being Chilus,
The confutation.
thin, and flowyng says Collumbus, runs easily into the spaces and empty
parts of the intrels, which is by the transuerse Fibers comprehended as with
hands. In the mean time nature is not idle, but lest it should escape by the
subtlenes thereof, and slippernes of the intrels, beside the office of Vena
Chilis, fetches The Mesaicall Deines of Mesenterium.
it in by the notable texture of Mensenterium: so that finally all the good
juice is drawn from the dross, the ponderous weight whereof cannot stay in the
slippery substance of the intrels, though the straight Muscles of the belly
had not been.

As touching the retentiue fa^ultie, whereby each thing should be kept till
nature Fibers both in the Uentricle and intrelles serve: as also so many
turns, and wyndynges of the intrelles.

How the expulsive faculty is made, I have already from Galen, Vesalius, and
Fuchsius largely described: or (in a word) it is mightily brought to pass by
the Abdomen, Diaphragma also depressed.

And this is enough, that the Muscles of Abdomen in falsifiyng their natures,
be not robbed of their due (...). But before I go forewardes with any other
parts, I thought good to say thus much out of Collumbus, as touching the
invention Col. Lib. 5. Cap. 22.
of more Muscles then viij. unto Abdomen.

There are some Anathomistes of my time, who being desirous them selves Loco
citato.
Collumbus against the (...) of (...) Muscles the 8. to Abdomen,
to invent some thing, do constitutex. Muscles to Abdomen, but certainly they
are deceived. For they would have the fleshy beginning of the straight Muscles
to be a distinct Muscle, which by no means can be: for if they should be
Muscles as they say, some office must needs be applied unto them. As that they
are assistau^t to the erection of the yard, which they can not do because they
cleave not to it, but are fastened to Os pubis above. Again if the yard were by
them to be drawn upward, so must likewise the ^ape of women be: sense in women
they are seen no otherwise then in men: Neither has (...) voluntary mouyng:
they therefore have inferred, that by them the straight Muscles are aided, which
bears truth no otherwise then the rest. For so strong are the strayte Muscles
of Abdomen, that they n^de no help: and in that they will have their Muscles
to compresse The (...) is compressed by all the 8. Muscles of Abdomen.
the bledder, is all one thing: for the bleddar by all the viij. Muscles is
compressed, which only they would attribute unto the offices of these.

But there follows an other no less absurdity, in that these fleshy
begynnyngs, which they call distinct Muscles, are not found in all men:
therefore belike such persons should wat their vtilities, for which they would
have the said Muscles The opinion of the x. ^uscles of Abdomen ^o reproved.
be begotten. Which is a plain overthrow of all their vain inue^tion^,
therefore says he in conclusion, it is a vain saying that they hold of the x.
Muscles of Abdomen, and may in no wise be defended. But hitherto sufficient.

IT follows to speak of the testicles, and yard. Every of the testicles
retainyng Col. Lib. 5. Cap. 23.
Of the Muscles of the testicles.
one Muscle, long, and slender, situated in the Membran called in Greek The
Membran called Dartos.
Dartos. Their beginning is above Os pubis, where the hole is apparau^t through
which the Seminary vessels descend, enwrapped with the same Membran, yet do
they scant imitate the true form of Muscles, but are certain straight fleshy
The Muscles called Cremasteras or suspensores.
Fibers put in the same Membran Dartos. The ancient writers have called these
Muscles Cremasteras, as it were Suspensores or hangers up: made as it seems,
that the testicles should hang by them, and not suddenly slip down.

By the help of these Muscles the testicles of man are by little and little
obscurly The use of these Muscles.
drawn up, least by over slack or lose hangyng down, the Seminary vessels
Gal. lib. 2. de semine (...). per. ^uch. Lib. 2. cap. 30.
should be ouerloded. But the foresaid use of these Muscles are most notable
proved in the Act of generation. For if always the testicles should draw down,
and load the Seminary vessels to the perpetual coarctatio^ of their passages,
they could not so properly eiaculate the matter of generation, as when the
weight being subleuated by the attractio^ of these Muscles, their passage is
made more easy and open.

THe yard beside his substance, and ye thick Membra^ which enwrappeth it, Co.
lib. 5. Cap. 24.
The four Muscles of Penis. Ve^al. li. 2. cap. 50.
has four Muscles. Of which the ij. first have their begynnynges from the
orbicular, or round compassed Muscle, which lies at the extreme end of Rect.
intestinum. they are near one to another, and with their inner sides join
mutually together, being planted to the vrinary passage: whereas being in them
selves divided, do as it were embrace the body of Penis like fingers. And being
thin, Their use. Col. Ibid.
are made to this use, that when seed or urine should be put fourth, they then
might open the way.

The other ij. Muscles rise from the appendaunce of the huckle bone under the
The other ij. muscles of Penis.
rising of Penis, which takes his beginning from the inferior part of Os
pubis. These Muscles are short, but thicker then the aforesaid, and end in the
body of The use of the ij. last Muscles of Penis
Penis. Which as they are also ayding to the course of Urine, so much more
they profit in the time of coiture, sustainyng, and holdyng the yard erected,
until the whole act be finished.

AT the end or neck of the bleddar, in man grows two Glandules or kernels Of
the bleddar.
called Parastatas: which are always, except in children, old men, and such The
Glandules called Parastata do conteyne seed.
as be consumed by leanesse, full of seed. In the end of these Glandules is
put a thin, round, compassing Muscle with circular Fibers, which serves to
bynd The muscle complectyng ye neck of the bleddar.
together the neck of the bleddar, lest the Urine at any time against our
wills should issue forth. For were not this Muscle, the Urine every hour
would annoy us, as it chances to them, in whom the same is relaxed: as also
to such, in whom the same by wicked Emperickes professyng to take away the
stone, is The error which our cunning cutters for the most part commit in
taking away the stone.
cut overthwart, who, of the situation hereof being altogether ignorant, do in
stead of taking one grief away, induce manifestly an other disease, which is
most filthy and loathsome.

Leonardus Fuchsius makes this Muscle serviceable to three notable uses, the
Euch. Lib. 2. cap. 31. Lib. 5. us. part.
last whereof he takes from Galen. One is to shut the Orifice, and neck of the
bladdar. The use of this Muscle.
The second to leave nothing in the Urinary way: for when the Urin is gone
Muscle plucketh together, and drives out the rest of the Galen witnesses to,
is for the promptitude and swiftnes of excretion or making water, yet not of
that which is in the bleddar but that which is already in the Urinarie
passage: neither so swiftly (as now) the biting Urine could pass through the
Urinary way, Galen Ibid.
had not Nature placed round about the exterior part of the same passage this
Muscle: so notably seruyng to his use.

THe extreme end of the straight intrell is called the Fundament, endued for
V^sal. ^ib. 2. cap. 51.
The Muscles of the straight gutte.
his propper uses with iij. Muscles, one, which prohibiteth each untimely and
inuoluntary egestion of excrementes, and other ij. which speedely pluck up the
end of the straight intrell, thrust forth before by egestion.

One of them therefore is round, compassing about the end of the straight
intrell Col. ^ib. 5. Cap. 27.
The round compassing Muscle of the straight gutte called Sphincter.
called Sphincter, and being broad and thin, containyng ouerthwarte Fibers,
is much united together with the skin and Ligamentes received front the tail
bone, and this is comparable to that of the bladder, which preuenteth The ij.
other muscles of y^ straight gutte and their uses.
untimely excretion. The other ij. are also broad and thin, beginning from
the Ligaments of Os sacrum, and from Ilium, and endyng in the upper part of
Sphincter. These in like sort are ordained of nature to draw up again the
straight intrell, lest it should go out in such as straigne them selves, as
nevertheless in some sometime no doubt it fortuneth.

Diverse and sundry, great, and necessary motions are appertainyng to the The
Muscles of the thigh.
thighe as to extend, to bow, to move toward the other leg, again outward
on the side, and to turn about with a compassing motion. The thigh therefore
The Muscles of the thigh.
(says Galen) is bowed toward the flancke in li^ting the same upward, and
extended in setting the same directly to go on the earth. But the chiefest
extensio^ thereof is whilst we stand, to the which action nature has given
many, and strong Col. ^ib. 5. Cap. 28.
Muscles. But the number of the Muscles seruyng to the actions of the thighe is
x. The Muscles moving the thigh are te^.
great, and strong, as it was behofull to the mouyng of a member so thick and
long.

Of these the first is that Muscle that does constitute the haunches,
sufficient The first Muscle moving the thigh does constitut the buttoc^es.
thick, and slethy: springyng from half the Appendaunce of Os Ilium, from Os
sacrum, and Coccix, it has a broad and half circled beginning. Neucrthelesse
becommyng always narrower and narrower, it cease at length at a sharp end,
which is committed to the greater Trocha^ter, and going lower in the thigh,
lies upon the joint of the hippe with a broad tendon.

The greater part of the second Muscle lies under the first, being somewhat
Appendaunce of Ilium with a fleshy, and half circled beginning, it runs
upon the same joint also, and ends at a broad and strong tendon, which
cleaves to the top of the great Trocha^ter or Process of the thighe, and
embraces it.

The third Muscle of the thighe lureketh under the second whole, being also Os
Ilium, and as is said of other two in his progress it diminishes, ceassing at
a tendon, which to the said great Process is knit, and that in the inner point
thereof, where it is somewhat inuerted.

These iij. Muscles have the office to extend and stretch out the thigh, to
attract, The use of these iiij. Muscles.
and draw it vpwardes, as also to lead it to the exterior parts.

The fourth has an oblique situation, and springs from the iij. lower hones
Os sacrum, with a fleshy (as it seems) and round beginning. The end of it is
at a round tendon, which in the top of the greater Process toward the
posteriour parts ends, and drawing the thigh to him self, has also power
to help the circumaction thereof.

The fifth Muscle is of the loins sited in Abdomen, being round, fleshy, thick
Vertebre of the breast, and the iij. uppermost of the loins, where the body of
the Vertebres is: it destendeth upon Os pubis, and endyng at a round tendon, is
to the lesser Trochanter inserted.

The vi. Muscle occupyeth all the whole inner hollow part of Os Iliu^: it
begins Abdomen with a semicircular rising: it descends above Os pubis, and
is fleshy almost to the extreme end thereof, where it degenerateth into a
tendon, which to the lesser Trochanter is The use of the fifth and (...).
unplanted. And the use both of the fifth and this, now described, is to bow
the thigh.

The seventh goes out from Os pubis, near unto the Cartilage thereof with
Trocha^ter with a slender tendon. And this nature made to draw one thigh toward
an other, and to put one thigh upon an other. And thus says ^ib. 5. Cap. 50.
Col. although in deed Vesalius contrariwise says it serves to ^ow the thigh.

There is no Muscle in the body greater then the viij. (This Galen and Vesalius
Fibers, as if a man coueted to deceive, and not to teach, be might easily for
this show you iij. or iiij. Muscles. It springs from the bone Pubis that is,
from the inner part thereof. And from Coxendix, ampleaeth the lesser Trocha^ter
and tends downwardes cleauyng in that long and rough line, and in the hinder
parts is fleshy. But at length begets a Lendon which to the head of the
thighe on the inside is inserted. The use of which Muscle is to erect the
thigh: so does it aid the seventh also, when we intend to put on^ thigh upon,
or a loft an other.

The ninth Muscle occupyeth all that hole contained in Os pubis, and Coxendix,
Trochanter apparaunt.

The tenth and last Muscle of the thigh is in the interior part, and the
aforesaid Muscle (says Collumbus) is not only not to be neglected, but
chiefly, and most especially to be marked, for it is marvelous therein to
contemplate the great providence of the high creator. For the beginning The
ma^ueilous creation of this tenth Muscle.
thereof is broad and fleshy, as before is said of the i^. Muscle, and from
within, it is carried without above Coxendix, where ye cauitie is made that
represe^teth the form of a polley. This Muscle where it boweth to it self in
going forth makes often times iij. tendons, sometime four, and five, which are
at last united together, constituting one only notable tendon, whose end in the
posteriour part of the greater Trochanter is finished. But ere I end, where
this Muscle begins first to taste of tendinous substance, there immediately
nature by great in dustry has pre^red a ^leshy purfe or bag, wherein this
tendon is safely placed from any burt by the same bone, which is by this muscle
comprehended, neither is the same fleshy bag being so good a propugnacle, any
way to be accounted an a distinct muscle from the (...).

AMbulation (says Galen) in man, is made by the one leg fastened one the
(...). us. (...). (...). iij.
How ambulat^o^ is m^de.
earth, and the other taken from the same, and cir^lated. But to fasten and set
down on the earth is the action of the foot, and to circumlate, or fetch
about is the action of the whole leg. This is not only in going, but also in
running: the one foot continually being set on the ground and the other
together with the whole leg carried forward. But to change the platos of
footyng happens by the benefit of the leg: albeit that the stay of our
falling, and firm setlyng on the ground, is brought to pass by the good
composition of the foot.

Veselius describes the leg as though it were only to be exte^ded, and
bowed, V^l. ^pit. Cap. 2.
without any other manner of motion, and therefore not notably accoumpteth above
the number of i^. Muscles.

But the leg (says Realdus Collumbus) extends, and boweth, as is openly
The leg.
seen, according to the rectitude, or straight measure thereof, and is
obliquely also toward ye exterior parts moved: although the same motion be
obscure, which obli^ue motion Vesalius confesses not. These same motions
nevertheless are Col. lib. 5. Cap. 29.
wrought aplly by x. muscles, whereof v. do bow, four extend, and one only in
the hamme which gives oblique moving. And this one Vesalius imagined if it do
The motions of ye leg are made by ten muscles.
any thing, that it does imitate the motion of the first muscle that moves
Radius directly downward. For it being sited obliquely could not have or make
any straight motion: and because he had denied oblique mouyng to the leg I
omit to say he would not acknowledge the right office of it. But surely he has
left the use thereof to be of other more aptly described, as appears by that
is said. Where fore so much the rather I give credit unto Collumbus, and to his
assertion as touching this oblique motion.

The first of these Muscles rises both sinewy, and also fleshy from the inner
part of Appendance of Os Iliu^, but forthwith goes forward sleshy, broad, and
thin like a swadle band, and slopwise is delated by the interior parts of
the thigh, but when it comes to the inner head of ye thigh, it proceeds,
and at a sinewy te^don is ended, which is not round (says Collumbus) as
Vesalius would, but broader, and fastened in the fore part of the leg. He
also reprehe^deth Galen (unless his meaning was only of Apes) in that he
affirms, by the benefit of this muscle that one leg is laid upon an other,
as children have occasion to do in playing.

But to go forward, the second muscle of the leg springs from the anteriour
Cartilage of Os pubis, the beginning thereof being broad, after the length of Os
pubis commissure: it descends fleshy, with straight Fibers, at the interior
head of the thigh made round, and cease at a sinewy tendon, also almost
round: notwithstanding it is furthermore dilated, and at length ended in the
fore part of the leg.

The third with a sinewy beginning long, and also round, springs from the
Appendance of Coxe^dix, being made fleshy afterward about the midst of the
thigh, and is carried down by the hinder part of the thigh, with many sorts of
Fibers: but coming to the knee, it makes a sinewy tendon, wherewith it is
implanted to the posteriour but interior part of the leg.

The fourth from the same place begins near unto the third, but the be,
Fibers. Near unto the knee it goes out in a sinewy tendon, which before the
end is dilated, and ceasseth at length in the Anteriour part of the leg
between the first and second.

The beginning of the fifth is from the Appendaunce of Coxendix near unto
Muscle, Collumbus assures us it is not separable from this fifth Muscle neither
to be accounted one distinct Muscle from it. Nevertheless if any man will call
the same fleshy part of the fifth Muscle an other new Muscle. He supposes it
sufficient to have admonished us of his judgment. In the same place it
begins outwardly to degenerate into a tendon, which together with the
aforesaid flesh descends even to the end, and in the end is collocated in the
head of Fibula. If the cause be inquired why nature added to this Muscle this
portion of flesh, Collumbus says, that to the end this Muscle might he made
the stronger, Nature would that it should come from the midst of the thigh to
be the nearer The use of yt (...) first Muscles of the leg.
unto it: for on the outside is only this Muscle, but in the inside be four.
And the office of these five Muscles rehearsed is to how the leg. Although
that which Collumbus has orderly described in the fifth place, Galen and
Vesalius have cited for the fourth.

This is that Muscle that Galen says he commanded to be cut in a certain
Col. Ibidem.
An unworthy saying of Galen.
currour, who nevertheless could run more swiftly: which thing is most
unworthy, for such a prince of Phisic^e to imagine, or say. For this muscle
being taken away: direct flexion can in no wise be brought to pass: which
straight ^ectio^ of the leg, to be in runnyng Galen admonishes: us in Lib.
secund. de Anat. administrat. And truly this case stands clean contrary: for
such as be wounded or cut into this muscle, although the wound be not very
great, yet when they are healed, it shalve a labor unto them to bow the same
leg. Thus much of the Muscles bowyng the leg.

Now, to the extensio^s thereof there be iiij. in number seruiccable. The vj.
muscle Appendaunce of Os Ilium both fleshy, and also siuewy in the beginning.
It is a short muscle, but thick, and is joined to the greater Trochanter,
there his flesh ends: but then follows The tendon of the (...). Muscle of
the leg the greatest of all tendons.
a broad, sinewy, and membraneous tendon, then which there is no greater in the
whole body: it comprehends almost all the muscles which are placed about the
thigh, and has straight Fibers. This te^don truly is of great nobility, much
therefore to be marked of Chirurgians, least at any time tra^suersly they divide
it. It complecteth the rotule of the knee, and to the Anteriour part of the
leg, and Fibula is at length inserted.

The seventh has a sinewy beg^nnyng from the greater Trochanter: and Fibers to
the rotule of the knee, and furthermore ends at a broad, and membraneous
^don, which complecteth the same.

The viij. rises sinewy from the neck of the thigh, and from the greater
Trochanter Fibers: and the end thereof is a tendon, which also complecteth the
knee.

The ix. issues from the anteriour part of Os Iliu^ above the joint of the
hippe, The Muscles exteding the leg.
the anteriour part of the leg. These four muscles last described do extend,
and stretch directly forth the leg, even as by the other v. it was directly
bowed.

The x. muscle lyeng under the hamme, comes out with a sinewy and round
Fibers implanted fleshy to the posteriour and interior part of the leg.
Wherefore this muscle obliquely serves to move the leg toward the exterior
parts says Collumbus: denying what soever Vesalius has said to the contrary.

THe foot it behooved not to be round and hard (says he, that wrote the use of
G^l. us. part. Iib. 8.
The foot and of the necessary figure thereof.
parts) but long, broad, soft, and often divided, because such like construction
is meet for all difficulties of places: as clymin of trees, wales, rocks or
such like. And I have known (says he) whose toes have been mortified with
snow, The defecte in such aswant their toes.
and cut of, and yet these in standing, walkyng, nor runnyng, would give place
The want of the plant.
to sound persons, unable (notwithstanding) to go down, any hollow, or steep
place. And such as had the next part called the plant corrupted, might not go
in The lack of (...).
plain places: but Tarsus so spoiled, neither could they stand, much less go
at all. (...). (...). 5. c^p 30.


The construction of the whole foot is therefore most propper and necessary to
The Muscles of the foot.
nature, so that it can both bow, extend, and move to the sides, by the help
of his muscles. Which are divided into Posteriores, and Anteriores. Being in
number xij. or at the most xi^. albeit I know Vesalius there reckneth but nine.
V^l. Li. 2. cap. 50.


The first springs from the in^er head of ye thigh, above the knee
backwardes, The (...) Muscle of the foot.
and begins fleshy and narrow. But in going forward is dilated, and about
the midst of the leg ends at a broad and sinewy tendon, which always after
is made narrow, and ceasseth at the superior, and posteriour part of the heel.

The second is like unto the first. For although it go out of the outer head of
the Vesalius has Lib. 2. Cap. 59.
these words, when as both these said Muscles stretchyng from the head of the
thigh downward, not far from their beginning do meet together, and cleave
with Fibrous knittinges, and the lower they descend, the stronger they grow
together, so that now the tendon which either of them produced is altogether as
one, sprung from both the muscles: the interior or first muscle
(notwithstanding) is somewhat longer fleshy carried downward, then the second:
yet Collumbus (with Lib. 5. Cap. 30.
Collumbus affirms the first and the second both one.
out any such words) says, that in deed it is one body and one tendon. And
further, if it were not that he endeuoreth to shun by all means, what soever
might make the mind of the Reader perplexed, he would not fail to affirm
these ij. muscles (as they describe them) to be one, and only a muscle, with a
double beginning as is already said.

But in the mean time these two, which may so worthily be called one, do What
makes the calfe of the leg.
make the posteriour bellye of the leg called Sura, and by our usual phrase,
the calfe of the leg.

The third is a small muscle, rising from the outer head of the thigh near to
ye The longest te^don in the body.
the round Tendons in the body, is not a longer to be found. This muscle lies
under these two aforesaid, is obliquely placed, and contains oblique Fibers.
It marches from the outer parts toward the inner, cleauyng to the tendon of
the two aforesaid, being yet at last implanted to the inside of the heel, and
having in office to euerte the foot to the interior parts.

The iiij. is the greater Muscle of the leg, and black, and springs from
the Appendance of Fibula, with a strong, and sinewy beginning, but after goes
forth fleshy, and cleaves to both the bones of the leg, exceedyng them in
breedth: but where it is come unto the midst of the leg, it The tendon of
the fourth Muscle of the (...) ye strongest of all others.
stretches forth narrow, and makes out a tendo^ toward the heel, then
which, through out man, none is more strong: and this te^don being united
together with the tendon of the first muscles, is ended in the posteriour part
of the heel.

The office of the first, ij. and iiij. muscles is to extend the foot, and set
it to the The Muscles extenoing the foot.
earth, to the which thing yet other four muscles do minister help
plentifully.

When Hector should be drawn (as it was said) after that violent fashion, as
The te^don whereby Hector was draw^ about the w^lies of Troy.
the History me^tioneth, he was bound by this tendo^, and daily we see how that
boutchers do ha^g up whole heastes thereby: which sufficiently declares the
force thereof.

The fifth muscle comes from the two Bones of the leg Tibia, and Fibula,
Ligament that is put between them to divide the Anteriour, from the posteriour
muscles. It is ^leshy almost to the end of the leg, and near to the inner
ancle: it ends at a strong, sinewy, and round Tendon: and going under the
inner ancle, as also under the botelike bone, at length ends under the sole
of ye foot in the part that is called Tarsus. Nature begat this muscle to
this use, to draw the foot inwardly: nether is it without a Ligament.

The vj. muscle flows from the posteriour part, with a long, and fleshy
beginning, goes under the inner ancle, being endued under the heel with a
Ligament, The perforated tendons of the foot.
sprung from the Appendaunce of Tibia. The said Tendon is divided under the
sole of the foot into four round perforated Tendons: which proceed forward
The tendons that ^ow yt fou^e to^s of the foot.
unto the third ioynte of the four Toes (the great one accepted) and are there
inserted for no small utility: for they bow the iiij. toes, and strongly bynd
them.

The vij, begins long, and fleshy from Fibula the space of three fingers
under the Appendance: it is fleshy, until it come unto the heel, where it is
changed into a round tendon, which from under the Ligament under the ancle
slippeth under the sole of the foot, and is inserted to the bone of the great
toe, to bow it. Hitherto of the posteriour Muscles of the foot: now to the
Anteriour.

The first of these rises from Tibia, that is from the Appendaunce near unto
Fibula, cleauyng much thereto, and being sufficient thick, is also greater
then The (...) Muscle in the fore part of the foot.
the rest of the anteriour Muscles. This, where it is gone beyond the half
length of the leg, becomes narrow, and ends at a round, sinewy, and
strong tendon, whose progress is by the upper part of Tarsus: it is detayned
by a Ligament The tendon in the foot that appears so near. under the sainne
The tendon ^ow^g the ^treine foot.
which issues out from the inferior Appendance of Tibia, and Fibula. This is
the Tendon, which is so lifted up, and evident to be se^e under the shinne. It
ends at the part of the foot called the Plant, in the Bone that is put
before the great toe: and has the power to bow the foot.

The second goes forth with a sharp beginning from the Appendaunce of Tibia,
and cleaves to the Ligament that lies (as is said) between Tibia and Fibula.
Moreover at the end almost of this same Fibula, the root of this Muscle is
fleshy: notwithstanding it ends in four round Tendons, which are detayned
under that Ligament, that rises out from the Appendance of Tibia, and Fibula.
The tendons extend^g the four toes.
These four Tendons are enlarged, and at last inserted to the upper part in
all the toes of the foot, the great one excepted. So that they can extend, and
stretch forth these toes.

The third springs fleshy from the midst of Fibula, near unto the
Ligament: Ligament, carried and inserted to the last joint of the great toe,
which it does extend. This tendon is into ij. divided, whereof the one ends
as aforesaid, the other is inserted in the same bone of the plant, yeldyng
help to the bowyng of the foot. This second tendon springs also from the
muscle: which portion in some seldom bodies seems to be an other Muscle, as
some perhaps will suppose. But Collumbus affirms it to be but only one.
Nevertheless he forces (...). Cap. Ibid.
not greatly, if any man think good to number and account it two Muscles. But
The Muscle which is accounted the (...).
then to the xij. (as before is named) must be added a 13. and so the number of
the muscles serving to the extreme foot, is xiij.

The fourth springs from the upper Appendance of Fibula toward the
exterior Muscle turns the foot to the exterior parts and consists under
the transuerse Ligament.

The fifth likewise brusteth forth of Fibula, with a long beginning, outward it
Muscle, the foot is drawn to the exterior parts.

But finally this is to be noted, albeit we have said that the foot by all
these How the foot may be set to the ground.
Muscles either is extended, or bowed, else drawn outward, or inward:
nevertheless it is certain, that all agreeyng and in one action together
concurrant, then Col. Lib. 5. 31.
the same, by all these together, is fixed on the ground.

MVscles seruyng to the toes, and placed in the ^trente foot, are the^ in
number. The (...) ^etning to the toes are 18.
Although we have above deso^ived other iiij. whorof ^o (...) bow, and others
extend, as we have admonish^d. So it is (...) he judged, by what (...) it How
yt Muscles serving to the toes are 22.
comes to pass, that the Muscles (...) to the to^ of the foot, (...) (...)
ij.

The first therefore of these xviij, proposed, (...) (...) the midst of the
plant, The first (...) to the toes.
beginning from the inferior ya^t of yt hee^, that is from his Appendance. To
this is added a broad tendon, which Galen esteemed to spryng from the third
Muscle, (...). dessect. Muse.
which we have accounted the iij. (...) the postoriour Muscles of the leg,
Galen the fourth. The beginning of this Muscle is unth (...) and fleshy, under
The four perfotnted te^dons and their uses.
the plant it is divided, and goot^ footh in iiij. round perfor at ^d tendons,
which are sowed to the second winter of the iiij. toes: a thing mar^cilous to
be spoken, but more marusilous to be sone. Their office is to bow the second
wyntes of those The brand tendo^ of yt foot of must exquisite sense.
toes. The broad te^don, which is added unto this Muscle, is most sharp of
sonse, so end ^ned of nature to (...) each outward (...) swiftly.

The second Muscle is produced also from the h^e, near to the first, but is in

Also the third Muscle springs from the heel, n^oare unto the ^st: the (...)
Process thereof is to be seen: and at length The tendon seading the little toe
from the rest.
makes out a tendinous substaa^nce to the same little toe, to lead him from the
rest.

In departing from these three, other fours do follow, as are evident under the
The perforating Muscle.
sole of the foot, and bones of the plant, whose beginning (...) out from the
tendons of the perforatyng Muscle, (...) (...) in the third wynte of the four
fingers, but these Muscles being of them selves small, and round, to mutually
from the heel receive a portion of flesh unto them.

Of these Muscles Galen and (...) do write, and that their office is to pluck
away the iiij. toes from the tho^ve, or great ^or, because they (...) in the
iiij, round, and sinewy te^dons, which go forward to the outer (...) of the
four toes, and are bound to the superior tendon, which we have said to have
proportie to extend. But they march forward ^ue^ unto the extreme toes, neither
end they (...) the first ioynte as Vesalius would: who in this point was smally
diligent, when he granted Vesalius and Col.
differ in the (...) of these in^. Muscles.
to these Muscles but only oblique motion. But know gentle Readers this to be
my ^uiontion (says Collumbus) neither is this use of them known to any man
Col. Iab. 5. Cap (...).
that ever writ before us in (...) for these Muscles move not with an oblique
The use of yt iiij. Muscles (...) the iiij. (...) (...) to Col. to (...) other
known.
motion, but do truly extend, (...) stretch out the four (...): (...) so much
they extend, as that by them they are more exte^ded, they by the other tendons:
as the eyes being judges, it is easy to be (...) by any expert (...).

Beside these, there be x. Muscles in the (...) of the plant. For to every toe
ij. (...). Muscles setting to the ^guler toes of the toote.
Muscles are addicted, which are fetched from the beginning of the foot, and
end in the first (...) of all the (...) (...). They (...) fleshy, therefore
for^ed of nature, to obey to (...) more (...): which thing is brought to pass
when two of them move at one time. But otherwise, when only one of them
moves, then do they draw the toes obliquely inward, and outward.

The last Muscle that is placed in the extreme foot, that is the (...). is
situated Tarso^, and Pedium, beginning from the Ligament, that (...) together
the leg and Fibula with the foot. It is a broad and thin Muscle, ending in
5. tendons, and sour time in iiij. so is it at length inserted in the extreme
part of The use of the 18. Muscle of the toes.
all the toes, and in mouyng, those toes thereby are obliquely extended. Col.
Lib. 5. Cap. (...).


THe cubit is both bowed, and also extended straight without any manner of The
Muscles serving to y^ cubitte.
of oblique motion. Which thing surely every man may easily practice in him
self. But these not being able to be brought to pass without the organs of
volu^tary mouyng, let us see what store of the^ are attributed to each manner of
his actio^.

Two Muscles there be therefore for flection, and as many for extension:
although Two Muscles extend the cubitte and (...). ^ow (...).
Galen makes iij. to extension, which is manifest (says Vesulius) in Apes.

Of these, the first is a strong Muscle, evident under the skume, and sited in
the The first Muscle bowing y^ cubitte.
interior part of the shoulder: it springs from the shoulder blade with ij.
distinct begynnynges: whereof the one is sinewy and round, beginning from the
upper part of the brow of ye ruppe, or acetable made in ye scapple bone, it
goes further above the head of the shoulder, and slippeth through that chincke
that is sited in the same superior part, which chincke in deed nature created
of purpose for this te^dons sake. The other beginning of this Muscle, goes out
from the Process called Ancyroides, partly sinewy, and partly also fleshy: but
the fleshy part cleaves to the shoulder, and seems a distinct muscle, and
separated, which yeldeth help unto the shoulder, since thereby he is drawn
toward the breast. Furthermore these ij. beginninges of the said Muscle are
united under the head of the shoulder together, making athicke Muscle and
almost round, strong, and filled with straight Fibers, which in the elbowe
leaves at a sinewy Tendon, which near to the end is dilated, and knit to
Radius, who has in the inside thereof a Tubercle, made propperly for the
insertion of this Muscle.

The ij. Muscle from the hone of the shoulder is carried all fleshy, with
straight Fibers, and lies hid under the first Muscle. It is carried fleshy
beyond the ioynte of the cubite, and lastly fastened to Cubitus, and Radius.
And the cubite by the utility of these two Muscles, is made directly to bow.

The third is produced from the shoulder blade a little under the neck thereof
and Process of Vlna called the elbow: and also goes beyond the same. And
straight be the Fibers of this Muscle.

The fourth has two begynnynges from the neck of the shoulder, whereto it
Muscle, with many begynnynges: albeit in deed they are ij: finally this fourth
Muscle ends where the third, having also straight Fibers. And the office both
of the third, and fourth Muscle is to extend, and stretch forth the cubite
straight.

AS touching the hand so notably of the omnipotent creator created, as that The
hand.
it is most apt, and prompt to all, and every kind of Art, defense, and safe
provision for the body, so as no member more declares the unspeakable power
of almighty God in the creatyng of man: because I will nether use a double
labor, Why last of all he speaks of the hand.
nor yet detain thee with vain circumstaunce from the sum of the matter, I
commit thee to the Hystory of Bones, where out of Galen compendiously we have
^b. 5. Cap. 33.
Of the Muscles of the hand.
noted the noble use and effourmation of this member.

Here the hand is spoken of last of all after the same order, and accordyngly
as What Muscles will abide longest in dissection.
Collumbus uses, because the end of a tale is the better carried away. And this
member is most notable, and worthy longest to be borne in mind. The Muscles
where The Muscles of the hand are (...) into inner and outer Muscles The inner
Muscles of the hand are viij.
of (says he) will, in dissection, the longest endure uncorrupted, both
because, whilst we live, they are more exercised, as also for y^ that they are
clogged with less fat. These, in describyng, are (after the manner of Galen) to
be divided into outer, and inner Muscles, as those that move the foot, before,
are said to be divided.

But to speak first of the interior Muscles, they be in number viij.

The first whereof is very proper: it springs from the top of the inner
Tubercle The first (...) Muscle of the hand.
which is in the shoulder, with a sharp and sinewy beginning, and forthwith
goes small and fleshy, but bears the true form of a Muscle: for the head
thereof is small, the belly broad, and the tail long, and street, even down to
the wrest. This Muscle moreover goes somewhat obliquely toward the hand, and
ends at a round, and long tendon, which runs above the inner Ligament of
the wrest, The balle or palm of y^ hand. The use of the (...) (...) Muscle of
the hand.
which being passed, of the remnaunt is made a broad tendon, which is extended
through the hollow of the hand: but leauyng the ij. greater hills discovered,
is at last among the iiij. fingers bestowed. The true use of this Muscle, is to
help the fingers in bowyng, and being exquisite of sense, what soever we
therefore comprehend, This Muscle makes not the ball of the hand without hear.
or gripe in the hand that offers us any present hurt, (for in a moment we
know it, by the sensibilitie thereof) we cast away, and immediately avoid it
from us, before it proceed further to hurt us. Neither is it made to that end,
as that the Col. ibid.
Th^ues for the most part (says Collumbus) want this first (...): our muscle
of the hand.
ball of the hand therefore should be without hear, as some would imagine, for
Collumbus writes of certain thieves which had not this Muscle, but only a
tendon brought from the inner Ligament of the wrest.

The second goes forth from the inner tubercle of the shoulder, te^dyng sharp
in the first beginning, both sinewy, and fleshy, it cleaves fast to the
cubite, and

The third Muscle begins at the same place, with an oblique progress after
Radius: yet in coming likewise to the wrest, it goes out into a round, and
strong Tendon, which is inserted to that of the Postbrachiall bones that
supporteth the little finger. The office of these two Muscles is, that, if both
move at once, they bow the wrest, but when one alone styrreth, then does it
move obliquely, now up, now down, by the help notwithstanding of two
exterior Muscles, as we shall come unto anon.

The fourth has a marvelous beginning. For it springs sharp and sinewy
Cubitus, and Radius. After, when it has passed the midst of the cubit, it
stretches out narrow, and is ended in iiij. round tendons, sinewy, and
perforated, which are brought under the Ligament of the wrest, under which
nevertheless the iij. first Muscles are not carried. The end of these te^do^s is
in yt second joint of the iiij. fingers, which they serve to bow: and because
they were to be penetrated The perforated tendons of the hand.
by the te^dons of the v. Muscle, going to the iij. joint of the four fingers
as shall be said, therefore nature perforated these: which be sinewy, fair, and
shynning: a thing notable and marvelous to behold. This prudent nature also
wrought, to the end that the fingers after a certain order should follow one
an other.

The fifth Muscle is much stronger then the fourth, and no marvel: for that it
The 4. perforating tendons of the hand.
which finally are inserted to the third joint of the four fingers, the
thombe in deed being exempted, contrary to Galens mind, who would have the v.
fingers Gal. Lib. us part. Li. de anat. admim. (...). and Lib. de motu. Musc.
bowed by this Muscle, and that one of the tendons thereof should extend unto
the tho^be: which to be true in Apes, Collumbus plain affirms. For the
thombe in man is moved by his propper Muscle, as shall be said. This fifth
(moreover) cleaneth to the Ligament which deuideth the inferior from the
posteriour muscles.

The vj. springs from Radius being likewise adherent to the same Ligame^t and
iourneth down along the length of Radius, endyng near the wrest at a round
Tendon and sinewy: which together with the Tendons of the fourth and fifth
Muscle, runs under the coape, or vaulte of the wrest of the hand, and
finally is inserted to the last ioynte of the thombe, which it boweth.

The seventh Muscle with a fleshy beginning comes from the inner Tubercle
Radius ends partly fleshy, partly sinewy, with oblique Fibers.

The viij. being four square, placed near unto the wrest, rises from the
cubite, Radius: having transuerse Fibers, and transuerse The Muscles (...)
directly directly downward.
situation. And the office of these two last, is in prone order to turn Radius.

Of the outward Muscles. The first begins fleshy, and sinewy from the outer
The (...) exterior Muscle of the hand.
tubercle of the shoulder, the^ puttyng on more fleshynes waxes thick it
marches between Cubitus, and Radius, till it come to the wrest: wherefore
sometime it stretches forth in iiij. sometime in iij. tendons, round, and
sinewy, which pass through the hollow which is in the Appendance of Radius,
but are gathered together by one of the Ligamentes which spryng from the same
Appendance. These Col. Lib. 5. cap. (...).
said tendons in proceedyng fourth further are broad, and end from the first to
the third joint of the iiij. fingers. But when it has only iij. tendons, then
is the little finger without. But ofter has it iiij. then three: which te^dons
are stretched forth even unto the extreme ends of the fingers under the
nails: but are not inserted to the roots of them. Hereby comes the sensible
feelyng that consists between Why such pain hap^eth by any solution of
continuitye between the flesh and nail.
the flesh and nail, as is proved when any hurt happens between them, by the
great dolor that ensues, although the same pain lies not between the flesh
and nail says Collumbus, but between the flesh and the Tendons. And the
office of this Muscle is to extend the four fingers.

The second Muscle begins at the same Tubercle near to the first with a
Radius, and Cubitus, and to the extreme end of the little finger is inserted.
The Muscle that leads the ^tle finger from the rest.
This round Muscle has the office to lead the little finger from the rest, and
is no small use unto us for the making of the Paline of the hand.

The third Muscle goes out fleshy from the middle, very near, of Cubitus, in
Cubitus is a long roughe line, made to give beginning to three Muscles. The
situation of this is oblique, and the end at a round Tendon, which is inserted
to the fore finger to extend, and stretch forth the same obliquely. But this
said Tendon chooses a Ligament from the Appendance of Radius, and this Tendon
is divided in some, into two.

The fourth Muscle with a fleshy beginning from the cubite near unto the
Appendance of Radius, then endyng at a round, and sinewy tendon, is to the
third joint of the thombe, to extend, and lead the same from the other fingers,
inserted.

The fifth from the same line of Cubitus, near to the fourth Muscle, with a
fleshy Collumbus) he that deliteth in the multitude of Muscles, may divide this
into three or iiij, albeit he judges it only one: which is carried above the
ij. horned Muscle. But it deuideth sometime into iiij. sometime into v.
te^dons, whereof one to the third joint of the tho^be, an other to the second
joint, the third to the first, and the iiij. to the bone of the wrest which
supporteth the thombe: there are sometime beside in this place found ij. other
tendons: and this Muscle has the office to extend the thombe.

The vj. springs from the root of the outer Tubercle of the shoulder: it
em-braceth braceth, and is knit unto Cubitus, creepyng after the length thereof:
nevertheless in coming to the wrest it degenerateth into a round sinewy, and
strong tendon, which is carried above the Appe^dance of the cubite into a
certain hollow, near The Pr^cesse of the (...) (...) Styloides.
to the Process of Cubitus called (as before is said or described in the
Hystory of bones) Stylois: from this Appendaunce it takes his Ligament, which
is transuerse: it is inserted moreover not far from the wrest, to that
Postbrachial bone that sustaineth the little finger.

The seventh which is called the two horned Muscle, springs fleshy, with a
Radius, ends in the midst thereof in a strong, and double tendon, (being The
ij. (...) tendon.
therefore called two horned) which, after it has visited ye wrest, is inserted
to the Postbrachiall bones, that supporte the four finger, and middle finger.
These ij. muscles last said, do extend the hand, or else thus do serve to extend
the wrest The Muscles ex^ding the (...).
when both at once do labor. But the seventh, together with the second of the
inner The (...) or the hand upward and d^wnward. The turning ^f the hand in
(...) compasie.
muscles, the other two ceassing, do carye the hand obliquely downward. So the
sixth, with the third inner muscle, do baire it obliquely upward. And this is
their first use. The second is to circu^uerte, or turn about the extreme had:
which motion they show, when one in mouyng, does immediately follow another.
Which use of other Anathomistes, I perceive has been nothing so well noted as
of Collumbus: whom for his diligence, I account no lost labor to imitate.

The viij. muscle, which is called the lo^gest, is brought from the shoulder,
with Radius, and is inserted into the Appendance thereof with a membrancous
tendon.

The ninth is produced from the bond, which knitteth together the cubite (...)
The (...) (...) the hand upward and Radius outward.
Olecranon, and being all fleshy, is fastened to the midst of Radius. These
two muscles baire the hand upward: and move Radius outwardly.

MUscles of the extreme hand are in number xxi. neither at any time more, ^he
Muscles to the extreme (...) o^ the had are (...).
but sometime fewer. That is to say xix. Of these muscles seven (if they be the
whole number of xxj. serve the thombe. But if but xix. then are they v. to the
The dis^ (...) of these Muscles among ye singers.
tho^be: four go to the little finger, and iij. to every one else, and one to
the broad tendon.

The first is a little ^rausuerse muscle, placed upon the hill of Uenus, and
springing Fibers, and is inserted to the broad The (...) Muscle of the extreme
hand.
tendo^, which to dilate it was therefore made. And this muscle (as says Col.)
was The (...) of Venus.
neither mentioned of Vesalius nor the ancient Anathomistes before him. Col.
Lib. 5. Cap. 35. and Vlt.


Four other long, lean, and round muscles do follow, which go forth from the
tendo^s of the fifth interior muscle, which boweth the third joint of the four
Collumbus denies that they are fastened to the first, as Galen, and Uesalius
have professed before him, who although they knew these muscles, yet were
ignorant of their use and insertio^: and you shall see how: for they affirm,
that by these ye four fingers are led toward the thombe: But says he (and
that not without a plain The Muscles extending the iiij. fingers of the hand.
demonstration of his reason) by these muscles, although they lie in the
interior part of the hand, are the singers. Notwithstanding, extended better
then by the first of the exterior muscles, or at least as much. And they were
put of nature in the inside, because she well considered the great peril that
should ever be incide^t A thing very notable and little known.
unto them, on the outside if they were sited. Whereby it fortuneth many times,
that although the tendons of the outside of the fingers be divided, and cut in
sunder, yet the party being hole, shall afterward nevertheless extend the
same finger, neither is the Chirurgian that cures it, the more to be extolled
therefore: as diverse that (having small knowledge in A^atho mie) do here and
there, greatly esteem them selves, for the good success of such cures,
purchased more by the benefit of nature, then their rare experience, or
singular application.

The sixth muscle goes forth from the Ligament of the wrest, and from the forth
Venus: it marches forth by the inferior part of Postbrachiale, and is almost
round: then ends it at a T^don, which is implanted to the first bone of the
little finger, whereby the same finger is able to move from the rest.

The seventh begins at the wrest, and is placed in the upper part: this
Muscle

The eight comes forth near unto the seventh, is fleshy and placed toward

The ninth is under the seventh, from the same Ligament of the wrest, all
fleshy,

These three Muscles make that fleshy part of the thombe, which Palmesters The
Muscles co^stituting the hill of Mars.
do term the hill of Mars: and they draw the thombe toward their beginning:
that is, do extend the same, and lead it from the rest.

Three other follow, which go out of the bones of Postbrachiale that support
Three other Muscles in the extreme hand.
the forefinger, middle finger, and ring finger: their situation is oblique, or
rather transuerse under the line of life (as the Palmesters term it) they end
in the second ioynte of the thombe: albeit their beginning is half circle like
these three (notwithstanding) could Collumbus be content to account one Muscle,
having a broad beginning, a sharp end, and enterweauynges of diverse Fibers,
saving A C^eat given by Collumbus.
that he would not seem to much to dissent from Uesalius, to sh^e (if he may)
the cauelyng tauntes of strangers. The use of them is to bow the thombe
toward the ball of the hand.

The seventh Muscle of the thombe comes from the Postbrachiall Bone The se^th
Muscle of the thombe. The Muscle that lays yt thombe aloft on the fore finger.
that bayreth the forfinger, occupying the space between tho forfinger, and
thombe so that the situation thereof is overthwart, and is inserted to the bone
of the thombe, being thereby authorized, to pluck the thombe toward the same
finger, and lay it aloft thereon.

Besides these, there be yet other viij. Muscles, springyng from the
Postbrachiall Eight other Muscles g^en to the fingers the thombe excepted.
bones, and inserted to the first joints of the iiij. fingers. Of these, ij.
being allotted to every finger, exceptyng the thombe, in which none of them is
settled.

These vi^. Muscles are thus endued with offices: that ij. of them by mouyng
The Muscles bowyng the fingers both straight and obliquely.
together, do bow straight the first ioynte, wherein they be implanted. But
when one styrreth only, the^ obliquely they make their motion in bowing these
joints.

And now here with mine author, how man's members move, I am come to the gole.

An end of the History of Muscles.
The back part of the Muscles.

Of the Hihory of Man, the fifth book describyng the instruments seruyng to
nourishment, which is brought to effect, by meat drink, that is, Of the
nutritive and natural parts.
WHen as the whole mass of man, for the insited heat Gal. (...). 1. (...).
san. Cap. 1.
therein, must needs have run in perpetual ruin, The necessity of
nour^ment.
and vastation, unless other like substance continually in stead of that
which wastes, was restored: the almighty creator, not only unto man and
living creatures, but also unto the very Plants them selves, ^che growyng.
thing has a certain power to require his necessary.
has given a certain power, to require that always, which is wantyng and
requisite for them. For neither to eat, drink, or use respiration we learn
of any body, at any time, but immediately even from the beginning, we have in us
that works all these without any instructor. To this that Lib. 6. Epid. par.
5. aph. 1.
Divine Hipocrates has this elegant saying: Nature her self has not by
reason Nature needs no inst^.
found the instinct to every her actions: for neither is she of any taught,
neither ^ow the body is maintained.
has she learned to work those things, which are convenient: but by meat,
what soever of dryer substance, and by drink, what so of mo^er wastes, we
^ow the ayerye (...) (...) substance holds.
restore. And so always to the old estate we maintain and reduce them both. No
otherwise, then as the commoderation of aerye, and fiery substance, we hold by
(...). (...). 3. ^ib. ^p.
respiration, and pulsation of the Arteries.

NOw when that that flows to every part, ought to be of such nature as the
The necessity of instruments (...) to nourishment.
particle it self, and none of all those which are eaten, and drunken, are
wholly such: it was necessary unto Nature, first, that those things were
conco-cted, Th^e hindes of instruments serving to (...).
and changed, and (so much as may be) assimulated, and made like to nourish,
and restore the body, and after to expel those recrementes, whose generation
of necessity follows such mutations. For this cause ^hiefly (says Galen)
Nature Lib. 6. de anat. ad. and de not. (...). Lib. cap. 10.
instituted three kinds of instruments seruyng to nutrition.

As, some for the first reason, to conceive, and labor the nourishment, as
also The use of the first instruments.
to destribute the same unto the whole body. Others for the second cause to be
The use of the (...) (...) (...).
the receptacles of excrementes. The other particles for a third reason,
seruyng to the transmittyng of these excretions, untimely exiture prohibityng,
and in The use of the (...) (...)
time dew readely expellyng.

Of the first number are the Uentricle which receives the nourishment, and The
first (...).
through him, and the Ueynes, which derive the same confected nourishment into
the whole body.

Of the second reason are the intrels, which receive the dryer excrement, as

Of the third, the Muscles: for they are unto egestion serviceable. All which
The extreme (...) called (...).
things in their places shall be described, and how they serve unto nutrition we
will declare: beginning first somewhat further of with the parts of Abdomen,
as, of them in dissection, the Anathomist makes first demonstration. (...)
soon lost and soon ^red.


THe outmost skin (therefore) which is in Greek called Epidermis, in Latin
Cuticula, is the uppermost thin skin, which only most outwardly of Col.
Lib. 13. Cap. 1.
(...) (...) is ^sible.
all others enwrappeth the body, being very thin, and of it self altogether
insensible: growyng swiftely, soon lost, and soon repaired again.

The insensibilitie thereof is unto the body very requisite: the outward parts
The first utility.
being thereby freed from the ^olour of each light action, which otherwise we
must needs have endured, not only in applying our hands to the holdyng of
any thing, and passing with our feet continually to go: but even in wearyng
also our garments upon us, no less then if our Bones were likewise of
sensible Bones insensible
substance, we should neither be able to go, much less frequent such violent
actions, in the use of our life, as daily we do.

Again, as Nature to so good end created it of insensible substance, so
likewise The tenuitie of Cuticula.
she framed it most thin, to the end the members sense should not thereby
(more then was convenient, to the aforesaid end, and purpose) be dulled. Where
fore we may endure to handle, rub, or stir our members to, or with any The
thicker Cuticula the dull^ sense.
thing, which has not either the sharpnes, or force to excoriate the same
outer skin: which if it had been thicker, it seems certain our sense must
needs have been the duller.

Besides, an other commodity (no less needful) it owes unto the body. For
Pores.
expel by them such superfluites, as Nature has already driven to the outer
parts: and infrication, these manifestly do show them selves.

In no wise many this skin be divided from the second by instrument
notwithstanding How Cuticula (...) separated from the true (...).
the force of fire, or hoate water makes it by blisters diuisible rise from
the other.

NExt under this Cuticula appears the true skin, called (...), in Latin The
true skin called Derma. and Cutis.
Cutis. This covers over all the extreme parts of the body, the eyes, ears,
nostrels, and such other places, which nature for other uses most conveniently
What parts are not covered by the skin.
framed.

And the skin, not only of all the parts of man, but of his whole
substance Gal. Lib. 1. de temp. Cap. 8.
subject to generation, and corruption, holds the mean betwixt hard and
soft. The skin hol^eth a mean between hard and soft.
For the skin is as it were a Nerve endewed with blood, reteinyng a certain
mean between the flesh, and sinew, as though it were constituted of both mixed
together. But the sinew is cold, and without blood: the flesh hoate, and
endewed The substance of the skin.
with much blood. In the midst between both is the skin, neither manifestly
The sinewe.
without blood, as the sinew, nor plainly with blood aboundyng as the flesh.
Flesh.


Realdus Collumbus (therein reiectyng the judgment of Aristotle, for the not
Loc. citato.
The skin (...) against Aristotle.
being of sense in the skin) says it is of white substance, endewed with
sense, and filled with Ueynes, Arteries, and sinewy Filamentes, therefore must
it of force be marvelous sensible, to have judgment of every quality: as in
discereyng The necessity of sense in y^ skin.
the excess of heat, cold, or such exterior injuries, it might minister
always unto the wits a ready knowledge thereof: so being a common mean, to
prevent annoyance to the extreme parts of the body. As for example if any man
lay his hand or other part suddenly to a hoate piece of iron, or such other,
in a The utility of sense in y^ skin,
moment the sensible mixture of the skin presents it to the wits, whereby
he is moved immediately to pluck away, or remove him self from that present
annoyance.

Moreover the skin every where, cleaves not alike unto the subject parts.
Vesal. ^ib. 2. Cap. 5.
How the skin cleaves to the subtect parts.
For otherwise in the Palm of the hand, and sole of the foot, otherwise to
the Muscullous substance of the forehead, otherwise to the lips, eye lyddes,
ears, nose, fundament, yard, and otherwise throughout the whole body is it
committed to the parts under lyeng, and in dissectyng must diversely be
separated. Distribution of Nerves to the skin.


Again among all the parts of y^ skin is not alike distribution of Nerves,
neither alike thicknes of the skin in all parts: for to the skin on y^
inside of Thicknes of the skin.
the hand, very many sinewy Fibers are reached, but to y^ skin of the neck,
few. Face.


Likewise the skin of the face is softer, and thinner, but of the neck, and
soles Softnes of the skin.
of the feet, harder. That which inuesteth the inside of the hand (unless by
labor Palm of the hand.
it become harder) retains an exquisite mean in hardness, and softnes,
between the other skin, and all the whole body, very near approchyng to the
weight with equal temperature. But every where the skin of man, for the
magnitude of his body, is thinner then in four footed creatures: although in
man Where yt suinne to thicke^.
in the neck, back, legs, and sole of the foot it chances much thicker,
but not in all alike.

Also some parts of the skin are wholly immouable, and resistant to turn,
Of motion in the (...).
as of the palm of the hand, and sole of the foot: others apt to turn and
wind, but not by any volu^tary mouyng, as the skin of the whole body, else
that which in deed moves excepted: as that of the forehead, and all the
skin of the face, and which bewrappeth the forepart of the neck, and sides.
And this of motion is participant either by proper Muscles in it serving, as of
the forehead, eye liddes, and lips, or for the cause of the nigh parts, as
the skin of the ball of the cheeks, which being destitute of Muscles, moves
together with the next unto it.

Further more some part of the skin is heary, as of the neck, armeholes,
Sh^e with bear on it.
privy parts, and chinne in men: others without, as the palm of the hand,
and sole of the foot.

Besides such like places before mentioned, whereby the skin is not left
perpetual, Col. Lib. 13. cap. 1.
and generally coueryng all places, it is replenished with certain pores,
Pores in ye sainne.
and holes, where through the sweatyng excrementes of the outer parts do
pass. But those in some bodies more large, in others more street: whereby it
comes Why some sweat lightly or cont^ary ways.
to pass that some sweat lightly, and with no labor, others again by no
exercise may be provoked to sweat.

NExt under this skin lies the fat of the outer parts, poured out between
Ve^l. lib. 2. Cap. 5.
the skin and fleshy Membran. Which happens by the intercourse Fat, and
how it is engendered.
of Ueynes and Arteries, which in those parts sweatyngly pour forth blood:
which immediately by coldness of the Membran and slender heat, congealeth, and
degenerateth into fat. It is as well known unto every body in color, as
substance: wherefore needs no other description, nor any such explication as
other parts. Collumbus.


But as touching the use thereof, it is by softenes a fit propugnacle to the
outer The use of fat.
Lib. de (...).
parts, and a perpetual sustenaunce unto them: which although Galen affirmed
That fat is in men as well as women, contrary to ^alen.
to be plentiful in women, and little or none in men, yet we see for
certainty, that it is found in men even as in women: more plentyfull in some,
and with less store: but the truth is that in colder bodies it is copious, and
in hoater very In what bodies (...) abo^deth or desecteth.
scarce. And fore proof, lay a part the yard, and purse of the testicles, and
in all the other parts fat may be found: and if you way the use and mouyng
of such Al ye outer parts save the yard and tes^cles have their fat.
as want fatnes, you shall easily find out the reason of the diversity.

The substance of fat is not every where alike: for in the Palm, and sole
The di^ersitie of fat according to the place.
of the foot it is almost fleshy, and hard, made so for the necessary mouyng
of those parts: but is not the organ of sense, as Aristotle imagined. Fat is
(...) contrary to (...).


Also Vesalius affirms it a coat unto the subject parts: to conserve and
keep their heat in time of cold, and to cool them in time of heat? Loc.
citato.


Under it lies a Membran called fleshy, in Latin Panniculus Carnosus, or An
other utility of fat.
Membrana Carnea. This is the fourth inuolucre, bewrappyng all the body The
skin called Membrana (...).
from the head, unto the sole of the foot. It is called fleshy, in respect of
that in the Why it is called the (...) Membran.
neck, and in respect of all other Pannicles in the body. And the elder sort
called it fleshy (as it seems) because that in children it is fleshy, and
filled with many Collumbus.
Fibers, which nevertheless in tract of time do vanish away. The fle^hy
Membran under the armehole.


But under the armehole this Me^bran is not fleshy, as Galen affirms Lib. 1.
de Anat. administr. Whereby appears he imitateth to much the bodies of Apes,
Where A^ies run between the (...) and (...) (...) (...).
and beasts, but it cleaves to the Muscles them selves: between which, and
the skin small Ueynes do run, but void of Arteries in all places, except
in the temples, head, yard, purse of the testicles, and fingers, in which
places certain Arteries (though few innumber) are found runnyng between the
skin, and the same Membran.

This Membran is as it were the gate, or entrance for the Ueynes, and sensible
Fibers of the body, to pass through for sense, and nourishment unto the skin.

Of force it must be very sensible: not only in respect of the Fibers that
come Of the sensibilitie of the fleshy Membran.
through, but principally because it self is most of sinewy substance. For it
may be that in children it be fleshy, but in elder persons it retains small
fleshynes, have that in respect of other Membrans, it seems somewhat more
fleshy, as partly already is touched.

AFter this appears in Abdomen, and as it were deuidyng it in the midst,
The descript^ of the white (...) and navel.
a line, and round pit, called the navel, of the Latins Vmbelicus: and the
line or hollow tyeng from it, for the whitenes thereof, Linea Alba, the white
line, or of some, the Vmbelicall Ueyne.

This Navel Galen and Aristotle supposed to be situate in the midst of the
The situation of the navel.
body, but Vesalius contrary thereto with many (I will not say frivolous)
reasons repugneth, which Collumbus again has surely suppressed, affirming
that of right, it occupyeth the middle part of the body, since whilst we are
in the womb of our mother we are nourished thereby, and by the same also put
fourth The utility of the navel.
our excrementes.

The beginning hereof is at the Matrice, and springyng upward to the navel The
rising and (...) section of the white si^e.
passes in thereby to the liver and ends in Venap^rta. But the Arteries (for
so it is the receptacle of iiij. notable vessels) inserted to the navel, and
reached downward Fuch. I^b. 4. Cap. 4.
to the sides of the bottom of the bleddar, are continual with the branches
of the great Artery, after the principal division thereof above Os sacrum. For
the Arteries making entrance into the navel, are united to the stocks of the
great Artery which descend into the legs, as hereafter shall be expressed
more fitly. By the benefit of the vmbelicall Ueyne the child in the womb is
nourished, The use of the vmbelicall (...) to the infant in the womb.
and by the office of the Arteries is replenished with insited heat, and
vital spirit.

There is a fourth vessel called Orrachos, which begins at the bottom of
the bleddar, and serves to draw the Urine from the birth. And this together
Col. lib. 11. Cap. 1^ (...).
with the other vessels, the midwiues do cut of, near to the belly, so that
after the infant be borne (save that it remains as a certain cord or band
unto the body) we find not any notable use thereof.

AS for the Muscles of Abdomen, which in the History of Muscles are so
copiously handled, I commit thee to the reading of the second book. But here,
because no where else we have described the nature of fleshes, which so
plentifully bewrapped the frame of man, each where clad therewith, it shall not
be amiss to say somewhat, to the end we ouerscape nothing worthy, or needful
to be declared unto the younger sort.

F^esh therefore is a simple member, neither solid, nor absolutely moist, but
What is fle^.
thicker then the moist parts, and softer then the dry. It is begotten of
blood How flesh is e^gendred.
meanly dried: whereby it happens that bodies aboundyng with blood be very
Gal. 10. de temper.
corpulent, and fleshy. So necessary it is unto the body, as that nature has
left no What part is without flesh.
part destitute thereof, the brain excepted, but either is in them contained
or Whereto the office of flesh is compared.
near unto them adjoined: fulfillyng so, all the parts of the body, like the
plaster, or dawbe unto the la^ted house.

Of the flesh are sundry divisions, diuerfly set down by sundry Authors
heretosore: Of the kinds of fleshes.
as some of them affirm three kinds, of which, that is the true and simple
flesh which grows in the gummes of the teeth, and head of the yard. The
second is universally mixed with the Muscles, being every where compounded with
sinewy Fibers, and diverse substaunces according to the nature of the place.
The third flesh is that of the Glandules, or kernels: which third part, because
(...) makes digression to speak of Glandules.
it is so much different from the other I will somewhat digress to speak of
them, that is, the Glandules, not vnueedefull, nor improuidently made of nature.

ANd (...) are no other then a round body somewhat long, (for the most part)
Col. (...). 9.
being rare, and filled with (...)

For diverse causes in diverse places Nature has set then^: but their general
Glahbule or (...) what it is.
proppertie is to turn the (...) which they receive, into their color.
Notwithstanding their uses be diverse. Some are ^wed as beds unto Ueynes, and
The office of the (...).
Arteries, to deteute them from hurt: others fulfill void places? others to
receive (...). (...). (...).
and contain humidities, least any place through mouyng ^ght be dryed^ others
to receive excrementes. And those kinds of Glandules are to be found in diverse
parts of the body.

The first in the Scull after this sort, one in the brain, between the same
and (...) (...).
Cerebellum, which is called Co^rion Pineale, described hereafter in the (...)
of the brain and Nerves. This is round but somewhat long.

An other in the cell of Sphenoides, lyeng without 'Dura matter, in which ends
Glandules of the (...).
the basin or tonnell. What is meant by the Cuneall cell thou have learned that
in the History of bones. And this is that Gandule which taking in the
excrementes of the brain, sends the same afterward to the nose and Palate.

In the roundell of the eyes are four Glandules, two to every one, the right
Of the (...).
and the left: that is two above, and the rest beneath. Where they are placed
of nature to receive the superfluous humiditie that comes to the eyes, and
therewith to moysten, and refresh the, lest they by often mouyng should dry up,
and afterward give over to mouae. These are they which, being by sorrow or
other Whence tea^s proceed.
cause constrained, do pour out tears.

There are other two Glandules in the jaws called Paristhimia, receiving also
Of the (...).
the humidities of the brain, to moysten those parts, which is greatly
needful, when as continually in speaking, eating, inspiryng, and expiryng
they labor.

Others likewise we find under the root of the tongue, small, and possessing
Of the tongue.
the same utility as before is said.

Two other cleave unto Larinx, and the rough Artery, thicker in women Of (...)
and Asp^ (...).
then in men, whereby it comes to pass, that the prominent part of Larinx in
few women is apparent: the thicknes of these making even with the same. Why
the th^te bouncheth not forth so much in women as in men.


Under the Cannell bones also, where Vena caua is divided into two, that is,
Axillarem, and Iugulare^, are other Glandules slender in us, but thicker in
beasts, called Lactes and Thymus. (...)

Again, in the hollow of the breast are other two joined to the midst to
Aesophagus, Of y^ canell bone.
to moysten continually the same whereby the meat may pass, and Of AEsophagus.
slide down more easily.

But in the vale of Abdomen there are not ij. but an innumerable sort found, Of
Abdomen.
throughout Mesenterium dispersed for the division both of Ueyne, and Arteries.

Amongst which under the Ue^tricle is a certain notable one, there set as well
Of the ventricle called Panchreas.
for the division of Vena porta, as also to be unto the Uentricle as a
propugnacle, lest in touching their back, it should happen to receive hurt.
The name thereof is Panchreas, that is Affusio, lying flat, or prostrate.

At the root of Penis, and in the neck of the bleddar, are two little thick
Glandules Of the neck of the bleddar.
called Parastate^ and Assidentes, sittyng down, or restyng. These receive,
The (...) in substannce (...) little from Glandules.
and contain the seed brought thither by Vasa deferentia, as hereafter among
the parts of generation shall be plainly taught.

And among the Glandules likewise may be accounted the testicles of the man Of
(...) in the (...) (...).
or woman: for in substance they differ little.

And since we have expressed the Glandules of the inner parts, and that it is
very necessary to be perfectly instructed also of those that Iurke in the
exterior members, we will speak somewhat of them before we pass, although I
make have to come again to the fleshes.

It is to be noted therefore, that near unto the ears, as also under the
nether Glandules of the cares and (...) (...).
iaw lies many Glandules, which serve both to the division of Ueynes, and
Arteries, and to the receiving of certain supersluities of the brain, being
therefore The Emunctory places of the brain.
called the Emunctorie places of the brain. These be sufficient great and
thick: wherein often times chance those abscesses, called of the Greeks
Parotides. Where grows the (...) called (...).


Moreover under the armehole are not a few of them, begotten for the causes
before mentioned. Which place is called the Emunctorie of the heart.

In the flank besides that, between Abdomen and the thighe, are many Of the
(...). The (...) of the (...).
Glandules to the same end and purpose ordained: this region being called the
Emunctorie for the liver. Of the flank.


Neither is the bought of the cubite, and knee utterly destitute of these
Glandules, The (...) of the (...).
although but small, made for the vessels division.

Some again have them in their neck, arms, and legs. But those more The
use of the glandules about the (...) of the (...) and (...).
seldo^e.

Albert the whole substance of the pappes is Glandulous, and fat, beside the
nipple: which Glandules nature consented to make white, that thereby
accordyngly Where are glan^s more (...).
they might convert the red blood into white milk: since every thing that is
altered in the body, changes into the color of the same that altered it. The
use of the gland^ (...) the papp^.


The Glandulous substance of the pappes was put so in the interior part of
the breast, both for elegancie of form, as also to be yielded more fitly unto
the infant (...) (...) (...) (...) to (...) (...) (...) that (...) (...) (...).
in giuyng suck: being reposed between the skin, and fleshy Membran. And
this brief I chose as a sufficient description of the Glandules: which (now to
come again) as is aforesaid, is accounted of some, a third kind of flesh in
ye body. ^.


Notwithstanding all the soft parts of the body, both inward and outward ^.
are generally comprehended under the name of flesh: as of the outward parts,
the Muscles, Glandules, gummes. etc. of the inward parts the heart, brain,
liver, lunges, spleen, reins, intrels. etc. Among all which, there being (...)
the soft (...) are (...) (...) (...).
not two alike in substance how can the aforesaid division stand true? as for
example, what part of the body is of such substance as the heart? What is like
unto (...) (...) (...) substance.
the liver? is any of such matter as the Spleen? Which (although I omit to
speak of the rest) are sufficient (in my judgment) to disprove the triple
division.

Besides this, neither is the head of ye yard, neither the gummes (which they
The substance of the head of the yard and (...) (...) not (...).
would have to be the only true flesh) alike one an other, but differ almost
as much as the rest. Galen therefore to this purpose says there be many kinds
of Lib. 2. de Temper.
fleshes, and that simple flesh is to be found no where, without the mixture of
other Simple flesh is no where in the body.
parts. Then if we divide the fleshes into three, and almost all the parts of
the body so diversely vary in substance, how may this division stand: when
among diverse parts be diverse substaunces, yea and diverse temperatures, if
Galen have Diverse parts have diverse substaunces and temperatures.
said truth, that the sanguin parts are hoter then those without blood, and so
according to more or less?

But further to omit long discourse, and therewith the opinions of diverse,
Vesalius Epit.
most propperly (in my opinion) has divided the fleshes into two, that is, Two
sorts of fleshes.
the propper, and impropper. And truly this is that which my conjecture
shoots at. For considering that some is hard, some soft, some inward, some
outward, some begotten of blood meanly dried, some more hard, some more slack
etc, it shall be sufficient enough with Vesalius to divided them into two, and so
(if it be lawful) to call the propper Sanguinea, and the impropper Exanguis.
As that to be The pro^ flesh.
propper, or Sanguinea, which is engendered of blood: of what sort is the flesh
compounded in the Muscles, the heart, and all the rest of sanguin substance.
And that impropper, or Exanguis, which contains not blood, but is of nature
for other no The impropper flesh.
less use ordained, and created: as is the brain, the sinewy parts,
Glandules etc.

Hitherto all the parts spoken of, together with the Muscles of the belly
declared (...).
other where, are comprehended under the name of Mirach (for so the Arabians
call it) or more propperly after Latins Abdomen.

NOw follows the Membra^ named Siphach, or Peritonaeum, which, enclosing Gal.
us. part. Iib. 4. (...).
more nearely all the nutritive parts, that is, between Septu^ transuersum and
the thighs, is a thin coueryng, but strong and toughe, made of sinewy The
description of (...).
substance, enwrappyng thus the lower belly, from the left to the right side,
and going by the gutte (...) unto the turnyng joints of the loins, compasses
all the bowels and parts within Abdome^. The upper part whereof cleaves to the
lower part of Septum transuersum, and the nether part, unto the bones of Pubis,
and Ilium. Therefore the Grecians named it Peritonaion, wherehence (...). ^ib.
11. Cap. 11.
the Latins have borrowed this word Peritonaeum: As that, which foregardeth, and
circumplecteth all the subject vessels and bowels: no otherwise then as the
whole cauitie of the breast, together with all the inner parts which the breast
contains, are clothed, and compassed about with the Membran called Pleura.
Peritonaeum is in figure somewhat round, strongly knit unto the Spine, where it
The (...) of (...).
shows it self also thicker: and it is so thicker near the Spine, because
from thence it was to be divided into many parts.

It is a Membran of thin substance, like broad and continual spider webbes,
Vesal. ^ib. 4. cap. 2.
with no Fibers at all intertered. Wherefore is accounted in the number of the
(...) one of yt similar parts.
first of the simple bodies, called Similar parts. And it is among all other
simple The beginning of (...).
Membrans of the body, the largest, and greatest. The beginning whereof is taken
on each side from the Ligamentes, which do connect, and knit together the
Vertebres of the loins, and which commit Os sacrum to the bones of Ilium. Thus
from them, as a broad Membra^ derived. And ascendyng immediately from other
side, is covered over with the Muscles of the loins, and with these, which
occupieng the insides of Os ilium, give motion to the thighs, and with Fibers
cleaves to them, such as we see Muscles in them selves committed together
withal. But so soon as it has surmounted the Muscles, it stretches forth to
the inside of the transuerse Muscles of Abdomen, and to the whole inferior
region of Septum tra^suersum, The end or insertion of it.
most firmly growyng to them, or especially to their sinewy tenuities.

Vesalius says, Peritonaeum represents the figure of a long bottell, like an
(...) compared to a bottell. The length of it.
egg, the length whereof pertains from Septum transuersum, down to the
lowest seat of the amplitude, which Os sacrum together with the other Bones
committed to his sides, effourmeth.

Furthermore the inside of Peritonaeum reaches out certain Processes to those
The (...) of (...).
instruments which it contains, both bynding them thereby together, and also
knittyng them unto it self, not denying to bestow of every of them an
inuolucre, besides their own peculiar coats, which they unto them selves do
propperly possess. Wherefore, besides that Omentum, and Mesenterium are from it
naturally Col. loc. cit.
derived, and Septum transuersum (as is aforesaid) clothed, it inuesteth the
What parts (...) clotheth.
liver, and not so alone the liver, but also the spleen, ventricle, intrels,
reins, vrinarie ways, bleddar, and matrice in women, with Meynes, Arteries,
Nerves and Glandulcs.

Galen recites sundry profitable uses of Peritonaeum. As first that it
covers (...). 4 us part.
The uses of periton (...).
all the subject parts and vessels under Septum transuersum: as the Uentricle,
intestines, the kell, Mesenterium, liver, spleen, reyues, both the bleddars and

Secondly, that all which it embraces, it deuideth from the outer coursing
Muscles, lest any of the small intrcls stippe into the spaces between them, and
so (whilst they press and strain together) be grieved with pain, the
Muscles hindered of their mouyng, and the excrementes contained in the intrels,
downwardes difficultly transmitted.

The third use of it is to drive out the excrementes of dry nourishment,
together Septum transuersum. For Peritonaeum in the superior extremities
thereof, coming to the breast and false ribs, after the manner of Septu^
transuersum, somewhat aydeth the compressiue motion of the Uentricle The
utility of Septum (...) (...) and (...) (...) anoydyng excrementes.
and intrels. For by this same Peritonaeum and Septum, as by two hands joined
together above, but distaunced beneath, what soever lies in the midst is
compressed, and the excrementes of meat downwardes compelled.

Fourthly, being therewith compassed as a coat or inuolucre, it might conserve
How (...) (...) (...) and (...).
the mean time, of necessity it follows that the meat is left destitute of
concoction, and distribution thereof in the body slowed. (...). 3. cap. 2.


The fifth, and (as Fuchsius says) most principal use of Peritonaeum, is to
contain Septum transuersum, and as by a certain skin every of them, being
particularly covered, might safely be bound toge. there, and in their fixed
seats abide. For the continuitie hereof being violated The (...) that ensues
(...) being ruptured.
and broken, brings nosmall danger, especially if any of the interior
parts be also wounded. But it alone broken, the disscase ensues called in
Greek (...) in Latin Ramex, and in English a rupture. The Rupture.
Loc. cit.


And beyond all this Realdus Collumbus teaches us an other use thereof, which A
new use of (...).
heretofore of no man has been marked: that is, from the half space of
Abdome^ vpwardes it is a simple Membran, but from the navel down wards
doubled: the use of which reduplication is, first for the Arteries called
Vmbelicales, for the The use of the reduplication of peritonaeum.
vessel named Oiragos, for ^eynes and Arteries ascendyng under the straight
Muscles of Abdomen, which vessels between this same reduplication of
Peritonaeum are contained, all which he reports never any man to have found
out before him as also for the bleddar: and again this same doublenes of
Peritonaeum is a means, that the intrels might more strongly and safely be
contained.

Peritonaeum finally is in the inside smooth, but without rough, to cleave unto
The use of the asperitye of peritonaeum.
the said Muscles and their tendons more strongly. In many places it is
perforated, but not so often (says Collumbus) as Vesalius imagined.

FRom the parts of this same Peritonaeum, proceedyng on both sides from the
Gal. Lib. 4. us. part.
back, comes this same Omentum, called of the Greeks (...) in English
Omentum
The compass of the kell.
the Kell. Which meetyng on both sides overthwart the bellye, pass upward even
to the stomache, and uppermost part thereof: being a fat Pannicle or couerong,
The parts constituting the kell. Situation.
simple, and without Fibers, but aboundyng with ^eynes, Arteries, sinews, and
fatnes. It is situated above the spleen, and in the forepart of all the
intrels, and is stretched out to the hollow of the liver, to the posteriour
part of the Uentricle, Vesal. lib. 5. cap. 4.
and almost all the whole bottom thereof.

The fashion of it is like a satchell or bag, having a round Orifice, and The
figure of the kell.
higher in posteriour then in the Anteriour part ascendyng. After the same
manner, we call one part of the Kell the Anteriour or superior Membran, and the
other the inferior or posseriour: although in deed the Kell be only one
Membran, and that especially in dogs, the Anteriour part being one and
continual with the posterieur, and so the Kell, after the manner of a bag,
does constitute a cauitie, which may be filled. All which shall be more evidently
discerned, if the same (divided from the parts of the back and bottom of the
bleddar, being in no other place broken or perforated) you covet to fill either
with liquid, or Solid substance.

Furthermore like a round orbicular circle, beginning from the mids of the
The progress of the ^ell.
back under the posteriour part of the Uentricle, it is carried by the hollow
of the liver, after the bottom of the Uentricle (from whose third coat there
it springs) to the hollow of the spleen and so unto the midst of the back,
as it were with his beginning. Therefore the whole inferior half circle, from
the hollow The infer^ part of Omentum.
of the spleen by the back, coming even unto the right side of the Uentricle,
does constitute the inferior Membran of Omentum. But the superior is fourmed
The superior part of Omentum.
by that part of the circle, which is brought from the right side of the
Uentricle by the bottom thereof, unto the hollow seat of the spleen. Hence
both mutually meetyng, ^re also downwardes dilated above the intrels, and under
Peritonaeum, and covers them both before, and on each side: stretchyng down
to Os Pubis, with his lower extremity.

These Membrans are with no tyinges bound unto the intrels, save the inferior
What parts are tied to the ^ell.
Membran only: which in men, is strongly continual unto the intestine Colon,
and that all the length thereof that marches under the bottom of the
Uentricle. Neither may this be negligently in man observed: when as the
inferior Why the kell is (...) to Colon.
Membran of Omentum serves to Colon, there in the stead of Mesenterium,
whereby the same is reached out to the Uentricle. For Colon in all that space
requires no part of Mesenterium, far otherwise then in dogs and Apes. For
in dogs it cleaves to no intrell, and in Apes retains a mean between
both, Vesal. L^c. cit.
which made Galen also differ.

The Ueynes enfolded in Omentum, making so the image of a net, are only The
veins enfolded in the kell.
the branches of Vena porta, but none from Caua comes to Omentum. They are
scattered out from that branch of Porta, whose principal portion is drawn
out unto the spleen: So thence innumerable branches of Ueynes run abroad in
the Membran of Omentum, not straight forth, or with direct trases, but with
aboundaunt oblique courses, and wandryng walks: like as in the manner of
weauyng of nets is to be seen.

The Arteries of Omentum break of from those, which to the Uentricle, liver,
The Arteries of O^ntum.
spleen, and vessicle of Choler are distributed. These all together with the
Ueynes, Oment is safely leads, and to his Ueynes from them obtains fellowly
mates, so that there are few surcles of Ueynes to be found not associated with
like portion of Arteries.

Again, Omentum is (thyrdly) enterwouen with those Nerves, which from The
Nerves of Omentum.
the portions of the vj. pair of the brain, reached after the ribs, are
emplanted to the liver, spleen, and Uentricle.

But the fat wherewith Omentum flows in dull and fat meant, is abundant, The
(...).
but in lean, little and scant.

Beside that, which is common to both the Membrans, the inferior Membran
thereof, where it is strewed under the posteriour seat of the Uentricle, has
specially a certain great, and notable Glandulous body, which because that in
dogs it is red, and after a certain manner like simple flesh, the Grecians
therefore Gal. 4. us. p^t.
Lib. de di^s. ve.
call it Calicreas, and Panchreas. But in man it appears more white then
Panchreas.
red: situated there to Vena porta, and to the branches of Arteries and Nerves
The utility of Panchreas.
for their secure deriuation, only boulstred by the inferior Membran of
Omentum, Gal. us. part. Lib. 5.
and laid under the Uentricle to enritch the same with ease. For all the
vessels, eue^ where they begin to divide and ramifie, there also do they easily
incur damage, as if any evil be incident unto them through violent mouyng,
that part which was lately divided, does immediately incur the same. Nature
therefore not rashly, where (of Ueynes) such distribution, and diuarication
ought to be made, places this Glandulous body, to enwrappe the^, and fulfill
their divisions: that Why nature in ^dry pa^es lay^h Gla^lous bodies.
none of them for lack of defense, should be soyled, but restyng in a body
soft, and meanly yeldyng, although they happen to be provoked with a more
vehement mouyng, yet because they are not shielded with hard and stubburne
parts, but such, as by lightly receiuyng them, do gently exolue the violence
of every motion, they are from hurt, breakyng, or strayning perpetually
conserved.

This body is called Panchreas, that is, all carnous or fleshy, for that it is
made Why it is called (...) and why (...).
and contexed of Glandulous flesh. But Calicreas, because it is sweet and
pleasant in eating.

To declare briefly therefore the uses of Omentum, it enfoldeth the branches of
(...). ^ib. 5 cap. 4.
Porta, and them enfolded leads to the spleen, Uentricle, Duodenum, and
Colon. The vsess of O. mentum.
And not only those branches, but also the Arteries and Nerves, which to the
said places were also to be inserted. And this Vesalius judged the greatest and
most excellent use thereof.

Again this is not the least, that by it the Uentricle is bound to the back,
and again the liver, and spleen knit unto the Uentricle, together with the
interuenture of vessels, and sinews. And being to the intrels accidentally
made an inuolu^re, does cherish and continue that heart like a cloth, or
stomacher. Wherefore such as have Omentum, or any part thereof cut away, they
feel the Uentricle, or The (...) of the ^ell.
stomach (as most the common sort term it) colder, they digest less, and
stand in need of outward helps: chiefly if the part that is taken away be in
great quantity. Wherefore the Kell is not to be robbed of this benefit it
yeldeth to the furtheryng of concoction.

THe instrument of which operation is the Uentricle, which is that part of The
ventricle.
the body, into which living creatures receive their meat ordained by nature
Why the ve^tricle was ordained.
to make of the same susteinyng, by concoctyng and making the first mutation.
The situation of the ventricle.


Under the breast and Septum transuersum, next between the liver and spleen it
is seated, obtaining a passage, which reaches in the meats from the mouth,
called The neck of the ventricle called. stomach.
by all these names: as Aesophagus, Stomachus, Gula, and after the Arabians,
Meri.

THe beginning of the stomache is at the root of the tongue, in the lower part
Col. Lib. 11. cap. 4.
Larinx, to which it is knit, and not to it only, but also The beginning and
progress of the stomach or neck of the ventricle.
to the Anteriour body of the Vertebres of the neck. This receiuyng the meat,
compelled thereunto by agitation of the tongue, drives it down to the dilated
parts thereof.

The substance hereof is sinewy, and Membraneous, made therefore to dilate,
Vesal. Lib. 5. cap. 3.
The substance of the stomach.
and readely gather together again, enterwouen with Fibers ministryng unto his
office. The rest of this body is very round, and within excellent smooth and
slippery.

It consists of two propper coats, one specially differyng from an other in
Test ^tiam Gal.
^ib. 3. de not. fac. and. si. 4. us. part.
substance, hardness, thickenes, and kinds of Fibers. The first of these, or
inner coat is more sinewy, hard, and somewhat thinner, and with the conte of
the mouth and The contes of the stomach.
and palate continual, endewed with straight Fibers to the attraction of
meat, as The ^res and there use.
hands. But the outer coat is thicker, softer, more fleshy, almost
participatyng with the Nature of Muscles, and with transuerse or circular
Fibers abundant.

And thus nature intended only to place two kinds of Fibers in the stomach:
Why nature placed but ij. kinds of Fibers in the stomach.
as the straight to attract, and draw the substance, and the transuerse to
drive it down: neither had any more been commodious. For had there been any of
oblique race, the meat must needs with over long delay have tarried in the
stomach, to the no small greuaunce of the body: for as much as the stomach
filled with meat, if very long it should be distended, must needs over long
also be a let, whilst The notable d^scence of the stomach down to the
ventricle.
they are dilated, unto the lunges, roughe Artery, and also great Artery.
Nature therefore so prouidently contrived the seat of the stomach, reachyng
through the ^cke and breast unto the Uentricle, exactely upon the midst of the
Vertebres of the neck, and the four first of the breast, inclinyng to nether
side, but so (...) under the rough Artery placed, as by no means to molest ye
organs before named.

Again at the beginning of the fifth (...) of the breast, the stomach, that it
might give place to the greater truncke of the great (...), marchyng after the
Vertebres of the back to the lower parts of the body, somewhat declineth to
the right side from the middle region of the Vertebres, creepyng near to the
same Artery down to the ninth Vertebre of the breast: from the body of which
Vertebre it is immediately elevated, and departing further of the same Artery
(lest in swallowyng the meat it might fortune to be compressed) penetrateth at
length the sinewy part of Septum transuersum, toward the left side, but
nevertheless The stomach pers^ not (...) (...) in the way of the great (...).
is altogether estranged from that hole, which the great Artery, in falling
down to the inferior members, occupyeth: for it has one peculiar to it
self, and to the Nerves therewith descendyng, prepared.

After all this, at the beginning of the ix. Vertebre of the breast, the
stomach, by the interuenture of Membra^s, produced from the Ligamentes of the
Spondils, is to the bodies of the Vertebres committed, and possesses from
those Membra^s Whence the stomach has h^s (...) coat.
a third coat, as it were, of his second an inuoluere, mingled with no Fibers
at all. But, that, near to the fifth Vertebre of the breast, the stomach shows
it self Why the stomach (...) descendyng (...) toward the right (...).
rather on the right then on the left side of the Artery, the Artery it self
is the cause, not as a tyran occupying the middle seat of the back, but
whilst it takes his beginning from the left Uentricle of the heart, and by the
rest of his way is subjected under Vena caua, toward the left side, of
necessity in greater part to the left side bendyng: and therefore, somewhat
giuyng place to the stomach, admits the same a fellow or companion of the
seat of the Vertebres, so that the stomach might be less obliquate, or
crooked, and obtain also firmer seat then in the left side might be found.

Furthermore the stomach does not perforate the right side of Septum
transuersum, The stomach ends not in the right side of the (...).
neither is stretched straight into the Ue^tricle from the right side of the
back, but being carried above the Artery, and obliquate or crooked, with an
obtuse or Why the stomach in desc^nse (...) into the lest (...).
blunt corner, seeks the left side, lest the stomach in going to the
Ue^tricle, should have been compelled to perforate the liver, which occupyeth
all the right side of the inferior region of Septum: but freely finds out
that part in Septum, whereas less of liver being, yeldeth easy passage
thereto. Such is the thinner portion of the whole liver, stretched to the left
side of Septum, as that in the posteriour region Where the liver ^th place to
the (...) of the stomach.
thereof, where the stomach goes through Septum, it has a cauitie like a half
circle engrawen for the stomach, whose Anteriour part it ample^eth, there to in
proportion agreeing.

But it sufficed not nature to give unto the stomach so obliquate, those said
Fibers, How more spedy passage (...) meat through the stomach was pro^ed.
for the speedy passage of meats, but also, to the end his concauitie might
always be with moisture anointed, she has placed Glandules both in the jaws,
stomach, and Larinx. Which perpetually, left those organs should be dried,
prepares The (...) called (...).
them humor, and spettle. The Latins term them Tonsillae.

Also in the middle space of the stomach, where the same is subject to Aspera
The use of those (...) in the middle space of the stomach
Arteria, in that place as it is divided into two trunkes to the lunges, two
others are put, not only before the stomach, but also cleauyng to the sides
and posteriour part thereof: plainly aunswerable to those, wherewith nature has
compassed the beginning of the neck of the bleddar in men. For even as these
do irrigate, and moysten the way of (...), and seed, so the Glandules fastened
to the stomach hume^ his amplitude, and, lest by drines the meat should with
difficulty fall into the Uentricle, do imbrue and wash it with a certain
spettelly humor.

The stomach, immediately as it has penetrated Septum in the left side of his
Where y^ stomach is with the (...) (...).
sinewy part, is made continual with the body of the Uentricle, which touching
a great part in the left side, of Septum, uses the whole region or space
between the The situation of the Uentricle.
liver and spleen. But in the right side, the Ue^tricle no where touches
Septu^, but all the right side, and whole superior part thereof is hidden of
the liver: being so much therefore distau^t from the midrief as the thicknes
thereof comes to on that side.

THe figure thereof is round, and somewhat therewith long, from the right
stretchyng Collu^bus to a gourd long, and round fashioned The figure of the
Uentricle.
round, because all round things are more capable, and less subject to
injuries: Why it is round.
but long, because so, both the place wherein it is contained, and also the two
Why the Uentricle is long.
Orifices thereof, one whereby it receives meat, the other whereby the same
confected is thrust down unto the intrels, do require.

In the left side also it is much more ample, and round, a little puttyng forth
The description of the Uentricle on both sides.
toward the inferior parts, and thence forthwith turnyng to the right side,
is by little and little gathered together to a street, and in the upper part
descends, but in the nether asce^deth: so that in the right side it becomes
much more slender then in the left. Also in the superior part thereof, which
pertains from one Orifice to an other, it is more street and narrow, as in
the inferior, larger and broader.

In the Anteriour part it is equally every where Gibbous, and no where
defourmed. In the posteriour region it shows after a certain manner two
Gibbous parts, one on the left side, and the same greater, and longer put
forth: an other on the left side less, and more depressed. And those bounched
parts make a Where the Uentricle is impressed and the cause of that impression.
certain cauitie, or impression after the longitude of the body, to the
posteriour seat of the Uentricle impressed. For in what place the Uentricle
respects the Vertebres of the back, and the descendent trunkes of the hollow
Ueyne and great Artery to them stretched, that it might fit it self every
where to the place thereto assigned, the posteriour region thereof is inwardly,
as into his own amplitude, somewhat impressed: although the Uentricle being
drawn from the body, and blown up, shows not the same.

TWo Orifices has the Uentricle, one whereby the meat and drink is received,
The Orifices of the Uentricle.
because the stomach there fitly perforatyng Septum, might first grow unto the
Uentricle, and be made one common body therewith. The ancient Greeks do The
upper Orifices of the Uentricle.
call this (...), but we (after the Latins) name it the upper mouth of the
Uentricle. And although it be in the left side, notwithstanding it comes
nearer to the middle seat thereof then to the left side. Wherefore Galen says
it is sited under Mucronata Cartilago, as under a certain propugnacle and
defense. lib. 7. us. part.


The other Orifice of the Uentricle, transmitteth the meats changed, into The
nether Orifice of the Uentricle.
the intrels. Whence the Grecians call it (...) the Latins Ianitor, but
commonly the nether Orifice, or mouth of the Uentricle. This Orifice is in the
right side, What makes the beginning of the Intrels.
and constituteth the beginning of the intrels. Hence it happens that the first
intrell called Duodenum, many have named the beginning.

Moreover the Orifices of the Uentricle not only in situation do vary, but The
differences between y^ upper and nether Orifices.
besides, the nethermost is more street then the uppermost, because sometime
are swallowed hard, great, and unbroken lumpes: for whose ingresse, it behooved
the Why the upper Orifices is larger then the nether.
way of the Ue^tricle to be large, and ample. But beneath (contrariwise) since
nothing passes that is raw, hard, great, are not turned into juice, it is
streter, although neither so street, as that it only tra^smitteth the thick
juice, since not a few, and that without hurt or damage, do often times, avoid
great swallowed bones.

But in diverse creatures Galen affirms a certain Glandulous flesh in the
Lib. 4. us. part.
inferior Orifice of the Uentricle, sited to augment his stretenes, chiefly
when No glandule compasses the nether Orifice of the Uentricle in man.
the Uentricle for concoction sake, uses the retentiue faculty. But in man no
Glandule circumplecteth the nether Orifice of the Uentricle, as witnesses
Coll^mbus Lib. 11. Cap. 4.

So not only in the inferior Orifice of the Uentricle, but also in the
uppermost, The thic^ (...) swelled portion in the Orifices of the Uentricle.
the substance of the Uentricle is thicker, and the Orifices toward the
interior parts, obtain a swelled, or more extuberant part like a circle,
wholly aunswerable to the substance of the ventricle. Which in dissectyng the
stomach being yet whole, is to be perceived by feelyng, but being opened, and
turned comes to sight, manifestly showing the beginning of the Uentricle, or
end of the stomach, and the beginning of Duodenum. But this thicker portion of
the Uentricle V^l. l oc. Cit.
The use of this thicker portion.
is chiefly made to this end, that the mo^the thereof might be made more thick
and strong then the rest of his body, lest by force it be rushed open, or broken
of those things that pass downward.

BUt as the outer face of the Uentricle is smooth, and every where plain,
Where the Uentricle has as^eritie where not.
eminences excepted: for there the Uentricle (if it be vehemently drawn
together) shows nothing but wrinkles save only a color dark, and as it
were Color.
with clouds waryng greatly red, intermingled: being on the out ^de
(nevertheless) almost altogether white.

But very diverse is the quantity of the Uentricle. For if after the manner of a
(...).
bleddar, it be blown up, it shall not be any marvel to thee, that at one
time, it can receive such store of meats, and drinks: albeit, by the
constrictiue force it The ac^on of the Uentricle.
uses, whether it contain little, or much, it does complect the whole, so, as
no void space is left, but always full as is the bleddar. To this action is the
Membraneous substance thereof agreeable, that fitly it might in time of need
dilate, as also aptly bynd together again when it is requisite.

THe Uentricle consists of two broad and thin coats together joined, even
The coated of the Uentricle.
the Uentricle like as of the stomach, is sinewy, and Membraneous, and to the
inner Why the inner coa^e of the Uentricle is in the mouth ^arder the^ in the
Uentricle.
coat of the whole stomach, mouth, lips, and guts continual, though from
the coat of the mouth and stomach a little, only in hardness, differyng. Which
was seemly, because we first confect, and make ready in the mouth the rough
and hard meats, before they be committed to the Uentricle, by which, the scope
of the mouth, were not this tunicle thick and hard, would be worn, and
fretted, and therefore the coat common both to the stomach and ventricle,
immediately as it comes to the bottom of the ventricle, is made softer.

This is with two kinds of Fibers intertexed, or enwouen. Wherein also it The
^ibres of the inner coat of the Uentricle.
varieth from the inner coat of the stomach. For the interior part of the
coat, that respects the concauitie of the ventricle, is endewed with many
straight Fibers: for so (says Vesalius) it behooved the ve^tricle by them to
draw, and suck in the meat and drink by the stomach. Galen before him also
made the like affirmation.

Nevertheless, Collumbus herein has not spared to confute them both, and that
Loc. C^.
to understand by what reason, if thou think it not tedious (gentle Reader) I
will The inner coat of the Uentricle contains no (...) Fibers, against Galen
and Vesalius.
willingly employ my pen to express the words as he has written them.
Galen, and after him Vesalius supposed that nature had constituted straight
Fibers in the inner coat of the ventricle, thereby that it might possess the
power of attraction, but what soever is eaten the stomach brings into it, and
therefore it stood in no need of straight Fibers. Notwithstanding it is not
destitute of the iiij. natural The Uentricle (...) the so^re natural Uertues.
virtues, which are also in other members, as attractiue, retentiue,
concoctiue, and expulsive.

But the Fibers due unto this interior coat of ventricle, which Vesalius
calls The use of the Fibers in yt (...) coat.
the second kind, are oblique, sited on the outside of this coat, where it is
embraced of the second: by these is purchased unto the ventricle, the needful
virtue of retention. The Fibers of the second coat.


After this, as it was expedient, expulsion of the confected meats should
follow, like as after attraction, retention: so accordyngly nature (put in the
second or outer tunicle of the ventricle, transuerse, or overthwart Fibers,
folden in also with some oblique for the outer coat, which is thicker and
softer the^ the inner, being not so stretely compact and bound together)
abounds with transuerse Fibers, and answers to the second coat of the
stomach, save that it is less flesh y^ then this, and enterwou^n with some
oblique Fibers also.

To these two tunicles of the ventricle hap^eth an other or third, as unto them
The third coat of the Uentricle.
a propugnacle, borrowed from Peritonaeum, where it comes to that part of
Septum that gives way to the stomach. Wherefore Collumbus said rightly, that
there are two propper coats unto the ventricle, and one common. And this
portion of Peritonaeum first covers the upper Orifice of the ventricle, and
thence after the whole body thereof, even to the beginning of Duodenum, being of
all the coats which it reaches to other organs, the thickest, yeldyng
likewise a beginning to the upper Orifice of the ventricle, as has be^e said
before.

This coat first receives and surmiseth, all the Ueynes, Arteries, and
sinews The utility of the third coat of the Uentricle.
that are reached to the ventricle. All which veins have their only beginning
Whence spring the Ue^es to the Uentricle.
from Vena Porta, and none or very few from Caua: but the Arteries all spryng
from those, which are scattered from the great Artery first into the lower
Membran Whence spring the Arteries to the Uentricle.
of Omentum, and so into the liver, vessicle of coler, spleen, and finally into
the ventricle derived.

THe first vein of the ventricle begins from Vena Porta, before the same
Ueines and Arteries of the Uentricle.
be divided into the two great trunkes, rumyng to the lower Orifice of the
ventricle, being thereto at the posteriour part thereof conterminate, or very
near Vena Porta, which after the way of Vena Porta, goes to the hollow of the
liver.

The second vein is every where accompanied with an Artery: it is stretched
Vena Porta, where the same is divided into the two greater trunkes: the Artery
being from that derived, which is effunded into the liver.

The third vein of the ventricle is very small, not associated with any
Artery: Vena Porta, is in the posteriour part of the ventricle, in small store
of branches, dispersed.

The fourth vein, going forth from the same trunk, and every where in his
Omentum, is stretched to the spleen.

The fifth vey^e, being not deprived of the fellowship of an Artery, goes about
Omentum, connitteth branches from his highest seat to the Anteriour, and
posteriour parts of the ventricle. The original of the vein is from the
greater branch of Vena Porta; where the same to the lower part of the spleen
is to be inserted: and the Artery his mate, from the branch of the Artery
coming to the spleen. Galen seems rather willing to call this vein a
certain venial passage or wa^ and in one place, a short vessel, whereby the
Us. part. Lib. 4.
spleen belcheth up melancolye into the ventricle, as shall be said hereafter.
Us. part. Lib. 5.


The vj. is dedicated unto the ventricle from those that are reached out to the
Vesal. Loc. (...),
spleen, and comes to that part of the left side of the ventricle, that is
near the spleen. Among which veins that is the chi^fest, which takes his
beginning from the greater branch of Vena Porta, inserted to the higher part
of the spleen: from which, small surcles like hears commonly do reach unto the
upper Orifice of of the ventricle. Although there be not one b^t many Meynes,
which from the spleen are to the left side of the ventricle derived. Not
omittyng that to the said veins, coming to the left side of the ventricle,
p^petually Arteries are joined in fellowship.

The common use and office of all the veins of the ve^tricle, is to bring
thereto The office of the be^es of the Uentricle.
nourishment, as also to carry yt confected juice thence into the hollow of the
liver, no otherwise the^ the veins of the intrels. Notwithstanding the
principal office of the v. and vj. veins, is, that by them the spleen might
pour forth into the ventricle ^b. 3. cap. ^3.
melancholy juice, whereby (says Fuchsius) all the functions thereof, which The
way of melancoly to the Uentricle.
consist in a certain kind of embracing, are by his quality of taste, which is
tarte, and sour, thereby of necessity contractiue, and astringent,
stre^gthned: therefore neither The use of melan (...) to the Uentricle according
to Fuch^.
may the meat, before it be fully consected, preasse to go forth of the
ventricle.

And albeit he proves this to be the true, and legitimate use of the
melancholy humor to the ventricle, reiectyng wholly the judgment of Auicen,
and consequently all others that speak of natural appetite to be styrred up
thereby: yet Collumbus since his time has boldly confirmed it. I will not say
how doubtful Collumbus comes the op^ of (...).
herein the mind of Uesalius hunge.

But to proceed. The arteries of the ventricle serve to refresh the insited
heat ^b. (...). Cap. 7.
thereof. Beside the which veins and Arteries, no other vessel is to the
ventricle ^b. 5. cap. 9.
impla^ted: but if any of the ways deducyng choler, come unto the bottom of
the The use of the Arteries of the Uentricle.
ventricle, the same is most seldom seen. Wherefore Vesalius protests but
only Of the ways of colet to the Uentricle.
once to have invented the same: and that in a man of complexion most
choleric. And Collumbus freely confesses, that among all the bodies that
ever he had Lib. cit. cap. 3.
dissected, his eyes might never attain the special sight thereof. Galen
testifies Lib. cit. cap. 8.
the same in his second book of Temperamentes and his viij. Chapter. Galen.


OF sinews, not a small pair is, from the vj. con^gation of the brain, The
nerves of the Uentricle.
prolonged down to the ventricle. For after that the recurrent sinews (in the
Hystory of Nerves expressed) have poured out Nerves and branches to the
inuolucre of the heart, and by the like also communicatyng with lunges, they
immediately haste^ down to yt stomach, the right to the right, and the left
unto the left side: but the Nerves, so soon as they have a little space
descended with the stomach, committed only thereto by the interuenture of
Fibers, they both are divided in two and the right with oblique branches is
carried to the left side as the left unto the right: both which, accompanying
the stomach, pearse through the midrief, not offryng thereto any branch at
all. But where the iiij. branches of the two Nerves do touch the upper Orifice
of the ve^tricle, with diverse orders of braunchynges they embrace it, reachyng
straight downward surcles, with notable space between.

From the left Nerve of the vj. pair embracing the right region of the mouth
of the ventricle, a certain notable branch, after the higher side of the
ventricle even to the lower Orifice thereof, is deduced: which albeit that in
the progress thereof it pours out portions, and enwrappeth the nether Orifice
of the ventricle with some surcles, yet is it not there wholly wasted, until
further it have crept into the hollow of the liver.

But moreover, unto the lower part of the ventricle comes two Nerves,
purchasing their begynnynges from the stocks of the sixth pair of sinews of
the brain, brought down after the roots of the ribs: and being the mates
of those Arteries, supported by the superior Membran of Omentum, are digested
into the bottom of the ventricle. The use of the Nerves of the ventricle.


Amongst all which sundry portions of sinews that the ventricle stood in
need of, nature by none showed such noble providence, as in those to the
superior Orifice thereof inserted: which are not there in such manifold manner
scattered only to discern annoyaunce, at any time offered thereto by
choleric humors, or other of that kind, but likewise that by them, as by
river, the animal force might be thereto dispensed, making the stomach to
feel the needefulnes of meat and drink: and so consequently styrryng it to
receive food, the same Galen Galen.
shows in his fourth book of the use of parts.

THe Uentricle round about (as great fires to the cauldron) is compassed with
How co^^odiously the Uentricle is situated, and how it is assisted by the
parts cir^cent.
his whole superior region toward the anteriour parts, and his right side,
and the right Gibbous part in the posteriour seat. But the higher part
thereof, consistyng to the posteriour seat of the upper Orifice, and all the
whole left side thereof, is compassed with the midrief, only that side
excepted, with the spleen on the left side of ye ve^tricle, and lower
posteriour part thereof, occupies. But in his hinder part the ventricle
obteineth the inferior Membran of Omentum, and the vessels which therein are
diffused.

Beside that, under his posteriour part, a part of the midrief, Vena Caua, and
the trunk of the great Artery, beside the back, and Muscles thereof, do
consist. But there is notwithstanding a great part of the Anteriour region of
the ventricle, which covered neither with the liver, midrief, kell, nor spleen,
obtains here an other succor, in heatyng nothing inferior to ye kell. For
beside Peritonaeum, and the viij. Muscles of Abdomen, there is a vein from the
navel led unto the The Vmb^icall ve^e.
liver, whereby the child receives nourishment within the womb, and which
after time of birth becomes without blood, and use.

To this vein, where being knit to Peritonaeum, it is laid over the ventricle
in round circuit, much fat springs, which, that the ventricle in his
concoctiue office might more swiftely labor, yeldeth there some help.

Neither is the ventricle as some have fondly supposed, nourished by Chylus,
The Uentricle is not nourished by Chylus.
which it engenders, since by the benefit of those faculties, which it
obtains common with the other parts, it draws to it self out of the
veins, and reteineth and labors propper nourishment, thrustyng out from it
self what soever is superfluous. This also testifies Collumbus, saying no
part of the body is Lib. 11. cap. 4.
nourished but by blood.

Finally by the gifts, by which the ventricle ministers unto the whole body,
Vesal. Li. cit. cap. 3.
and for which, some call it the king of the body, it receives meat, and
drink, The operation of the Uentricle.
by straight Fibers in at the stomach from the mouth, which immediately taken,
Recei^th.
is retained by oblique Fibers, and all a while embraced, until, by engendryng
in Retay^eth.
it self the alteratiue faculty, it have converted the same into a thick
cream, or juice, in color aunswerable to his own substance: and at length,
endeuouryng to put forth into the intrels that which it has confected, it
opens the lower Orifice, and then by transuerse Fibers that which it
embraced, thrusts downward. Expels.
Some time it vomitteth: but that motion is violent, and against nature: Col.
Loc. cit.
for then the oblique, together with the transuerse Fibers do drive out, with
great (...).
endeavor, and the straight Fibers of the stomach move in opposite order to
natures first decree.

ANd since the guts are to this ventricle continual, it seems,
immediately Of the Intrels or g^ttes.
they take their beginning from the ventricle, so seem they also one
substance Col. Lib. cit cap. 5.
therewith, although a little thinner. They are situated from the inferior
Orifice of the ventricle even down to the fundament, and occupy the greater of
Abdomen. Situation.
Their substance is Membraneous, yet not every where alike in thicknes.
Substance.
But such notwithstanding, as easily might embrace that which it conseineth,
and (...). Li. Cit. cap. 5.
again apt to be distented, or retched out by the things contained.

They have two peculiar coats, and one, which they purchase from Peritonaeum,
The coats of the Intrels.
to make them less subject to injurious offense. Wherefore Galen affirms that
the interior, by Dysenteria or other daily griefs, sometime putrifieth, yet
In (...) the inne^ coat of the Intrelles may putrine and the ^arry live.
the outer being safe, some so affected do escape. The interior coat of the
guts is ^oster then the interior coat of the ventricle, for that they
receive no rough or unbroken things as does the ventricle: but their outer
coat is more thin, Lib. 4. (...). (...).
(...). Loc. Cit.
and sleshy, yet less fleshy then the inner coat of the ventricle: because
they are Why, the inner coat in ye intrels is softer then the same in the
De^tricle.
rather the instruments of distribution then of concortion. The inner coat of
the great gu^es is so much harder then the interior coat of the small, by how
much they contain matter more hard and void of juice. For that which is
contained Why the inner coat of the great gi^es is ^aroer then of the small.
in the small guts is liquid, flowyng, and watrish: whereas that in the great
guts is hard.

Both the coats of the intestines have orbicular Fibers, that they might drive
(...) to the (...).
speedely sucked to the liver. But the outer coat of the straight intestine,
and of Why to the strayt gutte and (...). are sum strayt Fibers.
Colon, obtains straight Fibers: which are made as a band to the circular
Fibers, lest happily they sometime, in forcyng out the hard excrementes, might
also together with them depart, and be plucked away. And for this cause chiefly
so many of that kind are bestowed on the straight gut, for that it amylecteth
the dryer excrementes.

The third coat of the intestines is as a propugnacle to the second, by whose
The third coat to the intrells.
benefit, and interuenture of Mesenterium, the intrels are bound to the
back. This is taken from the Membrans of Peritonaeum securely carieng the
vessels to the intestines. For these Membra^s, together with the vessels
coming to the Where first the vessels come to the intrells.
hollow seat of the intrels, are dilated, there endewyng them with a third
coat. By the hollow side of the guts is meant the part which the vessel
first touch, and by the Gibbous part, the contrary.

They are created round in form, to be the more capacious, and less subject
The figure of the intrells.
to injuries. But veins and Arteries are not in like number given to every Of
the vessels to the guts.
one, like as not in all the intrels is equal store of juice to be sucked out.
For by how much the intrelles in continuitie are nearer the ventricle, by
so much they Why to the small guts are in^e, to the great fewer.
contain more of the best juice: therefore consequently, greater store of
vessels are to the small guts distributed, and fewer to the great.

So are the guts endewed with sinews, that they might give knowledge of The
use of Nerves to ye guts.
every hurtful hunger. For, if they were altogether void of sense, nothing
might resist, but that the guts, either by yellow Choler, or other biting
humor, might thoroughly be correated before a man should feel.

Moreover although the intrels be one continual body, notwithstanding, when
The division of the intrells.
they are circunduced into diverse, and many enfoldes, and turnynges, and those
differyng in figure: neither choose they in all places the same nature in
situation, substance, and form. And again others are made touching some
peculiar part in man: nether the principal use of them all alike. The learned
Anathomistes, and such as have been in dissectio^ expert, do number them as
though they were more. And first they divide them into small, and great: then
either of them again into three, so that all are in number vj. constituted
(although Collumbus if Collumbus would divide them into (...).
it were lawful to starte from the elders, could contentedly stand to the
first division) that is to say Duodenum, Ieiunum, Tenue, Coecum, Colum, and
Rectum. All which in order we will speak upon, so soon as we have unfolded
the peculiar properties of the first division, that is, the office of the small
and great guts.

The small guts (as witnesses) Gal. Lib. 4. us. Partium) are chiefly
fourmed, The use of the small guts.
that by their benefit, what soever juice is of the meat labored by the
diligence of the ve^tricle, the same might be drawn into the liver, the shop
or storehouse of blood. As also that the dregs, and such things as are unapt
to be drawn, might be duly excernedor avoided. Last of all, to the concoctiue
and alteratiue The small gutte^ aid ye (...) and alterat^ force.
force the small guts are somewhat assistaunt: as that the substance first
confected of the ventricle, they might a little more absolutely change. Neither
is it to be denied, that the meat, in the passage thereof through the intrels,
is more concocted, like as also in the veins the blood, and in the heart the
vital spirit: The blood to (...) the veins perfected.
which (says Collumbus) is engendered by the labor of the lunges in the
venial lib. 7.
Arteris, but after made perfect in the heart, as in ye History of the
spiritual parts is sufficiently touched. Therefore, even as Nature has given
unto the veins (which she framed for instruments of distribution) of the
generatiue faculty of blood, even so, and by the same reason, to the small
intrels; made for distribution thereof into ye veins, a certain co^coctiue
faculty of meats is joined. ^lynded, The use of the foldes and compasses of
the g^tes.
and turned with many foldes and turnynges, has nature all the scope of the
small guts: to the end, that if any nourishment in the passage of the first
anfract or turnyng do escape the mouths of the vessels, to the inside of the
intrels opening, it might chance into the second: but if it did pass that
also, yet follows the third, fourth, fifth, and others a great number.
Wherefore for the streit and long passages, with so many turns and foldyngs,
every part of the meat is at length constrained to appropinguate the mouth of
some one, or other of the vessels. Cue^ as the whole gutte every where round
about, is replenished with an innumerable multitude of vessels: whose Orifices
penetrate into the capacity of the intrels, after the manner as shortly shall be
said. Of the which vessels is catched, what soever is profitable of the
nourishment that passes by. So as it cannot be, that any juice fit for the
nourishment of the body, may slip from the same unprofitable. The foldes and
turnynges therefore of the guts, are to that end made, to yield exact
distribution of all the concocted nourishment, lest the same swiftely passing
away, and so going out, the body should be driven into an urgent necessity of
receiuyng Why man is so temperate in (...) king of sustenaunce.
nourishment: whereby men should lead their lives in continual needefulnes of
belly chere. As for example. The creatures in which none of those foldes or
turnyng, spoken of, are found, but have one simple intrell, or gutte from the
Why some creatures are insatiable in catyng.
ventricle to the fundament straight pretensed, we see to be ravenous,
insatiable, and such as live in perpetual desire of eating. Not improuident by
them did nature in man's body work her effect in the intrels, with such
anfractuous foldes as are evident, that they might delay, and a while retain
the juice which flows from the ventricle, until the meseraicall veins have
sucked in all that is Now the juice (...) carsed to ye liver.
commodious, and carried it to the liver.

But the great guts, although they be also to the distribution of the iuyces
The use of the great (...).
convenient, notwithstanding particularly, because great is their amplitude or
scope, and therefore able to gather together and contain many things, to the
end that not immediately, but by long space of time we use egestio^. Also if
any thing shall escape this suckyng in the small guts, the same whilst with
longer delay the excrementes tarry in the great, is haled forth by their
vessels. But to speak of these particularly, that is to say of the singular
parts and divisions.

First all that part of the gutte, which under the ventricle from the inferior
The first part called Duodenum. Situation.
Orifice thereof, straight (after a certain manner) descends thither, whereas
the gutte first begins to be infolded, because in man for the most part it
holds Lib. 5. cap. 5.
the length of xij. fingers, is called of the Greeks (...), and of the Latins
Duodenum. There are (says Vesalius) which think not good to call this a
gutte, but rather a rising, beginning, or a Process of the intrels. This
portion or part Duodenum is led into no anfractuous foldes, as before of others
is said, Why Duodenum has no foldes.
for as much as under the ventricle where it is carried, it obteineth no spare
place, or vacant room in which it might aptly bow, and infold it self. As
also that it be^oued it to give place to Uena porta coming from the hollow of
the liver, as Galen copiously mentions in his ii^. (...) of the utility of
parts. (...).


The original thereof is therefore from the inferior Orifice of the ve^tricle,
ralled Pyloron, and in diverse from the same Wherefore to this purpose, Galen
says Pyloron.
Duodenum is the beginning of the (...) and not Pi^on
in his fourth of the use of parts. That Duodenu^ or the beginning of the
guts is not part of the ventricle, but sour other part connect and knit
thereto.

Fuchsius therefore says, that they are much deceived, which judge no
difference Lib. 3. Cap. 5.
between Duodenum and Pyloron. Duodenum has a vein and an Arte^e peculiar
(...). ^. (...). ca. ^.
to it self, and which is carried directly downward after the longitude thereof.
(...) and Artery.


This vein purchases his estate from Venaporta before it be inserted in
Mesenterium. Ves^lius.
But the Artery proceeds from that, which is offered to the liver. Nerves
such as it has, it receives from those, which come to the lower D^ce Nerves.
of the ventricle, and to the right side of the bottom thereof.

Beside, the intrell Duodenum chalengeth that unto it self, that the way or
The be^te of coler to Duodenu^.
passage carieng yellow coler to the guts, is implanted to it, that is to
say, by the influxe of coler stimulatyng and styrring up the force of the
guts, to help their action vehemently, and to the expulsing of phlegm within
them insident.

But notwithstanding that thus Uesalius describes a peculiar propperty to
(...).
Duodenum, that is, the access of yellow coler unto it, whereto Fuchsius not
only Cap. 5.
subscribeth, but also says further that they are far deceived, that affirm
this passage of coler to be inserted to any other of the guts, alledgyng
further, with many words in the v^ Chapter of his third book, that whereas
the occasion of this error seems to be take^^ut of Gal. ^b. 13. Therap.
method. cap. 13. It happens rather through i^becillitie of his interpretour
Tho. Linacre, not perfectly Tho. Lin^e.
understanding the sens^ or meaning of that place. But howsoever himself
understood of that place, I will leave to the learned to discuss. Only this I
say, that I say, that all are not agreed upon this point that Uesalius, and he
have set down without doubtyng, as more propperly we may declare in describyng
the next gutte.

The progress of this portion Duodenum is thus, after the extorture thereof
C^. Lib. 11. cap. 5.
from the ventricle, it descends toward the Spine, whence again afterward
The progress of Duode^um.
it rises, and gives a beginning to the foldes or turnynges of the guts,
there endyng. So under it is laid a certain Glandulous body to support, and
shield V^l. ^oc. cit.
The use of the glandule under Duod^num.
the vessels propper to the same g^tte, as als^ to irrigate, and moysten the
amplitude, or scope of the same gutte with a certain gentle humor: but
because this intrell alone does not receive the r^hearsed utility, but in like
manner also the other intrels: I will defer their special explication till I
take in hand to speak of Mesenterium.

Now the second intestine there begins, where is made the first conuolution
The second portion o^ y^ guts. (...).
or enfold. The Grecians call it (...) the Latins Ieiunum, and that because
from time to time in dissection, in comparison of the other guts, it is
found Why it ^s called the hungr^ gutte. What makes it ever empty.
void, and empty. For the juice that it receives, it tra^smitteth most
swiftly: for that choler not mixed with the juice flows to the side of the
intrell, styrryng up by his sharpnes the virtue thereof, to the immediate or
sp^dy propulsation of that therein contained.

But then me think if it should but flow unto the side of this, from the
abundance Collumbus affi^meth the way of (...) to come vnco (...).
of that which Duodenum has, the chief effect thereof should be more seen in
Duodenum then in this, that is, Ieiunum should never be found so empty as it,
whereas always this bears the name of emptines above any other. And Realdus
Lo^. Cit.
Collumbus writes plainly, in telling wherefore it is called Ieiunum, or as w^
may term it the hungry gutte, which happens (says he) because the juice
coming hither is as yet thin, and flowyng. Furthermore for the cause of the
way of the vessicle of choler, which ends at the beginning of this same
gutte: without any Lib. 1. (...). ^.
mention of coming to Duodenum. Also Iho. Fernelius says it auoydeth speedely
from it, by the sharpenes of choler, that flows into it. So that it may
reasonably be gathered, if choler work his most special effect in this, that
then his principal prospect is thereunto.

This gutte Ieiunum is situated just in the midst of the bellye, being th^re
(...). (...).
next unto the center of Mesenterium, to the end that the arms or branches of
The ^ation of (...).
Venaporta, and the great Artery, might with a shorter journey be poured out
upon it. But that Rhazes, Mundinus, Alexander, Benedictus and such others, that
The ^rour of ^ers.
supposed this intrell to be no more turned or folded then the last of all
called Rectum, were greatly overtaken with error, there is no man that knows
not.

Ieiunum has his veins and Arteries in copious sort, from those which are
(...) and ^ries.
reached forth to Mesenterium, from Venaporta, and from the root of the
Artery, that from the great Artery takes his beginning above the Arteries of
the reins. For few branches are diffused among the smaller guts, from the
arm of the Artery, which begins from the great Ar^eries, after the going
forth of the seminall Arteries. Neither are the vessels, as in Duodenum led
after the length of Ieiunum under it, but as out of the center of Mesenterium
from beneath stretch up ^ow the (...) come unto (...).
ward, and straight forward into it, being thereunto with sundry sorts of
braunchyngs, like the root oftrees, especially into the hollow part thereof,
implanted, openyng their mouths into the inside of the gutte. Sinews likewise
obtains Nerves.
this hungry intrell derived from the branches of the v^. pair of the brain,
which are extended to the roots of the ribs. For from them two branches, on
each side, are sent to Mesenterium, and thence again into many parts broken,
and delivered to the intrels.

The third intestine succeedyng Ieiunum is called Ileon, of some Tenue, or
Gracile, The third port^ Ile^n.
but most commonly Ileon, for the many foldes thereof or Vesalius and Collumbus
do testify. It occupyeth the midst of the bellye as Ieiunum for the same
Iocis c^tat.
Situation.
^uses, and ends at the beginning of the great gutte. But where Ileon
begins it is no plain matter to express. For from the beginning of Ieiunum
down unto the end of Ileon, is found no manifest matter, whereby to distinguish
the end of the one and beginning of the other. For (says Collumbus) they both
be of one substance, Now the end of leiunum from the beginning of Il^o^ is
distinguished.
and color. And no otherwise he can search the difference between them, then
that the meseraicall veins are more plentyfull, and great in Ieiunum then in
Ileon. These three intrels hitherto spoken of, are the small guts, the other
The small guts.
three that follow, the great: that is to say Caecum, Colon, and Rectum.

The fourth gutte therefore being the first of the great, is called by the
ancient Vesal. ^uch.
professors of Anathomic Caecum, that is the blind gutte, because it is
endewed Why the fourth portion is called Caecum.
with one only mouth. Hence it comes that Auicen, and some other later
professors have named it Orbus, or Monoculus. And they are far deceived,
which not yeldyng to the ancient Greeks, do devise two holes or Orifices
therein, 16. 3. tract. 1. Ca. 1.
In Caecum are not ij. holes as some have deused.
when as these two Orifices, which they imagine, are not in the said gutte
called Caecum but in the extuberant beginning of Colon. For this in his left
side has ij. Orifices: whereof the one higher is continual with the small
gutte, but the other Colon i^ his (...) side has ij. Orifices.
lower is called the beginning of Caecum.

Wherefore this Caecum in man is shorter then all other intrels, and much more
narrow, and street, then the narrowest part of all the other intrels, and like
a Caecum i^ the shortest part o^ the guts.
(...) worm wound in foldes rather then a gutte: so that it seems scarce
wort^y to be accounted in the place of an Appendance of the guts, much less
therefore Figure.
in the number of the thick intrels. And Julius Pollux in his second book,
accompteth A ^chsio citatus.
it rather and more rightly an Appendaunce then a gutte. Far wide Now,
untruly this gutte is called a lack.
therefore they do stray, which affi^me this blind gutte to be as a certain
large and thick belly, meet for the receipt of excrementes, and for that
cause give it the name of a sack. But from the used authority of Galen, being
ignorant that him self was deluded by Apes.

In dogs also this blind gutte is much more ample and large then in men, In
what creatures Caecum is large.
but in squirrelles and dorme mise, it is answerable to the amplitude of their
ventricle, and in dissection found swelled out with dregs. And for that
cause in such creatures rightly, it may purchase the name of a sack, but in
man other-wise: in whom that small portion of intrell and Appendaunce, not
annexed to Situation.
Mesenterium, but in it self folded, and cleauyng by the benefit of Fibers,
is Caecum Intestinum, because that in order, situation, and form, though not
in largenes, Wherein Caecum (...) (...) is compared to the (...) gutte in other
creatures.
it agree with the blind gutte of the aforesaid creatures, and has one
Orifice, whence (as is said) it first took the name of Caecum. But Vesalius
opinion is suspected by Collumbus, in that he is thought to have given the name
of Caecum to What Vesalius understood by Cacum and what Collumbus.
this gutte for the Appendaunce sake: whereas he supposes rather the elders to
have understood by the name of Caecum Intestinum, what soever is stretched from
the insertion of the small guts unto Colon. The which space (says he) in
Oxen, swine, dorme mise, and squirels is very notable.

Of this (says Fernelius) the dregs, and refuse in the belly have their
first Lib. 1. cap. 7.
Where first the (...) beg^.
kind and name. For from the iuyces, whilst they are carried through the small
guts, is sucked and chosen all the most pure and vtile substance, the
remnaunt are superfluous dregs: by which name they are first nominated, when
as they come to this Caecum Intestinum.

The fifth portion is called Colon a torquendo, that is to say of writhyng, for
that (...) Poll. test.
Why the 5. portion is called Col^.
most mighty pains do consist therein, when as by phlegm or gross spirit, it
is obstruct, and stopped.

In the right side of Ilion, at the lower part of the right kidney, as a
certain Vesalius.
The beginning and progress of Colon.
great gloke swelling out, is that large and round beginning of Colon, which
from thence by little and little straight stretches upward to the liver, where,
being strewed somewhat under the hollow thereof, it touches the bleddar of
coler, with which touching it is sometime dyed: which perhaps was the cause of
error in The cause of error in Mundinus and others.
Mundinus and others, supposing therefore the way of coler had been transposed
to the intestine Colon. From the vessicle of coler it is brought forth of the
right side, after the inferior region of yt ve^tricle, and stretched under the
bottom of yt same ouerthwartly to Abdomen, but not above the ventricle as
Mundinus dreamed: Collumbus.
Mundinus his (...) surmise.
who craftily had surmised, that therefore concoction in the ventricle was
hereby assisted, whilst the excreme^ts in this gutte were detained. Whence it
comes that herein a hurtful humor holden, catches likewise the ve^tricle
by consent, whereby Gal^ oc. (...). Lab. 2.
How y^ ventricle is offended by rousent of Colon.
both appetite and concoction becomes the worse. And somewhiles in deed it
so affects the ventricle, as that the patient often falls into defect of
mind Vesalius.
whilst he endeavors to unload his belly. This again, after it has touched
the left side of the ve^tricle, it lightly obtains above the lower part of
the spleen Collumbus.
certain foldes, or in^ures, and so by little and little comes upon the left
kidney crookedly, whereto it is bound. Forthwith besides inflected, it
descends, and in coming to the left side of Ilion makes two compasses, at
length finishyng his course at Rectum Intestinum in the top of Os sacrum.
Hence also it comes How it comes that pain in Colon may seem ^e be in
Re^es and contrea^se.
that by the vicinitie or (more then that) the tyeng of Colon to the kidney,
Phisitio^s are sometimes deceived, imaginyng the pain that is in Colon to be
in the reins, and again that which is in the reins to be in Colon, as
plentifully Galen teaches in his 6. de affec. loc. ca. 2.

But to the end that the right, or greater trunk of Vena porta might be seated
Vesalius.
in the small guts with shorter journey, and to transfer the meat to the
liver How Colon gives pl^ce to the small guts and why.
by more abridged way: this intestine Colon gives place to the small guts,
and proceeds as it were by distaunced places much from the center of
Mesenterium. For which cause, the principal portion thereof occupyeth the
left side of the body.

Moreover this gutte in men is far otherwise then in dogs, it is not
exactly The fo^rme of Colon.
ly round, but all after the length thereof depressed above, and beneath, and on
(...) side effourmyng a certain row (as it were) of globes, and celles.

To Colon in his whole progress, from the right side of Ilion almost to the
left Vessels to Colon.
kidney, veins and Arteries, like as to Ieiunum and Ilion, are implanted: that
is to say, from beneath rising by companies upward: and to the inferior part
there, of from the right kidney, even unto the straight gutte veins, and
Arteries, like as to Duodenum, are reached. And Nerves both Colon, and the
other great guts N^.
have, with the small intestines common. Finally when nature had devised this
Collumbus.
fifth portion of sufficient largenes and scope, she prepared for the same two
Ligamentes The ij. Ligamentes that hold Colon.
like ij. gyrdles, of which the did the one higher, the other lower.

The sixth, last, and lowest portion of the guts is called Longoan or Rectum.
It Vesalius.
The ^i. portion of the guts called (...).
great gutte, that descends from the beginning of Os sacrum, down to the
fundament or seat, in men under the bleddar, in women under the matrice, is
comprehended Situation.
under the name of Rectum Intestinu^, in English the straight gutte. It De^els.
has vey^es and Arteries from the branches of Porta, and the great Artery:
and N^ues.
of Nerves chalengeth his part among those, that are common to the other
intrels.

But before I clean break of this description of the guts note (diligent
Collumbus.
The notable de^ce of nature in placing yt guts in the belly.
Reader for so Collumbus wills) the notable devise of nature, who in platyng
the intrels, first made of the great guts as it were a certain valley, and
then sightly seated therein the small: the more easily to shun all extreme
injuries.

The body named Mesenterium, or Mesaraeon, purchases both those names Vesal.
cap. 6.
Testante. Gal. de an^t. admi. lib. 7.
between the intrels, and therefore complecteth them as a band. But it is named
Mesaraeon for his propper substance, conteinyng all the veins descending from
Mesenterium and why it is so named.
the liver into it, together with the nighe Arteries and Nerves: whence those
veins hap to be called Mesacaic^, or Mesaraea. What the veine^ in Mesaraeon
are called.


Therefore in the hinder part of the guts is placed this band: by whose
benefit it might come to pass, that the intrels be bound together to the
back. It rises Situation.
from the Spine, and is begotten of two Membrans from Peritonaeum, or is The
original of Mesenterium.
(as Collumbus briefly speaks) a doubling again of Peritonaeum, between
which Cap. 6.
reduplication the aforesaid vessels run. Notwithstanding the original of
those Vesalius.
Membrans is not from one and the same seat of Peritonaeum, but diverse,
according Fou^e.
to the form of the same Mesenteriu^, which the guts almost do make, being
therewith bound together. For as the manner of every inflexure of the guts is
not alike: so neither every where alike shape of Mesenterium. Which Galen as it
s^emeth diligently noted Lib. de Ven. dissect. For although in deed
Mesenterium Di^isson of Mesenterium.
be every where one continual, he nevertheless has recited three as one the
right, an other the left, and the third the midst.

It appears that he calls the midst that part of Mesenterium, which
Which is the midst.
gathers Ieiunum and Ilion so the back: which springing with a narrow
beginning, is brought forth into a marvelous amplitude and breadth, that it
might grow to all the inflexures of Ieiunum and Ilion.

The right and left he might name, where it byndeth Colon and Rectum to the
Which is the right and left side.
back. The right in the region of the right Ilium, and left placed in the
left. The part therefore of Mesenterium peculiar to the small guts, chooses in
all respect How that part of Mesenterium is begotten that ^oyneth the small
guts to the back.
the like beginning as does the inferior Membran of Omentum. For from the
coats of the great Artery and hollow vein, which the same vessels in their
whole progress, after the Vertebres of the loins, obtain from Periton^um,
Membraneous Fibers in great number arise, immediately degeneratyng into ij.
Membrans, the right into a right, and the left into a left. By these Membrans
mutually knit together, that part of Mesenterium is effourmed that byndeth the
small guts to the back. But the parts conne^yng Colon and Rectum together
Whence spr^geth the part knitting Co^on and R^cum to the back.
to the back, spryng from those regions of Peritonoeum after which these
intrels are reached, Peritonaeum always sendyng forth certain Fibers thither,
which do degenerate into Membrans.

Neither is the substance of Mesenterium, only that it might bynd the intrels
Why Mesentenon is of such sub: staunce.
more strongly to the back, made Membraneous, but also for a certain other
great use, that it might safely gather together, and shield the secure course
of veins from Porta, and Arteries from Magna, ramifieng in ye intrels, so that
neither whilst a man leapeth, or falls they are co^tused or broken. For the
greater trunk of Vena porta, whereas Mesenteriu^ about the region of the
reins springs How the truncke of Vena Porta enters into Mesenterium.
from the back, is led between the two Membrans thereof, associated with an
Artery, which fetches his beginning from the great Arteric, before the same
Whence the vessels come. senterium.
disperse his branches unto the reins, to the end it might be poured out into
the intrels. Hither also are extended two Nerves, on each side one, made out
from those branches, which from the vj. pair of the brain are reached out
to the roots of the ribs. So that the same great trunk of Vena porta, and
the said Artery, together with the two Nerves do go under the center of
Mesenterium, making entrance between the Membrans thereof, which mutually
cleave together: and afterward, strayeng throughout all the region of
Mesenterium, insert The distribution of the vessels to the guts.
them selves to the intrels by innumerable branches. But beside this rehearsed
Artery, there is an other certain stock derived from the great artery,
which enters into that part of Mesenterium, that under the region of the
veins begins from the back. And the exorture of this stock is taken from
the great Artery, a little under the beginning of the seminall Arteries.

Furthermore, even as man every where abounds with copious fatnes, so Fat
in Mesenterium.
likewise in Mesenterium the plenty thereof is spyed, by blood there sweatyng
out of the vessels, and after converted into fat by the nature of the
Membrans. So that beside the sinews, and vessels, the Membrans of Omentum
contain likewise much fatnes between them.

But beyond all fatnes there is an other thing by nature added to Mesenterium,
Panchreas.
that is, a Glandulous body called in Greeks Panchreas, heretofore spoken The
office of Panchreas.
of: so substrewed, and circumposed to the singular scissions of the vessels
every where, as that none of them by any mouyng may be dissolved or broken.

And therefore at the center of Mesenterium, where of the vessels the first
distributio^ Situation.
is made, nature has laid this Glandulous body, with all security to lead,
and conduct the first deriuations most notable branches of the vessels. To the
rest The use of all the Glandules to the guts.
of Mesenterium, for every branch she has given some Glandule, as a
firmament of the same division, never omittyng their official duty in
moystening the guts. So that together with the beneficial help of those
Glandules, the Membrans of Mesenterium most safely lead the vessels toward
the intestines, with no less utility byndyng the guts to the back, and at
length formally fashionyng a third coat unto them all. As when the Membra^s of
Mesenterium deduce How the third coat is made to the guts.
the vessels to the hollow part of the guts, together with the vessels,
they grow unto them, but thence either of them mutually departing creep over
by The (...) of the third coat.
the sides of the guts, and degenerate into a third tunicle: by this
occasion, both byndyng them more strongly, as also for the vessels,
constitutyng the safer propugnacle.

THe next, and most notable neighbor unto the ventricle is the liver, the
retainer The (...) the (...) of concupiscible faculty.
of all concupiscible faculty: whom no man (for his vicinitie) may deny to be
greatly assistaunt unto the same, through his warm complexion, and The (...)
(...) the (...) of blood and aid to the (...).
situation with the natural nourishment of the blood, whereof who can disprove
it the fountain, although Aristotle would feign have proved the beginning of
Gal. lib. 4 us. part.
blood to be in the heart.

Wherefore this being one of the principal parts in the body, leaves us to
Col. lib. 6 de. Iecorect (...).
note how that it is first also engendered above other members in the body. For
The (...) (...) first engendered and how.
when the Vmbelicall vein is first engendered, thereto also first cleaves and
increases the liver, the first instrument of the generation of blood.

It is collocated immediately under the midrief, occupieng the greatest part of
Vesal. lib. 5. cap. 7
Situation.
his inferior seat, but in the right side of Abdomen, under the false ribs:
in Col. (...).
which place it is fastened with two Ligamentes, of which the one is about the
Two (...) of the (...).
hollow beyne, the other is called a Suspensorie of a certain division,
wherein the Vmbelicall vein is inserted. These therefore do fasten the liver
unto Septum transuersum. And although it be situate in the right side as is
said, yet nevertheless it occupyeth a great part likewise of the left side,
whereas by the help of a strong Ligament, it is connected and knit to
Diaphragma.

It is not in figure exactly round, and in man is a whole substance, not
divided Figure.
into lobes as Galen verily supposed, although of that manner it be to be found
in four footed creatures. And the cause why in us y^ litter is whole, and in
them Why man's (...) is not divided into lobes as us (...).
divided, Collumbus does in this manner discuss, that man being of direct and
straight figure, fourmed by the hand of the omnipotent, whith the hollow part
of the liver Ibidem.
covers next, and immediately the ventricle which coueryng from the right to
the left side, occupyeth the whole Anteriour region, and makes that the
ventricle Topic medicinis are (...) applied upon the sharp cartilage.
suffers no cold. Wherefore it is easily (...), how finally auayllable are ye
vngue^tes, which some men minister upon the sharp (...), to amend the cold
intemperature of the ventricles, whilst they increase but the heat of the
liver under lying, and before hoate of nature.

But again to ye purpose. The liver of four footed beasts is divided into
many Why the liver in (...) (...) creatures is divided into lobes.
lobes, the apter to enclapse the ventricle as with the fingers of ones hand:
which, if it should be whole, and they going prone upon the earth, might by no
means be brought to pass. But in birds for that they rather stand
vpstraight, The liver in birds is divided into (...) parts.
then go prone upon the earth, it is only into two parts separated. Therefore
in man no where divided at all, but in the Anteriour part, and out side of the
liver. Why the liver of men has that only d^usion.
Which was necessary there to be divided for the admission of the vmbellicall
vein. Under this also, where Vena porta goes out, are two small eminences,
Two (...) under Vena caua.
necessary for the defense thereof, lest the vein, by the body of the Vertebres
at any time, should be compressed. But nevertheless these eminences are
neither to be called Lobes, Fibers, nor wings.

The liver having two parts the one exterior, and the other interior, has
the outer Gibbous or vo^ed forth, and smooth, but the other hollow, and roughe
The coat that inuesteth ye (...) and (...) it sense.
like water banks. And that because that underneath it is placed the round
bounched ve^tricle. It is circundated, and enwrapped with a thin Membran of
Peritonaeum, wherefore the extremities thereof are not void of feelyng.

It is in substance nothing else but a heap of crudded blood, intertexed with
The substance of the liver.
(...) veins, and some Arteries, and is a great member, the prince of Abdomen.
Wherein some have supposed natural spirits to be engendered, but that Natural
spirits are not begotten in the liver.
sentence is not allowed: for, to be the fountain of blood (as is aforesaid)
nature dedicated his office. Neither do I suppose that any man in these days
doubts it to be the head, original, and root of all the veins. The
original of Vena poit^.


IN the hollow part whereof spryngeth a vein, called of the Grecians (...) of
the Latins Porta, which, contrary to Vesalius opinion, Collumbus affirms
continual with the vmbelicall vein. The roots therefore of Vena porta are
diversely sowed in the hollow part of the liver throughout his substance. And
they be sufficient thick, chiefly as touching their coats, and at length in
one vein do coite and join together, so constitutyng a thick trunk, or
stock: which afterward goes wholly outer between the aforesaid small
eminences. Which Why it is called Vena po^.
therefore Hipocrates called Portas, as it were the gates for the issue thereof.
But afterward under the ventricle.

It is divided into many branches, whereof the first it sends to the upper
The first bra^ch of Vena po^ta is carried to the upper orifice of the ventricle.
part of ventricle. Of which branch one part creeps after the length thereof,
and an other embraces above his Orifice is a crown, and is therefore called
Vena Coronalis.

The second branch of Porta goes to the inferior part of the Uentricle,
Vena Coronalis.
The De^tricle is nouri^hed by blood not by chilus.
branches of veins committed, so that by their blood the Uentricles might be
nourished: but not therefore nourished with the juice Chilus, as some fondly
have dreamed, which being over thick, also contains in it self all kind
of The spleen only is nourished with excde^etes.
excrementes. Neither is any part of the body (the spleen excepted which is
nourished by mela^colie humor) increased by any excrement. The third branch
Porta goes forward to Om^itum, and there in sundry sort is scattered.

The fourth is conveyed to the spleen, to transport thither the melancholy
humor Glandules compiled together, lest it should touch the bodies of the
Vertebres, or at any time be compressed: thence therefore it rises, and
deuideth the longitude of the spleen, thereunto entryng. From this vein
springs an other, small in some, in other The beine from the sple^ to the
ventricle carieng sour juice to the stirting up of appetite.
great, and again in others greater: this climeth up toward the Orifice of
the Uentricle, and there ends. Although sometime it is to be noted not to
ascend so high. The office of this vein is to drink, and pour out of the
melancholy humor into the Uentricle: and that to this end (says Vesalius) to
strengthen Vesal. Ibidem.
all the functions thereof by the quality of his taste, which is sharp and
sower, therefore The use of Melancoly to the stomach after (...).
byndyng, and drawyng it together in it self, and also of nature, forbyddyng
the meat to slip out of the stomach before it be fully confected. And this
(saythhe) is ye true, and very lawful use of the mela^colie humor, brought
unto the stomach, denying to what end, or how it may serve to provoke, and
stir appetite The use of Melancoly to the stomach after Collumbus.
in the stomach continually. Which argument Collumbus has again
(notwithstanding) approved and fortified, saying that without the same, we
should in our great affairs and business forget to take our meat: which might
purchase decay, Col. Lib. 6.
and weakness in our bodies. And further affirmyng that in who^ this vein Why
some easily other^ difficulty do sustain hunger.
is larger, in such hunger may lest be suffered: and in such as have it lesser,
they may better endure abstinence.

The 5. branch of Porta is sent to the intrell Colon.

And the vj. greatest of all, to the small intestines.

The vij. to Rectum Intestinum, and these are the principal branches of Vena
porta. Of the which those iij. which are said to be transferred to the intrels,
wherein they come into Mesenterium, there they are divided into the infinite
number The ^eseraicall be^es where they end in the intrels have Membrans in
their extre^ties
of Meserenicall veins: which do not only embrace the intrelles, but also
pearse through into their inner cauitie: whereas most advised nature has given
to the extremities of every of them a Membran, like as in the bleddar, to the
extreme ends of the vretarie vessels: which both give passage to the urine
discendyng into the bleddar, and also prohibit that vpwardes none may return
again. The same work also esteem that nature has wrought in the extremities
of these Meseraicall veins. Which no man before Collumbus has invented,
although all together confess that the office of these Meseraicall veins is
to The great (...) (...) of na^ as (...) the (...) (...) (...) (...) vnknow^ to
other (...), (...) before Col^.
draw the juice Chilus from out of the intrels: but in neglectyng to follow the
end of them, they failed also to find the great industry of nature, that is,
by what great policy and art she framed them: first that these veins might
easily receive, and draw the juice Chilus, and immediately being received,
that these little. Membrans mentioned, should prohibit the egression thereof
again. And if thou ask what Chilus is, as one not yet possessing ye full
knowledge thereof, know What Chilus is.
that it is a conversion of meat and drink into a matter like to the
substance of milk, which after it is past the Uentricle, descends still the
turnyng ways of How the dis^bution of (...) is made.
yt intrels, until these have sucked forth whatsoever juice is good and
profitable. And for because that to his office neither four nor yet x. veins
were sufficient, nature created an innumerable sort, and these in the upper
ventricles much more Why there are ^oe veins i^ the upper the^ in the nether
i^trels.
great, and plentiful, but the more descendyng, so much the more thin and
sc^rse. Neither did necessity require them so much in the last intrelles,
because Chilus is there now turned into dregs, and hard excrement.

As yet there remains an other branch to be described, which is also to be
Vena Porta, notwithstanding that it is derived from that which is dedicated to
the spleen: and descendyng on the right side The (...). d^ll veins.
through Mesenterium, goes down to the extreme end of Rectum Intestinum,
there making the Hemorrhoidall veins, which purge the abundance of
melancholy humor. And thus much of the original and description of Vena Porta
is sufficient.

The general use both of Vena Porta, and his branches, is to bring the juice
The use of Vena porta and his branches.
Chilus into the hollow of the liver, and throughout his substance to disperse
it: there again to be digested, and converted into red blood like the
substance thereof. In which digestion are two excrementes engendered, as choler
both Citrin, and The generation of yellow and black collor.
black: Of which yellow choler like unto the fire, is received of a little
vessicle, which nature in the hollow side of the liver has collocated and
ordained: but the melancholy juice is sent by the fourth branch into the
spleen, to nourish it.

Further, although these veins were forgotten for the translation of Chilus,
The ^wresayd beaut^s have a d^uble v^e.
nevertheless, they have also an other use, no less necessary: since they
carry with them the blood, that nourishes the ve^tricle, intestines,
Mesenterium, and Omentu^. Col. (...).
But this by the way, Collumbus wishes us to note (though against the mind
Gal. 4. us. part.
of Galen) that in these veins is not the virtue of making, or transformyng
What veins to not make blood.
blood: which is easy to discern, to such as diligently mark the white
substance, and thin coat of the veins. For by what means may Chilus, by
their tenuitie and whitenes, it being also white, and thick, be turned to pure
red, and thin blood: whilst nature has each where ordained, that every
member of Every thing that alters chau^ geth that, that is to be (...) into
his color.
man's body, that has the office to convert any thing, does transmute, and
change it into his own color, as is to be noted by the testicles and women's
breasts? Also the Uentricle shows it plain, for whether the meats that we
eat be The Dentricle changes all meate^ into white.
white, red, yellow, green, or other colors, all those notwithstanding it
conuerteth to white, the color of his own substance. Here also the
testicles. etc.

BUt now in the Gibbous part of the liver, where the substance thereof seems
greater, and thicker, springs a vein called Concaua, Chilis, or Magna, The
dey^ called Concaua, Ch^lis, and Magna.
being the mother of all other veins in our body. To this are diverse thick
and great roots, which are inserted in the substance thereof from the top to
the bottom, and do all at length constitute that large vein, which is
extended and ramified both up to the head, and down to the foot. This vein
is rightly compared unto a great river. For from thence as there be many dikes
issuyng, so very All^che Parts of the body are nourished by blood.
many branches are derived from this vein, like little brooks, and runnyng
dikes, which are spre^ abroad throughout the whole body, transposing blood to
every Membran, of late made, and labored in the liver.

This Vena Concaua, in ascending upward from the liver toward the head,
perforateth the midrief, in what place it is distaunt from the bodies of the
Vertebres, and in that place puts forth two veins, which, again divided
into branches, are distributed throughout the same Diaphragma. Which done,
this Uena Caua, runnyng almost immediately to the right care of the heart, is
set upon The coming of Vena caua to the heart.
the Orifice of the right ventricle of the heart connect, and knit therewith,
complectyng it every where on the outside, not being carried into it.

IN this place it brings forth a vein, which compasses, and embraces the
Coronalis vena (...) the heart.
heart like unto a crown, wherefore accordyngly it is called Coronalis Vena.

FUrthermore this hollow vein ascendyng up toward the head, is carried up
above the lunges, and there distaunt from the Vertebres. And above the heart The
rising of the vein without a fellow call^ Axygon.
no small space, thrusts forth the vein without a mate, called by the
Greeks (...), which although it be in the right side, yet has his beginning
from the midst, or as it were the center of the hollow vein, which is
reflected near the bodies of the Vertebres, and down to the extreme part of
the breast descends, sendyng branches both on the right and left side to the
spaces between the ribs, The Intercostall veins.
for the nourishment of those parts. And although this stock lie in the right
side, yet nevertheless under the lunges, Aesophagus, and great Artery, are
branches, Weynes sent from ^he vein without a fellow to nourish the left side.
thence scattered, to cherish and feed the left side.

FRom the same right trunk or stock, whilst it begins to be reflected,
breaks of an other branch, which ascendyng vpwardes, dedicateth branches to
the superior spaces of the upper ribs, and not only in the right side, but
in the left also, except in some, and those very few, in which a little branch
is derived on the left side from Vena Axillaris, and carried now to two, now to
three, and sometime to one of the spaces between the ribs only.

FRom all these veins nourishyng the spaces of the ribs, as is said, there
The veins that nourish the vertebres and spinall marey.
spryng yet other veins, which go in between the Vertebres, where the holes be
for the production of Nerves. These veins nourish the said Vertebres, and
Spinall marey, and enter in at the holes sited behynd the bodies of the
Vertebres. From these further, before they enter in the Spinall marey to
nourishe it, veins are also sent to the Muscles of the skin and back.

Moreover above ye vein without a fellow, the hollow vein asce^deth, lyeng
Deynes, called Axillares.
a loft ye rough Artery, straight up the height of ye Cannell bone, there
putting forth ij. great veins called Axillaris, because they go under ye
armehole: which between the Cannell bone, and first ribbe, do pass by the
cauitie of the breast.

THen after from him stretches the humerall vein called also Capitalis or The
rising of the vein called (...), or Cephalica.
Cephalica, which nevertheless ascends not to the top of the shoulder: but
rather is carried after the inner region, and passing forth between the first
and second Muscle of the shoulder, stretches to the outer parts, and there
lies evident aloft. For when it is passed through the fleshy Membran, it goes
between it and the skin to the cubite, and is carried outwardly near to the
first Muscle that boweth the cubit: at which bought it deuideth in two
branches, whereof one goes to the inside of the cubite, and in departing from
the bought thereof it is united with an other like branch of Basilica: of which
two is made the true common In what place Cephalia and (...) is vn^ted.
vein. But the other bow of the aforesaid vein, in the outside of the cubit,
both above and outward produces many branches: but at length, the chief
branch Where is the (...) common, vein.
stretches above the wrest, and extreme part of the hand, between the little
finger and the ryng finger, and this division is carried to the extremities of
either of those fingers. And this is the vein commonly called of each
Practisioner Saluatella, ^.
the opening of which they believe to profit much in the effects of the spleen.
To which (of truth) me seems no reason can consent.

After that this Vena Axillaris is gone from out of the hollow of the breast,
and has committed from him this vein lately described, it plungeth it self
deeply ^.
under the Cannell bone at the Process of the scaple called Anchiroides: in
which place it obtains very many branches, which nourish the first Muscle
of the arm, and not only it, but also the second of the scapple bone, and the
second of the breast, and the fourth, and seventh of the shoulder, and the
scapple it self, and all the space even to Abdomen. Besides these, in women,
you must understand that other branches are convenient to the nourishyng of
the breasts.

FUrthermore this Axillaris Vena being carried to the shoulder, under the first
Muscle bowing the cubite, is divided into iij. and those notable great veins.
The vein called (...), or (...) (...), and (...) (...).
Whereof one is called Basilica, or Hepatica, the inner veins (after
Hypocrates) of the cubitte.

This vein, which we have said to pearse so deep, comes alost by little and
little to the extreme end of ye shoulder bone: and where the cubite boweth, like
to Cephalica, it is divided in two, whereof the one is united in the inside of
the cubite with a branch of Cephalica: in which place is made the common
vein. That is to say, common, because it is partaker of both the veins. Which
branches constitutyng The common vein why it is so called.
the same, are called Medianae, most commonly opened of every Practitioner.

But here is to be noted, that near to Cephalica and his Mediana lies no
nerve, Med^na Vena. ^.
so as there does to Basilica.

An other branch is poured forth by the exterior part, and diversely
conjoined: Anal^ is a (...) of ij. veins in ^ne, and sometime of an Artery and
a Vein.
for now with a branch of Cephalica, now with the common vein Per
Anastomosin: at length it sends branches above the wrest and back of the
hand, as also to the middle finger and forefinger.

THe other apparaunt vein, which is called common, in the midst and inside
of the cubit is carried obliquely above Radius, and so^dry ways divided,
sends a branch between the forefinger and thombe, and between the forefinger
and middle finger, and coaseth at the ends of them. And this bow was wont The
ve^ne (...) to be cut in disseases of the head.
to be opened in affectes of the head. But of the other two great veins called
Axillares, the one lies sufficient deep, and under it five Nerves, it is
little distant, but rather touches the bone of the shoulder, and sends out
branches to nourish The progress of the two great vemes (...).
the two Muscles that bow the cubite: then forthwith runs between the first,
and second Muscle, and above the bought in tripple sort deuideth: there
committyng a sort unto the inner Muscles of the cubite. Then searchyng further,
is inclined to the wrest, and under the Ligament have recourse unto the ball of
the hand, not sparyng there to dedicate surcles for the nourishyng of these
Muscles which are in the end of the hand: besides that to every finger they
apply two little veins, which after their sides to their extremities are
carried. An other branch passes at the bought, by that Ligament that is sited
between Cubitus and Radius, and is distributed to the exterior Muscles. The
other Axillaris in the mids of the shoulder is reflected toward the
posteriour part, limityng branches to the Muscles extendyng the cubite.
Afterward it tends more downward to the longest Muscle and to the two
horned Muscles, and to those Muscles, which have their beginning from the outer
tubercle of the shoulder, and so is it among these Muscles dispersed.

IN the same region under the Canell bone, where is the beginning of the
Axillares, The four vey^ to the muscles (...) Abdomen.
thou may also see spryng four descendent veins, whereof two descend under
the bone of the breast, in the side parts near the Cartilages of the ribs:
those go downward, and passing beyond the breast do march through the straight
Muscles of Abdomen, which in some women are joined with an other vein, which
from the inferior part rises to the same Muscles. These descendyng between
the fourth and fifth ribbe, sometime higher, and sometime more crooked, The
veins which in men nourish the anteriour Muscles of Abdomen: in women moreover
engender m^ke.
direct them selves to the outer part, in men to nourish the Anteriour Muscles,
and in women not to that end only, but for the generation of milk, being
dispersed in their pappes. The other two go downward above the hollow of the
lunges, near to Mediastinum and above Pericardium, together with ij. Nerves,
which are brought to the Tendon of Diaphragma.

SOmewhat higher appear four Iugular veins, two outer, and two inner: the
two outer immediately above the Canell bone, scatter the twigges unto the
Muscle Epwmyda. And the stock or trunk after the scapple bone rising
obliquely by the sides of the neck, sprinkleth forth parts to the Muscles
seruyng the The veins to the Muscles and skin of y^ head, and parts of the
face.
head, and after the hinder part of the head vpwardes to the skin of the
head, and to that part of the outer Iugularis which is left. Above the nether
iawe it offreth it self to the Muscle called Masseteres, and obliquely is
carried through the midst of the face to the greater corner of the eye:
nevertheless distributing some branches to the Muscles of the face, sends a
vein into the corner above the roundell, and that through the Muscle
constringing or pullyng together the eye lidde: Of the veins to the eye brows
joined and again disioyned.
the remnaunt ascends between the eye brows to the skin of the head. But
this note, that in some between the eye brows the left with the right is
joined, and again disioyned.

THe other Iugular vein is sufficient great, carried upward toward the The
progress of Iugularis Vena toward the seat of the skull.
seat of the Scull by the Anteriour parts of the overthwart Process of the
Vertebres of the neck, near the rough Artery.

The vein which we now speak of, under Larinx puts forth a notable
branch, with whose twigges the Glandules and Muscles of Larinx are nourished:
The veins nourishing the Muscles and glandules of (...).
the same vein is also diversely divided under the inferior iawe.
Notwithstadyng the division thereof is less when it comes to the Gla^dules
under the ear, seruyng to Hyoides, and to the tongue it self: and that
beneath. This vein the The vein that is opened in the dissease called Angina.
Physicians command to be opened in the dissease called Angina: the rest of
this vein is distributed to the jaws and also to that tunicle that inuesteth
the mouth.

THe greater truncke of the said vein enters the Scull through the unequal
The ve^ue sown in Du^ matter.
hole, by which the vj. pair of sinews of the brain descends. But being
entered, immediately it is converted to the posteriour parts, and sent into
Dura Matter: but carries his tunicle with him, and ascends by the hinder part
of the head, unto the top almost of the Labdall Suture, in which place, the
right side with the left is joined, and Dura matter duplified. From the
posteriour part it is carried to the forehead by the supreme part of the brain,
and inserted in the round hole between the forehead and Ithmoides: in the
hinder part of the head, where the veins did coite and join together in one,
it is admitted into the quadruplication Deynes nouri^hing the substance of the
brain.
of Dura matter. And from thence ij. veins go forth after the whole longitude
of the upper ventricles, which braunchinges nourish the substance of the
brain.

But the quadruplication of Dura matter above mentioned, is called a press, and
The part in the brain called the press.
lies between the brain and Cerebellum.

Again, the vein going by the superior longitude of y^ brain, co^stituteth
a The vein consti^ing a merualous cauitie.
marvelous cell or cauitie. For above it shows the plain pattern of a half
circle, but has beneath iij. corners, which in this place are sometime
larger, sometime streter. It spreads it self in a diverse fashion: and the
branches of it The (...) of veins through the hard and thin (...) and entr^
into the substance of the brain.
after they have perforated Dura matter, are ramified abroad through the thin
Membran, all about it, and in diverse sort now upward, now downward. But when
they are passed through the thin Membran, they enter the substance of the
brain it self.

ANd here my Author supposes this will seem news unto the Reader, because ^
the other (...) (...) (...) (...).
before him never any found out, that veins and arteries entered the substance
of the brain. Under this substance of the brain the inner Iugul^ris, before
it enter the Scull, sends forth his portions by the laterall parts unto the
temporal Muscles, and in the Scull it self to the sides of Dura matter next to
the Canell bone. This vein brings forth an other little vein, whilst it
ascends after the transuerse Processes of the Vertebres of the neck, and
puts forth branches to the nourishment of the Muscles of the neck: the
same in some booyes springs from the vein Axillaris.

But where between the Vertebres of the neck Nerves go forth, thither this
vein hasteneth, to the nourishment of the Vertebres and Spinall marey. Upon
the first Vertebre it runs toward the hinder part of the head, where the
hole is evident that pearseth to the organ of hearing, which it enters to
nourish all The vein nourishing the b^nes of the head, (...), upper (...) and
(...).
the same organ. And by this inner Iugularis are all the bones of the head,
teeth, upper iawe, and nether, cherished: neither is there wherefore to expect
the description of any other peculiar branch of a vein to serve unto the
teeth only.

CAua Vena, or the hollow vein, after it has gone forth under Diaphragma The
course of (...) (...).
from the liver his propper fountain, it cleaves to the body of the Vertebres
on the right side, and after the going forth thereof a little beneath the liver,
puts forth a. small vein to nourish the parts adjacent, and is diversely
divided. Afterward the same trunk going downwardes, puts forth ij. veins
The veins called (...) not allway (...) in number.
called Emulgentes, which are ended in the veins. But beware thou esteem not
these to be always only two, since sometime you shall find them divided into
iij, (...) four, somewhiles five, albeit not commonly so noted of other
writers.

Galen principally, and also diverse other Anathomistes have used heretofore
Galen (...) bayi^e used reasons as touching the situation of the (...) veins
as touching ma^s body.
long discourse of words, as touching the puttyng forth of the Emulgent
veins, auouchyng the right vein to be higher exalted then the rest, and for
what cause: though in deed in vain. For since truth is contrary unto them
so much, as that they would by policy invent the reason of that which is not
so, both the proposition, and arguments of force must fall together, like him
that whilst he more endeavors to deck the top and sight side of his
house, then has care to set firm his foundation, his time, and cost both
perish together. Wherefore Collumbus Col. Li. (...). de I (...)
says, the reasons of Galen are more ingenious then true, as touching the body
of man (from which no part of these my labors by my will shall swerve) whose
veins Emulgentes thus we will describe.

FRom y^ left side of Vena caua under the ve^tricle, sheddeth out a large
vein, and Col. Ibidem.
The description of the ^mulgent veins.
sufficient long, called Emulgens, which is carried above the body of the
turnyng joints, and the Artery Aorta, flowyng to the midst of the left
reyne, which The situation of the kidne^.
is in man somewhat higher the^ the right, and that for the litlenes of the
spleen, which not resistyng romthe to it (as does the livers greatness on the
other side to the right kidney) leaves it in the higher state, the right being
compelled to stand lower. But after it is come unto the reins by the aforesaid
means, it enters the body thereof, there being amplified and cut into
branches, which throughout the substance of the reins are distributed.
Nevertheless, Collumbus would not There is no such ^earse in y^ reine^ as
others have seig^ed.
have us think of these to be made the searse, whereof Galen esteemed so much,
and that through it the Urine is streined, and it being dilated blood to be
pissed.

Here in deed nature (says he) might have been able to place Membrans as to
the Misera^ul veins, and to the ends of the vreters: but, because this seemed
more commodious unto it, there are certain eminences begotten of the same
substance of the reins, which entering into the same branches, resist that
the blood, How bl^ud happens to be made with Urine.
which together with the serous matter is deduced to the reins, should
naturally slip forth again. This notwithstanding being noted, since it is
notable, when nature endeuoreth to thrust down any stone, that commonly is
done with such force, as that it sends out great store of blood together with
the brine. The use of the Emulgent veins. The (...) vessel named vreter.


The use of these Emulgent veins is to purgethe blood of serbu^ substance,
and to the reins to yield due nourishment. From this vein springs a bessell
called Vreter, that is Vrinarius: it springs invery deed from the body of
the same reyne, there it takes Urine, and brings it to the bleddar.

In the right side the same Emulgent vein is sited lower then the left, and
shorter far: for betwirt the hollow vein and the right kidney is f^ial
di^aued, yet is it set to in the same order as the left.

THere springs from the left Emulgent a vein called Seminalis, or a seed
The left Seminall vein.
vein, which obliquely under Peritonaeum descendyng, and carried above Os
Pubis, is reposed in the testicle, as more apertly among the generatiue parts
is discussed.

But this mark by the way, that this springyng of the Seminary vein is The
false opinid of other Anathomistes as touching the beginning of the Seminall
vein.
not from the Emulgent to carry the serous humor to the left testicle whereby
the feast of Venus might with greater pleasure be celebrated, as many of the
ancient Anathomistes heretofore have devised. For (say they) nature therefore
determined the beginning of one of these Seminall veins to be so far of, to
ye end that in the act of coiture, the tricklyng down of the humor so long a
scope, should only be to purchase the greater delectation in that present time.

But the true cause (says Realdus Collumbus, is the litlenes of the said
vein, Col. Ibid.
The true cause of the beginning of the Seminall vein.
which if it should have sprung out from the body of the hollow voyne as the
right does, because it should then have gone over the great artery, it should
ever have been in danger in every great dilatation, which the same Artery
must needs make, to be broken. Which inco^moditie to prevent, prudent nature
devised a needeful mean: willing therefore that from the left Emulgent vein,
and not from the body of the hollow vein, the left Seminall passage should
take his beginning.

Contrariwise the right Seminall vein flows out from the fountain of The
rising of the right Seminall vein.
the hollow vein, the space of ij. or iij. fingers breadth under the right
Emulgent, which first descends obliquely, then is carried under Peritonaeum,
after above Os pubis, but lastly ends in the testicle.

And this is the race of the Seminall veins in men, with a more likely
conjecture then among the a^cientes was known, or imagined: who would by their
assertion prove (as it seems to me) that the longer the Seminall veins The
length of the S^nall veins (...) not the gr^ater delecta^io^ in (...).
were, the greater delight had the body in the act of generation. Which if it be
so, then prove they also that mon has more pleasure in the use of venerie then
the woman: whose Seminall veins having the like beginning and ends, yet but
half toward the length of those in man, for that her testicles are sited
within the body, never coming to the top of Os sacrum. But it is marvelous,
under the right Seminall vein, to the fourth Vertebre of y^ loins, to be no
vein sent unto the superior parts but only to the inferior parts. For
from the liver down to this place, between the Vertebres, where the Nerves go
fourth, the hollow vein profereth portio^s, which both nourish the Spinall
marey, and the body of the Vertebres. The division of Vena (...) at the 4.
(...) o^ the loins.


Nevertheless immediately, as Vena caua is come unto the fourth Vertebre of
the loins (...) is divided into ij. notable arms, which obliquely being
carried above Os Ilium, and Pubis, make their journey downewardes the one to the
right, the other to the left leg. From the which division, first spryng
veins The distribution of V^na Ca^ to the inferior parts.
sufficient great, which downwardes abroad, but first toward the fundament,
disperse them selves. For where the same division cleaves to Os sacrum he
tra^smitreth his arms through the holes thereinto the Spinall marey, to the
same Os sacrum, and to the Muscles sited in the loins, which take their
beginning from this Os sacrum. Moreover committyng his branches to the Muscles
of the buttockes, seruyng to the thigh.

From the same arms those veins are purchased, which are implanted in the
extreme end of y^ straight intrell. From this same vein go forth those veins,
that visit the sides of the bleddar to nourish it, and the Muscles seruyng to
the straight intestine, and that in men. For in women they go to the beginning
of of the neck of the matrice, out of which place their menstruous purgations
Whence (...) do fl^we in women.
flow from them. The same branch that nourishes the bloddar cherishes the
neck of the matrice. And the same principal division sometime begets a
vein, which descends, and down abroad is received in that hole which is
placed in Os pubis and Coxendix, and to the ix. and x. Muscle turnyng the thigh
about transporte themselves, to nourish them: yet further to the vij. and being
strewed through the inside of the thigh, have there an end.

This nevertheless by the way is to be marked, that the seiuinarie vessels in
How the (...) (...) in women are constituted.
women end not in the head of the testicles, but be poured downward to nourish
the substance of the matrice. From these veins the vmbellicall vein takes
his beginning, whereto is attributed the original of our generation. The
original of the Vmb^call vein.


The same division of Vena caua puts forth ij veins, that is to say a
right, and a left, which are vpwardes reflected toward the head. Their
progress is between the division of Peritonaeum, and above it, degeneratyng
into arms and branches: and under the straight Muscles, even to the second
intersection of them, The veins of C^na nourishing Peritonaum.
ar^ distributed, to carry to the said Muscles and Peritonaeum nourishment.
These b^ the veins, by which Hypocrates, and Galen affirm such co^sense to be
in women What veins make consent between y^ ma^ce and pappes.
between the matric^ and breasts, the which sometime may be found united with
those ij. veins, which, downwardes descendyng under Ste^non, are placed in the
end of the straight Muscles.

In some bodies they are joined only in one part or two with a very small
branch. But Collumbus says that in some bodies of women, what diligence
soever he used, yet might he not possibly find the union of these veins. But
this he says, that they come not from the nature, but from that division
whence the veins of the matrice do spryng, which are not instituted to cherish
the substance of the womb, but to nourish the neck thereof.

By those veins Mestrua are expurged, and not passing through the matrice,
Through what veins Men^ua are purged.
as Collumbus testi^eth in the above named place, where he alleges the
authority of very probable dissections, which he practiced for the purpose.
This thick arm or bow divided from the stock of Vena caua, when it comes
above Os pubis without Abdomen, is brought into the ^ankes, here begettyng very
many branches which nourish the Glandules there reposed, in which Glandules
happen The glandules wherein Bubo springs.
the tumors called Bubones.

FRom the same place veins appear which walk through the yard, between The
veins to the yard and purse of the Testicles.
the skin and fleshy Membran even to the end of Praeputium. His branches
also are through the purse of the testicles disseminated.

Out of the same place whence we have said all these veins do spryng, goes
forth a vein most evident, which obliquely ascends to Ilium os, marchyng
vnner the skin toward the outward parts of the ribs, and above Abdomen is
shed out in diverse branches.

This notable arm which a little before we have mentioned after it passed over
the flank, it goes forth in three parts, whereof one descends obliquely
inward toward the knee between the skin and sleshy Membran, and above it on
the inside descendyng through the leg, trauaileth above the inner ankle, and
upon the foot toward the toes, especially the great toe where it is diversely
bestowed. The vein called Saphena.
This is that vein of name called Saphena, out of which in disseases of the
matrice blood is wont to be losed, in the descense whereof very many branches
be here and there sent both to nourish the skin, as also to engender fat.

The other ij. thick bows or arms are carried covered of Muscles,
notwithstanding that obliquely they descend through the inner parts of the
thigh, and pass forth, between the ij. lower heads of the thigh, thus carried
under the knee: first distributyng many branches, which e^ult on the thigh
where it is bowed.

But from the greater brau^ch, which we have spoken of, rises a vein, which
under the skin first, then after through the hinder parts of the leg,
runs eue^ to the foot. Under the same bought of the knee an other vein
breaks out, which nourishes the Anteriour Muscles of the leg; and an other
also deeper: thus being carried downward, it cleaves to the Ligament sited
between Tibia and Fibula, which it perforateth, creeping to the Anteriour
parts of the leg, and descendyng above the foot, is with the Ligament
thereof coherent.

A greater brau^ch goes so low, that it runs even under the sole of the
foot by the inner ankle; sprinklyng in the leg and sole of the foot diverse
branches, surcles, and twigges.

An other branch likewise very notable is divided also through the Muscles,
and sends a vein under the (...). First Muscles sited behynd in the leg,
where their Tendon begins. Hence it rises up; and under the skin flows
toward the anteriour parts, being finally transmitted to the outer ankle of
the foot. And this is that vein of ^^ne called Vena Sciae, Ischi^, or
Coxendicis, and therefore Vena scij, Ischij, or Coxendicis.
in such disseases is opened. The branch that is borne under the knee is
named Vena poplitis, which in ancient authorities is often mentioned. From
which Vena Poplitis.
veins, as also from others before described, very many surcles and twigges
arise, which being small, and dispersed hither and thither diversely, with
uncertain order, and unlike at all times, for auoydyng unprofitable
prolixitie, my author Adian. Lib. 14. de Var. hist.
all further endeavor willyngly omitteth, and I, not desirous to offend in to
much diligence, do here ordain the foot of this matter, lest it be said unto
me as Antalcida Antalcida his answer to the Persian present.
answered the present of the Persians: Whose king sendyng him a garla^d of
roses, touched over besides with some odiferous ointment, I receive quoth he
Col. Ibidem.
the gift and I praise the promptitude of his mind, but he has lost the
savor of Fuchs. Lib. 3. cap 14.
The utility of veins.
the roses, and frangrantie of their nature, by deprauyng and falsifieng their
Art.

THis therefore shall be sufficient to the ingenious reader, waying well, the
first All parts are nourished with blood only.
creation of the veins to be for the tra^sportin^ and conuaying of blood, the
lively Why veins were made hollow.
nourishment, to all parts of the body, for so says Collumbus all members are
only nourished by blood. Wherefore nature devised the veins hollow, to the
The substance of the veins.
end that like rivers they should run throughout the body, having coats made
thin, yet of sinewy substance, and made (as Galen affirms) of Membrans,
Gal. Cap. 2. Lib. de inaequal. intemp.
and Fibers, toughe therefore, and able, not in prompt to every ruption. Fuch
Lo. predicto.


Leonardus Fuchs. de humani corporis fabrica comprehends all the veins of
How all veins are comprehended in the number of iiij.
the body within the number of iiij. as the roots of all the rest. That is,
one proceedyng from the hollow seat of the liver, and runs into the vessicle
of choler, into Mesenterium, and Omentum.

The second of the Gibbous part of the liver, into ye rest of the body (the
lunges

The third from the right ventricle of the heart is spread into the lunges,
only Arterialis.

The fourth is produced from the Navel into the liver, and only serves to

THe bleddar, that is the receptacle of yellow choler, and called of some
Cislis The bl^dder of choler.
Fellis, of others (though more rudely) the Gall or purse of citrin choler,
has Col. (...). 11. cap. 8.
his seat in the h^llow side of the liver. For on what side the liver
amplecteth the Situation
right side of the ventricle, there is a cauitie engraven exquisitely agreeyng
to the Vesal. Lib. 5. cap (...).
middle portion of the gall. And to that cauitie the middle superior portion
of the same vessicle after the length thereof grows: but the inferior part of
it, without the substance of the liver hangs downward.

It is in form long and round, by little and little down to the point of the
bottom Figure.
thereof like a certain long fashioned pear enlargyng, so that with a narrow
mouth, and more ample bottom it consists. For it being required that the rest
of the body thereof, should be large and capable, because it could not be made
exactly round as a globe, the cauitie is after the lo^gitude thereof augme^ted:
therefore nether asfected with any inco^moditie by the stomach, nor overmuch
insinuated in the liver.

But that being emptied it might flat or shrink in, like as by filling extend,
it is constitute of Membranous and sinewy substance, consistyng of one simple
Substance.
and peculiar coat, thin, but hard and firm enterwouen with three fold
manner Fibers.
of Fibers. The straight be inmost, the next are the oblique but fewer then the
straight, the outmost are the orbicular or transuerse Fibers. To this tunicle
Tunicle.
of the gall is lent an other from the coat of the liver, not to the whole
vessicle, but to that part only that hangs without the body of the liver,
which alone needs it for an inuolucre and propugnacle.

This vessicle although it grow in deed to the liver the shop of
sanguification, (...).
notwithstanding it takes unto it ij. very small veins from the stock of
Uena porta, in that order diffused into his coat, as we see the little veins
scattered into the adherent or white tunicle of the eye. Also from the Artery
reached Arter^ss.
out to the hollow of the liver, a very small branch is offered out to the same,
wandryng e^uen to the very extreme part of the bottom thereof.

Neither is the same destitute of sinewy relief, lest likewise of sense it
should Nerves.
be frustrate. For the Nerve of the liver being lead by the lower Membran of
Ome^tum, and brought from the right side or stock of the vj. pair of sinews
of the brain, reached out to the roots of the ribs, delivers forth a
surcle to this vessicle, in lean bodies almost no less evident then the
Artery.

The ways of this vessicle made to receive and put forth are thus. The neck
The passages or ways of ye bl^ddar of ch^ler.
of the vessicle (somewhat harder then the bottom) ends by little and little
at a street porie passage, at that part of the liver, whence Uena porta takes
his beginning. Whether when it is come, it deuideth into two Processes, one
reachyng upward, the other downward. That which is carried upward lyeng to the
Anteriour side of Vena porta, ascends into the liver, and therein being in
two parts dissected reaches one to the right side, the other to the left.
Every of these The brounches whereby choice (...) drawn i^to his Ves^cle.
also in the liver are digested into other surcles, and those again into
others, until they have constituted an innumerable order of branches, through
the body The passage of coler inserted to Duodenum after Vesalius, to (...)
after Collumbus.
of the liver between the arms of Vena porta and Caua diffused. And these are
the surcles or branches, by whose labor choler is drawn into this vessicle.

But the Process of that way of the vessicle which reaches downward, underset
with the inferior Membran of Omentum, hasteneth down somewhat obliquely, Loc.
Cit.
The use of the passage to the (...) trelles.
and is implanted to Duodenum not far from the beginning of Ieiunum, nay to
the beginning of Ieiunum says Collumbus. This Process (whereof before The
industry of nature in the passage to ye intrells.
is made mention) carries choler expulsed from the vessicle into the intrels,
in the mean time neither admittyng any of their juice or windyncs, nor any of
the The use of the membrans set to the orifice of this passage to the (...)
(...).
choler to regurgitate back again, because they have into the intrell not
only a writhyng entrau^ce, but it is brought to pass by the benefit of two
Membrans, stackly set to the sides of the Orifice, lightly yeldyng way to the
weight of choler rushyng in, as also wholly inhibityng the return thereof into
the passage ag^yne.

But the same passage inserted to the gutte is for the most part (...) (...)
and in very few two, or divided. Wherefore there is over plain (...) (...)
(...) The error of sundry Arabians.
Mu^dinus, Ualescus, and Carpus, with others of that Arabia se^, were exce^gly
(...) deceived, who affirmed that nature continually had assigned y. ways, for
the vomittyng forth of choler from his vessicle: as one to the intrels, an
other to the veutricle. For if choler should so have recourse unto the
ventricle, the same should by What incommobitie might happen by choler coming
to the ventricle.
the bityng thereof (as Gal. 5. us. partium affirms) perpetually provoke or
rather compel the ventricle to avoid the meat: nether should it so much use
the retentiue faculty, as whilst the meat were concosted.

Vesalius confesses he never saw it in all his time but in one only man, who
What Ves^us once saw as ^onching the coming of choler to the Wentricle.
in diverse other organs, and specially about the ribs and Muscles of the
breast, as he varied from the workemanshyp of other bodies, so had he one
passage also of choler that visited the ventricle, being a man of state, and
temperature of body, hoate and dry.

Realdus Collumbus never found it, although he protesreth him very often and
diligently to have searched for the same. But he denies not when there is
great abou^daunce It is against nature when cholet belcheth up to the ventricle.
of the same yellow choler, that it accustometh to regurgitate, and belche up
to the Uentricle, albeit the same is against nature, and not according to
Nature.

Contrariwise nothing resists the incourse thereof into the intrels, since
there the gift thereof is notable, cuttyng, purging, and wipyng away all gross
phlegm, The use of choler to the intrells.
or unprofitable humors heaped in those small passages. Furthermore by
styrring and bittyng, provoke their proppertie to a final extrusion of the
excrementes. And it self also together with the excrementes, yeldyng no hurt
(when as in man all things are dispensed by the law of nature) but great good
purpose, is at length put forth from the body. Of very right therefore the
passage carieng choler is in the guts, not in the ventricle, emplanted.

Choler is, as all sufficiently know, the thin excrement of blood: like as
melancholy What is choler.
is the thick dregs of the same.

THe spleen consists on the left side of the ventricle, more after the
inferior The situation of the sple^.
and posteriour parts. It cleaves to the lest part of Septum tra^suersum,
almost in the midst betwe^ the left side of the bodies of the Vertebres, and
the Cartilages of the false ribs.

In form it is correspondent to the proportion of his seat, and like unto
the Fi^.
liver impressed in him self by the parts adjacent. For where it touches the
midrief, as the same is their somewhat hollow, so accordyngly the spleen in
that place is bounched or Gibbous. Where the ventricle after a certain sort
lies on the spleen, as it is large, and there like a great globe extubera^t,
so in like case the spleen a little, and in the upper part only is hollow. For
in swine, Dogs, and Oxen, whilst it is longer but narrower, and stretched in
longer space to the Gibbous part of the Uentricle, it is in them more hollow,
and more complecteth the Uentricle in manner of the forth part of a circle.
Magnitude.


Contrariwise in man the spleen is thick, great, and broad, though shorter
the^ in such kind of creatures, and yet for all that not exactly four square.
The length far exceeds the breadth, for ye lower part of it stretched forth
more to the anteriour parts of the body, ends at a blu^t corner: but yt
upper part, into a more obtuse corner is co^pressed. The left side is somewhat
gibbous, yt right easily hollowed with (...). light impressio^s. The hollow of
the spleen, with a more profou^d line Where ye vessels are admitted.
reached after the length thereof, abounds, which directly proceeds, and
unequally here and there swellyng forth, admits the sinuated vessels of the
spleen.

This bowell moreover in man is naturally endewed with a certain black Choler
of the spleen.
and very obscure color, but in a dog has for the most part a more
splendent red then the liver in swine whitish.

The substance of the spleen consists of thick and much black concreted
Substance.
blood, like the more Solid kind of sponge, and lighter pumeise stone, packed
together with the frequented Fibers and filamentes of vessels. It is therefore
rare, The use of the spleen his substance.
and slack like a spo^ge, to draw and receive the thick iuyces from the
liver. And for that cause the small twigges or Fibers of the vessels (destitute
of hollownes) every where wouen together, are covered with much thick and
feaculent blood, Why the substance of the spleen is called (...).
which Erasistratus called Parenchina, because it is poured forth about the
vessels like as in the liver.

Ueynes, Arteries, and Nerves unto the spleen are after this sort. The lesser
or Deynes.
the least trunk of Vena Porta, supported by the inferior Membra^ of Omentum,
tends ouerthwartly to the spleen, and first offering branches to the
posteriour seat of the Uentricle, and the upper Orifice thereof, and to the
lower Membran of Omentum, as also to Colon where it comes to the Ue^tricle,
when it has put forth these, the rest of it derived first into two branches,
and those afterward into others, so that at length in copious order of
braunchynges, through the lower Membran of Omentum, they might be to middle
part of the hollow of the spleen, after the rectitude of the straight line
lately spoken of, implanted. But before these branches lose themselves in the
substance of the spleen, from one of the The beginning of the veins from the
spleen to the Dent^cle.
more notable branches, seeking into the lower parts of this bowell, a vein
breaks out, marchyng thence to embrace the lower seat of the Uentricle. From
the other branches going to the spleen, sometime three, sometime more branches
spring, runnyng to the left side of the Uentricle, but not to the upper Orifice
thereof ascendyng. And even as the veins that come unto the spleen are
supported by the inferior Membran of Omentum, so likewise those branches,
that from them are derived to the Uentricle, by the superior Membran of
Omentum are sustained.

Arteries also, which with such frequented course are directed to the spleen,
Arteries.
fetch their beginning from the Artery, which brustyng forth the great Artery
above the region of the reins, grows into the inferior Membran of Omentum,
and on the left side is especially offered to the spleen in equal order with
the reins thereto appertainyng.

Nerves to it are begotten from the brau^ch of the us. pair of the brain,
which Nerves to the Spleen.
ministers to the roots of the left ribben, and sends a surcle to the lower
Membran of Ome^tum, to be sprinkled in the coat of the spleen, rather then in
the substance thereof. Moreover the spleen no less then the liver, is covered
with a certain The conte of the spleen.
thin and simple coat from the Membrans of Omentum, that are tied to the
straight line of the spleen. For these Membrans, being inserted to the hollow
of the spleen, do degenerate into his coat. And because they have their
original from Peritonaeum, by their benefit, and interuenture, we may
worthily say that Peritonaeum it self offreth a coat to the spleen.

But beside the knittyng of this bowell to the back, and to the Uentricle by
How the spleen is bound to the midreife.
the assistaunce of Omentum, small twistes or Fibers, coming from Peritonaum
where it clotheth the midrief, are in uncertain number knit to the bou^ched
part of the spleen, whereby it comes to pass that the spleen is also bound
unto the midreif. But Vesalius confesses that these are not always to be found
in man. So Cap. 9.
sometime it falls out that the Gibbous part of the spleen is firmified to
the exterior inuolucre of the left kidney (which flows with fatnes) by the
mediatio^ How the spleen is sometime tied to the (...) of the ^dney.
of certain Fibers: But especially if the kidney (as often it happens) be
strewed for the most part under the spleen.

And this is the true description of ye spleen, ordained of nature to be the
receptacle The office of the spleen.
of the gross and feaculent part of blood confected in the liver. For as the
vessicle of choler serves to suck away the thin and lighter recrement, so
the spleen By what the spleen draws his ^culent blond.
to receive the thick and melancholy humor. And this the spleen allureth, and
draws unto him by the trunk of Vena porta coming unto him (as is said) in
sundry branches.

But this same iuyre being drawn, it does not immediately put forth, but The
operation of the spleen.
first with great diligence does labor and confect the same, making it lose
and spongious, apt for his own nourishment, to which thing are chiefly
assistau^t the often inserted The use of the arteries in the spleen.
Arteries in the spleen, by their heat highly helpyng to the exact elaboratio^
of his blood. Nevertheless if any part flee from the same elaboration, being
unapt for his nourishment, or to be made equal to his substance, it is
euomitte^ in The use of melancoly euomitted to the ventricle.
to the Ue^tricle to a great purpose and use, as before in the Uentricle is
showed, Fuchsius flatly affirmyng that by his sowrenes he assisteth the holdyng
and contractiue functions of the Uentricle: although Vesalius in his
description of the spleen (seeing the sundry opinions of men) durst affirm
nothing. But Collumbus does iterate old Auicens his opinion, notwithstanding
Vesalius doubts, and Fuchsius affirmation.

THe reins, which strain the blood sent of the liver into the hollow vein
V^l. Cap. x.
together with serous and watrish humiditie, which in plenty surmounteth The
kidneis ij. in number.
both choler and the feaculent blood, are made of nature two in number.

And that more speedely the serous humor, which we call urine, might by them
The reason of their situation.
be separated from the blood, they were both placed so near unto the liver as
was possible. For the right kidney in his upper part touches the lower region
of the liver, and the left seateth him self so hye, that on some side it lies
under the spleen. Either of them lies near the sides of the bodies of the
Vertebres, in the lower regio^ of the midreif, where the same covers the x.
xi. and xij. ribs, especially in that part where the ribs are most of all
to the posteriour parts obliquate and crooked. For that bowyng of the ribs
to the posteriour parts offreth How the seat for the kidneis is so fitly
prepared.
to the reins a fit seat, whereby they are both safely fenced, as also
notably prevented, lest they being toward the anteriour parts, yea but a
little, prominent, should occupy the seat of the other organs of nutrition.

Galen (says Collumbus) used much vain labor, in searchyng out the cause ^b.
11. Cap. 9.
(...) in vain disputed of the situation of the reins.
why nature left the right kidney higher then the other, as though the right
were situated higher the^ the left, but his study and reasons therein are
fallen together: unless (says he) yet dissect beasts: for then you shall
find him not to have In beasts the right reyne surmounteth the left, but in
man contrariwise.
written rashly: in them the right kidney surmounteth the left, but in man
contrary altogether.

Now I know not plainly where to impute the fault, but betwixt ij. so famous
Anathomistes, I mean, Vesalius and Collumbus, (the one writing that where the
spleen descends lower then the liver, there the right reyne for the most part
to The contrary op^ons of (...) and Collumbus as touching the situation of the
kidneis.
be higher then the left, and contrariwise, the other affirmyng that in man the
right is always lower then the left without any exception) the ignorant Reader,
and such perhaps as never saw dissection, should rather seem snared in a heap
of doubts, then to pass this point with a clear resolved mind. Of Collumbus
I marvel that in all his time he had not seen it^, else seen, has not written
it. The author his (...) between both.
But sure he that diligently shall go through his whole work, shall clearly
see that he has not shot at any thing with light conjecture, neither set down,
which he had not particularly observed in the body of man: and to him of
necessity (because in my time I never saw the right kidney higher then the
left) I am constrained to subscribe. The reason why the kidneis must one of
necessity be situated higher the^ the other.


But that the situation of the reins must needs be one contrary to an other
Vesalius very elega^tly has remembered. The greatest occasion (says he) not
being taken of the place wherein they might aptly be seated, but because in
opposite order they might not draw the serous blood: for so the one fetching it
directly to the contrary side, should have wholly prohibited the office of the
other.

In form the kidneis are long, but less broad, and every where equally The
figure of the kidneis.
thick. Before and behynd they are compressed, and on the out side exactly
orbicular or round compassed, and Gibbous: but in the inside, which is shorter
then the outside, partly hollow. For in the middle regio^ of the interior side
they have a hollow deeply impressed, which in the higher and lower part of it
makes a sharp corner, but in the midst between both an extuberant part. In
the upper side the reins be a little broader then in the neither, as also the
exterior side is somewhat thicker then the interior. Collumbus compares the
kidney to the figure of a little pulse or grain, called of the Herbarians
Faseoli.

The reins are endewed with that magnitude or greatness as might susfice
Magnitude.
to take away the serous humor unprofitable to the blood. Their outer face or
show as it is smooth, and slippery, so also very red and shining. It is of
substance The substance of reins.
fleshy, thick, very Solid, and hard, and little varieng from the substance of
the heart, save that it is enterwouen with no Fibers at all. For the substance
of the The use of the Fibers of the^ vessels.
reins, as also of the liver and lunges, is destitute of Fibers, only the
Fibers of the vessels poured out into him, seruyng to attraction, retention,
and expulsion.

But when as the whay of blood ought by the reins to be strayned out, because
they might not so fitly grow to the bodies of the hollow vein and great
Artery, as the liver it self unto the hollow vein, therefore notable
branches are brought Deynes offered to the kidneis.
from the vein and Artery unto them. And from the hollow vein two great
arms are reached, that is to say, each of them to either of the reins, which
break not out one directly against an other, but always the one higher then the
other according to the situation of the reins, and these are commonly called
the Emulgent veins. The like reason is of the Arteries, which being reached
out under Which are the Emulgent veins. Arteries to the kidneis.
the veins, are together with the^ carted ouerthwartly into the bosom or
hollow of the reins, which is fourmed in the inside of them, as lately was
declared.

Immediately, and so soon as the vein and artery have come unto the said
bosom of the kidney, they are first either of them divided into ij. branches,
before they make any entrance at all, one branch offering it self to the
upper corner of the same hollow, and the other to the neither. And in the same
progress of the vessels into the reins, the arteries very seldom scatter
from them selves any branches, but are wholly spent in the substance of the
reins. Yet from the Whence begi^neth the Seminall vein.
vein of the left kidney, the Seminall vein seeking down to the left
testicle, is sent. And sometime like the right vein, springs a branch
abroad in the fat Membraneous coat of the kidney, which Vesalius says is to
be found, when the left reyne occupyeth the higher seat, and that is either
always or most commonly.

Now we will unfold the way of the vessels, and their distribution throughout
the body of the reins, as also the celles, or cauities in the kidney.

THere are therefore in the reins two cauities, but far otherwise framed of
Two c^ities (...) the kidney.
nature then sundry Physicians have supposed. For the vein and artery going
into the body of the kidney do degenerate into one, aunswerable in hardness and
thicknes to the coats of the Arteries. And this being hollow after the manner
of The description of the distribut^ of the vein and Artery through the body
of yt kidney.
a vein or artery throughout the body of the kidney distributed. For, first
by little and little being dilated, it is separated after a certain sort into
ij. parts: of which we will call the one the anteriour and the other the
posteriour. The anteriour after one order and course produces now six, now
seven, and sometime also more bra^nches of equal thicknes, in which this
anteriour part of the Membraneous body or first cauitie is finished. These
present branches after the anteriour part of the kidney, one equally
(according to the form thereof) departing from an other, do hasten toward
the outside of the same, yet not to the outer face of the having this peculiar
gift unto it self, that in the highest part of the bottom thereof, Where the
bleddar is harder and thicker.
and where it goes into a neck, for the emplantation and explantation of
certain passages, it is made harder and thicker.

No coat in all the body (says Vesalius) more exactly shows the iij. Kinds
of Fibers then does the bleddar being blown up. For the straight are the
inmo^, ^es.
the transuerse the outmost, and oblique the middlemost: through which the
bleddar The action of the bleddar.
purchases expulsion, retention, and attraction. Hard and thick ought to be
the coat of the bleddar, because of necessity it must reach forth to so great
a quantity, as also be subject to vlcerations, stones, sharpnes of Urine, and
such Why the coat of the bleddar is hard and thick.
kind of evils: which unless it were hard, would easily tear; eat through,
and perforate the same.

It has an other thick and strong inuolu^re given from Peritonaeum: and this
The second coat of the bleddar.
is called the second coat of the bleddar. This Peritonaeum offr^th unto it,
where above Os pubis the bottom of the bleddar and all the Anteriour region
thereof cleaves thereunto. But the posteriour side of the bleddar, respectyng
the straight gutte, is smooth, and slippery, anointed with a watrish humor.

But since the Urine in the bleddar is unapt for nutrition, nature right
Weynes and (...) to the bleddar.
well distributed thereunto veins, and Arteries, wherewith his heat might be
maintained. And first she has derived on both sides of the neck of the
bleddar one vein, and one Artery, from the branches of Caua vena, and magna
Arteria, through the hole in Os pubis going down to the leg, which, thence
ascendyng after the length of the body of the bleddar, are wasted into a sort
of small twistes and hearelike surcles.

Of Nerves nether is the bleddar destitute. For albeit that Urine, with a
certain Me^ues to the bleddar.
familiar substance, no less then choler into his propper vessicle, willyngly
flows, nether whilst it is natural is any thing at all injured thereby:
sometime notwithstanding so much ^holericke excrement is mixed therewith,
whereby The utility of the sense to the bleddar.
it becomes so sharp and bityng, that unless the bleddar by sense could
judge the quality of Urine, in retainyng the same long it should be grievously
affected. Therefore amongst the other parts of the body the bleddar obtains
not the least Nerves, only for the sense of touching, reached from the
branches of the vj. pair, lent out to the roots of ribs, as also from the
lower payres produced from the spinall marey.

Beside these vessels and Nerves, out of the higher part and midst of the
bottom of the bleddar a way springs (that is to say, infantes whilst they
yet are in the mothers womb) called Urachos, which going forth at the navel
and Col. Lib. 11. cap. 10.
The way educing Urine from the infant as yet ut the womb.
through the innermost inuolucre, is the passage whereby the Urine is conuayed
from the child, which after it is brought forth to light, serves no more to
any use, but being bound to the navel susteineth the bleddar.

So also to the sides of the bleddar (...). Arteries are attendaunt
transportyng to Vesal^. Ibid.
the infant vital breath, which afterward, no less then the said way of Urine,
dry The use of the Arteries to the sides of the bleddar.
up and become unprofitable.

Moreover into the lower seat of the bleddar, beside the veins, Nerves, and
The insertion of the vessels bringu^g brine into the bleddar.
arteries, into the hollow thereof two others passages are inserted deducyng
Urine from the reins, and called Vreteres. Nether were they rashly devised of
nature. For when the reins (as most behouefull) must be placed near unto the
liver, but contrariwise the bleddar in a lower region: it was necessary that
certain passages were made whereby to convey the urine out of the reins into
the bleddar, and those nature effourmed very like unto the body of reins. For
they consist of one simple coat, a little harder then the coat of the veins,
and enterwouen The ^ate of the vessels bringyng ^te.
with fewer oblique Fibers. For so they are made more apt to bear out
injuries, and both easy to stretch out, as also to yield again, and the
oblique Fibers do nothing hinder, whereby the Urine should not swiftly pass
into the bleddar. These F^es.
are explanted from the second cauitie or cell in the kidneys, leadyng the^
through the midst of the first cauitie: hence being extended to Peritonaeum
above the Muscles of the loins, securely creep downward to the bleddar. In
their progress they grow to Peritonaeum, and by gettyng from him certain
Fibers, take on them an other coat, enter wouen with little veins and Arteries
Whence the (...) nary vessels have the second coat.
as is Peritonaeum.

These by the way are very little, anfractuous, or turned. For out of the
cauitie of the kidneys they are downward a little toward the inner parts
deduced, the better to come unto the bleddar. But lest they should hang, and
not firmly be inserted to the bleddar, or should make over crooked a way to
it, they Why the brinary vessels are not ^planted to the bottom of the
bleddar.
are not emplanted to the highest part thereof, out of which proceeds the
way for the Urine of the infant to the navel, as before is said: but that side
of the bleddar, which is nearer to the posteriour region of Peritonaeum, to the
which these vessels in all their progress securely grow.

But the region, where first on each side these pores take hold, is in ye
posteriour part of the bleddar a little before the neck, and penetratyng the
coat of the bleddar that sprung from Peritonaeum with an oblique anfract or
turn, at length pearsing the other coat, do open and enter into the hollow of
the bleddar, in like order as the passage of choler is inserted to Ieiunum:
that is to say, with lose or Ieiunum ( says Collumbus) but Vesalius says
Duodenum.
slack Membrans on both sides, set to the hole of the passages or pores, from
the body of the bleddar appendaunt, like as if to the inner coat of the
bleddar such thin Processes there should grow. The use of these, is
aunswerable to the office of the Membranous Processes growyng to the way that
leads choler: that is to say, they give place unto the Uriue flowyng out of
the pores into the bleddar, and whilst the bleddar being distended, is willing
to regurgitate the same The use of the Membrans to the insertions of y^ V^e
vessel^.
into the ways again, these gathered together, and stuffing the pores, wholly
inhibite the return of the Urine. Which work so effectually they bring to
pass, as that by them no air at all may issue out, notwithstanding that the
bleddar be filled with wind, as Galen abundantly teaches Lib. 5. de vsu
partiu^. And that the same oblique going in of the insertion of the pores
serves to the same use, the blowyng up of the bleddar exquisitely shows.

The same experience we daily see in bellows, for by the hole which is on the
The membrau^ in the (...) vessels compared to the devise in bellows.
back side air is drawn, but when the bellow is compressed, the flappe by
force of the wind being pressed to the hole, none at all may return. The
insertion therefore of the Urinarie passages consists at the inferior and
posteriour region of the bleddar, not far from the neck thereof. But here is
to be remembered by the way, that certain heretofore, being ignorant
altogether of these Col. Loc. Cit.
described Membrans, have nevertheless had the boldness to affirm that ye
Urine The error of certain.
was gathered into the bleddar by resudation, or sweatyng through, who here, as
in a glass, may see the futilitie of their subtle invention.

Here the lowest part of the bleddar ends at a narrow issue, which we call
The neck of the bleddar.
the neck of the bleddar, otherwise in men then in women put forth, as also in
those fattened and growyng to other parts then in these, and to conclude
showing What in y^ bledbar is common both to man and woman.
a diverse use in both. First this is common to both, that is, a Muscle lapped
round about the neck of the bleddar, which takes charge that the Urine slow
The use of the Muscle in the neche of the bleddar.
not forth against our will, as abundantly in the Hystory of Muscles we have
said. So likewise both in men and women the Urine goes forth by that way, but
in men it also serves to the eiaculation of sperme. Therefore to the neck of
The Slandules called Parastatae to the bledar in man.
the bleddar are given two Glandules called Parastatae, or Assistentes, which
receive the vessels bringyng seed, and again by great desire in coiture put
forth the same by the passage to the extreme end of Penis: of which it is at
length eiaculated. Col. Loc. Cit.
For this way or passage is common both to Urine and seed. How the ^ow the
seed goes forth from those glandules (...).
seed from those Glandulous bodies goes out, is not plain to every one: for
nether is there any open or manifest hole thereto, but very many little porie
places like as pertains to a sponge: they nevertheless at the first sight
not very conspicuous, albeit that by pressyng the Glandules they immediately
appear: for then the seed that lurked within appears. The utility of the
bleddar (lest The office of the bleddar.
I delay the time with over many words) is first to receive the Urine brought
unto it from the reins by the Urinarie vessels called Vreteres, The bleddar
(...) to a fountain.
then a while to deteyne the same, and last of all to avoid it. No marvel
therefore if to a fountain it be compared. In women it cleaves to the matrice,
The bleddar in women wants the glandules called (...).
wantyng the Glandules called Parastatae.

An end of the History of Natural and nutritive parts.
Of the History of Man, the vj. Book of the instruments seruyng to the
propagation of mankind. That is to say, The generatiue parts.
WHen Nature, through occasion of the matter, was denied Vesal. Lib. 5. cap. 12
the immortality of man, as Gal. Lib. 1. de (...). sanit. Cap. 1. plenteously
teaches, notwithstanding, to the consecration of humane kind, even from the
beginning, the almighty creator made ij. men: the Male, The cause of the
c^eation of both kinds.
to reach out the effectual beginning of generation: the Female, aptly to
conceive the same, and to nourish the infant begotten of that matter. To the
which gifts, both the man, and the woman obtain fit, and peculiar
instruments. What they be, and how they serve, so far as from the beginning
my purpose has intended, that is to say, The (...) pa^tes of the Female are
(...)
as much as of the Male may commodiously be spoken (for more I thought not good
to translate into English) shall now specially be declared.

THe Testicles therefore, which first we will open, are situated so, as is
evident to The Testicles.
each man's sight. They are two in number, round, but there withal somewhat
Number.
long: a little blunter, and larger below, then in the superior part, although
very Figure.
obscure to be judged. On the outside of the testicles is no manner of cauitie,
impression, or inequality. They consist of white, milkie, and soft substance,
every Substance.
where alike, and continual: save that it is filled with very many, and most
small veins, whereby it seems light, and hollow, as is the substance of the
spleen. But they are hollow, as also Galen witnesses Lib. 14. de us. part.
cap. 10. that Galen.
the matter, taken in the vessels to be co^cocted, they after receiuyng, might
labor Use.
it again, to make it more perfect, hoater, and fit for generation.

The Testicles are covered with many coats: some common to both, and others
The coats of the testicles.
peculiarly enwrapyng either of them.

As touching which coats, or inuolueres (whether I term them it forces Col.
Lib. 11. cap. 14.
not) great strife, and controversy, I may not say confusion, is found
amongst the Anathomistes, chauncing either through want of skill, or else
negligence, or both.

Nevertheless, I have determined to set down the opinions of the best, and,
as plainly as I can, wherein they disagree, suspendyng mine own judgment, for
obscuryng the light to the Reader. Wherefore, in having before your eyes, to
Col. Loc. cit.
dissect Scrotum, for the sight, and administration of the Testicles, first
appears Cuticula.
Cuticula, the^ Cutis, which, in this place, is most thin, and wrinkled, next
Membrana carnea, Cutis.
Membrana carnea.
between which, and Cutis, is not fat, lest it should not extend, and In the
purse of the testicles is (...) fat between Cutis, and Membrana carnea, and
why.
contract, reatch forth, and wrinckle together, as it now does.

Proper Membrans to the Testicles are numbered two, which particularly enwrap
either of them, in largenes, making, and thinnes, one varyeng from an other.
For the exterior, or outmost clotheth the Testicle, and his vessels, even
Vesal. Ioc. Cit.
unto that part, where they are committed to the large scope of Peritonaeum,
being The proper Membrans of the testicles.
strong, thin, and aboundyng with veins. For where the seminall vein, and
artery, as also the vessel caryeng seed upward, are brought forth of the
great The description of the outer coat. Whence the first coat of the
testicles springs.
scope, or amplitude of Peritonaeum, into the regio^ of the flank, and into
the purse or codde, thence Peritonaeum educeth this present inuolucre, which
worthily is to be called a part, or Process of Peritonaeum: for so it is
produced from Peritonaeum, The outside of the st^st coat how it is.
as the codde from the skin. This coat, on the outside, where Membrana
carnosa touches it, is thereto grown, by certain Membranous Fibers.

Moreover on what side the coat of the right testicle touches the coat of
the left, by Fibers likewise both the coats are committed mutually together:
so that y^ outside seems not very smooth, but rough, by means of y^ Fibrous
growyng together of ye Membra^s. But the inside, or interior part of this
coat, where it respects The inside of the ^est coat how it is.
the Testicle, and his vessels, is smooth, and with a watrish humor anointed.

Furthermore this coat obtains somethyng common with the fleshy Membra^ of
the body. For as that, in some part, is increased, and enterwouen with certain
What the first coat of the testicles has common with Memb^na (...).
fleshy Fibers, and thereby degenerateth into the nature of a Muscle, even so
this coat of the Testicle, after the whole length thereof, in the posteriour
part, obtains from Peritonaeum, down to the lowest part of the Testicle,
fleshy Fibers, and shows the nature of a certain strict, and long Muscle,
which to the same coat, or Membran is fastened: no where departing from it,
but, beginning with it from Peritonaeum, is also, together with the coat,
grown to the infeririour part of the vessel, that carries seed from the
Testicle.

This coat, besides that it fitly covers the Testicle, and holds it
suspended, The use of the ^est coat of the testicle.
by the benefit of that Muscle, draws upward the Testicle, as with a
certain voluntary mouyng. By occasion of this Muscle, that is to say, because
it is Why y^ first coat is called (...).
red, as the rest of the flesh, that coat is called Erithroeides.

The second, is under this, and nearer to the Testicle, by the means, and
interuenture The situation of the second coat of the testicles. Whereto the
vessels do grow.
For there this coat is slacker, thinner, and softer, where yt vessels are
fastened to it, then the whole compass else. For to the higher part of this
coat, a vein, and artery, bringyng blood and spirit to the Testicle, do
grow: and there also many branches, perforatyng this same coat, do make
incurse into the substance Where are inserted the vessels curieng seed.
of the Testicle. In the posteriour part, this coat, all after the length
thereof, has strongly grown to it, all the foldes of the vessels caryeng
seed, coueryng the Testicle, there also being broken into, with many holes not
easy to be seen. Each where else, on the outside, it is smooth, washed over with
a watrie humor, and knit wholly to no part: on the inside, it grows every
where to the substance of the Testicle. This coat, with the ancient Greeks,
is called (...) of the second coat of the ^icles.
Dartos. The first professors of Anathomie, which named the Testicles Didimoi,
have called it (says Vesalius) Epididimos. (...).


Collumbus not only not subscribeth hereto, that is to say, that this
Epididimos, ^
and next of all encloseth the substance of the Testicle, but says flatly,
there be The c^es to the ^icles after (...) (...) which
in, propper coats to the Testicle, how soever Uesalius sought them, as
Erithroeides, Dartos (which two are now lately described) and Epididimos: which
Epididimos, Which is (...).
he allows not to be the ancient name of Dartos, but of the third tunicle,
which does immediately bewrappe the substance of the testicle: being white The
third coat (...) the ^icles.
in color, and in making thick, that it might plain appear, those to have
erred, (...) (...) not the folding of the vessels.
which called Epididimos that foldyng together of the vessels, that appears
above the Testicle.

TO either of the Testicles, singular veins, and arteries are brought, one
differyng ^.
from an other in beginning: for the vein coming to the right testicle, The
(...) to the (...) ^icle.
fetches his beg^nning from the trunk of Vena ca^a, lower then the going
forth of those veins that are reached to the kidneys, yet goes not forth at
the right side of the same stock, but out of the superior, and fore part
thereof, a little to the right side declinyng, and by little, and little, reached
oblique toward the right side, and stayed by Peritonaeum, is carried downward.
The vein of the left Testicle, does not borow his beginning from the stock of
Vena caua, but, springyng The vein of the le^ testicle.
forth much higher then the right, breaks out of the lower seat of the left
Emulgent vein. Sundry Anathomistes heretofore, seeing such diversity in the
exorture of these veins, imagined, that the left seminall vein, was so begone
from the (...); for that it was necessary, that a false humor were carried to
the testicles, ^.
by the long tricklyng whereof, by the way, to stir up, in the time of (...),
The (...) of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the (...) of the (...) (...)
(...).
such great delectation.

Collumbus (notwithstanding) confuteth wholly this opinion, in these wor^. I
have known many, who, having lost their left Testicle, to (...) whole of that
kind of rupture called Intestinalis, have confessed, and sworn unto me
diligently The (...) of that (...).
enqu^yng, that, in the same act they enjoyed the (...) pleasure, as before
time they had found.

Some Anathomistes therefore, have not known how to discuss this case, I
mean, for the unlike exorture of the seminall ^eynes: others have omit^ to
speak thereof: but Collumbus (as his custom is) endeuoryng to cure the (...)
of doubtful minds, has excogitated a propper reason, and that bears
likelihood of truth. These are his words: for as much as these seminall veins
are very slender, and little, and that the great artery is situated so near to
Vena caua, on The (...) cause why the (...) (...) vein begins at the le^t
(...).
the left side, which artery never in living bodies, ceasseth to move, great,
and evident danger was eminent, that this slender vein, in those continual
mouynges, should be broken. Which prudent nature waying, to (...) such
incon^ditie, willed that the left seminall vein, might from the Emulgent be
fetched, not from the trunk of Vena caua: least in desce^se it should lie upon
the great artery.

THese seminall Ueynes, in this order going downward, are committed to
Peritonaeum, by Fibrous knittings, which, in degeneratyng, make the^ an other
coat. And to either of these veins, the fellowship of an artery is committed:
for the beginning of both the arterics, is lower then of the vein going to the
right The beginning o^ the seminall arteri^s.
Testicle: they are taken forth in the midst of the anteriour part of the
great artery, one directly against an other, and near themselves, and the
right crossi^ obliquely over the trunk of Uena caua, so desce^deth, and
hastneth downwardes, The progress o^ the right Artery.
to the vein of the right Testicle. The left coming to the vein on his side
is Loc. cit.
sometime wantyng (says Uesalius) and, for that, the vein of the left
testicle is The left.
larger far then of custom. But to spryng out of the arterio of the left
kidney, is scarce at any tymesene: although, to chance sometime, it is not
impossible.

The right vein, and artery (the like is to be understood of the vessels on
the The progress of the right veyn^ and Art^ (...) they touch together.
left side) being together, after a space, so contingent, and mutually growyng
together, as that most elegantly this word of the Grecians Anastomosis may be
to them applied (although the like may be seen also in sundry veins, and
arteries Col. Loc. cit.
in the body, and chief^ in the arms, and legs) they lie to Peritonaeum
tied, with Fibrous or Membranous knittynges, and, in bended sort, reachyng
down the Vesalius.
right side, are carried above that passage, which brings Urine from the right
kidney to the bleddar: in their progress, pouryng out very small twistes, and
slender surcles, to Peritonaeum: but so soon as these vessels are come to
that part of Os pubis, whereas the (...). of the Muscles, inouyng the thigh, is
carried, above the huckbone, downewardes toward the lesser or inner Process of
the thigh, there (I say) those vessels, near to Peritonaeum, do pearse through
the side of the same Muscle so, slipping forth of the large scope, or amplitude
of Peritonaeu^, fall down to the peculiar coat of the Testicle, together with
a little Nerve, produced sometime from a branch of the (...). pair of sinews
of the brain, lent out among the roots of the ribs, but other whiles from
the xxj. payres of the Nerves of the Spinall marey.

Morcouer the hole of Peritonaeum, that thus transmitteth the vessels, with the
The hole through which the vesselss pass out of Abdomen.
Nerve, is not so evident, as if one should put a pen in the mouth, or strike
it through a paper: but Peritonaeum most exactly grows to the sides of the
vessels, and to that coat, which it reached unto them, in the progress, being
as yet with in the compass or scope thereof, safely sendyng them, no otherwise,
then as Septum transuersum, and the Membrans wherewith it is clothed, do offer
way to the stomach, and hollow vein. But so soon as these vessels have passed
the hole of Peritonaum, they are led from the right side, after a certain
sort, again obliquely down toward the left, so brought to the upper part of
the right testicle, in this last descense, one with an other mutually mixyng as
aforesaid, and effourmyng one body like a pillar depressed before, and behynd,
whose crest, the first meeting, and mixyng together of the vessels make. But
the foundation is that part, whereby they are committed to the upper part of the
Testicle.

About this body ten thousand branches confusedly are packed, nether all of
them directly proceedyng downward, but some partly straight partly round
compassing, partly overthwart, others appear folded in other order together:
and it is impossible to follow one manner or order of their tracyng.

Whilst so many enfoldynges of branches are made in that Membran, which
Peritonaum offreth there to the vessels, whereby they cleave unto it with
Fibrous knittynges, that body seems to represent the skin in the calfe of
the leg of some rusticke, or labouryng person, which is newly swelled, with
the tumors called Varices. For as therein we may perceive the veins, diversely,
and altogether unequally, with straying traces, in abundant sort to wander: so
likewise in this body of the seminall vein, and artery, innumerable branches
are seattered. For the which similitude certainly the ancient Anathomistes
have called this body (...) as one should say, a swelled body to the Testicles
(...) parastates.
assistaunt. This, in the seat, or foundation thereof, grows to the upper
part of the inner coat of the Testicle, which we have said to be called (...)
and distributeth Epididymos.
also many branches, straight pearsing this coat, to the upper part of the
Testicle, many ways among the substance of the Testicle, like as the The
Seminall ^ynes and (...) are called Vasa praeparantia.
veins of the liver, into the substance thereof disseminated, consistyng of a
very thin coat. This is the order of the seminall veins, and arteries,
which also are named Vasa praeparantia.

So that mutually foldyng of the vessels together, by a maruailous art was
Col. Loc. cit.
The use of the folding and wr^thing of the Seminall vessels.
devised: for thereby it is brought to pass, that the same matter of seed,
which first is red, should begin by little and little to be prepared, altered,
and made white. By which elaboration begone, no doubt, a great part of labor to
the Testicles is diminished: which wholly had belonged unto them, had not the
foldyng together of the vessels, ministered unto them help, as more hereafter.

AT the outside of this same Varicosum corpus, where it is to the Testicle
applanted, Vesal. Loc. cit.
The history of the vessel bringing seed from the testicle to the neck of
the bleddar.
an other white and hard body, after the manner of a harder sort of sinews,
grows to the inner coat of the Testicle, and thence begins. This on the
outside where it is not committed to the Testicle, is Gibbous, and round after
a sort: but on that side it grows to the tunicle itself, it is hollow,
according It is not meant round every way as a globe but long, and therewith
round as a staff.
to the conuexed shape of the Testicle. This body is carried, from the outside
of Uaricosum corpus to the hinder part thereof, and down by little and little
creepyng toward the interior parts, after the posteriour region of the
Testicle, grows fast to the inner coat thereof, so long, until it have
descended to the lower seat of the Testicle, whence forthwith it is vpwardes
reflected, stretchyng forth, and lyeng to the inner coat of the Testicle, but
not any more growyng to it, nether reteinyng the same form. For all the way
whereas that body is knit to the coat of the testicle, it is almost of equal
thicknes, and alike figure, which to the te^drell of a vine, or gourd, which
windeth or turns thick about any thing, may be assimulated. Where (...)
(...) of the vine, or ^eping of a snake to compared to the bringing vessel.


Although (notwithstanding) it turns not about, or in round compassed
wyndynges, as does the tendrell, but as it were from side to side: like which
reuolutions, a snake, or ele in creepyng makes. For the turnynges, anfractes,
or inuolutions of this body, are very continual, and together growyng.

After this sort therefore, that body grows to the inner coat of the
Testicle, and is on the outside, the impressions of those inuolutions being
taken away, smooth, but on the inside, being with a sharper instrument removed,
from the inner coat of the Testicle, rough, yet pearsed with no ways, or
pores, that may be seen. Nether is it seen otherwise hollow, not only where it
grows to the coat of the Testicle, but nether also where, from it departing,
it is carried vpwardes. For as soon as it has descended down to the inferior
part of the Testicle, in the straight reflection thereof up again, it is made,
by little and little, narrower, and rou^der, no more wreathed, but ends as at a
round sinew. And that chiefly in deed it does, whereas, by clymyng upward, it
surmounteth the upper part of the Testicle. Whether so soon as it is comme, it
is laid to the fore part of the same Uaricosum corpus, toward the inside, to
which, by the interuenture of a thin Membran being knit, it proceeds
somewhat higher, and (...) (...). cit.
is thetherto returned, whereas Vasa praeparantia came forth, entryng through
the same hole, which is made in the Tendons of the ascendent, descendent, and
oblique Muscles of the belly.

But immediately after it is come into the capacity of the bellye, it boweth
The progress of the bringing vessels, after they are come into the capacity
of the belly.
downward, near Os pubis, and under the bleddar, where, more and more it is
amplified, and again near the ends, much enfolded and writhen, until at
length it is emplanted among the Glandules called Parastatae, which, about the
root of Penis, and borders of the bleddar, are placed. This description is to
be applied either to the right, or left of the vessels Defere^tia, for so both
of them, after Vesal. ^oc. cit.
Where the bringing vessels do meet, and join together.
one prescript order, begin, and go forward under the bleddar, above the
straight gutte, and at the same Glandule, mutually meexyng, do join together,
constitutyng one body. In which their foldes, wrethes, obuolutions, and
Glandules, Col. Ibid.
so much seed is contained, as might suffice to the generation of three or
four children, What seed is contained in the Glandules and foldes of the
vessels.
especially in fruitful bodies.

Wherefore let it be no marvel to us, which Aristotle propounds, as a thing
to be wondered at, in that a Bull did engender, notwithstanding that his
Testicles It is no wonder which Aristotle made of the ^ull that begat and
wanting his testicles.
had been cut of. As therefore the other four before described, are called
commonly Vasa praeparantia, as vessels first preparyng the matter of sperme, so
these two last spoken of, are called Deferentia, as we should say, bringyng the
the seed. For in deed they receiuyng the same at the substance of the
Testicles, Why the first, iiij. are called Vasa praeparantia.
do bring it to the yard. The insertion of this kind of vessel in the yard is
not easy to be seen, and is opened only in time of coiture, and excretion of
seed. Why these ij. are called Vasa deferen tia.


BUt the Glandulous body, in which the vessels Deferentia, after their mixyng
together, are inserted, which also they call Glandulae Parastatae, as is
Vesal. Ibid.
The insertion of the bringing vessels to the yard.
lately said, is reposed in the lower part of the bleddar, in the midst after
a sort, between the body of the bleddar, and neck thereof. It is one body, and
moreover The situation of the Glandulous body called Parastatae Glandulae.
greater then the Testicles them selves, albeit not exactly round: for before,
and behynd it is depressed, but on the sides, round as a bowl. Through the
midst thereof the conduit of the bleddar proceeds, which is, in this place
somewhat The magnitude and figure of the ^landules parastatae.
more large, and ample, then in the rest of the progress: but not pearsed
through, of the vessels bringyng seed, that manifestly can be seen, but only
rough, unequal, and wrinkled, chiefly in the posteriour part, where the going
in of the bringyng vessels, sometime to the diligent dissecters, are plainly
apparaunt. The use of the substance of the testicles.


NOw it rests to express the uses of these singular described parts. It is
evident to all men, that the substance of the Testicles, by a peculiar
facultic begotten to them selves, does make seed of that matter, which the
veins, and Arteries bring, and carry throughout the Testicle, as do the
Ueynes, through the liver, the blood. But the best portion of the blood, and
spirit, the veins, and arteries of the Testicles do (...), with a long (...)
(...), wrethed with innumerable reuolutions, to the perfect (...) of matter,
for the making of seed. Neither is that same brought into any one large (...),
made in the Testicles to receive it, but is distributed into most small
vessels, made of the same so thin a coat, dispersed through out the
substance of the Testicle. And like as is said of the substau^ of the liver,
so likewise the substance of the Testicle, by his ins^ted faculty, adds
unto the blood, and spirit, contained in his vessels, the perfect Nature of
s^de. And this force, in men, is the cause of strength and manhood, and in
women (if so we may say) of womanhode.

Furthermore the seed prepared of the Testicles, innu^ (though very ^ow the
s^de is ^ched out of the testicles unto the bringing vessels.
small) porie ways do reach into the foldes of the bringyng ^ell, growyng to
the Testicle, thence again, out of both the Testicles, ^yng seed to be (...)
iaculated, and cast forth into the matrice. But the bringyng vessel is, above
the Testicle, writhen with so many turns, and w^dynges to the end, that
sooner, and in more copious sort, it might receive seed from the Testicles, as
also that the seed from it might likewise obtain some-elaboration. But the
applantation How the bringing vessel (...) to the testicle
of this vessel to the testicle, with most street, and small holes, is brought
to pass by the interuenture of the inner coat of the Testicle: because the
vessel is hard, strong, and thick, for so it was requisite, to bear out
injuries, but contrariwise, the substance of the Te^icle to be slack, and
soft. So that prudent Nature either here, or else where, has not joined in one,
those which in essence Two con^ies are ^ed no where without y^ (...) of somo
(...) sub^ce.
were contraries, except only by the mean of some indifferent substance, put
as a mediator, of frendshyp and amity betw^ them. In how much therefore, the
inner coat of the Testicle is, in hardness, inferior to the vessel bringyng
seed: therein, the same coat, by so much again surmounteth the Testicles:
although not round about, but only in that place, where the seminary vessels
grow to it. For here it is softer then any where else, and pearsed through with
small holes, as is said.

Neither does this vessel grow to the Anteriour, but posteriour part of the
Testicle, that now, whilst it may reach, or contain the confected seed, for
the Testicle alone does confect it, it might be reposed in a sa^er place, using
the Testicle in place of a propugnacle. And by the same reason, when the
vessel enters Where the seed (...) (...) perfectly (...).
into Peritonaeum, under the Ueyne and Artery it is worthily hid, that it
might contain seed, with blood, and spirit, of which the seed is more
perfectly prepared.

Finally, the right vessel does coite and join with the left, and so both
into the neck of the bleddar are insinuated, that, atonce, the seed of both
the Testicles The use of the (...) body.
might be proiected and cast into the womb. The use of the Glandulous body is
to moysten the way of Urine, and seed, and to be as an underset, or proppe,
like as of the ways digested through it from the bringyng vessels, so also of
the Ueynes, Arteries, and Nerves, distributed to the body and neck of the
bleddar: yea, and peradventure may seem to add unto the seed a certain
perfection, Loc. cit.
and to be expedient for the generation thereof, says Vesalius.

BUt besides, unto man, for the apt act of generation, the omnipotent maker
has given a member (called in Latin Coals, penis, mentula, virga, or Pudend^
virile, (...). (...). 5. cap. (...).
(...) (...) and the office of that (...).
in English the yard) most fit for the effusion of seed into the womb: which
in the time of carnal society, ought to be swelled, stiff, and erected, but
Why the (...) is (...) ^ded.
so to remain at all other times, it should become unapt to use, and easily
iniuried, no otherwise, then if the hand should always be borne extended.

When as therefore it was behofull, that sometime it should be slack, slender,
(...) cons^ction of (...) (...), and how it is erected.
and short, and at other times extended, and swelled, it seemed expedient that
the yard were made of two bodies, large and hollow within as a sponge, which
should, being filled with spirit, be erected, produced, and notably swelled,
but the same spirit once dissolved, they incontinent become slack, narrow
together, fagde, and shorter.

The figure, and situation thereof to all is well known, but the substance
Col. (...). (...), (...). (...).
(...).
to very few, although most worthy to be known not consistyng in vulgar
speculation. Situation.
For in man, the substance of the yard is not bony like as in a Wolf, The
substance of the yard.
Fox, or Dog: for in us if it should have been so, it must needs have been
Why y^ substance of the yard is (...) (...).
continually stiff, and hard as a stick, which in sundry causes must needs
have been an impediment unto us.

Neither is it Cartilaginous, nor of a Ligamentall substance, nor Musculous,
nor sinewy, neither a Ueyne, Artery, nor Membran. Although of these, some
appertain to the making thereof. But none of these, taken alone, was applied to
the making of the yard. Neither could they have showed, for what cause, parent
Nature had begotten the same.

For it was not only done for the emission of Urine, but to eiaculate seed
into The use of the yard.
the matrice, for procreation sake. For this cause (as also is said before) in
man, the yard was made of a certain substance, which may either be erected,
or enfeblish, made stiff, or bendyng.

It is therefore (I say) of very right spongious, rare, and porie, almost like
the substance of the Spleen, albeit Nature has endewed it with thick Ligam^,
which together with the rare substance of the yard, take their beginning from
the inferior part of Os pubis (not from the superior, as Galen supposed:) and
having in the fundament a sleshy beginning, stretches forthwith toward the
upper parts, but about the midst of Os pubis, the right beginning with the
left, is united, and joins together: then being inflected downward, Glans
(...) the head of the yard, the (...) over which is called (...).
are implanted to the borders of Glans, which Glans is harder then the other
parts of the yard. The right Ligament, with the left, after the length of the
yard, is united.

But because the substance of the yard, did then consist but of a rare, and
porie joining, or setting together, and for that it could be little apt to the
necessary erection in coiture, (since scarce sufficient help was purchaced by
the only benefit The arteries to the yard.
of the Ligamentes:) provident Nature poured forth two Arteries, through these
aforesaid bodies, which are, from the root of the yard, carried even to the
extreme Now the true erection of the yard happens.
end of Glans, but so, as that by the way almost an infinite number of
branches are dispersed. When lust therefore styrreth to the generation of a
new man, she pours forth great force of spirits throughout those Arteries,
and hearie braunchynges, by whose help, the same substance before, wrinkled,
weak, and bendyng, is now lifted up, erected, made stiff, and hardened. But
The use of the Ligamentes (...) the yard.
the Ligamentes aforesaid, do as it were propper and underset the same, being
of them selves thick, both for this said cause, as also least the spirits
should over hastily vanish away, being wasted. These Arteries, and their
offices, Collumbus boasts no man before him to have rightly known: by which
In the yard is neither vein, nor (...).
also (says he) nourishment is brought unto the yard, whilst else, in the
yard is no Ueyne, nor any Nerve, notwithstanding that Uesalius is of clean
Loc. citat.
contrary opinion. (...) to the yard.


Beside these parts hitherto decided, which Nature devised for the framyng
Col. Loc. Cit.
of this instrument, there are also four Muscles, which in the second book of
this The passage common to (...) (...) (...).
History, are sufficiently spoken of.

There is besides, that common way, or passage, destined both to seed and
(...), which, under these two bodies, is conuayed, nether is it any thing else
Of what the common passage consists.
(says Collumbus) if it be rightly wayed, save the substance of the bleddar
lengthned out to the end of the yard.

All these are covered over, and clothed with Cuticula, Cutis, and Carnea
(...), Why there grows no fat vnde^ the samne of the yard.
without fatnes altogether: which here for motion sake is wantyng, lest
supernaturally therewith increasing, it might be grievous to the matrice.

The extreme part of the yard is called Praeputium: being that skin wherewith
What is (...).
Glans is covered, so, in the act of venerie, now upward, now downward, The
Hebrews ^acke praeputium.
to the exceedyng delectation of the Female, moue^: this is that, which the
Hebrews, in time of Circumcision, lose. The line under the yard, marchyng
Vesal. 1. oc. cit.
after the length thereof, is called in Latin Sutura, for so it represeuteth
(...).
the fashion of a seame. As the part between the inuolucre of the Testicles, or
purpose of the stones, and the fundament, is called (...) That is
Interfoeminium. (...).


But because I am from the beginning persuaded, that, by liftyng up the Why the
parts of women are not here spoken of.
veil of Natures secrets, in women's shapes, I shall commit more indecencie
against the office of Decorum, then yield needful instruction to the profit
of the common sort, I do here ordain the vi. rest of these my labors.

An end of the History of the Generatiue parts.
Of the History of Man, the vij. Book: of the making of the heart, and of the
Instruments ministryng to his function: commonly called, The Vital or
Spiritual parts.
BEfore you all whosoever you are (most attentive Readers) I freely protest,
that hitherto my pen has not wauered in the doubtful balaunce of
ambiguitie, but passed the plain pathe of truth, guided by the footesteppes of
my forerunners: till now at length, being come to a place somewhat ascendyng
(as they that will attain to the scope of their desire, must not refuse the
hill with the dale) I find the steps of some willingly yeldyng to so tedious
a journey: others, with senses unappalled, to have plowed a path directly over
the mountain: here I see one willingly walking a contrary way: and there an
other, praising their endeavors, but protestyng him self only to have light
in the nearest way. So that here, no marvel, though I should stand amassed, and
as one plunged in the depth of contrary streams.

For Galen, Vesalius and diverse others, as touching ye instruments that
restore The opinion of Galen and Vesalius how blood comes into the left
Uentricle of the heart.
the ayrie substance, which continually waste, and refreshe the innated
heat, are contented to affirm, that, of the air drawn in by the lunges,
part is received by the surcles and branches of the venial Artery, and there
hence, being prepared by the elaboration of the lunges, is by the same vessel
carried into the left ventricle of the heart, where, metyng with the blood lately
strayned through the hedge between the ij. ventricles, it does together by the
workyng of the heart, ordain that famous composition, the vital spirit.

Contrariwise Realdus Collumbus says, that the blood, sent from the right The
opinion of Collumbus.
ventricle of the heart, by the arteriall Ueyne, into the lunges, there taking
the mixture of air, is drawn, by the venial artery, into the left ventricle
of the heart, whereas, being almost made before, it is now perfected vital
spirit.

Albeit I am not ignorant, how lately, both these assertions are denied:
Leonardus Leonardus Botallus.
Botallus prouyng that blood is brought into the left Uentricle an other way,
that is, by a propper Ueyne that is found somewhat above the coronall Ueyne,
near adjoining to the right auricle, thence with direct tract marchyng to the
left: which contrariety notwithstanding (lest I should seem to confound the
History of the vital members:) I have thought good to describe the parts after
the best approved, and that in such wise, as there shall appear therein great
perspicuitie, and likehode of truth. Yet not that I mean to reject Botallus,
although he has neither distinctly set down the deriuation of that Ueyne,
neither apertly the insertion thereof, but because the labor of him shall be
less, that endeavors, alone, to stop the runnyng stream, accomptyng any
duty none (right courteous Reader) in describing the parts, to have forewarned
thee of this late invention.

To the which description that I may briefly come, I will omit further
circu^stau^ces: only to do away obscurity, I mean, that the whole be not
maimed, by wantyng part, it behooves to begin at the pannicle coueryng the
ribs, and thence to the other parts, contained within the capacity of the
breast.

THe coat therefore or Membran to all the ribs (beside the xij. on each side
Vesal. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Of the Panicle called Pleura.
occupied with the implantation of the midreif) and to the whole breast bone
vnderreached, and coueryng the bodies of the Vertebres of the breast, and the
up, per part of the midreif, toward the ampiitude of the breast, is named in
Latin Succingens, and commonly called Pleara,

In the posteriour part it touches along from the first Vertebre of the breast,
down to the xj. out of which region, consists that part of the midreif, that
transmitteth the great artery, but in the forepart, it des^udeth from the
cannell bone, to the lower part of the breast bone, whereto the midreif grows.
In the sides again, from the first ribbe, to the upper face of the midreif,
which respects the cauitie of the breast, thus clothyng it, and also the whole
amplitude of the breast.

This coat, like as the cauitie of the breast, in figure varieth very much. For
in The ^ure of (...).
the upper part, according to the breast, it is streit ended as it were poynted,
in the lower part broader then above, but in the sides of the breast broader
then in the inferior part. Moreuer in the fore part it is much shorter then
behynd, by reason of the obliquely situation of the midreif. It touches from
the point of the breast bone, to the xi. Vertebre of the breast. Also in the
fore part, and in the sides, outwardly, even like to the breast it self, it is
in figure (...), or bounched forth: but in the posteriour part, longwise, as it
were to the amplifyeng, and enlargyng thereof, it obtains an inward
impression, after the order of Peritonaeum. For the bodies of the Vertebres are
apparaunt, or prominent into the cauitie of the breast, like as the roots of
the ribs, which are somewhat (...) backwardes from the bodies of the
Vertebres, until, forthwith proceedyng toward the anteriour parts, they are
downwardes obliquate. This Membran inwardly is (for the most part) smooth, and
as with a watery humor, ouernoynted. Besides, where it reaches forth certain
Membranous Processes, by which it either yeldeth out other Membrans, or
gathers some peculiar body unto it.

Sometime there is found, although very seldom, a harder kind of fat in the
inside of this coat, no otherwise then to Peritonaeum, and that especially,
where ^atte.
it is nearer to the Vertebres, and where the chiefest veins thereof are guided.

Moreover here, and there, on both sides, it puts forth Membranous Fibers
The tying of the lun^ and (...) to Pleura.
to the lunges, whereby the lunges are thereto very fast knit. And to the
inuolucre of the heart, where the same coat covers the midreif, in great
scope, is continuated, and tied. But the outside of this Membran, which grows
every where to the parts adjacent, is rough, and unequal, after the manner of
Membrans connected and tied together.

It is perforated as often as the midreif, since it covers it, that is to say,
twice, The pe^tions of (...).
not three times, as Vesalius would: once for the descense of the stomach or
upper Col. ^ib. 2. cap. 21.
Orifice of the ^entricle, and the second time for the ascense of Vena caua:
but in The great a^rie does not (...) (...).
deed the great Artery, runnyng close by the body of the Vertebres, cannot
perforate the same, but is rather crossed over therewith, or to be plain, the
midreif rather s^meth to give back to the side thereof. Under the Cannell
bone, it is (...). (...). 6. cap. 2.
not pearsed with a large and continual hole, but the vessels which creep
unto it thither, it contains with very many holes, and grows unto them.
Here likewise it transmitteth the branches of Uena caua, and Arteria magna, as
also the stomach, rough Artery, the Nerves of the vj. pair of sinews of the
brain, and the Nerves to the midreif. Last of all, in the hinder part, it is
perforated, after the longitude thereof, and that on both sides, with an orderly
consert of Ueynes, and Arteries, entryng forth, that way, to the spaces of the
ribs.

This coat is in substance Membranous, to wit, hard, thin, equal, and The
substance of Pl^.
somewhat, in strength, surmountyng Peritonaeum. And like as Peritonaeum, so
also the substance of this Membran, is, at the back, harder, then near the
breast. For the beginning thereof, is taken from the Ligamentes, which bind
together, The beginning of (...).
the bodies of the Vertebres: upon those, I say, it chiefly does depend. But it
is not simple, although Uesalius espied not the contrary, but double: I mean
not ^
the right side, and the left, but that every where this ^bran Pleura, is two
(...) (...) of (...).
fold, or double, or simply two Membrans, the one interne, the other externe,
between which Ueynes, Arteries, and Nerves do slide: all which are carried
between (...). ^ib. 6 A^ho. com. 33.
the spaces of the ribs. Whence it happens, that, there, many times,
springs inflammation, with much tension, and prickyng dolor, called the
Pleurisy. Where happens the (...).
Collumbus judges the cause of this duplication the deep dexterity of
Nature, Why (...) consists of ij.
that so, the outer might defend the inner Membran (then which nothing is more
sensible) from the rigor of the ribs, which should have been pro^ered,
always, through the perpetual motion of the lunges.

Beside this succingent coat, the ribs have to them, one peculiar, which is
^.
no other, then the Membran common almost to all bones, called (in that it
covers the bone) of the Greeks Periosteo^. But Pleura, in that it bewrappeth
what The (...) of (...).
soever is contained within the concauitie of the breast, does, like
Peritonaeum, lend coats to all the parts contained, firmly thereby knittyng
every organ to other. Last of all, it so propperly prepares way to the Nerves
of Septum transuersum, as that it deduceth them, hid as it were in a scaberth,
to it. This, for the (...) Pl^ura (...) called a coat (...) how a membran.
use thereof, in that it clotheth, defends, and strengthens the inner parts,
is called a coat: but as touching the substance, a Membran.

This Membran, or rather these Membrans, creep^th downward after the Col. Lib.
11. cap. 3.
The progres^ of Pl^ura.
sides of Sternon, toward the Spine, the right among the^ selves being
distaunt from the left: and being so fastened to the same spine, do divide the
breast into ij. cauities, and the lunges into two parts: neither that rashly,
but that, one side Why the lunges are de^ded into ij. parts.
being hurt, the other (notwithstanding) might escape free, and serve to
natures use, and retain at the least half their action. This reduplicatio^
(as we may call it) Medi^stinum.
of Pleura, is in this place, called Mediastinum, because it midmeasureth the
breast, being led from the top of the breast, to the bottom, or lowest part.
Between In Mediastino ^atter (...) be gathered and also drawn forth.
Mediastinum, that is, this double Pleura, deuidyng the breast into two, some
matter may be gathered, which, Sternon being perforated, may be drawn out, by
a diligent Chirurgian, and in Anathomicall practice expert.

WIthin the upper part of the breast, where the veins and arteries are divided,
appears a certain Glandulous part, called Thimus, which in Calves, Thimus.
and such others creatures, is most pleasant to be eaten. I suppose we call it
the sweet bread.

About the midst of Aesophagus, are two little Glandules, placed there of
nature The use of the (...) of Aesophagus.
to (...), and moysten that passage.

THere is a certain coat, common to the inside of the nostrels, to the
palate, Col. Lib. 11. Cap. 1.
and to the tongue, and it seems to be a portion of Dura matter, or the hard
The coat to the nostreles, palate and tongue.
Membran of the brain, which, after it is crept forth of the Scull, is
amplified, made thicker, and almost fleshy: wherewith when as the whole palate
within, and the mouth is clothed, as the furthest part, or extremity of the
palate, it becomes double, and somewhat lengthned, constituteth a round,
long, and little thick pen^, called by diverse names: as Vna, Vuula, Columella,
Gargareon.

The office of it is to deteyne the humiditie falling from the brain, neither
Vuula, and the office thereof.
are perpetual.

Neither does it meanly avail to the vtterauuce of voice, and pronounciatio^,
The defect of Vuula what en^. eth.
the Spanish dissease, to the utter ruin and vastation of this part: how
afterward (I say) they speak rather after the manner of crows, then men.

A third utility also has this same Gargarion, and that is, lest the dust,
which trouble the rough artery, which this rather incercepteth by the way.
^eynes, ^eynes to (...). V^l ^ib. 6. cap. 6.
into the midst thereof, it re^ueth from those branches, sent to the coat of
the palate, but, with Nerves, does participate little. It is evident also, that,
to what To whom the drawing of cold air much (...).
persons this Gargareon is wantyng, to such, the cold air is much more gre^us
then to other men as testifies Gal. Lib. 11. de us partium.

ON both sides of the jaws are two Glandules: one on the right side of
Gargareon, (...). Loc. (...).
and the other on the left: and they have to name Paris^miae: tonsillae, The
Glandules (...) (...).
amigdala, fauces: these also (being of Glandulous substance) were made to the
receiuyng of the humiditie of the brain, and therefore were they placed thus in
the jaws (called of the Grecians Pharynx, of the Latins Fauces) to minister
unto (...).
them moisture. But the iawe is contained within these borders, the foundation
of the head, and palate, the anteriour bodies of the Vertebtes of the neck, in
which place, sundry, and many organs appear: as the top of Trac^ea Arteria
called Larinx, the bone called Hyoides, and his Muscles, the root of the tou^g
and his Muscles, the vj. pair of sinews, ye inner veins called Iugulares,
the arteries Carwtides, Gargareon, the neither iawe, and a portion of his
Muscle^, the Pr^cesses Styloides, and the stomach or Aesophagus. Therefore these
same Glandules, being used in so street a place, are, from the elders, called
Parisihimiae.

Enwrapped they are in the same Membran, wherewith we have said the The (...)
of the Gla^uies (...).
mouth and palate to be clothed: which, further descendyng, runs to
Aesophagus, constitutyng his interior coat: as also the inner clothyng of the
Uentricle, and intrels: and yet more downward, behind the tongue, inuesteth the
Epiglotte, Larinx, and the rough artery, even to the extreme parts of his
branches dispersed throughout the lunges. But the outside of this rough
artery is shrouded under the succingent Membra^, called Pleura. And thus much,
being exactly wayed, is sufficient for these parts.

THe lunges are sited in the breast, whereof the greater part they occupy, being
The situation of the lunges and ^itting.
bound to the bodies of Vertebres, to the heart, and to the rough artery: into
two parts this again is divided, a right and a left: wherefore some infer
that Division.
there be two lunges. The figure of it outwardly is round, inwardly hollow: and
Figure.
Why the lunges a^e inwardly hollow.
that necessarily, since so it beho^d it to yield unto the heart, and
Pericardion. But besides that division, this instrument, the lunges, is divided
(to the end it might Why the lunges is divided into lobes.
both be more agile, and easy to move, as also, more aptly to embrace the
heart) into four lobes, not into five, as in beasts Galen approved. Which
diversity is Col. Ibid.
thought to happen, because in them the liver is much distaunt from the heart.
Wherefore Why the lunges is d^ided into moc lobes in beasts then in men.
when the hollow Ueyne, so long way from the Vertebres, is distaunced, it
required a boulster, wherewith to be vnderlayd: so that prudent Nature then
willed, that the lunges, in beasts, should by one lobe, surmount the same
instrument in the body of man: which lobe, in those creatures, is strewed under
the hollow Ueyne: but it is hollow, as Galen most excellently has said,
because it gives place to the roundnes of the hollow vein. But since that in
man, between the heart, and liver, only the midreiflyeth, there was no need at
all of the v. lobe.

The substance of the lunges is rare, light, and porie, as a sponge, in color
The substance of the lunges.
somewhat red, which kind of substance the elders have named Parenchyma. i.
The substance of the lunges.
A^usio. It is inuolued of the Membran pleura, lately described, being there
very The vess^ls in the lunges.
porie. Through this instrument, the lunges, these vessels are disseminated: so
wit, the rough artery, the venial artery, and the arteriall Ueyne.

The rough artery is carried in through the longitude of the neck, in the fore
The description of A (...) (...).
part under Larinx, consisting of gristelly ringes, but not perfect ringes (as
in the History of Cartilages appears, where the rough artery is at large
described) The use of (...) (...).
which deuidyng into a right and left first, and those, by little and little,
into many others, is wasted, in branches, to the extreme parts of the lunges.
The office and service which it owes to nature, is to carry air, both in, and
out: and from the upper parts proceedyng, goes down to the lower.

The venial artery, from beneath, is carried almost straight upward, beying ^.
to the branches of the rough artery.

The same likewise does the arteriall vein. Thus these three vessels are
embraced The Arteriall vein.
of a substance rare, light, and porie, thus being the lunges ^dred.

Whose use is, as the Anathomistes rightly write, for the coolyng, and
refrigeration The use of the (...).
of the heart: this effect being wrought, by the bringyng of cold air unto it.
And who likewise knows not, that the same both serves to inspiration,
expiration, and voice.

All which offices, of right appertainyng to the lunges, I ca^ prove by the
testimony A (...) use of (...) (...).
of every Anathomist: since herein, as with one consent, they accord and (...)
together: but severally Collumbus adds one of great effect, and nothing
touched heretofore of any other. For it is (says he) the preparation, yea
almost the generation of vital spirits, which after are perfected in the
heart. That is to say, the inspired air it receives, through the mo^th, and
nostreles, it being brought, by the ^ow vital (...) are (...).
conueiance of the rough artery through the substance of the lunges: the
which instrument ceasseth not to mix the same air, with that blood, which is
brought unto it, by the arteriall vein, from the right ventricle of the heart.
For this same arteriall By the larg^nes of the Arteriall vein the use (...)
f^d out.
vein, besides that it brings blood, for nourishment, is so large, as that
it may serve for other use also. And this blood by styrring, through the
continual mouyng of the lunges, is made thin, and together with the air
mixed, which thus, by the same refraction, and beatyng together, is prepared:
so that, the air, and blood, together mixed, are received by the branches of
the venial Artery, and at length, by the trunk of the same vein, sent into
the left ventricle of the heart: The vital spirits p^rtected in the heart, are
carried by the (...) (...) to all the parts of the (...).
but so well mixed, and attenuated together, as that to the heart, small labor
at all is left: after which small elaboratio^, the heart (as it were) laying to
the last hand, to the making of the vital spirits, that, by means of the
great artery, they might be distributed to all the parts of the body it was
most requisite.

The which ^w assertion, or late invention of Collumbus, because it was like to
be much spurned at, and by all means possible (especially of those that had
sworn them selves to the decrees of Galen, and Vesalius) confuted, and
rejected: How Collumbus sa^eth his opi^ion as touching the generation of vital
spirits in the lunges.
the same Auth^ur has (as it were) entreated us willyngly to contemplate,
first, the magnitude and largenes of the lunges, which without vital blood
could not endure, when as there is not the least particle in all the body that
is destitute thereof. But if this vital blood be not begotten in the lunges:
from what part might it thither have been seut, but from the great artery: and
thence (says he) not one branch, great, nor little, is conuayed to the lunges.
For to this purpose, as touching the venial artery, or arteriall vein, he
demands how, by them, vital blood should be brought unto the lu^ges,
whilst nether of them does beat: but serve for other special offices, as
shortly more largely shall appear.

There are little small Nerves, which touch only the coat of the lunges, but
The Ne^es of the lunges touch his coat but pearse net.
pearse not within: which makes that the lunges are with very small sense
endewed: notwithstanding that it is a member greatly needful, and so
necessary. The coat whereof, since it is porie, no marvel that in time of ye
Pleurisy, and inflammation of the lunges, it receive blood into it, which
spettle outwardly declares. How hap^eth bloody sp^trie in the (...).


In conclude, the lunges, so needful to the refreshyng of the heart, nature
did not only devise, as also, lest it should be served at any time with
unprepared V^l. ^ib. 6. cap. 7.
air: but many creatures she would have breath, for the cause of voice also, so
requisite The matter of voice.
to their life and natural being. That therefore, which is given out from Gal.
Lib. 6. us. part.
the lunges in the time of expiration, is the excellent and notable matter of
voice.

THe Membran enuoluyng the whole heart, with his auricles, and begynnynges
(...). l^b. 6. cap. 8.
of the vessels, like a certain casket, or case thereto, is called of the
Greeks The in^cre of the hate (...).
Pericardion, in Latin Cordis inuolucrum: some Casula cordis, for that it is as
a certain house unto the heart: the barbarous number, by the addition of one
letter pronounce it Capsula. But we will use here to say the inuolucre of the
heart.

The image, or portraiture whereof is very like unto ye form of a Pine nut,
Figu^e.
having a round orbiculer foundation, and a blunt point.

But the foundation of the heart is not continual with the inuolucre thereof,
The perforatio^s of (...).
but at least pearsed through with v. holcs, whereof two yield way to the hollow

The foundation, or scate, is meant to be the top, and highest part thereof,
Which is the scate or foundation of the heart.
which in man, is placed somewhat higher then the body of the fifth Vertebre of
the breast, yet lyeng not close thereto, but over against it.

Besides, this inuolucre, in the progress or desce^se thereof, varieth as
touching The situation of pencardium.
situatio^. For in man, whose fore part of the breast nature has made shorter,
is (...) so crooked, toward the left side, and again forwards, as that the
point after a certain manner reaches more downward, the^ that part of ye breast
bone, where to the upper part of Septu^ tra^suersum grows. And again so much
appertains to the left side, as that the right part of his point scarce
attaineth to the midst of the breast. Also to the fore parts the point so
proceeds, as that it may touch the left side of the breast bone, and
Cartilages coarticulated or knit thereto.

It consists of Membranous substance, and with the other Membrans there The
substance of pericardium.
fore numbered amongst the similar parts of the body. For it is enterwouen
with no Fibers, but is a simple Membran, every where thick, very hard, and
constitutyng a concauitie, wherein the heart may both use his dilatation, and
constriction casely. For the heart, in it self, contains no portion growyng
thereto, but is distaunt every where equally from it. The concau^tie of
pe^cardium.


This cauitie is altogether smooth, wette with a certain thin humor, and
Pericardium bears no f^tte.
destitute of all fatnes. And so is the outer face of this inuoluere, although
Aristotle Intersepient membrans are those which grow about those vessels
between the lunges and the heart.
far otherwise supposed, affirmyng the inuolucre of the heart to be fat,
deluded peradventure with the intersepient Membrans, which, growyng to this
inuolucre, are very fat, especially in man. But the exterior face of this
inuolucre, for ye Fibrous knittyngs, as Me^brans growing together, is rough. To
the anteriour part of the inuolucre of the heart, whereto those Membrans are not
knit, Me^branous Fibers, fulfillyng, or supplyeng the room of these Membrans,
do grow. But to the whole posteriour part, the intersepient Membra^s are freely
growyng.

All the point, and egregious portion of the right side of this inuolucre,
grows Where pericardium grows to Septum transuer^.
very strongly, and in most ample space, to the sinewy circle of Septum
transuersum: which thing in deed is peculiar to man, since in Dogs, Apes,
and Swine it is much distaunt from the midreif. Also, in man only, the
anteriour part of the point cleaves to Pleura, with Fibrous knittynges, in
that part (I mean on the left side) where the Cartilages of the vj. and vij.
ribs are bound unto the breast. But that knittyng of the inuolucre is brought
to pass among the Membrans that divide the breast in the midst for no where
the inuolucre of the heart exceeds the midst of them, nether in any part
touches the lunges, but by their interuenture.

Moreover there are no arteries dispersed in this inuolucre, neither veins,
unless Deyn^s and (...) to (...)
it be some small ones, springyng from those which are derived to the
intersepient Membrans, as others to Omentum. For when it transmitteth Vena
(...), it boroweth of it scarce any thing: but where it grows to the midreif,
it chalengeth (...).
to it the vessels co^monto the midreif. Nerves also it purchaceth, though very
obscure, proceedyng from those, out of which there current nerves do brau^ch.
Thus this Membranous inuolucre, being as a fine box or case unto the heart,
susteineth the same, by the aid and benefit of the intersepient Membrans.

In the space or distaunce contained between this inuolucre Pericardion, and
The watrie h^mor (...) (...) (...), and the use of it.
the heart, a certain watrie humor is contained, lest the heart by perpetual
mouynges might be dried: which although Matheus Curtius doubted to be true,
Col. l^b. 7.
the truth notwithstanding, both in dead, and living bodies does testify it
self.

THe heart, within this inuolucre closed, being the fountain of vital heat,
The heart.
and perfector of vital spirits, after they are labored in the lunges, as
before is touched, is also the original root of all Arteries, but not of
Nerves, neither Ueynes, as fondly some have fabled.

THe figure of the heart is not much unlike the pine nutte (but somewhat
depressed) V^sal. L^b. 6. cap. 9.
The figure of the heart.
little, at a point somewhat sharper then the pine nutte, and is much more long
then thick. All the exterior face thereof, from the foundation or seat, to
the extreme The cir^scription of the ha^t.
part of the point, is very even and smooth, growyng to no part at all.
Notwithstanding the branches of the coronall Ueyne, runnyng from the seat to
the point of the heart, with the fellowshyp of their Arteries, which swellyng
with blood do cause a little inequality, but not much, because ye greatest
portion of their bodies, is impressed within the substance of the heart: so
likewise does the fat, wherewith man's heart abounds, enduce some inequality:
but the foundation of the heart for the going forth of the vessels, is every
where unequal. For to the right side thereof, the right auricle, together with
Vena caua, and the arteriall vein, is committed. But it has on the left side
the left auricle, and besides the venial artery, the beginning of the great
artery. Of which more at large hereafter.

THe heart, although it was of sapient nature situated in the breast, yet not in
the Col. Ibid.
V^sal l^b. 6. cap. 9.
midst of the breast, as Aristotle supposed and the common people at this day
do The (...) of the ha^t.
think. For only the seat of the heart, which, since it is the original of
the vessels, is supposed the most noble part, exactly obtains the midst of
the right and left side of the breast: both beholding the anteriour, and
posteriour parts. For so far it is distaunt from the breast bone, as it is in
space from the bodies of the Vertebres. Of the longitude of the breast, which is
constituted of xij. ribs, it respects the body of the fifth Verteb^e. But in
the anteriour region of the breast, which is ended by the longitude of the breast
Bone, it obtains truly the midst, being so much removed from the Cannell
bone, as distaunt from that part of the breast bone, whereto the midreif is
inserted. And thus in his seat, this noble part is safely situated, being much
removed from the injuries which outwardly might happen. From which part, the
rest of the body of the heart, by little and little, is so reached forth toward
the anteriour parts, and into the left side, as that the posteriour part of
his point, bends more to the breast, and forwards, then the center or ^ddest
of the foundation: and the right part of the point being more to the left side,
the^ the midst of the same seat, exceeds the midst of the breast bone,
into the left side, and the center or prick of the point respects the
Cartilages of the vj. or vij. ribs on the lest side, where they are bound
unto the breast bone. Furthermore it lies so apt for the embracing of the lobes
of the lung^s, as most readely the vessels might, from the one, to the other be
conuayed.

THe chief substance of the heart does consist of flesh not altogether so red
as the The substan^ce of the heart.
flesh of the Muscles, but in hardness, thicknes, and interwearyng of Fibers,
much varyeng from it. For the flesh of the heart is much harder, and thicker, to
bear Gal. quoque. ^ib. 2. de (...) (...). Cap. 4.
out, injuries far more able, (for so it was expedient considering his
motion) and finally, with diverse kinds of most strong Fibers endewed: whereas
the flesh Fibers.
of Museles is not so firm, but contented with four Fibers, that is for the
most part one kind, and those more strewyngly set, according to their required
actio^, Col. Ibid.
as in the history of Muscles: whence the error of those is detected, who
soever The substance of the heart is not musculous.
they are, that affirm the heart to be of Musculous substance.

THree sorts therefore of Fibers are contained in ye flesh of the heart, that is
to say, V^sal. Ibid.
straight, oblique, and transuerse. The straight we call those, which from the
Which are the straight Fibers of the heart.
foundation, are carried to the point of the heart. Those transuerse, which, in
cross or compassing wise, go about the heart, and those oblique, that choose
their course The transuerse.
more slopewise then the others. The oblique.


The flesh of the heart avails to the principal functions thereof, which
especially The use of the flesh of the heart.
consist in the making of vital spirit, or in making perfect the same, after
the labor of the lunges, as Collumbus assures us.

The Fibers serve to an other function: for by them, the heart, whilst the
creature The uses of the Fibers.
lives, is dilated, and contrahed, and somewhiles rests between contractio^
and dilation. Moreover they serve to the mouyng of the heart, which is natural,
Cordis motus a (...).
and nothing subject to our will, as thus: the straight for attraction, the
trasuerse G^l. lib. 7. us. part. G^l. Ibid.
for expulsion, and the oblique for retention. And these motions of the heart
are called Diastole, and Sistole: and Diastole, when the heart in his dilatation
receives in What is Diastole.
What is Diastole.
of spirit, like as Sistole is, when the heart by constriction puts forth
the same.

THe seat of the heart is compassed round about, which the Ueyne called
Coronalis, Col. Loc. (...).
The (...) beyne
is joined in fellowship, the artery called Coronalis, which is yet to
describe, and which sometime are ij. to the end that by means and help
thereof, the substance The Coronall, Ar^erye.
of vital heat might be quickened. Wherefore (says Collumbus) some man may
doubt, yea, and by the premises, frame a sufficient argument to prove, that
the vital spirits are not begotten in the heart, but in the lunges. Albeit he
refers the case to the more sapient Philosophers to discufse. And so it
shall be sufficient, here, truly to describe the parts of the body, how they
are, and to what use created, least I meddle over far in such mysteries.

To the seat moreover of the heart, is offered a little Nerve, proceedyng from
the (...). Ibid.
left sinew of the v^. pair from the brain, whereas it constituteth the left
recurrent Nerve. For this pearsing through the seat of the heart, his
inuolucre, and reached forth to the left side and posteriour part of the
arteriall Ueyne, creeps The use of the ^etue to the heart.
very obscurely into the foundation of the heart, and that only for the feelyng
of annoyaunces.

THe coat that grows closse unto the substance of the heart, is altogether
aunswerable The coat next the substance of the heart.
to that Membran, which fo firmly grows to the bellyes of the Muscles, I
mean that most thin Membran, which from the substance of the The fat of
the heart.
Muscles may not be plucked. Upon which coat, in man chiefly, grows plenty
of hard fat, but that most commonly, about the seat of the heart: though
sometime it be effused even down to the point of the heart, by the sides of the
Ueynes, and Arteries sprinkled about the body thereof. Which fat was for the
continual mouyng (...). Ibid.
of the heart very necessary. For to that end, we find fatnes also in very many
The use of the (...) to the heart.
parts of the body, and chiefly about the eyes, and ^e^porall Muscles, least
they should be dried by labor.

BEside fatnes, the heart has little ears or auricles. For so the authors of
dissections, ^.
do call those two Appendau^ces, growyng to the seat of the heart. They ^ ^ ^.
are called by the name of ears, not for their use, nor any action, but for
(...) sake, which they obtain, in situation, like unto the proper ears.

The right ear is set to the right side of the seat of the heart, coueryng all
the The (...) of the right care (...) the heart.
fore part of the insertion of Vena caua, after his longitude, and with his
point departing from the body of the Ueyne, rayseth it self vpwardes, somewhat
higher then the seat of the heart.

The figure of this auricle is like a poynted steeple pillour or other
buildyng, (...).
whose brodest part is the bottom, and thence the nearer to the top, the
narrower. For so it begins, but at a long fashioned foundation, and goes
forth into a sharp, albeit not very sharp, nor long. The exterior face of
the auricle varieth, according to the fulness, or emptines thereof. For when in
the constriction of the heart, it swells, being filled, then it is Gibbous,
every where equal, and as with a wa^rie humor anointed. But being fallen, and
emptied, appears wrinkled, and set with foldes. Sometimes also, though very
seldom, it chances, that the outside of the distended auricle appears
unequal, but that is through fatnes then, that grows upon it. The inside or
interior Superfice of the ear, (...) a cauitie, is wholly aunswerable to the
same side of the Uentricles of the heart. For like as that, where the vessels
are inserted and educed, is smooth, but (...) where else rough and full of
caves: even so that ear, where it grows to the insertion of the hollow
Ueyne, is smooth, but in all the other rowme beside, so full of Fibrous
foldynges, as that it surmounteth the ventricle of the heart, in inequality.

The substance of the auricle is little, but that very hard and skinny flesh,
wherein Substaunc^.
it much differs from the heart, but in that it contains the three sorts of
Fibers, Fibers.
it is therein aunswerable to the flesh of the heart.

The setting to of the auricle is much after this sort. The left side of his
seat, Situation.
grows to the extreme part of the substance of the heart, where the anteriour
region of the Orifice of the hollow Ueyne consists in the right Uentricle of
the heart: or more truly, the auricle goes forth from that same extreme part.
But the right side of his seat, grows to the body of the hollow Ueyne, after
the longitude of his insertion into the heart, and in the anteriour part thereof,
being made, as it were, one body with the vein. The rest of the auricle is
free from the knittyng to of any part, being contained also within the
inuolucre of the heart, though with no Fibrous knittyng committed thereto.

The left auricle of the heart, is in very many points like unto the right. For
The description of the (...) ear of the heart.
it consists in the anteriour seat of the rising of the venial artery
according to the longitude thereof. And so from his seat also, ceasseth at his
point, as is said of the other. Which point being sharper then the point of the
right auricle, but is reached more toward the left side. Besides, the left in
more aged persons, gives place to half the largenes of the right auricle,
like as the Orifice of the venial artery, is much less then the Orifice of
the hollow Ueyne.

As touching the inside and outside, the auricles are every where one like an
other. Although the exterior Supersice of the left, is always more wrinkled and
unequal. In substance also they are agreeable, but the left is much harder,
and in constriction and distention is less obedient. And if it be compared to
the right auricle, it appears feeble and dried, and on the outside always,
aboundyng more with fat then the right.

In knitting they agree altogether. For as the right grows to the right side
of the heart and Vena caua, nigh the insertion thereof: so in like sort the left
in the right side of his seat grows to the substance of the heart where the
venial artery goes forth: but on the left side to the same body of the
venial artery.

In use notwithstanding they differ, although very little. For when as the (...)
^se.
with great force, does receive his blood into the right Uentricle from (...),
and, as it were in snatchyng wise, does swallow it, the same Vena caua, not
consistyng of any strong or arterious body, should greatly have been daungered,
I mean for breakyng, in that strong attraction of the heart: save only that
therefore nature created the right auricle of the heart, which being obedient to
the mouyng of the heart, and full with blood, should pour forth the same blood
which it contains, into the right ventricle when the heart is dilated, and
that the same should be, after a sort, rolled into that ventricle to dispense
with the force of attraction, and to be to the heart, as a ready hand or
storehouse. Aunswerable to which use is the cuticular construction of the
auricle which is light, and to the sufferyng of injuries resistaunt. Hollow it
is to contain the matter, and construct with Fibers, as a thing subject to
attraction, retention, and expulsion.

Likewise the left auricle of the heart, growyng to the venial artery, bears
altogether the like service unto it, and to the left ventricle of the heart, as
we have said the right ear to be in use to the right Uentricle. And so much
the less is the cauitie of the right ear, by how much the Orifice of the
venial artery, is narrower then the orifice of Uena caua. In mouyng also,
air is more ready to follow then blood, so that for this occasion also, the
left auricle is made less the^ the right.

THe heart of man obtains within, two notable and large cauities, called of
the Ventriculi or Sinus, sited after the sides of the heart, one on the right,
the other on the left. Whereof the right exceeds the other in largenes, and
both of them in form vary much one from an other.

For the right descendyng more downwardes to the point of the heart then the
Superfice which is Gibbous. But on the left side of it, it is Gibbous like the
outside of a half circle, by means of the hedge between the Uentricles, which
as a thing half round, bouncheth into the amplitude of the right Uentricle.
And this form the right Uentricle of the heart observes, from the seat down
to the point. No otherwise then as the figure of the heart is made also from his
seat narrower.

The left Uentricle also begins with a large seat, but by little and little
becomes Superfice, a round cauitie like a Pincapple. For the hedge that is
between the Uentricles of the heart, on the left side, wherewith it makes the
right of the left Uentricle, is hollow contrary to the other side, which
bouncheth into the right Uentricle, and has equal thickenes and nature with
the substance of the heart, constitutyng the anteriour and posteriour parts of
the left Uentricle. But the whole substance of the heart, beside of the hedge
of the Uentricles, constitutyng the amplitude of the right Uentricle, is very
thin. But that which effourmeth and compasses about the left Uentricle,
surmounteth much in thicknes the substance of the right Uentricle, and is
every where a like thick, saving the seat only, where for the insertion of
the vessels, so much substance must needs want, as the amplitude of the
Orifices do occupy space.

The Superfice or inside of both the Uentricles is very unequal, and beset as
it were with many causes, deeply impressed into the fleshy substance. Neither
do these consist only in the sides where the right ventricle respects the
left, but round about, throughout the whole Superfice of the ventricle: and
that not only in new dissected bodies, but perpetually apparau^t as often as you
lust to behold the heart: neither at any time not appearyng in a dried heart
besides this inequality, which in the left ventricle is something greater:
both of them have inwardly certain fleshy explantations or Processes, which
are round and slender, and cease into Membranous Fibers, continual or joined
to the lower seat of the Membrans in their borders reposed. These Processes
are chiefly discerned fleshy at the point, or lower part of the Uentricles,
which make to the strength of the Fibers, which they conteyne.

That through the hedge situated between these two Uentricles, blood should
Col. Loc. cit.
pass, as it were by resudation, from the right into the left Uentricle,
almost all Anathomistes hitherto have affirmed. And that the same in passage
also should be made thinner for the more easy generation of vital spirits.
But very wide they wander, says Collumbus. For the blood through the arteriall
Ueyne is carried to the lunges, whence, being attenuated, it is carried by the
venial artery into the left Uentricle of the heart together with air: which
no man before his time noted, or at least have left extant.

Moreover about the seat or foundation of the heart, four vessels are
apparaunt: ^essels of the ha^.
two to the right Uentricle, and two to the left: in the right, the hollow
Ueyne, and arteriall Ueyne: but in the left, the great artery Aorta, and the
venial artery.

Notwithstanding, esteem not (as many suppose) that the hollow vein does

The arteriall vein neither springs from the heart, but from the liver. For

The artery named Aorta, which of all other arteries is the mother, springs
from the left Uentricle of the heart, and rises upward.

But before we prosecute the description of this artery, it seems meet to

The opinion of other Anathomistes is, that the use of these divisions of this
vessel into the lunges, is to carry unto the lunges the altered air, which are
as a fanwynde to the heart, to cool the same: they supposing also that then the
lunges do receive certain I know not what fumes from the left ventricle. And
this inue^tion does meruailously delight them: because they imagine that in the
heart surely the like is accustomed to be done as in chimneyes: as though in the
heart were green sticks, which whilst they burn, do make a smoke or fume.
Thus much Collumbus writes according to the sentence of other Anathomistes.
But he him self judges clean an other way: as thus, that this venial
artery is made to carry from the lunges, blood mixed with air, into the left
Uentricle of the heart. Which thing (says he) is as true, as that which is most
true: not only being apparent to every inspection of dissected bodies, but
manifest also in quick diffections of creatures, how full of blood this Ueyne
is always found: which could not be so, if it had been made only for air and
vapors.

It is to be noted that in the Orifices of the iiij. vessels, at the seat of
the heart, xi. Membra^s do stand, called Trisulcae or iij. edged that is to say
iii. to Vena caua, (...). to the arteriall vein, iij. to the artery Aorta,
and ii. to the venial artery: which are not all in figure alike. For those
which are put to the hollow vein, and venial artery, are diverse in form
from the Membrans of the great artery, and arteriall vein. For the Membrans
of these, are like iij. of those letters which the Latins call C: but the
others are like arrows. The use of these is marvelous: and by their means,
we learn and perceive many things, that appertain to the knowledge of the
functions both of the heart and lunges. Know therefore, that as they are in
figure diverse, so their utility not all a like. The wickettes therefore (for so
they may not much unaptly be termed) of the hollow vein and venial artery,
are sited from within forth, as seruyng to the emission of blood: but the
wickettes of the other ii. vessels, contrariwise, from without forth, or
inward, that so they might seem unto us to be made, for the containing of
included blood. This also note, that those little wickets, which from within
forth are opened, abound here and there with certain filmentes or threedes,
dispersed through the ventricles, made so to hold and strengthen them. By which
filmentes peradventure Aristotle was deluded, supposing them to be Nerves: so
therefore he assigned the heart to be the root of Nerves, and consequently of
feelyng and mouyng. But to return to the four vessels: two of them are made
to carry into the heart, whilst yt heart is dilated: but the other ii. to bear
forth in the time of constriction.

When the heart therefore is dilated, it receives blood from the hollow ^eyne
into the right ventricle, as also from the venial artery, prepared blood and
spirit into the left ventricle. Therefore those Membrans lie down and yield to
going in. For whilst the heart is coarcted, these are shut: left any thing they
have received, should return or go back again the same ways: and at the
same instaunt the Membrans, of the great artery, and arteriall vein are
opened, and give way to the going forth of the ayerie blood, which throughout
the whole body is dispersed, and to the natural blood carried forth to the
lunges.

The matter therefore is always so, that when the heart is dilated, the Membrans
first mentioned, are opened and the rest shut. So that you shall find the
blood which is now gone into the right ventricle, not able any more to go back
again into the hollow vein. By which sense we gather that the heart by no
means is that member wherein blood is engendered, as Aristotle says, when as
the blood is from Vena caua distributed,

This moreover know for a surety, that in the heart of man is no bone to be
found, although in Oxen, Horses, and such great creatures it may be showed, but
in man no such thing, except it chance, that in very aged persons the like be
invented: as in the History of bones I have protested my self once to have
found. Only a Cartilaginous substance at the root of the great artery,
toward the arteriall vein is seen, which a Bone in no wise may be called,
although Galen him self would have it so: whose sentence partly I have set
forth in the place before cited.

Suppose this assertion most approved in Anathomie, that all arteries proceed
from the heart, even as all ^eynes from the liver, and all Nerves from the
brain.

From the left Uentricle of the heart therefore, springs that artery named
Aorta, of all other arteries in the body the mother. In quantity it is
sufficient large, and in substance thick and white. The cause of the thicknes
is first, least the blood with filled spirit should easily vanishe and wast,
and secondly least it in mouyng should be broken. For the Artery moves
continually, yet not by it self but through spirits.

AFter that Aorta is gone forth from the heart, immediately it brings forth
Vesalius describes it: but further ascendyng, it is divided into ij. trunkes
or stocks, one greater, the other lesser: the greater desce^deth, the lesser
ascends, that trunk is made the greater which I say does descend, for that
the great portion of the body was to be revived therewith.

The trunk ascending puts forth an artery from the left side, which is
called Axillaris arteria, which stretches forth obliquely toward the
armehole, and sends branches to the superior ribs, and going forth to the
arm choseth his journey after the inside, to mate himself with the inner
Basilica, but sendyng a branch vpwardes, commands others to all those
Muscles, which are about the shoulder, the scapple bone, and his cauitie, not
faylyng the anteriour parts of the breast, nor the Glandules under the armehole.

But the trunk of Arteria axillaris descends straight through the inner
region of the shoulder, down to the boughte of the cubite: and before it pass
this part, it gives out a little Artery to accompany the fourth Nerve of the
arm, which Artery is among the Muscles distributed, that serve to extend the
cubite: but so soon as it has passed the bought of the cubite, it is divided
into two, sometime into three arteries, yet first it leuyeth little arteries to
those Musc^es that are in the shoulder and cubite, and one branch goes near
to that Ligament that is set between Cubitus and Radius, and being gone forth
marches to the externe Muscles. The remnant follows the longitude of the
cubite: which after it has flowed beyond under the inner transuerse Ligament
of the wrest, in the palm of the hand, it is diverse ways divided, and to the
extremities of the fingers divided: but an other branch tends toward
Radius after his conductyng: and so soon as it is past the mid^est of the
cubite, it arises between two Muscles: and goes under the skin by the inner
part of Radius. This is that branch, whose mouyng Physicians are accustomed to
feel, when they lay hold of the wrest, to take counsel at the pulse.

By the way notwithstanding I wish thee this to note, that in some persons this
branch is diversely placed, so that to be the same, which hitherto we have
spoken of, thou may take occasion to doubt, in that it is sometime carried on
yt outside. So that what Physician soever, inexpert in Anathomie, shall in the
accustomed place (chiefly in a sick body) only seek for the pulse, and can
not find it, he will judge untruly death to be near that person, and so
prognosticate falsely.

Albeit no man may deny, but that very seldom it is otherwise situated, for in
deed for the most part, it does occupy the inside. This moreover so soon as
it departs from the wrest, it proceeds through the outside, to the
extremities of the fingers. An other branch near to the Ligament is carried.

This trunk afterward ascendyng, this Axillaris arteria being now dispersed,
it is cut into ij. arteries called Car^tidas, or Seporarias, which through the
laterall There are both Internae and Extern^ (...).
parts of the neck, are straight carried to the seat of the scull, cleauyng
to Aspera arteria, and fixed to the inner veins called Iugulares. But before
they enter into the Scull, they send ij. arteries to the face, and being
divided under the neither iawe, they impart of the smaller sort, to the Muscles
of the neck, of the head, of Larinx, of Hyoides, and of the tongue. But the two
branches (which are the greater) carried to the tongue, are carried throughout
his lo^gitude to the extremity thereof, which journey being achieved, they
ascend under the ear, and both before and beside the same, are to the
temporal Muscles elevated, so then being to the forehead, to the skin of the
head, and to the Muscles of the face distributed.

The other arm or bow thereof, which to be carried backwardes we have affirmed,
is bestowed upon those i^. Muscles, which (according to Collumbus inu^tion) are
placed in the posteriour part of the head. So is it carried also to the skin,
and Muscles of the head. From the same place, and somewhat higher also two
arteries fetch their beginning, entryng into the nether iawe, under the ear,
in at the hole there (if you behold diligently) sited, after the longitude of
the iawe: with which Arteries a Ueyne and Nerve are joined in society: but
then they are dispersed to all the roots of the nether teeth: a part
notwithstanding goes forth through the hole in the chinne, and marches
through the lip. This Artery (...) 7.
Uesalius forgot, in so much that he has made no mention at all thereof.

BUt before we fall to the description of those arteries which are contained in
the Scull, certain others are first to be described, of which a part also is
taken from the Scull.

It is to be noted therefore, that y^ right Arteria axillaris does spryng from a
place The beginning of the left is higher then the ri^ht.
less exalted then the left. Moreover it marches not in oblique order as it
does. But the beginning of it is from the right artery Soporaria, in the
regton of the Canell bone it goes straight through the armehole under the
Canell Bone: to the right arm: where it is divided and marches foreward like
as does the left. But from the anteriour part, whence these Soporaria, and
Axillaris arteria do spryng, ij. arteries do grow tendyng downwardes, and seno
their branches to the superior spaces of the ribs, and to the Vertebres, of
which two arteries, Vesalius was ignorant: Col. Ibid.
also other ij. small arteries do arise, which under Sternon are converted, and
descend, associatyng those two veins, which tended to the pappes, and to the
borders of the straight Muscles. After their manner therefore are divided.

Almost in the same region, but backwardes, toward the bodies of the
Vertebres, you shall note ij. other arteries, which being carried through y^
tra^suerse Processes of the Vertebres of the necks (for to that end nature
left them perforated) as also through those holes, out of which the sinews do
proceed, do command their brannches to the Spinall marey and Vertebres, and
to those Muscles, that side ways do serve to bow the neck: albeit that in
some persons these ij. arteries are not from Soporariae, as in the most, but
often from the arteries Axillares, produced. These arteries, which thus we
substitute to animal contemplation, between the head and first Vertebre, do
make ingresse into the posteriour part of the Scull: that is to wit, between
the same Vertebre and the Spinall marey: first ministryng unto the cave or
laberinthe of the ear ij. arteries, which in their ingresse do mingle
together. But in such order the right is united to the left, as that of both,
one for the length of half a finger, is made: Into ij. it is afterward
divided: then again into many others, and first they reach to Dura and Tenuis
meuinx, and then to Cerebellum. By these the beginning of the Spinall marey,
Cerebellum, and part likewise of the brain, are reuined and quickened: and if
nature had not begotten, these (says Collumbus) the posteriour parts of the
Scull had wanted arteries.

These ij. arteries, which through the transuerse Processes of the Vertebres
do arise upward, between the first Vertebre, and the bone of the hinder part of
the head, enter into the inner region of the Scull between the same Vertebre,
and the spinall marey. But after they are entered into the cauitie of the Scull
by the length of half a finger, they are joined together, and of ij. made one
only artery.

Nevertheless they are again forthwith divided, and that into a right and a
left, from which, arteries are to the ij. Membrans of the brain, and to
Cerebellum suborned. And further, through the substance of these parts, in
the upper part, through the half space of the Scull, most large is the
distribution of these arteries. The rest of the Scull is reuined by the
ramification of the ij. arteries Carwtides, or Soporaria, as shortly shall be
said. Which before they penetrate into the Scull, imparte of their power by
little Arteries into the laberinthe of the care. But so soon as this trunk of
the Artery is entered into the Scull, as is before said, it dispatcheth forth
branches to the Spinall marey, to the hard and thin Membran, to the brain,
and Cerebellum.

Of these ij. arteries the true distribution, no man has known before
Collumbus, Col. (...). cit.
nether did Uesalius invent it, who, whilst he was practiced in the
description of the Arteries ascendyng through the transuerse Processes of the
Vertebres, was contented to affirm, that they entryng into the Scull, do tend
through that camtie of Dura matter, into which the Ueynes Iugulares do enter,
but this rather he supposed to see with his eyes. Wherefore (says he) no
marvel, if so much he divided the description of ancient Anathomistes, as
touching Rete mirabile: since rather from these Arteries, of which he was
ignorant, then from the Artery Carwtides, the marvelous net is effourmed:
although neither P^te (...).
to Galen these two Arteries have been known: therefore he says Ueynes are
carried through the posteriour parts of the head, and Arteries through the
Anteriour.

But these two Arteries which we have described, are under the Spinall marey
exalted vpwardes, and besides those manifold branches, which are sprinkled
throughout the thin Membran, they pass into the substance of the brain, in
that place, which is called Cwnarium, or Glandula Pinealis, in the This
glandule in the brain bears the shape of p^us.
extremity of the superior Uentricles, and there brings to pass a large
and notable plicature, or weauyng: which (after Collumbus opinion) may
worthily, for the marvelous workemanshyp thereof, be called the marvelous
net, which is in the posteriour part fastened to Torcular. Into this
plicature so notable Torcular is the forth caui^e of Dura matter quabruplified
between Cerebrum and Cerebellum.
and worthy admiration, are immitted two Arteries named Caratides, as in their
place shall not be omitted. Therefore of four Arteries this marvelous net is
made, most notable to each studious Anathomist, both for the dignity and
newnes of the thing, which before Collumbus was never taught or noted.

The Arteries Carwtides, so soon as they are come to the seat of the Scull,
they seem to enter the hole, forth of which did pass the vj. pair of
sinews, and which does take in charge the inner Ueynes Iugulares: albeit they
arise not up, nor here do bring forth two Arteries, as Uesalius affirms: who
also Col. Loc. ci^,
would have them to enter into the cauities of the hard Membran together with
the Ueynes Iugulares. But then thou will say peradventure, what do these
Arteries under the seat of the Scull? They are converted to the Anteriour
part, and pass through a hole, which lurketh in the te^porall bone near that,
through which the sixth conjugation of sinews descends, and they enter among
the inner Iugulares: but before they be received of the inner part of the
Scull, they deliver forth two Arteries, whose branches are diverse, to wit, to
the palate, to the inside of the nose, to the upper teeth: others' enter into
the Scull by those holes there sited, and like a tree through the sides of the
hard Membran, together with those Ueynes therein conspicuous, are explicated,
and therefore is Sincip^t in that place excaued.

But after that these Arteries have esfused forth these branches to the
palate, and teeth as is said, they rise up into the Scull through that hole,
which is sited between Sphenoidos and the temporal bone, in which place a part
of the third pair of sinews descends: although Vesalius for the same does
reprehend Galen. But so sooue as they are passed the seat or sell of
Sphenoides, they minister ij. Arteries to the eyes a long by the opticke
sinews, to show life unto the eyes, and not only life unto the eyes, but also
to the Muscles of the eyes, and to those by which the iawe is opened, I mean
the upper iawe: wherefore you shall find the divisions of these large and many.

That which remains of these Arteries Caralides, ascends above the
aforesaid sell coherent with the thin Membran, and after the callous body
toward the posteriour parts, and diverse ways is sprinkled through the thin
Membran, above, within, and to the sides. Also some of their branches are
deduced from the thin to the hard Membra^, and others from the thin Membran
to the substance of the brain.

After so many distributions of the Soporiferous Arteries above the sell of the
The Arteryes called (...) (...)
Cuneall bone, they underlay the upper Uentricles of the brain, immediately
after they have perforated the thin Membran, the which Uentricles are The
cuneal bone is the bone Sphe^^^^^. (...) men^^o^ed.
anfractuous or full of foldes: and whereas at first they seemed but two, they
are severed into very small ones and those innumerable. There therefore you
shall behold a most pleasant net contexed and wouen together of Arteries:
the which Arteries have their Ueynes to them joined in fellowshyp, and in
their ends lies the Pineall Glandule. These has Galen described for the
netlyke Glandula P^^^^ls called also (...)-(...),
foldyng, as though it might represent the Secundine.

Collumbus notwithstanding boldly affirms this (if it be any where at all) to
be the marvelous net: for no where (says he) shall you find such foldes,
through foldes, and interweauynges of the least, and innumerable Arteries, else.
But Galen did describe the marvelous net whereof he makes mention, to be
above Sphenoides, where that Glandule, which receives every excrement
begotten in the brains, being to that office by Nature dedicated, is resident.
But whosoever shall seek the same where Galen has described it, he shall be
frustrate of his purpose. For nothing else shall he find there, but certain
little Arteries, ministryng life to these parts, and to the bone Sphenoides.
The same Arteries, which thus constitute the marvelous net, do send their
power through the substance of the brain: which thing of no other
Anathomist, save only of Collumbus, has been written.

And this is the end of the description of the superior trunk of the great
Artery, without you make account of those Arteries to be described, which flow
forth to the right superior ribs. This by the way is worthy to be noted,
that not one Artery tends to the lunges, whereby they might receive vital
spirits from the heart. And this is a sentence most approved in Anathomie, that
(exceptyng the lunges only) all other parts of man's body are endewed with
beatyng Arteries. By which reason, Collumbus protests sufficient authority
to what severe disputer soever, shall go about to prove, that in the heart it
self are not begotten the vital spirits. But of this matter is other where
said.

The greater trunk of the great Artery called (as we have often said) Aorta,
tendyng downewardes, declineth toward the left side, and is to the body of
the Vertebres adherent, which to the superior trunk is not incident. For
that, no otherwise then Vena caua, is distaunt from the Vertebres. This
inferior trunk therefore, whilst it descends, out of his hinder part
profereth Arteries to the spaces of the ribs: and these again charge others
to the Spinall marey, to the Vertebres, and to the Muscles, in the posteriour
part of the breast sited. But where it comes down to Septum transuersum,
bringyng forth two a like Arteries, which are into the same distributed, it
passes under the same, and still cleauyng to the body of the Vertebres,
marches down to the last Vertebre save one of the loins. But so soon as it
has passed the midreif, it produces an Artery to the liver, in place whence
^ena parta went forth, as we have said: being there distributed. An other
spredeth to the vessicle of choler, an other to the spleen, an other to the
Uentricle and Omentum: other little branches to the Glandulous body Pancreas,
and others also to the intestine Colon. Under this an other appears, whereof
are very many and large divisions, both through Mesenterium, and to the small
guts: being perpetual mates to many of the Meseraicall veins.

Moreover a little lower it begets two Arteries, and those very notable,
called the Emulgent Arteries, which enter into the kidneys. Under the Emulgent
Ueynes, a little more bendyng down, it produces the two seminall Arteries,
which have their begynnynges from the body of the great Artery, but not from
the left Emulgent (except in very few) as to Galen it seemed. These
descendyng, are folded together with the seminall Ueynes down to the
Testicles, both in man, and young maid, and in women to the body of the
matrice, yea to the inner part of the matrice: and from these the vmbellicall
Arteries of the infant, take their beginning.

Under these seminall Arteries, in the midst of the trunk emergeth an other
Artery, which is carried to the Mesenterium of the straight gutte, and to part
of the intestine Colon, after the left side of Ileon. But the Arteries of the
straight gutte, down to the extreme part of the fundament, together with the
Meseraicall Ueynes of Vena porta, do descend, wherefore there are made both
Ueynes and Arteries called Haemorroidales: in the posteriour part out of the
same Artery under the midreif, Arteries make egresse to the Vertebres, to the
Spinall marey, to the Muscles of the back, and to the Muscles of the bellye.

But so soon as it is come to the last Vertebre of the loins but one, and in
some bodies to the last of all, it is first divided into two and those great
branches, which (...) the right and the left side, but surmountyng the hollow
Ueyne in the region of Os sacrum. These two branches are subdeuided, and
descendyng more, are ramified to the sides of the bleddar, to the neck of the
matrice, and to the Muscles resident in the concauitie of Abdomen. Two others
likewise pass through the holes sited in Os pubis and Coxendix: from which
holes, so soon as these Arteries are gone forth of Abdomen, they are sent to
the two bodies of Penis, from the top to the lowest part, and them do they
pass in branches: they being those Arteries, by which erection of the yard
is made: which thing neither has any man noted unto us but Collumbus. The
remnaunt of these Arteries, is dispersed through those Muscles, which are put
in the inside of the thighe, but they pass not the knee.

From those Arteries which the bleddar receives, others also are purchased,
which being brought to the inner part of Os sacrum, through whose holes they
tend, both to the same, and to the Spinall marey: but without, to the Muscles
seruyng the thighe. Like as also from the great division of the Artery, some
issue forth, which with vital blood, do nourishe the Muscles of the thighe,
which are within the belly situated. But of those Arteries which after Os
sacrum and Coccix do descend, some together with certain Ueynes of Vena caua,
do flow to the Muscles called Sphincter: the which Arteries, may also be
called Hemorroides.

Moreover out of the great division of the great Artery, two other Arteries
spryng, which are reflected vpwardes, and passing through Peritonaeum, do
ascend under the straight Muscles above the navel: and in many branches are
ended among the Muscles of Abdomen.

In this division two Arteries, called Vmbelicales, are set down, which are
the first Arteries that in the infant are begotten. For after that they make
apparaunce from the Navel: they march through Peritonaeum, in what place it
is double, unto the sides of the bleddar, and do begette these Arteries, of
which somewhat before is said. But after the beginning of the Vmbelicall
Arteries, the heart it self is begotten: but to return again to the
Vmbelicall Arteries, for of any such parts I determine not further to speak.
These, after our bodies are brought to light, are dried up, and usurp the
office of two Ligamentes.

But furthermore the two arms of the great trunk, which are carried down
into the legs, pass under the fifth Muscle of the loins bowyng the thigh,
and going forth toward Abdomen above Os Ilium, and Pubis, are joined in
fellowshyp with the inner veins of this place, which march among the
Muscles. And like as those veins are divided: so in like sort we see these
Arteries to all the Muscles of the leg, foot, toes, and their extremities,
disparcled. Finally, they commend their force by branches, to the Glandules of
the flank, to the purse of the Testicles, and under the skin to the yard.

Now diligent Reader note, that not the Bones them selves are destitute of
Arteries, least so they should lack vital warmth also: without which, no part
in the body lives.

Of the History of Man, the viij. Book, of the brain, and Instruments
seruyng to the Animal function.
Since to the explication of the whole History of Anathoinie, there yet
wants the fountain of senses, and voluntary mouyng, and seat of the
principal part V^, Lib. 7. cap. 1.
of life, by whose benefit we imagine, reason, and commit to memory: this
present book, being consecrated to that end, shall entreat of the brain and
his universal parts, with the instruments of sense.

Like as therefore the substance of the heart is endued (...) spirit.
with vital force, and the proper flesh of the liver Natural.
with the natural faculty of life: moreover as the liver makes the thicker
blood, and that which is calaginous, natural spirit, at least if there be
any, and the heart does confect and mix with vital spirit the blood runnyng
throughout the body. And like as the bowels, through the conduites to them
dedicated, do derive their matters to the relief of all the parts of the body,
so also the brain obtainyng sit matter to his office, by instruments in
proper seats, and fitly ministryng to his function, does beget the Animal
spirit being Animal spirit.
far the thinnest and most excellent, which partly it uses to the divine
sun^io^s ^se of the Animal spirit.
of the principal part of life: distributyng part to the instruments of
s^lyng and mouyng continually by the Nerves, never leauyng the destitute of
spirit, which of the action of those instruments, is supposed chief author.
No less the liver, and heart, do fustrate no parts in the body (so long as
man is in health) of those matters due from them, although not always in like
store and quality.

THe Nerves therefore (whose original to depend upon the brain we shall
shortly declare) owe thereto like service as the great Artery to the har^es,
and the hollow vein to the liver.

For in like sort they deduce the prepared spirit from the brain, to those
instruments, The Mer^es (...) the messengers of the brain.
to which it is continually owyng by natures commandment being therefore
rightly judged the diligent messengers and garders of the brain. Which as it
is the most excellent of all the parts and members in man, so is it The (...)
of the brain.
most safely enclosed, and stately constituted, having the supremacy of all
the members of the body.

And although Aristotle imagined, not that to be contained in the brain and
Aristotle in (...).
The brain was not made to the cooling of the heart.
his faculty as is in deed, and therefore rashly assigned the constitution
thereof to the coolyng of the heart, and that the heart should be the author of
blood and sense, yet it is most certainly otherwise, and his opinion therein
easily refelled. For as in the heart the spirit is made vital, and in the
liver natural blood is forged to The (...) of (...) Animal spirit.
the whole body: so in the brain is created animal power, the most noble and
(...) property in the whole body, as it is a part most excellent os all others.

What soever therefore some have inserted to the contrary, Reuldus Collumbus
Col. Lib. 8. cap. 1.
by ^ue notable reasons proves it chief and supreme of all other member parts
and offices in the body.

First is, in consideration of the noblenes of the brain his situation, which
The first reason of the (...) of the brain.
apertly shows the principality thereof above all other members, for as much
as it possesses the (...) part of the body, and strongest tower from all
injuries.

The second is the ^gure thereof, which is round, and partly long, but more The
second reason.
r^e then long: the which figure is rashely made no where of Nature the noble
Architecte.

The (...) reason that moves (...) thereto, is to behold the strong munimentes
The third reason.
and strange defenses and couerynges thereto appertainyng: as first the Which
ate the (...) of the brain.
hear, then the skiune, which there is thickest (what soever Aristotle says,)
then a certain fatnes, nert Membrana carnea, Pericranion, and Periosteon,
Afterward the strongest of all, being the Scull: which is no doubt a notable
fort to the noblenes, of the brain. But this is not all, for under the Scull
are contained two couerynges or nearer enclosures, one distaunt from an other,
made also for the safety of the brain. Those Bones of the head (as in the
History of Bones is largely declared) are so worthily closed and seamed
together, that they can not be separated, nor the brain hurt without exceedyng
violence. Whereof contrariwise The heart is more easily hurt then the brain.
to the heart appertains no such defense: forbetwene the spaces of the ribs,
an instrument moved with small force may intercept the office and function
thereof. Wherefore it plainly appears that nature was more careful in
constituting the brain, then in placyng the heart.

The fourth reason is to consider the marvelous use of the brain, since it is
The fourth reason.
the author of sense and mouyng, without which the body were no otherwise but a
stock, or dead Image, altogether destitute of sense and motion. So is it also
the seat of the mind, endewed with the virtue of reason, which is the
greatest Cicero. ^ib. 1. offic.
Wherein man most differs from beasts.
sign in deed, to discern the difference between man and beast, which (says
Galen) is an Art before all Arts. From whence are obtained seeing, hearing,
smellyng, (...). Lib. 1.
taste and speech. To the which actions, what great utility the brain
profereth, it is well to be perceived by Idiotes and foolish bodies, who having
defect in this, are lame in all the rest.

The fifth Argument he proves by the parts and considerations of this Art,
The fifth reason.
whereof we entreat, as thus: In the generation of man the liver is engendered,
by the means and help of the vmbellicall veins, but the heart by the means
of the vmbellicall Artery: and these, both the vein and Artery, spryng from
the vessel of the matrice, but the Nerves (which to be the instruments of
sense and motion no man doubts) spryng from the brain of the infant which is
engendered of the seed it self.

Therefore of right the brain is to be esteemed more noble then all other
members, Col. ^n. tract, de (...).
and as one may safely say, the king of all the principal parts.

Wherein is framed by a subtle kind of operation the most precious and daynty
What most adourneth man.
jewel which adourneth man with the greatest ornament above all other
creatures, that is, the spirit animal: not sparingly reserved to some
principal part, but according to custom of Nature, (who in her gifts is
buntifull yea even to the basest part) is fruitefully distributed, and poured
upon every part of the body, to the end they should not live destitute of
sensible action.

But before we speak fully of the function, and princely property of the
brain, I think good to speak upon the three Membrans which first appear
unto us The thick and thin Membr^ (...) the brain.
enwrapping the same, the one of them being without the compass and enclosure
of the Scull, and the other two within the same.

But secondly I will speak of that without the Scull, because it is produced
from one of them within.

THe uttermost therefore of these inner Pannicles, which in deed with in forth
is next unto the Scull, and in respect of all other Membrans either of the
brain or other parts of the body, thickest, is of the Grecians called (...),
in ^uchsius. cap. 2. de Cerebro.
Latin Crassa, and for the excellent hardness thereof Dura, the hard or thick
Membrans: the barbarous sort call it Dura Matter, which in compassing the brain
about, Dura m^ter covers the brain as (...) the (...).
does not gather the same straightly and closely together, but in slacker sort,
and remiss order, no otherwise, then after the manner that Pericardium
inuolueth the heart: provided or rather forecasted so by Nature, lest otherwise
the straightnes thereof might yield cause of impediment, or deprivation of his
motion in Diastole and Sistole. For though it seem marvelous, yet it is most
certain, (...). ^ib. (...). cap. 8.
(...) and (...) in the (...).
that not only to the heart belongs the same Diastole, and Sistole, but
likewise to the brain. As all such diligent Anathomistes as have employed any
travel to the search of lively dissections: or if few such, yet at the least
if they have but given a little heed to the mouyng thereof in wou^des of the
head, that have pearsed Cranium, they shall confess it no obscure mystery, but
an evident and plain truth.

This hard Membran (says Realdus Collumbus albeit no man ever before his (...)
(...) is ij. Membrans, a (...) not known to every (...).
time did find it) is double, not in respect of the thickenes thereof toward
all other Membrans in the body, but two distinct Membrans. Whereof the one
inward beholding the brain, and the other outward, next to the Scull, which
worthily is endewed with less sense then the other: for because it is the
next, and Why the exterior (...) (...) (...) is not so sensible as the
interior.
fittest to touch the hardness of the bones.

But the other again inwardly, excels in perfect sense. Therefore these
Membrans redoubled in the top of the head, under the straight Suture
discendyng, separate the right part of the head from the left. Notwithstanding
not so Where (...) (...) is (...).
even down to the bottom, or lowest part, but to the half of the brain, as
one should say to the center, prick, or half way of any round fashion or
form, where the callous body is.

This doubling of the Membra^s (whereof I have made mention) in the hinder part
thereof toward the brain is more large the^ before toward the forehead.
Where is the fi^ure of a (...).
The figure thereof is, after the fashion of a sickle.

But again in the hinder part of the head these Membranes are (...), Where
(...) (...) is (...). double and why.
or to say plainly, Dura Membrana is in this place four double, and that not
in vain: for as much as very properly in that part it deuideth the brain from
Cerebellum. Between which are four corners, or rather cauities filled with
The (...) felled with blood between the four doubtenes of Dura matter.
blood, into which the inner Ueynes called Iugulares make entrance (of which
ingresse Uesalius, as one in this point judged little diligent, was ignorant)
and go foreward even to the extreme part. For that cause there is in this place
no The (...) of the veins called (...).
blood without the proper vessels, which if it should be (as in deed Vesalius
deemed) Dura Matter might be called the beginning or original of Ueynes, then
(...) is led to an (...).
which, what to be more absurdely said or thought can not be devised. But to
return to the foresaid hollowes or cauities.

Of these, the two first are placed at the seat or foundation of the brain,
where Where are the ij. (...): cauities of Dura matter four doubled a^e.
a way is made for the inner Ueynes called Iugulares, whose entraunces are nigh
the Bone of the head called Occipitium, and do arise vpwardes to the point of
the seame called of some Lambdoides, and here join together, that is the right
with the left, and make the third hollower: which marches foreward after the
The third cauit^e.
whole length of the head, and ends in the hole, which is in the top of the
nose betwixt the forehead, and Os Ithmoides. But this third hollow is not round
beneath, The figure of the third cauitie.
for the sides thereof are in tria^gled wise framed: the upper part resembles a
half circle, to whose eminence and roundnes the fore part of the head gives
place, for so does the same cauitie lie just under the straight seame or
Suture. The rising of the veins dispersed through y^ thin Membran.


From this hollow, or rather from the vein which we said to be reposed therein,
very many other Ueynes, both from the sides and also beneath spryng forth,
which wander here and there, dispersed throughout the thin Membran, which By
what veins the brain is (...).
we will speak upon by and by. Those aforenamed are cut into an innumerable
sort of Ueynes, by which company the whole brain is nourished. Above this By
what veins the bones of the head are nourished.
hollow cauitie small Ueynes also arise, which, to the end the Bones might be
nourished, do pass through by the Sutures. The fourth cauitie of Dura (...)
doubled.


The fourth cauitie or corner of the hard Membran quadruplified, is just
between Cerebrum, and Cerebellum: which place the Anathomistes call a press,
Where is the press.
whence the foresaid Ueynes have their rising. Being carried through the
substance of the brain, and through the thin (...) where with Cerebe^ The
leading of the ^eynes from the pre^e.
is inuolued, they show them selves mates to the netlike (...).

And albeit we have said, that like as Pericar^ in ample manner covers the
heart, thereby to yield him large scoape, for continual pulsation: so this
thick Membran to cover the brain aptly as was convenient for Diastole and
Sistole. Yet not so disseuered from the brain, as the h^t from Pericardion,
which are not bound together at all with veins and arteries.

But D^a Matter is tied almost every where, to the (...) that lappeth Ve^l. ^ib.
7. cap. 2.
the substance of the brain, and that to no small end and utility. For the
branches Now Dura (...) is tied to the brain.
derived from the third cautie of the hard Me^bran, with an innumerable fort on
both sides; unto the seat or substance of the thin Membran next unto it, do
^ow Dura matter ^howeth the ^yne.
sustain very fitly the brain suspe^ded, so that it can not fall down, to
compresse the Uentricles, so that by this means, the hard Membran is both to
the brain an inuolment, as also an apt proppe to support and hold up the same.

To which purpose likewise, are maruelously assistaunt the Fibers, that creep
forth at the Sutures from the hard Membran, and fastenyng it again, and in
like manner, to the Scull, as the thin Membran to it with veins and arteries:
The use of the Fibers sent through the seames.
so that the brain thus secondly vpholden, the weight thereof is excellently
prevented to force it to much downwardes.

Furthermore, consider that nature has not only sent these Fibers through the
Sutures in reflected manner, as the Smith that turns again y^ point of the
^ayle, but they are also increased above the Scull with a marvelous
dilatation, so that all mixyng together in one, do at once degenerate into a
thin Pannicle Now pericranium is begotten.
or Membran, which, because it covers the Scull, the Grecians have nominated
(...). Nevertheless, this is not the immediate or fool coueryng to the Scull.
For under it consists yet an other thin Membran, which is most common also
to all other Bones in the body, which bewrappyng them, is therefore Periosteon
to the ^cull.
called by proper appellation of the Greeks (...).

BUt to return again to the inward Membrans of the brain, and those whereof
we have not as yet spoken: Col. ^oc. Cit.


Under Dura Matter, which I have sufficiently done my part to show, lies Where
is Pi^ m^r.
Pia Matter, called also Tenuis memrix, with which indument the brain and
Cerebellum Cho^on.
are nearely clad, the is close to the substance of them, it being of some
Secundina.
called Choriou, that is to say Secundina. And this thin Membran is
copiously Where lies the substance of the brain.
stored with veins, and arteries. But under it lies, the white substance of
the brain, which is soft and marey like, although not so, but differs from
the substance The subst^ of the brain and ^rey ^o not (...).
of the ^arey that is found in the cauities of bones not a little.

NOw to come to the figure and fashion of the substance of the brain, Pia
Matter The figure of the brame Pi^ matter taken away.
being taken away, it is very like unto the foldes of the small entrals when
Othentum is lifted up, that is, for the likeness of the thing, in that The
reason of the (...) and turninges in the brain.
the brain, like to the guts, seems to show many infoldes and turnynges.
Of which circumuolutions if any man enquire, the opinion of Collumbus, is
thus, that it is so made, both for the lightness thereof, as also by the same
wyndyng The brain has not that Figure for (...) ^alie as some do^ say.
foldes that the brain might more easily move in Diastole, and Sistole.

Notwithstanding they are not wantyng that have said the brain was made so for
the cause of understanding: which if it were so, Asses and other beasts
Collumb. allows not this judgment of V^lius but (...) that by veins that
(...) (...) (...) of (...) brain it is (...) (...) as a (...) (...) (...) said.
^ould be reasonable creatures as is man, since they want not the like shape of
the brain.

But Vesalius Lib. 7. Cap. 4. auoydyng that error, and (...) forth a more
(...) r^son of truth, thinks that Nature rather ordained such foldes in the
brain as a means of nourishement to the substance thereof: for neither is it
so firm in any place, that Ueynes and Arteries, as in other parts of the
body, may be through the same in every place scatteryngly dispersed: nor yet so
small and slender in quantity, that Ueynes, and Acteries in the top only
braunchyng, are sufficient to nourish and warm the same throughout. Which
provident Nature foreseeyng, has engraven these cornered implexures, that in
them the thin Membran, replenished with sundry vessels, might insinuate it
self, whereby to minister nourishment more fitly to the substance of the
brain.

And chiefly also for the occasion of this nourishment, was the brain in two
parts dissected, that is to say, that the thin Membran might fold it self
in the middle thereof, and there made in reflexures, should nourish the
substance of the brain: without which division of the brain, and deep
reuolutions, that part of the brain, whereas the right side beholds the
left, should not be nourished. Hitherto Vesalius.

It seems certain that Aristotle was not a little deceived in matters
Anathomicall, Collu^ c^p. cit
The ^inder part of the head is no^ without brain contrary to Aristotle.
whilst he writes that the hinder part of the head is destitute of brain,
but every man knows that the hinder part is not empty, and void, but has
and contains therein not only the brain, but Cerebellum also.

ANd to come to the midst of his substance, we find two cauities, or rather
Two Ventricles of the brain.
(for so are they called) ventricles, as one would say, a right, and a left,

There are which call these the anteriour Uentricles, but Collumbus rather
Those which are called the (...) should more rightly be called the (...)
ventricles.
wishes to term them the superior: for as much as they are contained or
situated above the rest. These therefore are indifferent large, and endowed with
the thin Membran: wherein is reprehended the error of Vesalius, for so much
as he denied the same.

Through these upper ventricles of the brain the reticular or net like foldes
Plexus Coriso^.
called Coriformes are carried, whose uses do belong to the generation of
animal The use.
spirit.

Whereof Realdus Collumbus chalengeth to him self, the only and first
invention The invention o^ Realdus Collumbu^. how the Anim^ spirits are
begotten.
after this manner. The original beginning of these ve^tricles, is above the
Bone named Sphenoides, toward Ethmoides: but the air drawn by the nostrels,
is conserved a space in that cauitie of the forehead, or Cuneall bone, which
being there altered, ascends into those two ventricles which he calls the
superior, or uppermost, and that by the holes of the bone Ethmoides: whereas
and in which ventricles, by continual labor of the brain, and motion of the
reticular (...), this air is mixed with the vital spirits. And thus are the
animal spirits, made of the same air lately prepared, and by mixyng with the
vital. To this end Galen says thus, the generation of the animal spirit,
has the vital Gal. Lib. 9. us. part.
The vital spirit the propper matter of the Animal.
his proper matter. Wherefore the whole brain is contexed and wouen together
with the division and distribution of arteries: of which, many divisions do go
from the ground, or foundation of the brain into the Uentricles, no
otherwise, then the veins descendyng from the top of the head. And by these
dispersed arterics, vital spirit is effused into the ventricles of the
brain, which, by metyng

The utility of the animal spirits is not one, or simply to be accounted of,
Col. Loc. cit.
The use of the Animal spirits.
but is extended, and liberally bestowed upon all the senses: which being begot
in the cauities of the brain, discende unto the foundation or seat thereof:
where the third ventricle is, which is a little, long, and straight cauitie,
reachyng from The third (...) tricle of y^ brasue.
the anteriour to the posteriour part of the brain.

Not far from this ventricle the Nerves of Spinalis Medula do spring.
Therefore The beginning of the neruess of the spinall marey.
an easy matter for the animal spirits to come unto, and pearse the sinews,
or to be carried by them to the organs of sense to give them help, and to aid
the actions of every member, no otherwise then as, being carried through the
optic sinews into the eyes, they minister unto them the actions of seeing. In
like sort as it is to be deemed of the hearing, and tastyng, and of every
action proceedyng from the brain.

But besides this third ventricle thus lately spoken of, it shall be requisite
likewise The fourth ventricle of the brain where. The way of the (...)
spirits from the third to the fourth ventricle.
to describe a fourth, which is between Cerebellum and the Spinall marey: in
which place there is a small hole going from the third to this fourth cauitie
now spoken of, being but little, yet not so small but as may suffice the animal
spirits to pass thereby from the third, to the fourth Uentricle. And this is
the place wherein is said to be contained memory.

The fourth ventricle is not much capable, and is comprehended of the thin
The place of memory.
Membran. There the Spinall marey, (as shall be said when we come to the place)
The cauitie in the (...) marey like a writing pen.
is endewed with a cauitie figured like a writing pen, as it were a hole,
whereby no man doubts the contained spirits may pass unto the Spinall marey.
Above the third vaentricle of the brain, you may behold a portion
supereminent, The callous body.
or appearyng over it sufficiently white, which is called Callosum corpus, a
Callous body. Under this lies an other portion named Fornix, and Psalloides,
The arche or baulted place.
in figure of a half circle, or rather an arche, or bendyng bridge: which on
the hinder part leans as it were on two legs, but in the forepart on one
only. Neither The use of the callous body and vaulted place.
unprofitable is this body callous, or hard, or that after the fashion of a
compassed arche made, but to the end that the wayght of the brain might not
ruin or fall upon the third cauitie.

BUt between these small portions of the brain, namely the callous, and
vaulted The glass in the brain what it is where, and of what use.
bodies, is contained as it were, a glass, so truly called, because it is
clear and cristall like, being nothing else in this place but the thin
Membran of the The use of (...) (...).
brain here doubled: with which duplication of thin Membran, the superior
ventricles are environed, which thence return downwardes. Whereto if this
glass were wantyng, it were not evident bow the right Uentricle should from
the left be discerned, and called: forasmuch as by the means and help of this
only Membran, they are divided.

BEhynd this vaulted part in the extreme part of the brain toward
Cerebellum, The testicles in the brain.
and in the upper part of the third ventricle, Nature has feyned certain
eminent parts, which in their upper parts, represent the likeness or Image
The baunches or (...) in the brain.
of Testicles, and so called therefore of Anathomistes Testes: near unto the
which, two other particles yet somewhat greater are to be discerned, called
according to their figure clunes, the haunches or buttockes. Between which
lies that The hole like the fundament.
hole, which is already noted to from the third, to the fourth ventricle, and
seems like unto the fundament. Furthermore in the forepart of these Testicles
(as we call them) stretchyng to the third ventricle, an other part of the
brain appears, which not unaptly, but very elegantly expresses the shape or
priuye The image of a woman's pri^itie in the brain.
part of a woman. With this body is seen a little hard Glandule, in color
contrary to the substance of the brain, that is to say, somewhat yellow,
covered with the thin Membran.

THis Glandule is called Pinalis, or Conarium, fitly representyng the shape of
Gl^ndule (...).
The yard in the brain.
the yard. So that in the brain wants nether the figure of the Testicles,
buttockes, fundament, woman's shape, nor yard. The use of this Glandule
Collumbus Col. (...). cit.
holds opinion to be for the division of the vessel: othersome have
coniectured The use of (...).
that the making and office thereof was, to shut in the spirit of the fourth
The (...) of Anathomistes in the use of (...) (...).
ve^tricle, but that he allows not. Galen says, that it has in this place
the same office that others in other parts of the body possess: but it
fills (says he) the division of the great vein wherewith all the foldes
Choroides, that are in the anteriour (...) Ibid.
ventricles of the brain, are filled. In the forepart of the third ventricle
The (...) where (...) (...) and the use thereon.
is to be discerned a deeper cauitie, which goes at length above the seat of
Sphenoides, and this cauitie is called Peluis, or Infundibulum, which is to be
Englished a tunnell or hopper made to receive the excrementes begotten in the
ventricles, and transmit, and carry them to the Glandule placed in the seat of
Sphenoides. Which Glandule in deed is sufficiently thick, being put without
the ^ard Membrans, framed so of the divine workman to receive into it the
excrementes of the brain. And this Collumbus affirms to be the place, where
the thin Membran rises to cover and clothe these ventricles.

And not withstandyng all this said, yet before we cease or give over the
description of the brain, note thus much, that in the brain and whole
substance Only (...) (...) (...) in the brain.
thereof only four cauities or hollowes are to be numbered, and more, or besides
them none, (says the same Realdus,) although some have affirmed v^. the cause
^hy some (...) have imagine, (...). ventricles.
of which error is the anfractuous or crooked deduction of the first v^.
ventricles, which they have not diligently persecuted or followed forth to the
end, but imprudently have deemed by that means, two other ventricles to be
contained in the forepart: which certainly are nothing else but a portion of the
first.

NOw the discourse of the brain, being sufficiently handled, it seems
necessary (...) C^r.
consequently to speak of Cerebellum. Cerebellum which has his (...).
place toward the hinder part of the Scul, under the hard Membrans: of which,
Indument.
as also of the thin Membran it is compassed on each side: notwithstanding
that his circumuolutions, and turnynges, or wreathes are not the same, but
otherwise (...).
then we have noted of the brains. And this part (says Johannes Fernelius
Iho. Fernel. cap. ix.
Ambianus) is much harder then the substance of that we call the brain,
Substance.
and therefore produces harder sinews, and also (says he) it is moredry:
whereof the extreme part falls down the hollow pipe, or cave of the spine or
back Bones, even unto Os sacrum: but he seems in this to subscribe unto
Galen, (...) ^ffection according to Galen.
who says, that the end of Cerebellum is the beginning of the Spinall marey,
and for that cause it is the harder, that to all the hard sinews of the body,
it might be a beginning: for as much as from this hinder part of the brain, no
soft sinew is produced.

But notwithstanding that these be the words of Galen and Fernelius, two
famous men in Philosophical discipline, yet as men not retainyng the whole
(...) and scope of Art to them selves (for so had never man that lived yet) Of
the substance of Cerebellum contracy to Galen.
their words are not as Gospel in all things: to this I say therefore with
Realdus Collumbus that the substance of Cerebellum is not hard, but with his
turnyngs (...). (...). (...).
at length ends downward in two Processes: the figure of which is like the
The worms in (...) and there use.
white and short worms found in rotten wood: whose use is to prohibit, least
of the fourth ventricle, pressed by the weight of Cerebellum, the substance
should be stopped. And whereof Galen thought that from this Cerebellum came
harder sinews, the^ from the brain, the truth is (says Collumbus) that there
hence proceeds No pair of sinews springs from Cerebellum contrary to Galen.
not one pair, nor one at all: Wherein to be sure, he purposely marked many
times and often: neither is the substance thereof any thing harder at all, The
substance of Cerebellum is not harder then of the brain.
then of the brain.

THus far we have spoken of the matter and substance of the brain. But to
speak further of the principallitie of his functions, and to argue more
Wherein the noblenes of the brain is most plainly argued.
plainly the noblenes of his nature, by explication of the sundry benefits be
yeldeth throughout the frame of the body, behold but the organs of smellyng,
hearing, and seeing: with taste, and feelyng: as also how much he makes to the
motion of members, in strewyng such an infinite number of sinews throughout
the Now man differs most from growing pl^aces.
body, and parts thereof, without the which, no other could be coniectured of
the life of man. Then is to be descerned by trees and spredyng plants: which
only flourish in growyng, and frutage, but void of sense, sight, hearing,
taste, mouyng, How much more exquisite are the sent in man the in other crea
tures.
and smellyng: which are chiefly in the body of man most notable above all
other creatures, by so much the more, by how much the brain in man, is
different from all other creatures.

TO go foreward therefore in the description of these aforesaid organs, first
The first of the common sense called smelling.
you shall note that in the forcpart of the brain about the seat or
foundation thereof, the rising of two organs are plain to be discerned, which
the Grecians Col. ^ap. 2. Lib. 8.
call Olfactilia, but other Anathomistes Processus Mamillares: which are The
rising of the Mamillar Processes.
long, and small, consistyng of the substance of the brain it self, only
inuolued with the thiune Membran. Between the brain, Os Sphenoides, and Os
frontis, Progress.
these organs are carried: above which the hard Membrans are to be discerned, of
which we have spoken before.

Thus the organs of smellyng do cease at two little thick parts, and those
again Ending.
in the Bone called Ethmoides, at the side of a certain eminent Process
thereof. So that of the breath that we draw at our nostrels, part ascendyng up
by ^se.
the nostrels into these said little holes (for so says Fernelius,) part of the
breath received (...) Fern^l.
^ib. 1. cap. ix.
passes this way into the brain, and the rest into Trachea Arteria) we ^alen
Lib. 9. and 11. de us. part.
distinguish and find out the differences, of good and evil savors. How
hapueth (...) of savors.


The which proper organ, to the end it might not have lightly default in
operation, but retain his virtue more effectually, Nature has produced in
places mentioned, near to the Process lately spoken of, two portions or soft
sinews: not of ancient Anathomistes therefore called sinews, but we term
them so, Why the Nerves in the organs of smelling are not hard.
since, by their rare tenderness, they are the fitter for this purpose to
discern the differences of air brought unto them: which to been hard, no man
would judge it by reason so fit: since they support a more subtle sense, then
any other parts (...). Ibid.
in the whole body.

Again, a double commodity is found by these said organs. For besides that
they thus present all savors good and evil, unto the brain, so do they also,
and The second use of the organs of smelling.
in like maker, receive the filthy and ^lymy excrementes purged from the
Anteriour, or upper Uentricles of the brain.

To these nostrels appertain a certain Cartilaginous substance, which in
the midst of them makes a several division, or hedge: called therefore
Nartum The division or hedge of the nose.
septum, or Interseptum Cartilaginosum, stretched from the bottom, to the top
of the nose: as also to the upper parts of the palate: for all that region, or
part, is repleate, with holes, and hollowes, to receive the said superfluities
of the brain.

THe ears being in like sort the organs of hearing, are sited in the extreme
G^len (...).
Of the organs of hearing.
parts of the temples, of which the outward parts are called Auriculae. The
substance of the ears are Cartilaginous or grissely, and not rashly so
ordained, Substance.
for as much as thereby the entraunces or passages are made, not only easier,
but also (which is notable) continually open, and pressed to receive the sound
^ernel. Ibid.
of every speech, or other noise. Therefore Dura Membrana, or the thicker
coueryng in clothyng and enwrappyng the deepest corner or wyndyng of the ears,
a ^al. 11. ^ib. us. part.
certain soft sinew is brought thereto on each side, from the fifth conjugation
of the ^ernel. Ibid.
How hearing happens read more elegantly in the history of (...), and namely
where yt (...) of the organ of hearing are described.
brain, objected to the holes transuersely, or overthwart: which receiuyng
the air of any sound, caryeth and presents it unto the brain, the notable
and common begynuyng of sense.

Thus have I said how smellyng and hearing take effect in the head, and by what
means the brain has knowledge of both. So in like manner you shall here how
the noble orgas of light, which to the whole body are to be compared as the
Sun unto the world, are situated in the head, and how with diverse aids, they
obtain their action.

THe eyes therefore are assistaunt on both sides, the most delityng and
prexious Of the organs of see^ng.
parts in the body: which no otherwise then circumspect espialls in a forte,
that watch the uppermost tower, to behold a far of and give warnyng
Situation.
of their enemies: so the eyes are sited in a most high place, the rather to
espy, and discry things pleasant, or otherwise hurtful to the body.
Fernelius reports, (...). Ibid.
taking his authority (as he says) from Galen, that for cause of the eyes,
the head was appointed in the highest place of the body, because the brain,
for the shortness of the sinews opticke, stood in need to be situate so near
the eyes. But such reasons are not disputed on, since the brain to have his
fastest being a loft, and eyes there most ^ightly seat in the head, no man
judges rashness or improuidence, not only because nothing may be amiss, that
is wrought by the omnipotent creator, but also forasmuch as the same in the
weak judgment of worldlinges, seems so notable, as the thing, which,
otherwise then so, could not have been the like.

Therefore if in markyng the situation of the eyes, you retain but some seruple
of diligence: no doubt, but as you find how excellently Nature has engraven
in the head and uppermost iawe two proper celles or cauities for their
habitation, Collumbus. ^ib. (...).
so will it (eue^ as it were) ravish your senses, to consider how many meet
defenses and propugnacles are placed round about their cauitie. Which albeit
they have to them selves proper uses appointed, yet serve they besides so fit
for to guard the eyes, as if they had been for no other purpofe ordained. For
above Which and how many are the propugnacles of the eyes.
them is Os frontis and the eye browe, beneath, the first bone of the upper
iawe, the bones of the cheek, likewise the nostrels, and Os iugale: besides
the gristels of The eye liddes direct the ^ight. The fashion of the eye in man.
the liddes, and the eyeliddes themselves, which serve to direct the sight.

The fashion of the eyes in man is round: which if you mark well, you shall
find that nothing else in the body has a direct round proportion. But in
other creatures the eyes are not directly round, no, rather oblique or
depressed. Neither is that marvelous, whilst the figure of man differs from
all other creatures in no small point. Neither more openly, then worthily, has
Realdus Realdus Collumbus reprehendeth all that write of the eyes before his
tune.
Collumbus reproved such as hitherto have made description of the eyes, by
srequentation of brutish Anathomies: which clearly he notes in Galen, and
after him Vesalius, whose (...) in matters Anathomicall no man neglects: yet
Galen and vesalius were deceived in the workmanship of the eye.
with no small negligence is he spotted in this point, since, so carelessly to
write in a matter so great, excellent, and often wished he blushed not.

But now to come to the matter, in what place the eye is sited, and for what
cause, that is to say, for sight, no man doubts, but how the sight is made,
that is not with facility explicable: the strise thereof as yet is under
judgment, as touching How vision is made is a difficult question.
emission, and immission. Some thinckyng to have obtained truth on their side,
are confuted with the fancyes of their own foolish fablyng. So that one so
much hinders an other, as when reason should give judgment, conceyt stands
in the light: but of this argument we will make no disputation. It is
sufficient The blind think them selves unhappy.
in this treatise, to show that the eyes are made for the cause of seeing. Which
thing is so marvelous necessary to man as they that either by nature, chance,
Whence ^o the faculty of seeing. Of what substance are the opticke (...).
or sickness lose there sight, account them selves unhappy.

The faculty of seeing comes from the brain, brought unto them from the
visible spirits by the opticke sinews, which sinews are thick and soft (as
shall be declared when we come to the description of sinews) enwrapped with
Innoluere.
Rising.
the hard and soft Membran, and spryng out from within the brain, to the seat
Progress^.
or soundation thereof: and penetratyng Os sphenoides through the round holes
Insertion.
What does constitute the membran called (...) or Retina.
thereof, do end in the inner cauitie of the eyes, whereas they constitute the
Membran called (...).

The eyes therefore consist of many parts, that is to say of five Muscles,
notwithstanding that Galen and Vesalius are of much contrary opinion, as in the
Of what (...) the eye of man does consiste.
History of Muscles is plainly set out: sire Membrans, and three humors: with
Nerves, Arteries, Ueynes, Glandules, and much fatnes round about.

Of the Muscles seruyng to the eyes, which we have said to be five, four of
Of the muscles of the eyes.
them are so disposed, as that they seem to be distributed to the four
corners of The four first muscles.
the eyes, above and beneath, to the right side and to the left. Their rising
is from Os sphenoides, and Duramater, and are long, consistyng of straight
Fibers: and in The (...).
(...).
their ends explicatyng their own substance, do constitute a tendinous
Membran, (...).
which ends at the pannicle Cornea, behynd Iris: every which Muscle doing The
use of every of these (...). muscles.
his office by him self, and labouryng without the help of the rest, ^raweth
Col. Loc. cit.
the eye either upward, or downward, to the right hand, or to the left: but if
at The use of the four muscles laboring together. The use or the toure (...)
(...) (...).
one time in mouyng, they go together, then they hold or stay the eye: but
again at what time they use not their motion all at once, but one of the^
successively after an other, the eye is turned round, or in compass wise.
Which diversity of mouynges at unlike time, is also to be seen in the four
Muscles addicted to the mouyng of the wrest. Wherefore, diverse motions to be
showed by diverse mouers (...) compares these four muscles to the muscles of
the (...), as touching their use.
and that in them selves diversely, let no man think it an absurdity to
believe.

But now to come to the fifth Muscle, whereof Realdus Collumbus protests him
self to be the first inuentor: it ample^eth, or embraseth the half and more
of The fifth muscle of the eyes (...) Collumbus (...) (...).
the eyes, in transuerse manner sited: nevertheless, is not to be despised or
with slight regard beholden, since the motion thereof is not only exquisite,
but according to the providence of God ordained, whereby the countenance of
man, is different from beasts: as the Poet has versified.

Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre (...). (...). 1. Met.

Iussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
When every beast, with prone aspect, to look on earthy mould,
He had ordained, yet man he made, the heavens for to behold:
And that he should his countenance unto the skies erect.
So by the benefit of this fifth Muscle we behold the heavens, and directly
cast our countenance upward. By it so is made perfect the devise of so great a
work begone, which serves and helps at every turn. For not only the eye
may be The use of this (...) (...).
lifted up by this Muscle, but be likewise stayed: as also turned round, or
again contained in his seat immovable still, or stedfact, without turnyng
this way or that way.

Wherefore I am in this opinion further persuaded, that Nature with great
foresight, and provident skill, gave unto the eyes this fifth Muscle,
participatyng with the property of every action: and placed it so closely, and
nearely wrappyng, or claspyng the hinder side of ye eye (as the like she has
done to other parts, whose offices are notable) that if the Muscles of the
corners, that is the other four, or any of them should by outward
inconvenience, and hurt, be dispoyled of their virtues, this (which by Nature
is sited so secretly, that as it is a hand unto the eye, so the eye is a shield
unto it, for that the one can not be rightly hurt, and the (...) the (...) of
authors as (...) the (...) of the eyes is plainly set forth.
other escape) might minister assistau^ce, least the eye thence forth should be
deprived of mouyng altogether.

The other Anathomistes, I mean, such as have written before the time of
Realdus Collumbus, how they have varyed from him in the description of the
Muscles The (...) (...) of (...) of the (...) is (...) among the muscles of the
(...).
of the eyes, I have most diligently, and directly, in the History of Muscles
declared. We ought yet in discussing the frame of the bodies light, further to
consider: for amongst these Muscles are distributed the second pair of
sinews from the brain: amongst which, the eye, and opticke sinew, a great
portion of ^at is The use of fat to the eyes.
placed, least that by want of such moystnyng, as it yeldeth, the eye, in
perpetual mouyng might dry and consume. Hereto also are joined (...).
^landules, of which The (...) and use of the (...) in y^ eyes. (...) whence
they spring.
the one above, and the other beneath, pouryng forth tears in a perplexed
mind, are made also to water and moysten the eyes the better.

But this said, to speak of the manifold Membranes of the eyes, they are Of
the membr^s of the eyes.
six in number.

The first of them is the outmost, and has many names, as all these, Adnata,
The names of the first membr^ of the eye.
alba, adhaerens, and coniunctiua: it is a Pannicle thin, and white, taking
his beginning from Pericranium, and ends at the greater circle of Iris: for
Iris is The description of the membran (...).
that circle in the eye replenished with diverse colors: which variety of
colors, proceeds not through the humor therein closed, but Vuea membrana,
the which What is Iris (...) the eye.
Vuea is not in all persos of like color, but in some blacker, in some more
white, (...) is not in every one of like color.
in some blew, etc.

The name of Iris is taken of the similitude of the raynebowe in the firmament,
The (...) of (...) in the eye.
so diversely colored. But that which you see in the center, or middle prick
(...) or the apple of the eye which is (...).
of the eye is named Pupilla, often called in English the apple of the eye: by
the benefit and office whereof, we have sight.

And notwithstanding that the same Pupilla appears black, yet nether it, nor
any thing under it (as says Collu^bus) is black at all, but most perfect
bright and shynyng: albeit I dare not subscribe to him in that.

But as in the contrarie^ie of opinions, when as every affection throws a
bra^de, truth hides her head, whilst reason has enough to do to defend him
self: makes some, not of the simplest Anathomistes, to hold in, and pause in
diverse Vesal. cap. 9. de arg. fac. (...).
of their discourses: so some again, not regardyng what others affirm, their
own eyes being witnesses (though I deny not, the rest to have used
dissections, perhaps yet not so often, in this respect upon the body of man) have
plainly without bawkyng depainted their judgments, upon such inventions, as
experience has found them.

For albeit Galen and Uesalius, have described the eyes far otherwise,
Realdus Collumbus (nothing terrified with the face of their authority) has
a^ouched The second membran unknown to other (...).
contrary to all their minds nether more, nor (...) less then six Membrans.

Of which, the second in number that he recites never any found before him,
The beginning and insertion of this second mem^.
and therefore goes unnamed. This says he is begotten of a certain kind of
sinewy thinnes of the Muscles of the eyes, and lying under the tunicle called
Adnata, or (...), before spoken of, is ended near unto Iris.

The third Membran is called in Greek (...), in Latin Cornea, and of
Ceratoides.
Galen. 10. us. part.
some Dura: so called, for that in cu^yng it is like to a horn, but that it
forces Fuch. cap. IX.
not: in (...) it is both hard, and thick, springyng from Dura Matter it self.
Fernel. cap. 13. Li. 6.
^ratoides constituteth the fashion of the eye.
Through this Membran Ce^toides, the fashion of the eye is constituted. Nether
has it more, then one original root, or rising: which perhaps has been the
The error of the Arabians in the membran Cornea Cornea is one only.
cause of error in others, accomptyng the forepart thereof Cornea, for that it
shyneth like a horn: and the hinder part Sclirotica, only sor the hardness
thereof. Whereas it is one only, and not two, brought from Dura Membrana, as I
said before. Ceratois in the forepart thereof is bright, and shinyng, and
therewith subtle Cornea what kind of one.
and small, in which place Iris and Pupilla is sited: this stays the eye, and
clotheth, The vtilities of the membran Cornea.
both the opticke sinew, and the eye (...) within hallow, containyng likewise
three humors, and three other Membrans.

Now to the fourth Membran of the eye, which is called Vuea, and Chorion,
(...), The names of the fourth membran of the eye.
and Choriformis, springyng from the thin Membran of the brain, and is the
first that clotheth the ^ticke sinew: after dilatyng further under Cornea,
Beginning.
Progress.
(...) forth unto the forepart. Yet for all that, it does not enwrappe the eye
(...).
all about as Cornea is said to do. But after it has come to the apple of the
eye, The fourth membran enwrappeth not all the eye. Where ye fourth Me^bran is
double.
which this same Uuea fashioned, and makes, it is reslected toward the
hinder part, and marches forth to the beginning of Iris, and there is made two
sold or double, and departs from Cornea all that space that is so clear and
cristall like: although in other parts again it is not a little knit thereto.
It bears the name The ^timologie of the Membran Vuea.
Vuea, for that the grain thereof represents a grape, the slalke taken away.
In this point (as I said) that is, as touching the colors of this Vuea,
great diversity Diverse colors in (...) in man. The colors of (...) in an ox
are moc then in man. The use of the variette of color. Why the eyes being
weary we wink.
is in creatures to be discerned, yea in man him self. For Vuea in man is
black in color, red, blew, and yellowish: but in an Ox, besides those
colors, also green, and bright, blew. By the which variety of colors the
weryed eyes are recreated, and therefore we shut the eyes, to the end that
after quiet resort of the visible spirits, these colors may newly be
refreshed.

The fifth Membran of the eye is called Amphiblistroides, in Latin Retina,
thosen of the very substance of the visible Nerve. Wherefore if we properly,
and The fifth membra^ called Retin^.
more directly should speak thereof, it is not a Membra^, but in very deed a
thing soft and white: which if you do behold precisely together with the
substance of (...). loc. cit.
The beginning and substance of R^.
the brain, you will rather deem it the substance of the brain then
otherwise. This lies more inwardly then does Vuea, and a little further
marches forward The situation of (...).
to the half part of the eye.

The sixth Membran, called (...), in Latin Aranea, for that it seems to The
sixth Membra called Ar^nea. Beginning.
represent a Spiders webb, sprynges in like sort from the thin Membran, being
of it self most thin and splendent: not far unlike the thin pellicle
Whereto A^nea is compared.
found, under the rynde of an onion^, whose use is to complect, and retain
the The use of the sixth Membran.
glassie, and cristalline humors.

Herein the great Anathomist Ve^alius seemed perplexed of sense, in his
description Col. Loc. cit.
(...) obscure in the Membran Aran^.
of the copweblike Membran. Yet over rashly made division thereof, not knowing
that therein was enclosed the glassie humor. Galen is no less reproved, V^l.
lib. 7. cap. 14.
in so much as he separated it from that which is sited before the cristalline
The Membran like y^ eye (...) which (...) mentions is not any thing dise^et
from the ^embrans hith^ ^ibed.
bumor. Which Collumbus affirms to be only one: although the part which is
said to be placed before the cristalline humor, be a little thicker then in
other parts. And these are supposed to be the true Membrans of the eyes.
Vesalius notwithstanding harped upon a seventh, like the eyelyddes, which
should be put between the glassie and watrie humor. Notwithstanding in deed
that those lines, which close about the cristalline humor, are in Arenea, as
before we have written.

After these it follows fitly to speak upon the three humors necessarely
appertaining Of the hu^ors of the eye.
to the eyes. That is to say, the watrish, cristalline, and glassie. Amongst
which, the watrishe is placed (being so of Galen called, for his substance and
G^len. us. part. 10.
The place of the wa^ie humor.
color ropresentyng the white watrishe part of an egg) between the Membran
called Vuea (where it is made double and inuersed) and that which is called
Cornea. Co^ Ibid.
Where are suff^sions made called (...).
Which humor is not much in quantity: and therein suffusions are made, which
the younger sort have called Cataractes. This, Collumbus proves to be an The
wat^e humor is an excrement.
excrement, for that twice he had seen it effused, through wou^des, and yet in
space renated or sprung again, so as the party sustained the loss of no eye.
To which The watrie humor being ^used may renate or grow again.
I faithfully subscribe, having proved the like in Anno. 1570. But to return
to our matter.

The second humor of the eye is Christalloides; or Christallinus, called so,
for because The second humor (...) the eye why it (...) (...) the ^lline.
place where it is sited is toward the forepartes, almost in the center of
the eye, being amplected olf the hinder part with the vitrious humor, having no
other Membran interiacent or lyeng between: but before covered with Aranea. The
Situ^tion.
(...) (...) of the (...) (...).
figure of the christalline humor is round, but in the fore part depressed:
where it respects the watrish humor, it is like the kind of a pulse called a
lentill. The substance, of this humor is somewhat hard. The use thereof is
exiellent and most The substance of the christali^e humor.
noble: being almost the principal member of sight, pleasant to be marked,
and worthy to be known, not injuriously therefore called the idol, or Image of
seeing. The use of the christali^e humor
Now the third humor called Hioloida, of all sorts of Anathomistes Vitreum,
because it represents fused or moulten glass. The place or being, whereof is
in The Eti^logie of the name of the gla^ie humor of the eye.
the hinder part of the eye. Yet not only holds his abode there, but holds
no small portion also of the forepart, as appears, since of four parts of
the eye it Situation of the vitteo^s humor. Why y^ vitreous humor us hollowed.
is said to occupy three: I mean the hollow part. Besides all this Hialoides
is hollow in the midst for good purpose, giuyng place unto the christalline
humor: being likewise of it self most splendent and pleasant to behold.
Aranea enwrappeth this together with the christalline humor, near to which
Retina lyesh, R^ na ^ourisheth the vitreous humor, the vitreous nou^heth the
christaline humor.
which yeldeth nourishment to the vitrious humor, which vitrious in like manner
feeds the christalline. Therefore no marvel that the vitrious humor shines
so excellently, being the nourisher and feeder of the christalline more
shinyng. So that by means of renewyng these nutricions, that humor is also
engendered, Now the watrish humor is begatten.
which is called Aqueus or watrishe, of Galen Alluginius, for the cause before
named. And these are the three humors in the eyes, helpyng or rather ministryng
Call. (...). (...). 10.
sight: for by their help, and by means of their round proportion, with the
center in the midst, and their decent situation, with such visible space
between, we easily and rightly see. Besides the five Muscles serving to the
eye, as also besides The Epiglogue of the parte^ of the eye, and fe^uyng to the
eye.
the vj. Membrans, three humors two Glandules, the opticke sinew, the second
pair of siuewes, and fat (all which I have susticiently in this discourse
distributed) there are both Ueynes and Arteries, dispersed through the Muscles,
fat, and Membrans, among which many of them are distributed, as also through
Cornea and Vuea.

This is the most proper explication that I can gather of the frame and
workmanshyp P^roration.
of man's eye: to speak plainly and without painted circumstaunces, least I
might happen to fall within the danger of foul obloquie with Vesalius, who is
said not only in the Muscles and Membrans fo have erred, but even in Col. Ioc.
cit.
the humors also to have wandered out of the way, supposing the christalline
humor Vesalius erreth i^ the history of the eye.
to be exquisitely sited in the center of the eye, as also the quantity of the
watrish to be equal with the vitrious humor.

Hitherto of smellyng, hearing, and seeing. Now of tastyng, whose chiefest Of
the sense of tasting.
instruments (says Ioannes Fernelius in his ix. Chap. De partibus corporis
humani) are in the palate and tongue, although the tongue (as says Vesalius) by
the The tongue the chief instr^ent of ^ast and how.
consent of all Philosophers, is the principal. Which office it purchases by
reason of the two branches of the four pair of ^selves of the brain, which
discendyng The four pair of Nerves set^ing to the orga^ of taste.
to the roots of the tongue, are distributed through the upper coat of it. The
other two branches of the same pair passing through the holes of the fourth
Bone of the upper iawe, march through the coat of the palate, to the Anteriour
part thereof.

And thus these four pair (says Collumbus) were begotten to be the organ of
Of the sense of feeling.
taste. As for the virtue of feelyng, which is equally poured out among all the
parts of the body, I ca^ not desine the propper instruments thereof, until
the propagation They are had in decision that affirm one nexue for feeling,
another for moving.
of Nerves be absolved, to which Nature resigned the whole liberty of feelyng
and mouyng: that worthily, they might be derided, who affirm one portion of an
Nerve to be endewed with feelyng, and an other with mouyng and without sense.

But before I fall to the particular description of Nerves, it may be demanded
What a nerve (...).
what a nerve is: it is answered, that a sinew is an organ, by the which both
sense and moving is carried unto the whole body. Which makes that such parts
as are void of them, are no less frustrate of sense.

Galen says that for^ three principal ends Nature has made such
distribution Lib. 5. de. us. part.
Why nature made such distribution of nerves.
of Nerves in the body. The first was to give feelyng unto the sensiue
instruments, the second to give motion to the moveable parts, and the third
to endue all others with that faculty, whereby to discern all annoyances.
Albeit that to the Muscles being the instruments of voluntary mouyng the
greatest Nerves are given therefore, in this consideration nature has not
distributed to every part Why nature gives not to every part like portion of
nerves.
like measure of Nerves, to one as to an other: but to some more liberally, and
again to others more sparingly. Even as appears by the members of nutrion,
whilst none of them are instruments either of sense, or motion. Nature has
given them therefore small Nerves, only to be partakers of the sense of
knowledge in any paynefull annoyaunces.

The figure of a Nerve is long and of round proportion, of substance soft, and
Collumb. Ibid.
The figure of the Nerve.
porie also, to give perfect passage to the animal spirits (...) among the
parts. And this substance of the nerves is endewed with the slender, as also
the thick Substance.
The Nerve is clothed with dura and (...).
Membran of the brain, to be of more ability.

Their distribution is diverse, but their original is from the seat or
foundation The originale of nerves.
of the brain, near to the third Uentricle: from whence they spryng, both to
the right side and to the left. And for as much as all that hitherto have
written The nerves of the brayue have been (...) (...) into vij. pair
of them, do describe their proceedings by payres, which are in number vij.
in which point there is not one of them that differ from an other (although in
other cases but seldom may we say so,) we will also in this present discourse
observe the like order, as touching the vij. pair of sinews of the brain.

And to begin, the first of them therefore are indifferent thick, and also
soft, The first pair of Nerves of the brain.
whole rising is somewhat distant from the anteriour seat of the brain,
whereas, above the cell of the bone called Sphenoides, they are united: but not
crossewise, Substance.
as some have dreamed. For whereas they join together a little space, they
separate Beginning.
again shortly, the right one passing to the right eye, and the left, unto the
left eye. But note a little as touching their inuolucres, for from their
beginning (...).
lately noted, to the hole sited in the roundell of the eye, through which they
pass, they are only bewrapped with the thin Membran: but from thence to the
eye, in which they end, and make the aforesaid Membra called Retina, in that
space (I The (...) of the name of the first pair.
say) they are enwrapped both with the (...), and also the hard Membrans.

These are called Nerui (...), that is, the visible sinews, and that because
they In the optic^e nerve is no pore. The pure spirits may paue through the
rare substance of the optiche nerves.
bring the virtue visible unto the eyes. They do consist of a spongy substance
of the brain, but not manifestly replete with pores as some say: yet not to be
denied (since their substance is both rare and also soft) but that they
prepare passage for the purest spirits. And thus much of the first pair of
sinews.

The second pair of sine was is brought through their propper holes, and
through Of the second pair of y^ brain. Situation Progress and use.
a rift or chinke of the roundell of the eye, to the five Muscles seruyng to
the eye, and to these two that open the eyelid: besides that they send yet
further (in some) a branch into the temporal Muscle: whereby in deed many
times it happens, that by the hurt of the Muscle of the temple, the eye also
is hurt, as it were The temporal muscle hurt (...) (...) to hurt by (...) and
(...).
by consent: and so again on the contrary part.

The third pair of sinews rising more backwardes, and as it were sidewayes,
has two begyunynges, whereof the one is greater, the other lesser: this pair
perseth The third pair with (...) and use.
the scalpe, and discendyng down wards by the same hole which is not only
common to this, but likewise to the fourth conjugation of sinews, is cut into
many brauuches, whose distribution therefore is very diverse. For the one
branch cr^peth to the temporal Muscle, the other to the roundell of the eye,
and through the eyebrow to the forehead, as also to the Muscle that closes the
eyelidde, likewise to the Muscle that delateth the nose, and to the nose
besides procreateth an infinite number of branches. An other branch of this
third conjugation of Nerves takes also the way through the roundell of the
eye, but lower. It passes downewardes by the third bone of the upper iawe,
through that hole which is placed about the middle part of the face, as shall
readely ariue in the port of remembrance The hole in the midst of the face.
by readyng the description of bones: to the which place when thus (as I said)
it has brought it self, it is there further divided into many sinews, which
sow them selves among the parts of the upper lip, through the Muscle named
Massetera, and among the Muscles of the cheek: of which small sinews also, a
part enter the cauitie or hollow of the nose. An other brau^che flees to the
roots of the upper teeth, an other descends the neither iawe, whereof a
portion in like sort is distributed to the roots of the lower teeth. Such
store of the^ as remains, besides these now spoken of, coast about the
compass of the chinne, nether leauyng the lower lip void or destitute of
sense.

The iiij. pair of nerves arises so near unto the 3. that the original of
them The situation of the fourth pair of nerves.
toward the mouth, and is cut into iiij. several branches, which pass
through the holes of the v. bone of the upper iaw, and thence march forewardes
through the Division.
tunicle of the palate toward the forepartes. Besides these, other two little
branches descend unto the Processes called Stiloides, and so to the roots of
the tongue, being distributed through the upper coat thereof. And the
distributio^ of these branches Use.
to these last recited parts, are to make perfect the organ of taste. Which
gift and office, though some Anathomistes not of the playner sort, have
ascribed to the third pair of sinews (which might happen through the
vicinitie of the iij. with the fourth) it shall be to me no cause of stay in this
my present pilgrimage.

The fifth pair of sinews, rising at the same seat or ground of the brain,
The situation of the fifth pair of Nerves.
in the temporal bone, which laberinth (being in the history of bones plainly
described) ends at the ears. So when it is come half way within this
laberinthe, becomes thicker, and does not only co^stitute a me^bra^. This I
say is y^ hollow, which we have described more diligently in the history of
bones, wherein the iij. little bones so meruailously serving to the gift of
hearing, are mentioned. The one of which iij. no Anathomist as yet save Realdus
Collu^bus has declared, nether I think found. To the sharp Process of ye
little bone which is like ye similitude of The bones of the organ of hearing.
y^ thighe, a little nerve ends derived from this v. pair aforesaid, from
which a little writhe^ sinew issues into this laberinthe: but it goes forth
through y^ hole of the te^porall bone, which is placed at the roots of the
aforenamed Styloides. This little nerve is toward y^ forepart reflected, and
like a serpent enters into y^ temporal Muscle. In y^ same place an other little
nerve is found, which is it self wrethed also.

The vj. pair of sinews is at the posteriour seat of the brain, or more
backward Galen Lib. 8. 9. 10, vsa. part.
discerned, having diverse branches or roots: and as ( Galen says) by how
much the nearer they spryng to the Spinall marey: by so much they are also the
harder. This pair descends through the hole that is sited between the bone
of the hinder part of the head and the te^porall bone, in place where the inner
Ueyne Iugularis ascends to the Scull. The vj. pair of sinews is at the
posteriour Col Ibid.
The situation of the sixth pair of Nerves.
seat of the brain, or more backward discerned, having diverse branches or
roots: And (as Galen says) by how much the nearer they spring to the Spinall
Distribution.
marey, by so much they are also the harder. This pair descends through the
The history of the right recurrent nerve.
hole that is sited between the Bone of the hinder part of the head and the
temporal bone, in place where the inner Ueyne Iugularis ascends to the Scull.

This vj. conjugation is diuersely distributed, for it carries sense not only
to all the parts within the breast contained, but stretches further, and
visits all the bowels of Abdomen. After that the right Nerve of this vj.
pair is gone out of the place above named, it sends certain branches to
the Muscles of Hioides, and to some of the Muscles of Larinx: then it
descends between Vena Iugularis. and the Artery (...), nigh the rough
Artery, even to the Canell bone. In the Artery Carotida.
region whereof, is sent a little sinew under the right Axillaris Arteria which
after is reflected toward the head, and cleaves to the sides of the rough
artery, ins^nuatyng it self into the cauitie of Larinx, and at length in the
formal instrument of voice, named (...) is impla^ted. And this is the true and
brief description of the What is Glottis.
right recurrent, or reuersiue Nerve.

But again under the regio^ of the Can^ll bone it sends forth a little
brau^ch, which runs not only to the pannicle Pleura (which I have
sufficiently discoursed among the spiritual members) but likewise to the
roots of the ribs: again sendyng an other little Nerve to the right side of
the lunges: the rest discendeth being fastened to Aesophagus, down to the upper
Orifice of the ventricle.

THe left recurrent Nerve, departing from the place where it begins, yeldeth
The history of the (...) (...) (...).
little branches unto the same Muscles that the right did, and descends
likewise in the same sort: and in the region of the left Canell bone sends
branches to the pannicle Pleura, to the roots of the ribs, and to the left
side of the lunges: Then further discendeth, till it almost touch the greater
branch of the Artery Aorta: In which place it sends forth a Nerve, which
under this Artery is rest^ed, and after turns it self again vpwardes,
toward his original and fountain, cleauyng (as by the right is said) to
Aspera arteria: thence forth entryng in between the Bone that is not named, and
that which represents a shield in the inner part of Larinx, and so enters
into the organ of voice.

These are the noble Nerves, which (says Galen) are endewed with the virtue
(...).
of fourmyng the speech, and are besides therefore called Vocales nerui. Whose
The use of the (...) Nerves
offices and uses are to much neglected, and to little amongst other things
known: for although few (in comparison of the rest) suppose in them to be
contained the The use of the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
propper power of vocal virtue, yet (to their great admiration) if they
willyngly dissect a living dog, they shall prove it plain and very truth:
for by diuidyng one of them you shall find him maimed of his voice, but hurt
them both in that order, and he shall be domme for ever after.

To this I must needs subscribe, for often have I of purpose proved it: being
so plain and a part to all that behold it, as that no doubtful question can
grow thereof. Notwithstanding that, some will scarce believe their own eyes.
Galen (...) ^art.
(...).
was the first that invented these reuersiue nerves: albeit he could not
satisfy him (...) (...) of (...) (...) (...) (...).
self in the reason wherefore nature did not convert the left recurrent nerve
to the left Axillaris Arteria: when as from the left recurrent sinewe, an other
little (...) (...) (...) (...). (...) (...).
(...) spryngeth, which, followyng the roots of the great Artery, is
distributed through the coat of the heart, but pearseth not the substance
thereof for the litlenes (...) (...) (...) (...) se^fe.
of it. And this is (says Collumbus) the true cause why nature reflected the
left reu^ue nerve under the great Artery, and not under the Artery of the
armehole on that side, as the right reuersiue nerve is said to have done on the
other side. Whereat (I said) Galen stood much amassed, neither could
sufficiently satisfy him self in the reason thereof, as appears in his vij.
book De vsu partium. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
But by this it seems that nature, as well as to create these notable parts,
had care to place them from all easy annoyances: as appears by this nerve
lately recited, which is otherwise reflected then the right recurrent, least
it, being so very (...), in the mouynges of the heart so continually, should
happen in the time of breathyng to be broken.

What portion that remains of this recurrent nerve, descends along Aes^gus
(...) (...) (...).
down to the upper Orifice of the Uentricle. But as soon as the right (...)
nerve, and the le^, are come to the same upper Orifice of the Uentricle, they
are straight way divided into many little Nerves, like nets, and thus do
embrace the upper Orifice aforesaid. Which are the cause in griefs and pains
of the mouth of the ventricle, that the heart it self is thought to ache. And
this disease Why the mouth of the ventricle payn^ the (...) seems to ache.
is called Cardiacus dolor.

Then again the right from this part departing, stretches forth to the
Membran that inuolueth the liver, and an other part also to the vessicle of
choler, an other to the left kidney, and to the upper part of Ome^tum. Besides
all the branches that it committes to Mesenterium.

After the same manner the left recurrent nerve is braunched to the spleen, to
Another di^tion.
the neither part of Omentum, to the left reyne, and to the bladder. And in men
thus end the recurrent nerves. But in women, after all these places, they pass
further unto the womb or matrice.

NOw to describe the vij. pair or conjugation of sinews, whose rising is The
situation of the vij. payr^ of Nerves.
more toward the hinder part of the head: but from the brain, not from
Cerebellum as Galen would with many small roots, whereto is dedicated a proper
From the brain not from Cerebellum springs the 7. co^ of Nerves.
hole sited after an oblique manner in the aforesaid part or Occiput: through
which as soon as this has made egresse, it shows it self first toward the
Anteriour parts, and into many Nerves, delated to the Muscles of the tongue,
Hioides and Larinx, is divided: Of which the greater runs under the nether
iawe, and so under the tongue to the extreme end thereof, to make it partaker of
sense and mouyng universally. But the fourth pair as we have said before, is
it that bringes the sense of tastyng to the tongue: and the tongue therefore is
said amongst other gifts to have the discre^tion of tastyng.

These vij. pair or conjugation of Nerves, are all that are remembered either
of the ancient, or later Anathomistes, as touching the sinews coniugated from
the brain: yet Vesalius seemed to smell an other (says Collumbus) but whether
it Col^bid.
were for that he would not go aside from ancient authorities, or otherwise,
it is Vesalius excused.
not known: he concluded at length that it was in his judgment, the root of
the fifth conjugation. But Collumbus doubts not, that under the seat or
foundation The description of the viij. pair of Nerves of the brain.
of the brain toward the fore parts, goes an viij. pair, which through a
proper hole in the bone Sphenoides passes to the temporal Muscles, to the
Muscle lurkyng in the mouth, called therefore of Galen Latitans, and to the
third Muscle also of the nether iawe called Masseteres: the original of this
being distant from the fifth pair of sinews sufficient enough.

BEsides all which we have hitherto yet said, in declaryng the original and
distribution The description of the (...) pair of ^newes of the brain.
of the vij. pair of sinews proceedyng from the brain: and besides also the
viij. and last spoken of, you shall hear the opinion of Realdus: who by his
often search and diligence, doubts not to prove a ix. pair or conjugation of
nerves, which no man before his time ever write or invented. And this is (says
he) a slender pair, beginning at those two foldes, or two together Processes
of the brain called Nates, Penes, Testes. These being thin and small, walk
toward the face, and pass also to the second pair, and are scattered into
the third Muscle of the eye liddes, fitly also braunchyng out to the fifth
Muscle of the eye.

In deed as he doubts lest some, or most will not admit his late invention
of these two last pair of Nerves, but, holdyng them selves more steadfast to
the fame of authorities, will rather account them as the roots of others: so
he professes not to contend therein, neither will we pretermit any time in
discussyng the matter. For me thinks it suffices us to know the braunchyng
of the Nerves, as also perfectly from whence they proceed: which may be well
enough, without so many sundry divisions, namyng (except it please the gentle
Reader) neither vi^. nor nine pair: only be diligent to find out how Nature
has made their distribution.

Galen, in his ix. book De vsu partium fully affirms that the harder sort of
(...) ut errou^.
sinews are only made and ordained for the cause of mouyng, but other wise
unapt for sense: again the soft sinews, in like sort, to ^inister sense to
the singular parts of the universal body, being not so able for moving as the
rest. Where fore the harder sort of nerves, have their original from their
Spinall marey, but the hardest of all from the lower parts thereof: the sort
then again are brought from the brain, but of those likewise, the nearer to
the Spinall marey, so much also more harder then the other. So that by this
reckenyng, Galen accomptcth this of the sinews, that the softest are the
perfect sensible, the more hard the further from perfection of sense, but the
hardest of all, to be not farthest of only, but (says he) altogether unapt
for sense. For which Realdus Collumbus, no otherwise Collumbus Ibid.
All the Nerves (except ye op^icke) caty sense and mouyng.
then reverently reproves him, assuryng us, that there be no nerves in the
body (the visible only excepted) but carries with him both sense with mouyng,
and mouyng with sense. But now, since we have labored sufficiently to
prosecute the order of the vij. pair of sinews, we will presently resort to
the nerves of the Spinall marey, called also Cerebrum elongatum.

AS the marey of the Spine or ridge of the back is esteemed by the consent Of
the nemies of the Spinall ma^ey.
of all Anathomistes, to be of the like substance, that the brain is, whose
original also is the brain, stretched forth long wise through the turnyng
joints to Os sacrum: So is it no less strongly munited and armed with
defensive propugnacles Collumb. Lib. 8.
called the Vertebres, or turnyng joints, then the brain by the enclosure
Cap. 4.
(...). l^b. 6. cap.
of the Scull, or bones of the head, as I have said before, even aboundauntly
The ^olucres of the Spinall marey.
in the history of Bones. And this is to be noted of the Spinall marey, that as
the brain, so this marey thence produced, is covered with the like two
Membrans, as Pia matter, and Dura Matter, or Crassa Meminx: which enwrappe the
same, and to the outmost end of this elongated body. Whereof the one next the
substance, and the other on the outer side of that again, to defend the same
from the ruinous actions of the Vertebres.

This although it is called marey, yet thereby we understand not such marey,
The difference of the Spinall ma^ey from the marey in other bo^es.
as is the cauities of other bones, for neither is this so fat or flowyng,
neither is the other covered with the Membra^s of the brain, as is the Spinall
marey, neither is there with it any communion with the instruments of sense,
or Muscles. Again, the Spinall marey differs from the brain in two things.
For first, The differe^c^ between the brain and Spinall ma^y.
the brain has Diastole, and Sistole like the heart, (as before we have said)
but so has not the Spinall marey. Secondly this marey is carried through Bones
which are moved, but steadfast and stable are the Bones of the Scull, compassing
about the brain.

The beginning of the Spinall marey is double, or two fold, the one more, The
beginning of the Spinall is double.
and the other less: the more part springs from the brain, but the less
from Cerebellum. And again, that that is brought from the brain, is only one
manner of way or form, but from Cerebellum, two fold, or divided into the
left, and right part. But the greater beginning of it proceeds in such sort
from the foundation The greater beginning of the Spinall marcy.
of the brain, as i^ seems to be the very ground thereof.

Wherefore to speak apertly, it springs from the fore part of the brain:
from The beginning of the Spinall man whence.
thence therefore is to be taken the beginning thereof (as says Collumbus: then
not in the place where it first enters into the Vertebres, as it pleases
some, in which The (...) of some.
place it is endewed with no circumscription. And if then the beginning thereof
be in so high a place to be appointed, are we not forced to grant the third,
fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eight pair of sinews not to spryng from the
brain, but from the Spinall marey?

This marey entryng forth of the hole of Occiput, into the first of the turnyng
Where the Spinall marey is thicker.
joints, is somewhat more thick then in the whole progress that it makes
besides. But again at such time as it comes to the top of the breast, it is
thence to the top of Os sacrum, of equal thicknes. Although some, not of the
nearest, supposed it in the mean space to waste by the gettyng of nerves, when
as in deed in Os sacrum only it becomes more slender.

In going forth of the Scull it is clothed with Pia, and Dura matter, therefore
The ^olucre of the spinal marey.
it clotheth also those Nerves that stretch forth from it. But when it must
pass through the mouable Bones, nature added thereto an other thin Membran,
least the same marey should any way be hurt by the hardness of the Bones. In
which Membrau Galen is thought to be deceived, for because he esteemed this
third tunicle to be a Ligament, wherewith the Vertebres should be co^nected and
Gal^n l^b. de Osstbus.
knit together. Which to be true, think how: since the turnyng joints
besides are not destitute of the proper Ligamentes, as in the History of
Ligamentes appears. For no man can surmise, or judge this thin tunicle to
be fit or apt in colligatyng and byndyng together these bones, whose motions
are so great.

The Spinall marey therefore is found marey like, or medullous only to the The
spinall marey in marching forward becomes simory.
extreme part of the breast, but then in marchyng thence forwards, it appears
sinewy: like whereto are the sinews thence proceedyng. But this esteem to be
by means of the division thereof. Herehence it is easy to be discerned, why
some Why hurt in the interior part of the spinall marey is greater.
matter descendyng through the Spinall marey, the greater hurt is felt in the
inf^riour part. The cause is very apparaunt: for that in this place it is
sinewy, but in the other medullous, or rather a portion of the brain
elongated, as we have said before. For else it may seem, that we use this word
medullous improperly: since that is only marey, which nourishes the Bones. To
which in nothing this is like: neither yet is the Spinall marey (though Galen
him self Call. in error.
would have it so) softer, then that, wherewith the bones are nourished.

And had not the almighty creator thus produced it of two things, the one The
necessitse of the spinall marey.
had come to pass. For either all the parts of the body under the head, and
besides the Nerves of the vi. pair and admittyng no branches of the sinews
of the brain, should have been destitute of the arbitrarious mouyng, and
frustrated of sense, whereby now so exquisitely they have the knowledge of
every annoyaunce: or else of necessity to every part of the body a nerve from
the brain must have been derived. But if they had wanted induyng, then no more
had man answered the form of a living creature, but a picture rather of
stone, or clay: and on the other side, from the brain to reach both small and
great nerves to every part, had been the part of a workman, little wayeng the
security of the nerves.

Therefore the Spinall marey was provided, that there hence Nerves might The use
of the spinall marey.
spring to fulfill all other parts of the body with sense, and mouyng: which
are otherwise destitute, for any of the vj. pair of the brain, that visits
them. Then that this marey should be of affinity with the brain, which
provides so noble parts to the body, who can doubt, gain say, or inueigh to
the contrary, unless he bear armor against truth.

IT is described by Anathomistes diversely, as touching the parts of sinews
traduced from the Spinall marey: but because we will consume no time to
answer, and reply upon every self opinion, for seemyng over correctiue, as
some are ready to object, we will fall to the only distribution of Nerves. That
is when they proceed, and how they are after sown abroad among the parts of
the body. Collumb. Ibid.


The first pair therefore of these Nerves is sent forth between the bone of the
Vertebre of the neck, so privily, and artificially, The first pair of nerves
from the spinall ^arcy.
as that the motions of the head are all together denied to injury them. And
to the end this might safely be brought to pass, nature has engraven a proper
cauitie, as well in the bone of the hinder part of the head, as also in that
side of the first Vertebre, or turnyng joint of the neck, which ought to end
at a spine, or point. This conjugation of nerves thus departing, are
afterward disparcted into diverse and sundry little branches, both by reason
that the pair it self is but small, as also more commodiously to be
distributed unto the notable company of small Muscles that serve to the head.
For they arose the first Vertebre, and were carried to the hinder part of the
head, and again, from thence reduced to the second Vertebre. But before it go
forth, is reflected above the Spinall marey: a thing notable to behold.

The second pair, or conjugation of sinews, because of the impossibility of
Vertebres, as appears, has two (...): whereof the greater appearyng
backwardes, is carried here and there by the sides of the Spine of the second
turning joint, whether once being come, it deuideth it self into very many
parts and branches, which reflected presently vpwardes, stretch forth to the
skin of the head, to the ears, and to Muscles there aboutes. The other
beginning less then this, comes forth by the forepartes, between the first
and second Vertebre, by the sides of the tooth thereof, (as appears by the
description of the second Vertebre, in the history of Bones) and is distributed
to the fifth Muscle of Larinx, which is common to Aesophagus.

The third pair of sinews engendered of the Spinall marey, creeps through
Vertebre; and from their sides as you have heard by the rest. Then after has a
former division, which is into four parts or branches, but those not so
contented are into very many parts, some to the Muscles of the bead, and to
that ^ong quadra^gular Muscle brought from the fleshy Me^bran, which obliquely
draws the lip downward, some to that long Muscle that pulls the shoulder
blade upward, and others to the skin of the neck, ramified.

The fourth pair passes forth between the iij. and fourth Vertebre, through
Vertebres, I will repeat no more hereafter. This pair thus passing forth (as
I say,) is into diverse branches divided, whereof some ascend, some descend,
and others (...) them selves to the hinder part. Further more from this pair
are sent small sinews serving to the Muscles of the neck, as also to the
Muscle called Cucullaris. But among the fore parts or branches, some are
inserted to the Muscle, strewed under the stomache, one of the which, being a
small one, is united with a branch of the fifth pair, and the fifth with the
sixth: of the which three beginnyngs are constitute those Nerves, which march
forwards down to the Septum transuersum, descendyng by Mediastina, and above
Pericardium.

The going forth of the fifth pair is found between the fourth and fifth.
Vertebre, (...) and distribution.
divided thence into many Nerves, both anteriour and posteriour. The anteriour
branches, which is most of the others apparent, is united with a brau^ch of
the fourth pair, and in some, takes a little branch from the others that
follow. This nerve, thus made and co^structed of three, desce^deth to the sides
of Aesophagus by the fore parts of the turnyng joints of the neck, and so
down to the sinewy parts of Septum transuersum: In which part the end thereof
is determined. Collumbus says that in some this rises from the fourth pair:
but that Col. Ibid.
seldom, for it is most often found to proceed from the fifth.

BUt note when first this comes to the hollow of the breast, least the
continual moving of the lunges should be a mean to hurt or break the same,
it is bound or stayed with certain Membrans; both above and beneath
Pericardium. This nerve with a vein is properly associated.

And no marvel (gentle Reader) that nature so willyngly provided for the
safeconduict The (...) a noble muscle.
of this Nerve, since to the midreif it was destinated: a Muscle so rare and
noble, as in all ma^s body is none the like. That which remains of this fifth
pair or conjugation is diversely disparcled: for a branch thereof accompanied
with a Ueyne and Artery, is sent through the midst of the hole that is ^ited
in the shoulder blade, and there spent amongst the Muscles that from the same
scaple bone do spring.

An other branch descends through the sides of the neck, and is distributed
to the Muscles called (...) and Cucullares. Other branches stretch to the
shoulder, others to the fouresquare Muscle that draws the lips obliquely
downewardes, as also to the iiij. Muscle of the bone Hyoides. Sundry others to
the cauitie of the shoulder blade, where there are enstrewed to the Muscle
there lurkyng, and to the second Muscle of the breast, as also to the skin
there aboutes.

Vesalius numbreth this fifth conjugation amongst the Nerves of the arm,
because Vesal. ^ib. 4. cap. 14.
The (...) of Collu^bus.
it is spread forth unto the Muscles serving the shoulder. But Collumbus,
because it goes not together with the v. nerves of the hand, will in no wise
so account it. Of the which Nerves of the hand, because of the true
Anathomistes it is much Why the nerves of the hand are (...) described.
wished, we will now address us toward it, that truth the gemme set in
order, the foil may show more persite.

THe hand, being (as says Aristotle) the organ of organes, and an organ before
The hand is the organ of organs.
all other organs, to the end it might excel in the sharp sense of touching,
nature has chosen, and given thereto five proper and needful pair of
sinews, (...) pair of (...) to the hand.
that is to say, three to the extreme fingers, and two to the extreme hand. All
which fine pair have their original from the Spinall marey, going forth by
^he common The beg^nning of the fine pair of Nerves to the hand.
holes of the Vertebres of the neck, and the first turnyng joint of the breast.
And these after they be gone forth from their risinges, as is said, are so
united afterward together, that one pair from an other it is almost
impossible to distinguish. ^here they are (...).
Nevertheless they are at length separated, seemyng to constitute and ^here
they are separated.
frame them selves after the fashion of a net.

These fine payres of sinews march forth with one consent under the channel
Why woun^es to the (...) process of the scaple bone are deadly.
bone, as also to the inner Process of the shoulder blade. In the which place
also they are accompanied with Vena Basilica, and Axillaris Arteria: wherefore
no marvel though a wound in this place be fearful and dangerous. But to go
to every one of them seperately.

The first pair of Nerves to the hands is brought forth between the fifth, and
Vertebre, when it is come to the cauitie under the armehole, it sends Of the
(...) pair of nerves of the hand.
forth a nerve to the first Muscle of the breast, and to the second of the
scaple bone, and a (...) in like order to the first and second Muscle of
cubite, whereby the same is bowed. Furthermore, if you willyngly follow it
further, it runs under the first two headed Muscles through the inner part
of the shoulder, but after the bought of the cubite, it accompanies with the
common Ueyne, and both together as it were with one tract, are deduced to the
extreme part of the hand. But in that space not ceassing to pour forth sundry
little branches to diverse parts of the skin there aboutes.

The going out of the second pair is according to the same journey and place
that Of the second pair.
we have described to the first, so then it sends three Nerves to the Muscles
that serve the shoulder, whereof one issues out at that hole of y^ shoulder
blade that ^keth under ye armehole, being first diversely distributed, the^
after is carried straight forth after the fore part of the shoulder to the
bought of the arm, passing the^^e betwixt the bone Cubitus and Radius: but
note that at what time it enters into the bought, it disperseth it self in
branches, which are bestowed on the 4. 5. and 6. Muscle, by whose means all
the five fingers are bowed But so soon as it is passed and gone behynd the
midst of the bone Radius, it puts forth a nerve sufficient apparent and
deep, which cleauyng as it goes to the Ligament that is set between the Bones
Cubitus and Radius, is at length implanted to the quadrated or four Col. ^ib.
8. cap. ^.
squared Muscle in the history of Muscles manifest: which being sited near
unto the wrest, moves the hand directly downewardes in prone manner. The
greater trunk or stock of this same nerve descending further, and lower,
creeps under the Ligame^t that lies on the inside of the wrest, in which
place it brings forth sundry branches duly dedicated to the Muscles of the
thombe, and others to a portion of these Muscles, which we have called long
Muscles, and showed to spring from the Tendons of the fifth Muscle. Other
branches likewise it sends to those Muscles which, rising from the
postbrachiall part of the hand, do bow the I^ the ball of the hand sometime v.
(...) (...). Nerves.
first joints of the fingers. Which done, in the palm of the hand it is cut
into v. parts, but some time into seven, though not so often. Of which five
parts, two marches forewardes through the sides of the thombe, to the
extremity thereof, in the mean time here and there distributyng their surcles
to the skin: two other post themselves to the extreme parts of the
forefinger, in the mean time neither laying wast the skin and compass about
them. The fifth runs through the inside of the middle finger. And these are
the five parts: but in such as it is divided into vij. parts, note the vj.
iourneyth through the extreme region of the middle finger, and the vij. through
the inside of the little finger. And thus much of the second pair of sinews
seruyng to the hand.

The third pair so addicted, after the self same manner runs down after Of
y^ (...) pair.
the side of the shoulder, and inferior parts of the cubite, as also above
the joint between Olechranon, and the inner Tubercle of the shoulder, where it
brings forth diverse branches, which through the first Muscle, of which is
made a large Tendon, may easily be found scattered, as also to the second and
third Muscle of the wrest. Then it marches after the length of the cubite on
the inside, about the midst whereof, or little more it is divided into two
parts: the one greater, and the other lesser, and the one again takes his
race more deep, the other more outward. That which runs inward, passes
under ye inner Ligame^t of the wrest, there ramifieng to that first Muscle with
a broad Tendon, which Collumbus first observed, and from thence to the vj.
Muscle which leads the little finger from the rest: not ceassing to yield y^
like kindness to those Muscles that exte^d or stretch forth the fingers, which
(in the proper place) we have said to spryng from the tendons of the first
Muscle that boweth the third joint of the fingers: neither denying to assist
the Muscles that bow the foremost joints, and which cleave to the
postbrachiall bones: this done it seuereth it self into three, and sometime
into v. which stay their courses at the extremities of the fingers, being
through the sides of the ryng finger and little finger delated, although
sometime it is found to stay about Why the (...) of the hand is so sensible.
the midst of the middle finger. Beyond all this it imparteth slender
braunchings liberally to the skin all about, and namely to the palm of the
hand, which makes it become so sharply sensible, and exquisite in touching.
But now to come to the lesser bow or branch before divided. This, strayeng
through the exterior parts of the hand, is reflected above the wrest, there
into three proper rames specially divided. But in some preparyng five casts
them through the upper of the back of the hand. So through the sides of the
little finger and ryng fingers, and through the half of the aforesaid middle
finger, and to their extremities committed in like order as is declared by the
other on the inside: Only in this differyng, that the inner are much greater,
then the outer Nerves, most nobly done of Nature, who was not ignorant that
the outer might with more facility be hurt then the inner.

The fourth conjugation of Nerves prepared for the hands, is greater then Of
the fourth pair of nerves to the hand.
all the Nerves thereto distributed, and takes in hand the like rising and
journey as does the rest, but when it is come very near to the midst of the
shoulder, it is reflected to the exterior and superior parts thereof, whence
and in what place issue forth little Nerves to the Muscles that bow the cubite,
and further to the exterior Muscles, not neglectyng the scope of the skin to
the ^ubite and shoulder appertainyng. Among diverse other Muscles there aboutes,
this fourth nerve lurketh, wherefore braunchyng along by the Bones Radius and
(...), after that by such means the Muscles that rise from the middle of the
cubite to serve the thombe, are refreshed, it visits forthwith the wrest,
whereas like unto a trunk or stock divided into five parts, so in like order
this is severed: ij. whereof brustyng into y^ forefinger, other two delight the
thombe, the fifth is sent to qu^cken the extreme part of the middle finger, as
is said of others before. But from those which we said to go foreward to the
thombe, are exiled very sma^l surcules, or twigges, which yield that benefit
they may to the Muscle that is place^ between the Thombe and forefinger. And
truly great is the distribution of this fourth nerve beside among the Muscles
of the cubite.

But the fifth nerve is very small, of whose branches some are made out to Of
the (...) (...) of nerves to the hand.
yield sense unto the skin of the shoulder and cubite: other branches it
sends in like sort under the armepit: what remains associateth Bas^ca
Vena, and in the same journey disparcleth diuersely surcles through the skin,
and at length ends at the extreme parts of the hand. Moreover from this fifth
nerve certain are sent under y^ Cannell bone, to the viij. Muscle of the head,
so to the first, and fourth of the bone (...), to the first, and second of the
breast, and to the vij. of the shoulder; as also to those Muscles, that serve to
draw the neck sidewayes. And this is the place whence small nerves are con^ded
to the fleshy (...), and so to the skin of the neck. In this sort consider
of the distribution of nerves unto the hands, with as much perspicuitie as
brevity described. But note that in all persons you shall not finds the small
surcles and twistes of nerves alike dispersed, yet the bodies, stocks, and
bows of them you shall see in sundry bodies smally disagr^yng. But this is not
to be marueiled at, if you espy in some bodies a Nerve that runs through the
midst of a Muscle, and the same in an other to go through the sides of the
same. And for because in some that are wounded, some time feelyng is lost, and
yet the manner of mouyng remains still, and in others contrarily, as the
mouyng lost, sense seaseth not, in others so both are destroyed together: Some
Anathomistes (I say) in this case seemyng astonyed, and devising to find the
cause, have made differences in Nerves, that is to say, they will have it that
in every place where Nerves are distributed in the body, there should be both
Nerves sensitive, and moitie. But (...) in (...) persons (...) sense sometime
mouyng sometime both is lost.
this opinion Realdus Collumbus supposes none to be of, save such only as are
ignorant of the true distribution of nerves. And therefore that it is
sufficient to say, that those surcles of sinews that disperse abroad in the
skin, do bring sense, (since the skin moves not) and such as are addicted
to the Muscles, impart to them both feelyng and mouyng. Wherefore when the
Nerves of the skin are wounded, or that noyfull matter segregated to those
parts does corrode or distroy them, it is no rare matter if the skin in such
places be left destitute of feelyng: as also mouyng is marred, when in place of
the Muscles where they are resident, solution of continuitie is made, with
breach of the concourse of the Nerves: And both are then maimed, when not
only in the Muscles, but also in y^ skin, the sinews be dispersed or
divided. Judge therefore in this wise the causes, when either sense or mouyng
perishes, as also when both be destroyed together. Or if I shall speak
plainly, a hurt that When by the hurtyng of a Nerve feelyng or monyng may be
lost, when neither.
chances unto the Nerve before it enter into the Muscle, and in place where
it should Retrahere, and Contrahere, cannot be any means conioyne, or knitte
together again. But if the like happen in that part which is already entered
the Muscle, in that part shall neither continue amission of sense, nor mouyng.

If the fancy of any reasonable man, that labors with no less industry to
seek the truth, shall persuade him to add a sixth pair of Nerves to the
hands, as heretofore it seemed good to Vesalius, let him beware, least in his
judgment V^al. cap. 15. Lib. 4.
be deceive him self, taking the division of some stock, for the original
^len erreth in nothing so much as in the parts of man's body.
of some Nerve: in which absurdity many are weltned, whose names on earth
resounde as echoes from the rocks, being in nothing so far deceived as in
the parts of man's body.

THe Nerves of the breast, which are less then they of the hand, also have Of
the Nerves produced from the Vertebres of the breast.
their original from the Spinall marey, forth of the twelve Vertebres of the
breast: howbeit they are not twelve pair, what soever moved Uesalius so to say,
who not to have espied that to xij. Vertebres appertain xi. holes, like as to
The Nerves of the breast are xi. pair.
xij. ribs, xj. spaces, it is marvelous.

These twelve therefore of the breast, which issue forth at the common holes of
Ve^l. in (...).
the Vertebres of the breast, do not immediately constitute the form and manner
of a net, as do the Nerves of the hand, but after their going forth, they all
severally divide them selves into two unequal portions: for the payres, in
their (...) and distrib^tion of the Nerves of the b^est in general.
distribution, some reach forth greater on the one side, the on then other, and
some to the fore parts whereas their mates to the hinderpartes are reflected.

Those that delight the fore parts, march after the inferior parts of the
ribs, after the cauitie in the lower part long wise engraven: which in the
History of Bones and description of the ribs is more plainly set out, being
co^uersaunt each one in course, with a branch of the vein that is said to
have no mate, and of the great artery. All which three (I mean the nerve,
vein, and Artery,) passing by one way, even from the aforesaid Vertebres to
Os Sternon after the length of the ribs, and the Cartilages, under the
succingent Membran, or Pleura, like lines equally and proportionably
distaunced, do enter among the Muscles intercostales, amongst which, both the
outward and inward, they are ramified and spread.

Others are thought to bring sense to the sixth Muscle of the breast, being
placed in the inside of it, and do bind together the forepartes thereof. From
the foresaid, Nerves flow through the first Muscle of the shoulder, and through
the second of the shoulder blade. Furthermore other branches are carried to the
pappes, and their nipples or teates, brought from these nerves which in order
follow: then more downward, from the nerves that are placed in the middle
region of the breast, surcles are derived, which are charged with the oblique
descendent Muscles of Abdomen, in which place, of these nerves a large
distribution is made. But from the last nerves of the breast are others
departed, in which the ^leshy part of the famous Muscle Diaphragma is delited.
The re^aunt of the Anteriour sinews are commanded both to the skin of the
breast and bellye, sendyng also nerves among the Muscles, laid under
Aesophagus: as also to the roots of the ribs. Note further that with these
nerves, the vj. conjugation of brain is interlaced and mingled.

The other division of the nerves of the breast is reflected toward the hinder
parts: and nerves from the aforesaid begotten, do carry sense to the first and
second Muscles of the head, and to them of the neck: so in like sort to the
fifth and ^irt Muscle which circumuerte or turn about the shoulder, some making
speed to the first and fourth of the shoulder blade: diverse direct them selves
to the third of the (...), and to the skin about the shoulder blade, many
visit the Muscles of the back, making no less way to the fourth of the
breast, and to the skin of the back being distributed.

But of this I would have every one that reads the History of nerves to
consider, that this Fiber like braunchyng of sinews among the skin parts,
The (...) Distribution of nerves (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
is in no wise to be accounted like in every person: for so they be not in
(...), neither is any Anathomiste able to decide perfectly in one special
description, the crafty creepyng courses of the small twistes, or cutaneous
surcles, to serve for all bodies: For as much as they can neither invent the
right order, nor certain number, but in some more, in other some fewer, now
also higher, and now more crooked. Thus severally ^ourneyng, and diverse is
their distribution.

THe paynfull Anathomist shall sinde, that in comparison of the sinews
appertainyng Of the Nerves produced from (...) Vertebres of the loins.
to the breast, these of the loins are much greater. And although among five
Vertebres of the loins, there is but four common holes, yet five sinews are
from them derived, that is, as we have said five, pair or coniugations: (...)
there are v. payres of (...) of (...) (...) and but (...) (...)
For because the first pair goes forth between the extreme Vertebre of the
breast, and the first of the loins, giuyng back from the last ribbe, and is
therefore rather nombred among the sinews of the loins, then of the breast. And
that the more willyngly since it denies his service to the breast, to yield the
same to the lower belly.

Wherefore now to speak briesly of this first conjugation addicted to the
Vertebre Of the first pair of Nerves of the loins.
of the breast, and first of the loins, which being of it self sufficient
small, marches forewardes under Periton^um. After the egresse or going out
thero^, it cleaves into two branches, whereof the one is greater, and the
other lesser: the greater of them is carried to the fore parts, first preparyng
nerves to the beginning of Septum ^ransuersum, which we have said to arise
from the bodies of the Vertebres of the loins: Other sorts it seaseth not to
pro^er to the ends of the fifth Muscle of the thighe, called by his proper name
Lumbalis, and many others to the Muscles of Abdomen. But the lesser nerve of
this first conjugation, reflected toward the hinder parts, ends among the
Muscles of the back.

The second conjugation goes forth between the first and second Vertebre of Of
the second pair of Nerves of the loins.
the loins, marchyng under Peritonaeum, and under the fifth Muscle of the
thighe, in which Muscle many branches also from this conjugation are spent.
But rising up at length, notwithstanding under Peritonaeum, dispatcheth a
branch from the top of Ilium, which leapyng out of Abdomen, profereth both
sense and mouyng to the first Muscles of the thighe, and to the sixth of the
leg. But an other branch it commands to the sixth of the thighe; and
first of the leg, and mountyng above the upper part of Os Ilium, to the
skin of the thighe. Besides all this, a very small sinew springs from this
same second pair, which being likewise very long, does associate the
seminary vessels, The error of some.
and ends at last in the Testicle. Which Nerve, some being greatly deceived,
do call Cremasteres, for neither is this Nerve, nor the seminary vessels What
is (...).
to be called Cremasteres, but only the fleshy Fibers placed in the coat of
the Testicle called Dartos.

The third pair of Nerves from the loins going forth between the second The
third pair of Nerves of the loins.
and third Vertebre, is carried under Peritonaeum, and under the fifth Muscle of
the thighe. The first branch from this pair decided, runs under Os pubis,
near unto. Os Ilium: where it is into two divided, the one part through the
upper parts brought to the skin of the knee, the other follows the vein
Saphena. And what portion thereof remains, is committed to the Muscles, and
skin clothyng the back.

The fourth of these coniugations appears between the third and fourth Of the
fourth pair of Nerves of the loins.
Vertebre, and being the greatest of all the nerves produced from the loins,
is carried under the fifth Muscle of the thigh and Os pubis, and fellowly
accompanies a Ueyne and Artery into the flank: In which place it begets a
sort of small surcles, which to the skin and cutaneous parts of Penis and
Scrotum are right seruiseable, but no deeper do they run. Afterward in this
region of the flank it is divided into seven branches, which are distributed
to all the Anteriour Muscles which show their service partly to the leg, and
partly to the thigh: Of which branches, some likewise descend unto the knee.

The rising of the fifth conjugation is in like sort between the fourth and
fifth O^ the fifth comu^ion of the (...).
turnyng joint, which like unto the rest is into two parts divided: whereof
the greater has his passage under Peritonaeum, toward the fore parts,
through the hole between Os Coxendicis, Pubis, and Ilij, whence after nerves
are proffered to the ninth and tenth Muscles of the thigh, that turn it in
compassed sort: Others thence straight to the seventh and eight Muscle of the
same thighe, to the Muscles of Penis, and to the bladder, and in women not
only to the bleddar, but also to the matrice: not withstandyng the sinews
that resort thereto from the vj. conjugation of the brain. And thus much of
the first part of the fifth pair of the loins. But the second part is
reflected after the Muscles about the back, and to the skin, as is said by
the iiij. conjugation. And is this the brief description of those five pair of
Nerves that appertain to the loins, which in going Now these payres of
nerves of the loins are (...) and (...) together.
forth are connected and knitte together, the first with the second, the second
with the third, the third with the fourth, and the fourth with the fifth, in
order comparable to the implications of the sinews of the arm.

And although the whole pack of the principal Anathomistes have thus affirmed
(...) Collu^bus ^ib. 8 ^p. 7.
five pair of sinews to the loins, yet Realdus Collumbus confesses that The
Nerves of the loins are not (...) (...) (...).
not always five pair are found, but sometimes four: for that in some
persons (says he) the fourth with the fifth has such community, that of them
both but one pair can be described. Wherefore it avails not to marvel why
the grounded opinions of such famous men as have sustained great labor and
traueil in the pilgrimage of man's body, should in tract of time sound so
dissonant, since neither country, age, nor nature have consented, that in the
bodies of creatures should be no dissension. But now to come to the
coniugations produced from Os sacrum, which may be called, and that worthily,
the sinews Of the nerves of (...) (...), and (...)
of the feet.

THese sinews therefore are found to issue forth between the last Vertebres
Their (...)
of the loins, and the foppe of Os sacrum, and from the first, second, and
third hole of Os sacrum. They are four in number, which from their begynnyngs
once gone, are so conjoined and knit together, as worthily they may constitute
the greatest nerve in the body, which, being esteemed no less, runs in The
Nerve the gr^est o^ all in the body.
progress under Peritonaeum from the inner part of Abdomen, to the outer,
toward the haunches, and (...) Coxendix, and Coxix, above that fourth Muscle
that turns about the thighe. After where it iourneyeth near the greater
Process trochanter, it sends forth nerves then, to the three Muscles
springyng from Coxendix, and that serve to bow the leg. Others also to the
black or leady coulored Muscle, growyng after the same sort from the greater
trochanter: but here it cease not, since afterward it casts about through
the hinder parts of the thighe, between the fourth and fifth Muscle of the
leg, almost to the bought of the knee. In which place it is after divided
into two notable branches or bows, one somewhat greater then an other:
whereof as the greater is ^llently occupied among the hinder parts, so the
lesser with as great (...), sp^eth him toward the forepart of the leg.

The greater again with sundry surcles from his body derived, visits the
^ought of the knee, and the first Muscles to the outside of the foot
appertainyng. But from the lesser it is easy to discern one little one
derived, which searches the body of the Muscle under the ha^me, and an other
that assaileth the third Muscle, whose beginning is at the exterior head of
the thigh.

But note by the way, that the greater body of this sinew after it has passed
the bought of the knee, is presently into other parts diversely divided: whereof
one stretches forth under the two first Muscles of the foot, whose sleshy
parts, when it has passed, and ouergone, it creeps along under the skin,
hastyng speedely after that sort to the h^der parts of the leg, not
neglectyng the extreme parts of the foot. From the other branches, small
surcles ariue at the fourth, and greater Muscle of the leg, from thence to
the interior and posteriour parts of the leg, and keeps his course under
the inner ancle, so stretchyng under the sole of the foot, to augment his
circuit, strayeth out to the very skin, and to the first, second, and third
extreme Muscle of the foot, then afterward to all other sorts of small
Muscles, that in the sole of the foot retain any serviceable offices.
Moreover, besides the sundry deuisions and distributio^s of this branch
rehearsed, it is after cut into ten portions of nerves, which by couples, that
is to say, two to every one, are commanded to attend upon the toes of the
feet and their extremities, as also to yield like bounty of their functions,
to the skin and cutancous parts of the toes.

But an other branch more deeply penetrateth between the greater and lesser
Focile, cleauyng to the Ligament there intersited, which Ligament is said to
divide the anteriour from the posteriour Muscles, and ramifieth not obscurely
amongst the fifth, sixth, and seventh Muscles of the foot. An other lesser
trunk is entertained among the fore parts of the leg, slidyng under the
Appendaunce of the lesser Focile, or Fibula, where it profereth nerves to the
Muscles, as well from the greater, as the lesser Focile exorted or sprung. The
trunk descends A Caveat for the application of cauterie to the leg.
still downewardes, notwithstanding by the anteriour parts of Fibula. Wherefore
in this point we are admonished that in the application of a cauterie we
presume not so far as Fibula, but only to the shinne or greater Focile,
neither pass the depth of the first Muscle, for further, shall perish the
nerve last recited, after which ensues most grievous accidents, and pain in
that place perpetually.

That portion of this nerve that remains, is carried under the Ligament, and
fore part of the foot, pearsing under the extreme ancle, and through the
extreme parts of the foot: out of which seat certain surcles are sent to
the xviij. Muscle of the foot. Then after what remains, is separated into x.
little nerves, all which are notably inserted, and surely settled to the
extremities of the toes. Yet this is not all: for from the same trunk, one
other small sinew is extended, least the extreme skin parts of the foot,
void of their company, should be frustrated of sensible property. After the
iij. holes in Os sacrum, follow the fourth, and in some the fifth.

But here before I intermeddle any further, you shall consider a reasonable
cause, why the number of these nerves of Os sacrum be not certain, since as it
seems each author writes as he found: which made some describe vj. others
five, others four etc. the cause I say is to be alleged in this point, like
as in sundry other parts, the variety of nature, and unlike construction of
the ^yes of creatures. Wherefore Collumbus willyngly declares Lib. 8. cap. 8.
that he has Os sacrum con^steth no^ always of like number of boness.
found in diverse bodies Os sacrum, to consist of four, of five, and of vj.
bones, albeit never of three (says he) as Galen falsely affirms: howbeit I
have a sceleto^ to testify the same at this day: so that whatsoever was then,
it argues Collumbus The author has a Scele^ wherein Os (...) both consist
only of three (...).
was not of natures counsel what she would do hereafter.

This note therefore, where Os sacrum has five bones, there are four holes,
and where six, there five between bone and bone. Then in these two last holes
are nourished and begone two other pair of sinews, wantyng in those that lack
the v. and vj. bones. Which after they are egressed or gone forth, beget also,
by together knittyng, one notable nerve, which is naturally reflected and
distributed amongst the Muscles of the haunches, and their skin: also
inwardly to the parts of Abdomen, as to the Muscles of the straight gutte, and
of the bleddar. So in some women to the matrice, and neck of the matrice, with
like concourse of other surcles to Scrotum and Perineum. Likewise from the
hinder parts of Os The (...) of the hinder parts of Os sacrum.
sacrum, through the same holes are departed other nerves, small, and short, to
the Muscles of the back, haunches, and other posteriour parts of the skin.

GAlene rehearses besides all these a Nerve inconiugated, or having no fellow:
Of the (...) inconiugated.
but Uesalius denying that, says that it may so happen that whereof Os sacrum
does consist of five bones, there the end of the Spinall marey slidyng out of
the bone may constitute a surcle on each side. Collumbus also not seemyng
obstinately resistaunt in this matter, says, if any such be, it is to be
imagined at the extreme part of the Spinall marey: notwithstanding that in all
his time, albeit very often, and for that only purpose he protests to have
sought, he never found wherefore to auouche the same. But says he, amongst all
which hitherto I have dissected (almost innumerable) I have seen the extreme
part of the Spinall marey in very many surcles, both to the right, and left
side, distributed as also further dispersed through the fourth Muscle of the
thighe, and throughout the skin which is between the haunches, and even down
to the fundament.

So is manifestly argued unto us, how deuinely the incomprehensible creator
has made the body of man, not only simply to live, but aptly to live, with
all requisite parts and parcels thereto. For as no part is destitute of
natural warmthe, tell me what member wa^teth the vital and animal spirit:
which as the first by the liver and veins, the second by the heart and
arteries, so the third by the brain and sinews is transposed through all the
parts. And if nerves be the instruments, Galen de (...).
of feelyng, and voluntary mouyng, very injuriously seems Vesalius to deny
some Dissect.
No Muscle (...) without one Nerve or more.
Muscles to have them, since they are no Muscles that are without them, as
testifies Realdus Collumbus Cap. 8. Lib. 8.

An end of the History of the Animal parts.
Of the History of Man the ix. book, discoursing the marey contained in the
Bones, Periostion, and the hears.
BEsides that in the History of the nutritive parts are described the skins
and fattes, and amongst the Cartilages the nails, there remain yet certain
parts to be spoken of, which, in a solid discourse of the body of man, may in
no wise be omitted, as the marey contained within the bones, Periostion, and
the hears.

The greatest Bones therefore have within them large capacities, (...). (...).
1. cap. 15 Of the marey in bones.
whereby, together with their hardness, they purchase lightenes and agilitie to
move. Notwithstanding such capacity is not in them How marey is (...).
left empty, but with much marey is stuffed, which, flowyng thither from the
common nourishment of the Bones by the small penetratyng veins, is there made
Where is the chief store of marey.
and reposed, and by little and little in tract of them receiuyng preparation,
does white, and (...), till it become a substance fit to the nourishyng of the
bones. Of which sort great store is found in the bones of the shoulders, arms,
thighs, What marey smaller bones (...) and how.
and legs. All other bones, in which are no such large co^cauities, but are
either small, or less necessary unto mouyng, do in small celles or porie
places conclude a humor more liquid the^ marey, and more thin or melted, but
which notwithstanding (...) (...) and (...) (...) (...) of (...) substance to
thig.
answers thereto in a certain proportion. The brain and Spinall marey have
an other manner of substance, as before in the description of the Spinall marey
is declared. And thus much of marey the proper nourishement of Col. (...). 13.
(...). 3.
bones, is sufficient. (...) is (...) (...).
Now it happens that, some suppose the Bones do (...).


PEriostion is a sinewy Membran, and thin, which clotheth and enwrappeth the
Bones, and is endewed with much sense: wherefore many are deceived, through the
ignorance of this Membran, supposing the bones to feel: for this Membran
(...) is not on the inside of the (...).
in the inside of the Scull do not seek. For there is no such thing, although
under Pericranium it may be found: neither are the teeth invested with
Periostium. For The teeth are void of (...).
what stood the ^th in need of it? Neither is it laid in the Articulation of
bones: for so if it should be, it would excite marvelous pains in the mouyng
of the^, as Why Periostium may not be in the joints.
somewhat also we have touched before in the beginning of the History of bones.

THe hears although they seem superfluous parts I know not how, yet because
Col. (...). 13. cap. 2.
they are as a certain covering of our body, of them also a description is The
use of the (...).
necessarily required. For besides that they cover the body, as we have said,
they serve also in the steed of a propugnacle. Some do add a third use of the
hears, The procreation of (...).
that is, that those fuliginous vapors which are elevated in the third
co^co^io^ of nourishment, whilst it passes into the substance of the
members, should be consumed into the nourishment of hears: which sentence
Collu^bus neither prayseth nor disprayseth. But hears are made also (says he)
for decency of form. They Whence the hears do (...).
spring forth of the skin in perforatyng the same. The roots of the hears
are thicker then the other parts of them, and are fastened to the fat, which
between the skin and fleshy Membran is sited, the purse of the Testicles
excepted.

Wherefore the hears take their nourishment from the fat and therefore
increase. Whence hears are nourished.
They grow almost in all places, but chiefly where the skin is hoate and
(...). (...). 1. (...). corp. cap. 15.
dry: for the cold and moist is unapt to the bringyng forth and conteinyng of
hear. In what places hears grow most.
Where the skin is hard and dry, as in the head and chinne, there is brought
forth the longer and stiffer hear. The roots of the nails and hears are
tender and soft: but that which is extant without the skin, is strong and
very hard.

In man the hears are begotten partly together, partly afterward. In the The
hears grow not (...) one time or (...) one begyn^yng.
head they are naturally engendered, but properly in the eyelyddes and brows,
which nature from their first growth ever keeps in alike greatness, having
fixed them least they should increase, into a most hard skin like to a
Cartilage: these The use of the hears of the eye lyddes.
are ^etched and stable, not only for comlynes, but also to defend the eyes
from motes, hears, and such outward accidental annoyances. The hears which
are after begotten first brust forth about Os pubis, and the fundament, next in
the armepittes, The opin^on of some reproved in yeldyng a reason of the not
having hear in the ball of the hand and sole of the foot.
and in men last of all in the chinne. In the sole of the foot and ball of the
hand grow no hears, and that (say some) because of the broad Tendo^: which,
the foot of the Hare having the same, and yet filled with hear, confuteth.
But in deed those parts in man to be without hear, both use and mouyng
required: for in the Hare such hearynes furthereth her swiftnes.

Now here I will make an end, since all things seem sufficient plainly
expounded, Col, loc. cit.
whereby the marvelous workemanshyp, and subtle contexture of the members may
be re^aled.

An end of the ix. and last Book of the History of Man.
A Table of the Instruments seruyng to Anathomicall dissection.


A Table wherein is quoted the place of every Principal matter contained in
this History, to be sought under the Letter Alphabeticall, and to be found by
the direction of the Figure. Wherein the Reader is to be forewarned, that every
Praedicare is to be sought under his subject, not else to be found in this
Table: as to seek the Appendaunces, Veins, Nerves of the Teeth, he must look
under the name of Teeth, not of Veins, Nerves or Appendances: and this order
is observed in all the other.
A.
ABdomen the Muscles thereof, described. 54. the Deynes of the Muscles thereof.
77 Acetable what it is. ^2 A^gylopa the disease where it chances. 11. 15
Aesophagus the Muscles thereof. 58 Altered things change into the color of it
that ^ltereth. 66. 77 Ambulation how it is made. 57 Anathomy in what part it
begins 1. 6. obser^eth not extreme youth or age. 7 Ancles the number, use,
and figure of them. ^4 Angina the disease, in ^yng thereof, what v^yne ^ust be
open^d. 77. i^ it the membr^ ^ay be taken ^ro^ the dynges of Ti^chea A^teria.
(...) 39 An^uall spirit a new opinion thereof. 9. the use, prima^y, instruments
thereof. 98. the proper matter thereof. 100 Apes have their i^isory, and dog
teeth distinguished with a sea^ne. 11 their Luinx is a bone. 17 Apophisis what
it is. 2 Appendau^ce what it is, the substance, use, continuance, and nature
thereof described 2. channged by nature, and nations. 23 Appendaunces of every
bone, look under the proper nam^ of the bone. Appetite how it is styrled up.
75 Apprehensio^ by the hand de^cribed. 31 Ari^totle his err^ur in Diaphr^gma.
53. that fat is sens^ble. ^4. that the skin has no sense ^id. that the bones
of Occiput ar^ thi^nest. 8. that the hinde^ part of the head is empty ^old.
that the heart is the authout of feelyng and o^ blood. 44 Arm holes the ^uscles
thereof. 51. there is no fleshy membra^ in them. 64 Arm why it has a sharp
co^nered bowyng. 18. the motion thereof 5^ Arte^ies, look under those pa^tes
whose (...) they are. Arthrodia described what it is. 3 Articulus, or
ar^culation, the differences, and nature thereof. 3 (...) (...) described. 90.
39 Auditorie organ the nature, figure, situation, use, and names of the bones
thereof described. 10
B.
BAthe ^e structure, motions, vertebres, spi^all marey, and parts thereof. 17.
19. what part is so called 20. what p^rt of it is most subject to hurt. 25. how
it is bowed foreward, 2^. the muscles, and motion thereof described. 52 Back,
very strange. 23 Basis what it means. 3 Basil^re what it is. 9 Beasts why
their iaw is long. 12 Beetles why they have no heads. (...) Belly the muscles
thereof described. 55 Bleddar the muscles thereof. 56 Bleddar of choler
described. 80 Bleddar of urine the situation, form, figure, netues, deyn^s,
fibers, a^teries thereof. 83 Blood how it comes to the ve^tricl^ of the heart.
89. how it happens to be made with brine: 78. the original fount^ine of it.
75. 44. perfected in the veins. 72 Body the motions thereof. 51. the
foundation, and frame thereof. 1. is not made of one bone continual. 3. what
incommodities it suffers if nerves should proceed from the brain. 17. how
it is maintained. 63. nourished by blood. 76. di^erse parts thereof have
diverse substance, and temperatures. 66 Bones their nature; substance, use,
signs described. 1. how united without appendance. 2. their convticulation at
large described. 3 once broken how k^it again. 4. some parts of them in
children seem Ca^tilages. 7. how they differ from the teeth. 13. were made for
the cause of other parts. 14. nourished with blood. 26. why perforated. 14.
their use. 16. how they differ from Cartilages. ^7 ^f they be large, they move
largely and suddenly, but short bones little, and easily. 18 Boatelike bone of
the foot described 36 A Boy in Denice his monstrous head. 6 ^rachiall bones
described. 29 Brain the principal member of the body. 6. the obstriction, and
dilatation thereof under Bregma. 8. en^ironed in y^ head as in an hoate house.
6. nerves proceed not from it. 17. how it is helped to forge animal spirits
9. how purges humiditie and ex^rement 9. 10. 11. 15. the veins that nourishe
it described. 77. the primacy, ^essengers, membrans thereof. 98. the
propugnacles thereof. 98. 101. how nourished. 99. the substance thereof where it
lies. 99. the ventricles, glass, testicle, b^ttockes, yard, haunches, and
holes thereof described. 100. what inconvenience it suffers not being purged.
6 Bregma a bone of the fore part of the head. (...) Breast the vertebres thereof
at large descr^ed. 19. 20. 21. the mansion place of the heart. 23. the nature,
const^nccion, ribs, vertebres, use, bones thereof described. 23. 24. the
Cartilages thereof. 39. the muscles and motion^ thereof. 53. the Cartilages o^
the ribs th^rof to what use. 23. 24 Brows why it has holes. 14 Buttockes
how c^nstituted. 57 A ^ull engendered without testicles. 87
C.
CAecum the ^ut des^ribed. 7^ Canell Bones their whole nature described. 26
Cartilages their nature described. 38. how they differ from nails. 40. how
they differ from bones. 17. their use. 2 Ca^tilago mucronata described. 24. 40.
54 Cartilages of Bones, look under the name of the bone whereto they
appertain. Cauities of bones, look under their bones. Causties of processes
disfer as the pro c^sses. 2. how enlarged. 3 C^lles, look Cauities. Cerebell^
where it ly^th. 6. the nature, substance and use thereof described. 101 Check
bone described. 11. the substance, and cauities thereof to what use. 12. 15.
the muscles thereof. 45 Children only have a transuerse suture under the
palate. 1^. have their neither iaw bone two. 12. how they become tongue tied. 42
Choler what it is, and how inco^modious to the ventricle. 80. the way of it.
72. the generation of it. 76 Chylus the description thereof. 76 Coccix the
nature, aetymology, use, vertebres, holes, figure, color thereof described.
22. the Cartilages thereof. 39 Colou the gut described. 74 Collumbus muentor of
the uses of Appendance. 1. impugneth Galen. 6. 45. his number of bones of the
head 8. differs from other Anatho^istes in the ^escription of Tarsus. 35. his
opinion what is contained in the cauities of Os frontis. 9. ^cited the fourth
process of the ^temporall bo^es. 9. ^prehendeth Vesalius. 10. 44. chalengeth
Vesalius. 21. fo^d a third bone of the orga^ of heatyng. 10. first ^ound the
Popin^ay to ^oue either jaws. 11. makes. 13. bones in the vpperpa^. 12.
derideth Galens opinion that there should be a bone in the heart. 25. his
experience that teeth are engendered in the matrice. 14. invented the mus^les of
y^ eye brows 46. (...) a rare office of the (...) veins. 76. first inuentor
that veins and atteries (...) the substance of the lunges. 78 Composition and
coa^ of bones described. 3. 5 Conco^, and alteratiue force aided by the small
guts. 72 Conu^sions a cause thereof. 10 Concupiscible faculty the seat
thereof 75 Coriza the disease why it takes away the sense of smellyng. 10
Coxendix desetibed. (...) (...) moves his upper jaws. 11 (...) the
desctiption thereof. 27. the muscles thereof. 30 Cucularis (...) 50 Cuneall bone
described 9. the processes, and ca^ties thetof. 9. the holes thereof. 14 (...),
and Cutis the nature of it described. 63
D.
DEluge the cause thereof. 10 (...) the muscle thereof described. 53 (...) and
Sistole what it is, where, and when it appears. 8 Dogs head distinguished
with (...). 7. their dog teeth, and (...) teeth distinguished with a seame.
(...) their (...) bone consists of two bones. 12 Dregs where first they
begin. (...) (...) the nature thereof described. 72 Dura matter. 7 her veins.
77. their use to the brain. 99 (...) what it is. (...)
E.
E^es their Cartilages described. (...). their (...). 47 Eating insatiable why
in some crea^, and not in man. 72 Effect must content vo, where the cause is
not known. 11 Em^ the disease. 24 Emunctory of the heart and liver. 66 Emulgent
veins described. 78 (...) described what it is. 3 (...) described. 16. why it
ought to be (...). 39 (...) in Anathomy con^d: as of Galen 2. 6. 8. (...). of
Vesalius. r. of Celsus. 6. Aristotle. 8. 44. 64 of some (...) (...). 1. 4. 13.
19. 32. 40. 45. 53 (...) of the (...) how (...). 6. 9. 10. 11 (...) of the
belly excluded, how 54 Experience, that bones art sensible. 1. that there is a
bone in the heart. (...). that (...) are (...) in the (...). 14 (...), and
Inspiration how pro^. 53. 54 Eyes (...) (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), and (...) (...) (...). 102. their (...) (...). (...) their (...) of what
bones it consists. 2. why placed in the head. 6. their pain and (...). 15
how they open and shut. 45. the muscles thereof. 46. their motion and stay. 46.
47. the Cartilages of the lyddes of them. 38. their brows drawn upward. 45.
the muscles of their brows by whom invented. (...)
F.
FAce the veins thereof. 77. why it is round. 12. the holes thereof. 15 105. the
muscles thereof. 45 Fat the use, generation, and nature of it described. 64
Fea^e a cause thereof. 10 Feelyng the sense thereof described. (...) (...), look
those parts whose Fibers. they are. Fibula how it is joined to the leg. 34
Fingers the bones, utility, and nature of them described. 30. why composed of
bones and joints. 31. their bones hollow. 1. their Ligamentes. 42. their
muscles. 61 Fistula lachrymalis what it is. 11. 15 Phlegm how it descends to
moysten the palate. 15. by what ways purged. 9. 10 Flesh the nature, use, and
properties thereof described. 65. 66 Fleshy membran described. 64 Folly a token
thereof. 6 Foot the bones and nature thereof described. 35. the plant thereof
described. 36. how it is (...). 34. the Ligamentes thereof. 42. the motions and
muscles thereof. 58. the nerves thereof. 110 Forehead the bones thereof. 9. the
muscles thereof. 45
G.
GAlen what knowledge he requires in a (...). 1. his errors. 18. 9. 10. 11.
12. 19. 26. 27. 29. 51. 54. 58. 81. 89. 64. 69. 78. 109. commends the head
that has most sututes. 6. never mentioned of the cauitie in Os srontis. 9.
ignorant of the auditory bones. 10. varyeth from him self in the bones of the
upper (...). 11. wrote not of the holes of the head. 14 marked not Lannx to be
a bone. 17. his description of Os sacrum rejected. 11. his judgment of the
bone of the heart. 25. (...) of the inferior head of the shoulder. 27. reproved
by Collumbus. 45. desscribed the eyes of the beasts. 47. his negligence
reprehended. 49. first (...) of the recutrent nerves. 105 Gemini his crrour in
the use of Abdomen. 55 Generatine parts described. 85 Glandules what they are,
and their description. 65. receive phlegm. 9 Glene what it is. 2 Glottis what
so called. 17. 105 Glouton what it is. 33 Gomphosis described, what it is. 4
Growyng things have power to require necessaries. 62 Gummes their hardness
serve for teeth. 4 Guts their situation, use, coats, stgure described. 7.
the muscles of the straight g^t. 57 Gynglimon what it is. 4
H.
HAmme the muscles thereof 33 Hand the description and (...) thereof. 28. the
(...) structure and utility thereof described. 31. the parts, motion, muscles,
and (...) thereof described. 60. the nerves thereof. 108. the palate thereof why
so sensible. 112 (...) what it is. 4 (...) the bone thereof described. 25. (...)
of it. 66. the situation, sigure, substance, fibers, use, flesh, arteries
nerves, coat, fat thereof described. 92, the ears and ventricles thereof. 93.
the vessels thereof. 94 the (...) thereof 95. more ease^ (...) then the brain.
98. it ^eth when the mouth of the ventricle thereof is payned. 106. the (...)
thereof. (...). the veins thereof. (...). the (...) thereof how it receives
blood 89. the Cartilage of it degenerateth into a bone. 25 Head the muscles and
motion thereof. 51 the cross in the sames and sutures thereof described. 3. 7.
8. the structure, figure, bones, use thereof described. 6. 8. 9. how tied to
the neck with a Cartilage. 8. the distillatio^s thereof how purged. 9. 10. 11.
the perforations, and holes thereof described. 14. how joined to the neck. 19.
the motion thereof. 19. how articulated to the vertebres. 41. the luxation
thereof is deadly. 41 Head ache the cause thereof. 6 Hears the use, nature,
generation of the^. 111. why the in (...). 64. why not in the bale of the hand.
61 Hearing, the bones, substance, and cause thereof. 101. the bones of the
organ thereof. 105. 10. they are porie. (...) Hector by what part of the body
(...) about Troy. 59 Heel bones described. 35 Hippe the articulation thereof.
33. the Cartilages thereof 40. Ligamentes thereof. 32 Hippocrates his errors. 54
Holes of all the Bones of the body described. 44 Humerus the nature thereof
described. 26 Humiditie by what means purged from the brain. 9. how it
descends to the eyes and nostrels. 15 Hyoides the bone of the tou^g
described. 16. the muscles thereof. 48
I.
Jaws the vpp^, the motion and bones thereof described. 11. 12. the (...)
thereof. 39. the muscles thereof. 47 Iawe the neither, the figure, bones, hardness
cauities thereof described. 12. the holes thereof. 15. the glandules. 90. the
cauitie whereto it is articulate. 9 Ieiunum the nature thereof described. 72
Jews what part they Circumcised. 88 Ileon the gut described. 73 Ilium the bone
thereof described. 31 Incision under a ribbe hurtful. 24 Infantes in the womb
what use it has of the vmbellicall vein. 65. the passage for their urine. 83
Inspiration and expiration how procured. 53 Intercostall muscles described. 53
Intr^lles the beginning of them. 69. their nature described. 71 Iointes their
motion, compo^, and knittyng described. 2. their Cartilages. 40. their membran.
42 Ithmoides described. 10 Ithmoides the process like wings of of balls. 12.
the holes of it. 15 Iugall bone the utility, figure, and nature thereof
described. 9. 10. 11
K.
KEll the use, situation, parts, compass, and nature thereof described. 67
knee the bones, substance, and nature of them. 34 kydneys their situation. 78.
their use, substance, magnitude, (...) described. 82
L.
LAmbdoides what it is. 4. 7 (...) the use, situation, bones, stgure thereof
described. 16. preued to be a bone. 17. the instrument of voice 18. it
consists of Cartilages. 39. the muscles and nature thereof described. 49. the
veins thereof. 77 Leg how it is joined to the thigh. the motions and muscles
thereof described. 58. the description thereof. 33. cauterie how it must be
applied to it. 110 Ligamentes their use, generation, production. 2. 3. 4. 5.
why created for the body. 41. their nature described. 41. 43 Ligamentes
particular, look under the bones particular to whom they appertain. Lips
the muscles thereof. 45 Liver the nature, use, figure, coats, veins thereof
described. 75. how it receives (...). 72. the (...) of it. 66. where it gives
place to the (...) of the stomach. 68. the Ligamentes thereof. 43 Loins their
Cartilages. 21. the nerves thereof. 110. the nature, processes, and vertebres
thereof described. 11 Lunges why de^ded into two parts 90. the situation,
sigure, substance, veins thereof described. 91. imitate the form of the
breast. 23. where they are not there is no neck. 19 Lucatio^ why difficult. 23.
perilous in the vertebres of the back. 18. hardly reformed in the shoulder.
40. deadly in the head. 41 Line white the nature thereof described. 65 Lions
ribs are round not flat. 23
M.
MAgitians their deuilish comment of the resurrection. 37 (...) precesse the
Etimologie thereof. 9 Man his face why it is round. 12. moves not his upper
(...). (...) why (...) (...) of one bone. 3. his natural defense in falling.
8. his generatiue parts described. 23. 85. why temperate in taking of
sustenaunce. 71. wherein he most differs from beasts and plants. 98. 101
Marey of bones, the nature and generation of it. 111 Meat how it speedely
pearceth thorough the stomach. 68 Media^num. 90. 43 Melancholy the use of it to
the stomach. 76. the use of it to the ventticle. 70. 81 Membran of the bones. 1
Membrans interseplent which they be. 91 Membran fleshy described. 64 Memory the
place of it. 100 Menstrua how purged. 79 Messenterium the nature and
description thereof. 74 the veins thereof. 75 (...) described. 54. 107 Motion
voluntary how procured. 44 Month the muscles thereof. 9. 48 Mucrenata (...)
described. 24. 40. 54 Mundinus full of errors. 56 Muscles whence they spryng.
2. how strengthened. 2. what they are, and their nature described. 44. every one
works toward his begyn^. 50 none without a nerve. 111 Muscles particular,
look the place of the parts which they (...). Milk how engendered in women.
77
N.
NAture, that is, God. 1 Nature her care for the sorme of (...). 11. made
nothing in vain. 2. 3 her singular industry. 8. 15. 19. her marvelous Art,
wisdom, and providence in creation. 9. 16. 23. 34. 40. 55. 44. 63. 74. is
every where just 17. changes by nation, and times 23. why he places the
glandules in sundry parts. 68 Natural spirit. 98 Navel the nature thereof
described. 65 Nails their figure, use, hands, and original described. 40.
their pain. 61 Neche, what is meant by it in the description of bones, 2 Neck
what it is, the use, motion, and vertebres thereof. 18. 19. the head how tied
unto it. 19. 8. the muscles thereof. 45. 52. 8. where it is wanting the
creatures are dumme. 18. the luxation of the vertebres thereof. 18 Nerve, what
it is, the description thereof. 105. the immediate orga^ of sense 1. proceed
not all from the brain. 17 are disseminated into muscles. 44 Nerves of the
breast. 109. of the brain. 106 Nerve opticke why so called. 14 Nerve the
greatest in all the body. 110 Nerve inconsugated described. 111 Nerves, look
those parts of the body whereunto they serve. Nose the books thereof inwardly
porie. 1. why they seem to (...). 4. the partition thereof. 10. the spongy
bones thereof eaten with the Spanish disease. 12. the holes of the same. 19. the
muscles thereof. 45. the Cartilages thereof. 39. the division or hedge thereof.
101 Nostrels their contraction and dilatation. (...). the place of the air
which they draw. 9. why (...) of (...) construction. 12. the (...) thereof, why
they are shut. 39. how they receive phlegm. 9 Nourishement the necessity and
instruments of it. 63. how procured to such pattes as have no bemes, or
atteries. 1
O.
OCciput described. 8. the holes thereof. 15. made of many parts in children.
19 Omentum the description thereof. 67 Opticke nerve why so called. 14 Os (...)
described. 36 Os cuneale described. 9 Os frontis the cauities thereof. 15. the
description thereof. 9 Os (...) the nature thereof described. (...) Os iugale. 9
Os Malae described. 11 Os Nauiforme described. 36 Os Pubis and Coxend^is. 32.
their Cartilages. 40, 39 Os (...) the description thereof. 22. the Bones
thereunto committed described. 32. 1. the (...) thereof. 110. is greater then
all the other vertebres. 18 Osla squammosa what they be, and why so called. 8
P.
PAlate how moystened by phlegm. 15. 9 Panchreas the description thereof. (...)
Pappes why they are in the breast. 66 (...), glandules described. 90 Parts
(...), and (...). 1 (...) the weaker are less subject to peril. 8 Parts
adjacent nourish one the other having no beynes or arteries. 1 Penis the
muscles thereof. 56 Perforations of the bones described. 14 Pericardium
described. 43. 91 (...) the nature thereof described 111. 1. Peritonaeum a
membran. 43. the description thereof. 66 (...) described. 90 Philosophy magic
conceruyng the (...). 37 Pia (...) the use thereof to the brain. 99 Plant, the
want of it how inco^dious. 58. it is described. 36 Pleura a me^bran. 43.
clotheth the ribs on the out side. 24. the substance, utility, figure,
thereof described. 89 Pleurisy where it happens, and why with bloody spettle.
90. 91 (...) moves both the jaws. 11. 47 Pores of the Bones. 1. of the (...).
64 Postbrachiall Bones what their proper motion is 3. their description. 29
P^putium what it is. 88 Process the nature thereof described. 2. 3 Processes
of the particular bones, look under the particular description of bones.
Process (...) the Etymology thereof. 9 Process Ithmoides. 12 Process
Odontydes. 19 Process Ancyroidus. 25 Process Acromion. 25 Prominence what it
(...). 8 Pubis os described. 32 (...) stone. 1
R.
Radius the insertion thereof to the shoulder. 27. the description thereof. 21
Reason the habitation thereof. 6 Rectum the gut described. 74 Reins their
substance and nature described. 82. how they seem to be payned, when it is
colon. 73 Respiration the original thereof. 54 Resurrection the work thereof
falsely imputed to bones. 37 Rete mirabile. 96 Rheum cause of the decay and
pain of the teeth. 13 Ribs of the back and breast described. 20. 23. 24. of
the loins. 21. of the neck. 19. their Cartilages. 39. enlarge and draw
together. 3. as many in man as in woman. 23 Ringes gristly described. 39
Rotatores what. 33. seem appendaunces. 2 Rupture whence it happens. 55. 67
S.
SAcrum os why so called. 22. the Cartilages thereof. 39. the bones thereto
committed. 31 Sagittalis, a seame, what it is. 4. 7 Savors their dignotion.
10. 101 Scaple bones their nature described. 25. not hollow. 1. have
appendaunces. 2. the muscles thereof. 50. their cauities. 26. the wounds thereof
are deadly. 108 Scull the perforations of it. 4. the arteries thereof. 95. the
bones and seames thereof. 4. 7 Seames, look Sutures. Seed where it is
contained. 87. the passage thereof. 84 Seeing the sense, orga^, substance, and
nature thereof described. 102 Seminall vessels where they are inserted. 85.
how they pass through (...). 86. their journey. 32. they are described. 55
Seminall beynes described. 78. 82 Seminall atteries described. 86 Sense the
fountain of it. 44. the orga^ thereof. 1. how lost in a wound. 109. how
requisite in man. 101 Senses their natures, use, numbe^ largely described. 101
Sense in the teeth how procured. 13. why it is under the veins. 40 Septum
transuersum described. 35 (...) are spongy and (...). 1. falsely said not to be
subject to corruption 37 (...) what it is. 34 Shoulder blade the bones thereof,
number, (...), use, processes, cauities, appendaunces described. 25. 26. 27.
o^ce (...) is hardly recovered. 40. the Cartilages thereof. 40 Shoulder bones
the motion, and muscles described. 50 (...) parts what they are. 1 (...)
described. 8. the bones thereof, why they seem to move. 4 Sinews where they
want, there sense wants. 1. their conjugation what it requires. 14 Skin of
the body of two sorts. 63. their natures described. 64 Slepy artery the hole
of it. 15 Smellyng the use, nature, and end thereof described. 101. the Nerves
thereof are not hard. 101. how, and why taken away. 10 Spanish disease. 12
Spettle how it happens bloody in the (...). 91 Sphenoides the bone thereof. 9
Spinall marey the necessity of it. 17. the nature thereof described. 18. 106.
the nerves thereof. 100. how nourished. 76 Spine how far it tends
downewardes. 22 Spirits natural are not begotten in the liver. 75 Spiritual
parts described. 89 Spleen the situation, figures, and nature thereof
described. 80. only nourished by excreme^res. 75. the veins thereof. 81. what
vein is commonly opened for the affectes thereof. 77 Standing straight how it
is purchased. 33 Staphoides described. 36 Stephaneia a seame what it is. 47
Ste^non the (...) bone described. 24. 26 the Cartilages thereof. 39 Stomach the
use, coats, and substance thereof described. 68. the Muscles thereof. 52 Stone
cutters their error. 16 Stylo^ the process. 2. 9 Sutura described what it is.
4. why they are in the head. 6. 7. are conspi^ without, but not within. 8
Suture transuerse under the palate only in children. 12 Sutures that separate
the Bones of the head from the upper iaw. 11 Suture Coronalis. 4. 7 Sweat why
some do lightly, some hardly. 64 Synchondrosis what it is. 4 Syndesmosis what
it is. 4 Synneuresis what it is. 4 Sylsarcosis what it is. 4 Systole, and
Diastole. 8
T.
TAlus the description thereof. 34 Tarsus the bones and nature thereof described.
25 Tastyng the sense thereof described. 104 Tears how they spryng and whence
they are engendered. 14. 103 Teeth their number, nature, names, situation,
pain, and other properties described. 13. 14. they are sensible 1. their
beynes. 78. their nerves. 13 Temple the Bones thereof described. 9. why, and
whence they are rough. 78. the Muscles thereof described. 48. the danger that
ensues, the Muscles being hurt. 10. the seat of the Muscles. 15. the (...)
bones thereof how united. 4. the seames thereof described. 7 Tendon what it is.
44. the largest tendon what. 59 Testicles their number, substance, use, coat,
veins, and membrans described. 85. the (...) thereof. 79. differ a little from
(...) (...) substance. 65. the Muscles thereof. 56 (...) his head of what
figure it was. 6 Thieves said to want a part of their hand. 61 Thighe the
figure, bones, and nature thereof described. 32. the Cartilages thereof. 40. why
hardly (...). (...). the motions and (...) (...) thereof described. 57. the
Processes of it. 2 Thimus. 90 Thombe the bones and joints thereof described. 29
Throt why it bo^cheth not forth (...) women as in men. 65 Tibia the nature and
description thereof. 33. the appendaunce of it has Processes. 2 Toes the bones
thereof described. 37. their want how inco^ous. 58. the Muscles thereof
described. 60. the Ligamentes thereof. 42. their tend^s. 59 Tongue the Bones
thereof. 16. the Ligamentes thereof. 42. 49. the vtilities and muscles thereof.
48. whenco it has the sense of (...). 49 Tongue tied how children so (...) 41
Trochanteres what so called. 2. 33 Tunnell where it is and the use thereof.
(...)
V.
VEnice. 6 Dentricle the parts, figure, (...) and nature thereof described. 68.
the Orifices thereof. 69. the veins and arteries thereof. 70. the Nerves
situation, and parts (...) thereto described. 71. is nourished by blood. 75.
how offended by Colon. 73. changes meats into white. 76. the mouth thereof
when it is payned, the heart does ache. 105. what (...) it (...) by choler. 80.
the mouth of it. 24 Vertebres their Ligamentes whence they spring. 42. all have
holes except the first of the neck. 21. have appendaunces. 2 Vertebres of the
neck, breast, and loins, look the description of the neck, breast, and
loins. Virtue none without his proper organ. 46 Vesalius his division of the
parts of the body. 1. his errors. 4. 10. 44. 53. 69. 54. mentions of a mad
boy in Venice with a monstrons head. 6. his opinion what is contained in the
cauities of Os frontis. 9. how blood comes to the heart. 89. the first
inuentor of the organs of hearing. 10. ignorant of the inferior head of the
shoulder. 27. describes Larinx as it is in beasts. 49. 17. invented the
discourse of the holes of the head. 13. reproved by Collumbus. 21. 55 Veins
their number, names, nature, use described at large. 75. why made hollow, 79
Vein Iugularis noutisheth the brain 15 Deyne Axillaris, and Cephalica. 26
Veins particular, look those parts to which they serve. Vital parts
described. 89 Vital spirits perfected by the heart. 91 they are described. 98.
their propper matter. 100 (...) the description of it. 27. the appendaunce
thereof has (...). 2 Vmbelicall vein to what use to the infant in the womb.
61 Unaptness a token thereof. 6 Vomit. 71 Voice the matter and instruments of
it. 18. 19. grave or base how it is uttered. 50 Urine the nature, properties,
and bleddar thereof described. 83. the passage thereof. 88. the vessels thereof.
78 Vuula the description thereof. 90
W.
Womans priuities the image thereof in the brain. 100 Wounds in what part
(...) the body they are deadly. 8. 24. 40. 54. 101 Wounded men why they loss
sometime se^ce, sometime mouyng, sometime both. 109 Wrest the bones, nature,
and description thereof. 28. 29. the (...) thereof. 40. the Ligamentes thereof.
(...)
Y.
(...) the office, use, substance, instruments, and whole nature thereof
described. 88. the veins thereof. 79. the Muscles thereof. 56 Young man dead
through the pain (...) the head. 6 Youth not to be observed in Anathomy. 56
FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by John Daye^, dwelling over Aldersgate.

And are to be sold, at the long shop, at the West door of Paul's. 1578.

Cum gratia and Privilegio, Regiae Majestatis.


