Credo Resurrectionem CARNIS.

A Tractate on the eleventh Article of the Apostles Creed.

By W. H. Esquire sometimes of Peter-house in Cambridge.

skull with wings SPES ADDIDIT ALAS.


LONDON, Printed by E. P. for N. Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
South Entrance of the Royal Exchange, 1633.

Credo Resurrectionem Carnis.
CHAP. I. Of the Creed in general.
WHat Origin said of the inventio^ of Hieroglyphicall Learning, Origin. Hom. 7.
in Exodus
may not unfitly be applied to these Breviaries and Epitomes of Holy Writ, like
the Jews Manna, they fall down in round and small cakes, yet afford good
nourishment; Like rich Jewels, they carry worth in every spark, and in these
little maps is contained a world of matter.

As those december verba, the short Law of the Decalogue, is a pattern of all
duties to be done; As that Oration quotidiana, authorized by our Saviors lips,
is the curious Archetype, and masterpiece of all prayer, the common place, the
original copy, the platform of all requests to be made; So the Apostolical
Creed is a plain and absolute sum of all holy Faith.

It is called in English the Creed, from the first Word, Credo; quia omnia
credenda; according to that of Athanasius; whosoever will be saved, before all
things it is necessary that he hold the Catholic faith; which faith except
every one keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish
everlastingly. It is called Apostolical, because it summarily conteines the
chief and principal points of religion handled and propounded in the doctrine
of the Apostles.

Other confessions are received not as new, but as paraphrases, and
expositions, and enlargements for the better clearing of this: for as there is
but one Faith, so but one Creed; as the four Gospels, are indeed but one
Gospel; so the Apostolical, Athanasian, and Nicen Creed, are but one in
substance.

This of the Apostles has ever been accounted in the Church most ancient, and
of greatest authority; which although it be not Protocanonicall Scripture; yet
is it the key of Scriptures, and medulla Scripturarum, the pith of the whole
Bible. Here have I an ha^dful of holy flowers which are called from the several
beds of that spacious garden of the sacred Scripture; here is collected into
one fair body, the substance and sweetness of all those divine mysteries
which either lie hidden or scatterd in the volume of holy writ. This is that
Parvulus Iudex the little Judge in matters of quarrel about religion: for what
doctrine soever is contrary to the Analogy of faith in these things, ought and
must be rejected. If a fool say in his heart, there is no God, If a Jew deny
Christ, If an Epicure believe not a life everlasting, If a Cain deny the
remission of sins, or a Corinthian the Resurrection of the flesh: All these
crossing the Articles of our Christian faith, the Church rejects them, God
condemns them, And they fearfully perish without his mercy to recall them.

The matter or object of the Creed concerns, 1 God, 2 Church,


First God
1 The Father and our Creation, Article 1. 2 The Son and our Redemption, in the
6. next Art. 3 The Holy Ghost Article 8.
Secondly, it concerns the Church in the 4. last Articles, which is more
fully described by her Properties 1 Holy Article 9. 2 Catholic. Article 9. 3
Knit in a Communion. Article 9.
Prerogatives. In the soul, remission of sins, Art. 10. In the body,
resurrection, Art. 11. Body and soul, everlasting life, Art. 12.



These be the twelve signs in the Zodiake of our faith, through which passes
Christ Jesus, the Sun of righteousness. O never may the clouds of infidelity
darken or eclypse his beams.

These twelve Articles are so necessary and so lincked together, that he that
denies one by consequent denies all, because that of any one so denied, the
denial of the very foundation of our faith is straightly inferred, He that
with Marcion denies the Humanity of Christ, may be easily convinced to deny
the passion of Christ, because the Godhead is impassible; and he that with
Ebion denies the Deity of Christ, may with the like facility be convinced to
deny the Resurrection of Christ, because the manhood only never had been able
to raise it self from the dead. Romans 1.4.
And he that denies the Resurrection of Christ, cannot believe his Ascension;
because the Apostle tells us, ( Ephesians. 4.9.) that he which ascended, is the
same which descended first into the lower parts of the Earth.

By this manifest inference, may we plainly see the connection of these
Articles. If ye deny one, ye deny all; and if ye renounce any one, ye
cannot be saved.

But I will not take a large survey in a small plot, Its a good rule to be
observed by booke-writers which a great master in oratory has prescribed, ut
titulum legant, to read the title of their books, and often to ask
themselves what they have begun to handle. From this maine sea, I will
therefore strike into a little channel: and having drunk of the brook in the
way, and given a taste of the Creed in general, I descend to this particular
Article, which is the subject of our following Treatise.

CHAP. 2. Each term in this eleventh Article remarkable, from the explication
of which is inferred the immortality of the Soul, and consequently of the
rising again of the body.
IN our precedent Chapter we showed the dependancy of one Article with another,
and that to deny any one of these principles, is the next degree to infidelity.
We may farther illustrate this truth by this Article of the Resurrection.

He that believes not this, believes all other things in vain; for if there
be no Resurrection from death, then can he receive no reward of his faith. Nay
I will take the note a little higher; He that believes not this, believes no
other Article of his Creed; for (as our English Postiller has observed from
Erasmus aptly) The whole Creed in gross, and every parcel thereof, argues a
resurrection. If there be a God Almighty, then he is just, and if just, then
another reckning in another world; If a Jesus Christ who is our Savior, then
must he dissolve the works of Satan, sin and death. If an Holy Ghost, then
all his holy Temples which have glorified him here, shall be glorified of him
hereafter. If a Church which is holy, then a Remission of sins, a Resurrection
of the body, a life everlasting.

Thus do we see how this Primarium Evangelii caput, this predominant Article
presupposes all the rest: how it is, Nexus Articulorum omnium, the tying knot
on which all other links of holy Faith depend. By this hand is religion held up
by the head. This is the anchor of our hope, the reference of our faith, the
certainty of our salvation, and the very door of the Kingdom of heaven.

From this mine arises another treasure: it is worth our observation, how this
Article of the Resurrection is placed between the Article of the Remission of
sins, and the other of Everlasting life; teaching us, that then only the
Resurrection of the body is a benefit, when Remission of sins goes before, and
eternal life follows after: for as the Resurrection is sepes Fidej, so
eternal life is Corona Fidej.

In this, as in each parcel of the Creed are two maine things observable.

First the Act, which is to believe, therefore Credo must be applied to every
Article, Pides est tota copulativa. Secondly, the object, which is the ensuing
Article. In the Act, is the personality, which is faiths possessive [Ego] I
believe; This was Jobs Creed, Scio quod Redemptor n^ I know that my Redeemer
lives. I must (says one) put all men in my Pater noster, only my self in my
Creed; My prayer must be like the penny, which Peter found in the fishes
mouth, with which Christ bid him pay tribute pro me and te; I must pray for
others, believe for my self. No man's faith can do me good, but mine own; for
I cannot believe by an attorney, nor be saved by a proxy. When doubting Thomas
found his faith at his fingers ends, then did he cry out with an holy
appropriation, my Lord, and my God, ( Vt brevissima sit absolutissima
confessio, says Bullinger) for he did utter that in two words which is the
contents of the two Testaments, and sum of all sums of Faith and holy
belief. That living carcass (whom formerly we mentioned) he that was even
poor to a proverb, was enriched with this singular faith, Job 19.26.
I shall see God in my flesh, id est (as it is excellently glossed on) I in my
flesh shall see God, or, Videbo Deum in carne, h. e. Deum incarnatum, I shall
see God, having taken flesh on him. If I have this faith in particularity, and
can apply things general to mine own comfort, then God even my God shall give
me his blessing: Et non est haec superbia Elati, sed confessio non ingrati.

From the Act, we remove our meditations to the object: and here we will first
explain those two Emphatical terms 1 Resurrectionem. 2 Carnis.


For in these models and summaries of Christian doctrine, there is weight in
every word, we must therefore herein imitate the finers of pure gold, Qui non
tantum auri massas tollunt, verum and bracteolas parvas, that make use not only
of the wedge, but even of the smallest foil or rays, that their metal
casts.

Resurrection is properly a rising again upon a fall taken: for this
praeposition [Re] (as it has been noted, B. of Wimo^.
by a pious and learned Father of our Church) does ever imply, not only Again,
but Again, as it were upon a loss, not second only, but a second upon the
failing of the first; as Redemption a buying again upon a former aliening,
Reconciliation upon a former falling out; Orthod. fid. lib. 4. ca. 28.
Restitution upon a former attainder; Resurrection upon a fall taken formerly:
to this suites well the definition of it given by Damascen, (...); Resurrection
is a second quickening or setting up again of that which first fell; Resurget
quod prius cecidit.

In this word then [Resurrection] we do find the strength and sinews of an
argument. If the body rise it must first fall: in this is implicitly woven up a
confessed truth; That all men must dye the first death; Debemur morti nos
nosiraque, to dye is as true, as good a debt as any the world knows; for the
levying of which debt (as one excellently, and with a silver pen) there is an
extent upon all mankind; and a Statute recorded by Saint Paul, Statutu^ est
omnibus semel mori; This a decree not to be reversed, a debt not possible to
be declined.

Here might I have store of rich cloth, to apparel my lines withal, but lest
the hemme should be bigger than the garment, I have taken no more than what is
suitable to my purpose.

My second observation is, that in this common cognizance of our faith, in this
Article of my Creed, I do not say at large, I believe a Resurrection, but more
strictly, more expressly thus, Credo resurrectione^ carnis, I believe the
resurrection of the flesh [Carnis scilicet non Animae] This word Resurrection
does properly belong to the body; the body that falls must rise.

To think that our souls shall sleep in dust, as our bodies do till the
last doom, is but a dream of the Anabaptists (the spawne of the ancient
Arabicks) Ne in somnium quidem cadit anima cum corpore, quomodo ergo in
ueritatem mortis cadet, quae nec in imaginem ejus ruit, says Tertullian: and
experience tells me, that my soul while it is now like the Ark of God, In
medio pellium in these walls of flesh, has her own working and lively
operation, even then when the Publican arresteth my body, while my senses are
imprisoned in the bands of sleep.

For the mind of man is a restless thing, Of the immortality of the Soul.
and though it give the body leave to repose it self, as knowing it is a
mortal and earthly part, yet it self being a spirit and therefore active and
indefatigable is ever in motion, it has no rise at all from this clay; It
sleeps not in a living body, therefore it shall not sleep in a dead body, it
is made of an everlasting nature; As Gods eternal decrees have an end without
a beginning, so the soul of man has beginning without an end. It has
beginning to live it shall have no time to dye. There is indeed a death of the
Soul, not that it cease to be, but when it cease to be righteous; Habet
and anima mortem suam cum vita beata caret, quae vera animae vita dicenda est,
says Augustine; consonant to this is that genuine and proper interpretation of
those words of the Evangelist; what will it profit a man to gain the whole
world, and lose his soul: Perdere animam, says the gloss, Est non ut non
sit, sed ne male sit; for the soul being immortal is capable of Eternal,
either Felicity, or Misery, and whatsoever life: it lives, yet it never
cease to live.

I have briefly set down the riches of the observatio^s that naturally arise
from the explication of these two terms; both which I find comprised in one
verse, Psalm. 16.20. Thou will not leave my soul in grave, [there's the
Immortality of the soule] nor suffer the holy one to see corruption [there's
the Resurrection of the body.] This David knowing before (says the Scripture)
spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, the accomplishment of which prophecy is
often repeated in the new Testament; Act. 2.31. Act. 13.35.
howbeit David after he had served his time, by the Counsel of God, he
slept, and was laid with his Fathers and saw corruption: yet by the virtue of
an insitio^ into that Christ, whose sacred body the Lord preserved from the
least putrefaction, the Prophet apprehends a certain hope of the Resurrection
of his own flesh to Immortality, and assures himself, that God will not give
him over to that corruption, which shall seize on him in the grave, that his
dead body shall not miscarry, nor vanish away in rottenesse, but be raised
again in glory.

This meditation leads me by the hand to treat of our Saviors Resurrection,
being pertinent and conducing to the series of our discourse.

CHAP. 3. Christ's Resurrection manifested by the testimony of Angels, by his
own apparitions, by the fulfilling of the Prophecies, his Resurrection is a
demonstration of ours.
THE glorious resurrection of our blessed Savior was first proclaimed by an
Herald from Heaven, so all the Evangelists testify. Sonuit de sepulchro vox
laetitiae, never before was heard such news from the grave, but at that time,
when an Angel was the preacher; his Sermon, Christ is risen; his Auditory,
Mary Magdalen and other devout women.

To discourse at large of those celestial, and immortal spirits, comes not
within the compass of my walk, yet thus much briefly and to our present
purpose.

Angels however they still behold the face of our Heavenly Father, yet they are
but his household servants, his pages of honor which he sends on his holy
errands, the sacred tutors of the Saints, the guard of Gods elect, the
watchmen over the walls of the new Jerusalem, chaplains in ordinary to the
King of heaven, Messengers and Ministers attending about his Throne expecting
his pleasure, always in readiness to make known his will unto Man.

When God brought forth his first begotten Son into the world, he said,
worship him all ye Angels, and so they did; when the blessed Virgin,
oreshadowed by the Holy Ghost, carried her divine burden within her womb, an
Angel appeared unto Joseph to justify the innocence of the Mother, and the
Deity of the Son; when he was borne the Angels told the same unto the
sheepheards, and that with an Ecce too, Luke 1. when Herod meant death to the
Babe for the name of a King, an Angel revealed the same unto Joseph, and
willed him to fly into Egypt with the child, and so, Populus Aegypti qui fuit
persecutor primogeniti, became custos unigeniti: when Herod was dead, the
Angel bid Joseph return again into Jury. When Satan left tempting him the
Angels came and ministered unto him; when his soul was exceeding sorrowful
unto death, the Angels atte^ded to comfort him; and when his body was to be
raised from death, an Angel descends to draw away the curtain, while our Lord
came forth of his bedchamber; an Angel roles away the stone which his
Adversaries had laid upon his grave; an Angel is the first that reports the
glad tidings of his resurrection.

The truth of this Angelical assertion, was seco^ded by Truth it self; for
what the Angel preached unto the women, what the women reported to the
Apostles (for in this Article were they first catechized by the weaker sex) our
Savior makes good by his manifold apparitions, being seen at sundry times by
such, who were (...), and ideo (...), witnesses chosen before of God for that
purpose, as the Apostle affirms in his little Creed to Cornelius Acts 10.
wherein is a synopsis or sum of the chief points of holy belief.

Concerning the Doctrine, verse 36, 37. Miracles, verse 38. Life, and Death,
verse 39. Resurrection, verse 40, 41. Coming to judgment, verse 42.
of Jesus Christ.

What Peter there recites to his Auditor, his new convert, his Cornelius, what
Paul elsewhere to his Corinthians, was all foretold, Per os Prophetarum, by the
mouth of the holy Prophets; for this is sure and convertible, Nothing was done
by Christ which was not foretold, nothing was foretold, which was not done. So
that there was an Oportet, a forceable reason that he should rise again, Vt
impleretur, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, his Resurrection being, as
Aquinas says, Complementum omnium promissionum, the Consummatum est, the
period, the accomplishment of al predictions.

We may farther illustrate this if we look on our Savior (as he was seen by
Ezekiel in a vision) as a King, Ezekiel. 9.2.
as a Priest, as a Prophet; walking amongst the midst of the Angels, as a King;
clothed in white as a Priest; and with an inkhorne hanging at his girdle as a
Prophet; And here likewise shall we find an Oportet, that his Prophetical,
Sacerdotall, Regal,
Offices, each of them employed a proof of his Resurrection.

First, let us consider him as a Prophet, even the Prince of Prophets. When the
Angels at the Sepulcher said unto the women, why seek ye the living among
the dead? He is not here, Luk 24.6.
but he is risen: he adds to remember how he spoke unto you, when he was
yet in Galile, saying: The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of
sinful me^ and be crucified, and the third day rise again. It is remember
(...), not what only, but how, not the matter, but the manner; remember that:
He will keep his word, though he die for it, and though he dye for it, he will
rise again the third day, to keep it to a minute. The very (...), of his
resurrection is determined; He rose the third day, and that early too. When God
was to give sentence upon man for sin, he stayed till the heat of the day was
over; but upon this day, being to preach remission of sins, he rose betime,
while it was yet dark. It was the Love of God, and tender affection to his
Church, which he had so lately, and so dearly bought, made him rise so soon,
and appear so often the same day to distressed souls. In all my Creed there
is no other circumstance of Time, but this, of all the Actions of Christ for
me there recorded, only this Action of rising again, though of all the most
difficult, yet it is to be believed with the circumstance of time and no
other; to show; that the doubt and difficulty, the improbability, in respect of
means be it what it will, yet whenever my Savior promises, he keeps
it, as well as whatsoever he has promised.

Secondly, as his prophecy, so his priesthood enforced his Resurrection; How
could it appear that the obligation was cancelled, the law fulfilled, God
pacified, if he had not risen again; If the debt had not been taken off by
the surety, it would have lain still upon the Principal; If Christ had not
risen from the dead, we should still be yet in our sins, and our Faith
should be in vain. But we know that our high Priest with one offering has
consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified. Heb. 10.14.
The powerful operation of this passion endures for ever; being the La^be
slain from the beginning of the world, and bleeding, as it were, to the worlds
end. Aron and his successors were but only forerunners of Christ, who is the
end of the Law, and for this cause called, Sacerdos accedens, or superveniens,
a Priest added to the Priests, a mediator of the new Testament consummating the
priesthood of the old. As there was never Priest before, had the love to
sacrifice himself for the people, so never had any the power to revive that
sacrifice he once killed: but our high Priest Christ Jesus, had love to lay
down his life and power to take it up again; by the first he showed himself
to be the Son of man after the flesh; by the second he was declared
mightily to be the Son of God. Romans 1.13.
As he could not but dye, having taken on him a body of death; so he could not
but live again, because that body was, Vitae sacrarium, the vestry and
chapel wherein life was preserved.

Thirdly, as he was made to be a Prophet like Moses (Act. 3.22.) a Priest like
Melchisedech (Psalm. 110.4.) so also a King like David (Luke 1.32.) God will
give him the throne of his Father David, and he shall rule over the house of
Israel for ever.

He was a King by birth, simul natus, simul Caesar, so the wisemen testified
of him Math. 2.2. And he was a King at his death, so Pilate wrote his
inscriptio^ though in the narrowest limits, Jesus of Nazareth King of the
Jews, Ioh 19.22. But to expect the Messiah for a temporal Prince was the
Jews perpetual dotage, the Apostles transient error, Math. 20.21. Act. 1.6.
Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel. Of temporal
royalty he had so little a share, that his chair of estate, was the Cross;
his crown made of thorns, his scepter a reed; and for a Vivat Rex, the
people gave him a Crucifige. But Qui subijt, subegit, he that did undergo,
did overcome; and as Saint Bernard sweetly, Qui agnus extiterat in passione,
factus est Leo in resurrectione; He that stood as Lamb at his Passion to take
away the sins of the world; became a Lion at his resurrection to spoil all
principalities and powers, and to make an open show of them, Coloss. 2.15. Then
did he manifest himself a most victorious conqueror over all his enemies, then
did he receive the keys of death, and hell, then did he break the serpents
head, and made all knees bow to him in heaven, earth, and under the earth. And
now being raised from death, he dies no more, death has no more power over
him; for this is his Epithet (as the beholder and penman of that revelation
which has as many mysteries, Apoc. 1.18.
as words has set it down) He that was dead, and is alive, and lives for
evermore.

From hence arises naturally matter of Confutation, Consolation.


First, this doctrine of our Saviors Resurrection is a sufficient condemnation
to all Jews, who (as we have formerly noted) do still look for another
Christ: for why should they not believe their own Prophet. They said the
Messiah should suffer, Christ suffered all things so as they were prophesied;
Who then can be the Messiah but he, in whom all the prophecies are fulfilled.

Secondly, It overthrows the wicked error of Corinthus, who taught, that
Christ should not rise till the general Resurrection; But as Job confuted the
blasphemous speech of his wife, with a Loqueris ut insana mulier; so Epiphanius
worthily says of this heretic, Stolidus est and stolidorum magister. I will
not take up the graves of the Chiliasts, or Millenaries, in their very name may
we read their errors, but their gross superstitions and assertions shall for
me be buried in silence. Thus having melted the dross from the silver
metal, let us see what fruit we can pluck from these branches.

Christ, says Saint Paul, is become the first fruits of them that slept; 1
Cor. 15.20.
He is the first sheafe of the harvest, by and from which all the whole crop
of the dead Saints receive virtue. At the time of our Saviors Resurrection,
some few ears that were then ripe, and hereafter the whole harvest shall be
carried into everlasting barns. The Eva^gelist speaking of it says; that many
bodies of Saints which slept arose; All the dead did not rise, but many, and
those Saints too; the general Resurrection is reserved to the last day; this
was a pledge and earnest of it. As many rose with him, so some before him, but
all the Resurrectio^s which we read of in former times were wrought in the
figure and virtue hereof. Lazarus, the widows Son, and Iairus daughter,
came forth of their graves, or were, recovered to life, Mortui sed morituri:
But Christ was the first that rose, Cum victoria Mortis; that rose to eternal
life, never to visit the grave again.

This assures us of our Resurrection, Christus e^ typus Christianorum.
for as the head must rise before the members; so the members are sure to
follow the head; if the head be above water, there is hope for the whole body;
if the root has life, the branches shall not long be without; the first
fruits being restored to life, all the rest of the dead are entitled to the
same hope: for the Resurrection of our Savior is not only Auspex and exe^plar,
but also, fidej iussor, yea Chirographum nostrae resurrectionis; so that he
that did rise will raise. These two resurrections are inseparable. Thus did
that great Champion of the Church, who (as a Father says) Priusquam natus erat
Dominus Redemptorem suum vidit a mortuis resurgentem. Thus did Job excellently
argue, when from, Job 19.25.
Scio quod Redemptor, he inferred, Scio quod ego, etc. I am sure that my
Redeemer lives, and I shall rise again at the last day: for, eadem catena
revincta est Christi Resurrectio and nostra.

Some divines affirm (from the assertion of Bonaventure) D. Boys postil. page
868.
that the year wherein our blessed Savior arose from the dead, should,
according to the Law, have been the year of Iubile: which Feast, was
appointed by the Lord to be celebrated every fiftieth year for these causes.

First, Why the Iubile was celebrated every 50. year.
that they might keep a right Chronology and reckning of times: For as the
Grecians did compute their times, by the number of Olympiades, the Romans by
their Lustra, so the Jews by their Iubiles.

Secondly, that a true distinction of their Tribes might be preserved; because
then Lands returned to their owners in their proper Tribe; and servants to
their own families; hence was it called Iubile, from a word, which in the
original signifies, deduxit, or produxit, because it brought men back again
to their estate.

Thirdly, he instituted these Iubiles, that they might be a type to them of
their full deliverance by Christ, and for this cause was it called Buccina
reductionis, because they blew with Rams-hornes, at this feast, in remembrance
of their deliverance out of Egypt.

And surely the Iubiles The spiritual Iubile.
in old time did mystically shadow forth that Spiritual Iubile, which
Christians enjoy under Christ; by whose blood, we have not only a reentry into
the Kingdom of heaven, which we lost in the transgression of our great
Grandfather Adam which we had formerly morgaged and forfeited by our sins: And
this was happily signified by the Israelits reentry upon their lands which they
had formerly sold; and again the found of the Gospel (which was in this
Feast typed by the noise of the Trumpets) is gone throughout the world.

The Redemption of Christ, Easter Day.
is a year of Iubile, the Resurrection of Christ is the chief day in the
year yea, Regina Dierum, as Ignatius styles it. All Christians, herein
imitating the pattern of the blessed Apostle, in honor of Christ's
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 16.2.
observe their Sabbath on the eight day, which is the first day of the week,
whereas the Jews hallowed their Sabbath upon the seventh day which is the last
day of the week. So that Easter day is the Sabbath of Sabbaths, an high and
holy day, from which every other Sunday has its name; being so called, because
the Sun of righteousness, arose from the dead this day.

Christ's appearing on the eight day, is not without a mystery; we labor six
days in this life, the seventh is the Sabbath of our death, in which we rest
from our labors; and then being raised from the dead, the eighth day, Christ
in his own body, yea the very same body that was crucified, shall reward every
man according to his works.

Happy then is that man, whose whole life is nothing else, but a Lent to prepare
him against the Sabbath of his death, and Easter of his Resurrection.

CHAP. 4. Arguments drawn from diverse Attributes of God, as his Power, Mercy,
Justice, etc. to confirm us in this Article of the Resurrection.
AT my first entrance into the school of faith in the very first Article of my
Creed, I no sooner read that there is a God, but I learn withal that he is
Almighty.

The doctrine of his Omnipotency, is the basis and fundamental Arch, on which
is built our Christian religion; from the knowledge hereof proceeds all faith;
because we believe with the blessed Virgin, Quia potens est, that God is able
to do all those things which reason is not able to comprehend. Contrariwise
the ignorance, or the not right understanding of this truth, is the cause that
there be so many (...), unbeleevers and misbeleevers: Atheists, without the
knowledge of God; Infidels, without hope or faith in God. It was our Saviors
own Argument against the Sadduces, you err not knowing the Scriptures, Math.
22.29.
nor the power of God, i. e. (says the Paraphrase) ye Sadduces do err
grossly and da^nably, in this your misco^ceit of the resurrection, and the
ground of your error is your ignorance both of the Scriptures, which have
clearly revealed the truth thereof, and of that Omnipotent power of God, whereby
is only this (otherwise impossible) work. If with the men of Berea we do
search the Scriptures, we shall find, that before the Sadduces had any being
in Israel, this heresy of theirs was palpably convinced, with an example of the
resurrection, even in Elishaes revived corpse. Now the power that can raise one
man, can raise a thousand, a millio^, a world. No power can raise one man, but
that which is infinite, and that which is infinite, admits of no limitation.

In the beginning the Word of the Lord was the seminary of all being: his will
was his Word, and his Word was his deed. His Fiat and Fuit met together, his
Dixit and Benedixit kissed each other. All at first was nothing, and from that
nothing carne all: How easy is it then, for him to repair all out of
something, who could thus fetch all out of nothing? How should we distrust him
for our resurrection, who has approved his Omnipotency in our creation? Our
remainder after death can never be so small, as our being was before the
world, ashes is more than nothing.

The body, we confess, that is once cold in death, has no more aptitude to a
reanimation, than that which is mouldred into dust; only as it was Gods
omnipote^cy to create man out of a substance that had no ability to produce the
matter: so likewise it is the Prerogative Royal, to revive that dust, to form
it into a new Adam, to fetch a man a second time from the earth, to live with
himself, when time shall be no more.

This Resuscitation of the dead is one of those four keys, which (the
Hebrews say) are in the hand of him, who is the Lord of the whole world. The
Scripture makes mention of each of them.

1. Clavis pluviae, the key of rain; the Lord will open to thee his good
treasure: Deuteronomy. 28.12.

2. Clavis cibationis, the key of food; Thou openest thy hand and fillest every
thing with thy plenteousnesse: Psalm. 145.16.

3. Clavis sterilitatis, the key of barrenesse; God remembered Rachel, and
opened her Womb: Genes. 30.22.

4. Clavis sepulchrorum, the key of the grave; when I shall open your
sepulchers: Ezekiel. 37.12.

By all which places it is intimated, that these four things God has reserved
in his own hand and custody. Namely, Rain, Food, the procreation of children,
and the raising of our bodies. For though at first he made him, ex nihilo, out
of nothing, yet he did not make him, ad nihilum, to return to nothing; There
may be a dissolution of soul and body, for a time, but there cannot be an
annihilation of either, because they must be reunited again to remain for
ever.

As we have derived a maine proof of the Resurrection from the power of God;
so likewise may we argue from his other glorious and divine attributes: but
because I will not enlarge a treatise into a volume, I will herein follow the
Schoolmen who reduce all communiter ad duo: his Mercy, Justice.


These be the two master Attributes which set all the rest on work: these be
the two feet of God whereupon he walks al his ways.

When God makes a covenant with his own, it is an incorruptible and
everlasting covenant, Numb. 18.19.
therefore it is called a covenant of salt; to note the perpepetuity of it. In
this covenant are all the dead Bodies of the Saints, and the Lord forgets
them not. When Jacob went down to Egypt, Genes. 46.4.
the Lord promised to bring him back again: but how did the Lord bring him
back again, seeing he died in Egypt? the Lord was with him when he was
brought out of Egypt. So the Lord preserves all the bodies of the Saints,
Psalm. 34.20.
and he keeps all their bones, yea even then when their bed is made in the
dust, because they are within the covenant. It is said of Josias (although he
was slain in battle) yet he was gathered in peace to his Fathers, i. e. to the
Spirits of his Fathers who enjoy peace; for he was not gathered in peace in
his body, for he was slain in war. 2. Chro. 35.

In 22. of Math. and the 32. Christ says I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God is not the God of the dead, but the
living; He does not say, I was the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob; or I am the God of Abraham that once was: but as implying his own
eternal being, and the certain being of those holy Patriarchs, he says, I
am the God of Abraham, etc. Now God is not the God of those that are not, and
have no existence at all, but of those that have a being. So that he will
raise their bodies, or else he did, Dimidium tantummodo Hominem restituere,
else he were God but to one part of Abraham. But as his mercy is over all his
works, so his works of mercy are over all his: His mercy extends both to soul
and body, and in the mercy of the most High they shall not miscarry: Therefore
shall God raise the bodies of dead men.

But we must not frame unto our selves a God all of mercy; but learn to sing
that compounded ditty of the Psalmist, of mercy and Judgment. Gods justice is
himself as well as his mercy: As his mercy (which we have already showed) so
likewise his justice requires, that their must be an universal resurrection.

If in this life (says the Apostle) we have hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.15.
we are of all men most miserable. Paul indeed was at a, quotidie morior, every
hour in danger to be drawn to the block, every day dying, ready to be
offered up for the name of his Lord and Savior: But to what purpose did he
expose himself to such variety of perils, if there were no resurrection?
Miserable is that man that either labors, or suffers in vain; Shall Paul
bear in his body the marks of Christ Jesus, and shall he not bear in the
same body the crown of his glory? Shall the labourer endure the heat of the
day, and shall he not at length receive this penny, his wages? Christiani ad
metalla, was a usual condemnation, but what made them dig so willingly in
the mines? Surely they had a treasure there which the Emperor knew not of,
they had infinite more precious wealth from thence then he: For the hope of
the gaining a better life, is the persuasive Rethoricke against the fear of
loosing this; Haec vespera est, and necesse est addi matutinam laetitiam; and
then shall our birth be consummate when the evening and the morning are made one
day.

These mixed meditations compounded of contrary ingredients, as a Cross and a
Crown, Martyrdom and glory, Mortality and heaven, death and life, are strong
grapples and ties to hold a Christian and his patience together; It were
injurious to complain of the measure, when we acknowledge the recompense;
Afflictions are the flowers of eternal felicity, and who would not willingly
gather the flowers for the fruits sake.

He that hewed timber out of the rock, Psalm. 74.6.
was known to bring it to an excellent piece of work: so was Joseph hewed in
the stocks, and in the prison, God brought him to an excellent piece of work,
to make him Lord of Egypt; Thus was Christ Jesus hewed and squared on the
Cross, with hammers, and nails, and spears; of that excellent work see where
he sits at Gods right Hand, Thrones, Powers, Dominations, Angels subjected
to him. And thus will God deal with the dead bodies of his Saints, which
though they have bin persecuted here, and the iron has even entered into their
soul, yet at length, they shall come out of their graves, like so many Joseph's
out of prison: for Death like that Egyptian Mistress has only power over
their coats, their upper garments, their bodies; and the grave like the
serpent is dieted and feeds on nothing but dust. It is not so much the death
of the body, as the corruption of the body, Mortalitas magis sinita est quam
vita.

When the Lord brought the Israelites to Canaan, he made them go Southward
into the mountains, the South was a dry and barren part. Thou have given me a
South land, give me also springs of water, Judge. 1.15. Thus does God deal
with his children in this life, he shows them great afflictions and
troubles, the South part, as it were at first, but afterward he brings them
to the land that flows with milk and honey.

He that shall build his faith on this rock, he that does thus, Reponere
fidem in sine, will supervolare crucen^, triumph over the Cross, and with Job,
comfort himself on the dunghill with a videbo Deum: and outface death with his
Resurrection, in hope and expectation of that glory, he shall once enjoy with
Christ. Benedictus sic Deus, (says the Apostle) Blessed he God who has
begotten us again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ to an
inheritance incorruptible, etc.

It has been well observed, (by one of no vulgar Judgment) how the
Resurrection is there placed, in the midst between our hope and our
inheritance. To hope before it, before the Resurrection, hope; but after to the
inheritance it self, to the full possession and fruition of it.

So from the state of hope, by the Resurrection (as by a Bridge) pass we over
to the enjoying our inheritance.

Before I shut up this stage, I must clear a doubt, and remove an objection
which hangs on this thing

Some of the Rabbis have conceited, that the wicked by corporal death shall
utterly be extinct, and that none shall come to Judgment, but they shall be
saved; grounding their opinion on those words of the Psalmist: Psalm. 1.5.
The wicked shall not rise in Judgment: But here instead of the natural milk
of this text, they suck out the blood of misinterpretation; And they which
shall tenter and wrest the Scriptures (which is a fault Saint Peter complains
of) with expositions and glosses newly coined, to make them speak what they
never meant must needs bring forth aut heresim, aut phrenesim. If we tread in
the steps of the best interpreters, we shall find (as Hierome and others
observe) that this is not to be understood, Quod non furgent, sed quod in
judicio non resurgent; He says not that the wicked shall not rise, but in
judgment they shall not rise; not rise (...), but (...), faith Christ; as
Felons whose fact being evident, are placed at the bar not so much to be
convicted, as to be condemned. Their conscience that like a Blood-hound hunts
dry foot, shall set before them the sent of their sins, so that the Lord
Judge shall not make any great inquisition to find out their faults, but
proceed to sentence.

At that great assise shall we all appear ( Nam oportet nos omnes, 2 Cor.
5.10.
says the Apostle) and confusi and confisi, both Christ's confessors, and his
crucifiers, but the end of their Resurrection shall be different; the one to
glory, the other to shame: which was properly figured in Pharaohs two servants,
Genesis 40.
the Baker, and the Butler; both of them were taken out of prison, but the one
to be restored to his office to minister before the King, the other to be put
to death. So shall both the godly and the wicked come out of their graves, the
one, Rapi in occursum, to meet their Savior in the clouds, the other, verti
retrorsum; to be turned down to hell with all the people that forget God.

But I will not strain this note. I have the rather touched upon it, because
it is one of those, Quantuor nocissima, which we should still have in
remembrance: for after death comes judgment, whose forerunner is the
universal Resurrection.

The day of death; and the day of doom are the two Pole-starrs on which we
pilgrims and travelers on earth should fix our eyes. May my soul still keep
on this wing, Dan. 6.10.
may my heart be like Daniels window which was open in his chamber toward
Jerusalem; may I often repose my self on the rose bed of this contemplation; for
they that never have any holy whisperings with God, that never walk up to Mount
Tabor, into some retired place of meditation and prayer, (such as Isaacks
field, Cornelius his Leads, David's Closset) carry their souls in their bodies,
as Joseph's brethren did their money in their sacks, and know not what Treasure
they have. And here for method have I occasion given to treat.

CHAP. 5. Of Sadducisme and other heresies which flatly oppose this Article of
the Resurrection.
SVperstition and Atheism are the two extremes of Religion; the Pharisees ran
on the Rock of the one, and the Sadduces sunk in the Sand-beds of the other.

This gross error of Sadducisme crept into Moses chair, many of the high
Priests themselves, as Ioannes Hircanus; with his sons Alexander and
Aristobulus, and likewise Anaus the younger were of this Sect.

To show the original and occasion of this heresy, I must open an antiquity,
and take up a story, as I find it already related to my hands. The Sadduces
were so called from Sadoc, the first Author of this heresy; this Sadoc lived
under Antigonus Sochaeus, who not long after the days of Nehemial was the
chiefest Rabbin in the great Synagogue at Jerusalem; this Antigonus gravely
instructing his Disciples, that they should not be of servile minds, or do
their duties for hope of reward: His Scholars hearing this desired him to
expound his mind more fully, whereupon he added, that men must not expect the
recompense of a good life in this world, but stay for it until the world to
come: To these words Sadoc a chief disciple of his took exception, and said,
He never heard of any such thing as the world to come; whereupon he with his
fellow Baithu^ turned Apostates, and repaired to the schismatic Temple built
upon Mount Gerizim, and became principal Rabbis of the Samaritans. Amongst
them did Sadoc first broach his heresy, and taught them that there was no
Resurrection of the dead; because no immortality of the soul and spirit, and
so consequently no judgment to come.

Will you have a fuller relation of their impiety, shall I present you with the
picture of a Sadduce as I find it curiously penselled out? Castly our eyes on
the Table of that counterfeit Solomon, where you have him lively set forth in
his proper colors. In his second Chapter of his Book of Wisdom, he recounts
at large, the sensual thoughts, the earthly conceits of all such Epicures and
Atheists, Qui non agnoscunt saeculum nisi praesens, and at length he winds up
all on this clew; such things do they imagine, and go astray, for their own
wickedness has blinded them; verse 21. yea so blinded them, that as they live
like beasts, so they imagine they shall dye like beasts; that they shall not
only mori but per mori, dye like Oxen knocked on the head, that they shall be
annihilated, and therefore they dance after this pipe, Let us eat and drink
for to morrow we shall dye. 1 Cor. 15.32.
Nay the Apostle has it in the present tence (...) morimur, to not the
sensuality of these wretches, who think that their souls and bodies shall be
quite extinguished together.

But on rotten joists is this foundation laid. Our blessed Savior with the
modesty of truth has long since confuted this bold and broad faced heresy of
the Sadduces. We read, Math. 22. That he put them to silence; the Original
is significant (...) he bridled their mouths; which is a phrase borrowed from
fierce and stomackefull horses, which being held in by a strong bit, become
subject perforce to the will of the rider. He that spoke as never man spoke so
resolved their doubts, and dissolved their sophismes, that they were
tongue-ride, had not a word to return upon him.

It is farther observable how our Savior in that place fits his Answer to the
Questionists, and concludes most evidently against the^, by pressing them with
their own principalls. Concerning the Resurrection of the dead he prooves it
not out of the Prophets, but draws his Argument out of Exodus, Exodus 3.6.
For whereas the Sadduces rejected all Scripture, save only the Pentateuchi,
Christ disputes with them in their own Canons, and makes Moses give them an
answer, whose authority was sacred with them.

The Pharisees in their Doctrine were much nearer the truth than the Sadduces,
for they confessed that there were Angels and Spirits, they acknowledged the
Resurrection of the dead: Hereupon Saint Paul perceiving, that in the Council
the one part were Saduces, Act. 23.6.
the other Pharisees, cried out of the hope [ id est, of the reward expected]
and of the Resurrection of the dead I am called in question; yet though these
Sectaries had a branch of the Tree of knowledged, they bowed the sprig the
wrong way; They taught that the souls of evil men deceased departed into
everlasting punishment; but the souls, said they, of good men by a kind of
Pythagorian transmigration into other good men's bodies. Of which Opinion Herod
may seem to have been; for when news was brought him of Christ, he said
that John the Baptist being be^ded, was risen again; thinking that the soul of
the Baptist was passed into the body of Jesus? Hence again arose the like
different opinions concerning our Savior, some saying he was Elias, Mat. 16.14.
others Ieremias, as if Christ's body had bin animated by the soul either of
John, Elias, or Ieremias.

It were a world to rake up the old errors of all such as have drawn in the
same line it were infinite to traduce the fond conceits of the Saturnians,
Basilidians, and those whom Tertullian calls Partiatios Sadducaeorum, or
Semi-Sadduces. But I forbear to set down fancies for truths, I willingly spare
that oil: for as it was noted by some as a token of Gods special providence,
that Saint Augustine and Pelagius the heretic should come into the world much
about one year, that the Antidote might be contemporary with the poison: so
truth in all ages has been justified by her children, and our Church has
ever found some Advocate to plead her cause, so that the gates of Hell (which
Origin well expounds to be blaspheming heresies) shall never prevail against
it.

And here may we cast a Dart at the Sadduces and Epicures of our times, for
these be not the names of a nation, but of a disposition, every Country may
have a Sadduce, every Table an Epicure (...). This heresy is every day brought
on the stage, and is but vetus fabula per novos histriones, the same play acted
again by other Actors.

The palliated hypopocrite that gives God the complement of a fashionable
profession who wears Christ's livery, but serves the Devil, is a Sadduce, all
his holiness is but theatricall and personate, a stage-devotion, he does but
play Religion: by his (...) his rough cast countenance he deceives the world.
Sir Thomas Moore.
It was pleasantly spoken by him, who said of a vicious Priest, that he would
not for any thing repeat the Creed, lest he should make him call the Articles
of his Faith into question, Quis audiet illum docentem, qui seipsum non audit?

He that daily feeds on cibos desiderij, whose lushious appetite walks from
dish to dish, Et pittisando totum consumit diem, as if his soul (which some
Philosophers held) were made of salt, is an Epicure that digges his grave with
his teeth, and adoreth Deum stercorarium, he makes his belly his God. This
argument is too demonstrative, it shall content me only to glance at the
generality of so copious a theme. Surely this looseness of living arises
from the self-perswasion of the mortality of the soul; that is the Nilus,
wherein this Crocodile is bred for as Tertullian well, Nemo tam carnaliter vivit
quam qui negat resurrectionem carnis.

On the contrary, he whose mind is deeply seasoned with a meditation of our
humane frailty, does so live, Tanquam Ephemeridem Deo traditurus, every day
being ready to give an account to his God; he considers that this world, for
all the World, is like a Globe of Crystal, which though it take the eye with
variety, and delights of objects, yet the glory thereof is but little and
brittle.

We read in the Acts that Agrippa and Bernice came into the place where Paul's
cause was to be heard, Act. 25.23.
with great pomp, it is in the original (...) intimating thus much, that the
glory and pomp of this world, is but a fancy, a dream. This life is but
saeculi falsi vita (as the Heathen man spoke) but the hope of the life
immortal is the life of this hope mortal.

In the language of Canaan, in the Scripture phrase, death is called a change,
Job 14. In the third of James we read of (...), i. e. (as the word carries it)
the wheel of our nature; this wheel turns apace, and daily turns off some,
and we know not how soon our turn will come. Our estate in this life is like
the vertical Dyall which shows neither our Ortum or Occasum, our Genesis or
our Exodus, our coming into the world, or the time when we are to go out of
it: But our estate in the life to come is like the Horizontall Dyall, upon
which the Sun shines always, there shall the Sun of righteousness for ever
shine, and in his light shall we see light.

I have dwelt long on this subject, and am loath to part with so sweet a
meditation; but lest I strike too much on the same string, which is a fault in
music, I will like a skillful Gardner delight your eyes with variety of
objects, and in this maze show an order in confusion; and because the Articles
of our faith are not only Credenda, but Credibilia, I will see what fruit I can
pluck for our purpose, from the Tree of Pophiry, I will fetch some Arguments
from the schools, and give you a sight.

CHAP. 6. Of many resemblances in the book of Nature of our Resurrection.
IF we borrow some Jewels from the Egyptians, and search the writings of
profane Authors, we shall often find some shadow of holy history among the
Heathen. Plato Moses alter Moses Atticus.


Plato the divine amongst the Philosophers (as it is observed by one, who
sweetly descants on the songs of Sion, which Jonas sung in a strange land, when
he was imprisoned in a living tomb, within a Crystal cage) this Moses
amongst the Athenians differs but a little in describing the Nature of the
godhead, from that other Moses, which was as I may so say (absit invidia
verbo) a Plato amongst the Hebrews, each of them does but a little vary the
Article, The one writes (...), He that is, the other (...), That that is; From
whence we may take up this note, when God had a purpose to reveal his
eternity to Moses, he chose to do it by a word, which being but one syllable
amongst the Greeks does notwithstanding signify and contain three times, that
which is past, that which is present, that which is to come; all which are
indistinct in God, because he is not changed, but is yesterday, to day, and
the same for ever more, for in Gods Grammar as it is wit tily said, there are
no lerters, but (...). and (...). no Nowne but Bonitas, no Pronoune but Ipse,
no Verb but Sum, no Adverbe but Nunc.

But to leave generalities, and to return to the head of our race where we
first began. In this point of reuniting the soul with the body, this Athenian
Eagle has soared higher than any other of the Philosophers, Anma Platonicus.
for he held that in the revolution of so many years, men should be in the
same estate wherein they were before, which is obscurely drawn from the
Resurrection; when we shall be in (...), Math, 19 28.
as we were in (...).

The Principal Secretary in nature, and dictator of reason, holds the
immortality of the soul, and consequently strong reasons even from his own
axioms and rules of Philosophy may be derived to confirm the Resurrection of
the body. For if we admit the soul to be immortal, then it must necessarily
follow that the body, as the Organon or instrument thereof be reunited
thereunto. The soul was not made to live to it self, but in the body, and
rests not fully content so long as she wants her companion. Secondly, the
soul separated from the body is imperfect, Et nulla res imperfecta est capax
perfectae falicitatis. Thirdly, Non est perpetuum quod est contra naturam; but
it is contrary to the nature of a man's soul to be separated from the body,
seeing it is (...), the perfecting act thereof; wherefore the Soul cannot be
continually separated, but must necessarily resume the body.

It is not my intent to lead my Reader into the Lycaeum of the Peripateticks,
or the Gallery of the Stoics, or the Tusculatum of the Orator. The season of
the year does now invite us with Isaac into the fields, and with Joseph of
Aramathea into our gardens: And here (as it has ever been the guise of godly
men from the beholding of worldly things to beget heave^ly thoughts, to turn
the sight of every solemnity into a School of Divinity, and from things they
see here downward, to make a prospect upwards) whatsoever is presented to our
eyes, may be an Emblem to us of our resurrection. How does it feed us with
delight, to view the trees apparelled with a fresh beauty? to see, -- The mealy
mountains late unseene,
Change their white garments into lusty green,
The gardens prancke the^ with their flowery buds,
The meades with grass, with leaves the naked woods.


For what is the Spring, but as Tertullian calls it the resurrection of the
year? and it is no way consonant to reason, that man for whom all other things
do (...), shoot forth, wax fresh, spring and rise again, should not have his
spring and rising too.

The whole creature does write a commentary to give us comfort in this point;
but principally the Arabian Phoenix that sole bird of wonder; The Phaenix.
never did the Roman Emperors lie in their beds in greater state, when in their
(...), they were to be burnt, and changed to Gods, then she does consume
herself in cost, because she knows she shall be revived. By all writers she
has ever been held a type of our glorious Resurrection: In the 91. Psalm it
is said, (...), In the vulgar translation we read it, he shall flourish like
the palm, but it may be translated, he shall flourish like the Phoenix, for
the greek word (...), admitts of both significations.

Dies diei discipulus, one day teaches another, and one night certifieth
another, each day dies into the night, and rises into the morning again,
these vicissitudes of times, and revolutions of seasons, are but so many deaths
and so many resurrections.

Homo est nummus Dei, Man is Gods coin stamped with his Image. Nazianzen
speaking of Rulers, as of the Image of God, compares the Highest to pictures
drawn clean through even to the feet; the middle sort, to half pictures
drawn to the girdle; the meanest to the lesser sort of pictures drawn but to
the neck and shoulders: But all in some degree carry his Image, as well the
poor penny, as the coin of gold. In these lively pictures of ours may we see
some shadow, some resembla^ce of our future Resurrection, do not our nails
pared, and our hair being cut grow again? And if these dead parts of the body
be restored by the ordinary power of God in nature, much more shall his mighty
power restore the bodies of men; has God given me the security of the very
hairs of my head, and shall I distrust him for the raising of my body?

These and the like meditations are armor of proof against the fear of death.
Pulvis es, and in pulverem reverteris, is Man's Epitaph written with Gods own
finger. -- Libenter mortalis sum, quisim futurus immortalis, is a faithful
man's suscription and reply.

I might here without disgression record what I find upon file, many memorable
sayings, Apothegmata merientium, and novissima verba, the last breath of such
Seraphycall Zelots, as have gone to heaven, (...), with some sentence of piety
in their mouths, with good words in their lips, and like so many dying swans
have warbled out their souls into the hands of God. But this field has bin
already reaped to my hand.

Since an Angel sat on our Saviors grave, and proclaimed those good tidings
-- Resurrexit non est hic, we have added to our tombestones too Hic jacet-this
happy clause- speresurgendi; for we know that the bodies of the dead are not
lost but laid up, that they do not perish but rest in hope, that the
sepulchers are not gulfes to swallow the^, but repositaries to keep the^;
therefore do the Germans wittily call the Churchyard Gods acker, because the
bodies are sown there to be raised up again.

Securus moritur qui scit se morte renasci.

Souls take your rest, whose soul in heavens attends,

A blessed reunion of two loving friends.

When Christ shall come with a Prodi Lazare, the graves shall set open their
marble doors; when the Ark-Angell shall sound the trump of collectio^, the
scattered bones of the Saints shall be gathered together with sinews, and those
sinews incorporated with flesh, and that flesh covered over with skin, and by
a new Metempsycosis or rather (...), such as Pythagoras never dreamed of, the
same soul shall reenter into the same body.

But of the perfect restoration of our bodies, and glory of our souls, we
shall discourse more largely in the close of our meditations.

Before I unlade my ship, and put her into the creek, before I lodge my
colors, I should collect something by way of refutation from the absurdities
that arise from the denial of this truth. The blessed Apostle has set them
down at large in his Epistle to the Corinthians, to which most comfortable
Chapter (wherein is store of Manna, for the soul to feed on) I refer my
Reader. To comment upon each of those texts were to set up a candle before the
Sun; many of them being plain and easy to be understood. I will only select
one period of harder construction, and give you, the.

CHAP. 7. Diverse readings and interpretations of those words, 1 Cor. 15.29.
Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, Or [as others]
baptized for dead, if the dead rise not at all, etc.
SOME Chymicall wits (as the Advocates of Rome) have extracted from hence a
proof of their Purgatory; as Stapleton and that Franciscane in the Treatise of
the fiery Torrent; Du Moulin in his confut. of Purgat. p. 268.
who disguising the passage thus, what shall they do that baptize themselves
for the dead; expound that which they have corrupted in this manner, To baptize
ones self signifies to do laborious and satisfactory works for the dead,
and withal we must understand, that it is to fetch them out of Purgatory. How
fruitful is error of absurdities? But (...) will not sit on the skirts of
this fiery hill, since Nabuchadnezzar cannot interpret his own dream, nor the
learned of our Adversaries cannot aread us their own riddle, this Somnium
Monachorum; nor resolve us concerning this mathematical and imaginary fire;
either where it is, or what it is: This ignis fatuus has been sufficiently
quenched by the waters of Shilo, which have abundantly flowed from the best pen
of France.

Thomas Aquinas, by the dead understands sins, which are dead works; as if
the Apostle had said, why are they baptized for the abolishing of sin whereby
death comes, and which being removed, death shall prevail no more.

Others, as Claudius Guiliandus understands it of Martyrdom for the faith of
the resurrection, because our Savior speaking of suffering Martyrdom to the
ambitious sons of Zebede, said, can ye be baptized with my baptism.

These Expositions are far fetched. In this and the like places of Scripture,
we must even have Oculos ad sensum: for the occasion of speaking is the best
key to every speech; we will therefore weave this web a little closer.

In the translation and interpretation of these words Expositers vary. I will
strike the several flints, each of them may afford a spark to give some light.

(...), are translated by some, baptized over the dead, as though it had been
the manner of some to baptize over the graves of the dead, to cherish their
hope of resurrection. If it might appear to have been so by any History, this
would at once decide all controversies: But (as a modern writer descanting
upon this Exposition of Luther has observed) none has made mention of any
such thing, and if we look into the Register of Gods own Record, we shall
find that places of much Water, were raither chose to baptize in, as Jordan,
and John the Baptist is said to have baptized by Enon besides Salim, because
there was much water there: Ioh. 3.23.
And S. Luke reports that the great Eunuch of Ethiopia went into the water and
came out of the water at his baptism, Act. 8.38, 39.

Others think that the Apostle here seems to allude to the ancient custom of
the faithful Jews, who to strengthen themselves in the hope of the
resurrection, used to wash the bodies of their dead, and then (...) to embalm
them before they buried them. As though the Apostle would prove there is a
resurrection of the body, from this custom, seeing otherwise this washing
should be in vain. Though this co^struction be of some weight, yet it is not
sufficiently agreeable to the phrase the Apostle here uses.

Calvin (according to the explication of Epiphanius upon the Text) interprets
the Apostles words, as though he should reason from the custom of such
converts and beginners in Religion, as neglecting baptism overlong, yet when
their death approached, made haste to be baptized that their bodies might be
washed and cleansed against the joyful day of the Resurrection. Though the
interpretation be not lightly to be passed by, yet I cannot rest in it, as in
that which the Apostle should make his Epicherema and ground of his reason; and
Master Calvin himself, worthily condemns them, that should so defer their
baptism till their going out of this life.

Francis Iunius rich in languages, and subtle in distinguishing, has
observed, that this particle (...), though it be usually and rightly
transtlated [Super] may nevertheless (according to the use of the same both
Greek and Latin praeposition, in Greek and Latin writers) be taken here for
[ Praeter besides] or in signification of [ Insuper Moreover] as noting the
continuance of the Sacrament of Baptism, in the Church, by a constant course,
for the comfort of the living still, like as it was found to be of comfortable
use to those that were dead, so long as they were alive; as though the words of
the Apostle were to be read thus, Else what do they, which are baptized still,
or moreover and beside those that are already dead; because otherwise it might
be inferred, that unless the dead should rise again, neither have the dead
any fruit of Baptism abiding them, to wit in respect of their bodies, and so
shall be disappointed of that which they looked for by faith; neither have the
living any reason, at least in respect of the body, why it should be continued
amongst them. And this may the doubling of the Question by the Apostle import.
Else what shall they do, that are baptized, [ viz. such as are already dead]
and again, why are they [namely the living being alive] yet Baptized. Saint
Ambrose understands this place of a Sacramental washing, applied unto some
living man, in the name and behalf of his friend dying without Baptism, out
of a superstitious conceit, that the Sacrament thus conferred to one alive in
the name of the deceased, might be available for the other dying unbaptized;
As if the Apostle did here wound the superstitious Corinthians with their own
quils, and prove the Resurrection of the dead, from their own erroneous
practice, telling them in effect, that their usual, (but misgrounded) and
superstitious custom of baptizing the living were in vain, if there were no
Resurrection.

Thus have I briefly set before your eyes, what curious threads have been
drawn by expert workmen from this woofe of Scripture. Other Truth men herein
have labored, and we have entered into their labors.

I have here, I confess, presented a Caena dubia, let each man please his own
pallat; If any shall demand my sentence, (Etiam and culices circumvolent cum
apibus) I do herein subscribe to the interpretation given by du Moulin, which
(with submissio^ of my Judgment) I take to be proper and genuine; Nor do I
obtrude this explication on my Reader as Magisteriall, but leave him if this
sense satisfy not, to his father disquisition.

The sense of these words (says he) must be taken of the Apostles intent. His
intent was to prove the Resurrection, hitherto he implies Baptism, which in
those days was celebrated, (as may appear in the monuments of Ecclesiastical
History) by dipping and as it were diving, Magdeburg. cant. 14. cap. 16. col.
234.
by plonging the whole body in water, in token that we are in death. And the
coming forth of the water, represents the Resurrection. S. Paul's meaning is,
that this sign were in vain if there were no Resurrection, and that in vain
we are baptized for dead, or as dead, and to represent unto us, that we be in
death if there be no hope of the Resurrection.

And in this sense may we understand the Greek [(...)] to be used by the
Apostle, as the Latin [Pro] is used in this and the like phrase, [habere pro
derelicto] for he which is baptized should be baptized for dead, i. e. as one
in a manner dead, even to dye more and more unto sin, but to love more and
more to God: because baptism is a token of regeneration, the pawn and Image
of our Resurrection, as Saint Ambrose styles it, Et per regenerationem corpora
nostra Resurrectioni gloriae inaugurantur. Therefore says the Apostle; are we
buried with Christ in Baptism, Romans 6.4.
i. e. (as Ignatius expounds the phrase aright) believing in his death, we are
by baptism made partakers of his resurrection.

And thus having endeavored to clear this obscure text of the Apostle, I
join issue again with my former Meditations, and will show that.

CHAP. 8. The same bodies which we now have, shall be restored unto us in the
same substance; They shall be Immortal, Honorable, Glorious, Spiritual,
Impassionate.
THe end of our MEDITATIONS shall be the meditation of our end, the
contemplation of another life is the Star which guides us from the East to the
West, from our Orient to our Occident, and brings us at length to the place
where our Savior is. We know that in every man there is (...), a natural
querulousnes against death, but this is silenced with the remembrance of our
Resurrection, by which we learn, that death is better than life, because a
passage to a better life. Here we grow up to a full vigor, and then we
decrease till we decease: but when we shall ascend above the wheel of time,
where nothing but eternity dwells, we shall have such an issue from death,
as shall never pass into another death; there at first we come to perfect
stature, and so continue for ever, that life shall last as long as the Lord of
life himself.

But why do I attempt an Eagles flight with the wing of a wren? why do I
seek to express that which cannot be expressed? I will not go beyond my
line, for a diapason and rest to our song, for a pawse, a period, an Amen. I
will a little descant on that which I find set down by the Apostle through the
sacred Scripture, but principally in that excellent Chapter, which we may call
the Spring garden of our Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.


As the Princely Prophet David when he sweetly warbled on the glorious
Attributes of God, has for the Amaebaeum and burden to his song, For, his
mercy endures for ever; so that divine and Extaticall Doctor of the Gentiles
(as if he had been the Apostle of the Resurrection) makes this comfortable
Doctrine, the matter of most of his Epistles, upon this stock does he seem to
plant the whole body of Christianity.

At the general Resurection 1 These. 4.16.
the dead in Christ shall rise first, the observation is, that the sentence of
Absolution shall be pronounced before the sentence of Condemnation, a venite
come unmee, before an Ite, depart from me God is loath to let his fury be
predominant; Then (says S. Paul) shall we who live and remain be caught up
with them also in the clouds; the word in the Original is passive, (...), we
shall be ravished, so our rising and upgoing shall not be by our own power,
but the power of God.

Again; This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal, must put
on immortallity; not a corruptible or mortal at large, but hoc, this
corruptible, this mortal. The blind men which our Savior cured, received no
new made eyes, but only sight to the eyes they had before; The widows son,
and Lazarus, rose in the same bodies in which they died. He that was seen in
the flesh, shall be seen of the flesh, yea of this selfsame flesh, videbo
mihi: Not the substance or lineaments of our bodies shall be changed, but the
qualities. When the Apostle says, he shall raise up our mortal bodies, he
so calls them in respect of that which they are now, not in respect of that
they shall be then: For in the Resurrection (as he testifies that had a
prelibation of that glory) they shall be raised.

1. Immortal, not subject to any more disease or death, we shall not stand in
need of these ordinary helps of meats and drinks, by which our nature is
preserved, Christus transiens ministrabit nobis, and it shall be our meat and
drink to do our Fathers will.

2. Glorious; The Just shall shine like the Sun in the firmament, Et qualis
tunc erit splendour animarum, quando solis habebit claritatem lux corporum? And
to confirm the verity and solidity of this glory, it shall not only be
revealed unto us, but (says the Apostle) (...), in nobis, in us, Jerusalem as
the Kings daughter is all glorious within.

3. Honorable; Every defective member shall be restored to its integrity
Jacob shall not hault, Isaac be blind, nor Leah bleere-eyed, nor Mephihosheth
be lame; Hoc est credere, Resurrectionem integram credere.

4. Spiritual; I mean a body so spiritual, not that it shall loose the
dimensions of a body, and pierce through any natural body, as the light
pierces through the glass, as the Papists say of the Body of Christ after his
Resurrection by a penetration of dimensions; but because without contradiction
they shall obey the motions of the Spirit besides the glorified state and
condition it then be in.

5. Impassionate; Free from such passions as may hurt, and offend, but not from
the passion of Joy, the joy of the soul shall be the soul of Joy.

Other particulars I cease to enquire, because God does forbear to deliver
them, and in the silence of the Holy Ghost I will not be curious. I will not
wind my self into a laborynth, where the happiest wit may lose it self. If
the Disciple that leaned on our Saviors breast, (his Legatus a latere, qui
esinu Domini biberat mysteria, Apoc. 2.17.
from out of the bosom of his Master drank deep of the heavenly wisdom)
brake off his Revelation with a Nemo scit, needs must I take up here a (...),
Quis ad haec idoneus; needs must I leave my Reader with a Theologia negativa, a
negative Divinity, or divine ignorance, and tell what is not in heaven.

The plumage of the Cystrian Swanne appears more white when it is opposed to
the Ravens blackness, and we may better conjecture at the joies above, if we
consider the miseries on earth.

In this world are a world of troubles; non habet is hic requie, says the
Prophet; Rest and Glory, Glory and rest, are two things that meet not here;
the glorious life is not the most quiet, and the quiet life is for the most
part inglorious.

Sublunary transitory
Are as bars in the arms of Glory.
Riches and Honor like Absalons Mule do sometime leave their Master in
extremity.

A consideration, which if well digested, would gather our divided thoughts, and
rouse up our souls, quae sursum quaerere, quae sursum sapere, to seek first
the Kingdom of Heaven, and then we know caetera adijcientur, and indeed when
heaven is once named all worldly things are but, etc. not worthy mentioning.

It is observed by those that are skild in the holy tongue, Deus est centrum
quietativum.
that in the sacred name Jehovah, are none but litterae-quiescentes, mystically
implying thus much unto us, that God is the God of rest, in whose presence (as
the Prophet sings) there is joy, Psalm. 16.11
and fulness of joy, and fullness of it for evermore.

When once we shall be planted in that caelestiall paradise, there shall no
apple of contention grow between God and us. It is Nazianzens note upon that
divine Anthemne of three parts (which Saint Luke the Evangelist and Psalmist of
the new Testament, Luke 2.14.
records) Pugnas and dissidia nescire Deum and Angelos, no broiles, no brables
in Heaven.

There shall the soul be satisfied in all her desires, there shall be no
Actual or Potentiall evil; no Actual, because grace being consummate in the
Saints excludes al sin; No Potentiall, for they being confirmed in goodness
cannot sin. There shall be no sorrow, nor tears which are the effects of
sorrow, those rivers of our eyes shall be dried up; There shall be no more
death, for Resurrectio eri^ mors mortis; At that Iubile of glory victus vincet,
the Conqueror shall be disarmed, and we whom death has overcome, shall
overcome death.

And now having sung deaths Epitaph, and sounded the victory, I retreit, This
(...), shall be my conclusion; were my Ink nectar, or my pen taken from the
wing of an Angel, I could not set forth to the life the joys of the life
immortal.

This casts me into an extasis, and makes me imagine some great matter I
cannot well express, what! Silence shall be my Eloquence; what I comprehend I
will admire, and what I comprehend not I will more admire.

A Peroration to the Reader.
THus have I walked about Sion, and viewed the bulwarks thereof: I have showed
the strength and munition of this Fort of Faith. In a plain and short way (nec
breuius potui nec apertius) I have meditated somewhat one this sweet and
comfortable Article of our Creed.

Expect more generous wine from old vine-trees; for resolutions of sacred
riddles and deep mysteries of religion, consult with such, whose very trade is
Divinity, with those cunning Bezaliels, which are continually digging in the
precious gemmes of the holy Scripture.

And now having cast my Mite into the public treasury, having made my thoughts
legible, and sent them, in dias luminis a^ras, This little Manual (habent sua
fata libelli) must either stand or fall, at the uncerteinty of my Readers
Judgment.

I do not embosome such a Mountebanoke opinion, as to set the garland on my
own work, I dare not arrogate to my self Arachnes motto (mihi soli debeo)
and boast that I have spun this thread out of mine own bowels, No I will
freely confess (it were mere ingratitude should I not acknowledge it) Nihil
egi sine Theseis, where I liked the water of other men's wells I have drunk
deep.

I will therefore (with Lyranensis) rejoice in this, that I deliver what I have
learned, not what I invented, I have feld much wood out of other men's groves
wherewith to build, but (as one spoke in the like case) I have so hewed it, and
squared it, and polished it with my own phrase and my own method, that the
Authors, though good Enditers, can hardly bring in evidence of theft against me.

If this Enchiridion, or my vade Mecum, shall meet with a fair and candid
interpretation from the Ingenuous, the file may perchance be drawn over it
again; Not that I hunt after the fume of vain glory (what but an Herodian
ear will sucke-in such breath) but because our second thoughts are commonly
more refined, and meditation like the wind gathers strength in proceeding.

W. H.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 28. the quotation in marg. juxta finem has reference to Damascen in page
29. p. 62 l. 8 for superst. read supposition^. 70. l. 4. for not only. r.
both. 77. l. 6. r. work is effected. 80. l. 4. r. his p^erog. 82. l. 15 r.
made man. 89. l. 8. r. life only. 96 l. 13. for fidem. r. spem. 99. l. 6. r.
they that. 121. l. 10. r. hear him repeat. l. 17. lest it. 133. l. 13. of
nature. 144. l. 11 r. added on 145. l 12. for Souls. r. Bones. 167. l. 3. for
love. r. live. 189. l. 6. for. gemmes. r. mines.


