TWO BOOKS OF EPIGRAMMES, AND EPITAPHS. Dedicated to two top-branches Of
GENTRY. Sir Charles Shirley, Baronet, AND William Davenport, Esquire.

WRITTEN By THOMAS BANCROFT.

LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks, for Matthew Walbancke, and are to be sold at his
shop in Grayes-Inne-gate 1639.

The First Book of Epigrammes.
To Sir CHARLES SHIRLEY, Baronet.
THis verse, (whose Author was so near you bred)
Seems to run straight to you for Patronage,
As to a brave Bud, that has promised
The fruit of Honor in maturer age:
Daigne then these leaves to sweeten with your Springs
Fair growth, and listen whilst a Blackbird sings.
2. To the Reader.
Reader, till Martial thou have well surveyed,
Or Owens Wit with Ionsons Learning weighed,
Forbear with thankelesse censure to accuse
My Writ of error, or condemn my Muse.
3. To the same.
Though Epigrammes be but a curter kind
Of Satyrs, striking on as sharp a string,
To Dysticks or Tetrasticks do not bind
My freeborn Muse, for youth would have his swing,
4. To his Book.
Dear issue, some thy Name that viewed,
Did from rash premises conclude,
That, through suffusion of thy gall,
Thy parts would prove Ictericall,
And that (wrapped up in sheets unclean)
With scurrile Rymes and jests obsceane,
Thou would profane a good man's ear:
But (as thou art to Virtue dear)
Such lewd licentious tricks defy,
And cheat such Censures honestly.
5. On the Spheres.
What are those ever-turning heavenly Spheres,
But Wheels, (that from our Cradles to our Urnes)
Wind up our threads of Life, that hourly wears?
And they that soonest dye, have happiest turns.
6. On several Countries.
In several figures several Regions are,
Cast and described, some round, some angular:
So Irelands form is Ovall, Britain takes
The threatening semblance of a sharpened Axe,
(Wherewith large France seems hewne into a square)
And to an Oxes hyde we Spain compare:
But Nature well, brave Italy does show
Like a swift Leg, that far with Fame does go.
7. On cracking of Nuts.
Much cracking hurts the Teeth, but to the Tongue
The bragging humor does a deeper wrong.
8. On Thomas Randall.
Who knew not this brave spark of (...) whose
Both Life and Learning might detraction pose,
Save only that he drank too greedily
Of The Muses Spring, and left the Sisters dry,
Who (smiling therefore gave the (...) command
His Body to couvert to pearly sand,
And strew it in their Fountain, there (...)
Like his clear thoughts, and make their draughts divine.
9. To a Glazier, shrewdly married.
Of Gla^ and Lead, woman, and weighty care
^ou have enough, (and some perhaps to spare)
(...) break thou will, nor can thy brittle Trade
(...) hold, now quarrels are so rashly made,
10. Of the Earth.
(...) ^at make Earth a living Monster, (whose
Breath moves the Ocean when it ebbes and flows,
Whose warts are rugged Hills, whose wrinkles, vales,
Whose Ribbs are Rocks, and Bowels, Mineralls)
What will they have so vast a Creature eat,
Since Sea too salt, and Aire's too windy meat?
11. A drunken brabler.
Who only in his Cups will fight, is like
A Clock that must be oiled well, ere it strike.
12. An Epitaph on his Father and Mother, buried near together in Swarston
Church.
Here lies a pair of peerless friends,
Whose goodness like a precious Chain)
Adorned their souls in lives and ends;
Whom when detractions self would stain,
She drops her tears in stead of gall,
And helps to mourn their Funeral.
13. To Iame Shirley.
James, thou and I did spend some precious years*
At Katherine-Hall; since when we sometimes feel
In our Poetic brains (as plain appears)
A whirling trick, then caught from Katherines wheel.
14. The Usurer.
He puts forth money as the Hangman sowes
His fatal Hempe-seed, that with curses grows:
So grows his damned wealth, in the Devils name,
That does in Hell the Harvest-home proclaim:
For which deep reason my poor Muse preserves
This suite, that Poets never prove Usurers.
15. An Epitaph on Mistress Anne Knyveton.
Here hidden lies dear Treasure under ground,
Blessed Innocence, with budding Virtue crowned,
That, like a Taper on some Altar fired,
Shone fairly forth, and sweetly so expired,
Expecting here in darkesome shade of night,
A rising Sun, that brings eternal light.
16. Another on the same.
Gentle Friends, with tears forbear
To drown a withered Flower here,
That, in Spring of Natures pride,
Drank the Morning dew, and died.
Death may teach you here to live,
And a friendly call does give
To this humble house of mine,
Here Is his Inn, and this the Sign.
17. To Thomas Pegge Gentleman.
Me thinks I may to Sugar and to Wine
Our loves compare, which kind discourses mixed:
Since when, that heart that totally was mine,
Has in your bosoms Paradise been fixed.
What wonder then my Friendships force does last
Firm to your goodness? you have pegg'd it fast.
18. To an Eunuch.
Thou still art wrestling, yet the fall do get,
As Ships that want their Ballast, over-set.
19. Against Drunkenness.
Of all soule-sicknesses that Mortals have,
This falls the heaviest, quenching many a brave
Young spark, yet kindling Lusts unhallowed fire.
Sweet friends, that to the two-topt Mount aspire
Of noble Art and Honor, to the ditch
Of base ^ontempt tumble this loathed Witch,
That worse than Circe) with a cup does sack
The Fort of Reason, and sound senses crack.
For who (not frantic) would diseases buy
At a lame rate, or thirst for poverty?
20. An Epitaph on Master Henry Hopkinson.
Lo, of old Natures true faith-fastned hearts
Lies here a Picture, which with loveliest parts
Heavens hand did garnish, and exactly draw
With the quaint lines of Virtue, Art, and Law:
But lest too long it should to view be set,
Laid up his work, and this the Cabinet.
21. To Ben. Ionson.
As Martials Muse by Caesar's ripening rays
Was sometimes cherisht, so thy happier days
Joyed in the Sunshine of thy Royal JAMES,
Whose Crown shed luster on thine Epigrammes:
But I, remote from favors fostering heat,
Over snowy Hills my Muses passage beat,
Where weeping Rocks my harder Fates lament,
And shuddering Woods whisper my discontent.
What wonder then my numbers, that have rolled
Like streams of Tygris, run so slow and cold?
22. To the same.
Let Ignorance with Envy chat,
Inspight of both, thou Fame do win,
Whose mess of Learning seems like that,
Which Joseph gave to Benjamin.
23. To Oliver Cookerill.
Thou once did wrong me, but I all forgive,
And wish thou may in less vexation live,
Than when thou did of bootlesse love complain,
Whose heat in tears of dripping spent thy brain;
When, with a sunk cheek and a sobbing heart,
In roaring Rhyme thou did discharge thy smart,
And like a leaden Serring lay'st alone,
Ready to squirt out life at every groan.
Yet, when thou could not thy dear Doll obtain,
Did with reproach her Maiden same distaine:
This was not fair; but do no more amiss,
And Cupid with both eyes will wink at this.
24. To Caspar the Foote-man.
Caspar went nimbly once, but now does tread
Scarce thick enough; he is lately married.
25. To Godfrey Froggat.
Cuz, thou and I (though no man knew the same)
By our mere likeness should our Kindred claim:
Both Learning-lovers, faithfull-hearted, kind.
Of lowly stature, yet of lofty mind:
Only quaint Fortune, that with thee does stay
Plays the blind Jade with me, and wheels away.
26. On humane bodies.
Our Bodies are like Shoes, which off we east,
Physic their Cobbler is, and Death the Last.
27. An Epitaph on George Siddon of the Bull-head in Bosworth.
Death, the great Gamester, that at fairest throws,
And surely strikes a Dye, to Tables goes
With sightlesse Fortune for our Siddons life:
But (better to prevent a future strife)
Out of her Trumpet Fame the Dice must cast,
And play for Chance: so to their sport they haste,
(As even Life and Death were at the stake)
Straight Fortune blots, and Death the man does take,
Which the blind Goddess, seconded by Fame,
Did here interre, and won the after-game.
28. To Thomas May of Sutton-Cheney, Gentleman.
Sweet Tom, that (like that Minion Earine,
Whose Beauty great Domitian held divine)
Do in thy name the youth and pleasure bear,
Beauty and loveliness of all the year;
Yet in thy gall-lesse temper do imply
More sweetness, than that Name does signify:
My true heart loves thee, (what can more be said?)
Were I but Jove, thou were my Ganymed.
29. On Maltworme.
This son of Riot spent on Ale and Beer,
And Indian fume, two Thousand pounds a year:
Yet naught for all his Angels has to show,
Except a great Nose of a glorious hew,
Worth all his body; for that is but mould,
But his tryumphant Nose scorns beaten gold.
30. To Sampson Baker.
Sampson, whose strength not in thy Hair,
But in thy firmer Braine-pan lies,
I friendly warn thee to beware
Of reason-blinding vanities.
By the implored help divine
Of wild affects the Lion slay.
Account strong Beer a Philistine,
And the Indian Witch a Dalilah.
31. To Thomas Dixie, Gentleman.
Thy stature is (like mine) but low,
Yet as the Giants once did throw
Huge Hills on Hills, so have thou laid
Vast Law on Arts, and thereby made
A passage to Fames house on high,
Like that to Jove's, the Galaxy.
32. To Amorer.
How manlesse is thy dotage, to adore
That gilded rottenness, that poisoned core
Of swelling prides Aposteme! Must therefore
Thou be a sheep, 'cause she is a Goatish Whore?
To Sir JOHN HARPVR.
YOu once my lusty Lines did like,
(And I as well did like your Gold)
My measure-keeping Muse does strike
On the same string; whose hopes are bold
That you will daigne an ear to it,
Since Hermes (to adorn your mind)
Has yielded you his pleasant Wit,
And Phoebus has his Harp resigned.
34. To the same.
You have a Genius pleased with Verse, (I hear)
That smoothly passes through your cleansed ear,
As water of Pactolus, where no stay,
Nor downe-fall interrupts his golden way:
For such your merits I your praise shall sing,
Whilst you still harp on so divine a string.
35. To William Bottom.
Who would Penelope's day-worke unwind,
Thy Name (wrapped up in Huswifery) might find.
36. A trick for your Learning.
Two Scholars in Thames-streete were drinking hard,
And late; to whom a Constable repaired,
And tax't them for it: Invited yet to drink,
He turned up Glasses, till both nod and wink
At greatest faults he would; when sleep at last
Did bridle up his brutish senses fast.
Mean while the waggish Mercuries conspire
To Abuse himand two Watermen they hire
To take him napping, and transport him thence
The Way of all Fish: who never recovered sense,
Nor from his dead sleep found himself alive,
Till both his Charons at Gravesend arrive.
To all harsh Magistrates a warning fair,
That they of too much Wine and Wit beware.
37. To Tom Dizzy.
Thou have some do w-bak'd Learning I confess,
But leavened so with pride, and peevishness,
That all distaste it: Mix thy humors then
With courteous sweetness, most adorning men,
And throw proud fancies down; so may thou rise
At Fortunes next rebound, and stand for wise.
38. To a Red-ey'd Conjurer.
Thine Eyes, like fireballs, show how hot thou art
In love with Hell, whose Lion rules thy heart.
39. To Sir Andrew Knyveton, in his Travail.
IF wishes, fastened to the wings of Love,
May over-take you, and auspicious, prove,
I wish you power (in a solid soul
And a sound body) Fortune to control;
I wish you ten-fold wisdom may obtain
To his, that ten years wandered on the Maine;
I wish this Travail may bring forth your fame,
I wish you best and happiest of your name,
I wish all graces on your heart distilled,
And lastly wish these wishes all fulfilled.
40. To the same at his Return.
Welcome to us, as is the Morning lay
Of the raised Lark, (glad Ushex of the Day)
To wearied Watchmen: for our duller hearts
Scarce leapt from sorrow since you left our parts:
But when their livelyer palpitation told
Your near approach, scarce could our heart strings hold
Our gladness. This Vlyssean course of yours
Us of your worthier qualities assures,
Whose Knowledge is (no doubt) by travail so
Improved, that still you will beyond us go.
41. An Epitaph on Mistress Gray, Grandmother to Sir Andrew Kniveton.
LO here dear Relics of the richest frame
Of Beauty, by whose fall the Paschall Lamb
(Her honored Crest) a golden Fleece has lost,
Kept here by Death, till with a glorious Host,
Not Jason, but our blessed Jesus come,
Sailing on clouds, to fetch this Treasure home.
42. On Gentry.
I saw once (on a Hill in Wales)
The Old Herald Time with dusty Scales
Weighing of Gentry, and close by
Stood the blind Goddess secretly.
Those that were brainelesse, light, and vain,
Did mount aloft; and those again
That had their weight of worth, did fall
Low as this earthly Pedestall:
And still as Fortune pleased, she made
The Balance move, and laughed, and played
Her wanton prankes (too seriously)
Ah ha, are these your tricks? thought I;
Then is the cause by Fortune found,
Why Gallants floate, and Wits are drowned.
43. Gluttons and Lechers.
Gluttons are heavy hulkes, that scarce can steer;
But Lechers are light Friggots, here and there.
44. The Life of Man.
Man's life is but a cheating game
At Cards, and Fortune plays the same,
Packing a Queen up with a Knave,
Whilst all would win, yet none do save,
But loose themselves: for Death is it,
That lastly cuts, and makes his hit.
45. To Master Farnaby.
Since by the labor of thy smoothing hand
We think we do rough Persius understand,
The Criticke-vext Petronius, Iuvenal,
The full-mouthed Maro, witty Martial.
The Tragedies of high-strain'd Seneca,
The noble Lucans brave Pharsalia,
With the wise Morals of the Stagyrite,
And Epigrammes which Grecian Muses write:
We never shall recompense thy pain; but Fame
Will crack her Trumpet for it, and sound thy Name.
46. To old Sir John Harpur of Swarston, deceased.
AS did cold Hebrus with deep groans
The Thracian Harper once lament,
So art thou with incessant mones
Bewailed by thy doleful Trent,
While the astonished Bridge does show
(Like an Arch-mourner) heaviest woe.
47. On Martial Boggard.
Boggard, the Soldier, chancing in the Street
With a weake-witted Citizen to meet,
That would admire his bragges, began of Wars
To thunder dreadfully, and boast his skarres,
Filling his mouth with names of men at Arms,
With Musters, Marches, Stratagems, Alarmes,
With Sallies, Camisadoes, Batteries,
Slashing and slaughtering of his Enemies;
Which he so lively acts, as he had been
At deadly blows; when straight a Sergeant seen,
Makes him blow for it indeed, and's cloak let fly,
Who thus both Ensign lost, and victory.
48. To Master Pestell of Packinton.
Lo here her labors does my Muse commend
To you, her Phoebus, and her choicest friend;
Whose knowledge, brightned with a beam divine,
Does through the frowning clouds of envy shine,
Making its splendor (like that desert flame)
A guide to bliss, a column to your fame.
49. An Epitaph on Mistress Anne Roberts of Naylston.
Stay, Passenger, and see thy journies end,
Take sorrow in thy way, and kindly spend
One pearly tear, t'inrich this Monument,
Which a sole Son to a dear Mother lent:
Whose life (her Countries loss) did still abound
With fruits of grace, to be with glory crowned;
And (as these White Characters in black Marble.
Letters, which her worth contain)
Was fairly white, without black vices stain:
But life's best treasure wastfull time will spend;
Go, passenger, thou see thy journies end.
50. To Dabbler.
Thy Muses looser Robes with many a trick
Are jagg'd, pink't, stuck with Flowers of Rhetoric,
That smell all Poesy; yet please they none.
How happens that? they are out of fashion.
61. Ingrossers.
How do you shave the City against the hair!
And even would intercept the common Air,
Were It in your power! yet you leave us breath,
To fly in ourses after you to death.
But since you put us to such public loss,
Take all our faults too, and be knaves in gross.
62. An Epitaph on Alexander Hill.
An Alexander, and a Hill
(Two lofty things) did envious Death
At once dismount, and thus does kill
Our hearts too by his loss of breath,
Whose thoughts with Virtue did advise,
And honored truth, yet here he lies.
63. To a Detractour.
Thou still art darting (like a Porcupine)
Thy quils against me, faulting every line
That my hand draws, and with the frost-like power
Of thy benumbed verse would nip the flower
Of thy sweet Poesy. I wish thee show
More favor to thy self, than thus to blow
Sparks in thine eyes. Art thou not (slave) afeard
To pluck a couchant Lion by the beard,
That roused will rend thee? thou but shoot'st in vain
Thy bolts of folly, that rebound again
From my unpierced Muse, whose lofty rhyme
Shall (Diall-like) stand in the face of time,
And look it down, when thou and thine shall lie
Damned up with Dust in blind Obscurity.
On Twitchup, the Usurer.
At once his money and his judgments eye
This wretch puts forth, lest Hell should terrify.
64. An Epitaph on William Holorenshaw, the Mathematician.
Lo, in small closure of this earthly bed
Rests he, that Heavens vast motions measured:
Who, having known both of the Land and Sky
More than famed Archimed or Ptolomy,
Would further press, and like a Palmer went
With His Jacobs Staff beyond the Firmament.
56. To Briskape the Gallant.
Though thou have little judgment in thy head,
More than to dress thee, drink, and go to bed,
Yet may thou take the wall, and the way shall lead,
Since Logic wills that simple things precede.
57. On a French Knight, and Mistress Wolsley
A wanton Knight, borne, wed, and cursed in France,
Came to our English Court, and there by chance
Wooes, and re-weds a fair and virtuous Maid:
Which wrong of love being by time bewrayed,
He (lest his Weddings Destiny should turn
To Hanging) leaves his second choice to mourn:
Who Wife, nor Widow, Maid nor Whore does prove.
What is she then? a Quintessence in love.
58. To the Slanderer, Stinks.
Could I but work a Transformation strange
On thee, whose malice pricks and rankles so,
I would thy Carrion to a Thistle change,
Which Asses bait upon, and Rusticks mow.
59. To Sir Gilbert Knyveton. ANAGRAMME. Turn to be Kingly.
HE that can rule his little I Will of Man,
(Girt with a waving Maine of misery,
And his affects to laws of Reason can
Rightly submit, may claim a Monarchy;
And by such Empire may more honor gain
Than he that serves his Gold, yet Masters Spain.
60. To a Musician, on his hurt finger.
Thy Lute, that late seemed in a desperate case,
(Like a torn vagrant without Hat or Band)
May hope to have its Treble match the Base,
Since thy hurt finger's on the mending hand.
61. An Epitaph on Captain Knyveton.
HEre lies a Traveller, (that least would lie)
One that in Belgia, France, and Tuscany,
With other Regions of remoter site,
In a progressive warfare took delight;
But being now with Peace more highly blessed,
Has laid his Musket by, and here is his Rest.
62. The brevity of Man's life.
Who would regard this brunt of life? which is
In times long tract a short parenthesis,
Drawn with bent lines upon (this earthly stage)
Of creeping infancy and crooked age.
63. To Mistress Dorothy Harpur, (now the Lady Fitzherbert.) ANAGRAMME. Pure
Heart I hoord.
LEt stupid worldlings stuff their chests with gold;
Their glittering pelf does no proportion hold
With the Souls beauties, nor so safe does lie
As thy rich worth, whose brest's a treasury.
64. To Mr. William Roberts watch-maker.
Kind friend, that, in this iron age unkind,
Do work thy Fortunes out of Brass, and find
That mettle softer than the hearts of friends:
Be rich in patience, till a fair amends
Fortune shall make, who downright cannot wound
One that a headpiece bears so strong and sound.
76. An Epitaph on the King of Sweden.
HEre lies a sparkling Iem of honor, quenched
In dear effused blood, and sadly drencht
In a salt Ocean of inundant tears:
Yet lofty Fame (in clouds triumphing) bears
His name: that in more heavenly Poems like
Phoebus shall shine, and Austria Planet-strike.
76. To William Iernegan, Gent. Anagramme. I value my Learning;
Well may thou value at the highest price
That plant, that makes thy brain a Paradise:
To whose rare excellent the Iems most bright
But cloudy are, and sollid gold too light.
77. To Captain Roberts.
Captain, that Conquered have my heart
By force of Love, and truly art
To truth and innocence an aid:
Nor art (as others) basely swayed
By gifts or favors of the great,
In a bad cause to swear and sweat:
While such as I (whose hearts do hold
Clear truth, not troubled much with gold)
Of villains wrongs might often complain,
Yet tune our wind-pipes still in vain:
My strongest verse shall guard your name,
And Bulwark it' against bold defame,
Whilst you against the wrack of time,
Shall stand as Genius to my Rhyme.
78. To Trent.
Sweet River, on whose flowery Margin laid,
I with the slippery Fish have often played
At fast and loose: when ere th'enamour'd air
Shall in soft sighs mine ecchoed accents bear,
Gently permit the smoother verse to slide
On thy sleeke bosom, and in triumph ride
Unto the Main: where when it sounds along,
Let Tritons dance, and Sirens learn my song.
79. To Swarston.
Swarston, when I behold thy pleasant sight,
Whose River runs a progress of Delight,
Joyed with the beauties of fresh flowery plains,
And bounteous fields, that crown the Plow-mans pains:
I sigh (that see my native home estranged)
For Heaven, whose Lord and tenure's never changed.
80. On Pillard with his Periwig.
Pillard, thy Head seems in a monstrous case,
That wears a French crown with an English face.
81. To Grace-dieu.
Grace-dieu, that under Charnwood stand'st alone,
As a grand Relicke of Religion,
I reverence thine old (but fruitful) worth,
That lately brought such noble Beaumonts forth,
Whose brave Heroic Muses might aspire,
To match the Anthems of the Heavenly Quire.
The mountains crowned with rockey fortresses,
And sheltering woods, secure thy happiness,
That highly favored art (though lowly placed)
Of Heaven, and with free natures bounty graced,
Herein grow happier, and that bliss of thine,
Nor Pride ore-top, nor Envy undermine.
82. On a cursed wife.
What painful sorrows wretched man consume!
That burned with Fevers is, or drowned with Rhume.
Rackt with Convulsions, wrung with Stranguries,
Fe^ter'd with Gouts, or goar'd with Plurisies.
If all such mischiefs throw not down his life
To Hell-ward, damn him to a scolding wife.
83. On Poets.
These Darlings of free Nature want no vigor
Of brain, and therefore to grow rich are liker
Than weaker heads, and might be blessed with Angels,
(For which the Soldier fights, and Lawyer wrangles)
Did not their lofty Fancies 'bove the Welkin
Still soar, whilst others are for Treasures delving.
But fie, my verse is foundr'd, all this time
I dreamed on riches, I but raved in time.
84. Our Grandames infirmities.
Earth had her dropsy in the all-drowning Flood,
And now expects her burning Fever near:
Her Plurisies effusions are of blood
By wars: her Agues, tremblings of her Sphere:
Which whether yet it prove vertiginous
With round rotations, ask Copernicus,
85. Of War.
War's like a cursed wife, whence a man may cull
Some fruits of goodness, (though of mischief full:)
For those land-surfeits wanton peace does breed,
War by incision cures, when Kingdoms bleed.
86. On Scheltco, the Astrologer.
Scheltco, that saw the heavenly Squadrons ranged
In a strange fashion, and their postures changed,
Pretended by those starry lights to see
That the Worlds end in Eighty Eight should be:
And so too thought the Spaniards, (as appears)
That took their leave of it with brinish tears.
87. To John Fretchvile Esquire.
A Good man's Center is his Countries love,
Whither your weighty worth does swiftly move
After your fathers, whom to honor, bright
Phoebus did friendly aim, and hit the Sir Peter Fretchvile was honored by
the name of the White Knight.
white.
88. The New World.
Some in the Moon another World have found,
Whose brighter parts are Seas, the darker, Ground:
Which were it true, we should have Moone-calves tossed
From those sharp whirling Horns to every Coast:
And a wild World it were, and full of tricks,
Where all Inhabitants were Lunaticks.
89. On Sir Philip Sidney.
Idols I hate, yet would to Sidneys wit
Offer Castalian healths, and kneel to it.
90. To Charnwood.
Charnwood, if all thy Stones were turned to Bread,
(As once the Fiend did such a motion make)
It would be more than Zerxes fed,
Or Tenariffe and Aetna both could bake;
And hungry Churles (that rail at Soldiers)
Would rend up Rock-bread, and turn Pioners.
91. On a Woman.
When Man lay dead-like, Woman took her life
From a crook't Emblem of her Nuptial strife;
And hence (as bones would be at rest) her ease,
She loves so well, and is so hard to please.
92. On the same.
Woman was once a Ribbe, (as Truth has said)
Else, since her tongue runs wide from every point,
I should have dreamed her substance had been made
Of Adams whirle-bone, when it was out o'th'joynt.
93. On the motion of the Stars.
Artists affirm that from the burning Line
Some Stars of Aries Northward now decline,
And the slow-paced Cynosure appears
Nearer the fixed Pole, than in former years:
No marvel then blind Mortals walk astray,
When Heavens clear eyes have lost their wonted way.
94. On Gluttony and Lechery.
These fleshly Factors for the Devil deal,
The one in gross, the other by retaile.
97. To the Honorable Esquire, JOHN MANNOVRS of HADDON.
YOur Honored ancestour was styled King
Of the high Peake, for royal Housekeeping:
And well your self approves your noble strain
Of Kindred, by that bounty you maintain:
Whose rareness in this iron age bewrayes
A golden Mind, and precious makes your praise.
98. To our Queen MARIE.
HOw are You compast with a Ruby-chayne
Of hearts, dear Queen! that with an endless reign
Of joy unto You: whose sweet name to all
Sounds mirth, and seems a heavenly Uirginall.
99. To Vicar Blunder.
Those iron Lungs of thine, and throat of brass,
(To whose cracked bore loud Stentors windpipe was
But a small Reed) cannot with vengeance sack
Our garnisht walls, or painted windows crack.
Whereat thou weep'st, as if the fervent pain
Of zealous grief did melt thy Leaden brain:
Yet (as a puddle soon congeales to Ice)
Thou straight art hardened to thy quaffing vice.
Thus deep mouthed Thumper, after fruitless pain
In hunting Counter, falls to's lap again.
100. On John the Warrener, fallen in love with Ioane the Net-worker.
T'Intrap poor creatures he accounts no sin,
But is himself now taken with a Gin.
101. To the Lord Uerulam.
Had I a tongue of all Friar Bacons brass,
Which should (they say) have wal'd this Island round,
I scarcely could how deep thy knowledge was,
With all the strength of such an Organ sound
Fame cannot do it, her trumpet it would split:
Why then should words blow wind on such a wit?
105. To Nathaniel Carpenter, on his Geography.
So well I like the structure of thy Sphere,
(Whereon thou seem an obeliske to rear
To thy fames wonder,) that my Muse preferres
Thy skill before the Ephesian Cherisiphons Architect of Dianaes Temple.
Carpenters.
106. To a Tell-tale.
Thy glowing ears, to hot contention bent,
Are not unlike red Herings, broyl'd in Lent.
107. To Baull, the Crier.
In thy rude Parish (as thou do profess)
You Are like the Baptist in the wilderness:
Yet ere for conscience off thy head should go,
Thou would not cry Oyes, but roar out No.
108. To our King CHARLES.
YOur royal Father our right Atlas was,
And you as high this happy Realm sustain,
Whose wisdoms glory (as a gemmy glass
For noblest Kings) out-shines the Arctick waine.
So, though bright Jupiter were set, the skies
Could lack no luster, when the Sun did rise.
109. On deaf Joan, the Ale-wife.
She prates to others, yet can nothing hear,
Just like a sounding Judge, that wants an ear.
110. Copernicus his opinion.
Copernicus did think those Orbs above,
Stood as Spectators, while the earth did move:
Nor did he far from ground of reason stray,
Since earth takes pains, and Heaven keeps holy day.
111. To our Prince CHARLES.
RIch sum of all our hopes on Earth,
Great Heir of England, at your birth
Heaven put his cloudy tresses by,
And smiled on us with open sky,
Whilst all the Planets seemed to throw
Their golden radiance at your brow.
A clear presage, that favors shall
From Heaven upon your Highness fall,
And thence on us reflecting, glance
On the glibbe Ocean into France.
112. To Sir THOMAS OVER BURY, on his Wife.
Others by Children lengthen out their life,
Thou only art eternized by thy wife.
113. To Zounds the Swaggerer.
What do thou mean to revell roar, and spend?
To drink, and drabbe, and swear so? will thou rend
Thy way to Hell? The Devil will spy day
At a small hole, and snatch his Chuck away.
114. To the same.
What Gulfe's within thee, that thou swallow'st so?
Is it to drown all thirst before thou go
To that Infernal hot-house? such a ground
Of reason's deeper than I list to sound.
115. A point of hard fortune.
A thief, that of a Ram had gelt the Flock,
And tied him 'bout his neck, upon a Rock
Laid his fat load, intending there to rest
His weary shoulders: but the captive beast
Straining and struggling for release, at last
Beyond the pointed stone his body cast,
Whose weight crushed out the fellons breath anon,
That was both strangely hanged, and died of the Stone.
116. To George Slanders, on his Marriage.
Thy baseness used thy Friend in hostile sort,
But has not Wedlock snared the Woodcock for it?
117. To Th. Chapter Esquire.
Your noble Genius holds (as does appear)
The very shadows of the Muses dear,
Who with proud maintenance have leavened those,
That scarce will give you thanks in humble Prose,
Nor in high Verse can do it: So on a sink
Shines lovely Phoebus, though his object stink.
118. To Shakespeare.
Thy Muses sugared dainties seem to us
Like the famed Apples of old Tantalus:
For we (admiring) see and hear thy strains,
But none I see or hear, those sweets attaines.
119. To the same.
Thou have so used thy Pen, (or shook thy Spear)
That Poets startle, nor thy wit come near.
120. To Aston Cokaine, Esquire.
He that with Learning, Virtue does combine,
May (though a Laick) pass for a divine
Piece of perfection. Such to all men's sight
Appears your self: who, if you take delight
In these composures, your applausive show
Will stamp conceits, and make them current go.
121. The World.
The World's a Forest, (maimed with fatal strokes)
Where Wolves and Foxes are wild youths desires,
Where dead men Ashes are, the living, Oaks;
And Cats and Women are but scratching Briars.
122. On Blinkes, a pretender to Poetry.
He nine ways looks, and needs must learned be,
That all the Muses at one view can see.
123. To William Coke Esquire.
IF Gallants would your ways of goodness choose,
Each Gentleman would gentle manners use.
And (to our honor) the English Court would be
A High-gate, leading to fair courtesy.
124. An Epitaph on Mris. Hope Alford.
Keep off, prophaner feet; here sleeping lies
A sacred Nymph, that virtue did adore,
And treasured all the blessings of the skies:
Whose well-fraught vessel, hasting to the shore,
Struck deep into these Sands: but with a tide
Of glory shall be raised, and stellifi'd.
125. Peace and War.
Weapons in peace grow hungry, and will eat
Themselves with rust: but War allows them meat.
126. An adumbration of Man's life.
As't pleased the Father of all lights, he made
Man as a Gnomon, and his life the shade:
Which, when it has bin this and that way thrown
In any projects, with a breath is gone.
127. Dulman to Ignoramus.
Friend, thou this Term the brabbling Boores have gelt,
And grow'st so fat, thy belly rots thy Belt.
128. Ignoramus his reply.
What should I do but geld them? when so kind
The Rustickes are, to give me wealth for wind.
129. To Sir John Fitzherbert of Narbury.
SOme worthy cause does make your Country hold
Your self so dear: It is sweet courtesy,
And goodness, that adornes you more than gold,
And wins more honor than a crown can buy.
For though great vices titles rot, the fame
Of virtue keeps her sound, and spreads her name.
130. An Epitaph on Fox the Tinker.
Here under rests (deep-earth'd in his grave)
A Fox old and wily, that smelled of a Knave:
Yet every day mending, grew holier of late,
And took's hammer with him to knock at Heaven gate.
131. On Pride.
Why Pride to others does her self prefer,
The reason's clear, she is heir to Lucifer.
132. The Miller to the King.
Scorn not the Miller, King: for thou with wind
Thy Mill-like frame do move, and viands grind
Into thy stomachs bag; and Death that takes
Toule in a Coffin, no distinction makes.
133. On Captain Milward, lying dead upon Trent bank.
Behold (like treasure in the Bank) a son
Of Mars, that had his fathers honor won
Out of the fire, yet in water died,
And thus his thirst of glory satisfied.
134. On the same.
For thy deaths sake (noble friend)
Be no man before his end
Happy thought, though flattering fame
Fix amongst the Stars his name:
He that leanes on wealth or strength,
Breaks his staff, and falls at length.
133. To John Milward Esquire:
Though natures force for such a brothers fate
Your tears exact, yet cease to macerate
Your self: the water-Nymphs enough for all
Will weep, and keep a fluent funeral.
136. To Doctor Done.
Thy Muses gallantry does far exceed
All ours; to whom thou art a Don indeed.
137. To the Lords of the privy Council.
You, that the eyes of this fair Island are,
How much concerns it you to have a care
That you from filmes of ignorance be free,
From pearls of pride, and rhumes of glutton^,
Nor in the flatterers Fennel take delight,
But herb of Grace, that makes a perfect sight!
138. The four Elements.
Natures large Empire of Tetrarchy
Of Elements consists, that mutually
Make war: what wise man then can hope for rest,
Whom four unruly Naturals molest?
139. On a good Physician over-match't with an ill wife.
All Herbs that painful Dioscorides,
Or Theophrast, or twenty such as these
Have ere described, his vast Learning knewes,
Yet almost has forgot where Hearts-case grows.
140. On Nell Lusty.
Charons unwearied Boat to burning Hell
Carried all comers; so does rampant Nell.
141. On Celestial bodies.
Some make the Heaven a Quintessentiall frame,
And some the Stars but Elementall fire:
Who would the Problem clear, let him the same
Of Lucifer (the Morning Star) enquire.
142. Death, a sure friend.
The Flesh and Spirit ever fighting are,
But Death soon parts them: Is It not then a friend,
That our dull terrene muster off does pare,
And makes the flame-like form to Heaven ascend?
143. A Cure for Impatience.
Who Patience wants, a Rod to him prefer,
And let him Angler turn, or Schoolmasters.
144. On the same.
Who would be patient, wait he at the Poole
For Bull-heads, or on Block-heads in the School.
145. To I. P. an old Fencer.
Jacke, thou have often ventured for the Prize
Of Fortitude, and art reputed wise:
For, being beaten to the World, and well
Stricken in years, thy prudence may excel.
146. Time alters all things.
All suffer change; by turns we rise and fall
Of Time, that serves his Process upon all.
147. To Gilbert Knyveton, Gentleman.
YOu bear his Name that bear me much good will,
And bound me with the golden ties of Love
T'addresse my service to his Offspring still:
Whose true devoire may it accepted prove,
So shall the wandering Star of my desire
Be culminant, nor farther needs t'aspire.
148. On Sleep.
Sleep binds the Senses, but at liberty
It sets the Soul, and mocks the fantasy
With strange illusions, playing (Iugler-like)
At fast and loose, till Death in earnest strike.
149. To Hugh the Crier.
Thou still do bawle and brabble, none knows why;
That all the Town sounds of a Hugh and cry.
150. A good wits diet.
That which upholds our tottering walls of flesh
Is food; and that which does our wits refresh
Is wholesome Study: for like stronger Fare
Be solid Arts, but Sweet-meates Poems are.
151. To the prime Lady Fainebe.
When thou beholdest in thy Mimick Glass
Thy form, that most of Beauties does surpass
In Natures dainties, wisely then compare
Thy Feature to thy Mirror bright and fair,
But f^aile and brittle, shattered with one blow
Into a thousand splinters: thus bestow
Thy cogitations, and thy plumes of pride
Low as thy Grave will fall, and there abide.
152. To Sir Landlesse Ramkin.
What? art thou Knighted? why, thy means are small,
And thy flush Lady now will lavish all
Upon her ^^cke, save what she does bestow
Upon thy brow, to make thy Knighthood show.
156. To the same.
Knighthood's come on thee (as a man should throw
Gold on a dunghill,) and thy Lady so
Suits with thy gredtnes, that her gown will be
In stead of coat of arms, and honor thee.
157. To Doctor Butler, in his last sickness.
How angry seems the Fates at thee,
(Rare man!) that thousands have set free
From their arrests* and (sure) did make
Those adamantine Sisters quake,
Lest through thine Art their power should
Both be contemned and controlled:
But Death into his vengefull jaws,
This Butlers self now rudely draws.
158. To the Lord Sillysense.
Your greatness with your Dwarf delights to pass
The time, and makes your Fool your looking-glass.
159. To Captain James, after his intended discovery of the North-west
passages.
Captain, that have endured ten thousand knockes
Against floating Isles of Ice, and settled Rocks,
Out-daring tempests with undaunted sense,
And dulling sharpest colds with patience,
Meeting more dangers than each tedious day
Had hours: too ill proud Fortune did repay
Thy hazard: yet (to th'honor of thy name)
The North-west passage proved thy way to Fame.
160. On the Searchers of the North-west passage.
Those that make proof of what the Spaniards say,
Of that short Cut into the Southern Maine,
Are like young Gallants that with Cheaters play
At passage, and with loss repent in vain.
161. Loves Remedy.
Withdraw the fuel from Loves piercing fire
By abstinence, or come not near unto't
By dalliance; so may thou quench desire:
If not, let marriage for thee do it.
162. The Pulpets complaynt of a Diabolical Liar,
Strong was I built, else had I surely bin
Crushed to the ground by thy grand weight of sin,
Whose pride has fathered many a loathsome lie,
On the sweet Saints, Bernard and Hillary,
Grave Augustine, with others; and does vent
More foolish Bulls, than ere the Popedom sent
Into the world: nor ever Sermon makes,
But straight turns vagrant, and the text forsakes.
Base son of Levi, that did never know
Thy father, nor thy pedigree can show
By th'Booke: if yet thou have one grain of grace,
Rub off that brazen morphew from thy face,
Do as the beggar on a Sunny day
Does by his Lice, throw baser lies away,
And either ballast that light skull of thine
With learnings weight, that makes a grave Divine,
Or at the Altars horns (for oaths and lies)
Hang a worse Priest than ere did sacrifice.
163. The Liar.
Twelve stones wore Aaron on his breast, but I
Look but for one, the The whetstone.
Emblem of a lie.
164. Naked Love.
Nature allows her Birds and Beasts to wear
Light armor of warm Feathers, Wool, and Hair,
And unto man gives providence, t'enfold
Himself in garment* against invasive cold:
Why then should tender Love be left to go
Naked alone? because it is hottest so.
165. An Epitaph on George Agard, Gent.
Here lies in a dead sleep (unheard and unseene)
Not high George a horseback, nor stout Georg a Green,
But joviall George Agard, made round as a Bowl,
From Tavern to Alehouse the better to ^owle.
Who amongst witty Clerks many pounds having spent,
Whipped Petties for pennies, and thus was content
In School to do penance by paynes-taking great,
That so with his own rod himself he might beat.
Thus casting the flesh down, his Spirit did even
Mount up at rebound, to drink Nectar in Heaven.
166. On Nuptial love.
Adam (before his fall) did fall alone
In love with Eve, who offspring yet had none;
So that the prime and liveliest touch of all
Loves Consorts, is the affection conjugall.
167. On Church-bells.
Some Novellists, that Conscience most pretend
With Caps and Surplisses themselves offend;
Others dare rail at other matters else,
As at the Ring, but few against the Bells:
Which should they tax, the Ropes would undertake
To answer for them, and all quiet make.
168. Evacuation of the four humors.
Man's head is purged (as Galens sons declare)
Of Blood and Phlegm by the Nose, and by the Hair
Of melancholicke dross; but choler will
Have him by the ears, and that way vents her ill.
169. On the Kings Iester.
How plumpe's the Libertine! how rich and trim!
He jests with others, Fortune jests with him.
170. To cracking John.
Fie, make not wise men mad by boasting so,
Since every child thy silliness does know,
Whose vaporous brain might in a Cherry-stone
Be lodged; cracke't, and where is the kernel John?
171. To Humphrey Okeover, Esquire.
I sometimes heard a kind of Prophecy,
That your name should in fair Longevity
Equal the Tree of Jove: which may it bide
Like Royal Cedar, never putrifi'd,
Nor otherwise impaired; so sound a fame
To you I wish, and your well-timber'd name.
172. To Robert Lincoln, Gentleman.
Dear Sir, your Fates look, as our Proverb says,
The devil looked over Lincoln, and would raise
Contempt against your worth; whose honored name
Stands Ensigne-like, defying base defame.
173. On Thomas Draper, Gentleman.
I need not wrappe this Draper in the clean
Linen of plausive Verse, and yet I mean
That the indearements of our love shall go
In as fair dressings as my Muse can show.
For our affections have with many a grain
Of Salt been seasoned, and will still remain
Sound and unshooke, while Thousands will their hands
To Friendship set, yet break her strictest bands.
174. To T. R.
How shall I plague thee for thy villainies!
That mean thy beaten bulk to pulverize,
And in an Houre-glasse (while swift Time can fly)
Toss, turn, and vex thy powder pitteously.
175. To Sir Henry Merry deceased.
When I have numbered all the golden grains
By Tagus washed, or Iemmes in hidden veins
Of the deep Earth, then may I here recite
Thy fair and rich endowments, worthy Knight:
Which since we want, we weep, as if we would
Supply with Pearls what dearer was than Gold:
But (tears exhausted) sadly sigh alone,
And frown at mirth, now noble Merry's gone.
176. On old Trudge the Termer.
Thy practice has small reason to expect
Good terms, that does fair honesty neglect.
177. Christmas in a Consumption.
Old Christmas seems a weakling child again,
(A Child of twelve days old) nor can contain
Himself from soft tears and excessive moan,
Now his kind Nurse, good Housekeeping, is gone.
Cooks (that their fingers lick't) their hands may wring,
And Butlers over their sounding Hogsheads sing
Sad notes: for now their Offices are thrown
Upon the back of Pride, and all is her own.
178. On the Ocean.
How strangely does the humid Ocean moove
By some impulsion from the Spheres above!
And seems indeed a less terrestrial sky,
Whose bubbles, stars; and foame's the Galaxie.
179. An Epitaph on Walter Merry, Gent.
Here buried lies his kindreds top,
And flower of worth renowned,
Whom ruder fates too soon did crop,
TO Embosome thus in ground:
Who, having drunk the heavenly dew
Of grace, blind Natures guide,
Straight (like the Heliotrope) withdrew,
Closed up his sweets, and died.
Ye virgin Nymphs, with many a tear
Your Christ all Viols fill,
And all those lyquid treasures here
Upon this Grave distill,
That Roses here and Violets
From beauty sown below
May spring, to deck your Coronets,
And sweeten all your woe.
180. On old Sharke.
Sharke bad me to his roast, but in the end
Forced me to pay both for my self and friend:
Thus (though a Coward) showed he mettle yet,
In beating of me with a silver spit.
181. To Bertholdus Swart, Inventor of the Gun.
Berthold, thou aptly wast surnamed Swart,
From the black mischief, which thy darkesome Art
First brought to light: whereat the Furies frown
To see their torturing Engines all put down
By one of thine, whose thunder made to shake
Hels deepest groundwork, and the Devils quake;
Yea, mightiest armies has to spoil full death
Sent with a powder, and deprived of breath
More then all Mars his brondirons ere did kill,
Yet gapes for prey, and roares for (...)
182. The greatest Clerks, not the wisest men.
What fancies float in some men's heads! as those
That in the two Northern asterismes.
Dragon and great Bear suppose
Some Stars to shine, whose power hales amayne
The marine waters towr'd the Arcticke wayne:
Which were to make that pair of Beasts to draw
More than all ere were yoked, or Nature saw.
183. On Tobacco taking.
The Old Germans, that their Divinations made
From Asses heads upon hot embers laid,
Saw they but now what frequent fumes arise
From such dull heads, what could they prophetize
But speedy firing of this worldly frame,
That seems to stink for fear of such a flame.
184. Maids and Wives.
Maids are white papers, which no hand did bind:
But wives are blotted books, and interlin'd.
The praise of Poverty.
If smallest thread the choycest cloth does yield,
If finest herbage make the daintiest field:
Then slender poverty, wrought with so small
And thin a fortune, must be best of all.
185. To William Lilly.
Grand Schoolmasters, some livelier twigs of Bays
Shall stick thy Tomb, that merit'st ample praise:
For though the Laurel never Lilly bear,
Yet such a Lilly may the Laurel wear.
186. On Excessive drinking.
Is aged Nature so exhaust and dry,
That men now drink so much, so greedily?
Or is Hels torrid region nearer to
Us than it sometimes was? It seems so:
For towns smell hot of it in every nooke,
And husbands like her horned monsters look.
187. On Carnal mirth.
Mirth is but a Musicke-strayne,
Played upon a fretted heart.
Whose harsh strings so much complain
Of the want of Wisdoms Art,
That rude Death in discontent
Strikes to ground the Instrument.
188. To a young and wealthy wanton.
I wonder not to see thee play, that art
One of blind Fortunes puppies, pretty heart.
189. The Egyptian Isthmus.
Were Aegypts Isthmus cut, the Natives fear
The angry Red Sea to the ground would bear
Their Pyramids, and men like sheep would dye
Of the Red water, stained with cruelty.
190. The Prodigal, on himself.
Ingenious Daedalus, whose Art out-went
All fancies of the Greeks, and did invent
Large net-like sails, to catch all winds that blew,
Which made the Poets fable that he flew,
Did scarce deserve so high a fame as I,
That bravely make bright Gold and Silver fly.
191. To old Canker, a wicked Gardener.
Our Grandsire in a Garden fell, where thou
All vicious license do thy self allow:
Nor can sharp warnings penetrate thy heart,
That in thy Trade of lewdness rooted art.
192. To John Ford, the Poet.
The Verse must needs be current (at a word)
That issues from a sweet and fluent Ford.
193. To his Brother John Bancroft deceased.
You sold your Land, the lightlyer hence to go
To foreign Coasts: (yet Fates would have it so)
Did never New England reach, but went with them
That Journey toward New Jerusalem.
194. The penitent Prodigal, to his loose-bodied Mistresses.
Hence tempting trifles, hence, I here defy
Your sighs and tears, your smiles and flattery.
Your virtues are but vizards, and your wits
But wandering flames, that lead men into pits.
Be Fools your play-fellows; I Will trust no more
Women than waves, that flow to every shore,
Offering their forward boldness unto all,
Yet when they are at proudest, backward fall.
196. On Lust.
Lust is a Wilderness, where wantons sow
Their wilder seeds, not caring how they grow.
197. To Justice Much-ill.
You term your self a Pillar of this Land,
As if our Realm on rotten propps did stand:
But who their Tenants to the quick will pare,
Not Pillars they, but Caterpillars are.
198. A Prince and a Parasite.
Like Cleopatra suckling of a Snake
Is that unhappy Prince, that much does make
Of a base Parasite, that baskes in sin,
And folds infection in a Lizards skin.
199. Of Man.
Man is an Engine, moved with Reasons weight,
But Death, that stops his breath, unwinds him straight.
200. Of the Ethiopian Mountain, Amara.
On this fair Mountain, sphericall and high,
Stands (as fame goes) a precious Library,
Where Livies whole work, Enochs Oracles,
Salomons Physics, and some mysteries else
That did survive the Flood, entreasur'd lie,
Insulting over Times wastefull tyranny.
O could I thither reach! then should I stand
High in the Muses grace, and all command.
201. Man's gradation.
We climb the slippery staire of Infancy,
Of Childhood, Youth, of middle age; and then
Decline, grow old, decrepit, bedridden lie,
Bending to infant-weaknesse once again;
And to our Cophines (as to Cradles go,
That at the staire-foot stand, and stint our woe.
202. To Envy.
Envy, thy part so basely acted is,
That even in contempt thy Snakes do hiss.
203. On Greene-wit Gosling.
Gosling did want his Courtly terms of late,
And did desire the wooing phrase to know:
But having tendered love, with scornful hate
Has been repulst, and finds the way to woe.
204. Hope of preferment.
A sweet enchauntresse is the flattering hope
Of dignity, that gives the fancy scope
To wander to Elyzium, and does keep
The wit still waking, though the Conscience sleep.
205. Loves Motion.
Kind Love, whose motion deep affection shows,
From the outward sense to the inward Center goes.
206. To Plots, a pretender to the Mathematics.
Thou sai'st, thou by thy figured Art do know
How much broad cloth about the earth will go.
But would thy Charity a garment make
For it, in honor might thou equal Drake,
When Fame should say of two such men of note,
Drake made the earth a girdle, Plots a coat.
207. To Mr. Henry Mellor, the first Major of Darby.
You seem the prime bough of an ample tree,
Whereon if fair expected fruits we see:
Whilst others fames with rank reproaches meet,
As Mel or Manna shall your name be sweet.
208. To Innocent Heartlesse, on his Imperious Wise.
Not without cause thou still do weep and pule,
For still raines Winter where the wife does rule.
209. On Hypocrites in friendship.
False friends are like to Cuckoes, that will haunt
Our pleasant walks, and scurvily will chaunt
IN the Spring, and part of Summer: but of all
The flock not one attends you at the fall.
210. To Sir John Curzon.
Your Ancestors were men of generous parts,
Whose bounty (as in freehold) held all hearts:
Yet were for solid wisdom short of you,
That long were tutour'd by a learned Sir Thomas Crew his Father in law.
Crew.
211. To a lying Victualler.
False tales are like Trap-doores, which still to bolt
With Oaths against the truth, is to revolt
From him we vowed to follow, love, and fear.
If therefore thou do hold that Jewel dear,
For which our Lord a bloody price did pay,
Give not the Devil leave a claw to lay
Upon it, whiles thou would the truth disprove,
And (like thy hanged Sign) with each wind do move.
For he is above, that closest faults will bring
To light, and call mine Host to the reckoning.
212. To Mistress Mutable.
Love runs within your veins, as it were mixed
With Quicksilver, but would be wisely fixed:
For though you may for beauty bear the Bell,
Yet ever to ring Changes sounds not well.
213. To a Giglot, with her green sickness.
Thy sickness mocks thy pride, that is seldom seen
But in fools yellow, and the Lovers green.
214. To John Gell, Esquire.
If Gell from Gellius come, your pedigree
May (like a Pike) be trayl'd from Italy:
Whose farre-fam'd valor the remotest parts
Of Earth has won, as you a world of hearts.
215. On Wood of Kent, that prodigious Gormund.
Some wondeer how the Stone Sarcophagus
Consumes dead bodies with so quick a power,
But I astonished am my self, that thus
A walking Wood should such a mass devour
Of meats, wherewith a Garrison might dine:
His heart's of Oak sure, and his stomach Pine.
216. Money, a fruitful commodity.
As with coined Metalls we our Trades maintain,
So the Indians Traffic with their fruits for gain:
Yet do our dealings no less fruit infer
Than theirs; How comes that? ask the Usurer.
217. The English, too like the French.
A Writer, skilled in Constellations, notes
That England is ore-rul'd by Mercury:
Which I believe, for Delos-like it floats
In the waved humors of inconstancy.
218. An Acrostick to Mistress Elizabeth Corbet.
Express your worth I cannot, loveliest friend,
Let those attempt it, whose rare wits ascend
In righter lines above the vulgar sphere;
So (as your form is) may your fame be clear,
And all the wandering Stars in beauties sky
Be but as clouds beneath your Galaxy.
Egregious Nymph! whose excellence refines
These drossie fancies, and these weaker lines
Helps to corroborate; if wishes could
Crown merits, yours were precious stones and gold.
O! could I on a loftier Muses wings
Raise high my strains above terrestrial things,
Bearing the golden treasure of your name
(Endeared to Virtue) to the starry frame,
Then should you Phoebe see (in honors show)
To pluck her horns in, and her Orb forgo.
219. To Tumbrell Gullygut.
Some Indian Ethnicks use to sacrifice
Their teeth, as things which they most highly prize,
And think their gods delight in: were thou one
Of those, long since thy fanges had all been gone,
And grinders too; but Hundreds (gladly blessed
By such a loss) had wished thy bones good rest.
220. On Pot-valiant Champions.
Malta is famed for many warlike Wights;
But Malt has more of such, our Alehouse Knights.
221. On Ioane Easy.
Ioane turned a Trador in the Stews, when sent
To lead a pure life in a Nunnery:
And herein Ioane as Jonas did, that bent
His course to Tarsus, balking Ninivy.
222. The Roman Eagle.
The Roman Eagle, once with terror spread,
Whose two heads East and West were brandished,
Is now dismembered, having left but one
Faint head, and almost all the feathers gone.
No marvel then the crest-fall'n bird does quake,
When War but strokes her, whom such aids forsake.
223. To Nath. Bate, Gentleman.
Kind Sir, you once did find me (to your cost)
Where a loathed life usurping Richard lost:
So may I loose mine own, when once I prove
To you ingrate, or bate you ought in love.
For since the Patron mends the Poets Art.
Well may you claim the tribute of my heart,
Who wish your Muses industry repaid
With high respect, and mine her waiting-maid.
224. On Pickwell the Miller.
Pickwell must needs be a sweet youth (they say)
Who lives by flowers and fine meals every day.
225. To John Whiteall, Gentleman.
Let no man think the first worlds innocence
Quite lost, nor seek prime goodness farther hence
Than your calm breast, embeam'd with Virtues light,
Whose Fame is like your Name, entirely white.
226. To Canary Birds.
The old Egyptians would not drink
The Grapes strong juice, which they did think
(In sober sadness) to be sprung
From Giants blood, as cause of wrong,
Rage, lust, and other mischiefs more:
But were it of Medusa's gore,
And should contort your bodies to
The forms of Snakes; yet would ye show
Your selves such loving worms to it,
That (by instinct of winding wit)
Ye would cling to the Goblet fast,
And drink until your sloughes ye cast.
227. To Master Thomas Lightwood.
Names should give light to things, and so does thine
To thee, yet to obscurenesse does oncline,
And falsehood too: for weighty do thou prove,
That solid art in Learning, sound in Love.
228. To Mammons bondslaves.
Near Sicily lies Sea-girt Strombolo,
That seems to strive with Aetna, which should throw
Most flames, and loudest roar: which when sometime
Our Merchant Gresham did with Sailors climb,
These words they heard, (while fear their flesh be-
Dispatch, dispatch, the rich Antonio comes: (numbes)
When one so named, (as they after found)
Whose Chests with coin and curses did abound,
Yet gaped for Gold still, at Palermo died.
Was not this Mammons voice, that did provide
To entertain that Guest? what think ye, friends?
If so, then worldlings, hasten to such ends
Through Bills and Bonds, that at your wished repair
You with your golden god may richly share,
Where your intreasur'd hearts may nere be cold
For fear of want, but swim in molten gold.
229. A trial of right.
Women and Metalls by their sounds we know,
(If not by touch-stones) whether right or no.
230. To the same.
Thou rayl'st at Rome, and do her friends oppose;
Yet bear her Badge in chief, a Roman Nose.
232. Of carnal pleasure.
The strongest shaft, which to the metall'd head
The Devil draws, each loving heart to slay,
Is that fond pleasure, which in lazybed
Slips from the string of Lust, and hastes away.
233. To Francis Quarles.
My Muse did purpose with a pious strife
To have traced out my sinlesse Saviors life:
But thou had lanch'd into the Maine (I hear)
Before my Bark was rigged; which shall forbear
To interrupt so praised an enterprise,
('Bout which with Quarles no quarrels shall arise)
Ply then thy steereage, while deficient gales
My wishes still supply, and swell thy sails.
234. To the Honorable Matron, the Lady GRACE CAVENDISH.
Fair Virtues which in single hearts take place,
Are in a double sense the gifts of Grace.
235. An Epitaph on Mistress Anne Port.
Here lies a creature to be most admired,
So good, and yet a woman: who aspired
To sum all virtues up before her years,
And scale by such ascents the heavenly Spheres
VVhereon she sits, comparing with the Sun
The Diadem of glory she has won,
And joying to outshine him, makes the frame
Of Heaven resound her mirth, as Earth her fame,
Whilst we half wrack't with losses of this sort,
Like Seamen sigh, that want their wished Port.
236. To the Lady Maunsfield, now the Countess of New Castle. AN AGRAMME. All
Fame lives in Deeds.
WHile those which naught save fruitless titles have,
Bury their greatness in Oblivions grave,
Your real worth unto your Name shall give
A royal fame, that in your deeds shall live.
237. To his Muse.
No enemy has done me so much wrong
As thou, that have betrayed me with a song
To ship-wracke of my fortunes: yet such sport
Thou do afford me, that I hug thee for it;
And those that most do envy thee, delight
To see thee hovering in thine Eagle-flight,
And (proudly pearched on a Meteors back)
With Jove's maine Thunder vying crack for crack,
While (Swallow-like) Detraction flies below,
And chatters. For such feats I love thee so,
That were the choice proposed, I should refuse
Rich India's bosom, to embrace my Muse.
238. To the Flower of Youngsters, Rose Verney.
By some foreknowledge were thou named Rose,
Whose fame-blowne Beauty such a tincture shows
Of vernall brav'ry, as may well compare
With Venus Flower, that in sweet and fair
Dainties excells, yet is not without pricks;
No more art thou: Blush Rose, I smell thy tricks.
239. To Sir Charles Shirley, Baronet.
COuld I but coin you in my mind, you should
Be of the right stamp, as were all your old
Forefathers, men of merit and renown,
Whose meanest puts our modern Nobles down.
Their Houses seemed as Hospitalls for poor,
And Charity still waited at their door,
As Fame will upon you, whilst you aspire
To equal their desert; and my desire.
The end of the First Book.
The second Book of Epigrammes.
1. To William Davenport, Esquire.
YOur native sweetness, which you often have
Diffused to others, boldens me to crave
Your favor to this weakling work of mine:
Whereon if your clear Judgment daigne to shine,
All clouds of envy menacing my Verse
I shall despise, and with one puff disperse.
2. On Theological Virtue.
Virtue's a Bridge (near to the Cross, whereby
We pass to happiness beyond the Spheres)
Whose Arches are Faith, Hope, and Charity,
And what is the water but repentant tears?
3. Sin, like a Serpent.
Sins falsehood glistereth like the Serpents kind,
(From whence it crept) and bears a sting behind.
4. On Drunkenness.
The youngest of all vices (that I know)
Is Drunkenness, which in the age of Noe
First reeled into the World, and thus appears
Like the Red Dragon, after thousand years:
Yet sure to Hell this sucking Vice has spewed
More souls, than all that ancient multitude.
5. On Devotion.
Devotion's like an Eagle, making way
Through cloudy Meteors, when she means to pray.
6. Gods Bounty.
No mortal has seen God, few heard him speak;
(Hence is their love so cold, their faith so weak:)
Yet all his goodness taste, which (like the shower
On Gideons Fleece) he on all flesh does power.
8. On Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom.
From sorrows straights, wherein we launch our lives,
In his hopes Haven Lazarus arrives,
And wonders in how short a flight of time,
He to that Crown of happiness could climb;
From Rags and company of Dogs, to sort
Himself with Princes of that glorious Court,
There with those arms, that on the Altar placed,
Our dying Saviors lively type embraced.
O blissful change! to be incircled so,
What King would not his Diadem forgo?
9. Mocking's Catching.
Ieere they that list, whose follies are professed:
With sins or swords it is not safe to jest.
10. The body and the soul.
God at one instant did not make the whole
Of man, but first the Body, then the soul:
And hence the fleshly Rebel (for the right
Of eldership) does with the Spirit fight.
11. Percolation of Waters.
Sea-waters finding passage through the clay,
Lose saltness, (as experienced Writers say)
And with a sweeter relish please the sense:
So, than the mournful tears of penitence,
Which sinners through their earthen Organs strain)
No water is more sweet, more sovereign.
12. Faith and Love.
The air does first affect us, though the fire
Be more Celestial, and more high aspire.
So the first tendrell of straight virtues tree
Is Faith, but the top branch is Charity.
13. Of Nature.
In Heavenly things mere Nature's blind and base,
And like a meal of fragments without Grace.
14. David and Goliath. Christ and Satan.
Five stones took David, winning at one throw
Goliah's head: and our meek Savior so
Five wounds received, that weapon-like did slay
The Infernal Giant, and his Host dismay.
15. The fall of Angels.
Some say, the downe-cast Angels here and there
Alighted, as they bodied Creatures were*
But whether some of them in Air reside,
Others in Water, or in Earth abide,
It matters not: for (howsoere they fell)
Who loses God, finds every place his Hell.
16. Strong encouragement.
He acts as brave a part as David in
Killing Goliath did, who conquers sin
At the first onset: for that is to wound
A Giants front, and force him to the ground.
17. Of Mortification.
Since Paradise is lost, look not to see
God in soft pleasures walks: for surely he,
That did to Moses in a Bush appear,
Loves sharp compunction, and a life austere.
18. To penitent Magdalen.
Mary, but late the cage of Hell,
Thy heavenly change what Muse can tell?
Those twinkling eyes that did allure
To sordid lust, now drop the pure
Pearl of Contrition; and that hair
That wandering Cupids did ensnare,
And waved its pride in every street,
Now humbly licks her Saviors feet,
And from those blessed roots derives
Virtue, more worth than thousand lives.
To cleanse thy stained affections then,
Still weep and wipe, kind Magdalen.
19. A beam of comfort.
God that his splendor did to Moses show,
From Egypt fled, will sure with comfort so
Shine upon those, that gladly bid farewell
To lust, whose lightness keeps us dark as Hell.
20. On the two thieves crucified with our Savior.
As Jew and Gentile did his life oppose,
So here two Thieves our dying Lord enclose:
These, true to falsehood, gasping here for breath.
Do yet invade the King of life and death:
The one wi^h worst of weapons plays his part,
The other robbes him of his dearest heart:
Both on the bloody Characters do look,
Of life, yet one but saved by the Book:
That (as in Moses bush) with Rays divine
Sees in the thorny Crown some glory shine,
And hangs not faster on the fatal wood,
Than his soul cleaves to her eternal good.
Strange Thief! that thus by virtue of his vice
Broke loose from Hell, and stole to Paradise.
21. An unfruitful Reader.
Who reads Gods Word, not following it in deed,
Is like a sounding, but an empty Reed.
22. Sects in Religion.
While Sects are wrangling, Satan does contend
To make them all their virtues treasure spend:
Just, as while Clients strive, the Lawyer takes
Their Metal, but no chain of Concord makes.
23. To London in time of Pestilence.
London, when I behold thy Ladies go
So Bedlam-like with Naked arms, and show
Shoulders and breasts, like Maremaids, all behung
With golden toys, and precious stones among;
And when again the roaring boys I see
Put women down with manlesse luxury,
Still to be fashion-sicke, and drink, and swear.
And rage, as if they Stygian Monsters were:
I wonder not to see thee black with woe,
Since high-built Cities lie in dust below,
For crimes less bold: and having drunk thereby
Deep cups of vengeance, thou will pledge, or dye.
24. The Arc and Dagon.
Afford not sin one corner in thy heart,
Since all is too little for so great a Lord,
That will not for the whole accept the part:
Nor will his Arc and Dagon ere accord,
Whose head and hands at the entry of desire
Cut wisely off, nor suffer sin entire.
25. On Palestine.
My sighs out-pace my tongue, when I would tell
How this famed Region, which did all excel
In pleasant fruits, and typ'd the happyest place,
Is now a Den of Barbarism, so base,
So stripped and ruined, that with grapes and grain,
It scarce a flight of Locusts can maintain.
Ah cursednesse of sin, that thus to Gall
Turns milk and honey, and empoysons all.
26. The motion of sin.
Sins motion's various; and her Zenith well
We term presumption, but her Nadir Hell.
27. Mark the end.
Jacob held Esau by the Heel, and so
Should every man that fears his Maker do:
Not stroke the head of sin, but apprehend
His rugged foot, and mark his fatal end.
28. Nebuchadnezzars Image moraliz'd.
Like this Kings Image with the head of gold,
The ambitious seems, and makes a lofty show
Of wisdom; but his latter end behold,
And you shall see the proud aspirer go
On earthen feet, whose frailty will not bear
Their master out, from danger or from fear.
29. An old suit.
God not with silken robes old Adam clad,
But skins of Beasts, (the most contemned wear)
To show, that he who Princely Empire had,
Having defaced Gods Image, did appear
More like to beasts, and (through his tears) might see
His blinded soul, and bodies misery.
30. Our Saviors first Miracle applied.
Jesus, that Water turned to Wine,
Will turn our penitential brine
To Nectar, and our bitter moanes
To sweetest joys, Celestial tones,
When our white Souls unto this Lamb
Shall married be, and Heavens frame
(While fiery Angels clearly sing)
An endless wedding peale shall ring.
31. Pride, not unpunished.
King Ezechias, in a boasting sort,
Showed all his Treasures, and was punished for it.
For Pride falls with a vengeance on our backs;
And high Clouds scatter when the Welkin cracks.
32. Good Works,
The stones whereof Gods Altars framed were,
Must be unwrought: so pious deeds should be,
Not mixed with ostentation, but sincere,
For wisdom shines in such simplicity.
33. Heaven and Earth.
As from one Maker Heaven and Earth proceed,
So some resemblance do they hold indeed:
For as the Boreall parts of Heaven include
Most Stars, and of the greatest magnitude,
So does our Northern Hemispheare below,
More of the continent and Islands show
Than does the South. Thus Heaven and Earth accord,
And so were men in goodness like their Lord,
Or like his quire of Angels there would be
Through the whole World a complete Harmony.
34. The souls twylight.
As Sea and Earth I view, but with mine eye,
Nor Elementall fire nor air discry:
So know I men and beasts, but cannot so
High God, and holy Angels reach unto:
For (ah) by Adams fall my knowing part
Seems dashed and duld'd against a stony heart
35. To Princes.
Ye Royal guides, that before your people go,
Think on that Meteor in the Wilderness,
Which Israel led: for airy honor so
Still floates and flits, but sooner vanishes.
36. Eminent Examples.
The obvious actions of the great, that strike
Our senses to the quick, are not unlike
Those varied Rods, which Jacob once did leave
Before his Ewes, what time they should conceive:
For after such impressive objects go
The sheepish vulgar, which few precepts know.
39. Poverties privilege.
Ierusalems great Chiefes are forced away
By Babels Monarch, when mean persons stay:
And as a prey to the hellish Tyrant are
Rich Worldlings, when poor starvelings better fare.
40. A Boaster.
A Boaster's but a glorious Monster, and
Extends a tongue far larger than his hand.
41. To Pride.
If silver from superfluous moisture grows,
(Like that which drops from every Driuells nose)
If gold be but the dregs of earth, and stones,
(Though never so precious) but her barren bones;
If flaunting silks, rich scarlets, daintiest furs
Be but Beasts excrements, (which man abhorres)
Then Pride you are odious, and thy Students be
Scarce able to commence to man's degree.
42. On Joseph's Cloak.
The Snake his slough, the Dove her plumes does cast,
(Whose innocence and prudence hold we fast)
As Joseph left his garment, yet retained
A jewel, which once lost is never regained.
Thus stone-cold chastity far off does fly,
And Lust assumes the Cloak of modesty.
43. On Nebuchadnezzar, Deposed.
What Object's this, of pity or of fear?
Great Babels Monarch, picking Sallets here
With Hawke-like Tallons, and a Horse-like maine,
That lately did a gemmed Crown sustain:
'Twas far from lo ftiest Royalty to slide
To such subjection: but illusive pride
Joys in such Gambolls, jeering, when she brings
Scepters to Bables, and does fool the greatest things.
44. Death of Tyrants.
In the Red Sea stern Pharaoh died, and in
Christ's blood was drowned that cursed Tyrant, Sin.
45. Gods Image.
Likeness breeds love; and therefore God did make
Man as his Image, that he thence might take
A dear occasion in deep love to fall
With his high Lord, whose grace surmounts to all.
46. Of Divine Precepts.
How good is God! whose every sweet command
Does with the souls and bodies safety stand,
Whose true and happy preservation lies
In antidotes of virtuous exercise:
But vice is like a worm, that Canker sets
Into the Bone, and harder Conscience frets.
47. Of Repentance.
Put not Repentance off till thou be old,
For such Devotion heartlesse grows and cold:
Nor ere shall that man for a wise one pass,
That lays much treasure on a tired Ass.
48. On Worldlings.
Like Gideons troops, which off the Captain cast
For bending Beast-like to the ground, to taste
The Crystal River, is the wretched crew
Of Worldlings, which with downe-cast minds pursue
Their wretched treasure, that like water flows
By course, and from them with a murmr goes.
49. On the same.
Rich Worldlings are poor Snakes, sustained alone
With shining dust, and down to baseness thrown.
50. Prosperity perilous.
King Saul, his sons, and other Chieftaines more,
Fell under wounds upon Mount Gilboa;
And when in high prosperity we soar,
Well may we fear a downfall and decay:
For honors Bubble, swelling never so high,
Breaks with a prick, and out the wind must fly.
51. Affliction profitable.
A fishes Gall blind Tobit cured: and so
Bitter affliction lends us light to know
The World, and all its fashood, that in lieu
Of promised Roses sticks our breasts with Rue.
52. On the same.
The higher that the Deluge rose,
More upward did the Arc ascend:
So in the deepest waves of woe
More Heavenward our affections tend,
And sad affliction often does prove
A beaten path to joys above.
53. Pain before pleasure.
Vigills and Fasts to joyful feasts make way,
And Earths short pains to Heavens long Holiday.
54. Of Riches.
Like Sparrowes Dung, that seel'd up Tobits sight,
Is wealth, whose love our souls becloudeth quite,
And with pollution so belimes her wings,
That heavily she mounts to heavenly things.
55. Joseph in Prisan, to Pharaoh's Butler at liberty.
Whilst we in Prison fettered lay
Our loves were fast, and thou did say,
Thou surely would (if ever graced
Again) relieve me: but thou have
Let slip thy promise, and my pain,
Though Pharaoh's Cup thou holdst again.
Thus Royal favors Sunshine makes
(In Dunghill minds) ungrateful snakes
Of Libertines, in office set;
And cups make men their friends forget.
56. On Tobias his Fish
The Entrails of this Fish, once laid on fire,
Caused all infernali Spirits to retire:
So a zeale-burning heart the fiends does quell,
And a good liver fears no bugges of Hell.
57. The Devils child, the Devils luck.
Judas, that did the Khapsacke bear;
Like a false-hearted Soldier,
The bloody colors did forgo
Of his dear Lord, to serve his foe
For helish pay, yet in the close
Had not one cross to help his woes;
But (with his empty bag by's side)
Was hanged, and broke, and poorly died.
58. On Avarice.
Greedy Gehazies snow-white Leprosy,
Fairly resembles foulest Covetize,
That makes men lame to works of Charity,
And hoares our hairs ere age their color dies,
59. A false World?
This crooked World is serpentine,
And poisons does with pleasures deal,
Just as the Snake does brightly shine,
Yet banefull venom does concile.
So one fair fruit deformed us all,
Whence all our lives like leaves do fall.
60. Of Religion.
Religion is a golden chain, to bind
With ten strong linkes all Adams stubborn kind.
61. On Saint Stephen stoned.
Some men are beaten to this world; but here is
One that was battered to the heavenly spheres,
Whose prayers (faster than the stones did fly)
Vollyed for entrance to the opening sky.
Nor did poor halfe-dead Isaac more rejoice
To see the Ram, and hear the Angels voice,
Than Stephen did to see the Lamb (once slain
For our sins guilt) with his triumphant train:
Well might he joy, that was within a small
Stones cast of Heaven; whence treasured blessings fall.
62. Pride and Humility.
Mountains their tallnesse loose, but valleys grow
Higher, by ruins on their bosom cast;
And climbing pride comes tumbling down below,
But humble goodness will reach Heaven at last.
63. Divine Wisdom.
Moses his real Serpent had the power,
Those other made by Magic to devour;
And Gods transcendent wisdom does contain,
All others knowledge, as a boundless maine;
Which never Creature strove to pass, but fell
Short in his Voyage, lost in darkest Hell.
64. Ignorance, the Devils fool.
The Devil in dark ignorance delights,
And as stern Nahash once the Gileadites,
Right eyes required; so endeavors he
Knowledge to quench, and arts dexterity.
65. Of Mahomets Religion.
Like to that thousand-slaying Asses jaw,
Which Sampson brandisht, is the senseless Law
Of Mahomet; which more weak souls has slain,
Than the Alcaron does witless words contain.
66. On Jacobs wrestling.
Jacob, that Esau had supplanted first,
(With confidence well fortified) now durst
Encounter with an Angel, and does bear
The blessed prize away; though lamed he were:
Yet no discomfort could him hence dismay,
Since such maimed soldiers shall have heavenly pay.
67. On the same.
Jacob went halting, that he might not fly
Far from his Lord, that loves such company.
68. Man's life in the lapse.
On Tigris bank when once Tobias sat,
Of slippery life he well might meditate,
Which faster than that swiftest river flows
With downright course to death, nor Eddy knows.
69. Of the Pillar of Salt, the remainder of Lots Wife.
What object's this that does assault my sense
With fear? the monument of her offense,
Who with good Lot did from lewd Sodom go,
Yet for apostasy was pillory'd so;
Warning us all to season with this Salt
Our rank affections, and avoyde her fault.
70. Of a Carnalist.
How like is he, a wanton life that leads,
To hoary Jordan! that the flowery meads
Clippes in his progress, yet does swiftly tend
To the dead sea, and makes a bitter end.
71. Seths Pillars.
Seths famous Pillars, that inscribed stood
With Learning and Religion, escaped the flood:
For (though both Gold and Silver feel decay)
Fair knowledge may be clipped, nere washed away.
72. Of Drunkards.
Drunkards are like to leaking ships, and in
Great danger to be sunk in seas of sin.
73. Worldly pleasure.
As Ioab Amaziah did embrace,
And stabbe together: so with flattering face
False pleasure courts us, but with pain the whiles
Wounds whom she wooes, and slaughters when she smiles.
74. Not too fast.
Swift as a sylvan Roe was Asahel,
Yet (overtooke by Fate) he wounded fell
In following Abner. For in veyle of night
Close by the ground flies death, and puts to flight
The bold'st pursuers: and from life of grace
Too frequently they fall, that honor chase.
75. To an Epicure.
Thy belly is thy God, thine appetite
All thy Religion; which with tooth and nail
Thou followest, and with an eager zeal
Do sacrifice to Riot day and night;
Nor wilt surcease, till death his spear has tossed
In thy vast paunch, or way and weapon lost.
76. Ill enough at the best.
The Skins of beasts, that sacrificed were,
Were plucked off; but when we best appear,
The services which we to God advance,
Are skinned ore with veyles of ignorance,
Pride, and hypocrisy; so much we prove
Strangers to simple truth and naked love.
77. Solace in solitude.
The Coale-blacke Raven in the desert fed
Elias; but that glory-glittering Dove
Those souls does cherish, that are sequestered
From worldly toys, and fixed on joys above.
78. No truth in the World.
False-hearted Laban, in fair Rachels stead,
Put bleare-ey'd Leah on his patient friend:
So though the World much bliss has promised,
With blind conceit it gulls us in the end.
79. Comfort in self conquest.
On troubled waters could not Noah's Dove
Take rest, but in the Arc, that did contain
A wilderness of Creatures leagued in love;
Nor will that Dove-like comforter remain,
Save that in breast, whose wild affections be
Bound to tame peace, yet strike sweet harmony.
80. An Ocean of Wine.
Wine is a Drunkard, is an inland maine,
With pleasure tossed, but wracking him with pain.
81. Christ's rising and setting.
When Christ did rise, at midnight day did spring
With strange light; when he crosly set again,
Day gloom'd to night, under whose threatening wing
The sad earth quaked, as conscious of his pain.
Right Sun of Heaven! from whose blessed course proceed
Both light and shade. Right Sun of Heaven indeed.
82. To the Heavenly Host, exulting at our Saviors Birth.
Cease your loud joys, Celestials, cease,
Your noise disturbes the Prince of peace;
Whose tears (which who can singing view?)
His cheeks sweet rosaryes bedew,
And at whose plaints th'empassion'd stones
Are chafed to drops, and melt with mones.
Yet hail dear cause of precious joys!
For those thy vollying sighs and cries,
Do force the ports of Heaven to sly
Open, and make us way thereby
To bliss; and that thy pearly rain
Does our robbed souls enrich again.
Then do not yet, Celestials, cease;
Your mirth proclaims the Prince of peace.
83. Of the beatificall Vision.
Peace Epicures, cease Stoics, with the rest
Of Ancients, to make known what makes you blessed:
Your chief goods are but empty dreams, but mine
A real vision, glorious, and Divine.
84. To Herod, Murderer of the Innocents.
Fie brutish Tyrant, sheath thy blade,
So drunk with former slaughters made,
That now it does at rand on fall
On the most harmless things of all.
The Son of Heaven's without thy sphere,
And thou but idly beat'st the air
With threats: but mothers groans and cries,
That vapor to the vengefull skies,
From swollen Clouds, shall headlong down
With Lightning burst, and blast thy Crown.
85. Patient and prudent.
A suffering man is like the Beare-starre, slow
To move, yet such as may discrection show.
86. To the blessed Virgin at her purification.
Why, favorite of Heaven most fair,
Do thou bring fowls for Sacrifice?
Will not the armefull thou do bear,
That lovely Lamb of thine, suffice?
87. On Mary Magdalen, weeping etc.
How fast does Mary let her floud-gates go,
As if the bottom of her love to show!
Catching with golden nets (O rich device!)
That precious prey, true bird of Paradise.
88. To Jordan, wherein Christ was baptized.
Jordan, that in the Type of Heaven do spring,
And of all rivers may be styled King,
Crowned with thine own delightful plants, that lave
And decked their tresses in thy glassy wave,
How happy wast thou, that the King of Kings
(More sweet, more fair, than all thy meads and springs)
Was dipped in thee! Thenceforth thy current should
Have stood for Jasper, set in banks of gold.
89. Flesh to dust.
Death (a strange Miller) flesh to dust does grind.
How? not with water, but defect of wind.
90. Comfort in calamity.
In frosty times most starry fires are seen;
And when afflictive sorrows are most keen,
God comfort daignes, and so to us does show
His lightfull face, that we his favor know.
91. Of Heaven.
When I admire some stars, whose magnitude
Does the earths vastness many times include;
And those least Lights more radiant to behold
Than Diamonds, or Diadoms of gold:
Me thinks I feel my lightened heart (inflame
Of rapture) mount to that illustrious frame,
Yet fall back like a dying spark, that must
Be turned to ashes, and confused with dust.
But (Oath wonder!) when the pavements are
So rich; how glorious, how transcending fair
Is the great Chamber! and how bright that face,
Where precious beams of beauty, glory, grace,
Are sweetly all (as flowers for sacrifice)
Commixt, and offered to joy-ravisht eyes.
92. To a serpentine Sychophant.
Thou liv'st by doing others deadly wrong
At great men's Tables, with thy banefull tongue:
And yet dependest (as thou dare aver)
On Heavens full hand, to be thy Caterer;
That threats to shake thee for detested tricks,
As Paul the Viper into burning Styx.
A general benefit.
Moses prescribed, that holy fumes should be
Tempered and mixed in equal quantity:
Whereby in a sweet sense is understood,
That equally we share the Sovereign blood
Of Christ, that does the beggars soul refine
Pure as the Kings, whose gold-girt temples shine.
94. The power of prayer.
Our prayers are as fired shafts, that shall
Make that old Serpent (like to Python) fall.
95. An invitation to happiness.
Me thinks I see a glittering troop of Saints,
Beckning to me from Heavens gilt battlements,
To hasten to them. Here (they seem to say)
Is the springs flourish, Summers lightsome ray;
The Autumnes plenty, with the Winters ease,
And all that may the high-wrought fancy please:
Who then pure treasures do prefer to toys,
Mend thy dull pace, and mind this place of joys.
96. Evil Objects, infectious.
As those that gaze on bloody galled eyes,
Become obnoxious to their maladies:
So on lewd precedents who often will look
Shall lewdness catch, and learn it without book.
97. Peter, at the transfiguration.
What fulgour's this! what harmless lightning's here!
Has Phoebus vaulted from his radiant sphere
To gaze here on my Lord? or only spread
His rich flame-coloured mantle on the head
Of happy Tabor? Hence dull shadowy toys
Of mirth; give me these pure illustrious joys,
To shine with Moses and Elias still,
And keep a high-day on this Heavenly hill.
98. The Covetous, to sublime contemplators.
As to his eye who yellow glass applies,
Sees all things of that golden color: so
When thoughts of profit taint our fantasies,
We only are well seen in things below;
But in Celestial matters blind as Moles,
That hunt for Worms, and haunt obscurest holes.
99. Of the Wedding Ring.
This precious Emblem well does represent
That evennesse, that Crowns us with content:
Which when it wanting is, the sacred yoke
Becomes uneasy, yet with ease is broake.
100. Pharaohs Daughter, finding young Moses in the Water.
What pretty pledge of love swimmes here
Deeply engaged? How every tear
Shines in the casket, as a Iemme
Does in my Fathers Diadem!
How (like hope in Pandoraes box)
Lovely it looks! More hard than rocks
Were they, whose hearts would not relent
At sight of such an Innocent.
Come, little Angel, thou with me
Shall shine in Heaven of Royalty;
And with great Pharaohs Crown shall play,
That may bear rule another day,
And (as I thee from waters rage)
My name preserve from wrack of age.
101. To ambitious favorites.
Look favorites (that ever climbing are)
On Absolon, hung by the locks on high:
For so your actions go against the hair,
And danger hangs upon your dignity.
102. On the skales that fell from Paul's eyes.
These skales the old Serpents were, who when they fell,
Did cast his slough on earth, and slipped to Hell.
103. On Iezabell, to Ladies.
How fared proud Iezabell, whole days that spent
In pruning, painting, courting of her glass?
Was not her flesh t'an odious excrement
Concocted, and ejected on the grass?
Ladies, such faults wipe off, as did at end
This Queen of Pride, and dogged her to her end.
104. Iphtah, meeting his Daughter after Victory.
Ah ruthful object, that does dart
A thousand horrors to my heart!
Poor harmless hapless child! must thou
Make good thy Fathers ill-made vow?
And shall I such rash breath fulfull?
Dear Heaven avert it. Yet I will,
And must, although with trembling hands
I shake in sunder natures bands.
But to thy memory each day
Full sums of sorrows must I pay,
And when salt tears have drained mine eyes,
Make Fountains poor with fresh supplies.
105. The worlds entertainment.
The World resembles Iael in her tent,
And entertaines us with like complement;
Feeds us, and covers us, while close we lie,
Strecht on the dull couch of obscurity:
But when we sleep fast, faster to the ground
Our heads and hearts do fix, and both confound.
106. John Baptists Head.
This was a Cryers head, and still does cry,
For vengeance on the crown of tyranny.
107. Christ Crucified.
How quaintly Heaven his fairest jewels sets
To the Worlds view betwixt two counterfets!
With two pale Pendants hangs this radiant stone,
Yet makes his foil, takes glory but of one.
Strange Rock! that in our wilderness of sin
Struck with the rod of Justice, from within
His precious Caves poures liquid life to ground,
Whose Cataracts to highest Heaven resound,
Out-buying with fine golden rivers price
All floods, all fruits, all states of Paradise.
Dear Mates, that through these worldly billows steer,
Bend to this Rock, or else ye shipwreck here:
Let my kind Muse the singing Siren prove,
To draw you on with charming lines of love.
Hail true Celestial Comet! which of old
Such flights of ravished spirits have foretold,
That, by thy bloody streaming in the air,
Do make the black Prince of his Realm despair
In life's sad Night; he cannot wander far
From joy, that sails by this transfixed star.
108. An upstroke to his soul.
Up, Dove-like soul, and make thy Saviors side
Thy restfull Arc, his sprinkled blood thy guide;
Bath in this balm th'enflamed eyes of Lust,
Thy Plumes of pride, thy feet of lame distrust:
Hark how the bubling Current chides thy stay
In thine own sound, and murmurs at delay;
See how his arms are for thy welcome spread,
And how he beckons with enclining head,
Urge then thy flight, thy pains will not be lost,
Nor love want comfort, though thy Lord be lost,
109. On our Saviors Cross.
Our Saviors Cross, beguilt with guiltless blood,
Was framed (as some write) of four kinds of wood,
Palm, Cedar, Cypress, Olive; which might show
That blessings thence to the four parts should flow
Of the vast world, and from the four winds should
Christ's flock be fetched to his thrice-blessed Fold.
110. Of the terrors at the Death of our Savior.
What tempest's this, that from the Tree of Death
Would shake this fruit of Life? what angry breath
Of Heaven tears up my tender-rooted heart?
Does the rude world into confusion start?
Or Nature, bending to her final wrack,
Hear the maine Engine of her motion crack?
The Temple rends its clothes, the Rocks (that were
Angry at harder hearts) their Centers tear,
Heavens blood-shot eye winkes close for grief and dread,
The Earth grows sick, and vomits up her dead,
The Sea howles out, while the loud winds in rage
Hiss at those Actors on their Tragic Stage,
That, having lost both shape and reasons spark
In that black day, seem Dragons in the dark.
O poisonous sin! whose force the solid ground
Thus breaks, and threats whole Nature to confound.
111. On the Sponge filled with Vinegar.
Man's life is like this Sponge, and steepes
It self in woes; when crushed, he weeps.
112. The anguish of Conscience.
Who with a guilty soul to bed does go,
Fares like a Nightingale with tender breast
Upon a thorn, and takes as little rest,
But with less strains of Music, more of woe.
113. Man unnaturally revengefull.
Nature some creatures terrible does make
With horns, and hoofes, and tusks, wherewith they take
Bloody revenge, and work each others woe:
But no such native terrors man does show,
Yet to harsh mischief is most bent of all,
And (with a vengeance) most unnatural.
114. Our Saviors Parentage.
This flower of Iesse had his blessed birth
From Heaven derived, though planted here on Earth;
Resembling those whereof famed Maro sings,
Whose beauties bear th'enscribed names of Kings.
115. Faith a fast friend.
Of Moses body God took care,
Nor would allow the Fiend a share
In it; much less will he forgo
A soul (deare-bought with deadly woe)
If but her hand of faith be laid
On his strong Arm, that all does aid.
116. Sins attendants.
Sin has three Bond-maids, Fear, and Guilt, and Shame,
That daily follow, duly haunt the same:
But be I rather joylesse left alone,
Than on the left hand go, so waited on.
117. Of silence.
John's Birth made glad long-silent Zachary,
And grace attends on Taciturnity.
118. Belly, cease thy grumbling.
God, that for every Beast provided meat
Before (their Master) Man had ought to eat,
Showed us how small a care is requisite
For things that please the rambling appetite:
For man that bears a Queene-like Soul, should have
Small stomach to become his bodies slave.
119. True Knowledge.
The Temples Windows, on their inner side
Far larger than without, thereby implied
That in Gods Church appears the vital light
Of Truth, without it shades of Death and night.
120. The Souls Center.
Our bodies in the flitting air can take
No rest, nor in the flowing water make
Abode, but on the solid Earth remain,
Whose groundwork does the unweildy world sustain:
No more can Souls (for lasting joys designed)
In watery wealth or airy honor find
Sure comfort, but in him that all things moves
Must rest, and there concenter all their loves.
122. Against profane jesting.
Let others scoff, whose joys are here at best;
I Am not for Hell in earnest, nor in jest.
123. On Judges. To Sir Tho. Mitward.
In fair Jerusalem the Judges sat
On Thrones erected in the Cities gate,
With faces to the East; that learn they might
Of Sol (the heart of the Planets) rising bright,
To raise pure hearts to Heaven, and rightly trace
Through Virtues Zodiac, Signs of heavenly grace.
124. Now, or never.
Upon their Sabbaths Eve, old Isreal's Host,
(Preparing for the time they honored most)
Stored them with Manna for the future day:
So should old Fathers (hoar'd with frosty gray)
Against their final now-approaching rest
Hoard up good works, as Treasures in the Chest,
And (Archer-like) with most impulsion send
Devotions shafts, when drawing to their end.
125. Wink not at great faults.
When Paul was preaching, Eutychus asteepe
Came toppling from aloft, and dead was found:
So those that in the Church no watch will keep,
Fall lame from goodness, though their sleep be sound.
126. Gold like straw.
Straw ripens Fruits with kindly heat (we know)
Yet serves in hot Spain to conserve the Snow,
That cooles their Wines: so warmes deceitful gold
The heart with joy, yet makes Devotion cold.
127. On the healing of a crooked woeman.
Christ, that did cure this weakling, does delight
That wrongs be rectified, and all upright.
128. Against our Fashion-mongers.
In various forms the Tempter does appear,
But only humane shape good Angels wear:
We then that still newfangled fashions use,
Whom follow we? the Fiend, that us pursues.
129. A sight of our Savior.
Zacheus, whose low stature could not see
Our Savior passing by him, climbed a Tree
To take a full view of him: so may we
With Contemplations nimble pace ascend
The Tree whereon our Ransom did depend,
And there behold our all-surpassing friend.
130. A Cure for the Kings evil.
Greatest of Mortals, that with sparkling Gold
Inspheare your brows, and potent Scepters hold,
When vain pomp swells you, let the Crown that tore
Our dear Redeemers head, be sadly wore
In your remembrance, so those Thorns will prick
Ambitious tumors, whilst in mind they stick.
131. Temptation of the flesh.
This grand Enchantresse deals as Dalilah,
And so importunes us, that we give way
To her desires, to th'losse of Judgments eyes:
But then the infernal Philistines devise
Such grinding work for us, that for their toule
They take what dearest is, the precious Soul.
132. David's Harp out of Tune, after its Masters decease.
How am I slighted now, whose strings
Lately enchain'd the ears of Kings,
And seemed by virtue of their charm
The Infernal Dragon to disarme!
Now being of no note at all,
My mirth hangs with me on the wall,
Though still as good as ere did twang:
So may lost favorites go hang.
133. A consort of Stars.
Each Shepherd knows that of those lights above
Some with a swift course, others slowly move;
And that the fixed Stars in a plain song-way
Go on, but Planets (that below them stray)
Seem to run descant still and modulate,
Yet are their motions all proportionate,
And regular: How could this wonder be,
But that the God of peace loves Harmony.
134. A guilty Conscience.
A guilty Conscience is a Iayle, wherein
The Soul is chained with sorrow, charged with sinn^.
135. On the same.
Like Tobies Dogge's a guilty Conscience,
That still is grumbling wheresoere we come,
And though still beaten back, and bidden hence,
Yet restlesly pursues and dogs us home.
136. To a busy headed, idle-handed Zelot.
Thou wholly do neglect thy Family,
And marr'st good acts with such impiety,
Whilst, like the nail that stuck in Sisera
His Temples, in the Church thou still would stay.
Such fervent folly does expose to mocks
Devotion, and such nails the Devil knocks.
137. The necessity of Respiration.
As humane bodies are conserved by breath,
So must our Souls too in a sort respire,
Send sighs and prayers out from hearts entire,
And draw in quickening grace, else look for Death.
138. An offer of love to our newborn Savior.
Since in the Inn no room they will afford,
Take up thy lodging in my breast, dear Lord,
Where for a Cradle let my panting heart
Rock thee asleep, that do true rest impart;
And for thy swaddling bands, my Muse shall bring
Strong Lines, that bind the passions of a King.
O this poor offer would thou take dear Lord,
A heartier welcome should no flesh afford.
139. On a seared Conscience: to a damnable Swearer.
It is affirmed, that where the Devil lays
His claw, and marks damned witches for his own,
That part grows stupid, and no sense bewrayes,
Nor bleeds, though pierced with Needles to the bone:
Thy Conscience so, which hottest Hell did sear,
Is senseless grown, nor wounds nor blood does fear.
140. A flock of Fools.
What numbers are there like the sons of Gad,
That more than Cana'n liked Mount Gilead!
Their folly's infinite that so admire
Hillocks of wealth, though few to Heaven aspire.
141. A flight of cares.
Like noisome Flies that Egypt did infest,
Are worldly cares, (whose buzzing does molest
Our fixed devotions) yet with shorter wings
Than to fly off, though longer be their stings.
142. Light enough in the Scriptures.
Who tax the Scriptures with obscurity,
Are like old Eli, that could scarce descry
The hallowed Lamps: for in those leaves does shine
A Sun, that did our cloudy flesh refine.
143. Our Kingdoms happiness.
Mild showers make sweet flowers spring amain,
So blessings grow apace where good Kings reign.
144. Hard hearts, to be broken.
Men's hearts are like those Tables made of stone
Which God inscribed, and by contrition
Must so be broke: such breaking makes us sound
In the best part, and heales us with a wound.
145. David dancing, Michol mocking.
When zealous David danced, as if he would
Shake all his sins off, Michol could not hold,
But at his holy mirth her mocks she throws,
And nimbly as his feet, her loose tongue goes.
Yet here is the difference; his quick motions were
Of the right stamp, in hers rude wrongs appear.
149. David to Michol.
Do thou frown, and look awry
At him, whose zeal mounts uprightly?
Do thou count loves force a toy,
And jeere because I dance for joy?
Flout and spare not; I (to meet
My Lord) will leap with agile feet,
And before his sacred Arc will move
In measures of unmeasured love.
For 'twas an Arc that once to save's
Was glad, and danced upon the waves.
150. A devilish uproare.
When Israel would depart, stern Pharaoh more
Raged not, than does the infernal Lion roar,
When his revolting Subjects bid goodnight
To his dark kingdom, and embrace the light.
151. Lust and Pride.
Abra'm saw Sodom wrapped in smoke and fire;
And who the world beholds, shall it desery
Involved in hotter flames of lewd desire,
And smoke of pride, that towreth to the sky
Like to a Meteor; yet descends again
In tears of sorrow, as a Cloud in rain.
152. Fond delights to be relinquisht.
Abra'm when Isaac left the dugge, did make
A Feast, (though none we hear of at his birth)
And when soft manlesse pleasure we forsake
For wisdoms truth, more cause we have of mirth,
Than if we should false Mammons sums collect,
That make the Chest sound, but the breast infect.
153. Of Death.
Death as a Clock the Destinies have set,
That still points at us with a fleshlesse hand,
And more than hourly strikes; too senseless yet,
His warning blows we list not understand.
154. Diffusion of goodness.
For Jacobs and for Moses sake,
Laban and Pharaoh both were blessed:
For our peace-loving Lord does take
Delight in gentle souls to rest,
Whose goodness does (like the Altars fume)
Spread sacred sweets, but nere consume.
156. Of the same.
Sweet virtue, like the humid morn, does give
Her due to all, that in her compass live.
157. Meditation of mortality.
The Mariner that best his Bark does guide,
Sits at the Stern; and he that would provide
For his souls safety, to the end must fly
Of life, in thoughts of frail mortality;
So shall he bring his vessel to the Cape
Of his best hope, and wrackfull vengeance escape.
158. No peace without piety.
Jonas once gone from God, on sea or ground
Nor calm of peace, nor shine of comfort found;
But vainly aiming at contentment, is
Like a faint Soldier, that his rest does miss.
159. Works of Charity.
The meal and oil that did Elias feed,
Nere fayl'd; nor will a charitable deed,
Though often repeated, make the giver poor,
Whilst Heaven keeps Angels to supply his store.
160. To Lavolt, a favorite.
Moses into the air light ashes threw,
And forthwith did a heavy plague ensue:
So if (dust that thou art) thou soar too high,
Sad vengeance will deject thy vanity,
Just as that golden Calfes fine ashes were
In water cast, and worthless did appear.
161. Birds of prey, hardly reclaimed.
Achan was stoned for a wedge of gold,
That stuck too fast in his ill-bent desire:
But stony hearts their barren breasts do hold,
That wealth by stealth and lawless shifts acquire.
162. Of incineration.
As Daniel did by strewing ashes find,
The juggling Priests deceit; so in thy mind
And memory the wholesome ashes cast,
Whereto the fates will sift thy flesh at last;
And the false footsteps of the world thereby
Thou shall race out, and guilefull tricks desery.
163. Of the same.
Let not frail red and white delude thine eye,
For the Ash Color is the surest dye.
164. Of the external senses.
Who shuts not up his senses with a guard,
Lies open to the fate of Ishbosheth,
Who having left his palace gates unbarr'd,
Sly treason entered, and lets out his breath:
So shut these portals then, that Satan's skill
Pick not the Lock, nor sins intrusion kill.
165. The duty of meditation.
Those beasts that served for legal sacrifice,
Were such as chewed the cud: but men (more wise)
Should thankefully record and meditate
Of his high power, that did all create:
Else, less perhaps than things with hoof and horn
They God adore, and the universe adorn.
166. A troublesome world.
This World resembles Labans house, wherein
Good Jacob naught save trouble found and sin:
But having left it, by the Angels scale
Takes heavenly heights, and slights this earthly vale.
168. Of concord.
God many of each sort of creatures made,
As of birds, beasts, and plants; but of mankind
His wisdoms depth the first foundation laid
Only in two, and those as one combind;
That all, remembering how from one they came,
Might with the bent of love at union aim.
169. Of Regeneration.
As Moses put his shoes off, so must we
Our foul desires, that hope our Lord to see:
For like our loose affects, and would
Be so kept under, lest they grow too bold.
170. Of Divine contemplation.
Christ shined in glory upon those that went
To Tabors top with him; and so when we
By contemplation make our high ascent
'Bove worldly cares, through which we dimly see;
God lights us with his splendor, and displayes
His precious beauties with propitious rays.
171 Isreal's Shepherd upon the mountains.
Our Savior often in mountains did abide,
To preach or pray, but knew no height of pride.
172. General disobedience.
The most men (though no Kings) I may compare
To Saul, who did the lustiest cattle spare
Of Amalek: for so the lives we save
Of brutish passions, though command we have
To slaughter them; so cross we are to Gods
Just Laws, and even with our selves at odds.
173. To Asia.
Blessed Region, where my sacred Savior walked,
And God with man in flowery Eden talked,
I reverence thy soil, preferring thee,
The worlds fourth part, before the other three,
Though vast America against my strain
Swell with proud hills of gold, and high disdain.
174. Of abstinence.
Daniel by abstinence dispersed abroad
Those steshly vapors which becloud the mind,
And saw thereby the mysteries of God
More clearly than the rest of humane kind:
For fasting (that lusts fervor does allay)
Makes us as Eagles sharp, and apt to pray.
175. Holy violence.
Jacob, that rugged Esau's heel did hold,
Taught us thereby some rigid course to take
With hateful sins, and pluck them (if we could)
From us by th'heeles, that head against us make.
176. Away profane.
Those Beasts were to be stoned, that came but near
That Mount, where God in terror did appear:
And men that in Gods Temple dare present
Their beastly lusts, may fear like punishment.
177. Of the Star, and the stable, upon our Saviors Birthday.
Me thinks, the Stable and the Star I see,
The one above, the other here below:
Which two my Saviors several natures show,
His Manhood namely, and his Deity.
178. Double Victory.
As Daniel first destroyed the Idol Bell,
And then the Dragon: so if first we quell
The Idol of our flesh, we quickly shall
Make Satan fly, and down like lightning fall.
179. Of humane life.
If life be but a thread, then why may not
Sharp misery be the needle, death the knot?
180. Of solitude.
Our Heavenly Savior (passing all degree
Of humane sanctity) went often apart
To pray, and found such solitude to be
A fit companion for a single heart.
181. Of Traitors.
Like odious Toades are traitorous Male contents,
That from fair daylight hide their foul intents,
And in the Denns of mischief dormant sit
Till night; but then their blacker venime spit,
While with their harsh ill-boading sounds they break
The air, and peace of Kingdoms, where they speak.
182. Of Bablers.
Like the Caldean troops, that down did break
Ierusalems high Walls, are those that speak
Much to small sense, and violate thereby
The bounds of reason, mounds of modesty.
183. The Objects of reproof.
The stone that Daniel Writes of, did not smite
The Idols golden head, nor silver breast,
But carthen feet: so heavy blame does light,
Not on men's rich deserts (with honor blessed,)
But at poor errors reprehension flies,
And stones to death the slight'st infirmities.
184. The fall of fortitude.
Rich golden Vessels pale and sickly grow,
If not well furbusht with a painful hand:
So men of noblest metal fall below
Their worth by sloth, or as mere ciphers stand,
And (by their dullness) making others mount
To Honor, are themselves of no account.
185. Preparation for the Sacrament.
Men's hearts are like hard wax, which fiery zeal
Should soften, ere they take the heavenly seal.
186. Keep within compass.
Wild Esau ranged the fields, but Jacob still,
Kept home: so Gods indeared Servants will
Themselves in compass of a Conscience hold,
But impious fools are straglers from the Fold.
187. Earth to earth.
In Peru lives the Foxe-like Cincia, which
Kind nature does with a strange bag enrich,
Under her belly placed; to which (in fear)
Her straggling young ones have to hide them there:
The all feeding Earth the like maternall part
Performs to us, which (when the fatal Dart
Of death affrights, and strikes us down for sin)
Sets open a grave, and takes her offspring in.
188. The worm of Conscience.
Sin like a Serpents egg, in dunghill laid,
Of soul corruption to each heart convay'd,
And hatched with hot desires of greedy sense,
Becomes a Worm, and gnawes the Conscience.
189. Of tongues.
Our tongues are not of bone, but flesh, to show
Our words should not be harsh, but gently flow.
190. Good preachers, Gods favorites.
When Solomon the sacred Temple built,
God favored him, nor knew he then the guilt
Of what might vex him, sinful vanity:
So those that Gods dear Church do edify,
Keeping sin under, are in high regard
With him, that Crowns his workmen with reward.
191. Gods fear, with true fortitude.
Gods fear made Moses bold to go
To that stern Tyrant Pharaoh,
Not trembling at his harsh replies:
For when the Lord of earth and skies
Is lodged once in a faithful breast,
What earthquake dare his room molest?
192. Of zealous alacrity.
That God, that did the Israelites command
To eat with eager have the Paschall Lamb,
Now wills, when pious works we take in hand,
That we with nimble zeal perform the same:
For he that Heaven incessantly does move,
Admits no sluggish souls to rest above.
193. Poor and rich.
The Shepherds quickly with their Savior were,
But the three Kingly Sophies came from far;
To show, than poor men are to God as near
As fortunes Sons, that rich and potent are.
For pride (which made both men and Angels err)
Often waits on wealth, and leads to Lucifer.
164. Of Prayers.
Prayers are lively sparks, that mounting fly
From fire of zeal, and penetrate the sky.
195. A Crown for constancy.
In Aarons vesture, sumptuous to behold,
Betwixt small sounding bells of shining gold
Pomegranates stood, which native Crowns do bear;
And in the utmost skirts these placed were:
To show, that good works (which pure bells express*
Shall in Heavens Court be Crowned with happiness,
When in a course of constancy they have
Reached the Lands-end of life, the final grave.
196. The Devils temptation.
Satan's temptation seems the steel,
That striking on our hearts of stone,
Makes lust to sparkle; yet (we feel)
Often cooles our hott'st devotion.
197. Avoid Satan.
Good Abra'm drove the noughty fowls away,
That seaz'd upon his solemn sacrifice:
So the fould fiends temptations, when we pray,
Should we expel from the Heavenly exercise,
And pluck up (for the Lords sake of the soil)
The thorns of care, that grounds of goodness spoil.
198. Of perseverance in piety.
Those yoaked Kine, that drew the Arc unto
Beth-shemesh; though their Calves did bleat apace,
Did to their journies end directly go:
So when Christ's yoke upon our necks we place;
Though our fond lusts importune us to stay;
Yet hold we on, and keep the heavenly way.
199. To Fewlove, a turbulent Churchman.
What Devils horn compells thee? can not Preach
Of what thou nere wilt by example teach,
Good life and manners; but thou needs must be
Braying against the fruits of Sanctity:
As bounteous alms, set prayers, and the like,
Whereat thou do with points of Doctrine strike?
This 's not to build up, but edge tools to throw
Amongst ignorants, and wound their weakness so.
200. Of Hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy, like Ieroboams wife,
Walks in disguise, and rather acts a life
(Upon this trifling stage of vanity)
Than leads one, that her manners may discry.
For though an outward form they bear,
Pluck off her Mask, and (oh) the Devill's there.
201. The choice of a wife.
When Adam soundly slept, God Eve did make,
And when our fond desires are least awake,
The sound est course it is a wife to take:
For he that shootes love from a wanton eye,
Though on a fair match he may hit thereby,
Yet foully erres from th'white of chastity.
202. Of Confession.
Confession deals with sins, as Ioshuah
With the five Kings in the Cave of Makeddah;
That from dark hollow hearts where vices reign,
Brings them to judging light, and sees them slain.
203. The blood of our Lord.
Thy vital blood sweet Savior does assuage
Our feaverous sins, though hot as Hell they rage
Within our flesh. In sultry Egypt so
Dire plagues decrease, when Nile does overflow.
204. Wisdom without measure.
As Moses Serpent did the rest devour,
Gods wisdom fools our knowledge, foyles our power.
205. On bad Patrons.
Some Patrons worse than those our Savior scourged
Out of the House of Prayer, which he purged
From sin: for those in the Temple only sold,
But these will sell the Temples self for Gold.
206. Portions for Gods Children.
The doors that to Gods Oracle did lead,
Of Olive were, with Cherubs garnished,
Whose mysticke wood fat plenty did imply,
As the carved work, Celestial dignity:
Both which their portions are, whose hearts entire
Open at Gods knock, and shut out lewd desire.
208. Heaven hardly entered.
Of new Jerusalem truths Scribe does write,
That her twelve pearly gates stand opposite,
In Walls, whose Bases are twelve jemmes entire:
To show, that men from all parts shall aspire
To his fair City, (equalled by none)
Yet hardly make their way by Pearl and Stone.
209. To a vain Babbler.
Thy prayers are so tedious, that they be
Long ere they reach to Heaven, too high for thee.
210. Spiritual bondage.
When Zedechiah must to Babel go,
They blinded him, and heavy Chains did throw
Upon him: so when ignorance does shut
Men's eyes, and indevotion fetters put
On their affects, how quickly are they gone
To th'horrours of infernal Babylon!
211. A happy Convert.
A yongster going to the Stews, did meet
By chance a dead man's Coffin in the street:
Which courage-quelling sight a mortal blow
Gave to his lust, and took impression so,
That he returns a Penitent, and draws
His loose affects up to strict virtues Laws.
O wholesome spectacle! through which he sees
Folly in gross, and sins deformities.
212. To an Apostate.
That thy loose tongue is so profanely bold
To carpe at sacred truths, I wonder not,
That hear how much thy zeal has taken cold,
And sanctity the falling sickness got.
213. Celestial comfort.
The fire that in few minutes should have turned
Three Children into ashes, only burned
Their bonds asunder: but when once that flame
That shall dissolve the Worlds unwildy frame,
Sins chains shall loosen, and dull flesh refine,
We shall as Eagles soar, as Angels shine.
214. On the ten Lepers in the Evangely.
Ten Lepers cleansed were, one only blessed
His Lord; this toward Heaven out-leap'd the rest.
215. To Luke Warm.
The Egyptian Copties, though they long remain
In Churches, neither kneel, nor sit, but lean
On crutches still: why do not thou the same,
Whose Sanctity is sick, Devotion lame.
216. On old Simeon.
Those Pilgrims at Mecha once have been,
And Mahomets magnifick Temple seen,
Do usually deprive themselves of sight,
Lest on prophaner objects they should light:
Old Simeon so (if zeal compared may be
With madness) when he did young Jesus see,
(His hopes rich sum, and Sun of glory bright)
Desired the quenching of his vital light,
As loath (good man) t'infest his aged eyes
With spectacles of sins and miseries.
217. To a Communicant.
Thy body is now the pot of Gold,
That does Celestial Manna hold:
Then keep no cankred malice there,
For Golds nere rusts, but shines clear.
218. To a Pharisaicall boaster.
When Moses in his bosom thrust his hand,
It came forth leprous; but when thou into
Thine inside divest, thou will understand
That much unsoundnesse in each part does grow,
Till in the Jordan of Christ's blood it be
VVasht soundly off, like Naamans Leprosy.
219. Who first, for a winding-sheete.
With what a swiftness are we hurried on
By Times impulsion to our final home!
That seem to strive as Peter did, and John,
Who first unto the Sepulcher should come.
220. Worms meat.
The proudest King's but carrion, served in
A Leaden dish to worms, for heavier sin.
221. Keep off your Hatts.
The Four and twenty Elders did deject
Their Crowns before the Lamb: but yongsters owe
To the Worlds Savior now so slight respect,
As in his presence their bold heads to show
Unseemly veyl'd. O wrong to Sanctity!
Done in the public view, yet covertly.
223. Comfort in the Cross.
When Helena, most dear to Constantine,
(A Lady pregnant with affects divine)
Had happ'ly learned that Christ's Cross did lie
At the low confines of Mount Calvary,
Causing the rubbidge, under which it lay
By Jews ill-buried, to be cast away,
The broke Earth trembled (as the Story shows)
And from her ruptures dainty odours throws
Into the Air: For though the Cross imprint
Fear in our hearts, yet is there comfort in it,
And such a sweetness as was never found
In Tempe's Groves, nor Edens flowery ground.
224. Heavenly endowments.
We should the Robe of glory (as it were)
Spinne out of Christ by faith, embroyder't here
With works of Piety, perfume it too
With Incense of our Prayers; else we do
But feast on dainty dreams, and Heavenward rear
A scale of phansies, that no weight will bear.
225. An intricate Receptacle.
Man's body's of the Elements composed,
Within his body is his blood enclosed,
His spirits in his blood, in these his Soul,
And in it God does rest, that moves the whole.
226. On Truth.
Truth seeks no corners: How may this appear?
It comes from Heaven, which is a perfect Sphere.
227. Adams honorable interrement.
In a cleft Rock, near which our Savior died,
Was Adams head found, who had prophesi'd
(As Fame averres) that his Redeemer should
His bones there moisten with effused blood,
What time the Ocean of his love should make
The Nectar-drunken Earth to reele and shake.
O primely honored man! thus with the best
Of sweets embalmed, and rockt to blissful rest.
228. Treasures of Devotion.
The Starre-led Sages, that would Christ behold,
Did Presents bring, Myrrh, Erankinsence, and Gold:
So if tears, prayers, pure affects we bring,
We shall with comfort see our heavenly King.
229. On St. Thomas the Apostle.
Thomas for unbeleefe did make amends
At last, and had his Faith at's fingers ends.
230. The place of Christ's Nativity.
In a poor Grot on Bethlems Eastern side,
Which for a Stable sometimes was employed,
The Sun of Righteousness did (as it were)
Break from a tender cloud, that held him dear:
But in this lower world hard welcome found,
To whom a Manger hewne in the rocky ground
For Cradle served; not to be rock't, unless
An Earthquake came, and pittyed his distress.
231. On the Star that watched over our Savior.
Since other Planets seem to serve the Sun,
For Mars, Jove, Saturn, as his Legates run
About, and when he comes but near, in show
Of honor to their Epicycles go;
So Hermes does as Secretary 'bide,
With him; and Venus, as his amorous Bride,
Still waits upon him when to bed he goes,
And no less duty at his rising shows:
Then with good reason does this star express,
Such service to this Sun of righteousness.
232. The Forge of devotion.
A beaten brest's the anvile, prayers be
The sparks, and zeal the fire of sanctity.
233. On our Savior, wounded in the side.
The Balsame-shrubbe, lanc'd in the rine,
Does rich and fragrant tears distill:
But here is an upright Palm Divine,
From whose pierced side does Nectar trill,
Whose drops would dampe the rosy Morn
With sweets, and Galaxie adorn.
234. To an Atheistical scoffer.
The Tempter set our Savior (as they say)
On the proud height of Quarantania,
And showed him sundry Kingdoms: but should he
Hurl thee to Earths low-bowell'd vastity
Down Aetnaes fiery jaws, he happily might
So satisfy and terrify thy sight,
That thou no more would shocke at hideous things,
Nor play with such a flame as singed thy wings.
235. To the same.
Thou question'st me of Hell with hot desire
To know the seat of it, and seem indeed
Like Peter at the worst, who near the fire
His Master did deny, as thou thy Creed.
236. On Cocke-fighting. To Master William Latkins.
Some, that dislike what ere their betters love,
This pastime as a cruel sport reprove.
But why should not man, of all creatures Lord,
So use them as they pleasure may afford?
Is it more cruelty for fowls to fight,
Than beasts by the Butchers Knife to dye outright?
But I can raise good from the Pit, and call
To mind at every sound sad Peter's fall;
And while they fight that are so near of kin,
Spur up mine anger against (mine inmate) sin,
That crows against me. Thus who does allay
His mirth, and less for coin than conquest play,
May (Cocke-sure) take his pleasure; and delight
(With peace of Conscience with) a sportive fight.
237. Of Whoores, and their Masters.
Who will not foul veneriall acts forbear,
But ready are to mix with all they meet,
Are like those creatures which to Peter were
Presented in a trance, beasts in a sheet.
238. Gods garden.
Each virtuous breast Gods garden is, where grows
The Lilly of fair Chastity, the Rose
Of shamefastness, the Palm of charity,
The lowly Groundsell of humility;
The Camomile of patience, with the rest
Of pious plants, that make their owner blessed.
But thorns and brambles (cares and crook'd desires)
Must be extirp'd; they are pricked for Stygian fires.
239. Of Grace.
Grace is like Cedrons Channel, quickly dry,
Unless Heaven (still distilling) yield supply.
240. Man's dignity, and danger.
Each man an Adam; a good conscience is
His Paradise, and pledge of Heavenly bliss;
Lust the forbidden fruit; which when we taste,
God is displeased, from comfort man displaced.
241. Of the blessed Trinity.
Should I (as sometimes has been seen) behold
The King of Planets, with his beams of gold
Forming upon a Cloud, his Image bright,
And from those two, a third resulting light;
In such clear objects should I seem to see,
A shadow of the all glorious Trinity.
242. To William Davenpore Esquire.
Some argue (as blind fantasy invents)
That active discords of the Elements,
Did work the World up from its articke Mass:
But howsoere (to let that fiction pass)
Some verbal jarres betwixt my self and you,
Have made a world of real love ensue
In our affects. Which when I violate
By mixing friendship with one dram of hate,
Let Phoebus give me for a Laurel Crown
A wreath of Snakes, to hiss my Poems down.
The end of the Second Book.
FINIS.

