THE GLVTTONS FEVER.

Written by Thomas Bancroft.

LONDON, Printed by John Norton, for William Cook, and are to be sold at his
shop, at Furniuals-Inne gate, in Holborne. 1633.

To the nobly accomplished Gentleman, Wolstan Dixie, Esquire.
NOt as enamored on the various plume
Of a light fancy, do I here presume
To your straight judgment in an oblique line
To make my flight, address my first design.
For as a vernall Lark, but lately dressed
In her first Down, abandoning her nest,
Stretches her pinions, her small force assayes,
Flutters, and falls before her flight she raise,
Fears every blast, that scarce commit she dare
A Walnuts weight to the light wafting air:
So fares my Muse, yet scarcely got on wing,
Nor in the Region high enough to sing;
Such be the musters of her fears, so much
She doubts her strength, and blasting enuies touch.
But the chaste bay not every songster wears,
Nor of Appollo's sons prove all his heirs:
It Is not for all to reach at Shakespeares height,
Or think to grow to solid Iohnsons weight,
To bid so fair as Chapman for a fame,
Or match (your family) the Beaumonts name,
Whose grace, due to the Muses, is your claim
Their height, your honor, and their worth your aim.
Let such as these draw Nectar from the quill,
For freshest Garlands climb the sacred Hill,
And with high verse the ears of greatness swell;
Whilst I, scarce touching at their Thespian well,
With thirst, zeal their happy draughts admire,
And, but your censures truth, no test desire.
Daigne you with clearer knowledge to refine
This drossy ore raked from an empty Mine;
Daigne but to grace my verse, and guild my lines,
With that fair splendor from your judgment shines*
And then let envy all her forces bring,
And feed on basiliskes, and whet her sting,
She shall not wound me with her weapon'd rage,
But prick me Poet for high virtues stage:
There to advance above wretched Enuies spite
Mine elevation, with a sacred flight.
Next unto heaven, where pleasure's most of price
The Muses Garden be my Paradise.
T. B.

To his friend Mr. Bancroft, on his Poem styled, The Gluttons Fever.
BANCROFT, the neat description of thy dream
Has roused my sleepy Muse unto a theme,
That may deserve a Phaenix quill; but mine
'S too dull to praise thy verse, that is rare, divine.
Me thinks, I may to DIVES Feast compare
Thy wel-disht Poem: thou have dainty fare,
As once he had: the difference is this:
His niggardly was spared, thine freely is
Bestowed on all: but doth't in that alone
Dissent? no, his had scrappes, but thine has none:
Which being complete, let them for ever fast,
And on the Sullen die, that will not taste.
Thou wast asleep thou say, when that thy brain
Did fancy this; sleep so, yet wake again:
If thus thy Muse can warble on a dream,
O how't will ravish on a wak^ng theme!
When Sol salutes the Tropickes with a ray,
He straight withdrawes, recoiles, and glides away;
But that thy luster may transcend the Sun,
Go on fair Muse, that bravely have begun.
THO: DIXIE Gent.

THE GLVTTONS FEVER.
IT was in heat of summer height of noone,
When at the Sun the Dog-starre seem to bay,
(Like Wolves of Syria at the shining Moon,)
And with hot breath t'enflame the planets ray;
That, flattered forth to pleasures of the day,
Where once usurping Richard could not stand
I chanced to walk, in center of this Land.
The place did plea^e, ^o ^a^^e was Ambeame hill,
That seemed to swell, as proud of royal blood,
Which on his border sharpest swords did spill,
Where lives, a^ cheap as leaves, were in the Wood.
When down the Valley ran a sanguine Flood,
As frighted with the horror of the fight,
And Earth did blush at such a savage sight.
Here pitched my fancy on the Tyrants fate,
That, for the poisoned dainties of a King,
Like a rolled serpent flew upon the State,
As direly bent to ruin all to bring;
But here, disarmed of ambitions sting,
Shot out his soul. Who thus to reach a Crown
Through blood does swim, in blood does justly drown.
Richard, thought I, thy purchase was too dear,
With thy souls quiet for a Crown to part,
That lasht with scourges of a cons^ious fear,
Whose every stroke sent horror to thy heart,
Did at the glance of every shadow start,
As thinking still the hasty fiends did strive
To deepest Hell to hurry thee alive.
But if these lightnings of infernal fire
Thus blast the soul, and strike all comforts dead:
Great Thunderer, how heavy lights thine ire,
That, when all proppes are shrunk, all hopes are fled
All painted clouds of pleasure vanished,
Falls on the wretched soul, and sinkes it low
With storms of horror, to eternal woe!
With these impressions in my cloudy thought,
I trauel'd on in birth of sad conceits,
As every object on my fancy wrought,
Till near dissolved in the melting heats
Whose strong reflex on every creature beats,
I made mine eyes my harbengers, to take
Some shady room up, till the day did slake.
A neighboring wood a noble Syluane owes,
(Fresh in remembrance of this fatal field,)
Which to adorn victorious Henry's brows,
That Princely arms so royally did wield,
(For Palm, and Laurel,) did tall poplar yield,
Whose trembling leaves still cause of terror find
As still there were some danger in the wind.
'Twas then the shelter to a panting heard
Of falser hearts; whose faces to the rere
Had lost their Colors when the foe appeared,
But here relieved with many a native spear
Put courage on, and amongst the thickest were.
In safety here the dainty Pheasant flies,
And timorous Hare may sleeping close her eyes,
Hither my weight of weary limbs inclined,
Where a quaint arbor, by some lover made
Of sharpe-set Holly with faint Iuie twined,
The emblem of his love with love repaid,
Sraight entertained me with a pleasing shade;
While the moved leaves seem in the sunny ray,
Like gilded Laurel, ore my head to play.
In such a Palace might free pleasure reign,
Which the plum^d courtiers of the air did haunt,
That proud of sunshine, in a lofty strain
Did their own praises to their echoes chaunt,
Of highest worth did to their shadows vaunt;
And those that seem their symphony to hate
Are Owls and Buzzards, birds of wretched fate.
Here, like a Corse, bestucke with Cypress boughs,
I hid my sorrows, while dull dreaming sleep,
In a dark vapor stealing on my brows,
Did softly thence to every member creep,
In juice of Mandrake did my senses steep,
That, like dejected cowards, now had left
Their Fort besieged, of succor quite ber^ft.
Deep was my sleep, and deep, me thought, I went
Into the bowels of a dark abyss,
That woe and horror did as much present,
As highest Heaven does happiness and bliss
To glorious ^aints, that worldly snares did miss.
It was the cave, where black Destruction lies,
Not feared, because not seen with mortal eyes.
Here shall they languish in eternal night,
Whom prisoners he takes, who nere took rest,
Nor flying Comfort, nor estranged Delight;
But balefull Sorrow with his wounded breast,
Harsh Horror, Rage, and Famine most distressed,
Pale wi^her'd Sickness, Pain, and wrinkled Care,
With thousand Woes, his sad attendants are.
Here Gluttony, enraged for want of food,
Eats Enuies vipers, while the monster tires
On her own heart; here in a freshing flood
Lust does his penance for his hot desires;
His own lifeblood here vengefull Wrath requires,
Here Murder burns on piles of dead men's bones,
And under mounts of Gold oppression groans.
Here lies Ambition, that no bound did know,
Rolled in the dust, still sinking in disgrace;
Here rugged treason, full of wounds, does flow,
In his blood; here Sloth, to find his pace,
Is sharply scourged, and in this dreadful place
I, like a plummet to the center flung,
Did seem a while in ayrie balance hung.
But what I heard, what mortal tongue can tell,
Or ear contain, and not in sunder riue?
It was the moan the Glutton made in Hell,
That, from his own, unto Heaven gates did drive
Poor Lazarus, the wretchedst soul alive;
But now of friends, wealth, pleasures all forsook,
With hideous cries this empty Kingdom shook.
Now, memory, be faithful to my muse;
Tell how he begged, that erst so swelled in pride,
And what high language Abraham did use,
T'vpraid his life, that misery defied,
Tell to his speeches what the wretch replied,
Who, like an Ox of fatal garlands proud,
Thus in his fall began to roar aloud.
Infernal sergeants, whether will ye hale
A wretched creature? to what depth of woe
Must I descend in this Cimmerian vale?
Into this yawning furnace must I go,
Whose roaring entrails pitchy horrors throw,
To whose fierce flames a thousand Aetna's are
As smallest sparks, extinguished with compare?
How far, how far from all supernall Light
Am I thrust down by rude imperious hands?
How deep ingulfed in this cave of night?
How wrackt, and swallowed, as in Seas, and Sands?
How fast chained up in everlasting bands,
Here to abide the Almighties fiercest ire,
Whose frown a flash, whose wrath's eternal fire?
Fair Prince of light, that with thy roabe of Gold
Does deck the world, that in cold darkness lay,
Let me (O) still thy joyful beams behold,
To these sad shades remove thy court of day,
Vouchsafe the splendor of one smiling ray;
At least once more unto my comfort shine,
And all the beauties of the Heavens be thine.
What hideous storm of all confused woes
My sense with pain, my soul with horror smites?
What dreadful ambush of unnumbered foes
Has me begirt, whose ruthlesse rage delights
To force these yells, whose ghastly form affrights
Above all the whippes of vengeance, or the darts
Of grimmest death, opposed to guilty hearts?
Has Nilus left no issue on his strand,
But all his monsters in this dungeon pent?
Are there no Serpents on the Libian sand,
But hither all transported to torment
With scorching stings, and poisons deadly sent?
Which how it does, (all comfort quite to kill,)
With banefull steames this odious prison fill?
The sulp'hrous fumes, that from the flaming skies
Blast the poor infant in the burdned womb,
Th'abhorred caves, where Plague, and Famine lies,
Where never beam, nor breath of Heaven has come,
When the long buried vapors break their tomb,
Vent not so sick a dampe, so foul a breath,
As here enwrappes me in a Cloud of death,
Ah doleful echo of this dreadful cave!
At once to hear the wailing Dragons moan,
The hungry Lion roar, the frantic rave,
The weeping Heart bray, and the Mandrake groan,
The cries of captives in confused tone,
Would with less horror grate my tender sense,
Than these harsh woes, that cry all comfort hence.
Such is the music made of dying mones
In this rude chantry, that no mean does know,
But treble shriekes the base of deepest groans,
With heavy texour of lamenting woe,
Taught by tormentours, that no pity show.
Strange consort, which no harmony commends,
And yet keeps time, that never never ends!
That impious faction, Corahs rebel crew,
Whom greedy vengeance snatched alive to Hell,
When the cleft Earth did grimmest horror show*
And all on heaps to deepe-mouth'd ruin fell,
Sent not so sharp a shrieke, so loud a yell,
As here from thousand throats with piercing sound
Strikes every ear, and leaves a ghastly wound.
Where fiends and Furies all at once vnchain'd,
With pois'ned scourges to afflict me here,
Where every part with sense of torture pained,
And every sense his part of woe does bear,
Nor ever glimpse of comfort does appear?
Has only here dire Mischief chose to dwell,
And heauiest Sorrow sunk his cave to Hell?
For Tyrian purple, and Achaian bysse,
Here do I lie close wrapped in sheets of fire;
For sumptuous fare (my more than Heavenly bliss,)
Here thirst, and hunger on mine entrails tire;
For mirth, here mischiefs to my pain conspire;
For a bright palace, here is black Ruins stage,
Where actors howl and hissing serpents rage.
What tyrant joined these adamantine bands?
What Fury in my bowels built her Hell?
Is all my flesh a fire? My bones the brands?
My sinews all divul'st with passion fell?
Do all my veins with liquid sulphur swell?
Crack all mine arteries with tortures tried,
Yet must more storms, more wrackfull woes abide?
Great Heaven, that do that Starry brow advance,
Thou, that the measures of quicke-turning time
About the world eternally do dance,
Cannot so high these restless dolours climb?
Cannot these cries, that drown th'harmonious chime
Of all thy spheres, some tender pity move?
Is there no beam of mercy shines above?
Why do thou mock with euer-blazing fires
These ceaseless torments, to enrage my woe?
O could my fury armed with strong desires
Strike out those lights, that never comfort show,
And on that proud roof rusty darkness throw:
Into how blind, and rude a Chaos should
Those wheels of time, thy giddy orbs be rolled?
What tempest fights thus sharply in my pains,
That, in the ardours of this quenchlesse fire,
Shiuers a hundred winters through my veins,
Nor suffers once my torments to respire?
Fond wretched soul to chase a wild desire
To this sad fall, and for frail earthly toys
Loose an eternal Iubile of joys?
Abhorred Sin, that on the world did pluck
Vast ruin down, too heavy to be borne!
Thou, that a scarre on natures brow have stuck,
With thorns and thistles have her beauties torn,
And stripped her of her roabes divinely worn!
Thou, deadly plague, the poisoned spring of all
Man's fatal woes, may triumph in my fall.
Damned hagge, that all in mischief have out gone,
Whose very breath infects all vital air!
Seuen-headed monster, that to senseless stone
Do turn the heart, and sink it in despair,
To th'vgli^st shape transform'st the creature fair!
How have I trodden all thy flowery, sweet,
But cursed paths, that in this dungeon meet!
O Pride, high traitor, eldest child of hell,
Apparent heir of misery, and shame!
Thou bane of bliss, that made bright Angels swell
Till they burst Heaven, and down in legions came!
Bold mischief at the highest throne to aim!
How have I followed all thy steep desires,
And flashing riots, to these flaming fires!
And thou, foul Gluttony, deep gulf of sin,
Full Sea of mischiefs, that with swelling tide
Do bring lust, sloth, with train of sorrows in,
And rankely spring'st each vicious weed beside;
How (like a stalled beast) by thee, and pride
Have I been fed, and dressed for greedy hell,
That I thus deep into his bowels fell!
O eyes, why were yea blind to heavenly light?
O ears, why deaf unto the prophets sound:
O hands, why were yea lame to render right?
O knees, why stiff, and strange to hallowed ground?
O feet, why slow to have safe virtue found?
Cursed be yea all, vile traitors, most unkind,
That with his foes against your Lord combined.
Cursed be this tongue, base organ of deceit;
Cursed be this brain, that did high pride admire;
Cursed be this heart, that burned in lustful heat;
Cursed be this spirit, that still blew the fire;
Cursed be this flesh, the forge of lewd desire;
Cursed be all senses, parts; and powers of mine,
That did all ways of blessed life decline.
How have I rauell'd out the knotty thread
Of mortal life, that in our prime of years
Hides worms and dust within a flowery bed?
'Twixt Earth and Earth it is but a strait of tears,
A helpless palsy of weak faithless fears,
A storm of sighs, a bubble filled with breath,
That swells, and shines, but vanishes in death.
Did I enjoy, (or were they all but dreams?)
All sweets of pleasure, heights of all delight,
That with swift motion, as the sunnie beams,
Took wing, and with irreuocable flight
Left me to horrors of this endless night,
(Like a shot star,) from prides high turrets thrown
To Stygian deepes, where comfort never shone?
Where Is now that wealth would counter-poize my woes?
Ill-honour'd Mammon, that with daring hand
Do cast at Kingdoms, and of Crowns dispose,
Yet art a God of such a short command!
And you, faint friends, that by our fortunes stand,
How soon you loose us in a maze of grief,
Nor ever will be found to yield relief!
Prodigious world! the rende'vouz of Hell!
Vast Sea of danger! Nursery of woes!
Great shop of vanities, where all will sell!
Black stage of mischiefs! Field of mortal foes!
Rude garden-plot of vice, where rankely grows
In every bed, lust; in each border, pride,
Amongst choicest plants some banefull weeds beside!
Old faithless baud! Enchantresse! More untrue
Then treasons heart! More various then the Moon!
More counterfeit then the Camelians hiew!
How have thou clipped my golden hopes so soon,
Blasted and darkened all my joys at noone!
How have thou borrowed all my time and strength,
And paid me home with miseries at length!
There Is not a path in all thy spacious round,
But is with snares and traps, and serpents stored;
No piece of all thy painted beauties sound,
But for some blemish or disease abhorred;
No limb but lame, and for some wound deplored:
Now have I followed all my guilefull trains,
And pleasing dangers, to these lasting pains!
Shall I nere more thy joyful face behold,
Thy face, O Heaven, where lasting beauties shine?
Nor (that which fairer seemed,) my glittering Gold?
Did I at once my treasures all design?
Where are my Robes? my junkets? and my Wine?
My swarms of friends? like busy Gnats, each one
Filled, and flowne off, all in an instant gone.
Where is that coast, where safety does reside?
Those bounteous Fields with Olive blessed, and Vine?
Those swelling Hills, the lofty walks of pride?
Rich Vales? fair Brooks, whose straying course, like mine,
So pleasant seemed, and downward did decline?
In one dead sea are all my pleasures drowned,
All comforts wrackt, and never to be found?
For now false pleasures, that no sooner wed
But were diuorc'd, no sooner gained but gone,
Has my damnd'd soul, in errors night misled,
Lost the true treasures to the world unknown,
The rich possession of a heavenly throne,
With the blessed vision of that form divine,
Where thousand suns of light and glory shine!
Were Fates so kind, as to the coasts of light
To send me back, and thread my life again:
O Heaven, how for thy Kingdom would I fight!
How strive, and climb the blessed Palm to gain,
In that high Court of happiness to reign!
How should mine ages second course abound
With fruits of grace, to be with glory crowned!
My meat should be the dainties of the Word,
Strongly concocted with the heat of zeal;
My Wine, such as the Bridegroom does afford,
My mirth, sweet heavenly mercies to reveal,
And my whole age but one continued meal.
So would I prove a Glutton then, and spend
My life's revenue to that grateful end.
My garment should be Innocence, as white
As Chastity could blanch it, spangled round
With Gold of pure example shining bright,
Embroidred with rich virtues on the ground,
With constancies rare border fairly bound.
So would I then be proud, and loath to hide
From the worlds eyes such ornaments of pride.
My house should be the Hospital of poor*
My Barn their granary, my Gold their rent;
Still should the Altars smoke, and on the floor
Of the blessed Temple should my knees be bent,
Mine eyes should flow, my beaten breast relent;
On Heavens pure beauties would I fix my heart,
Nor should the stroke of thunder make it start.
Thus to her load-starre should my soul incline,
My breathed flesh still panting up the hill;
My studies should be height of things divine,
My teacher, truth; till happiest in my skill
I did my heart with sacred wisdom fill,
And knew the mysteries of Heaven as well.
As now (alas!) the mysteries of Hell.
Dire Conscience! what thunder broke thy rest.
And did not dash thy prisoner to air!
How do thou now lie worming in my breast,
That raging Hell does not more grimly stare
Then thy wild looks of horror, and despair!
How have thou hung each action upon times
Neglected file, and registered my crimes!
Why do thou twit me with voluptuous pride,
How ill I spent the treasure of my time,
My thoughts mis-centerd, all mine actions wry'd
In falsest aims; yet in my pleasures prime,
Whose headlong course did steepest dangers climb,
Would never prompt me how this fall to shun,
Whilst I to Hell in full careere did run?
As a high Rock, hung on the craggy side
Of some steep Mountain, swelling with disdain
Of the low Region prostrate to his pride,
Shook with an Earthquake, tumbling down amain
With thundering terror on the trembling plain,
That the tossed air from every cave rebounds,
And deafes the Vales with loud confused sounds:
So, hurried on, to ruin did I haste,
Whilst yawning fiends my funerals did yell,
That on my treasures mount had pitched so fast,
As naught should shake me, ere I headlong fell;
So firmly, as a Rock, I seemed to dwell,
And rockt a sleep in downy pleasure lay,
'Till mischief roused, and seaz'd her cursed pray.
Injurious Time, that unto light does bring
The worst of things, yet me to darkness sent!
Cannot I pluck one feather from thy wing,
Recall one hour of thousands vainly spent,
Wherein I might my wretched age lament?
'Twere worth a Kingdom, were thou now my friend,
A dearer favor Time could never lend.
Then would I purge the venom of my heart,
And beat my breast, that did the viper keep;
With sharp compunction every sense should smart,
My clouded brain with sad defluxion weep,
And all my sins lie drowned in sorrows deep:
So some few minutes might my loss repay,
And crown a black night with a joyful day.
What heavy darkness, highest Lord of Light,
Does thus oppress me in this dreadful place?
Ah! might I once enjoy thy blisfull sight!
TO admire new worlds of wonder in thy face!
How were I happy in so high a grace!
Once to behold, (though then for ever blind,)
In one blessed knot, all beauties sweet combined!
High-honour'd Victours, joined in glorious Quiuers
To sing his praises, that your conquest crowned,
Where hoasts of Angels, like bright mounting fires,
Tread the dimn'd Stars in measure to the sound;
Whilst wretched I sighs, plaints, and cries confound,
TO have lost at once both Crown and State divine,
For pleasures base, for sins deceitful shine!
If I have mourned to see that Prince of day,
When the pale loue-sicke Lady of the maine
In a kind treason clipped his golden ray,
But straight restored it to the world again,
How should mine eyes these bitter floods refrain,
But weep his absence, at whose glory bright
A thousand sunny Lamps their beauties light?
Have I not seen a daring vapor rise
High into air, ambitious to ascend,
But straight imprisoned in the cloudy skies,
How it spittes lightning, roares, and seems to rend
Those glittering curtains, as at once to spend.
The angry engines of hot Heaven, to fright,
And start old Chaos from the deepes of night?
How then must I for ever damned thrall,
Barred from my bliss, and center of my rest,
The sovereign prize, and source of pleasures all;
That only feast's the spirit, fill's the breast,
In endless honors does the soul inuest;
How must I here in woes, that know no bound,
Then the whole world a dearer soul confound!
Those slumbering years, I did in pleasure spend,
Why did they wake in death, in woe expire?
Or, since so soon they started to their end,
Stopping the torrent of my wild desire,
Why should my torments in this ruthlesse fire
Survive all ages, and my griefs amount
To higher sums, then ever time shall count?
Often have I known an exhalation try
The centers strength, and trembled to behold
How it shook Mountains, and drank Rivers dry.
Still thirsty of revenge, as if it would
(For false imprisonment) the Earth have rolled
From her deep seat, the massy base vp-blowne.
And the huge frame to vaste confusion thrown.
And do I here, empal'd in floods of fire,
That trembles to behold the farthest light,
Struggle with dying panges, and nere expire;
Yet armed with rage, my miseries to right,
Confound not Heaven, and Earth in fell despite;
That I might see, though in ^he ruined sky,
Some sparks of joy, before all comfort die?
Up Snaky vengeance, in a fiery storm
Bring on thy Furies, all the cursed band;
I shall outface thee in thy vgliest form;
Shake all thy whippes, and kindle every brand,
Thou shall not fright, nor force me from my stand:
Let me, that here all hoasts of Heaven defy,
Thy Stygian troops, all plagues infernal try.
Come griesly torturers of ruthlesse Hell,
My coale-blacke scorpions, (i^ no blacker art
Has charmed your rage, that chained in darkness dwell,)
Fix all your stinges in center of my heart,
With poinant anguish strike through every part;
And where more strong some vital force remains,
Set to your tortures, sharpen all my pains.
O for some pyramid, to proudest fame
Reared high as Babell, on whose mounting spire,
(Since I must perish in a cursed flame,)
Like some dire meteor streaming blood and ire,
I might stand centred in this hellish fire,
That with hot fury might his axell burn
From the maine globe and all to cinders turn.
'T were worth my ruin amongst the stars to fall,
Like Lucifer shot headlong for his pride;
To see the bolts of vengeance grind the ball
Of the cursed Earth, benighted nature slide
To her first dungeon, and all creatures hide
Their forms in darkness; 't were a sport to make
Confusion shout, and hell with laughter shake.
But whither runs my madness? how I rave?
Must woe and mischief ever be my theme?
Still must I call for death, yet keep the grave?
Through rage and anguish must I still blaspheame,
And fry, and freeze, with heat, and cold extreme?
Still must I howl at heaven, and bite my chain,
And gnash my teeth through horror of my pain?
Were I more years then time has minutes spent,
Or this burst frame would into atoms fly,
In all the plagues, deep hell could ere invent,
Adiudg'd to languish, and unpitied lie;
Yet lastly live, or, lost in darkness, die:
Still were my hope a Halcyon, to appease
These angry storms, and calm these boiling Seas.
Were the hot engines, all that ever flew
With red-wing'd lightning, to my torture cast;
Unto more flames, then ever Aetna threw,
Were I condemned and yet released at last,
When thousand myriads of slow years were past:
'T were yet a solace, that, in darkesome night
Of heauiest woes, would show my sorrows light.
But (Oh the grief!) this euer-raging fire,
Which the incensed breath of heaven does feed,
The Immortal death, that on my heart does tire,
This cursed heart, that evermore must bleed,
How far it does the direst thought exceed!
How quite confound me in a state of woe,
That only hell is deep enough to know!
But stay, what wonders do mine eyes behold?
What strange impressions in so high a sphere?
Two suns at once embeam'd with flaming Gold?
Rather two Saints, that in that State appear?
What thrones they hold? what Palms in triumph bear?
What Diademes they wear? what Roabes, that shine
(Not like my purple, but) like rays Divine?
It Is Abraham, for Faith so far renowned,
With that Saint-begger, was so low debased
With wants and sores, but now with glory Crowned.
Blessed Lazarus! how highly is he graced!
With how dear arms of amity embraced!
His life's poor stock he might with comfort spend,
That was assured of such a bosome-friend.
I will assay what mercy reigns above
That with some truce affliction may befriend.
Dear Patriarch, if pain may pity move,
If sorest throws, that ever heart did rend,
If heauiest sorrows may so high ascend,
To a sad captive cursed to blackest woe
With favor shine, and some sweet comfort show.
Thou that, enthroned upon the golden Poles,
Do drink rich Nectar from the i^mortall spring
To thy joyed children there triumphant souls,
(So may fresh armies serve thy Heavenly King,
And unto thee glad news of conquest bring,)
Do not in honors happy court disdain
A wretches plaint, the language of my p^ine.
Let from thy bosom Lazarus descend,
With one cold drop my burning tongue to slake,
One drop of water on his fingers end:
For (oh!) my torments in this fiery Lake,
At whose dread Name the peccant soul should quake,
Who can express? my sorrows boundless are,
As are thy joys, and both beyond compare.
For cursed Sodom did thou strongly plead,
When ore their sins incensed vengeance hung;
But more dire drops this goary heart has bled,
Then on those heads the flaming tempest flung,
A hotter storm broils this bewailing tongue:
Then let thy pity to my plaints awake,
And on my woes some dear compassion take.
He ended; when, as if the spheres had rung
Some tune-full change, or thunder learned to chide
In milder language, or some Cherub sung;
With powerful voice, that Hell to silencety'd,
From his high throne the Patriarch replied,
Whose sacred words, first steept in heavenly dew,
Thus from his lips in golden vollies flew.
What change is this? what wonder strikes mine ear?
Art thou the man that did supinely sleep
On pleasures couch, unto the world so dear,
That now, benighted in the infernal deep,
Do thus ra^e out thy sorrows, howl, and weep;
While I scorned wretch, that at thy gates did pine,
Does in full Orb of heavenly glory shine?
Where Is now your power, you, that proudly could
Lead your blind Goddess in a golden chain?
Where now your roabes so gorgeous to behold?
Your mounts of Gold raised in your worldly reign?
Of friends and parasites your pompous train?
Did all like leaves, fly with your flitting breath,
And leave you naked in that storm of death?
Fond prodigal to spend an age of Gold,
And act at last a woeful beggars part,
When naught auailes thy sorrows to unfold!
A thousand times unhappy that thou art,
That above thy dish would never raise thy heart,
When mercy smiled upon thee from the skies,
How can thou now lift up those wretched eyes?
Do but thy times of pleasure now record,
That did no God, but Gluttony, confess;
For whom thy house a Temple did afford,
Whose Altar was thy table of excess,
Which still the fattest Sacrifice did press;
The hallowed water was delicious wine,
The fire, thy lust, that never did decline.
Amongst thy cups, with Rosy garlands crowned,
Cens'd with perfumes, in Princely purple dressed,
All cares extinct, all sorrows deeply drowned,
Still did thou sit, becalmd with ease and rest,
Mirth in thy face, and solace in thy breast;
But as for Heaven, it was (a Pole) to high
For thy brute sense, that would to pleasure fly.
On basest Earth was centred all thy rest,
That drossy mass, exposed to lowest scorn;
Which how it seems like some foul wormy nest,
Of nature quite abandoned and forelorne,
Closed in the thicket of sharp rending thorn,
Whose prickles, cares, whose leaves, deceitful arts.
And stony fruits are hard unfruitful hearts?
It Is but a Field, where sin corruption sowes,
Where every breaths infection blastes an ear,
Against the grain where every creature goes:
Yet on this sandy base, that naught will bear,
How high thou did thy bold ambition rear,
Whose honor before the thunderclap of death
Was but a flash, and vanished with thy breath?
Look how a Porcpisce, in the boiling Maine,
Ioy^d with the news of some tempestuous blast,
Plays in the waves, as in the winds disdain;
While the poor Seaman sadly climbs his Mast,
Folds up his sails, and in his frights aghast
Heaues his pale eyes these powers to implore,
To waft his light Bark to the restfull shore:
So, let high Heaven, that with a piercing beam
Disclouds each thought, his wrathful forehead bend:
Still would thou wallow in full pleasures stream:
Let poor pined Lazarus all day extend
His bloodlesse hands and throat with clamours rend:
Yet, as thy heart had from some Rock bin hewed,
Nor storm it feared, nor calm of pity showed.
Now shall thy judge thy cruelty requite,
And strike that fire from out thy flinty breast,
Shall to his glory lend a forced light:
Nor shall the throws of anguish ever wrest
The tune-full heart, with heavenly virtue blessed,
Nor sin still trumph, but too late shall think
Vengeance nere sleeps, though justice seem to wink
Still, still ingulfed in that Brimstone-flood,
That rowles about those griesly vaults of night,
Shall thou bewai^e that lost eternal good,
Whereof this Saint enioyes the joyful sight,
A plenilune of neuer-waining light,
Whose very glimpse would clear all clouds of woe,
And make to life dead seas of sorrow flow.
Behold this Bower, reared so high above
Those iarring elements their heat and cold,
Those cloudy Tents, that with the wind remove,
Or restless Orbs with rapid motion rolled:
No Earth quake undermines this happiest hold,
Upon these battlements no tempest falls,
No thunder batters these imperial Walls.
It is that Palace, built to lasting joys,
Into whose height the King of glory goes,
That in his hand the mundane Globe does poize,
And to the blessed a world of pleasure shows;
To whom he does rich Diademes dispose,
That here, (as pendant on the golden threads
Of their pure lives,) adorn their happy heads.
Walled all with Jasper is this lofty Bower,
Which, as his base, unvalued gemmes uphold;
The Porters, Angels high in place and power;
Each gate, a pearl of bright celestial mould;
The pauement, Stars, fixed in eternal Gold;
Roof'd, as with Silver, with condensed flame
Of glorious light, that filles the immortal frame.
In dazeling splendor of ten thousand days
Shines the high Monarch, that all glory lends,
Sunning all treasures in those precious rays,
On whom the heavenly hierarchy attends,
As on whose Throne all vital joy depends.
In his pure beams let flights of Angels soar,
And with presented Crowns all Kings adore.
Pay worlds of Nations tribute to this King,
That does their States in happiness inuest;
Let his high praises with the Sun take wing,
And clear the Firmament from East to West.
Great glorious Lord, by all thine Armies blessed;
Thou, in whose hand I see that golden reed,
Measure my heart, and let my zeal proceed.
Pure Majesty, that may all Crowns refine!
Thrice hallowed flame of light, of life, of love!
Bright Orb of grace, that does to glory shine!
High treasurer of honors stored above!
Circle, and center unto all that move!
Natures sweet Organist! thy highest strain
What voice can reach, to sing thy happi'st reign?
One beam of thine out-shines a world of light,
One call would start corruption from the graves,
One glance would clear the cloudy brow of night,
One nod becalme the Oceans surging waves,
One smile send sorrow sighing to his canes,
One Altar-sparke of thine in lightlesse Hell
Would kindle day, and all the shades dispell.
Of Heavens rich beauties to the ravished sight
One mirror here all treasures do reflect,
One Globe all beams of glory does unite,
One load-starre all the voyagers direct,
One sovereign power in safety all protect,
One banquet here both souls and senses feasts,
And filles* and feeds, nor ever cloyes the guests.
The ten-fold curtain of these azure spheres
Serves but to veil this Arc from fleshly eyes;
But when her head the soul exultant reares,
With open wings where heavenly glory flies,
What wonder does her faculties surprise!
How does she here extend her powers wide
To drink in pleasures from the boundless tide!
A glittering Ocean of clear wauing glass
Melts from the Throne of Majesty divine,
That Edens floods in pureness does surpass,
Where several drops the galaxy outshine,
That, mixed, would change the brackish waves to Wine,
And the black lake, where Sodom erst did burn,
To precious streams of liquid Crystal turn.
So, when the planets lovely Prince does fix
His dazeling beauties on some spongy cloud,
Where the brave beams in gorgeous colors mix,
The rorid vapor of such honor proud,
To be in Heaven so gloriously embow'd,
Dissolues in joy, and 'bout the burning skies
In silver drops the melting treasure flies.
Here the glad pilgrim, crowned with lasting wealth,
Viewes his bathed limbs from every blemish clear.
Nor cares to weed the wonted fields for health:
Here mounts that tree, whose flourish all the year
For sacred guests does sovereign banquets bear,
In whose rich taste delicious pleasure flows
Into all forms, and heavens all sweetness shows.
Not Angels dainties in the Desert shared,
Nor honied milk of Cana'ns flowery breast,
Have with this plants rare delicates compared;
Under whose shadows sleeps eternal Rest
With joys surcharged, of treasured hopes possessed:
Who taste this fruit the Serpent have beguiled,
Nor with foul lusts their shiny souls defiled.
No thirst nor hunger shall their joys devour,
No wanes of sorrow shall their brows enfold,
No boisterous storm their vernant prime defloure;
Where beauty knows not age, nor age makes old.
O wondrous change of base inglorious mould!
Blessed souls, that in afflictions roughest maine
Wracking their sins, this heavenly Haven gain!
Here are no pageants to inuit the sight,
No syren-songs to rock the slumbering ear,
No generous wines t'exalt the appetite,
No odorous fumes that spirits wont to cheer,
No amorous claspe to draw affection near;
And yet a fullness, where all fair and sweet,
All lines of life, all paths of pleasure meet.
A glorious triumph with high honors blessed,
An air of harmony that filles the quires,
A rich rare banquet, an ambrosiacke feast,
A sweet perfume that with no time expires,
A joy sublimed in loves high sacred fires,
A pleasures maze, an Ocean, where to drown
Is depth of bliss, a Kingdom and a Crown.
Hark, how these Hero's, that in honored quest
Of higest bliss did to this mount aspire,
Shout out their joys, with language not expressed;
How Zealous David, cleared with heavenly fire,
Shrilles out his ditties to his golden lyre;
Whilst the rapt Angels with immortal lays
Make up the music, and their Makers praise.
Here may the soldier, that with painful march
Did to such height of happiness ascend
Hang up his arms in this triumphall arch.
And treasures share, that time shall never spend:
The Sea-sicke voyager let hither bend
A dextrous course; though now he plow the maine,
A bounteous harvest shall reward his pain.
Who ever noone with midnight did compare,
A hallowed Temple with a pestred room,
The beams of Majesty with clouds of care,
A marriage-chamber with a fatal tomb,
Or to the spacious world the narrow womb;
Let him to Heaven all earthly joys oppose,
And all his lines in deepes of wonder lose.
Were I again to walk the worldly round,
A thousand hopeful Isa'cs would I slay,
Till with dear blood I had the Mountains drowned,
To gain one glimpse of this eternal day;
Which might my faithful sons but once suruay,
How would they impe their hearts with fleet desire
To mount this pitch, and to these joys aspire!
What is life's winter to this spring of years,
But a loose meteor in frail beauties skies,
Dispersed with sighs, and dropped away in tears?
It Is but a flourish before the fall prize,
A knot of miseries, that death unties:
And what desire's so impotent, so base,
To Adore a cloud, when Heaven presents his face?
In his prime virtues did the world consist;
All precious bounties did the Earth afford,
Which off that stage the banefull Serpent hissed
In all the wealth her ample womb does hord
Were man ensphear'd, and of great Nature Lord:
Were he new stamped, and all his powers, am'd
By his sleep fall, in straight perfection framed;
Were all the sweets, that ever Zephyre blew,
Wrapped in one cloud, and for his solace brought;
All fruits and flowers, that in Eden grew,
Were they distilled for his delicious draught;
Were every sense with highest rapture caught;
Were his clear heart to heaven erected right
To measure heights of joy, and pure delight:
Yet were the joys of that delightful state,
(Though freed from bonds of misery and pain,
From times vicissitude, and stroke of fate,)
But as poor rivelets to the bondlesse Maine
Of these high pleasures, but as scattred grain
To these large fields whose harvest does abound,
That all the year is with rich plenty Crowned,
If with just wonder mortal eyes behold
One rising planet his refulgent grace,
VVrapping the newborn day in sheets of gold,
All Heaven enflaming with his loueliest face;
Whilst from his throne he does in conquest chase
Usurping darkness, that with mournful night,
Winged with black vapors, sadly takes her flight:
What height of rapture does the soul surprise,
To see the Sunshine of ten thousand days,
With all the splendor of the illustrious skies,
Meet in full circle with united rays,
That to the veiw all heavenly treasures lays!
How shall this glory bless with vital light
Those longing eyes, that hither bend their sight!
Into one Pandect were the spheres compiled,
With Tropickes claspt, with Hemicycles bound;
Were for my penns the Angels wings despoiled:
Mine ink, this Ocean, precious and profound;
My characters, new Stars, of Heavenly sound;
Should I more leaves then ever Autumn shook
With wonders fill, in this Celestial Book:
Yet should I scarce these treasured joys unfold,
In whose rich fullness Lazarus does flow,
And far beyond all flight of time shall hold;
Whilst thou, damned Glutton, in excess of woe
Shall surfeit still, nor health, nor comfort know:
Thou would not give one crumme all heaven to gain,
Nor may thou hope one drop to ease thy pain.
From this bright Mount, where happiness does sit,
Above earthly change and heavenly motion placed,
To the deep darkness of the infernal pit,
The distance large, the latitude is vast,
Nor ever embassy betwixt them past:
Cast is their lot, unchanged rests their state,
That once have past the broad, or narrow gate.
Drop out thine eye balls in a briny shower,
And beat thy heart, that would no sooner mourn:
Though vast eternity shall time devour,
And in one flame the general machine burn,
Still shall thy wheel of torment sharply turn,
When thou have wearied all the Stars in sky,
And sands on Earth, to sum thy sorrows by.
Here closed the music of that Heavenly tone;
When, as in depth of Hinnons gloomy vale,
Some wretched infant on the Altar thrown,
The bloody Priests with sacred horrors pale,
(Whilst the poor dying birth did shrieke and wail,)
Raised high their noise, and hideously did wound
The ears of Heaven, that on the mischief frowned:
Amongst thousand thralls to plagues and tortures sent
So wail'd the Epicure, more deep distressed;
Thrice did he crack his chains, and thrice he rent
The clinging Snakes from off his goary breast;
What wild despair could to his thought suggest
He taught his rage: and thus, with flaming breath,
Gaspt in the panges of everlasting death.
O gulf of horror! poison of my fate!
O depth of woe, that never thought could gage!
O weight of misery! O doleful state!
How quenched my comfort! and how hot this rage
Of torment, which no pity does assuage!
Ah that a creature frozen in despair
These flames should 'bide, and not dissolve to air
Cursed that I am, how can my heart contain
So vast a sorrow? will the joyful day
Of gracious mercy never dawne again?
Wrackt is my hope? and to this desert bay
Will my lost comfort never find the way?
Must I for anguish ever howl among
These hideous fiends, and gnaw this banefull tongue?
Woe to the authors of this woeful state,
That poisoned nature with contagious seed:
Woe to the womb, where first I took my fate,
Why did it not some Snake, or Scorpion breed?
Woe to the nurse did such a monster feed,
And not some panther from the desert sent,
That piece-meale might her cursed corpse have rent.
Woe to the light, that first my life descri'd:
Fate strike each minute of that hateful day:
That ominous circuit when the Sun does ride,
Let him in cloudy darkness loose his way,
And to the farthest frozen regions stray:
That with his heat those Icy mountains steep
May melting flow, and seem my woes to weep.
When first I sucked the poisons of the world,
Why drew I not destruction from the skies?
Why were not sheets of flaming sulphur hurled
Upon my cradle? nor did mischief rise
In earthly damps to blast my hateful eyes,
That never fixed on Heaven? how sadly slow
Was vengeance, armed to strike the deadly blow?
Dread Lord, that mounted on the radiant spheres
Do as the dust the cloudy vapors raise,
Let thy black whirlewinde, that the Mountains tears,
Wrack me at once, and drown these doleful lays,
Tear, toss, drive, loose me in thy stormy ways:
Thou, that mou'st all things, unto nothing turn
The cursedst brand, that in these flames does burn.
Thou, that with swiftest embassy do send
The dreadful lightning from the darkened sky,
O let thy fierce cloud-bursting vengeance rend
Through deepest Hell, and in thy tempest fly
My fiery soul, but straight flash out and dye:
That I may once more see thy glorious light,
Though then to vanish into endless night.
Thus all in vain, as against both tide and wind,
My sorrow sails, as every sigh does drive:
But of five brethren, which I left behind,
Whose pride and luxury does mine survive,
What shall become? if here they once arrive,
How sharply will their miseries rebound
Upon my heart, and gall each bleeding wound?
Dearest of Saints, that art divinely styled
The friend of God, befriend his image so,
As unto these with worldly soil defiled
To let thy Lazarus* with a message go,
And unto them this depth of danger show;
How for those sins, that feed their lewd desires,
I pine, thirst, burn in these unquenched fires.
Let him to light this horrid darkness bring,
These sulfurous floods, and fell tormentours rage,
That they may seem to feel these serpents sting;
Let him the glory of Heavens ample stage
And beauty blaze, that fears no dint of age;
That burning then with heavenly love they might
These flames prevent, and find that blisfull light.
Natures first light, said Abraham, displaies
A sacred shine, that cleares the darkest mind,
And beautifies her sphere with heavenly rays:
This be their prospect; be they nere so blind,
They may in her the great Creator find:
Religions noble seed, that rarely grows
In fields of flesh, in every breast she sowes.
She as a volume does her work bestow,
In every race of creatures draws a line;
Each plant her leaves does for their learning show,
And not an Asteri^ske does faintly shine
In Heavens high front, but is a mark divine:
No worm, weed, pebble wants his native worth,
But creepes, grows, rests to set his Author forth.
These roabes of State, the high imperial skies,
Powdered with Stars, what dullness does behold;
And not the greatness of that King descries,
That in these vestures does the world enfold?
Who sees the Sun enthroned in burning Gold,
And not the Father of all heavenly light,
That does advance this mirror to the sight?
The wrath of Heaven who feels and trembles not?
Who knows his Armoury with terrors stored,
His Wildfire, Lightning, and his Thunder-shot,
His burning Lance, his dart, and blazing Sword,
Kindled and brandisht by his powerful Word;
Who hears on high the embatteled tempests roar,
And falls not down the great God to adore?
Who viewes the Earth in airy balance waigh'd,
With all her offspring on that ample floor,
With Rivers caru^d, with Minerals in-laid;
Who sees the Ocean with his scaly store,
His watery Mountains rolling to the shore;
And does not thence in high reflection move
A heavenly beam unto this Throne above?
Those wondrous powers of the subtle soul,
That with deep thoughts unto the center flies,
But in an instant mounts above the Pole,
And linkes a chain of causes to the skies,
May they not learn her to be heavenly wise,
To know where rest and happiness are placed,
And thither bend her motion, thither have?
But that so various ^and so vast a frame,
As the maine Orb, so many turns should last,
Still kept in motion, still remains the same,
With every wheel so firm, each pin so fast,
That not a joint is wrench'd, nor part displac^d;
How can it not the soul transported move
To pay the heavenly tributes, fear and love?
Lik a great Watch, whose maker is the Spring,
Is natures frame, that every shortest hour
Should strike the soul, and make it loudly ring:
And sound the praises of the all-mouing Power,
That thus inuites her to his heavenly ^ower,
Thus in each creature, like inferior Kings,
By picture wooes, and all to knowledge brings.
But his own Language may thy brethren hear,
From Heavens high Region does his voice resound;
The Temple and the Synagogues are near,
To these alone is their attention bound;
Plant they their feet upon the hallowed ground,
Whence let the flames of ardent zeal arise;
So shall they clear their sins, and climb the skies.
Let them the volumes of great Moses turn,
And learn what high Jehovah did ordain,
When to match Heaven the cloudy Mount did burn,
Thunder and Trumpet did confound amain
The embattled terrors, that Earth shook again;
Thus to inflame and strike with sacred aw
Each mortal breast, to embrace the eternal Law.
Let them behold the Prophets heavenly flight,
Those towering Eagles, that their eyes to prove
Pierced to the brightest Sun, the Lord of Light,
That the dark soul illumines from above:
Those from the Mountain could the cloud remove,
And let in sight to mysteries profound;
Truth is their spirit, happiness their sound.
There is that Antidote that foyles the grave,
To clear eternity there shines the way;
It Is by that book the Almighty Judge does save;
It is that Port of light, that opens day,
The powerful influence that does convey
Life to the soul, the happy seed that springes
With humblest growth, but highest glory brings.
There may they taste on stony Tables set
That precious food, that time shall never wast;
Though fiercest Tyranny from Hell were fet,
And with the world her cruelty should last:
Where Death stood sentinel this Word have past,
And as the sun, (but with more heat and light,)
Shall clear the world, nor ever yield to night.
There may they see in antique leaves enrowl'd
That gracious charter, granted from above;
There may they fair Theosophy behold,
Ennobled by her Serpent, and her Dove;
There may they reach linckt by diuinest love
The sacred virtues, as a chain let down,
TO exalt the soul to her celestial Crown.
Great work of truth, whose structure does excel!
Canon of justice, that to lowest ground
Beats down the forts of sin, and batters Hell!
Organ of mercy! how for ever bound
Is this blessed Quire to its celestial sound,
That has repaired those ruins wrought by pride,
And all these thrones with Kingly States supplied!
The warbling murmurs of the Silver floods,
The numerous swarms that on fresh Hybla light,
The whistling gales that fan the Arabian woods,
The Swannes high rapture at his lowest flight,
Strike not an accent of that sweet delight,
That in this message of dear Heaven is found,
Whose every note does precious Music sound.
Build all by that, as by a rule of Gold,
Their lives fair structure; in the mirror bright
Let them the souls each lineament behold,
And dress her beauties by that heavenly light,
Which unto all, that travel day or night
Through the worlds desert to this promised land,
Does for a cloud, and fiery pillar stand.
The lamps of heaven, and light ambitious fire
Let planet-strooken Persia still adore,
Nor higher let her sunne-burnt zeal aspire;
Her Eagles aid let fighting Thebes implore;
Fall Babylon her mighty Whale before;
On monsters Memphis doat, and deep in ground
Seek her green gods, in every Garden found.
Let the blind Ethnickes, barred from happier lights,
Thus forge their gods in phans^es least divine,
And wrong religion with unhallowed rites:
Those clearer souls, that unto Heaven incline,
Must aim at God in his directing line:
Unto his precepts must they upright stand,
Or headlong fall, and feel his dreadful hand,
As in a straight amongst Rocks, and Shelues, and Sands
Is man emplung'd, nor happy course can steer;
But on the mount his great Directour stands,
Gives him his Word, he shall find safety nea^e;
When if he headlong rush, nor care to hear,
What hope remains him, or what reason why,
But he should split, and wrack, and sink, and die?
God, rich in goodness does his bounties shower
On every creature: but with ample flood
His precious blessing upon man does power:
Man that, unkind, forsakes that sovereign good,
Leaves the sweet Fountain for the infectious mud,
And justly bears his wraths eternal weight,
Whose awefull Law his wilful lust did slight.
Deep in a prison full of worms and snakes
Lies every soul, to hopeless bondage sold,
But on the Patient, God compassion takes,
And strives to raise her from that noisome sold:
Where if she fail to fix her faithful hold
On present aid, what future end remains
Save endless sorrows, plagues, and woes, and pains*
Then Let thy brethren, purged from foul excess,
From banefull pride, and brutish cruelty,
To safer paths their needful steps address:
Let them to Heavens blessed oracles apply
A chaster ear, and fix a faithful eye
On those high hopes, whereof the heavenly Lord
Assures the soul by truths eternal Word.
There flows that spring, that with a current fair
Through Rocks of cruelty does passage find,
Through Hills of pride, through Valleys of despair,
Through Vaults of ignorance in darkness blind,
Through Mines of avarice with Hell conioyn'd:
Through every soil does happily convey
His precious streams, and cleares his narrow way.
There may they drink, not surfeit need to fear,
And bath securely, though in floods profound;
It Is that their sins foul leprosy will clear,
Will cure the ulcers of their souls unsound,
And 'swage the rancour of that festred wound,
Which the cursed Serpent with a banefull sting
Did erst inflict on natures tender spring.
Let them that fair, that facile means embrace,
On sacred truth, that firm foundation, stay;
And that dear Lord so sweet in gifts of grace,
That with his loves fresh flowers does array
The naked world, and strewes the Heavenly way,
Let them above the clouds his mercies raise,
And fill their mouths with his immortal praise.
Thus if the treasure^ of their age they spend,
Lightened of sin that Heaven cannot sustain,
They to these thrones of glory shall ascend:
But, be their days extinct in pleasures vain,
Wha^ but eternal darkness shall remain?
While their loathed bodies feed the wormie grave,
Their souls shall wail in that infernal eaue.
Here in a flood of anguish, sadly broke,
The damned miscreant more deeply drowned,
Amongst tears and cries, and sobbing sorrows spoke:
Alas! though Moses should himself expound
His holiest Laws, they would but s^eig^^ his ^ound,
At least no faith, no (...) would be len^^*
On deafned ears is music vainly spent.
How often the sword of vengeance did we see
Brandisht against our Luxury, and pride,
Voluptuous surfets, lust, and tyranny?
Yet to our hearts all passage still deni^d,
All threats and terrors did our height deride:
Not all the Egyptian mischiefs were of force
Our loue-sicke hearts from pleasure to divorce.
But from the horrors of this ghastly cave,
Or from those mansions of eternal rest,
Should some strange Legate, lately sent to grave,
Return, to tell what wretched souls unblessed
To deepest plagues and torment were oppressed;
Or what high joys their painful cares repay,
That upward strive, and keep the heavenly way:
Then would they, sure, their sinful heart discuss,
And, pierced with grief, their wretchedness lament;
Had they no hearts, but Rocks of Caucasus
Fixed in their breasts, they could not but relent
With melting sorrow for their days misspent:
Should such a messenger such news relate,
They would believe, nor doubt the eternal State.
No more, replied the Father-saint again,
Then if blind error, straid from lightlesse Hell,
With bold delusion should presume to feign,
What sums of Angels from their stations fell.
And what, unchanged, in brightest glory dwell,
How near the world his final period hies,
Or what more deep in misty darkness lies.
Those sacred sages, that to Heaven did lend
New light, that cleared all mysteries divine,
That into leaves did golden truth extend,
And unto God drew souls with every line,
Have open set so full, so rich a mine
Of precious weal^h, as may each soul suffice,
That at just rate does heavenly treasures prize.
So strong is Truth, that has all fates withstood,
Such arteries of life it does display,
Such nerves of power, veins of dearest blood,
Of precious soul th'vnualued debt to pay;
So brightly shines that pure celestial ray,
Sent from the fountain of supernall light,
That springes the day, and cleares the cloudy night?
That who against such evidence offend,
Such weight of sense, such Majesty despise,
Would not to stranger embassies attend,
Though some pale prisoner from the grave should rise,
And rippe up Hells black bosom before their eyes:
Nere will they credit what the tru^^ imparts,
Whose breasts are stoned with such obdurate hearts.
Should Heaven crack thunder, till the melting skies
Should drop their stars, and threat an endless night;
Whilst, joyed with mischief, grimmest hell should rise,
With all her plagues and tortures brought to light;
That from the horrors of the dismal sight
The Sun should start, and run his golden head
In pitchy clouds, whilst day to darkness fled:
Yet would the senseless Earth as soon relent,
And weep new springs for hopeless humane kind,
As impious man his blackest crimes lament,
That had become with beams of knowledge blind,
Nor the high way to happiness would find:
The Key of grace that should the heart unlock
When sin excludes, it is but vain to knock.
As heavens high court, so is that humbler way,
That thither tends, bestarr'd with wondrous light,
Which through the world their vital beams display:
God to his palace every soul invites;
Whilst man, regardlesse of celestial sights,
Neglects his call, and bars up every sense,
As bent to keep each heavenly blessing thence.
Tyrant of nature, from his height deposed,
To drown his proud dust in a maine of tears!
What he^^sh poison has his senses closed,
That, when high God does from the burning Spheres
Denounce hot vengeance, neither sees nor hears,
Nor fears his frown, all creatures else does awe,
That with prone homage serve the heavenly Law?
Were he not fiercer then the savage flocks,
Were he not colder then the stormy air,
Were he not harder then the flinty Rocks,
Or prouder then the aspiring Cedars are;
He would with shame or sorrow quite despair,
To find himself more stupid grown then these
Wild beasts, cold blasts, hard stones, and haughty trees.
Had those first mortals, in the Deluge drowned,
But diu'd to Hell, and shortly rose again,
To tell sad news, what woeful change they found,
To those proud builders upon Shinar plain;
Had they desisted from attempts so vain?
No, their fond thought had meant their Babell high'r
Farther to climb from that infernal fire.
Had those swift legates, those celestial scouts,
Whom Lots blessed roof with joy did entertain,
Only of torments told those impious routs,
Nor burnt them down to more infernal pain;
What had they done, but with more fell disdain
Incenst their iusts, that Heaven did most oppose?
So fire, allaid, more strong, more raging grows.
What swarms of insects, storms of flaming hail,
What pitchy fogges, what waters sadly died,
What sores, what deaths stearne Egypt did assail,
That had those heavenly messengers defied,
Ere they could bend the stubborn Tyrants pride,
Who dauntlesse stood, as against the Waves a Rock,
That proudly seems their foaming rage to mock?
Look how a Vessel, near some wrackfull strand,
^usht by the rage of some impetuous blast
Upon an ambush of soft swallowing sand,
Whilst to her aid the weeping surges have
Still lower sinkes, and strikes more deeply fast;
Nor from that bed of ruin ere does rise,
But in one grave both drowned, and buried lies:
So whilst frail mortals, in that worldly maine,
Where thousand Sirens chaunt their sweet deceit,
Do wildly float in waves of errors vain;
Though on their crimes the heavenly heralds beat
With strokes redoubled, and sharp vengeance threate;
Yet sink they will, (where heaven his ^^nd withdrawes,)
In sins, as sands, to Hels devouring jaws.
As stony tables, humane hearts contain
The heavenly Law, that every soul commands:
And must be broke, before they firm remain,
Brook by contrition, knocked with mornefull hands,
For sins unnumbered, as the Libian sands:
Else, be their breasts inscribed nere so deep,
As Rocks their gemmes, they vselesse treasure keep.
Not all the sweetes of eloquence, distilled
From precious flowers: not all the charms of art,
That ever soul with so^t affection filled:
Not Hels dire terrors, nor the threatfull dart
Of stearnest death can move the sinners heart,
When (sick of wickedness) he senseless grows,
And saddest symptoms of destruction shows.
That glorious Monarch, at whose dread command
Swift Heaven recoiles, Earth to her center riues,
He that locks Hell, and chains the infernal band:
He, he it is, that frees from heauiest gyues
The pitied thrall, and gasping wretch reuiues:
It Is he, whose power numb'ds the hand of death,
That else strikes home nor leaves a living breath.
That Lord, that does to every humane sphere
Reason, and Will, as Luminaries lend,
As duller planets, plants the senses there,
Directs their motions to their happiest end:
A headlong race else greatest sophies send
To black confusion: though aloft they dwell,
And shine near Heaven, their shades decline to Hell.
Thus far my dream, usurping reasons seat,
Played in the working current of my blood:
When in loud thunder, after scorching heat,
I starting found my fancy in a wood:
A key-cold gelly on my temples stood,
A stupid darkness did be cloud my brain,
And stark, as death, did every limb remain,
Like the pale Thracian comne from shades below,
I seemd a stranger to the face of light:
Yet found my way unto that Town to go,
Feigned by the Poets song, and bloody fight,
My souls quick journey speedily to write:
That this deep dream, until my latest sleep,
Might in my mind a clear impression keep.
FINIS.

