HISTRIO-MASTIX. Or, THE PLAYER whipped.

Printed for TH: THORP. 1610.

HISTRIO-MASTIX.
Actus primi Scaena prima.
Enter Peace, Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, Arithmatick, Geometry, Music, and
Astronomy. Peace. Unmask thy face thou minister of Time
Look forth bright mirror, let thy golded hand,
Ride (with distinctlesse motion) on the eyes
Of this fair Chorus, till the Reign of Peace,
Has propagated Plenty, and increase.
Now sit we high (tryumphant in our sway,)
Encircled with the seauen-fold flower of Art,
To tread on Barbarism with silver feet;
These, these are adjuncts fit to wait on Peace,
Who being courted by most searching spirits,
Have always borne themselves in God-like state,
With lofty foreheads, higher then the stars.
Draw near fair Daughters of eternity,
Your Fostresse Peace, is (like the aged Nursse)
Grown proud to see her Children flourish thus.

Gram. We know not how to turn these bounties back,
But with continuance of obsequious love,
Whilst Peace tryumphes, it lies in Grammers might,
To make the rudest brain both speak and write.

Log. Logic shall furnish them with Argument,
And make them apt and able to dispute;
The theme shall be of Peace, and her sweet name,
And every Sillogism' shall prove her fame.

The. Rhetoric will put her richest habit on,
Of gestures, Voice, and exornation,
Her Tropes and Scheames, shall dignifie her sense.
And Honors Peace, with clearest eloquence.

Ar. Her graces in my numbers shall be seen,
So full that nothing can be added more,
Nor ought subtracted: true Arithmetic
Will multiply and make them infinite.

Music. Music shall feast the bounteous ears of Peace,
Whilst she inspires her numme conceit with life,
Varying each concord, mood and faculty,
In flowing straynes, and rapting Symphonie,

Astr. The motions of the Planets and their Spheres,
The Stars, their influence, quantities, consents,
All that Astronomy can teach or know,
She does profess from sacred Peace to flow.

Geo. And I will make her powers demonstratiue,
In all my angles, circles, cubes, or squares,
The very state of Peace shall seem to shine,
In every figure or dimensiue line.

Peace Enough fair Virgins Time shall prove this true,
Whilst you do honor Peace she will cheerish you.

Enter Mauortius, Philarchus, Larius, Hiletus, Chrisoganus* Omnes, Honor and
safety, still attend fair Peace

Peace. Thanks noble Lords and worthy Gentlemen:
But wherefore look you so ask aunce on these,
As if they were not worthy your salutes?

Omnes. Because we knew them not.

Chri, The more your blame.

Peace. O pitied state! most weak, where nobles want
The love and knowledge of the liberal Arts;
Are you the men (for birth and place) admired?
By whose great motions, lesser wheels turn round?
And shall your minds affect so dull a course?
As if your sense where most irrational?
What is a man superior to a beast
But for his mind? nor that ennobles him,
While he deiects his reason; making it
The slave unto his brutish appetite.
Make then your minds illustrious in your deeds
And each choose (in this troop) a spowsall mate,

Mauo. We do obey: And I choose Music first.

Phil. I Geometry.

Hile. I Rhetoric.

Lar. And I Astronomy.

Chri. And I to be a servant unto all.

Peace. But now beware ye iniure not the fame
Of these bright Virgins with adulterate love,
Mean time their servant (here) Chrisoganus
Shall teach of every Art the mystery.

Exeunt Peace and Arts. Mauo. But if (by Art) as all our Artist^ say,
There is no real truth to be attained,
Why should we labor in their loves bestow?
The wisest said: I know I nothing know,

Chri. The wisest was a fool for saying so:
That Oracle pronounced wise Socrates:
For do I know I see you, or the light?
Or do you know you here me, or I touch you?

Phil. All this we needs must know assuredly.

Chri. If this be certain then which comes from sense,
The knowledge proper to the soul is truer;
For that pure knowledge by the which we know
A thing to be, with true cause how it is,
Is more exact then that which knows it is,
And reaches not to knowledge of the cause.
Besides; that knowledge (that considers things
Abiunct from senciue matter) is exacter
Then that which ioynes it self with elements;
Arithmetic ever considers numbers
Abstract from senciue matter: Music still
Considers it with sense, as mixed with sound:
Therefore Arithmeticque is more exact,
And more exact then is Geometry:
Since vnitas is still simplicior puncto,
And number simpler then is magnitude.
For Vnitas may still be sine puncto,
But Punctus never without Unity,
Nor; Magnitudo sine Numero.
Dum (enim) punctus ponitur, ponitur (ex necessitate) vnitas.

Mauo. But all this proves not we may know a truth.

Chri. If we have this we call Scientia,
We must have truth of mere necessity,
For Acriueia does not signify,
Only a certainty in that we know,
But certainty with all perfection.

Phil. Although I am not satisfied in this,
It does me good to hear him thus discourse.

Mauor. My Lords, let us betake us to our studies.

Phil. In nothing am I better pleased, let us go.

Exeunt. Enter Incle, Belch, Gutt, Post-hast. The Players Song.
The nut-brwne ale, the nut-browne ale,
Puts down all drink when it is stale,
The toast, the Nut-meg, and the ginger,
Will make a sighing man a singer.
Ale gives a buffet in the head,
But ginger vnder-proppes the brain:
When ale would strike a strong man dead,
Then nut-megge tempers it again,
The nut-browne ale, the nut-browne ale,
Puts down all drink when it is stale.
Inc. This Peace breeds such Plenty, trades serve no tu^nes

Bell. The more sooles we to follow them.

Post. Lett's make up a company of Players,
For we can all sing and say,
And so (with practice) soon may learn to play.

Incle. True, could our action answer your extempore.

Post. I Will teach ye to play true Politicians.

Incle. Why those are th'falsest subtle fellows lives.

Bell. I pray sir, what titles have travailing Players?

Post. Why proper-fellowes, they play Lords and Kings,

Idcle. What parts would best become us (sir) I pray?

Bell. Faith to play Roagues, till we be bound for running away.

Post. Content; Scriuener, hoe,
You must tie a knott of Knaves together.

Enter a Scriuener. Scri. Your appellations?

Post. Your names he means; the man's learned.

Belch I Belch the Beard-maker.

Gut. I Gutt the Fiddle-string-maker.

Incle. I Incle the Peddler.

Post. I Master Posthast the Poet.

Scri. Your nomenclature?

Post. O stately Scriuener, that's where dwell ye?

Omnes. Townsmen, townsmen all.

Scri. The Obligatories Condition?

Post. Politician Players.

Exit. Scriuener. Bell. But whose men are we all this while:

Post. Whose but the merry Knight's, sir Oliver Owlets,
There was never a better man to Players.

Gut. If our parrell be not poynt-deuice the fatt's in the fire.

Post. What a greazie phrase: This playing will furnish ye.

Bell. What hoe Master Bougle, a word.

Post. Heeres half a dozen good fellows.

Clout. Soft sir, we are but four or five.

Post. The liker to thrive.

Enter Bougle. Boug. What saucy knaves are these?

Post. A speaks to you players; I am the poett.

Bell. As concerning the King and the Clown.

Boug. Will you have rich stuff indeed?

Post. It Is not to be dealt on without store of drink.

Boug. Store of money you would say.

Post. Nay it is well said, for drink must clap up the bargain.
Lets away.

Exeunt. Enter Fourcher, Voucher, Velure, Lyon-rash and Chrisoganus in his
study. These Merchants and Lawyers enter two and two at several doors. Lion.
Master Fourcher, how fares your body sir? come you from your book?


Four. Troth Master Lyon-rash, this Peace gives Lawyers leave to play.


Velure. Master Vourcher? you are very well incountred sir?


Voucher Master Velure, I value your frienship at as high a price, as any man's.


Lion. Gentlemen, how shall we spend this afternoon?


Four. Faith lets go see a Play.


Vel. See a Play, a proper pastime indeed: to here a deal of prating to so
little purpose.


Vour. Why this going to a play is now all in the fashion.


Lion. Why then lets go where we may hear sweet music and delicate songs,
for the Harmony of music is so Heauenlike that I love it with my life.


Four. Nay faith this afternoon we will spend in hearing the Mathematickes
read.


Vel. Why then lets to the Academy to hear Crisoganus.


Omnes. content.


So all go to Chrisoganus study, where they find him reading. Four. Master
Chrisoganus: by your leave sir.

Chri. Gentlemen you are welcome.

Fur. I pray sir what were the best course for a scholar?

Chri. Why no man can attain to any truth,
But he must seek it Mathematice.

Vour. Which are the Mathematicque sciences?

Chri. Arithmetic and Geometry are chief.

Vel. What difference is there twixt philosophy
And knowledge which is Mathematical?

Chri. This sir: the natural Philosopher
Considers, things as merely sensible;
The Mathematician; vt mente abiunctas a materia sensibili,
But this requires time to satisfy;
For it is an Axiom with all men of Art,
Mathematicum abstrahentem non comittere mendacium:
And (for the beauty of it,) what can be
Urged (more extractiue) then the face of heaven?
The mysteries that Art has found therein:
It is distinguished into Regions,
Those Regions filled with sundry sorts of stars:
They (likewise) christened with peculiar names,
To see a daily use wrought out of them,
With demonstrations so infallible,
The pleasure cannot be, but rauishing.

Fur. The very thought thereof enflameth me.

Chri. Why you shall meet with proiects so removed
From vulgar apprehension, (as for instance,)
The Sun here rises in the East with us,
But not of his own proper motion,
As being turned by primum mobile,
(The heaven above Coelum stellatum)
Whereas his true asscent is in the West,
And so he consummates his circled course
In the Ecliptic line, which parts the Zodiac,
Being borne from Tropic to Tropic: this time
We call a year; whose Hierocliphick was
(Amongst the Egyptians figured in a Snake
Wreathed circular, the tail within his mouth:
As (happily) the ^atines (since) did call,
A Ring, (of the word Annus) Annulus,

Vour. I apprehend not in my ablest powers,
That once in every four and twenty hours,
The Sun should rise and set; yet be a year
In finishing his own dessigned course.

Chri Why that I will demonstrate to you, thus;
Turn a huge wheel: contrary to the sway
Place me a fly vppon't: the fly (before
It can arrive the point from whence it went)
Shall sundry times be circumuolu'd about;
Even so the Sun and the affinities:
For if you wonder how at one self hour,
Two of discordant natures may be borne,
As one a King, another some base Swain,
One valiant, and the other timorous,
Let but two drops of incke or water fall
Directly on so swift a turning wheel,
And you shall find them both cast far in sunder.
Even so the heavenly Orbs, whirling so fast
And so impetuously (project men's fates)
Most full of change and contrariety.

Four. Cood faith these knowledges are very rare,
And full of admiration; are they not?

Chri. The Mathematicques are the strength of truth,
A Magazine of all perfection.

Vour. Shall we design some place for exercise,
And every morning have a Lecture read.

Four. Content, (if so Chrisoganus stand pleaz'd)
His exhibition shall be competent: we will all be Patrons.

Chri. To make you Artists, answers my desire,
Rather then hope or mercenary hire.

Exeunt Enter haruest-folkes with a bowl: after them, Peace leading in Plenty.
Plutus with ingottes of gold-Ceres with sheaues: Bacchus with grapes. The
haruest-folkes Song.
Holyday, O blessed morn,
This day Plenty has been borne,
Plenty is the child of Peace;
To her birth the Gods do prease,
Full crowned Mazors Bacchus brings,
With liquor which from grapes he wringes:
Holliday, O blessed morn;
This day Plenty has bin borne,
Holliday let us loudly cry,
For joy of her nativity.
Ceres with a bounteous hand,
Does at Plenties elbo stand:
Binding mixed Coronets,
Of wheat which on her head she sets.
Holliday, O blessed morn,
This day Plenty has bin borne,
Holliday lets loudly cry,
For joy of her nativity.
Peace. Reach me the bowl with rich Autumnian Juice,
That I may drink a health to your new Queen.
Times winged hours (that poynted out my raygne,)
Are fled; I am no more your Sovereign.
Wound Air with shrill tuned Canzonets,
I rob my self to make my Daughter rich,
Peace does resign her pure imperial Crown,
(Wrought by the Muses) in whose Circle grow
All flowers that are to Phoebus consecrate.

Exeunt. Finis Actus primi.
Actus secundi, scaena: I.
Enter Plenty in Majesty, upon a Throne, heaps of gold, Plutus, Ceres; and
Bachus doing homage. Plen. What heavenly sovereignty supports my state
That Plenty reigns (as Princess) after Peace?
Then if this powerful arm can turn the hour,
It is my will, (and that shall stand for law)
That all things on the earth be plentiful.
I crush out bounty from the amber grape,
And fill your barnes with swelling sheaues of Corn,
How can this, but engender blessed thought,
Especially when Gods our good have sought?

Ceres. For thee, thy servants captiuate the Earth,
Her fruitfulnes falls down at Plentyes feet.

Bach. Bachus will cheer her melancholy sense,
With drops of Nectar from this Crimson Juice.

Plut. Her body shall sustain ten thousand wounds,
And swarthy India be transformed to Sea,
Disgorging golden choler to the waves,
Before sweet Plenty find the least defect.

Plen. For this abundance powered at Plenties feet,
You shall be Tetrarch's of this petty world.

Enter Mauortius, Philarchus, Chrisoganus. Mauo. What dullards thus, would dote
in rusty Art?
Plod ding upon a book to dull the sense,
And see the world become a treasure-house,
Where Angels swarm like Bees in Plenties streets,
And every Peasant surfets on their sweetes?

Phil. Give me a season that will stir the blood
I like not Nigardice to hungar-starue,
It Is good when pooremen frolic in the hall,
The whilst our fathers in the Chambers feast,
And none repines at any stranger-guest.

Chri. Who was the author of this store, but Peace?
That common-welth is never well at ease,
Where Parchment skins, whose use should bear records,
Must head their brawling Drums and keep a coil,
As if they threatened Plenty with a spoil.

Plenty. Your houses must be open to the poor,
Your dusty Tables filled with store of meat,
Let goodly yeomen at your elboes stand,
Swords by their sides and trenchers in their hand:
Long-skirted coats, wide-sleeues with cloth' enough:
Thus Lords, you shall my government enlarge,
Reverence your Queen, by practizing her charge.

Omnes Ours be the charge and thine the Empire.

Exit Plenty. The bring her to the door and leave her. Mauo. Gallants let us
invent some pleasing sportes,
To fit the Plentuous humor of the Time,

Chri. What better recreations can you find,
Then sacred knowledge in diuinest things.

Phil. Your books are Adamants and you the Iron
That cleaues to them till you confound your self

Mauor. Poor Scholar spend thy spirits so and dye.

Phil. Let them do so that list, so will not!.

Mauo. I cannot feed my appetite with Air,
I must pursue my pleasures royally,
That spung'd in sweat, I may return from sport,
Mount me on horseback, keep the Hounds and Hawks,
And leave this Idle contemplation,
To rugged Stoicall Morosophists.

Chri. O! did you but your own true glories know,
Your judgments would not then decline so low.

Phil. What Master Pedant, pray forbear, forbear.

Chri. It Is you my Lord that must forbear to err.

Phil. It Is still safe erring with the multitude:

Chri. A wretched moral; more then barbarous rude.

Mauo. How you translating-scholler? you can make
A stabbing Satir, or an Epigram,
And think you carry just Ramnusia's whippe
To lash the patient; go, get you clothes,
Our freeborn blood such apprehension lothes.

Chr. Proud Lord, poor Art shall wear a glorious crown,
When her despisers die to all renown.

Exeunt. Enter Contrimen, to them, Clarke of the Market: he wrings a bell, and
draws a curtain: wherevnder is a market set about a Cross. Con. Where Is this
drunkard Clarke to ring the bell?

Clar. Heigho, bottle Ale has buttond my cappe.

Corne-b. What Is a quarter of Corn?

Seller. Two and sixpence.

Corne-b. Ty't up it is mine.

Enter a Merchants wife, with a Prentice, carrying a hand-basket Wife. ha'y'
any Potatoes?

Seller. Th'aboundance will not quite-cost the bringing.

Wife. What Is your Cock-sparrowes a dozen?

Sell. A penny Mistress.

Wife. There Is for a dozen; hold.

Enter Gulch, Belch, Clowt, and Gut. One of them steps on the Cross, and c
yes a Play. Gulch. All they that can sing and say,
Come to the Towne-house and see a Play,
At three a clock it shall begin,
The finest play that e're was seen.
Yet there is one thing more in my mind,
Take heed you leave not your purses behind.

Enter a Ballet singer, and singes a Ballet. Bal. What Is your plays name?
Masters whose men are ye? how the sign of the Owl ith luy bush? Ser Oliver
Owlets.


Gul. It Is a sign ye are not blind Sir.

Belsh. The best that ever trod on stage.
The Lascivious Knight, and Lady Nature.

Post. Have you cried the Play, masters?

Omnes. I, I, I, no doubt we shall have good doings, but How proceed you in
the new plot of the prodigal child?


Post. O sirs, my wit's grown no less plentiful then the time.
There Is two sheets done in follio, will cost two shillings in time.

Gut. Shall we here a flurt before the audience come.

Post. I that you shall, I swear by the Sunne-sit down sirs,
He reads the Prologue, they sit to hear it. When Aucthours quill, in
quiuering hand,
His tired arm did take:
His wearied Muse, bad him devise,
Some fine play for to make.
And now my Masters in this brauadoe,
I can read no more without Canadoe.

Omnes. What hoe? some Canadoe quickly,

Enter Vintner with a quart of Wine. Post. Enter the Prodigal Child; fill the
pot I would say,
Huffa, huffa, who callis for me?
I play the Prodigal child in iollytie.

Clout O detestable good.

Post. Enter to him Dame Virtue:
My Son thou art a lost child,
(This is a passion, note you the passion?)
And has many poor men of their goods beguild:
O prodigal child, and child prodigal.
Read the rest sirs, I cannot read for tears,
Fill me the pot I prithee fellow Gulch.

Gutt. Faith we can read nothing but riddles.

Post. My masters, what tire wears your lady on her head?

Bell. Four Squirrels tails ti'de in a true loves knot.

Post. O amiable good, it is excellent.

Clou. But how shall we do for a Prologue for lords?

Post. I Will do it extempore.

Bell. O might we here a spurt if need require.

Post. Why Lords we are here to show you what we are,
Lords we are here although our cloths be bare,
In steed of flowers, in season, ye shall gather Rhyme and Reason?
I never pleased my self better, it comes off with such suauity.

Gul. Well fellows, I never heard happier stuff,
Here Is no new luxury or blandishment,
But plenty of old Englands mothers words.

Clout. I st not pity this fellow's not imploid in matters of State,
But where is the Epilogue must beg the plaudite?

Post. Why man?
The glass is run our play is done,
Hence Time does call, we thank you all.

Gulsh. I but how if they do not clap their hands.

Post. No matter so they thump us not,
Come, come, we poets have the kindest wretches to our Ingles

Belsh. Why what is an Ingle man?

Post. One whose hands are hard as battle-dores with clapping at baldness.


Clout. Then we shall have rare Ingling at the prodigal child.

Gul. I a^t be played upon a good night -- lets give it out for Friday.

Post. Content.

Enter Steward. Stew. My masters; my Lord Mauortius is disposed to here what
you can do.


Belsh. What fellows, shall we refuse the Towne-play?

Post. Why his reward is worth the Mayor and all the town.

Omnes. We Will make him merry in faith, we will be there.

Exeu^t Enter Velure and Lyon-rash, with a Water-spaniell, and a Dusk. Vel.
Come sirs, how shall we recreate our selves,
This plentious time forbids abode at home.

Lion. Let Us Duck it with our Dogs to make us sport,
And cross the water to eat some Cream;
What hoe? Sculler.

Vel. You do forget; Plenty affoords us Oars.

Enter Furcher, and Vourchier, with bows and arrows. Four. What shall we
shoot for a green Goose sir?

Vour. There Is a wise match.

Fur. Faith we may take our bows and shafts and sleep,
This dreaming long vacation gives us leave.

Vel. Gentlemen, well met, what? Pancrace Knights?

Vour. The bounty of the time will have it so.

Four. You are prepared for sport, as well as we.

Vour. One of the goodliest Spaniels I have seen.

Lion. And here is the very quintessence of Duckes.

Fur. For diuing mean ye?

Lion. I, and thriuing too.
For I have won three wagers this last week;
What? will you go with us and see our sport?

Vour. No faith sir, I Will go ride and breath my horse.

Vel. Why whether ride you? we will all go with you.

Vour. Lets meet some ten miles hence to hawke and hunt.

Lion. Content: this plenty yields us choice of sports.
Our trades and we are now no fit consorts.

Exeunt. Enter Usher of the Hall; and Clarck of the Kitchen. Usher. Master
Clarke of the Kitchen; faith what is your daily expense.


Clar. Two beeues, a score of Muttons;
Hogsheads of Wine, and Beer, a doozen a day.

Vsh. Never was Age more plentiful.

Clar. Usher, it is my Lords pleasure, all comer, be bounteously entertaind.


Usher. I but is it my Ladies pleasure.

Cla. What else? She scorns to wear cloth-breeches man.

Enter Porter. Porter. A Morrice-daunce of neighbors crave admittance.

Clar. Porter, let them in man.

Enter Morrice-dancers. Butler, make them drink their skins full.
Omnes mor. dan. God bless the sounder.

Clar. Porter, are these Players come?

Port. Half an hour a go sir.

Clar. Bid them come in and sing the meat's going up.
Exit
Vsh. Gentlemen, and yeomen, attend upon the Sewer.

Enter Players, with them Post-hast the Poet. Vsh. Sir Oliver Owlets men
welcome, by Gods will,
It is my Lords pleasure it should be so.

Post. Sir, we have carowst like Kings,
For here is plenty of all things.

Vsh. Look about you Masters; be vncouer'd.

Enter Sewer with service, in side livery coats. The Players Song.
Brave ladds come forth and chant it, and chant it,
for now it is supper time.
See how the dishes flaunt it, and flaunt it,
with meat to make up rhyme.
Pray for his honor truly, and truly,
in all he undertakes;
He seru's the poor most duly, and duly,
as all the country speaks.
Post. God bless my Lord Mauortius, and his merry men all,
To make his honor merry, we sing in the hall.

Vsh. My Masters, for that we are not only (for causes)
Come new to the house; but also (for causes)
I matuaile where you will lodge.

Post. We hope (for causes) in the house, though drink be in our heads.
Because to Plenty we carowse, for beef and beer, and beds.

Vsh. Sed like honest men: what plays have you?

Belch. Here Is a Gentleman scholar writes for us:
I pray Master Post-hast, declare for our credits.

Post. For mine own part, though this summer season
I am desperate of a horse.

Vsh It Is well; but what plays have you?

Post. A Gentleman's a Gentleman, that has a clean shirt on, with some
learning, and so have I.


Vsh. One of you answer the names of your plays,

Post. Mother Gurtons neadle; ( a Tragedy.)
The Devil and Dives; ( a Comedy.)
Arusset coat, and a Knaves cap; ( an Infernal)
A proud heart and a beggars purse; ( a pastoral.)
The Widows apron-strings; ( a nocturnall.)

Vsh. I premise ye, pretty names,
I pray what ye want in any thing,
To take it out in drink.
And so go make ye ready masters.

Exeunt players. Enter Mauortius, Philarchus, with Landulpho (an Italian Lord)
and other Nobles and Gentles to see the Play. Mauo. My Lords, your
entertainment i^ but base,
Courser your cates, but welcome with the best.
Fellows some Cushions; place fa re Ladies here,
Signiour Landulpho; pray be merry sir.

Lady. Is It The Italian guise to be so sad?
When Love and Fancy should be banqueting?

Land Madam, your kindness has full power to command.

Lady. These admirable wits of Italy,
That court with looks, and speak in sillables,
Are curious seperuisours over strangers,
And when we covet so to frame our selves,
(Like ouer-nice portraying picturers,)
We spoil the counterfeit in coloring;
England is plain and loves her mothers guyse,
Enricht with cunning, as her parents rise.

Land. Lady, these eyes did ever hate to scorn,
This toung's vnur'd to carpe or contrary,
The bozome where this heart has residence,
I wish may seem the seat of courtesy.

Usher. Rowme my Masters take your places,
Hold up your torches for dropping there.

Mauo. Usher are the Players ready? bid them begin.

Enter Players and Sing. Some up and some down, there is Players in the town,
You wot well who they be:
The sum does arise, to three companies,
One, two, three, four, make we.
Besides we that travel, with pumps full of gravel,
Made all of such running leather:
That once in a week, new masters we seek,
And never can hold together.
Enter Prologue. Prol. Phillida was a fair maid; I know one fairer then she,
Troylus was a true lover; I know one truer then he:
And Cressida that dainty dame, whose beauty fair and sweet,
Was clear as is ye Crystal stream, that runs along ye street.
How Troyll he that noble knight, was drunk in love and bad goodnight
So bending leg likewise; do you not us despise.

Land. Most ugly lines and base-browne-paper-stuffe*
Thus to abuse our heavenly poesy,
That sacred offspring from the brain of Jove,
Thus to be mangled with profane absurds,
Strangled and chok't with lawless bastards words

Mauo. I see (my Lord this homespun country stuff,
Brings little liking to your curious ear,
Be patient for perhaps the play will mend.

Enter Troylus and Cresida. Troy. Come Cresida my Cresset light,
Thy face does shine both day and night,
Behold, behold, thy garter blue,
Thy knight his valiant elboe wears,
That When he shakes his furious Spear,
The foe in shiuering fearful sort,
May lay him down in death to snort.

Cres. O knight with valor in thy face,
Here take my skreene wear it for grace,
Within thy Helmet put the same,
Therewith to make thine enemies lame.

Land. Lame stuff indeed the like was never heard.

Enter a roaring Devil with the Vice on his back Iniquity in one hand; and
Iuventus in the other. Vice. Passion of me sir, puff puff how I sweat sir,
The dust out of your coat sir, I intend for to beat sir.

Iuv. I am the prodigal child, I that I am,
Who says I am not, I say he is too blame.

Iniq. And I likewise am Iniquity
Beloved of many alas for pity.

Devil. Ho ho ho, these babes mine are all,
The Vice, Iniquity and child Prodigal.

Land. Fie what unworthy foolish foppery,
Presents such buzzardly simplicity.

Mauo. No more, no more, unless twere better,
And for the rest ye shall be our debtor.

Post. My Lords, of your accords, some better pleasure for
to bring, if you a theme affords, you shall know it, that I
Post-hast the Poet, extempore can sing.

Lan. I pray my Lord let us ha^te, the Play is so good,
That this must needs be excellent.

Mauo. Content (my Lord) pray give a theme.

Theme. Land. Your Poetts and your Pottes,
Are knit in true-Loue knots.

The Song extempore.
Give your Scholar degrees, and your Lawyer his fees
And some dice for Sir Petronell flash:
Give your Courtier grace, and your Knight a new case,
And empty their purses of cash.
Give your play-gull a stool, and my Lady her fool,
And her usher potatoes and marrow
But your Poet were he dead, set a pot to his head,
And he rises as peart a sparrow.
O delicate wine with thy power so divine,
Full of rauishing sweet inspiration,
Yet a verse may run clear that is tapt out of bear:
Especially in the vacation.
But when the term comes, that with trumpets and drumes,
Our play houses ringe in confusion,
Then Bacchus me murder, but rhyme we no further,
Some sack now, upon the conclusion.
Mau. Give them forty pence let them go,
How likes Landulpho this extempore song?

Exeunt players. Lan. I blush in your behalfes at this base trasn;
In honor of our Italy we sport,
As if a Synod of the holly Gods*
Came to triumph within our Theaters,
(Always commending English courtesy.)
Our Amphitheaters and Pyramides*
Are situate like three-headded Dindymus,
Where stand the Statues of three striving Queens,
That once contended for the goulden ball,
(Always commending English courtesy.)
Are not your curious ^ames of sharper spirit?
I have a mistress whose ^ntangling wit,
Will turn and wind more cunning arguments,
Then could the Craetan Labyrinth ingyre.
(Always commending English courtesy,)

Mau. Good sir, you give our English Ladies cause,
Respectively to applaud the Italian guise,
Which proudly henceforth we will prosecute.

Land. Command what fashion Italy affoords.

Phil. By'r Lady sir, I like not of this pride,
Give me the ancient hospitallity,
They say it is merry in hall, when beards wag all.
The Italian Lord is an Ass, the song is a good song,

Actus tertij, scaena I.
Enter Pride, Vainglory, Hypocrisy, and Contempt: Pride casts a mist,
wherein Mauortius and his company vanish off the Stage, and Pride and her
attendants remain. Pride. Brave minds, now beautify your thoughts with pomp,
Send forth your Ships unto the furthest Seas,
Fetch me the feathers of the Arabian Birds,
Bring Mermaides combs, and glasses for my gaze:
Let all your sundry imitating shapes,
Make this your native soil, 'the land of Apes.
Then Ladies trick your trains with Turkish pride,
Plate your disheau led hair with ropes of Pearl,
Wear sparkling Diamonds like twinkling stars,
And let your spangled crowns shine like the Sun,
"If you will sit in throne of state with Pride,
"The newest fashion (still) must be your guide.
Vain. Vainglory vows to lackey by thy foot,
Till she has swollen men's hearts with Arrogance.

Hyp. In like designs, twofac'd Hypocrisy,
Is pressed to spend her deepest industry.

Gont. And (till her sovereignty decline and bow)
Contempt shall be enthroned in every browe.

Pry. Then thus, (as sovereign Empress of all sins)
Pride turns her hour and here her Scene begins.

Enter Furcher, and Vourcher; two Lawyers. Vour. How shall we best employ this
idle time?

Four. Lets argue on some case for exercise.

Vour. You see the full gorged world securely sleeps,
And sweet contention (Lawyers best content)
Is sent by drowsy Peace to banishment.

Pride. O these be Lawyers! Concords enemies,
Prydes fuel shall their fire of strife increase.

aside. Enter Velure and Lyon-rash. Four. Signior Vourcher, know you those
Citizens?

Vour. They are two wealthy Merchants and our friends.

Four. Yt may be they have brought us welcome fees.

Pry. Lawyers and Merchants met! bestir thee Pride.

aside Vel. In faith no suit sir, quiet, quiet all.

Pry. Fortune and health attend you Gentlemen.

Four. We thank you Lady; may we crave your name?

Pry. Men call me Pride, and I am Plenties heir:
Immortal, though I bear a mortal show.
Are not you Lawyers, from whose reverend lips
Th'amaxed multitude learn Oracles?
Are not you Merchants, that from East to West.
From the antartieke to the Artick Poles,
Bringing all treasure that the earth can yield?

Omnes. We are, (most worthy Lady)

Pry. Then use your wisdom to enrich your selves,
Make deep success high Steward of your store.
Enlarge your mighty spirits, strive to excede,
In buildings, riot, garments gallantry.
For take this note: The world the show affects,
Plain Virtue, (vilie cladde) is counted Vice,
And makes high blood endure base praeiudice.

Vour. But we have Laws to limitte our attire.

Pry. Broke with the least touch of a golden wire.

Vel. Yet wisdom still commands to keep a mean,

Pry. True, had you no means to excel the same,
But having power, labor to ascend,
The fames of mighty men do never end,

Four. Is not Ambition an aspiring sin?

Pry. Yes for blind batts and birds of lazy wing.

Lion. Me seems it is good to keep within our bounds,

Pry. Why beasts themselves, of bounds are discontent,
Spend me your studies to get offices,
Then stooping suitors with uncovered heads
May groaning come, vnbowelling the bags,
Of their rich burdens, in your wide mouthed deskes.

Lion. But men will tax us to want charity.

Pry. True charity begins first at home,
Here in your bosoms dwell your deere-lou'd hearts,
Feed them with joy; first crown their appetites,
And then cast water on the care-scorch't face,
Let your own longings first be satisfied,
All other pity is but foolish pride.

Four. Sweet council; worthy of most high regard,
All our endeavors shall be to aspire.

Vonr. Ours to be rich and gallant in attire.

Pry. All to be brave, else all of no respect,
It is the habit, does the mind deiect.

Vour. Lets brave it out, since Pride has made us know,
Nothing is graced that wants a glorious show.

Exeunt: manet Pride. Pry. The puffed up spirits of the greater sort.
Shall make them scorn the abject and the base;
The impatient spirit of the wretched sort,
Shall think imposed duties their disgrace,
Poor naked need shall be as full of pride,
As he that for his wealth is Deifide.
Exit.
Enter Steward, with four Seruingmen, with Swords and Bucklers, in their hose
and doublets. 1. ser. No Steward with discharge shall us disgrace,

Stew. Why all the Lords have now cashierd their trains.

2 ser. But we have served his father in the field.

3. ser. What, think they boys can serve to beard their foes?

Enter Mauortius and Philarchus with their pages. Page. Be patient fellow,
see thou not my Lord?

1. ser. What an I see him? puppet prating ape?

2. ser. We are no stocks, but we can feel disgrace.

3. ser. Not tonglesse blocks, but since we feel, we will speak.

Mauo. What a coil keeps those fellows there?

Stew. These impudent audatious seruing-men,
Scarcely believe your honors late discharge.
Exit,
1. ser. Believe it? by this sword and buckler no,
Stripped of our liueries, and discharged thus?

Mauo. Walk sirs, nay walk; awake ye drowsy drones,
That long have sucked the honney from my hiues;
Be gone ye greedy beefe-eaters y' are best:
The Callis Cormorants from Dover road,
Are not so chargeable as you to feed.

Phil. It Is true my Lord, they carelessly devour.
In faith good fellows get some other trade,
Ye live but idle in the commonwealth.

Mauo. Broke we not house up, you would break our backs.

1 ser. We break your backs? no it is your rich laced suits,
And straight laced mutton; those break all your backs.

Phil. Cease Ruffians, with your swords and bucklers, hence.

2 ser. For service, this is savage recompense.
Your Fathers bought lands and maintained men?
You sell your lands, and scarce keep rascal boys,
Who Ape-like iet, in guarded coats; are whipped
For mocking men? though with a shamlesse face,
Yet graceless boys can neuermen disgrace.

3. Ser. Desertfull virtue: O impiety! Exeunt.

Mau. My Lord Philarchus, follow all my course,
I keep a Tailor, Coachman, and a Cook,
The rest for their boord-wages may go look,
A thousand pound a year, will so be saved
For reuelling, and banqueting and plays.

Phil. Plays, well remembered, we will have a play,
Steward lets have Sir Olliuer Owlets men,

Mau. Philarchus, I mislike your fashion?

Phil. Faith I Will fly intoo't with a sweeping wing,
Me thinks your honors hose sit very well,
And yet this fashion is grown so stale;

Mau. Your hat is of a better block then mine.

Phil. Is on a better block, your Lordship means;

Mau, Without all question it is, he that denies,
Either he has no judgment or no eyes.

Phil. Your Lord-ships doublet-skirt is short and neat,

Mau. Who sits there, finds the more uneasy seat;

Enter a Page. Page My Lords, your Supper stays; it is eight a clock,

Mau. What, is it so late, that fashion's not so good. Exeunt.

Enter Perpetuana, Eillisella, Bellula with them a Ieweller, a Tyre-woman, and
a Taylour; with every one their several furniture. Perp. Of our three Jewels
(sir) which likes you best?

Jew. An excellent piece, this those excells as sarre,
As glorious Tytan stains a silly Starte;

Filli. Tush, be not partial, but pervse mine well,
See you not proud Ulysses carrying spoils;

Jew. The rest are but (to this) in sooth base foyles,
And yet they all are rich and wondrous fair,

Bell. But trash; I Will have a Jewel Amatist,
Whose beauty shall strike blind the gazers Eye;

Perp. I Will put it down, one promisd to devise
A Globelike Jewel cut transparently,
And in the place of fixed stars, to set
The richest stones that mightiest sums could get.

Fill. Nay I Will be matchless for a carckanet,
Whose Pearls and Diamonds placed with ruly rocks
Shall circle this fair neck to set it forth,

Bell. Well Goldsmith, now you may begone. -- Taylour,
Exit Ieweller I Will have a purfled Roabe, loose boddied-wise.
That shall enjoy my jewels may denhead.

Tay. The loosest bodies are in fashion most,

Perp. We better know what likes us best, then you,
Let me have flaring fashions, tuck't and pinned
That powerful winds may heave it all a huffe,

Bell. True measure of my body shall be taken,
Plain dealing is the best when all is done,
That fall Pride taught us when we first begun.

Fill. I Will have a rich imbost imbrothery,
On which invaluable precious Roabe,
I Will hang the glorious brightness of my Globe.
Mistress Pinckanie is my new ruff done?

Pinc. Believe me Madam it is but new begun.

Bell. Let pinching citty-dames orecloud their Eyes,
Our breasts lie forth like conduicts of delight
Able to tice the nicest appetite,
Mistress Pinckanie, shall I have this Fan,

Pink. Maddam not this week do what I can,

Fill. Pleasure as bondslaue, to our wills is tied,
We Ladies cannot be defamed with Pride,
Come, let us have a play, let poor slaves prate
Rank pride in meanest sort, in us is state,
Remember promise mistres Pinkanie.

Pink. Well Ladies, though with work I am oppressed,
Workewomen always live by doing, best.

Exeunt, Enter Chrisoganus Posthast, Gulch, Clout, Gut, and Belch. Bell.
Chrisoganus faith what is the lowest price,

Chri. You know as well as I; ten pound a play.

Gull. Our Companie's hard of hearing of that side,

Chri. And will not this book pass, alas for pride,
I hope to see you starve and storm for books,
And in the dearth of rich invention,
When sweet smooth lines are held for precious
Then will you fawn and crouch to Poesy,

Clot. Not while goosequillian Posthast holds his pen.

Gut. Will not our own stuff serve the multitude?

Chri. Write on, cry on, yawle to the common sort
Of thickskin'd auditors: such rotten stuffs,
More fit to fill the pauneh of Esquiline,
Then feed the hearings of judicial ears,
Ye shades tryumphe, while foggy Ignorance
Clouds bright Apollos beauty: Time will clear,
The misty dullness of Spectators Eeys,
Then woeful hisses to your fopperies,
O age when every Scriueners boy shall dippe?
Profaning quills into Thessaliaes Spring,
When every artist prentice that has read
The pleasant pantry of conceits, shall dare,
To write as confident as Hercules.
When every Ballad-monger boldly writes:
And windy forth of bottle-ale does fill
Their purest organ of invention:
Yet all applauded and puffed up with pride,
Swell in conceit, and load the Stage with stuff,
Rakt from the rotten imbers of stall jests:
Which basest lines best please the vulgar sense
Make truest rapture lose pre-eminence.

Bell. The fellow does talk like one that can talk,

Guit. Is this the well-learn'd man Chrissganus,
He beats the Air the best that ere I heard,

Chri. Ye scrappes of wit, base Echoes to our voice,
Take heed ye siumble not with stalking hie?
Though fortune reeles with strong prosperity.
Exit.
Clou. Farewell the Muses, poor Poet adieu,
When we have need't may be we will send for you.

Enter Steward. Stew. My Lord has sent request to see a play.

Post. Your Lord? what, shall our pains be soundly recompensed?
With open hand of honors srancke reward?

Stew. Ye shall have four fair Angels gentlemen,

Clout. Fair Ladies mean you? we have four in the play

Ste. Nay (my good friends) I mean in fair pure gold.

Gull. Fie it is to much, too long ere it be told,

Stew. Mas these are single jests indeed,
But I will double it once, ye shall have eight.

Post. But are you sure that none will want the weight?
To wey down our expense in sumptuous Clothes?

Bell. Well, pleasures pride shall mount to higher rate,
Ten pound a play will scarce maintain our state,

Stew. Fat Plenty brings in Pride and Idleness:
The world does turn a Maze in giddy round:
This time does raise, what other times confound.

Post. O sir, your moral lines were better spent,
In matters of more worthy consequent.

Gull. Well, whilst occasion helps to clime alofft,
We Will mount Promotions highest battlement.

Stew. And break your necks I hope; clime not too fast,
A heady course, confusion ends at last.

Post. Preach to the poor; look Steward, to your count,
Direct your household, teach not us to mount:

Stew. Farewell ye proud (I hope they hear me not)
Proud Statute Rogues.

Exit they follow. Enter Fourcher, Velure, Lyon-rash, Champerty and Calamancha,
their wives. Champ. Faith husband, I Will have one to bear my train,
Another bare before to usher me.

Cala. Nay I my self will learn the Courtly grace,
Honor shall give my wealth a higher place.
Out on these velvet gards, and black laced sleeves,
These simpering fashions simply followed.

Cham. Well, through the streets in thundering coache I Will ride,
Why serves our wealth, but to maintain our pride?
Law, Arms, and Merchandise, these are three heads,
From whence Nobility first took his spring.
Then let our haughty minds our fortunes spend,
Pleasure and honor shall our wealth attend.

Calla. Nay I will have it, I that I will.

Four. Contain your speech, within your private thoughts,
We are encountered with the honored train.

Enter Mauortius, Philarchus, Fillissella, Bellula, and others. Mauo. Fair
Ladies, could these times afford you cates,
You should be feasted in Apolloes hall;
But (Lords) the chaps of wide-pancht gluttony,
Have wasted all the dainties of the land.
Servant Philarchus, what, no mask too night?

Phil. A Play, a Mask, a Banquet, we will have all.

Enter Steward. Stew. My Lord, the Players now are grown so proud,
Ten pound a play, or no point Comedy.
Exit.
Mauo. What? insolent with glib prosperity?
Faith Gentlemen no Players will appear:
Gallants, to your Mask.

Phil. How soon they can remember to forget,
Their undeserved Fortunes and esteem;
Blush not the peasants at their pedigree?
Sucked pale with lust; what, bladders swollen with pride,
To strout in shreds of nitty brogerie?

Mauo. Well, though the penny raisd them to the pound,
Just Envy, causeless Pride does still confound.

Phil. Well let them blase, there is none so blind but sees,
Prydes fall is still frost-bit with miseries.
Enter a Mask. What, come they in so blunt without devise?

Fill. The night is dead before the sport be borne.

Mauor. Cease Music there, prepare to banquet sirs.

Phi. Ceres and Bacchus tickled Venus stirs.

Mau. Gallants unmask, and fall to banqueting,
A health about, carowse shall feed carowse.

Phil The first is pledg^d, and here begins a fresh.

Mau This royal health of welcome greetes you all.

Vouch. Bacchus begins to reele with going round.

Phil. The grape begins to fume.

Mauor. Why let it fret: not pledge a Nobleman.

Champ. I like this Jewel, I Will have his fellow.

Bell. How? you? what fellow it? gip Velvet gards.

Champ. Insolent for-beare.

Mauor. A petty-foggers whoodded wise so pearcht?

Cham. Why not proud Lord? then bid your mincks come down.

Vouch. Dishonorable Lord, I say thou li'st.

Mauor. I challenge thee on that disgraceful word,

Vouch. Here answer I thy challenge in this wine.

Mauo. I will confirm thy pledge, and meet thee too.

They speak and fall a sleep on the Stage. Sound Music. Enter Envy alone to
all the Actors sleeping on the Stage: the mnsicke sounding: she breaths
amongst them. Envy. Down climbing Pride to Stygian Tartarie,
The breath of Envy fills the empty world,
Envy, whose nature is to work alone,
As hating any Agent but her self,
Turn, turn, thou Lackey to the winged Time,
I envy thee in that thou art so slow,
And I so swift to mischief: So, now stand,
Peace, Plenty, Pride, had their competitors,
But I enjoy my Sovereignty alone.
Now shall proud Noblesse, Law, and Merchandise,
Each swell at other, as their veins would break,
Fat Ignorance, and rammish Barbarism,
Shall spit and driuell in sweet Learnings face,
Whilst he half starved in Envy of their power,
Shall eat his marrow, and himself devour,
Awake ye Brawne-fed Epicures, look up,
And when you think your clearest eyes to find.
Be all their Organs struck with Envy blind.
Exit.
They all awake, and begin the following Act. Actus 4. Scaena 1.
Mauo. O pallid Envy how thou suck'st my blood,
And wastes my vital spirits: I could rave,
Run mad with anguish, for my slight respect,
O where is the honor to my high borne blood!
When every peasant, each Plebeian,
Sits in the throne of undeserved repute,
When every Pedlers-French is termed Monsignuer,
When broad-cloathd tradesman, and what lack you sir.
Is wrapped in rich habiliments of silk,
Whilst urgent need makes Princes bend their knee,
As servile as the ignobilitie,
To crouch for coin, whilst flaues tie fast our Lands,
In Statute Staple, or these Merchants bands.

Bellu. Wan ghostlike Envy, spungeth up my blood,
Whilst I behold yon halfe-fac'd Minion,
The daughter of some Cloves and Cinnamon,
To equal me in rich accoustrements.
O, where is the outward difference of our birth!
When each odde-mincing mistress Citty-Dame,
Shall dare to be as sumptuously adorned
With Jewels, chains, and richest ornaments,
As we from whom their Fathers held their land
In bond-slaues Tenure, and base villianage.

Vouch. Why should yon bubble of Nobility,
Yon shade of Man appropriate Epithetes
Of noble, and right honorable, Sir,
To the blind Fortune of his happy birth?
Why should this reeling world (drunk with the juice
Of Plenties bounty) give such attribute
Of sovereign title, place and dignity,
To that same swollen up Lord, whom blinded chance,
Above his virtues merit does advance,
To high exalted state, whilst all repine,
To see our sweat rewarded, and our pain
Guerdond but with a single fee, an Angels gain.

Champ. God for his mercy, how yon Lady ietts,
And swoopes along in Persian royalty.
O, I could pine with Envy, and consume
My heart in foul disdain, that she should strout,
And swell in ostentation of her birth,
Decking the curled tresses of her hair
With glittering ornaments, whilst I am pent
In nice respect of civil modesty:
I Will not endure it, Lawyers wives shall shine,
Spite of the law, and all that dare repine.

Vel. Drops of cold sweat hang on my fretting brow,
O, I could gnash my teeth, and whip my self,
Parboyle my liver in this envious heat
Of deep repining Malice! I am vexed,
Stung with a Viperous impatience,
That yon Nobility, yon John a Style,
Should sole possess the throne of dignity,
Whilst we fat Burgomasters of the State,
Rich treasuries of gold, full stuffed up trunkes,
With all the fattest marrow of the land
Should be debarred from types Maiesticall,
And live like Aesops Ass: whilst our mean birth
Curbes our aspiring humors from the seat,
Of honors mounted state; I cannot sleep,
My entrails burn with scorn, that Merchandise,
Should stand and lick the pauement with his knee,
Bare-head and crouching to Nobility,
Though forfeited to us be all their state,
Yet Envy (still) my heart does macerate.

Perp. Gip Mistress Madam, and French-hood intaild
Unto a Habeas Corpus: Jesus God,
How proud they iet it, and must I give wall?
And bend my body to their Mistresse-ships,
O husband, I am sick, my cheek is pale
With --

Vel. With what my sweet?

Perp. With Envy, which no Physic can prevent;
Shall I still stand an abject in the eye,
Of fair respect, not mounted to the height
To the top gallant of o're-peering state,
That with Elated looks of Majesty,
I may out face the proud pild Eminence,
Of this same gilded Madam Bellula,
And yon same Ione a Noke, chained Champertie?

Vel Content thee wife; the tide of Royalty,
Shall only flow into our Merchandise,
The gulphe of our Ambition shall devour
All the supports of honor, lands and plate,
Rich mineral Jewels, sumptuous palaces,
All shall be swallowed by the yawning mouth
Of hungry Avarice. Thus I plotted it,
You see Mauortius stormy brow portends,
Tempestuous whirle-windes of tumultuous arms,
Now when the breath of war is once denounced,
Then troop the gallants to our wealthy shops.
To take up rich apparel, pawn their land,
To puff up Prides swollen bulk with plumy shows,
Then, when the Actions expectation flags,
And fills not up the mouth of gaping hope,
To us returns the mal' contented youth,
And for the furnishment of one suite more,
All, all, is ours, Jewels, plate and Lands,
Al take cariere into the Merchants hands,
Then come, withdraw, and cool thy envious heat,
My policy shall make thy hopes repleate.

Exeunt Velu. and Perpetu. Camp. And shall I still (dear Vourcher) sit below,
Give place to Madams and these city dames,
O, how my envy at their glory flames.

Vour. Be patient but a while (sweet Campertie,)
And I will make the world do fealty,
To thy exalted State: the Law shall stand,
Like to a waxen nose, or Lesbian rule.
A dial Gnomon, or a wethercocke,
Turned with the breath of greatness every way,
On whose incertaintie, our certain ground
Of towering hight shall stand invincible:
The Dubious Law shall nurse dissension,
Which being pampered with our feeding helps,
We Will swell in greatness and our palace Towers
Shall prick the ribs of Heaven with proud height:
Then let thy Envy cease, since thy high fate,
Shall not discern a fortune more Elate.

Exeunt Vour. and Champ. Bell. Se with what slight respect they pass from us,
Not giving to our birth's their due saluts,
O Dearest Lord! shall high borne Bellula?
Be suncke, and thus obscured by the proud shine,
Of yon sophisticate base Alcumie,
You b^llion stuff: O noble bloods repine!
That dirt usurps the orb, where you should shine.

Mau. Content thee sweet, the lightning of my arms,
Shall purge the air of these gross foggy clouds,
That do obscure our births bright radiance,
When Iron Mars mounts up his plumy Crest,
The Law and Merchandise in rust may rest,
Then Euy cease; for e're the Son shall set,
I Will buckle on Mauortius burganet.

Exeunt Mauo. and Bell. Enter Chrisoganus solus. Chri. Snmma petit liuor,
perflant altissima venti,
Then poor Chrisoganus, whole envy thee,
Whose dusky fortune has no shining gloss
That Enuies breath can blast? O I could curse
This idiot world! This ill nursed age of Peace,
That foster all save virtue; comforts all
Saving industrious art, the souls bright gemme,
That crussheth down the sprowting stemmes of Art,
Blasts forward wits with frosty cold contempt,
Crowning dull clodds of earth with honors,
Wreath guilding the rotten face of barbarism
With the unworthy shine of Eminence.
O! I could wish my self consumed in air,
When I behold these huge fat lumpes of flesh,
These big-bulkt painted posts, that senseless
Ssand, to have their backs pasted with dignity,
Quite choking up all passage to respect:
These huge Colossi that roll up and down,
And fill up all the seat of man with froth
Of outward semblance, whilst pale Artizans.
Pine in the shades of gloomy Academes,
Faint in pursuit of virtue, and quite tierd
For want of liberal food* for liberal Art
Give up the goal to sluggish Ignorance.
O whether does my passion carry me?
Poor fool, leave prating, envy not their shine,
Who still will flourish, though great Fate repine.
Exit.
Enter Belsh, Gulsh, Gutt, and Clowt with an Ingle. Gul. Jack of the
Clock-house, where is Master Post-hast?

Bell In my book for Slow-pace, twelue-pence on'spate, for staying so late.

Gut. Prologue begin; rehearse, etc.
Gentlemen in this envious age we bring Bayard
For Bucephalus: if mierd, bogg'd,
Draw him forth with your favors,
So promising that we never mean to perform
Our Prologue peaceth.

Gul. Peaceth? what peaking Pag^nter pend that?

Bell. Who but Master Post-hast.

Gut. It is as dangerous to read his name at a playe-dore
As a printed bill on a plague door.

Gul. You wear the hansom'st compast hilt I have seen;

Ingle. Does this fashion like my friend so well.

Bell. So well I mean to wear it for your sake.

Ingle. I can deny thee nothing if I would.

Gul. Fie how this Ingling troubles our rehearsal: say on.

Gut. Fellow Belsh you have found a haunt at my house
You must belch and breath your spirits some, where else.

Bell. Iealious of me with your seat for Master John,

Gut. When the door's shut the signe's in Capricorn

Clow. Then you might heave the latch up with your horn

Gul. This Cockoldly coil hinders our rehearsal.

Gut. I Will tear their turret tops,
I Will beat their Bulwarcks down,
I Will rend such Raskalls form their rags,
And whippe them out of town.

Bell. Patience (my Lord) your fury strayes too far.

Gul. Stay sirs, rehearse no farther then you are
For here be huffing parts in this new book;

Gutt. Have Ier'e a good humor in my part?

Gull. Thou have near a good one out of thy part;

Bell. I Will play the conquering King that likes me best,

Gutt. Thou play the cowardly knave; thou do but jest,

Clou. Half a share, half a shirt, a Comedian
A hole share, or turn Cameleon.

Gull. Well sirs, the gentlemen see into our trade,
We cannot gull them with browne-paper stusse,
And the best Poets grown so envious
They Will starve rather then we get store of money.

Gut. Since dearth of Poets lets not players live by wit
To spite them lets to wars, and learn to use a spit.

Clout. O excellent ill a spit to roast a rhyme.

Gutt. Twill serve you to remember dinner time.

Bell. That's true it is time, let us away.

Exeunt. Actus quintus.
Enter War Ambition, Fury, Horror, Ruin. War. Rule fier-eied War, revel
in blood and flames,
Envy, whose breath has poisoned all estates,
Has now resigned her spightfull throne to us:
Stand forth Ambition; fly through the land,
And enter every breast of noble blood,
Infect their honored minds with factious thoughts,
And make them glister in opposed arms:
Let unjust force and scarlet Tyranny
Wait on their Actions till their ulcers break,
Or else be launced by the hand of War,
Which cannot be without a lasting scarre,

Ambi. Ambition like a Pestilence does fly,
To poison Honor and Nobility.
Exit Ambition.
War. Fury, thy turn is next, go now and fill
The trunck of Peasants with thy dangerous breath,
Inspire them with the spirit of Mutiny,
Rage, and rebellion, make them desperate
Hurry them headlong unto every ill,
Like dust raised with a whirl wind; let their eyes,
Be ever fixed upon the bruised prints
Made in their state by wild oppression,
And (after all) possess them with this fire,
That only War must purchase their desire.

Fury. Fury shall shine amongst this multitude,
Like a bright Meteor in the darkest cloud.
Exit Fury.
War. Horror shall greet the bosom of green youth,
The melting liver of pied gallantry,
The wrinckled vizard of Devotion,
The cheuerell conscience of corrupted law,
And frozen heart of gowty Merchandise,
Horror wound these, strike palsies in their limbs,
And as thou stalk'st (in thy prodigious shape,)
And meet'st a fellow swollen with mounted place;
Shake him with glaunses of thy hollow eyes,
And let thy vigor live as his heart dies.

Horr. Enough, ere long, the air shall ring with shrikes.
And sad lament of those, whom Horror strikes.
Exit. Horror.
War. Horror adieu,
These three, are Vshers to our Deity,
Only vast Ruin here attends on us,
And is a follower of our high designs:
Ruin thou faithful servant to grimme War,
Now teach thy murdring shot to tear men's limm's,
Thy brazen Cannos how to make a breach,
In a fair Cities bozome; teach thy fires
To climb the tops of houses; and thy mines,
To blow up Churches in the offended sky.
Consume whole groves and standing fields of Corn
In thy wild age, and make the proud earth groan,
Under the weight of thy confusion.

Ruin. This and much more shall Ruin execute.

War. Mean while we will steep our sinowie feet in blood
And dance unto the Music of the field,
Trumpets for trebbles, bases, bellowing drnmmes.
Broils Envy bred, but War shall end those brawles,
Deaf war that will not hear a word of Peace:
Sharp pikes shall serve for subtle lawiers pens
The Merchants silks shall turn to shining steel,
In steed of false-yard sticks, large horsemens staves,
Shall measure out true pattern's of their graves.

Exeunt. Enter Belsh setting up bills, Enter to him a Captain. Capt. Sir
what set you up there?

Belsh. Text bills for Plays.

Capt. What Plays in time of Wars? hold sirta
There Is a new plott.

Belsh. How many mean you shall come in for this?

Capt. Player it is press money.

Bell. Press money, press money, alas sir press me,
I am no fit Actor for th action.

Capt. Text bills must now be turned to Iron bills.
Exit Captain.
Bell And please you let them be dagger pies.

Enter an Officer, Post-hast, Gulsh, Gut and Clowt. Ofiicer Sir Oliuers men;
the last Players took the
Towns reward like honest men.

Gulsh Those were a cupple of Cunnicatchers that
Coosen Majors, and have no consort but themselves,
But we are a full company, and our credit with our
Master known.

Offi. Mean while there is presse-mony, for your reward,

Clou. No (I thank your worship) we mean not to trouble your town at this
time.


Offi. Well Masters, you that are maister-sharers,
Must provide you upon your own purses,

Gut. Alas sir, we Players are priuieldg'd,
It Is our Audience must fight in the field for us,
And we upon the stage for them.

Post. Sir as concerning half a score angels
Or such a matter for a man in my place.

Offi. Those days are out of date.

Bells. The more's the pity sir,

Exit Officer. Guls. Well, I have a Brewer to my Ingle,
Heel furnish me with a horse great enough.

Post. Faith I Will eene past all my ballads together,
And make a coat to hold out pistoll-proofe;

Clout. I marvel what use I should make of my Ingle,
The hobby-horse-seller.

Gutt. Faith make him sell a whole troop of horse
To buy thee one.

Bell. Sirrs, if these soldiers light upon our playing parrell, they will strout
it in the field, and flaunt it out.


Post. Well sirs, I have no stomach to these wars,

Gut. Faith, I have a better stomach to my breakfast.

Clont. A shrewd mornings work for Players,

Omn. Let Us be gone?

Exeunt. Enter Mauortius and Larius on one side, Philarchus and Hiletus on the
other with weapons Drawn: Chrisoganus between them. Ambition breathing
amongst them. Chri. Have patience worthy Lords, and calm your spirits.

Mauo. Peace prating Scholar: bid the Sea be still,
When powerful winds doc toss the raging waves,
Or stay the winged lightning in his course;
When thou do this, thy words shall charm me too.
Till then preserve thy breath.

Phi. Mauortius, dare thou maintain thy words?

Mauo. How? dare Philarchus? yes, I dare do more;
In blood or fire; or where thou dare not come;
In the numme fingers of cold death I dare.

Phi. Swallow those words, or thou shall eat my sword.

Lar. He is no Estrich sir he loves no iron.

Hill. And yet me thinks he should be by his plume.

Mauo. What are you playing with my feather too?
They all run one at another, Chrysog: steps between them.
Chri. O stay your rages,
Let not Ambition captiuate your blood,
Make not your hates objects for vulgar eyes.

Mauo. A pox upon this linguist, take him hence;
Philarchus, I defy thee, and in scorn,
Spit on thy bozome: vowing here by heaven,
If either sword, or fire, or strength of men,
Or any other steeled violence,
Can bring to swift confusion what is thine,
Upon this grateful soil; it shall be done.

Phi. And when 'ts done, I will restore my wrongs
Out of thy Forts, thy Castles and thy lands.

Mauo. My lands?

Phi. I, factious Lord, till then adieu,
We Will shine like Commets in next enter-view.

Exennt Phi. and Hile. Mauo. My soul is big in travail with revenge,
And I could rip her womb up with a stabbe,
To free the imprisoned issue of my thought.

Exeunt, manet Chisoganus. Chri. O, how this vulture, (vile Ambition,)
Tyers on the heart of greatness, and deuoures,
Their bleeding honors, whilst their empty names,
Lie chained unto the hill of infamy:
Now is the time wherein a melting eye
May spend it self in tears, and with salt drops,
Write woe, and desolation in the dust,
Upon the frighted bosom of our land,
Pity and Piety are both exilde,
Religion buried with our Fathers bones,
In the cold earth; and nothing but her face,
Left to adorn these gross and impious times.

stand a side. A noise within crying, Liberty, liberty. Enter a sort of
Russetings and Mechanichalls, (F^^^ leading them) and crying confusedly. Omnes.
Liberty, liberty, liberty.

1. Nay but stay, stay, my Masters: we have not insulted yet who shall be our
Captain.


2. Mass that is true: faith let us all be Captains.

3. Content, so we shall be sure to have no equality amongst us.


4. O, it is best, for, (for mine own part)
I scorn to have an equal.

1. Well then: what exploit shall we do first?

2. Marry I Will tell you:
Let Us pluck down the Church, and set up an Alehouse.

Omnes. O excellent, excellent, excellent, a rare exploit, a rare exploite.


1. Good: this is for exploite: but then there is a thing called Action.

3. O, that is going to Sea; that, we have nothing to do withal,

4. No, we are all for the land, we.

2. Land, I: we will pluck down all the noble houses in the land, e're we have
done.


1. It were a most noble service, and most worthy of the Chronicle.


2. Slid, these Lords are grown so proud,
Nay, we will have a fling at the Lawyers too.

3. O, I, first of all at the Lawyers.

4. True, that we may have the law in our own hands.

1. O then we may take up what we will of the Merchants.

2. I and forfet our bonds at pleasure, no body can sue us.

3. O, 'twill be rare: I wonder how much Velvet will ^^parell me and my horse.


4. Talk not of that man, we will have enough:
All shall be common.

1. Wives and all: what, Helter, skelter.

2. Slid, we are men as well as they are.

3. And we came all of our Father Adam.

2. Go to then, why should we be their slaves?

Omnes. Liberty, liberty, liberty.

Exeunt. Chri. See, see, this common beast the multitude,
(Transported thus with fury) how it raues;
Threatening all states with ruin, to englut
Their bestiall and more brutish appetites.
O you auspicious, and diuinest powers,
(That in your wisdoms suffer such dread plagues
To flow and cover a rebellious land)
Give end unto their furies! and drive back
The roaring torrent on the Authors heads,
That (in their pride of Rage) all eyes may see.
Justice has whips to scourge impiety.
Exit.
Enter Lyon-rash to Fourchier sitting in his study: at one end of the stage: At
the other end enter Vourcher to Velure in his shop. Lion. Good morrow master
Fourcher.

Four. Master Lyon-rash you are welcome:
How fare you sir, in these prodigious times?

Lion. Troth like a man grown wild and desperate,
E'ene spent with horror of their strange effects.

Four. I fear they will be much more stranger yet.

Lion. And you have cause to fear sir.

Fou. So have you: if wealth may make a man suspect his state,
What news hear you sir? sit down I pray you.

They sit and whisper whilst the other two speak. Vouu. I wonder how you dare
keep open shop,
Considering the tumults are abroad:
They say the Nobles all are up in arms,
And the rude commons in disseuerd troops
Have gathered dangerous head, and make such spoil,
As would strike dead a true reporters tongue.

Vel. Faith I am ignorant what course to take,
We in the City here are so distracted
As if our spirits were all earth and air,
I know not how: each hour here comes fresh news,
And nothing certain

The other two again. Four. Well if this be true,
The issue cannot be but dangerous,

Lion. O they have made the violent'st attempts
That ere were heard of: ruined Churches, Towns,
Burned goodly Mannours, and indeed laid wast.
All the whole Country as they pass along.

The other. Vour. There Is no prevention if they once come here
But that our City must endure the sack.

Vel. I fear it sir.

Vour. Faith we are sure to feel
The fury of the tempest when it comes.
The Law and Merchandise may both go beg.

Enter Champerty to her husband and Lyon-rash. Cham. Where are you husband, do
you here the news?

Four. What news on Gods name?

Cham. O the enemies.! Four. What of the enemies?

Cham. They are entered into the city.

Lyo. Adieu good master Fourcher.

Fou. Lord have mercy upon us,

Cham. O good Master Lyon-rash go pray.

Exeunt Four. Lion, Cham. Vel. How now, what noise is this?

Vou. They cry arm arm me thinks.

Enter Perpetuana. Perp. O sweet heart the Spaniards are come,
We shall all be killed they say.
Master Vourcher what shall we do? O Lord.

Enter a sort of fellows with armor and weapons and cross the stage crying
arm, arm, arm. Omn, Arm, arm, arm.

Exeunt. Enter a Captain with Soldiers: the Soldiers having most of the
Players apparel; and bringing out the Players among'st them. Soul. Come on
Players, now we are the Sharers
And you the hired men: Nay you must take patience,
Slid how do you march?
Sirrah is this you would rend and tear the Cat
Upon a Stage, and now march like a drowned rat?
Look up and play the Tamburlaine: you rogue you.

Exeunt. Enter all the factions of Noblemen, Peasants, and Citizens fighting:
the ruder sort drive in the rest and cry a sack, a sack, Hauoke havoc,
Burn the Lawiers books; tear the Silks out of the shops: in that confusion:
the Scholar scaping from among them, they all go out and leave him upon the
Stage. Chri. Thus Heaven (in spite of fury) can preserve,
The trustfull innocent, and guiltless Soul;
O, what a thing is man, that thus forgets
The end of his creation; and each hour
Strikes at the glory of his maker thus?
What brazen vizage, or black iron soul
Has strength to Justify so Godless deeds?
He that is most infeoft to Tyranny,
The man whose Jaws burn most with thirst of blood,
What colors or thin cobweb can he weaue,
To cover so abhorred iniquities?
If then there be no shadow, no pretext,
To veil their loathed bodies; what should make
Men so enamored on this Strumpet war.
To doat upon her form? when (in her self)
She Is made of nothing, but infectious plagues.
Witness the present Chaos of our Scene,
Where every street is chained with linckes of spoil,
Here proud Ambition rides; there Fury flies,
Here Horror; and there ruthlesse Murder stalks,
Led on by Ruin, and in Steel and fire,
That now on tops of houses; now in vaults,
Now in the sacred Temples; here, and there
Runs wild.
Exit.
Allarmes in several places, that brake him off thus: After a retreat sounded,
the Music plays and Poverty enters. Actus Sextus
Scaena 1.
Enter Poverty, Famine, Sickness, Bondage, and Sluttishnesse. Pouer. Reign
Poverty in spite of tragic war,
And tiumph over glittering vanity,
Though want be never void of bitter woes,
Yet slow-paced remedy, true patience shows,
See worldling worlds of Virtue lined within,
Though sinners all; yet least repleat with sin.
I scorn a scoffing fool about my Throne,
An Artlesse Idiot; that (like Esops Dawe,
Plumes fairer fether'd birds: no, Poverty,
Will dignifie her chair with deep Divines,
Philosophers and Scholars feast with me,
As well as Martialists in misery.
First change the hour from five to fatal six,
Then ring forth knells of heavy discontent,
With fighes and groans whilst I have government.

Famine. Thin Famine needs must follow Poverty.
My bones lie open, like a withered tree
By storms disbarkt of her defending skin,
So near the heart the weather beats within.

Sick. O end thy Age! that we may end our days,
Once Objects, now all Abiects to the world,
For after feeble Sickness death ensues,
And ends grief that happy joy renews.

Bond. Then Bondage shall vnbolt those cruel bars,
That thralls fair honor in obscure reproach,
And sauage-like yoakes up humanity,
To bind in chains true-borne ciuillity.

Slut. Though Sluttishnesse be loathsome to her self,
Penurious time must be obscaene and base,
Who hates the rich must dwell with Poverty,
Since rule in any thing, is Sovereignty.

Pouer. Were Poverty a word more miserable
Then Man's austere invention could propound,
Yet is poor Honesty rich Honors ground:
Whose eyes vnuail'd like to th'vnhoodded Hawke,
Look straight on high, and in the end aspire,
To feel the warmth of Princes holy fire.
Yet Honor, Wealth, Lands, and who wins the prize,
Obtaines but Vanity of Vanities.
Come follow me my never failing friend.

Exeunt. Enter Mauortius and Philarchus at several doors. Mauo. The broils
of war wherein I gloried more
Then Priams Hector, who by burning walls,
Was traild along (dread victories deep fall)
So from these gates my self in mean disgrace
Am banished forth, pinch't through with poverty.
Who tells us all it is true that she has sed,
Poor flies will tickle Lions being dead.

Phil. The thirst of Honor called me to the wars,
Where I have drunk a health (too deep a draught)
My full-mouthd bags may now be filled with air,
The Devil and Ambition taught it me.

Mauo. Is that Philarchus that complains? it is so,

Phil. See how Mauortius turns away his face,
To seek to friends it is holden for disgrace.

Mauo. Time was, I could have dined amongst my friends,
Now stands at every door a lack and Apes
And tells me it is too late, his Lord has dined.

Phi. This miserable world would make one mad;
I stepped unto a Vintner at the Bar,
And offered him my Rapier for a pawn;
The saucy slave took it in such a scorn,
And flung it in the streets, replying thus,
Mere want brings weapons out of use with us.

Mauo. See poor Philarchus pouring out his plaints,
To unrelenting walls, relentlesse men.

Phil. Are wounds rewards for Soldiers in the field?
What? sell our lands, are these the fruits of War?
Then dye Philarchus, let not shame survive,
Thy fainting honor, dead and yet alive.

Mauo. Here come our wives, how wretchedly they look.

Enter Perpetuana and Bellula. Bell. My Jewels pawnd, my rings are gone to wrack,
The greedy Usurer has gotten all.

Perp. I am a prey to wretched Poverty,
Ill featured Famine will devour us up,
Whose wrinkled face, is like pale deaths aspect.

Phil. Behold my wife like Winters parramour,
Robbed and bereaved of nuptial Ornaments.
"Hide thee Philarchus lower then the grave,
"The Earth will cover though it cannot save.

Perp. If men lament, whose wonted yron-hearts,
Were harder then the Armor they have worn,
And wail the Agent of a woman's voice,
What shall weak women and poor Ladies do?
Fall to those tears, that we were borne unto.

Exeunt. Mauo. Could I but learn (with Craesus) to endure
The falling sickness of sad Poverty,
Who lost a rich commanding Emperie
Patience would prove a tutor to my grieves.

Chri. Thou want's a Solan to consort with thee,
To prove affliction is the perfect way
That leads to Jove's tribunal dignity;
Ill have thou governed thy prosperity,
That can not smile in mere adversity.
Look upon me (the poorest slave in show,
That ever fortune buried in mishappe:)
Yet this is Natures richest lewell-house
And teaches me to weep at all your wants.

Phil. Why, thou art far more wretcheder then we,
How can thou teach us then tranquillity?

Chri. See thou this poor and naked bozome here?
Do thou behold this scorned uncovered head?
When thou wast rich and Peerless in thy pride,
Content did never harbor in thy breast,
Nor ere had love, her residence in thee,
(I mean the love of perfect happiness)
But skillesse grudging from a haughty spirit
Did blind thy senses with a slender merit.
Whilst I (poor man) not subject to such thought
Gave entertain to those sweet blessed babes,
Which Sapience brought from Wisdoms holy breast,
And thought me rich to have their company.
By nursing them in Peace I shunned all Sloth,
Nor yet did Plenty make me prodigal:
Pride I abhorred and termed the Beggars shield:
Nor ever did base Euuie touch my heart.
Yet always loou'd to bear (as Solon sed,)
A Turtles eye within an Aspicks head:
Nor could the rattling fury of fierce war
Astonish me more then the midnight clock,
The Trumpetter to Contemplation:
For Poverty, I shake her by the hand,
As welcome Lady to this woeful Land.

Mau. How might we tread the path's to happy ends,
Since foes to Learning are not Virtues friends.

Chri. First entertain submission in your souls
To frame true concord in one unity.
Behold the fair proportion of a man,
Whom heavens have created so complete,
Yet if the arm make war against the head,
Or that the heart rebel against the brain,
This elementall body (thus compact,)
Is but a scattred Chaos of revenge;
Your laws appoincted to be positive,
(By War confounded) must be brought again.
For law is that which Love and Peace maintain.

Phili. Thou Son of knowledge (richer then a man)
We censure thy advise as oracles.

Chri. Follow, and I Will instruct you what I can:

Ma* We followed beasts before but now a man.

Exeunt. Enter Fourcher; Vourcher, Lyon-rash, and Velure. Four. O Heavens
pouring high-pryzd savors forth,
Like to the honny dew that sweetes the Leaves,
Once send us Peace, that fairest Palme-crownd Queen.

Vour. Ruin and War the precedents of Wrath,
That crop't the fifty Sons of Hecuba,
Have rid their circuit through this fertile soil,
And quite transformed it to a Wilderness.

Vel. Come let us sit and mourn with sad laments,
The heavy burdens of our discontents.

Lion. To wail our want let speaking slack the pain,
For words of grief divide the grief in twain.

Vel. Our Shops (sometimes) were stuffed with cloth of gold,
But War has emptied them, and Spyders build
Their Cob-web-tents; weauing foul dusty lawne
For poor woe-working Poverty to wear.

Four. O woes! behold our poor distressed wives.

Enter Perpetuana and Filissella. Perp. From Poverty to Famine, worse and worse

Fili. The scurge of Pride, and Heavens detested curse.

Perp. Where Is that excess consumed upon the back?

Fili. Suncke down to Hell whilst hunger feels the lack.

Perp. Who now will pity us, that scorned the poor?

Fili. Pity is past when Peace is out of door.

Perp. Drink thou my tears and I will drink up thine,
For naught but tears is miseries salt wine.

Fill. We that have scornd to dress our meat our selves,
Now would be glad if we had meat to dress.

Perp. And if Lament were remedy for want
Their cates wear course that in Lament were scant,

Lion. Comfort sweet wife, ill lasts not always so:
And good (sometimes) makes end of lingering woe.

Perp. My grief is thine,

Lion. And mine is most for thee.

Per. My care is thine.

Lion. Be mine for thee and me.

Exeunt. Enter country seruing-men. 1. Faith Poverty has paid my wife on the
petticoate.

2. From these deuowring woormes, eat men alive,
And swollow up whole Mannours at a bit
The whilst our hungry bodies die for lack,
And honest husbandy must go to wrack.

1. Pray sirs for Peace, that best may please us all.
From cities Pride the country takes his fall.

2. It Is Time, for plough-shares (now) are turned to bills,
Carte-horses pressed to carry Caualliers,
True laboring servants counted Soldiers slaves,

1. Though Famine hungerstarue yet heaven saues.

Omn. Then let us pray to heaven all for Peace.
For thence comes comfort, plenty and increase.

Exeunt. Enter Posthast with his Hostess. Host. Post me no posting; pay me the
shot,
You live by wit; but we must live by money.

Post. Goody sharp, be not so short,
I Will pay you, when I give you money.

Host. When you give me money? go to, I Will bear no Longer.


Post. What and be under fifty?

Enter Cunstable. Host. Master Cunstable hoe, these Players will not pay their
shot.


Post. Faith sir, War has so pinch't us we must pawn.

Cun, Alas poor Players: hostis; what comes it to?

Host. The Sharers dinners six pence a piece, the hirelings pence.


Post. What sixepence an Egg, and two and two at an Egg.


Host. Faith Famine affords no more.

Post. Fellows bring out the hamper choose somew-what out o'th Stock.

Enter the Players. What will you have this cloak to pawn,
what think you it is worth?

Host. Some four groats,

Oun. The pox is in this age, here is a brave world fellows.

Post. You may see what it is to laugh at the Audience.

Host. Well it shall serve for a paune.
Exit Hostess.
Cun. Soft sirs I must talk with you for tax money,
To relieve the poor, not a penny paid yet,

Post. Sir, (at few words we shared but xv. pence last week.

Cun* But it is well known, that each maintains his Puncke,
And tauernes it with drunken suppers still.

Omn. Alas they are our wives.

Cun. Ye are not all married.

Post. Who are not are glad to bring such as they can get.

Bells. Before I Will give such a president, I Will leave playing.

Gul. Faith and I too: I Will rather fall to work.

Post. Fall to work after playing impossible.

Cun. Sirs, will you here the truth.

Gut. Sir you may choose,

Cun. But you must all choose
Whither you will be shipped and set a shore no man
Knows where as the Romans did:
Or play for the maintenance of the poor;
And your selves kept like honest men.

Omn. We choose neither.

Post, Saving your sad tale, will you take a pot or two.

Cun. The dearth of Malt denies it

Clou. Its a hard world if the Constable despise it.

Guls, Must we be shipped in earnest,
Or do you make us Sheep in jest,

Cun. Ecce signum.

Post. Cunstable do you know what you do.

Cun. I, banish idle fellows out o'th'land,

Bells. Why Cunstable do you know what you see.

Cun, I, I see a Madge howlet: and she sees not see.

Post. Know you our credit with Sir Oliver?

Cun. True, but your boasting has crakt it, (I fear.)

Gut. Faith I must fall to making fidle strings again.

Bles. And I to curle horse tails to make fools beards.

Post. I Will boldy fall to ballading again.

Cunst. Sirs, those prouisoes will not serve the turn,
What hoe, Sailors, ship away these players.

Enter Sailors. Sail. The wind blows fair, and we are ready sir.

Cunst. No matter where it blows; away with them.

Post. It Is an ill wind blows a man thus clean out of ballading.


Exeunt. Enter Peace, Bacchus, Ceres, and Plenty, bearing the Cornu copiae, at
the one door: At the other Poverty, with her attendants; who beholding Peace
approach, vanish. Peace. Bondage, wan Sickness, and bare Poverty,
Vanish like clouds before the Eastern light,
Now Peace appears, hence all to endless night,
And you dejected spirits, crushed with want,
Mount up your minds unto the fairest hope,
Need has nursed Peace within your Horoscope,
The warm reflection of whose cheering beams,
Makes you as rich as bright Pactolus streams.
Shine plentuous Bounty, crown the naked world,
With odourous wreaths of thy abundant sweetes,
Laborious Artizanes, now bustle up,
Your drouping spirits with alacrity.
Peace gives your toyling sweat a due regard,
Crowning your labor with a rich reward.
Ceres be lavish, Bacchus swell to brimme,
And all to Peace sing a propitious himne,

They begin to sing, and presently cease. A Song,
With Laurel shall our Altars flame,
In honor of thy sacred name.
Enter Astraea vshered by Fame, supported by Fortitude and Religion, followed
by Virginity and Arts. Peace. No more:
Be dumb in hushed observance at this sight,
Here comes Amazements object, wonders height,
Peaces patroness, Heavens miracle,
Virtues honor, Earths admiration,
Chastities Crown, Justice perfection,
Whose train is vnpolute Virginity,
Whose Diadem of bright immortal Fame,
Is burnisht with vnvalued respect,
Ineffable wonder of remotest lands;
Still sway thy gracious Scepter, I resign;
What I am is by Thee, my self am thine,

Q. Eliza. Astraea mounts unto the Throne.
Mount Emperesse, whose praise for Peace shall mount,
Whose glory, which thy solid virtues won,
Shall honor Europe whilst there shines a Sun.
Crowned with Heavens inward beauties, worlds applause,
Throned and reposd within the loving fear
Of thy adoring Subjects: live as long
As Time has life, and Fame a worthy tongue.
Still breath our glory, the worlds Empress,
Religions Guardian, Peaces patroness;
Now flourish Arts, the Queen of Peace does reign,
Virtue triumph, now she does sway the stem,
Who gives to Virtue, honors Diadem.
All sing Paeans to her sacred worth,
Which none but Angels tongues can warble forth:
Yet sing, for though we cannot light the Sun,
Yet utmost might has kind acceptance won.
Song.
Religion, Arts, and Merchandise, triumph, triumph:
Astraea rules, whose gracious eyes, triumph, triumph.
Over Vices conquest, whose desires, triumph, triumph:
Whose all to chiefest good aspires, then all triumph.

In the end of the Play. Plenty, Pride, Envy, War, and Poverty.
To enter and resign their several Scepters to Peace, sitting in Majesty.
FINIS.

