A SERMON Preached before the Ancient Company of Black-smiths in S. Marie
Magdalens Church in London on Saint John Baptist day last. 1611.

By William Holbrook.

LONDON, Printed by E. A. for Nathaniell Butter, dwelling at S. Austins gate in
Paul's Churchyard.

1612.

TO THE ANCIENT company of Blacksmiths in London, and especially to the Master,
Wardens and Assistants thereof, all grace and happiness in this and the life to
come.
POndering with my self (beloved) to whom I should dedicate this labor, I
found none that had greater right or claim to it then your selves: at the
request of some of you it first began to be, and came to be sounded viva voce
in the ears of you and many other. At the earnest request of the some it now
comes forth to a further view, which I thought should never have seen the
Sun any more. Further, the matter of it in some part concerns you only,
and was perticularly dressed and served for your instruction; though there be
many dishes common to you and others to feed upon, for these respects me thinks
I should wrong you, if I should dedicate it to any other: My desire in penning
it, is the same it was in preaching it, that you may be edified and taught to
live soberly, righteously, and holily, in this present world, and I have peace
of conscience both in the one and the other: I affected plainenes in speaking,
so I have in writing, and therein kept my self as near as I can, with the
help of my brief notes, to the method phrase and matter, I observed in the
delivery of it. Accept it according to the worth of the matter, look upon
that, not upon my rudenes in handling it: the meat is good, though happily an
other Cook might have dressed and served it in more skilfully. Thus I leave it
to your charitable and christian acceptance; and you all, to the blessing of
him who is blessed for ever: To whom I will pray (that as in publishing this
labor, I have satisfied some of you) you all may according to the desires of
my heart, receive profit and instruction by it.

Your Christian friend, and hearty wel-wisher: WILLIAM HOLBROOKE.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE COMPANY OF Black-Smiths.
GENESIS 4.22. And Zillah also bare Tubalkain who wrought cunningly in every craft
of Brass and of Iron.


Being labored much (beloved in him who is blessed for ever) to preach at
this assembly, I was no little time before I could meet with a Text answering
the persons and occasions: At length I found this Scripture, and have labored
the same, I hope according to the true and geminine sense thereof, and for your
profit, so that I shall neither wrong you nor it, in the handling thereof. In
it, we have a commendation both of the antiquity, necessity, and lawfulnes of
your Trade: though in posterity of Lamech, no disparagement thereof, God
bringing light out of darkness, and good out of evil: so herein ordering and
disposing this posterity of Kain, that though they will not give themselves to
the worship of God, yet by them he brings forth skill, both in liberal arts,
and mechanical trades, for the good of all: of liberal arts in Iuball: of
mechanical, trades in Tubalkin, in this Text mentioned: who is commended unto
us by his parentage, and that on both sides, by Father who was Lamech, by
Mother who was Zillah, his second wife, in whom Poligamy, or Bigamy, bebegan:
Secondly by his trade or calling, in which four things are to be considered:
First, that he was not idle but had a calling: Secondly, that he wrought in
his calling: Thirdly, the perfection he did grow to and labor after, in these
words He wrought cunningly: Fourthly, what his calling was, to work in Brass
and Iron. In these have we seen the special things in this Scripture to be
considered: for the words, there is some difference between the original and
translation, which is to be observed for the clearing of the Text, and the
making of better way, to the doctrine and instructions. The difference is
herein, Whereas the translation is, He wrought cunningly, the original
(according to the learned translaters) is verbatim, he sharpened, or put an
edge to Brass and Iron, metaphorically speaking, that as a man finding a blunt
knife or tool, does set an edge thereupon; so did Tubalkain, finding this
work, he labored to bring it to a better perfection then it was before. That
it was before, it is very probable, if not out of question, as Tremelius and
Iunius hereupon with others observe, because Kain tilled the ground before,
which he could not do without Iron instruments, especially the ground being
accursed: so that the meaning of it is, he brought this trade to a greater
perfection, and labored more in it then before was labored therein: From
which we will hasten to the several doctrines from the same deducted. And first
we will observe somewhat more generally, considering him a wicked man, yea the
son of Lamech, by whom Poligamy or Bigamy first came in, one of Cains brood,
separated and removed with the rest (as in place, so in profession) from the
fear of God, yet had he riches and a trade, yea he excelled al others in his
trade, bringing it to a greater perfection then before it was. That a wicked
man should be thus graced and outwardly furnished, we observe this doctrine,
that the wicked may equallize, Doct.
yea out go the godly and dear servants of God in these outward things, in
having wives, children, riches, skill in trades, and the like; which in
general the Preacher experimentally confirms: saying in his ninth chapter,
the 1. and 2. verses, I have surely given my heart to all this, and to declare
all this that the just and the wise, and their works are in the hands of God:
and no man knows either love or hatred of all that is before him. All things
come alike to all: and the same condition is to the just and to the wicked: to
the good and to the pure, and to the polluted: and to him that sacrifices, and
to him that sacrifices not: as is the good so is the sinner: he that swears,
as he that fears an oath. If this do not sufficiently bring light to the
point, it may be cleared further by considering in particular instances, how
the wicked have matched, yea exceeded the godly in these things. For wives and
children; did not Ham equalize Iapheth and Schem? Genesis 10.6.21. was Ishmael
behind Isaak? Genesis 25.12.16 and had not Esau wife and children as well as
Jacob? In riches; did not Dives exceed Lazarus? But to hasten the further
execution and clearing of this point, by reason, I will add these further
proofs, for the undeniable conuincing of this truth, Job. 21. ver. 7. where
Job showing this very thing, speaks thus: Wherefore do the wicked live and
wax old, and grow in wealth? their seed is stablished in their sight with
them, and their generation before their eyes, their houses are peaceable
without fear, and the rod of God is not upon them: their Bullock gendreth and
fails not: their Cow calueth and casts not her Calfe: they send forth their
Children like Sheep, and their Sons dance, they take the Tabret and Harp and
rejoice in the sound of the Organs; they spend their days in wealth, and
suddenly they go down to the grave. And who be these? even such as say to God
Depart from us for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is the
Almighty that we should fear him, and what profitt should we have if we
should pray unto him? as plainly (...) Job, does the Psalmist in Psa: 73. see
the 3. ver. to the 13. and in Ierem 12.1. and 2. giving evidence to this
doctrine. Least this should seem strange to any, that these matters should go
thus with the wicked, it will not be amiss to consider some reasons why so
that should be; And surely the the Children of God spend in speaking better
things. Secondly they have larger consciences, they fear not an oath nor false
dealing; so they have it, they be not troubled with the manner and means how
they come to it. It needs not then any whitt seem strange to any, that the
wicked should herein excel the godly; which being true, Dives go from his
riches thither? Haman from his wife and friends? Judas from his learning and
skill in preaching? It is the best then to esteem these things dunge, and if
we will think any thing the better of our selves, for any thing, let it be
for this, that we are found of and in Christ Jesus. Thirdly, this should
learn us, not to strive Lamech, and Dives a firebrand in hell may match us. In
spirtuall things, only in Christ Jesus we may leave them behind us, and
excel them: let us therefore with David, continually and unfeignedly pray that
he would incline our hearts to wisdom and not to covetousness: and that though
riches increase, we do not set out hearts upon them. Thus much for the first
point of doctrine drawn from the general consideration of this wicked man,
and his father Lamech so outwardly graced and dignified.

Let us descend to a second, out of the words, namely, from the description of
him from his mother, who is named by her name, as also set forth by the fruit
of her womb, which is a special outward blessing and end of marriage. Now in
that it is said And Zillah also (that is she whom he took to his other wife,
and so fell unto Bigamy, and did procreate and bring forth children as well as
the former, which was his lawful wife, for it was Gods institution that every
man should have his wife to avoid fornication: we learn, The Zillah with whom
it is unlawful for him to marry ( Addah his former wife yet living) nay with
whom he so living commits adultry, has children as well as Addah, and in
that respect it seems as good and as lawful as his marriage with Addah: but
to reason from the success: Of these things concludes not according to the
truth. Abraham his going into Hagar his Maid, his wife, her giving of Hagar to
him to wife, nor his obeying of his wife therein, were warranted by the
conception and procreation of Ishmael. And so might I say of Reoboam taking
eighteen wives and threescore Concubines; this was not warrantable, because he
had 28. sons and 60. daughters 2. Chro. 11.21. Reas.
The reason is at hand, not only because these successes do consist partly of
natural causes, but also God does let these have success sometime for the
shaming of those that committ this sin, whereas otherwise happily it would
not come to light; Which being so, it plainly appears, that the success of
these things argues not the lawfulnes of them. From which we may learn:
First, Haman and his wise: but let such know they have committed a fearful
sin, and their marriage was displeasing unto God, not withstanding the
outward success thereto. And thus to conclude from the outward success of
things does keep many in impenitencie, as those that thus unlawfully marry,
and such as increase themselves, and wax rich by sinful courses, by fraud,
lying, couzening, false weights; by riding, buying and selling upon the Saboth:
God prosper us (say many) in outward riches, go, my cause is lawful. Alas
poor man, thy proof will not hold out, when it comes to be tried by fire
and the balance of sanctuary, which is the revealed truth of God: in the mean
while, know there is bitterness in the end, and in fine, it will hurt like a
serpent and bite of the bait, catch the hook and all. I know it is a fearful
and dangerous temptation, to see the prosperity of any course. But let us
labor more to be strong in the might of the Lord against that, always keeping
our selves in, with that sayof our Savior. What will it gain a man to win
the whole world, and to loose his own soul? truly so do all such that be
carried away with lies, deceiptfulnes of sin, they play (as we say in the
proverb) wily beguilie, they deceive themselves most of all, as Esops dog
did, who (as the fable reports) for the greedines of more, snacht at the
shadow of that piece of meat he had in his mouth, and so for a shadow lost
the substance. So much for this second point. We will proceed to the next,
gathered out of the description of him by his mother: whence we observe for
our third Reg. 15.2. Abitam, who walked in all the sins of his Father, and
whose heart was not perfect with the Lord as David's was, Set out by his mother
whose name was Maaccah the daughter of Abishalom. Aza likewise who did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord as did David his father, is set out to
us by his mother. Ibidem. v. 10.11.12. His mothers name was Maacah the daughter
of Abishalom. Iehoash set out by his mother whose name was Zibiah of Beersheba.
2 Regu. 12. 1. Amaziah likewise, Who did uprightly in the sight of the Lord 2.
Chron 25.1. his mothers name was Iehoaddan of Jerusalem. Iotham in like manner
2 Chronicles, 27.1. Hezekiah also set out by his mother. 3. Chron 29.1. his mothers
name was Abiiah the daughter of Zechariah.

For that we see hereby how frequent a thing it is for the holy Ghost to
observe the mother. And the reason of it is, Reas.
for the most part the children imitate them much: Vt canibus catuli similes
sic matribus Haedi; like mother like children; which being thus, it should
learn us these lessons. First,

Oh let it be thy care, especially who art a mother, to have a special eye to
thy self how thou walk, talkest, workest, apparrelest thy self before thy
children, speak thou and teach them to speak the language of Canaan, and with
thy natural milk they suck from thy breasts, labor to speak unto them the
heavenly milk of the word; be thou apparrelled so frugally and christianly
that they may observe thee and follow thee therein. Remember, example
prevails more then doctrine; and as the Apostle says in another case, give
no offense to the Jew or gentile, so say I to all mothers in this case,
observe your selves in your whole carriage amongst your children, that none may
observe ought but what is good, and to edification amongst you. Remember the
Lord observes you: he had need to look to his carriage and behavior when the
Lord so eyeth and observes. Secondly, this teaches men unmarried to be
careful in choosing of quod semel statuend. diu deliberand. Consider their
equality for religion, condition, disposition every way, if thou respect thy
self and thy posterity, which thou may look and pray for, upon the using of
that ordinance: Whosoever would have good children, let him look that he take
a good wife, that may promise him much comfort that way. The beginning of
comfort in children is to begin thy family with a gracious wife, as Isaach
did, of whom it is said: she comforted him after his mothers death. In nature
this is a right course, he that will have good fruit, must store this ground
with good plants: a man cannot look for apples where he planteth a Crabtree
stock: no more can a man look for good children where he marries a wicked
wife. I know God may for the husbands sake sanctify the children, (he being
gracious) but it is not usual, for oftentimes God punishes the rash and
unwarrantable matches of many of his own children, with monstrous children; Of
such matches came Giants and monstrous persons in former times: of the like,
came monster, yea, sons and daughters of Anak: If not in quantity, yet in
quality and condition in our days, as daily experience tells us: yea, often
times such matches are rewarded with children, misshapen in bodies and dwelling
with them, as men of knowledge, giving honor to them as to the weaker vessels,
approving and commending them in what is good; disproouing and disliking what
is evil: and by all good means laboring the redress thereof, that it be not
at the length too truly said, like mother, like daughter, which meets with
the remissiuenes and folly of many husbands: who for fear of displeasing their
wives, fearing them more then God, yea making their wives Idols; whereas
husbands should please their wives in that which is good and to edification,
let evil humors so dwell in the head that the whole body at the length is
tainted therewith. And so much shall suffice to have spoken of this point.

We will now come to the next description of him, and that is from his
calling: wherein we observe these four things. First, that he was not idle but
had a calling; which offers this point of doctrine unto us, (considering him
as a mere natural man) without conscience of God. It is against Cor. 7.20.
gives witness thereto, commanding every man to abide in his calling wherein he
is called, whether bond or free, as the verses after declare: It is a statute
law of God irreuokable, Genesis 3.19. that every man should in the sweat of his
face (that is in some calling wherein he may labor) eat bread till he return
to the earth. Yea God would have Adam not to be idle, nor always to be praying
and praising God, therefore he put him in the Garden to dress it. 2. Thessa.
3.12. Paul there (reproving such, that under a show of being Christians, and
amongst them, did neglect to labor, but lived upon other men's labor and at
other men's trenchers, joining himself in commission with the rest of the
Apostles, and the rest with him) confirms this saying, we command and
exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness and eat their
own bread. God making of the world in six days, was to teach us this, and
our Savior Christ his working of the Carpenters trade, until the time of his
public office in the Church. Which being so, it first teaches parents not
only that they be careful to bring up their children in instruction and
information of the Lord, but also that they train them up in a particular and
personal calling; The holy men of ancient times, (both concerning their sons
and daughters) have done so, yea, though great and worthy, without question
able to have kept them though they had done nothing. Adam brought up his sons
in callings, so did Jacob his, and Laban too.

Let parents then look to this, and that not only Patres Corporis, but also
Patres Patriae: if the former fail, let not the second, to see men brought up
and trained up in particular callings: which if it were carefully observed,
there would be a healing of many evils in the whole land, and in particular in
this City. Thirdly, for what is the cause of so much idleness, beggary, cunny
catching and shifting, yea and whoring in this City* but this, that men do?
not of conscience set themselves to labor in particular callings, and the
Maiestrates do not see the good laws to this end made; executed.

If they will not of conscience fall to this course, let them be constrained be
law: the Maiestrate should not bear the sword for naught, or be like a player
upon the Stage, to play his part and away: ex malis moribus bon inascunter
leges, yea, let me somewhat alter that, and say also malis pro moribus boni
leges. Secondly, this should teach children willingly to submit themselves to
be trained unto, Tubalkain of Cains brood, and Lamechs son, shall rise up in
judgment against them, except they fall to some personal calling.

Oh let such fall now to a calling! it is no shame to begin to do well, but
it is a shame to live out of a calling: And that I may persuade them to it, and
others who stand in any calling, cherefully to go on in it; I will lay down
some motives to persuade every man to a personal calling. Motives to particular
callings.
First Idleness is the mother of all evil, and an occasion for the devil to
draw men to evil by, yea, what occasion of sin does not the devil take to
draw men to, that be without employment; Let the Sodomites judge: Did not he
draw them as he does many with us from idleness to fulness of bread, and belly
cheer, to make their belly their God? and from that to pride, and from all, to
be void of compassion to the poor? Nay, let the dear servants of God, when
they have but for a while (without warrant, and more then needed) ceased their
businesses? witness this, did not the devil tempt David and draw him to
adultery, and from thence to murder? and when? when he was idle, sleeping upon
his bed: when he was needlessly walking, (when he should have been
otherwise employed) upon the Roof of his house: and does he not draw most
in our days to the like? yea, to fearfuller sins, being idle; for as one
says, if thou have nothing to do, the devil will arrest thee for his
service. Oh how should the consideration of this move every man to betake
himself to a particular calling, it being such an excellent means to keep a
man from We command that they labor and eat their own bread: 2. Coll 3.12
oh consider what a base thing it is to have no clothes, no maintenance of a
man's own! so base is every one that is able, and will not walk in a
particular walking, but gives himself to idleness, sporting, eating and
drinking, and live as though there were no pleasure after this life, for such
in truth there is none: sin lies at the door for such, and will fly in
their faces, nay gnawe their consciences one day in that place where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth for evermore. Thirdly, thou must come to ede,
bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. Yea all such that spend their time in
eating, drinking and rising up to play, making their bellyes and their sports
their Gods: consider this; their accounts will be fearful and greater then
they are able to endure one day. And to these let me add all unprofitable
callings, for which the common wealth is worse, not better, (being as the
wennes or warts upon the body) such are Dice-makers, Card-makers,
Ale-house-keepers, and the like: never did, nor shall, good come by them, to
the common wealth. Let such know, they have not been employed in a particular
calling, appointed and allowed of God; these considerations propounded to
persuade every man to a particular

Oh it is a happy thing to see a woman to be a Mary and Martha together: to
play Mary in her due place, and Martha in hers: It is a pleasant thing to see
both these, as Mother and Daughter in every man and woman. Thus much of this
point: We will come to the second thing in this calling observed by us;
Namely, that as he had a calling, so he wrought in it; where observe we this
point of doctrine, Doct.
That every man and woman must work in that calling and trade, the Lord has
called them unto: the former places prove this. Habel wrought in his calling;
and this is much commended unto us, in the description of the good wife. She
lies not on the one side, but she seeks Wool and Flax, and she labors
chearefully with her hands, she girdeth her loins with strength and
strengthens her arms, she puts her hands to the wheel, and her hands
handle the spindle etc. Pro. 31.13.17.18 ver. etc. She is not like the Idle
huswifes of our time, who having business to do in the house, will lie on the
one side and think what they may eat, drink, and wear; or whither they may
go to spend the time: or if they do any thing, it is but to sit upon a stool
and a cushion, finding faults but mending none; Such a wife does her husband
little good I think, I am sure much hurt. That which is here spoken of a
woman, the weaker (and teaches that sex what to do, is not to be idle but to
work in calling and place the Lord has allotted them unto) is spoken much
more to commend and teach men to do it, being the stronger. The reason of this
point is clear, because God has ordained callings, Reas.
to keep men from idleness, not to draw them to it or to continue them in it.
But before I come to show what uses this doctrine learneth us, let me free it
from exception. I know callings be of diverse sorts, some mechanical, some
liberal. Also I know that in a calling there may be diverse labors; as in a
Ship, some to climb the ropes, others to guide the Stern etc. And to
perticularise according to the present occasion in this trade of Black-Smiths:
some labors be heavier, some lighter, some hotter, some more temperate: as
some must blow the fire, some must attend the heat, and take it whilst it is
hot: some file, some ouersee and set out the work. Now I do not say that
every man must work in every of these, But in this Trade (he being able) he
must work if not in the stronger and heavier work, then in the lighter; but
in laboring, to be freed from the heavier, take heed of too much ease, least
so at length thou grow weary of all, and will do nothing, neither heavier nor
lighter, all is too heavy for thee. This being promised by way of
anticipation, the doctrine Reasons why Usury no calling of God.
and not else; Now this is no way nor calling of God, because a man may live
therein without any work of his: he may lie on the one side as a swine in a
Stye, or do nothing Trade never a whit hindered, his Trade goes on; oh riches
of iniquity, that be so gotten without thy labor, that eatest what thou
did not labor for! surely without repentance, thy money must perish with
thee, thou art never able to justify thy calling to be of God. Secondly, it is
the means of idleness, not a means to keep men from idleness. Thou will say
thou do take pains: what I pray thee, except it be to go or ride at the day
to receive thy money or to renew thy bonds? And few do so, for it is most
commonly brought in, or else better it were; for you have a bond with two
hooks to hook them to you, if they come not, and that with vengeance; but to
thy self: Is this thy labor? This thou may do and spend thy greatest time
in idleness; and this thy labor is but in the service of the devil, and
coveting in evil, covetousness to thy self. In the second that calling which
God assigned them to? surely they will be as that man which was at the feast
without a wedding garment: which (being asked by our Savior, how he came in
thither not having on a wedding garment?) was speechless: so will it be with
these men that have left their callings to follow an idle life, they will not
be able to say any thing for themselves, their deluded consciences that now
speak for them, will then speak against them, and be more then a thousand
witnesses for their condemnation: what will Christ say and do to them, which
he finds without a calling? as he said and did to the man aforesaid without
a wedding garment: he will give them to the devils and bidd him bind them in
chains, and cast them into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of
teeth foreuermore. This shall be the doom of all idleness and vsuryes at that
day that so live, and so dye. Thirdly, his particular calling, I will for
direction, that we may follow the same without offense, and neither incline to
the right hand nor to the left; that is neither too much worldlynes, nor
carelesnes, lay down diverse rules to be observed of us in our working in our
particular callings. Rules to be observed in working in particular callings.
First we must look that the daughter do not eat up the mother: that is,
that our particular calling do not eat up our general, which is the fault
of many, not only of worldlings who altogether devour their general calling
by applying themselves without reason, and ceasing to their particular, (except
it be when they are constrained to come to public exercises of religion) but
also of many christians, who too much taste of the oulde man herein, that when
they should be in prayer with their families evening and morning, they be
either sleeping in their beds, or plodding about the affairs of this present
life, so that they sildome find times to apeare before God; if once a day, they
think that a great matter: nay I would that were not often omitted too for any
matter of proffite coming in: is not this to make the daughter to eat up the
mother? If not altogether, yet that it is in a greater part, it is more then
maniefest: let us then ever hold this fast, that as the mother is not to eat
up the daughter, so the daughter is not to eat up the Timoth. 4.5. Is this the
course we must take in our callings? alas how few be there that so do, who
begin and end their works with the word and prayer? not one of twenty* well
let us, knowing that it is our duty, begin and end our calling thus; it is a
fearful and irreligious course to set upon our works without prayer, we
cannot go on in them with any assurance of Gods blessing and good speed
therein, for ask and ye shall have: what a fearful course is it then that
most do follow? they go to and from their works, as the dog to and from
his kennell. And as in every company this is much neglected, so not the least
amongst your company of Black-Smiths, though amongst you, God be blessed, he
has his number, and of them this practiced, as I know upon my own
experience, whose diligence let it provoke the rest.

business, omitting many days (with a show of walking in their calling
profitably) but in truth nothing less.

Fourthly, you must use faith in your callings,

Fifthly thou must not be all for thy self, looking Love seeks not her own
but the good of another as well as of thy self; this is contrary to the
quallity of most, that think they may get as much as they can, and that every
man is to make the best (that is the most) of his own. But alas we must look
that others gain as well as we, else how do we deal as we would be dealt
withal? and do as we would be done unto? we must not say and do according
to the old proverb, Every man for himself, and God for us all: but as the
Apostle says, we must bear one another burden, and not so deal that we may
be eased and others grieved.

Thou must use patience; yea, labor with patience use the means appointed of
God, and so to be contented with the Lords addition, yea with meat, drink,
and raiment; we have need of patience, that after we have done the will of
God, we might receive the promise. Hebrews: 10.36. Job as well contented with
Gods taking away as giving to him, the Lord gives and the Lord takes away,
blessed be the name of the Lord.

Joseph for a dear year, or else by spending too nigardly, having riches and
not a heart to use them, one of the evil sicknesses under the Sun, which
Solomon speaks of. As many sin this way, so many especially of you the
Black-smiths trade, and in the exesses for the most part, working for a while
and then loytering, you sinfully spending until all be gone.

I know your trade is hott and fierye and so will require drink, but ye must
the more pray and be circumspect over your selves that ye sin not in
drinking, the devil being reddy to take that occasion to make you mispend your
precious time and money, for both which you must one day give an account.
Whether ye eat, or drink, get, or spend, or whatsoever ye do else, remember
ye should do all to the glory of God. Thus have we finished the second
thing in his calling, namely, that he himself did work in it: from whence we
will proceed to the third, and that in his perfection and skill in it,
laboring the perfection of it more then before any had: whence we will observe
this point of doctrine. That it is lawful, Doct.
yea meet and necessary and the duty of every one to grow to a perfection
in his calling wherein the Lord has set him, as much as he can. Which that
Parrable of the talle^ts, put forth to servants, witnesses, he being most
commended that had best used his talent, and to the most advantage of his
master. That which S. Paul urges upon Timothy in his particular calling and
function of the ministry, proves this point. 1. Timot. 4.15.16. saying,
These thing exercise, and give thy self unto them, that it may be seen how
thou profitest among all men. Mark what he says, he would have him so to
carrye himself in his ministry, that it may be seen that he increases in
the gifts thereof; and therefore in the next verse, commands him that he
take heed unto his self and unto learning, and to continue therein, for in so
donig he should save himself and them that hear him: and for this end that he
may grow to perfection in his ministerye, he advises him. ver. 13, going
before, to give attendance to reading, to exhortation and to doctrine. This
which he urges in one calling is true in an other, though there be difference
between the excellency of the one, and the other, the contrary to this is
condemned in the sluggard, who always pretends many objections to hinder him
from his calling and goeing on in the same. Solomon speaks Proverbs.
26.13.14.15.16. verse. saying, The slothful man says, A Lion is in the way: A
Lion is in the streets. As the door turns upon the hindges so does the
slothful man in his bed. The slothful hides his hand in his bosom, and it
greeueth him to put it again to his mouth. The slaggard is wyser in his own
conceit then seven men that can render a reason: Whence it is plain, that
seeing the slothful man is condemned for that he will not diligently apply
himself in his business and calling, and so go on in the same, but pretend
many dangers and excuses, That it is commendable, nay the duty of every man to
be diligent and to proceed to perfection in his calcalling what he can. Reas.
The reason of it is plain, the greater perfection a man grows and attaineth
unto in his calling, the more good he shall be able to do to him self, his and
others, which is a thing we lawfully may, yea must as much as we can aim at;
which being so, this doctrine man in his special calling, to labor thus as
much as a man can: the minister to labor by reading, prayer, meditation, and
conference: to be more and more furnished with the guiftes of the ministry,
that he may be the better able to lay down the truth with foundnes of
argument, and in the evidence of truth to reprove, convince, exhort and
instruct: and so every mechanical tradesman, in his trade: but because a man
may fall into many evils in laboring this, I will therefore for our direction
lay down and commend unto us a few rules to be observed of us in laboring
for more and more skill in our callings and professions. Rules to the observed
in attaining skill in our calling.
The first whereof is this, we must take heed that our desire and endeavors to
be skillfull and perfect in these things, do not eat up, or surmount our
desire, and endeavor to be perfect in better things, as most commonly it does;
the devil and desire of account and fame in the world, so bewitching us and
ouer-ruling us, that we little care or study for perfection in that great
profession, which is that one thing only necessary; any thing will serve our
turn that way, if we come cerimoniously and formally to pray, it is good
enough. But in our callings we cannot be satisfied, except we equalize the best
and skilfullest of our profession. Oh it is a happy thing where both these meet
together, as they may, to be an excellent Christian and an excellent Tradesman
or Artist; or if both cannot be attained unto, to excel in the best things,
according to the Apostle his exhortation and counsel: 1. Cor. 14. Follow
after love and covet spiritual gifts: As if he should say, if we will covet
for gifts, be sure to covet spiritual gifts: indeed it is a commendable, yea
a commanded covetousness.



one of another. Manus manum fricat. O how happy a thing it is to see brethren
to dwell together in unity says David: so may I say, how commendable a thing
it is for to see brethren of one profession and trade, so to use their guiftes,
that every one is a gainer thereby and no man a looser: our common Proverb is
worthy consideration in this case; it is merry in Hal, when beards wagge al.
Let it be thy resolution in laboring for skill in these things, ever to be
the more thankful to God, and studious of better things, which few do: for
laboring for these things and attaining to be skillful herein, they forgett
the maine matters. Romans 8.11.
Few or none say with S. Paul (although he in another case) we are debtors
(because the Lord has given us skill in this) to live not according to the
flesh but according to the spirit: fewer with David what shall I render unto
the Lord for all his guiftes (and in particular for this) I will take the Cup
of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord: nay rather do they say (if
not in their words their courses show) I will eat more, and drink more, and
be more proud then before, wretched is the case of such; And as our Savior
said of Judas It had been good for that man if he had never been borne: so say
I of these men, it had been good they never had attained unto this skill, so
they had the fear of the Lord; for better is a little with the fear of the
Lord then great riches with trouble. From these rules to be observed in our
laboring for cunning and skill in our trades, we will come to the last use of
this point, and Doct.
whence we observe this last doctrine for this time, That the trade of working
in brass and iron is ancient, and obseruable: Ancient, because here named when
few others were invented; nay very probable more ancient, then this place
conuinceth it to be: for as much as in the giving of the sense of the words, I
noted acording to the judgment of the godly learned, as it is very likely Cain
used iron instruments to plowe the ground withal, after it was cursed;
obseruable it is, because here the holy Ghost takes notice of it, guiding
Moses to set it down as worthy our observation. And not only here, but else
where does the holy Ghost take notice of this Trade, 1. Sam. 13.19.20. which
being thus, it affords many instructions both to you of this trade for whom
this sermon was specially provided, and also to us. First it teaches you to
bless God that he has set you in such an ancient and commendable trade;
years, in them, which have no warrant from God, nor never did bring good
either to Church or common wealth: It may be they have gotten a living to
themselves thereby; so does the Theife by his stealing, the whore by her
whoring, and the like: and so that reason will prove them as place of note,
and by the same place encourage himself to dishonor the King? yes verily. How
much more then are ye worthy to be thrust out of Gods favor, that abuse his
calling, so obseruable and worthy, whereunto the Lord has called you? For if
not a hair of our head fall to the ground without Gods providence, certainly
his providence is much more seen in guiding men to their places; but it is
their sin (not this goodness in bringing them to it) if they abuse it.
Thirdly, if this calling and trade be so obseruable Causes why this Trade is so
basely esteemed from others.
can the Husbandman till, sow, and reap without the help of it? can the
Mariner travail the Seas without it? can the Carpenter build without it? can
the Soldier fight without it? can any manlye in his house, sleep safely in his
bed, and have his goods in house, shop, and warehouse safe without this trade?
I know he cannot, who then can say he has no need of a Blacke-smiths help? If
this were considered, surely we should esteem it more then we do. The second
cause in ourselves why we so little esteem it, is because we are like children
and fools, carried away with shows of things, not considering the truth and
substance of them: we see the trade not so sweet and pleasant as other trades
be, nor the persons so beautiful and fashionable as others for the most part:
and hence it is we come so little to respect the Trade. Alas here is our
sin and folly, that we judge of things according to the outward appearance,
we consider not this as the ordinance of God, and how profitable it is to the
common wealth: well let us judge more wisely of these things, and not be carried
away with shows. Hence it conmeth that diverse Trades neither warrantable nor
profitable be so much admitted, as toye-makers, and makers of new fashiond
follies and the like; this is the bane, and will prove the great
impouerishment of the kingdom at the length; that needless, yea graceless
trades be set up, and this, and such as this be, be so much neglected? well
the worth of these will appear more carendo quam fruendo, but the inutilitie
of these worthless trades magis fruendo quam carendo, These are too principal
causes, why we so little observe and regard this trade, so observed of God as
we see. Let us amend the things that are in our selves, and taking away the
clouds that have so dazeled our eyes, that we have not seen nor rightly
judged, of the worth of this trade: and let us esteem it of more worth and
regard for the time to come. And from these causes in our selves, Causes in
Black-smiths.
let us descend to the causes in your selves, why it and ye come to be so
basely reputed and esteemed as your are: The causes in your selves be diverse.
First in particular and inferior parties, some of be governed then to govern,
being men either of scandalous life, as drunkards and the like: Wennes I say
and wartes to the body of a common wealth, better spared then preserved. Can
there or did there ever come any good to a company by the government of such
men? I trow not. Therefore (beloved) if you would have that esteem and do
desire your trade should be of that credit it is meet you should have it be of,
then every one in particular, that is guilty of the foresaid sins, of
drunkenness, of hastye anger, of uncivil and Churlish behavior; Let him labor
for grace, whereby he may become temporate, slow to anger, and of a meek and
quiet spirit, which are things both with God and men much set by. And for you
that are Governors over the whole company, either present or are newely to be
established, walk as men blameless in your own carriages, and for your own
examples, and use your authority for the reforming of these sins amongst
many of you, be not led by favor to some nor few. The faces of others, do
what your places require you, and the Lord is with you. For you that are
Governors in families, look to those that are in your tharge; which if every
one would make conscience to do (as he stands charged before God to do)
then such enormous vices would be redressed amongst you. To conclude with
application to you all in the electing and establishing of your Governors, as
the Mastier and Wardens, let your eyes, hearts and hands go with such that be
of lawful Trades, of blameles lives, and that can rule and govern their own
Howses well; for how can you look for a good government from those that
know not how to govern themselves, nor their own familyes: oh choose men
fearing God, and hating covetousness, and such as will be men of courage for
good and against sin. Thus have I showed you the antiquity and the
obseruablenes of your trade, as it is in truth. As also how both you and it
come to be so disgraceful amongst men. It behooves you to remove the causes,
and so the effect will be removed: so shall your trade be of more esteem in
the world, and you of more respect with God and man. Which God (for his mercies
sake in Christ Jesus who is blessed for ever) grant. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line last read genuine, p. 2. l. 4. add the, l. 13 r. mentioned, p.
4. l. 20. r. Prosecution, p. 5. l. 9. read give in, p. 6. l. 1. read seeking,
p. 7. l. 1. read from, p. 10. l. 10. read ergo, course, l. 17. course, p. 12.
l. 17. add and, p. 13. l. 3 read spoute into, l. 19. add vm, twice. p. 16. l.
29. leave out Thirdly, p. 17. l. 2. leave out the (?) l. 7. read by, l. 10.
read bona nascuntur, l. 11. bona, p. 21. l. 23. read in a, p. 22. l. 20.
premised, p. 23 l. 18. r. an, p. 24. l. 15. r. devil, l. 18. r. idlesbyes, l.
19. usurers, p. 26. l. 21 r. express, l. 22. r. yea, p. 32. l. 25. 4. r.
customers, p. 34. l. 18. add of, p. 37. l. 4. r. this, l. 9. r. his, p. 39. l.
5. r. you, p. 40. l. 21. r. nor fear the faces, l. 25. r. charge.

To the Reader.
Think not (Christian Reader) that I take any delight to be seen in Print,
and thereby to bring my self upon the Stage of the World, and under the
censure thereof. I have little reason to take delight herein, if I consider
the readiness of many to carpe, and rather to find faults (happily where there
be none) then to mend any, or my own insufficiency to this work: Yet what
will not Jonathan do for David? At the earnest seeking of my Christian friends
(whom this specially concerns) have I been drawn to consent to the
publishing of this work. If you find good in it, or by it, pray for Gods
blessing upon it, and for me, (though the most worthles of the Lords worthies)
that I may by my Ministry fetch water (that is, tears of unfeigned
repentance) out of the hearts of the uncircumcised Philistines, to their
salvation, and the praise of his glorious grace who is blessed for ever.
Farewell:

Thine in Christ Jesus WILLIAM HOLBROOKE.


