THREE SERMONS UPON THE PASSION, RESVRRECTION AND ASCENSION OF OUR SAVIOVR,
PREACHED At Oxford, BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Now Archdeacon of OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniell Butter, and are to be sold
at his Shop at Saint Austines Gate in Paul's Churchyard. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. Dr. CORBET DEANE OF CHRIST-CHVRCH IN OXFORD.
Worthy Sir,
I Cannot forget your favors, whiles I enjoy them: and yet the contemplation
of that which is present, cannot properly be called Remembrance. But when I
think of giving thanks, me thinks it is not more my purpose then my fear:
since gratitude does in some sort make bounty less; bounty being more
content, when it is attended by gratitude; but being more eminent, when it is
opposed by ingratitude: so that the greatest thanks, though not the best, is
not to give thanks. Besides, bounty having in it more of outward good then
gratitude has, gratitude may seem a purer goodness, then bounty; and so
whiles it strives to requite it, may seem to exceed it. Yet since reason tells
us that ingratitude is against reason, being an injustice, and so against
nature, I choose to give thanks the common way; not that I judged it enough
gratitude, to give thanks thus: but that I judged it too much ingratitude, not
to give thanks thus. That I might not therefore requite your goodness with
injury, I endeavor to imitate that goodness by making my thanks; like unto
it, public and yet sincere. Secret thanks are often free from flattery, yet
always like it: being commonly at as much distance from examination, as
flattery desires to be. Happy then are my thanks, which are as just as your
merit, being made just by your merit: which so appears in your exemplary and
daily Devotion, that you have taken more possession of your Church, then of
your Dignity. And for your College, you have made it enjoy a Statute of
Improouement, not so much in Diet, as in Study: ruling it by the Statute of
your Example; which will be Deane beyond Your time. Any man May say thus much,
but I Must: truth will make it justice in another: but choice will make it
gratitude, in Me: who owe my self unto you; nay, who owe my Friends unto
you. They have given me blessings; but you have given me Them; even the most
Noble (and, through your favor) My Sir Francis Stuart: whom, when I have
Named, I have Bounded my understanding: and, when I have named him Mine, I have
Contented it. Which happiness must needs make me remember You, as the cause
of that happiness; and as, before, I was His, by being Yours; so now by being
His, I shall be the more

Your Barten Holyday.

A Sermon preached at Christ-church in Oxford on Good Friday, 1621.
1. Corinthians. 2.8. Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory.


GReat sorrows are dumb: and can custom then justly expect that this should
be eloquent? This day has enough with his own grief: and shall we add unto
it by repetition? The severity of this passion admits no other wit of
Rhetorique, then the salt of a tear; nor sharper accent, then of a groan
equal to a lost friend, or to a sin. Yet see the endeavor of compassion,
which had rather with moderate tears recover it self to language, by the
relief of complaint to ease affliction; then to be guilty of ingratitude by
wonder and silence. This day must cry-out, and articulately lament unto all
days, this horrible truth, the tragedy of God: which seems as much to exceed
our faith, as our sorrow. Is our God, our living God, as the carcasse-idols of
the Heathen, whose God-heads suffer the stroke and victory of the Chizell and
the Hammer? Or, are Poets Prophets indeed? and are there very Giants, that dare
invade God? Fiction, that intends to persuade, neither contradicts nor exceeds
nature: and story must be more severely contrived within the possibility of
action: otherwise it begets not faith, but scorn, and the Historians reason is
rather questioned, then his eloquence. Yet this day breathes-out such union of
extremities, the humiliation of God, and the insolence of man, in Jesus
crucified, and the crucifying Jews; that your piety can scarce be more amazed
at our Lord's affliction, then at the Jews cruelty; so that, if the motive
and condition of these unreasonable actors were not expressed, our suspicion
might cry-out, Who will believe our report? History or invention has anciently
told us of some altars, where-on wild devotion sacrificed men: but durst Poetry
ever faigne a people that sacrificed their God? Would any man have thought that
the Jew would have been the first Antichrist of his Messiah? That the children
of Abraham would murder the God of Abraham? That the partakers of the Lords
glory, would crucify the Lord of glory? I must admit you a respite to wonder,
and satisfy as well your admiration, as your enquiry; which does, me thinks,
with the labor of expectation desire to know not only the fact, but also the
affection of the Jews: as if then you would be persuaded to the story of the
action, when first you shall have heard the story of the actors. Not the Jews
alone were partakers in this guilt: but chiefly the Jews triumphed in this
guilt; the Jews, who were always of a churlish understanding, and now their
souls were as dark as perverse. They had before committed an essay of cruelty
upon the Prophets: but that was but a younger practice to this fury. Then they
crucified the Lord in his Saints: but now they will do it without a figure.
And may not our reason as well as piety here demand with wonder, What aild the
Heathen, nay, what aild the Jews to murmr themselves into a Conspiracy
against the Christ of the Lord? Surely, their rage did not discern in him the
mystical systeme of God and man; for had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. Yet shall execrable violation be softened into an
ignorance? shall elaborate malice be excused into so gentle a guilt? shall the
crucifying of our Savior be made but manslaughter? It is not an error to
pardon an error: but it is a crime but to excuse a crime. Could the Jews be
ignorant of his innocence, who was pronounced not-guilty, by his judge? Who was
pronounced innocent, by his Judas? Who was pronounced holy, by Jews amazed to
silence, and in that to confession, at the power of his innocent syllogism, If
I am guilty, why do you not convince me? If I am innocent, why do you not
believe me? Could the Jews be ignorant of his office, when as he so repaired
the senses of the diseased, that their sense might justly persuade their
understanding to believe? When as he called, by the voice of his power, the
dead to a compendious resurrection? When as he proved his life to be a
Commentary upon the Prophets? Could the Jews be ignorant of his divinity,
which was as necessary to the actuating of his wonderful office, as of his
wonderful person? His divinity, which was acknowledged by the Devils, whom he
dispossessed: who, for a moment, did by a greater miracle leave their lying,
then their habitation; and being tormented unto truth, admirably confessed him
the Son of God? His divinity, which at his Baptism, Heaven revealed unto
the Baptist, which revelation he likewise revealed unto the Jews: the best of
whom esteemed him as a man of God; the worst of whom feared him as a man of
God; And he told them what he saw, not in the contriuance of phancie, or by the
fallacy of a glass; And he did see the veil of Heaven divided: as if the
divine persons, who never had been undivided, would now sensibly appear
united at this the Synod of their Trinity; And he did see the mild emblem of
the Holy Ghost descend upon him; and he heard the voice of the Almighty, who
was both the father and the witness at this great Christning. And shall we yet
say, that this light of the World was so obscured in the cloud of flesh, that
it was not clearly presented to the eyes of the world? shall we yet say, that
we do not sufficiently understand, whether or no the Jews did sufficiently
understand? shall we yet say with a bold compassion, Had they known it? and
yet we must say with a safe compassion, Had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. The common Jew was the common sense of that
politic body: his outward soul was able to see the Law: but, for Prophecy,
he was as far from the understanding of it, as from the gift of it. He
could with enough ignorance gaze at the wonders of our Savior: but it was a
greater wonder to work, in a Jew, a belief of these wonders, then to work
these wonders. Yet some did believe them and abuse them, vilely apprehending
these demonstrations as the impotent persuasions of probability. And some thus
thought him to be the Christ; yet durst not reveal this cheap opinion: least
they should be excommunicated to salvation, by being cast-out of the Synagogue
to Christ and his Disciples. It is the property of a wiseman, not to have his
heart in his tongue: but never was it the property of a wise man, to have a
heart without a tongue. The mercy of our Savior made the dumb to speak: but
the fear of the Rulers made these speakers dumb; thus were their consciences
tongue-tied by authority. And the Rulers themselves did not more impose this
silence upon others, then upon themselves: but striving as much to exceed the
people in perverseness as in authority, unto their ignorance they added fury.
Indeed they could not by the sharpest discretion of their eye distinguish an
incarnate God: nor was the Critique Gamaliel able to instruct his Disciple Saul
in the Catechism of this mystery, though Readiness unwilling ignorance admitted
him nearer to pardon and conversion. But the chief of the Jews, to whom the
Gospel was a schism, politiquely rejoicing in their wisdom and honor,
scorned the imputation of leuity by a change, and a suspected dejection by this
change; whereby the High Priest of Jerusalem should be abused into an obscure
Christian. Wherefore armed thus with the affectation of ignorance and the
malice of ambition, at what thunder would these startle? at what vnconceiued
almightinesse would this fury turn dastard? Yet had they known it, they would
not have crucified the Lord of glory. And yet by an unmoved decree this passion
was sealed to a necessity; and can we then make this predestined execution
depend upon the will of the uncertain Jews? This dazles the eye, and is a
wheel turning in a wheel; a sphere wrapped in a sphere; the lowest against
the order of Heaven and nature, seeming to give motion to the highest, the will
of the Jews to the decree of God. Had Festus upon his judgement-seate heard
holy Paul preach this seeming opposition, we may easily believe that without
the manners of deliberation he would once more have cryed-out to our Apostle,
Much learning has made thee mad. But we leave him to his own ignorance and an
other judgement-seate^ and without being rapt to the third Heaven, we know,
that Those things which are necessary in respect of the first cause admit
uncertainty in respect of second causes. The crucifying of our Savior was
necessary compared to Gods decree: but it was contingent compared to the
liberty of the Jews will: in whom it was choice, and not necessity to will
or not to will the death of Christ. If the Jews had known it, then both the
causes of this action, and the action it self might have not been, and had
not been. But this condition, the knowledge of our Savior (which if it had
been, our Savior could not have suffered) could not be, because the first
cause, God, had decree he should suffer. And as God by this decree of his
Passion, did not with an active concurrence, lay a necessity and guilt upon the
will of the Jews: no more did he impose any necessity upon the humane will
of Christ: but our Savior made himself a free sacrifice with as much mercy as
affliction. For though there were in his humane will a necessity of obedience
to the decree of his Passion, yet was there also a true indifference: this
necessity being extrinsecall to his humane will precisely considered, as it was
intrinsecall and natural to his person. But his humane will suffering no
violence, did for our sake in the liberty of choice offer-vp his person to the
violence of the Jews. Who were so glad of their ignorance and ambition, that
rather then they would fall from their Cleargy-monarchy they would not fear to
set upon God. The brauest sin that ever was, was ventred in Heaven by an
Angel and the basest sin that ever was, was committed on earth by a
Disciple. A Disciple, who had he been of an entire faith, had been even yet
of an entire fame, and in our sacred Calendar enjoyed the place and title of
Saint Judas. He was Christ's purse-bearer: whose office under such a Master,
was in all likelihood of too narrow a commodity for a large Knave: yet loving
this, more then his master, he bargains with the Priests, and takes earnest
to be a convenient Traitor. But here I must not forget one thing, because our
Savior has commanded me to remember it: and that is thy piety, O happy woman,
who did bestow upon our Sauiour's head and feet a precious ointment. With
thy beautiful hair thou did wipe his beautiful feet, from which thy
ointment returned sanctified to thine own head: and by a commanded anniuersary
of thy piety, he has poured upon thee the ointment of a religious fame.
Justly do I here remember her, her liberality being the unjust cause of Judas
his murmuring: and it was he whose thrift did chide at the spending of this
ointment. Now therefore, as if he had vowed a repair of this loss, he finds
a policy to sell the ointment, which was already spent; by selling his master,
who was anointed with it. A subtle Merchant, that labourd so with an
emulation to engrosse treasure and iniquity, as if he would have contented
with Adam for the future tradition and monopoly of sin. Thus you see, that it
is possible, to find actors for the crucifying of the Lord of glory, and now I
think, you can believe that there are monsters. But now behold a man! a man,
in whom innocence and patience contend for supremacy. His enemies are preparing
for his death by malice; and he himself is preparing for the same by love.
The most of them are at their conspiracy, and he is at the Communion with his
Traitor. At which last Supper he himself seems to remember and imitate the
goodness of that woman, whom he commanded us to remember. She wiped his
feet, and he washes his Disciples; and would you not think that these feet
would for ever after go upright? Me thinks, when he came to wash Judas his
feet, his sullen treason might have expressed it self in Saint Peter's
answer, Thou shall never wash my feet. Indeed to wash a Judas was to wash a
Black-more. Yet he had more need to have used Saint Peter's second answer,
Lord not the feet only, but also the hands and the head. But it would have
been a mercy unwelcome to his stubbornenesse, to have been washed to an
unwilling cleanness. His stain was as obstinate as his purpose: and his ears
were cauteriz'd as much as his conscience against our Sauious words, which
prevailed as little with his affection, as with his memory. Christ pointed-out
the Traitor first by word: and, as if that had not been enough, with his very
finger; He that I give a sop unto, he shall betray me; nay, with the Traitors
own finger, He that dips his finger with me in the dish, he shall betray
me. Christ dipped, and Judas dipped, and Christ gave the sop to Judas. Who would
not here have thought, but that he, who by his garment and shadow could
confer health, must by his sanctifying hand have conferred salvation? Was not
here the finger of God? And yet here was not the finger of God. Judas now
found the truth of that unhappy Philosophy, Every thing is received according
to the nature of the receiver. Christ gave the ^^p* but Judas eat it. When
straight behold a sad transubstantiation a sop turned into a Devil! And now
you will think it was time for him to leave Christ's company; and so indeed
he did for immediately he went forth, and it was night a necessary shadow for
the melancholy of treason: yet it was but an emblem of his guilt. To conclude
supper they sung a Psalm: this was the harmony of the Gospel in a Celestial
Quire, where there was never a Judas, and Christ was the Chaunter. Indeed they
had need to sing, whiles yet they had the leisure of company and joy: for,
after this meeting, sorrow had contrived the perpetual silence of their
Music. But leaving their Music and the City they depart toward mount
Oliuet, a place where the customary devotion of our Savior enjoyed the
practice and happiness of Prayer. The way was but short, yet our Savior made
it tedious, not by his company, which was their delight: but by his discourse,
which hitherto had bin their delight. He tell them that this night he shall be
their grief and danger. They, as not seeing it, make a large promise, though
without surety, as much of their constancy, as of their affection. Peter
especially makes this promise, which our Savior tells him he especially will
break: and that this night, which is the present witness of his double
protestation, shall be the speedy witness of his triple denial: the Cock ere
morning being to be his watchman and remembrancer. The length of our Saviors
discourse reaches the mount, where departing from his Disciples about a stones
cast, he enters into a Garden, and the horror of his passion enters into him.
Now, he is crucified without a cross the height whereof as it afterward
advanced him, so now the fear of it depresseth him to the ground. In the
obedience of his supplication he bows his knees; he whose almightinesse could
have bowed the heavens. In the dejection of his thoughts he falls prostrate on
his face, to show us the nature of our guilt, that dares not looke-vp unto
heaven: and yet his voice is toward heaven, whiles thrice he begs of his
Father, if it be his will, that this cup may pass* this cup crowned full with
the blood of sour Grapes: and thrice he returns to his Disciples, whom be
finds heavy as night and sleep. Whiles he prays, new terrors seize on him;
and man though united to God is so oppressed, that an Angel from Heaven is
sent to comfort him. So hard it was for him that overcame the Devil, to
overcome the Cross. But alas had he not need of almightinesse, for whom there
remained strokes, and whips, and wounds, and thorns, and nails and a spear?
and shall we think an Angel, shall we think one Angel enough against this
host of torments? Can we with the confidence of words frighten horror? His
agony and prayer increase; and from his merciful pores flows a sweat of
blood: which begins his passion before the Jews do. It pierces and dies his
garment; O, this would have been a relic worth the keeping! a garment richer
then Elias mantle! a garment animated with blood, though not to life, yet to a
miracle! The Prophet's love and sorrow were but little ones; though his eyes
did cast-out rivers of waters, for the destruction of Jerusalem: but behold for
our sins, every part of our Jesus does weep blood: whose speedy drops seem
to imitate the expedition of the love that sent them. After which agony of
devotion, on his faint limbs he raises himself, and returning to his
Disciples rayses them: who willing rather to break their sleep, then their
faith, arise; when he comforts them with a hope of more sleep, yet tells them
that at this time they must sleep no more: treason and tyranny by a strange
friendship being in a readiness to set upon him. Whiles yet he speaks, lo,
a band of Officers are come from the High Priests with Lanternes, and torches,
and swords and staves, to take him, who neither means to fight, nor run
away: his mercy will not let him do that, nor his innocence this. Their leader
is Judas guiding them with his feet to Christ, but with his counsel against
Christ. When according to the compact and method of the Treason, he salutes
our Savior with a phrase and a kiss, enough to have breathed a Devil into
any man, but Christ: who as much understanding as abhorring his salutation, by
a Prophetique question preuents and reueales the news of his intent; Judas,
betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? And was there ever such a sight as
Christ and Judas thus united! Did not Christ now also descend into Hell! From
this kissing Traitor he passes to the swordmen; his innocence making him
confident to ask them, whom they seek! when their business and authority
strait-wayes answer, Jesus of Nazareth. (They had untowardly learned to make no
difference of persons.) He with a mild courage replies, I am he; and
immediately, as if he had come to apprehend Them, they fall down backward;
they fall from Christ. The blowing-downe of the walls of Jericho with
Rams-hornes, though it was no less wonderful, yet it was less speedy. And
where is now the conspiracy of their ambition? Where is now the strength of
their invasion? Where is now the provision of their armor? Is it not all made
the triumph of his meekness. Here is no heavenly army to overthrow this
legion of Devils; but with a victorious mildness they are struck down, their
bodies acknowledging his power, which their souls denied: their understanding
bodies being unwilling to act, what their senseless souls prompted them unto.
Yet does his pardon give them strength to rise again, and again he asks them
whom they seek, and they dare answer, Jesus of Nazareth. Before, they spoke
to his humanity, and his divinity answered them: but now he answers them
with the patience of his humanity; which suffers the sacrilege of their hands
and malice. When Peter's zeal, at the captivity of his master, vnsheathes his
sword: and cutting-off the High Priest's seruant's ear, makes him learn a new
Circumcision, which was no Sacrament, but a punishment. But again appears the
divinity and mercy of our Savior: who corrects Peter and his fact, replanting
the seruant's ear; which straight acknowledges and enjoyes his power. Yet they
persist in their impiety: and when he by his power has proved himself a
God, they by his patience will prove him to be a man. And being in the hands
of very Jews, his Disciples, forgetting their master and their protestations,
run all away: even bold Saint Peter runs away with his courage, and his
sword: even his beloved John runs away, breaking the bonds of love with the
strength of fear. O, here I cannot but stay and grieve that his beloved John
also does forsake him. Sure there is some friend for whom some friend will lay
down a life: and sure there never were such friends as Christ and his
Apostles: and sure of his Apostles there was none so near him as his beloved
John. The rest were in his company, but he in his bosom: and does his beloved
John also forsake him? Me thinks the protestation and persuasion of Saint Paul
would have admirably become the mouth and practice of Saint John, Neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, no
not a very Jew shall ever be able to force me from the love and bosom of my
Jesus. Yet even beloved John also does forsake his Jesus! Whose miraculous
hands they bind: the greatest miracle of which was at this time not their
power, but their patience. They bind his hands; foolishly forgetting, that if
any of them should lose another ear, as much as in them lay they hindered him
from healing of it. Indeed happy had it been, if Adam and Eue's hands had
been bound thus in Paradise! But see the bonds of our sins, that are able to
captive the hands of Christ! Who is led by the blind malice of his Jews unto
judgment. And is there no good man's eye, who will with an easy tear follow
his traveling affliction? Is there none that will go after him, though not to
be a partaker, yet but a witness of his injury? Yes, there is one of more
love then age covered rather then clothed with mere linen: who being hastily
come, and as hastily apprehended, chooses rather to leave his linen, then his
life, and slipping from their hands runs as hastily back again: and indeed
he runs away so fast, that I cannot tell you who he is. Yet if the curious
please to run after him, they may peradventure find him to be the son of
that man of the village Gethsemane, at the foot of mount Oliuet, who owned the
Garden where our Savior prayed. The tumult of the night might easily awake him
to this undressed speed: which whiles he uses in running back, the Jews go
forward in their way and malice; leading our Savior first to Annas. They were
to pass by his reverend door, at which, by way of honor, they present their
show: and he sends him to be presented to the High Priest Caiaphas, his son
in law; this was the kindred of these honorable murderers. But whiles this
troop is with our Savior, you may look back, and behold Peter following
afar off, full of love, and shame, and sorrow. Yet alas, he returns but to
forswear himself and his master! In a curious desire he enters the
High-priest's hall, a place of temptation and blasphemy: where with as much
danger as dissimulation, he mixes with Christ's persecutors; whom as already he
accompanies, so anon, by an unhappy proficiencie, he must imitate. Conversation
is the last concoction of love, and does by a secret friendship of nature
intimately assimilate. Now the High Priest with an assisting tumult of Scribes
and Pharisees does not examine our Savior, but tempt him; and when at their
importunity he has acknowledged himself the Christ, he is made guilty of
being God: and straight they practice upon him the wantonness of scorn. They
profane his sacred face with the blasphemy of spittle: they blindfold him in
execrable sport; and then striking him, in jesting inhumanitie they ask, who
strikes him. Whiles Christ is thus condemned, Peter is examined, and straight
commits an easy denial of his master: and straight the Cock crows, but yet
not loud enough to awake his guilt. He is persecuted again, and too
wretchedly swears an ignorance. A third tempter vexes him, being both an
accuser and a witness; and this is Malchus his cousin, whose ear Peter had
cut off: which makes Peter fear more then the proportion of the Jewish Law, an
ear for an ear. He suspects that this ear will bring in danger his whole
head. And having but one evasion, though worse then his entrance, he wishes
himself accursed, if he knows our Savior: when, alas, he knows that he were
accursed, if he did not know him. And now the Cock, as if instructed to our
Sauiour's prophecy, in his just time crows the second time; with the repeated
diligence of his wing and voice not more awaking himself, then the heavy
memory of Peter's conscience, which thus raised before day, makes him
understand and bewail his night of sin; nor does he more hasten out of
doors, then do the tears out of his eyes. Where mark the apt degrees, as of
his fault, so of his sorrow. The have of his repentance begged pardon for his
denial: the tears of his repentance begged pardon for his oath: the
bitterness of his repentance begged pardon for his curse. But now the Jews are
not avoiding, but provoking a greater curse: and as soon as it is day, in
steed of seeing to correct their judgment made by night, they confirm it;
leading our Savior from this Cleargy-censure to the Secular execution. When
behold the mercy of treason! Judas has a mind to be godly! and seeing his
master condemned by Caiaphas, he is with a swifter judgment condemned by
conscience. Now he repents him of his bargain: and as if he could as easily
have been rid of his guilt, as of his hire, he brings back the money that
would not be put to use, and though it were fearfully refused, in the presence
and Temple of God he throws it down, flying from it as the Priests would
have done from death; and indeed it was the wages of sin. His sin now does
acknowledge it self and our Sauiour's innocence. This loyal Traitor betrays
his treason. And would you not think that now again he has almost
vn-Iudas'd himself? shall not Judas also now again be among the Apostles?
Does he not seem practiced in the order of repentance? He grieves, he
confesses, he restores. O, would he stay here! but, Lo, he departs from the
temple and the God of the temple: he departs and hangs himself. He that is
covetous falls into temptation, and the halter of the Devil. He hangs
himself, and breaks asunder; What could you look for less, but that the
Dragon should break with the pitch-ball? You may remember he conceived a sop,
and now behold he brings forth a Devil, and thus by the riddle of damnation
he is both the child and parent of the Devil. He breaks asunder, and is
delivered of his bowels. It was the wit of justice, he should lose his bowels,
that had lost his compassion. But since Judas has left us, let us leave him:
and from this spectacle of justice got see our Savior the spectacle of
injustice, traveling from Caiaphas to Pilate, and from Pilate to Herod. This
was a Jew of a delicate Atheism: who, in a reprobate joy and fancy, had a
most intentive desire to see a fine miracle or two. But his impiety was
severely deluded by the silence of our Savior; which changing the tyrants
curiosity into scorn, he returns him to Pilate, clad in a garment of
ridiculous honor and simplicity. But Pilate desirous to free him, not so much
by the mercy as the custom of the Jews, proposes to the easy choice of their
pardon, Jesus and Barabbas a murderer; and whiles they are here at their
deliberation, as he on the judgement-seate, behold his love is increased by
fear. His wife prompted to compassion not by a bribe, but by a dream; sends
to her husband to warn rather then request him to desist from judgment; the
trouble of a vision having frightened and instructed her: and sure this was the
best counsel she ere took of her pillow. But the people possessed with the
Priests demand Barabbas; which was an impious, yet a fit request: for could
there be an apt^r fellowship then of a murderer with murderers? As for
Jesus, as if they would crucify him twice, they twice cry-out, Crucify him,
Crucify him. Is now the voice of the people the voice of God? Sure we are,
that the voice of this people is the voice of their Priests; by whom Pilate
being conquered yeelds-vp our Savior unto soldiers, who multiply scourges
upon him, as they do sins and plagues upon themselves; as if their madness
would whip his divinity out of him, making it ashamed to stay in so torn a
carcass. But, O you Soldiers, how shall you wish, that a happy palsy had
made faint your hands? And, O thou Lord of glory, how has thy mercy wooed thy
Godhead unto this ignominious patience? O Lord of mercy, we are scarce more
saved by the power of thy mercy, then confounded with the wonder of it: the
condemnation of a world being a cheaper loss, then the least effusion of thy
redeeming blood! Yet the merciless soldiers beyond this cruelty scornfully
clothe him with a Purple Robe; though their cruelty in this had prevented
their scorn his innocent blood clothing him with a nobler purple. But now
because in the art of crucifying they had no separated torment for the head, by
the increase of inue^tion they enlarge their science of murder, fixing on his
head a crown of thorns; and thus, as if he had a distinct soul in every
part, they distinctly murder every part. And is not now the Lilly verily among
the thorns? This tender head of our beloved enco^passed with the affliction of
a crown! A crown neither of gold, nor Roses! Neither of honor, nor pleasure!
Behold, a goodly fruit! The Lord planted a Vineyard, and when he comes to
gather grapes, he receives thorns! They abuse his hand with a scepter of
reed; his hand the power whereof was the scepter* and that their mouths might
sin more then in words, they spit upon him. But their own dark eyes had
more need to be touched with our Saviors purging spittle. For had they seen
what they had done, they would not have spit upon the Lord of glory! This
affecting spectacle softens Pilate; and by an error of humanity taking Jews
to be men, and that their eyes peradventure might move their hearts, he
presents him to them with this preface of compassion, Behold the man! But,
alas, Pilate, can any man behold this man? Will not all eyes be sooner blinded
with grateful tears? Or how can they here behold a man? A man lost in his
own blood! Which strives as much to obscure his body, as his body his
Godhead! Yet the unmoved Jews with broad eyes of cruelty gaze upon him. And
shall we yet think Deuealion's people a fable? Sure these children were
raised unto Abraham from stones! And now they are so ready to crucify Christ,
that they are ready also to condemn Pilate, not fearing to pronounce him a
hypotheticall Traitor, if he does not crucify Christ. Wherefore through the
conquest and policy of ambition he thinks at once to satisfy the Jews and
God, so to secure his estate and conscience. In the presence of the people he
takes water and washes his hands, protesting himself innocent from this
innocent blood. He had need to rub hard, that means to wash away guilt with
so weak an element; guilt never to be washed away, but by the water of
repentance and baptism. It was in his power, as well as in his desire, to have
set him free: but he pronounces him innocent and punishes him: he condemns
himself, and crucifies Christ: he delivers (...) beloved Barabbas to their
pardon, and Christ to their cross which now he bears, as afterward it bears
him. But in this travail toward mount Caluary, his strength is less then the
burden: and needs must it be a heavy cross, which was laden with a world of
sins. Wherefore to hasten the execution, not to ease our Savior, they make
one Simon carry the weight of the cross: our Savior yet carrying the weight
of the sins. Happy Simon now eases Christ of his burden: but Christ hereafter
will ease Simon of his burden. Whiles he goes on, a multitude of women,
forgetting to be Jews, bestow tears upon him: whom he exhorts to thrift of
sorrow; bidding them stay their lamentation till a time of lamentation for
themselves, and for their children: whose blood shall be made as cheap as
their mothers tears, when in the vengeance and sport of slaughter, the curse
of barrenesse, and a dry pap shall be a blessing. At last they bring this
Catholic sacrifice to mount Caluary, to the altar of the world: where every
part of him is stretcht-out, as the free emblem of his extended mercy. They
fasten him to his cross with violence: but he was fastened surer by his own
love. They pierce his hands and his feet with nails but his heart with their
ingratitude; thus is he used in the house of his friends! They exalt him on
his cross, arming himself against himself, and making his own weight his
own affliction. And now I must cry-out with Pilate, Behold the man, advanced
in the triumph of redemption upon the Cherub of the cross! Or if your tender
eyes have not the hearts to see this spectacle, yet read the title of his
cross, and sure the first word, Jesus, may comfort you. Yet if the remembrance
of his name should prove the remembrance of his sorrow, where will you then,
alas, bestow your eyes? If you look away, you shall see those that pass by
the way, nod their heads at him: if you look on the ground, you shall see the
divided soldiers at lots for his entire Coat; which they more respect, then
they do Christ: if you look among the company, you shall see the unhallowed
Priests profaning him: if you look on either side his cross, you shall see a
thief made his companion. Whereof one, as if he were his executioner,
crucifies him with blasphemy; though the other crucifies his own unbelief,
and by a new theft steals Heaven at his execution. If yet you cannot behold
our Savior, behold his Disciple and his mother, whom from his cross he
himself beholds. Saint John's love had now made a recompense for his flight,
by conquering his fear to this return and sorrow. Our Savior beholds his
beloved John, and having nothing left that is his own but his mother, he
bequeathes her unto him. But, it may be, you are as little able also to look
on these, who also are crucified with the passion of love. If then you cannot
at all endure these sights, be indulgent to lamentation: Let tears seize on
your eyes, as an universal darkness does on Judea. The guilt of the Jews
puts out the Sun: and yet this huge night which can hide all Judea, cannot
hide the guilt of the Jews. O how they shall hereafter wish that this
darkness had been more speedy, that it might have prevented or excused their
violence? Then happily they would have pleaded, O had we seen what we did, we
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. In this forced night and agony,
this man of sorrows cries out with a voice as strong as earnest, his fainting
humanity begging aid and release. Thus long they have afflicted his
outward-parts, and now their wit finds a device to torment his inward also. In
a drouth of combat and torment, he cries-out, I thirst: and when from this his
Vineyard he might look for wine, behold they vilely sponge him with
ungrateful vinegar. Being persecuted thus with a swift succession of plagues,
in a free obedience he bows his head, and in the Empire of his Divinity and
love, is pleased to die, giving to the justice of his Father, for a redeeming
sacrifice, his troubled spirit. Corrupt Philosophers who now for a long time
have animated the world with a magique soul, may in this truth bury their
error, and now acknowledge, that only this is the soul of the world. Thus
they have crucified him: and now they shall know whom they have crucified. The
Jews and the Devils shall know that it was the Lord of glory; and the whole
world shall know that it was the Lord of glory. Behold an angry miracle tears
the veil of the Temple, and by a greater mystery reueales their mysteries.
Behold an earthquake shakes open the graves; and after the resurrection of
this firstborn of the dead, the glad carcasses by the return of their
disacquainted souls can no more then their souls endure the Grave. Behold the
stones cleave asunder, as if violated nature would lend them mouths to cry-out
against the Jews; or as if they would pronounce themselves of a softer
tempter, then the hearts of men. And now there is a religious earthquake in
the heart of the Centurion: from whose inspired mouth proceeds a voice
articulated by faith and wonder; pronouncing the innocence and divinity of our
Jesus; and even the Jews do smite their breasts, as if their hands instead of
repentance, should soften their hearts. But his friends nearest to him in
affection, stand afar off: to whom it is a death not to dye with him. And
indeed none of them did die by martyrdom; the Lord counting the torment of
this spectacle equal unto it. His friends stand afar off: yet farther from
comfort, then from him. O how may we imagine his tender mother weeps? How may
we imagine she now cryes-out, O my son Jesus, O Jesus, my son, my son! This
is a more wounding lamentation, then the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley
of Megiddon; when the good Josias, when the beloved Josias fell under the
sword, of Pharaoh. Now the soldiers come to examine the execution to see if
these, the late prisoners of the Jews, be now become the prisoners of death:
and finding the two thieves breathing still, in the custom of vain cruelty
on malefactors, they break their legs: when, alas, their souls were readier
to run away, then their is bodies But, to our Savior, being already dead,
they are pleased to show a negative mercy. Yet one to prove himself more
senseless then what he wounds, now pierces his side: as if beyond the expulsion
of his soul, he would not leave in him the form of a carcass, When behold,
an instructing mystery flows from his side. Water flows out, as if it would
present unto the soldier the innocence of our Savior: blood flows out, as if
it would present unto the soul there the admonishing horror of his own guilt.
It was vile, to wrong the innocent: it was inhumane to abuse the dead: but it
was execrable to violate the Lord of glory. But the glory of this Lord shall
now dispell this night of sorrow. Now weep not, that he died: but rejoice
that he died for you. It was his love that he would redeem, as it was his
power that he could redeem. So he did redeem, as be did suffer, he suffered
not in his divine nature; but by the ^nion of his divine nature: he red^emed
not in his divine nature; but by the union of his divine nature. For from a
double nature his mystical unity did arise: and as his soul was a divinity
to his body; so was his divinity a soul to his humanity. To create man, God
^reathed a spirit like himself into him; him to redeem man, God himself
entered into him; and though the divinity could not he crucified; yet was the
union of it with the passion of the humanity, counted as the passion of the
divinity. Thus by the bounty of interpretation, and communication of
proprieties, they verily crucified the Lord of glory. Whose carcass now as
cold as death raises a flame of love in the breasts of Joseph and Nicodemus.
Joseph in a courageous Christianity goes unto Pilate, and begges the body.
When Christ was alive, Judas sold him; and now he is dead, Pilate gives him
away; whose body though it were preserved by the divinity, yet Nicodemus
sweetens it with Myrrh and Devotion. They wrap him in a linen cloth, not so
much concealing his nakedness, as expressing his innocence. They lay him in
Joseph's Tomb, which was in a garden; and was not then this garden Paradise? It
was a glorious sepulcher; as if, by the prophecy of love, it had been
proportioned to the guest. Whose body being here entertained with magnificent
piety, his illustrious soul forces a triumph in Hell, crucifies the Devil,
and overthrows the tyranny of damnation. He does not take away damnation, but
contract it. And now you see, after this redemption of our Savior, you may
like Thomas put your hand and faith into the wound of his side, and receive
salvation. You may behold the opening mouth of this wound, which with eloquent
blood inuites you to faith and love. You may behold the Lord of glory coming
from Edom, with his died garments from Bosrah. This is the Lord of glory:
glorious in his apparel: glorious in his nakedness: glorious in his
mightiness to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments
like him that treads in the Wine-fat? Thou have trodden the Wine Press
alone, and of the people there was none with thee. O, what did cause these
soundings of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward us? Who can express thy
sorrows, and thy louing-kindnesse toward us? Who can express what thou have
done for our souls? Thou wast afflicted, thou wast despised, thou wast whipped,
wounded, bruised, condemned, sacrificed for our souls; thou wast made a
servant of death, thou wast numbered with the transgressors, thou made thy
grave with the wicked for our souls. Wherefore God has highly exalted thee,
and given thee a name above all names; that at the Name of Jesus every knee
shall bow; of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth; And every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord of glory;
And the four and twenty Elders shall fall down before the Lamb, with their
Harps and golden Vials full of Odours; and in their new Song shall they praise
thee; And the Angels about thy throne, even ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands shall say with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory. Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the
company of Heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious Name; evermore praising
thee and saying; Holy, holy, holy Lord of glory, Heaven and earth are full of
thy glory, and of thy mercies. The Angels in Heaven wonder at thy mercies: the
powers of Hell tremble at thy mercies: thou thy self triumphest in thy
mercies: and the sons of men rejoice in thy mercies. Wherefore, O thou that
take away the sins of the world, deliver us: by thine agony and bloody
swear, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious death and burial deliver us;
And we will fall down before thy glory: and we will sing praises unto thy
mercy: and we will triumph in the victory of thy blood: and we will for ever
even for ever acknowledge, that, Thou the crucified Lord of glory art the
Christ of God, and the Jesus of men.

The end.
A Sermon preached at Saint Marie's in Oxford on Easter-Tuesday, 1623.
1. Corinthians. 15.20. Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the
first fruits of them that slept.


IT were unnecessary art and fear to stir^e to keep the living awake with a
preface; when as the dead are at the business of a resurrection. Wonders and
blessings are above their auditors: who must be glad to be sta^^led to the
news. Now was our Savior task'd with his most vnweildie miracle. His mercy
had before bestowed many upon others: but now his power tries one upon
himself. His divinity acts a miracle upon his humanity; repairing this
second Trinity of his person from the immortal ruins of a God, a soul, and
a carcass. Three days did he consecrate for the performance of this wonder:
and three days do we consecrate for the persuading to this wonder; which
should have been the joy, and was the shame of the Apostles: who were slow to
apprehend it, though Christ was their Schoolmasters. They had not as yet
learned their own Creed: which, their perverse sense was pleased to be
taught, not so much by our Savior, as by his sepulcher: whose opening mouth,
when it sent forth Christ the Word, pronounced his Resurrection, which is the
Epitaph of God. Thus did the ambition of the gra^e instruct the prevented
Angel: and though it cannot, as the multitude of Tombs, with the voice and
conquest of proud Death, tell us whom it does captive; yet does it remember to
us, whom it did. Which assumed triumph of death, is as short as its combat.
Ioseph's devotion bestowed this Tomb upon our Savior; but our Saviors
victory bestowed it upon death: which, since his Resurrection, has lien buried
in his tomb. But can a dead man be warmed again into life? And can the lungs
that have forgot to breathe, learn to breathe again? Faith indeed can answer
this with as much ease as speed; and being honored with an imitating
omnipotency, can with a coequall extension of assent apply it self to the
number and degrees of Gods actions. But, as hard it was to raise the faith, as
the body, of Saint Thomas: nay, it was his body, that caused him to believe the
Resurrection of Christ's body; which was a way of faith, more certain then
grateful. Yet must the understanding be so raised, before it can believe that
the body can be raised; that the divine indulgence does gradually chastize
the difficulty by the length of instruction. For scarce had man viewed the
materials of his Creation, when straight he was practiced unto an essay of
this second Creation. When Adam descended into sleep, there was a Resurrection
of his rib, which awaked into a woman. Did not mortality then put on
immortality, when a senseless bone was so endued with reason, that it could
apprehend its own preferment? Me thinks, the Chymique might hence extract an
easy Rhetorique for his promotion of metalls; and, without an Apology, teach
that usury of art, And here too, was an employed legacy, a woman bequeathed
to time, to multiply resurrections. Which yet were almost reduced to a despair
by her degenerating Nephews: whose crimes had forsworn or scorned the
resurrection of their bodies, and did more ouerwhelme them then the flood. Yet
then look upon Noah with joy, as the Lord did with favor; and when the old
and the new World were distinguished and continued but by an Isthmus, from
Noah's wife the Arc of mankind, see a new resurrection of man; and from his
flood a resurrection of the world. But will you see a raising without death or
sleep? Behold Isaac as near the stroke as the hand of his father, arising
from his Funeral pile; and at this resurrection too there was an Angel
remoouing though not a Tombe-stone, yet a Knife more exorable then the sword
which the Angel in Paradise did shake; whose threatening edge was as devouring
as its flame. But here was a sacrifice offered, yet not slain: and though not
slain yet accepted. But peradventure it will more gratefully frighten you to
see a man taught to be buried alive, and more yet, to live after his burial.
Behold then Joseph from the tomb of his prison rising unto a triumph as
eminent as his innocence: which had before conquered his passion, and now his
affliction. Behold in Joseph the mystical body of our Savior; a body
admirably mortal and incorruptible; a body that suffered rather the grave then
death. And will any man now count it such a wonder to see the fetters fall-off
from Peter; when they had learned the religion from his Masters winding-sheete,
which fell at his feet when he arose? But if the eye and courage of your faith
will venture farther, and see the active horror of a grave, behold Jonas his
quick tomb made a tomb of salvation to him. Three of our days he lay
struggling in his new night of amazement, as if he had found an Egypt in the
Whale, and did acknowledge that watery Purgatory. At last the grave by a new
instruction cast-vp the living. The Whale was no more a Sepulcher, but a fish;
and Jonas no longer a coarse, but a Prophet. He had surely died, if he had
not been buried. And here was a resurrection, though not a reviving; a
resurrection from disobedience and the Whale. Thus this rare An'choret and his
tomb were both alive: but the tomb of our Savior was as desperate as death.
What could be expected from a grave and a carcass? Yet behold this carcass
revive into a man; nay, into a God! And I may rightly say, behold: for he did
rise, that we should behold him; and at that time wherein we might behold him.
He rose, when night rises into morning, and at this pregnant season, when
winter is quickened into the spring. Now did the dayspring visit us from the
grave. It was on the first day of the Jews week, a week well begun; and is
was the first day of the Christian Creation. If you will turn over the notes
of time, you may believe that Pharaoh, as on that day of the year, was invaded
by an host of waves, which conquering his Chariots, made him without wheels
hurrie faster unto Hell; Whiles Moses led his Israel through the Wilderness of
the Sea, passing from the shadow of death in that monument of waters. Did not
our Lord also leave his tomb with an equal and contrary wonder? Then were the
waters made firm, rising into Alps; as now the earth was made to quake like
the waters; And well might it tremble, when the Lord conquered it and forsook
it. The Angel too made a little earthquake in the grave, when he removed the
mighty stone: with which the vain few tried to oppress our Savior after
death; as it he would have sealed him up, to an impossibility of resurrection.
But since the Angel has opened the tomb for us, shall we go see the place,
whence Christ is risen? And yet we shall not make such have, but that the
speedy devotion of the two Mary's will be there before us: whose feet were as
swift as their love, and their love as time; nay, more swift then time, which
hindered them by the delay and command of their Sabbath. A Sabbath it was, but
only of their bodies, which, whiles our Savior lay buried, were but the
sepulchers of their souls; their souls, that found no Sabbath, till they
found the Lord. They came with prepared spices and ointments for him, whose
divinity did prevent Balm, and esteemed their piety of a more precious
sweetness, then their ointments. But will you see this love languish into
fear, and this fear again strengthened into joy? They are no sooner in the
sepulcher, but that they find it as empty of our Savior, as it was full of
wonder; and instead of the body of the Lord they behold the Angel of the Lord
sitting upon the stone, which he had conquered to obedience; as if he meant to
rest himself in triumph, after the conflict of his miracle. His raiment was
white as snow, which he did imitate in purity and descent. His countenance was
like lightning, or more wonderful: for, that is of so instant a terror, that
it is the object rather of our memory, then our eye; but this with courteous
majesty was patient to be beheld. The women with the duty of fear beheld it;
being quickly encouraged by the angel, but first by their innocence. The
soldiers beheld it too, though with such guilty faintness, that they seemed
to strive as much to shame their sex, as their profession: being at once
almost disarmed of their weapons and souls. They became as dead men, and were
rather the prisoners, then the keepers of the grave. But in the mean time, the
angel comforts and instructs the women, who now are his Disciples; and
receiving commission to preach the resurrection of our Savior to the Disciples
of our Savior, they haste out of the Tomb, with the confused expedition of
fear and joy. Was not this a strange pilgrimage to run from the sepulcher of
our Lord! But it was yet more strange; they seek the Disciples, and find
Christ. It was a comfortable mistake! And indeed he did comfort them with his
presence and speech; When immediately they fall on their knees, at his knees,
in love and worship holding him by the feet. O how glorious are the feet of the
Lord of the Gospel! The Gospel of whose resurrection these female Evangelists
are again sent to teach; and the first scholars which they must teach, must
be Christ's Disciples. When, to show their obedience to be as ready as their
love, they depart even from Christ to their duty; and speedily find Peter and
John for their auditors. Here was zeal and tenderness; the fiercest and the
mildest of the Apostles; as if they had been left together to temper one
another. And these no sooner hear the news, but straight they run as fast
to the tomb, as the women did run from it. John came first unto it: but
Peter went first into it; Love was swiftest; but zeal boldest. When they are
entered, they find Christ's victory acknowledged by the linen clothes, his
spoils of death; and these spoils too had been divided; the napkin of his
head being laid by it self. It seems, the angel at our Sauiour's
resurrection attended to be a witness of it to the women, and leave a
witness of it to the Disciples. Thus, that he was not stolen away, appears by
the inconvenience and leisure of his vndressing, and by the method of the
linen: which the frightened policy of the soldiers did no more touch, then
observe, and they no more observed it, then did the women: who after the sight
of the angel, had their eyes as much amazed as their minds. The soldiers too
did more tremble then watch: but the Disciples had less fear and more time;
besides, they learned somewhat, which they were not taught; and could now teach
the women this news of the grave. But did he rise but from the grave? This is
the news but of his body; yes, he did rise also from the damned, who are
dead too, as much in judgment as to nature; Though some are as unwilling to
have Christ descend into Hell, as to go thither themselves: and in a dangerous
Brachygraphie write the Creed so short, that without the commission of an Index
Expurgatorius, they quite leave out the article of the descent. But, what an
unmannerly ingratitude is this, to accept of Christ's benefits, and deny his
wonders? They will enjoy his conquest of Hell, and yet they will not let him
go to conquer it. Ought we not to make greater the glory of Christo and can
we make less the power of Christ? Let then our piety behold and wonder to
see Heaven descend into Hell! to see again Gos^^^^ in Egypt! The Devil had
been before in Heaven; and now God is pleased to go into Hell! The
arch-angell conquered the Devil in Heaven; and now God conquers him in his
own Empire, and makes his Empire his Dungeon! We overcome the Devil by
flight; but God by invasion. Yet who would not stand amazed to see God with the
Devil? Had the Manichie been now, he might here at once have behold both
his Princes Me thinks, our Savior now turned Sampson's Riddle into a
Prophecy, which he expounded and fulfilled. Did not out of the eater come
forth meat, and out of the strong came there not sweetness; when from the
jaws of Hell by Christ came forth salvation? Now whiles the soul of our
Savior was triumphant in Hell, his body was obedient in the sepulcher: his
divinity being as his soul, till it recalled his soul, and made the whole
Christ change an age of three and thirty years into eternity. Lo, here is
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, whose almighty strength vouchsafed to couch
under the power of the grave; and, Lo, the glorious indignation of his love,
has rouzed him up again from the sloth of death! Will you behold how he was
raised? behold how the potter works upon the wheel: he takes clay; he makes
it a vessel; and this vessel being marred in the hand of the potter, he makes
it again, as he best pleases; Christ was immortal clay, and earth purer then
Heaven! When, by the wonder of omnipotency, the Creator and the creature were
made into one; and of one matter did consist both the potter and his pot! From
this broken clay there did arise the same, and a renewed Christ! That he rose
in the earnest of a body, his own mouth did testify, when he said nothing;
proouing it by the authority of food, which he did eat with his Disciples.
Could any man in this point be yet an infidel? If any could, see how he
conuerts them; He lets Thomas disgrace himself to a belief, and by his
distrust mercifully and miraculously increase his faith! Can any doubt that he
was renewed in a body of glory, when he was full of God? Know you not that his
body was indeed the Temple of the Holy Ghost? Was he not renewed in a body of
glory, whom the doors that were shut, when he entered to his Disciples, did
obediently acknowledge to be the King of glory? And though he were patient
under death three days, yet since the first part of the first was spent before
he died, and the last part of the last, after he revived; there was the
number, but not the length of three days; and thus he made so short a change
seem rather a sleep then a death. And, O, but to consider here, as well the
wonder as the change! Do but imagine, that in the dawning birth of the
morning, you saw the revelation of a grave emulating the morning: a coarse
rising with more comfort and glory then the Sun: a winding sheet falling away
as an empty cloud: the feet and hands striving which shall first recover
motion; the hands helping to raise the body; the feet helping to bear both the
body and the hands: the tongue so eloquent, that it can tell you, it can speak
again: the ears so pure, that they can perceive the silence of the grave: the
eyes looking forth of their Tombs, as if they were glad to see their own
resurrection: Would you not be as much affrighted, as instructed with this
power of a God? Would you not be turned into very coarses, to see this living
coarse! Would you not be struck as pale, as the winding sheet you looked-vpon?
But, when all this shall be done, as well in mercy, as in majesty: as well to
raise you to a hope of eternal life, as to strike you with a remembrance of a
temporal death: as well to make you like unto God, as to make you know you are
yet not like vnhim: O, how will you then at such compassion dissolve with
compassion; as if you would hasten to the like resurrection! How will you then
kiss those hands, which, before you feared? How will you then with steadfast
eyes examine and adore the resurrection of that body, which is the hope and
cause of the resurrection of our bodies! For therefore did he raise himself,
that he might raise us, and so become the first-fruites of them that sleep.
But shall we rise too? and shall dust again be taken-vp, and breathed on?
Shall every man by this second Adam be made as wonderfully, as the first Adam?
And yet shall we want faith, when God wants not power? Or, shall we think it
harder to unite the body and soul, then to make them? It were an impious
discourtesie to deny that to God, which God denied not unto his servant. Did
not the widow of Zarephah, thus receive a son by Elias, who yet was neither
the father of it, nor the God? Nay, did not his servant do more for the
Shunamite, to whom he promised a son before he was conceived, and restored
him after he was dead? Nay, did not the bones of this Elisha give life to one,
that was as dead as themselves; teaching him to confess the mercy of a grave?
It is especially an act of the mercy of the living God to give life to the
dead: yet by a greater mercy he makes it an act of his justice; freely
binding himself to admit our boldness, not so much to to request as to claim
a resurrection? For shall the bodies of the Saints be more remembered by their
tombs, then by their labors? or shall they be worse oppressed with death,
then they were with their torments? or shall their souls with an envious
inequality usurp and enjoy the purchase of their bodies? shall those eyes,
whose devotion did still watch or mourn, for ever want respect as much as
sight? shall those hands, that have been free in extending themselves and
mercy to the poor, be for ever bound by the ingratitude of death? shall those
knees that have bowed with such willing reverence, be so held down by the
violence of mortality, that they shall never rise up again? Where are then
thy tears O David, if thy eyes shall not enjoy the happiness of their own
sorrow? Where are then, O Job, thy faith and patience, if thy body be now as
much without hope, as it was before without rest? Where are then, O Esaias, thy
victorious sufferings, if after the ignorant fury of the Saw, and the schism
of thy body, thy body suffer a wilder dissociation from thy soul for tedious
eternity? Where are thy travels then, O Paul, if after thy Christian
Geographie, and conquest of Paganism, thou lie for ever confined to the dull
peace of a grave? No; the almighty, which made man with such wisdom of art,
will neither lose his glory, nor his work; But, as he made his greater heaven
for his angels, so made he the lesser and mortal heaven of man's body for his
soul, and will make it as eternal as his soul. There is more excellency of
workmanship in the soul: but more variety in the body. The soul does more
truly express God: but the body more easily. The soul judges best: but the
body first; and though the eye of the soul does behold the works of God more
clearly: yet does the eye of the body behold them more properly. Nay, should
the body not be raised to life and heaven, how great a part of heaven and
that life would be lost, whiles not enjoyed, and be as unnecessary, as it is
wonderful? God has provided joys, which the eye has not seen, nor the ear
heard; but, which the eye shall see, and the ear shall hear, and without the
pleasure of a trance, for ever possess, as much without error, as without
measure. Such honor will the Creator of our bodies do to the bodies of his
Saints; they shall acknowledge corruption, but overcome it: they may in their
journey be the ghests of the grave: but at last they shall be the inhabitants
of Heaven. Yet the Lord cannot hereafter so much honor humane flesh by raising
it, as he has already by assuming it. It was before his servant, but now his
companion. That was a resurrection of the flesh, when it was raised unto God:
but the only resurrection of our flesh is, when it is raised to the soul. At
the day of judgment, though there shall be no marriages of sexes, yet there
shall be of parts: when souls shall be united to bodies in so entire and
inexorable a matrimony, that it shall admit no hope nor fear of a divorce.
Neither need we fear, in the jealousy of this match, the ignoble parentage
of the flesh: since what it wants in birth is supplied in dowry; and flesh is
now become such refined earth, being made wonderful in shape and office, that
the soul may be thought to be scarce more noble, but that it seems more
reserved, by being invisible. And yet you may observe the bodies emulation:
which falls before its resurrection, into such atoms of dust, that they are
with as much difficulty to be seen as to be numbered. But, notwithstanding
that these principles of earth be thus divided among themselves, yet are they
not divided against themselves, retayning still though not an appetite, yet an
obedience to resurrection; Nature has not lost this, and God will supply that;
and as easily unite as distinguish each dust. To yield to this truth, is the
Creed of the Creed. If therefore any man's faith in the assent to this
mystery, should be as weak as his reason, he may help both his reason and
his faith, by his sense: by which they shall either be convinced, or persuaded.
If you will be but as bold as antiquity, you may propose unto your selves the
solemn Poetry of the Phoenix, a creature rarer then the resurrection, though
not as admirable: in whose ashes you may find the fire of life, expecting but
to be fanned to the resurrection of a flame; as if this creature by the mystery
of death, would by a fire both perish and revive! But without the courtesy of
supposition, you may in earnest behold the Eagle shoot-forth new quils:
wherewith may be written and testified his endeavor of immortality. Thus does
God teach nature how to teach us mysteries; and without the Magical study of
the language of birds, to understand without their voice, their secret
instruction. But peradventure you will think, that to discern this truth in the
nature of the Eagle, will require a sight as sharp as the Eagle's; remove
then your eye from the fowls of the air, but to the trees wherein they nest;
and with a negligent view you may observe, how after the nakedness and death
of winter, they bud afresh into life and beauty. Yet why should we in the
sloth of this easy contemplation study so broad an object? Let our eye with
more grateful industry confine its prospect to the small seed of corn; and
at least take the pains to see the pains of the husbandman. And shall we not
admire at the delightful arithmetique of nature, to behold a seed, whose hope
seems as small as it self, by being cast away, to be found; by destruction
to receive increase; and from the same furrow to have both a burial and a
birth! Thus then we see that the body is able to show that it self may rise:
but now the soul will prove that it must; and with such friendly eloquence
help its first companion, that by the union of love, it will prevent the
resurrection. For, should the soul for ever want the body, should it not want
both perfection and wonder? Is not the soul most perfect, when it is most
noble? and is it not most noble, when it is most bountiful? and is it not most
bountiful, when it gives life to the dead? Is it not likewise most full of
wonder, when it is thus perfect in that which is imperfect? when it mixes with
corruption, and yet is incorrupt? when it is most burdened, and yet most
variously active? Thus, by this necessary inclination of the soul, the
resurrection is as natural in respect of the union, as it is above nature in
respect of the manner. But now see the curious zeal of the soul; It will not
only have a body again, but in a precise society it will have only its own
again. For the preserving therefore of such numericall identitie, there shall
be wonderfully restored the substantial union, which is but formally
distinguished from the parts united. There shall be restored the personalitie,
and lastly the native temperament, which does contain the indiuiduating
dispositions, whereby such a matter has a pecullar appetite to such a form.
Which matter by virtue of such inclination remaynes formally the same, though
it may be varied by extention; as when the infant shall be raised into a man,
the person shall be enlarged, but not multiplied. But the unruly wit of
Philosophy will here demand, how they shall rise with their own bodies, who
when they lived, had not bodies of their own; being not only fed with the
flesh of men, but descending also from parents nourished with the like horrible
diet? For, by this wild reckoning, there will be such a Genealogy of debt,
that the body of the Nephew must peradventure be paid to the great
Grandfather. To which, some Christians do reply with as much impertinent
devotion, as unwarrantable subtlety, without necessity attributing to Gods
Omnipotency a total supply of new bodies, which, for the preserving the
numericall identitie, shall be endowed with the former temperature. But surely
we ought to judge it a safer modesty, not to satisfy reason, then to offend
Religion. And, since we must rise in our old bodies without all sophistry, we
may more temperately believe, that the divine wisdom has decreed and provided,
that there shall never be any humane body, which shall totally consist of
other humane bodies; It being harsh to say, that the same body is raised, when
there are only the same reproduced dispositions; and as absurd to affirm, that
such dispositions, being the special accidents of a former matter, should be
transferd upon another. You see then the sacred eagerness of the soul; It
will neither loose nor change a dust; nor will it only possess, but also
adorn the body. Mankind shall feel and express a youthful spring: the
walking-staffe and the wrinkle shall be no more the help and distinction of
age: and death it self shall suffer climactericall destruction. O, how the
wonder will almost out-act faith, when the infant and the dwarf shall be made
a proper man! When the limbs exhaled with famine, shall be replenished with
as much miracle as flesh! When the child that left its soul, before it left
the womb, shall in an instant without growth, be as big as the mother! when
sleep shall be commanded from the eyelid, no more by care, but by
immortality! which shall chase death out of nature, and with importunate
triumph cry-out unto the grave, O earth, earth, earth, hear the voice of the
Lord! Thy dead men shall live: with their primitive bodies shall they arise:
awake and sing you that dwell in dust: for your dew is as the dew of herbs; by
which blessing you shall be made as glorious, as fruitful. And since that
fruitfulness is the gratitude of nature, let it remember us as much to
acknowledge as enjoy the mercy of that power by which we rise; And we may
most justly and easily remember by whom we rise, by remembering him, by whom we
fell. Yet, if we behold the original of their humanity, we shall find, that
they were both without sin, and that the first Adam had his best paradise
within himself. But when he was fallen by the weakness of the woman, that
was made for his help; never did woman prove a strong help unto man, before
the Virgin Mother of Christ God and man; And then, though the first Adam had
eaten up the apple, the second Adam swallowed up death. He had before made the
poor man take up the bed of his sickness and walk: but he himself was the
first, that ever took up the deathbed and walked. Yet some, before our
Savior, borrowed a fantastical resurrection, as Readiness equivocal Samuel;
and some rose in earnest, but to die again in earnest; as supererogating
Lazarus, that paid to nature one death more then he owed. But our Lord is risen
with as much perfection as power, and with as much power as love and glory. The
Poetical Chymiques tell us of an Alchymisticall man at the earth's center: who
by a sphericall diffusion of his virtue, does like a subterraneous Sun
improoue metals to a metamorphosis yet new. Which, as it is bold in the fable,
so by a devout mythologie may be made modest in the moral. And this secret
workman shall be our Savior, whose virtue was so dispersed into the bowels of
graves, that at his resurrection he improued carcasses into Saints: who were
the witnesses and attendants of his power. Indeed to advance the head without
the members were so unnatural, that it were more like an execution then a
preferment: and it were stranger to see a Leader without his soldiers, then
without his arms; besides, were it fit, that when the master rises, the
servants should lie still? Thus then they were raised; and as much to
holiness, as to life. It was not only a resurrection; but also a consecration.
Christ was the first of them that rose, nay, he was the first fruits of them.
He had the precedence both in order and virtue. The first fruits were the
first handful as acceptable as ripe; by a bountiful mediation obtaining
holiness and entertaynment for the rest. And this first offering did commend
it self unto the Lord rather by the speed then the quantity. The Jew offered
this at his own home; and it was as domestique as his thoughts: being a
present of eloquent simplicity, which at the same time did honor and overcome
the Almighty! O, how our Savior made this figure solid, when at once he
conquered for us death and heaven! He was but the first handful of corn, and
yet as powerful as small: making all the rest of a like holiness, though not
of an equal. But there were greater first-fruites, which the Jew went to pay
at Jerusalem: and as the first were an offering of humility, so these of
pomp: those did more set-forth the thankfulness of the labourer, and these
the munificence of the Lord. If you will take the word of the Rabbines (whom in
the story of Custom we have no more need to suspect, then they had to faigne)
when the husbandman carried-vp these fruits to the holy City, he had a Bull
went before him; whose horns were gilded, and an Olive garland upon his head.
This was the picture of his masters affection and estate; as if by the
impetuous beast he would express the courage of his joy: by the gilded horns
the riches of his plenty: and by the Oliue-garland the crown of his peace.
Behold the displayed Heraldry of his happiness! And that it might be
increased by applause, a pipe played before them, to charge all to take notice
of it, until they came to the mountain of the Lord. Shall not these
first fruits be likewise paid at our great Resurrection? shall they not be
brought to the heavenly Jerusalem? shall they not have Angels go before them?
shall there not be crowns likewise provided? and shall they not be vshered
with the voice of a trumpet? It was the sound which the Jews used at their
brauer Funerals; and may it not then fitly be used, when they shall awake
again from their tombs? Till Christ was risen, those that were buried were
dead: but if we once but name him the first fruits of them that rise, let us
no more say they were dead, but that they slept. Yet all before the
Resurrection shall not sleep: but some shall instead of rising be only
new-dressed, by being clothed with incorruption; and so have rather a change of
raiment, then of life. They shall not put-off their bodies, but their
mortality; and be made like Christ both in the truth of the Resurrection, and
in the glory. The Eutychian shall then confess, that the two natures in Christ
are not mixed, though joined; and that his humanity though exalted is not
changed. The Vbiquitary shall then see, that Christ's body may be seen: and it
shall certainly prove, that it is not euery-where, by being not in the grave,
whence it is risen. The Pythagorean shall then recover the possession and
acquaintance of his vagabond soul; and the Saducy shall then arise in that
body, in which he denied the resurrection of the body; and with his bodily eyes
see the error of his soul. Since then our Redeemer is as eternal in his
flesh, as in his Godhead: since the soldiers fear acknowledged his
resurrection, which their malice denied: since we must rise both by his
authority and example: let our rising not only follow his, but also imitate it.
As then the day of death and the peace of a Sabbath went before the
Resurrection of our Lord: so let the crucifying of our vices, and the quiet
contemplation of eternal joys go before the glory of the Resurrection. So
shall it be unto us, as it was unto our Savior, a true Passover, who passed
thereby from this world unto the Father. So shall our hope be as certain as
our rising: so shall our souls rise as well as our bodies, in that day of
wonder; When the last earthquake shall shake-vp death: when the oecumenicall
voice of one trumpet shall be loud enough to whisper-vp drowsy mankind: when
loose dust shall with the warmth and moisture of blood be kneaded into man:
when the tribute of dispersed and devoured limbs shall be paid-in from all
countries and creatures: when there shall be a Resurrection of disease, of
sleep, of death, of the winding sheet, of the grave, of rottenness; all which
shall be purified into health, into watchfulness, into life, into a robe of
glory, into a throne of glory, into immortality: when there shall be a
Resurrection of earth and heaven, which shall be both renewed: when there shall
be a Resurrection of God himself; whose glory, which seemed buried in this
world, shall illustriously arise in the face of heaven and earth: when there
shall be a new Resurrection of our Lord Jesus; who shall no more arise from
the grave, but from heaven: when the Jew and hell shall tremble, and those
wounds of glory appear, which are the bloody seals of our salvation! So
raise us then, O thou Lord of life, unto holiness of life, that when these
things shall come to pass, we may not only rise in judgment, but also stand
in it; and in these bodies both behold and follow thee into thy Heaven that
glorious body prepared for the glorified bodies of thy Saints; where thy
crucified body sits at the right hand of thy Father: where thy glorious company
of Apostles praise thee: where thy goodly fellowship of Prophets praise thee:
where thy noble army of martyrs praise thee! And with their bodies, O let our
bodies find a labor to be learned in Heaven, and let our souls even there
feel a new affliction, that whiles we cannot grieve enough that we cannot
praise thee enough, our increasing gratitude for our bodies resurrection, may
be our soul's eternal resurrection.

The end.
A Sermon preached at Christ-church in Oxford on Ascension-day, 16^^.
1. PETER, 3.22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God,
Angels, and authorities, and powers, being made subject unto him.


FOr man to go into Heaven, is almost impossible: for God to go into Heaven
is impossible. To understand then the wonder of Christ's ascension, we might
wish that our souls could but ascend like his body: which, whiles it was on
the earth, received motion from his soul; but when it left the earth, received
motion from his Divinity; without which, that motion can now be no more
understood, then it could then be performed. The greatest wonder of man's body
has been the structure: but the greatest wonder of this body is now the
motion. The force of man's hand can make earth ascend toward Heaven: but only
the power of God can make earth ascend unto Heaven. Man can raise earth above
its Sphere: but only God can fix it above its Sphere. This day you may see
both these wonders: whiles the body is made as wonderful as the soul: whiles
the body is made the wonder of the soul; and goes to Heaven with as much
ease, and with more weight. And indeed Philosophy may seem to have come short
at least of perfection, if not of truth, whiles it has discovered the effects
of its own ignorance, instead of the causes of ascension and descension. Which
now seem not to be the works of weight and lightness, but of sin and
innocence: seeing that a body free from sin has learned to ascend; and
spirits laden with sin have sunk themselves from Heaven, to the punishment
and center of sin. And yet innocence is rather a preparatiue, then a cause of
this wonder: a body cannot ascend without it; a body cannot ascend by it. It
has more power upon the soul, then upon the body: yet it has not this power
upon the soul. And as the soul cannot ascend by the power of innocence: so
neither can the body ascend by the power of the soul. The soul can afford
unto the body the motion of progression, but not of ascension: progression
being made by the power of the soul, but by the parts of the body; and it is
a kind of friendly attraction, when one foot inuites the other to a succession
of motion, by a succession of precedencie. But the ascension of the body
cannot be performed, but by somewhat that is above the body; above it, not so
much in place, as in power. The body can bestow upon it self an equivocal
ascension, when a part of the foot shall be raised into the stature of the
body: but this is rather an ascension in the body, then of the body; Nay, we
cannot at all call it an ascension, but by leave; when the body has by chance
an erect situation; all other posture making it descend as much to the name, as
to the simplicity of extension. The fowls of the air also have their
ascension; but it is as well by the air, as in it; and their cunning wing,
which diuides the air into away, compacts it into a help. Thus do they ascend
with an easy wonder: it being performed by the power of nature, and
apprehended by the power of the understanding. But for man's body to ascend,
without the actiuitie of a wing, above the actiuitie of a wing, is so strange,
that it was strange even in Christ's body; nay, it might have been strange to
his own body: which had it not been instructed by his divinity, might have
maruail'd at its own motion; And it did no less amaze Heaven then possess
it; making a great part of the Angels thus behold earth, without descending to
it. And this body ascended rather to Heaven, then to God. The Divinity was
with it, yet did not ascend with it: since it does not change place, but fill
all place. His soul did ascend with it; yet did rather effectually change
place, then properly: whiles it did only not change that body, which did
change place. The whole person did ascend: not that the Divinity left any
place, where the humanity had been; but that it was in every place, where the
humanity was to be. And this ascension of Christ's body was not only far
from the nature, but also against the nature of his body: which acknowledged
the burden and tyranny of our Elements, till by resurrection it was refined
into the liberty of a glorified nature, and taught to obey its own
preferment: which, the Divinity so bestowed both upon body and soul; that
they were almost not more near unto it, then like unto it. And that they might
be more like unto it, the Divinity became voluntarily as humble, as the
humanity was naturally; and voluntarily made the humanity as high as the
Divinity was naturally. Which great work of the ascension did not only need a
Divinity to perform it, but also to persuade men, that it could be
performed; the belief of the ascension being the next wonder to the ascension.
As then God did effect it, so he did teach it: he humbled himself to man; he
humbled himself in man: making the degrees of his instruction descend by the
degrees of man's apprehension. And first he did discover the possibility of
ascension to the Understanding: by which we do as truly as Moses, though not
as clearly, see Enoch's ascension; which was not, for ought we know, seen by
any eye, but the eye of the understanding: the ascension of his body being no
more discerned then the ascension of his soul. God took him body and soul:
his body being by a holy obedience to his soul made so like his soul; that
it did ascend as easily; nay, as soon as his soul. Holiness, which to other
men is a resurrection of the soul, was to him a resurrection also of the
body: which was refined without the deliberate corruption of a grave; It was
refined sooner then it could be corrupted; It knew no grave but sin: from
which it did ascend, as it did ascend from its own mortality: but his soul
did first by righteousness ascend in his body before it did ascend with his
body. God took him to himself; leaving his story to posterity and faith:
as if he would teach the world by this inferior proportion, that ascension
should be an object of faith. The next apprehensiue faculty in man, to which
God descended to teach it the possibility of ascension, was the Fantasy.
Thus Jacob saw the angels go up to Heaven: though this was an ascension but by
the help of a ladder; and that help, like that ascension, but in a dream;
and the bodies which ascended were but like a dream, having no more substance,
then a dream. But Saint Paul did by the fantasy not see the ascension of
another; but enjoy one himself; and to that degree of truth, that he doubted
whether his body did not as much possess Heaven, as the Vision possessed his
body. At last the divine instruction taught the ascension to the Sense: it
taught the ascension of the body to the body. Thus did Elisha see Eliah
ascend: he saw him ascend like the fire in which he did ascend; in which he did
ascend, till he ascended above it. He saw the state of his ascension in a
Chariot; he saw the speed of his ascension in his horses; he saw and he heard
the whirlwind in which Eliah suffered a triumph and rapture of his body; as
other Prophets had suffered a rapture only of their souls. Nay, Elisha's touch
too did apprehend the ascension; whiles it took up the mantle that did ascend;
for the mantle too had an ascension, though not to Heaven, yet toward Heaven,
and to the working of miracles. But all Elisha was but a witness of this
ascension; whiles God tooke-vp Eliah, and left the Prophet with Elisha: whom he
clothed not so much with the mantle, as with Eliah! But if you would hear of
one, that had gone toward Heaven and come down again, as if he would be a
witness of his own ascension, you may remember Abacuc; with whose story we
may be satisfied, as much as Daniel was with his provision; Whom yet if
carefully we will observe, we shall perceive him cast into the Lions den so
late in the evening, and delivered thence so early in the morning, that there
will be no more need, then there was time for the ascension of Abacuc, and the
miracle of the dinner; Nay, had it come, it would have been as great a
miracle, to have kept the Lions from the food, as to have kept them from
Daniel; And had Abacuc lived till Daniel's imprisonment, he would indeed have
had need to be carried, though his journie had been far shorter, then from
Jury to Babylon. Thus did death make this Prophet prevent this ascension of his
body, by an ascension of his soul. But Simon Magus did ascend in earnest:
nay, and he proved it too, by descending in earnest. Only it was an untoward
ascension: he did ascend by the power of the Devil; but he descended by the
power of God; he descended to that power, by which he ascended. Now as this
Sorcerer was made to descend by the prayers of Saint Peter: so Saint Thomas of
Aquine (as some have told us) ascended by his own prayers; he ascended
without presumption a foot or two. Which petty ascension may serve for a
mannerly miracle; if the Saint-maker's eyes were not as dim as his devotion;
and by an apocope of that Saint's body, mistook not his knees for his feet,
upon which peradventure he stood praying; and the mistake was as easy as the
miracle. But we have heard of some Dead bodies that have ascended; thus some
have buried Moses in Heaven, striving to make his tomb as famous as his
holiness; and belike lest the Devil should have made his body an Idol, they
sent it to his soul to make-vp a Saint. And some have sent the body of the
blessed Virgin thither, with much reverence and opinion, though as far from
use as from certainty. And some have given two or three little ascensions to
her Temple: which is pleased as yet to be honored at Loretto; which is pleased
as yet to honor Loretto, and make that place ascend above other places, by not
ascending from that place. Nay, the Turks too boast of an ascension, not of a
temple, but of their Mahomet; though had this been, it had been an ascension
without a resurrection; an ascension not so much of his carcass, as of his
coffin: which being of iron has been reported to ascend to the roof of his
temple, or rather to the secret virtue of many Load-stones fixed with as much
secrecy in the roof of his temple. Yet even this ascension also will prove to
be the work rather of Poets, then of Load-stones. Which can indeed make iron
ascend, nay, make other Load-stones ascend from the common center; though they
themselves, if not violently sustained, do naturally descend and acknowledge
the common center. Yet since without respect one to another, each does attract
with an absolute intention; and since the application in such attraction is
most aptly made from some point in the stone to some point in the iron: the
defect of such form in the iron, and the number of the stones, which was
invented to help the invention, does with the honesty of Philosophy quite
betray it; since the iron by a confused command of its duty, could not apply
it self to any one, and therefore not to any. And thus you see that Mahomets
presumptuous sins did ascend higher, then his body, or then the invention of
his idolaters. But if we would see a low ascension, and yet a wondrous one, we
may behold our Sauiour's walking upon the water: which was an ascension in
respect of nature, though not of our Saviors person: it was an ascension of
his power, though not of his person: nay, it was an ascension of his person,
because it should naturally have been a descension of his person. And least
we might think that this ascension could only be effected in Christ's
person, as it could be effected only by his power, he did effect it in Peter's
person; And though he needed Christ's hand, as much as his inuitation, yet was
it his unbelief that was heavier, then his body. But Christ's body was at
last to ascend above all the elements, except so much of them as composed his
body: which ascended to immortality forty days sooner, then it ascended to
Heaven; and now as much required to be placed above the place of our bodies, as
it was above the condition of them. When therefore he was to ascend, he led his
Disciples out of Jerusalem; it was the first degree of his ascension to
separate himself from the trouble of the City; to separate himself from the
impiety of that City: whose malice, whiles it was increased in procuring his
death, was admirably deluded in procuring his ascension. He led: his Disciples
unto Mount Oliuet; a place from whence his prayers had often ascended, as now
his person. It was not far from Bethanie, a Village not great (it seems)
either in people or sins; and so peradventure as near to the benefit of the
ascension, as to the ascension. And being now to go up to to the Kingdom of
God, he discourses to his Disciples of the Kingdom of God; as if their ear
should prepare their eye; whiles he himself will make himself the
illustration and proof of his own doctrine. Yet to show the truth of his
love, as much as the truth of his words, first be lifts-vp his hands, at which
they lift-vp their eyes and hearts; and then he lift-vp his voice and blesses
them. See, with what kind prevention he supplies his future absence by his
present blessing; he makes his blessing the Deputy of his person: which
whiles they behold with eyes as earnestly fixed by love, as they could be by
death, behold he ascends, and they lose the sight of him, sooner by a cloud,
then by distance. Which shortness of the the pleasure of their sight was
happily supplied before, by the intention of their sight. His body was but a
cloud to his Divinity; and now his body ascends in a cloud: which did as
eminently show his power, as it concealed his person. A cloud full of God is
the Chariot of his triumph; and the curtains of his Chariot are the wings of
Cherubins! Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye
everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. But whiles the
Apostles steadfastly gaze after him, as if they would turn their eyes into
Perspectiues, or attend him as far with their sight as with their desire;
behold their passion is not satisfied, but changed; and heard by them, to save
them the labor of gazing, they behold instead of one Christ two Angels; and
their white apparel instead of a cloud; though their number was not so much
for a supply of Christ, who was gone into Heaven, as for a more full security
of his return from Heaven. The expectation whereof, if any shall think
tedious, they may ascend after him, and peradventure before his return; not by
seeking the impression of his footsteps on Mount Oliuet, but by finding the
ready way in his precepts: by which we may ascend to the understanding of his
ascension: by which we may ascend to the height of his ascension. Which was
above all the Heavens, that either Philosophers or the Stars had been
acquainted with; nay, into that Heaven, of which Copernicus might without
error have said, that it stands still; the Heaven in which the Saints rest
like the Heaven; the Heaven in which Christ rest's like the Saints. And yet you
shall not only see his ascension into this Heaven, but you shall see also his
ascension in this Heaven; that was the ascension of his person, but this of his
glory. Enoch and Eliah ascended to this Heaven: but you shall see Christ Jesus
in this Heaven ascend to the right hand of God! Behold this day the humanity
made the favorite of the Divinity! Behold Christ on the right hand of God! O
what a spectacle would this have been for Herod and Pilate! they would have
cried out that their worst Hell had been from Heaven; and to have escaped the
horror of this sight, they would have chosen utter darkness! But behold
Christ on the right hand of God! In whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore! And yet can we behold those pleasures, which no eye has seen? Nay,
can we behold the hand in which those pleasures are? Nay, can the hand be
found, that we might behold it? Shall we dress the Almighty with shape?
and by an idolatrous gratitude bestow the figure upon God, which he has
bestowed upon us? Shall we give hands to him, that were not able to give them
to our selves? No, we give not hands unto him: but he gives them to himself;
yet he gives them not for himself, but for us; not to assist himself, but
instruct us. He makes us understand his greatest favors, by his less favors;
and so by this happiness in their use, makes his less favors greater. He
teaches us the parts of Christ's triumph by the parts of our body: and makes it
as easy in some measure to distinguish between the glory of Christ and of the
Angels, as between our right hand and our left; as between Gods right hand
and ours; nay, to judge of Gods right hand by ours. In the right hand of man is
his strength: and the Almighty calls his own strength his right hand. The
right hand of man, nay, every right side limb of man is by situation and power
of that prioritie by nature, that as if God had showed the sacred union and
distinction of sexes in the same body, our left limbs are but female limbs;
and so our left hand may be a help unto our right: but our right is a defense
unto our left. And this courteous purpose of nature, as it is always promoted
by exercise: so was it more singularly by wit and courage in those Amazonian
warriers; who conueighed their right pappe into their arm, bringing-vp that,
as the heir of their strength, and providing victory for its inheritance. And
yet these were not monsters, but wonders; whiles they had not two right arms,
but a double one. But nature it self without this supportment of use and art,
has built the right arm upon the foundation of a greater bone, then the left:
that if these bones were brought to the justice of the balance, we should with
no less admiration then truth confess the right to exceed the left in weight
and mystrie. And as Nature has thus honored our right hand, so likewise has
Custom. It is the hand wherewith we command, as if it claimed to her the
scepter of reason, and would express as well the majesty as the purpose of
the will. It is the hand wherewith we direct, with courtesy in part
performing our own command, whiles with skill we teach it. It is the hand
wherewith we promise, in which form of covenant the hands of men we so firmly
united, to profess the intended union of their word and deed. It is the hand
wherewith we bless, wishing the strength of our hand to be the Emblem of our
blessing. It is the hand wherewith we defend, and which by the artificial
mercy of protection, we can bestow upon another, and yet nere part from it. It
is the hand wherewith we honor, as if he whom we place at our right hand*
were as dear unto us as our right hand* Thus our right hand implies all that
we can give: but does Gods right hand imply all that he can give? Here let us
with reverent comparison and delight behold God and Christ, Christ with God, at
the right hand of God; the neerenesse presenting them both to the same view;
the neerenesse expounding them both by the same view. It is supreme glory
with God to have equal glory of Divinity with God; And Christ had this, the
supreme part of Christ, his Divinity: which since it did from eternity enjoy
such equality, this is rather to be the right hand of God, then to be at the
right hand of God: to be at the right hand of God, being a triumph which Christ
could not receive before his hypostaticall union; a triumph, which he did not
receive till after his ascension. Leaving then only unto wonder, such wonders
of his right hand, we may only behold the pleasures (though they are wonders
too) the pleasures in that hand; and not without pleasure consider the
difference betwixt his hand and ours: since ours venters to be but the
Gypsie-prophet of our own success; but his right hand of truth and bounty,
does by a Catholic and unfeigned Palmistrie, show the blessings provided for
other men! And O how admirable are the blessings of the man Christ Jesus!
Blessings that more encompasse him then the cloud he ascended in! Blessings as
ineffable, as his generation! Blessings as immense, as his love! Blessings as
inseparable, as his Divinity! Blessings as exquisite, as his torments! O how
are those hands, those feet, that side, which understood the point of the
nail, and of the spear, and of the Jew, made now as impenetrable, as the
hearts that prepared them; made now as glorious as the patience that admitted
them! The face, which received spittle as vile almost as the mouth that sent
it, how does it now shine like the Sun in his strength, that now for the
brightness of it, the soldiers could not see how to spit upon it! The head,
which did no more desire a crown, then a crown of thorns ought to be
desired, how is it now crowned with the merit of that blood, which the thorns
did shed! with the mercy of that blood, which was ready to forgive those that
shed it! The soul, which was so intentive to its own sorrows, that it
almost forgot to animate the body, for which also it in part did sorrow; how
is it now delighted as much with the society of the souls, whom it has
delivered, as with its own righteousness, by which it delivered them! O happy
Saints, who in peace behold our Savior in his triumph of peace! A triumph
attended by the peaceful Melchizedeck: who now instead of blessing Abram, does
with Abram bless the God of Abram; and instead of presenting Bread and Wine,
the blessings of peace, presents himself a King and Priest of peace! A triumph
attended by the peaceful Solomon: from which seed of David God would not take
away his blessings for ever; nay, in his mercy he has for ever given him more
blessings, then he had women and children; and has now requited his Temple
with a Temple; which more exceeds Solomon's in wonder, then his exceeded Gods in
the leisure of the building; his being the work and study of seven years, but
Gods being the work but of a day; nay, but of the first instant of Gods first
day; a day when yet there was no Sun wherewith to measure a day; a day when
yet there was no man, for whom to measure a day! A triumph attended by the
peaceful Ezechias: who now is in a Temple safer from Sennacherib, then
Sennacherib was in his own temple from his own children; who now is at more
rest, then the Sun was in his Dial; in which though it went not forward, yet
it stood not still; and now his repreeue from death for fifteen years is
liberally improued into eternity! A triumph attended by the peaceful Josiah:
who instead of celebrating his solemn Passover, does now feast with the true
Lamb himself; and though that peaceful Josiah did not end in peace, yet by
that end he now enjoyes a peace; a peace as harmless as that Lamb, with
which he enjoyes it! A triumph now attended also by our peaceful James: who so
loved peace, that he lost his own, whiles he studied ours; who so loved
peace, that excepting the combats of each Christian with himself, he would
not have had the Church to be Militant here on Earth; making it almost
Triumphant here on Earth; who loved peace, as much as the Priest ought to do;
nay, who loved peace as much as he loved his Priest! And now he is ascended
thither, where only is to be found a peace equal to his love of peace; and
now without going to Spain, we can find a Saint James, Saint James of
Britain, Defender of the Faith and the Clergy! O happy Saints, who do in
peace attend our Savior in his triumph of peace! And O the happiness of holy
Stephen! whose eye was as full of wonder, as his soul of grace; and did so
steadfastly look up into Heaven, as if his eye had imitated the constancy of
his soul. And he beheld with that zeal of look, the son of man in his
triumph of zeal: which was so raised against Stephens persecutors, that he
stood-vp at the right hand of God; as if for his servants sake, had it been
possible, he would have ventured again among the Jews; his love making him
ready to forsake his glory, rather then his Saint! Whom yet he delivered from
their cruelty, whiles he seemed not to deliver him. He delivered him from
their cruelty by their cruelty; and by the speed of death, rescued him into
Heaven; whiles he was as constant in his prayer, as in his death. And it seems
his prayer was heard for Saint Paul: whose first zeal did not more delight in
Saint Stephens persecution, then his second zeal delighted in Saint Stephens
zeal; and now with joy both do attend upon our Savior in his triumph of
zeal! And O the happiness of divine John! who here on earth had the honor
to see our Savior in Heaven in his triumph of honor! And he saw the Elders
fall down before the Lamb, imitating the humility of the Lamb; and by the
imitation presenting unto him the remembrance of his own humility; and they
triumphed more in their duty, then in their age; and by fruitful gratitude,
gave honor to themselves, whiles they gave it to the honorable son of God!
And now Saint John is become a part of that wonder, which he wondered at:
whiles by his own ascension he increases the number and triumph of those
Elders; having put off his own body, that he might be nearer to our Saviors
body. O happy Saints, who are near the right hand of God, whiles they are
near him who is at the right hand of God! whose dwelling seat is at the right
hand of God; a seat which the malice of the Jew cannot reach unto; nay, which
the prayer of the Jew cannot reach unto! Whose judgement-seate is at the right
hand of God; nay, the judgement-seates of his Saints are at the right hand of
God: for they also with him shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Yet mark
the prerogative of our Savior: they shall with him judge the world, but only
he shall save it! And again, mark the prerogative of our Savior: by which
he is as wonderfully distinguished from them, as he is by his love united to
them. As then you have beheld the ascension of his glory, so in this ascension
now behold a jealous ascension, an incommunicable ascension of his power;
Angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him! The glory of a
Prince is in the multitude of his people: the greatness of a Prince in the
power of his people; but the greatest power of God is in himself; yet he
communicates a great power unto his angels. To know the number of whose angels,
is as much beyond our ability, as beyond our use; and it is enough glory unto
God, that we know their number to be so great, that we cannot know it. To
know the power of the angels is as easy as to know our own weakness: of
which, our bodies are able to instruct our souls. But to define the Orders of
the angels, is not an act of man's knowledge, though it has been of fancy;
but like some to build the angels nine-storie-high, were such a piece of
architecture, that Virtuoius himself would have thought it to have no more art
in it, then safety: and he would have been as much confounded with wonder,
as the building would be with its own height! Besides it would exceed the
tower and vanity of Babylon: the foundation of this angelical Tower being
higher then the top of that. Yet that of Babylon would in one respect exceed
this; since that had a stronger foundation, though not a wiser. But
peradventure these Dionysian builders laid their foundation upon a Dream, and
took their imitation from Jacobs Ladder: upon which because Jacob did behold
angels, they have by finer workmanship rea^ed a Ladder of angels; And that the
invention might seem new by the seen, as his ascent reached unto Heaven, so
these are made to reach unto God. Whose wisdom has indeed distinguished his
angels, but rather by their employment then their nature: as he has
distinguished the souls of men, not by their offense, but their endowments.
Thus some of his Angels are Seraphins: whose love is as hot as fire; whose
love is as pure as fire. Some are Cherubins: the intuitiue expedition and
extent of whose knowledge may be named and figured by a wing. Some are thrones:
who are safe from the fear of Gods judgments, whiles they are made the seats
of his judgments, the ministers from whom his judgments are sent forth. You
may descend to dominions, principalities and authorities: but this middle
Region of the angels is so full of clouds, that we can only see the clouds,
through which we cannot see. You may descend yet lower, to Powers, archangels
and angels: and yet thus near we shall be troubled with mists, that we can
scarce see our hand, wherewith to point-out the differences. Besides, the
Almighty can as easily appoint the change of their offices, as their offices;
and by the weight of his message promote an angel into an archangell; or he
can send the same angel to Balaam and to his Ass; or he cannot only change
their offices, but also mix them; making the same angel that killed the
firstborn of the Egyptian, preserve the Israelite to confess the
distinction. And because this distinction is rather the cause of
thankfulness, then the effect of curiosity, let us more consider their
strength, then their Heraldrie; yet rejoice more in their obedience then in
their strength; they being all made subject to our Savior; all, whether they
are angels of authority to declare his pleasure, or angels of power to execute
his pleasure. And it is his pleasure that as they are subject to him, so they
shall be subject for us. It was for us that he sent two angels to be a
witness and an effect of his ascension. It was an angel delivered Peter from
the prison, and kept him safer then the jailou^ could. It was an angel
delivered Paul from the wrath of the tempest, which was not so obedient to the
angel, as the angel was to Paul. And when at the last Day the trumpet shall
found, the angels shall make as much speed as the voice of the trumpet, and be
as officiously obedient as the bones of the dead: which they shall raise and
attend, at that last ascension. And then shall they wait for ever after,
rather upon the person then the message of their Prince Christ Jesus; of our
Prince Christ Jesus. Who is ascended to raise us to an ascension of Faith; by
which, it being of things not seen, we do not only honor the person in whom
we trust, but modestly oblige him; And thus the skillful mercy of our Savior
vouchsafes to make himself beholding to us, by his own work, for his own
work, for our faith in his absence; rather then to make us beholding unto him
for our delight in his presence. He ascended therefore to raise us likewise to
an ascension of Hope: which has observed his love to be so united to his power
in his assumption of our nature unto his nature: that by the great act of his
ascension, it likewise expects the assumption of our persons unto his person.
He ascended likewise to raise us to an ascension of Love: which being like
fire ought to ascend: and being purer then the fire ought to ascend above the
fire; and since the fire can ascend to Heaven, love ought to exceed it, and
ascend into Heaven. Into which holy place our high Priest is entered, not so
much to beg pardon as to give it; and by his entering into this holy place,
that he might make the certainty of our peace equal to the mystery of it, he
has proved our Priest to be equal to our God. He had before made man but
little less then the angels: but now the man Christ Jesus is above all the
angels: to whom Enoch's ascension was news, but this amazement! And as it was
their singular wonder, so let it be our singular joy. And indeed we may well
rejoice, when by ascension we shall be purged from the melancholy of our
humanity: when our faith shall be happily lost into sight: when we shall be
past hope, not by despair, but by possession: when we shall be more
transported by love, then by angels: when we shall be no longer their charge,
but their company: when God shall so delight in us, that if we could sin, we
should be proud, that he so delighted in us: when we shall so delight in God,
that if there could be sorrow in that delight, we should be sorry, that we
had not always delighted in him; and the eternity of this delight, shall be
an ascension of this delight. O happy and full Vision, when Jacob shall not
dream that he sees angels go up to Heaven, but shall go thither himself;
and now adore the angel, whom once he wrestled with: and as he then would not
part from him, till he had a blessing, so now he never shall part from him,
because he has this blessing! O happy and full vision, when Moses shall see the
face of God and live; nay, when he shall live, because he sees the face of
God! when Moses his face shall shine so bright, that now it would shine through
his veil; and yet his righteousness shall be more glorious then his
countenance! when now he shall not need to go to the top of Mount Nebo, to
see the land of promise; but on the top of this holy hill, enjoy the true land
of promise, and the God that promised it! O happy and full Vision, when Simeon
shall with more joy be taken up into Heaven, then he tooke-vp the child Jesus
into his arms; and shall find himself more increased in joy, then the child
his Savior increased in stature; when he shall see his Savior honored at
the right hand of God, who once vouchsafed to honor Simeons arms! O happy and
full Vision, when Peter shall see himself as much transfigured as Christ; when
Peter shall see Christ more then transfigured; and now shall with delight
behold our Saviors face, when before for fear he fell upon his own! O happy
and full Vision, when Paul shall so see Christ's body in Heaven, that he shall
know himself to be there in body! when John shall no more need to see the
new Jerusalem come down from Heaven, but shall goe-vp unto it! Unto which, O
thou Lamb of God, grant that by the imitatio^ of thy innoce^ce, we may ascend:
that we may ascend to that Jerusalem, by thy light, who art the light of that
Jerusalem that the sight of thy triumph may be our triumph: that our petitions
may now so ascend, that they may make way for the ascension of our souls and
bodies: that with thy Cherubins and Seraphins continually we may cry, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath; who do now with victory rest from thy
passion; And though we cannot hope, for the glory of thy right hand, vouchsafe
us the protection! Hear thou that sit at the right hand of God the Father,
and have mercy! For thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord, thou only O
Christ, with the Holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the Father!
Hear O thou that sit at the right hand of God, and have mercy! And let thy
mercy make our ascension a witness and part of the glory of thy ascension.

The end.

