A mirror of

love, which such light does give,
That all men may learn,
how to love and live.
Compiled and set forth by Miles Hogarde servant to the queen's highness.

Mense Maij. 1555.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the most high and most virtuous lady, and our most gracious sovereign,
Mary by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and
Irelande, defendour of the faith, Princess of Spaigne and Sicilie,
Archeduchesse of Austria, Duchess of Millaine, Burgundy and Brabant,
Countess of Haspurge, Flaunders and Tyrole. Your Majesty's most faithful,
loving and obedient servant Miles Hogarde, wissheth al grace, long peace,
quiet reign, from God the father, the son, and the holy Ghost.
WHen I considered, oh most noble Queen,
How God in time has wonderfully wrought,
In reducinge us home, which so long has been
Out of his true church, yet now to be brought
Into his church again, it came to my thought
What love by your grace god to us did show
When hope was almost past as al men do know.
This love (I say) thus coming to my mind,
I thought to the world somewhat to express,
But yet then thinkyng, how I am assynde
By thacceptation of your goodness,
To serve your grace, though most unworthiness,
Appears on my part, I did think, I say:
The fruits of my wit, to your grace first to pay.
Yet does my hand shake that scarce I can write
Considryng your highness most royal estate,
Since I so simply did this book indite,
Being both of wit and learning frustrate,
Wherewith such a work ought to be ornate:
But yet your highness great benignite
Showed to all men did much encourage me.
Therefore when I had this work finished,
Which is but short and compendious,
Containyng matter mete to published,
Unto all men, sith it does plain discuss,
The great love of God showed unto us,
Not in high learning, but in terms plain,
Which every simple wit may easily attain.
Also they may learn how them selves to love,
As nature does teach, and accordingly
To love their neighbor, as that love does move,
And by the way, I do show openly,
How their acts both has, and also does try,
That they this love in order have not kept,
Since obedience, they have not accept.
Now make I humble request to your highness,
If it with your gracious favor may stand,
That this simple work, may have such success,
To pass forth in prynt, that it may be skande,
Of al men to learn, to keep the true band,
Of charity, and then I win mine intent,
For to that end I it only meant.
Of my mind this is thonly pretense,
Most humbly beseching your noble highness,
To take it in worth, though intelligence,
To set forth this work to the worthiness,
Does lack on my part, yet nevertheless,
My wit is good, I would al things were well,
Thus as my wit is, my will forth I tell.
Your highness humble servant Miles Hogarde.

To the Reader.
GOod readers al, whose chance shall be,
This book to hear or read,
Where lackes in deed, fine eloquence
I wrote as wit does leede,
Yet let not the authors rudeness,
This good matter deface,
For though the author simple be,
The matter may take place.
May chance some man will think and say,
That great pity it was,
That such a treatise as this is,
Should thus so rudely pass.
I will ask them this question:
If they a stone should find,
That were of price most preciouse,
And not wrought to his kind,
Would they then cast that stone away,
And esteem it right naught?
Or would they seek all means they might
To have it purely wrought?
If they should answer unto this,
What think ye they would say?
They would not be so mad I trow,
To cast that stone away.
Even so this matter, which in deed
Is very precious,
Yet not wrought to the purpose well,
I do confess it thus.
Happily some man to me will say,
Why should I wade so far,
In matter which I can not make,
But rather does it mar.
My calling is not books to write,
Nor no faults to reprove,
But to follow my business,
As wisdom would me move.
Before (say they) when men did preach,
Which artificers were,
They were not calde thereto, say you,
Gods word will them not bear.
But now can ye suffer a man,
Which no learning has,
Against his calling as it were
To write upon our faith?
To them do I answer again,
My self for to defend,
If Gods precept did me forbid,
No books I would have pende.
But God forbids al men to preach,
The which he has not sent:
So has he not all men to write,
This is most evident.
But here my book I do commit,
To those that learned be,
If fault they find it to correct,
As therein cause they se,
And pardon here, of them I crave,
For this mine enterprise.
I only did intend thereby,
My wits to exercise.
I have but a simple talent,
My writing does express,
Yet does it serve in idle times
To exchewe idleness,
Now trusting I shall not offend,
In this my simple deed,
I will now by the help of grace,
In my purpose proceed.
FINIS.
When by course, as god has ordinated,
Phoebus had entered into Gemini,
The fields with flours were fr^shly furnished,
Co^forting man, beast and bird thereby,
Which comfort to enjoy I went only,
To walk in the fields, and as I there went,
A bird I heard singe, with notes excellent.
Which when I did hear, down I did me lay,
My dumpishe wit (as it were) to renew,
From thoughts of this world, which at this day,
Is so unstable as we see ensew,
Men for their fancies their own bale does brewe,
On which as I thought, even suddenly
This bird I spoke of, did me epsy.
I perceive ( quoth she) by thy countenance,
That toys in thy head thou have conceived,
Of the which gladly thou would make vtterau^ce,
That thy busy wit might be releued,
Which till thou have done thy brains are grieved,
But them to ease, I will set before thee,
To shorten thy study, matters two or three.
Of the which if thy wit can any thing do,
Thou nedest no more to muse on that thing.
I doubt ( quoth I) I can not reach thereto,
Unless by thy help I it to pass bring,
On a weak wit ( quoth she) that doubt does spring,
A wise man would first the ground of it hear,
Or lack of wit could make him to fear.
I have cause, quoth I, my wit for to dout,
Since I see wise men into error fall,
Which does make me loath for to go about,
To enter any matter mystical.
Thou know not, quoth she, what the matter shall
Contain which I have to thee to express,
That is truth, quoth I, that fault I confess.
Then mark, quoth she, what I shall to the say,
Thou know that I am called a Nightingale,
The which by nature does singe night and day,
To the praise of God, both on hyl and dale,
For which cause a worm does me assail,
Which would me destroy by day or by night,
If any time a sleep take me she might.
But by gods gift his malice to prevent,
When I to sing do my self prepare,
A sharp thorn to my tender breast is bent,
Because of slepinge I should then beware,
By pricking whereof I do escape her snare,
Now tell me, quoth she, how likest thou this ground?
In mine ear, quoth I, very well it does sound.
Another ground, quoth she, I will to the express,
Thou know this is the merry month of May,
In the which al lovers do them selves dress,
To attain their loves of their hearts the stay,
For which cause thou know this I dare say,
Old Philosophers for the sign has feigned,
Two lovers imbrasing both being naked.
That is a goodly ground in deed, quoth I,
What should I upon that matter invent,
It sounds nothing but to ribaldrie,
And my time to this I have not so spent.
Do thou think, quoth she, that I it so meant?
To answer right, quoth I, I can not tell,
But me think it can not be taken well.
Thy corruption, quoth she, by this thou may know:
For where by this sign is none other meant,
But as man and woman by nature does grow,
To natural love with the consequent,
So in this time mankind is most bent,
Inioyng by youth the amarous flours,
Nature thereto provoke al his powers.
Thou (I say) not considering this thing,
Do apply it only unto wantonness,
But a better mind into thy head to bring,
If thou no good thing can thereby express,
I will teach the to refourme that dullness,
And how thou may both thinsamples apply,
Unto sad matter and not wantonly.
To the first, quoth I, I could somewhat say,
To make it sound to a virtuous end,
But the last in my head can enter no way,
To apply it well, it does so much bend
Toward wantonness, that any time to spend,
In such folishnes, I judge it but vain.
Thy nature still, quoth she, thou show plain.
The which more plain to the to appear,
The second example I will so apply,
To such kind of matter that thou shall hear,
No wanton pleasure provoked thereby,
But matter both pleasant and also godly,
Though thy wi^kednes from it does the let,
Thou shall hear what I before thee will set.
I am content ( quoth I) to give an care,
Unto thy words, I pray thee say thy mind,
Mary first ( quoth she) to the does appear,
How by nature, this time, al mankind
Is given unto love by her course assinde,
Therefore I do think our time hear present,
In matter of love is best to be spent.
Then better to understand the ( quoth I)
Tell me what love is or thou do begin,
This word love ( quoth she) is taken diversely,
As hap is wisely, that thou have brought in,
For thereby the more knowledge thou shall win,
I am glad ( quoth I) I do some thing well,
It was unawares ( quoth she) that it so befell.
Love is an affection of man's heart which works to diverse affectes as man's will
does apply it.
But to the purpose, this word (love) I say,
In man's heart does work to diverse affectes,
Therefore diversely scanne it here we may,
Since men's affections has diverse respects,
Which man's nature (some time) so much inffectes,
That where to all goodness he should it apply,
From God and al virtue he turns it awrie.
Thou tellest me ( quoth I) of loves abuse,
And not what love is, as in deed I ask thee,
To turn love ( quoth she) unto the right use,
Where love is taken in the chief degree,
God is love, which never changed can be,
Whereby he made angels in their glory,
And man after their fall, their place to supply.
Now by this love man is like to angel,
And of the godhead is participate,
But when man against this love does rebel,
God and al goodness in him is frustrat,
Then of love to show the second estate,
When man his love to him self does extend,
That love in him self may not have an end.
But since that all men indifferently,
Are made of one mould and to one likeness,
Man's love for gods cause he must so apply,
As love (in God) to him self he does express,
The like love by measure, God does witness,
Man must show to man in every degree,
And this measure fro man never hid can be.
This love (I say) which from God does proceed,
Thus orderly as I have told unto thee, Charity ca^ not be taken in an evil
sense.

Since to unity this true love does led,
In our old English is called charity,
Because from other loves known it should be,
Which either are vain or indifferent,
This word the right love expresses evident.
Is there loves, quoth I, that these do not include?
None quoth she, that before God are accept,
But there be loves which do man much delude,
That by nature into man's heart is crept,
Which does make him forget natures precept,
Whereby man is worse then a beast in my mind,
For they love their like being of one kind.
I dare say, quoth I, thou do not say true,
The love that God has planted in ma^s heart by nature, since he is a reasonable
creature.
Some loves beside those do not God displease,
Old Ethnikes do write whose works we may view,
What pain many took for common welthes case,
Love to their countrei their hearts so did cease,
That what pain they suffered they did never pass,
Such love by nature in them grounded wasse.
Of this sort was the noble king Codrus,
And Mark Regulus that worthy Roman,
Certain heathen cha^pions.
And eke the stout knight called Curtius,
With the three Scipions which ever took pain,
The commonwealth stoutly for to maintain,
Hercules also for this, I could name,
Whose acts are inrowlde in the court of Fame*
These were champio^s in feats marcial,
Which for the commonwealth did venture their blood
Also learned men taught virtues moral,
Whereby the people in good order s^ode,
For kings and princes they changed no mode,
To the common wealth such love had they than,
In respect th^rof they feared no man.
Of this sort I may name witty Cato, Certain heathen philosophers.

Sage Seneca, Salon and Byas,
Plautus the prudent with worthy Plato,
Demosthenes, Salust, and Pythagoras,
Diogenes also which ever plain was,
Were al these men's virtues displeasaunt to God?
In that saying wisdom and thou art far od.
To answer to the directly, quoth she,
Thy folly by this plainly does appear,
Who ever heard that Gods pleasure can be,
In any man which no true faith does bear,
Toward our lord God with reverent fear?
Yet must thou needs grant, quoth I, I am sure,
That those men's loves were not before god vnpure.
A good shepeherde (says Christ) is well content, John. x.

His life for his sheep to venture and lose,
Which these men to do, did freely consent,
With the world they would not flatter nor gloss,
But as conscience led, Tho^^^ hethen philosophers would not flatter.
so they did depose,
They would never play the Parasites part,
For worldly welfare to bear a false heart.
I would there were none such at this day, quoth she,
But I fear me the number is not small,
Which for worldly wealth does seem to agree,
To al points of faith which are catholical,
And yet in their hearts think it not at al,
Of two b^d I ^u^ge that number the best,
Whose hearts by their acts is plainly expressed.
By my troth ( quoth I) I judge the same,
Of al men with such men I cannot away,
A dissemblyng man is worthy of shame,
But here in deed deceive the world he may,
Yet shall he not deceive God I dare say,
Nor can not ( quoth she) for God does see all,
But now again to our purpose to fall.
I thought ( quoth I) thou had forgot it clean,
Nay ( quoth she) though I made a digression,
Thy folly as I did say shall be seen,
In concluding with such a fond question,
Thou think that there is no condition,
Between the love of a true christian,
And the love proceeding from a pagan.
In deed to speak of the love natural,
The natural love in man is a gift of god indifferent to all men.
The gift of God to both is indifferent,
But I think these Pagans loves would appal
Many Christians, at this time present.
For the use of love stands in man's consent,
Who loves his neighbors, that such pains will take,
Now to shed his blood for common welthes sake.
In that point, quoth I, they keep Gods precept,
And then as I did say I may conclude,
That those men since they Gods will therein kept,
Out of the right love thou can them not exclude,
And then I say further I am not so rude,
As thou would make me, since thou do grant,
The same thing, for which thou gave me a taunt.
Thou farest, quoth she, as some do at this day,
In answering before thou do understand,
And one thing more here to the I will say:
As heretics has scripture falsely skande,
In taking a patch as came to their hand,
And leuing the rest their errors to frame,
So to defend thy folly thou do the same.
Thou must mark thorder of gods commandment, The order of gods precept in
love given to man.

Thou shall love thy lord god (says he) above al thing
That love has first place as most excellent,
Then thy neighbor as thy self according,
So love to thy self fro the first love does spring,
And then to thy neighbor in order right,
This pleases our lord wrought by any wight.
Then those that I named before, quoth I,
Loving their neighbors as they did express,
Did well please our lord thou can not deny,
As the stories plain do bear them witness. There is no charity without
faith.

Nay soft, quoth she, I meant nothing less,
For pagans wanting the light of all grace,
The true love of god with them had no place.
Than lacking that love for lack of true faith,
Their love to please god could never attain,
For as I did say, and as scripture says,
True order in love al men must keep plain, How can they call on him on who^
they do not believe, to, (...).

Or else al our works our lord does disdain,
They must first love God, as I did the show,
Which they could not do which do not god know.
I am in this ( quoth I) well satisfied,
But alas one thing I do much lament,
That we confessing Christ deified,
Do from god further in our works dissent,
Then did these Pagans we se evident,
All virtue they did not only commend,
But studied their lives in virtue to end.
The cause is ( quoth she) man's forgetfulness
The great love of god to man i^ creating heaven and earth and all creatures
for man.
Of the benefits which God for him wrought,
As first the great love that he did express,
Making heaven and earth and all things of naught,
For man's behoufe, therefore how much he ought
To give thanks to God, what tongue can declare.
Yet in respect of other these the least are.
Oh wonderful love that God showed to man,
That being in glory unspeakable,
Before al worlds were, yet would vouchsafe than
To create the heaven by power i^ effable,
With thorders of angels to be seruisable,
Honoring him as thonly lord and king,
Above his creatures for ever reigning.
This talk ( quoth I) passes my capacity,
I pray the of this let me no more hear,
I confess it does so, in deed) quoth she)
But this much may we talk with reverent fear,
Since no curiosite in it does appear,
But to thee the love of God to express,
Proceeding from him self by his own goodness.
But of such high matter to make an end,
I will come lower and unto the tell,
How mercifully his love did extend,
When angels by their pride out of heaven fell, The love of god to man i^ his
creation

He made man al his creatures to excel,
And the place of angels for to supply,
In nature higher he did him dignifie.
Was man ( quoth I) higher in his nature,
Then angels were in their creation?
In substance ( quoth she) he was not so pure,
For out of the earth God did him facion,
A gross substance thou see probation,
Where angel is a substance spiritual,
But in soul man is to angel equal.
If between them ( quoth I) be equality,
How is man higher in his nature than?
In that appeared Gods great love ( quoth she)
That he of his goodness shewde unto man,
When man from God by his own folly ran,
And following his lust was disobedient,
He lost Gods favor thereby continent.
And so became the child of damnation,
Prepared as it were unto hell fire,
Then God of his own mere inclination,
Which does not the death of sinners require, The love of god for that he sent
his son for ma^s sake to die.

Shewde so great a love yt there could be no higher,
Though man was become Gods utter enemy,
He sent his only son for man's fault to die.
And not the like death that kills al mankind,
Which is (as we say) gods visitation,
But the most shameful death that could be assinde,
By wicked tyrauntes imagination,
Which was on the cross to suffer passion,
Having his body al to torn and rent,
Not one drop of blood he spared unspent.
But to our purpose again to come nere,
To show how man was brought to high estate,
Above al angels that love did appear,
When gods son was first for man incarnate,
In the virgins womb never to separate,
By which conjunction mankind did attain,
In nature above all angels to raygne.
Yet though our nature was in Christ, quoth I,
Knit to the godhead in perfect unity,
It follows not that al mankind thereby,
Should above angels in his nature be.
Yes it does follow, I will prove, quoth she,
When the time was come as god had decreed,
That Christ should suffer, man to heaven to leed,
How man excels angels in nature.
His exceeding love to his church to show,
Because that he would the figures fulfill,
Both of Melchizedech, as thou do know,
And of the paschal lamb which the Jews did kill,
He showd his disciples the great good will,
That he had the pascal with them to eat,
Because he would place a more heavenly meat.
Which he had promised to them before,
Saying, the bread that I will give truly,
Is mine own flesh, John. vi.
and then furthermore,
Which for the life of the world I will give to die,
And he that does eat my flesh fruitfully,
I in him, and he in me truly shall dwell,
By this man's nature does angels excel.
This promise he performed still to endure,
Untyl his coming to the great judgment,
When he took bread into his hand so pure,
Speaking these words with a loving intent: Thinstitution of the sacrament of
the altar, wherein is showed the love of christ in geuynge us his flesh to
eat.

Take ye and eat, yet there he did not stent,
But said, this is my body which given for you shall be
Oh most tender love and heavenly charity.
That he showed to the oh man most unkind,
Which wilt not thy love give to him again,
But rather disputest by thy reason blind,
His love toward the as it were to stayne,
Thou would his act should no such love co^tayne,
For where he gave to the his body most divine,
Thou only take it but for bread and wine.
Yes, quoth I, they say that it does signify
His body which upon the cross was spread,
And that, they say, Christ did mean only,
I would feign learn, quoth she, where that word is red,
By John's ghospel, John. vi.
quoth I, they say they are led,
Where he says the words I speak are spiritual,
The flesh (says he) profits nothing at al,
Did not his flesh profit for thee to be borne?
Did not his flesh profit by his good living?
Did not his flesh profit for the to be torn?
Did not his flesh profit by his up rising?
Did not his flesh profit thee in theating?
How can thou now but in great error fall,
To say that Christ's flesh profits not at all?
Yet ( quoth I) Christ says so thou can not deny.
Yet could he not mean so ( quoth she) thou do here.
Then what did he mean tell me now ( quoth I)
For my gross wit can not conceive this gear.
It is meant two ways which the text does bear,
One is the flesh of man in this mystery,
Can attain nothing but by faith only.
Another is the flesh profits not at all,
Meaning his flesh as the Jews did it take,
Which was but as a man's flesh natural,
And then by no reason that man's wit can make,
No man's flesh can profit for theating sake,
But the flesh of Christ to the godhead knit,
Gives life to man that worthily eats it.
Now I know more than I did before,
This makes the matter plain enough to me.
Do not they ( quoth she) offend our lord sore,
Which will not at this day to this truth agree,
Wherein Christ shewde so great love to the?
They are wedded so to wine, that the god Bachus
They believe more in this, then they do Jesus.
But of such men now I will speak no more,
Only do I note to those that faithful be,
The great love that Christ showed to man before,
That he would suffer death for him upon a tree,
In giving man his flesh, oh heavenly charity,
That man should feed thereon in most godly wise,
And eke of his church to be the sacrifice.
Immediately after thinstitution,
Of this sacrament his love to finish,
Towching his suffreraunce in each condition, The love of Christ showed to man
in his redemption.

That he for man's love would here accomplish,
None earthly pain could his love deminishe,
But being from sin a pure innocent,
To die for thy sin man he was content,
Consider in this all the spitful mockes,
His whipping, scourging, and crowning with thorn
Being there blindfield suffered many knockes,
Bidding him al hayle king of Jews in scorn,
And think how by hi^ the hudge cross was borne*
Whereto they nailed him with most painful smart,
And with a sharp spear persed his blessed heart.
Who ever hard or read of the like love?
What could he do more then for thee to die?
Yet to love him again this will the not move.
Yes with all my heart I do love him ( quoth I)
Yea but thy deeds ( quoth she) show the contrary, John. xv.

If thou did hi^ love thou would his will obey,
Which since thou do not, thou love him not I say.
Yet for all this love no more does he crave,
But love for love as reason does require.
Prou. xxiii.
Alas sinful man what more would thou have?
It is no great thing that he does desire,
Call to him for grace to kindle the fire
Of burning charity to reign in thy heart,
Then shall thou to Christ do a lovers part.
That love, quoth I, God grant to every man,
Amen, quoth she, now here this love I must end,
To express it whole truly I never can,
None humayne wit here can it comprehend,
Therefore no more time in it I will spend,
But for this love I do will the alwayse,
To give unto our lord continual praise.
Here follows the love that man ought to have to him self.
Now (quod she) that I have to the expressed,
The love of God to man, as I can it show,
The depenesse whereof does cause me to rest,
Since it passes al human wits to know,
The grace that thereby to mankind did grow,
Therefore leuing that shortly thou shall hear,
What love a man ought to him self to bear.
That man should love him self I pray thee, quoth I,
Where has god given him that commandment?
He need not, quoth she, for naturally
To love him self every man is bent.
What man alive is there that will consent,
Unto him self to be injurious,
Which beasts will not do tame nor furious?
Truly quoth I, and if experience
Be a ready rule this to demonstrate, Thinordinate love of man to him self.

How man loves him self, then the evidence
Shows his love to be so inordinate,
That by that self love he does accumulate
Plagues of god to reign upon him always:
This love does man turn to his own decay.
By self love we se the man which is proud
That which in other he does most detest,
In him self of him self is most aloude.
In none other man the like vice does rest.
For he that with other vices is oppressed,
He loves those that in the like does delight,
Because they agree unto his appetite.
The lechour loves those that be lecherous,
The slouthful man those that most sluggishe be,
The spiteful man those that be envious,
The wrathful man those that to anger agree,
The glotton loves those that drink best we se,
The covetous man that loves avarice,
Loves those which do love his exercise,
These loves does spring of our own nature
By the world, the flesh, and the devil also,
Which daily thereto does mankind allure.
But yet to my purpose nerer to go
Gods good creatures man turns to his woe
By love unto them so inordinate
That grace by this love in him is frustrate.
What does move man unto al kind of vice,
But the love that to him self he does bear,
Whereunto his affection does him entice,
As for worldly things him self to forswear
To rob and to steal he thinks him self clear
This love to him self, does him so blind
That fault in him self he does never find.
The corrupt merchaunt using merchaundise
That only for lucre takes great pain
The love to him self does make him dispice
Al means that he should work for common welthes gain
The plowman which serves with catel and grain
For the love to him self daily we se
He does without cause make a scarsitie.
What causes landed men for to raise their rent?
What causes nigardes to hourde up in store?
What causes patrones to symony to consent?
What causes the full still to gape for more?
What causes heretics errors out to rore?
What causes the breach of matrimonye?
What causes al these but self love only?
Examples in scripture I could rehearse
How on this self love god did take vengeance.
It is hard therefore into my head to perse,
That love to man's self, as thou make vtterau^ce.
Can not but be a mere misgouernaunce:
The reasons that I to the before made
Do me hereunto utterly persuade.
I think ( quoth she) thy wit be not thine own.
Did thou mark well what I before did say?
Yea I am sure ( quoth I) it is to well known,
That self love does bring al to decay.
As of Christ him self truly learn we may:
He that loves his life shall lose it (says he)
Here he declares what self lovers be.
Thou blessed yt ( quoth she) which does al men deceive,
By taking for thy purpose half the sentence:
But the truth if thou will truly conceive
Thou must gods word use with such reverence
That thou offend not thine own conscience,
As in the same text thou did erst allege:
Thou spakest I dare say against thy knowledge.
I am sure, quoth I, the truth I did say.
Can thou of my talk disprove any thing?
Of thy talk, quoth she, yea sure that I may
As first this last text which in thou did bring,
It is not a truth in thine aledging,
For the truth of scripture is not in a part
Dividing the sentence thou do it pervert.
Math. x*
He that loves hi^ self (says Christ) more the^ me,
Is not worthy of me, this thou leuest out.
But join this together, and thou shall se
Thy folly opened, which thou ghost about
To defend, and therein art somewhat stout.
But here me now a while, and I will sone try,
That thou wast bigilde in thy fantasy.
Mary ( quoth I) I pray the talk thy fyl,
But truly and if thou do not say well,
Be thou sure that interrupt the I will.
Do not let ( quoth she) my fault me to tell
So it be a fault, or else bye and sell
Upon this, thou shall again of it hear,
As I have not I will not the forbear.
If thou call ( quoth she) to thy remembrance
Of man's love to him self when we began,
Man by nature must love hi^ self
I did tell the even at our first enteraunce,
That naturally here every man
Is given to love him self the most he can,
Or else of al creatures he were the least,
For wit should lack in him which is in a beast.
Then say I ( quoth I) as I did before,
That since self love to god is displeasaunt,
As I shewde to the and could have done more,
How should I then to this thy saying grant,
But that worthily thou might give me a taunt?
To say and unsay how can that agree?
Surely this gere soundes wondrous to me.
Lord god ( quoth she) how long will thou be blind*
Of al fond fools that I have talked withal,
More folly in one I did never find,
And the cause why that thou therein do fall,
Is thine ignorance as here prove I shall.
There is faith which is no faith, so say we,
A love and yet no love this deceaueth the.
This is that ( quoth I) which does most me^ deceive,
Now thou come in with subtle sophistry,
It is and it is not, who can this conceive,
One thing to be the same thing and yet is a lie?
I pray the be playner to me ( quoth I)
For of these dark riddles I can no skyl,
I spoke plain truth before and that I hold still.
For as for me I speak by experience.
Self love to man thou see inordinate,
No man thereof does take intelligence,
Witness I take of the meanest estate,
Which tow probations are in such rate,
That very well of them both conclude I may,
It is most true that I before did say.
For that thing which thignoraunt can discern,
And also that which experience does teach,
Tow better rules of proof no man can learn,
To knowledge of these every child can reach.
Therefore from the here to make a breach,
I need talk no more for ought thou do win,
For all thy high reasons are not worth a pin.
I think sure, quoth she, no Poet could paynt
One more aptly this world to represent.
To take witness of experience i^ time paste, is to take witness of ignorantes
in matters of faith
For never heard I yet reasons more faint
And in vain babbling so many words spent
Yet before victory of wit impudent
Thou triu^phest as though thou had thy desire,
Like him that would brag liyng in the mier.
First, where thou say I fall to sophistry
Because I say there is a faith, which truly
How faith is faith and no faith.
Is no faith, but thou must consider why:
Faith in all christian men indifferently
Touching the nature of faith certainly
Is a true faith, but in gods acceptance
It is not accepted without good conversation.
And then not being of god regarded
Better it were to have no faith at al.
For a panym shall be better rewarded
By suffering less pain in hell infernal,
Then the false christian which from god does fall:
Deper shall he be buried in hell
^. Pet. ^.
Then he that of Christ did never here tell.
Then because that faith without good living
Brings to man greater damnation
I call it no faith, but yet not meaning
But that faith it is by true nomination
As by scripture I can bring probation.
matthew 25.
The five folish virgins which came to late
Being shut out, yet did call at the gate.
Saying open to us lord we the pray.
How could they call on him who^ they did not know?
Then know him they did, by this conclude I may
Which without faith they could not, s. Paul does show
Then by this parable it does follow Roma. x.

That faith is faith still with y^ worst sins that be,
Unless with the sin of infidelity.
For contrary to faith there is no sin they taught that if a man once fell in
deadly si^ne, he loss his faith, which is against the scripture as here is
proved, and so is the opinion of only faith to iustifye. etc. James. ^.

But only the sin of infidelity,
Therefore an error such preachers did bring in
Which did affirm here man's justice to be
By only faith, excluding charity
As being any help toward man's justice,
But only faith alone to have that office.
That doctrine, quoth I, I did never like
For I know S. James does it reprehende.
This stroke beside the matter thou do strike
Therefore thereof I pray the make an end:
So will I, quoth she, I did no less intend
But now to learn if thou have a will
Thou see how faith is no faith, and yet is faith still.
It is true, quoth I, I do perceive it well
Then of love, quoth she, conceive thou like case
That as I before unto the did tell
If man do set self love in the wrong place
Against gods commandment he does sore trespass
But where yet a fancy into thy head fell
That self love could no way be taken well.
Ignorant techers they would be doctors of the law and yet understood not
what they spoke, neither whereof they affirmed i. Timo. i.
Here do thou see now what did the begile,
By taking witness of such as rudest be,
Even as the world has done here a great while,
Thignoraunt was plaste into high degree,
Perching up in pulpittes as thou do see,
Seming to thignoraunt gods word to preach,
Pretending to know that they could never reach.
Then thignoraunt hearing ignorauntly,
Thignoraunt teach with his reasons blind,
They thought straight that his learn^g was so hie
Since he such strange and new doctrine could find,
They thought him a prophet by the lord assinde,
To reduce to god both the pore and rich,
Luc. vi.
So the blind led the blind, and both fell in the diche.
And of this sort the number was not small,
Therefore do I much wonder now at the,
That thou thignoraunt for witness would call,
In a matter wherein they do nothing se.
But yet I wonder less I remember me,
Since into learned men ignorance has crept,
Which did the ignoraunte to that office accept.
And also where thou say that experience,
Does teach that self love is so inordinate,
That taken it can not be in a good sense,
Thy folly herein thou do demonstrate,
For since man in this must gods word imitate,
To love his neighbor as him self always,
Would God, man by self love should him disobay?
Thou have not yet ( quoth I) proved to me
How a man, and why him self he should love.
Forsooth that shortly thou shall here, quoth she.
First man must consider how that god above
Made him to his image: Why man should love him self and how.
this should man move
So to love him self, that with filthiness
He should not spot him self made to his likeness.
Also in man's heart this must be inrolde,
How that he being lost by Adams fall,
Was bought again neither with silver nor gold, i. Peter. i.

But with the precious blood of Christ most royal.
For this ought man to his mind to call,
How he should to Christ do great injury,
To defraude him of that he bought so dearly.
Again after his bitter passion,
In his grave dead three days his body lay,
And then man for thy justification, matthe. 28. Luc. 24.

Triumphantly he rose on the third day,
And then unto heaven for thee to make away,
When of his heavenly doctrine he had made an end,
Miraculously to heaven he did ascend. mark. xvi.

Then call to mind how god has made thee
A membre here of his body mystical* i. Cor. 10.

Oh what fear and shame unto the should be,
When Christ in his glory shall come to judge all,
If thou by sin here from his mercy fall? math. xxv.

His wounds thou shall see then freshly bleding,
If thou be in sin to thy condemning.
For then shall the book of thy conscience
Be opened before thy face so plain,
Thou shall need then none other evidence,
But wish that thou mihgtest presently be slain,
Which can not be but in eternal pain.
Thou shall ever die and never be dead,
Because thou did fall from Jesus Christ thy head.
All this considered that I have said here,
How much art thou bound to have a respect,
Such a love toward thine own soul to bear,
That with filthy sin thou do it not infect?
Unless at the judgment God do it reject,
With these terrible words which he shall say:
Matthe. 25.
Go thou cursed avoid fro me away.
But if thou follow the wise man's counsel,
That is on thine own soul to have mercy,
Eccle* 30.
If thy flesh against the spirit does rebel,
Do not thy love unto thy flesh apply,
But since that thy soul shall never die,
Love so thy fleash that thou may be sure,
Soul and flesh together in heaven may endure.
Math. 25.
Oh what joyful voice to the shall it be,
When Christ shall say at the judgment general,
Al ye my blessed children come to me,
And inherit ye the joys eternal,
Prepared for you before the worlds al?
To this end must man love him self I say:
That he may with Christ reign in joy always.
For to that end God did man only create,
And in good works here his life for to spend, ^. Timo. 2. He that loves
iniquity hates his soul. Psalm. xi.

Which if he do not his soul he does hate:
And that very nature does reprehende.
Therefore to my counsel do thou attend*
Love so thy self thy love be not in vain,
So shall thy love truly turn to the again.
Love lovingly as love does the bind.
Love God lovingly as the lord of al.
Love lovingly thy self as he has assinde.
Love lovingly thy soul as the principal.
Love so thy flesh it make not thy soul thrall
Unto deadly sin by thy wilfulness.
Love lovingly the life which is endless.
By love thou shall gods commandment fulfill, Roma. xiii.

By love our lord in thy heart shall raygne. i. John. iiii.

By love al wicked thoughts thou shall kyl. i. Cor. xiii.

By love thou shall avoid thinfernal pain. Prouer. x.

By love for gods servant thou shall be known plain
By love that orderly from god does proceed, i. Pet. 4.

So love thy self as that love does led. John. xiii.

In love to thy self keep this order true,
Then in love to thy self thou shall not err.
In love to thy self do thy fleash subdue,
Then love to thy self thou do well prefer,
And do love thy self in a right order.
And where as self love is not on this rate,
Man loves not him self, but does him self hate.
Now I se ( quoth I) how I was begilde,
Self love may please our lord very well,
Then since that ( quoth she) is from the exilde,
I need no more thereof to the to tell.
And god grant that no man do this love repel.
Amen ( quoth I) and grant me that I may
Embrace this love to mine ending day.
Here follows the love that man ought to have to man,
THus have thou heard now briefly ( quoth she)
Of the love of God which he showed to man,
And also of the love which in man should be
Toward his own self as nature does scan.
Now remains to show shortly as I can,
Of the love that man unto man does owe,
As nature does will, naturally to grow.
First for an entrance I will begin,
Gene. ii.
How god did work in man's creation,
In making him pure and clean without sin,
Having in him none evil cogitation,
Gene. iii.
Till the devil by his subtle temptation,
Caused man against our lord to offend,
Whereby god his justice to man did extend.
Then was man driven out of paradise,
The world for to increase and multiply,
Where God after by natures exercise, Gene. iiii.

Gave him children which indifferently
Were like to him self proporcionally,
Whereby I note that god would by this thing,
That man to his like should ever be loving.
That rule of nature did sone end ( quoth I)
For as the book of Genesis does tell, Gene. iiii.

Though Adam had children like him self truly
In proporcion, yet from love one fell,
I mean Caine, which slew his brother Abel.
And what envy wrought in other beside, Ibidem.

In the same book may easily be tried.
Therefore (I say) though God did ordain,
That man should bring forth by generation
Man like to him self, because love should raygne
Between mankind without mutation,
Since breach of this love, we se probation,
Was between brethren in the beginning,
Your rule fails, and therefore fall must your building.
This has ( quoth she) some apperaunce in deed,
As though this foundation were not sure.
But yet in Genesis if thou do read,
Though Cayne wickedly against nature
Slew his brother, whereby he did procure
The curse of God to him and his progeny,
Al Adams children were not cursed thereby.
Gene. 4. and.5.
For Adam had children which virtuous were,
On whose line Christ did naturally descend.
Therefore al those that any malice bear
Toward their neighbors, do with Cayn affe^de,
And of his line I take them to depend.
But those which are knit in one by charity,
Of the line of Christ I take al such to be,
Thou know ( quoth I) we are but gentiles borne.
That is true ( quoth she) mary then ( quoth I)
Out of Gods favor al us thou have worn,
For Gentiles did live in Idolatry,
And Gods people they hated utterly:
Belike then al we descended from Cayne,
I like not that sequel by god I tell the plain,
Thou harpest so ( quoth she) on ignorance stringes,
That in wisdoms melody thou felest no taste:
Yet thou would appear to know many things,
As many have done, which learning defaste:
Yet for high preachers in pulpittes were plaste.
But thine ignorance in a word or twain,
I intend here to set before the plain.
Roma, ix. Ozee. ii.
The Jews thou know were gods only elect,
And he their god by promise to them made,
Which for their deserts he after reiecte.
Roma. xi.
And Paul that to prove profoundly does wade,
Where as he does the Romans persuade,
Not to be proud, lest from God they fall,
Since they were planted branches unnatural.
And Christ is called the head corner stone,
Which Jews and Gentiles together did knit, Psalm. 118. math. xxi.

In building his church he made them both one,
Without any respect to them had in it:
He made them his children, Romans 2. and 3.
that is to wit,
By adoption, though of Abraham's sede,
After the flesh they were not in deed.
But by faith in Christ God indifferently Roma. ix. i. Cor. x. i. Tes. iiij.
James. 2. Roma. viii. Hebre. xiii.

Is father to al which do him profess,
Then are ye al brethren: by this conclude I,
That love each to other ye ought to express
Without respect of persons, since Gods goodness,
As his own children does accept you all,
Fro the band of love ye ought not to fall.
In this ( quoth I) thou have said very well.
Forth in thy purpose I pray the proceed.
Mary before ( quoth she) as I did the tell,
Since no respect of persons is with god in deed,
But that by faith in Christ al men he does led
Into such unity of brotherhode,
That before him is none acception of blood.
Yet kings and princes ( quoth I) I have heard say,
Shall Be in much higher reputation
Before our lord God at the latter day,
Then those which had no such gubernation. Luc. xix. matthew. 25*

That saying ( quoth she) is meant on this facion:
To those that most is given, most will god requier.
Who would then ( quoth I) goueraunce desire?
Yes ( quoth she) that does with virtue well agree.
For those that God does to authority call,
So godly in that their living may be,
That higher glory in heaven have they shall.
But and if that from godliness they fall,
Deper damnation shall they have in hell,
Then shall the beggar that in like offense fell.
But now shortly to touch the love that a king
Ought to his subjects ever to have,
Chiefly he must before each other thing,
Se that gods honor he do not deprave,
For thereby him self and his he shall save.
Contrary where God is not honored right,
Thonour of that king shall fail in Gods sight.
The love of a prince ought such love to be
Toward his subjects, that above al thing,
None evil example in him they should se,
Lest to like offense he do his people bring.
Therefore as Tully does say in writing,
A ruler offends more in gods presence,
By evil example, then by his offense.
Also the wise man Solomon does say,
The state of a king in his people does stand,
Whereby he does will that a king always,
Must them maintain, for defense of his land,
Which if common wealth be not truly skande,
His subjects decay, then what does ensue,
Right ^on^ his enemies may him subdue.
Commonwealth has been ( quoth I) skand in deed,
But I se common wealth little amend.
I pray the if corn be ouergrowen with wede
What would it help that many words to spend?
In talking thereof if no man extend
His helping hand the same wedes out to root,
The talking thereof thou see would little boot.
Truth ( quoth she) I know well thine intent,
But I trust that god will so work by his grace,
That if the people would hold them content,
And obediently gods law embrace,
Such a common wealth god in this realm will place,
That the king and queen in studies will not cease,
Tholde yeomanry of England again to increase.
That is the thing ( quoth I) that al men do crave, The prosperity of the commons
is the kings honor, but the decay of the people is the conf^^^on of the
prince.

For in them the wealth of the realm does rest,
Sense covetousness did them deprave,
As we have seen here over much expressed.
What wealth we had to speak in ernest.
We have been so long wrapped in misery,
That to discern wealth we can not scarsely.
Lo man behold thine own madness ( quoth she) Prouer. 1^*

In what misery thou know thou have been,
Yet when god sent a noble queen to thee,
To rid the out of that misery clean,
Shortly such madness in the was seen,
Thou neither regardest thy bodily wealth,
Nor yet before God thine own soul health.
Which hereafter in place convenient,
Manifestly to the I will declare.
With that ( quoth I) I am well content,
But me think thou have left this matter bare.
Thou tellest not what would rid me out of care,
Touching the lack of commonwealth thus gone.
No for wise men ( quoth she) I let that alone.
But touching the love shewde here by your queen
The love of god showed to us by our noble queen in forgeui^g us that we might
have lawfully taken, which is a rare thing.
Has been expressed to you in such sort,
That the like in England has not been seen,
As to your cronicles if you resort,
Tell me if they any such love report,
That a king has forgiven that was his own right.
As her grace has done which now ye set light.
No more of that ( quoth I) wherefore ( quoth she)
Trowest thou, quoth I, that I will report this?
Then for a flatterer taken I should be,
Which is a vice that I hate most ywis,
Therefore in vain by the that spoken is,
If thou will not, quoth she, another shall,
I pass not, quoth I, so I meddle not withal.
If thou do not, quoth she, it will be confessed,
Of al such as be loving subjects true,
For by reporting truth I have not transgrest,
Since I speak it thunkindnesse to subdue
Of al those which rayseth false rumors new,
Using vain words not mete to be spoken,
Whereby they show al benefits forgotten.
But yet the chief love by your queen declarde,
To you her subjects as ye know it al, The love of our queue i^ restoring us
to the church again.

When you were quite out of Christ's church debarde,
By your wicked errors most scismatical,
God which your just queen to the crown did call,
By her mean to the church does you restore,
Yet scarsly ye do give god thanks therefore.
This love of your queen example may be,
What love al kings to their subjects should show.
Thou flatterest so, quoth I, that believe me,
If I in writing should this abroad blow,
Such a fame thereof toward me would grow,
That I should have a great cause to be proud,
Therefore by me it shall not be auoude.
If not, quoth she, yet thou can not deny,
But that it is most true that I here do say.
Truly so I do believe it ( quoth I)
Yet in no wise report it I may.
But unto god here I hartly I pray,
That our king and queen in love long may reign,
And grant noble fruit to e^crease between the^ twain
Amen, quoth she, if it please gods goodness,
His will be done, but now this love to end,
I will no more thereof to the express,
But forth will proceed as I did intend,
Which shall be now a little time to spend,
To show the love which thou do owe always,
Unto the king whom thou art bound to obey.
First for as much as thou did chose a king
On earth here to be thy governor,
God did bind the then, that above al thing,
Though he did use most tyrannical power,
Thou should him obey at every honor:
And in no wise against him to rebel,
Though he were a membre of the devil of hell.
Yea ( quoth I) what if he would compel me
Against gods word my faith to forsake,
Am I bound then to his law to agree?
Nay ( quoth she) but yet this way thou must take,
Thou may with the sword no resistance make,
^. Peter. iiii.
But rather suffer paynful punishment,
Then to any rebellion to consent.
But out of the way that block to remove,
The church is not now in her infancy,
She is.xv. hundredth year old and above.
Therefore there is no doubt but that certainly,
Al kings under her knows Christ truly,
Catholic kings make no martyrs by prosecutio^
Therefore there is now no persecution,
Nor of martyrs blood none effusion.
Therefore to my purpose to come again,
If god would thou should obey a pagane,
Of forse this sequel must follow plain,
Much more thou must obey a christian man,
For certain causes which show the I can,
As first because it is gods ordinance,
That over the he should have governance.
Also from thy foes he is thy defense,
And by him thou do live in quietness,
To whom thou art bound by charge of conscience, Roma. xiii. i. Reg. 8. and.9.

Tribute to pay and with all humbleness,
Thine obedience to him to express,
What so ever he commands the to do,
Without grutching thou art bound thereunto.
Again since he is defendour of right,
And also a dew refourmer of vice,
Maintayning the good by his princely might,
Calling back the evil from their evil execitie,
Are not these reasons to such as be wise,
Enough to persuade them unto obedience,
And their king to love in their conscience?
Me think ( quoth I) they are sufficient,
Then what unkindness is in those ( quoth she)
Which directly against gods commandment,
Obedient to their prince will not be,
But murmours and grudges, that (believe me)
I think the like in no realm has been,
Both god and their prince they have forgot clean.
Yet be they those that gods word profess,
And glory in knowledge with a pretense,
As though they would not the lords word tra^sgresse
And yet none so far of from obedience,
Whereby it is an open evidence,
That they be those same of whom Christ does say,
Shall call him lord, math. vii.
lord, at the latter day.
For in words only stands their religion,
They are cursed children which have forsaken the right way.
As by their demeynour it does appear.
Yet if their words made no division,
The world their bablyng much better might bear,
But most sclaundrously they prate without fear,
Against those which are in authority:
^. Peter. 2.
But S. Peter shows that such there would be.
If their religion be in only words, quoth I,
And yet as thou say their words be stark naught
Their deeds be as evil before thou do try,
Then both words and deeds in them to sought
Make an equality, surely they have cought
A goodly religion, but as Christ does tell,
Matthe. 12.
The tree and the fruit does agree very well.
I pray god, quoth she, to grant them grace all,
And of wicked talk their tongues for to stay.
But truly if they to their minds would call,
Eccle. x.
How Solomon warnes them where he does say,
Beware thou talk none evil night nor day
Against the king, for the birds of the air
Will it unto him open and declare.
Also scripture does say furthermore,
1. Reg. 15.
Much better before God is obedience,
Then is sacrifice: I conclude therefore,
That though such men should do their diligence,
To please our lord with a devout pretense,
Yet in their goo^ works god does not delight,
Because obedience they do banish quite.
Then are they, quoth I, in a perilous case.
They are so, quoth she, thou may perceive well,
When man wilfully does cast of gods grace,
In this life he does even begin his hell.
Alas with what confidence do they dwell,
Under christian princes as ye do here,
And yet a true heart to them do not bear?
Mary, quoth I, the number is not small,
Of those which daily out of the realm do run,
Because into that fault they will not fall,
Their native country for that cause they shonne,
But bide they there, quoth she, when they have done?
Nay, quoth I, from hence they pass and repasse,
To show their brethren if it be as it was.
Then belike, quoth she, they look for a change.
Do they, quoth I, yea that thou may be sure,
When their tongues begin at rouers to raunge,
They say this world will not long endure.
They think your religion, quoth she, as vnpure,
As theirs which so little time did stand,
That never before was in this land.
But this from the beginning has been.
Ever steadfast standing at a stay,
Where al other sects as it has been seen,
Did never stand but sone did decay.
Therefore maruayle at al those ye may,
Which rather will choose uncertain novelties,
Then constant truth wherein salvation lies.
Some thinks, quoth I, al are not of the best,
Which are admitted in the court to wait.
Has it not been ( quoth she) partly expressed,
By some which god did reuele but of late,
Some being low, and some of high estate,
Which were not found true in word and deed,
But god I trust shortly will them out wede.
It is my hope to, but to the ( quoth I)
Me think thou do not keep an order right,
Thine intent was to show generally
The love that a subject to his prince should plight
Yet particulerly it seems to my sight,
Thou appliest it only to us in this land,
And that with thy purpose does not well stand.
Yes, quoth she, if thou to thy mind do call,
I told the how al kings their subjects should love,
Then of the love of subjects in general,
To their kings again as scripture does move,
Then thunkindnesse of you I did disprove,
To whom god has such loving princes sent,
And yet ye will not be obedient.
Now I remember me, quoth I, thou say true,
I pray thee proceed as thou do intend,
With a good will, quoth she, Now shall ensue
The love of a pastor to his flock.
The love that a pastor ought to extend,
Toward his flock as in scripture is pende,
Trusting none will be therewith offended,
But such whose liuinges may be amended.
First for an entrance no further I will seek,
Christ does tell the^ plain what men they should be: matthe. xi.

Follow me (says he) for I am low and meke:
Then no kind of pride in them ye should see,
But to be examples of humility.
Therefore Christ calls the^ of the world the light, matthe. v.

No evil example should they show in sight.
Also in scripture this is plain found,
Such a love in all pastors ought to be,
Since to preach and teach they are not only bound, 2. Timo, ^^

Of love they must keep hospitality,
Releuing the pore in their necessity.
Therefore gods law they do not transgress,
Lands and goods to that end here to possess.
Love so should led them that they should be loath,
That any by their lives should take offense
Therefore in their living and their teaching both
They ought always to do their diligence,
Their flocks to edify or else in conscience, i. Peter. ^. Acts. xx.

Discharged are they not before our lord,
Of the plain scripture I take record.
Woe be unto me, says holy S. Paul, i. Cor. ix. Iere. xxii^. Ye have ea^te^ of
the fac and clothed you with the wolle, but the flock ye have not fed. etc

If I do not truly preach the ghospel,
For the lack whereof this woe sore did fall,
Chiefly on this realm as al you can tell,
Driven they were out both of church and cell,
Plagued were al priests of every sort,
The which experience can truly report.
Al was for lack that they had not that love,
John. xxi.
Which Christ in the ghospel does plain express:
John. x.
A good shepeherd from his sheep will not move,
When the wolf approaches them to repress,
But him to withstand he does him stoutly dress,
He does not sluggishly lay him to sleep,
And suffer the wolf to devour his sheep.
There has none in England done so ( quoth I)
Truly I would there had been none such ( quoth she)
Although some did offer them selves to die,
Yet a great number did cowardly agree,
Their sheep before them devoured to be,
Directly against their own conscience,
As now ye do see by experience.
Alas how can they be merry at heart,
Ezech. iii.
Since god at their hands will requier the blood
Of al those which fro the faith did depart
By peruers preachers whom they not withstoode,
But suffered the^ of those ravening wolves wood,
To be devoured by errors pestilent*
Well ( quoth I) now that fault they do repent.
God grant their repentance to be ( quoth she)
Better then your late wedded priests do appear
To forsake their wives though they did agree,
The repentance of some of our weddid preistes.
Because they would be received as they were,
They are so penitent that without fear
Nightly to their wives some of them resort,
After paynful penance the^ selves to comfort.
And yet beside this many men do say,
That to the commonwealth they are utter foes,
For in corners where they know speak they may,
They sow much sedition thus the saying goes,
And no man so much as do only those,
That were wedded priests, yea and they say plain,
They hope shortly to enjoy their wives again.
This is ( quoth I) beside thy purpose clean,
For the love to their flocks this hurts nothing,
The most of al priests has not preachers been,
For all men has not the gift of preaching.
Yet should they ( quoth she) preach by their living,
For by their example if they live right,
They profit much their flock which thereof has sight.
I pray god grant al which has been constant
In this troublous time, that they not neglect
Their duties as the wicked make their vaunt.
They say to promotions they be so affecte,
To preach or teach now they have no respect, would god that I did lie in this
saying

But gape still to catch, which when they have cought
They be as do^me dogs which can speak right naught.
I trust in God ( quoth I) they will that amend.
If not ( quoth she) to be feared much it is,
That as scripture says worse will be the end, Matthew. 27.

Then was the beginning as it will not mis,
If more diligent they be not after this,
And call to their minds what Christ says in deed:
If thou do love me my sheep thou must feed. John. xxi.

I have not sent these prophets says our lord: and yet they ran I have not
spoken to the^ and yet they preached. etc. Iere. xxiii
O lord ( quoth I) how diligent were they,
Which did preach and teach erroniously?
They would lay on lode, yea every day,
To get the people to them to apply,
And if their brethren in prison do lie,
They will give so largely to them evermore,
That they come out richer then they were before.
And beside that if they speak high treason,
Both against god and also their king,
Being attaint therefore at any season,
They are one to another so loving,
That they will swear they heard no such thing,
Though five hundredth knows it is a lie,
They will ieoparde their souls for his body.
Luce. 16.
Does not the gospel ( quoth she) tell the right,
That the children of this world in their kind,
Are wiser then are the children of light?
And that very true in them thou may find.
But I trust that those whom god has assinde.
To be the light of the world will so love and live,
That their love a true light to the world shall give.
Which love I pray God grant unto them all,
The love of the flock to the pastor.
Amen, quoth I. Now shall thou hear, quoth she,
What love the flock must have in general,
Toward their pastors of every degree,
Since god has set them you to ouerse.
i. Timo. 5.
They are worthy double honor says S. Paul,
But those that do preach says he in special.
Now since they must have honor for thoffice sake,
If they do offend by their weak frayltie,
None outcrie on them ye ought for to make,
But seek to refourme them by charity.
Rejoice not at their fall for then offend ye,
As did Noes son which saw his father bare, Gene. ix.

And had his curse therefore scripture does declare.
Constantine the great on a time did say,
If he saw a priest with a woman lie, The charity of Constantine the great.

He would rather his cloak upon them lay
To cover them both, then he would openly
Have that act known, meaning thereby,
That though the priest were lewd without shame,
Thoffice of priesthode he would not defame.
Yea, quoth I, Constantine is dead long ago,
And has carried with him his charity,
Where shall we find him now that will do so,
But rather will do the clean contrary,
Defame those priests that do live honestly?
If to their errors he will not consent,
A whore master they call him continent.
That is of heretics, quoth she, an old practice,
So did Tharrians by Athanasius, The practice of the Arria^s against Athanasius
when learning would not serve.

When by no learning as the story trise,
They could him convince, then did they thus,
Accused him to be a man vicious,
They said he ravished a woman against her will,
And also that he his servant did kyl.
This did theretikes feign most unjustly,
Against that constant and catholic man.
So those of our time show evidently,
That as Tharrians did belie him than,
Our sacrame^taries ca^ lie as the Arrians did.
Of good men this day lie as fast they can.
Therefore no marvel though thonour decay,
Which your priests ought to have at this day.
Also as it is a part of honor,
For subjects to pay tribute to their king,
So it is to priests which on our soul have power
To pay to them tithes which is their living,
malach. iii. Leui. xviii. i. Corin. ix.
And that to be paid without murmuring,
As ye do therein your king sore offend,
Offense for both to God does like extend.
Also Solomon does give this precept,
Eccle. 38.
Honor thou the Physician says he,
Ought not this precept more to be kept,
To those that of your souls the Physicians be?
Therefore to end this love here, I do will the,
If thou will not resist gods ordinance,
Love those that of thy soul has governance.
Of the love that each man owes to other generallye. Eccle. xiii. James. ^.
Leui. xix. i. Cor. xiii.
Now to knit up with a word or twain,
Of the love that one man to another owes:
It must be such a love no man may disdain,
Him that is his like, as the scripture shows,
Be he rich or pore, charity thus grows,
She has no respect of persons at al,
Nor fro patience she does never fall.
By the band of charity al men are knit
To make truly one body mystical. Ezech. iiii. Roma. xii.

No deformity ought to be in it,
Christ being head ought to rule the body al,
The hand to hurt the foot is unnatural,
Or the foot thoffice of the hand to take, i. Cor. xii.

A deformity in the body does make.
But when each membre duly does attend,
Unto his office as S. Paul does say,
The body shall increase and in wealth amend,
If one membre bring not another to decay,
Which in this realm it has done many a day,
Because charity with them has no place, i. John. iii

From their head Christ thy can receive no grace.
The middle part of this body mystical,
I take to be noble men of each degree,
As lords, knights, and squiers being principal,
Under the head which environed be,
With arms, hands, legs, and fete as thou do se,
The head and middle parts to serve and obey,
In order as God has appointed always.
By arms, hands, legs, and fete, I understand, Hereby is the order of
charity broken, which S. Paul reproves. Roma. xii. i. Corin. xii, Ephe.
iiii.

All the common sort each in his exercise,
Some on the water, and some on the land,
For the bodies wealth as their callinges lies,
The noble man should not use merchaundise,
The lord nor knight no fermer should be,
In the body that is a deformity.
The merchau^t ought not wode and coals to sell,
Neither to take fermes into his hands,
But live by merchandise as his calling fell,
So al landed men should live on their lands.
For sense they fell to this, commonwealth stands
In an evil case, and the cause is why,
Each man his own calling does not apply.
How chances it ( quoth I) that thou do now,
Show causes of the common welthes decay,
Which before to me thou would not auow?
To point means to mende it ( quoth she) I did say,
I left to wise men, but here by the way,
Because where love is common wealth does raygne,
Which since it is decayed love is gone plain.
I pray God ( quoth I) mende al things amiss,
And that each man may love other lovingly,
In deed ( quoth she) so gods commandment is,
Ephe. iiii. i. John. iii.i
For to Christ your head ye are knit thereby,
And by the lack thereof as I before did try,
Ye are divided from Christ, therefore I say,
Labor for love that dwell in Christ ye may.
John. xiiii. i. Cor. xiii.
Then love by love man shall of God obtain,
For love by love does knit al men in one.
Then love by love auoydeth all disdain,
Roma. xii. i. Timo, i.
And love by love in love is not alone.
For love by love bri^geth love where love was none,
So love by love fulfylleth gods precept.
Then love lovingly of all men must be kept.
Now as thou have hard before, think on gods great love,
First for that he made the to his own likeness,
Of his own good will, nothing did him move, A short recital of the three
loves before entreated,

But only his love which he did express,
After such a sort thy self can witness,
Otherwise thou know he might have made the
Give him praise therefore as most mete shall be.
Yet notwithstanding this thy creation,
It had been a profit to the very small,
For thou wast made the child of damnacion,
By the sin of Adam when he did fall.
But God spared not his son natural,
To dye for sin, as I prove before,
Therefore give thanks to him for evermore.
Then in love to thy self have ever a respect,
Remembryng what a shame for the shall be,
Being made like to God, that image to infecte,
And think how with his blood he did redeem the:
Then in love to thy self let it so agree,
In an order to God, and him not forget,
Then love to thy self ryghtly thou do set.
Then last of all as I have declarde,
When love to thy self thou have placed right,
To thy neighbor by that rule thou shall awarde,
True love louyngly, pleasant in Gods sight,
So shall thou show thy self the child of light,
Having that love which accords to Gods will,
Wherein and whereby thou shall Gods law fulfill.
Now quoth she, I have fulfylde my purpose,
Taking occasion as thou did hear,
Of Gemini the sign, which does man dispose.
To natural love, and that thou could not bear,
Thou thoughtest such fylthynesse in it to appear,
That no good matter made thereon could be:
But now thou see thy folly as I told the.
Truth it is quoth I, now I see it well:
Then write it quoth she, if thou wylt take pain,
I am content quoth I, though I my folly tell,
Sith that it may turn to my neighbors gain:
Then farewell quoth she till we mete again.
With that she took her flight, I saw her no more:
Then I went and wrote all as ye heard before.
Finis.
Imprinted at London by Robert Caly within the precinct of the late dissolved
house of the gray Freers, now converted to an Hospital called Christ's
hospital.


