Upon the Copper-piece.
MAn formed (in Mind, Word, Spirit) by the Trinity
(Bears eke the Image of that glorious Three
Jn's Understanding, Will, and Memory.)
In The strickt examine of the World can find
Nothing that is not Vain, to show his Mind
For some more excellent Object was designed.
Therefore his Soul, (whose Hieroglyphick is
The Phoenix,) knowing that she could not rise
Renewed from such course ashes, nimbly flies
And busily pursues the Hierarchy
But it is not Angels that can satisfy
The ambitious Bird. Some higher flight she will try
And in the Sun, a representative
Of the Great Essence that all light does give
She finds a flame that only makes her Live.
THE ARRAIGNMEN^ of the whole CREATVR^ At the Barr^ RELIGION REASON^ EXPERIE^


THE ARRAIGNEMENT OF THE WHOLE CREATVRE, At the Bar of RELIGION, REASON, and
EXPERIENCE.

Occasioned upon an Indictment preferred by the Soul of Man against the
Prodigals variety and Vain Prodigality.

EXPLAINED, Applied, and TRIED in the History and Mystery of that Parable.

From whence is drawn this DOOM Orthodoxall, and IVDGEMENT Divine.

That no Earthly Vanity can satisfy Man's heavenly Soul.

And by reason of the variety of Instances and Demonstrations, it may serve in
some sort as a COMMONPLACE, for almost all manner of Readings.

LONDON. Printed by B. ALSOP and THO: FAUCET, 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE WHITMOVR, Lord MAYOR: And to the rest of that
Honorable FRATERNITY and SOCIETY; the Aldermen, Recorder, and Sheriffs, of the
famous City of London: Health in the Lord. (*)
My Lord and Gentlemen:
WHen I considered, that All of you are Potentiall Lords, and Actual
Magistrates; and not only so, in your severals, but a Society of such: So many
Members of an Honorable Head (The Lord Major) and so many Heads of the
several Members of this City, the Metropolis of the most renowned Kingdom in
Europe. Every particular of which considerations, bearing with it a weight of
Honor in the balance of my Judgment, have moved me to intayle upon you all,
the Title of Right Honorable; which being the highest and lowest of my ambition
in the Dedication of this Treatise, I have made choice of your Honors to tender
the Patronage unto. Wherein it cannot be imagined, I should have any End of
gratifying some favors received, seeing I never had occasion to be acquainted
with any of you, in all my life hitherto.

Neither may it be safe to acknowledge any such weakness in the Work, as
that it could not walk without such pillars of supportment (a common
pretense;) For then I should be grosely guilty of dissimulation or ignorance,
two such great infirmities, two such soul deformities as I cannot easily
determine whether more to abhor.

Neither can I conceit, That your Honors can want any requisite means for
instruction and direction in the ways of Godline^ (...) in Pulpit or Pr^s^^^
for (...) were a mistake as manifest (...).

But my Ends (...) more General, and (of ^erre not much) more Gen^ also (...)
only respecting Your own, but the Common-good.

And for the first. If J spoke with the tongue of Men and Angels, I could never
enough set forth the luster and beauty of that Goodness, which concurres with
Greatness; nor the misery of that Greatness that goes unconsorted with Goodness:
The former is instrophiated with the Title of Gods upon Earth; The latter lies
subject to the tyranny of Devils in hell. Which deliberation (Right Hon:) when
I entered upon I was abundantly inflamed with desire, that You all might be as
gracious as you are Great; And that your virtue and goodness might march in
aequipage with your State and Authority, whereby your Future glory may
transcend your present Honor as far as the Sun does the Earths Center. In
which happy possibility although I am ascertained; That some of you are in a
high manner, and all of You in some sort seated and stated; notwithstanding
could not my zeal and ambition, but desire and endeavor to have a finger in
the affairs of this high importance; Luke 24.6.
And (according to the Angels course in the case of our Saviors resurrection)
to be your Remembrancer in these things, wherein (no question) you have former
acquaintance.

Again, how well it sorts with Persons of great substance, that they be put in
mind of the emptiness and vanity that is in all Earthly things, least their
hearts should be stolen away therewith. For Satan is malicious, Sin is
subtle, our Corruptions are strong, and we (since the Great fall) are full of
frailty and weakness. To which purpose, this subject serves well; not only,
to discover the vnsatisfying Husks of Earthly Vanities; but also, to show us
that Bread and Water of Life, that immortal Inheritance of the Saints: The
only satisfaction to the soul of Man. A Subject no doubt as necessary for
the Times, as the Times are subject to Necessity.

2. Concerning the Common-good. If this mean Present may be entertained by
such Honorable Persons, the benefit will flow further than to your own
particulars.

For as it is in Vices, that they are more or less accounted of, as is the
quality of him that commits them; Omne animi vitium, c. Iuuenal.
Even so it fares with Graces and Virtues, according to the Poet: Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur Orbis.

The eyes of the World are wholly bent, either for Love, fear, or flattery,
upon the placets, and practices of those Great Persons, where it has
dependence or relation. Each being led more by Examples than Precepts.

Which whether it be done by an inward Principle of GODS own stamping in man's
heart (as in all other Creatures in their kind) inclining to that perfection
which either Authority of Person, meliority of Judgment, or pulchritude of
Appearance presents to the apprehension: Or it come by an Influence from the
actions, or persons of Superiors, mooving the mind of the admirer or
intentionate observer; It is rather fit for the Mimeticks to dispute, then for
me to determine. Certainly our Sensuality is much moved with sensible
Objects.

And sure I am, that your Honors by your godly conversation, and countenancing
of good Actions and intentions, shall not only shine in your several
Spheres, like Stars in the firmament, Firma mente stare est firmamenti
astero splendid^or.
but also Edify your souls in your most holy faith, benefit the Church, and
people of God, 1 Timothy 4.8.
bring much Honor to his great name, And make your selves capable of all the
promises both of this Life and of that which is to come. Consider what J say, 2 Timothy 2.7.
and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

One word of the Work wherein I am not ignorant of diverse Tautologies, which
notwithstanding I have admitted, some for their goodness, bonum quo communius
eo melius; Others for the fitness when they fall, considering withal how
requisite such repetitions sometimes are to beget a conviction in Judgment; an
impression in memory, the Master-peeces of true Knowledge and Wisdom.

If the Simple find fault with the Method, or the Cynicke with the Style, we
seek neither of their satisfaction. Jf any be Contentious, 1 Cor. 11.16.
we have no such custom, nor the Church of GOD.

The more Judicious are more Ingenuous, and by consequence more Courteous also:
Together with whom, so your Honors accept it, who else like not may look off,
if they please. I will say no more for it, than the Parents said on their
Sons behalf whom our SAVIOVR cured, Ioh. 9.21.
It is of age to answer for it self.

Lastly, the concealment of the Authors name carries this benefit therewith;
That neither can the Faults of the one, reflect upon the other, while he goes
unknown. Praestat agere dictum, quam actum dicere. Aug.
Neither can he be counted guilty of, or subject to be tempted, with that
great Vainglory, which makes many so forward to become fool in Print. So
that every way that excellent Proverb is worthy of all approbation. Quo
obscurior, eo securior. Obscurity is the best security against Censure and
Selfe-conceipt, Persij Satyr. 1.
Non te quaesieueris extra.

But least my Boldness should be burdensome, in that which is spoken before,
I have made choice of St. PAVLS charge, for mine Apol^gie. Charge them that are
rich in this World that they be not high minded, 1 Timothy 6.17
and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living GOD, which
gaveth us abundantly all things to enjoy. That they do good and be rich in
Good works, ready to distribute and communicate. Laying up a store for
themselves, a good foundation again the time to come, that they may obtain
Eternal life.

And so I close all with that Doxologie of the Author to the Hebrews. Heb.
13.20.
The GOD of Peace which brought from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great
Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Verse.
21.
make you perfect in all good works to do his will, working in you, that
which is pleasing in his sight, through JESUS CHRIST (our Lord) to whom be
Glory, both now and ever. AMEN.

Your Honors, in all due observance: R. H.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Preface with a Paraphrase upon the Text and Context. page 1 CHAP.
II. The maine Point propounded, that No Earthly Vanity satisfies Man's heavenly
Soul. page 13 CHAP. III. The amplification of the Point, and the Proof entered
upon. page 17 CHAP. IIII. The Prodigals Husks explained, and the effect of
Hunger. page 22 CHAP. V. The Prodigals hungry Husks further applied to
Epicurish, profuse and profane Men. page 31 CHAP. VI. The Reason why the
vainest Men, cannot always attain their worst desires. page 41 CHAP. VII. How
vain it is to trust to vain Men, in any Distress. page 50 CHAP. VIII. The
Insufficiency of the Husks of Vanity, to satisfy and content the insatiable
appetite of the Soul, further explained. page 55 CHAP. IX. CHRIST'S Verdict of
the Worlds waters, insufficient to quench the Souls thirst, without the waters
of Life. page 63 CHAP. X. SECT. 3. SECT. 1. The hungry Husks of vain
Worldlings and the blessed Bread of GODS Children declared, and compared by the
Prophet Esaias. p. 71 SECT. 2. Gods Children, as they have Gods plenty, so they
have Gods peace, which Worldlings want. page 81 SECT. 3. The Joys of the
Saints, never conceived, nor received by Sinners. page 87 CHAP. XI. SECT. 2.
SECT. 1. JONAS his Judgment and Experience of lying Vanities. page 92 SECT. 2.
Eight Demonstrations of Lying Vanities. page 100 CHAP. XII. SECT. 6. SECT. 1.
SOLOMON'S depth of Wisdom, diving and wading into the vility and Vanity of
things Sublunarie. page 108 SECT. 2. Solomon's Censure of lying Vanities, from
his own Experience. page 113 SECT. 3. Solomon's three Books compared; The
sum of his Ecclesiastes, being his Verdict against Vanity. page 121 SECT. 4.
The aims, and ends of Solomon, that he may Effect what he does Affect. page
126 SECT. 5. Solomon's Repentance, Sanctification, and Salvation, prooved by
Scriptures, and Reasons. page 136 SECT. 6. SOLOMON'S Salvation, prooved from
Authors and Authorities. page 156 CHAP. XIII. SECT. 4. SECT. 1. The Nature of
these Vanities, their disproportion with the Soul, the immensity of Man's
Appetite further declared. page 168 SECT. 2. The Vnfatiablenesse of the
Appetite, and Concupiscible Faculty. page 191 SECT. 3. The Composition of the
Heart, Sublimity of Man's Soul; Center of his Spirit; GODS Image; Man's
Pilgrimage. page 205 SECT. 4. The Verdict of Divines; force of Religion; union
betwixt Holiness and Happiness. page 218 CHAP. XIIII. SECT. 2. SECT. 1. The
Inconstancy and uncertainty of Life, Health, Prosperity, Common blessings and
all Externals. page 224 SECT. 2. The uncertainty of Honors, Riches, Pleasures,
further exemplified. page 237 CHAP. XV. SECT. 5. SECT. 1. GODS just Judgment
on Vanities, and Vain men. page 251 SECT. 2. The Vanity and vexation of that
Love which is Humane, placed on the Creature, allured by Beauty. page 253 SECT.
3. The Vanity, Fury, and Frenzy of Lustful Lovers. page 258 SECT. 4. The
unquietness of Earthly Loves, prooved by Inductions. page 265 SECT. 5.
Several Reasons united, convincing the first propounded Proposition, placing
all Contentation in the Creator, not in the Creature. page 270* CHAP. XVI.
These Huskish vanities are never so fully, and freely inioyed, but there is
always something wanting to the Concupiscible or rational Appetite. page 278
CHAP. XVII. There is no absolute Comfort and Contentation in any thing, every
calling has its cross, even Marriage it self. page 293 CHAP. XVIII. Our
inordinate appetites after earthly things so devide, disturb, distemper and
distract our hearts, by diverse passions and perturbations, that in steed of
hoped contentation, we reap vexation, exaggeration, distraction, and
destruction. page 306 CHAP. XIX. These outward things used out of Christ, in
carnalities, in the abuse of Christian Liberty, ever leave a sting in the
Conscience more or less, which deprives of all true peace and contentation.
page 328 CHAP. XX. The Peroration, and Conclusion of this Tract. page 333.
AN APOLOGVE FOR AN EPILOGVE.
IT is not unknown how hard it is to preserve a Treatise of this make from
faults in Printing, I will not therefore trouble my self with gathering, nor
the Reader with perusing of every mistake, the ingenuous have not only
judgment to discern, but also courtesy to connive at small errors. I could
not be present my self at the Press, neither list I to plead further for the
Corrector and Compositor. Let this that follows suffice for the Text; the
Margent is matter for Scholars, who need no other help then their own
ingenuity.

Errata.
Page 108. line 17. for Pyripatitions, read Peripatetickes. page 109. l. 24. r.
Incident. page 114. l. 7. r. Aquila, and line 22. deletur as, line 23. place
the Colon at Fools: line 24. for indeed, read, is here. page 141. l. 20. r.
Adoption. page 259. l. 9. r. Theseus. l. 26. r. kis. page 260. l. 19. r. Comes.
page 261. l. 3. r. Gleanings. page 264. l. 19. r. fly. page 276. l. 1. r.
Perhibent. page 283. l. 20. r. Chrysostom. page 284. l. 10. r. Richard. page
285. l. 27. r. Lyonlike. page 287. l. 2. r. Sorrowful. page 288. l. 26. r.
Meat. page 292. l 1. r. whit. page 293 l. 21. for where is stung, read where
he is stung. page 301 l. 3. r. Pleasures. page 311. l. 20. r. Joseph. page 335.
l. 24. read Work.

Jn behalf of this learned Work, to the Reader.
THat Parable so seldom well applied,
So frequently ill practiced; understood
By wealthy ones of such as want their food;
Is here declared: The meaning verified
Appeaches worldlings most: and fools beside
Whose covetous desire, for earthly good,
Neglects the bread celestial. This foul brood
Which loves to feed like swine, is here descri'd.
Who pleads not guilty? None I fear. What then?
As he did think upon that better diet
Ordained for man at home: return again
And have it: here is the means, do thou apply it.
If my commends might move (alas they are small!)
Only therein I would be Prodigal.
T. C.

Libelli ad quos pertinet lectores dialogus.
O Curas hominu^! O quantu^ est in rebus inane!
Quis leget haec? Mollis? Non. Sed avare? Neque
Cur? Non me spectant. Mutato nomine de te
Textus narratur. Prodigus ille nepos,
Haud ego. Coelorum Dominum, and coelestia temnis
Munera, perdis inops. Quin pretiosa magis,
Danubius, Nilus, Ganges, and America dives
Quae mittunt, rapio. Nil minus inde sitis.
Dulcia sed quis non? Epicuri de grege porcus,
Vesceris and siliquis. Da meliora. Cape.
Quin vbi? Praesto vide. Sed verba haec! Imme salubri
Font petita. Probe niteris. Ergo lege.
Consulentibus Horatio, Persioque libellus hic ita suadet; adminiculum
suppeditante, T. C.

THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THE WHOLE CREATVRE, At the Bar of Religion, Reason and
Experience.
CHAP. I. The Preface with a Paraphrase upon the Text and Context.
THere is no end of making of Books, says SOLOMON, Eccles. 12.12.
and much reading is wearisomnesse to the Flesh; which consideration made me a
long while suspend and put off my daily solicitations for this Works
preferment to the Press; And the rather for that according to the Proverb,
Nil dictum quod non prius, There is no new thing under the Sun but even
Inventions are vicissitudes, and the actions of our mind, though different in a
manner, are but Tautologyes upon the matter, which relish no more to our
captious curious Intellects, Crambe his coctum.
than Colwoorts twice boiled to Epicurish pallats. But when I considered that
the hungry soul sweetly gusts again the same Spiritual cates, as did
sometimes the hearers of Saint PETER, 2 Epist. 3.1. And of Saint PAVL, Decies
repetita pla^bunt.
Acts. 13.42. Both Jews and Gentiles. I held it unmeet, to balance the
deserts of the one with the Censures of the other. Or to bring the
consideration of mine own credit in competition with the benefit that may
happily redound to the Commonwealth of Christ's congregation. Conceiving
withal, that; In regard of the multitude of men and minds the variety of
Capacities and apprehensions, it is very requisite that in like sort there
should be variety of methods and expressions of the selfsame truth of God.
For which reasons I have bin induced, to forward the public appearance of
this Treatise, hoping that the well taking thereof may be a means to produce
the remainder, for the further satisfaction of the Reader, and to encourage the
Author for the fuller accomplishment of Gods honor, and the good of his
Church. And so I settle upon the basis of the ensuing building, in the Parable
of the Prodigal. Luke. 15.16.

And he feign would have filled his belly with the husks, but no man gave unto
him.

THis Parable sets before our sense and consideration the best and the worst of
this Prodigal, his gold and his dross, his corn and his chafe, his flowers
and weeds, his wine and dreggs, his sins and his sorrows, his vanities and
vexations, his transgressions and humiliations: His unnatural flight from his
Fathers house, and his return again, by weeping cross, tandem aliquando,
Basil. in suo exem. Ho^. 8.
like the Stork repairing to her old nest which seemingly she had forsaken.

Herein we may observe, 1 What he was. 2 What he did. 3 What he suffered. 4
What use he made thereof.


How he was active in sining, Si pergit dicere qua vult quae non vult audiet.
and passive in Suffering, according to the Pagan. Sin and sorrow being as
Esau and Jacob: Twins borne both at a birth, The latter supplanting the former;
As the Conclusion, (indeed the confusion) following the premises. As the
Fathers feigned pleasure and pain, to be lincked in one chain; To break the
Ice, as it were, and make way for the intended Treatise, we will observe in
some epitomized heads the substance of this Parable, both in the Life and
Spirit thereof, the outward rind and bark of the words, and the inward fap
and pith of the Spirit; in the sense and meaning of our Savior who propounds
this Prodigal as a true Image and Idea of a humbled Penitent? A true Map and
model of a Sinners misery. By Faith and Repentance an Object or Subject of
Gods all-Salving all-Saving mercy. Which General gives it self to our
consideration, in several observable particulars; As namely,

1. Who the Father of this Prodigal was; Even God the Father of Spirits, and
of all mercies; compared here to a Man, as in other Scriptures the parts,
members, and affections of man are attributed unto him, Per figuram, (says
Saint AMBROSE) Non naturam, figuratively, not naturally, as some conceited
Heretics have dreamed. Expressing in their outward shapes and figures his
Philanthropie and good will to Man, which our Savior Christ especially
demonstrated in his frequent appearing to the Patriarchs in the form of Man;
chiefly in his merciful, miraculous, and mysterious Incarnation, Ha
apparitiones, praeludia incarnationis, Tertul
assuming the nature of man but without sin in that Nature, all the former
apparitions being so many preludes hereof, according to TERTVLLIAN. As also,
who these two Sons of this Father be, not so probable the Jews and Gentiles
as some would with pregnant arguments maintain; But even the Proud
selfe-conceited Pharisie, and the repenting heart-humbled Publicane, to whom
and for whom, both this, and the two other preceding Parables of the lost
Sheep, and the lost Groat, were propounded, as appears plainly in the Context.

The penitent Publicane typified in this our Prodigal, and exemplified in all
his actions and affections both Temporal and Spiritual, being called a
younger Brother as the Philosopher termed his Auditors young: Not so much in
respect of years as of manners, not wanting age, but wisdom; as indeed all
Sinners according to Scripture phrase, are in Gods account, in respect of any
Spiritual wisdom, held foolish, unwise, indiscreet, childish, etc. Yea
branded and stigmatized with the very marks and Epithet of fools, simple
ones, and ignorants, howeuer the worlds blind Arithmeticke number and rank
them amongst the Machiauillian Politicians, Achitophels and subtle serpentine
spirits of this generation, in respect of the Morrall and Natural wisdom.

2. Now as it appears, what he was, forthwith anatomize his Corruption, search
his wounds, and the ruptures of his soul to the quick, and we shall see what
he did, and so expose him to the view of Men and Angels, acting his several
obsceane parts in the public Scenes, as openly as ABSALOM in the top of his
fathers Palace; behold him in his stuff and pomp, as the Peacock glorious in
his plumes, his wings furnished with Silver Feathers, flying into all excess of
riot, spending his means which proudly and peremptorily (by a Mandamus rather
than an Oramus) he had extracted from his Father; misspending them on Hawks,
Hounds, Harlotts, and all voluptuous and lycencious courses, till sucked to the
last drop, by these hors-leaches, fed upon by these Harpyes, devoured by his
lusts, as ACTEON by his dogs, brought to beggars Bush, (the usual end of
Prodigality) wanting oil to his Lamp, fuel to his luxurious fyers, means to
his mind, yea and a mind to his mean means, he was in such Meanders of
misery and labyrinths of troubles, brought to so low an ebb and exigent, the
black Ox treading so sore upon his toes; Penury and poverty as a straight
shoe, so pinching him, that he is even as a Bear at gaze or at a maze, as the
Bucke at the bay, not knowing what to do, even at his wits end.

Observe him, turning his back off his Father, setting him exceeding light, as
many Fond Prodigals since and even at this day; yea, setting him on a Lea-land,
as they say; contemptuous and regardlesse of the Privileges and Prerogatives
of his Fathers house, as ESAIAS of his birthright; the Gadarens of Christ; AESOPS
cock of the found Pearl, never knowing the good of a Father (as wicked men
and ungrateful vipers neither know nor acknowledge the benefit of any blessing
till they want it, and be wholly deprived of it) as a stern wife sometimes of
a loving husband: an unthankful people sometimes of a Faithful Pastor; as the
Israelits of MOSES and ELISHA, and a bad servant of a good Master.

4 Trace him as a Fox or Hare, every foot as he went from his Fathers house;
follow him as the storms and winds did JONAS; as the hew and cry does the fell
on into that far Country; The region of Sin, the Oblivion and forgetfulness
of God; into which, by the vanity of his mind and manners, deprived and
depraved of Grace, he fled and hastened with the fleet of his corrupt
affections, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

5 Set eyes and spies upon him, and see what he does there, wasting and
consuming all his goods (his tallents and gifts being abused in the service of
sin) with ryotous living, by which his means melted as wax before the fire,
and thawed as ice before the Sun, never leaving nor taking up with himself,
till he had spent all; as a byrd, deplumed of all his fair Feathers. As indeed
give some an ynch, and like their father the Devil, it will take an Ell. Once
admit it, it pleads possession, as the spirits in the Gospel it is loath to be
cast out, nor will it leave its hold, but (Eiectione firma) once over shoes
and over boots also.

Wicked men leave not off sinning, till by degrees they grow from Serpents to
Dragons, from Cubbes to Foxes, from evil to worst, till they have, as hellish
Graduats, commenced in the highest degree of sin, sitting as Lots sons in
Law, and SAILOMONS fool in the chair of pestilence; the seat of the Scorner,
hating Counsel and contemning instruction, till by their doings, they have
irrecoverably undone themselves, so long hoisting up their high Sails, bearing
up their top and top Gallant in the impetuous sea of their lusts, till wanting
the Pilote and Palmure of their reason and Religion, they run themselves upon
the rocks, and make shipwreck of goods, good-name, credit, coin, conscience,
yea body and soul, all at once; as this Prodigal had done, had not his
Fathers remainning mercyes, been above his demerits: chiefly Prodigallity,
(vulture-like) gnawes a man to the very bones, the profuse prodigal that gets
(as a Beast an ill haunt) an ill habit and custom in sin; usually never
leaves till as a great Snowball in a Sumner day he melt all away, not able to
take up with himself, unless the Lord himself, by a special curb and bit
restrain him, till (like a wooded horse with a childish rider) he runs
himself out of breath, and perhaps break his neck too down some hill or
promontory, having no more power to stay himself, than a man that runs down a
hill, till he come to the bottom, he wasted all, the usual end of Prodigality.

6 Behold him also in his low ebb and exigent after this full sea, let blood
as it were in his vain veins, till he could bleed no more; what he did, what
diet he used, after this vehement purse purging in the flux of prodigality, to
recover himself again: his course indeed being too course and too carnal,
his salve worse than his sore, he goes not, as he should have done (and as
indeed he did afterward) to his Father, crying Peccavi, with confession in his
mouth, contrition in his heart, compunction in his soul, and tears in his
eyes, extracted by the fire of the Spirit, from the limbeck of a penitent
heart, and sin wounded soul; No, no, his hour was not yet come; All the
Elect are not converted at once, he was not yet called; the wind blows where
it lists, and the Spirit works where it lists, when it works it is
energeticall indeed, and powerful in operation, not resisted by the very gates
of Hell. It dissolves the very works of the devil, Iaile-delivers his
prisoners, vntyes their chains, as the Angel did PETER'S; brings them as
Israel out of Egypt from the bondage of that spiritual PHARAOH, with a mighty
hand and outstretched arm indeed, but it had not yet wrought on this
Prodigal, the cross was yet unsanctified unto him, as sometimes unto Pharaoh,
AHAB, AHAZ, ISRAEL, and others; he was not by these afflictions converted: Oh
no, afflictions wthout Gods Spirit are (as the word and Sacraments) the favor
of death to death, as perfumes to the Beetle, washing to the Ethiopian, or
rensing to Clay; they more soil the soul of the impenitent. Besides,
conversion of a sinner is not so easy a work, hoc opus, hic labor. It Is a
marvel, a miracle, as great as to turn water into wine, stones into bread,
nay into children of ABRAHAM, yea as to create a new world, a new Microcosme,
It Is digitus Dei, must do it, it is only the work of the Almighty. Besides,
the Elect are not all called at once into the Lords vineyard, but some at one
hour, some at another, some in the morning, some in the Evening, some at noone
day, as appears in the Conversion of MANASSES, MARY MAGDALEN, SAVL, ZACHEVS,
AUGUSTINE, CYPRIAN, Confess. l. 8. c. 7.8.9.
the theife on the Cross, and this our Prodigal. Besides, he takes the staff
by the wrong end, Osiand. Epit. Cent.
he goes not in this penury directly to his Father as he should have done, (who
as he is an Ocean of grace, a Fountain of mercy, both could and would have
made supply as did JACOB and IOSHVAH, MOSES and DAVID, ASA, IEHOSAPHAT,
EZECHIAH, DANIEL, the Gospels Centurion, blind Bartimeus: Mark. 8. Mark. 9.
Math. 15.
the distressed Father, the Cananitish Mother, the friends of the Possessed,
the unclean Leapers, and all holy men, humbled penitents: and Publicans in the
Old and New Testament. But first he seeks to the Citizen of the Country as
the Context is: That is indeed to the very Devil himself: compared to a
Citizen for his obstinacy and tenacity in sin, as a dweller therein, as a
Citizen in his house: as a Map and model of all Natural men, who in their
distress will touch every string: attempt every means lawful or unlawful,
from earth or from hell, ere they seek unto GOD by Faith, by Prayer,
Repentance, and Humiliation, as his children do, he will cleave to this Citizen
rather than seek to his Father: As carnal men at this day in their distresses
will seek; First, either to the Creatures; Secondly, to friends in the Court;
Thirdly, to their Idols of gold or silver; Fourthly, to the Physician; Fifthly,
or to Nature; Sixthly, or to Saints and Spirits; as our Popelings, to Saint
ERASMUS, St. BLAZE, St. ANNE, St. URBAN, St. ANASTASIVS, St. ROCH, St. OTTLIA,
St. MARGARET, St. APOILONIA, St. SEBASTIAN, St. LOY, St. CHRISTOPHER, and Saint
EVLALIA, for their several sicknesses, dangers, and diseases. Seventhly, or
else to the very Devil and his instruments, Coniurers, Necromancers, white and
black, Witches, as PHARAOH, to IANNES and IAMBRES his Magitians; as AHAZIAH,
to Baalzebub the god of Ekron, or Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; SAVL to the
Witch of End^r; as BALAAK to BALAAM, the Witch of Pethor; NABVCHADNEZZAR and
BALTHAZER, to the Magitians of Babell; the Romans to their Augurists, the
Gentiles to their Southsayers. If GOD be sought to at all by Carnal men, it
must be as a Miser goes to law, or takes Physic, Tanquam ultimum refugium,
as his last refuge. When other means fail (as usually they do as a broken
staff or a staff of Reeds, that deceives the leaners trust) this Prodigal
does not only serve this Citizen, but he adheares and cleaves unto him,
intimating how nearely and dearly he affects him and his service, in the very
inwards of his soul, as JACOB did RACHEL, as SAMPSON did DALILAH, and the
Harlot of Zoreck, and as SICHEM did DINAH, whose soul is said to cleave unto
her. But how does this Citizen requite his love, his service and observance?
Very basely, and badly, (for the service of Sin, of all other services,
slaveries and thraldomes, is the basest, worse than the bondage of Egypt, or
the Turkish Galley-slaves;) he imployes him even to keep Hogs, hogs of
Epicurus his stye, he feeds even Swine; For wicked and graceless men, that
now must be his followers, his Comrades, and boon Companions, at his pots,
his Punkes, his drink and his Drabs, are compared as to Lions, Bears, Wolves,
Foxes, evil beasts, so even to Hogs, and Dogs; those Hogs he must feed,
till they sponge him of all his substance. Oh bad and base exchange, from a
Son to be a Swineheard, from feeding at his Fathers table, to fill the
Hogs-trough; Oh, how Sin turns our light into darkness, our gold into
dross; yea, even our Heaven into Hell, Mercies into Judgments, favors into
frowns, honey into gall and Aloes, blessings into banes: as Repentance on the
contrary, changes evil into good, darkness into light, war with GOD and
the Creatures into peace; yea, Hell into Heaven; awakens those, that are
asleep; raises up those that are dead; heales those that are wounded: Makes
of fools! yea of Bedlems and mad men, as this Prodigal once was, sober and
wise men; yea, of sensual Sinners, sanctified Saints: of limbs of Satan,
heirs of Grace, Coheires of glory. Acts, 26.18, 19.

But yet this is not all; his misery, as a rankling ulcer, grows worse and
worse; as his service is base, so its burdensome, and grievous: many a poor
prentise, though he be put to base offices, yet its some comfort to him that
he has meat and drink enough; but in that great dearth and famine, both in
respect of Corporeal and Spiritual food, to which he and the rest in this
Region of Sin, were subjected; he was pinched and plagued with hunger, he
was pained and pined in his belly, he had the plague in his paunch, as in his
Purse, he had a stomach for meat, no meat for his stomach; he might grin
like a Dog, gruntle like a Hog, roar as a Lion, or howl like a Woolfe, for
any meat, that he got; for as it is in my Text;

He feign would have filled his belly with the husks, but no man gave unto
him.

CHAP. II. The maine Poinct propounded: That no earthly Vanity satisfies man's
heavenly Soul.
FRom whence (the Text, and so the Context in the preceding part of the
Parable, being thus briefly opened, and Paraphrased) to aim at the mark at
which I directly shoot, in the explanation, and application of this Scripture;
Committing all other Poincts and particulars, which might be extracted in the
curious and exact examination of every word, which in this, as in other
Scriptures, Instat Laelius de expresso Dei verbo, and J^liricus in claevi
Scripture, lib. 2.
has his weight, and Emphasis; I only fix and insist in one Proposition,
truly Orthodox, (though to the world it seem a Paradox, or Pseudodox,) which
naturally arises out of the very body and bowels of the Text, as beams from
the Sun, and sparks from the fire; And that is this, which speaks the Title
of this Treatise.

That all Earthly and Sublunary things whatsoever, all carnal desires, and
delights; the concupiscence of the Eyes, concupiscence of the Flesh, and pride
of Propositio, 1. Ioh. 2.
Life; all the pleasures, profits, and preferments of this present evil world,
with the best of earthly contents; yea, the whole luster and glory of the
world, such as Satan showed our Math. 4.
Savior, with all the unsanctified Pleasures that ever any seemingly inioyed,
or superficially ioyed in, with which the heart of man has been bewitched,
and ensnared; that these in their severals, and all these jointly, and united,
( with what ever in this nature, can be conceited and imagined, are not all of
them, of any validity, or sufficiency, to give any true Comfort and
contentation, any sound, sollid, lasting (much less everlasting) satisfaction
to the heart and soul, and spirit of a man, till by Faith in CHRIST and
Repentance, he truly turn and convert unto GOD, the true and sovereign
good, as this Prodigal here, to his Fathers house; all these are but windy
Husks, which fill not the belly, fulfill not the desire of this Prodigal.
This point I desire, to press and further to express: both because it is so
contradicted in the judgment and practice of Carnal men, whose bleare and
Beetle eyes, being not able to behold the Sun of that beauty and excellency
which is in GOD, the Fountain and Wel-spring of all Good, whose hearts and
affections also being chayned and imprisoned, yea married and wedded with the
things here below, on whose painted beauty they doat, as SAMPSON on
DALILAH'S, or as the Forest beasts on the speckled Panther, De fraud
Pantherae Plinius, hist. lib. 8. cap. 17 Aelian, 5. c. 40. and Solin. cap. 20.
to their own destruction. They build their contents here below, on a
quagmire or sandy foundation, which proves fatally and fearfully ruinous; as
neither being able, nor willing to mount up any higher, their wings being
glowed with the worst Bird-lime; here they glut themselves in carnal
delights, as Kites and Dogs with Carrion, as the Prodigal son did before his
Conversion. As also, because this one proposition, being thoroughly proved, the
judgment of these infatuated men being convicted, their lethargicall
Consciences rouzed, their intellectual part better informed* the eyes of their
understanding opened, if GOD please to join the Collyrie and Eye Salve of his
Spirit: they may at last look up as that Dan. 4.
Brutish Nabuchadnezzar, and as awaked out of a golden dream, or sluggish
slumber, brought as out of their fools paradise, restored as Bedlems or
madmen to their right wits: they may see how far all this while like lost
sheep, they have stragled, or straied out of the way, run themselves out of
breath, as in a Wild-goose chase, in the prosecution of these worthless
vanities, as Boys to catch Butterflies, or their own shadows; sown the
wind, reaped the whirlewinde, built Castles in the Air; yea, fed themselves
with Air as the Solo aere nutritur. Plin. lib. 8.33. and Lib. 11.37
Cameleon, in their froathy and aerie conceits of Imaginary felicity, in these
Externals; that so seeing they have spent their Oils and their toils Operam
and olcum perdere. Erasm. adag.
in vain, wearied and tired themselves in the ways and works of wickedness,
run all this while Counter; or in Paths as dangerous, as devious: laid out
all their money (spent and misspent their talents) but not for Bread, Esa. 55.2.
spent all their labor as the Prophet speaks, without any profit, for that
which satisfies not, being still an hungry and thirsty as the Poets Exponitur
Fabula per Natalem Com. in Mythiologijs; and in fine Textoris Offic. lib. 9.
pa. 853
TANTALVS, or as this our Prodigal in the midst of sensual dainties at the
Devils banquets, filled only (as the empty stomach with air, grief, or
wind, as an empty bladder with breath) but not refreshed, desiring and
requiring even windy Husks; yet neither their desires fulfilled in getting
them, nor the bulk of their bellies filled with them, if they have them; I
say, if the Lord ever make them conscious of their aberrations, sensible of
their miseries, how they have glutted down painted poisons; swallowed (though
invisibly) the hook of hastening Judgments under the bait of their bewitching
sensualities, how all this while, they have built upon false grounds; they may
at last, after the large Circuit and Circumference of their errors, after all
their fluctuations in the waves of several Lusts, after so long wading and
dabling like Children in the puddles of those vanities, return to GOD the
Souls true Center, the hearts only Anchor; leaving their false rests, by
idolatrizing with the Creature, and cleaving to their true rest, the Omnipotent
and All-sufficient Creator, to be blessed and praised for ever. (*)

CHAP. III. The amplification of the Poinct. And the proof entered upon.
NOw to prove what I have propounded, in which lies the pith of all; without
which I should but build without a foundation, and never rear this projected
edifice: This Prodigal Son, which our Savior propounds in this Parable,
even for the demonstration (as of other Theological axioms) so of this
Proposition; that all Sublunary vanities satisfy not the Soul of a Sinner,
which is the nail I drive at: (he being the basis and maine ground of my
intended structure,) I desire he may be considered in

A threefold Condition.

1. When he was in his Fathers house as a Son. 2. When he stragled from his
Father as a Sinner. 3. When he returned to his Father as a penitent Sinner.
Or in his Map.

First, the Sinner his Egresse from GOD. Secondly, his Progress in Sin.
Thirdly, his Regresse by Repentance, to the throne of Grace; is seriously to
be considered: with the fruits and sequeles of all these, plainly and
perspicuously proving, both the parts of the Proposition, the affirmative and
the negative, the one including the other, by necessary corollaries and
consequents: Namely, first, That as all light that comes to the world is by the
Sun, and that comes to the body, is by the Eye Math. 5.
; and that as without the Sun there is nothing but darkness to the world:
without the Eye, Polyphemian and Cymmerian darkness to the body: So first, all
true, saving and sollid rest, and tranquillity to the Soul, is GOD, and from
GOD: Secondly, and without GOD, nothing but horror, and terror, tumults, and
troubles, want rest, and unquietness, vanity and vexation of Spirit (as the
wise SOLOMON found and affirmed Eccles. 1.1
in the Idolatrous love, the sinful and sensual abuse of the Creatures:) so
both these are seen as plainly in the Prodigals glass, even in the Text,
compared with the Context, as the Sun at the noone day.

For the first: The All-sufficiencie that is in GOD: and so by a Climax or
gradation to show the second: The insufficiency of Sin; as most contrary to
God, and to man's true good; besides what is writ, and characterized as in golden
Letters, in the heart, and feeling experience, of every illuminated and
sanctified Christian; Habemus reum confitentem: We have the Prodigal himself
giving in his verdict, of the All Sufficiency that is in God, and the
Insufficiency of every worthless lying vanity, to give to the heart, and soul
of man, any sollid satisfaction or true desired contentation. For, as Vexatio
dat intellectum, vexation gives understanding, his crosses and afflictions
being sanctified unto him, he being at last awakened out of a dead slumber, in
which like those that dream of meat and drink, he found that his soul was
hungry and thirsty; being sensible of the insupportable burden of Famine,
which makes Man, and beasts, birds, and fishes cry out and complain in their
Articulate, and Inarticulate languages, he himself reflecting on himself, in
the serious Soliloquies of his now illuminated Soul, brought by the power of
Repentance Hiue Ressipiscere, Resapere, and rescipiscentia, quasi receptio
mentis ad se. Tertullian, sic Mentzer. and Calvinus in Esa. 46.8.
into his right wits again, from which as the Context signifies, he was
formerly distracted; being now able (which is an inseparable property of a true
man, not communicable with beasts) to number and recount, to deliberate and
discuss, to confer and compare himself with himself, his present estate of
a Swineheard, with his pristine and former estate of a Son, laying in an
equal balance his pinching Penury, his straight Commons, his famishing
unsatisfying Husks, with that satisfactory sufficiency of Bread: Including
every thing necessary in his Fathers house, pitifully complaining (as some
Fellons in Tiburnes language, as the luxurious Fool in the Prove. 5.11
Proverbs, as these inconsiderate ones in the Apocriphall book of Wisd. 5.12,
13.
Wisdom; yea, as some distressed men in Prison, or in their last dying
groans; as an Ox bellowing that is pricked with the goad: he breathes and
pathetically bleeds out this vocification; Oh, how many hired Servants in my
Fathers house have bread enough, but I here dye and perish for hunger; In
which verdict of his, he speaks (what my Text speaks) plainly and
perspicuously: That the servants of Sin and Satan, are famished; their best
food, is windy unsatisfying Husks: the Region of Sin, in which they live is
a land of Famine, in which they usually dye, and perish by famine, sometimes in
their bodies, and outward man: as millions in the dearth of Samaria and
Jerusalem, and Thebes, and other Countries De quibus Hebrai, ex Tharg. Ruth.
Dio. l. 60. and Hilarious, feria 2. post 3. Dom. Quad
when they were straightly besieged by their enemies. Famine, as it is one of
the Plagues and Rods wherewith the Lord threatens to Whip a stubborn and
rebellious Deuteronomy. 28.20. 2 King. 21. Ezekiel. 14 12, 21. Lev. 26.16. Ose, 2.9.12.
Psa. 106.33, 34.
people; So of all others it is the sharpest, a whip indeed of iron, worse than
either the Sword, or Plague, as appears by IEREMIES Ier. Thren. 4.9.
complaint, in his Lamentations, and by DAVID'S 2 Samuel 24. and 1 Chronicles. 21.
choice in his propounded castigations: but ever in their souls, how ever they
are not sensible of this worser Spiritual famine, no more than the Church of
Laodicea of her Rev. 3.17.
nakedness; yet certain it is, famished they are, what ever the spacious
world, with her specious Contents, and choice delights can afford them, is but
vanity, and wind, unto the Soul, vacuity and emptiness, unto their hearts;
husks, and draffe, fitter for Hogs and Swine, than Men: mere Sodomes apples,
beauteous in show, yet once touched fall into dust and De his Pomis
Sodomiticis, Solinus cap. 36. Aegisippus, lib. 4. cap. 18. Orosius, l. 1. c. 6.
Imo Tertul. Apol cap. 39 and August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 6. cap. 30 and 21.
Cap. 5
rottenness, he that tastes them, gets no more refreshing by them, than our
Savior CHRIST got from the flowring Math. 21.19.
Fig Tree, which deluded the eye, with lustrous leaves but satisfied no hungry
stomach, by substantial fruit. Nay, all these externals being so far from
satisfying the soul, and contenting the Conscience, that (as Husks, and
Apples, and raw fruit in the bowels of Children) they breed worms Barrow, his
Method of Physic, Chap. 19. pa. 134.
and wind, Inflations, and ventosities, Collickes, and Convulsions: Gripings
in the maw, and grinding in the guts; horror of heart, and terror of
Conscience: they press and oppress the Soul, their best operation after
digestion, is vexation of Spirit, as the waters of Jealousy drunk, they
corrode the bowels, gnaw the heart, as that Eagle or Vultur, the heart of
PROMETHEVS in the Textor, in Theatro Philos. lib. 8. page 845.
Fable; disquiet the mind, as the biting Gnats the Lydian Lions, who cause them
in their rage, to scratch out even their Itching Simon Majolus de diebus
Canicularib. part. 1.
eyes: how ever their stolen waters seem sweet, and their bread of deceit
pleasant Prove. 9.17
which they eat in hugger mugger, (as some Thieves their stolen venison;) yet
it is harsh in digestion, Mors in 2 King. 4.40.
Olla, mors in illo, mors in Ilijs; There Is Death in the Pot, death in the
Platter, death in the Paunch; every dish they taste in the Devils Read Adams
his Devils banquet, de istis before, et planius.
banquet, is as Mercury, or Cicuta, or Ratsbane; yea, as the blood of a mad
Bull, or the poison of Toads, either instant death (without by the receipt of
the oil of Grace it be evacuated and disgorged again by Repentance; as DAVID
did his surfeit, on VRIAS his 2 Samuel 12. and Psalm. 38. Psalm. 51.
sheep,) or at best, terrible danger; for as the wisest of mere men said, of
one vicious vanity How vicious this dru^ken or drinking vanity is: read Basil
Sermon. de Ebrietat^. Aug. in Psalm. 125. In^ pist. ad sacr. Virgins. Epist. 182.
Hieron. Epist. ad Oceanum. Ambros. de Elia. As also our Mr. Downam, in one of
his 4. Treatises. Smith in his Sermons. And Harris his Drunkards Cup.
it holds in all the fellows: at last it bites like a Serpent, and stings like
a Prove. 23.32.
Cocatrice, its unto them, as the venom of Aspes, as the hook in the belly of
the Fish; they vomit up again their sweet morsels, says Job, 20.14 15.
JOB: and (which once, the heathen Orator feared) when the dart of destruction
strikes through their Prove. 7.23
liver, mourning in their latter end, as the dying HYAENA, they are constrained
to buy Repentance, at too dear a rate, Non tanti poenitentiam emam. Demosthen.
paying too sower a shot, for their sweet meats of unlawful delights.

CHAP. IIII. The Prodigals Husks explained; The effect of Hunger.
But to drive this nail further to the very head: reflexing more fully on the
Prodigals husks, which he desired, yet wanted: As also, on that bread, in his
Fathers house, which the meanest hyrelings enjoyed; for want of which, he now
was at the very point to be starved; even these two Phrases opened, if we had
no other Arguments, plainly demonstrate the All-sufficiencie which is in the
service of GOD, the Insufficiency which is the slaverie, and vassallage of
Sin: To satisfy and content the immense, and vaste desires of this immortal
Soul, and working Spirit, which the GOD of Spirits has breathed into Creando
infusa, infundendo. Creata. August.
Man.

For the first, Vtor concessis: to take the benefit of my Text, to get Grapes
from Thorns, or Figs from Thistles; as MOSES got Water from the Rock, Exo.
17.6.
or as SAMPSON got a refreshing Spring, from the Iaw-bone of an Judge. 15.19.
Ass, and Honey from the belly of a Judge. 14.9
Lion; to extract sollid Manna, to feed the soul, even from these unfilling
husks, according to the aim, and scope of our Savior; husks feed not, fill
not the Prodigals belly: earthly lying vanities with which he was now
intoxicated, as Birds with Nux vomica, fill not, fulfill not the desires of the
Prodigals soul: The letter and the spirit, the body, and the soul of my Text,
speak this Proposition, and declare it more evidently, than Shiboleth declared
a Judge. 12.6
Gileadite, tha^ the Cowle declares a Cucullus non facit Menachum.
Monk, or treason a Iesuited Papist; and shows it more evidently, than the
whiteness of the skin showed NAAMANS 2 King. 5.
Leprosy, or the blew spots, the Plague.

1. For whether by Husks here with AUGUSTINE, we understand the Doctrine of
the Scribes and Pharisees, which (like the Doctrine of the Turks in their
Alcoran: of the Jews in their Thalmud: of the Gnostickes, Valentinians, and
Montanists in their De quibus omnibus lege Augustinum, Jreneum, Epiphanium and
Philastrium, de Haeresibus. Vt etiam Vincentium in speculo, Bergomens. in Supp.
Chron. Magd. Centur. and Osiandrium, in Epit. Centur. passim.
Heresies: of the Anabaptists, Zwingfeildians, and Davigeorgians in their
fantasies: of our Papists, and Friars in their Postils, Sermons, Missals,
Breviaries, and Of which amongst the rest, read the Bee-Hive of the Romish
Church, and Stephens his Apology for Herodotus, Pomeriu^ de Sanctis and
Bernardinu^ de Bustis, in Mariali.
Liturgies) is froathy and without substance, stuffed with Tales, and Fables,
ungrounded traditions, and fictious vanities; yea, mere dreams, and vain
Dotages, chafe and husks, without kernels, as JEREMY taxes their
predecessors the false Prophets in former Ier. 23.16 and 25.
Times; which feed the Soul as much as Guegayes, or painted Plumes, or ZEVXES
his painted Grapes, can feed the bodies of beasts, or birds.

2. Or whether by Husks with the same AUGUSTINE Hom 17. ad fratres de Eremo.
and Anton. de Padua, in Locum.
elsewhere, we understand worldly Honors, and Vain glory, which is windy and
full of ventosity, consisting of popular applause: the wind and breath of the
unconstant vulgar.

3. Or by these Husks we understand Riches, and temporary Goods, these
externals of Gold, Silver mines, Minerals, Lands, Livings, revenues, Pearls,
precious Stones Iemmes, Jewels, called by the Heathens Bona Fortunae, the goods
of Fortune; which in some famines by Land or Sea, have no validity to feed the
body, (for MIDAS may with some Captives, eat sooner his own flesh than his
gold:) much less the soul.

4. Or by Husks with Tom. 2. in loc. in Hom. de Patre, et duob. filijs.
CHRYSOSTOM, we conceive vain Pleasures, which in their after-births bring
greater gripings and convulsions to the soul, than husks to the belly: the
crop and harvest of a voluptuous seed-time, being ever pain and perplexity.

5. Or by these Husks, we conceit with others, the foments, and seeds, and
Incendiaries of vain Lusts. As first, loud, and lewd laughing. Secondly,
Lascivious looks. Thirdly, filthy and rotten Speeches. Fourthly, promiscuous
and wanton Dancings. Fifthly, Amorous discourses. Sixthly, Vain songs, and
sonnets. Seventhly, Effeminate Music. Eighthly, Fantastic apparel. Ninthly,
Froathy love letters. Tenthly, Uncivil and unseemely familiarities with the
weaker sex, the Albertus Magnus in Lucam 15.
prologues of tasting the forbidden Fruit, the very roots of filthiness, the
fuel, the oil, nay, the very bellows to the fire of How all these are
incendiaries to Lust, read that elaborate book called Democritus Junior ex
Poaet. Medicis, Philosophis. Part. 3. M. 2. Subs. 2. page 327. ad p. 389.
Uncleanness.

6. Or more generally, all kind of Carnalitie, Voluptuousness, Epicurisme,
whatsoever consisting in excessive, abusive Eating, Drinking, Drabbing, Feasts,
Festivals, frolike merriments, or in Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, Fowling,
Bowling, Gaming, Carding, Dicing, Tabling, etc.

7. Or more particularly by Husks, we understand all Lawless unlimited
venereall Pleasures, in the sins of the Flesh, in Adulteries, Whoredoms,
Incests, Fornications, Rapes; carried hither and thither as an Ignis fatuus
with the Air, as a wildfire with the wind, fit to fasten on any object, as a
Kite to stoop to any Carrion, as a Hog to rake and draine in any dunghill; to
let the heart loose to every Strumpet, as was said of Omnium mulieru^ vir fuit
Caesar, corrupit, enim Posthumiam Servij Sulpitij, Lolliam Auli Gabinij,
Tertullia^, Crassi, Mutia^ Pompeij vxorem: vt etiam Juniam Serviliae filia^.
Textor officin. lib. 5. p. 671.
CAESAR, and to grind with every false Miller; as did that unsatiable Et
lassata viris non satiata recessit.
MESSALINA: this being as In Postillis.
GRANATENSIS, Jn Paraphrasi in locum.
ERASMUS, and Jn Scholijs, in cap. 15. in Lucam.
ISODOR CLARIVS, clearly see into it, even to eat Husks indeed, and to feed
with Swine.

8. Or lastly by these Husks, if we understand simply all Sins and lusts
whatsoever, Concupiscence of the Flesh, concupiscence of the Eye, and Pride of
1 Ioh. 2.16
Life; sins Actual, and the foment and Seminaries of them, sins Original,
Birth sins, and bred sins, by which; First, GOD is Dishonored. Secondly,
Religion blasphemed. Thirdly, Profession stained. Fourthly, Man's sensuality
glutted. Fifthly, the Devill-delighted* Sixthly, the Conscience soyled; having
like their father the Devil, many names, but (as was said of that turne-coate
Alias Cowbeck, alias Dolman, aut vir Dolosus.
PARSONS) never a good Multorum nominu^, vix boni nominis.
name: sometimes called Psalm. 25.18
Sins, Psalm. 51.1.
Iniquities, Psalm. 38.4.
Transgressions, Ezra 11.1^
Abominations, Tit. 3.3.
Lusts; yea, first Lusts of the Gal. 5.24.
Flesh, as the Mother of them. Secondly, Lusts of the Ioh. 8 24.
Devil, as the Father of them. Thirdly, Lusts of 1 Pet. 1.14
Ignorance, as the Nurse of them. Fourthly, Lusts of the Gentiles 1 These. 4.5
and Heathens, as the chief Actors of them. Fifthly, Lusts of Uncleanness, as
the fruit and effect of them, defiling the Soul as pitch the Body; leaving (as
the Snaile that goes over a Stone, a Toad over the herbs) a kind of venom,
filth, and pollution behind them. Sixthly and lastly, deceiveable 1 Timothy 6.9
lusts, as imitating their Father, being the greatest deceivers, and Impostors,
above all Mountbankes, Quacksalvers, Emperickes, Gypsies, Conic^chers,
whosoever; Cousening us of no less than Grace, from GOD, Peace with Esa. 57.
vltim.
GOD, Tranquillity of Soul here, and Eternal felitie hereafter; All these
Lusts, take these Husks in what sense you will, are (as AUGUSTINE Tom. 10.
Hom. 27. ad Fratres in Ereme.
calls them) Demonum cibi quibus Peccator repleri desiderat; the Devils cates,
with which the Sinner (as here our Prodigal, a type and model of all
unregenerate men) desires to be filled and refreshed; but all in vain: for as
ERASMUS In his Periphrase on Luke chap. 15
has it, though like sweet Husks, they puff up the belly (as a windy
bladder, or the Pipers bag) and delight for a time, yet they neither fill,
nor furnish the mind, with any good: they neither satisfy, nor fatten Nec
sati^t nec saginant animam.
the Soul: they vanish like Tobacco, into smoke, and as smoke into Air, and
like Air into nothing: they Et redit in Nihilum, quod fuit ante Nihil.
never turn, in Succum and sanguinem, (as good meat, as the Childrens bread)
into sollid nutriment, to sustain the Similary or dissimilary part, to augment
and nourish either the Body, Blood, or Spirit, vital or animal.

But as we have seen this in the Mysterious and Spiritual sense, so we
shall see a little more clearly into the propounded poinct, from the very
Letter: If from the grounds of Physic, Philosophy, and History, we make a
little further scrutiny into the Name, nature, quality, and operation of these
Husks in Symbolicall Theology, we shall from the School of Nature, as many
more have done As Job chap. 37.38 39. Solomon in Canticis passim and Proverbijs,
Valesius in sua sacra Philosophia, Alstedius in Theolog. Naturali. Dane us in
Physic. Christian. Gemimanus in summa exemp. Bercherius, in Reductorio: and in
Sylva Allegoriarum, in folio.
before us, read in this most pleasing and profitable poinct, to every
illuminated Christian, even lectures of Grace; For whether we take husks, as
some do, for Mast or Acornes, an ordinary meat for Swine, falling from Oak
trees: for which purpose they put their Swine into some woods in England,
Westphalia, Ireland, and other Countries, till they be fatted. Secondly, or we
take them for that fruit which is like Acornes or Mast, which Liber, 7.
Simplic. Fereus siliquam vt glandes quercus.
GALEN says comes from a tree, by him called Siliquastru^, by him compared
(though by others distinguished) to that tree which Lib. 13. hist. cap. 8.
PLINY calls Ceraunia. Thirdly, or with AMBROSE, we take them for certain
Cods or swads, which they give their swine in Afric. Fourthly, or as we call
them, the husks of Beans, or Pease, or Fitches, which the poorer people cast
to the swine, after they have eaten the Pescods, as our Country calls them.
Fifthly, or as some Reidanus Medicus, in Geldria, apud Levinu^ Lemnium de
secretis.
call them, a kind of light Pelfie corn, enclosed in certain ears, which are
long and swampe, and full of awnes, abounding in Apulia, and Italy, of a sweet
taste, but of little nourishment, which those of Genoa call Carube or Carabole.
Sixthly, or if the husk be that Silicon which ISODORE says is corruptly
called Siliquam, taking the name of the Greeks, from the Etymology of it,
because the fruit of it is (...) enimlignum dicu^t and (...) dulce.
sweet. Seventhly, or take them in the best acceptance that we may, and
speak all the good of them that VARRO and COLVMELLA affirm of them: and place
them amongst some kinds of fruits; yet they are seldom or never used but of
the poorer sort, or in case of dearth or famine, such as was in Jerusalem
besieged by TITUS VESPASIAN, in Perusia besieged by OCTAVIUS, in Melus by
NICIAS, in Athens by SCYLLA; and other Countries, in which according to
Scriptures, and other Historians, worse meat than husks, even Mice, and Rats,
and Dogs, and Cats, and Ants, and Frogs, yea old Shoes and leather, herbs and
plants: De quibus Dio lib. 16. Suetonius in Claudio, Liv^vs, Suidas,
Thucidides, Appianus, lib. de bello Mithridatis. Bosquerus, in Academ. peccar.
Cicero lib. 5. ad Attic. Cap. 51 Ammianus, lib. 19. and 33 Vegetius, lib. 3.
cap. 3. L^rinus in Acta, cap. 11. page 483.
yea, Cabs, and Doves dung, the heads of Asses, 2. King. 6.25.
and flesh of Horses was desired food: Hunger I say which BASIL Oratione de
Fame, and si^itate.
calls the head of evils, MARCELLINUS Romans Hist. lib. 19.
the last of miseries: HOMER Odyss. 12.
the worst of evils, MENANDER the most dire and dolorous evil: GALLEN Lib. de
Cibis Cuchemicis.
a lingering death, with other Epithites appropriated by OVID Metam. lib. 8.
, and others; that hunger which as we say breaks the Iron-wall, constrained
this Prodigal to eat these Husks.

8. But take these husks, in the worst sense, as they are meat for Swine,
with which Swine are fed, and fatted, both with us, and in Syria and other
Countries, as PLINY notes: Lib. 18. Hist. Cap. 12.
So this Prodigal as an Hog of Epicurus Epicuri de Grege porci, Horatius.
his stye, was feign to seek to the trough too, for Mast, or to Woods for
Acornes, or to the Dunghill for husks: as his course was Swinish, so his fare
was course, his Commons were with the Swine, (the common case of Prodigalls:
the fairest end of Luxury: from superfluities to want necessaries: the burning
Fevers, and pleurisies of Lusts, ending in a cold Palsy of want, a
consumption or consummation of means, extremity of lack, being the Daughter
killing the Mother Filia devoravit Matrem, ut portus ille viperinus de quo
Pl^us, lib. 10. cap. 62. Aelian. lib. 1. c. 25.
Lasciviousness, as NERO killed AGRIPPINA Suctonius in vita Neronis.
:) Oh durum telum necessitas* need has no Law: needs must he run whom need
drives: he plays at small games, ere he sit out: he feign would have filled
his belly with the husks, says my Text, etc. Oh the all-prevailing Oratory of
Hunger, what a crafts-Master, yea a Master of Arts Magister Artium Iugenijque
largitor Venture. Pers. Sat.
is the belly? What a hand and a Hanke, has it over Men and Beasts? It tames
the wild Panther, the Wolf, and the Tiger: Not only gratitude as to his
Physician, for medicine: but hunger even for meat, makes the conquered Lion
follow ANDRODIUS Aulus Gellius de noctibus atticis lib. 5. cap. 14. Aelian.
lib. 7. cap. 43
the Roman fugitive as a Dog his Master: it makes the wild Dear (even Bucks,
Hearts and Hindes, as I have seen, follow the Wood-man in the Snowy Winter, for
green Boughs: yea it brings the Wild Hares to foder with the Sheep; it
teaches the Indian Parrot to prate, Sic de Psittaco Ascanij. lege Prodigium.
Antiq. lect, lib. 3. cap. 32. and de alio mira refere Zonaras in Basil.
the Cardinals Popin Iay to salute her Master, CESARS Crow to cry (...), the
Cobblers Crow to chatter out Ave Caesar, De istis Plinius lib. 10. cap. 3. and
4. sic cap. 42 43.
yea the Birds of Sappho Magnus Deus Sappho? Polyenus in suis stratagem.
, (or Hamo) to play the Parasites, and Carroul out their desired Dieties: yea
it makes the young Hawks and Eagles active and agill for their prey: being
first taught by the old ones. Yea this hunger brought the Dove, back again
into NOAH'S Arc, after she was sent out as a scout-watch, to discover the
desired Genesis 8.9.
dry land, after the deluge: and this famine brought refractary HAGAR
Jnterposito Angeli mandato. Ge^. 16.7.8.
back again, as tamed and obsequious to her Mistress SARAH.

CHAP. V. The Prodigalls hungry Husks, further applied, to Epicurish, profuse
and profane men.
IF I might make a digression from my intended scope, (though still jumping in
equal parts, with the Text) my pursuit being one only poinct, (as the
Faulkener and Woodman follow but one game) as the Lioness that brings forth
but one young one, at one De partis hoc leonino. Plin. l. 8.16. Basil. hexam.
Hom. 9.
birth, but yet it is a Reusneros in Symbolis.
Lion, no Ape, no Mouse, no Monkey: I would from this hint, and opportunity,
wish all Birds of the Prodigalls feather, to see their faces in his Glass: to
measure at last their foot; and their shoe too, at his Last: To take up with
themselves ere they be at last cast, split upon his Rocks: bog'd in the
quagmire of his misery; not to bleed any more like pruned Vines, or as a sick
man, in the flux of his nose, when they have lost too much blood already;
least their mean means daily washing, (as Conies and Lambs, in wet Columella
and Varro de rebus Rusticis.
weather) they come to a speedy irrecoverable consumption of all; Lodge in
beggars Inn, sit under Beggars bush, stand without as Pierce pennilesse the
Client, before the door of the Si nihil attuleris, stabis Homere For As.
Lawyer, lie begging as that Lazarus before the gates of churlish Luke 16.21
Dives, without either Crust or crum; make a knagg'd staff, and a wallet their
Fidus Achates, their individual companions, their miserable Comforters: yea
least they make their mother earth, their bed, the Circling Air their
Curteines: the heavens their Canopie, the water springs their Tavern, their
fists (as once that See Staffords Diogenes, and the Forest of Histories, ex
Laertio, Fulgoso cum aliis.
Cynicke) their drinking Dish; Fig leaves their clothes: painted Clothes
their best apparel: green herbs their diet, Duke Humphrey their host;
Mother Need their hostess: their meat sighs, their tears Drink, hunger
their sauce, and patience their Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est
nefas, Horat.
Physic, to endure what ever Gods Justice, man's hardhartednesse, and their
own demerits shall bring upon them.

Besides, think upon the desolate Case of this prodigal, you dainty Courtly
Dames, you pampered Citizens, you full crammed Countrymen, that make feasts
like 1 Samuel 25.36.
NABALL, fare delitiously every day, as that rich Churl in the Luke 16.20
Gospel; that abound in all Asian luxuries, and more than Sabaritish delights;
that rob the Sea of the choicest fishes; the Forests and fields of beasts; the
Air of birds, to sacrifice to that Curtian gulf, that devouring Minotaure,
your bellies: to satisfy your Epicurish curiosities; Think of it too, you who
make your Belly your Phil. 3.17,
God, who spare no cost, nor pains to content your paunch, that love your Gut,
better than your GOD; that, had you Pearls like CLEOPATRA, would dissolve and
drink them; you that feast as superflously as that Roman GALBA, VITELLIVS,
LVCVLLVS, and the greatest Epicures; That eat like gurmundizing Helluohs:
drink as that PROCVLVS, TRIGONGIVS, and TIBERIUS De hisce omnibus allisque
Gulosis, lege Textor. in Theat. Phil. lib. 5. p. 641. Brusonium exemp. and
Facet. l. 3 cap. 1. page 165, 166. in 4. Athen. lib. 2. l. 10. l. 11 Crantzium,
lib. 10. cap. 5 lib. 11. cap. 7 Lonicerum in Theat. lib. 9. folio, 660, 661. ad
page 674. and in Catalogo gloriae Cassaneu^ part. 2. p. 64.
NERO, whom the ordinary Creatures cannot content in fuellizing and refreshing
Nature, which is content with a little; but you must overbalance the bulk of
Nature, with superfluities, both in Quantity, and Quality: nothing satisfying
your Pride, your vanity, your curiosity; Oh know, that Gods inflicting
Justice, and the demerits of your provoking Sins concurring; if the LORD
should turn your Plenty into Penury; your Fullness into Famine; your
superfluities into want of necessaries: If your full bags, full barnes, full
baskets should be emptied; your full Seas and spring-tides of meats, and
moneys, revert to a shallow: If Bread, and the staff of Bread, should be
taken from you, leanenesse, by Cleanness of teeth, be brought upon you; if you
should try and experiment the miserable fruits and effects of Famine, which
some of the Pagans, and Heathens have felt, as they are described by De tuenda
valetudine.
PLVTARCH, Noct. Attic. l. 16. c. 3.
GEILIUS, Antiq. lect. lib. 13. c. 24.
CELIUS RHODIGINUS, Lib. 8. Metamorph.
OVID, Lib. 5. Epist. 21.
TULLY, Lib. 3. de Bello Phars.
LUCAN; and of later times, by PHILIP BOSQVIER the Jn Flag. Acad. peccat.
Gallice, lect. 1. Number. 21.
Jesuit, and Conc. in Sermon. 2. post Dom. 3. Quadrig.
MAURICE HILARET, but chiefly by Vt supra Orat. de Fame. 5.
St. BASIL, that has writ a whole tract of this Argument: Or if you were
exercised, but the one half in this trial of Dearth, bit with the hungry
teeth of this monster Famines, in any measure, as were the ancient Patriarchs,
and the people of GOD, at Nine several times, for several Sins: (as the
Hebrews, and the Chalde Paraphrase have observed; The first, happening in the
days of ADAM, as the castigation of his Disobedience, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. The
2. under LAMECH the first Bigamist, Genesis 5.29. The 3. in the days of ABRAHAM,
Genesis 12.10. The 4. in the days of ISAAK, Genesis 26.1.5. The 5. in the days of
JACOB. Acts, 7.11. The 6. in the days of BOOZ, because the unthankful
Israelites began to serve BAALIM, and ASTEROTH, Ruth, 1. verse. 1. The 7. in the
days of DAVID, for the sins of the bloody house of SAUL, 2 Samuel 21.1, and 2.
verse. The 8. in the days of AHAB, for his and IEZABELS barbarous outrages,
against ELIAS, and the Lords true Prophets, 1 King. 17.1.9. The 9. under
ELIZEUS in distressed Samaria, even for the like causes, 2 King. 6.) I say, had
these our delitious Libertines that now so prodigally, profusely, and
profanely abuse the Creatures in all excess of 1 Pet. 4.4.
Riot, been pincht and pressed with this pressure of Hunger, and suffered
scarcity of Bread with these pristine Patriarchs, or scarcity of Drink
either, as did once the Exodus 17.3.
Israelites in the Wilderness; HAGAR and her Son, ISMAEIL in the Genesis 21.15
Desert; victorious Judge. 15.8
SAMPSON; flying Judge. 4.19
SICERA; the Army of Apud Curtium.
ALEXANDER, of Whose army was releeved by the prayers of Christians. Apud
Eusebiu^, lib. 5. c. 1. Tertull. lib. ad Scapulam. and Apol. cap. 5.
ANTONINUS, and some Kings of 2 Kin. 3.9
Israel; or had they but in some measure, been Passive in the sufferings of
this our Prodigal, in this kind, as they have been Active in his sins;
acting over and over again his vainest, his vildest parts, and pageants; Oh
surely than Carendo, magis quam fruendo, as the phrase is, they would have more
poyzed and prized GODS abused blessings (their misspent means) in the want of
them, than in their fruition they would have done; they would have been
thankful, 1. With Pease and pulse; with Dan. 1.12
DANIELL and his three Companions. 2. With Locusts and wild Honey, as once
Math. 3.3.
JOHN the Baptist. 3. With broyled Fish and a hony-Combe, as once CHRIST Ioh.
21.9.
and his Apostles. 4. With Barley bread and Fish, as once five Thousand of
CHRIST'S Mark. 6.41
Auditors. 5. With one parcel of a Calfe, and Cakes, as once ABRAHAM'S
Angelical Genesis 18.7, 8.
guests, in the form of Vide Pareum and Pererij disput. in locum.
Men. 6. With a little Oil in a Cruze, as once the poor Prophets, poorer 2
Kin. 4.2.
Widow and her Children. 7. Yea, with Flesh and Bread in the morning, and
Flesh and Bread in the 1 King. 17 6.
Evening: (right Scholars Commons,) with water out of the River, as once
ELIAS, yea with a little Cake and Oil Verse. 12.
as the poor Widow of Sarepta, without seeking for any further variety, to
satisfy curiosity and sensuality: yea, rather than they would have tried the
extremity of Famine, they would have gnawne their own flesh, sucked their own
blood, as some Fellons have done that have hung in Chains; yea, eaten their
own Children; as those woeful Mothers did in the seige of De excidio Hieros.
apud Hegesippum cum Josepho, de b^llo Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 16. and Lo^accro in
Th^atre exempl in 3. p^acto. page 265
Jerusalem, and 2 King. 6.28
Samaria, much more would they have eaten the flesh of Strangers, as the
Savages and Cannibals; or eat Snailes as the wandering and roving Gipsees; or
Frogs, as in some places the Italians; or bread of Acornes, as the ancient
Ante vsum frugum Arcades vescebantur glandibus: Argaei pyris. Palmulis Carmani.
Persae Cardamo. Agriophagi Pantheris. Opiophag. Serpentibus, Anthropophagi
humana ^ar^e.
Heathen, before the Invention of Tillage by Textor. page 232.
CERES, and Jdem page Applicatio.
SATVRNE: bread of Rotten wood, as once in besieged Paris: flesh of Horses, as
at this day the Scythians: Guts and Intrailes of Beasts, as still the
Aethiopians: yea, they would eat the sowrest Bonniclapper, and make Bread and
Cates of the Blood of their Phle^tomized bullockes: yea, eat dead Sheep and
Swine, (as our poorer Irish have been known in their late scarcity of
victuals:) yea with the Prodigal, they would make a search, and scrutiny
amongst the Swine, and scramble amongst the Hogs for husks: rather than they
would starve by famine, and perish by hunger.

Oh! in the midst of our dainties and varieties, let us according to the
prescript of the Deuteronomy. 8.10 1 Timothy 4.4
Scripture, and practice of the Act. 27.35
Saints; yea of our Mark. 6.41
Savior, bless the Creator, for the free and liberal use of his Creatures:
and acknowledge this unspeakeable mercy; that we have not yet in our several
Families, according to our demerits, experienced this insupportable burden of
Hunger, with which other Nations, Kingdoms, and Countries, have been pressed
and plagued; but have food Corporeal and Spiritual De pane Corporali,
Spirituali, and Sacramentali disserit Bosquerus, in locum.
too, even Bread enough.

And let no man vilify and abase, contemn and despise the meanest of the
Creatures, appointed by the LORD of Life, for the preservation and sustentation
of the life of Man; how ever there be a secret Antipathie Vide Magiru^ in
Physicis, de sympathia, and Antipathi^, and Scaligeru^, Exerc. 345. p. 1075.
^.77 79. c.
betwixt thy stomach and some meats: yet do not so far disparage the dish
thou love not, that thou perswadest thy self, thou could not eat Butter,
nor Cheese, nor Pigge, nor Swines flesh (and yet no Jew,) if thou should even
dye for it: Oh no! I tell thee, there goes two words to a bargain; Life Job,
2.4.
is sweet, Lions, and Worms, Eagles, and Wrens, prize it: rather than thou
should dye, thou would eat the coursest Branne: yea, Crusts and scraps
with beggars; Onions, Lentiles, and Leekes, with Captivated Israel: yea even
Flesh in Lent, with that good old De quolge apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap 40.41. and
Hist. Magd. Cent. 3. page 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Serapion; yea Swines-flesh on good Friday, and Eggs on every Wednesday
(without all fear of the hatched fleshly Chicke.) Notwithstanding all the
Bonds, and Ligaments of Papal Apud Navarrum, and Toletum, in Casious
Conscientiae.
Superstition, Nay with out Prodigal, thou would make a public personal
search, even for windy Husks, rather than thou would hunger starve; the
Swines diet in a famine is a dainty.

Lastly, from these premises extract thy conclusive resolution, never so to
drink Wine in the bowls, that thou forget (like PHARAOHS ungrateful Ge^.
40.23
Butler, the afflictions of poor Amos, 6.6
JOSEPH; let NABALL in his Regal feasts, spare DAVID and his distressed
followers some of the 1 Samuel 25.8, 9.
Offalls, the broken meat may refresh them, as did BARZILLAES 2 Samuel 17.28.
Present, and ABIMELECHS 1. Sam. 21.6
Shewbread, as DAVID'S Figs and Raisings, revived again the faint 1 Samuel
30.11.12
Egyptian, left sick in the field by his merciless Master: Oh think, what a
torturing Tyrant Famine is; worse than De his and alijs Tyrannis, vide
Lonicerum in suo Theatro. praecep. 4. folio 351. ad 361. Textor. in officin.
lib. 5. page 603. Ovidium lib. 1. de art. Valerium l. 9. cap. 2.
Phalaris, Periander, or See the Book writ of this subject.
Busiris; the English Rack, Spanish strapado, the Cruelty of their Jpse
Perilleo Phalaris promisit in ore, Edere mugitus et bovis ore queri, Ovid.
Inquisition, PERILLVS his Fox in his Martyrologie, and D. Beard, his Theater
of Gods Judgments, page 47.48, 49.
Bull; MAXENTIVS lincking the quick with dead: JOHN de Roma and MINERIVS,
their invented Fox in his Martyrologie, and D. Beard, his Theater of Gods
Judgments, page 47.48, 49.
Tortures, for the Protestants torment, not so long, so lingringly, as this
macerating, massacring, murdering Famine. Yet is the rage of this hungarian,
soon appeased, with a small Meat offering, or Drink offering: Nature is
content with a little, Grace with less: Oh then, In medijs patinis and
poculis, in the midst of thy full pots, and full platters, throw some soppe, or
chop, or chip, to stop the mouth of this barking Cerberus, that (like some
Spirit in the Apud Delrium in Magicis disquis. and Lorinum, in Actus, cap. 16.
v. 16.
Pythonists,) howles, and cries in the paunch of a poor man; give him
therefore something out of thy superfluities, Cito, and site, speedily, and
seasonably; For qui cito dat, bis dat, he that so gives, gives twice; or twice
as much, as he whose help is out of season, as a Pardon after an Execution.
Then, Si non pr^pter hominem, propter Augustinus.
humanitatem: If not for the man's sake, who perhaps (like many Beggars) is
stubborn, debausht, Qui and quales Mendici, sunt suste^tandi, vide Zepperu^,
de legibus Mosaicis l. 4. c. 26. p. 625, 626, 627.
profane; yet for Humanities sake, suffer, him not to roast at a lingering
fire, when thou may take him off the spit: pull him off his Rack, pluck him
(as REVBEN did JOSEPH) out of the Pit Ge^. 37.23.
of his perplexity: If thine own danger move thee not, subjecting thy self
to that fearful thunderbolt of AUGUSTINE, Si non Pavisti, Occidisti: If thou
feedest him not, thou killest him, (as he that will not pull one out of the
pit when he may, its all one, as if he put him in;) and he that will not put
oil, to the dying lamp, fuel to the fire, its all one, as if he put it out:
yet consider his distress, and danger, that begs of thee coin, and crumbs:
Think with thy self, its not for nothing, that this poor Caytiffe so
importunes my alms, that (as the Cananitish woman with Math. 15.23.
CHRIST, the poor Widow with the unjust Luke 18.5.
Judge: Another, with TRAIAN the Wronged by one of his Soldiers, apud Suetonium.
Emperor; and a fourth with King Pausanias.
PHILIP,) he will have no nay say: more than the Shunamite of ELISHA in
another 2 King. 4.30.
Case: Alas, Venture non habet aures, the belly has no ears, it hears no
denying, nor can bear no deferring: Therefore dispatch this suitor, rid thy
hands, of this Orator, Impo^itie: think what a burden he suffers, that has
his Wife fainting, his Children crying about him, (as so many hungry
vociferating birds, flocking after the damme, as so many Prisoners in York
Castle, or Ludgate; houling, meat, meat, Bread for the LORDS sake:) yet he
none to impart, unless like the Isodor. lib. 12. cap. 7. Albertus anim. lib.
23. applicat. August. in Psalm. 101. and Gregor. in Psalm. 7. Paenitentiales.
Pelican, he prick and pick his own breast and feed them with his own
Blood: having no oil for his own Lamp, much less for others; Oh that
hunger, of which the Beasts are so sensible, that it makes the Lions roar, the
Ox bellow, the Woolfe howl, the Dog and the Fox grin and bark, the Ass
bray, the Chicke chirpe; the Kite pule, yea the young Ravens and Eagles, and
all Creatures else by a natural instinct call and cry, and seek their meat
at In Psalm.
GOD: That hunger which caused our Prodigal to seek even for Husks: That
hunger which made the Cynicke DIOGENES (as now the Capuchins) to beg alms;
it causes this poor Irus, poor Codrus, poor Lazarus to cry at thy door,
complain at thy gates. Oh, cast thy Bread upon his Eccles. 11. verse. 1.
Waters, so thou conjures down, or casts out a hunger-starved Spirit: Thou
followest the Precept of the Math. 26.11. Mark. 14 7.2 Corint. 8. ver. 2.14.
Exodus 22.21. Exodus 23.9. Levit. 19.33, 34. Deuteronomy. 15.4.7.
Scripture, and the practice of the Job, 29.12. Math. 25.35. Luke 21.2. 1 Cor.
16.1. Act. 11.29. Romans 15.26. Tertulliam. Apol. cap. 39. de Christianis: de
Elemosinis autem Attici, lege Tript. Hist. lib. 12. cap. 2. Cyrilli, lib. 5.
cap. 37. Ambros. lib. Offic. cap. 28. Laurentij, Johannis Elemosinarij, and
aliorum, apud Ecclesiasticos.
Saints.

CHAP. VI. The reasons, why the vainest men, cannot always attain, their
worst desires.
I Might observe also, that this Prodigal seeking for these Husks to fill his
belly, no man gave him them: he sought for husks (as the hungry dog sometimes
seeks for Carrion, the hungry Lion for his prey) but could not find them;
even wicked men, sometimes do want their wish, want their will: not only good
things in Justice are held from them, their sins sequestrating betwixt GOD and
Hos. 59.2.
them, making the Heavens to be unto them as Brass, the Earth as Lev. 26.19
Iron, as in Common Famines; causing the Clouds to withold their rain, as
in the days of 1 Kin. 17.1
AHAB; but which is more strange, they cannot have always their glut, their
fill, and their will in Sin; even Husks: Vanities, unlawful delights, are
sometimes withheld from them: even such sensual and sinful delights are kept
from them, which if they enjoyed would do them no more good, than poison to
Rats, than MIDAS his Rex Phrygiae optavit, vt quicquid tetigisset, in aurum
verteretur. Ravis. in Theat. Phil. lib. 2. page 90.
Treasure, or the Toulouse Omnes qui aurum ex Tholosano diripuere (Q. Caepione
Consule) misere periere, affirmante, Aulo Gellio, noctib. Attic. lib. 3. cap.
9. and Majolo de dieb. Canicul. Colloqu. 19. page 604.
Gold, to the possessours. Not only GOD curbes, and restraines them in their
revengefull desires, as he did Ge^. 31.24
LABAN from JACOB; SAVL 1 Samuel 23.28.
from DAVID, Pope LEO with all the Sanderim of the enraged Papacy, from
touching the least hair of LVTHERS De Herocis actis, and mirae praeservatione
Lutheri, ex Nigrino, Slei dano, and Bacholizero, vide Osiandru^, in Epit. hist.
Centur. lib. 1 c. 22. a. page 55. ad paginam, 84.
head; IEZABELL from murdering 1 Kin. 19.3
ELIAS; HEROD from Act. 12.11
PETER, and these 40. votive Jews from shedding the blood of Act. 23.21
PAVL: and also in their Luxurious desires, as he kept ABIMILECH Genesis 20.6.
from touching SARAH: the lustful Elders, from polluting In hist. Susannae.
SUSANNA: and in their proud and ambitious desires: ABSALOM from his Fathers 2 Samuel 15.4.
Crown; ADONIAH from being a 1 King. 1.18.
Monarch: Cardinal WOLSEY Fox in Ma^tyr. and Speed in Cronic. Henr. 8.
a Pope; ARRIVS Arrius, Florinus, Blastus; Haereticos propter Episcopatuum
repulsas: testatur Niceph. lib. 4 cap. 7.12.20.30. and 8. Cap. 5.
a Bishop: and DIOTREPHES Epistol. 3. Ioh. verse. 9.
more in eminency, and preheminencie than he was: though (as is usually seen
in profane men) their aspirings, and their risings, be their fearful and
fatal Numb. 22.23.
ruins: they being rapt and carried sometimes on high, as the Eagle carries
the shell Fish, that they may be crushed down again with the greater Vt
^o^e^ruant graviori.
fall: I say God, does not only curb wicked men, in their unlawful aims,
and projects, denying even some sinful pleasures, to the Voluptuous: the
knowledge of some Arts to the Curious, (as Necromancie to Vide Cardan^ Encomium
Neronis post tractaetum de curationibus admirandis.
NERO; the Philosophers Though some say Lullius, and Kelly had it, which I
believe, as Guianaes gold.
stone, to our Alchymists, etc.) Gold to the Covetous, though it would stand
them in no more stead than drink to the Dropsy: nor do them any more good
than the stolen Wedge did Josh. 7.24
ACHAN, or the thirty pieces, (the price of the best blood) did that viper Mat.
27.3.
IVDAS; the Lord in his merciful providence so shackling, curbing, bridling
crossing, and keeping in sometimes the corruptions, lusts, and affections, of
men unregenerate, as the Stallion within his stall: the Lion within his grate,
the raging Sea, within his bounds: Even for the good of the Universe, the whole
society of Man, least if they should break out so far as they would, it this
curbing bit of Gods own hand were not over their belluine appetites, they
should over-runne all: as the waters that break out, in some universal Omnia
ab secum, ventus and unda rapit.
Deluge; as the rage of the Goths and Vandals once overranne Vide Procepium de
bello Gothorum.
Italy: and the Turks Quomodo Turci attracti in Graecia^, omnia Ferro, and
Flamma devastantes, vide Mela^ct. in Chron. page 573
Greece: yea, least they should make an universal Combustion of all, as the
Greeks of Dares Phrygius de bello Trojan.
Troy, and NERO of Jn incendio Romae, Homericos deca^tavit versus. Sueton. in
Nerone.
Rome: their rage being unrepressable, like wild fire in the Flax, or Powder;
yea least else, there should be no peace to the Civil and Religious to live
amongst them, more than Sheep amongst Wolves, Kids amongst Bears: or Hens
amongst Hawks: as was the case of LOT in Genesis 19. 2 Pet. 2.
Sodom: DAVID in the tents of Kedar. But even the Devil also that subtle
Serpent, sometimes in his more than Machiavillian policy, as much as in him
lies, cuts short their Commons: even in their most Dog-like devouring
appetites, when they have the most insatiable greedy-worme, and the most
longing Lust, after some lying vanity, which they love and long after (as
SICHEM after Genesis 34.
DINAH, AMMON after 2 Samuel 13.
THAMAR, SAMPSON after Judge. 15.
DALILAH, HERCULES after DEIANIRA, Dei Multorumque, fiat spes inuidiosa
procorum. Ovid. lib. 9. Met.
ira,) to their own destruction; even that very poisoned delight which they so
much desire, (as a Bedlam, a Sword) to their own ruin: it may be they shall
miss the Cushion, and not obtain it, as they will, and when they will: the
Devil they shall have as soon, as that lust, at which their teeth waters:
they shall no more attain it, than the Fox the grapes that hang on the tree,
which he cannot reach: HOLOFERNES loses his In libro Judith.
life, rather than he attaines his lust with IVDITH, though he seem to have
her in his power. Many English and Romish Iezabels, Italian Curtezans, frying,
boiling, and broiling in their luxurious desires, as did that strumpet
mentioned by Saint Ego non sum ego; apud Ambrosium, lib. 2. de paenitentia.
AMBROSE, (after her converted companion) after such as they are enamoured on,
yet prevailing no more than that entising Apud Valerium tit. de coatinentia and
Text. in Offic. p. 647.
PHRINE, with cold ANAXAGORAS, or then wanton Venus, with Adonis in the Fable;
to omit infinite other instances which prove and demonstrate this assertion,
that even wicked men and women cannot procure and atchieue always even those
Soul poisoning lusts after which they long, no more than the Prodigal in the
Text could get those husks, which he sought after; for as the words are plain:
he would have filled his belly with the Husks, and no man gave unto him; In
which, though it may seem very strange: that the devil will not suffer his
fellow Commoners, to glut themselves at his banquet, with what dish they like
best, and to fall too (after the Court fashion) even where they lust, till they
be cramd like Capons, and gorged up to the very throat: knowing the sooner
these Bulls of Basan, are fed in his Pastures, (as these Psylli and Merfi in
De quibus Plinius, lib. 7 c. 2. lib. 18. cap. 25. lib. 25. cap. 10.12.
Italy, with poison) the fitter, the faster, the fatter, they come to his
Shambles; the sooner their sins are ripe, in number and measure (as the
sins of the Amorites Ge^. 15.16
and Cananites) the speedier God puts to his Sithe, and Syckle; yet
nevertheless the Devil is no fool (the Devil he is as soon) he knows well
enough what he does. 1. He keeps those who^ he dyets, sometimes something
sharp, Hawke like, that they may in their corrupt desires, with the wings of
their enlarged infected affections, fly swifter, and faster, after the game,
which the Spaniels of his inward temptations, and outward instruments
continu^lly spring. 2. He fears too credibly to glut his guests by too full a
diet (as some horse with Oats, if they be powered all in the Manger at once)
therefore that these his stallions may still ney after their Neighbors Ier.
5.8.
Wives, he keeps them in heart, and lust, and at soil, as ever fit for any
unclean fact, as opportunity is offered: and lets them see oftentimes, rather
than enjoy, the object of their desires, to set still a fiercer edge upon them:
he dyets them now and then sparingly, that they may keep good (or rather bad
stomachs, to his desired Cates, and Viands, till he dyets them in Hell, where
they shall gulf down (as fast as here the Drunkard his German quaffes, and
his English pots and pledges) fire and Brimstone Psalm. 11.6. Esa. 5.11. 12
Revel. 21.8
their Belly full, passive in suffering, as active in sinning. 3. He knows
well by his created, and his experimental acquired knowledge, that the mind
makes, or marres the man; that the heart is all, and that who has the heart,
has all: therefore as Gods Corrivall he pleades for the heart too, as well as
God does Lege Juchinum Jesuitam, de 4. No^issimis in Proverb. 23.26.
; as the true Mother and the false, pleaded for the Child before 1. King. 3.
SOLOMON, as We, and the Papists plead for the Apud Morneum nostru^: Feildum
and Sonnium (in Thesibus) de Eccles. sic in progressu Papatus ejusdem Mornei:
and apud Sutclivium, and Whitakerum de Ecclesia: and de Romano Pontifice.
Church; as the seven Cities pleaded for Smyrna tamen vera patria apud
Ravisium. fol. 82.
HOMER, as two Suitors about one Woman. He knows that if God have the heart,
as he had the heart of 1. King. 15 3.
DAVID, 2. Chron. 14.2.
ASA, 2. King. 18.3.
EZECHIAH, Ioh. 1. v. 47.
NATHANIEL, though there be many infirmities, he has the whole man. As there
is no danger of Life natural, though there be many byles and botches in the
flesh, so long as the heart is sound; so it is in the life See Dike of the
Hearts deceit, in fine libri.
Spiritual: neither does the Tree wither so long, as the sap is sound at the
root, though the bark pill, the flowers fall, the blossoms wither, and the
fruit be blasted; or worme-eaten: therefore he bids fair for the heart, and
uses all his tricks, and stratagems (chiefly politieke pleas) to get it from
God: as ABSALOM with his Complements sought and wrought the alienation of the
peoples hearts, from his Father 2. Sam. 15.6.
DAVID; he is sure enough of the whole, if he have the principal, the best
pledge and pawn, which is the heart: as the Iaylor has the Prisoner sure
enough, if tied but by one leg; as the Fowler has the Bird safe enough, if but
snared by one foot, limb, or wing: though the rest of the body be free; and
therefore, Satan is not so careful to content his Vassals in all points, for
he knows that if this Prodigal has but an heart and an appetite to these
husks, and feign would have them, though he get them not, no man giving them:
even this very desire after Vanity, speaks him vain and dissolute; as HAMANS
plotting and projecting Esth. 3.6.
the massacring of ESTHER, of MARDOCHEUS, and all the race of the Jews (as our
powder Papists See the Earl of Northamptons speech, with other books extant
in verse and Prose, of the powder Treason.
the like of us, and SENACHARIE 2. King. 19.27.
the ruination of EZEKIAH, and Jerusalem) even this very Machination, and
Imagination of Murder, this hatching of their Cocatrices Esaias. 59.5
Eggs; to prove killing Basilisks; this spinning of their Spiders Webs, speaks
them Murderers: even as the lusting and burning after the beauty of a Mat.
5.28.
woman, speaks an Adulterer; TARQVIN Cum Lucretia vxore Collatini, apud Livium.
as well as CLODIUS; ABIMELECH Genesis 20.
as well as Quaeritur aegistus, quare sit factus adulter. Ovid.
AEGISTUS; APPIUS CLAUDIUS Cum Virginea filia Virginei.
, as well as Mark 6.18
HEROD: though not in the effect of the Act, yet in the affect of the Vt in
bonis sic in malis apud Deum voluisse and valuisse.
heart; which God respects above all the rest, both in bonam and malam partem,
in the evil, as in the good; accepting ABRAHAM'S willingness to Genesis 22.16.
sacrifice, as much as NOAH'S active building of the Genesis 6.16.22.
Arc: DAVID'S desire to build God a 2. Sam. 7.5.
house, as well as SALOMONS deed: the Will as much as the Work 2. Cor. 8.1, 2,
3.
in the poor Elemosinary Macedonians, so he abhorres, the very desire and
endeavor, and hunting after sin, in the Reprobates, though they even miss
of their game; for such causes as I have shown, as much as he abhorres the
very act of sin in the Regenerate, sinning of frailty and infirmity, as did
Ge^. 19.33
LOT, Genesis 9.21.
NOAH, and Math. 26. Vltimo.
PETER, without any desire, affection, premeditation, or resolution: the desire
without the deed, showing in the one the heart, to be more corrupt than the
deed, without the desire (by the reluctance of the Gal. 5.17.
spirit) in the other: all being corrupt when the heart is corrupted, as the
whole body of the fish smells, when the head Observat Geminianus in summa
exempl. and similit.
stinkes: as all the streams be infected, when the fountain is poisoned, and
the fruit being naught, when the Root is rotten.

Applicatio.
Look to this poinct who ere thouart, and look thy face in this glass, thou
that have months mind to any sin, at which thy lips water; yet either thou
can not commit it, for want of opportunity (as AMMON thought it hard to do
any thing to his Sister THAMAR, whom he lustfully loved, because she was a 2.
Sa^. 13.2
Virgin, which was the case also of Antigonus, in respect of his Mother in
Strotonica vxor Selenchi.
Law, and of that Immundus Polienus in stratagem. and Loyer de Spectris.
Mundus, who without the help of a feigned Diety, could not obtain his
purpose on her, who had Paulina.
imprisoned his heart:) or dare not commit it, for fear either of the Laws
of man as paenall in Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts, or in slavish fear of
Hell, or the Prologue to it, terror of Conscience; yet hugs it in thy heart,
as the Ape her Complectendo Necans, Plivius, Hist. lib. 8. cap. 54.
young. Imbraceth it in the arms of thine affection, as the mother her child,
art content to live and dye with it; as CLEOPATRA with her Ravissius in
Officina, Page 553.
MARK ANTHONY: suffers it to reign in thy heart, as a King in his throne: to
take up thy thoughts, as by a Commission: continually contemplates thereon; yet
dare not be active in it, for fear of after claps; (as the thief that has
a mind to a fair well mertald horse, yet fears to ride the halter at Tiburne:
as the Fornicator, that follows his desired DINAH: his beauteous Galatea: in
the pursuit of his affections, with as much vehemence as the Hawke her prey,
or the Hound the Hare; as blinded with his lusts, madded and enraged in his
desires; yet dares not prostitute and pollute her, for fear of the worlds
shame in his base bastardy: As the Egyptian Dogs dare hardly lap at Nilus, for
fear of the Plinius lib. 8. cap. 25 and Aelian. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 3.
Crocodile: as the Bear dare hardly intermeddle with his desired honey, for
fear of the stinging of the Bees; I say, who ever thou art in this
predicament, make of thy self what thou wilst, thy true Heraldrie is, the
son of the Ioh. 8.44. and Act. 13.10
Devil, as yet thou art in the snares of Satan: the gall of bitterness, the
bond of Act. 8.23.
iniquity, thou art captivated of him to do his will: for thy affection to
sin in Gods account, is action; and he that commits sin, is of the 1. Ioh.
3.8 and Ioh. 8.34
Devil: so the Scribes, and Pharisees, Saduces, and Horodians, were Murderers
and Crucifiers of CHRIST (as they were called) both before Ioh. 8.40.
and after Acts. 4.10
they put CHRIST to death; because they sought his blood, as SAVL sought 1.
Sam. 20.33.
DAVID'S: Even as the Prodigal seeking Husks (as vain men do their
pleasures, their profits, their preferments, and the achievement of their
Covetous, ambitious, and luxurious desires and designs) is accounted a fool,
a Younger Brother, a Bedlam, a vain man, (as are all those of whom he is a
Type and a Map) notwithstanding, that he did not accomplish his desire: for
the Text says, No man gave unto him.

CHAP. VII. How vain it is to trust to vain men in any distress.
Observatio^.
NO Man! The phrase is observable.

1. Oh this it is to put any confidence in man, or in the son of man, or in
the best of men, the greatest of men; Kings, and Princes, terrestrial Gods,
whose breath is in their Nosthrils.

2. But chiefly, this it is, to serve the Citizen of the Country, to hold a
candle before the Devil; to observe him, and offer sacrifices to him; as the
Indians, Virginians, and other Salvages, in their divellish bloody devious De
hisce Daemonum sacrificijs lege apud Majolum de diebus Canicul. part. 2. page
47. and 64, 65. titulo de cultu Daemonum and Purchase, hic pilgrimage passim.
devotions.

3. And this it is also, to rest and rely on wicked and profane men, to feed
Hogs and Swine: as this wastfull Son once; what trust is there in man that is
altogether Psalm. 39.5. On which read Purchase, his Microcosmus extant.
vanity: What in the Devil, that old Rev. 12.9
Dragon, the Father of lies? Who always leaves his Clients (Witches,
Coniurers, and Necromancers, though in their own esteem, his darlings, and of
his Privy Delrius disquis. Magicarum and Pierius de Magia.
Council) as he left Dr. Faustus, Cornelius Iovius in Elogijs illust.
Agrippa, and others, on a Lea-land, in their greatest exigents, and pressures
of body and soul: fishing even for their souls (as he did for 2. King. 1.
AHAZIAHS, and 1. Sam. 28.
SAVLS) in the troubled waters of their greatest miseries: but chiefly what
repose is there to be put in vain and profane men; in carnal Comrades, and
Pot-companions, those Swine: into which the unclean Mar. 5.12.
spirit, still enters? What help or assistance, what comfort, or good Counsel
had the Prodigal now in his extremest hunger, from these Swinish Epicures, on
whom he had spent, and misspent his means, those whom he fed so long as ought
lasted; or that had fed upon him as Harpies, and flesh Wolves, would they now
feed him? Can he get so much as Husks from them? Though this had been but
faint feeding: he to feed them with the best corn, with the distillations of
the Malt, the best broth of the Barley, the best blood of the Grape; and he to
receive again from them, even in his gnawing hunger, not so much as Swads and
Husks, not awnes? Not Leas? Not Dregs, to drink? Hoccine humanum factum, apud
Comicum, aut inceptum, hoccine officium amici? Is this square and candid
dealing? Is this the part and office of a friend? Is this the fruit of carnal
friendship? To use thy companion (as the Spaniell does the water) so long as
thou can get and gain by him, and wipe the fat off his beard, as 2. Sam. 16
Ziba did from Mephibosheth: and then in his misery to shake him off: to leave
him as the twatling Jngrati symbolum, apud Whitnaeum Alciatum, and Reusucrum.
Swallow, the Country man's house in the Winter: to pick his meat, as some
Lawyers with their Clients; as the Eagle with the opened Oyster, and to leave
him the shell to feed on, which his strong Patience must digest as he may, as
the Ostridge does Ass^runt plerique Hi^stori^ negat. sotum modo Albertus anim.
lib. 23. li^. 5. Applicatio.
Iron.

Oh consider this you unadvised Hotspurres, summon your wits together, you
younger Brothers, or rather you elder Brothers, you Prodigal Heirs, whose
wings for a time are better feathered: as you may see, the Lion by his Ex
vnguibus leonem.
pawe, see the end of your race, in the course of this Prodigal: be not It is
a Phrase used in the book called the Jesuits Catechism, in Quarto, whereby
these sharkers are discovered.
drained, (as the Jesuits deal with young Gentlemen) out of your means: be
not gulled and flattered out of your Revenewes, by Sycophants, and flaging
Companions; that seek to feed on you, as the little Bird Trochilus, in Jaws
of the De quo Plinius lib. 8.25. Aeli^nus lib. 3. c. 11. and Heroditus lib. 2.5.
Crocodile; that seek to grow up by you, (as the Ivy that spreads on the
Churchwill,) till they suck your moisture, and bring you down, for all
together, building on your ruins: be not uncased, out of your lands, your
livings: as the Cooks uncase Conyes, by such g^atonicall Conny- (money)
catchers: be not C^rrion, for such chattering Crows to prey upon: you had
better feed all Diomedes wild Vt qui Throicij quoudam praesepia regis:
fecerunt dapibus sanguinoleus* suit. Ovid in Jbidem.
horses; or with this Prodigal, feed all the Towns Swine: or with the Roman
CRASSVS, feast an De divitijs and numeroso exercitu Crass^, Ravisius, in Theat.
phil. Page 92. and Page 258.
Army, than feed such Helluohs: such trencher Guls, that haunt you as SOCRATES
his Genius: or BRUTUS his Who met him fatally at his Pharsalia^ battle, apud
Liviu^.
Ghost: whom at last you will occasionedly curse, as De eujus querelis vide
Iosephum, Antiq. lib. 18. Cap. 13. lib. 19. cap. vltima. Et Lorinum in Acta,
cap. 12. v. 23.
HEROD, and Alexander apud Indos, vulneratus en inquit vestrum Deum. Apud
Curtium.
ALEXANDER did their Flatterers, in their greatest exigents: as ADRIAN did his
multiplicity Turba medicorum occidet Cae^arem.
of poisoning Physicians; as FAVSTVS cried out, on his Mephistophilus, some
Witches, on their attending spirits; some heart broken penitent, on his blood
sucking Whore; (some SAMPSON on his DALILAH,) even at his death, whether
natural in his bed, or violent at the Gallows, lamenting your acquaintance
with them; as CORNELIUS AGRIFPA did his familiarity with the Devil, in the
form of a black Abi inquit perdite, qui me totum perdidisti. See the Theater
of Gods judgments in Quarto, cap. 23. Page 124.
Dog; at the best know, that if ever you stand in need to those Cannibals, that
have so long fed on you: as here this Prodigal did to his former Comrades, you
shall cough for comfort, as he did: you shall have as much relief even for
your out ward man, as DAVID had of 1. Sam. 25.10.
NABAL; you shall be denied cold water; as once the churlish Samaritan, did to
the best of Ioh. 4.9.
men; you shall have such respect as our English King LEIR of his two
unnatural Lanquet in Cronicis.
Daughters; ^s POMPEY had of his ungrateful Ptolomie King of Egypt, to whom
he fled from Caesar.
friend, who sent his Head, See the Death of Doctor Faustus, extant in English.
as a Present to CAESAR; or as TVILY had of his viperous friends; OCTAVIUS,
HERENNIVS, and POPILIVS, who presented his hand, and head, and tongue, and all,
to his enemy Apud Brusoniu^, de Jngra^ lib. 3. c. 11. page 18.
ANTHONY, and tyrannizing FVLVIA: you shall be used as the Countryman that
warmed the cold Snake, in his Apud Aesopum in Fabulis.
bosom, by whom he was stinged: or as the Pilgrim in the well moralized
Fable, who plucked the hunger-starved Serpent, out of the Cliffe of the Rock;
and she in requital would needs eat him, as her first prey: Look for as
much good from such, what ever they now pretend, in their French, Spanish, and
Italian Complements: as IVDAS got from the Scribes and Mat. 27.4.
Pharisees, when he made his moan to them, in his distress: Expect from them
nothing but scathe and scorn, as the jangling Iay in the Fable, had from the
flattering Fox, when he had by his Oratorie gulled her of the Cheese, which
she had in her beak.

Get thou Gold from the Prodigals dross, gain from his loss, Grapes from his
Thorns, Figs from his Thistles; as VIRGILL got gold out of ENNIVS his
Dunghill, and SAMPSON; honey from the dead Judge. 14.
Lion; so get thou Corn even from the Prodigals husks; warning from his
Premoniti premuniti, and felix quem faciunt, aliena pericula cantum.
harming; as the Lion is instructed, when the Dog is beat before him. If he
could not get Husks for his hunger, from those that had sucked him, and his
means: think, that there is the same nature in every Serpent, every viper,
every ungrateful varlet, that is in one: Do what good thou can, to a wicked
graceless, godless man: chiefly to a Hog; a Drunkard, an Epicure; thou
casts but a Pearl before a Math. 7.
Swine, a precious Stone, before AESOPS Jn Faebul. 1.
Cock, thou sowest but thy seed, in an Irish bogge: with ULYSSES Cuius ficta
Insania, fuit a Palamede delecta, apud Homerum.
plowest but the sand; all is lost Perit quod facis ingrato.
that is done for such a fellow: he will regard thee and reward thee if ever thy
errand be in his way: as PHARAOHS Butler did JOSEPH, Genes. 40. vltimo.

CHAP. VIII. The insufficiency of the Husks of Vanity, to content the
insatiable appetite of the Soul, further explained.
THus, we see our Prodigal would have eaten Husks, if he had them; but all
the craft is in the catching: No man gave unto him.

But what would he have done with them, if he had got them: he should have
had as much good of them, as the Dogs of grass: they had stood him, in as much
stead as a cold stone for the heart-burne: for Husks feed not, fill not; He
feign would have filled his belly with the Husks, etc. says the Text: He
gladly would: that intimates that he could not: he would, but could not:
That Is the Poinct: for to keep us, a while to the Letter, till we extract our
first conclusion further from the evidence of the Spirit: Husks (like
vanities, of which they are true Hierogliphicks) fill not: satisfy not: and
good reason: 1. For Husks are windy and vaporous; therefore forbidden by
VALERIVS FRACCVS a Medicus viterbiensis, lib. 1. c. 130
Physician, that lived in the time of PLINY. 2. According to DIOSCORIDES, and
PLATINA; they hurt the stomach and loose the belly, chiefly it they be new. 3.
The Husk according to Lib. 3. de tuenda valetud. and lib. 2. de Facultate
Alimentorum.
GALEN, is Pravi succi edulium, of a very evil favor and relish. 4. Such a
Drug which seems soft without, and empty within; by which according to Jn
Lucam, in locum.
AMBROLE, Corpus non reficitur, sed impletur, The belly is not refreshed, but
only puffed up, as an empty bladder; or as the ordinary gloss has it, being
of that kind, Quod ventrem magis onerat, quam reficit, which rather onerates
and loads the belly, than contents it.

But to return to my first Proposition, that all these Husks of honors,
profits, pleasures, riches, beauties, knowledge; all lusts, luxuries, vices,
vanities whatsoever, are but windy vaporous, froathy, aerie, etc. which rather
hurt the heart, distemper the Soul, bring a flux of all kind of follies; than
satisfy the desires of the sons of men: For all these Husks, there is a
dearth, a famine, a want, a Desiderantur nonnulla.
defect, a vacuitie still in every worthless vanity. I know they promise much,
as the Harlot to the young man, Prove. 7.18. in her Corporeal Lust; that if we
will commit with them Spiritual fornication, we shall take our fill of love;
yet this filling proves but emptiness, this conjunction with them, brings
forth but a Moone-calfe, a wind-egge: or some unperfect misshapen Embrio; rugged
and deformed like a whelpe of a Lamhendo Eaetus deformes efformant vrsi.
Solinus. Cap. 28. and Aelian. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Bear, unworthy of our loves, of our affections: those that doat on them
imagine like the Nimrodian builders of Genesis 11.4
Babell, that they have got a great purchase; that by them they shall eternize,
and perpetuate their names, and climb up as high as heaven, but in the truth
and trial, they walk upon Ice, their feet flip; and they fall down to the
lowest Center of Psalm. 9.17.
Hell, to their trouble and confusion; we think they will prove to us, rocks
of refuge, and Castles of defense, as the Coat to the Dove, the stony rocks to
the Connyes; in all our exigents: but by the delusion of that great Magitian
the Devil, they prove but Castles built in the Air, we think we may trust to
them as to true and trusty friends, as faithful to us as JONATHAN to DAVID,
etc. But in our chief distresses they prove to us, as the Fig Tree to our
Savior, that had leaves fair promising, but no fruit to satisfy Mat. 21.19
hunger: they flatter us with our imbracings, in our prosperity, (as
beautiful Strumpets their Lovers and Amorites) whilst like horse-leaches, they
suck the blood from their veins, the moisture from their bones, and (as De vi
Magnetis August. de Civit. Dei lib. 4. cap. 6. and Vives Comment.
Loadstones) draw the Metal from their purses; but after in our adversity,
they leave us, as HAGAR did her Ge^. 21.16
ISMAEL, to die and perish for the want of the waters of refreshment in the
Wilderness, and dry Desert of the world, not once vouchsafing their looks,
and attendance; in which respects, those who think to satisfy their soul, in
their fruition: or as the hungry man in the Prophet, who dreams that he eats,
but when he awakes he is empty: or as the thirsty man, who dreams that he
drinks, but awaked from sleep, his soul is thirsty still: Esaias. 29.8. Like
the Hound, that by the working of his fantasy, opens in his sleep, as though
he were pursuing the Dear, or the Hare; which is nothing else but a dreaming
deceit: They which desire these Husks, or which once taste them, are as those,
that have appetitum Caninum, the disease called the Dogs hunger, always eating but
never Barrowes Method. lib. 3. cap. 7. page 110.
satisfied, with the Horse-leach daughter, they still cry give; Pro. 30.15
give, as the Grave Hell and Pro. 27.20
Destruction, they are never sufficed, never contented: there is still a hunger
after these husks be received, concocted, and digested, as there is still a
thirst, in the Dropsy Barrow ut supra, lib. 3. Cap. 32.33 p. 155, 156
man, even after he has well drunk, now hunger we know, always intimates a
desire, and an appetite: therefore as we read, of a holy, a heavenly, and a
spiritual hunger, which is in part here Math. 5.6. Luke 1. v. 52
satisfied, with Grace, and after shall be fully satiated in Glory: 1 As a
hunger, and thirst after Righteousness. 2 After the Waters of life, Esaias.
55.1. 3 After the salvation of the soul, and after the souls of others, Ioh.
4.32.34. 4 After God, yea after the living GOD, like the thirst of the Heart,
after the Rivers of water, Psalm. 42.1.2. As it is dexterously applied, by some
of the Chris. hom. 33. in cap. 4 Johan. Tom. 3. Bernard. Sermon. de passione, and
Aug. Sermon. 2. in Psalm. 34. cum Arnoldo tract. de vorbis domini, in Cruce.
Fathers. 5 Yea, a hunger after the Word of God, that spiritual Manna, and a
thirst after the waters of life: such as was in DAVID, the Psalm. 119.103.
Patriarch, in the Publicans in the days of Luke 15.1
CHRIST, in the Catechists and Converts, in the days of AUGUSTINE, in the Act.
8.28.
Eunuch, and the noble Baeraeans in the Act. 17.11
Acts: such as Hom. 3. de Lazare.
CHRYSOSTOM, and Saint Epist. 103 ad Paulanu^.
IEROM, commend to the men of their age: such as NICEPHORUS commends in
THEODOSIUS the Niceph. l. 4. c. 3.
Junior: EVSEBIUS In vita Constantini lib. 4.
in CONSTANTINE the Great: RANULPHUS Lib. 6. c. 1.
in ALFRED a English King; PANORMITAN in ALPHONSUS King of Lib. 1. de vita
Alphonsi.
Arragon: PAULUS EMILIUS in CHARLES the Lib. 3. hist.
fifth, and which at last, even some Jesuits Lorinus in Act. Apost.
convicted with the truth they cannot but commend: so there is also a Carnal,
a Metaphorical, insatiable hunger, after these externals: there is a hunger
after Gold in Aurisacra Fames.
VIRGIL, a hunger after Crowns and Scepters in PLATO; a hunger in Lusts and
Concupiscences in this our Prodigal, a hunger after sin, and a hunger also
in sin; sin being by Tom. 5. eperis Imperfecti, in Mathaeum.
CHRYSOSTOM, called a banquet for the Devil; as righteousness of the spirit,
a banquet from God: Now in this feast, in which the Prodigal had tasted and
gulphed down, so many of the Devils dainties: after all this, he suffered
hunger: after he had consumed both gifts of Nature, and common graces; abused
all his Talents; weakened and corrupted both Will, Reason, and Understanding;
eclipsed all the light of Nature; decayed all his Natural, dulled all his
Spiritual powers, in the service of sin, in the prosecution of Vanities; as
Interpretors Johannes Major, and Granatensis in locum.
note; yea, after he had made shipwreck of coin, credit, conscience, honor,
reputation, and all: then he began to be in need, and suffer hunger: then
according to Lib. 7. in Lucam. c. 15
AMBROSE and Cemment. in locum.
ALBERTVS, he began to long after those pleasures a fresh, which he had
enjoyed: with which he was not contented; for according to BOETIVS, he needed
still, because he still desired: Eget eo, quod quisque L. 3. de consel. Psalm.
3.
desiderat: He had the will still to desire, what he had not power to Habuit
voluntatem non valetudinem Fruendi.
Enjoy; his hunger, being the appetite of delectation, says a Stephanus paris.
ho^. 18.
Modern, it could not be fulfilled: the ardour of his Concupiscence according
to Part 2. in parabolam prodigi. Observatio.
CALISTVS, being so much the more inflamed, as fire with the oil, by how much
his carnal delights abounded.

From whence I would have all men to see with open eyes, and to consider with
enlarged and illuminated hearts: The World with all her chief, and choice
contents, is of no validity to give to any man, this inestimable Jewel, this
happy Dowry of true content: she never was the Mecaenas and Patroness of such
an Advowson, as true contentation: this, like Terras Astraea reliquit.
ASTRAEA comes from Heaven; it is the largeness and bounty of the sovereign
Monarch of Heaven and Earth, to his especial Favorites elected, (selected) to
Grace, to Glory; of greater worth than JOSEPH'S Ge^. 41.42
chain, or MARDOCHEVS, his Esth. 6.11
honors, DANIELS Dan. 5.29
royalties, than all the gold of Peru, the Pearls and Mines of India, and
treasures of the Earth, even as the Sun is more glorious, than the Moon; the
Moon more glorious than the Star, the brightest Star above the dimmest
candle: and as well may the Sun be said to come from the earth (as the Poets
fained TITAN to set in the Ocean,) as to excogitate, the beams of this
content, to have any earthly original: (as that PALLAS from IVPITERS Jovis
filia, ex Cerebro orta Minerva, textoris Theat. Phil. l. 4. p. 342.
brain) it comes from God: as the baptism of JOHN, it comes from Heaven, for
the world here below, with all her sublunary pleasures and treasures, is not
able to make a man to be vndique Arist. in Ethicis.
quadratus, every way square, and happy. Let her open both her hands, set wide
her doors, and Windows: bring forth all her best Totum penu depromere.
wares, show all her treasury, and storehouse, furnish her shop of vanities,
pleno cornu; with a full horn, power on one man (which seldom happens) all
other choice favors; yet all this is nothing: Let Natures best Graces which
she severally disperseth, (as the Sea her Rivers) run in one torrent, meet all
in one Subject, as in a Center, let a man be imagined

1. More Heroicke than the nine Worthies. 2. More valiant than Theseus or
Hercules. 3. More Courageous than Hector and Achilles. 4. More prudent and
politic than Ulysses and Nestor. 5. More victorious than Caesar and
Alexander. 6. More learned than Philo Iudeus, or Faber Stapulensis, so extolled
by Cassanenus, in Catol. Gloriae mundi: To be Omnium sui temporis doctissimus.
7. A better Poet than Homer. 8. A better Philosopher than Aristotle. 9.
Morralist than Seneca. 10. Historian than Plinny. 11. Humanist than Plutarch.
12. A greater Schoole-man than Aquinas. 13. A better Divine than Augustine. 14.
A greater Critic, than Lipsius, and the two Scaligers, I^lius and Josephus,
whose praises appear in the Epistle ante libros de sub^itate. 15. More subtle
in Nature than Cardan. 16. In Theology than Scotus. 17. Better read than
Erasmus. 18. A better Physician than Galen. 19. Mustian than Nero. 20.
Mathematician than Tycho Brahe. 21. A deeper Astrologer than Ptolomy. 22.
Geometrician than Eucl^d. 23. A more exquisite Lawyer than Vlpia^ or Baldus.
24. A greater Canonist than Panormitan. 25. Chronologer than our Broughton. 26.
A sweeter Orator than Tully or Demosthenes. 27. A more general Linguist than
Mithridates. 28. A more perfect Grammarian than Priscian. 29. Logitian than
Ramus or Keckerman. 30. Rhetorician than Quintillian. 31. Grecian than
Turnebus. 32. Hebri^ian than Drusius and Buxtorfius. Yea in a word let him be,
1. A Properer man than Adoniah. 2. Taller than Saul. 3. Fairer than Joseph. 4.
More lovely than Pompey. 5. Better beloved than Titus Vespatian, dilitias
dictus humani generis. 6. More desired than Augustus. 7. Stronger than Sampson
or Sangar. 8. Richer than the Lydian Craesus. 9. Every way more fortunate than
Policrates, spoken of by Erasmus in Adagijs.

Let such an Eutopian man be imagined, coined in our conceits, new minted in
our minds, in whose one lap all these good things are powered (as Jupiter is
feigned to shower gold in Danae^ lap) even while he is a sleep,
notwithstanding all these, the conclusion holds firm. They can administer no
true Content.


all these without the fear, the service, the knowledge; the worship of the
true God, man's sovereign good: without eating bread with this penitent
Prodigal, in our fathers house, refreshed with God; best bounties, in his true
Church; all these besides and without this, can bring no true rest, tranquillity
and satisfaction to the Soul of man, no more than the Husks to this our
younger Brother.

CHAP. IX. CHRIST'S verdict of the worlds waters, Insufficient to quench the
Souls thirst; without the waters of Life.
But least in reading this Orthodoxe truth, which to the Incredulous world, may
seem a Paradoxe, some Skeptic or Critic say of me (as some say Mornaens de
veritate Relig. Christianae.
Galen, others say Aristotle, said in reading of MOSES, Hic vir multa dicit,
nihil probat: This man speaks much, but proves little; since in many positive
truths, we deliver, we may complain as ESAIAS, concerning Christ's Esaias. 53.1
incarnation, who has believed our report. Most natural men even within the
Church, (as well Turks and Pagans without:) being either unbelievers as Ioh.
20.28
THOMAS, or contradicting Antagonists, as Elimas the Act. 13.10
Sorcerer, and the Jews against Act. 14 14 and 17.13.
PAVL: Porphiry and De cujus Blasphemijs, vide Zozim. lib. 6. cap. 2. Socrat.
lib. 3. cap. 21. Theod. lib. 3. cap. 25.
Julian, against the Primitive Fathers: or flat Atheists, as that noble man 2,
King. 7, 2.
in ELISHA's time; the scoffers in PAVLS Act 17.32
time; the mockers 2. Pet. 3.3
in St. PETER'S time; the desperate ones in IEREMIE's Ier. 18.12 18.
time, when they should receive and embrace any truths, without the Sphere and
Circumference of their own carnal reason; which breeding (as the Serpent in
the dead Plinius l. 10. hist. c. 66. and Thol. Syntax artis mirabilis, l. 33.
cap. 10 page 647.
man's) in their living brains, is the greatest enemy they have unto Religion,
and most prejudicial unto Salvation: knowing too well, how many are endangered
in their souls, by their own abundant reason; as NOAH was Genesis 9. v. 21.
drunk with his own wine; GOLIATH slain with his own 1. Sam. 17 51.
sword: this reason, too much relied on the birth of their own brains, being
the very baine of their souls: (as the Moath that breeds within the Cloth, the
Canker that breeds within the Rose, the Worm that breeds within the Apple: the
Wolf that breeds within the flesh, are all of them the bane of their breeders
and feeders, as the viper is of her own Plin. hist. l. 10. cap. 60
dam, as NERO was of his own Mother Suetonius in Nerone.
AGRIPPINA:) therefore because reason must be convinced, the Conscience
convicted, the heart persuaded, the Judgment enlightened; I will, as God shall
give the door of utterance, in the best improvement of my Talent, add as it
were a Soul, to the Body of my first Proposition.

1. From Testimonies. 2. Reasons. 3. Demonstrations; my Testimonies shall be
fewer, my Reasons 24. My Demonstrations diverse, from particular inductions;
then the uses will follow (as the thread the needle) for our instruction and
edification.

First for my Testimonials, though I could produce many, yet as in an Orchard I
pluck not every fruit, nor in a Garden gather every flower, but some choice
ones: so I only limit, my self to fewer witnesses, since even in the mouth of
two Witnesses, every matter shall be decided.

My first testimony, shall be from the Author of the Testaments, CHRIST
himself; my second from ESAIAS, that noble Evangelicall De landibus hujus
Prophetae Multa and Mira legimus apud Hier. Epist. 103. and 117. Aug. 18. de
Civ. Dei, c. 29. Greg. l. 5. in 1. Reg. cap. 13.
Prophet: my third, from the verdict of JONAS; my fourth, from the experience
of SOLOMON the wisest of men: and these will we produce, if God permit.

For the first, to begin with Gods own Testimony: our Savior Christ, in that
conference which he had with the woman of Samaria, in the 4. of Iohu,
discussing with her, and declaring to her, the worth of the waters of Life,
those living waters; to set an edge, on her affections, to long after them, and
to loath these filthy luculent, P^ius in Panyger, p. 360. Plato in ^ymaeo. p.
704. Cicero lib. 2. de leg. page 320. Zenophon in Oechon. page 239. and lib. de
Iside Plutarchus, com. 2. page 611.
and puddle waters of her lusts, in which the soul of this Adulteress had
been too long soyled, she still pleading for the excellencies of the waters
of JACOBS Ioh. 4.12.
Well, and the privileges and prerogatives of that Patriarch, (as NAAMAN 2.
King. 5.12.
extolled Abana, and Pharpar rivers of Damascus, above the Jewish Jordan:) as
the Jews bragd of MOSES and Ioh. 8.53 and Ioh. 9.29
ABRAHAM, above CHRIST; as our Papists now of their own waters, though bloody,
as these seen of 2. King. 3.22.
Moab, bitter as these of 2. King. 2.19.
Jericho: as they run from the Romish As Traditions so urged, and answered by
D. W^t, i^ his reply to ^sh^. A Pa^ page 47.
Sea, above the waters of Shiloh, the mundifying waters of the Word; as they
extol the puddles and broken p^s of their own Alti^ summa^. 3. cap. 12. q. 2.
Rhemists in Heb. 6. An^. 10. V^sques sup. 1, ^. p. ^ disp. 2^4. Cap. 1.
works, above the Christalline fountains of Gods mercies, Christ's merits:)
our Savior instructing her ignorance, rightly informing her judgment,
reforming her errors, tells her by way of Anttihesis or comparison, that
whosoever drinks of the water of Jacobs Well, shall thirst again, but he that
drinks of his water shall never thirst Ioh. 4.13 14.
intimating, that there is a defect in the waters of JACOBS Well; and so in
every other earthly thing Rogers in his true co^vert in locum page 91.
whatsoever: it cannot quench, this inward thirst of the soul (no more than
these Husks could satisfy hunger) but causes a greater thirst, than was
before, even as sprinkling of a little water, upon a raging hot fire of coals,
makes it burn the faster and fiercer: all the vain men in the World fed with
Swinish husks, and drinking on the Worlds Cesternes, chiefly gulping down
stolen Pro. 9. vlt.
waters, and swallowing the bread of Deceit, (as HAGGAI Hagg. 1.6
Prophesies of those Carnalists, Jews and Gentiles:) they eat but they have
not enough; they drink but they are not filled with drink: they put their
waters into leaking vessels, that run out: and again (as AUGUSTINE) saw in his
vision by the Seaside, Poffidonius in vita Aug.
) they seek but to fill a sive with water, a frivolous labor, they eat as a
man that has a consumption, wondrous greedily, but their meat does them no
good, they are still, as lanke and lean for all they devour, as PHARAOHS
Lean Kine, which eat up the Genesis 41.4
fat: (nay for all their feeding; they famish: at evening, they return, and
make a noise, like a Psalm. 59.14.15.
Dog, they go round about the City, wandering up and down for meat and grudge
if they be not satisfied, says the Psalmist: which cannot be meant so much in
respect of food corporal, (for NABAL makes a Feast like a 1. Sam. 25 36.
King: the rich Churl fareeh deliciously every Luke 16.19
day, and the wickedst have their Barnes Lu. 12.70
full, their Cow calving, their Oil, and their Wine Job. 21.10
abounding) but there is deficiency in their Souls, notwithstanding, all their
abundance in externals, in respect of Nutriment Spiritual: In which respect,
even the young Ps. 34.10.
Lions, those great, and mighty Peers, Princes, and Potentates, of the world,
that seem to bath themselves in Oceans of delights, (as once that proud Vxor
Neronis.
Popea, in Goats milk) which here rule the roste, are Domine fac totum, as
the Lion in the Fable: Ninerodian Genesis 10 9
hunters tyranizing over others, as the young Lions which are most agill and
spirited, over Beasts: the Eagles over Birds: even these do lackc, (as did De
Tantali supplicio, apud Inferos, fame sitique torquente: Vide Proportium, lib.
2. and 4. Horatium in Epod. Seneca^ in Octavia: and Ravisium page 81.
Tantalus, and that Midas) in the midst of their opulencie, and superfluity:
and suffer hunger as this our Prodigal.

To have all homebred arities, all veneriall Iunkets such as are reckoned up by
Pliny. Lib. 26. cap. 10. and ab. 28. c. 14. ad finem. By Galen, lib. 5. de
sin^p. di^. 6. cap. 2. And by Ty^aquell, lib. 14. conub^ul. All far fetched
and dear bought booties, as Figs and Lemmans from Spain, J^cca from Cuba,
Moyze from Peru, Ryce from Pegu, and Cambaja, the bread of Luce, from Congo,
the fruits of the Palm Tree from Guinee, yea Tobacco from Trinidaao, which to
some is i^star omnium: And for liquors, the peerless, pearled health of
Cleopatra, Quae centies sestertium. 1.250. milia anreorum vno ferculo
consumpsit. Tex. p. 62 9. Or some Ganimede draw them the neatest Wines whether
Cyprus and Candise Muskadine, Jtalian Falerne, Spanish Sack, German Rhenish,
French Claret, or the rest; whose several species are reckoned up by Cassaneus
in Catol. gl^. fol. 352. Pt. 12. And kin^s are recounted by Pliny, lib. 14.
etc. By Columell lib. 4. cap 3 de re rustica, etc. Let them have C^ya from
Gre^ce, C^ffa from Turkey, Aqua vitae and Rosa s^, from our mother Alb^,
Vsquebath from ^reland, Or which of all is most rare, let them suck up the
Ferrall, which drops from the ever dropping Tree, in the Island of Canaris,
reported by Mazi^s, De rebus Jndicis All these, and what ever else in this kind
can be desi^ed cannot satisfy the soul, nor content the spirit of man,
without that spiritual ^od here spoken of.
If the Earth should bring forth (for these sons of men) all her choysest store
of herbs, fruits, and flesh; the water afford all plenty of the most desired
fish; the Air administer the most esteemed Fowls, the whole lap of Natures
store laid open, and all Arts, and Inventions far and near, improving and
preparing the best materials therein, for the filling and satisfying of the
most sensual senseless, and unlimited appetites in the world. Yet unless
they by Faith Spiritually eat the flesh, and drink the blood of their
incarnate Ioh. 6.51.53.
Savior, unless they feed on the Milk and Manna of the Word, and Wine of
the Sacraments: unless they be a thirst, and come to the waters, buying Wine
and Milk without Esaias. 55.1, 2.
money, without merits, without price (without Popish Peter Pence) unless the
Lord prepare for them, a Feast of fat things, upon his holy Esaias. 25.6.
mountain: unless with spiritual Israel, they eat that Pascall Exodus 12.
Lamb, slain in Gods decree, from the beginning of the Rev.
world, to take away the sins of the Ioh. ^.29.
world, off the Elect: unless with this repenting Prodigal there be killed
for them, this same Vitulus saginatus, this fat Luke 15.30.
Calfe; for all the rest of their dainties, they suffer a dearth: they are
pincht with spiritual famine, as this our Swine-feeding prodigious Prodigal:
as their Viands are of no valor, no value without these, they do but breed
gravel in the belly; or turn to a stone in the heart, more dangerous than the
stone in the Reins: as the waters of Jealousy drunk by the guilty Jewish
women, they turn to putrefaction and swelling: they are as rot grass to
sheep: yea as pudle waters which some have unadvisedly drunk, in which there
is the froth and sediments of Frogs in time of ingendring, they cause crawling
and trouble in the bowels, or as green Apples, and raw-fruit breed worms, yea
that great hag-worme of a Corroding Conscience, still gnawing (as the Vultur on
Ovid. 4. Metam. and l. 3. de Po^to and in ibidem.
TITIVS and PROMETHEVS Propert. l. 2. and Ravis. page 81. Ethi^e Interpretatur,
lib. Offic. page 845.
his Liver) as the children of Vanity: yea, when Vanity is sweet in the
mouth, and hid under the tongue, favored and not forsaken, but devoured and
digested, it shall turn to the gall of Aspes, yea to very poison; it shall be
disgorged and vomited up again: Job. 20. ver, 12.13 14.15. No quietness shall
the soul have, no more than the Ship or Whale had in which JONAS Ioh. 1, 4,
and cap. 2. v. 10
was; no more than the rankling heel, in which the thorn is: no more than the
side in which the stitch is, or the eye in which the moate is, or the flesh in
which the impoysoned bullet is: or the stomach surcharged with meat, or
over-ballanced with drink; till like an Impostumated breast, or a ripened
Ulcer, the rotten dregs and filthy matter of every vicious vanity, be purged,
evacuated, and emptyed out of the soul, by contrition of heart, compunction of
spirit, confession of mouth, and actual dereliction: till this fostered, and
harbored guest be disloged, till vanities rankest veins be phlebotomized,
there is nothing but unrest in the Soul: distraction and division in the
heart, a taxie, disorder, and confusion in affections, nothing but broils, and
civil wars in the whole Hominem esse Microcosmum vel parvum mu^dum lege (^u^
varije aliusouibus ad mag^um mu^dum) ex Aste^io, in Theologia natural^.
Microcosme of man; as there was no peace in Abraham's family till Hagar and
Ismael the bond woman and her son were cast out of Genesis 21.9 14.
doors: for there is no peace to the wicked says my Esaias. 58.20.21
God: but they are as the raging sea: even boiling and surging, in the waves of
several lusts, they cannot rest, or come to any true repose; every dish of
vanities cooking, either stupifies and benums them (as Henbane that cold
poison) as is seen in those that have 1. Tim. 4.2 Read the learned book dal'd
the Physic of the soul. Cap. 8. page 103.104.
cautherized, and lethargicall Consciences, without any sense of any sin
whatsoever, or else (like those that eat Hemlocks) mads, and inrageth them, as
in those that have too wakeing, and working Consciences, as had Genesis 4, 13
Caine, Mat. 27.3 and Act. 1.25
Judas, Francis Apud Grineum in Theorem. theol. part. 2. page 151.152.
Spira of Padua: the Advocate Ponsen^s of The History of France under Francis
the second.
France: the German Kraus, a Doctor in Swabe: Dr. Latonius: Gerlach: and
Bomelius of Lovaine with many See the memorable Histories of our ries of our
Times, in Quarto, Page 186.187. Added to the C. Crescense, apud Sleidanum, Lib.
23.
more: The Husks of Vanities are no true diet for this Prodigal: they are
neither meat nor medicine for the mind of man: they either benumme or inrage:
bring their feeders into the cold Palsy of security: or into the burning
Fever of desperate fury.

CHAP. X.
Sect. 1. The hungry Husks of vain worldlings: and the blessed Bread of Gods
Children declared and compared.
I Have brought in my first witness, from Him that is indeed the Judge, in
this and every other controverted case and cause, the plain testimony of
CHRIST, concurring with the scope and drift of his own Parable: as the Prince
of the Prophets breaks the ice, so that Prophet which is the foreman of the
Iewry of the twelve, wades after: for as ESAIAS is accounted by Evangelij
vocationisque gentium, pronunciator apertior. lib. 9 confess. cap. 5
AUGUSTINE a more evident Trumpet and Proclaimer of Christ, than the rest: so
setting up a Siquis, as it were, or making a gene^all Proclamation, to all and
every one, Jews and Gentiles, Graecians and Barbarians, that were a thirsty
after Esaias 55.1.
CHRIST, and after his merits, heated scorched, and burnt up, with the fiery
indignation of the Law, revealing sin, desirous to be cooled, and refreshed
with the Gospel: heraldring out the worth of that water of Life CHRIST, with
all his mercies and merits, as freely offered and preferred unto all, that are
rightly qualified, with hungry hearts Math. 5.6
to receive him as the Air to breath in: the earth to walk on: the Sea to
sail in: the Sun of his mercy, casting beams on all that groan under the
Math. 11 28. and Math. 9.12, Luke 19.10.
burden of their sins: so expostulating with them, further, after the manner
of the Prophets (as MOSES often, with Deuteronomy. c. 1. Exo. 32.21
Israel: SAMAEL with 1 Samuel 15 14.
SAVL, NATHAN with 2. Sa^. 12.9
DAVID, and others; with others in like cases) by way of Increp^tion and
re^argution, he demands of them of wherefore they lay out money, for that which
is not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not: Esaias 55. v. 2. In
which he shows! 1. What they do foolishly: 2. What they reap frivously they
spend (as all other vain men) their oil, and their toil; their costs and
their pains, their money and their labor, in non panem: upon that which is not
bread? What ever any man does in a blind zeal, in a false Religion, as the
Jew in his Iudaisme: the Turk in his Mahumetan sine, Act. 9.^.2 Act. 22.^4. 1 Timothy 1 13
Saul once in his Pharisa^sme Vidi S^u^te^i Censura^ de Tertulliano i^ patrum
Medulla.
TERTVLLIAN in his Montanisme: the Anabaptists at this day in their f
Anabaptisme: the Familists in their g Familisme: the Papists chiefly in their
Papisme, in their Massings, Crossings, Creepings, Sprinklings, Idolatrizings,
Lege Doc. Rainolds, te Jdol. Romans Ecclesiae, and in Thesibus.
St Worshipings, Pilgrimages, Trentrals, Dirges, Shrifts, Pardons, Exorcismes,
Crucifixes, Shrines, Relics Images, Superstitious Ceremonies, Observations of
Times, Meats, Will-worships; Traditions, and the De quibus omnibus, lege
Willers Synops. and Tetrastylon. Sutcliffs works against Bell. his
Turcopapismas, his Abridg. of Popery. D. Morton his Protestants appeal. D.
White against Fish. D. B^ard his 13. reasons, D Fow^s: ^o^el, Down^m, de
Antichristo. D. Field de Eccl. Morney of the Mass and his progress of Papacy.
Humfrey in 10 reasons of Champian, cum alijs.
like. or what pains soever are employed Quicquid est homini, studij luboris
Industriae Calvinus lavater and Marlorat in locum.
in prosecution of any inordinate lust, vice, vanity carnality, concupiscence
watsoever that tend not to, ends not in Christ; these, and all these, are non
panis, they are no bread, they are but Husks and Akorns, they satisfy not:
these that follow after such, follow but after their shadow, pursue a Flea; run
after a butter-flye: they have a great catch for their labor: they beat but
the Air; they gape for the Wind: they miss their mark, they run at
uncertainties; they wander in Devious Toto errant coelo.
paths; they sail without their Compass, and Card; they dash upon the Rocks;
they sow the Wind, and reap the Whirlewind; when they look for Harvest and
crop of felicity, they are answered with the thorns of Cares, the Briars of
sorrows, the brambles of anxieties: with AESOPS Dog, they snatch the shadow
for the substance: with that Fabula in Ambitiosos applicatur a Ravisio, in
Officina. l. 8. page 853.
IXION, they embrace a Cloud, for IVNO; they wed bleare-ey'd Genesis 29.25.26
LEAH, for beauteous RACHEL; as dim-eyed ISAAC, they mistake Genesis 27.22, 23
JACOB for ESAIAS, that which they think plants them, supplants them: these
which they take (as ADAM received EVE) to be their helpers to beatitude) they
prove Remora piscis adhaeret Navibus and sistit. testibus vincenti^, l. 17. c.
29. Plin. l. 9. c. 25. and Basilio exem. hom. 7.
Remoraes, and Hinderers: they gripe these worthless trifles, as Fools do
Thorns, till they prick at last their very hearts, till they bleed again,
they dally and play with them as the Child at the hole of the Aspe and of the
Cockatrice, or at the hive of the Bees, till they be stung again, till they
dye or cry: in a word, they prove not bread unto them, as they thought, but
Husks which they thought not: they gain over shoulders by them, when all
their Cards are cast: their pains and their perils being counterpoized, with
the best that they promise: their chief Clyents rue their bargain, and buy
repentance at too dear a Non Tanti paenitentiam emam. Them.
rate: they bring them as much content in the issue and event, as Mercury to a
green wound, as smoke to sore eyes: the pleasure and profit they promise, ends
in pain and perplexity, as AMMONS unlawful love to THAMAR ended in 2. Sa^.
13.15
hatred; as sweet wine often corrupts to sower Vinegar: Hugging these in their
arms, as MOSES his Exodus 4.3.
rod, they turn Serpents, they break promise as perfidiously, as LAEAN with
Genesis 31.7
JACOB, as the Carthagenians with Rome, as Vlidislaus the Hungarian with the
Knols in his Turkish History, Bonfinius in Hist. Hungaria, and Jusius in
Theatro Iudicierum Dei, Anglice scripto. cap. 29. page 166 167.
Turk, and the Turk with the Christians. They answer not expectance; they
promise bread, for sustentation, but they perform Husks, vanities: vexation:
Parturiunt Montes nascetur ridiculus mus: they indent golden Mountains, but
pay chirping Myce, or micry Mole-hils: they allure him with the bait of
painted beauty, but strike with the book of experimented baine.

My Rivers return to their first Seas, they are not bread they satisfy not.

For the better clearing of which point, it is worthy our consideration, the
use, the excellency the necessity of bread, even according to the litterall
sense, as we have seen the vility, and vacuity of Husks, that so contraries
being opposed may more manifestly Contraria juxta se opposita magis elucescune.
appear, as Venus pictured besides Vulcan seems more beautiful, as Arions
Harp is more melodious after Pans Pipe, as honey more relisheth the palate,
after Aloes and Gall: and as the rose smells more fragrant after assa faetida:
bread then we must know, both in the Scriptures and Authors, has a very large
Panis Doctrinalis sacramentalis victualis apud Ludolphum de vita Christi.
extent: for it contains all sufficiency of food and nutriment, both for soul
and body, and therefore some would derive the Latin panis, of the Greek word
(...): which signifies, says one, the multitude of all safeties: the magnitude
of all Multitudinem salutum magnitudinem solaminum, and plenitudinem omnium
bonorum.
comforts, the plenitude of all good things, what ever is needful for
corporal, or animal sustenance, which me thinks better agrees to CHRIST, in
the mysterious sense, who is called that bread of life, Ioh. 6.51. Then to the
literal sense: yet consider the creature as it is, in it own nature: of all
the blessings which God has given for the preservation and sustentation of the
life of man, for his esse, and been Tullius de Officijs.
esse, his being, and his well being: there is none of more use than bread: for
if we consider either what account the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the men of
God, yea Pagans, Heathens, Turks, Salvages, in all Countries, and Kingdoms,
have made and still do make of it, in all ages: 2. Or how, well we are with
it: 3. Or, how ill we can be without it, we shall say of it, as Ad Laelium de
Amicitia.
TVLLY said of friendship: Solemn e coelo tollere videntur: they seem to take
the Sun out of the Heaven, that would deprive mortal men of it.

For the first use and antiquity of it; however it be a question whether flesh
were eaten or no, before the Negative determinant Theod. q. in Genesis 25. Chris.
hom. in Genesis 27. Hier. contra Jovin. lib. 2. Peter Martyr and Lyranus in Genesis
9. Aquina. 1.2. q. 102. d. 2. dubitat. tamen Calvinus in Genesis 6. Reprobavit
sententia^ dominicus a Soto. l. Justit. 5. q. 1. art. 4.
Flood, or only herbs and plants, which then had more vigor and force in
them, than now: yet, I persuade my self, bread was a food used of the
Patriarchs even before the flood, as since: for CAINE being a Genesis 4.2.
Husbandman, (as ABEL a Shepherd) and tilling of the ground, sure corn came
of his tillage, and of Corn, bread? And after the Flood MELCHISEDECH brought
to ABRAHAM bread Ge^. 14.18
and Wine: and the sons of JOB, whom some think was about the time of Pineda
and Mercerus perfat in Jobum.
MOSES, banqueted, and eat bread together, in the Elder brothers Job. 1.13
house and JOSEPH from Egypt, sent Corn for bread, for his Father JACOB, into
Genesis 42.15.
Canaan. I know some Countries were long without the use of it: using Akornes
for bread: yea PLINY reports it in his time, (which was some 40. years after
CHRIST) there were men eaters (as the Canibals now) that lived without bread:
and it is certain the Art of Baking was very lately brought to 380. years after
the Persian war.
Rome, for till the time of the Persian War they used boiled Corn instead of
bread: and before the use of Corn came up, many Countries lived of Lib. 8.
cap. 11. idem Plinius. Justin. l. 2. and Ovid. 4. Fast.
Pulse, and Gland, and Dates, and other such fruits of Trees: but after it was
once found out, by Tyllage, by OSYRIS in Lib. 16.
Egypt, TRITOLEMVS in Graecia and Asia, SATVRNE in Macrobius in Sat^ru.
Latium, Pliny lib. 7 Cap. 16.
CERES (or Isis) in Attica, Scicile as also the way and means how to grind
Corn, knead it, and bake it in bread: as did PILVMNVS Diodorus Siculus lib. 6
c^p. 15. and Polydorus Virg. de Iuvent. lib. 3. cap. 2.
the first Baker in Rome: how wonderously was the invention welcomed? And the
Inventors dignified, (yea deified with divine honor, and how this good Creature
since has been esteemed (except to profane and unthankful persons, to whom
plenty of it, as of all other common blessings, makes it disrespected) who
knows not?

And good reason it is to be equalized nay preferred before all other foods
besides, used in Authors of diverse As Camels flesh being the food of the
Arabians, Lizards and Nuttes to Syrians and Affricans, Grasshoppers to the old
Lybians, Lions and Bears to the Nomades of Assricke, Serpents to the Indians,
Horses and Wolves to the Vandals, and Sarmatians, Crocodiles to the Egyptians,
de quibus Hier. cont. Jovinian. lib. 2. Stra^ de situ orbis, ^b. ^6. Plutarchus
in synops. Aristoph. Salust. in bello Ingur. and Gibbons in Ge^. cap. 7 p. 264.
All these are little wholesome without bread.
Nations.

First, it is more wholesome of it self than any other meat, without it, for
let a man eat flesh of Bullocks, Beeves, Kids, Calves, or so much desired
Venison, Hares, Hearts, yea Quales, Partridges, Pheasants, he shall soon be
weary of them, without bread: yea tasted all or most of them together, in the
excessive riot of Feasts, I think with SENECA they rather clog the stomach,
than Diversa non ^lant sed inquinant.
nourish; fighting together in their diverse qualities Humida pugnantia siccis.
and operations, as the Eliments do, yea as so many Cocks in a Pit.

Therefore those that eat, of those meats without bread, as Salvages and
Canibals, are seldom clear complexioned, but blackish, and swarthy, of a
smelling and stinking breath, as is observed, neither so strong and nervous as
those that use bread.

Secondly, other meats though never so neatly and curiously cooked, often bring
satiety chiefly in sickness and distemper, or after some surfeit of them: that
they are never so distasted, but that even after sickness, the appetite
returns to it again.

Thirdly, other meats are not well relished without this: this, always even
without other meats.

Fourthly, some naturally hate and abhor There is a secret Antipathy in some
against Cheese, Mallards, Apples, Eggs, Pigs, Pyes, of which Physic knows
neither cause nor cure Like. I may say of Oil, Butter, Caveare and Tobaccho of
some much loathed.
other meats, or at least in superstition abstain from them, as once the
Pythagoreans from beans; the Papists at this day from all flesh and white
meats in Lent, and Saints Eeves, against that Christian liberty which the word
Coll. 2.16 1. Cor. 10.25. Romans 14.17 1. Tim. 4.4. 1. Cor. 8.8.
allows: the Turke^s also and Jews, with whom Papisme Vide Sutcleus
Turcepaspanu^ Reinoldum de Jdol. Rem. Ecclesiae. and Omerod his book called
the picture of a Papist.
in many things does sympathize abstain from diverse meats, at diverse times
superstitiously observed: as Epiphan. her. 66: Aug. de her. 46. and 30. contr.
Faustum. Cap. 5.6.
Heretics, have done in former times: our Iudaizing Threskites lately, but
never any (except in our marvailous if not miraculous prodigious Fasters, that
have by report exceeded even MOSES and ELIAS) have totally and wholly abstained
from Recorded by Wierus in his Tractaite of Abstinence, and the memorable Hist.
of our Time. p. 352.
Bread, yea bread and water have been used of our strictest Paenitents, in
their fasting humiliations: Yea, Pambo Macarius, Paulus Simplex, Anthony
Hilarion, of whose Austeritie Hospinian writes wonders, were daily dieted with
bread in their pittances, or portions more or De M^ra abstanentia horum and
aliorum Menachorum and C^itatum lege, Theod. lict. lib. 1. Cellat. Soc. 4. c.
23. Evagrium. 6.13. Zozom. l. 5. c. 10. and 15. and l. 6. c. 28.29.33.34.
Niceph. lib. 11. Surium. Tom. 1. and Tom. 6. de vitis Patrum.
less: yea DANIEL himself Dan. 10.3
though he abstained from all pleasant bread, (as DARIUS Dan. 6.18.
once from Music) in his occasioned humiliation, for one and twenty days,
yet it is no consequent but he eat ordinary bread, since according to the rule
of that zealous Hier. lib. 2 Epist. 14.
linguist, fortissimum Ieiunium est aqua and panis: bread and water, are the
chief Fasts; yea for the whole term of life, though some have abstained from
Wine as the Josephus in bello Indaico lib. 2. cap. 8.
Essens, amongst the Jews, the Nazarites, Baronius annalium Tom. 1. and Bell.
lib. 2. cap. 5. de Monachis.
and the Rechabites, from flesh, yet none from bread: except such, as cannot
get it: as these in Navar, that live in Rocks and Cliffes by the Sea side,
only on stockfish all winter: and in other frozen Countries, as our poor
Mountanous Irish also have made poor shift, with course fare, even without
bread: Insomuch that the Poet observed some in his time, content only with
bread, salt and water: as was sometimes, that Cynicke in his Tub: therefore
it is well observed by some, that our Savior instituted the Sacrament of the
Eucharist in bread, as a Type and figure of his body: because it is in use
amongst all Nations: nor ever forbid by any politic Law, as other meats are;
as flesh in Lent, the not killing of Calves, Lambs, Pigs, for propagation of
Cattle, after some rot or Murraine: or for supply of war, or the mating, of
some Country, as now Virginea: or some other politic ends: nay it is
observed, that even most creatures affect bread, more than any other meat,
appropriated to man: The Elephant, the Dear, the Dog; the Fox, the Wolves
(those wild vild Dogs) the Conny, the Hare, have been all known to eat
bread; but especially all Nations whatsoever, delight in bread: as
Villamontanus notes, that in the Haven of Iapha, as they travailed to
Jerusalem, the Moors and Arabians flew to their ships, requiring nothing but
bread; many such Histories we purchase by the Pilgrimage Purchase his
Pilgrimage passim
of that learned Preacher: and HERODOTVS tells us, that the Egyptians glorying
in their antiquity, then tried it thus; PLAMMETICVS their King tried this
Conclusion; he made two Children to be kept two years, by a Heardsman from all
company, at last visiting them, the first word they spoke, was Bec, Bec, which
both in the Phrygian tongue, and the lower Germany, signifies Bread: Bread.

Fifthly and lastly, bread is Instar omnium instead of all; nay taken for all
other victuals; as I have noted this Greek word Pan, intimates: therefore it is
a curse mixed with a Command, that ADAM shall eat his bread, that is earne,
whatever is needful ad victum cultumque for meat, drink, and apparel, in the
sweat of his Genesis 3.10 Marlorate inlocum.
brows, in some lawful calling; and that which is the best of Danaeus in
orat. Domini Ambrosius in Psalm. 118 and Babingto^ on the Lords Prayer, fol. 75.
prayers, the rule and square of all other prayers, directs us to pray for our
daily bread: that is whatever is needful for our temporary life, according to
our places, callings and conditions.

SECT. 2. GODS Children as they have GODS plenty: So they have GODS peace which
worldlings want.
NOw from these praemises according to the letter, we extract this truth, that
as Husks signify every vanity, as opposed to bread, including, concluding,
every good blessing, so the truth (as a square shows what is crooked) showing
it self, and the contrary, demonstrates to it both the propositions: first
propounded, that in the service and observance of sin, and Satan, the
Citizen of the Country, (the Author and Father of all the sins, of the City
and Country) there is nothing but hungry Husks; emptiness, vacuity, vility,
vanity, insufficiency, as on the contrary in our Fathers house: in the true
Church of God, in the service and worship of the true JEHOVAH, the Father of
Mercy, the Father of all Flesh; of all spirits; there is bread enough,
Corporal, Sacramental, spiritual, comfort, and contentation enough,
external, internal, aeternall. GOD providing a large allowance, a liberal
diet for his family, above that which SOLOMON daily allowed for 1. Kings, 4
22.23.
his, every day being to them a solemn Feast, a Christ-tide a Festival, as in
the new Moon, and solemn Assemblyes: a great Feast, indeed: above that of
Esth. 1.3.
ASSVERVS, or the Roman Galba, or When he supt in Apollo.
LUCULLUS; a Feast of fat things in his Holy Esaias, 25.6
Mountain, his Syon: a Feast of Wine on the Lees of fat things, full of marrow
of Wine on the Lees well refined; Mat. 22.4
for Wisdom has killed her Beasts Prove. 9.2.
already: her Oxen and her Fatlings: yea the Paschall Lamb and fat Calfe:
Omnia V. 8. and Luke 14.17.
parata all things are prepared: she has mingled her wines; she has furnished
her Table; the milk of the Word, the Wine of the Sacrament; the oil of the
Spirit: the unction from above, cheeres the countenance, and glads the heart of
all the Israel of GOD; they are all abundantly satisfied with the fatness of
their fathers house; he makes them drink of the rivers of his Psalm. 16. verse.
11. and Psalm. 17, 15
pleasures, the faith-espoused soul, married to the Kings son, is brought
into the bridal Cant. 1.4 and Chap. 2.4 and Chap. 5, 1
Chamber, takes her fill of love: yea is led into his banqueting house, in his
pleasing Garden; there eats honey, with the honey comb drinks wine, with
milk; yea drinks abundantly till she be inebriated, Ro^. 14.17
with love, Gal. 6.16
which is better than wine, yea till she be even in a Love Qualme, sick again
with love; as in a spiritual ecstasy of Joy: For the Kingdom of God is Love,
Peace, and Joy, in the Holy Ghost: and this Peace is upon all the Israel of
God, whosoever: this Peace as his last and best legacy, the Prince of Peace
left, with all that have true and Ioh. 14.27
saving Grace; to which peace is inseparably united and married: yea lincked,
as in a golden Gal. 1.3, Romans 1.7. 1, Cor. 1.3 2. Cor. 1.2 Ephesians. 1, 2, 5.
chain: For it is a false Calumny and frivolous imputation which the Children
of darkness, cast upon the Children of Light: that they are ever sad, sullen,
Semper taciti tristesque recedunt. Lucretius.
sighing, Sic dictum ^lim, Calvinianos, esse Melancholicos.
melancholy as a Hare or See Demecritus of Religions Melancholy, Part. 3.
sect. 4. page 493. ad p. 537.
Owl, never enjoying themselves, but pine, and droupe and hang down their
heads as a Bullrush: so pure and precise, that they take no content in the
Creatures, but deprive themselves of all Joys, or pleasures: unsociable,
besides, as Tymon Tymonille Atheniensis Misanthropos.
retired, or as Students: unhewen, unmanly, unmannerly men: such as take
delight in no company, and none in them; and so consequently that they are
starved in respect of any true content? For have they no joys because the
beetle blind bleare-ey'd world sees them not? Is there no soul in man, this
little world, no God in the world this great Homo Microcosmu^, Mundusque
Megacosmos comparantur ab Alstodio in Theol. Not. Part. 2. page 643.
man, because man sees neither? Had the Israelites no Manna, because the
Moabites and Ammonites tasted it not? Does not the Sun shine, because the
blind Beggar, discernes it not? Is there no sweetness in Honey and Sugar,
because the distempered palate of the aguish sick man, gusts it not? Is
ABRAHAM'S ISAAC sacrificed, because he was on the Altar? No ISAAC then (and
still) Ge^. 22.12
lives: ISAAC the son of laughter, the Fathers joy: the joy of GODS salvation
ever lives in the heart of the Elected and called: the Ram is only Ge^. 22.1^
sacrificed, carnal, sensual, Sodomitish, sinful, belluine, brutish,
fleshly, unclean and impure Joys, in the abused Creatures, such as brutish,
Swinish, hoggish Epicures, loose Libertines, wallow in; as the Eele in the mud,
in the abuse of Wine, Women, Music, Meares, Drinks, Apparel, Hawking,
Hunting, Sports, Pastimes, Feasts, recreations, turning liberty into
licentiousness, Christianity into Carnality: these joys and contents, in
which vain men live, (or rather by which they dye) as it were laughing, even
tickled to death: these only are moderated, mortified, sacrificed, yea
crucified, on the Cross of CHRIST: but ISAAC the son of Promise; spiritual
joys they still live: yea then live most when ABRAHAM (or the son of ABRAHAM
a believing Gal. 3.7.
Christian) is most tempted, tried, afflicted persecuted: as the Laurel is
greenest, when the winter is Imo vivit and viget in Mari Rubro Plin. lib. 13.
cap. 25.
fowlest; the Dolphin most plays, when the Sea is most Solinus c. 17.
stormy; the Swan sings sweetest, when death is the Cantaetor cygnus funeris
ipse sui.
nearest; as it may be seen; DANIEL rejoicing in the Lions Dan. 6.21
Den, PAVL and SILAS singing in Act. 16.25
Prison; the Apostles glad, that they were threat, and beat for the Name of
Act. 5.41
Christ, the Martyrs tryumphing at the As Jgnatius Polycarpus A^talus Bi^rlaam.
Fabianus Victoria apud Eusebium, lib. 3. c. 30. lib. 4. c. 15. lib. 6. c. 29.
Niceph. lib. 3.19. l. 14, 15. lib. 5 7 and apud Basilium, sermon. de Barlaam.
Stake; as CAESAR in his Trophies: and JOHN most ravished in spirit, when by
bloody DOMITIAN, he was banished to the Isle Pathmos: Yea as carnal men, like
that politic Prince in the Poet, are most sad in heart, when they seem most
glad in face, in the midst of their madding mirth, as SOLOMON calls it, their
hearts being most heavy; there being a pad in the straw, a Serpent under the
green grass, a Corn in their toe; a stone in their strait shoe, a moate in
their eye: Sonitus horroris: a sound of horror and Lev. 26.36. and De^ 28.65
66.67.
terror in their hearts which the world sees not: the guilt of their curbing
crucifying Consciences as they prolong to a further Tragedy, the flash to hell
fire, summoning them to Death and Judgment, to which, they are most near
approaching; Hanniball ad Portas: Even to the Pit brinck, when they are most
secure, sensual, Lethargicall lewd, licentious and outrageous in their sinful
vanities, as appears in Sodom Genesis 19.9 24.
Gomorah, the old Luke 17.25, 26.
world, 2. Sam 16 22.
ABIOLOM, 1. Sam. 15 32, 33
AGAG, SAMPSONS Judge 15.26.
Philistines, drunken 1. Sam. 25 36, 38.
NABAI, Da^. 5.4, 5
BALTAZAR, the Gospels Luke 12, 20
worldlings, the purpled Luke 16, 22
Glutton, with many more: (who if they knew all, had more need to act the parts
of HERACLITVS, than DEMOCRITVS; to weep than to laugh, as St. IAME^ Iam. 4.9.
counsels, to mourn with the Dove and Pelican, (as did DAVID) for the miseries
coming on them, than to jangle like lays; chatter like Crows; croake like
Frogs, prate like Parrats, nay roar like Bulls, in their unsanctified vanities
and scandalous soule-killing poisonous mirth: IEREMIES Threenes, the times
lamentations, the the Psalmographes paenitentiall 7. Psalmi Paenitentiales cum
Commentarijs Vegae, Lorini Marlorati Molleri Strigellij.
Psalms, recyted by Possiaonius in ejus^ita and Hist. Magd. cent. 5 page 11 13
AUGUSTINE, and Grinaeus in suis Apot^. Mo^entum, page 9^.
CALVIN, on their deathbeds (and the Lachryma of the Saints, better befitting
them, than Songs of Sodom, unclean ribauldry, which they vent and vomit out
in every Tavern; Inn, Alehouse and Tippling house) So again on the contrary,
the sanctified Christian, the true Convert; rejoices when he is afflicted,
tryumpheth when he is persecuted: her seth in holy affections, as the Ponderi
non sedit, Aulus Gellius lib. c. 6. preci^ue Gerliciu^, in Epist. ante axiom.
Eceles. ex Plinio, lib. 13. cap. 4.
Palm Tree, in despite of all the weight of Afflictions: Crosses are, but as
cold water sprinkled on a hot flaming fire; they more inkindle the heat and
ardour of his love: which much water cannot quench (as the sap to the root, the
besiedged Garrison, to the strongest part of the Castle: the spirits to the
heart of the dying man, dying Swan: the natural heat to the stomach and
inward parts) so his spiritual comforts retire inward, to his heart, and
soul, and conscience, in the coldest winter of outward troubles, trials and
pressures: his Sun shines even in his Raines and Storms; his Roses of
Comforts, grow in the midst of his Thorny trials: yea, they flow from
afflictions, as refreshing-waters, to all Gods Israel, even out of stony
Rocks; out of his soures, come sweet, as SAMPSONS Judge. 149
Hony-combe, out of the belly of the Lion: he finds Joy even in Tribulation,
as JONATHAN found strengthening Honey even in the 1, Sa^. 14.27
Desert, and as some find Pearls, even in the heads of Serpents, and Vt
uniones ex Ostreis. Ovetanus hist. l. 19. c. 8. ex Conchis asserit, Aelian. l.
14. c. 8
Fishes, when the Winds of afflictions beat upon the outwals of his flesh;
even then he has a wonderful calm, and tranquillity, in the inward house of
his heart. Even as it is quiet under the Deck, when the Waves and billows
bluster; against the outside of the Sea-floting Ships: In a word, the godly man
has his inward haven, and sure Anchor, when he seems to be fluctuate; his
inward heaven, when to the world he seems to have his hell: nay says that
judicious M. Perkins
Divine, he sails to Heaven by or through the Gates and straites of Hell: to
apply all to my purpose; he is full and satisfied, he has bread enough in his
Fathers house, when he seems to be hungry: the carnal worldling, his soul is
empty, he feeds but on Windy Husks, in the service of Sin, when he seems
to be satisfied? Satan's service (like the careless Cures of some of IEROBOAMS
1. King. 13.33.
Priests) is mere Se Pascunt non Oves. Ezech. 34.3 4.
Starve -- his.

SECT. 3. The joys of the Saints never received, nor conceived of Sinners.
IF any be a doubtful Didimist in this poinct, or a disputefull Skeptic, as
hard of belief: besides the testimony of the Prodigal himself, in which
habemus reum, confitentem, we have the confession of the guilty, and what
needs more; we have also the dicision and determination of the Sovereign,
Judge himself: who by the mouth of ESAIAS thus decides the controversed case;
betwixt his own servants, that did hear and fear his word, and rebelling
Israel, that choose their own works and ways, as that evil servants to a
worse Master: Behold says the Lord Esaias. 65.1 13.14.
God, my servants shall eat, and ye shall shall be hungry: Behold my Servants
shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty: Behold my Servants shall rejoice, but
you shall be ashamed: Behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, and you
shall cry for sorrow of heart, ad shall howl for vexation of mind, thus GOD
expresses himself aptissimis verbis, in plain phrases, to put the point out
of all question, for his word is more permanent than Heaven and earth, as the
Decrees of the Medes and Persians Dan. 6, 8.
irrevocable; and indeed it must needs be so; for the servants of GOD, enjoy
GOD himself, CHRIST dwells in their hearts Ephesians. 3.17
by faith, there is the privy Chamber of the great King; there is the Hive into
which the spirit that Paraclete, the Comforter Ioh. 14 16
brings the sweet honey of spiritual Comforts; it is the banqueting house of the
bridegroom, yea his nuptial bed of heavenly desires, and delights; the Elect
are the Temples of the holy 1. Cor. 6 19.
Ghost, according to the promise of Christ, GOD the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit, the true invisible Trinity, Cohabites with them, as blessed Inmates
inhabites in them, is Inthronized in their very spirits: yea spiritually and
mutually sups and feasts with Rev. 3.20
them, and is feasted by them, as in the days of his flesh; in our flesh he
was feasted by Mat. 9.10.
MATTHEW, Ioh. 12.2
MARY, Luke 19.8
ZACCHEVS, and Luke 14.1 and cap. 7.36
others, now can there want Cates, Viands, and Iunkets where GOD himself
Caters and cooks the Dishes? Where he is the maker and Mr. of the Feast, can a
man want water that is in the Sea? Can he want light that walks in the Sun,
unless he be either blind, or shut his eyes? Is it probable (possible) that
he should perish for thirst, that has a fountain opened to him, as once to
HAGAR and Ge^. 21.19 Haec fons Christus Zach. 13. v. 1.
ISMAEL, or that those should want solid consolation, and contentation, that
enjoy Christ; his mercies, his merits, his Grace: his spirit? The fountain and
foundation of all true joy whatsoever: without whom there is no true Joy, as no
light to the world without the Sun, no life to man, without the soul: No
life to the Soul, without Grace: even as there is no heat in the Winter to
frozen Norway, without the fire: for there is no peace to the wicked, says my
Esa. 57.21
GOD; as no light to the body without the eyes: no light to the house without
the Windows: I know the world seeing with eyes quicker than Cujus visus solida
paenetrat corpora. Vincent. Nature. l. 19 cap. 79.
LYNCEVS, or the Serpent EPIDAVRVS, into that penury and poverty, in external
things, which GOD sometimes humbles his own children withal, as sometimes he
did JACOB, and his Genesis 42.1
family, NAOMI and Ruth. 1.13
RVTH, 1. King. 17 11
ELIAS, the Widow of Verse. 12.
Sarepta, the poor Widow of the 2. Kin. 4.1
Prophet, 1. Sa^. 21.3
DAVID, Luke 16, 20
LAZARUS, with many more: keeping them for their safety, for fear of
Rot-grasse, as Sheep, in a short Pasture: and not able to see (more than
Moales, Beetles and Owls, the luster of the Sun) into that abundant supply
of inward consolation, which as the Unicorns Plin. hist. 8 cap. 21. and Iovins
hist. l. 18.
Horns, or ELISHAES 2. King. 2 21.
Salt, seasons all the bitter waters of their outward afflictions: will not
believe this copy, and redoundant plenty, with which they are furnished, no
more than that incredulous Lord, would believe 2. Kin. 7.2
the prophesied plenty of Corn that should be in Samaria, when he dreamed of
nothing, but of a dreaded dearth: but is it so, that the Bell, ever ringeth,
what the Fool thinks? Is a pearl no Pearl, because AESOPS Cock, or a
Swine (an ignorant Swain, or an intoxicated Drunkard) knows not the value of
it? Is JACOB no better for the blessing, because ESAV does so little Ge^. 25.34
prize it? Is there no exquisite Music in DAVID'S Psalm. 150.5
Cymbals, in ORPHEUS, or ARIONS Harp, in LYDIAN or DORICKS De his and alijs
speciebus Musicae, Julius Pollu. lib. 4. Onen. c. 8.9.10.11. Rhodig. lect. l.
5. cap. 2, 3.25 26. and Polyd. de inven. lib. 1. cap. 15.
music, because the Deaf man hears it not? No exquisite De quibus Plinius
lib. 33. c. 4. l. 35 c. 6. and Discorides. lib. 5 cap. 61. and enerrat 68.
Colors, in ZEVXIS, or APELLES Tables: because the blind man, discernes them
not? Nor shines not the Sun, because the old wife of Bathe sees it not? Let
God be true and all men Liars? Let the Spectators say what they list; believe
the Judge: as that good OECOLAMPADIVS a splendent light in the Convenient rebus
nomina saepe suis.
Church; when the Sun shone on his face, as he lay on his deathbed, being
asked if he would have the Curtains drawn, laying one hand on his face, the
other on his breast, answered; abundance of light, abundance of light,
meaning outward light on his face, and inward light in his heart; so the Sons
of GOD, the Children of Light, have abundant comforts, which the children of
darkness discern not: As CHRIST himself Ioh. 4.32.
once, so Christians ever they have meat to eat, even spiritual Manna which
the world knows not of: Grinans in Epist ad D. Fabritium, Capiton and Iacobus
Grinaeus in Apoth. M^rient. page 91. Jdem de Zwingero, p. 97. Ob lux caendida,
lux mihi.
they have bread in their Fathers house: a large and a liberal allowance,
there is in the Church of GOD, in the Word and the Sacraments: for all the
sons of Syon, (however the Papists as false Stewards, and Soule-murtherers,
abridge the Lords people of their allotted Portions, or rather steal or
purloyne it from them, to their own carnal and sinister ends) whereas
Hypocrites, Heretics, and profane ESAVES within the Church, which are but as
rotten bows to the Tree, wooden legs to the body, having no stomach to the
Lords Viands, or finding, no relish in them, more then in a rotten Poast, or
white of an egg: as also Pagans, Heathens, Jews, and Turks without the
Church, wanting these means of life, this solid meat, as the rush in the
Summer, that wants mire: both the one and the other, fed with the poison of
humane inventions, deceiveable lusts, traditionary vanities, as this Prodigal
here; as AOAR, and ISMAEL in the Desert for want of water, ere they were shown
the Fountain by the Angel.

CHAP. XI.
SECT. 1. Jonas his Judgment and experience of lying Vanities.
WE have heard one Prophet speak, the truth, first propounded: confirmed and
further expounded by him, who inspired the Prophets: the point is farther
illustrated, by JONAS, who had as good experience of man's sinning misery, of
sins lying vanity, of Gods all-saving satisfactory mercy, as ever any mere
man, excepting SOLOMON; whom we reserve for the last: for this JONAS as you
know, being commanded by the Sovereign Monarch of Heaven and Earth, to go
preach and cry against the crying sins of Ninivee, projecting doubts and
dangers, finding knots in a Bul-rush, fearing the might and malice of man more
than God: consulting with flesh and blood, and carnal reason, the greatest
enemy to religion: against his mission and Commission; he sails to Tarchus:
but as he was cross and contradictory to GOD, GOD crosses him, he meets with
him in his own Eliment; wounds him at his own weapon: The storm and the Vbi
peccatum ibi procellae. Aug.
Tempest, the Waves and the Billows of the Sea, the utmost rage of Wind and
water, are sent out by GOD, as hew and cry after this fugitive Felon, he is
apprehended in the ship, ipso actu, ipso factu, in the very act of of sin;
Justice finds him sleeping, Ion. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.14.15.
takes him in the manner, just napping: the Lot finds him guilty; as if
Martial Law were executed on him: he is instantly thrown over-boord, by the
Mariners, as GODS Executioners: but the LORD in Justice remembering Mercy:
Inter fontem and pontem accedens Gratia: Grace coming as betwixt the Bridge
and the River, betwixt the Ship and the bottom of the Sea: Verse. 17.
he is reprieved and bailed by a Fish: yet kept imprisoned, as for his good
abearing, three days, and three nights in the bowels, and Garbage of the
Whale, as in a living Grave, hanging as a feather in the Air betwixt life and
death: truly humbled for his sins; yet apprehending and applying mercy, with
a bleeding, yet believing heart, he makes his Propheticke Song, in manner of
Lyricke Verses, according to the Hebrews, which he pens, when he is cast
upon the Sea the learned Lectures of D. Abbot, and D. King, upon Jonas.
Shore. In which Song, aggravating in many Phrases and Metaphors his own
misery both in his outward and inward man: amongst the rest he tells us, that
even his very soul was overwhelmed with him, or as some translations express,
it was even failing or sainting Cum deficeret anima, secundum 70. Interpretes
cum Augustaretur secundum Hierom. cum obrueretur secundum Iunium. quando
desperab^t, ^t Pomeranus.
in him, straightened in him: yea even despairing in him: in the very soliloquies
of his soul, he tells us the distracted and desperate thoughts of his heart:
that he was (according to sundry readings) even excisus and succisus, cut off
from Ion. 2.4.
God: Eiectus, reiectus: Cast out, cast off: Ejected, rejected, of the
Almighty: forgotten, yea forsaken of him; yet thus under water, he lifts up his
head; he remembered the Verse. 7.
Lord, here was his Faith, his Prayer, as a winged Mercury, darted out as
Pellets from a Gun, in the heat and fire of fervency, penetrated the Heavens,
pierced the Clouds, and ascended the Clouds (as an Aeagle mounts) unto the
Almighty: and in this heavenly soliloquie, with GOD, the eye of his soul,
being quickened, opened, and anointed, with Collyrium of the spirit, he sees
also the insufficiency, of every deceiveable Lust, and worldly vanity, to give
his sin distressed soul any satisfaction: his old burdened conscience any
contentation. Nay rather as by interposition, this sublunary lying vanities, as
he calls them, do cloud and eclipse from him, the sin of that mercy, in the
heat and light of which was his true tranquillity: for so indeed are his
express words, Commenting my Text (as the Prodigal before his repentant
return, both felt, and found) they which embrace lying vanities, forsake their
own Ion. 2.8.
mercy: that is, that mercy, which as a man a Lease, by purchase, from a
Landlord, they might have made their own, and appropriated to themselves, as
sure, as the Cote to their backs, that mercy they have neglected and rejected:
repudiated, and refused, yea despised, and despited, by following, and
persecuting, hugging, affecting, and embracing (as once our unregenerate
Prodigal) their Fancies, Follies, and vicious vanities.

Which Text that I may press to the quick, because it Paralels my Text in the
substance of matter, and plainly and prospicuously speaks the point in hand.
Whither by vanitics here (the subject and object of the love of vain men) we
understand with HVGO VICTORINVS, that double vanity that is in every sublimary
thing: the vanity of mutability and change, that is in the Creature, not only
Terrestrial, but Celestial, even in the Heavens themselves, as the Fathers
Hier. Comment. in Esaiam, lib. 8. cap. 24. and lib. 14. c. 51. and Origin. in
Romans 8. v. 20.
allude, all which Creatures are vain in respect of God, man's sovereign good:
whose name is only I am Exodus 3.14.
incommunicable to any Hierom. Epist. 50. and Comment, in 24. Esaiae.
Creature: as also vain in respect of man: by reason of his sin; man being
the end of the Universe, according to Homo finis vniversi Arist. 1. Phys. text.
25.
Philosophy, even a Microcosme and little world, being himself altogether
vain: Psalm 59.5. Subjects them also to vanity: Romans 8.20.

2. Or the vanity of sinful corruption, that is man: by submitting, and
subjecting himself, to the Creature, which was made to be subject unto him, by
placing and planting his desires and affections, or things terrestrial or
temporary, and not on him that is infinite, incomprehensible and aeternall,
making himself exceeding vain, as the Ancients Augustinus de moribus
Ecclesiae, cap. 21. Athan. in Synopsi. and G^ep. lib. 5. in lib. 1. Rep.
have discussed: Or in a larger division, if with a modern Berchorius (vel
nonullis Sterchorius) in verbo vanum.
Friar, in whose Dunghill there is yet some Vt olim Virgilius extraxit, ex
Ennio.
gold, we consider, either vanities natural which are in every Creature,
being nothing in respect of the Creator, and returning again unto nothing:
being of the earth, and from the earth, and returning again to the Earth,
their prima materia, their first matter, (as the Rivers to the Seas, as the
Ice, Frosts, and Snowes, into waters, which came from waters. 2. Or Vanities
temporal, and Temporary, of these outward and external things, called
abusively by Pagans and Heathens, and Paganizing Christians, the Goods of Bona
Fortunae.
Fortune: such as Riches, honors, wealth, worship, profits, praeferments. 3. Or
Vanities acquiring, as Arts, Sciences, liberal, mechanical: languages; moral
wisdom: eloquence, oratory. 4. Or Vanities personal, there being so many
vain men and Fools of the world, as there be vicious men, wicked men in
Scripture Psalm. 14.1. Psalm. 53.1 Psalm. 39.6 Prove. 7.7 Chap. 8.5 Chap. 4.9.
language, being ever unwise; and bad men: mad men. 5. Or Vanities Criminal,
which are all the vain works, words, actions, affections, thoughts,
cogitations, imaginations of vain, sensual, sinful, and unregenerate men. 1.
Whether they be mental in errors of Judgment, as all these Heresies old and
new, lopt off as Hidraes heads, by Councels and Augustine Epiphanius. Jrenaeus.
Sluselburgus in Catalogo Hereticoru^.
Fathers, now revived, and sprung up again in Popery: the Sponge of all
Abominations, and Corruptions in Doctrine and manners. 2. Or Cordial, as
rooted and eradicated in an unsanctified heart, the fountain and root whence
Mat. 15.19
they proceed: the Seminary and Nursery where they are fostered, and cherished,
the very shop and furnace where they are molded. 3. Or Actual: as they are
acted, wrought, and produced, by the Organs, instruments and members of the
Romans 6.13
body, the slave and servant of a worse Master; the corrupted. 4. Or Orall and
Vocal, bleared and blazed from the Hell-inflamed Iam. 3.6.
tongue, sending and darting out Oaths, Lies, Slanders, Calumnies, rotten
words, unsavory speeches, blasphemies: against the Vide Peralin summa de
Peccatis li^guae in sine libri.
Holiness; the verity, the charity, sanctity, sincerity; purity, that should
be in speech. All these vanities, with many more, which might be referred to
these, and other heads: our JONAS here terms and Christens them, by the name
and Epithet of lying Vanities, (by which as by a Genesis 4.15 Verse. 2.
brand set upon CAIN) they shall for ever be marked, and stigmatized to all
generations: being indeed as deservedly so termed, as Nescio an
ABEL, was termed Vanity by EVE: LENTVLVS a vain man by Vanior, an stolidior.
TVLLY; NESTORIVS a Qualis fa. v. Nestorius vide apud Magd. cent. 5. cap. 9.
Osiand. p. 242 243. l. 2. and Tom. 1. conc. page 559.
firebrand; HANNIBAL the Scourge of Rome: TAMBERLAIN, TOTILAS and Esa. 10.5.
ASHVR, the Scourge of God: CALIGVLA Clay mixed with blood, by Lucum sanguine
co^junctum.
SVETONIVS; SYNESIVS the great SYNESIVS, by PLVTARK. And NABAL, a fool by 1.
Sam. 25 26.
ABIGAL, because as she gave the Etimology of that fool; NABAL is his name,
and folly is with him: so I say of these Vanities, lying are they called,
because lying is with them. For, besides the Experience that our Prodigal had,
in his own person of these lyings and delusions, the fruits of his sinful
vanities, affoording him only Husks, for bread: emptiness and vacuity for
plenitude, and promised plenty: smoakes for fires; as the barren fig tree,
afforded leaves, for fruit: by whose experience, if vain men will not be
warned, in getting salves from his sores, health from his wounds: wisdom from
his follies; they themselves shall taste of his sauce; eating of his unfilling
meat, they shall be thrust through as with his spit, in many darts of
sorrows; till they purchase their bought wit, at too dear a penny worth: (like
a melancholy man, that could not be persuaded he had a nose, till by wresting
and pinching his next fellow made him feel D. Bright his Treatise of
Melancholy.
it; or as the Fool, that could not believe the fire was hot, till his finger
was burned, in the flame. I say besides his experiments, that Comments this
Text: we have evident Demonstrations.

For if that be a lying Vanity, according to Jn Psalm. 4.
CHRYSOSEOME, that has Nomen sinere, a titulary name without reality, as is
Vtilitatis expers, devoyd of Profit, which as the Parisian Divine inlargeth
Guielmus Parisiensis.
it; Nec confert plenitudinem, pontinenti, nec fulcimentum innitenti: nec
fructum laboranti. Neither brings fullness to the subject containing it; nor
sound stay to those that rely on it; nor fruit, nor benefit, to those that
labor about it: then all sublunary vanities, are of this nature: (as we shall
see anon, in the persecution of particulars, are indeed Mendaces, and Infidi:
because they grossly and greevously lie, to those which set their hearts upon
them: as Genesis 31.7
LABAN to JACOB, promising fair, but performing foul: Like Mountebankes,
Impostors, Empericks, and Quacksalvers, that to set out their vaenall drugs,
and magnify their skill, with braggodokean and bumbasted words, promise great
cures which they never accomplish; their wares, (as their works) their deeds
(as their drugs, and dregs) being altogether sophisticate, or like a painted
IEZABEL, a frizled Whore, which promises a man desired Prove. 7.16 17, 18
delight, but brings his Name to wounds and scarres; his Conscience on the
Rack; his Estate, to a morsel of bread: his Body to Diseases; and his Soul
to V. 26.32.33 See Downa^ in one of his 4. Treatises: de adulterio.
Damnation: they promise more than CYRUS did, to his Zenophon l. 7. de paedai
Cyri. and Camer. Cent. 2. oper. Suc. c. 32.
Soldiers; more than SAVL to his Courtiers, and 1. Sa^. 22.7.
Campers; more than CRAESVS to Craeso valde Familiaris apud Brusonium and
Fulgosum. tit. de amicitia.
ANACHARSIS, yea more than BALAACK to Number. 22.7
BALAAM: but as PIRRHVS was called Doson daturus, because he was ever about to
give, but never gave: so every vanity, is promissurus, promising by Else, (as
the Athenians are said to speak) but (as they are said to do,) performing by
Inches: as that George, on Horseback: ever on Cock-horse, but never riding:
all their glory, being but as the shining of In Italia, Cydendulae, vel
Lampyrides dictae Plinius l. 11 28. Vincent. l. 20. c. 126.
Glow-wormes, in a winters night: as a painted Poast, fair without, and rotten
dust within; as a Quagmire, green above, but full of Muds, Toads, Frogs, and
Nutes at the bottom: as a glorious Sepulcher, laid over with brass, or carved
marble, yet within full of dead Sculs, Scalpes, rotten bones, and mummiamized
Earth: as a painted face, which shining and glittering a far off, appears
ugly, old, and wrinkled, when the fasting breath has dispersed the varnish,
and shown the graceless grace, which lay hid, (as a Serpent under the green
grass, or a Toad under Sage) under the oily colors: thus there is a false
Gloss, and varnish set on them, and thus commended to the sons of vanity, by
him, who is the Father of ^l Lies.

SECT. 2. Eight Demonstrations of Lying Vanities.
But if these be too general, every sublunary Vanity, may be detected and
discovered; A Liar, as plainly as CAIN a murderer, IVDAS a Traitor,
ACHITOPHEL a Politician; ACHAN a Thief; DEMAS a worldling; IVLIAN an Apostate,
ANANIAS an Hypocrite, or HEROD an Adulterer, and that from these specialties.

First, because these vanities promise contentation and satisfaction, to the
soul of man, but that grape never grew from these thorns, they produce
anxiety, grief, vexation, anguish, discrutiation and discontent, in their
procurings, purchasings, persecutions, retentions, but especially like the
Devil himself, in those he possesses, they most disquiet in their farewell,
and leave taking: as some meats, and drinks, they have an ill gust, and taste
at their going down; as it is with Lovers, there is the shreudest play, at
parting; that goes hard, and kills the very old one on the nest; as may be
seen, in riches, and honors especially.

Secondly, they promise pleasure, and profit, but their pleasure, ends in
pain: as a hot gleaming Sun, in a storm of Rain: as the honey, in the Bees
mouth, ends in a sting in the Tail; Voluptas decedit, poena remanet: the
pleasure is transient, the pain permanent: breve est quod delectat, aeternum
quod Augustine
cruciat: it is momentany that pleases the flesh: aeternall that cruciates and
torments the Pro. 23.33
spirit; here inchoate, in the Conscience, continuate (but never consummate)
but in Hell: and for profit: what profit have you in these things, tells the
Apostle his Convert Romans, whereof you are now ashamed: IVDAS, his golden
hopes; ABSALOM his ambitious hopes, ends both in two Halters, the one of Romans
6.21
Hemp, the other of his own Mat. 27.4
hair, and now both meet, in one Center 2. Sa^. 11.9
of Hell.

Thirdly, they promise happiness, and felicity, as Siferaes mother promised
him Psalm. 9.17, and Act. 1.25
victory, as Poole and Cardinal Woolsey promised themselves Judge. 5.28
Popedomes; as Pyrrhus promised himself, the Empire of Grecia, but they
perform as much as the crafty old Apud Foxum in Martyrol^gia and Speed in
Chronicis, in vita Mariae and Henrici. 8
Prophet, who deluded the credulous young; when Pylat after his Presidentship,
lies and dies in a Ditch at Lions, when Richard the 3. after all his
Butcheries, is slain in Bosworth 1. King. 13 18
Field; when Craesus is taken by Cyrus, and tied to the stake to be Eusebius. l.
2.7. and Nicep. lib. 2. c. 10. Say he killed himself, but Hierom. in Math. 2.
and Antoninus, 1. Part. hist. tit. 6. c, 20. Say he was banished to Lions,
there dyed in a Lake.
burned; when Cyrus as thirsty of blood and gold, is thrown a Vessel of
moulten gold, to drink his fill; when that proud Pelian youth is poisoned, in
the midst of years, and glories, as a tree cut down in the blooming Of all
these, see Speed, Stow, and Hollinshed, in our English Chron. apud Her. l. 1.
and Orisium, l. 2. c. 6.
spring; when WOOLSEYES head on a sudden Apud Curtium Plut. in vita
Alexandri, Arrianum l. 7. Diod. Sicul. l. 10.
is sent to be chopped off from his treacherous He prevents it by poisoning
himself, as it was thought.
body: when NAEVCHADNEZZARS pride is thrown down, from feasting in great
Babel, to feed in the Forest, with bruit Dan. 4.33 and apud Iosephum Antiq.
lib. 10. c. 18.
beasts: yea above all, when the Georgeous, and gluttenous Gospels Helluo, that
would not feast LAZARUS, is feasted in Hell, with fire and Luke 16.24
brimstone, without so much drink as one Qui non dedit Micam, non accepit
guttam Augustine.
drop: all these, with thousands more, in examples, sacred, civil, and
profane, give in their testimonials, what felicity, tranquillity, beatitude,
blessedness, there is in the enjoying, of any earthly vanity in any humane
estate, and condition, whatsoever.

Fourthly, they promise certainty; but they are as uncertain as the Waves in
their fluctuations, as the weather in the variations: as the wandering De quibus
lege Purbaechium in Theorica Planet. Oswaldum and Jmlserum in easdem Theoricas
cum Tabulis Blanchini and Prugneti.
Stars, in their motions, yea as the Winds in their sufflations, (altering
in all their uncertainties, in their 32. De Omnibus divisionibus ventorum lege,
Plin. lib. 2. c. 47. Gellium l. 2. c. 22. Arist. l. 2. c. 4.6. and Senecam lib.
5. quaest. nature.
points; so uncertain are those sublunaries in their purchases, use, residence:
getting: keeping, parting.

Fifthly, they promise Perpetuity and Continuance when they are as brittle as
glass: as frail as Ice: as unconstant as the Moon; as light as a feather; as
momentory as thought: as short lived as Pigmees, (which at most usually live
Odorious de rebus Judicis lib. 1. and Albert. Anim. l. 7. c. 6.
but 8. years) nay sometimes as that Mane Oritur nocte moritur unde Ephemerum,
1. Diarum appellatur, secundum Arist. l. 1. c. 5. l. 5. c. 19. and Aelian. l.
2.6.4.
Ephemora, that lives but eight hours (like TVLLIES Consul, that never slept
all the time of his Magistracy, but dyed the same day he was created:) alas how
soon do honor and riches, take their wings, us an Aeagle? And suddenly take
their leave, as the Swallows in Winter? The Cuckowes in June? How does one day
see JOB, the richest, and the Job. 1.
poorest, the most mighty, and the most miserable man, of all the East? One
hour sees BAIACETH, the great Commander of the Ottomans; and an iron Caged
Melancton in Chronicis, lib. 5. page 644. Camerarins. oper. succ. page 330.331.
Precipue Spinaeus de Am. tranq. page 373.374.375. and Gorlic. in axiom. Pol.
page 655. instant in Bajarete Bellisario regulo Pompejo, Julio Aemilio Zerxe
vgolinor. alijsque fortunae Iudibrijs.
Prisoner: NABVCHADNEZZAR a petty God in his Dan. 4. Josephus contra Appion,
lib. 1. and Sleidanus do 4. Monarchijs in decimo sexto. p. 27.
Palace, and a Beast (in his own imagination) in the Park? What a short
Interim was there betwixt HAMANS honors in the Court of Esth. 5.11.
ASSVERVS; and his hanging on the Chapt. 7.10.
Gallows? Betwixt ADONIAHS attendance, with fifty footmen, as a conceited 1.
Kings. 1.5.
King, and his footing it for his life (as some murderer making, for a
Sanctuary or a Monastery) to depend on the Horns of the Verse. 51.52.
Altar, as a guilty Traitor? So glories fade as the mornings mysts, the Summers
dew: and the breath of man, upon steel, Sic transit gloria Mundi.

Sixthly they promise much sweetness, joy, delight, and contentation hence
they are desired vehemently (as the Dogs and Crows Carrion) men venture
neck-breake for them, as the Panther for man's desired Solinus cap. 20. and
Plinius lib. 2. cap. 25.
excrements: and when they have them, for a time they are sweet unto them; they
suck them, as children their Teats, they cry for them, as fools for Bables;
they retain them as HERCULES his Club; they gripe them, as the Eagle, and
Hawke their prey; they are as unwilling to part with them, as with the blood
from their veins; as PARIS from his HELENA; Phaltiel from his wife 2. Sa^. 3.16
Michall; or Ge^. 31.30
LABAN and MICHAY from their Idols: Judge. 18.24.
they hid^ them in their hearts (as Children Sugar under their tongue roots)
sucking sweetness from Job. 20.12
them, but at last, the sweetest wine of vanity, turns into the sowrest
Vinegar quasi Wineaeager.
Vinegar of vexation: the best contents of vicious vanities, ends in
discontents, as a squib in smoke, and sulphur: as SOLOMON speaks of one
drunken Vanity, we may speak of all; at last they bite like a Serpent, and
sting like a Pro. 23.33
Cockatrice; they vex like a Tick; they pierce like a sword; they gnaw like a
Viper; they smell like Assa fetida: they grow loathsome in the end, like
Isreal's lusted Nu^. 11.32
Quails.

Seaventhly, they promise much: and many good things both to soul and body: as
ACHANS stolen Josh. 7.25
wedge, and Ps. 78.30 31
IVDAS treason-gotten Act. 1.25
silver; ANANIAS and SAPHIRAES lying and juggling for Act. 5.5.10
gain; promised to make them all rich; as AMMONS incest with 2. Sa^. 13.32.
THAMAR, SICHEMS lust with his darling Ge^. 34.26
DINAH, promised them fleshly contentation, but these sinful, and sensual
vanities, burned the first; hanged the second; struck suddenly dead the third,
and fourth; shed the blood of the fifth, and sixth; So every other vanity, not
only sinful and criminal in it own nature, but these that are natural,
temporary, adventitiall, acquired (according to their first distinctions, these
things, that are good in their own nature, (or indifferent) once being by our
ignorance, pride, vanity, perverseness, sensuality, abused; they prove noxious
and hurtful unto us, as good meat to a corrupt stomach; they are to us as a
knife in the hand of a Ne puero gladium.
Child, a Sword in the hand of a madman; as being accompanied with many evils:
and mischiefs: causing, and occasioning; pride of heart, forgetfulness of
GOD: (as once in Deu. 32.15
Israel, security: as in Luke 17.28
Sodom, and the men of Judges, 18
Laish) neglect of GODS call; contempt of Grace, blindness of mind,
alienation, and estranging of the heart, from God: yea Idolatry it self, with
many such fearful effects produced, both in respect of God, our neighbors,
and our selves.

Eighthly, (or the eight-lye) of these Vanities is, that they promise us ease,
and help, in the day of trouble, and of trial: when then they themselves
prove the greatest troubles; like the wings of a Bird that is limed, help not,
but hinder her flight, in a danger: as the two great sails spread in a little
Pinnace, rather over-beare her, than clear her in a storm; as a wedge of gold
(the worldlings Pro. 18.11
help and hope) if he were cast into the Sea, with it hung about his neck,
would sooner drown him, than deliver him, these externals like sick men not
able to help themselves (like the Trojan Penates, the Heathens Household Vide
Majolum de diebus Canicul. Part. 1 de culau de movum Textor 15. Officina^. page
25. de Deorum multitudne. With our English Atheomastix in Folio
GODS; Isreal's Golden Calfe, the Ammonites Baal, and our Popish Gods, of
brass, lead and Vide Reinoldum de Jdolatria Romanae Ecclesiae.
stone: being not able to deliver themselves, can they deliver us? When
troubles come upon us, as sudden storms: as travel on a woman; not to be
prevented: when sickness ceazeth on us as an armed man, Diseases and Death
arrest us, as Gods Serieants; when grievous pains hold us as Gods Iaylors: the
Gout, Stone, Strangury, Collicks, Stitches, Tooth-akes, Agues; the demerits of
Lev. 26.16 and Deuteronomy. 28. Verse. 21.22
sin: torture and torment us, as Gods Executioners: but chiefly, when the
Conscience within us, houkes like a Wolf, bites like an Aspe, stinges as a
viper, the bowels that bred De horrore terrore, and latraetu malae
conscientiae, qui vult. consulat Lutherum in Genesis p. 486.652. and 671. in cap.
31.43. and 45. cum Strigellio, in lib. 1. Ethic. page 6, 7, 8. and Pezelio in
Genesis cap. 37. page 714. cap. 42. page 794. and 789. and in cap. 45. page 835.
Sic in c. 50. Page 971.5.
it; In these and such like trials, troubles, and exigents, in the day of
Affliction and Visitation, what help? What hope? What remedy? What redress?
What comfort? What contentation? Is in these externals? Do they not fly as
Israel at the sight of 1. Sam. 17.24.
GOLIATH: are they not the reeds of Esaias, 30.3.
Egypt, to rest upon? They brag indeed much what they will do (as Judges,
9.28.
Gaall once against Abimelech) but in the storm of Afflictions, external and
internal, like Snailes, they pull in their heads, they hide themselves when
they are sought for, as SAVL behind the 1. Sam. 10.22.
stuff; and if they present themselves, they prove like IOES three friends to
that perplexed Patriarch: only miserable Comforters, they cannot mitigate and
assuage the least pain; not quench the least fire; not bail out of the least
fetters of Affliction: not reprieve us one hour from the stroke of death? Yea
in every trouble, danger and distress, in the outward and inward man: like
false friends, they leave us in the lapse, and in the lurch: they say to us, as
the rebelling revolting Tribes, to REHOBOAM Look to thine own house DAVID; 1.
King. 12.16.

Thus as the Touchstone discernes the badnesse of the metal: as the Candle
discovers, the Thief: as the Sun dispels the dark, the spirit of Truth,
reveals the falsity and insufficiency of these lying Vanities: so that
whosoever rest, on these broken staves: may say with those in the Prophet: We
have made falsehood our refuge, and under Vanity are we hid.

Thus JONAS has given in his Verdict.

CHAP. XII.
SECT. 1. Salomons depth of Wisdom diveing and wadeing into the vtility and
vanity of things Sublunary.
But in the last place (as the best Wine in the Feast was reserved for the
last) we have our last Argument from Solomon, as most Archillean, invincible,
demonstrative, and conclusive: which is Omni exceptione mayor: we have Salomons
Verdict, truly resolving the insufficiency of every sublunary transient,
transitory Vanity, to satisfy the soul of man, more than the Husks of the
Prodigal: for Solomon speaks more certainly than that Apollo, extripode: of
every earthly experimented carnal content: Vanity of Vanity, yea all is but
Eccl. 1.2.
Vanity, says the Preacher. Which vehement and grounded Assertion of his,
ought to carry a thousand times more weight with us: than any axiom of
Aristotle: amongst his Pyripatitions: of Zeno amongst his Stoics: than
Pythagoras his ipse dixit: among his Pythagorians: than the saying and
Apothegmes of Socrates, Solon, Byas, Periander, Thales, and other wise Sages
amongst the Greeks and Collected by Fulgosus Brusonius, Diogenes Laertius,
Valerius, and others in their examples, and by Lycosthenes in his Apothegmes.
Romans: yea than the Delean Lots: or these Oracles, whether Pithian,
Delphicke: Dyndimean, Pernassean, Antiochean, Tryphonean, Amphiarian,
Egyptian, Thrafian (as they are distinguished Apud M^j^um de di^bus Ca^i^.
part 2. colloq. 2. p. 1^6 137, 138.
among the Heathens: with which the best and most of them consulted; for these
Oracles (as if juggling Priests and equivocating De Jmposturis and mendacijs
Monachoru^, lege plurima exempla, apud lom^rum, in 6. praecep. folio, 495, 496.
Jesuits, had spoke in them, as usually in their Popish Images) gave very
ambiguous, doubtful, and deluding answers, to the Greek Quod capturas esset
Jlium.
Agamemnon, the Theban Apud Sindam and Parsaeniam, in Arcadicis.
Epamminond, the Persian Herod. l. 3
Cambises, the Lydian Herod. l. 1
Craesus, the Macedonian Valor. l. 1. cap. 8.
Phylip, Dionisius the Diodor. l. 1
Syracusan, Eschilus the Valor. lib. 6 cap. 14.
Tragedian, Daphidas the Valor. lib. 1 cap. de Mir.
Sophist, and diverse more: because indeed, they were not inspired by Apollo,
Jupiter, Hamon, Mars, Bacchus, and other their fictitious Gods, (as their
Paganish Theology, believed) but by the very Devil himself, that spoke in
them, as he spoke in the tempting Pareus and Parerius in c. 8. Genesis
Serpents, in an Ox at Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 1. c. 31. ex Live.
Rome, in the Vide Lorinum in acta Apost. c. 16.
Pithonists, and some possessed: and in former times and perhaps at this day,
in some Exempla extant apud Lavaterum de spectris Part. 1. c. 7. Sleidanum, de
Statu reip. sub. Carolo. 5. l. 9. Cypr. de Valeria de missa in fine l. p. 424,
425, 426. de Imposturis Papisticis.
Images, amongst the Papists: But Solomon spoke by an unerring spirit: by a
wisdom incomparable: both Moral, Theological, and Experimental: more than
ever was infident to mere mortal man: in which three particulars, if we
should but a little insist, and reflex both upon the man, and the matter: the
Preacher, and his Text: his Testimony, will take a greater Impression, both in
our judgments, and affections: chiefly if we consider the time, when he gave
this his great his grand, judicious verdict of Vanity: For the first, since the
Wisdom of a man, whether real, or only in men's imaginations, gives a great
weight and luster, unto his words (as the same words spoke, by an old man, by
reason of his approved gravity, carry more force, than if spoke by a young man,
of less experience:) so SOLOMON, being for wisdom, as an Angel of God: as
the woman of Tekoah said of his father 2. Sa^. 14 22
DAVID, yea as an Oracle of God, shining amongst men, as the Sun amongst the
Planets: Extat elogium Zenocratis lib. 4. de dictis Socratis; and Platonis in
fine Phedenis. de Socr.
wiser than all the Greek and Roman Sages, than all the Persian magi, the
French Druides, the Indian Bracmans, the ancient Philosophers (SOCRATES
himself not excepted, whom APOLLO's Oracle judged most wise) yea wiser than
ETHAN the Ezrite: than HEMAN, and COLCOLL, and DORBA, the sons of 1, Kings, 4
31
MAHOL^, which were wise men, living in the time of SOLOMON, or Prophesying in
Egypt, as the learned Josephus l. 8. antiq. c. 2
think, and not the ancient Patriarchs, as some Her in q.
imagine: yea SOLOMON for mortal Wisdom: (as JOHN COONATVS, CAIETAN, and
PERERIVS limit it) and for humane knowledge, being not inferior (as some Rabbi
Moses, lib. 1. ductores, and lib. 3. cap. 35
Rabbis and Vibaldus Tract. de Magnif. Salomoni in cap. de sapi. ex Iosephe,
Antiq. 8. c. 2.
have imagined) either to JOHN the Baptist, or to MOSES, learned in all the
learning of the Egyptians: Act. 7.22. Or to ABRAHAM; or to DANIEL, that was
wiser than all the Chaldeans, and Augurists, in the University of Suza, or to
his father DAVID, that was quo sanctior, eo sapientior, as holyer, so wiser
than other men, yea, wiser than his Teachers, or than the aged: Psalm. 119.
Wiser, thinks Vives in l. 18. de Civ. Dei. cap. 20
Augustine, Orat. 2.
Nazianzen, and Jn cap. 1. Eccles. v. 16
Thanmanturgus, than any mere mortal man, not only wiser, than all the men
of his time, to which St. In c. 1. Ec.
Jerome seems to parallel him, only; but even wiser than all mere men that
went before him, not only in Jerusalem as himself confesses, but in the
whole world of Jews and Gentiles: equal thinks In l. 1. Reg. cap. 3. q. 7.
Abulensis, to Adam himself, even in his Created Wisdom: transcendent, and
superlative in wisdom, as Symmachus the Hebrew, and the Chaldee express it,
from his own Addidi sapientiam, super alios, c. v. 16, 17.
phrases: so wise a Philosopher, that he was able to dispute of any thing in
Nature, from Angels to Worms, from the Caedar of Libanon, to the Hysope on the
1. Kings, 4 33
Wall: from whom Proemio in Canticis.
Origin thinks, that even the greatest Philosophers, had their greatest light,
into the mysteries of Nature, since the most and best of them, as Clemens
Alexandrinus L. 5. Stro^.
proves, writ after Solomon, and so probably reading his works, (which are now
Incuria vol iniuria temporum.
perished) lapping in his Basin for Philosophy, as the Poets in Homers for
Poetry: Solomon whose wisdom was not so much acquired, by study, industry,
education (as the Indians dig their Mines, and as Abraham and Isaac had their
wels and Gen 26. v. 18, 19, 21.
waters, by digging; but infused as the fruit of 1. Kings, 3 9.12.
Prayer, as waters that are rained, and showred down from above; in such
abundance, that he is said to have Wisdom and Understanding exceeding much;
even a large heart, as the sand of the Sea 1. Kings, 4 29
shore: SOLOMON whose wisdom was so glorious and splendant, as a Beacon on a
Mount, a City on a Hill, that was conspicuous to the whole world, being the
Adamant not only to draw HIKAM the King of Tire, and the Queen of Sheba from
the utmost 1. King. 10 2
South, but all the Kings of the Earth, to hear his 1. King. 34
Wisdom, (as many came from all parts, to hear and see Origin in Alexandria,
LIVIE in Rome, and LVTHER in Saxony, that were as much inferior to him, as the
least Star to the Moon, the Moon to the Sun: SOLOMON more famous for
wisdom, than Judge. 16 30.
SAMPSON and Judge. 3.31
SAINGAR for strength: than ACHITOPHEL for 2. Sa^. 16.23
policy; than TVLLY or DEMOSTHENES for eloquence; than 2. Sam. 14 25
ABSOLON, Genesis 39.6
JOSEPH, or 1. Kin. 1.6
ADONIAH, for beauty, or any other for any common gifts, or graces: who gave
excellent demonstrations of his wisdom, both in the Acts, he did, in judging
between the true mother and the pretended, in the case of the controverted 1.
Kings, 3
Child, as also in the words that he spoke, disputing not only in Natural
Philosophy, of the Heavens, the Earth, the Eliments, the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Planets, Commets, Meteors, Beasts, Birds, Fish, Foul, Insects, Herbs, Trees,
Plants, Mines, Minerals, more truly and judiciously, than either ARISTOTLE,
PLINY, AELIANVS, VINCENTIVS, ALBERTAS GALEN, THEOPHRASTVS, DIOSCORIDES, GERALD,
DODONAEVS, or any other Philosopher, Physician, or Herbalist whatsoever: but in
Oeconomicall, Moral, and Ethicall Philosophy, in three thousand Parables, and
1. King. 4.32.
Proverbes, which he spoke at his Table, and at other times, by special
Providence collected, and preserved, by the Servants of EZECHTAS, (as the
Psalms of his Father DAVID, by EZRA the Scribe; and the speeches of LVTHER;
MELANCTON, ERASMUS, and other famous lights of the Church, are gathered and
digested by Vide Ma^lij Colloquia, in 8.
MANLIVS, and So Melanctons Chronicles are finished by Carrion his Poschils, by
Pezelius Chimnitius, his Harmony is perfected by Lyserus. Zanchy on the
Commandments by Quirinus. Mr. Perkins on Galatheans, by Mr. Cu^worth, other
writings preserved, and perfected by others.
others) this SOLOMON as a stream from the Fountain, as a beam from the
Sun of his fire-shining wisdom: tanquam Doctor e Cathedra: as a Doctor from
his Chair, as a Judge from his seat, or Throne, gave this sentence, and
censure, of all things under the Cape of Heaven, disjoynted and disjoined from
the knowledge, fear, and worship of God, (which he makes the summa totalis,
and the end of all: that they are Vanity of Vanity and all but Vanity,
emptiness, and vacuity, like our Prodigals Husks, in this my Text:
Incompetent and sufficient, to fill the vast, and immense desire, of the soul
of man.

SECT. 2. SALOMONS Censure of lying Vanities, from his own experience.
THis you see is the Verdict of him, whom it may be better said than PLVTARK of
SENECA, that he was nulli secundus, second to none, to whom these hyperbolicall
Elogies, and Commendations, which PLATO and ZENOPHON give to SOCRATES,
HYPPOCRATES, to DEMOCRITVS; IVI IAN the Apostate, and PHILOSTRATVS, to
Apollonius Julian did compare that Nicromancer, with Christ.
Tyraneus, LVCRETIVS to his Master Epicurus, ENNAPIVS of Longinus, Scoppius of
Julius Scaliger: PAVLVS IOVIVS of Picus Mirandula; others of ARISTOTLE, may be
truly and fitly appropriated, for he indeed was Aquilus in Nubibus, an Aeagle
in the Clouds: a miracle of Nature; a walking Keckerman so called D. Reynolds.
Library, the Sun of Sciences: A Sea and an Abisse of Knowledge; a Lamp of
the World: Qui genus humanam, ingenio superavit, and omnes, restrinxit Stellas
exortus ut aetherius Sol; Whose wisdom did excel all men, as far,
As does the splendent Sun, a twinkling star.


Being sanctuarium Sapientiae, a Sanctuary of sapience: far shining above,
either the Britain Druides, the Ethiopian Gymnosophists: or the wisest of the
Heathens, whom LACTANTIVS in his books of Lib. 3. de Sapientia, c. 17. and 20.
Wisdom, Censures, as Tractatu and de curatione Grac. affect.
Theodoretus censures Socrates, (even the wisest of them,) as the Apostle
before them both, speaks of all of them: to be very Romans 1.21 22.
fools, such an one indeed, that if SVPPVTIVS Aut. Dial.
in PONTANVS, had lived in the time of SOLOMON, he would never so peremptorily
have affirmed that travailing over all Europe to meet with a wise man, he had
mist his mark, and returned without his errand: had he made but a step into
Asia, and met with SOLOMON, and heard him utter his Parables, (as his own
Servants and the Queen of Sheba did) chiefly preach this Ecclesiastes, or
verdict against vanity, he would have been of an another opinion.

But which is further remarkable, Solomon does not only utter this, out of
the Fountain and deep abyss of his wisdom, but drawing these waters out of
the well of his own experience, to quench the fire of lustful vanities, as
more effectual, tha^ all the Popes holywater, he besprincles the souls of the
sons of men: For besides his pious and Prophetical spirit, with which this
holy Prophet, as some call Augustinus de Civit. Dei l. 17. c. 20.
him, was inspired, like the rest of the holy Prophets, when he writ the same
Canonical Ecclesiastes, or book of the Preacher, the true testimonial of his
Repentance, and so cons quently, of his (needlessly questioned) salvation: he
draws this book (whereof repented Vanity is the Argument) as the De hac
Bembice vel verim Jndico Ambr. in Exem. l. 5 c. 23. and Basil in Exe m. hom. 8.
Silke-worme her clew, or the Spider De miris istis Aranearum Texturis Arist. 9
bist. cap. 39. Aelian. lib. 6. c. 56. August. Ep. 101
her web, even out of the bowels of his own experience: for as Paul writes, I
aged Ad Philem. v. 9.
Paul; so Solomon, aged Solomon, preaching Solomon converted, and turned now
from his vicious Vanities, his manifest and manifold Adulteries, and
Idolatries; as Saul from his Acts. 9.20 Acts, 23.6
Pharisaisme Augustine from his Ex Confess. l. 8. ex Possidoneo in ejus vina and
Magcent 3. c. 10. page 11 13.
Mantchisme, Luther from his ^idanus and Osia^der. Cent. 16. l. 1 p. 5^
Papisme, he like blessed Peter, converted and Lu. ^2, 32
turned, labors the conversion and turning of others his own filthy soyled
soul, deformed and defiled, w^shed in the Laver of Regeneration he seeks to
wash others in the waters of the Sanctuary, himself being plucked, as a brand
out of the fire as Ruben plucked Joseph out of the Ge^. 37.29
Pit, he would drag and draw out others, out of the puddle of poluting
pleasures: as a note of a true Convert, distinguishing him, and all in his
case, from all temporizers, and hypocrites (as SIBBOLETH and SHIBBOLETH,
distinguished Judge. 12, 6
EPHRAMITES, from GILBADITES, as the Touchstone the Gold from the Copper, as he
had sinned publicly, (as his Father DAVID, by publishing his penitential Psalm
38. Psalm. 51. cu^ caeteris, Vide Vegam in Psalmos paenitent.
Psalms, after his greevous falls; as St. AUGUSTINE publicly retracting In
lib. retratactionum
his leaving errors; as Fox in Martyrologio.
CRAMMER, publicly burning that his culpable hand, which subscribed to Popish
Heresies) so he testifying this his Repentance publicly by this his
Ecclesiastes or book of the Preacher having true and saving grace, (as the
Sun his light, the fire his heat, the Seas the waters, the air his moisture,
the earth her fruits) he is studious and desirous to communicate this grace to
others: Like that other Disciple, and Ioh. 1.4. and v. 46.
ANDREW, that having found CHRIST themselves, call their friends PETER and
NATHANIEL to them, as the Samaritan Ioh. 4.29
woman, preaches him to her Samaritans the noble Ethiopian Eunuch, (as the
learned Jrenaus l. 3 cap. 12. and l. 4. cap. 40. sic Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1. and
Nicep. lib. 1. cap. 6.
think, to his Aethiopians) being first inflamed with his love themselves, as
the Church was in the Cant. 5.9 10.
Canticles, they would with her kindle sparks of love in all others, (as PAVL
with Act. 26.27 29.
AGRIPPA) desirous to win others to the faith, like themselves; for the whole
argument of this book, being not only natural, and morrall Discipline; but
according to Prologa i^ Ca^.
ORIGIN, and and Hom. 1. in Principio Proverbio.
BASIL, a fire or a light set upon a Beacon to discover to the sons of men, a
dangerous enemy, out of whose jaws he himself, by a special mercy had now
escaped; or a spiritual Herald, blowing a trumpet to sound a retrait from
their dangerous March, after these soule-polluting perishing vanities, the
whole argument and subject, of the book, being a discovery of several
Vanitates naturae, culpae miseriae.
Vanities; which the Vaellanicensis de ratione stud. l. 2. c. 16. Canus in
locis cap. ultimo Salmera^. Tom. 1. proleg. 9. sic. Bonaventure Hugo Card. and
Hugo Victor.
Modernes rank in several heads.

In the first Chapter, demonstrating the vanity of humane Arts, and Sciences,
and worldly wisdom.

In the seoond, the vanity of the appetite, and desire of pleasure, and
delicious things.

In the third; vain desire of long life, and propagation of our days.

In the fourth, and fifth, the vacuity of ambitious desires, of rule, place,
dominion, and superiority.

In the 6. the vacuity of that devouring gulf, the unsatiable desires after
riches.

In the 7. the vacuity of divining, prognosticating, and foretelling things to
come.

In the 8. the vanity of hunting after applause, and praise of men, catching
the popular Air.

In midst of the 8. Chapter, and 9. the Vanity of the Heathenish and Paganish
fortune.

In part of the 9. and 10. the vanity of corporal and bodily strength.

In the 11. and 12. the Vanity of flowring, and flourishing youth; all these
heads as a spiritual HERCULES, though as many and monstrous as that De Hercule
Ethice, apud Ravisium, in Theat. l. 8. p. 85 5. and de Hydra apud Majolum de
dich. Canic. part. 1. Colloq. 1. p. 12.
Hydraes, he labors, to lop off with the sword of the spirit, least they sting
others, as they have wounded him: all these Cates of vanities, like those of
Appolonius Tyrancus, he shows to be painted; or like the wine which Pope
Alexander brewed his Cardinals poison, but drunk Nauclerus Balaeus, and Chron.
Funccij fol. 165. apud Osiandrum cent. 15 l. 4 p. 492.
it himself; or at least as our Prodigals Husks, or Gland, vnsatisfying: as
he has received the Aconite and Mithridate against their poison, so he
administers it, as preventing or purging Physic to others: he knows, the
dangerous sting that is in every vanity, which fixing in the soul of any vain
man, like some sting with some kind of De quibus Majolus ut supra volumin. 1.
Coll. 8. tit. serpentum.
Serpents, he either dies laughing: or else sleeping, as they that have taken
supe^bundant of Poppy, or Opium, or such dormitory potions, unless they be
awakened, in a determinate time: therefore as a Physician, careful of his
Patients, to keep them waking: or to awake those that are asleep or slumber
in vanity with their golden deluding gulling dreams. Cynthius aurem Vellit, he
plucks them by the ears; he rings them a peale as loud as Bow-bell, yea as
loud as Thunder: he lifts up his voice as a Trumpet, that as it is said of the
old Allusio Origenis Hom. in Psalm. 38. and Geminiani, in summa Exempl.
Lions, that by their loud yell awake their long sleeping, dead-seeming young:
he may rouse, and raise men out of their Lethargicall slumbers in their
vanities: Solomon as now escaped, from these enemies, sets up a flag of
defiance, against them; as a man new got out of the gulf and quagmire of
Vanity, he now sets up a stake as the fashion of charitable men is to
fore-warne others of the same peril: as the rich Helluoh, in the Luke 16.28
Gospel, would have his brethren forewarned, that they come not into the like
danger; as an incautelous Mariner, having dashed on some sandbed, and by
splitting on some rock himself, having by repentance (which is the second
repair of the Navy of the soul Secunda post naufragium Tabula secundum
Canonistas.
after shipwreck) swum out as by some board or plank: he cautelously
admonishes others to steer from the discovered shelves: as that Tyrian
Queen, he commiserates others, having been in the furnace Non ignaeramali
miseris succurrere disco, apud Virg.
himself, as we pity those that are diseased and distressed, by the Gout,
Stone, Strangury, Colic, Toothache; if we have been afflicted with these
maladies, and as by sympathizing tenderly affected, prescribe for their ease,
our best experiments. That we have found good in our selves: so it is betwixt
Solomon now recured and recovered, out of his spiritual sownes and qualmes,
and the sons of men surcharged and surfeiting on the Cates of vanity at the
Devils Banquet: he cries to them, as a Mother to a child, ready to eat
Mercury, or Rats-bane, with an opinion of Sugar: oh! Hands off, Mors in 2.
Kings, 4 40
olla: death is in the pot, or in the platter: he cries to vain men, in the
utmost extention of his powers, as CRAESVS dumb son, on a sudden to those
that would have murdered his Apud Brusonium.
Father; as Paul and Sylas to the Act. 16.28
Iaylor, that would have murdered himself. Oh! do yourselves, oh do your
selves no harm? Ye vain men? Why do you set your hearts on Psalm. 4.2
Vanity, and follow after leasings? Why do you imagine a vain thing: why do
you spin spiders webs? Set nets, and snares, and gins, for your own Souls?
Why do you feed on Husks and Swads? As the Israelites once (and the
Muscovites now) on Garlic, Democritus Junior part. 1. Sect. 2. page 101.
and Onions? As once the Italians, (and our now roving Gypsees) on Frogs and
Snailes? As our poor hungry vulgar Irish often on Hawes, and Shamrocks? For such
is vanities best food: best Commons? When Gods larder, your Fathers house,
allows you bread enough? (Which bread in Gods language includes concludes all,
satisfactory good: even the coursest bread, that Gods servants eat, being as
Isreal's Manna above all the Food of worldlings; better than the Affrican and
Spanish roots: the American Palmitos and Potatos: the Chinaes herbs; the
Nomades milk: the West-Phalian fat meats: the Tartars raw meats; the
Flemings Butter: the Camhro-Britaines white meats: the Scandians fish; Or the
chief, and choice of food of any Nations? Ye^ GODS bread affords more
varieties of contents, than that one Indian Palmae Instar, totius orbis
arboribus praestan-Linschoton, cap. 56.
Tree, which yields them Coquernuts; meats, drink, fire, fuel, apparel with
his leaves; yea oil, Vinegar: and cover for their houses: if Authors relate
truly.

SECT. 3. SALOMONS three Books compared; the sum of his Ecclesiastes, being
his verdict, against Vanity.
TO express SALOMONS verdict, of lying Vanities (as Jonas calls them, these
vnsatisfying Husks, as our Prodigal found them: Not bread, as GOD himself in
Esaias termed them: earthly waters which quench no thirst, as our Savior
himself expressed them) and to press it somewhat fuller and further: We may
consider that this book of Ecclesiastes according to Cyrill, being the letters
testimonial or Certificate (sealed by the spirit) of his repentance; being (as
Most generally hold) the book of his old Age, as Joseph was to Genesis 37.3
Jacob, his youngest, his darling, most near and dear unto him: as Abell
Habel: id est vanitas.
to Eve his second birth, his better birth: experience being the Godfather, and
late (though true) repentance the Godmother, he christens it Vanity: as Tullies
book of Offices, and de Senectute, being his last works: the mental issue of
his understanding part (as the learned Critic calls them) show the most
maturity of Judgment: so this being Salomons last work (as his Canticles was
his Benjamin the Son of his right hand, in the prime of his youth) this is his
Benani: the son of the sorrows of his old Age: (as Isaac is called the son
of Ge^. 18.14
Promise; 1 Samuel 1.27
Samuel and Luke 1.13.
John Baptist, the sons of Prayer: Monicaes Augustine the son of Filius
precum and lachrimarum, dictus ab Ambrosia.
Tears,) he sends this Book as Jacob Ge^. 37.14
his Joseph, as Iesse his youngest son David 1 Samuel 17.17.
to visit his Brethren, to ask them of their welfare, to wish their health and
happiness: That as John writes to Epist. 3. ad Gajum, n.2.
Gaius, they may farewell, even in their Souls as he now fared himself: Yea,
he sends this book, as Abraham his Steward Eleazar out, with a Genesis 24.6 7.
blessing, to fetch Rebeccha from her Fathers house, and to marry her to his
Isaac, the Fathers joy: (if I may allegorize with Origin) to fetch the Soul of
man, that fair Rebecca out of her Natural birth and abode, in the state of
Corruption, in her natural condition, wallowing in her Ezekiel. 16.6
blood, soyled with her old and vain Conversation to be Spiritually espoused
and married, unto ISAACS Antitype, her Lord and Savior, her head Berchoriu^
vid. in reduct Morali, vol. 10. cap. 18.
and husband, that Ithiell and Vcall; as he, or wise AGVR calls Prove. 30.1
him, in whom she shall find true joy, and true rest: as NOAH'S Dove Genesis 8.9.
found in NOAH'S Arc, if she will at last leave to feed (with NOAH'S Raven) on
the Carrion of the worlds vanities; yea this Book, may be as David's spokesmen
to 1 Samuel 25.39.
Abigall, after her Dis-joynting from Naball (the worlds folly) to unite, and
contract her self, to the GOD of David: or it may be to the Soul, as
Salomons Parinimphs and Suitors to Pharaohs daughter, to forget and forgo her
Fathers Psalm. 45.10
house; to leave and loath her birth sins, and bred sins: to mortify and
crucify her original and actual sins, and transgressions; to break out of
all the intangling fetters of all her vicious vanities, and so to marry and
unite her self: unto the true, the typified Solomon, the GOD of Solomon: the
Prince of peace; the everlasting Esa. 9.6.
Father, in whom, from whom, and by whom, only is perfect joy, and true
tranquillity to the immortal Soul, and spirit of mortal and (without God)
miserable man.

For the better conceiving of this: It Is worthy our Animadversion: That as
SOLOMON as we all know, was the Amanuensis, or penman of the Spirit, to write
three Books, the Proverbes, the Canticles, and this his Ecclesiastes: So, as
Lib. de Isaac, cap. 4. and in Psalm. 36. in titulo, and in Psalm. 118 v. 1. and
Praef. in Lucam.
AMBROSE, Hom. in princ. Prove.
BASIL, and other expositors note: There is in them a certain Climax or
gradation ascending by certain stairs and degrees to more sublime and
heavenly matter: For in the Proverbes he allures Ephaebi and young men to
honest and lawful things, by that beauty and luster, that is in virtue, and
from the reward of well doing: And this they say answers his Name, Ididiah, or
Amabilis: 2 Samuel 12, 25.
Lovely: In this Ecclesiastes, or Book of the Preacher; he provokes these
that are Adulti, and more strong and perfect, to the dispising and repudiating
earthly and terrestrial things: from their insufficiency, blemish and
deformity, discovering their perilous and painted beauty: from whence he is
termed the Preacher: In the third, his Canticles, his Ep^thalium, or mystical
Song: from the consideration of natural and earthly things, Paulo maiora
Virgil.
cadendo, he ascends to the speculation, and contemplation of mystical,
divine and supernatural things, in which Metaphysicall meditations, w^e rest
and fix, as in an internal and settled peace; truly anchored in GOD: The
Asilum, and Sanctuary of all true rest, and tranquillity: and this answers his
third name, SOLOMON, or Pacificus: The Peacemaker, or peaceable: Others make
his three Books answer the three Courts of the Tabernacle: The outward Court,
the inner Court, and the Sanctum Sanctorum: CASSIANVS alludes to that double
Abrenuntiation enjoined unto ABRAHAM, of house and habitation: of vices, in
manners and Conversation: and of approaching to JEHOVAH by heavenly
Contemplation. Others Richardus.
apply his three Books to the three Patriarchs; ABRAHAM Genesis 12.4 and Ge^. 22.3
was obedient; ISAAC dug Genesis 26.19.21, 22, 32.
Wells; JACOB saw Ge^. 28.12
visions, even Angels ascending and descending: His Proverbes urges and
persuades obedience to the voice of Wisdom: Even to CHRIST, the second person
in Trinity, the wisdom of the Father: Ecclesiastes is a well or fountain of
heavenly Counsels, and conclusions, dug deep from his own dear bought
experiments, to the watering and refreshing of the Israel of GOD: The
Canticles soars higher as an Eagle, under the veil and shadow of the letter
from his matrimonial love to PHARAOHS Daughter, as carried up into a Divine
rapture and ecstasy, singing the mystical love, betwixt Christ and the Church:
But least (as is the fashion of the Speculative Friars, and contemplative
Monks) these allegories be too far stretched, as on the Lasts, and Tentors
(as a man's nose that is too hard wrung, gives blood:) Popery affording more
allegorizing Origenists, than found Textuists: So I like that tropologicall
order, which BERNARD observes Bernard, in Canticis.
that In primo pellitur superfluus amor sui: In secundo: Vanus amor mundi: In
tertio perscribitur, castus amor Dei: The Proverbes dissuade, that Philautia
and superfluous foolish love of our selves: The Ecclesiastes disswades, the
vain and worthless love of the vicious world: The Canticles persuade, the
pure and chaste, and perfect love of GOD: who as he best deserves, only
desires our hearts Prove. 23.26.
and affections: I will not discuss (much less determine) the Time, when
these three Books were writ, whether his Canticles were writ in his youth The
Book called Salomons solace, cap. 27. page 113. thinks the Canticles writ
before the 20. year of his Age.
before his Fall: Or according to Praefatione in Joshuam.
BEZA, and De Haeres.
PHILASTRIVS, in his old Age, when his heart was purged and purified: Though
according to others, his Proverbes were writ in his elder years, his
Ecclesiastes in his extreme old Age; I will not stand on things Conjecturall,
in the fluctuations of opinions; but I like the allusions of the Ancients: That
they are all three of them like the triple Passover in Egypt: (Exodus 12.1.)
In the Wilderness: and in Gilgall beyond Jordan: (Josh. 5.10.) Or like that
triple kiss of the hand, the foot, and the Oseulum oris mannum, pedum, etc.
mouth, testifying Love, observance, and obedience: Or like that threefold
Cord, not easily broken; drawing and dragging the Soul of man, out of the pit
and puddle of vanity, (as JEREMY was drawn out of the myrie Dungeon) and
pulling it upwards, nearer unto God: the Souls sole and sovereign good.

SECT. 4. The aims and ends SOLOMON, that he may effect, what he does affect.
LEt us mark further, as very worthy our consiration, with what vehemence, and
ardency SOLOMON speaks, what patheticall and emphaticall words and phrases he
uses: and we shall see that neither ULYSSES nor NESTOR, so famoused by In his
Odyses and Iliads.
HOMER, for their eloquence: nor ZENOPHON the flower of At. 9. Melipta dictus.
Rhetoric, nor the Orator CYNEAS whose tongue won PIRRHVS more Cities than his
Patritius de regno lib, 1. tit. 5. and Gorlicij axiom. Oecon. p. 309.
Army, nor DEMOSTHENES whose eloquence, PHILIP, more Impediebat ejus Conacus
excitata co^tra cum Graecia: Gorlicij axiom. Politica axiom. 126. p. 293.
feared, than all the war engines of the Athenians: nor CATO CENSORIVS called
the Roman DEMOSTHENES: nor TVLLY held the Prince of Latin Oratorum facile
Princeps, and Gorypheus.
Orators, nor LACTANTIVS called the Christian CICERO: nor STVRMIVS called the
German TVLLY; nor CORNELIUS GATHEGVS, the marrow of Populi delibutus, suadaeque
Medulla.
Persuasion; nor CATO GRAMMATICVS, the Atticke Attic. Sir.
Siren, nor that learned linguist, called the HOMER of Hieronimus Theologorum
Homerus.
Divines, nor any other, ever used more exquisite Oratory, either persuasive,
or disswasive; than this our SOLOMON, to expel and supplant out of the hearts
of men, the vain love of the world, and to fix and plant instead of it, that
same Regius amor; that royal, loyal, regal, and only legal love of God:
for as was said of the Oratory of PERICLES, we may much more affirm it of
SALOMONS, Quasi fulminare and acculeos, in animis auditorum relinquere videtur
Alstedius, in Epistola Dedicatoria ante Rhetoricam.
he seems as it were to thunder, and to leave pricks and goads in the hearts
of his Auditors; for as the fire long smothered, breaks out into a sudden
flame, he being in a deep and serious meditation of the worlds vanity, awaking
as afrighted out of a terrible dream, or out of a dead sown: in a sudden
rapture, or ecstasy: as having presently escaped drowning, burning, massacring,
or some immanent (eminent) danger: he cries out of a sudden; Oh Vanity of
Vanity Vanity of Vanities, says the Preacher; like that passionate Cicero.
Orator, that reasonates; Oh tempora? Oh mores? Oh times? Oh manners? As the
Comedian, Oh Coelum? Oh terra? Oh Heavens? Oh Earth? As the Horatius Persij,
Sat. 1
Poet, Oh curas hominum? Oh quantum est in rebus inane? Oh the fond cares and
conceits of men? Oh what Vanity, what Villainy is in the Earth; As the mournful
Prophet Ier. 22.29
JEREMY, Oh Earth; Earth; Earth; Hear the word of the Lord: as that
Evangelicall Prophet Evangelista potius Propheta, Hierom.
ESAIAS; Hear oh Heavens, and hearken oh Esaias. 1.2.
Earth, with such like passionate declamations, exclamations: SOLOMON at the
first setting forth, breaks and breathes in the ears and hearts of men, as
the fire set to powder, sends out the pellit, the string from the bow, the
sling from the hand, send forth the arrow, and the stone, to the intended
mark, with the greater vehemence; so the fire of SALOMONS inflamed zeal; and
strong-bent affections, meeting with a fit object and subject to work upon,
sends to the eager pursuers of Vanity, his disswasives speedily forth, with the
greater force, Emphasis and Enargy: yea SOLOMON knowing how firm and fixed the
hearts of men, were radicated and rooted in these earthly Vanities, (however,
their boles and boughs, their buds and chats, their leaves and flowers,
sprouting upwards, (the external and outward profession, the words and
gestures of many Temporizers hypocritically mounting toward Heaven) made show
of the contrary: he gives the stronger assault and push even in the first
encounter, to move and remove them from their strong holds: transported and
carried with zeal, as ELIAS in a fiery 2. Kings, 9 20
Chariot, marching vehemently like IEHV, rushing as it were amongst the Pikes,
he gives at first cariere a stout and courageous assault, against the chief
Garrison of Vanity, to overthrow, and overblow her strongest Bulwarks and
fortifications, even in an instant: at least he sets up a flag of defiance, and
as an Heroicke martialist professes open hostility and enmity, against all
kind of Vanities: for as JOHN was the voice of a Crier Math. 3.3.
in the Wilderness: and JONAS the voice of a vehement Crier, against Ninivie:
proclaiming Jonas. 3.4
Woes and Anathemaes against her, (as one JESUS once against Jerusalem, before
her overturne by Iosephius de Bell. Jud. l. 2 c. 19. 21, 22 24. l. 6. c. 16 l.
7. c. 7.8.
TITUS VESPATIAN) so SOLOMON as Gods Herald, and Trumpetter, to the whole
world; doubles and trebles his thunderbolts, against all kind of Vanities:
crying Vanitas Vanitatum, or as some read it, with a greater emphasis
Vanitantium: and least he should be mistaken he speaks it again and again
with a witness; as Christ three times to Ioh. 21.15
PETER, to testify his love to his relapsed Apostle, repenting in verity: so
SOLOMON to testify his hatred against Tyrannizing and domineering Vanity;
which rules in the heart of men, (as a tyrannical DIONISIVS, PHALARIS, or
Idumean HEROD, in an usurped Kingdom, three times inveighes against it, to
disthronize and dispossess it from that seat, which properly and peculiarly
belongs only to GOD: for as that Gracian Demosthen.
Orator, being asked three times, what was the first, what the second, what the
third part of Oratory; answered still Pronunciatio, prima, secunda, tertia pars
Oratoris.
pronunciation, pronunciation, pronunciation: so let SOLOMON be demanded what
he thinks of all these sublunary and earthly things, he will epitomize his
censure in one word, Vanity; but be better advised SOLOMON? Primae cogitationes
seniores: secundae saniores: the first thoughts are elder, but the second
sounder, and riper: yet he is the second time in the same Tone, the same Tune;
his verdict is Vanity: but deliberandum diu, quod perficiendum semel,
deliberate SOLOMON more seriously, and cave quid dicis, take heed what thou
speak, thy words will go far, for they are of weight and consequence; as
thou art the greatest of men, a King: the worthiest of men, the wisest King:
SOLOMON as a pattern and president indeed of a right wise man; (more perfect
than TVLLY draws his Orator, ZENOPHON his CYRUS, CASTILIO his Courtier, GALEN
his just Temperament, or ARISTOTLE, his Quadratus) is still like himself; Sibi
constans, and sui similis: the same man the same mind, fixed as the Pole, firm
as the Rock; his words-master; he says it, and stands to it, the third time,
as though like a zealous Preacher (as did the Ministers and De quibus lege apud
Eusebium, l. 3. cap. 4. l. 4 cap. 15. l. 5. c. 1. l. 6. c. 4.34. l. 7. c. 11
12. l. 8. c. 17 lib. 9. cap. 6. Theod. l. 3. c. 7.14.16. Ruffinum. l. 2 c. 2.
cap. 16. Magd. lib. Centur. 3. and Niceph. l. 3.36. l. 5.26 l. 7.16. and l. 10.
c. 10.
Martyrs in the Paganish, Arian, and Popish Persecution, JOHN Nauclerus and
Funccius, in Chron. fol. 162. and Osiander Cent. 15. l. 1. page 471.
HVSS at Constance, and our Queen MARY'S Fox in Martyrolog.
Martyrs) he would seal what he had spoke, and preached, even with his very
blood, he affirms and assevers, the third time, that all is but Vanity: even
Atmos, At moon, as JEROME notes the Greeks interpret it, even Vapor fami, and
aura tenuis, quae cito resolvitur, A vapor of smoke, or a tender Air, soon
dissolved, a squib soon ending in smoke and smother: Sodoms Habent intus
fuliginem, favil, testatur Solin. c. 36. Aegisip. l. 4. c. 18. Orosius l. 1. c.
6.
Apples, fair to look too, yet touched soon dissolving into stink: and
sulphurious Ashes: shadows, sharkes, and mere delusions, such as are used by
Conjurers, composed of air, by the Prince of the Air: Like the seeming dishes
that CORNELIUS AGRIPPA in the Army of CHARLES Apud. P. J.
the 5. Abbot TRITHENIAS: the German FAVSTVS, and other Migitians: have set
before their guests, feeding the eye, but not the taste, no more than these our
Swinish husks, like these dishes which Phenissa presented before Menippus her
lover, (as those that have writ of the contempt of the world, and of the Vanity
of these earthly things, Hugo Cardinalis, Hugo Victorinus, Bonaventure,
Carthusianus, Innocent the third, Titelman, and Arboreus of later times, but
above all, Didacus Stella, and our zealous and learned Countryman, In his
Christian warfare.
M. Downam, with the French Phoenix, the noble Du Plessis, plainly have
discovered; all which seeming to light their candles, from Salomons Torch, and
as the Moon, to take their light from Salomons Sun; let us hear himself
speak, in his own proper phrase and dialect; as he was a Preacher: as he was
a King: even such an one as Plato wished for a Philosophical Prince, and a
Princely Philosopher: as he was a Preacher: Vanity of Vanity, Vanity of Vanity,
all is but Vanity, says the Preacher: The Emphasis of his words, the zeal of
his soul, the strong movings of his heart, and the earnings of his affections,
are to be pondered, and poized again, and again: even as when we would show
the excellency, or denotate the certainty of any thing, both in Theology and
humanity, we see it is redoubled: as Canticum Canticorum, the Song of Songs,
intimating the Canticles, of Solomon: the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords: God
of Gods: the true Jehovah: the mystery of mysteries: Christ incarnate, the
Heaven of Heavens: the Imperial Heavens: the Virgin of Virgins: Mary the
Virgin Mother, the Sabbath of Sabboths; the Sacrament of Sacraments: the
Eucharist: the world of worlds; and the like; as also threats, and
denunciations redoubled: as to Adam eating the forbidden fruit, moriendo Genesis
2.17 Vide Paraeu^ and Marloratum in locis.
morieris, in dying thou shall dye: so also visitando visitabo: in visiting,
God will visit, expressing the certainty: so here, Vanity of Vanities, notes a
settled persuasion and estimation of the Vanity of these terrestrial things; to
give to the soul and spirit of man, any true contentation, or sollid
satisfaction, which is the nail I still drive at, and the mark which I shoot
at. CHRYSOSTOM notes that Exoken in the Chris. hom. 55. ad populum Antiochenum.
Phrase, by which the Greeks use to express the Emphasis of a thing: NYSSENVS
Jn locum.
alludes to our vulgar adages: as we use to say, Mortuo, magis mortuum: more
dead, than death it self: as having also the force of an abstract, as when we
call a foolish man even folly it self. A wise man eve^ wisdom it self so
these vain things eve^ Vanity it self: which is further illustrated and
confirmed by this triple or threefold repitition; in which number as the
Platonists and Pythagoreans included great Apud. Cornel. Agrip. deoccul.
Philos. lib. 2. c. 3. Plinium l. 28. c. 2. Arist. Metap. 1. c. 5. Macrob. lib.
1. in Some. Scip. c. 6. and l. 2. c. 21. and apud Venetum lib. problem. sect. 2.
q. 85. To^. 1. Nec non apud Galatinum, l. 3. c. 9 co^tra Judeos
mysteries, (and our Friars and Jesuits greater) so in the principles of
Peripateticall Philosophy rightly understood; Tria sunt omnia, Three are all:
so that, as the French, when they would express, that which is excellently
good; they call it Tres bon, or Ter bonum, Thrice good: so SOLOMON when he
would express the Vanities of these sublunary things: (not to meddle with the
Heavens, though some Hieron. l. 8 in c. 24. Esa, and l. 14. in cap. 51.
say they are here also included, nor with the Angels which are Origin in c. 8.
ad Romans and Amb. Epist. 21. de Angelis intelligunt.
above) he calls them all, Tria vana, three veins, or three vanities; or ter
vanum, thrice vain. But SOLOMON gives not only this Verdict as he was a
Preacher, but also as he was a King: I was (says he) King of Jerusalem: and I
purposed in my heart to find out wisdom in all these things, that are under
the Sun: I saw all that was done under the Sun: and I saw all was Eccl. 1.12
Vanity: Before we heard Vanity of Vanity, says the Preacher, now says the
King: this may strike a deeper impressio^ in us, to co^temn and condemn these
Vanities, from the authority of the Person, which does dislike and disallow
them: and that is SOLOMON a King: yea the greatest of earthly Kings, in
magnificence, Vide Vivaldi tractatum de magnificentia Salomonis. and Iosephum
in Antiquitat.
munificence, riches, honors, glory, wisdom, renown, surpassing all of
mere men, that went before him, or shall come after him: not that great
hunting NIMROD; the Chaldean NAEVCHADNEZZAR, the Persian ASSVERVS, ZERXES, or
ARTAXERXES, the Eagle ALEXANDER, the Turkish Ottomans: the Egyptian ancient
Ptolomies, or Souldans: the Latin Albanes: the great Mogull, the Cham of
Cathay: PRESTER JOHN, The Roman, Ethiopian, or Tartarian Emperors, in every
thing, hardly in any thing surpassing him, nay not equalizing him: as those
that have writ of him plainly demonstrate: now we know, as we write after the
lines, and follow the lives of great Regis, ad exemplum, totus componitur orbis.
men, so chiefly of Kings, the greatest of men; earthly Gods as they are
called, Solo Deo minores, only less than GOD: being here Vice Dei, instead
of GOD, with whom they change names: as offices: we believe Kings rather than
Philosophers, as the Philosophers observed; we insist their steps, whither
crooked or straight: as their words are Oracles; their acts examples, to tutor
us only to good, or evil cum privilegio: so we usually subscribe to their
Judgments, what they hold and enact, whether true or erroneous, as four
hundredth Prophets yielded to the false opinion of one 1. King. 22 12
AHAB, that it was good for him to fight at Ramoth Gilead: and most of Israel
worshipped the Calves at Dan and Bethel, 1. Kings, 12.29.30.
because Jeroboam erected them, and millions turned Arrians, in the days of
Arrianus apud Funcciu^. 109. h. Magd. Cent. c. 3. p. 101.
Constantius, Jdam Cent. 4. c. 3. p. 40 Theod. l. 4. c. 26.
Valens, and De quo sigfridus saccus Dom. 8. post. Trinit. and axiom. Eccl.
Gorlicij page 315.
Anastatius, Denying Christ's Divinity, because these Emperors were Arrians: as
the whole Christian world was Orthodoxe, professing the truth, as zealous
proselites, in the days of Constantine, Honorius, Arcadius, Gratian, Iovinian,
Justinian, Theodosius the elder and the younger, because these Christian
Emperors were Orthodox, zealous, sincere and religious: as Hist. l. 7. c. 10.
and l. 10. c. 7. and in vita Constable. l. 1.2, 3, 4.
Eusebius, (...) c. 9 etc. 6. c. 2 l. 7. c. 22. etc. 23. and l. 5. (...) 10.
Socrates, Hi^. (...) 6. (...)
Zozamen, l. c. 2. cum hist. trimpert. l. 1. c. 8.
Ruffinus, Nicephorus, and that Tripartite History, testify of them: such
force (as is more largely proved, in the Eare-jewell for Judges) have both the
Judgments and practices of Princes, with their Plebean subjects: every
superior like the heavenly bodies, having a wondrous operative influence, upon
their dependant sublunary inferiors: why should not then SALOMONS Verdict,
being so great, so wise a King; excelling amongst men (yea even amongst Kings)
as the Lion amongst the Beasts: as the male Dear amongst the heard: as the
Cassanaeus in Ca^. p^. 2 full. 373. et Plin. l. 10. c. 5.
Eagle (if not Idem ibid.
Phoenix amongst birds; the Lilly amongst flowers; the Cedar amongst Trees; why
does it not, I say as a golden Seal in soft wax, work in us the same
impression, that was in himself? Why should we be Didimists, Sceptecks; or
Athists, to doubt discuss, and deny: what he knew speculatively as he was a
wise man, practically: as a sinful (but repentant) man; and declares to us
authoritively, upon his word, and the pawn of his honor, as he was a King, and
the greatest of men; that all these terrestiall and transitory things; which we
admire; on which we dote, with which we Idolatrize, by which we perish: are
but mere Vanities, toys, trifles, delusions, dreams golden slumbers, husks,
vacuities, in conclusion (except the means of our confusion) nothing and
therefore not to be rested in, nor relied on, more than on a broken staff, or
the Reeds of Esa. 30.2
Egypt, lest as burnt at last, as the fond Flea, by coming too near these
dazzling flames, we occasionedly exclaim on these Impostors, as here repenting
Solomon, and lament that ever we put any trust or confidence in them, as did
that good old John the King of Reale^n Historia per Marinaenus l. 18. rorum
Hispanio^nu^
Aragon, on his death bed; yea least being brought by our credullty to such
exigents, as Cresus was captivated by Cyrus, and tied at a stake, to be burned
we then cry, oh Solomon Solomon, as he cried oh Solon Apud Herodotum l. 1.
Solon, or at least trying them all to our no small pains, cost, and
prejudice, every way both in our credit with men, and conscience with God: we
occasionedly complain as even Tully the Heathen did, ego omnibus tentalis nihil
invenio in quo acquiescere Verba recitantur, per Majolum de diebus Canicul.
Coll. 7 page 520^
possum, trying and attempting every thing (like a sick man rouling every way
in his bed) I can find rest and contentation in nothing, no more than our
Prodigal here in his hungry Husks.

SECT. 5. SALOMONS Repentance, Sanctification, and Salvation, prooved from
Scriptures, and Reasons.
But if we believe not SOLOMON, as he was morally wise; as he was practically
experimented, and traded in all the mysteries of Vanities; as he was a
Preacher, proclaiming his best notions, and motions of his repeated Vanities,
shooting off a warning piece, to the admonishing of others: yet let us believe
him, (which is my last and not least Argument) as he was a Prophet, and so
like ESAIAS, JEREMY, JOEL, AMOS, EZECHIEL, and the rest of the greater and
lesser See Gualter and Danaeus, in their Co^ments upon the small Prophets.
Prophets, in their Sermons, and extant Prophecies, endued in the penning,
preaching, and publishing of this Ecclesiastes, (being Prophetical, and so
Lelius de express Dei verbo, and Za^chi de sacra Script. prove that no books
in the old Test. are Prophetical, but those are also Canonical.
Canonical. with an unerring spirit, to expatiate a little into a Champian,
and Field of matter, concerning SOLOMON, and yet to find the truth of the
poinct, we still prosecute, as the Center in a large Circumference.

That SOLOMON sinned fearfully, who knows not? That has read his best, and
worst in the sacred Scriptures? In JOSEPHUS, and others; chiefly some Hebrew
Rabbis, that have writ his life: so fearfully indeed, and foully in his
manifest and manifold Idolatries, his gross and grievous Adulteries, his lusts
insatiable (more than these of PROCVLVS, AEGISTVS, NERO, De hisce omnibus, and
alijs vid. Ravisium in Theat. Philo. lib. 5. cap. 53 page 65 3. ex Plutarcho,
Thucid. Coelic. Gellior. cum alijs.
CAESAR, SARDANAPALVS of old, the Turkish Emperor, and the Kings of Morocco
now, or any of hers that ever we read of) that I know, as BELLARMINE, CANVS,
GREGORY de Valentia, and other Schoolmen Answered by Zanchius de preservatione
Sanctorum, Willet in Synopsi Pelargus, Ju Iesuitismo. cum alijs, contra
Modernot nostros Arminianos.
and Jesuits reckoning without their Host, and swimming without their Cork,
have untruely as uncharitably concluded his reprobation, as falsely as the
damnation of Infants, dying without Baptism: So even some of the Fathers Inter
quos Cyprianus, l. 1. Exempla 5. vel Epist. 7. and de vnitate Ecclesia poss
medium, Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 17. cap. 20. and de Doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap.
21. cum Tertul. lib. 2. contra Marcio. c. 23. and l. 3. c. 20. Reasons of the
fall of Solomon, and so of the sins of the Elect. 2 Cor. 12.7.
I know have questioned, whether by his Fall, he fell finally from Grace, or
no; as did SAVL: and even those that have been most favorable to him; as St.
BASIL, Exempla, ad Cytonem: IVSTIN MARTYR, contra Tryphonem, together with
ORIGIN, IRAENEVS, CHRYSOSTOM, BARNARD, have wondrously lamented his fall, as
also the fall of Sampson, and have laid down, some, reasons, why it pleased
the Lord so to permit him to fall. As namely, that the Lord by his fall might
humble him, as he did PAVL, after his q revelations, and as usually he does
his Children, to whom he has bestowed excellent gifts and graces shining in
eminent places; letting them often see their black Feet, to deject them, least
with the Swan, and Peacocke, the contemplation of their proud plumes, and
feathers too much erect them, and puff them up, (as bubles, and blathers) with
pride which of all other sins, God most hates and abhominates.

Secondly, that we should know him to be but man: and so know, what is in man:
chiefly if God leave him to himself: as a Cripple, without his Crutches: a
vine without his prop: a house without his foundation; a staff without an
upholding See my Preface before Origens Repentance
hand, a weakling weanling Child, without the leading Nurse, necessarily
failing in good: falling into evil; without the continual preventing Grace of
God.

Thirdly, that we should not build, upon the flesh: or upon such a Clayie
foundation as man: since the best and worthiest of men: SOLOMON the 1. King. 11
wisest. 2. Sam. 11
DAVID, the sincerest. 3. Judge. 16.4
SAMPSON the strongest. 4. Genesis 42 15. and 43, 3
JOSEPH the most Chaste. 5. Math. 26 70
PETER, and 6. John, 20 25
THOMAS, Disciples. 7. Genesis 9.21
Noah. 8. Genesis 19.36
LOT. 9. And Ge^. 38.26
IVDAH Patriarchs. 10. Eusebius. l. 6 cap. 40.41
ORIGIN the learned. 11. Grave Damnat Here Is. Montani de Pres. Herit. ^. 52
Postea defeudit contra Prax. cap. 1.
TERTVLLIAN. 12. Zealous Lib. 7, 8, 9 Confessionum
AUGUSTINE, with the rest of the Fathers, in the Greek and Latin Church as
have been proved to have had their Naevi, their warts, their wants, their
defects, in judgment, or practice: as the clear Sun his Eclipse; the clear
Moon, her weaning; the pure gold, his dross; the best wheat, his ^ares; the
best Garden, his weeds; and the healthfullest body some ill humors, or sickish
fits: as appears in the Polyganies of the first, the Adulteries of the second;
the Effeminacies of the third; the Swearing of the fourth; the Denials of the
fifth; the Incredulity of the sixth; the Drunkenness of the seventh; the
Incests of the 8. and 9. the Idolatry of the tenth; the Montanisme of the
Scultetus in Medulla Patrum, p. 172. Sic Chron. Funccij fol. 101. Hist. Magd.
Cent. 3.
eleaventh; and the Maniohisme of the Mag. Cent. 5. and Osiand. in cent. 4. l.
4. p. 168. en Possidonio.
twelfth: all which Jury give in their Verdict: that when the Seas are without
Waves and froth: the Air without Clouds: the best wines without leas, and
dregs, Trees and Vines, without superfluous branches; the body of living man
without excrements, than the best of mere men living on earth here, militant,
shall be without Hinc illud Lencij, in Apoth. Polit* p. 137. and Gorlicij in
Oeconomicis page 36. Magna Indoles non sine
sin, ere they come to Heaven tryumphant, and so make a more exact, pure,
perfect, spotless, Eutopean, Amsterdamian Church; without any blemish, than
was either in Rome, 1. Cor. 3.3
Corinth, Ephesus, Philippos, Galatia, Asia, Smirnia, Apocal. 2 c. and 3. c.
per totum.
Thyatira, in the Apostles times: or then is expected even of the Jews, after
their promised and believed Read Dr. Willets Hexapla Parens Parr, Drax and
Wilson, on Chapter 10. ad Romanos. Proouing by many arguments, the Jews
Conversion.
Conversion.

Fourthly, which is Ambrose Apol. David. cap. 4. and 1. cap. 3.
his reason, his fall was permitted, to show that he was mere man, not God;
and so not the expected Messiah of the Jews: for whom, in respect of his
manifold perfections, had he been sinne-lesse, that infatuated people, had
more probably entertained him: than either the Egyptian Apud Niceph. and
Socratem lib. 7. cap. 37
MOSES, or Of whose Acts and end, out of Rabbis, see Master Purchase his
Pilgrimage, lib. 2. cap. 10. page 132.
BEN COSEA, or any other Impostors at several times, to their own
destructions, both of bodies and souls, as histories Josephus de bello Jud. l.
7 c. 17. Nicep. lib. 3. c. 25. Eus. l. 4. c. 6.
relate.

Yet nevertheless for all this fearful fall, thus permitted for these and
other reasons, his fall was not final, his sin was not unto death; and so
consequently (as the point I aim at) this Testimony of his, and Verdict
against temporary Vanities, is not the testimonial of a Reprobate, (for then
like the pasport of a canting rogue, made under a hedge, it were of final
validity) but the Testimony of a repentant Patriarch: a sanctified Prophet, and
so consequently an elect vessel of Salvation? Which I easily convince, against
all oppugning Antagonists, by these querees and expostulations.

First, was he not an Amamiensis, a Penman of the Spirit of GOD, in writing
and inditing three whole books of Canonical Scripture, as the Church has
always acknowledged, and received them into the sacred Canon? In which
respect, De Civit. De^, l. 17. c. 20
AUGUSTINE, and Lib. 2. de
THEOPHILACT, call him a Prophet? And some of the Hebrew R. Moses l. 2. Mor^ch
cap. 45.
Rabbis reckon him with his Father DAVID, IOE, Fide.
and DANIEL: Now was any Penman of the Spirit ever a Reprobate? Look upon all
the Prophets from MOSES, to MALACHY: all the four Evangelists: the
Evangelizing Apostles, that in their Epistles writ as they preached; the sum
and substance of the Gospel? And tell me, if ever any of those, whom the Lord
used as his Organs and instruments in this blessed work, for his own glory,
and conversion of Souls, were ever Castawayes?

Sacondly does not Saint PETER call all the Prophets holy 1. Pet. 1, 21
Prophets: and if holy, then everlastingly happy: SOLOMON then being in the
Catologue of these holy ones, how should he be excluded from these happy and
blessed ones.

Thirdly, was not SOLOMON an excellent Type, and figure of CHRIST the Messiah,
as is by all acknowledged, without contradiction? Now was ever any personal
Type of CHRIST, a Reprobate? AARON, a type of his Priesthood, ABEL and ISAAC
types of his Passion: JOSEPH of his betraying: JONAS of his Resurrection: ENOCH
and ELIAS of his Ascension: IOSHVA, GIDEON, OTHINEL, IEPHTE: SAMPSON, temporary
Saviors, types of his Salvation, as also ABRAHAM, NOAH, MOSES, MELCHISEDECH,
DAVID, and all the rest that typified See an useful book in 8. called Moses
unvailed, and the Pilgrimages of the Patriarchs and Prophets, in 4 passim. de
hisce Typis.
CHRIST, it appears in these particulers.

First, in his birth, the Child of Promise: the Sons of God: as Christ, by Luke
3.31
Nature, he by 2. Sa^. 7.14
Adrption: both called the son of DAVID: according to the flesh. 2. In his
Names, as first SOLOMON, peaceable, foreshewing the Messiah, the true
MELCHISEDECH, the Prince of Peace.

Secondly, Iedediah, beloved of God, 2. Sam. 12.25. So Christ is proclaimed the
welbeloved Mat. 17.5
Son in whom the Father is well pleased.

3. Pro. 31.3
Lemuell; so called by his Mother, signifying God with him, or God with them;
answering the true Mat. 1.23
Emanuel, God with us: SOLOMON being withal, Exodus 7.1
as was said Exodus 7.1.
of MOSES, a God to his people.

Fourthly, Koheleth, a Congregator, a builder, a Preacher: as he labored by
his preaching, and by the Book of the Preacher, to congregate and gather unto
God, both Jews and Gentiles, so in this answering the true Ge^. 40.10
Shiloh, to whom the gatherings of the people shall be.

Thirdly, a Type of CHRIST in his Princely Office, set over Gods people and
heritage, (even as the Messiah is set a Captain and governor over his Elect)
because the Lord loved them. 1. Kin. 10 9,


Fourthly, in his admired Wisdom: for are not in CHRIST all the treasures of
Coloss. 2, 3
Wisdom.

Fifthly, in his Judgments and Equity (the improvement of his judgment and
wisdom) having the true Vrim and Thummim; for shall not Christ judge the
people with righteousness, and the Nations with Psalm. 96.13
equity. More specially, as he judged the two 1. King. 3, 27
Harlots, and discerned the true Mother of the controverted child from the
false: shall not CHRIST judge Jews, Turks, and Papists, for all their false
Pleas, and deluding lapwing cries. 2. His strict proceedings against 1. King. 2
25
ADONIAH, and V. 31.32
IOAB, his plotting enemies, does it not prefigure how CHRIST will proceed in
Judgment, against all his enemies, breaking them in pieces, like a Potters
Vessel: Psalm. 2.9.

Sixthly, SALOMONS translating of the Priesthood, from ABIATHAR of the house of
ELI, to V. 27.
ZODO, does it not show how the Messiah removed the annual Leviticall
Priesthood of AARON to himself, the true sacrifizing Melchisidech: a Priest
for Heb. 7.17
ever.

Seaventhly, as SOLOMON built the Lord a Temple; is not CHRIST the spiritual
builder, of Koheleth the Sea Morney and our D. Feila, de Ecclesia.
Church.

Eighthly, as SOLOMON fetched timber from 1. Kin. 5.6
HIRAM, a Gentile to the building of this material edifice, does not CHRIST
cull and call, and gather, even of the Gentiles, as living stones, built on the
corner stone, to the structure of his spiritual Temple. God persuading IAPHET
to dwell in the Tents of SEM. Genesis 9. verse. 7.

Ninthly, the Queen of Sheba bringing presents unto SOLOMON, from so 1. Kin 10
10
far, shows it not, that the Magi from the East and great Kings and Mat.
2.11 and Ps. 45.12
Princes, from the East, West, North, and South, shall bring their presents and
yield their homage unto CHRIST, by receiving the Gospel, and believing in him,
to their Salvation: Math. 8.11.

Tenthly, leaving all other particulars; the great glory, riches, magnificence,
and royalty of Lege Ludevicum Viv. de magnificentia Salomonis.
SOLOMON, together with the excellency of the Temple in the luster, and
structure of De hoctemplo preter 1. Reg. 6 2. Chron. 9. Chris. in Math. ho^.
88. Sixtum in Biblioth, l. 6. ann. 12. Mogdonetu^ de Monte Calvariae: Ruffinum
l. 11. and Eusebium hist. l. 9 cap. 2.
it, exceeding either the brightness of the Sun; the Image of IVPITER, the
Walls of Thoebes, the Tower of Babylon: the house of CYRUS: the Mausolean
Tomb: the Egyptian Pyramides: the Walls of Ninivie: the Temple of DIANA: or
any other most memorable wonders of the World: which not only Heathenish
Hystorians, as Plin. l. 34. l. 26. c. 5. etc. 8, 9, 11, 12 14.
PLINY, Lib. 1. c. 5.
MELA, L. 12. c. 16
STRABO, CVRTIVS, DIODORVS, Lib. 2.
HERODTVS, but even Christians, as De Civit. Dei, l. 2. c. 4
AUGUSTINE, L. 14. c. 16
ISODORE, Ant. Lect. l. 23. c. 6.
RHODEGINVS, ALDVS, have so famoused: does not the first answer to that
beauty, blessing, grace, glory, might, worship, renown, honor, truth,
righteousness: which is in Christ; to which DAVID alludes in his Psalm. 45.
Psalms, and SOLOMON himself, in his mystical Canticles, typifying Christ's
matrimonial Union, with his Church, under the veil of his marriage with
PVARAOHS Lorinus in Eccles. and Soto Major Praefat. in Cant. Ca^tico.
Daughter. The eminency too of his material Temple, does it not typifie the
beauty and glory of the spiritual Temple, the Church of the new Testament
under Christ.

Now in all these particulars, could such an excellent Type and figure of the
Messiah, be a Reprobate? Were not his sins pardoned upon his repentance, as
well as the sins of others, who praefigured him.

But here is the question of all questions: whether SOLOMON truly repented? For
we know the promises to the repentant, be their sins never so great, and
Esa. 1.18, Exek. 18, 27 Ierem. 3.14 Joel, 2.12
greevous: now SOLOMON repenting of his grievous transgressions, as did his
Father DAVID, why might not he be the object and subject of mercy as well as 2.
Sa^. 12.13
DAVID, 1. Tim. 1.13.14.
PAVL, 2. Chron. 33.11.12.
MANASSES, Mat. 26.75.
PETER, and all the rest of the Scripture-Paenitents. Luke, 7.47. Luke, 19.9.
Luke, 18.13.14. Mat. 9.10.

If any doubt of SALOMONS true Cordial, unfeigned, and saving repentance: let
him consider these things; in General, in special.

In general: that those, who are once dedicated to the Lord, and whom the Lord
loves, they must repent, at one time, or other: though they sin fearfully,
yet not finally; though they fall dangerously, yet not desperately; for the
foundation of the Lord remains sure, the Lord knows who are 2, Tim. 2 19
his: his gifts and graces are without Ro^. 11, 29
Repentance: whom the Lord loves once, he loves to the Ioh. 13, 1
end: his love is not fickle, wavering, and unconstant, as the love of ASSVERVS
to Esther, 6.6 and 7.10
HAMAN, Ammon to 2, Sam, 13 15
Thamar, Putiphars wife to Genesis 39.7 14
Joseph: ending (as man's lustful and unlimited love often) in hate: but more
constant than Ionathans to 1. Sam. 20 17
David, Philades to Orestes, Nisus to Eurialus, Damon to De his and alijs,
fidelis amicitiae exemplis: lege apud Valor. Fulgosum and Brusonium, tit. de
amicitia, sic apud Ravisium, p. 570. and Lo^cerum, in suo Theatro. fol. 422.
Pythias, as hot as fire: as firm as flint, as strong as Death; Now it is said,
the Lord loved 2. Sam. 12 24
SOLOMON, and gave him a Name, answering this love: and as an effect of this
love he gave him not only common graces, such as he bequeathes to Hypocrites,
and Reprobates: but even specificall, special, and saving Grace: even the
Spirit of 2. Chro^. 6
Prayer: to which rightly Vide Alstedium in Theol. Cat. sect 3. p. 736 737. ad
745 and Scultetum, de precatione, ap. 121. ad page 178. de modo oranat.
qualified, Salvation is promised and Act. 2, 21.
annexed; which Grace SOLOMON had in that excellent measure, together with
Eucharisticall thankesgivings, a branch and species of Prayer, that twice
praying that we read of, once in public in the 1. Kings, 8.
Temple: and in 1. King. 3.5.6.
private: for Wisdom, the Lord appears unto him, in Giboah: testifies his
acceptance and approbation of his V. 11.22.
Prayer; and of his Sacrifices: which he never did in any oblations and
sacrifices of a wicked man, an hypocrite, a Reprobate, all whose services (as
himself reveals) his very Soul does loath and Esa. 1.11.2 and 58.4.5. and
66.30. and Ier. 7, 8, 9. sic. Ioh. 9. v. 31
abhor: from whence I could with De perseverat. Sanctorum.
Zanchy, In locis.
Aretius, Jn locis Communibus
Musculus, Jn locis.
Peter Martyr, the French In his book called the Buckler of Faith. Et alibi
contra Armen.
Moulins, and all the late Hammerers of D. Morton D. Willet. D. Sutcliffe, and
the two D. Whites.
Papists, that Solomon having true Grace, never lost it: though the Sun of
his grace were clouded and eclipsed by his fall, yet it shined again, in his
repentance: his grace might loose both leaves and fruit, as a Tree in winter,
in his temptations and seductions, yet there remained still sap at the root of
his heart, the seed of God remained still in him, as he had an ebb in sensual
sinning, he had a springtide again in godly sorrowing: it being indeed with
Solomon, as with all Gods Children: as it is with the wood, whose nature is to
swim on the water; but overladen with iron sinkes: but take off this iron of
sin by repentance; Grace in them surgeth, rises aloft Grace in the Elect is
like the herb Ady^nto^, which long steeped in water rots not, but comes forth
dry.
again: the application is very easy, or they are in the act of sin, Mr.
Yates, Mr. Anisworth, Dr. Featly, Mr. Burton: chiefly Mr. Pryn Lincolinensis.
Instar omnium a. p. 364. ad p. 393.
as a man in a sown, or in a fit of falling sickness; not wholly dead: by
rubbings, and unctions, and stirrings, and administering of strong waters, they
come again to themselves: in such a fit, in such a sown, was Solomon, but at
last revived by his Spiritual Physician, whose grace gave him, the true Aqua
vitae or water of life, cordial repentance: wise Solomon was poisoned with: or
at least had surfeited like our Prodigal, in the husks of Vanity, but the
Lord gives him a Lotion, a Potion, the oil of his Grace, which makes him
evacuate, purge and empty them all, up again, by repentance: he casts them out
at his Eyes, by Contrition: chiefly (as other surfets (out of his mouth, by
true, hearty, humble, public Confession, for to intimate some particulars of
his Repentance, he freely and ingenuously confesses his sins: for whereas as
one well Salomons Solace, Cap. 130. p. 123
observes, he might in this his Ecclesiastes, have pointed at the folly and
vanity of ADAM, CAIN, NIMROD, ESAV, PHARAOH, SAVL, ABIMELECH, ACHAN, NABAL,
LABAN, MICHAY, and diverse others: as men do when they would hide and extenuate
their own finnes, and accuse others; yet Iustus accusator sui; the just man,
casting the first stone against himself, he inroules himself as the
principal, in the forefront of the Bead-roule of vain ones; he proclaims
himself the chief fool in Vanities Kingdom: therefore, so freely confessing
his sins, yea his special and particular vanities of which he makes a full
Catalogue: (as his Father Psalm. 51.14
DAVID, confessed his particular murder: PAVL his 1. Ti^. 1.13
Persecutions: the penitent Ezra. 10.2
Jews, their marrying of strange Wives: their rejecting of GOD and 1. Sam. 12
10. and v. 19.
SAMVEL, in asking a King: LVTHER often his particular abominations, when he was
a blinded Papist: ORIGIN his particular Idolatry, sacrificing to Heathenish De
quo Eusebius l. 6 Nioeph. 5. c. 12. Magdab. hist. Cent. 3. and slander in Epit.
Cent. 3. c. 6. page 11.
Idols, no doubt of it, but the LORD, as he was just and faithful forgave him
all his sins. 1. Ioh. Cap. 1. v. 9

Secondly, his Confession was according to the nature of his sin; his sin
public, as if with Absolon he had spread a Tent with his 2. Sa^. 16.22
Concubines, on the house top, as David's lust with Bathshehah, it was known in
Gath and Ascalon, amongst the 2. Sam. 12 14
Uncircumcised: So his Repentance is public; as if at our Paul's Cross, or
Heraulded in the midst of Jerusalem, Josh. 7.19
by his own tongue, and pen: his salve (as in the repentance of David, and all
true paenitents) was proportionable to his sore, he took away glory from God,
and scandalized the Church by sinning: now as Ioshuah desired Achan, he
glorifies God, and satisfies the Church by Public sins must have
proportionable acknowledgement according to the Apostles rule. 1. Cor. 5.5.
confessing.

Thirdly, his Confession was joined with Contrition of Soul, and compunction
of Spirit, with humiliation of heart, and true dejection: and that appears,
first from the Title, that he gives himself, and that is not the King of
Israel, and Jerusalem, as he might have done had he sought popularity, and
Vainglory, which Airs the most ( Aaere nutritur absque Cibo and potu Plinius
l. 8. cap. 33.
Camelion-like) gape after: but Solomon the Preacher: the poor paenitent
perplexed Preacher; in the sense and sight of his sin, he thinks himself
unworthy the dignity of a King, (as the Prodigal here after his feeding on
unfilling husks) thought himself unworthy the Name of a Luke 15.19
Son: as his Father David, thought himself too mean, In Psalm.
to be a Doore-keeper in the house of Public sins must have proportionable
acknowledgement according to the Apostles rule. 1. Cor. 5.5.
God. 2. He does not say I am a King, but I was King of Eccl. 1.12
Jerusalem, as now, thinking himself by reason of his sins, indignus nomine,
unworthy that name, and title: which he thinks best befits the Messiah: as also
thinking of that Message, which he lately received from the Lord, that his
Kingdom shauld be divided: and ten parts given to his Servant 1. Kings,
12.29.30.31
Jeroboam, and but two reserved to him, and his seed: being in that respect
hardly King of Israel, in Jerusalem. 3. As an Argument (further) of his
humiliation, it is observable, that in this whole book of Ecclesiastes, he
uses not the name Tetragrammaton, as being ineffable, and to sinners most
terrible, and dreadful, in the Consciousnesse of his sin; he does not once
mention it: Mindful of that, in the 50. Psalm, ver. 16. of his Mr. Asaph,
forbidding the wicked once to take the Name, or Covenant of God, in their
mouths. Which Text when Origin read after his Apostasy, mentioned by
Eusebius, Lib. 6. Magdeb. Cent. 3. and Niceph. Lib. 5. Cap. 12. He burst out
into tears and could not preach. He in awe and reverence thinks himself
unworthy to name JEHOVAH.

Fourthly, being converted himself, he labors, as Christ enjoined Luke 22 32
PETER, and in him all true Paenitents, and as PAVL Act. 9.28
practiced, the Conversion of others: for this book of the Preacher, preaches
repentance unto all, both Jews and Gentiles; yea it teaches mortification
from the worlds Vanities, the Fear of the Lord, and obedience to his Eccl.
12.13
Commandments, therefore in respect of the affe^t of it, or Salomons
affections to do good by it ^s called by some Rabbi Solomon, in Ca^tica.
the book of the calling again of the Jews: Comment in Cantica.
Origin calls it, Ecclesiastes, a Congregando Ecclesiam: from that desire which
Solomon had to congregate a Church to God: and some of the Hebrews (as two
famous amongst the Hierom. in Eccles. cap. 1 and in Ezekiel. cap. 46.
Fathers, and Aquinas de Regimine principum, l. 3. cap. 8.
Schoolmen) have called it his Book of repentance, in which book, as a true
Preacher indeed, he labors to find out right Scriptures, Delight some words,
and words of truth, that as goades and nails he might rivet them in the hearts
of others to work that remorse in them, which he found and felt in himself:
which indeed is a sign of true and saving Grace, when it is Communative, and
diffusive, for the conversion of the wicked, or confirmation of the weak: when
we would imprint grace in others, which is sealed in our selves, herein
tutored by the Cock who when he has found a Barley Corn clocks, and calls to
it, his Hens (as the Hen calls her Chickens) and when we are awaked our
selves out of the dark dream of our sins: by clapping our wings and Gall^
vigilantis Episcopi Typus apud Majolum, de dieb. Canic. Colloq. 7. p. 210
crowing (as Solomon here, and since LVTHER, that Vide Epistolas ad Leonem
Papam ad diverses Episcopos nobiles. Libellis de captivicate Bab. de Missa
disputationes and scripta apud Sleidanum, Nigrium, Bucholcheram, and Osiander
Cent. 16. lib. 1.
Cock of Belgia) to awaken others; either out of Popery, or profaneness: is
a sure sign of a sanctified heart, and of a Conscience truly touched.

Fifthly, SALOMONS confession was joined with faith: he believed with his
heart: as did PHILIPS Acts, 8.37
Eunuch: as he confessed with his mouth, to his Ro^. 10.10
Salvation, for his confession here to to GOD primarily (as in the Judgment
both of charity and verity, we are to conclude) and to his scandalized Church
secondarily; was not the Confession of a Felon, to his Judge, as ACHANS to
Josh. 7.20 ^1
IOSHVAH, fearing execution. Nor as the Confession of IVDAS, to the Math.
27.4.5.
Pharisees, for want of Faith, ending in a halter, and in Psalm. 9.17. and Act.
1.25
Hell: but as the Confession of a Son to his indulgent Father, (for that
reference the Lord himself professes he has to 2. Sa^. 7.14
SOLOMON) or as a Confession of a Patient to his Physician, in hope of help,
and health: and he confesses to the offended Church, as any man may in the
like case confess, even unto man, As appear by that comfortable letter which
Luther sent the sick Duke of Saxony, apud Osiandrum Cent. 16. l. 1 page 70.
(stearing yet far enough, from the Rocks of Popish Auricular Confession)
not only to give satisfaction, in case of Mat. 5.23 24
scandal, but as a diseased man to his Surgeons, (as the perplexed CHRIST-
crucifying paenitents to Act. 2.37
PETER, the Publicans to Luke 3.12
JOHN, the Magical Act. 19.18 19
Nicromancers, and others converted by PAVL, and as many in our days have
done, to the zealous GRENHAM, PERKINS, DENT, DEERING, DODD; and others: to whom
the Lord gave the tongue of the Esa. 50.4.
learned, and created the fruits of their lips to be Esa. 57.17
Peace, even in Case of desired Comfort, and Consolation. Esaias. 57.19, Job,
33.23.24.

Sixthly, SALOMONS Repentance, was constant and Conscionable: it was not in a
flash, or in a Crocodiles Vincentius hist. l. 17. c. 606.
tear, or two, like Heb. 12.16
ESAVVES and the hypocriticrll Deu. 1.45
Jews, not in a SAVLS 1. Sa^. 15.24
Confession: but as PAVL's, it begun and continued in that true Conversion, the
very life and soul of repentance, that sincere aversion from sin, and turning
unto Haec vera paenitentia preterita plangere pla^genda non co^mittere. August.
de pan.
God which the Prophets, every where call for, he did not after any fained
humiliation, return to his sin again, as the Dog to his vomit, the Sow to
her wallowing: as did Ahab, Saul, Adoniah, Ioab, Semei: but acording to the
rule and Canon: he did Praeterita plangere, plangenda non committere: Lament
his bypast Vanities, and as a man that gives a Bill of Divorce to his whorish
wife, never to intermedled with her more: as Noah, Lot, Judah, David, Peter,
and others: he did not Apostate again and backe-slide to his repentant and
abandoned follies; now he esteems all the Honors, Pleasures, Riches,
Dignities, Policies, Studies, Counsels thoughts, actions, endeavors of men in
this life, without the Wisdom, Word, Worship, Fear, and Favor of God: to
be mere Husks, and Vanities, such as will never help, ease, profit,
comfort, or content him in life, in death nor death: and his judgment ushering
his practice, he made a Covenant with his heart, never to feed more, on these
Husks, to sin more in the use, abuse, of these Vanities? But as a Traveller,
ever talking of, and fitting for his journey, his Thoughts, and tongue, now
walk and talk another way: even how to fear GOD, and keep his
Commandments, (Legal, and Evangelicall) being indeed, that Regia Via Vitae,
the true way to life: and herein indeed was his true repentance, according to
CHRIST'S Ioh. 5.14.
Precept, and AMBROSE his prescript, when he sinned no more, in that culpable
kind as Haec vera poenitentia cum sic paenitet hominem peccasse, ut crimen non
repetat. Amb de poenit.
before: the best repentance, says that zealour Belgic Luther, called often by
Hennius Eccardus and others, the Elias of Germany.
Apostle, being in one word, A new Optima paenitentiae, nova vita.
life.

Now true Repentance, being never incident to CAIN, ESAV, PHARAOH, or any other
Reprobate; SOLOMON truly repenting, who can (without manifest untruth) deny
him mercy: unless he deny the Scriptures, and make GOD to deny himself.
Besides, does not the Lord himself say, that if he sin (as he did too
grossly) he would visit his sins with Rods, and his transgressirns with 2.
Sa^. 7.14
Scourges, as indeed he did, by stirring up enemies 1. Kin. 11 14.26.
against him, as often against rebelling Judge. 4.2. c. 6.2. etc. 10.6.7.
Israel, according to his Lev. 26.17 Deu. 28.25
threats, but yet, he would not take away his mercy and loving kindness from
him: Gods visitations, being to him, as to all Gods children, as Rods
corrective from a father, as Physical purges from his Physician: instructive
and redargative, for the good and health of his soul, as Rubarb and Aloes to
purge the viscous and gluttonous humors of his follyes, as Discorides and
Dodoneus in their Herbals de Helebro.
Hellibore, to cure his Spiritual Frenzy: they were not condemnatory
Judgments from a Judge; not as plagues upon the Reprobate: as we read of the
plagues of Exodus Chapter 7, 8.9, 10.
Egypt, of Ge^. 19.24
Sodom, of Esa. 16. v. 11.13
Moab, of Edom, Esa. 17. v. 1.2.
of Esa. 16. v. 11.13
Damascus, and of the 1. Sam. 5, 6 7.^.
Philistines, in a word, they were to the instruction of an adopted Son, not to
the destruction of a rejected (...) instruct^onem non ad ru^m.
Reprobate; Nay further see, the Antithesis, in the Comparison, betwixt SAVL
and SOLOMON: the Lord promising, that he will not take his mercy from him, as
he did from 2. Sa^. 7.14
Saul: does it not include, yea conclude, that SOLOMON is as certainly Elected,
as SAVL rejected; whether we take it of a temporary rejection from his
Kingdom, as the rigged Hunnius and Huberus, in Thesib. and Eccardus in
fas^iculo controversier^ and Osiander in Euchirid.
Lutherans and some Armenians: wrest that place of the Mal. 1.2, 3
Prophet, and of the Apostle, concerning ESAV, and the Jews, to be meant of a
temporary not of a final Reprobation: or we hold his reprobation absolute and
final without any participation of saving Ro^. 9.12.15.
mercy, grace, or glory: as is more probable: since God took away from SAVL,
even here his common graces, his spirit of Magistracy; sent an evil 1. Sa^.
13.14
spirit, working on his See Willets Hexapla, in locum.
Melancholy, as his executioner to torment him; gave him over to a Reprobate
sense: to commit reiterated sins, with greediness: (as his maligning and
persecuting first DAVID, 1. Sa^. 19.3 etc. 20.22.
hunting for his blood: ungratefully and ungraciously, after so many 1. Sam. 22
18, 19
kindnesses, received from him, 1. Sa^. 24.14
perfidiously breaking his promises; bloodily 2. Sa^. 21.1
murdering the Gibeonites, more bloudily the Lords Priests, vowing, 1. Sa^.
14.44
swearing, and V. 45.
forswearing, the death of just JONATHAN his son, his raylings Chap. 20.27.
and 30.
revilings, Cursings, vain Chapter 22.7.
boastings, maine disobedience, and Chapter 15.22.23.
rebellion against GOD: hypocrisy and Chapter 11.15 and Chapter 14.33 and 35.
formality in all his seeming profession; proud and peremptory intermedling,
with the Priests 1. Sam. 13.10.
Offices, as once 2. Sam. 6.7
VZZAH: Consulting with the Witch of 1. Sam. 28.7.
Endor: and other sins, for ought we know unrepented do plainly testify)
and at last, as the conclusion of his Tragedy here, and beginning of a greater
in Hell, (unless Grace came as it may come in an Jnter pontem and ^o^tem See
Abreuethy his Physic of the Soul, c. 24. p. 374. and Democritus Junior de
Melancholia, p. 782.
instant, when his own Sword was in his own bowels) giving him over, to the
power of his spiritual and corporal enemies, the Devil and the Philistines:
and to paynick and agonizing 1. Sam. 28 30.
fears, suffered him to be Felo de se: a mutherer of 1. Sa^. 31.4
himself, I say however we hold of SAVL from these praemisses: it is plain
that SOLOMON was an object and subject of that mercy, which the Lord denied
unto SAVL; and therefore as contraries illustrate one Contraria juxta se
opposita magis clucescunt.
another, as black shows white, to be more white; GODS strict Justice upon
SAVL, as a Vassell of wrath: shows SOLOMON to be an Elect Vessel of Mercy.

I might say more for SALOMONS salvation, as that he is joined with his Father
DAVID, as a true worshipper of God, therefore saved, as his Father DAVID; for
2. Chran. 11: 27. the Tribes of Israel are said to walk in the ways of DAVID,
and of SAMPSON: and indeed however I have no heart to Apologize for the sins of
SOLOMON: (as some me thinks too far for the Apud Willetum in sua Hexapla in
Genesin.
Poligamy of the Patriarchs) yet it is plain in that Chapter, that
notwithstanding the Idolatries, superstitions, provocations, of his strange
Women, Religion was not altered in SALOMONS days, an Argument, some Salomonis
Solace, Chapter 29. p. 219.
think, that the foundation of his Faith was unshaken: And it is not probable,
that he himself did adore Astoroth, Milcom, Molock, or Camos: in his own
person; no more than AARON himself did worship the golden Calfe, which the
Idolaters importunity, caused him to Exo. 32.^
erect; though in tolerating his Wives in their strange worship, he is said to
follow these Idols, which his Apocryphal book of Wisdom (if it be Some
attribute it, to Philo Judaeus
his) divulged even to the Gentiles, shows how much, he disprooves, and
dislikes, and Sapientiae c. 13.10. and 14.8. and 15 3.
abhorres.

Lastly, SALOMONS last virtues, did so far counterpoize, and countervaile his
first Vanities, that as worthy of aeternall Record, they are registered by three
Prophets; NATHAN, AHIIAH, and IEEDO: 2. Chron. 9.29. Insomuch, that these
praemisses considered, Ambros. in Apol. Davidis cap. 3. and Author lib. Eccles.
cap. 47.
with more Arguments, that might be alleged, notwithstanding his humane
sins, some Nazianzen Orat. 11
have called him Divinum Salomonem, Divine SOLOMON: yea, others though he were
such a sinner (since his sins were his sorrows, his Vanities his vexation,
to the comfort of all sincere paenitents, such as was SOLOMON, and my Texts
Prodigal:) have called him a Saint, others a most Hierom. Epist. ad ami^um
Aegrotu^, To^. 9.
holy man.

SECT. 6 SALOMONS Salvation prooved from Authors, and Authorities.
ANd indeed if I may free my self, from transgressing, in this my seeming
digressing, for some reasons, which time permits me not now to relate, as once
over shoes, over boots too, it were easy to these Arguments, to bring in the
whole Iewry, yea Grand-Iewries of Antiquity to prove, both the repentance of
SOLOMON after his sin; his remission upon his Repentance: and his Salvation
upon his remission: his Justification, Sanctification, the fruit and effect of
his salvation.

For besides the constant opinion of the Hebrews, as we have Hierom. in c. 2.
Eccles.
heard, that his Ecclesiastes was his Repentance: as may be seen in their
book, called Sedar Olam: Cap. 15. Lorinus Prolegom. in Eccl. c. 2.
thinks that Saloman in his Proverbes, seems himself to testify his
repentance: as though in passing by the Field of the sluggard, and the
Vineyard of the Man devoyd of understanding, seeing it all overgrowne with
Thorns and nettles, considering it and laying it to heart. Pro. 24.30.31.32.
He should by this Field understand his own heart, all overgrowne with the
Thorns and Weeds of lust and Idolatry: and by the Instruction he received by
it, should intimate his repentance: as the reading of the Novissimus ego egi
paenitentiam and respe^i, ut eligerem, disciplinam.
septuagint, seems to confirm it: elsewhere by St. Jn cap. 28. Ezekiel.
Jerome, this repenting Solomon, is called King of Jerusalem, and opposed
against Ahab, Jeroboam, Ioram, and the evil Kings: and compared with David,
Ioshuah, the Patriarchs, Prophets, and other religious Kings and Judges of
Israel and Judah: and in an Epistle to Eustachium, Epist. 22.
though he lament his fall; yet he denies not his repentance, in an other Ad
salvinam Epist. 9. victi sunt quasi homines.
Epistle, he makes use of his fall, as also of the fall of his father David;
that we that stand should not presume, but take heed least we fall; of later
time Gregory de Praesat. in Conitica Ca^
Valentia pleads much for SOLOMON, confutes some that denied this book of the
Preacher, to be sacred Scripture, or to be placed in the Canon, as though he
had transcribed it from his Father DAVID, or received it from some other: and
though it were quaestioned as Apocryphal, even in the days of JEROME: because
SOLOMON Chap. 2. verse. 21. Seems to give way to Epicurisme and
Licentiousness, warranting to eat and drink, and be Ioviall, as the Helluohs
of the world: yet (as he is well cleared by that learned Comment in c. 1.
Eccles.
Apolagie, SOLOMON is far from giving way to Luxury, or any Vanity, which as
by Clubs and Malls, in the whole book, he beats down, only approving a a
free lawful, liberal, use, of the Creatures, such as the holiest men have
used, standing with moderation, reason, religion, and Christian gratulation.

Hence for all these and such like frivolous exceptions, the book is
approoved: his Verdict of Vanity, of all religious hearts, and illuminated
spirits, subscribed to: the Author himself, by the Chalde Paraphrase, has the
name of a Prophet; yea In Ps. 118 v. 1. lit. 2. and lib. de fide resurrectionis.
Saint ANBROSE besides that formerly alleged, in many places, gives him the
best Epithet of holy Solomon: chiefly in his Praface before Saint LVKE, and in
his book of his Faith in the Resurrection, where he cites this Ecclesiastes:
elsewhere Apol. David. l. 2. c. 3.
he paralels him, with Saint PAVL and DAVID: and places him as a true
Paenitent, in the midst betwixt them: sinning and repenting, CYRIL Catech. 1.
of Jerusalem exhorts to repentance, after the example of AARON, DAVID,
EZEKIAS, MANASSES, NABVCHADNEZVAR, PETER, and amongst the rest SOLOMON: HILARIE
Hilarious on Psalm. 52.
is confident; that like AARON, DAVID, and others, he was seriously reprooved,
for his sins, and repented: the very same IREVEVS Lib. 4. cap. 45.
says, he received by tradition, from one that was an Auditor of the Apostles:
CHRYSOSTOM is alleged by ALVARVS De Placitis Eccl^ari. 45.
PELAGIVS, for the same purpose to testify the repentance of SOLOMON; of whom
the same Father writes Sermon. contra Concubia. Tom. 9.
elsewhere, that after his lust and inordinate concupiscence, after
terrestrial and sensible (sensual) things, returning as it were out of a
park and shadowy Wood, to true, and heavenly wisdom: he uttered as it were,
ex Tripode, that sublime and heavenly voice, truly worthy of a heavenly man;
and a heavenly mind: Vanitas Vanitatum: Vanity of Vanity, Vanities of
Vanities, all is but Vanity, says the Preacher: yea says that Periphrasi in c.
2. Ecol.
THANMATARGVS, abhorring and hating all his former life, in which he had wasted
and wearied himself, spent as a Taper in pursuit Vanity: as a man shipwrackt,
weather-beaten on the Rocks of Vanity, swimming to the shore by Repentance,
at last he sets up Sea-markes, whereby others may avoid these Syllaes, and
Caribdis, on which he was newly ruined: hereupon Epistola de recuperandis laps.
BACHIARIVS, that lived about the time of AUGUSTINE, in his Epistle, concerning
the restoring of those that were fallen in the fiery time of Paganish
Persecution, as it is extant in these Volumes: called the Library of the
Bibliothera Patrum To^. 3. in Folio.
Fathers, persuades IANVARIVS amongst others things, that he would not doubt to
receive an Adulterous Monk into the Church, upon his repentance: because that
mercy was not denied even unto Solomon upon his humiliation; affirming moreover
that it makes nothing against his repentance that it is not registered, and
recorded in express words in the Scripture, no more than the repentance of
Aaron, Noah, Lot, Judah, Ruben, Sampson, who yet truly repented: his being
though not so public as his Father David's (which was publicly sung in the
Church) yet as true in secreto Conscientiae, in the inwards of his Soul, and
secrets of the heart, and Conscience: yea and that his sin was pardoned, he
makes this an Argument. (I know not how sound) in that he was buried amongst
the Kings of Israel and Judah, which he affirms was a privilege denied unto
some, that persisted in their Perverseness, disobedience and impaenitency to
the end of their lives: the like argument is used by one Martyn Lib. 10.
Hypotypos. Regula. 25.
Cantapretensis: as also by one Epist. 65.
Fulbar in Saint Bernards time, who spends an whole Epistle, on this Subject:
so one Ticonius in Augustines time, that was a little affected with Donatisme,
otherwise a learned man, in one of his Extat regula in lib. 3 de Doct. Christ.
c. 31
Rules, entitled of the Promises, and of the Law: extant both in the works of
Augustine, and L. 1. do su^mo bono cap. 25
Isodore, is very confident, that as that as the Lord did not deprive SOLOMON,
of his earthly Kingdom, as he did 1. Sam. 15 28.
Saul, 1. ^in. 12.16.
Reheboam, Dan. 4.31
Nabuchadnezzar, 2 Kin. 19 37
Sonachar^b, Dan. 5.30.31.
Baltazar, and other wicked Kings, of their Crowns and lives, or both, no more
did he deprive him of his Heavenly Kingdom: by his repentance being reprived
and pardoned: what needs more witnesses, to add water to the Sea, or light to
the Sun: THOMAS AQVINAS in his Opose. 20 and (...) Regimine principis lib. 3.
c. 8.
Opuscula, BONAVENTVRE, HVGO CARDINALIS, CARTHVSIANVS in their Coments on
Ecclesiastes, SOTO Mayor, in his Preface before the Canticles, VINCENTIVS
BELLOVACENSIS in his glass of L. 2. c. 84.
Hystories: SIXTVS SENENSIS in his Lib. 8. Here Is. 7.
Bibliotheke: the learned Jesuit Prolegom. in Eccles.
LORINVS; with other modern Papists, besides Protestants, and more ancient
than all these, ALBINVS Schoolmasters to CHARLES the Great, with many more;
from these, and other Arguments persuade themselves of his sound Conversion:
and conclude his salvation.

The Arguments or rather opinions and conceits of BELLARMINE, and other
Papists, of his Reprobation, being as weak, as false, and uncharitable, being
not worth recording: or if I should relate them, (as one says in the like
case) to relate them, is to confute Recitasse, est confutusse See M. Prins Book
of the Perpetuity of a Regenerate Man's Estate. Page 393
them: Mole ruunt suo, they fall of themselves, all their force may be referred
to two heads.

First, that this repentance of SOLOMON, which I so urge is no where recorded
in Scripture: therefore he repented not?

The Argument holds together like ropes of sand. 1. The repentance of NOAH,
LOT, and SAMPSON, (as I said is not recorded:) therefore were they not
repentant? It Is as untrue, as uncharitable? 2. The Scripture speaks, some
things ipsissimis verbis, in plain words, some things by necessary Jlliricus
l. 2. in Clavi Scriptura.
consequence: and so SALOMONS repentance, as also the repentance of SAMPSON and
GIDEON: for in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chapter 11. v. 32. they are approved
for their Faith: so is NOAH, verse. 7. Now as there is no real mother without a
child: so no justifying faith, without Repentance* being both united by the
true object of Faith himself. Mark. 1. v. 15 So ADAMS repentance is not
recorded: yet believing the promises. Genesis 3.15. Of necessity he could not but
Colligit August. Ep. 99, ex c. 10 Sapien. v. 1.
repent, for though there may be a legal repentance without Faith: as in Gen
4.13
CAIN, Mat. 27.3
IVDAS, Historia Fusius recitatur, a Grineo de Apostas. page 151 A Lud. Rabbi
de Martyrib. et a Lonicero, in Theatro, exemp. f 101 102.
FRANCIS SPIRA, and usually in the Reprobates, yet there can be no Evangelicall
Repentance, without saving Faith: nor no saving Faith, without Repentance: more
than a true Sun, without light; or fire without heat; now SOLOMON being so
excellent a Type of the Messiah, could not in all probability, but believe the
Messiah, and in the Messiah: therefore as PICVS MIRANDVLA well notes, in his
Apology for ORIGIN, by the Testimony of Comment. in c. 3. Genesis
HENRICUS DE ASIA, the Schooleman: it is no good Argument to say any is damned,
because the Scriptures reveal their sin: but for some causes secret, never
unjust, silence their sorrow: since also SALOMONS repentance may be registered
by some other Writers, as NATHAN, AHIIAH, IEEDO, who writ his life and Acts,
whose works are now perished, (iniuria and incuria temporum) by the iniquity
of the Times.

The second Dart that is shot against SALOMONS sincerity is: that in his time,
he did not purge out the Idolatry, that was in his Kingdom: pulled not down
the Alters and Idols, which by his permission if not approbation, his
Heathenish Wives, had erected, as did 2. Chr. 33 15
Manasses, upon his repentance and as a sincere heart, would have done, after
the example of 1. Kin. 15.12
Asa, 2. Chr. 30.14.
Ezekias, 2. Kin. 22 43.
Iehosophat, Or Vzzah. 2. Chapter 26.4.5
Azarias, and others: this knot, some think is hard to loose; but the
satisfaction that may be received is only this

1. That his not reforming of Religion, in every thing exactly and precisely is
no true Argument, that he was not converted: no more than the pulling down of
Groves and Idols, is always a note of sincerity: for whose zeal was hotter
this way than 2 King. 9. C. 10. per totum.
Iehues, yet where have we a more formal Hypocrite?

2. Even V. 28.29.
in the times of the best of the Kings of Israel and Judah, as you shall see in
these nominated; as the Canker in their Roses, there was ever something amiss
in the matter of Religion: some high Places or other untaken away: as even in
the time of MANASSES, after his repentance: the people did Sacrifice still in
the high Places. 2. Chron 33. v. 12.13.17.

3. His So 2. King. 12.3. sincere Ioash reformed not all.
Wives were so wedded (according to the Nature of that Sex) to their
Idolatries, that he could not dissuade them, would not perhaps displease Quam
infelix est Gynacocratia and Polypragmosu^ mulieru^ and in Ecclesiasti is et
politicis, instant Pencerus in Chro^. Bodinus l. 6. de Rep. c. 5. page
11^4.1115.
the: withal the people being settled in their Leas, and frozen in their dregs,
as too obstinate and pertinatious; he could not perhaps with that facility do
what otherwise he would and should even as GIDEON was overswayed and resisted,
when he went about to pull down the Altars, and cut down the Groves of Judge.
6.27.30.
Baal: perhaps as the sons of 2. Sam. 16 10.
ZERVIAH, once for his Father DAVID: There were some too hard for him; too many
like Tobiah and Nehem. 4.1.2.3.
Samballat, too near him, and dear to him, were perhaps ill affected, or
Idolatrously infected: to hinder the effecting of this weighty and worthy
work: the supplanting and eradicating of all kind of Idolatry: and Idolaters
out of his Kingdom.

These mysts dispersed, these Clouds remooved, the Sun of this truth shines
clear; that Solomon was sanctified, and consequently saved: yea, that he was
gracious with God and his Church, even when he pronounced this his Verdict of
Vanity: if I would use more inartificiall Argumentum Jnartificiale ex.
authoritate apud Ramum.
Arguments from Authorities, or Achillean from Scriptures and reasons, to prove
my Assertions, no Paradoxe but Orthodoxe: I could with In his hystory
Ecclesiastical.
Peter Comestor conclude my positions from that Promise which the Lord made to
his Father David, 2. Sam. 7.12.13.14. of establishing the Throne of SOLOMON,
and that the Lord would be his Father: Which Promise Comment in 2. Sa^. c. 7.
Paul Burgensis, and a Gloss of the Decretals: persuade themselves was made to
DAVID, rather concerning the Heavenly Kingdom of Solomon, and his aeternall
beatitude, then of his temporal Kingdom, since he was named the beloved of
God: as also, that the Lord heard the Prayer of David for Compare (...) 28.29.
him, to accomplish the thing which he had promised. I could also use the
Arguments even of In Com^d. Paradisi Cant. 11
Dantes the famous Italian Poet, who from his excellent institution, and
education from his Father Prove. 4.4. and Prove. 31.
David, and Mother Bethshebah: such as 2. Tim. 1.5
Timothy, from Lois, and E^nice, Constantine from Eusebius. in vita Constable. lib. 3.
Helena, Augustine from Passim fatetur in Confess.
Monicha: from his singular Love unto Wisdom; his study of the Trinity: his
love to the Word, to which, in the person of Wisdom; he so earnestly Pro.
4.1. and Cha. 5.1. c. 7. c. 8. c. 9.
exhorts: his religious worshipping of God, in the dedication of the 1. King. 8.
Temple, his excellent Virtues and gifts wherewith he was inobled; chiefly
from his contempt of the World and all wordly Vanities, which in this Book of
the Preacher, or preaching book, he so proclaimed; concludes him in the state
of Grace; I could also from Finus Sadeus a Jn cap. ^e invitat. de Constit. Nu^.
7. and de praeser. Number. 1. cap. 1.
Canonist, and Lib. 17. Theosophiae, cap. 20.
Johannes Arboreus: strengthen mine own hopes and others, of SALOMONS
everlasting welfare, from that hope he has in the Messiah, under the borrowed
person of the wise Agur, making a true confession of his sins, unto Ithiel,
and Pro. 30.1.
Vcall, even JESUS CHRIST: acknowledging himself, though the wisest of mere
men, yet as even some of the Hebrews held him, by reason of his sins, says
Lyra, to be more foolish and brutish than any man: so with Job. 42.10
holy Job, in the sense and sight of his sins even abhorring himself, and
his bypast follyes: Lamenting, and repenting with this our Prodigal, his
feeding on the Husks of Vanity, in the service of his lusts; when he might
have bin fed with the pure Mancher, the Heavenly Manchet of the sweetest
mercies, in the service of the Lord: but Manum de Tabula: I doubt I am within
compass of correption, or running wide, or Counter: from our Prodigal, to
SOLOMON, but if it be an error, it is on the right hand, error a dextra: I say,
as DAVID, in another case, is there not a cause: Si parvis, 1. Sam. 17 19.
componere magna, if we may compare Wrens with Aeagles? Did they not both
Convenire in eodem tertio? Did they not both feed on Husks: both buy
repentance too dear? Both return unsatisfied (as that Et lassata voris ^on
sa^recessit.
Messalina from the Stews) from Vanities Banquet? Were they not both gulled,
deluded, deceived, with windy Swads for sollid meat? Did they not both return
home, by weeping Cross: from the Commons of Swine, the gland of Hogs; the
fleshly sensualities of Epicurish men: to the delights, and desires of Saints,
and the joy of Angels? Applicatio
Vade and tu fac similiter? Oh that all in their case had grace, to do the
like! Oh how would they loath their husks, and like their exchange! How would
they bless God, for the praescriptions, and directions, the Isntrumental
means, and motives, of their internal peace here, which they never before
found: and their aeternall Peace hereafter, after this short Pilgrimage of
life: which they can never loose.

Thus have I discharged my last, and longest Bill, my strongest Battry against
the paper Walls of Vanity: SOLOMON, as the wisest of men speculatively: as the
best experienced of men, practically: as remorcefull amongst sinful men,
paenitentially: from his wisdom moral, experimental, Theological, (that
threefold Cord, which cannot be broken) from his spirit humane; yea, from the
unerring spirit Divine, by which the Preacher penned and published his
Ecclesiastes, or book of Repentance: giving in his true unpartiall, judicious,
and undeniable, determinate Verdict: as the very mouth of God: that all earthly
and sublunary things, under the Sun, in their several Species and individumus:
Riches, honors, pleasures, profits, Praeferments, Wine, Women, Music, Meats,
Feasts, Festivals, Frolicks: yea Learning, Knowledge, Arts, Sciences,
Languages, Beauty, Strength, Favor, Wit, Policy, Humanity, Wisdom, Children,
Friends, Favorites, Credit, applause with men: whatever, disioynted from the
Grace, Fear, love, favor, service, worship of the Almighty not used in God,
from God, to God, and his Glory: all these are mere Husks, Vanities,
Vacuities, Dreams, Delusions: To give to the Soul of man, that rests in them,
any true real satisfactory Contentation, more then snow in Harvest, Vinegar to
the aching Teeth, smoke to the eyes: Mercury to a green wound, or a cold stone
to him, that has the heart-burne.

Thus, we have heard the verdicts and testimonials of the greatest and best
men: casting this case controverted, with the vain sons of men? infatuated
with the Dregs and Drugs of Vanity: Esaias, Jonas, nay JESUS, SOLOMON, and the
God of SOLOMON, have spoke to the purpose; that unless men will be mad with
Cum ratione infanire.
reason, or against reason, as he that resolved in the Comedy, not to be
persuaded, though he were Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris apud Comicum.
persuaded: or as our Papists, as once the Pharisees, (unless they will even
shut their eyes against the Sun, till they fall into the Pit of Perdition:)
their Consciences must needs be convicted.

CHAP. XIII.
SECT. 1. The nature of these Vanities: their disproportion with the Soul: the
Immensity of man's appetite further declared.
But least these proofs, be too general, from expatiating as it were in an
open Champion, we will come to the strict enclosures of particulars: from
Testimonies and Authorities, we will come to more special Arguments, and
Reasons, as from shooting at long Marks, and running at Tilts, and Iusts
(wherein we may take our breathings, and fetch our cyrcling Carieres) we will
come (as in a Land, or Sea Fight,) to graple and gripe, with Vanities, these
speckled killing Panthera (vanitatis of figies) odore enim and conspectu anima^
tia sibi allicit obtecto capite dum devorat. Solinus cap. 20. and Plinius hist.
lib. 8. c. 17.
Panthers, and to lay on with downright blows, that we may lay them all at
once prostrate, (if we can, as DAVID did 1. Sa^. 17.49
GOLIATH, or as the Greeks did Mortuo Leone insultant Leopores.
HECTOR) to trample upon them, and insult over them, yea to kick them, as we
use to do with discovered Cheators, and Sharkers, as moore deluders, and
Impostors, not able to perform (more than Husks to the Prodigal) these
desired contentations, and satisfactions, which they promise: and that (amongst
many more) for these subsequent Reasons: partly from the nature of man: partly
from the nature of these Vanities themselves: partly from comparing both
together: partly from GOD himself: to which heads, all may be referred.

First, Vtor concessis, to take at the first hint, what has been already
prooved, and demonstrated, without begging of the quaestion: take it as
granted, that these externals are Husks, Vanities, Vacuities: how should they
fill the stomach? Fulfill the immense desire of the heart of Man? Take
thousands of blown blathers, and put them into a New Castle, or Rochell ship,
of a great burden (will they fill it) At least will they balance it? Or load
it? Fill a great Tith-Barne full of Chafe: is it filled, though it seem to be
filled? Let a man's stomach be so full of Wind, till he belch Galen. l. 30 de
Sympt. cause. 70.
again, and Rift, and break wind Barrowes Method of Physic, l. 3. page 116.
and Hipp. Aph. 39.
offensively, or let a woman be swollen, and blown up with a Method of
Physic, c. 35. p. 159. and 53. p. 198
Tympany, as big as a Pipers bag, as though she were with two children, all
this is but an empty kind of filling; Such food, such filling, has the heart
of man, with these Husks of Vanities; alas are they not as we have shown
them, altogether flatuous, and windy? Nay are they not shows, shadows, and
painted pictures? As ESAIAS calls, even the best of them, the shadow of Egypt?
Now can a hungry man, feed on shadows? Can a hungry Lion feed on painted
flesh? Could the deluded Birds, feed on ZEVXIS his painted Grapes? Is not the
hungry Hawke often deceived with a painted Lure; as the hungry Fish, with a Flee
of Hair? As the lustful Quail with a false call? And the Lark with a luring
Pipe, and a flattering Glass? Are not vain men so guld with Images? As some
have been with Visions, and Spectors? As PYGMALION and Ovid Metam. lib. 3.
NARCISSUS were infatuated, the one with a Oculos pictura pascit. Inani.
Picture, the other with the shadow of himself: as some fools stand gaping
and gazing on a well limbed Picture, till their bellies called for Tribute,
they are like to fall down for meat: could that vast Anteus, or that Cyclops,
De his, and alijs Gygantibus in Poetis. and Historicis, lege Textorem, in
officina, lib. 2 c. 37. p. 121
Polypbemus, in their time be fed with Air, and voices, without solid meat?
Could Ixion take any delight in that Cloud of Air, which he clasped, and
Tibullus l. 1. and Seneca in Hercule Furente.
embraced. Now alas; are not all these externals, mere Clouds? Airs? Mysts?
Shadows? Or at best Glow-wormes? Comets? Blazing Stars? Yea very dreams?
Such as NABVCHADNEZZARS dream, of his great Dan. 4.18
Tree: PHARAOHS dream of his Genesis 41.1
Fat Kine: JOSEPH'S dream of the Sun, Moon, and Genesis 37.9
Stars, worshipping him: and the hungry man's dream in the Prophet, of eating
and drinking: and lo when he wakens it is nothing so: his Soul is empty: and
so is the Prodigals still, for all these Husks of Vanities.

Secondly, (to make our next Argument comparative) there is a wondrous
incongruity, and disproportion betwixt these Vanities, and the soul of man, in
respect of nutriment, and sustentation; for (as we know) by Nature, and by the
God of Nature, there is a proper nutriment assigned to every Creature, that
has a sensative, vigetative, or reasonable soul: as to Trees roots, Plants,
herbs, and Flowers, the humidity and moisture of the Earth, with the dew of
Heaven: to the Ox, Ass, Horse, Mule, Bullock: Grass, Hay, Corn: To the
Lions, Aeagles, Vultures, Hawks, Flesh. to the Otter, Osprey, Cormorant,
Kings-Fisher, Fish; to the Hogs, Mast; to Dogs, Bones; to Serpents, Arist.
hist. anim. lib. 8. c. 4. and Plinius l. 8.14.
Blood; to the Hedgehog, Poma collegit and servat in Hymem. Aelian. 3. cap. 1^
fruits; Milk: yea, to the Spider Statim cu^ natae sinet, fila mittunt, ut
capiant Muscas, Arist. 9 Hist. c. 39.
Flies; to the Moale, Worms: to the Struthion, Albertus l. 23. anim. disputat.
Iron: to the Salamander, Arist. l. 5.19. Plinius l. 10.17.
Fire: to the Camelions, Idem lib. 8 33. and Arist. 8.11.
Air: to the Bear, Honey: to the Panther, Vt Antidoton contra Venenum S^linus
cap. 20
Man's excrements: to the Fox, grapes: (if they can come by them) yea they have
drinks also proportionable to their Natures, as the Cammell delights, in
troubled Arist. lib. 2.1. Solinus c. 50. and Pli. 8. cap. 17.
waters, the Horse, Heart, and Unicorn, in clean water: the Sheep, Hare, and
Conny: chiefly in our Septentriall cold Countries, in no waters; which proper
peculiar feeding, if you offer to change, and alter, as by giving grass to the
Lion, flesh to the Horse: and so of the rest, you go against the nature of the
Creature; So it is with a man, as he consists of body and soul, so he has
his nutriment proper for both: for his meats, Fish, Flesh, Fowls, Herbs,
Plants, Roots: for his Drinks; Water, Wine, Milk, Distillatory waters: yea
proper meats and drinks, are assigned to several Countries: as before has
been instanced; so in like proportion, the Lord has also assigned a Nutriment
to the Soul: for as the Messiah himself alleges from MOSES, Math. 4. Deutr.
8. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of the
mouth of God: for Gods word, yea CHRIST himself the word Ioh. 1.1.
incarnate, is that spiritual Manna, the living Bread, or the Bread of Ioh.
6.33
Life: sent down from Heaven, the proper food of the Soul: as the temporary
and typical Manna was for two years the proper food of the Ex. 16.15
Body, to the Israelites in the Wilderness: the flesh of Christ also
spiritually eaten by Faith is meat Ioh. 6.53, 54.
indeed: and his blood is drink indeed: and look as the nutriment of the body
is so necessary and needful, that without it the Soul cannot continue in it;
but dissolves and separates (as the fire dies without fuel, the Lamp without
Oil; the Trees without Earth; the Rush without Ioh. 8.11
Mire; and the Sedge without moisture) so needful is this spiritual food, to
the being, and well-being of the Soul: for as the Soul is the life and form
of the body, so is God the very essence and life of our life, and Soul of our
Soul: and as the body without the Soul, is a dead Carcass; rotten Carrion;
an Augean stable, a Golgotha, of dead Sculs; so the Soul without God, is a
very Dunghill, a Cage of Scorpians, a nest of unclean Birds: A Hog-sty for
Swine, yea for Zims and Oyms, and unclean spirits: at best a Vineyard laid
waste, a ground untilled, overgrowne with Briars: and as meat by eating,
digesting, and concocting, is turned in succum and sanguinem, into blood and
humors, and incorporated into the body; so the Souls food; if I may so say,
is spiritualized to the sustentation of the spirit.

Now these proportions and many more, holding; this is the thing that I urge:
that as other Creatures, cannot be fed with such food as is discrepant, from
their natures, as hay cannot be food for the Dog, Wolf, Fox, (those wild
Dogs,) nor bones for the Horse, Cow, Sheep, as not fitting their kinds,
holding so in their several Individuum; so the soul cannot be nourished with
these earthly things; they are not food convenient, for which wise Hagar
prays, De vsu partium l. 1. cap. 17. and l. 9. c. 4. and l. 3. de locis
affect. cap. 3.
in the Pro. 30.8
Proverbs, for as material things, cannot be filled with Materiale non agit,
in Jmmateriale
spiritual, as a man's stomach cannot be filled with wisdom: nor a Chest
with virtue; so that which is material, cannot be filled, with that which is
immateriall: now the Soul being neither composed of the Elements, and humors,
as Empedocles Sic Clearchus Anaxagoras, Aerium in quid putaverunt.
held: nor being the vital spirit of the blood, as the Stoics held: nor a
certain exhalation of the purest of the blood, as Galen held: nor a fiery
body, as Lucippus and Hipparchus Tholos. syntax. artis mirab. l. 24. c. 4. p.
599.
held: nor an Aeriall body, as Critias, Anaximenes, and that Cynicke Alij
quadam alia, vt tradit. Theod. l. 5. cont. infid. Arist. 1. de anima, cap. 2.
held; nor a watery Jdem ibid.
substance, as Hippon thought; nor an earthly, as Hesiod imagined; nor a fire
and Air, as Epicurus: nor of Water and Earth, as Zenophon conceited: nor a
heat, Complexion, or any Corporeal quality, diffused; through the body, as
Zeno, Cleanthes, Antipater, and Possidonius were persuaded; nor extraduce, by
propagation, from the Parents, as Tertullian and some Philosophers Nutat in hae
sententia Arist. l. 2. c. 1. sic Galen. and Tertullianus and Apollinaris
Alexand. ut refert. Gr. Nissenus lib. 2. de anima c. 6. and in h. tripert. l. 5
cap. 44.
thought, confuted by De Haeresi ad quod vult. Deum haer. 58.59. and Hier. To^.
7. in cap. 12 Eccles. sic idem Aug. Epist. 157 Tom. 2.
St. Augustine, not a middle thing betwixt the spirit and the body, as In Clavi
p. 138.137 142
Dorne, a late Writer thought; nor a third substance, as Didimus and Origin
conceited, as they are refelled by the same De Eccl. Dogm. Tom. 3. cap. 2.
Father: but as De anima p. 19.
Melancton, and more fully the learned Lib. de Defin. animae et Epist. 7. de
Orig. an.
Augustine, defines it, and Athanasius confirms it. Since this Soul in man,
is a substance created, a spirit intelligent, invisible, immortal,
incorporeall, like the Angels: and most like unto God, in bearing the image of
her Creator: It will never take any complacency, in these gross, earthly,
material, terrestrial things, as clean contrary, or contradictory, to the
nature of it: it cannot be nourished, nor (as Hyppocrates well Lib. 1. de
victus ratione.
disputes) is able to be altered, by meats and drinks: or ought else
corporeal: The proud man's Soul can never be filled, with Popular Air, though
he gape never so wide; the Soul of the Covetous man, will never be filled
with Gold, Silver, Pearls, Iems, Stones, Metals, though he should swallow the
best of the Earths, or Seas Extractions, as the Aestridge does Iron; The Soul
of the Luxurious man, will never be nourished with the flames of Lust, as the
Negat. Galenus lib. 3. cap. 4. de Temper. et Diosc. l. 2. c. 56. Salamandrum
igne vivere, asserit tamen praeter Ar. et Plin. Aug. de Civ. dei.
Salamander, the In Aerarijs fornacibus, bestiolas quasdam pennatas in medio
igne nasci asserunt. Arist. l. 5. hist. c. 19.
Fire-flye, and Tom. 4. tract. de definit. Eccl.
the Crecket with the fire-materiall. Nor the Envious man, will ever feed with
Poison, like the Spider. Aristotle's Sectio^. 28 Problem. 9.
rule in these, and all the rest, holding right, that qui solido cibo non
vescuntur, perinde afficiuntur, ac si nullum penitus capiant: Those that feed
not on meats solid, and right fitted, and suited for them, it is all one, as if
they were fasting.

The third reason of the insufficiency of these huskish Vanities, and the
sufficiency that is in God, the prime and principal verity: is deducted and
drawn, from the immensitie of men's appetites: which are so infinitely
extended, and dilated, that they cannot be replenished, by any finite object,
more then the Coat or Armor of a Pigmee, will fit the Giant Que Brachia Centum
Briareus apud Claudianum et Virg. l. 6. Aeneid.
Briareus, or the Nam qua^tus qualis cavo Polyphemus in Antro Vir. l. 3. Aeneid.
Polyphemian Cyclops; for no faculty of the Soul, so represents Gods
Infinity, as that which Philosophy calls Epithumetike; the burning appetite,
or desire of the Soul: which is so spacious and extensive, that the Prophet
has compared it to Hell, and and to Hab. 2.5.
Death, which cannot be satisfied: and therefore since no finite object is
able, to fill up this gaping Chasma, this insatiable Gulf, of the Souls
appetite: to satisfy this all-devouring Minotaure, till it cry Hoe, or Pro.
30.15
enough, there must be some infinite object; for the better conceiving of this:
suppose according to Aquinas 1.1. q. 78. art. 1.3. p. 168
Schoole-divinity, that every faculty in nature, requires such an object as is
fitting unto it: it must needs follow, that Appetitus and Appetitum, the
desire, and what is desired, must be proportioned (as Locus and Locatum) or else
there should be both Vacuum and Vanum, in nature: which is against the rules of
Prob. sect. 8. Probl. 9. To^. 2. p. 461
Philosophy: for since God and Nature, do nothing in Arist. l. 1. de Coelo. c.
4. To^. 1. p. 156
vain, if there were not in Nature some object fitted and proportioned to fill
the appetite, the largeness of it unfilled, should admit both Vacuity and
Inanis, and vanus, erit appetitus Arist. l. 1. Eth. c. 1. Tom. 2. page 604.
Vanity: which erres, and abhorres from the very scope and course of Nature:
now if any doubt the Capacity (and indeed rapacity) of man's appetite, let us
take a brief Synopsis, or survay, into the severals, and according to Aquinas
1. q. 7. art. 2. p. 14. and q. 59 art. 1. p. 127 and q. 6. art. 1 page 129.
Aquinas, dividing the general appetite into the three special kinds, of
Natural: Sensible: Intellectual: we shall see in all and every one of them,
an infinite avidity and greediness, not to be filled with any finite
Creature, or ought else than the infinite Creator, as Aquinas in many places
disputes, and of which many instances might be given.

And first, to begin with the Natural appetites: to instance with, Lib. 3.
Ethic. cap. 11 To^. 2. p. 640
Aristotle in three of them, the appetites of Eating, Drinking, and Sleeping:
none of these is able to content the Souls appetite, for though all the labor
of a man, be for his mouth, yet for all that the Soul is not filled, says
Eccles. 6.7
SOLOMON: there may be a repletion in the belly, and yet a vacuity in the Soul
notwithstanding: as we may see in the Gluttons, the Helluohs, and Drunkards of
our days: who when their bellyes are stuffed full, yea stretched on the largest
Last, and size: swollen as big as blown bags: the bulk of their nature
over-ballanced, by adding thirst unto Deuteronomy. 29.19
Drunkenness, rising up early to follow it, and sitting up late, as the
Prophet Esa. 5.11 12
speaks, drinking down the Evening-starre, and up the Morning-starre, as the
Comedians phrase Ad Diurnam stellam potantes Matutina^ Plan. in men. act. 1
Scen. 2. page 421
is, making their very ipsum Vivere, to be nothing else but Bibere: not
drinking to live, but living to drink; being mere walking Mushrumps, and
Sallowes, fed with moisture (as Bonosus once was Amphora pendens apud Brusion.
en Flavio Vop.
called) even very Hogsheads, as though like Lurdans, or our once Lord Danes,
and Abbey-Lubbers, they had been made for nothing but eating and drinking,
wilde-Geese-like to devour Epicuri de Grege Porci, ad fruges co^sumere nati:
Horat.
Grain: as Aristotle truly terms L. 3. Eth. c. 11. Tom. 2 page 640.
them: Furentes circa ventrem, men out of their wits, with pampering of their
paunch: Drinking as once that Nero, Tricongius, Proculus, and other famous
infamous Vt Piso, Ennius, Hylaeus, Lacyd. Erycaeon, Caeto minor, Apit.
Vitellius Bela, Galba, Phago, in Text. Of. l. 5 c. 51. p. 644
Drunkards, till there be neither Wine in their pots, nor wit in their pates;
yea till with the companions of Diomedes and Ulysses, by that great Circes,
that Malt with strong drink, they be Metamorphiz'd into worse beasts, tha^
ever Pliny, Aristotle, or Aelianus writ of, yea into worse Monsters than ever
Africa bred, or fed, or then LEO AFFRICANVS, De die. Ca^. col. 2. pa. 70 ad
page 84.
MAIOLVS, or L. de Prod.
LYCOSTHENES, ever mentioned: eating like Cormorants (or Corn vorants) as
though they had obtained POLYXENVS, his Apud Ar. 3. Eth. c. 10.
wish, even their necks as long as Craines, to glut down their beloved pots
and goblets, with the greater pleasures: and drinking till they be Ape drunk,
Swine drunk: Mouse drunk, Muck drunk, Maudlin drunk, Mad drunk, Beastly
drunk: worse then Devils in this sin, who being mere spirits, were yet
never drunk: yet nevertheless, though there bellyes be Capon-cramb'd with
meat: and their brains even sod, in drink, so intoxicated, as though like
caught Crows they had drunk Nux vomica, yet nevertheless herein Gods hand;
fearfully pursues and overtakes those Epicurish libertines, that though they
eat much, yet are they not filled: and though they drink much: yet have they
not Hab. 1.6.
enough: (though more then enough) their stomachs may be filled; yea
overpressed, as a Horse with Maltsacks, and a Cart with sheaves: overcharged as
some guns till they burst again, or exonerate as a Wolf or Dog, too full
gorged, with Carrion: making (more then many biting Usurers) By Dog-like
vomitings, and shameful spewings.
restitution, where they have taken too much; yet their appetites all this
while are insatiable; Venture improrum est insaturabilis: The belly of the
wicked ever wants, says the Wise man: Prove. 13.15. Which is the difference
which God himself both there and elsewhere Esa. 65.13 14, 15
puts betwixt his own servants and the Devils Swine, these sons of BELIALL,
Hogs of EPICVRVS stye: who as if they had Caninum appetitum, the Dogs greedy
worm in their tongues: and (like some drunken Smiths) ever a dry spark in
their throats, are never satiated with liquor, more than that MESSALINA once
with lust: Nec sitis est extincta, prius quam vita bibendo. Ovid. l. 7, Metan.
p. ^ 28.


Their thirst, and their life, as the Heathen Poet noted, being extinct and
quenched both together, this their insatiablenesse plainly appearing, in that
by all the inventions of Cookery, these Epicures provoke their oppressed
stomachs to eat more, by their Sallads, and Sawces: so to drink more by their
salt meats, their Red Herrings, salt Neat Tongues, Spanish Anchovies: with the
like, being as the needle to draw on the thread of their unthriftinesse,
sensuality, and gurmundizing gluttony.

The like instance may be given in the appetite of Sleeping, which like the
rest knows no limits if a man once addict and give himself to it: as SOLOMON
well notes, in the Proverbes, as exactly Characterizing a sluggard; as ERASMUS
his Morio: and setting him out as Graphically, as any vice or humor, is
expressed by THEOPHRASTVS, or our In Sir ^ho^. Overbury his Characters.
modernes in their Characters, See Montaigres Essays As also Essays of Sir F.
Bacon, M. Stephens. cum alijs.
Essays, Dialogi Petrarchi and Luciani.
Dialogues, Emblemata Alciati Reusneri et nostri Whitnai.
Emblemes, or D. Halls and Withers Satyrs.
Satyrs, for in form of a short Colloquie or Dialogue, first he rouzeth him
as a Dear out of his Lare: a Bear or Boar, out of his Den: sounds him a
hunts up to awake him out of his sound and heavy sleep: with, How long will thou sleep O Prove. 6.9.10.11
sluggard, and When will thou arise out of thy sleep: Then being as willing to
awake, as the Indian Sic Asi^i Mauritij Fessi in Itinere Immobiles Iacent,
Aelian. l. 14 c. 9.
Ass; and to come out of his bed, as the Serpent out of his Cave, or CACVS out
of his Furto Polluit ille lo^u^, Propert. l. 4. et Textor. l. 5. c. 46. page
633.
hold; and as willing to go to any work, as the Thief to go to the
Gallows: or the Dog to hanging; he entreats him, that he would not molest and
trouble him, or awake him out of his St. GILLIANS dream; (as they say) but
permit him, to have yet a little further sleep, a little longer slumber, a
little more folding of the hands together: and though SOLOMON reply and
plainly tell him; that if he continue in this Lethargicall sleeping, his
poverty will come upon him as a Traveller, and seize upon him, as an armed
Soldier: yet scilicet id curet populus? He cares not for all this, it is but
brutum fulmen; it will not serve the turn; he was so possessed still with his
Veternus, and sleeping Such as Physicians call Carus or Subeth, as also, the
Catoche, the profundus somnus, or Coma somnolentum: de quibus Galenus, lib. 4.
de locis affectis, et Method of Physic, lib. 1. cap. 18 p. 29, 30, 31
Sicknesses, as if he had been a very Dormouse: he sleeps as if Quid tibi
dormitor, proderit Endimion. Martialis, l. 10.
ENDIMION had been his Father, or he brother to these seven Sleepers in the
Golden (leaden) Aurea vel potius plumbea legenda.
Legend: as if he had drunk Poppie, or Opium: or meant to act over that
Gorbianus and Gorbiana, in the book of the Sluggardly Writ by the Dutch
Dydikind, and translated into harsh English verse, in 4.
sloven: He turns still in his bed, as a Door on the hindges, and cannot see
the time to rise at high Such a slovenly sleep is described in an odd
tractate, called, The Gull's Horn-booke.
noone; so that even this drowsy humor (like the drunken humor) is not
abated by yielding to it, but rather like the Dropsy the more augmented.

And as it is thus in Natural, so it is in Sensible appetites too, they can no
more be satisfied, then the former; for the Eye of man, says SOLOMON, Is not
filled with Eccles. 1.8.
seeing, nor the Ear with hearing: these two, the Sight, and the Hearing,
which the Philosopher makes the senses of Knowledge Sensus doctrina apud Arist.
in Eth.
, are (as well as the Touch, and Taste) insatiable; for as the Grave, and
Destruction cannot be filled: so cannot the Eyes of a man: Prove. 27.20. As our
Proverb is, It Is easier to fill a man's belly than his eye, the Concupiscence
of the Eye, as well as of the flesh: is not to be satisfied: Faemina vidit
vritque videndo: the more that PVTIPHARS wife, looks on Genesis 39.7
JOSEPH, SICHEM on Genesis 34.2
DINAH, 2. Sa^. 11.2
DAVID on BETHSHEBATH: as EVE on the forbidden Genesis 3.6,
fruit: the more they are thralled, ensnared, and captivated by the eye, the
more they dote on the beauteous object; as PIGMALION on his Image; as MVSEVS
excellently expresses it, in his Intuens su^ defessus satietatem, non inveni
aspiciendo Musaeus, de Herone. p. 342.
HERO: who was wearied, not satisfied, with looking on LEANDER: which
consideration made both Solomon, and the Wise man his Apocryphal
Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 9. v. 7.8. As also both ancient and modern Divines, and
Vide Senecam l. 4. Ep. 33. Gyrald. in hist. Deorum, synt. 13
Philosophers, persuade every man to turn away his eyes from beholding
Vanities; chiefly vain women and vain pictures: lest the eye as a traitor
shoot a poisoned bullet to the heart, making Vulnus insanabile a wound
incurable: least when it is past time, to shut the door of the Cage, when the
Bird is flowne: crying with that Amoretto in the Poet.

Vt vidi, vt perij: vt me malus abstulit error. How have I seen, and been
overseene, in Thus Mark Anthony with Cleopatra: apud Appian. l. 1
seeing, therefore the Counsel is, When VENUS comes thee nigh,
Oh shut, oh shut, thine eye:
Oh fondly do not eye her,
Much less do thou sit nigh her:
Least that thou perish by Quid facies, facies, veneris, cum veneris ante. Ne
sedeas, sed-eas, ne poreas pereas, sphinx. Phylosophica
her.


So for the Ear, Socrates likewise Apud Zenoph. l. 1. de factis Socratis, page
166
observes: that Aures suscipiunt, voces omnes, nunquam vero implentur: our
Ears do receive all manner of voices, and founds: and yet there be none of
them, that be able to fill them; and the like may be said of all the rest as
we have instanced in our Taste, in eating and drinking; much more holding, in
the touch, in which most sympathizing, with the beasts we are most sensual:
Which made that luxurious Zerxes, as Tully observes Lib. 5. Tuscul. page 170.
propound great rewards, to the Inventors still of new Pleasures, as being so
much glutted and dulled, but never contented with the old: Now if it hold thus
in natural and sensible appetites, what shall we say of our Intellectual and
Spiritual, which have their seat in the Soul: what shall we say to the
Irascible, Concupiscible, and rational Appetites, which that great Arist. lib.
1. Mag. Mor. cap. 13 Tom. 2. page 931. and lib. 3. de anima cap. 9. Tom. 1.
page 834, 835. Jtem Philo, lib. de confus. Linguarum, page 450.
Naturian, places in several faculties of the Soul: how insatiable is the
Irascible in matter of revenge? As never satisfied with blood, though drunk
with it as with Wine, as were once these inhumane Monsters, De Crudelitate
Neronis, Decij: Trajani, Domitiani, cum ceteris truculentssimis Jmperatoribus
et Pagan^, et Arrianis: vide Tacetum annal. 5. Entrop. lib. 7. Niceph. lib. 3.
c. 23. lib. 7. cap. 6. et cap. 22. Et lib. 11. cap. 25. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 1.
et cap. 30. l. 8. c. 7. et cap. 16. cum alijs.
Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Scylla, Theat. Philos. page 604, 605.
Marius, Dionysius, Periander, Busiris, the Jewish Athalia, Simeon, Iehocanan,
Antiochus, Machab.
Ephiphanes, or Epimanes; and of later time, that Romish Iezabel, and the
whelps of that Wolf; Fox in his book of Martyrs, page 1788.2114.
Gardener, Bonner, Weston, Minereus, John de De his et alijs; See the Theater
of Gods Judgments.
Roma, and other bloody agents, for the scarlet Papal whore? How insatiable,
the Rational, after Learning and Knowledge: As appears in the travels of
PLATO, and De Jndef^ssis horum et aliorum studijs, praeci^pue C^a^t^, Sophoclis
Planti Apollo^. Iul. Caesaris, Alexandri magni, Diodori, Siculi, Juliani,
Hieron. Lege Marcellinu^, l. 16. Gelliu^ lib. 3. cap. 3. Coelum Rhodig. l. 5.
c. 35 et lib. 6. cum Textore, p. 347.
PYTHAGORAS: the nocturnall pains of CLEANTHES, the Lucubrations of ARISTOTLE,
with his brazen Bull: the studies of CATO and SOCRATES in the Greek: and
inquisition after knowledge, even in their old Age: yea some on their dying
Couch: but chiefly how infatiable the concupiscible in respect of four maine,
and principal Cupiditatis natura, est infinita: Arist. lib. 2. polit. cap. 5.
Tom. 2. page 773
objects; Power, Honor, Riches, Pleasure; whole Volumes may be writ in the
extractions from Hystories and experiments: in which we shall further enlarge
our selves when we come to instances and inductions: strengthening in the mean
space, our first Proposition with a fourth reason, and that is.

That the insufficiency of these vain Husks, or Husks of Vanity to feed or
fill, or fulfill, the desires of the Soul of man, comes from the marvailous,
wonderful, and almost infinite activity and working of the Will of man, and of
his understanding part: for to enlarge a little my discourse of the rational
faculties. there is nothing created, and apparent, so various different, and
numerous, but the heart of man can imagine, understand, contrive, conceive,
will, affect, and desire, still more, till it be satisfied with that Summum and
vltimum bonum: that last, that first, and everlasting infinite good, which is
GOD himself: beyond whom, there is, non vltra, no further Progress: as for
instance; GOD bids ABRAHAM, Aspice Coelos, and numera Stellas, si Genesis 15.5
potes: Behold the Heavens, and number the Stars if thou can: as if he
should intimate the stars to be so many, that they could not be numbered:
more than the sands of the Seas; the piles of grass, the leaves of Trees, in
the Woods: the Hairs on the Head of man: and yet though these be beyond the
Compass of Arithmeticke: as being to us innumerable: the mind of man is able
to conceive more stars, more piles, more sands; more leaves: because to every
finite according to Philosophy, there may be an Omni finito potest majus
estimari.
Addition: as also if a man had the gold of CRESVS, CRASSVS, and of a hundredth
richest Kings, and Emperors in one heap: yea if he were possessed of all the
Indian Mines, and had all the sand of Tagus, and Alcumized in gold; yea if he
were so exquisite a Chemist, to turn all the Brass, and Tin in Cornwall into
gold, and silver; or had as in SALOMONS time, gold as the stones in the 2. Chapter
1.15
street, yet he might conceit, and conceive more: yea in his Covetous desires;
will and affect more: even that, all the imagined gold, in See the Book called
the discovery of Guiana
Guiana: were real, yea and really his too: so if there were a man, so proper
and goodly as the Poets GANIMEDE: as ALEXANDERS Apud Mellaficium, Historicum,
p. 476
HEPHESTION, ADRIANS ANTONIUS; CHARMIDES in PLATO, MAXIMINVS, the Emperor:
yea, as 2. Sa^. 14.25
ABSOLON, and 1. Sam. 9.2
SAVL, so extolled in the Scripture: or as JOSEPH himself, whom ORIGIN, and
GERSON, think the fairest man that ever was; were he as fair as that
CLODONEVS, called the fair King of Apud Paulum Aemil.
France: or as PILADES the Player, on which the Wife of IVSTIN was Cured by
Galen in her Love-sicke Passion.
enamoured: or as that Fencer, on which FAVSTINA the Empress so doted: small
and white handed: like our English Longimanus yellow, and golden haired, as
HOMER makes PATROCLVS and ACHILLES: yea had all these accomplishments and
perfections according to the very Letter, which the Spouse in the Canticles,
attributes to her Cant. 5, 10 11, 12, 13
beloved: yet one may be imagined (and perhaps of some lustful MESSALINA or
unconstant CRESSIDA desired) more fair, more rare, more goodly: or if there
were a Woman so fair and debonaire, as the Israelitish, Ge^. 12, 11
SARAH, Ge^. 27.19
RACHEL, and Genesis 26.7
REBECCHA, the Jewish Esth. 2.7
AESTHER, JACOBS Genesis 34
DINAH, DAVID'S 2. Sam. 11
BETHSHEDAH, The Elders Histor. Susa^. in Apocryphis.
SUSANNA, AMMONS 2. Sam. 13
THAMAR: The Roman Apud Pl.
LVCREECE, the Corinthian LAIS: the Athenian THAIS, the Turkish Knolls his
Turkish History.
IRENE, the Saxons Saxo Gramat. Danica Hist. l. 8.
SINALDA, the Gracian HELENA, Paris apud Ovid.
the Trojan CRESSIDA: so comely, so Courtly, as the Thracian RHODOPE, ANTONIUS
his CLEOPATRA, ACHILLES his Serva Briscis, Nivio color movit Achillem. Horat.
BRISEIS, VIRGILS Re gina ad Templum forma^ pulcherima Dido incessit Virg.
DIDO, CALISTHENES LVCIPPE, ZENOPHONS PANTHEA, THIAMIS his CARACLIA, ALEXANDERS
Curtius, l. 5.
ROXANE, ORLANDOES In Ariosto.
ANGELICA, SAMPSONS DALILAH, HENRY the seconds ROSAMOND, SOLYMANS ROXELLANA, or
any oother, so loved and desired of many worthies, famoused for Arts or De his
and aliis magnoram ut etiam doctorum amasiis lege, passim apud Ovid Virgilium,
Catullum, Tibullum, Propertium, and Martialem in Theat. Po^tice, page 140.141,
142.
Arms: were she capable of all these praises which PETRARCH gives his LAVREA,
OVID his CORINNA, HELIODORVS his CARACLIA, TATIVS to LVCIPPE, PETRONIVS to
CATALECTES, LELAND of King ARTHVRS GI^THERA, Museus of Hero, Lucian of his
Mistress, Apuleius of his Psyche: Longus the Soph^st of Daphnis and Cloe: if
all these one and thirty parts which John Navisan the Silva ^u^tiali. (...)
^plif. 7. Alba tria tria Rubra puella.
Lawyer, and Cassanaeus the Jn Catalogo gloriae mundi Par. 2. p. 61.
Civilian require to a perfect beauty, should meet in one woman, as lines in
one Center, should some Zeuxis, take the best beauties from the Paragons of
their Sex, to purtray one Venns: if she were composed of all graces, and
Elegancies, an absolute Masterpiece indeed: Her head from Prague, her paps
from Austria, her belly from France, back from Brabant, hands from England,
feet from Rhine, yea let her have the Spanish gate; the Venetian See the Book
called Democritus Junior. Par. 3. sect. 2. fol. 642. Ingen^um, enim est
confiteri per quem profeceris.
Tire, the Italian Complements, and endowments, the colors and proportion of
our English trained Irish, such an one throughout as Lucian decyphers in his
Imagines, Anacreon in his Greek Epigrams: Propertius, Gallus, Tibullus,
Catullus, in their Cynthia, Lesbia, Licoris, Astrophels-Stella, Pontanus his
Corolla; Venus, Charis, Parthenius, Ovid, our new Ariostoes, Boyards, Authors
of Arcadias Faery Queen, describe several beauties, in their Poems,
Love-Stories, Odes, Sonnets, Songs, Fancies, Emblemes, Empressaes, Devises, yet
nevertheless, even such an one may be bettered in conceit, and a fairer, both
for Colors, and Proportion: a wittier, a wiser, a worthier, may be imagined:
yea perhaps desired, and sought after by some goatish Centu^ Sarnatas virgins
diebus is gravidas reddidit testibus Vopisco. and Sabellico in exemp.
PROCVLVS, some lustful De ejus ^pri^ Plut. in vita Cice^nis.
CLODIVS, who could not be long contented with any one, though the very
quintessence of beauty; unless like a Common Bull, or Boar, he may rainge
where he will, and enjoy as many severals, as once 1. Kin. 11 3
SOLOMON, and Est. 2, 3, 12
ASSVERVS, or as the Sometimes the grand Turk, has 400. at once in his
Seraglio, Knolls in his Turkish History: And Sands in his Travels, lib. 1. page
74.
Turks, Muscovites, Zeriffes, and Persians, at this day.

So for Honors, if a man be in never so high, and eminent a place: yet he
may conceit there is a higher yet; the Gentleman conceits he may be a
Knight: a Knight, a Barronet, a Barronet, a Vicount, or Barron: a Barron, an
Earl, or Marquis; a Marquis a Duke: a Duke, a Prince: a Prince a King, a King
an Emperor; an Emperor ruling over many Countries, conceits (like as that
PYRRHVS once projected to his Wife CYNNEAS) that there be still more to
conquer; yea if he have half conquered the known visible World, he may
conceit with that proud Pelian Vnus Pele^ Iuvem (id est Alexandro) non suffecit
Orbis.
Youth, that there may be more Worlds than one to Conquer.

So for Knowledge, if a man were a walking Library: a Treasury and Storehouse
of all Arts, and Sciences: yet with SOCRATES he should improve his best
knowledge, to see his Hoc scio quod nihil scio.
ignorance: if he be not blotted with self conceit this dangerous Philantia,
he shall see, for one thing, he knows, he is ignorant of In eruditissimis, est
docti quaedam ignorantia.
many; both in Humanity, and Theology. So for memory: if one had as strong a
retentive faculty: as CYRUS that could repeat all the names of his Soldiers)
as THEMISTOCLES all the names of the Athenian Citizens) or did excel (whether
by Nature or Art) more in that faculty, than either CYNEAS, SENECA,
METHRIDATES, CHARMIDAS; the Emperor HADRIAN, or QVINTVS the President of Asia,
commended by Facetiaru^ and exemplorum, lib. 4. page 265.
Brusonius; or then SIMONIDES, THEODECTES, METRODORVS, HORTENSIVS, JULIUS
CAESAR, PORTIVS, applauded by In Tuscul. and de senect.
Tully, and others; some, as Inventors, some as perfectors of, some as
exquisite practitioners in that Art of Memory: So (as if he had drunk of the
Boaetian Haustis fontis Boaetica vndae.
fountain) he should find, that his Appetite, and desire is still to remember
more then he can possibly retain, for all his will, and skill, in this
memorative exercise: and that some things of weight and moment, which he hears,
sees, and reads, will escape him, will he, nill he; as some waters run by
the Mill, the miller knows not of. So in all other things; the Understanding
can understand more, the Will can desire more; the Memory can retain more, the
affections can love more, than those finite objects on which they are placed;
for according to Philosophy, as our affection can extend as far as our
Affectio potest se extendere sicut aestimatio.
estimation: As we can prize, and value, and estimate greater things, than
those sublunaries, we now enjoy: even him whom ARISTOTLE is said to call Ens
entium, the thing of things; PROSPER Lib. de previdentia, page 180.
, Authorem naturae: the Author of Nature: and PLATO, Animam mundi, the Soul of
the World: So we can desire and affect even to know, acknowledge and worship
this GOD, this supreme Diety, as the most Barbarous of the Gentiles have done
(as all Historians Vt patet, apud Cicer. lib. 1. de Nature. Deorum page 190. l.
1. Tuscul. page 112. Alex. ab Alex. Geneth. lib. 6 cap. 26. and 261. p. 321.
Aug. de Civit. Dei, c. 8 Tertul. in Apol. cap. 24. p. 54. Lact. lib. 1. Instit.
cap. 15. p. 39 and l. 2. c. 16. Maximum Tyr. Sermon. 1 page 6. Athanas. lib. 1 p.
21. Mu^ster. Cosm. l. 5. p. 1087 Maffaeum, lib. 6. hist. Jnd. p. 118. Linschot.
cap 36. page 70. et page 81. cap. 44. Cum Petro Martyr in Decad. page 284. Et
Plinio, hist. lib. 2. c. 7. page 2.
relate) however mistaken, in the manner and object of their Passim apud
Morneum, de veritate Christianae religionis, et apud Purchasium nostrum in sua
Peregrinatione.
Worship, by superstition, and divelish delusion: And indeed, till the Soul
truly know and serve this true GOD, and so rest and fix, and Anchor in the
fruition of this sovereign good; it has as many fluctuations as the River
Euripus in Aegeo septies Fluit et refluit: secundum Majolum Bocat. et Basil. in
Exemer. hom. 6.
Euripus, distracted hither and thither, as a feather driven with the wind, or
a Ship tossed on the sea with different Ventis jactata et vndis.
waves, still sensible of the want of something, that is better, than all these
earthly things, with which, it is bewitched and besotted: as much as Gold, is
better than dross, the Sun brighter then Clouds; the heavens, purer then the
earth; as (me thinks) is well shadowed in the popish Fable of their Jn Aurea
et Lomb. legenda: sic in Pom. de Sanctis.
St. CHRISTOPHER, who resolving with himself, to serve the greatest Master,
betook himself to the service of the Souldan of Egypt, then to the great
Cham of Cathay, to the Emperor of Tartaria; after, to the Ottaman Turk: as
hearing still, that the last Masters were greater then the former; at length
he served the Pope, as greater than these; at last the Devil (he and the
Pope being well joined) as greater than he: (as the Father, is above the
Son) but after all, he came to the service of CHRIST, as the greatest of all
the rest. Paulo maiora Canens, the Moral being; That man's Soul (like the
Hawke, the Hobby, and the Eagle,) still soars upwards, (unless kept down
with the weight of Sin, or fly crosse-way, the great gross way, through
Ignorance,) never quieted, nor resting right, till she be a true Christopher
indeed; Christum ferens, carrying Christ, as in their Legend he did, taking
Christ's burden upon it, which is easy Math. 11.29.
and his yoke which is sweet, when she is at this, she is at her true height,
true pitch, true Ela: she cannot go a note further, without overstraining,
and breaking; till she be at this, she is as the Needle touched with the De his
and alijs Mirabilibus Magnetis, lege Plinium lib. 36. c. 16.26 and l. 34. c. 14
et l. 20. c. 7. Diosc. l. 5. c. 168. and August. de Civ. Dei, lbi. 21. Nec non
Orpheum de Gemmis: et Theophrastu^ de lapidibus.
Loadstone, ever quivering and tottering, shaking, turbulent and timorous, till
she be fixed directly on the Northren Pole; her Motto, till then, may be that
of CHARLES the fifth, Vlterius, still forward: There Is a further mark to be
shot at, a higher prize to be aimed; greater peace and perfection to be
attained, then these externals, will or can afford: Which Truth (me thinks)
even the Pagan seemed to grope after in the dark night of Nature: For speaking
of men's Immense and unmeasurable desires, after Riches, (which holds also in
other externals) he adds to their appetites a Vix vltra: he does not say
nec, or Non vltra, which the verse perhaps might have borne: that they can go
no further, for they may soar still higher and higher after GOD, if they be
right placed: or spread or dilate after the world if wrong placed, but he
adds Tempore crevit amor, qui nunc est summus habendi vix vltra, quo iam
progrediatur habet. Ovid.
Vix vltra, they are so exorbitant after the World, that they scarce can extend
and stretch any further then they Observat hoc and Bosq. Iesuita, in sua Acad.
peccat.
do.

SECT. II. The insatiablenesse of the Appetite, and Concupiscible faculty.
Fifthly, the Insufficiency of these earthly, huskish Vanities, for the ends,
they promise and project, which is true contentation; is plainly discovered:
By the unproper application of them, to the Soul of man; having no right
Analogy and proportion, to the Concupiscible part; for when the Object is not
fitted, to the proper Faculty, it can never satisfy, or content it: As for
instance, let any Organist or Lutanist, if as exquisite for voice, or
instrument as De quo Horat. de art Poetica, Virgil. l. 6. Aeneid. and Ovid
lib. 4. Trist.
Orpheus, or Dictus et Amphion, Theb. Conditor vrbis, Horat.
Amphion: the Italian, Aequalis Pyladi apud Plutarchu^, Philomelo apud Mart. l.
3. Hormog. apud Horat. Papi. Iopa: et Creteae, apud Virg. lib 1.9. et 12.
Aeneid. vel cateris art Musica claris.
Orlando di Lassus; our English Bird, Bull, Morley, Douland: play on his Lute,
or sing, to a Deaf man: he takes as much content in Pans pipe, or a
Shepherds oaten Reed: Let a Painter as cunning as Apelles De his, et Ceteris,
art pingendi, Claris apud Ravis. in Theat. Phil. page 448.
or Zeuxes, or as the Romish Michaell and Raphaell, present the most exquisite
Colors to a Blind man: he regards them, as much as if you should show him a
Fish, or a Frog: Offer meat to a Sick man so long as his stomach is filled
with wind, or gross humors, either he loathes it, or his palate being
distempered; he didistasts it: chiefly offer meat or money to a dead man (as a
Dog of Sabinius carried Meat to the mouth of his dead Plinius hist. lib. 8. c.
40 and Zonaras in Tiberi^.
Master) he takes no notice of it, no nourishment by it: because color being
the proper object of the Eye, music of the Ear, meat of the Gust, and taste,
if there be no sensitive faculties recipient, in vain are the Objects
presented: Now the right satisfactory, and true contentive Object of the Soul
of Man, is God: all other outward and external objects, and subjects, which
are not used in God, as from God, and to God, are wrongly applied, for solid
consolation, and contentation: as rather increasing the diseases, than tending
to the health, and happiness of the Soul; as for instance; let an expert
Physician whether Galenist, or Paracelsian, rightly apply Drugs, Unguents,
Balmes, Potions, Iulips, Confections, Symples, or Compounds: as in the course
of Physic, Chyrurgerie, will by Gods blessing, cure any outward disease, or
inward Malady the Patient in all probability lives, though greevously before
pained, or dangerously Of strange and extraordinary cures performed by
exquisite Physicians, Instance in Cardan, l. 8. c. 43. de rebus diversis in
Lemnius l. 2. cap. 6. in Brasovil. com. in 26. Aphor. l. 3. Hypoc. in R.
Solenander l. 5. Consil. Cons. 15. sect 9. Jn Pontanus l. 4. c. 2. de Sap.
Chiefly Ambrose Par. l. 9. c. 31.32. and lib. 5. Obs. 9. and l. 4. Obs. 6. and
l. 10. c. 4. cu^ multis aliis.
sick: whereas an Empericke or Quacksalver, missing it in the matter, or
manner of application: in the cause or occasion of the disease; or in the
quantity or quality of his ingredients: ordinarily rather kills than Turbamedic.
occidit Caesar.
cures, Thus it is with every vain man, the ill affected part, is his Soul:
his several sins, are as several De morbis animi et corporis, conqu. sunt
(praeter Patres) etiam et Pagani, ut Jsocrates de pace, Sen. de vita Beata, and
de Jra. l. 2. c. 9. Cic. Tusc. 3. and de fin. 1. et 7.23,
diseases, or ill humors in the body, or as distempers in the brain, or in the Sea spiritual and corporal diseases paraleld, by the Scot. Bish. Abernethy in
his Book called the Physic for the soul
blood, now there is but one Physic, the Herb of Grace, but one Physician
the God of Grace: all Earthly Vanities, to this Cure are but Oil to the fire:
as the herb Bufonium, to the Ox, as the Chenomicon to the Goose: as water to
the poisoned Rat, as the poison of the Weasell, to the greatest Beasts; or as
the company of Physicians to Adrian the Emperor on whom he exclaimed, that
they had amongst them killed Caesar: instance in some particulars, either in
the burning Fever of Idem ibid. cap. 30. page 435
Lust: the Dropsy of Cap. 25, p. 377
Covetousness; the Tympany of Ambitious Page 393
Pride, the Consumption of Cap. 21, p. 313
Envy; the Madness of Cap. 19, p. 272
Anger; the Frenzy of Cap. 18, page 25.5
Passions; the Plurisie of x Self-love: or what else (as quot mali, tot
morbosi, so many bad men, so many diseased men:) and we shall see all those are
caused, by the full and frivolous abuse of earthly Vanities; as the raging
Toothache, by sower By which they are more i^aged.
Vinegar: to review them over again, come to the ambitious man: he delights in
great Tytles: as of Mr. Sr. Rabbi, Rabboni, right Worshipful, right
Honorable, Reverend, Renowned, Magnificent, Munificent, Don, Senior,
Mounsieur, Magnifico, if it please your Majesty, Excellency, Highness, Grace:
He loves greeting in the Marketplace: as once the Math. 23 6, 7
Pharizees, to be called gracious Lords, worthy Sir, noble Spirit The affects
the Title of Great, as great Passim apud Plutarchum, et Tranquillu^:
Caesar, great Sic de Po^p^io.
Pompey, great In every thing he affecting greatness, as wearing great shoes,
great Clothes, Inde magnus dictus.
Synelius, Charles Caerolus 5.
the great, as once great Melander dictus ab occardo Hunnio, Hub^ro.
Luther, Athanasius Vide Nazianz. in Fiunius Athan. et Scultetum, in medulla
Patru^ Part. 2. page 2
the great, Basil the great, Olaus magnus, and others; so honored for Zeal
and Learning, Arts and Arms: but when he has attained all those desired,
rather than deserved honors, has run through the best of these Tytles, as the
Sun through the several signs in the Zodiac: has commenced in the
highest degree of Vainglory: attained to his Superlatives: to be not only,
It Is megas, a certain (though uncertain) Great man, but O'megas, ille magnus
(as Simon Magus amongst his Acts, 8.9 and Eusebius, lib. 2. cap. 12
Samaritans) Pythagoras, amongst the Ipse dixit.
Pythagoreans, Lycurgus amongst the Plutarchus de Licurgo.
Lacaedemonians, Tamberlaine amongst the Rustic De quo Camer. in oper. succ.
p. 330 331
Scythians: Mahomet amongst his Apud Lonclavium in hist. Turcica
Sarazens, Ignatius Of whose Impostures, life and death, Read Pelargus his
Preface, ante Iesuiti sinum and the Jesuits Catec. in Quarto.
Loyola, amongst his Iesuited (Iebusited) Ignatians: honors content him not?
He swells still, to be greater than he is, like the Frog in the Apud Aesopum.
Fable: his heart is proud, ambitious, vainglorious still; he is not cured of
this his Tympany of Pride, by all these adventitials; why so? He has neither
right Physic, nor rightly applied: (but as Eeles, Geese, Pidgeon, fresh
Beef, in a wound impostumated, strong Wines, hot Waters; in a burning How
things cool and moist, mitigate Fevers: hot, increase them. See Method of
Physic, in Quarto, cap. 6. and 5. l. 4. p. 230.231.
Fever) those things are administered which rather increase than mitigate his
disease: because he aims still rather at greatness than goodness, is
studious rather to be great than good: seeks as did the Ioh. 12, 43
Pharisees, rather that honor, which is from men; then with Joseph, Nu^b. 12.3
Moses, Esth. 3, 2
Mordocheus; Ps. 131, 1
David, 1, Sa^. 8, 7, and cap. 12, 3.
Samuel, the Virgin Luke 4, 48
Mary, the Math. 8, 8
Centurion, Dan. 2, 30 Acts, 12, 23
Daniell, and other holy and humble Souls) that Honor which is from God. he
rather seeks to magnify and glorify himself; (as did that haughty y Herod,
proud Exodus 5, 2
Pharaoh, blasphemous 2. Kin. 19
Rabsakah, the Pseudo 1. Kin. 22 24. and Ier. 26, 8
Prophets, and false Apostles, in their times: Theod. l. 1. cap. 14.
Arius, and Haereticall Lvag. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Nestorius, with Hist. Mag. Cent. 4. c. 10 102
Paulinus, in the primitive Times: the Antichristian 2. The. 2.4
Popes, and Prelates in these and in pristine Papal times) then to receive (as
did Moses, Ioshuah, Job, Abraham, Cornelius, the humbled Cananite, yea Christ
himself, and his forerunner the Baptist) that honor, glory, Encomium, praise
and testimony which is from God; which if they once could attain, they had
then soared, to the highest top, and period of the best and most blessed
Ambition, giving unto God, his true and deserved honor, (who would render it
them again, as the Rivers come from the Fountain, whither they run.) Judge.
18, 24
Their own vain and vile glory, for which they contend, Tanquam pro aris and
focis, as Ge^. 31, 30
LABAN and his Daughter, for their Idols: as the Heathen for their Penates, or
the Popes and once the The Patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, Jerusalem,
and Alexandria, whose contentions hatched the Pope.
Patriarchs, for Universal Supremacy, I say this their Vanity, as Mysts, and
Clouds, and May-morning dewes, would vanish before the Sun of GODS Glory: and
fall down flat and crushed, as 1, Sa^. 5, 3.
DAGON before the Arc: as it is with CASTOR and POLLVX, the two observed Hinc
Clara Gemini signa Tyndarida Micant apud ^eneca^, et Ovidium.
stars, the rising of the day star of Gods glory in their hearts, would be
the setting of the Comet, and Blazing-starre of their own vainglory, and the
rising of the true Sun of their ever-shining, never setting Glory; Could they
thus fall down humbly upon this shade, and shadow of honor, they should truly
catch it: and could they fly from this selfe-glorie; Pr^ter alias as^utias
apud Ael^anum l. 9. c. 3 et Vincent. 30. c. 9. et 17. c 606 Crocodilus
fugientem sequitur sequentem fugit honoris emblema apud Al^iatum et Whitnaeum.
Crocodile-like, it will pursue, and follow them: Could they with the twenty
four Elders, in the Revelation: Cast down their honors, and Rev. 4.10
Crowns, before the Lamb: they should receive them again, with the holiest,
the happiest, Interest; else they do but sow the Wind, and catch the
Whirlewind.

Again, the Covetous man, is wonderfully in love with money: he is troubled
with the disease called the Philargury, or as that Athenean Demosthenes.
Orator, with Non Auginam pass^s est, led Argentangina^.
Argentanginy: or if you will, the Golden Dropsy; the Wedge of Gold: is his
help, his hope, his joy, his Genius, his GOD, his sovereign good, his
beloved, adored Idol; for Covetousness says the inspired Ephesians. 5 5
Apostle, is Idolatry, and so the Covetous man consequently a great, a gross
Idolater: he as Idolatrously worships his golden Calfe, which in his heart he
has erected: as Israel once in the days of Exo. 32.6
AARON and once the Calves in Dan and 1. Kin. 12, 28, 29
Bethell; yea, there is more hearty honor given to it, and confidence put in
it; and he makes it a better GOD than the Thebans their adored Aelian. l. 12
de anim. c. 5. p. 260.
Weasill, the Trojans their Clemens Alex. per trept. p. 11.
Mouse, the Egyptians their Dogs, Cats, and Crocodiles: Than the Aug. lib. 4 de
Civ. Dei, cap. 8.10. Lact. lib. 1. cap. 20. page 51. Clemens Romans lib. 5.
Recog. page 79. and Arnob. lib. 1. contra gentes, page 776
Romans their men Gods, their Fortune, their Volupie, their Flora, and the
rest of the rabble of their contumelious, and impudent Dietyes, by them and the
Athenians recounted: Then the Brackmans in the East, the Iapones in the North,
and other Provinces in the Indies, their Worme-Gods, Fly-Gods, Ape-Gods, etc.
Then the Athaneus lib. 1. page 21
Persians and Cicero lib. 3. de not. Deorum, p. 231
Pagans, their Starry, Tutelary, Elementary Gods, our Vide Reinold. de
Jdol-Romanae Ecclesiae, l. 1. c. 1. page 63. et cap. 8. page 220. et Passim in
libro sic Powellum de Antic. l. 1 p. 215. et l. 2 p. 439. Sutclivium, in
Synopsi, c. 10. p. 77. et c. 24, With D ^oro^s his Trysag. p. 161. et 194. et
147. et passim, l. 1. et l. 2.
Papists, their Cross-Gods, Grosse-Gods, Bread-Gods, Pope-Gods, or other 2.
Sa^. 15.6.
Heathens their Serpentine and viperous Gods, the very garden-Gods (of which
Aristophenes speaks in Nubibus act. 5. Sect. 2. page 228. and Iuvenal Sat. 15.
page 60.) this God he gives his heart to, or rather this golden God, steals it
from him, (as it self may be stolen, as well as Michaes) a Criple rests not
more on his Crutches, a Vine on his Prop, than he on it: he desires (as an
Adulterer on his Concubine, on which he dotes) that his eye, may be ever upon
it; yea when he has his handful his eye full, his Purse full, his Bags full,
his Chests full of it; his heart is not yet full: Avaro deest: he wants still;
he is not contented, he would have this his dead Idol, as God commanded his
Genesis 1.^.
Creatures, (as well as his Cow, and his Sow, by biting Vsuries, cutting
Oppressions, bleeding Extortions, to increase still, and multiply, one piece of
Coin to beget another: as one Circle in the water produces another: and
what is the reason of all this; because the Medicine is not rightly applied, as
if that were applied to the heels, or the hands; which should be laid to the
head; augmentation of Coin, never curing Covetousness, but the stipulation of
a good Conscience: addition of Money to the Miser, being to his desires as
drink to the sick of the Dropsy; as pitch and powder to the flame: Gods
all-salving, all-saving, all-satisfying, sanctifying grace, being the only
salve to this Hydropicall sickness; the only remedy to this malady: and not
corruptible, concupiscible Gold. As may be instanced in Matthew and Zachaeus,
whose insatiable Covetousness was never cured, till they had lodged CHRIST, in
their houses and hearts, as appears Math. 9. verse. 9. and Luke 19.4, 5, 6, 7,
8.

Lastly, (to instance in no more) the heart of the Luxurious man burns with
Vrit te Glycera intor Horat. lib. 1. od. 19 and Mollis Fla^ma Medullis: Aeneid.
4. sie, in pectus caecos absorbuit Jgnes. Mant. Aegl. 2.
Lust, (as did AMMONS 2 Samuel 13.2.
toward his sister THAMAR, SICHEMS toward Genesis 34.
DINAH, HOLOFERNES toward IVDITH, MARS toward his Mars vidit hanc, visamque
cupit. potiturque cupita. Ovid.
VENUS, CLITOPHON toward Apud Lucianum.
LVCIPPE, THYAMIS toward Heliod. lib. 1.
CARACLIA, and old CALYSIRIS the Priest of Isis, toward the Thracian RHODOP^,
as is recorded of them, and by some of themselves confessed:) now suppose he
have his desire and enjoy his beloved GALATEA, as the son of ANTIGONVS Jdem,
l. 2.
did his Mother in law STRATONICA; which Physicians praescribe Cum Avicenna
Guianareus, cap. 15. tract. 15. Arculanus, cap. 16. in 9 Rasis: et Aret. l. 3.
c. 3.
as the only Cure of Love; or lust Melancholy: yet nevertheless frequently it
falls out, that either Lust thus enjoyed, turns into loathing, the most
lustful Love, into the most real hatred; as sweetest wine corrupted turns
into the sowrest vinegar, (as appears in Hamon toward his sister 2 Sa^. 13.15
Thamar, in Putiphars wife toward Genesis 39.10, 14
Joseph, in Roxellana Lonclavius hist. Turcic.
toward the noble Ottaman-Mustapha: and in others recorded) many women as they
either love dearly, or Ant vehementer amat aut crudeliter odit.
hate deadly: So many men when they have plucked the fruit, scorning the Tree,
leaving it to blast, or waste, to stand, or fall: shaking them off, (as the
Spaniell shakes off his water on the shore) whom they have once used; or else
their desires being at large (as their Fires Rev. 21.8
shall be) as hot as Hell it self; not limited in the strict enclosures of
any one, as common Bulls usually, and Stallions, they run after every Gill:
Ierem. 5.8. Neigh after every Iennet, in the open Champion, as it were, not
being willingly tied to any one woman, (more than GALBA LVCVLLVS and other
Gluttons Apud Bruson. exempl. lib. 3. p. 165
to one dish of meat) seeking still after varieties (as did that Nero, Apud
eundem, c. 29. p. 230, 231.
Proculus, Sardanapalus, Julius Caesar, Coesar Borgias, Alexander his Father)
one nail driving out another; forgetting one, as they get another: (as
Eurialus forgets his Aeneas Sylvius, in historia, de Euryalo, et Lucretia.
Lucretia, by a new Mistress: Cressida, her Trojan Road Chaucer his Troylus,
and Cressida.
Troylus, for the Greek Diomedes, Demophoon his Apud Ovid. in Epistolis.
Phillis, for a fairer: Sampsons wife rejecting him in one Judge. 15.2
Moon, for his Companion: even Aetna, and Vesuvius shall as soon be quenched
with Oils, as their raging Lusts, thus As instances before were given in
Solomon, for men, and Messalina, for women, Semiramis, Pasiphae, Joane of
Naples, and other insatiable whores of that sex, do verify the point.
satisfied, though perhaps satiated: and good reason, since these effeminate
men, enjoy their desires, but only by the Organs of their bodies, and by their
external senses: they are not heated and warmed, with these truly Promethian
Ignis Promethei explicatura majolo, de cultu Deoru^, Col. 1. page 21.
Fires, which come from Heaven, the fires of the Spirit, which fell on the Act.
2.3
Apostles, which exhilarated the hearts of the sadded Luke 24.32
Disciples, which was so sensibly felt, of De qua re extat Epist. Eccesiae
Smyrneae and apud Eusebium lib. 4. cap. 15.
Polycarpus, St. De quo lege Ambrosium lib. 1. Offic. cap. 41. et lib. 2. cap.
28.
Lawrence, that zealous Glover, Apud Foxum in Martyrologio.
Sanders, and many both De constantia, et consolatione aliorum Martyrum, lege
apud Eusebium, Hist. lib. 8. cap. 7, 8, 9. et Victorem lib. 2. et 3. de
Persecutione Vandalica.
Primitive, and Queen Mary's Martyrs, that it made them patient: yea joyful,
at the very stake: this fire (which would expel, quench, and quell all
luxurious and lustful fires, as burning sometimes cures burning) this
spiritual celestial fire, never entered their hearts, never heated and
exhilrated their spirits, never warmed them, in the inwards of their souls,
they were never thus baptized, with the Baptism of fire: if they had, this
ignis fatuus, this Pooles-fire, this wild fire of fond Lust, Prove. 2.20.
had ceased: as the lesser stars are not seen when the Sunne-shines; but so
long as this is wanting, all their luxurious delights, in which they live, as
once the delicious Quos lux^i^perdidit Aristot.
Sabarites, all their filthy soule-soyling pleasures, in which they wallow and
welter, as Swine in the Mire, As some instances are in the French Goulart his
Histories, now translated by E. G. in Quarto.
and Eeles in the Mud: and with which the garments of their Natures are
besmeared and defiled: as if the garments they wear, were besputted with the
foame of a Bore, the slaver of a Dog, and the slime of a Snaile; all these,
quiet their hearts and content their souls, as much, as if they should put
Mercury into a green wound, lay Aqua fortis upon their flesh; swallow a Nate
or Aspe into their mouths sleeping: or drink (as some have done unadvisedly)
the spawnes of Toades and Frogs: never shall they be at ease, till as their
Physical (Metaphysicall) cure, they have taken such Pills of Paenitency; such
Potions of Grace; (as did 2. Sa^. 12, 13
David, Ge^. 38.26
Judah, Heb. 11 32
Sampson; Vbi nimfides ibi paenitentia Eva^gelica, Mar. 1. v. 15
Lot, 2. Pet. 2.7
Rahab, Heb. 11.31.
Mary Magdalen, Called Pelagius Lacrimarum, apud Surium, et Marulum.
Pelagian, that Egyptian Per annos 47. in descrt^ Nudae oberrans test Paulo
Diacono de vitis Patrum.
Mary, St. Lib. 8. Confess. c. 6.7.8.9.10. and l. 9. c. 6.
Augustine, that Convert in St. Ego non sum ego, apud Amb. l. 2. de Pae^it.
Ambrose, Saint De quo Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 67. (...) Niceph. l. 2. c. 42.
alij resitantur, in pratospirituali c. 143. et 165. ^t on vitas Patru^, p. 2.
c. 141
John's reclaimed Prodigal: yea SOLOMON himself: of the repentance of all
which we have such infallible Testimonies) as shall make them disgorge,
evaporate, and evacuate by cordial compunction, contrition, and confession;
all these Prove. 9.17
stolne-waters, sweet Morsels poisoned fair flesh, windy husks, which did for
a while content their sensualities, but for ever distress their Consciences,
distract their hearts, divide their minds, and damn their Pro. 9.32
Souls.

If I may stand to give a Soul of exhortation, to the Body of this reason: as
other famoused Physicians, Galen, Avisen, Rhasis, Hypocrites, Arateus, Aetius,
Gordonius, Guianerius, Alexander, Paulus, and of later times; Funccius,
Fracastorius, Fernelius, Celsus, Hermus, Jason, Practensis, Piso, Wecker,
Donatus, Altomarus, Faventinus, Victorius, Mercurialis, Hercules de Saxonia,
Laurentius: our Butler, Bright, Barlow, have praescribed Cures and Medicines
for all kinds of corporal Diseases, whether Acute, Chronicke, First,
Secondary, Laethall, Salutary errant, fixed, simplo, compound, connexed or
consequent, as they are divided, by Parthem. l. 1. c. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Fernelius Funcsius in his Institutions, Lib. 3. c. 7. Sect. 1. et c. 11. sect.
1.
Weckner in his Syntagma: and some others; and as they are numbered by 300.
Morbi recensentur a Plinio, lib. 7. c. 11
Pliny in all their varieties: so (as 1. Sa^. 21.9
David said of the Sword of Goliath in another case) there is none like this,
praescribed for the Soul: it may be Christened Nonesuch: for the curbing
cooling and curing of the Fever and Frenzy or every tyranizing Lust; only
the sons of Vanity are hard to be persuaded to receive Gods own praescribed
Ingredients: as Impatient Patients, they slight, scorn, and vilify, both the
Physician and the physic, with us his Ministers, his administering
Apothecaries; which makes them continue still like Babell, incurable; from the
crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, nothing but wounds, blaines,
bruises, and putrified Esa. 1.6.7
sores; neither closed, nor bound up, nor molified, with ointment, they take
their own cures, imagining to satisfy Lust, by fuellizing and feeding it:
which is to cure Venus, by Sine cerere et Bacehe, friges Venus.
Ceres, and Bacchus, to stop bleeding by launcing the green wound deeper, and
deeper: this is preposterous Soule-physicke, since Concupita non possunt
applicar^ concupisce^ti, as an eloquent Modern well Bosquerus de paenitentia
filij prodigi.
observes, these forbidden fruits, these husks of Vanities, unlawfully lusted
after, as the Israelitish Exad. 16 12, 13
Quails, cannot rightly, religiously, safely, and savingly be administered, and
applied to the lusting Heart: no more then a sharp knife, or poison, can
safely be given to a youngling child, though he cry for them like a froward
Vixan; since as in some diseases, arising of contrary causes as in the Dropsy
and the Iannice that which cures the one, increases the other, (to which
Physicians in all their praescripts, have a principal eye) so these Lusts
which transitorily delight the flesh: aeternally destroy the Soul.

These Lusts (like these loves, which are procured, or cured by such Magical
spells, Characters, Philters, and Love-potions, as are related by Lobelius,
Fernelius, Cardan, Delrio, Wier, Mizaldus, Codronchus, Paracelsus; and other
Physicians) they end and tend to grief, sorrow vexation, exangeration,
distraction, desperation, damnation: and therefore as all other Creatures by
the very instinct of Nature for the most part know how to cure themselves, and
have taught, as some Plin. l. 8. cap. 23
think, the first use of Physic to man: as the Dog and the Egyptian Ibis,
cure their sickness by vomit; the heart his wound, by Dictany; the Swallow
recovers her sight by Chelidine: the Weafill preserves her self from
poisoning, by Row: the Panther by Aconite, and man's r excrements; the Dragon
helps himself by wild Contra Vernam Nauseam.
Lettice; the sick Bear by eating Ants, and Pismires; Storke Doves, Iayes,
Marls, Partridges, Crows, their yearly Meat lothings, by the leaves of
Laurel, and other Birds, and Beasts, by other means, as those that have writ
of Husbandry, and cures of Cattle; besides St. Vrsam saxciam varbusc^,
testudinem Or^gano anguem Feniculose mederi, refert aexem. hom. 9
Basil, have particularly De his omnibus lege Columellam de re rustica lib. 8.
cap. 2, 3, 4, 5, et 7 Virg. lib. 3 and 4. Georg. Varronem, l. 2. cap. 2. Nec
non nostrates Tusser, and Martham.
related, chiefly Gregory Tholosanus? Syntagm. artis mirb. l. 28. cap. 38. page
541.) So me thinks, man the Lords Psalm. 8.
Deputy, and Vicegerent from God, over all the Creatures, should take only
Gods Physic, and praescript, which is Faith in Christ, and Repentance from
dead works; to purge his Acts, 15.9
Lusts, to crucify his sinful Gal. 5.24
Vanities, his soul Sicknesses, and so to purify his heart, the fountain
Mat. 12.34
of his words and works: otherwise to expect a sound heart, and a quiet
conscience, and yet let lust reign, and not disthroniz'd, is to think to heal
a green wound, with suppliant oils, and yet the poisoned bullet stick still in
the flesh, and fix in the Flancke: for its merely Faith, which gets a victory
over the 1. Ioh. 5.4
world, and what ere is in the 1. Ioh. 2.16
world; and where Lusts tyranize, there is no list of Faith, nor right
application of Christ crucified.

SECT. III. The Composition of the Heart: Sublimity of Man's Soul: Center of
his Spirit; Gods Image^Mans Pilgrimage.
SIxthly, the insaturity of the Soul of man, taking so little Complacency and
Contentation, from these externals comes partly too from the diversity of the
place, where we are, and reside: for we are here on earth, Pilgrims and
Strangers, as Genesis 47.9
Jacob, 1. Chr. 29 15
David, and the Heb. 11.13
Patriarchs acknowledged themselves; our bodies are Earth, from the Earth, and
tend to Genesis 3.19
Earth, as the ye is from the water, water it self, and dissolves into Aqua
es ex aquaes, et in aqua^ redibis Bra^ millerus in Concior. funeb.
water, earth then is the proper place of the Carnis proprius locus, terra est
Gregorius.
body, as water of the Fish: but the Soul is from Heaven, Olli caelestis
Origo: She has a caelestiall Animam esse spiritum, et incorporale^ ass^r^t,
Eusch. lib. 6. de praepar. Evan. c. 5. Claudianus Mamertus, de statu animae,
lib. cap. 4. Plotinus lib. 7. Ennead. 4. cap. 2. Nec non. ^ug. l. 1. de anima.
Origin cap. 3. ad Hieronimum.
original, and offspring: Poets say (but Divines more truly) that she is
Divinae particula aurae: breathed by the inspiration of the Factum a solo Deo,
et ex Dei Flatu, ex nihilo asserunt August. ut supra Epist. 7. frenaeus l. 2.
c. 63. (...) 6^ Greg. Nazian, in apolog. Lact. l. de Opit. Dei cap. 19. and
Aqu^ (...) iusus Gentes, lib. 2. cap. 88.
Almighty, Creando infusa, et infundendo creata: by Creation infused, and by
infusion created: here she is, but for a time, as it were banished and exiled
(as Themistocles and some others) by Ostrecisme; she is here Tanquam in
ergastulo: a^ in a Prison: (...) quasi Sema, the Earth, is the Prison of the
Body, he stocks or little ease of the soul: Now we know that Honors,
Riches, Pleasures, and all worldly things being but from Earth, how can they
satisfy the Heavenly Soul? As a man in a foreign Land, whose heart is at
home with his wife, and Children, blood, friends, and Consanguinity, Riches,
and Revenewes, takes little Complacency, till be at his own homely home
again: as the Bird at her old ^uus Nedus curque Magnus.
Nest, the Be at her old hive: Ulysses at his own Optat Ulysses fumum de
patrijs posse videre focis Ovid.
Ithica, as AENEAS above all things, to see old Vrbes Tr^janas primu^, and
Priami Tecta alta Maioris.
Troy, as all other men the place of their birth and Nescio qua Natale solum
dulcedine cunctos ducit, et Inmemores, non sinit esse sui.
breeding: so the Soul, coming from Heaven, (as Noah's Dove Ge^. 8.8, 9
sent, from the Arc to the Earth) is never well, till she return and retire
thither again, as to her Center and resting place: we know every Creature,
every Element, tend properly to it own Center: the fire upwards, the water,
stones, and other heavy and gross things Omne leve sursum, grave deorsum.
downwards: so the Soul has her Center, that's Heaven: or the God of Heaven
by Faith here on Earth; which indeed is her true Heaven, in the midst of all
corporal and spiritual afflictions and fluctuations, her true Heaven (as the
waters and Rivers to the Seas) she tends to the proper place, from whence she
came, till she come thither, to heaven locally, after her desolution, as the
Soul of Kuk. 16.21
LAZARUS, or Heaven come here into the Soul, by the blessed influence of
Grace, and the sanctifying, comforting Spirit: she has no more true and solid
content, in these outward things (with which she may be besotted, for a time
but never satisfied) then the Moale has out of the Earth: the Fish out of the
waters; like some Seamen, or Sea Monsters, or Fishy men, or men Fishes, I have
Many such are recorded by Olaus lib. 21. c. 1, by Alexan. ab Alexandro Gene.
dier. lib. 3. c. 8. By Peter Hispalensis, c. 22. page 1. et de Pisce Calano
scribit, cap. 21. ex Alexandro l. 2. c. 21 cum alijs Historicis.
read of, that are never quiet, but sometimes pine, or perish, till they be let
go into the Sea again: not contented with all that the Land can afford them;
so it is with the soul till she be carried, by meditation, contemplation and
divine speculation, into that maine Sea, and Abyss of Majesty, and mercy of
God: nothing contents her, no more than that Avis Paradisi, that Bird of
Paradise, which you see pictured in your great Maps, which never leaves
mourning till she dye, if she be once snared and captivated till she be
loosed and set at liberty.

Seaventhly, not only the disposition, How the Soul with her 3. Faculties, is
an image of the Trinity it is lively showed, by Roseliu^ in his Comment upon
the Pymander of Mercuriut Trismi^sius
but even composition of the heart, seems to plead and persuade the
incompetency of any sublunary Vanity, to give it any true contentation for the
heart of man being in the composure of it, parva trinacria, (like the letter
Delta, amongst the Greeks, Triangular in form) the Soul being as a little
Trinity: adorned with three faculties, Understanding, Will, Memory, as the
heart in proportion is three cornered: we know according to the principles of
the Mathematics, and experimental demonstration, no Sphaericall, or ^ound
figure can fill that which is triangular, but some Corners will be void, some
Angles will be empty: Now the whole world is sphaericall, Mundum alij Sphericu^
alij turb^natum alij in Formae Ovi, asserunt, apud Plutarchum, l. 2. c. 2. de
placit is Philosopherum.
orbiculer, and Nec est tamen rectilineus, nec triangularis, alterius ve
figurae quam ro^un^ae, Plimus l. 2. c. 2. Arist. l. 2. de Coelo, cap. 4.
Al^inous l. 2 de doctrina Platonis, c. 10. vide orbis dictus.
round, therefore called Orbis, the whole Earth is a Globe, voluble or round,
the Sea is a crowned Circle, compassed round by the Land, for that cause called
perhaps by some of the Ancients, Amphitrite the Heavens too are all Spheres,
and incompassing Circles, circling the Land and the Sea, as the heart is
enclosed in the body, the yolke of the egg within the shell: on this is a
wondrous Globe, the whole Earth, the whole Sea, the Heavens vast, and great
being all Sphericall: this whole Globe, this Sphere, cannot fill this little
triangulary heart: so many Omicrons, cannot fill one little Delta: yea one
corner of the heart, is able to contain more than the whole world: even our
understanding part (as I have prooved) is able with that ALEXANDER, and
ANAXAGORAS, to understand, imagine, and conceive more Worlds, and the will is
able to desire more; the memory to retain and remember more, than this visible
World, and therefore if there be no Vacuity Nullum est ^cuum v^ rerum ^ra.
in Nature, as has been discussed, what shall fill, who shall fill, the
Inanity and Vacuity of the heart of man; but the true God, who shall fill every
Angle of this trianguler heart and spirit, but the Triune God, the blessed
Spirit, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to be blessed and praised
for ever? Without whom, it is ever empty, ever hungry: it is like the Country in
which the Prodigal once lived in his aberration from his Father, in which
there was a great famine Facta est sum^s valida Luke 15, 14
spiritual, as once corporal in Jerusalem, and De quibus supra in Margin.
Samaria, when GOD left them.

Eighthly* for the further manifestation of this: we know there must be ever a
Proportion, betwixt the Continent, and the thing contained: when we would fit a
thing, we fit it acording to the measure and quantity of that it will contain:
we cannot hoise in the Sea, or a River into a narrow Vessel, (as Augustine in
a Vision meditating on the Trinity by the Seaside, saw a child attempt to put
the Sea into a Possidonius in vlta Aug.
Sive) nor can a great gutter, or vast bottom cut out with banks, which is
capable of many Floods, be filled with some few drops of rain; we seek not to
fill the large Scabbard of Guy of Warwick, or Goliahs Sword, with a little
Scotch pocket Dagger: Nor is Hercules shoe, filled with the foot of a Pigmey or
China Woman: and so for Creatures animate and living, we fill not the belly of
a Whale, with a little Gudgeon Nor the stomach of an Elephant with a Flea Nor
must we think to fill and satisfy the Soul, with things finite, which is
capatious of that sovereign good, which is infinite. In the poor Widows
enriching by the Prophet 2. Kin. 4.6
Elizeus: the Oil was more, than the Vessels: but the heart of man is a
Vessel, (greater than that Cauldron I have Placed it is said, by the Father of
the now Prince Palatine.
heard, in the Palatinate of Rhine) which all the Worlds oil will not fill:
more than a grain of Mustardseed will fill a hungry Camel, a little Dormouse
a Wolf, or a Lion: a little Wren a rapatious Eagle, oh no! The heart is not to
be filled like that Roman or Phrygian Gulf, but with some great Like that
Gulf into which armed Curtius lept, apud P^utarchum
thing even him, Ens Entium, thing of things.

Ninthly, I offer it, as a further meditation, and confirmatory Reason annexed
to all the former: that the Soul, according to St. L. despir. and anima, sic
de Civit. Dei lib. 12. cap. 1
AUGUSTINE, is created, in the Image of God, and Dei capax, and capable of God;
Quod minus Deo, impleri non potest, cannot be filled, with any thing less then
God: with these outward things (Occupari potest, impleri non potest) she may be
exercised and combred, but not satisfied and contented.

Tenthly, besides Insatiabilis mala Simon de Cassia.
voluntas, the perverse Will of man (to epitomize many other Reasons) ceazing
on these terrestrial egene, and hungry things (as a Wolf on a lean Carrion,
that is all bones, no flesh) must needs it self always be hungry and lancke
egene and lean.

Eleventh, moreover a man cannot be happy, in that which he injoyes Nemo
beatus qui eo quod amat quod avet quod habet non fruitur. Aug. de Civit. Dei,
l. 8. c. 9.
not, now fruimur eis, in quibus voluntas delectata Idem de Trinit. l. 10. cap.
10.
conquiescit, we are properly said, to enjoy these things in which the will
being delighted, rests contented: and remains fully satisfied; which indeed it
does not, in these external and outward things: as is demonstrable by Reason,
observation, and all experiments.

Twelvethly, which is also AUGUSTINES Reason, inde beatus, unde Jdem Epist. 121
bonus, That makes a man truly happy, which makes him holy: For Holiness in
the Church militant Jdem Epist. 121
ploughs and ushers 1. Th. 3.13 and 4 v. 3, 4, 7. and Heb. 12 v. 14.
happiness in the Church tryumphant: Apud Mornaeum de veritate Christianae
religionis.
Varro enumerating three hundredth several opinions of the Heathens, concerning
man's summum bonum, his chief, and Sovereign good: all these Phylosophicall
Archers, guided by the dim spark of Nature, (like Ahabs 400. 1. Kings, 22.6
Prophets, in an other case) shot wide and missed the mark: DAVID by an
unerring Spirit, makes the Holy man, the only happy Psa. 1. v. 1. Psalm. 112.
v. 1. and 119. v. 1 Sic Psalm. 15. per totum.
man, the good man (which was also a Paradox even in Philosophy,) the only
great man; now all these outward things (however in Christian Liberty a holy
heart knows how to make a holy and sanctified use of them) cannot make a man
more holy: all the gold in the world cannot purchase one dram of grace, which
is every way gratuita and given gratis: else according to true Gratia, non est
gratia, isi omnimodo gratuita.
Theology it is no grace at all: and so consequently these externals incompetent
in the means, can never accomplish the end of man, which is true tranquillity,
happiness and faelicity.

Thirteenth, again, wondrous is the excellency and sublimity of the Soul of
man, we are created to more excellent ends, then (excepting the Lege Casma^ni
Angelographiam sic Smalculdi libellum, de naetura and dignitate Ang^lorum.
Angels,) all other Creatures, whatsoever: the Soul to use LACTANTIVS his Lact
ant*. 7. Insti^u^ 5.^ (...) de ^ra, Jn h^ ^m^
words, is infused into the body, that she might know GOD, love GOD, worship
GOD: or as he has it more largely, the world was made, that we might be borne
into it: (as Eden was made so ADAM, the House built for an inhabitant) we are
borne that we might acknowledge the Maker of the World, which is God we
acknowledge God that we might worship him, we worship him that we might attain
aeternall felicity by him: or as the Master of the Sentences has ^
it, GOD made man, a reasonable Creature, to understand the chief Good: in
understanding it, to love it, in loving it, to possess it, and in possessing
it, to enjoy it: this then being the end of our Creation, not that we should
contemplate and adore the Sun, (as the Persians do) as some Philosophers
thought, and taught: nor only to rule over the rest of the Creatures, as some
others Vt dominari in caetera possit. Ovid. Metam.
thought: but that Eagle like we should mount and ascend higher, to the
knowledge, worship, and fruition of the Creator himself: till this end be
attained, (which indeed is our right hoc Multi aliter agunt, nihil agunt, parum
agunt, male agunt, inquit Seneca, ast. Christiani est hoc agere
Agere, the one thing that is necessary: Hoc vnum necessarium: Luke 10. verse.
40.41
MARY'S part to be acted) in acting MARTHAES part, trading and traffiking so
much with the World, affecting and loving the Creature above the Creator:
temporary and apparent good, before that which is real, and aeternall: we do
but Aberrare a Scopo, err from our true end, and scope of our Creation: yea
Toto errare Caelo: wander as wide, as the Earth is distant from the Heavens:
yea we do but (aliter agere, nihil agere, male agere, vel Seneca lib. 1.
Epistolarum, Epist. 1
malum) otherwise, then we should and ought to do: we do evil, for the
matter, or manner: yea we run at an uncertain mark; in which we do Operam
and oleum per dear: loose our labor: and so do as good as nothing; like him
that plowes the As once Ulysses feigning madness.
Sands, and sowes his seeds in an Irish bogge; as good do nothing as to no
purpose: as good sit still, as rise and fall: be idle as ill employed: as our
Phrases are.

And therefore (as partly before is prosecuted) as every thing rests only in
its own Center, and is not contented till it accomplish his praescribed Finis
and bonum convertuntur.
end: so it is with the soul of man, whose Center is God: place a ponderous
stone, where you will, in the Air, in the Fire, in the Water, it still
descends downwards, and rests not, till it come to his bottom, to which
naturally it moves, unless it be fixed, and stayed by the way: (as a bowl by
some rub or rough cast, may be stayed in midst of a steep Hill, that it
descends not to the Valley,) lay what Wood, what weight, what fuel you will on
the fire, it breaks through all, and as is said of the Plin. hist. l. 13. cap.
4.
Palm Tree, in despite of weight surgit in Altum, it ascends upwards, to his
Center: our material fire, we see aspires even to the Elementary Fire, with
which it has some affinity, and similitude: so we see the Rivers cease not
their motions, till they run into the Sea, from whence originally they came, as
doing naturally their dutious and tributary homage, to their Sovereign: yea
the Sun that Monoculus, the worlds great eye, runs his daily course like a
Giant, and rests not till he have (Iudge-like) rid, or run his Circuit, from
the East to the West, as it runs his Annuary or yearly course, through all the
twelve Signs of the Sic per annum, id est. 365. aies totum percurrit Zodaicu^,
Abenezra in cap. 12. Exodi, and Tholos. Syntax. artis lib. 8. c. 43. p. 63.
Zodiac: so it holds in other motions, both Natural and Artificial, and
Voluntary or rational, proceeding from the will of man: the twelve Tribes, we
know, that went up at their solemn Feasts to worship at Jerusalem, rested not
till they came to the Holy Psalm. 84.7.
City: no more did the Ethiopian Act. 8.27.
Eunuch and other religious Proselites: even as our Superstitious Popelings at
this day, in their devious Devotions, tending in their Pilgrimages, to the holy
Sepulcher of Jerusalem, to Saint JAMES of Compostella: to the Lady of Loretto
in Italy, and to other Superstitious places in Spain, France, Rome, and
elsewhere: rests not satisfied (more than the Turks travailing to Maecha to
adore their Mahomet) till they have offered up their Prayers, and gifts, to
those Images and Shrines of supposed Saints, as are in such places erected:
even as the ancient Philosophers PLATO, PYTHAGORAS and some of their Sectaries,
travailing to Athens, Egypt, and to the Indian Gymnosophists, to better their
knowledge, rested not till they accomplished their ends; as a way-fairing
Travailer by Land, and a Mariner by Sea, in an Indian or Virginean voyage,
rests not contented, till they come to the places, which to themselves they
propose, and as in these and other motions, in which nature still inclines to
his end, till this end be attained (as in a perplexed Res est soliciti, plena
timoris amor Ovid.
Lover) there is nothing but want, rest, fears, cares, jealousies, suspicions,
doubts, dangers projected, troubles, molestations, incertainties, fluctuations:
but when the utmost end is once accomplished, there is a quies, after motion, a
rest, a cessation and contentation, as in a marriage: when PAPHHILVS injoyes
his Apud Torentium.
GLYCERIVM, the Italia^ Guiccardine in his History of Italy, recorded by
Gonlari, page 465.
LIVIO his CAMILLA, RHODOMAMT in Ariosto l. 29. Stan. 8.
Ariosto his ISABELLA, EVRIALVS in AENEAS SILVIVS, his LVCRETIA, or JACOB Ge^.
29.29
in the sacred Story his RACHEL: thus it is with man in his motions
supernatural, and spiritual, as he was created for that end, that he might
know, love, embrace, rest and remain in God, his vltimum finem, his last his
lasting and everlasting good, till he come unto God by Prayer, into God by
Faith, (as the graft into the stock) resemble God, by a Holiness, in a
renewed Image; all the Creatures subjected to Vanity, cannot content him; as
all the Jews comfort not Martha and Mary mourning for Ioh. 11.19 27.1.
Lazarus, till Christ came; so all the Creatures cannot satisfy the Soul,
till the Creator come: as all Joseph's brethren could not content Joseph, till
Benjamin Ge^. 42.34
came, his best beloved; the soul that is thirsty after Christ, and not
contented with the Worlds broken pits, and dry puddles: says unto Christ, as
once the Evangelist Philip: Show us thy self and it suffices: She weeps and
mournes with that zealous Mary Ioh. 20.15
Magdalen, at the Sepulcher, unsatisfied with all earthly comforts (as the
Prodigal here with husks) till Christ reveal himself, and manifest his
comfortable presence; yea as Luke 2.48
Mary the Virgin Mother, and the loving Spouse in the Ca^t. 3.1, 2
Canticles: having by any means lost him, she seeks him sorrowing; mournes for
him, as the Nightingale for her young: pursues after him with a spirited zeal,
as the Solinus c. 21. and Mela lib. 3. c. 2
Tiger after her little ones, taken away by the Hunter: and never rests till
she have recovered him; and having once found him, she is overjoyed, as Jacob
in meeting with his desired Ge^. 46.30
Joseph, hence it is that touring and soring over these sublunary Vanities, and
trampling the Moon, these momentary and mutable things under her Rev. 11.1
feet, as unworthy of her love: as Alexander thought any one unworthy his
co^testing with who was not a In Olympicis apud Plutarchum.
King, and as that Tiger bred Gesuer de quadrupedibus, cap. de Ca^ibus.
Indian Dog, thought every creature unworthy his encounter, that was less then
a Lion, shooting at the fairest mark, even at the Sun it self, the true
Son Mal. 4.2.
of Righteousness, the righteous Son of GOD, she still aspires to the
highest, and rests in the holiest, using all these outward things, but as steps
and stairs, or as Coaches and Chariots, to carry and convay her upwards to
GOD: These like little revolets lead her to the Spring of Grace, and fountain
of mercy: as rivers they direct her, to find out him who is the ocean Qui vult
Mare, inventatumnem.
of comfort, and sea of consolation: or as Ships and Boats, they are used only
for their turns and times to carry her to her Elizean Fields, her happy and
blessed Islands: even that Cape of good Caput bonae speranzae.
Hope, to which she constantly, conscionably, and courageously sails, not
placing in the interim, her heart and affections on these her vehicula or
convoyes: more than the wise men set their hearts on those Drommadaries that
carried them from the East to Vide Fusius Bosqueru^, de Magis, in Echo
Concionum.
Bethlem, where they met with CHRIST: or then PAVL, set his heart on that Ship,
badg'd with Castor and Pollux, in which he sailed to Act. 28.11
Rome, leaving her very willingly, as soon as ever he got to the meanest
shore: yea, using them only, as the Traveller does his Inn, for a night or
two Hic tanqa^ in Diver^rio. Tullius.
lodging: or as the Pilgrim his hired Arabian Camel to See Sands his Travels,
and the Voyages of diverse English men. In Print.
Damascus, or the like; his heart being merely on his journies end, or on his
own home, and not vainly there, where he knows he has no continuance.

And herein the heart of man, is compared by some to the Needle touched, with
the Adamant or Vt supra de Adamante.
Loadstone which is ever quaking or shiuering, till it stand directly toward
the Northren Pole, and there being steady and fixed: (by which happy invention
the Art of Navigation came to so exact a perfection) or it is like the Arc,
which never rested till it was brought into the Temple: for so long as it was
in the Wilderness: in Canaan, or amongst the 1 Samuel 5.2
Philistimes, or in the house of 2 Sa^. 6.10.
Obed Edom, it was still moveable, tossed hither and thither, till at last with
joy and Iubile, it was brought into SALOMONS Temple, (typifying See the Book
in 8. called Moses unvailed, and Sylva^ allegori^ in F^l^.
CHRIST) and there it rested and remained: What the Northren Pole, is to the
Mariners needle; what the Temple, to the Arc of the Covenant: that is GOD unto
the Soul; yea, as Noah's Ark to NOAH, his sons, and the Creatures, in which
they are Genesis ^.1^
safe, sure, secure, and quiet: when all without the Arc are turbulent*
nuquiet, drowned, destroyed: floating on the waves like so many drowned Dogs
and Rats; as I could illustrate in the many and and manifold Turbulencies,
tumults, distractions, divisions, disturbances of ^arnalists, and worldlings
every thing, (as the evil Spirit to ^
SAVL,) vexing and tormenting them, as Bugbeares; terrifying them, as so many
Fairies pinching them; as Executioners torturing them, Friends, Foes, Children
Servants, prosperity, poverty, crosses, losses, disgraces, besides the Devil
and their own Lusts, horribly yea hellishly disquieting them; as though every
day, every way, brought or wrought their rack, their Gibbet; their purgatory
Thus was Nero perplexed, after the Murder of Seneca, and Agrippina: apud
Suetonium: the Herod's after their out rages, apud Iosephum, l. 2. antiqu. c.
17. and cap. 11. cap. 29. and lib. 8. v. 9. Pilate after his condemning Christ.
Cassius and Brutus, after Caesar's murder. Decius, Hadrian, Diolesian, Valens,
Paulinus, with many more after their bloody butche^es of the Saints, apud
Eutrop. l. 7. Niceph. lib. 7. ca. 6. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 1. Vincen. l. 10. c. 56.
Deuteronomy. 28.67.
compared wih the Calm, quiet, serene tranquillity of Gods Children, who by the
power and comfort of all sufficient grace, the corroboration and consolation of
his Spirit, the true Comforter: like some Birds even sing in the winter:
rejoice as DANIEL Dan. 6.22.
and JEREMY in Dens, and Dungeons: sing Psalms as PAVL and SILAS Act. 16.25
in Prison; and (as the Axeltree) are fixed in 1 Samuel 30.6.
GOD, when all the world (like the Circling wheels) are in motion: yea
terrible and tragical commotion: it never going better with just Genesis 19.17.24.
LOT, than when Sodom was all on a flaming fire: nor with Ier. 39.12.
JEREMY, than when the incredulous Jews were carried Captives into Chaldea:
This holding in NOAH, DANIEL, and diverse more.

SECT. IIII. The verdict of Divines; force of Religion; union betwixt Holiness
and Happiness.
14. IF we may add to all these reasons, Amplifications and illustrations,
Arguments from Authorities humane, by some called inartificiall: Augustine
Argumentum in artificiale ex authoritate apud Ramistas
himself, who spoke I persuade my self, as experimentally, as ever any
excepting Solomon: in his zealous and judicious Soliloques, Meditations; and
Confessions, speaks to the purpose, to the proposed point: as striking with
the great Dictus enim Mallaeus. Haereticorum.
Hammer, he hits the nail on the head: Oh domine Deus, fecisti nos propter
te, and irrequietum est cor nostrum doneo perveniat ad Confess. l. 1. cap. 1.
te: Oh Lord God, says the zealist, thou made us only for Thee, and our
hearts are restless, and unquiet, till they come again to Thee; as we see in
Nature, the inferior that cannot help it self, is never quiet till it be
united to the superior, of whom it has immediate dependence, for his esse,
and been esse: his being and welbeing: as we see how restles are the little
chirping Chirks, Partridges, and other birds till they be covered, fed, and
brooked by the Dam? What rest has the little harmless Lamb, in continual
bleating, if it be separated any time from the Ewe? What help has it against
the Fox, the Wolf, the Dog, without the Shepherd? How does the little Calfe
burst it self with bellowing? The young Fawn with earning? Yea the young
suckling Child, with crying? If the one be kept long from the C^w, the other
from the Do, the third from dug of the Mother, that did breed it, or the Nurse
that does feed it? Now God in whom we live, move, and have our Act. 17.28
being, whose offspring we are: (as Paul proves to the Athenians) is more to
the well-being of the Soul, than any Creature, to that seed, which issues and
proceeds from it: yea more than the foundation is to the house: the prop to the
Hop or Vine; on which it rests: yea than the Crutch to the Cripple, without
which he falls: since the Soul is even dead in Ephesians. 2.1
sins, without God: as the Apostle shows in the estate of the Ephesians, and
other Gentiles before their Conversion: even as the body (though as strong o^ce
as Sampsons and Hectors) is dead without the Soul, of this the same Augustine,
had good experimental knowledge; that where ever he was without God, his case
was miserable, and it went sorily with him, both in the outward and inward Hoc
confiteor hoc scio, domine Deus meus, quia vbicunque su^, sive te, male mihi
est, praeter te, non solum extra me, sed etiam in me Seli^. cap. 13.
man: yea he accounted his best plenitude and plenty without God (even as the
Prodigals Husks) extreme penury: De vltimis Cygnaeis verbis Lutheri,
Calvini, Philippi, Zwingeri, Zwin glij, Oecolampadij, and alierum. Vide apud
Grinaeu^, in Apothegmat. morientem.
Omnis copia, quae non est Deus meus, mihi egestas est: the like Anselme,
Bernard, Basil, Cyprian, and other devout spirits felt, and acknowledged:
together with our zealous modern Divines, Luther, Melancton, Calvin,
Oecolampadius: as appears both by their writings extant, and by the last words
they uttered, when they concluded their Holy lives, with Happy Deaths* as
their farewels to the world with her Vanities, and their welcomming of Christ
with his comforts, are plentifully recorded by that godly Grinaus in one
special Tractate: I conclude then my Testimonials, with that of Simeon Lib. 6.
cap. 16. in illud Luca 16. ca^it ^gere.
Cassianus, that the evil will of man is insaturable, his desire insatiable,
and always subjected, to need, and misery, till both be made capable of the
Dietie: and partaker 1. Pet. 1.4
of the Divine nature.

15. Moreover it is considerable, that GOD in the first Creation and
fabrication of this Universe; when in six days he had made the Heavens, the
Earth, the Seas, the Eliments; and all contained in them, however he saw they
were all good: yet he is not said to rest till the seventh Genesis 2.2. and Exodus
20.
day: till he had made man (excepting the Angels) his best work, as his last:
in man's production then, as God rests, and not before; so it holds in good
Symetrie and the best proportion, that man never truly rests, till he rests in
God: God rests as in a kind of Complacency, when he has created Man in his
own Image: and man never truly rests, till this Image of God deformed and
defaced by original and actual sin, be again in Holiness and
Righteousness renewed according unto GOD* for as man fell at first says In
Symbolo
GRANATENSIS, into this restlesnesse, by falling away from GOD, by Pride,
Infidelity, and Curiosity; by which means he became as an arm or leg broken,
and luxate; so he cannot be recovered joynted, and knit right again, till he
return to God, by Faith, Humiliation and Hence called repentance unto life,
Acts, 11.18 and rescipiscere re-sapere velredire in se, et Ire in Deum. Luke
15.17
Repentance, it is Grace only, saving Grace that ties man again to GOD, and
knits the Soul to GOD, from whom it has made Apostacy, by transgression:
hence Religion as some A Religa^do docitur Relig. Lact. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 28.
think, from the Etimology of the Word, has his denomination, because it
combines and binds the Soul to Hoc Vinculo Deo relegati sumus. Cicero de
natura deorum, lib. 3.
God: and as an Anckor holds it fast toward Heaven, which before was fluctuate
after Vanities; to whom when it is inseparably knit and married, as it were in
an indissolluble bond; as having hit her aimed mark, and attained her utmost
desire: Hoc adepto beata est, quo amisso misera; this gained and retained,
makes the Soul truly happy, of this bereft and stripped, (as a Bird deplumed of
his flying feathers, the Fish of her swimming Scales) she is every way a
Spectacle of misery: says De Civit. Dei, lib. 12. cap. 1.
AUGUSTINE: and since this Soul says GREGORY the Great, was created that she
might wholly exercise her concupiscible faculty in desiring God: what ever she
lusts after lower than God, in all reason cannot content her, because it is not
Omne quod infra appetit Minus est Iure ei, non sufficit quod Deus non est
Moralium, lib. 26. cap. 36.
God.

Therefore foolish, and frivolous is their imagination, that aim at
Contentation without Religion: even in the power of it true Conversion: that
hope for Satisfaction, without Sanctification: for Happiness, without Impius
and f^lix sic simulesse cupit, ve nolit pius esse velit, tamen esse beatus,
quod Natura negat, nec recipit ratio, de Macrino dictus apud. Capitolinum.
Holiness: as well may they walk without legs; see without eyes; fight
without hands; live without hearts or heads; yea as well may the whole world be
enlightened without the Sun; as well heat be in the deep of Winter; in the
cold Norway and frozen Regions, without Fire, or Furs: since as AUGUSTINE
writes to his Ep^i. 56.
friend, Etiam sine istis, homo possit esse beatus: without these outward
things, that the world dotes on, a man may be happy: (as were once poor Naomi,
Lib. Ruth. passim.
Ruth, the Widow of 1. Kings, 19.
Sarepta, Luke, 16.
Lazarus, yea Christ Foxes have holes.
himself, with his poor Acts. 3.
Apostles, persecuted Prophets, and constant Martyrs, that were Heb. 11.36.37.
pilled and polled of all they had) but without Religion and filial fear of
the Almighty, none can be happy but accursed (as were Genesis 4.11 12
Cain, and Ioh. 17.12
Judas, Ex. 14.28
Pharaoh, Mal. 1.3.
Esau, 1. Kin. 22.38
Ahab, 2. Sa^. 17.23
Achitophel) for as God blessed Abraham and made him rich without the King of
Ge^. 14.23
Sodom, from whom he had not so much as a shoe latchet, so God can truly
satisfy and content his children without the trash, and Husks and gland of
the world, which the Apostle in respect of Christ, held but us dross and Phil.
3.8
Dung: else were he not as he promises and performs, to all the Spiritual
Gal. 3.7
sons of faithful Abraham, Ell Schaddai, Genesis 17.1
God all-sufficient: else were it vain as the Hypocritical and profane
spirits have ever Mal. 3.14
scoft, to serve the Almighty: else Godliness were not great 2. Tim. 6.6
gain: but as the world holds it preposterously, gain should be godliness:
else the reward of Religion, should not be in the Superlative, Merces Genesis 15.1
magna, and maxima, the great, yea the greatest reward, both in Earth, and in
Heaven: yea else godliness should not have the promises of this life, and of
the life to Tim. 4.8.
come. *

CHAP. XIIII.
SECT. 1. The Inconstancy and Incertainty of Health, Life, Prosperity, common
blessings, and all Externals.
THese Reasons already rendered, have been drawn and extracted according to
our first proposed Method, partly from the nature of the Soul, partly from the
Nature of these Vanities, paralelled and compared together: further reasons
confirming and concluding our first Proposition may be deducted from the
Inconstancy, Uncertainty, Varieties, of these Vanities: from our own
experience in them: Gods Judgments, or Justice upon them, of which in order:
and then we will conclude, with such uses as are the very life, and Soul of
all, and this will we do, if God permit.

And first, I offer it, as our sixeteenth Consideration: that the
insufficiency of these earthly transitory and momentary things, to satisfy
the immortal Soul, and spirit of man, may be seen in them constantly; as the
godly man, does in God, in whom and from whom, he has his hearts See D.
Playsers Sermon called Hearts delight.
desire; for particulars: what meat can give the Epicures stomach long
content, though he love it as well as that angry Pope, once his Apud Platinam,
alleged in the mirthfull book called the World of wonders.
Peacocke: and long for it as much as nice Ladies, and Gentlewomen do for
Cherries, Strawberies, and Garden Pease, at their first coming in: yet after
some few repasts, he loathes it, as glutted with it; he cares no more for it,
than Courtly Dames, for Butchers Meat, or for Cherries at three pence a pound,
as too vulgar and common; neither far fetched, nor dear bought: Curious lips,
must have more Rara semper preclara.
rare, and costly Cates? So, what one Woman gives some voluptuous man long
content? What need we go further than experience: have we not seen some
luxurious Gallant married to Virgins honorably (or worshipfully) descended, in
respect of Birth: beauteous in the two essentials of beauty, Color and
Discussed in the book called the Courtier translated, out of the Italian:
Proportion: witty, wise, ingenious, virtuous, courteous, every way trained,
Est. 2.1.2.
gifted qualified, and demeaned, to give content: yet the same men, within some
few hony-Moones, when appetite was glutted as Wife-sicke, as ASSVERVS was of
his Vasti, some other ESTHER, desired suited, K. H. 8. labored of this disca^
solicited: as once that Roman, the shoe that others thought Apud P^
fair, has pincht them: they have thought to put it off, and throw it away:
yea some Hagar has been preferred, before beauteous Sarah: some Chambermaide,
or the Wife of some As o^ Jane She and you Ros^m^ before (...) nor, a (...)
befo^ (...) Quee^
Mechanic, or Country Farmer, as a Kite, or Kestrell has peerked into the
Eagles Nest; Even Mab, has been preferred before Madam; she that once in the
heat, fury, or frenzy of love, or lust, was prosecuted by so many and so
monstrous promises, protestations oaths, vows, solicitations, gifts,
Letters, Sonnets, as the Orators and Lures of Burt^n in his Love. melancholy in
diversified readings, from Poets, and Histories instanceth in all.
affection; is now undeservedly distasted, yea detested; abhorred as Ammon did
Thamar; forsaken and disrespected as Demophon did Phillis Jllis untrue
Demophon, apud Anglicum poetam.
Phillis: set on a Lea land as they say, and disrespected: only because it is
the nature, and nurture of such Beasts, be they never so well in their own
enclosures, to break over all Ruimus in vetitum nofascupimusque negata.
Hedges of Credit, Conscience, Civilitie, Christianity, for new Pastures, fresh
Fogs, though they prove to them, as rot grass to the Prove. chapter 6 c. 7. per
totu^. See one of Downams 4 Treatises, de Adulterio.
sheep; thus it is with all other vain men, no other pleasure contents them
long: In Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, Fowling, Bowling, Carding, Dicing; they
find satiety after a time, and still seek out new As Cyrus propounded rewards
to those who could inve^t new pleasures. Apud Coe^um Rhodiginum.
varieties: they surfeit of any one of these and the rest, if they have not
diversities: and they should be more dulled with them, and even tired, as a
tired Hackney, should they be tasked and tied to any one of these: what they
do voluntarily, if they should do it of necessity, inforcedly, and
compulsorily, their pleasure would be their Purgatory; yea, as toylesome and
irksome, as the rowing in the Turkish Gallyes to a Captived Christian, or
rolling the Wheelebarrow at Rotterdam: hence it is that still they have
prosecuted Vanities diversified: one succeeding, being still as the sauce, and
shooinghorne, unto an other; as the Scarabean Flea, or Wag-taile, that skips
from place to place, they move from one Vanity to another: still wavering as
Weather-cockes; Like noddies into the Land of Nod. Genesis 4. v. 14.16.
wanderers, like CAIN, like Genesis 49.4
RVBEN; light as water, fluctuate as the Waves, flowing reflowing as the Sea:
ever in motion (but when the dead sleep diseases, and sickness chain them)
as if quicksilver were in their brains: cork in their De Inconstantia and
levitate horum vanorum lege plurae apud Bosquirum in Academa peccatorum, part.
4. p. 141.
heels; carried hither and thither as Clouds, driven with the Winds, or as a
Ship that has weighed Anchor, or broken Cable, till they split on the rocks,
of their selfe-wrought Sic necet empta dolors voluptas.
ruin: now even this changing of their delights, as Children do their bables,
(as sick men, gowty men and childbearing women, change their places: yet no
where eased, and contented;) constant only in inconstancy; certain in
incertainty; changing their minds, manners, and demeanors, according to
variation of Times and Ages, as the Hodge-hog De quo Aristot. de admirandis, c.
64. and Aelian, l. 3. c. 10.
changes his hole, according to contrary Winds: in Youth hunting altogether
after Pleasure, in Manhood after Credit, and applause: in old Age after Riches,
loading themselves with thick clay: making the greatest provision and
viaticum, for their jorney, when they are nearest home, as having one foot in
the Grave: even this their trying every Vanity, touching every string, yet
resting in none; shows that no Vanity several, nay not all of them together,
can give that contentation to the Soul of man; which a sincere Christian
injoyes, only in one thing: the knowledge, and worship of the true Jehovah: to
be blessed and praised for ever.

17. Reason.
Besides what Contentations have we, in those things whereof we have no
certainty nor assurance? What content has he that is only a Tennant at Will,
in any Land, House, or Farm? Ready to be turned out at the pleasure of his
Landlord, upon hours warning? What content, has he that pitcheth his Tents
in the Sands, ready to be washed away with the rolling of every Sea? As the web
of the Spider, to be swept down with every Feather? Now what certainty there
is in honors, riches, pleasures, and all these outward things, who knows not?
Whose eyes God has in any measure opened? What constancy is there in health,
wealth, and worship? What Charter and assurance have we of credit, and
applause, respect with men? Strength, beauty, or any external gift, yea or
internal either, except the gifts of Grace? It Is manifest to any that will
consider and understand.

As to instance in some of these breefly (not to intercept a larger discourse)
for health, how uncertain is it, is not AHAZIAH in health to day, and falling
out of a Lattice in his upper 2. Kin 2.2
Chamber, in his sick Bed to morrow? EZEKIAH, sound even now, and ere long set
thy house in 2. Kin. 20 1.2. and Esaias 38
order, for thou must die? The Son of the Sunnamite, is perfectly well, with
the Reapers in the Field, and presently struck with Sickness: Caput 2. Kin.
3.19
dolet, his head aches? As the Philistines where instantly struck with 2. Sam.
5.9
Emerods; 2. Chr. 20 19
VZZIAH and 2. Kin. 5.5
GEHEZI, with Leprosy: Luthers great Adversary, apud Osiandr. in Epit. Cent.
16. page 57. is said to die frantic
ECCIVS and Cardinal The Popes Ambassador at the Council of Trent anno 1552.
frighted by the Devil in the likeness of a black Dog. Sleidan. l. 231 Comment.
CRESSENSE with frenzy: In the memorable Histories of our time, a page 187. ad
paginam 195.
FRANCIS SPIRA, with d^spaire: De cujus morte lege Caelium Rhodig. Antiq. Lect.
l. 29. c. 8
ARISTOTLE, HOMER, SOPHOCLES the Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12.
Tragedian: ANTONIUS the Apud Plutarchu^.
Roman: APOLLONIVS, the Apud, Plin. l. 7. c. 23.
Rhodian: HOSTRATVS the Friar, and diverse As Latonus and B^melius and Gerlach
of Lov. D. Kraus of Hall in Germ. P^usenas Advocat of Dolphin in France, with
others who dyed desperate.
others, upon sundry occasions, were suddenly surprised with grief, and
melancholy, of which they dyed. Pomponeus Atticus and Antonius Caesar, sick
with Fevers. Hieronimus Vrsinus suddenly wounded in Rome: Matthew King of
Hungary diseased of an Apoplexy: Wenslaus the young King of Bohemia, thrust
through with a Sword: Johannes Medices, and Henry the second King of France,
unexpectedly wounded in Iusts and Turneaments, Tyberius the Emperor, Hanibal
the Carthagenian, Philippomones General of the Messineans, Alexander the fixed,
and Caesar Burgias, poisoned with millions more, that might be Apud Ravisium
Broson. Fulgosu^, and Zwinge^ium in magno suo Theatro passim.
enumerated, in their perfect healths in the Sunshine of their glory,
struck some with one sickness, some with another disease: show how uncertain
the health is of the strongest, and most vigorous, since both naturally and
casually, as also deservingly, by reason of Genesis 2.17. and Ro^. 6.
sin, we are subjected to more diseases, than either Horse, or Hawke, or any
other Creature whatsoever.

So for life it self, alas how uncertain Lubrick and frail is it; as brittle
as Glass, as fading as a Job. 14.1.2.11 Esaias. 40.6 2 Pet. 1.24
Flower, as vanishing as smoke, as swift as a Post, or a Weavers shuttle, the
Scriptures, Histories, and experience of all times do demonstrate, as I have
seen elsewhere in varieties of In Simeons dying Song in the Book called 7.
helep to Heaven.
examples; together with Reasons: which if they be not satisfactory, the
consideration of so many excellent Worthies, both for Arts and Arms, even
amongst Christians; to omit Turks, Jews and Pagans, as have been cropped by
that meager Death, even in the budding and blossoming of their years, together
with others, that have been taken away in their prime and flower, or full
strength plainly show unto us, as in a Map or Glass, on what a weak and
uncertain Thread, our life depends: amongst the rest praetermitting that good
JOSIAH, the son of JEROBOAM; ACHAZ King of Judah, the Babes of Bethlem, the
first borne of Egypt: DAVID'S spurious Child, with others in the Scriptures:
when I consider the fatal and untimely fall of that Roman BRITANICVS the Son
of CLAUDIUS; De diebus canicularibus par. colloq. 4. p. 271 de (...) and alijs
CONSTANS the son of CONSTANTINE the Great, slain by MAGNENTIVS; the son
of MAXIMINVS slain with his Father by the tumultuous Soldiers: LADISIAVS the
young King of Polony, slain by the Turks: LODOVICK GRATVS that excellent
Linguist and Astronomer, as he was commended by MAIOLVS; all four cut off in
the 21. year of their Plurimaque exempla recinantur a Gregorio Richtero in
axiom Oecono, page 35.
Age: together with PHILIP the young King of Spain; HYPOLITVS MEDES the
Cardinal: HERACLIVS CONSTANTINVS; HENRY RANZONIVS, IEROM TIRVSANVS, that young
Bishop: who all were taken away, some by a natural, some by a violent death in
the 28. year of their Idem p. 36.
Life: to omit CHRISTOPHER LONGOLIVS, and the Marquis of Brandenburgh, who dyed
in the 35. year of Jdem ibid.
their Age: as RADOLPHVS AGRICOLA, and that delight of Nature, TITUS VESPATIAN,
in their 42. Idem. p. 37
year, ere ever they came to their Quam fatales fuere anni septenarij climat
terici and rebus and personis magnis and Familijs Consulo Fencerum de divinat.
page 21. Bucholcherum in Indice Chronico sub anno 1463. Strigellum, in
Chronicis, part. 2. page 277. Perel. in Genesis cap. 2 p. 32. Bodinum lib. 4. de
repub. cap. 2 p. 647.658.
Climacteriall, in which so many worthy men have been taken away; in these
instances, wherein I see such tall Cedars untimely fallen and cut down, by the
Axe of Death; I see how vain it is, to take any contentation, in a hoped long
life, with neglect in the mean space of a good life, by deferred repentance:
since Hodie mihi, cras tibi, and quod cuiquam contigit id cuivis: That may
happen to every man, which happens to any man.

Serius enim aut Citius, metam properamus ad unam. We sail to one Haven, we
must lodge in one common bed the Grave, and with that BRUTUS, kiss our Mother
Earth, God knows how soon.

Besides, how uncertain is the Prospertty of this Life: suppose there should
be a man amongst a Million, Rara avis in terris, A rare one indeed, a black
Swan; that were as healthful as OTTO HERVVARDVS, a Senator in Ausborough, in
Germany, who if we believe Astrologicall Exemplis Genit. praefixis Ephem. cap.
de infirmit.
LOVITVS, could never remember that ever he was sick, in all his life: or
that this age could afford such an one as NESTOR, that is said, to live three
hundredth Nestoris est visus per tria secle Ciuis. propter lib. 2. et Iuven. Sat.
years: such an on, as PARACELSVS, boasts of, that in the best improouement of
his Art, by Paracelsian physic, could be made to live 400. years If a man
could preserve himseife so long by meats medicines exercize, Bathes, Diets: as
that POLLO ROMULUS, is said to preserve himself by Jntus Mulso for as oleo.
wine. and oil: though now it be a rare thing to see a man live 127. years
(as our late deceased friar at LISMOORE) yea to live 105. years as ZENOPHILVS,
that musician in Lib. 7. hist. c. 5. Though Narcissus of Jerus. is said to have
lived 116. years. Paul the Hermit, 113. Prosdocimus a Bishop, 114 Florentinus
a Priest, 123 T. Fullonius 157. B. Syrus, 132. Homer, 108 nay more, one
Heroimes, 304. and Johannes de temporibus, 361.
PLINY: if besides all this, he had all that inward worth in him which the
Romans ascribe to their Catoes, Curioes, ffrabritioes: the Greeks to their
Socrates, Solon, Aristides: Homer to Agamemnon: that he was like u Jupiter in
ffeature, Mars in Valor, Pallas in wisdom: and had what all such outward
Prosperity, as Regis filia, Vxor, Matter Pliny, lib. 7.
Paterculus, ascribes to Quintus Metellus: Plutarch to P Fuit Crassus
ditissimus, nobilissimus, eloquentissimus, Juris peritissimus, and Pontifex
Maximus.
Mutianus, Crassus, Pliny to Lampseta the Ltcedimonean Lady, that was Daughter
wife and mother to a King, as our illustrious Queen Ann deceased. was sister
wife unto a King: and Mother to two royal Princes) let him be, in the opinion
of the world, Iovis Pullus, Gallinae filius alboe: stristotlles vndique Lib. 1.
Aethic.
quadratus, the worlds Jewel, Comet, blazing starr, luld in ffortunes Lap: let
him be called as Tully said of Octouianus Augustus Matris Partus vere
aurelibus: a golden branch, from a galden Tree Iunonius puer Iunoes own white
boy; Os oculosque Iovi pares.
let all men's Volumine, 1
eyes be upon him, all men's tongues speak all good of Omnes omnia bona dicere.
him: and let him be as he is Esto, quod audis, apud Horatium.
reported, let every man observe him more then that Volvon in the sportfull
Comaedy: bring Presents to him as the Persians to their Kings: applaud him as
the Sidonians did Acts, 12. non vox hominis sonat.
Herod: rise to him as to Themistocles in the Olimpicks: run to see him as
Shebaes Queen, to see 1. Reg. 10.
Solomon: the Barbarian Paterculus volumin. poster.
Prince to see Cesav: Gaze on him as the Filiae decurrunt pro Murum, and ad
fenestras. Glossa ordinaria.
Egiptians once on honored Joseph, the Citizens of Cullen on Matilda, the
Empress: the Sultan of Sanas wife in Arabia, on fair Navigat. Vertom. l. 3.
cap. 5.
Vertomanus: let songs be made in his praise, as the daughters in Israel on 1
Sa^. 18.7
David: let him have all the praises, that Tully gives Oratione pro rege
Deiotar. and alib.
Caesar: Plato to Socrates, and Chramides. Suspect. lect* lib. 1. cap. 2.
Scoppius to Scaliger, In Colloq. et Epistolis.
Erasmus to Sir Thomas Moore, or Jn Cyrop.
Zenephon to Cylus in all moral endowments; besides let him have all the good,
the world can afford him, let him dwell in such a house as Numeratur cum Dianae
templo. phidiae simulachro solis Colosso. inter Memorabilia mundi.
Cyrus his house: Nabuchadnezzars Babell the Palace of Escuriall, in Spain:
Fontenblew in France our English Tibbalds: Nonesuch: let there be united such
Gardens, as that of Adonis; the Turks gardens, in his Seraglio: the Popes
Belvedere in Rome, the Lord Chantelowes in France, or the Earl of Quem honoris
Causa nomino ille enim nulli semp. Magnus Apollo vix. Mator mihi non Melior
Alter.
Corkes at yoghall in Ireland: let his Orchards, be like these of the Aespide.:
let his ear be daily delighted Daniell 4.27.
with such Music as Alexander had from Timolaus: the Thebans from Amphion:
the Mariners from Orpheus: let him hear daily such Plays as the Romans in
their Theaters, and Amphitheaters: see such sports and Pageants daily, as the
Greeks had in their Olympian, Pythean, Istmian, Athenian, and Corinthean
Games: let him moreover Feast daily and deliciously as that Epicure in the Luke
16.19
Gospel, and Lucullus in his own House, or let him be feasted with more
rarieties tha^ AESTHER Esth. 7.
entertained ASSVERVS, DIDO the Apud Virg.
Trojan AENEAS; or CLEOPATRA MARK ANTHONY: let him be clothed in Tyrian
purple; as royally as Acts, 12.
HEROD, in as many varieties of Suits, as Suetonius in Nerone.
NERO: let him be attended and guarded with more men than SOLOMON, or the French
King: yea, and with Women too, as LILLIVS GERALDVS reports of an Egyptian
Prince: and Who had 150 Maids waiting at his Table.
CTESIAS of a Persian King, yea let him wallow amongst his Concubines, as De
q^n Orosius Lampridius et Herodotus.
HELIOGABVLVS, or De quo Justinius lib. 1. Vellejus l. 1. Atheneus, l. 12. cap.
12 Orosius lib. 1 c. 19. et Angust. de Civ. 2.20.
SARDANAPALVS give himself over to all pleasures, as that Pope, Ioh. 22.
JOHN: Hunt more than LEO the Jovius in ejus vita.
tenth, or ADRIAN the Emperor: Hawke more than the Muscovian Emperors, and
Persian See Sherleyes Relations.
Kings were wont: Dance more than that Matchiavel in ejus ^vita.
CASTRVCANVS, the Italian General: Card, Dice, Chesse more, than once the
Thebans: the Muscovites now, and these of Fessa, in Leo Afer, ^ 3. de Africa.
Afric: let him in all these be as merry as he may: rejoice with Salomons
young Eccl. 11.9
man: laugh more than the Sardinians: sacrifice, as once the Lacedaemonians,
Deae Risui, to the Goddess of Laughter: or as the old Greeks, ad Libidinosam
Deam, to the Goddess of Pleasure, yea to conclude in every thing, Secura
naviget aura; Let him hoyst up Sails, set up top and top-gallant; launch forth
into an Ocean of Delights, deny his soul no content, the Creature can afford,
yet if all these could be incident to one man, and meet in one subject, as
lines, in one Center: that he should enjoy even here, a Turkish Bohemus
Lonclavus, Bredenbachus, et Purchasius noster in suis Turcicis, Historijs
passim.
Heaven, for Wine, Women, Music, Feasts, Festivals, Houses, Orchards,
Gardens, Granaries, Arbours, Walks, Cards, Dice, Hawking, Hunting, Fishing,
Fowling, Bulls, Bears, Players, Fiddlers, Fools, Rimers, Buffons, Iesters,
Spices, Perfumes, Masking, Mumming: in touching every string of Vanity: that he
might sup as the phrase is, even in A rich decked Chamber, so called, apud
Plutarchum in Lucullo.
Apollo: yet all these, could not afford him strong (because not long)
Content: since there is no hold of any one of these, nor of all of them to be
taken, more then of a slipperie Eele: for those things that are the ground of
this content, are as rot as our Irish bogs, or English Quagmires: there is no
certainty in them: they fly as shadows from us, when we would be most cooled
and refressed by them: they sometimes but salute us, and are gone, as if in a
Dumb show, they did but present the Stage, and went presently off again: yea
they are to us usually, as the Apud gillium.
Paladian Horse to the Trojans, trains and lures to our bane, and destruction:
their short glimmering Sun ends in a long rain: for even those that had I
will not say enjoyed) the best of these contents, specified, were not h^ppy in
them, nor free from discontents, for we all know not what was the end of In
december voti compos, apud Plinium, lib. 7. tamen ab Octavio in pugn^ apud Actium
devictus Sabel. l. b. 3. and Lo^cer in Theat. p^g. 373.
Metellus, Inscitia regionis and loci, perit in bello contra, Parthes Patrit l.
3. de regno tit. 14 page 213.
Crassus, Jn site auri Cruci affixus est per Or^t^m apud Heroditum, lib. 3. p.
100 101.
Policrates, and many more, whom the bleareey'd world thought happy in those
things: they dyed unhappy, and violent deaths, as did also Cato Vticensis
dictus ab Vt. vrbe Affricae, in qua se occidit, secundum Plinium lib. 5. and
Gellio lib. 3.
Vticensis, Veneno perijt apud Ciceronem l. 1. quaest. Tusc.
Socrates, of whom Theodoret and Lactantius have but a mean opinion, though
the world and that Delphick Oracle, thought him most wise: and sure? As these,
have prooved miserable Creatures, to others, so they are like to prove us,
though they seem fair Roses to day, we may feel their pricks to morrow, a
fair Genesis 23.24.
morning (as it was with Sodom) may have a louring (yea fire-shouring) Evening?
Do we not see experimentally that as Seneca said of a City consumed with
fire, Vna dies interest, inter maximam Civitatem, and nullam: There Is but a day
betwixt a great City, and none: (as was seen in the overture of great De quo
Josephus de bello Iud. Tragice l. 2. c. 19.21.22. et l. 6. c. 16. l. 7. ^. 7, 8.
Jerusalem, the rich Thebae excisae ab Alex. magno Gorlic. axio^. p. 103.
Thebes, warlike De cujus ruina Bodinus de rep. l. 5. c. 6. p. 249.
Numantia, renowned 14. Dies, incendio absumpta, Gorlic. in axiom. Pel. p. 590.
Carthage, stern Per Hanibalem del^ ta. Jd. in axio^. hist. p. 249.
Sagunt, old Apud. Virg. and Darem Phrig. ex Argivis, corruere 886. Millia ex
Troianis 766. apud Maiolu^, in dieb. Cani, part. 2. p. 359.
Troy, famous De cuius Clade consule Krautriu^ Saxon. l. 11. c. 33.
Constantinople, so sometimes, we see in midst of prosperity, by reason of
many greevous accidents, occurrents, and variations: De Constantia.
there is but one day betwixt a man and no man: Betwixt Bellisarius a Leader in
the Fields, and Bellisarius a blind De cujus Tragico exitu, vide Fulgosum lib.
5. cap. 3. et Loincerum in Theatro fol. 336.
Beggar, by the High way side: betwixt Strigellius part. 21 Chr. 230.
Cyrus, and Apud Herod. ^b. ^.
Craesus, opulent, and potent Princes, and captived condemned Prisoners: even
in a Trice: yea small difference, in few days (as our Pharisees be) betwixt a
Knight, and a knitter of Caps: all human contents from Wives, Children, Blood,
Friends, Consanguinity, wealth, worship, and what not; may prove to us, as
they have prooved to others, even in respect of their mutability, mere Husks:
yea Mulier formosa superne, every one of them, didinens in Horatius.
piscem, beauteous as are Maids, at the first blush: when first we embrace
them, but foul, filthy, and gliding, slipery as Fishes, yea stinging as Aspes,
when we discover their worst, in their Vltiman vale, and scornful farewell,
they sometimes take of us.

SECT. II. The uncertainty of Honors, Riches, Pleasures, further exemplified.
TO contemplate this Reason, a little further; and (as Seleuchus with his Rods)
to unclose those unto several, which have bundelled up together; what
certainty is there in Honor, and in Popular applause, which depending on the
breath of the Honor est, in Honorante, non in honorate.
vulgar, as it is Wind, does it not change with the Wind? Do not the common
people even now cry Ioh. 12.^3
Hosanna, even now Crucify, crucify Luke 23.21
him; is not the same Christ, even now a Mar. 6.15
Prophet, and anon a Ioh. 7.12 20.
Samaritan, that has a Devil: is not Paul even now a Act. 28.4
murderer, with the Barbarians, and instantly a Verse. 6.
God: is not the same Paul and Barnabas, now honored in a Paganish Devotion,
as though they were Act. 14.12
Jupiter, and Meroury, now stoned as though they were Verse. 19.
Malefactors? Paul and Silas now imprisoned in the lowest Dungeon at Act. 16.24
Philippos, now honored and adored of the same Ve. 30.33
Iaylor, that was their Executioner, as Christ was honored of the same Math.
27.4.
Judas that was his betrayer: of the same Pilate, that was his Math. 27.24.
Condemner; James Abbot of the same man that set fire to his Who cried, James
Abbot was a good man, but I am damned. In the Book of Martyrs.
Martyrdom: as Iepht^ amongst the Judge. 11.7 8
Jews: Chrysostom amongst the Votis Episcoporum, ab exilio revocatur. Nice.
lib. 10. etc. 2. and Histor. Magd. Cent. 5. cap. 10.
Orthodoxe: Tully, Themistocles, and Coriolanus amongst the Apud Livinm in
Decad and Plut. in vitis.
Pagans, were honored in their reduction, and recalling home, some even of
them, by whom they were exiled, and banished? I must ingenuously confess, as I
have been much affected, when I have considered how some meanly borne, and as
mean in place, or race, have been raised from the dust, and set with Psalm.
113.7.8.
Princes, as that Maximinus, Probus, Aurelius, Pertinax, Philippus Arabs: who
from common Soldiers became De his and caeteris vide apud Valeriu^ lib. 3.
Titulo, de his qui infimo loco nati clari evaserunt. Theatrum Philosoph. lib.
2. page 99. and Cassanaeum in Catalago gloriae mundi Consid. 65. Fol. 42.43.
Emperors: as Herculus, Romulus, Themistocles, our King Arthur: and William the
Conqueror: the Scriptures Iephte, and Abimelech though Bastards, were famous
for Arms: as Peter Comestor, Gratian the Collector of the Decretals, Lumbard
the Master of the Sentences, first fou^der of Schoole-Divinity, the Bastards of
Nuns, were famous for Arts: as Agathocles the son of a Potter, Abdolominus a
Gardener, Iphicrates and Marius meanly borne, came to be Kings of Sicily,
Syria, and great Potentates: with others more, recorded by Cassanaeus in his
Catalogue, Zwinger, in his Theater, Gorlicius in his Politiciall Axioms, and
Machavell in his Florentine Lib. 7. Historia Florent. His add Saulum, et
Davidem, Asinas et Oves Pascentes ad regnum pervenientes. 1. Sa^. 9. et 16 De
quibus etiam le ge Josephum l. 6. antiq. cap. 4. and cap. 9.
History: chiefly when I consider how Cosmus Medices being all his youth
obscure and miserable, on a sudden had the Sun of his glory, shining as
from under a Post annum aetatis 40.
Cloud, how Huinades was fetch out of Prison, Henry the third of Portugal, out
of a poor Monastery, to be crowned Kings; so again when I have perused
Histories and pondered how (as in the turning of the Wheel, those spokes that
have been lowest in the dust, have been suddenly highest, and those that
have been highest, in a trice lowest again) so the greatest have been
suddenly depressed, and dejected, as the meanest have been exalted: laying to
heart how soon Pharaoh with all his pomp was drowned in the red Ex. 13.28
Sea: Herod consumed with Act. 12.23
Worms: Hatto the rich Bishop of Mentz devoured with An. Dom. 314. vt testatur
Job Fincellinus, and Munster Cosmog. l. 3. and Loincer, in. 5. praecep. et 6.
p. 346. et 539.
Rats: Adonizebech disgracefully mangled in his Hands and Judge. 1.6
Toes: ^ating Crumbs, as a Dog under a Table: Agag a King, hewn in 1. Sa^. 15.33
pieces, as an Ox, Iezabel a 2. Kin. 9.35
Queen, and a Kings Daughter, gnawne by Dogs as a Carrion: Dan. 4.34
Nabuchadnezzar turned out of his Palace: like a Beast to graze in the Park:
Great Chronica Phil. l. 5. and Campo Fulgosus lib. 9. cap. 5.
Baiacet as a Wolf or some wild Beast, carried up and down by the
Conquering Tamberlaine, in an Iron Cage: De quo praeter E^tropium, lib. 9.
Zonarum and Petrum Hisp. in vita) Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 9.
Valerian as a Slave and Vassal to Sapor holding his Stirrup (as though he
were Pope) whilst he got on Horse back; Frederick the third, one of the best
of Emperors, trod upon by Alexander the Bergomensis in supplem. Chron. and
Adventinus.
sixth, the worst of Popes: in St. Marks Church in Venicec as though he had
been an Aspe, or Basiliske: how that Scythian Shepherd, had his Couch drawn
with the Kings of Marlow in his Poem
Asia, as though they had been his Coach-horses: how Mauritius the Niceph.
hist. lib. 18. c. 40. et 58.
Emperor (as before him that perverse Ier. 39.6.
Ezekiah:) had his Empress, and his Children, slain before his eyes, by that
bloody Phocas, his Servant, the first Countenancer of Papal De quo Fusius Mor.
naeus, in suo progressu Paepatus.
Superiority, which was the case also of that aged Priamus of Troy: and
Palaeologus the Emperor of De Turcica clade et crudelitat lege ex Punc. in
Churnol. p. 163. O fiandrnmin Epit. o^nt. l. 3. page 482.
Constantinople, when those two famous Cities were destroyed: the one by the
Greeks, the other by the Turks: with many more great ones suddenly cast (as
was threatened Luke 10.15
Capernaum, from the Heaven as it were, of highest exaltation, into the Hell of
the lowest Confusion: yea into the darkest Dangeons of Desolation, by greevous
Imprisonments: as was once the case of Richard the second King of Miserum
Senem, it a Fame et calamitatibus in Carcere fregit Ca^^d. in Britania, in
Wiltshire.
England: Roger the Bishop of Salisbury, the second man to King Steephen:
Francis King of France, imprisoned by Charles the Guiccard.
fifth, Robert Duke of Matthew Paeris.
Normandy: Huinades and diverse other worthy personages: I say, of my self,
pondering these examples of the Tragdeies of so many great ones, they wrought
in me such impressions, as the reading of the death of Socrates, in Platoes
Phaedon wrought in Scaliger, and the death of Dido; with the destruction of
Troy, wrought in St. Confessienem. l. 1.
Augustine: even to make my heart full, and mine eyes weep: being ready to
say, as St. Gregory, when he was to speak of the repentance of Mary Magdalen.
Flere magis libet quam dicere: I would turn my pen into an eye, my Ink and my
tongue into In fontem frontem in flumina lumina verta^.
Tears: but chiefly, I see in all these Glasses, how vain a thing it is for
any man, to place his faelicity and chief contentation in eminency of place,
and high exaltation, (with neglect of the dignity of dignities, saving Grace)
since in the revolution of the Globe, in the once turning of Sesostris his
Magnus ille Aegypti rex, qui habuit copijs pedestribus 600. peditu^ millia
equitum 24.
Wheel, even in a trice, in the twinkling of an eye, all human glory may be
laid in the dust, the Sun of all honor set, or Eclipsed, or Clouded in
ignominy: all Grace turn to disgrace; as the hot gleaming Sun, to a sudden
storm: like honored Haman that was taken immediately from Feasting with
Assuerus and Esther, and hanged on the Gallo^es. Esther, 7. v. 10.

So for pleasures, alas how short lived are they? Even the best of them, how
soon do they fade as vapors? Pass away as a Dream that is told? Perish as
the grass upon the house top, or untimely fruit of a Woman: how soon are they
dashed and quasht in a moment? As the news of SOLOMON proclaimed King, and the
noise of Trumpets suddenly struck dead, all the joys and jollities of
ADONIAH, and his feasting 1. King. 1 verse. 49.
Guests: and the hand writing on the wall, with DANIELS interpretation: did as
a sudden Dampe, put out all the light of sensual content which Baltazar had
in carousing out of holy Vessels (unholily profaned) the healthes of his
Queens and Dan 5.6.7
Concubines: so the sudden fall of Dagons house upon the Philistines, when
they were Idolatrizing, (as grossly as if they had been at a Caeteraquis
nescit, ah, si fas dicere
Mass) sacrifizing to their Pagan Gods, mocking as Asp^s that Lyonly Nazarite
SAMPSON, (as if he had been a Hugonite an Heretic, a Lutheran, a Calvinist,
a true Christian) this unexpected fall of the house about their Judge. 16. v.
25.26.30
ears, as unwilling to bear the burden of their abominations, instantly as
a Vessel of water cast on a smoothering brand, quenched and cooled (yea
schooled) all their madding (I had almost said Massing) mirth: And indeed it is
true of all pleasures, if they die not like Children, in their very birth; yet
the least cross that bites, and comes to the quick, nips and bl^sts them, as
the frost the tender buds, and the lightning and De causis et effectibus
Tonitru, and fulgurationis consule Arist. l. 3. Meteor. Plin. l. 2. c. 49. et
50.54. et Pontanum in Metoris.
Thunder: the setting fruit, till they wither and decay, and dye again: the
pain in one Tooth, the Cramp in one Joint, the Gout in one Toe, the Megrim in
the Head: the Colic in the Guts: the Fever in the Blood: the Wolf in the
Flesh: the Scyatica in the Thigh: the Fistula, but chiefly the Hemeroides in
the nether parts: or any other perilous or painful disease, makes your
Voluptuous man all amort, turns his singing into sighing: his music, and
ministrelsie into Mourning or madding, and his Riot, into rage.

So for Riches, are not they as uncertain, as any of the rest: take they not
sometimes the Wings of an Aeagle, and fly away when their possessors think
they are as sure of them, having them close prisoned, in bags, and bolts, under
lock and key: as the Romans thought themselves sure of the Goddess Apud
Majolum de Cultu deorum.
Victoria, when they clipped her wings, and walled her within their City: at
least these Riches are Fugitives, and by degrees take their times (like Semeies
1. King. 2.39
Servants, Paul's Epiad Philemon.
Onesimus and that captive Androdius, in the Roman Apud Aelian. hist. l. 7. c.
34. and Anlum Gellium Noct. attic. lib. 5. c. 14.
Story, to run from their masters, never perhaps returning: (like a word
Ne^cit vox em^ssa, reverti.
once spoke, a Bird flowne; a loss in honor, or lost Virginity) never perhaps
recovered again: though their once owners in pursuing after them too far,
beyond the limits of religion and conscience, loose their souls for silver:
Acts 1.18
Iudas-like, as Semei lost his 1. King. 2 46.
life, in seeking his servants: for indeed well may we call Gold, and Pearls,
and Plate, Reductio per impossible.
and all kind of Riches and Revenewes Current, as well as Current money; since
we see with most men, like fools, Travelers, Gypsces, Cheators, Beggars and
fickle headed Servants, whose shoes are made of running Leather) they will not
stay long, (except some few that have the wit, the will, the Art, the heart, to
chain them) as Leopards, Lions, and Cats do after their prey, they skip from
place to place, from man to man: like some fawning Dog, or insinuating Whore:
(for the Scripture puts them both Deu. 23.18
together) that will be every man's, and yet no man's further then they will
themselves: they are moveable as Shittlecookes, or Tennis Balls, now racliated
here, now there: or as Frolicks at Feasts, sent from man to man, returning
again at last, to the first man, after they have had their course about; or
else, they take their leaves of all, as some guests in an Inn, and are never
seen more; and some they can no more be caught, than Ghosts or Shadows) as
that DAPHNE from APOLLO) the more they are pursued, the farther the faster they
fly, Quo fugis ah demons.
as fast as that Aegle that snatched up Ganimede in the Poet, but when they are
expected to return, they have alas Passarinas wings, as feeble as Sparrowes,
yea sometimes (as Stags and Dear, howted and hunted into another Country) they
never return: they come again to their first owners, when some Cheator or
Politic Banquerupt pays his Debts, ad Calendas Graecas, as our Country
Phrase is, when Hens make Holy Water, at new-Nevermasse: If any doubt whether
Riches be thus fickle and fugitive or no, if we had not the example of Job. 1.
Job, who in one day, may one hear, lost with his Children, such movables of
Oxen, Camels, Sheep, as the greatest man in the East hardly possessed the
like: and of Zeno the Apud Brusonium*
Philosopher: that in one bottom lost all his goods by Shipwreck: and of the
Turks Bashawes that sometimes in shorter (space than Naboth lost his
questioned * Vineyard, or the mother of Judge. 17.2
Michay these eleven hundredth sheckles of silver, about which she so cursed)
lose their heads their honors, their beck and command of the Turkish Knols in
his Turkish History, Passim.
Tyrant: if we had not the lamentable relations of Historians and Travailers
how the poor Armenians, the Greeks, and those Christians, that are dispersed
throughout the Ottaman Dominions, are upon all occasions, chiefly at the death
of the grand Turk, bereft sometimes by the Ianizaries (as the Israelites once
by the Judge. 6.11
Madianites, the Saxons by the Lord Dane once ruled in every house called the I.
Dane, now such as live Drones and Abbey-lubbers, are called Lurdanes. Holins
Cosmog.
Danes) of all that ever they have: as were the Citizens of Jerusalem, in the
siege of Titus Vespatian, spoiled by Simeon and Iesephus et Egisippus de
excidio Hieros.
Iehocanan, their seditious Captains, as our vulgar Irish, and some of better
note are squeazed, spunged, and The word is used for cheating, in the Jesuits
Catechism
druried, by the Priests, of all the moneys and means they are able to
scratch and scrape from them; as some of their own (ouerburthened as once the
Vide C^tum gravamina Germa^e vel onus Ecclesiae.
Germans, have confessed and complained; I say if these instances were not so
pregnant: as he that (with that Reynold In his discovery of Witchcraft, extant
in 4.
Scot, denies there be any Witches, besides the Testimonies of Magos enim
habuit Pharaoh Exodus 7.11
Scriptures, and Delrius Pierius Wierus, cum Antiquis et Modernis.
Authors, let him but be present at the Assizes of several Shires, and his
own eyes and ears will convict him, so he that) credits not the relations of
others, in this point, let him but observe in one year, nay but in a very few
Months, how many men formerly reputed of good rank and fashion, of alll
sorts, Gentlemen, Merchants, Mariners, Tradesmen, Mechanics, Yeomen, Citizens,
Country men, within the Circuit of some few shires, and Cities in Great
Britain, are come from a Springtide, to a low Ebb: from CRASSVS, to a poor
CONON, from DIVES to a LAZARUS: some by Shipwreck by Sea: some by Surety-ship,
the House wrack at home; some by bad Debtors, and politic Banquerupts, these
Shopwrackes; some by Sickness, Diseases, Physic, and Physicians: some by
bi^ing Vsuries, and paying Forfeitures, brought to an irrecoverable
Consumption: some by careless, Thievish, fugitive Servants; some by good (bad)
Fellowship: great Housekeeping, their minds over-bowing their means; some by
Hawks, Hounds, Horses, and Whores, devoured by their own Lusts, and eaten
with the Wolf bred within their own flesh; or as ACTEON eaten up with their
own Theatrum Philos. lib. 8. p. 855. Ethice applicat. Fabulam de Acteone.
Dogs: some by intermedling in callings in which they have no skill: some by
one means, some by another, lodging in Beggars Inn, and Suttons Hospital:
perusing their Briefes and Pasports, that come every Sabbath to the City and
Country Churches, in England, and Ireland; and that very man, in these
observations, shall be persuaded, that there is as much rest, repose, and
confidence to be put in momentary transitory and uncertain Riches, as in a
broken staff: or in a false DALILAH, a Whorish Money is compared to a fair
Harlot, who^ many court (as the Greeks did Lais) yet she is constant to none
woman, of whose love and constancy, the wisest man on the Earth, can have no
further assurance, than stands with their own ends, turns, likings, and Lusts.

But however these external, and adventiall good things, as Philosophers call
Bona Fortunae.
them, may stay with some, as though they were wedded to them, not to depart
for term of Life, yet there must be a separation in death, therefore they are
not that, which can make the Soul aeternally happy; as DAMASCEN has the
Fiction, of three Friends, who all professed love, the trial is this: one
Friend would stay with him, all the time of his health and prosperity; that
friend was Pleasure, Voluptuousness, Mirth: the second friend would stay with
him in his Sickness, yea to the hour of death; that Friend was Riches,
Wealth, Worship; but at the Crave, there it left him: a third Friend, would go
with him into the Grave: after the manner of the best beloved Wives amongst the
Acosta Maffaeus and Petrus Hispalensis de rebus Indicis
Indians, and some other Savadges: yea as a friend, indeed that will go with
his friend to the Court, stand by him, and plead for him, it will go with him
to Judgment, even to Gods Tribunal, and this friend, is Gods fear, and Gods
favor, but as for the second friend, Riches, they leave us you see, at the
Grave (as I have seen at an Assise, some Popish Gentlemen, leave the Judge and
the Justices at the Church door) as purposing to go no nearer toward Heaven,
with us, these friends says BERNARD, either have their end before we dye, or
see our end, when we Habent aut fi^em suum aut tuum
dye: either they forsake us, or are forsaken of us: we are active or passive
in our dereliction, says Aut possidentem deserunt aut a possidente deseruntur.
Ambrosius Epistola 9.
AMBROSE; Naked we came into the World, and naked shall we go out again,
says holy JOB: the great Saladine the Conqueror of Asia; a second
TAMBERLAINE, well applied it to himself, for dying in his Army, in stead of
all other obsequies: (such as ACHILLES made for his friend PATROCLVS, ALEXANDER
for EPHESTION, the Greeks for AJAX and ACHILLES, the Troyans for HECTOR, or
English for the noble SIDNEY, and many more military men) he caused only a
Linen Cloth, a winding sheet, to be carried on the top of a Spear, throughout
the Camp with this Proclamation: Saladini quod F^lgosus hist. l. 7. c. 2. and
Theatru^ histor. in 9. praeceptu^ p. 707.
reliquum: Here Is all that is left of great SALADINE: Ensigns, Trophies,
Victories, Conquests, Tryumphs, all are included, concluded, in this linen
rag: the Cover for my dead Corpse, and except this, all the rest must remain
behind: this Earth, Houses, Lands, Wife, Children, must we shake hands
Linquenda rellus domus and placens vicor. Hora.
with, when we depart our Pilgrimage: the Poet in his Paganish Divinity,
thinks we carry none of these to the lower Manes, the infernal Ghosts
Divitis ad manes, nil feret umbra suos. Ovid Tristium 5.
beneath, but most truly, the heavenly inspired Prophetical Poet tells us that
the rich man when he dies, shall carry nothing away with him, his Pomp shall
not descend with him to the Grave: Psalm. 49.17. Therefore that excellent
AUGUSTINE bids Vide viventem cogita morientem, quid hic habet, quid secum
tollit attend. Aug. and etiam Ruffinin Psalm. 48.
us, Eye the rich man: Poyse and ponder his estate, living and dying, to
consider what he has here, and what he takes with them, from hence: and in
this meditation, we shall find the men of this world, those Brutigenists, or
Terrigenists, as they are called, Earth-bred worms, which with that BRUTUS,
kiss and cull the Osculare terram, Jussus est, ab Oraculo apud Plutarchum
Brutus.
Earth, (as in the Jewish Feilds, and Vineyards, to be permitted to pluck, and
eat, whilst they were there, but to carry and pocket none away with him: Deuteronomy.
23.24; 25. Or their condition to be like boys, that having stolen a great many
of Apples, or Pears in an Orchard, stuffing and stopping their sleeves and
pockets full, besides these, with which they cram their bellies full; but at
the door, there stands one that searches them, takes all their fruit from
them, knocks them about the ears, and so sends them away with no more than
they brought in: the World is the Mundus est Pomariu^, nos p^tri, Mors Janitor.
Gal^lmus Parisensis, de vitijs.
Orchard, the Cormorants of The World, are those greedy Boys: the Fruit
stolen are Riches ingrost, the Porter is Death: or we may conceit them like a
poor man, that is invited to a Rich man's Table, he has the use of plate to
drink in, of silver spoones to eat his meat with, whilst he is there at the
Feast, but if he presume to pocket up any Plate, or carry away the least
spoone, there is search made by the Porter, for what is missing, and it is taken
from him, with a check and Similitudo Stellae, in suis en erratio ibus in
Luca^.
disgrace: as JOSEPH said of PHARAOHS Ge^. 4^.25
dreams, both the Parables are one, to one end: one application serves both:
we are here as in an Inn, says TVILY we may use the world, as our Hosts
house, and our bed too, that proper place, to which GOD has called us, for the
time we lodge, but we must carry away no Clothes, no Coverings, except we
borrow one Sheet, as our Winding sheet, useful (as the seconds to the Ve
secunda ad oditum, Infantem. Sen. Epist. 92
Child, to wrap us in: excepting this, Death as a Pyrate or Mors Latro est, qui
Mundanos omnes Nudos dimisit Ranlimus Doct. Mor. tract. 1. c. 6. and Chrysostom.
in Psalm. 48. de hoc argument.
Thief, strips us of all our Clothes, and robs us of all the rest, of all our
best: now if there be any faelicity to be found: Contentation to be hoped, in
these fluctuate and uncertain things, which either ere long will leave us: or
of necessity we must leave them, let any judge, who is not too far already
hoodwinckt, and bewitched with these Vanities: I might show further the
uncertainty not only of these extetnals, but even of those gifts which are
Common (to the Reprobates as well as to the Elect, to Pagans, as well as
Christians) which are internal too: whether acquired, as Arts, Sciences;
Languages: or Natural as human wisdom, Prudence, Policy, memory: for it
were easy to instance in many particulars in all ages, of many that either
from natural causes, or adventitiall, as Sickness, Frenzy, Fancies,
Beatings, bruisings of the brain, Age, Colds, Rheumes, Apoplexies, Lethargies:
or from GODS hand, inflicting (for causes best known to his Majesty, either
as trials of probation, Exempla extant apud Plinium, l. 7. c. 24. apud Maximum
l. 1. and Solinum. c. 6.
or as penal for sin) of Wisemen are become Fools; of learned men, become
Ignorants, and unlearned: of Politians simple witted: yea some of strong and
retentive memories, become oblivious and forgetful to admiration, not so much
remembering their own names: God usually taking away his Talents from those
that either bury them, suffer them to rust, for want of employment, as that
idle Servant in the Math. 25. v. 24, 25.
Gospel: or else in the Pride of their hearts, and profaneness of their
lives, employ them ill, to their own sinister and lustful ends, the hurt and
damage of his Church, and Children, and Gods dishonor.

CHAP. XV.
SECT. 1. GODS just Judgment, on Vanities and vain Men.
MY next proof and reason of the insaturity and insufficiency of all these
huskish Vanities, Prodigal eats, but neither feeds, fills, nor fats: is from
Gods mere Justice, and Judgment on him, and on such as he: that Recedens a
satiabilibus, impotentia saturandi: mulctetur: Departing from his Fathers
house, in which was bread enough: he should be hungered and starved, with
Husks, for want of bread: thus it is just with God, that when sinners leave
him, the Fountain of living Water, they should dig to themselves Pits that
will hold no water: that whilst they will not buy Wine of him without Esaias. 55.^
money, and drink freely of his living waters: they should as Reeds without
moisture, and as the Rush without Ib. 8.1^
Mire, perish for want of water: thus whilst they will not believe the truth,
its' just with God, to give over the sons of Vanity, to believe Lies, and 2.
These. 2 10.11.
Fables: to dream and dote in their sinful slumbers* and as sick men and
madmen to imagine strangely, and talk idly, as the Jews do in their
Thalmud: the Turks in their Alcoran, the Papists in their Mass books,
Rosaries, Catechismes, and golden Legends; as I might show more plainly, in
the application of these things, and therefore whereas Jonas says, that Those
that embrace lying Vanities, forsake their own Mercy: some read it by way of
Concession, and by way of an Ironicall Conclusion, as well? Go too? If they
will needs embrace Vanities, let them: I give them over to the Vanities of
their own mind, if they will not (as mad Colts) be restrained, I give them
the Reins: Counsel is no Command, I leave them to themselves, and to the
Lusts of their own hearts, but let them know that as Cain had long Genesis 4.15
life: V. 27. de his aquis fusius, apud Paulum Fagium. in Thargum on Keli ex
Hebraeorum Scriptis and ex Zeppero legibus Mosaicis l. 4. c. 18. page 466
the Israelites Ex. 16.12
Quails; and the Jews a 1. Sa^. 8.22.
King, with a Curse annexed: as the Colloquintida that spoiled their Pottage:
so they shall enjoy their Vanities with a Curse: they shall have no more good
of them, than Dogs of Grass: than the stomach of Mercury: than the whorish
Woman amongst the Jews, of the waters of Numb. 5.12.13.14.
Jealousy: that filled them indeed with swelling and rottenness, but plagued
and pained them, never refreshing them: or those that have a Barrow his Method
of Physic, l. 3. c. 35. page 160.
Tympany, filled with wind and putrified water, yet empty for all their
filling: these Vanities shall prove lying to them, as Iuglers and Impostors,
they shall merely cheat, and deceive them; but not content them: as if a
Father should say to a refractory, resolute, dissolute Son, that is not to be
counseled nor controlled: well Sirrah, follow your own ways, take your own
courses; think your own wit's best; as a Bucke of the first head, run on
wildely, and vildely still; but know you will be beat enough with your own
rod? Your self will be the greatest Plague unto your self? If these courses
thrive and prosper, if this way lead not just unto the Gallows, my
Prognostication fails me? Do as thou will? I can but pity thee, and pray
for thee, I leave thee to thy self, to run on to thine own ruin: Liberavi
animam meam: I have discharged the part of a Father.

SECT. II. The Vanity and vexation of that Love which is human: placed on the
Creature; allured by Beauty.
MY next Reason, Ratio 19.
which is as convincing and conclusive as any (if not as all) the rest, is from
Experience, which though she be said, to be the Mistress of Experientia
Stulteru^ Magistra.
fools, yet from their repentance bought at too dear a rate, she often
teaches and tutoreth Wise men, now in this Glass of Experience (as in the
Ship of fools, into which some of al professions entered) do we not see how
many men are vexed, tortured, and diversely distracted and disquieted, with
their earthly loves or their own lusts; as Noah was drunk and discovered, by
his own Wine: Gociahs head cut 1. Sam. 17 51
off, Genesis 9.21
by his own Sword: whereas had they placed their love wholly and solely up
GOD, as that Ignatius the Martyr, and Polycarpu^ did, Deus meus et omni^. Oh
Jesus esto mihi Jesus. Amor meus Crucifixus est.
who have said with DAVID'S heart, I love the Psalm. 18.1.
Lord: and with PETER, Lord thou know that I love Ioh. 21.15
thee; could all their love have run in that stream, and torrent after God; oh
what a calm? What a quiet? What a tranquillity, should they have had in their
hearts? Yea, what a Heaven upon Earth? Whereas now they are vexed with their
own passions, or rather perturbations; as the Ticke vexes the Ox, and the
Indian Gnats, the Lydian Lions, which sitting on their eye-bryes, cause them to
scratch themselves Plin^us.
blind: if any doubt of this, let us but observe the passionate melancholy
Lover, as he is graphically discovered, in many Poets and Historians, as he is
acted and personated in many Comedies, and Tragedies; yea as he reveals and
discovers himself in his words, habit, gestures, looks, sighs, Sonnets,
Love-songs, Maskes, dances, and what not? (Love being no more to be hid, than
fire in the Thatch) alas, how the poor man is perplexed? Doting upon the
natural, if not painted, or imagined beauty of a human Creature: which
perhaps after all his toyling and moyling, he never injoyes, more than Apollo
did Daphne, or that Actaon Diana, or those luxurious old Judges, did Susanna:
or if he purchase this his supposed Paragon, as his Fee-simple: he has caught
perhaps a Frog, a Snake, or a Sneake for a Fish: Copper for gold, or if a Fish,
an Ecle, by the Qui capit anguilla^ per canda^, non tenet illam.
tail: a wanton (want-one) Venus: ascolding Zantippe: a brawling Juno: or else
Pigmalions Image, a very picture: a silver feathered Goose: a fair Fool; a
very Babble, to play with: a Bessy Babe, that must be dandled, and in every
thing A description of a Sheep, and of a shrew.
honored, else she feeds all upon Poutes, by which match he gets a Pearl in
his eye; wears a straight shoe: all his life (though seeming meat) eats a
Sallet of Nettles, every meal, or else dines with a Woodcocke, or a Dottrill,
has a chiding worse, than half a hanging, every day: and carries a Warming
pan, or chasing dish, into his bed every night: where he hears Curtain, (if
not Curtezan) Sermons, ere the Alternaque Jurgia lecto in quo nupta facet.
Morning: thus for a hoped Paradise: purchasing a real Purgatory, drawing in
an unequal Yoke; he is more shackled and worse fettered, in his grieved
Soul, in retaining will he, nill he; than before in his thoughts, in
attaining, such a beauteous Cross, if not curse: but supposing the best, that
his love aiming at the best ends, lawful marriage, post varios casus, after
many offs, and ons; too and fro, he obtain his desired Co^bie junge^s stabili
Phillida solus habet^.
Galatea, and sings oh hymen Hymen: that his yoake-fellow prove something,
according to his desires, or deserts: or suppose (as in too many) that he
courts only his Concubine, or Curtezan, whom he means to prostitute, and
abuse as Diomedes did Crassida as at Rack, and Manger, and to keep her as his
Mistress, as Achilles did Briscis, and the grand Turk, his Greekish Irene,
either to please his eye, or satisfy his Lust: in the mean time, ere this
good Instrument be turned, to his content: ere this Bow, be right bent; ere
this Virgin or Virago be right wrought, and framed, as wax to his wicked will:
oh what pitiful pickle is my Amoretto or Luxuriosa in, all the time of his
woowing, (or woing) chiefly if (as the Fiction is) if Cupid shoot his golden
Arrow at the one, to fire him: and his Leaden shaft at the other, to cool and
quench her: oh what Symptoms has this his Love, or Lust all this while on his
body? Or mind? Or both? As even some Physicians have Langius Epist. 24. l. 1.
cum Valberiola Obs. l. 2. c. 7. and Iasone Praten. de Morbis cerebri cum
Gordonio c. 20.
observed: how does he show himself to be Planet-strucke: by his pale cheeks,
hollow eyes, lean body, abstinence from meat and sleep, want of appetite,
sequistration from company, solitary sitting, as an Owl, or Hare, Melancholy
walking, in Woods and Such Simp comes Accius Zanezarius, expressed ^loga 2. de
Galatea. Virgil Aeneidos in Dido, Eumathius in his Jsmenius, and Terence in
Eunucho.
Groves: as that Musidorus in the Arcadia: till the spirits being distracted;
and the Liver not turning the Aliment into blood, the members waxing weak, and
the whole body pining away, as the herbs in the Garden, in a Summers drought,
for want of moisture; he by this means becomes a very Sceleton, or the very
Anatomy of a man: as that fair Maid of Delphos, who was in love with a young
man of Minda: confessed not much less than these, in Aedyl. 2.
Theocritus: and Eurialus in his Epistle sent to Lucretia: in Aeneas Sylvius;
and Chaucer in his Knights Tale, Yea their very blushing at one another
Alterno facies sibi dat responsa pudore.
sight, as Jason when he met with Apollonius argon. l. 4.
Medeae, as Arnulphus has observed, and the very beating of their pulses, from
the inward Commotion of their hearts (by which Erostratus discovered the Love
of Antiochus, to his Mother in Law Stratonica: L. 3. Fen. 1. Aviceuna ex Galeno.
Galen the love of Iusta, a Consuls wife to Pilades the Player; Josephus
Struthius the enamouring of one of his Lib. 4. c. 14
Patients) even these (as Physicians also Guianerius Tract. 15. Valescus and
Langius vt supra cum Nevisano, l. 4. Silv. nupt. Numb. 66.
note) do bewray and betray what flaming fires there is inward, by these smoaks
outward: even as the print of the foot in the Snow, descryes a Lion, a Bear,
a Fox, or a Hare, or as the young maid discerned Peter to be a Mark. 14.70.
Galilean: by his very speech: and Gideon the Gileadites, by their
pronunciation of Judge. 12.6
Sibboleth: besides other expressions of themselves: Their gazing, glauncing
their eyes, as though they would shoot them out of their heads: their starting,
as Children affrighted: and staring as Fools at Pictures: Ob eximiu^ forma
decus, stupidos reddere spectatores assert. Celius l. 13. cap. 9.
as though they had seen Gorgons head) as though a Wolf had seen them Lupi
M^rim videre priores Virg.
first, when they get a sudden sight of their beloved one: as Apollo of his
Lucothoe, besides their sighing, weeping, sobbing to themselves, as IVNO tells
IVPITER of IXION in LVCIANS Dialago 3. Tom. 3.
Dialogues: their watching the Twilight as SOLOMON Prove. 7.9.
speaks, hovering like Hawks, near the places where their Darlings dwell,
lurking in Corners, as Lions for their Prey, or as Serieants for an Arrest,
only to see or speak with them; yea running and riding, by day or night, in
all Winds, all weathers: ventring neck-breake, (as Goats in Winter, that
climb for Ivy) over Pales, and Walls: yea as it were for Cholcos Fleece,
riding or swimming, deep and dangerous waters, exposing themselves to all
perils and desperate adventures, only to be one hour in the Company of their
Goddess, whose shrine is erected in their hearts: these and more than these,
even outward Symptoms, in the outward man; show how fondly and foolishly men
of light heads, and unstable hearts do disquiet and torment themselves in
vain, about that which is neither worth seeking nor possessing; perhaps the
purchasers of such prizes, bringing in to their houses, and hearts, the
Paladian Horse again into Troy, to their own destruction: as Cleopatra, was
to Mark Anthony: Aeneas to Dido: and Dalilah to Judge. 16.1 v. 19.20.21
Sampson, or at least perpetual vexation, as Eja Zantippe: Eja Socrate.
Zantippe, was to Socrates.

SECT. III. The Vanity, Fury, and Frenzy, of lustful Lovers.
But when I consider after all these, or conjoined to these, the biting Cares,
Perturbations, Passions, Sorrows, Fears, Suspicions, Discontents, Discords,
Wars, Iarres, Errors, Terrors, Affrights, immodest Prancks, Sleights,
Flights, Iealousies, Heart burnings, Wants, Neglects, spleen, Wrath,
Bloudsheds, Murders, Slanders, Detractions, Treacheries, Enmities,
Flatterings, Cosenings, Ryots, Lust, Impudency, Cruelty, Knavery, and all
that is naught; which besides Experience, De Civit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 22.
Augustine the best of the Fathers, In Market.
Plautus, In Eunuch.
Terence, De art Amandi.
Ovid, In E^logis.
Mantuan, not worst of Poets, have observed as Handmaides, and Pages to attend
upon Love: when I see the best, and wisest of men, for a time bewitched and
besotted with it: such as Judge. 14.2
Sampson, 2. Sa^. 11.2
David, 1. Kin. 11.1
Solomon, Ge^. 38.15
Judah, in the Scriptures: (omitting Ge^. 34.2.
Sychem, 2. Sa^. 13.2
Ammon, Putiphars Genesis 39.7
Wife, 2. Sam. 3.7
Isboseth, Holofernes in Judith, as not worth naming) besides Caesar Hanibal,
Thesus, Achilles, Pompey, Mark Anthony, Troylus, Hercules, yea and Socrates
himself amongst the Pagans: with all the Worthies that might be named amongst
Christians: when I hear Dido in Virgil, Phaedra in Seneca: Mirrha in Ovid, so
vehemently expressing their pinching Passions, as if they cried out in the
pain of the Gout, the Stone, or the Strangury: when I see a man Created
according to Gods Image: innobled with many excellent parts, so wholly taken up
and possessed with the Love of a Creature, that he can do nothing; think of
nothing walking, Te vigilans oculis animo te nocte requiro.
dream of nothing sleeping; desire nothing; delight in nothing, but only one,
making a weaker woman (as Orpheus his Te veniente die, te discedente Canebam.
Euridice, as Clytophon his Lucippe, in Achilles Statius: and that Lover in
Patronius) his Goddess, his Idols, his Mistress, his Life, his Soul, hit
every thing; his mouth, heart, eyes, ears, thoughts, being all full Te dies
noctesque amo, te cogitote desidero, tevoco te expecto, te spero. Euryalus apud
Aeneam Sylvium.
of her: (as he that is bit with a mad Dog, thinks all he sees is Dogs: Dogs in
his meat, in his drink, in his dish: so) his mistress still in his eyes, ears,
heart: which was the very case, of one of the Patients of V^lleriola, that
excellent Physician: of another in Vlricus De Pythovisse.
Molitor: and of thousands yearly both in Cities, Court, and Country: from
great Peers, to Plowmen; from Courtiers, to Carters:) being as merry when he
is with her as Pope John: as frolic as that mad Wench, Pope Ioane: as Ioviall
as the Persian Donec gratus eram tibi persarum Vigui rege beatior. Horat. Od.
9. lib. 3.
King: but without her as the Sun in the Eclipses: as the Moon under a
Cloud, as Melancholy as a Cat, as discontented as Pompey, and Mark Anthony,
after they had lost the Field, or as mad and enraged as Ajax, when he had lost
Achilles Armor: when I hear the Poets faigning some men degenerate into Dogs,
Apud Ovidiu^ in Meta^.
Hogs, Asses, Bruites, as Jupiter into a Bull for Europa; into a Swan for
Laeda: Apulaeus into an Feram induit dum Rosas comedit (id est) dum ad se redit.
Ass, Lycaon into a Wolf: Tereus into a Lapwing: Calista into a Bear:
Elpenor, and Grillus into Swine, by Circe: expressing by their Morals and
Muthologies: as Fulgentius interprets of one of them: Rex fuera^ sic Christa do
cet sed sordida vita immundam, e tanto culmi^e feoit avem Alcia. Emb. de upupa.
Alciat in another of them; and Natales Conees of all of them, how men by their
foolish lusts make very beasts of themselves; when I see how far this love,
(as if dust or sand were cast in their eyes) blinds these fond Lovers: or as
though they had eaten Hemlocks, and stood in need of Opus est Heleboro Hor.
Hellibore, plainly deprives them of their wits and senses: that as the Ape,
and Crow, thinks their young ones the Suns cuique pulcher.
fairest, though wellnigh most deformed of all Birds and Beasts, so though
their Mistresses, in the eyes of others, that are often times sounder judgments
be but meanly guifted, and qualified; either for wit, beauty, breeding and
trayning, inferior to thousands of her Rank: yet of these deluded Guls, she
must be estimated yea Heralded proclaimed, Trumpetted, as the only Paragon of
her Quisquis am^ Ranam ranam putat esse Dianam. Quisquis amat Lusca^, Lusca^
putat esse Venusta^.
Sex, in a thousand Sonnets (as the gleamings out of all Poetasters that ever
writ) Helena, Panthea, Flora, Rhodope, Rosamond, yea Venus her self, must hold
the Candle to her, yea case their caps to her; he that commends Phillis; or
Nerea, Amarillis, or Galatea, Tityrus, or Melibea; must after hold his tongve,
or else he does her wrong: she must be as Polypheme courts his Condidior folio
Nive^ Galatea Ligustri Floridior prato. O vid. Met. 13
Galatea, whiter than the Withywand: fresher than a Verdant field: brighter
than Glass: softer than Swans down: yea Phoebo pulchrior and Sorore Phoebi,
yea brighter than Phoebe, or Phoebus himself: yea the Stars, Sun Moon,
Metals, sweet Flowers, Odors, Colors, Gold, Silver, Ivory, Lidia bella que
been superat, lac, and Lillium Petrenij Catal.
Snow: painted Birds, all brought to express and delineate her. When I see
again, how servile and slavish they be to their beloved Idols: all their
Actions, Cares, Thoughts, being subordinate to please and pleasure them, more
than to please God himself: making themselves as Castilio notes Lib. 3. de
Aulico.
well, in his Courtier: their Servants, Drudges, Prisoners, Lackeyes, yea
Bondmen; as Hercules was to his Iole: Sardanapalus to his Concubines (amongst
whom he Carded and Suidas in vocab, Sardanapalus, sic Ovid in Jbim.
Spun) Aeolus to Mihi Jussa cap^ssere, fas est.
Juno, Me vel sarorem vel fas m^l^m voca Sen^ca in Hipp. part. 2
Phedra to Hypolites, Philostrotus to his Mistress, and all others so
besotted: refusing no labor, no toil, in a blindfold obedience (as the Papists
to their In caeca obedientia.
Priests, the Novices Iesuited, to their Superiors:) if to go as far for her
as Jericho or Jerusalem, to the Sonldan of Egypt, or great Cham of Caehay: yea
with Drake and Candish to Compass the World, for her: to undertake great
Adventures for her, as Orlando for his Angelica, in L. 1. Cant. 1. Staff. 5.
Ariosto: and your Knight errants in your fabulous books: much more, to serve
two Prentiships for her, as Jacob once for Ge^. 29.28
Rachel: and to endure harder taskes than Theseus, and Paris. 8. Yea, when I
consider how this fond love, make, those that are bewitched with it, valerous,
venterous, above Audacem faciebat a^r.
measure, as was Ferdinand King of Spain, at the siedge of Granado, in the
sight of Qu. Isabel and her Ladies, a few Spanish Knights overcomming a
multitude of Moors: causing Sir Walter Manney in Edward the thirds time, to
fight like a Dragon, being laden with Ladies Favors: and others to express
wondrous valor in Iusts and Turneaments: Venus making Mars himself more
courageous, if we believe In Convivio.
Plato; as even Prodigal of their blood, in their Mistress Quarrel: of which
they would not spend perhaps willingly, the least drop in the Cause of God, and
of Religion. 9 When I think further, how in the praedominancy of this passion,
they have not only wished to dye for them, as Theagenes for his Characlea: or
to dye with them; that one Grave might hold Hujus ero vivus mortuus hujus ero
Prop. l. 2. Vivam, si vvat si cadat illa cada^. Id.
both: which was the Prayer of Callicratides in Lucian: but they have indeed,
one dyed for another, as Dido dyed for Aeneas, (which wrought such compassion
in St. Augustine to think it) and one dyed with another, as Priamis with Ovid.
4. Met.
Thisbee: yea have been so drunk with Passion, that if their Mistresses have
frowned upon them (which was the case of Patronius) they have drawn their Si
occidere placet, ferru^ vides.
Swords, and wish them to kill or stab them, or whip them to death: as I heard
of an Italian, that at the Command of his Mistress, (protesting how much he
would do for her) threw himself off of a Bridge, and drowned himself: Oh
when I consider how they strive, and study to strain, Clamidemque ut pendeat
apt Collocat ut limbus totumque appareat aurum.
by all means, to delight and content their Mistresses: to please their eyes,
and to infinuate into their affections, by curious and costly clothes, decking
their bodies with Rings, Jewels, and Laces: by wearing their Hats, Doublets,
Cloakes, Breeches, all in fashion: by entertaining of Taylers, Barbers,
Perfumers, to teach them how to cut their beards: wear their Love-locks: turn
up their Mushatoes, Curle their Heads: Perfume their hair: Prune their
Pickitivant: yea to wear neatly their shoe-strings, points, Garters; that all
the Fantasticalites of their bodies, may be correspondent to their minds: not
neglecting for that purpose, according as Hensius writ to Primierus, even to
walk in Print, talk in Print, cat, drink, Preterqua^ res patitur student
ele^antiae Plautaes
and do all in print: yea and above all to be mad in Print too: doing more to
please a mortal Creature (which caused Pambo to shed tears, when he saw a
painted perfumed Curtezan) by Phantasticke apparel, Maskes, Music, Dances,
Gifts, Presents, Love Letters, Encomiums, Praises, oily flatteries, and what
not! Then the strictest Hermit, the most zealous Christian, to please the
immortal God: to epitomize all that is said, (as a whole Country in a little
Map:) since this earthly, this terrestrial, this human, this fleshly and
sensual Love is such a frenzy, such a madness as you have heard, in the ten
enumerated particulars, in this my Conclusive Meditation, when I consider it
such a plague, such a Rack, such a Torture, such an Execution Credo ad hominis
Carnisicinam amorem esse inveutam. Plautus.
as Plautus called Non deus vt prohibent amor est, sed amaror and error.
it: such a bitter Eripite, ha^c postem, perin ciemque mihi, Ovid.
potion as the Poet called it: such a Pest, as Ovid called it; that the Spanish
Inquisition, in every point is not comparable to it: yea lastly such a Fire as
all the streams of the Poets call it; that it is hotter as they say, than
Vulcans Mantuan, Egl. 2.
Fires, burns as Aetnaos Qualis Aetneo vapor exundat antro.
fire, more unquenchable than Wildfire, either by Nec aqua perimi potuere nec
Jmbre.
water, or showers, scorching the very inwards and Est mollis flammae medullis.
Virg. Aeneid. 4.
marrowes, of those that entertain it into their Pectus Insanum vapor am orque
torret, Seneca.
bosom; and that yet notwithstanding (like our Prodigal that consumed all he
had upon Harlots, as his Elder Brother upbraided him) that men should be so mad
as to roast or toast themselves at this fire: to scorch the Wings of their
Credit and Conscience with it: as the fond Flea, by flying too near the
Candle; to enter into this voluntary prison: to be shackled with these golden
fetters, to admit (as a Horse or an Ass his saddle and bridle) this voluntary
slavery and subjection: in the mean space the love of God being quenched and
cooled in the heart (which will not admit two reigning Loves, in the highest
degrees: no more than one Heaven two Suns, one Rome two Caesar's, two Popes:
one body two heads, or two hearts) if this be the way to give true sound solid
Contentation, Consolation, tranquillity, to the heart and Soul, and Spirit of
man, sure then my Observations and Calculations fail me: and I mistake the
point, which in all these variations, I go about to prove.

SECT. IIII. The unquietness of Earthly Loves, prooved by Inductions.
THus you see these Earthly Loves, (for I might say as much of the Love of
Riches, Honors, high places, and the like, in the exorbitancy of Affections,
being in the same praedicament with the former:) they are filled only with
unquietness, as a troubled Sea with Waves; and till CHRIST come into the
heart, who with one word stayed the raging of the Mark. 6.51
Sea, and by the same word and spirit, can stay the fluctuations of the Soul:
they stay not (like those that have the disease called St. Vitus Sola musica
curat fur^rem S. viti Boden. lib. 5. de Rep.
his Dance:) except through weariness or despair of attaining: which is no
rest, but a disability and listlestnesse to move; for force failing, desire
does still continue, like to a horse, which is tied, yet champs and gnawes the
bit, as impatient of his tying; and indeed this is the case of most in
persecution of their Loves or lusts, they have strong desires of attaining, but
often times little power; like a man that has a stomach to eat like a Hawke or
Aeagle, yet has not money enough to buy meat to suffice a Sparrow; or as a
man that has a desire to run 40. miles a day, yet being shackled, or fettered
cannot go so far, as a man may hop or dance a morris: they are neither able
to command, or obey their lusts: not to command them in the impetuositie of
their affections: not to obey them in the want of means, to attain them: I
conceive further, what ever is the object of our loves and desires, either we
enjoy it, or enjoy it not; if we desire it, and cannot attain it, then the
desire is enraged, as the Fox after Grapes, the Bear after honey, which he
smells in the bole of the tree, yet cannot reach it; as the hu^gry Dog that sees
the Cooks Mutton, yet cannot (dare not) taste it: and as the Grayhound that
sees the Hare or Dear; and the Mastiffe that sees the Bear or Bull, yet both
are holden or tied up, from their desired sport: desires resisted (like a
Torrent or Brook dammed up) the more they rage, and surge, and swell: like
Vixan Children, usually we cry for what we cannot have, though they be but
Bables: and again when we have and possess what we desire, our desires are
frequently glutted, even with having: as flowers that are gathered with
delight, smothered once and soyled in the bosom, afterward are thrown away
with neglect, when we see newer, fresher, fairer, and more fragrant, as fitter
Objects in our opinions, than the former, to content the Senses of our seeing
and senting: the new (as one nail drives out Successore novo, vincitur omnis
amor. Ovid de Art.
another) still expugning and expelling our desires to the old.

Besides I consider these externals, the wrong placed objects of our love, they
are either facill, and easy to come by: or difficult and hard to attain; if
the first, even their facility breeds satiety: the very easiness it self,
brings a distaste withal: our worldly love, being inflamed by some resistance,
and whetted by difficulty: as the fire is more inkindled, by the blowing of the
wind: when some simple ones think, it would blow it out: or not unlike to
those Fishes; that love to be in violent streams, and flood gates, but dye in
a calm, or still water; whereas again, if the difficulty be such as there is
no probability (possibility) of obtaining, as if a Pigmee should attempt to
lift as much; to reach as high, as a Giant, the Frog to swell as big as an Ox:
a poor Plebean or a Shoemaker to be a Knight, or an honorable man: (as a
fantastic Tailor, once tendered his love and service to a great Princess) the
desire by reason of the extreme difficulty, faints, as a Bird in the bosom,
or dies in the Birth: at least if any fruit be produced, it is an Agrippa:
Aegre parta: hardly come by: like Racheli Ge^. 35.18
Benjamin, the Son of Sorrow, or like the Rainbow, Thaumantis filia, the
Daughter of Prove. l. 2. et Arist. 3. Met. 6. ^u^ Titelm. ^. 6. de natura rerum
c. 12. and 13.
Wonder: but if we can by no means effect what we affect; (as Parsons that for
all his Policies, could never compass, a Cardinals Jesuits Catechism so
scoffs him.
Hat: De quo Ni^ l. vt etiam (...) Flo^ (...) bla^ 12.20. vt (...)
Eccius for all his Disputes could not conclude for a Byshopricke: Arrius for a
Dignitary: nor Cardinal S^
Woolsey for all his fishing with golden books and baits, even in troubled
waters, could not catch the Papal triple Miter) Desire then turns into
Despair, we fret and torment our selves in vain, as greedy Boys that see
ripe Cherries in the Orchard, but cannot (d^re not) s^ the intrenching Wall; or
as the Cat, that (...) Bird chirping in the Bush; and the Catus vult Pisces sed
non vul. tangere pedes.
Fish gliding in the waters, that is ready to hang her self, that she can
catch neither.

Now the cause of all this unquietness, is because our Love, is placed upon
false Objects, as if the love of a great Princess, should be placed upon a
Mechanical man, as once the French Kings daughter upon a Forrester, (else
never trust Ballad more) as if Pasiphar should love a Bull, or the As Semiramis
loved a Horse. Aristus the Ephesian an Ass, Fulviuia Mare; Theat. Phil. l. 5.
cap. 75. page 677.
like; which Objects cannot satisfy: for if we reflexe upon all things in the
world, we shall find (besides the Creator, Preserver, and Redeemer of the
world) nothing firm, fixed, stable, permanent, worth the least corner of our
hearts; no more than a Kite or Kestrell, to roof in the Nest of an Aeagle; or
an unclean Hog or Dog worthy to Ke^nell in the privy Chamber of some great
Vide luch^num Jesu^u^, de Novissimis, Sermon. de Munditia cordis, in 8. Jmitio
libri.
King: all sublunary things being but a chain of Cares, lincked together, and
a Web of successive woes woven in a Loome of Sorrows, from several threeds of
diversified Crosses, drawn out, by the hand of Experience, on the Rock of
Time, our best meats, having tart sawces, our chief sweets mixed with sowers,
as Aloes and Worm seed, with Figs and Rayzings, our chief Comforts in
meannesse, eminency, Riches, Poverties, Age, Youth, Marriage, Single-life, in
every Calling, Profession, Estate, Condition, from the Crown to the Cobbler,
having annexed their several Crosses, as those that have writ of the miseries
of man, As Innocentius 3. The French Morney, in his Tract of death. The Author
of the French Academy, Stella ac contemptu Mundi. Purchase his Pilgrim. With
Carpenter his preparative to Contentation, cum multis alijs.
have punctually demonstrated: from which Crosses, our Persons, State,
Callings, can no more be exempted, than the Air from Clouds, the Sea from
Waves, the middle Region from Meteors: chiefly in the achievement of the best
of these things; with which we Idolatrize, we are sure to meet with many
pricks, in the pursuit, ere we come to the Rose, and when it is plucked, it
proves perhaps after all our pains and perils but a Cockrose, or Canker Rose,
for all that? Or it may be, we never pluck it, after so many pricks of
Cares, and anxieties, (like the Hawke that often flies, yet never touches
feather: and the Archer that often aims, yet never hits the mark:) I could wish
that as that Zeno vel Thales.
Philosopher which lost all his goods, by Shipwreck; was by this means driven
more closely, to the study of Philosophy: as Alexandrinus Preceptor Hieron.
Didimus by the loss of his external eyes, was driven to internal
Contemplation, as Ignatius Loyola by the loss of his Pelargus prefatione, ante
sun^ Jesuitismun.
Lamb, was driven to be (at least in show) Religious: So making again of
their losses, as Plutarch directs how to gather fruit, from our very The Fruit
of Foes in English translated.
Foes. I wish, I say, that we could be at least, even Epimethians, so after
wise, at Prestat tamen esse, promet hiu^ qua^ Epimethiu^.
last: as beat by the rod of our own and others experience, tutored by the
doctrine and discipline of Solomon, and this our Prodigal: as to leave and
loath these uncertain, momentary Vanities, as unworthy the love of a man: much
less of a Christian: and turning the stream of our love (as once Jordan 2.
King. 2.14.
backwards, to give our hearts, our affections, our loves, our lives, as the
best Persian present, to our Heavenly King; an absolute, resolute deed of
Gift, to the Lord JESUS Totus figatur in Cord, qui totus pro te fixus in
Cruce.
CHRIST, who as he bought and purchased them with his own 1. Pet. 1.18
blood, no less 1. Cor. 6.20
prize: who most desires Prove. 23.26.
them, of all other Suitors he best deserves them.

SECT. V. Several Reasons united, convincing the Proposition first propounded,
placing all Contentation in the Creator, not in the Creature.
AS many little Brooks meeting together, and running in one torrent, make it
the deeper, and carry it the swifter: so these things promised, as now aiming
at my Conclusion: to make a great Grand-Iury indeed, of several reasons; all
truly and unpartially giving in their Verdicts against these Huskish Vanities,
as we have expressed them both in the letter and the sense: as In promptuario
Morali.
Stapleton, Philip Diez, and Granatensis, in their Postrils, bring in sometimes
together by bandles, Co^geries similium, many similies, as united in one, to
one Sic vis vnita fortior.
purpose: so I bring in Congeries rationum, a whole Jury of Reasons, all united
(as the rods Seleuchus showed his sons bound up in one Faggot) for the
greater strength; proportioning my munition and fortification, according to the
opposition, as by the many mighty and numerous friends and favorites of Vanity,
which will be strong and vehement: Vanity like a beauteous Italian Curtiza^
having many (as once that Corinthian Lais) to court her: as Lawyers and
Advoates to plead for her: yea as Champions to fight for her, as once for the
Greekish Belli deceunalis causa Theat. Phil. l. 2. p. 143.
Helena, maintaining her false Plea and qu^rrell in this: that she is able to
give to her Favorers and followers, as much Contentation and satisfaction, as
either Lady Virtue, or the Queen Regent of man's Microcosme: Gods grace, with
all her goodly godly train, the renewed faculties of the Soul, and the
affections of the heart: changed into her own nature (as fire changes whatever
it meets with into fire) to sweep down further this Pestilent Paradoxe, of
theirs, as Spiders webs, and to crush it as Hercules did the heads of young
Snakes, in his Textoris Offic. l. 2. c. 36. page 115
Cradle: let them, if they will not believe the Scriptures as Christians, which
the very Devils believe and See D. Moss his Sermon of the Faith of Devils, in
Iac. 2. v. 18
tremble (which Scripture, as the Sovereign Judge, in this and all other
Controversies: has decreed and determined against them iudicially, as we have
made manifest already) yet let them with Pagans and Philosophers, at least
believe reason: which tells them, that corporal things, do not work upon
Corporea, non agu^, in spirituale, nec materiale, in im^ateriale. Bedae axiom^.
spiritual, nor material upon immateriall, let a sword divide ones belly in
the midst, as Solomon would have divided the Controverted child, yet the Soul
and Spirit is not divided: we know what Anaxarchus said to Neocreo^ the Tyrant,
when he crushed him and tormented him: oh Tyrant knock Anaxarchus his Tunde,
tunde Anaxachi Vaseulu^, Anaxarchu^ non laed^.
Cask, exercise thy cruelty upon his out- vessel: thou hurtst not Anaxarchus
himself: his soul, his better part, is untouched, as the Scaberd may be
broken, and yet the sword remain safe, all the weapons in the world will not
paenetrate a Spirit, as our foolish Swashbucklers think, to defend themselves
in their drunken flourishes, against the Devil himself, with their Swords;
as well may they cut the Air, or wound a flame of fire: yea as well in their
pride, or rage, might the Persian Nec veluti Zerxes, Neptimo vin cla minamur
Classibus insolitum quu^ patefecit Iter Stroza pater.
ZEKXES, or our English King Lanquet in Chronicis.
CANVTVS, shackle and fetter the Sea, or command the Waves: therefore this is
the Counsel, and comfort which our Savior himself, gives to his endangered
Disciples, Fear not them which can hurt the body: but, animam occidere non
possunt, they cannot kill the Soul: which was the dying comfort of dying
Zwinglius, when he was deadly wounded, in his fight before Jn bello, inter
Fig^rinos, and Quinquepagicos apud S^eidanum, and Osiand^li, cent. 16. l. 2.
cap. 20. p. 203.
Zuricke, now to make application, in a word, what are all the huskish Vanities
in the World, such as have been enumerated in their particulars, but things
corporeal and material, subjected to sense, from the sense carried to the
intellectual part, what work or operation, these can have upon the
immateriall Spirit, and Soul of man: I leave it, even to the the
Consideration, of those that understand any thing in Philosophy, besides
Divinity.

Reasons: man's Soul is as immateriall, so immortal, capable of Immortality,
yea affecting and desiring Immortality: (as appears by the works and writing
of Philosophers: the famous Acts and Adventures of Martialists and good
Patriots: the Dua in Memphi, stulta fuere Ostentatio regum secundum. Plen. l.
36. cap. 15.
Pyramides, Acud Ph. l. 36 c. 8.9. and Rhodig. l. 23. c. 6.
Obelests, De Manpalo curiae regis Jdem Pl. l. 36. c. 5. Vt etiam de alijs
obelescis, l. 37. c. 5.
Mausolems, Cities erected, and named after the founders, by Rings, and As
Alexandria named from great Alexander. and Adrianopolis from Auria n.
Potentates, like Nimrods Genesis 11.5
Tower, Nabuchadnezzars Babell, and Absoloms 2. Sa^ 18.18
Pillar, only to get and perpetuate to themselves a living name, after death:
which was the chief and maine thing, that the Pagans aimed at, as may be
gathered by many circumstances out of their Iamque opus exegi, quod nec Jovis
ira, nec Jgnis, nec vlla potuit abolere vitustas. Ovid in finem Met.
writings, now man being capable of Immortality, desirous of, Dan. 4.27
and aspiring to Immortality, what contentation and satisfaction can his Soul
have, in these things, which are merely mortal, and momentary, non est
mortale, quod opt^: Moreover, if God created the world, for the use and service
of man; then sure, he has reserved some better, and moreable thing to content
man: since no man takes any great faelicitie in his slave, or Vassal: this
Reason might be amplified, in more particulars.

Further if the heart of man, be especially ravished, beauty, the chief Object
of love: as Philosophy holds: which is the cause, why we behold and contemplate
with such singular delight, the bright splendour of the Sun; the cleerenesse
of the Moon; the purity of Gold, the rich Marble, sparkling Diamond, Tyrian
Purple, yea the white Lilly, red Rose, spetious Damask, purpled Violet, fair
Primrose, speckled Dazie: the color of Birds, tails of Peacockes, silver
scales of Fishes, the feature of the well proportioned Horse; Majesty of the
Lion; good shape of Gray-hound, but especially a proper man, and beauteous
Woman: (above all varnished Pictures, or other Lusters of Art and Nature) as
coming nearest rest of all the rest, the Image of God: Beauty being the
Privilege of Nature; a dumb Comment, a silent fraud: a still Rhetoric; a
Kingdom without a guard, a commanding Tyrant, a great Dowry, a sufficient
Patrimony, an ample commendation, an accurate Epistle, prevailing with men: yea
the strictest of men; Stoics, As Virgil loved Al^xis, and Apollidorus
Antiphanes.
Philosophers, yea commanding Beasts, and Pagan Gods: according to the
Encomiums given of it, and Epithites to it: by Naturae gaudentis opus.
Plato, Theophrastus, Carneades, Socrates, Zenophon, Dialogoamorum.
Lucian, L. 2. Connub. c. 27.
Tiraquellus, Lib. 2. de Magia.
Apuleius, Parad. 2. cap. 101.
Abulensis, and diverse other; now all this earthly beauty, which we dote upon:
even the best and brightest of it: what is it but a derivative from that pure,
most perfect and primitive beauty, which is in God: a spark from that fire; a
glympse from that Sun; and indeed if this little Image, and Idaea of Beauty,
which is but corporal and external, so delight the natural man, that it
transports and carries him, even beyond himself: as the Ship that breaks
Cable, is carried into the maine continent: even sometimes against the maine
Rocks; oh then as Plato and Tully speak of Virtue, could we view and
contemplate that beauty which is in God: which is indeed pure and essential,
without all mixture of Corruption Natural; or Pigments of Art? Mirabiles
amores excitaret sui: How should we be taken with it? How ravished? How
refreshed? As the How sweetly and necessarily the Angels love God, Vide Aquin.
contra Gent. cap. 67.
Angels and Souls, and Spirits of the lust are now in Heaven: how should we
say as PETER, JAMES, and JOHN, who saw but a Glympse of it in the Mountain,
where Christ was transfigured: Bonum est esse hic: It is good for us to be
here? Let us build Mat. 17.4
Tabernacles: this is Bethel, Gods house: here God will be Ge.^ 21.16
seen; the place is holy ground. Exodus 3.5.

Whereas on the Contrary, that Love, which is merely kindled and inflamed,
from natural beauty inherent, in the Creature: unless in obedience to Gods
ordinance, in the lawful use of marriage: as ABRAHAM enjoyed his beauteous Ge.^
12.11
SARAH, ISAAC, his beateous Genesis 26.7
REBECHA, JACOB his beauteous Genesis 29.
RACHEL: or by natures instinct, amongst the Heathen; Collatine his Lucretia,
Adnetus his Alcest, Orpheus his Quintil. l. 2. Orpheus.
Euridice, and Assuerus his Aesther: if this Love I say, be not kept as Fire,
within the Chimney: as the Lion within the Grate: the Sea within his bounds:
but be lustful, Homer. Odysse. et Ovid Metam 4.
extravagant, exorbitant, placed on wrong objects: where is then the content
that is in it? Nay what Rack is it to the Mind? What torture to the Soul? A
Gibbet to the Conscience? A stain to Reputation? A wound to Pro. 6.33.
a good name: in a word, a pleasing, yet fatal Poison: a bewitching Circes: a
killing Basiliske, a Vultur gnawing on Titius his Liver: a furious Disease of
the Mind: as one quaestions Carolus a Lorine. an amor sit morbus.
it, and Tully concludes In his Tusculcanie, quaestions.
it; a lingering Fire, as the Poets styled Horat. Od. 19. lib. 1.
it: stupifying Obstupuit primo aspectu S^donia Didu
Gorgon: yea a species of madness; as Ficinus termed it: a Melancholy
madness, as Rhasis held it, yet madness it self, as Plato called it: an
Error and a Terror as the Proverb speaks it: Comment in Plat. c. 12
and the practice of most have found it.

Non Deus vt prohibent amor est, sed amaror and error.
Love is no God, as foolish Men do call,
But error, terror, bitterness, and Gall.
And therefore if we have any peace in this affection of Love, we must turn
the stream of Natural love, into a Spiritual Love: Philosophy tells us, that
natural motion, is better than that which is against Nature; but Divinity tells
us otherwise: that Love is best; which is different from Nature: the fruit of
Gal. 5.22
Grace, for ever since we were (as the demerit of sin) turned out of
Paradise, in that Apostasy and fall, like as when a man falls topsie turvie,
from a Rock or promontory: our desires have been turned, upside down, as a
dish with the bottom upwards: we falling headlong as it were, from Heaven to
Earth, like a Child that turns in the Mothers body, our love is turned wrong,
we need the hand of a skillful Midwife, even the Spirit of Grace, to turn it
right again, else the birth of this Carnal love, may be the death of the
Heart that breeds it, as prooving a Viperous Faetum vlpere matris, Alvum
lacerare testam. Aelian. hist. l. 1. c. 25. Isodor. l. 12. c. 3. and Basil
exem. hom. 9
offspring: and therefore as when a man bleeds too much at the Nose, to stay
blood another The General practice of Physic, in Folio.
way; so its our best Soule-Physicke, to turn the course of our earthly loves,
which satisfy not, into a Heavenly and Spiritual love, toward God, in whom
is all Contentation, Consolation, and Satisfaction: So shall we be assured of
true peace, from the God of Peace: Phillip. 4.7. Ioh. 16.33. For as the lower
part of of the Elementary Region, is the seat of Winds, Tempests, Earthquakes:
but that part which is toward Heaven; is always peaceable and Applicat
Gaminianus in summa, exempl. and similitudinum, l. de Coelo and Elementis.
still: so our love shall be ever full of unquietness; and unsetlednesse,
whilst it rests and seats on these base and brittle things below: but when it
takes the winge of an Aeagle ascends up above, raises itself up toward
Heaven, fixes upon Gods Promises, in the assurance of the pardon and
forgiveness of sins, (the want of which assurance is the cause of all the
doubts, distractions and want-rest Psalm. 6. Ps. 32.3.4.5. and Psalm. 38. per
totum.
of the Soul) then is the Soul at rest, as in her proper Center, and fixed, as
on the true Pole, till this: her best food is but Husks for Swine: her best
peace, security, satiety, her best Harvest of Vanities seed; either horror of
Conscience: Genesis 4.
Cain, and Mat. 27.3.
Judas, or lethargicall be nummednesse, as in 1. Sa^. 25.37
Nabal: yea her best Consolation, hearts vexation, or approaching confusion:
though for the time neither felt nor feared; for as the Snow water easily
turns into ice; the ice into water again: as it is now frozen, now thawed;
seldom constant, some few hours in one form, (but as an acute Philosopher
concludes Scaliger co^tra Cardanu^ exercit. 119 page 435.
it) when the ice is so congealed in the Alps that it turns into De
Generatione Christalli, ex aquis Basil. exem. hom. 3 Isodor, l. 16. c. 1 3. et
August. de Mirab. Scripturae, l. 1. c. 24
Crystal, then by reason of the hardness of it, turns into no other form,
all the Sun and heat in the World, will not melt it, nay the Iron Mall, will
hardly break it: so in our earthly loves, we are changed, and carried, yea
hurried, divided, distracted, now this way, now that; hither and thither:
backward and forward, to, and fro, as a feather in the Air, with the Wind now
pleased, now displeased: now frolic, now froward: now sad, now glad: now
merry, now melancholy; ever vain, and foolish, and fluctuate in all our ways,
irregular in every Act; but when our Love is once truly fixed, and fastens upon
God himself; then it is as firm as Crystal: as strong as Cant. 8.6
Death: as unmovable as Mount Syon: as joyous as when sorrowing Luke 2.48
Mary, weeping Ioh. 20.15
Magdelen, and mourning Ioh. 11.20 15
Martha, met with Christ, their Savior whom their Souls loved.

CHAP. XVI. These Huskish Vanities, are never so fully and freely enjoyed, but
there is always something wanting to the Concupiscible, or rational appetite.
AS a Tree ^oted in the Earth, is hardly removed, by the strength of many men:
so the conceit^ and opinion that's radicated, and rooted in the hearts of most
man, of the plenary, Contentation, tha^'s to be found in these Huskish
Vanities; is as hard to be r^o^ll^d, as Hercules Club to be wrung out of his
Jovi Fulmen Herculi Clavam Homero Versu^ subtrahere, tria hac olim ^redita
Jmpossibilia, Authore Macrobio lib. 5. Sat^rnalium
fist, which is the Reason that I still add ^e Reasons, Demonstrations,
Arguments, Inductions, to remove that false imagination, to expel these
Conceits (these indeed deceites) and delusions, as Mists and Clouds, by the
Sun of this one Truth, that all sufficiency and satisfaction, is to be found
in God the Creator, and not in these sublunary Creatures, I have shot many
arrows out of a full Pulchrum, ex magno tollere acervo.
Quiver, to wound the worlds false Paradoxes. I will venture on one more,
perhaps (as DAVID'S stinged stone) 1. Sam. 17 49.
it may lay GOLIATH grovelling: convince and convict Vanities chiefest Champions;
at least it shall make up the full, and Grand Jury of four and twenty, to give
in the Verdict of Verity, against Vanity: and that breefly in this maine
Consideration; that these Outward things are never so fully and freely enjoyed,
in their largest extent; but there is something still a wanting: Desiderantur
nonnulla, In something the Shoe still wrings; the Desire is unsatisfied: either
Covetousness, Curiosity, Lust, or Necessity, desires something that is not to
be had, or hard to be had; Improbable and impossible, to be accomplished, or
it be wailes and bemoanes something, that is lost, gone, praetermitted, and not
to be recovered. The want of which, does more fret vex, torture and torment,
an unmortified man, an unsanctified soul, (yea and too much often disturbes, and
disquiets even the godly man too, by reason of human passions, stirred up and
wrought upon by Temptations) then the fruition of all the rest and best of
these externals, gives no Contentaion nor satisfaction, even as the pain of
one tooth, the Crampe in one joint, is more felt in pinching pain, than the
health of the whole body: as for instance in some particulars. Haman has more
honors in the Cour^ of Assuerus, than he did deserve: yet not more than he did
desire; for he wants the Cap and Knee, and the observance of Est. 3.5. and
Chap. 5.11.12.13.
Mardocheus) the Jew, which (as Mercury pot into a green wound) did so sting
and nettle him; that as he told his Wife Zeresh, and his friends, all did him
no good which he enjoyed: neither Honors from the King, nor respect from the
Queen, nor glory of his Riches, nor muliitude of his Children, nor high places
of Promotion, in all which he boasts and tryumphs, gives any content to that
accursed Amalakite: So long as the Knee of the Religious Jew, is so stiff,
that it will not bow to him: so Ahab was a King; had Lands, Livings, Riches,
Revenewes, Orchards, Gardens, Fields Vineyards, no doubt of it in abundance,
proportionable to the Estate of a King of Israel: yet so long as he wants the
Vineyard of 1. Kin. 21.6.7
Naboth; at which his teeth watered; and over which his nose dropped, as lying so
fit and so p^t for him, just in his mouth: so long he is sick in the suds, and
diseased in the sullens: res^esse in his thoughts, he turns him in his Bed, as
the Wheel on the Axeltree, and the door on the Hindges: and had not Iezabel
that good Bird, made him a Potion and Caudell of the blood of the Vinetor, and
Grapes of the Vineyard, as a froward Vixan, he had took the Pet or the Pip:
and dyed: so Ammon notwistanding he was the Kings Son, and might have matched
himself with some of the Daughters of the greatest Princes and Peers of the
Realm, or with some foreign Princess, yet he is so vexed and perplexed,
that he falls sick for the love of his own Sister THAMAR: 2. Sa^. 13.2
as PVTIPHARS Wife, though of great place and means, matched to a great Officer
under PHARAOH; yet has small content, so long as beanteous JOSEPH, answers not
her longing Genesis 39.9 80.
Lust: the like I may instance in all others, who are crossed or curbed in some
one thing or other, they inordinately desire, the want of which, more afflicts
them, than the enjoyment of all they have, contents them: like Children in
their minority, that pelt it, and pule, and cry, for one toy they want, of
which they are more sensible, than of all the present good, or future hope they
have from their Parents; thus Themistocles is more fretted at the glory of
Miltiades, and Aristides his amulated Patritius l. 4. de regno tit. 20. p. 291
Corrivals: than at all the Honors he receives from the Athenians.

Instance in others; to begin with the ambitious man: Is he not ever swelling
like the Frog in the Fable: till at last he break and burst? As did the
Israelitish 2. Sam. 18 14.15
Absalom: the Roman Dion in vita Tiberij, et Gerl. in axiom. pollit. p. 67. and
page 409. his Tragedy is also penned to the life, in English.
Seianus: the French Preper. Galica Chronica, extat tragedia Angl.
Byron, and thousands more? Did not the denial of one office make the great
Spirit Byron, break out into treasonable words, if not complots, against his
King (as they were construed) from whom, he had received so many honorable
favors: can such men when they are at their height like strings of an
instrument contain themselves: but they must stretch higher till they break?
Besides if any stand in their way, either to hinder their rising, by
opposition, or to eclipse them, by their worth, oh how are they madded, and
enraged? What content have they more than a Fellon, in his Executioner? How do
they busy their brains and heads, night and day, to put them down, by
disgracing whom they emulate, by flanders, Calumnies, aspersions, or by
poisons, Matchavillian Tricks, Proiects, Conspiracies, open or secret murders,
one way or another, to rid them out of the way; being ever restless, so long
as they are eye-sores, and heart-sores, and unto them: as may appear in the
passages betwixt Saul and 1. Sam. 20 21.22.24. ad 28.
David: who was hunted as a Hair: and pursued as a Partridge: by that Tyrant,
because the Virgins of Israel ascribed more to David, than to him; the like I
might instance in Domitian toward Agricola; in Phalaris, Dionisius, Busiris,
Periander, the Turkish Tyrants successively; in Herod of Jury, John Basilius
the Muscovian Tyrant: and millions more, who in their ambitions, and jealous
furies and frenzies, ever made quick riddance, of such as they either feared,
hated, envied: or such, as by whom they were any way Of the tragical effects
of Ambition, in all ages, and of the Massacres it has made all Historians and
Chronicles instance, in these and others: chiefly Pencer in Lectione, Chr. 14.
Ia^. an. 70. et To^. 4. Declam. fol. 260. Stri gel. in Prove. Salom. p. 132 et
l. 1.
obscured; Selimus killing Coruntus his youngest Louicer. T^om. 1. Turcicae h.
c. 24.
Brother: and five of his Nephews, together with Mustapha, Bassa, and many
more; Jovins in ejus vita.
Batacet causing Armet Bassa, to be slain, as jealous of his valor: Soliman
the magnificent, murdering his own Son, the valiant Knols his Turk. Hist.
Mustapha, Arian the Emperor (according to Lampridius) killing all his
Emulators: Maximinus causing all his Senators, Heroditus l. 7.
(as De cujus crudelitate, passim Josephus antiq. l. 15.16.17. c. 8.9.10*
cu^marrobio, l. 6. Saturnalium et Soz^meno l. 5. cap. 21.
Herod all the Synedrim, and blood royal of the Jews, that were nobly
descended) to be bloudily butchered: The like pranckes Suetonius relating of
Claudius Caesar, and Domitian: Herodian of Anthonius, and Geta: The French
Historians of Henry the Ferres fol. 56. an. 1588
third: cutting off Henry of Loraine Duke of Guize: our English Chronicles
relating the like of the strange fears and iealousies which Henry the Mat.
Paris.
first, had of Robert the Duke of Normandy; whom he perpetually imprisoned:
which Henry the fourth had of Cambdens Remains.
King Richard the second: (though deposed) and of his own son Henry, (though
causelessely, as is prooved,) These with many more, show what a rack, what a
Gibbet it is, to a proud man, to have any to share with him in his honors; to
be equal with, or greater than himself: this aemulation, being an Atae, a
Megera: a Ghost to hunt them; a Fury to whip them: a secret wound, as Cyprian
calls Sermon. 2. de zolo and Fervore.
it: a Worm to Gnaw them, as the Moath gnawes the Garment, as Chrpsostome
calls it; and some Physicians observe Faelix Platerus. rus.
it; a rotting in the bones, as Solomon termed Prove. 14.13.
it; making of men very Skeletons and Anatomies, as some have Characterized D.
H. in his Characters.
it, being the greatest torment, as the Sicilian Tyrants found Jnvidia siculi
non invenere Tyranni, tormentum magis Horatius
it; can he have any content, that is hunted with such a Hag? When I read of
the fearful effects that this ( Emulation the Daughter of pride and ambition)
daily De Tragedijs invidiae, passim Instant Polibius l. 1. p. 54. Cureus de
annal. Silesiae, page 330. Livius de Scipione lib. 35. page 337. sic apud
Modernos. Philippus lib. 1. Eth. page 21 Antimatch. l. 3. page 571.
produces, what Tumults, Tragedies yea truculent massacres it stirs, in the
Church: Common wealth: Private Famelies, and all societies (the Gulphish and
Gibline Faction, that A^ud Guiccardin um
of the Adurin and Fregofi in Fusius.
Genoa: of Caesar and Pompey: Scylla and Marius: Cneus Pompeius, and Quintus In
the History of Italy. Apud Plutarchum and Livium.
Fabius, in Rome: of Orleans, and Burgundy in De quibus Antimach l. 3. page
773.774. and Comineus de rebus Gestis, Lodivici and Caroli, l. 60. p. 318.319
of France: of York and Lancaster in In which were slain a C. thousand men,
it is thought in years 28. Apud nostros Histor. Stow Speed, and Pelialbion.
England: being the bloody fruit that grew on this Tree: yea Dionisius
banishing Plato, and Phyloxenus the Poet, because they Eclipsed his glory: King
Philip of France, hating King Richard the first, of England: with a vatinian
deadly hatred, because at the siege of Achon, he bore away the prize for his
famoused valor: Alexander being unquiet in his thoughts, for the Trophies of
Achilles: the Romans envying Cecinna, because he was more richly Tacitus h. l.
2. part. 2.
adorned: as the Ladies maligned Solinna his Wife, because her Horse was so
richly furnished: it being the like plague to Women, that it is to men, in whom
usually it is praedominant: as appears in Rachel envying her sister Genesis 30.
Leah, because she was more fruitful: in the Companions of the Attick Merfine,
who murdered that beauteous Virgin, because she excelled Constantine
Agriculturae lib. 11. cap. 7.
them: In Juno (if we may moralize Poets) that turned Praetus Daughters into
Kine: and the Goddess, that envied Cyparissae, King Eteocles Daughters, for
their Jdem. Agricol. l. 10. cap. 5.
beauties; Heraldus l. 2. c. 12. de Bello saecro.
Niobes Arachnes and Marsias Tragedies proceeding from the same original:
besides all the experiments which we daily have in this kind, in both Sexes,
of all sorts and conditions) all these, let us see plainly, and prospicuously
as in a Glass: the small content which the proud Ambitious man, has in all
that he possesses: so long as he wants that which his Vanity desires and dotes
after: or so long, as another has ought above him, by which he thinks himself
disparaged, disgraced eclipsed.

And as it holds thus in the Ambitious, so much more in the Covetous man: he
wants that he Avaro deest quod ^bet et quod non habet.
has: (being possessed of his money rather then truly possessing it:) much
more is he perplexed with what he either really, or imaginarily wants* the
Pagan saw it; the practice of Thousand Covetous Carnalists proves it: Crescum
divitiae. Curtae tamen nescio quid, semper abest, rei, as riches, increase so
the desire swells to them, and surgeth much more: Its enlarged as Hell; and
insatiable as the fire: as the barren womb, the Grave: and Prove. 30.15.16
Death: for though they load themselves with thick Clay: though they have
more provision, and Viaticum: than they know well how to spend in the short
journey, of their way fairing life: yet the richest are as mad on the world, as
the poorest Peasants: they toil and moyle, how to get or gain over the Devils
back, or under his belly: they care not how, whence, where, from whom by what
Perfus aut nefas jure, vel injuria: non refer^ quomodo sed oportet habere. 1.
These. 4.6
means; Lyonly force, or Foxe-like Ex. 22.25. Eze. 18.13. Psalm, 15.
fraud; Nimrodian Genesis 10.9
Oppression; Usurious exhortation; or cosening Circumvention, it must be had:
though as Ahab got Naboths 1. Kin. 21.
Vineyard, Achan Josh. 7.
his Wedge of Gold: Judas Lu. 22.4. Math. 26.15 On which Text see D. Rawlison
and M. Dawes Sermons.
his silver: Michay his Mothers Iud. 17.2.
money: Gehezi his 2. King. 5.
silver Tallents: Crassus and Dionysius their abundant Treasuries: Balthazar
the Holy Dan. 5
Veslels: the Romans, their Tolusse Auru^ Tholosanum a Q. Caepione direptum
Jnfaelix Aulus Gellius l. 3. cap. 9.
Gold: by biting Usury, bloody Extortion, cunning Thefts, sly Cheatings, loud
Lies, hellish Oaths: pilling the poor, yea Church-robbings, Sacrilege;
reaving from God Mal. 3.8.
himself, and spoiling his Altars: and to effect these their Covetous ends;
they ride, they Per mare per terras, currit Mercator ad Jndos.
run, they friske, they fling, they curse, they swear, they tear, they rage,
they rave, as Bedlams, and men possessed with the Spirit Mammon, yea they toss
and tumble in their Beds, they set their wits a working, in the nights, as a
seething Pot, or bubling Spring, their hands and their feet work in the day:
as De Industria apum. ^ Virg. in Georgicis. Plin. l. 11. c. 10.11
Bees, and De Fornicis Arist. l. 7. cap. 38.
Ants, to lead home with all sedulity to their (honey) money Hives: their Chests,
their Nests, in the bottom of their bags, which like Hell, receives all that
come in, but willingly lets naught go out that is there jayled: thus is the
miserable- able-Miser, this Laban, this Nabal, ever restless in his thoughts,
and never satisfied: a slave a wretch, a dust Worm, a Brutigenist, a
Terrigenist; a Moale, a Swine, ever rooting in the Earth, with never an eye to
look up to Heaven: yea a very Mushrump, creeping from the Earth, on the Earth:
a Serpent licking the Genesis 3.14
dust, a Toad sucking the very Earth; a very Tree, his heart rooted in the
Earth: a slave to his Mammon, an Idolater to his golden Coloss. 3.5
Calfe: a debtor even on his deathbed to his back, and belly: yea as that
Father Sparges in In his Remains.
Camdens Epitaphs, sometimes dying to spare charges; what shall I say more? He
that as Augustine says, is troubled in his abundance, and sorrowsuil in
Augustatur ex Jnopia co^tristatur ex opulentia, August.
plenty; he that is sad and Tetricke even at Feasts and Festivals, because his
heart is locked in his Chest, he that ever fears, as that City Mouse in the
Apud Aesopum.
Fable: even at his repast, yea in his very Bed, as Theophrastus expresses, in
his Characters, least the Truncks should not be shut: the Chests fast, the
Capcase sealed; the Hall door bolted; yea if he see, but a Crow scratch on
the Dunghill; takes it as an ominous sign, as did that Enelio in In Amularia.
Plautus; that his money shall be dig'd up where he had hid it: he that is
jealous of all, and trusts none, as Pliny Suspicatur omnes timidusque sibi ob
auram insidi ari putat. Plinius proemio lib. 14.
notes; that fears his Wife, Children, Servants; as so many Timidus Plutus
semper predicatur, a Luciano and Aristophane.
Thieves: Nulli fidentes omnium formidant: he that serves his Genius, keeps
back from his blood: as Cyprian Epist. 2. l. 2
notes, and lives even besides himself; he that is as the Dog or Hog in the
Manger, never eating Hay themselves, nor suffering the Horse to eat, as the
Gryphins, Eras. adag. Chil. 3. Cent. 7
and great Indian Non mincres Canibus, Formicae aurum custodiunt Aelia^. 3.8.
Ants, neither touching some Mines themselves, nor suffering the Natives to dig
them; neither well employing his wealth, nor permitting others, he that sighs
when others Cantabit vacuus cora^ Latrone viator.
sing: and (Vigilans in pluma) cannot sleep upon a Bed of down: there be such
Fleas in his head, such distracting carking cares in his heart; which eat it
up daily (yea mightily) as the Moth does the Garment, and the rust the iron, he
that's ever Jllo- ru^ cogitatio nunquam cessat qui pecunias supplere diligunt
Guian tract. 15. cap. 17.
thinking quid Idolo suo immolet: How to serve his Cyprian prologo ad Sermones.
Idol: Cyprian Epist. 2. ut supra.
he that if his Corn or Cattle, fail or fall, is ready to hang himself:
(were it not for the cost of a Halter) he that thus basely sometimes changes
his very life for his lucre; as did Ananias and Saphira: yea sels his very
Soul for silver, as did Judas; his hands for bloody Treasons, as did In our
Chronicles.
Parry, and once Lopus: his health as did 2. Ki. 5.25
Gehezi: yea, Heaven it self: as do those whose 1. Cor. 6.9 and Phil. 3.17
God, is only white and yellow Earth, he that is diseased with this madness
of the Soul, as Augustine calls it; this insatiable Drunkenness as
Chrysostom notes it; this incurable Disease: as Cyprian terms Apud
Polyantheam and Polanum in Symph. Cath.
it; this ill habit, yielding to no remedies, as Budaeus thinks it; this
torture of the Soul, as Gregory held it; this Plague and vexation of Spirit;
this second Hell, as Solomon determines it, by an unerring spirit: shall I say,
this heart so hurried, and harrowed, with the Covetous Devil, have true
Contentation? This soul, solid satisfaction, which with the body is as it were
turned into Earth? And buried in Earth? Even as much peace affords, this lying
vanity, as Titius had (if the Poets had fained true) when the Vulter gnawed his
Liver: as Ravillack, when his flesh was pulled peecemeale with Pincers? Or as
that Propertius l. 2. and 4. et Seneca in Octavia.
Tantalus, when he starved in the midst of meae and drink.

Lastly, to instance in the appetite intellectual, he that knows the most of
any mere mortal man, and has attained to the period, and perfection of Arts,
Sciences, Languages, as far as is attainable in the short limit of our Ars
longa vlta brevis: secundum Hipoeratem.
life; yet as more fish go by the net, than come into it, so in some mysteries,
secrets, Conclusions, Notions, he may be so far to seek, that ignorance or
mere conjecture of what he knows not, may as much in some things perplexe
him, as all the rest, of his speculative, and practical knowledge contents
him: as for instance, notwithstanding that Pliny was a great Naturian yet how
did he greeve, that he could not find out the reason of the burning of the
Hill Vesuvius: in the inquisition after which he came so near, that he was
choked in the De cujus morte Plin. Junior in exempla, ad amicum, querdam.
Smoke: so ARISTOTLE, though the Prince of Philosophers, out of whose Basin,
those that followed him, may seem to lap (as the Poets out of HOMERS) yet
because he could not understand the motion of Caelius Rh. Antiq. Lect. l. 29.
cap. 8.
Eurypus; Quod capio perdo quod non capio mihi s^vae.
is said to drown himself: so HOMER the Laureat Poet, whom HORACE compares
with the best Quid utile quid nou before ac melius Cratippo ac Crantore dici.
Horat
Philosophers, is said to dye for grief, because he could not unfold a
Fishermans riddle: as SOPHOCLES is said too, to kill Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap.
12.
himself, because that one of his Tragedies was not approoved: as Apollonins
Rhodius, imposed voluntary Exile on himself, and lived ever, as a desolate
man, because he was Nonplus in one of his Plin. l. 7. cap. 23.
Poems: others overcome in Disputation public (like the Cantando victa moritur
Mizaldus Cent. 7.
Nighting all overcome in Cantando victa moritur Mizaldus Cent. 7.
singing: have dyed for sorrow, so how did NERO fret and vex himself, because
do what he could, though otherwise he was an ingenuous man, and a great
Cardan his Encomiu^ Neronis ^nter opusc^
Scholar: he could never attain to the knowledge and practice of the Dia^
N^ra^
Art Magic: (no more than our greatest Alcumists, after Hujus rei extant
varia Chimicorum volumina ut opus Ortulani codicilli Lulij Chenica Johan.
Cancinij Praxis Anglici Diaconi Morieni de transfiguratione Met. Thomae de
Albertus, l. 2. et 3. de Metallis. S^aia Philos. Liber dictus lapis Philos.
secundu^ Arnaeldi Rosarius philos. alius liber de pract. lapidis Phi. alius
Gebrialius Hermetis. Alius lumen novum ast. omnes Mir. ca^unt, vix credenda.
Stone, so much admired, desired as the Alchymists Helena, their Colchos,
golden Fleece, their silver G^ose ( as a Pope once called Venice) if they had
it; but all the craft is in the catching; so what Cosmographer can exactly tell
me whether there be Antipodes or no? What Travailer has found the head of
Determinat Petrus Alvares, l. hist. 18. et Gasp. Iesui^a, Scribens anno 1549.
Dubitat tamen Basilius exem. ho^. Plinius l. 5. cap. 9.
Nilus? What Navigator can can tell me, why the Needy in the Compass still
bends toward the North pole, as if there were a great Rock of Plinius lib.
34. cap. 14. Eusebius. hist. 11. cap. 23. et Vives in lib. 21. de Civit. Dei mira
ascribunt Magneti.
Loadstone, to attract it. So let Philosophers tell me, when or how the
Baerincles do breed in Wood? On Trees, in the De quibus vide Vincentium, hist.
l. 15. cap. 40. Fulgosum, l. 1. ap. 6. et Ortelium in Scotia.
Orchard? Without any further Generation? How the Phaenix comes to be revived
out of dead Ashes? How they prove that she is one, and but one? What virtue
there is in the blood of the Pelican, to revive from death to life her dead
young ones? Besides, the true cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea: as
also of the annual overflowing of Nilus once yearly fructifying Vnde
fertilior seges et piscium et Fruga^. Ael. lib. 10. c. 44.
Egypt, is disputed, the reasons given by Lib. 2.
Heroditus, Nature. quaest. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Seneca, Lib. 9. cap. 9.
Pliny, to some are not satisfactory, the Causes to, of Diversas terra motus
causas et diversorum sententias lege apud Senecam, lib. 6. quaest. Not.
Plutarch. de plac. Phil. 3. c. 15. Arist. Met. c. 7.
Earthquake; they are not Coniecturall? And the reasons why the Adamant
attracts the iron: the Ieat the straw, why the strings made of Wolves: will
never tune right, with those made of the Thermes of Sheep: with other such
like secrets in Nature, can be given no other, but only sympathy, and
Antipathy: so for Divinity, how many Divines are skeptic and doubtful, for
the manner of Christ's discention into See Disputes of B. Bilson, D. Willet, and
Parks, and Perkins his Problemes.
Hell: 2. Of his pr^sence, in the Sacrament. 3. Of the use of See Hockers
Policy, Eccles. Mr. Sprints book of Co^formity, and Powels de Adiaphoris.
Ceremonies. 4. Of communicating with an unable Minister. 5. Of the exact
beginning and ending of the Read D. Bound on the Sabbath.
Sabbath. 6. Of the fittest gesture in the Sea Dr. Mortons disputes extant,
compared with Parkers Works Antagoniste.
Sacrament. 7. How the Soul comes to be infected with sin, since it is
created and infused Disputatur per Pareum et Pererium, in Genesis et per Z^nchium
de seper operibus.
pure. 8. Whether we shall know one another or no in See Mr. Holland of the
fourefold state of man, fi^e libri. in 4.
Heaven. 9. See Morney of the Mass in Fol.
Whether the Angels be any way Vide Casmanni Angelo graphia^ and Smalcaeldum
quon^a^ Jesuitam de Natura Angel. Anglice.
material. 10. Whether there be Incubus and Apud Majolum de d^bus Canic. and
Wierum de Prestig. et Fonsecam nec non Timplerus in suis Metaphicis.
Succubus, as is affirmed with many Texts of Scriptures, that like that the
Eunuch read: Act. 8.30. are difficult and hard to be understood, even of the
most learned: are amiss understood of the profane and perverse: wrested (as
Peter speaks of some of Paul's 2. Pet. 3.16.
Epistles) to their own destruction.

No what satisfaction has the Soul in these things that are so defective and
Heteroclite? What Contentation, where so much is wanting? No more than a hungry
Giant has, that is but half filled, and rises with as great an appetite, as
when he sat down? Is not the Heart in this case, like a Barrel or Vessel,
half filled, that makes a noise, and a harsh sound if it be touched, even as
though it were empty? Or as a Ship half balanced, tossed like a Tennis-Ball, on
NEPTVNES Waves? Subjected to as many fluctuations, and dangers as if she had
in her no balance at all. *

CHAP. XVII. There Is no absolute Comfort and Contentation in any thing: every
Calling having his Cross, even Marriage itself.
Look to the further verifying of this point by Experience: for what man has
absolute Comfort and Contentation, in any one external thing, without his
Cross? his Molestation? Vexation, Perturbation? The cross being annexed to
every estate, calling, condition, from the Scepter to the Plough-share, from
the Court to the Cart; as inseparable, as blackness from the Ethiopian: else
we should and would have our Heaven, here upon Earth, and look for no other
content from above, then the World affords us here below: to prevent which, to
waine us from the world, (as Children from the Dug) our Spiritual Physician
imbitters these externals so us: no man but knows in some things where is
stung, wrung, pained and pinched? None is so well tuned and composed, but there
is some string jarring, and out of Tune, which spoils all his music, some
cross, or other, commixt with that Creature, that lust, that Idol, which most
takes up his heart, (as Aloes and Gall, mixed with honey) makes his lips worse
relish his Lettice: and as sour sauce to his sweet meats, distasts his Pallat;
yea as Colloquintida, spoils his Pottage, or as a sudden dampe either quite
puts out the light of his chief delights at some times, or other; or at least
Clouds and shrowds it, that it is scarce seen.

The largeness of the matter already discussed; will not suffer me to run
through every particular, or most, as I have done in other Arguments. I Will only
instance in one, and that is Marriage: Instituted of Genesis 2.18
God, honored of John. 2. Christ was borne of a Virgin: yet a Virgin married:
so he honors both estates, by his birth: Marriage and single-life.
God, Men and Angels: yea honorable among all men, says the Apostle, not
only Christians, but Jews, Turks, and Pagans, Heb. 13.4
as Hystories tell us: (and why not amongst Friars and Jesuits too, Dant de
vxore dunenda, and dear Oeconomina interceter ipse Plato l. 3. de legib.
as well as Jews, if they be men) in praise of which Ordinance of God, as the
Pens of the learned, ancient, and modern, Bellarm. de sacram. matr. Anto^. et
Gerson ^n opere morali
Papists themselves, that will needs coin it a Sacrament, have been
exercised: so I will not now expatiate into this Field of matter; but only
offer to your consideration, how few carnal men (which like the Luke 17 27
Sodomites, and old worldlings, marry in the Flesh, only to satisfy Carnality
and sensuality, without ever having an eye, to marry in the Lord) have
Contentation in their matches: (for of Gods Children, who make the Lord, their
delight, who marry in the i. Cor. 7.39
Lord, and are blessed in their choice, as was Genesis 12.
Abraham, and Genesis 24.
Isaac, and who using Marrriage as though they used it 1. Cor. 7.27
not: with moderation and mortification, having patience to bear, and overcome
the crosses incident to marriage, of such I speak not: (though these also
sometimes find this estate, a yoke heavy Est vita illa humuis quidem, ut
seulpsit Melancton ad Camerarum de Matrimonio Lutheri, inter consilia Theol.
extat. page 37.
enough) as did Elkanah, and 1. Sam. 1.8
Anna, Elizabeth, and Luke 1.13.
Zachary, Rachel and Genesis 30.1.
Sarah in their barrenness: Abraham in the Turmoiles with Ge^. 21.11
Hagar and Ismael: David in the withholding of his Wife 2. Sa^. 3.14
Michol, the untimely death of three 2. Sa^. 12.17
Children: the deflouring of a fair Thamar.
Daughter: Gesuer and Cardan though great Scholars, in their poor means to
maintain a Family: Beza, in his second match, with a brawling Zantippe: to
omit Moses his bickerings about his Ethiopian Numb. 12 1.2
Wife: Jobs just anger against his blasphemous Job. 2.10.
Wife: Jacobs anger at Rachel his fair, yet impatient Genesis 30.2
Wife: his greater anger at the deflouring of Genesis 34.5 6.7
Dinah: the bloody cruelty of Simeon and Verse. 30.
Levi, the Incest of his eldest Genesis 49.3
Ruben: the conceited murder of his beloved Ge^. 37.34
Joseph: the departing of his youngest Ge^. 42.36
Benjamin: to omit all others, that have found the best contents in wife, and
children, but comfortable Crosses) but I speak of such Carnalists, and
sensualists especially, who as cursed of God in whatever they set their hearts
on, and their hands too, have God against the^ in this business: not sending any
good Angel with the^ (as with Abraham's Ge^. 24.40
serva^t) to prospe^ them: but rather as the Angel did with Nu^. 22.12
Balaam, to oppose, and resist them: such either find Crosses, if not curses in
their matches: or make their Crosses, by their lewd, luxurious, filthy,
foolish, churlish, jealous, indiscreet, unconscionable carriage toward their
Yoke-fellowes: like the Mice or Rats in the Walls, or as the Conyes in the
Rocks, if they find no hole, make holes; making and taking faults themselves,
if they find none; or as an Ape, with his claws in a cut Taffety gown, making
little holes, greater: venial faults mortal: molehils, Mountains; by their
unequal aggravation, to their no small vexation, yea opposition, (as two
strange snarling Dogs, in a pair of couples) if not divorce and sequistration,
from the Bond and A Vinculo et a T^oro.
Bed of marriage, wit, beauty, all external, internal, gifts (when they come
once to be sick, and to surfeit one of another) giving no more content than a
gilded painted poison; than that fair, yet strait shoe, which so pincht that
Roman, that he could not be quiet till he put it off! To verify this that is
affirmed let us but open our eyes, and look into the world; and we shall see
such plenty of inductions, that plenty will make us Jnop^ me copia reddit.
penurious, not knowing which first to take: for my part, when I read and
consider, how soon, and on how slight an occasion, Assuerus repudiates his
beauteous Esth. 2.
Vasti: Mark Anthony the Daughter of Caesar, inamoured on the gorgeous Appianus
l. 1.
Cleopatra: the cause of his Tragedy: how Philip the French King is weary of
the Daughter of Denmark, in one night, and sends her back Nubrigensis l. 4.
c. 24.
again, because she had a smelling-breath: (as Selenchus King of Syria, never
more affected his fair Stratonices, because by chance he saw her bald pate)
how Herod upon false suspicions, beheads his Josephus Antiq.
Marian: and after finding her clear, had well nigh hanged himself: how Nero
divorced his fair painted Suetonius et Dian in Nero^e, and Tacitus lib. 16.
Poppea, though she washed her self every day in Goates-milke, (after the
fashion of some Court-painted Iezabels) to give him (or some else) content: how
soon Iustina, the Roman Lady, was made away by her jealous Camerarius Cent. 2.
c. 54. oper. succ. sic discite patres. ne nubat fatuo, filta vstra viro Jnstat,
autem Aurelius in Co^stantino V^lateranus in Chilperico: Plin. l. 14. l. 27.
Husband: how cruelly the fair Irene the Constantinopolitan Captive, was
butchered by the grand Turk, at the very time, which she expected to be
Empress.

2. When I read again how many great worthies have been wronged by the Luxury,
and Incontinency of their Wives: as Agamemnon, by his Clytemnestra: Menelaus of
Greece, by his Helena: Phylip of Macedon by his Olympia: Artax^xes of Persia by
his Abused by Apollonious Chous a young Physician.
Empress: Pertinax His Wife prostitute by a Fiddler.
the Emperor: Arthur Defiled by Mordred one of his Knights.
of England, by his Gynthera: or Helena Alba: as also how many goatish and
luxurious great men, have wronged their Wives: as besides these newly recyted:
that great Caesar, who (like many great ^s^a, in Vitellio, Galla Alcibiade
Antonio Cleomene Philippo, patre Alexandri, immo in ipso ta^dem Alexandro, cum
Roxana Barbara cum alijs, Patritius l. 4. de regno tit. 11. page 258.
Soldiers) was as effeminate in his Courting E^o Cleopatra, Lollia posthumia
Mutiae Tertulla cum alijs, unde omnium Mulierum, vir dictus. Apud Ravisium in
Theatro Philos. l. 5. c. 54. p. 653.
Tent, as Martial in the Field: Mahomet the great Turk: LADISLAVS King of
Montaigne in his Essays l. 2. c. 23.
Naples: Philippus called bonus of Who had 14. Bastard Huterus in ejus vita.
France, Laurence Medices: and the great Captain Castrucanui of Idem in vita
Castruca^i
Italy: Casmirus Comerus l. 12. hist.
with many more, that have been as much blemished by Venus, as famoused by
Mars: as Celius lib. 16. cap. 62. Instances in Pausanias: Tully lib. 2. de
finibus, in Appius Claudius. Match. l. 8. hist. Flor.
Livy l. 8. in Papirius.

3. Withal, when I have considered how many fearful fruits and Tragical
effects of Jealousy, are recorded in all Authors, seen in all experiments,
chiefly when Age and Youth, are unequally yoaked: as January and May, in
Chaucers Tales: old Sophocles doting on young Archippe: or an old woman married
to a young man: (as if Maxentius again; should chain the living, and dead
together) as fit for him as Snow for Tamapta Nuptijs qua^ Bruma frugibus Navis
Sylva Nupt. lib.
Harvest: as a fit subject for Martial, and Apuleius again to scoff at: Cum
tros Capilli quatuor dentes, pectus Cicadae, Mart. 7.3. Epigra^. 62.
or when men have only aimed at Beauty without honesty: wedding to their woe,
the fair and false-hearted: the beauteous and vicious, with as good success,
and to as much content, as Vulcan who married Venus: Claudius the lustful
Messalina: Plotomy the whoorish Thais: or Hierome King of Syracuse in Sicily,
L. 5. de Asino aur^.
who espoused Pytho, a Keeper of the Stews.

4. When I read of the whoorish tricks, which such as are branded with the
name of Meretrix have, to gull and beguile their husbands, which I had rather
any should read in Stephanus praefat. Her.
Navisan, and Dial. aemoris.
Platina, than I relate.

5. Considering how inconstant and incontinent many couples be, that after the
first- Honeymoone (as they say) after which the edge of appetite, in many is
dulled: their thoughts begin to mad, and gad after others, as Beasts that run
to rut, imagining every face fairer, than that they may call their own,
womanish Viragoes (like that Lucretia a Lady of Senes, doting on Aeneas
sylvius.
Eurialus: and Putiphars wife (on Ge^. 39.9
Joseph) enamored on some one they see properer than their Husbands) or (like
that Miloes wife in Jn Asino aureo.
Apuleias) doting on every one: I then think, the small Contentation, some
have in marriage: more than the Fish in the Net, the Fox in the Trap.

6. But above all, when I seriously consider the strange, and almost incredible
effects of Jealousy: (whether justly caused, or causeless) even to admiration
and commiseration: this Hag, this Davus, this Devil, this fury, this frenzy,
this fever, as Ariosto calls it, ever full of fears, treacheries, and
suspicions, as Hom. 80. suspitionum. plena and Jusidiarum.
Chrysostom notes it, so hurrying and transporting those that have bin
possessed with it.

1. That it has caused some to watch, their suspected Mates, wherever they
As Procris did watch her husband Cep^alus, hunting in the Wood, by who^ she was
slain. Ovid. lib. 7. M^am. hinc Procridis Telum apud Erasmum.
went, as narrowly as the Cat watches the Mouse, as Apud Ovidium and Tex torem
page 1.
Argus, watched Io, as the watchful Dragon, the golden Aureu^ Vellus a Jason^
deporta^um.
Fleece, as the waking Virg. 8. Aeneid te Jamter Orci.
Cerberus, that passage to Hell.

2. To others it has lent legs, if not wings, to fly after them, follow them,
as the Dog that sents the Fox, or the Hare: haunting and hunting them, as
spirits, per mare, per terras, by land, and Sea, as did JOAN Queen of Spain,
Wife to King Philip, and mother to Ferdinando and Charles the 5. who out of
furious jealousy, could not be restrained either by her Mother Isabella, or
the Archbishop of Foledo, from following Philip into the Low Countries: where
she played strange Gomesius l. 3. de rebus gestis Ximenij.
Reekes. The like spirit, possessing the Wife of Iovianus Pontanus, as himself
confesses.

3. Others that durst not go abroad, until they had committed their Wives,
Ant. Dial.
to the custody of special Keepers; Vide Epist. a Dionisium amicum, in have
rem.
which was the case of Hypocrates the Physician, when he went to Abder, to
visit Democritus: as also the Sophies of Persia, the Tartarian Mogors, the
Kings of China, and the Grand-Senior of the Turks, Geld yearly innumerable
Infants, and keep Eunuchs, for this purpose, even at this Riccius expeditione
in Snias, l. 3. c. 9. sic Lanclavius de rebus Turcicis.
day.

4. Others, keeping up their Wives: jayled, and confined to their Prison, as
the Zeriffes of Persia, that none see them: (if not locked up, as the Italians)
seldom coming abroad, and not then neither, except Alexander ab Alexand. l.
5. c. 24. Vilata teta in^edunt.
veiled, as is related also of the Persian Wives.

5. Others most shamelesly inclined, as is related by Leonius Var. hist. lib.
3. cap. 59.

6. Others as shamefully abusing themselves, as is recorded by Steukins,
Observat. l. 4.

7. Others would never be satisfied, till they have caused their Wives to
swear for their Honesties: as though Perjury, says Contra Mendacium
Augustine, were no less sin, than Adultery.

8. Others, as though their Wives (like Stockefish, Wallnut Trees, and Irish
boys,) were better for beating, giving them soundly, this Vnguentum
Bacchulinum, as they say of the Alexander Gaginus his Discriptio^s of Muscovie,
cap. 5.
Muscovites, till they make them confess, as upon a Rack, their Culpabilities.

9. Others, at their pleesures, divorcing them, when they either are weary of
them, suspect them, or too much respect some, as sometimes our wild or vilde
Irish.

10. Others in their Paganish and Popish Devotions or Deviations, trying their
honesties, at the Shrines of Saints, or Tombs of Martyrs, as that squeazie
stomackt Tailor, in the World of In Folio, or the apology for Heroditus.
Wonders, with his bare bald-head, entreated so long on his knees, the shrine
of S. JOHN Baptist, (that chaft Saint as he called him) to tell him whether
his Wife were dishonest or no, till the wind blew a stone down upon his Crown,
from the old Image, which sent him away raving, raging, and blaspheming: as it
was a custom once too, if we believe our Superstitious Irish, to try their
Wives at that great Stone, which may be seen as you ride to Waterford, called
St, Loures Camden mentions it in his Britannia.
Stone, now cleft a sunder, since it lost his Virtue) out of which; the Devil,
(if ought as at Delphos once) gave answer.

11. Others, have tried the honesties both of Wives and Maids at other places,
as Feronias Halicarn, lib. 3.
Temple: Memnons Statue, Pans Tabitus h. ^.6.
Cave, were used to that purpose: as also Dianaes ^amathius ^.8.
W^ll, Augustine relates De Civit. Dei, l. 10. c. 16.
some so tried; all by the delusion of the Devil; says De spectris P^rt. 1.
p. 19
Lavater. if any effect were produced.

12. Others causing them to go over hot coals, for their Trial: as
Nicephorus of Cuneganda, the wife of Henry Bavarus Emperor, who was put to
this Trial: Sigonius of An. 887.
Richarda, Wife to CHARLES the third, and PIUS the Descriptione Europa c. 46.
second, and others.

13. Other jealous Husbands, strangely tyranizing over them, whom they
suspected: of which there be innumerable examples, in Greece, Spain, Italy,
Turkey, Affricke, Asia, and in all the hot Countries, where hotspurre
Zelotipists have resided.

14. Some raving so far in this mad frenzy, of jealousy, (chiefly Women, in
whom according to Poe^. l. 3.
Scaliger, and In his Essays.
Montaigne, by reason of the weakness of their Sex, this Passion or
perturbation most reigns) that they have lost their health: been distempered
in their bodies, and brains: as Physicians in some, Skenkius Observe. l. 4. c.
de vter.
exemplify.

15. Others, as Tigers, and enraged Lyonesses, armed with fury and frenzy,
setting upon those, whom they have suspected to have wronged them in their
Mates: as a Merchant killing his Wife in his humor, Apud Fulgosum, et Poggium.
afterward precipitating himself; a Doctor of the Law, cutting off his man's
nose: chiefly Women (that like all K. James his Observation on the 5. Petition
of the Lords Prayer.
Cowards, are most cruel, where they prevail) have exceeded. That Queen JOAN
of Spain, that tyrannized over a poor Wench, with whom she suspected her
Husband, cutting off her hair, and dragging her about: yea our English Queen
Elianor, as a second Medea poisoning and tyranizing over, that fair In t^
strit Chronicis.
Rosamond, her husbands Paramour: but especially the Wife of great Zerxes, as a
Megera, or infernal Fury, falling upon the Wife of Masista, cutting off her
Paps, ears, lips, tongue, throwing them to the Dogs, fleaing off her skin,
slitting besides, the Nose of her Daughter Heroditus l. 9. in Calliope de
Amestri.
Artaynta: are sufficient proofs how mild, and moderate jealous Women be,
where they may revenge,

16, Lastly, to Epitomize many Histories in one; when I read the Tragical
examples, recollected in this By Democritus Junio^ part. 3. Memb. 3.
kind, both new and old, of Alexander Tullius Of. l. 2. sic Ovid. in Ibem.
inque tuo Thalamo jugaleris more Pheraei
Phereus, of Anthonius Lucilla^ vxorem veneno petijt Volaeter.
Verus, of Demetrius the son of Antigonus, of Nicanor: Pherus of Egypt,
Toreus, Atrens, Thiestes, Virg: Aen^id. l. 11. Juvenal. S^tyra 6. and Seneca in
Agamemnone.
Agamemnon: with many more; chiefly Hercules poisoned by Officina. Text. lib. 2.
page 204.
Dianira: Cilpericus made away by Ferdigund his Wife, the French Pau^us
Aemilius hist. Franciae l. 1.
Queen; and other Husbands poisoned; massacred, and murdered by their As
Ninus by his wife Semiramis, the son of Aegistus, by the Daughters of Danaus.
Antiochus by Laodice, Claudius by Agrip. Apud Iustinum. Senecam Palerium
Maximum. Plin. l. 32. cap. 22.
Wives, out of Iealousies chiefly, or some other discontents: loathing whom
they should love, and loving those lustful men, whom they should loath; as
Clytemnestra did Aegistus: Wives again, and other suspected persons, being as
cruelly cut off by Husbands, for the same causes; (as was Iustina a Roman Lady;
and Cecinna murdered by Vespatian, with many more examples of both Sexes; which
both Aug. lib. 7 de civ. Dei.
Divines, Camer. horarum Iubis. cap. 53. and cent. 2.
Historians, Faelix Platerus Observe. l. 1.
Physicians, and Ariosto l. 31. Staff, 1.
Poets, have Coacervated and gathered as in a Bundle) and yet nevertheless,
when I consider: that notwithstanding all these eyes and spies in the head, and
bloody Knives in the hands of Jealousy, wicked and wily men, (but especially
subtle and Serpentine Women) have had Mercuries to charm this Argus: means to
hoodwincke this Lyncaeus: to muzzle this Cerberus, to delude this wakefull
Dragon Jealousy: by one means or other, venting their stolen waters by the
Milne, which the Milnar knows not of: Jn Horto h. l. 2. c. 24.
as Garcias reports of Women in the East Indies, about Goa, that will by a
certain Herb, make their Husbands sleep for 24. hours, like Dormise, till
they abuse them at their pleasure: with a thousand such pranckes, if we believe
the witty Ariosto l. 28. Staff. 7.
Italian, that knew them best: when I ponder that hard Dilemma (knottier than
Sampsons and Sphinx Riddles, to some to unclose) which the Pagan long since
propounded: he that marries a foul one, shall have a Clog, and burden: (as
deformed Filia Henrici Lanagraviae Hessiae: Cromerus hist. l. 2.
Aleida was to Casmirus) if a fair one, perhaps a common and a wanton
want-out, as Messalina was to Claudius (there being more such; than Lucretiaes,
Penelopees, Vxor Tigridis apud Zenepho^tem in Cyroped. l. 3.
Armenaes) the Rara est co^cordia forma atque pudi citiae, Ovid.
fairest, not ever being the chastest, unless Gods Grace, and fear make the^
as the Kings Daughter, all beauteous Psalm. 45. 13
within: as were the Matrons of the Patriarchs: besides all the Crosses from
Children, which here might be enumerated: many having no more comfort of them,
than NOAH of his accursed Ge^. 19.25
CHAM, DAVID of his 2. Sa^. 18.33.
ABSOLAM, MAVRITIVS the Nieeph. h. lib. 18. c. 58.
Emperor, and Ier. 51.10
ZEDECHIAH of others, whom they saw murdered, before their eyes: but a great
deal of sorrow and discontent, as ISAAC and REBECCHA had of their profane
Ge^. 26.34
ESAV, that was a heart-breake unto them: many living to see them take
ill-courses, like the Lu. 15.13
Prodigal, or to come to untimely ends, as Elies 1. Sa^. 4.17
sons, and 2. Sam, 13 29.
Ammon. I say all these things poysed and pondered, speak to my Judgment, and
work upon my affections: that even Marriage it self, the nearest and dearest
Union with the Creaturs, (being to all profane persons, but even a snare and
a curse, as all other Ordinances of God abused) but even Darius his golden
Aureis Catenis vinctus suit Darius, a Besso apud Curtium.
fetters, can give no true rest, and Contentation to the soul of man, till it
be by a true, a lively, and a justifying Faith, married and espoused to the
Lord Osee 2.19
JESUS CHRIST, and forsaking all others, keep it only unto him never to
departure, no not when death (as in terrestrial Marriages) sequestrates it
from the body. *

CHAP. XVIII. Our inordinate Appetites after Earthly things, so divide,
disturb, distemper, and distract our hearts, by diverse passions and
perturbations, that instead of hoped Contentation: we reap vexation,
exangeration, distraction.
I Consider yet more, in this Argument, ere I draw in my Sails, in this Ocean
of matter, (knowing the Judgments of men must be convicted, ere their hearts
can be converted; else we build without a foundation) to keep me then still,
(according to the practice and praecept of best Melancto^, in concilijs
Theolog. and Camerbrius in Cent. 2. oper. succis. p. 287. and Gorlicius in
axiom Eccl. page 334.
Divines) to old and known Phrases, in weighty points without words new coined,
and minted: these sublunary Vanities, allegorized, and masked here under the
phrase of unfilling Husks, being too much desired and doted on, by men of
vain hearts, and unstable minds, as once the Prodigal, are so far from
filling, satisfying, and contenting their Souls, or producing and procuring
unto them, that true Peace, assured Joy, fixed Rest, satisfactory Contentation,
and contentive satisfaction, which all would have (as they pretend in their
ends, yet seek not to attain in the right use of the means) that on the
contrary they subject the Soul to exceeding divisions, distractions,
exangerations and vexations, by differing dominiering passions, lusts,
affections, perturbations, which reign in the heart, as ill-humours, in the
body; as Rebels in the Commonwealth, or factious spirits in a City: chiefly,
when there is neither mean nor measure, observed in prosecuting, nor
moderation, temperancy, and indifferency kept in possessing; nor patience in
the parting, with these outward things, but the heart being too much overjoyed
in the Flux, and Springtide of these externals: too much again contracted, and
straightened by grief, and overwhelmed by dolor; in the want (for quantity or
quality) of the things desired, or in the total, or partial deprivation of
them once possessed, in these cases, straits and exigents, such strange
unexpected, and Tragical effects, are produced, as abandon all peace, and make
it fly further, than Saul or Absolon caused David to fly, and put to death all
true trantranquility, as Athalia did the Kings 2. Kin 11.1.
seed: for by the reign of some one Lust, the rage of some one desire,
unaccomplished, or the struggling of some two or more different Passions, (as the
struggling of contrary Elements: or the striving of JACOB and ESAV, in the womb
of Ge^. 25.22
REBECHA) Reason is usually eclipsed, the memory dulled, the Will blinded or
bewitched: the imaginations corrupted, the affections as a Harp, or a Cytarin
untuned: or (as the bones of a Felon in the wheel, or in the Strippado, broke
or disioynted, the heart distempered, and distracted: the natural, vital, and
animal spirits, consumed, or corrupted the mind, (as the Flint by the
droppings of Vt Gutta lapidem, sic paulatim, hae peuctrant animum. August.
Rain, penetrated and pierced; the Conscience gauled and wounded: a black
unconquerable (and often uncureable) melancholy De modo vide apud Cardanum, de
subtilitate lbi. 14. and Corn. Agrippani de occulta Phylos. l. 1 cap. 63.
produced: the brains dried, natural, rest and sleep deprived, or abated, by
which according to Physicians) further, natural heat, is sometimes
overthrown; Diseases are engendered, Health De his effectis consule lemium de
Jnstitutione ad vitam optimam c. 26 Galenum de sanitate tuenda, l. 3. and l. 2.
Cratonis Consil. 21.
abated: and life shortened: in a word, all parts, all powers, of man,
perverted, subverted, or turned topsie turvie, as a man with his head
downwards, or heels Augustinus de Civitaete Dei l. 14. c. 9
upwards, or or as a door turned off the Philo Iudaeus l. de alleg.
hindges: these Thunderbolts of passions and pertbrbations, as they are
Pycolomineo Grad. 1. c. 24.
called, over-blowing all; as sharp Gales of Winds, overthrow the Ship; or as
the bolt from the broken Cloud, breaks down the Oak, or as a violent
Torrent, or Sea broke out: bearing down all before them: overthrowing all, as
a foolish Coachman, guiding wild Horses, overthrowes the Fertur aequis
auriga, nec currus audit habenas.
Coach, and all that are in it; as that foolish Phacton, misguiding once the
Chariot of the Torens velut agere rupto, sternit agrot, sternit sata.
Sun, in the Ovid. l. 11 Metam.
Poet, sets all in a fiery Fabula Ethice exponitur per natalem Committem in
Mythiol. and in Theatro, Ph. page 850.
Combustion.

According to my use, it is easy to give useful instances of the pernicious
and dangerous, if not deadly and deplorable effects of all Passions and
Affections whatsoever, if once exorbitant and extravagant, (as Augustine
himself has noted) placed upon wrong Objects.

To instance in Joy it self, which seems to be most pleasant and delectable
of all the rest, De Civ. Dei l. 14. c. ^9.
yet as NOAH was subjected to scorn and fcaith, by overdrinking even of that
Wine, which moderately taken, had been to his Contentation, so many by their
inordinate, and unlimited Joys, expose themselves to derision, distraction, if
not destruction, for have not some in the obtaining of these Honors,
Victories, Offices, Praeferments, Possessious, which they hoped for been so
over-ioyed that they could not sleep? Have not others run stark mad? As
over-joyed, and over conceited of their own worth? In accomplishing some
well-deserving work? As Lib. 5. S^p.
Cardan mentions of a Smith in Millan, that upon some extraordinary
commendations given, for his refinding of an Instrument of Archimenides, for
Joy run mad like that Soldier, Camus in Jn vita Artaxerxis
Plutaroh, who wounding King Cyrus in Battle, grew thereupon so arrogant, that
in short space he lost his wits: Others we see laughing in their sleeve, and
singing Iubilemus, and a Plaudite to themselves, in something done, name and
fame, worthy, as they suppose, as overjoyed, and tickled in their own
conceits, in a spice of Frenzy, have proclaimed themselves fantastickes, and
proud fools, to the whole world: as appears in Zerxes, that would needs whip,
shackle, and manacle the Sea: and send a Challenge to Mount De quo^t supra.
Athos 2. In Canutus a King of England, that would needs command the proud
Lanquet in Chronicis.
Waves. 3. In Menicrates the Physician, that for his great Cures, would needs
be named Aelian. lib. 12.
Jupiter. 4. In Alexander, that would needs be the Son of Ex Curtio Strigel.
lib. 1. Ethic. page 39.
Jupiter, and be clothed like Hercules, in a Lions skin. 5. In Cotys King of
Thrace, that in all haste must be married to Minerva. 6. In Sapor the Persian
King, that after his Victories over Valerian, will needs be Brother to the
Sun and Moon. De his and alijs, ex superbia et Jnsolentia insaenius, consule
Philippum, in locis Ma^lij, p. 476. ^t part. 1. Postil. p. 576. Strigell^us in
Psalm. 73. p. 7. Praecipua in Themistocle, Po^p^io, Philippo Metello, ^t Wolseo
nostro Anglo. instant Patritius de regno l. 4. tit. 18. p. 286. Pencerus in
Chro^. 26. Aprilis et. 14. Iunij. Anno 72. Cytre^ in Chron. Saxoniae, l. 7.213
et Hyppolit. in s^o Consiliario p. 220.
7. In Antonius, the Roman, that will be crowned with Ivy: and adored like
Paterculus poster. Volu^,
Bacchus. With other such fits of Frenzy: as Petrarch once acknowledged Lib.
1. de Mundi contempt^.
ingenuously, he himself was subject unto.

Yea some by too much dilating and diffusing their spirits, have dyed
suddenly, as over-ioyed, and too vehemently surprised, as was that aged
Father at Rhodes, embracing his two sons, that came Victors from the Games of
Olympia: Iovius Apud Goulart. page 478.
reporting the like of Sinan, General of the Turk^ Armies, recovering his
only son, whom he supposed slain; the like the French Histories of a
Mother, that received her Son in the Civil Wars safe and sound, whom she
supposed dead: the like the Italian Histories Guiccard. alleged by the same
Goulart.
relate of Livio, and Camilla, two Constant Lovers, that being long crossed by
the Father, and Claudio the Virgins Brother: at last, inioying one another, as
overjoyed the first night of their marriage, were found dead in one Bed
together: but above all, as most memorable, being that which both Jn vita L^
onis ho. l. 4.
Iovius, and that joviall Essays l. 1. cap. 2.
Montaigne writ, of that merry Pope Leo, the tenth: who upon certain News of
the taking of Millaine, which he extremely desired, (like a peaceable Praelate
as he was) fell by an excessive Joy, into such a present Feav^r, as shakt him
out of Saint Peter's Seat, like a mellow or rotten-Apple.

But a great deal more dismal and Tragical, have been, and are the contrary
Passions, and perturbations of sorrow: as in thousand examples may be
instanced, and in daily experience verified.

1. Some for the death and loss of Friends: as David for his 2. Sam. 18 33
Absolon, for his 2. Sa^. 1.17
Jonathan; for 2. Sa^. 3.3
Abner, for 2. Sam. 13 31
Ammon: Jacob for his Ge^. 37.34
Ios^ph: Alexander for his Impe^dit, in ejus Funus 10. mi^lia Talentorum
Gorlicus axiom. Pol. page 244.
Ephestion: Achilles for his Apud Hemerum.
Patroclus: Hercules for his Hylas: Adrian for his Antonius: Aegens for his
Officina Textor. page 255.
Son, the Widow of Naim for Luke 7.13
hers: Augustine for Monica, his He often speaks of her in his works: Chiefly
in his Confessions, and l. de cura pro^mortuis.
Mother, Quintilllian for his Praefat. l. 6.
Son: Cardan and De libris proprijs.
Mezentius for their only Sons: Niobe for her Solicito lachrimans defluis, a
Scypio: propertius l. 2.
Children: Portia for her Vixisset Brutus tunc non tam clara fuisset Portia,
Pamph.
Brutus: Pompey's Wife for her p Pompey: Hecuba for her Off. Tex. l. 5. page
553 Apud Sen. in Traged.
Priamus: ANDROMACHE for her HECTOR: mourning sometimes, to madness:
sometimes, to fearful howlings, and loud laments, (as the Greeks and our
Irish over their dead) sometimes in sorrow continuated, (like Rachel for her
Mat. 2.18
Children,) not to be comforted: even to annual, if not continual) memorials
of them, and mournings for them: as the Primitive Church celebrating her
Martyr., the whole Roman Empire lamenting the death of Augustus Caesar, and of
Titus Totus orbis Lugevat Victor.
Vespatian: The Jews bewailing their Apud Tumulos ^artyrum inde ta^dem
superstitio^e, invocationes. See M. Perkins his Proble^s, de Invoca^.
Ioshuah; and 2. Chapter 35.25
Josias: Rome Papal, their Leo decimus: the French, their Lewis the 12. Josh.
24.
the Bohemians their Aeneas Sylvius.
Zisca: the Turkish Army their Mortuns est Mustapha, hodie Turcicum. Proverb.
Mustopha, We English our Prince Henry, Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth:
yea Patients some: mentioned by Montan. Cons. 242.
Physicians, Turtle-like) have bemoaned the death of their Mates, many years
together, Budaeus l. 5. de ass.
some being so greeved and sadded: that they have suddenly dyed with them: as
Pyramid with Apud Ovidium.
Thisbee, some dying for them, as Dido for the absence of her Apud Virgilium
Aeneas.

2. Brothers also as impatient of life, following voluntarily their Brothers to
the Grave: as Zeanger son to Sultan Solomon, stabbing Centorius l. 6. de
bello Transilvano
himself, when he saw is worthy Brother Mustapha strangled with a Bow-string.

3. Sons deadly surprised with grief, at the death of their Parents: as one
of the Sons of Gilbert Duke of Montpenzier, falling down a^ the sight of his
Fathers Guiccard. l. 5. de belloltalico, sect. 5
Tomb, at Pouzzoll.

4. Chiefly, Fathers bursting their very hearts, at the death of their
Children, as RAIZCIAT, a Nobleman, discovering under his Helm, that i^ was his
own son new slain, that fought so valiantly, in the Hungarian Wars,
violence of grief vanquishing his vital Montalgno Essays, l. 1. c. 2. and
Jovius in Histor.
Spirits, he fell down instantly dead.

5. Others, being so enraged and impatient, that they have themselves leapt
into the Graves of their Sic Pythius Bythinius in mortui filij Monumentum, se
coniecit.
Dead: as the best beloved Wives amongst the M. Polus Venetus, and Vertoma^nus
Indians: others have slain many living (in an unadvised distraction) to
accompany the Ghosts of their dearest dead: as the Tartars at this day, killing
Boterus Amphitheat.
many Inferiors, to attend the Funeral of great Princes.

Others again, have been as passionate, and sorrowful, at and in the loss
of Honors in War, and in Peace: as MARK ANTHONY, that sat silent in his
Ship, and sullen three days together, after he was overcome by Plutarchus in
Antonio.
Caesar: drooping as a Cock, that is beat out of the Cocke-pit: as Figueroa a
Spanish Captain, kills himself with his man's Pistol, for his negligence and
Cowardice at the siedge of Ascanius Centurius l. 4. Belli Tra^silv.
Segedin: as PHILIP, Father to PETER STROSSE, chief of the banished men of
Florence, against Duke COSMO of Medicis; being taken Prisoner in fight, falls
upon his own sword, and kills Jovius in supplement^ Sabellici.
himself: as did 1. Sa^. 31.4.
SAVL and his Armor-bearer in like case, rather than they would fall into the
hands of the Uncircumcised: as CLEOPATRA with her Maids, stings her self to
death with Plutarck. et Ravisius, lib. 4. p. 553.
Aspes, rather than in her Captivity, she will serve, either the Triumph, the
love, or the Lust of Caesar: as Bajazet knockes out his brains in an Iron
History of Tamberlain, chiefly Amerarius ^per. succ. page, 330.331.
Cage: rather than he will be carried about as an Affrican Monster, by his
Conqueror Tamberlaine: as our Cardinal Woolsey will rather poison himself,
by the way from Caw-wood to Speed, in Hour^cum 8
London, ere he will to his foreseen shame, (as a second Achitophel) stand
to the trial of his accusations: as Cato Plutarch. in Catone.
Vticensis, will rather out of sullenness and stearnesse of his spirit, kill
himself, than he will submit to Caesar's mercy: thus either felt or feared
shame and disgrace, and not attaining or retaining Credit, Reputation, Honor,
desired, and (thought to be deserved) has troubled the best, even in their
spirits: as Barronnesse (disgraceful in these days) not a little troubled
Genesis 16.1
Sarah, Genesis 30.1
Rachel, 1. Sa^. 1.8.13.
Anna: the Spirit of Prophecy, that was on others in the Camp, as well as on
MOSES, (IOSHVAHS Master) troubled IOSHVAH: the fame of CHRIST'S Preaching, Mat.
11.2.
and Miracles, troubled not a little JOHN'S Disciples: but especially, they are
Racks, and Gibbets to the envious Scribes, and malignant Pharisees, who know
themselves Eclipsed, and let down by the gracious words, glorious works, and
unspeakable worth, that was in CHRIST: thus 2. Sa^. 17.^3.
ACHITOPHEL had rather hang himself, than live to see HVSHAYS council
preferred before his: as HOSTRATVS the Friar, has as good a warrant to hang
himself, if REVCLIN write a Satyricall Book against Sub nomine Epistolarum
obscur^rum vi^orum.
him, as did those two saucy Painters, (whom Hypponax with his Satyricall
lambicke, so whipped and Plin. hist. l. 36. c. 5.
stripped) most men being as impatient o^ an Affront, or disgrace, as that
APOLLONIVS RHODIVS, who banished himself voluntary, because he was once Idem.
l. 7. cap. 23.
Nonplus, in reciting his Poems: and as PROTHAEVS, the son of Aulcan, who is
fained, to-cast himself into the fire, because he was mocked, to be crookt and
lame like his Father-

And ere not we as Waspish and impatient now, at every idle word, as the
Gilieadites, (by Judge. 12.4
Ephramites) to be called runnagates: as DAVID was at the Currishnesse of 1.
Sa^. 25.22
NABAL; and ABISHAI, at the revilings of 2. Sa^. 16.9
SEMEI: do we not take the least disgrace (as our Tobaccho) in snuff? Are our
Academickes more patient to be put by their Graces, at our public
Commencements, than those of China? Who if they be excluded and thrust out as
Ciphers, in cheir exquisice Math. Riccius expeditione ad Sinas, l. 3. c. 9.
Trials, usually run mad and distracted: are our Divines more patient to be put
by a Benefice by any Senior immerito, Act. 8.19.
that has gifts like SIMON MAGVS, rather than SIMON PETER, more than AERIVS
(and some say NESTORIVS and PAVLVS Apud Magdeburgenses, et Osiandru^, in Epit.
Cent.
SAMOSATENVS) who are said to turn Heretics, (as some of ours Campian.
Cresewell. Rainolds. Carter.
Papists) because they mist of that praeferment, which they gaped for? Are our
Courtiers more patient of Corivals, than HAMAN of a E^th. 5.13
MORDOCHEVS: the Princes of DARIUS of a Dan. 6.3.4
DANIEL: are we more patient of Banishment, than ABSOLON from the Court of 2.
Sa^. 13.3
Israel, amongst the Geshurites? Or OVID amongst the Getes, Ovid de Tristibus.
and Sanromatians, are we not as impatient of Imprisonment, and the restraint
of Liberty, even the meanest of us, as was Quomodo Huniades, bis captus, et his
evasit lege Chronica Melancth. lib. 5. p. 64. et 650. and deincarceratione
Mathiae patris. apud Camer. 2. oper. Succ. c. 3. p. 190.
Huniades, Valerian the Emperor, BAJAZET the Turk: RICHARD the second: ROBERT
Duke of Normandy: ROGER Bishop of Salisbury (whom we have formerly named) with
other such great De omnibus hisce incarceralis (quibus addi possunt) ex
Germaenicis, Henricus 4. ex Gallis, Carolus Martellus: ex Turcis, Amurathej. ex
Persis Jsmael 2. ex Graecis Dionis. ex Gal. regibus Chilpericus. ex Hispanis,
Filia vinco Regis Castaliae Masi^issa ex Numidis, ex Mediolanensibus Ludovicus
Sfortia ex Aug. Comes, Richmontius cum multis alijs.
spirits? Are we more patient of disrespect any way, though our means be but
mean, what ever our inside be? Then men of excellenter knowledge, and moral
parts, than we in former times? Could we without grudging, feed on Pulse with
Dan. 1.12.
DANIEL and his three Companions? Could we go clad in Camels hair? (As in
rug'd Mantles) and feed on Locusts, as JOHN the Mar. 1.6.
Baptist? Could we beg a piece of Barley bread with ELIAS? Be driven to seek
our lodgings we know not where, with the Levite Judge. 19.15.
and his Concubine? Could we lie hard in the Fields and in Tents as 2. Sam. 12.
VRIAS? Could we wear old shoes, and eat moldy bread with the Josh. 9.12.13.
Gibeonites? And cut Wood as they, and as PHILOPAEMEN once the Plutarc. in vita
eius.
Orator? Draw water as CLEANTHES in the Night time? Serve a Baker and be stint
of our bread we eat, as once Apud Serve. and Sabel.
VIRGIL? Yea, beg our bread, as some say HOMER Herodit. in vita eius, and
Scalig. in Poeticis.
did? I am sure as great Date obilum Bollisario.
BELLISARIVS, and that Cynicke DIOGENES did: and the Capuchians 1. Kin. 17.10.
Theat. Phil. l. 4. p. 340.
now do? Could we be contented to be excluded, and not admitted to a Feast, as
was the case once of that famous Gomesius l. 3. c. 31. de sale.
Dantes, the Italian Poet, because of our mean clothes (which neither Gnatho
nor Thraso respects?) or if admitted, to be set, as Terence once at the lower
end of Cicilius his In Vita Terentij.
Table, beneath the salt: (usually the Chapleines place?) Would we not take it
as unkindly, as that Philosopher in In Lapith. convivio.
Lucian, if we were not invited? And as harshly as that spruce Gentleman in
Apud Plut.
Praetextatus, or as the Luke 14.7
Scribes in the Gospel, if we did not perke up to the highest place? It might
be, we would shrink away chafing and repining, as too much neglected. Could
we be content to have our secrets disclosed, or our infirmities publicly
revealed, to our disgrace: more than that Gentlewoman which Ronseus tells
Epist. Miscel. 3.
us, grew mad or melancholy, upon such an occasion? Can we be patient, to play
the Courtiers, or to Act the parts of wise Pilgrims, and strangers, to receive
injuries and give thanks? Can we hear our selves reviled (as Pyrrhus once by
certain Drunkards: as Charles the 5. by his muttering Cavete dixit audit
Imperator, apud Iovium
Soldiers: yea as Socrates when he was brought upon the Stage by
Aristophanes) and yet dissemble all and take no notice: pass by as a Lion, or
Courser through barking Curs, nor casting down head, nor lifting up heel: but
(as that Albanian Dog, presented to Gesuer de quadr^pedibus, translated by
Topsell. cap de Cambus.
Alexander: vindicating and revenging our selves merely by Contempt: as
holding it a most Princely thing: yea, that which is incident to GOD himself:
to do well, and hear Regium est been facere, et male audere.
evil, of a blasphemous multitude: or rather do we not as Bees, Waspes, and
Hornets, sting upon the least stirring, as Curs bark and snarle at every
pibble stone that is flung* besides, are we patient at the loss of our goods,
as was the Patriarch Job. 1. Vltimo.
IOD; or as these Pagans Olim nobilis attamen pauper Florus lib. 4.
Thales and Bias? Can we be contented with Poverty, as were not only the
Pagans, the Curij Fabritij? But even the 2. King. 4.
Prophets, the Acts. 3.6. 2. Cor. 6.10
Apostles, yea CHRIST Foxes hay holes.
himself: as GVALTER well notes, and gives the Lucam c. 2. v. 18.
Reason: Do we approve of all these Encomiums given of it; by Scriptures,
Pro. 11.4 Eccles. 4.13
Fathers, Aug. Co^f. l. 6.
Philosophers, Qu^t Clari docti, and virtuto praestantes viri punperimi fuere,
vide apud Aelian. l. 5. lib. 9. l. 11. Pontanum, de Fortit. l. poster. p. 76.
and apud Patritium, l. 9. de regno, tit. 10. page 595
Orators, Hor. Sat. 6. l. 2. Sermon.
Poets, or rather do we not fly it, as a mad Dog, Bear, Tiger, or Snake, as
MOSES from his Rod, turned a Serpent? If we get not, and gain not, at every
commodity, or mercenary ware we deal with, if we make not money contrary to
Nature; and GODS Institution, to increase, and D. Fentous book against Usury.
multiply: but chiefly, if we go down the Wind, and loose ought, we then
think we are utterly undone: we rage, and rave, as MICHAYES Judge. 17.2.
Mother, when her son stole her silver: yea some have run even stark mad, as
Birds fit to be Caged in Bedlam, as did that ROGER the rich Bishop of
Salisbury, being spoiled of all his Goods and Mannours by King Stephen, Vi
doloris obsertus, even swallowed of sorrow, he did and said, he knew not what:
says NVBRIGENSIS: at least we grow melancholy and malcontent, as Montanus
Consil. 26.
Physicians tell us of some in such cases: yea some as leaping out of the
Drying Pan into the fire, out of diffidence, distrust, carnality, Athisme,
Infidelity: loosing their silver, even loose their Souls too, by being Felons
and Butchers, upon themselves, like TERENCE the Comedian, that would needs
drown himself, because some of his Comedies perished by Shipwreck, not
considering that many great men, Noble men, Good men, yea learned men, have
been poor, yet respected for their gifts and Aristotle by the great
Macedonia^, apud Ca^ier. tent. 2. Virgil, Horae^, and others, by Augustus
Pollio and Mecaenas Eunius, by Scipio, Diogenes and Calamus by Alexander:
Erasmuus by Sir Tho^. Moore. So Cardan, Gesher. Lipsius, by other Patrons.
graces, whereas wicked men that have been wealthy, have been rejected, and
disrespected, for their retchlessnesse, notwithstanding their riches.

Besides, who can say that he is absolutely contented with his estate? That
says, his Lot is fallen on a fair ground: that is indifferent whether he be
higher or lower, or in a mean and indifferency, as the wise Pro. 30 8.
HAGAR wished? That is willing to shape his Coat according to his cloth: to
bear sail, just as he has Wind and Water, that with the 2. Kin. 4.15
Shunnamite, dwelt amongst his own people: without much troubling, or being
troubled by intermedling: that lives and reigns, as a Viceroy and Centurion
over his Affections: that is indifferent whether he be carried in a great
Boat or a little, since he reach and attain, his scope and Haven: but rather,
how few such, are there amongst us? How rare are such Black Swaus, as the Poet
thought in his Rara avis in torris, Nigro similim^ Cygno.
time? How are our heads still working, as new Wine in the Vessel? And how
still consulting and projecting by our selves and Friends: (as HAMAN with his
Wife Esth. 5.10 11
ZERESH, and Counselors: ABSOLON with 2. Sa^. 16.20
ACHITOPHEL; AMON with 2. Sam. 13 3.4
IONADAB, PIRRHVS with his Orator Patrit. l. 2 de regno tit. 3. page 92.
CYNEAS: ALEXANDER with his EPHESTION, DARIUS with his ZOPIRVS, AGAMEMNON with
his Axiom. polit Richteri Gorlicij axiom. 45. page 124.
NESTOR and ULYSSES) still, how to be more great, rather than how to be more
good.

13. So how can we bridle these Concupiscible appetites, in respect of all
Lusts whatsoever? Are we so mortified from desire of Honor, which we call
Ambition: from that Philangury or love of money which is called Covetousness,
from that Philantia and desire of Vainglory and applause, that we fly it as
a Tanquam matter multorum maloru^, authore Daneo, l. 3. Eth. p. 310.318. sic
Strigellio, in 2. Sa^. 12. p. 138.
Crocodile? Or from effeminacy and love of Women: or from excessive and
inordinate love of other Earthly things, as were the Apostles, and Primitive
Martyrs and Confessors, that forsook all to follow CHRIST: or as PAMBO,
ANTHONY, HILARION, MACARIVS, PAVLVS SIMPLEX, and other Heb. 11.36.37.
Hermites, and Anchorites: that pretended, Of the strict lives of these and
many more, read Sozomen, l. 1. c. 12
and it is probably intended, to place their Affections only on things above,
and not on things below: yea, are we so moderate and mortified (in the outward
man, at least) as the very Heathens? Love we money? No better than Fabritius,
that refused the gifts of the Apud Tul.
Samnites, Honors? No better than Phocian the Athenian, who fled from Nudis
pedibus ple^umque incedebat, apud Plutarc.
Magistracy? (As that Martin in the Ecclesiastical Histories, Apud Soc. lib.
4. c. 30.
Ambrose, and others, from being Bishops:) Women? No better tha^ Anaxagoras who
was no more moved with the allurements of Lai^, than a stock or a stone? Yea
are we so indifferent for all other externals, that we could content our selves
like that Cynicke, with our See Staff. Diogenes: Anglice.
Tub, and a Book, and a Dish? Or as that Israelitish Prophet, with a Chamber,
a Stool, a Bed, and a 2. Ki^. 4.10
Candlestick? Or with that Dioclesian (after he was elected Emperor) with a
Imperium sponte depesuit, Lelius Zecchius l. 1 de principe, c. 4. and Philippus
lib. 3. Chron.
Cottage-house: like an Irish Cabin, and a little Garden, with a few herbs,
roots, and Lentiles for food, with apparel as mean? As did the Jewish De
quibus Josephus de bello Jud. l. ^ cap. 7. and antiq. l. 18. c. 2
Essein: the Indian Vnus existis Brackmannis fuit Calanus Indus vt Cicero habet
in l. 1. de divin. and 2. Tuscul. quaest.
Brachmians, and Herod. l. 5. c. 5. and The. hist. l. 7. cap. 48. page 814
Gymnosophists: the Popish De quo stricto ordine, Hospinianus, de Orig. Monoc.
l. 6. c. 67. p. 297
Capuehians now: Alexanders Calanus: or Staffords Diogenes: when by
Sycophantizing, and observance, he might have been a Favorite to Alexander,
and been in Grace as Calco Platonis Fastum.
Plato, and Si sciret regibus vti, fastidiret Olus. Apud Hor. Arist. de Diogene.
Aristippus: these Courtly Philosophers? I doubt we come far short of these,
and such as these? If we would ingenuously confess (what other zealous and
devout spirits have confessed before us, in their Sololoquies and Meditations)
keeping a true audit, in our hearts, and a Court in our Consciences, we should
against our selves give in In soliloq.
Augustines Verdict: that our hearts are even rent, and raekt, and torn in
pieces, with Multiplicities of desires, now haling one way, now another, as two
Birds, that are flackering, and flying at the two ends of a thread, one drawing
Eastward, the other Westward, we would confess with Jn Ca^ticis.
Bernard, the restlesnesse of our desires, to be thus and thus (as a long^ng
Wife, desiring now this now that) in such diversifyed passions, that we can no
more reckon, and number than the Sands of the Seas, or Motes in the Sun: our
appetite extending it self to every thing, that superfluously we seek after:
our desires being restless, as a man that runs in a round, or traceth in a
laborinth: or as a Horse, that goes about in the Milne, as though our thoughts
and cogitations every minute, did roll Sisiphus his Rela^entem Saxum, ad
Montis verti^em, perpetuo volvens apud inferos Ovid ^. Metam.
stone: or turn Ixions Rotam perpetuam voluere fingunt quod se Juncne
gloriaretur concubuisse. Tibullus l. 1. and Seneca in Hercule Furente.
Wheel: or, as if we were laid on a Bed, on which it raines, turning now this
way, now that: or stretched on a Rack, ever in pain, and perplexity, till we
be taken off. For Ambition? We would confess we had been, and are infected
with this Canker, this Oh Ambitio ambientu^ Crux. De variis censuris doctorum
vide supra, Margin.
plague, this poison, as the learned call it: that we had been hunted with
this Hag: and pricked forward; (like a Bird or Squirrell in a Cage: an Ape in a
chain: a Dog in a turne-spit Wheel) still to climb and climb, though we
never come to the top: in danger still to fall, as the Goat that seeks after
Ivy, upon old Trees and rotten walls. For Covetuousnesse? We would confess,
that even this weed too, had grown and spread as a Pompion, and seeded too
far, in the Garden of our hearts, and that (according to the counsel of
Hypoc to Grateva the Herbalist) we had not yet so rooted it out: but the
remainders have been left: as the cause (if we believe Jn varijs sermonibus,
et homilij^, ad populum Antioch.
Chrysostom) of the most of the miseries and maladies of our life. And for
popular applause? Who is it amongst many, but with that Themistocles thinks it
the best Music? Who but is sometime tickled with it, as that Grecian Orator:
that took delight to hear even the vulgar Hic est ille, Demosthen.
Athenians, to whisper and point with their fingers, This is Demosthenes, as he
past by them: Augustine himself when he was a Manichee, and a Rhetorique
Lecturer at Millaine, as himself Jn l. Confess. At pulchru^ est digito
monstrari, et dicier hic est Pers. Satyr
confesses, being (Tyger-like) too much affected with these clawings and
ticklings. By which that proud Herod was as a man, tickled even to death: when
the Angel plagued him, as his Sydonians palpably praised him. So for
Effeminacy? How few can we add in our own experience to that Catalogue of
Chastones, Christians and Pagans, Virgins and Widows, which that Contra
Jevinianum.
Chast-Father enumerates in his Antagonisticall opposition against Iovinian? As
they are alleged by that once zealous Chancellor of Genson.
Paris: nay, if we durst reveal our hearts and thoughts to any, but the knower
and searcher of hearts, we would confess with the same Hierom, in one of his
Epistles: that when our bodies were cooled and beat down with Quoties ego, in
eremo constitutus. Jeinnijs men's aestuabat desiderijs.
pains, and Fastings: our souls and affections, were burning and boiling in
concupiscentiall desires.

14. So for the Irascible Faculty? Who amongst a thousand, was ever seen like
Socrates, Zeno, and other Stoics, for the most part, ever in one temper? (As
Seneca Lib. de Ira.
reports of Cato) who was ever seen free from passions? Or indeed: (because no
man can attain to that perfection, which the Stoics dream of, to be
continually freed from all passions and perturbations whatsoever, ever, no more
than the Sea from waves, the Air from winds: since as the Learned note, we
propagate them from our Parents, and bring them with us into the world, and to
put them off, and to be insensible of evils, (like that stupid Nation of
Afric, which Aubanus speaks of) were Exuere hominem, to put off the nature
of a Man, and to be (as is said of a Solitary man) either a GOD: an Angel, or
a Beast: an Eagle, or an Owl: a Saint, or a Stock) who keeps this Passion of
Anger, like the Sea, within his banks and Et exemp. and preceptis Antidota and
Pharmaca contra hanc Jram. habemus apud Senecam, lib. 3. de Jra. Zene. lib. 2.
Cyrop. Oros. l. 2. cap 16.
limits: who can so far bridle and moderate those fierce Bellerophon horses
of Angry heates by that minerva of Reason; that he can say of his offending
inferior, as once Plato to his Servant; I would beat thee if I were not
Angry? Who can so far master and conquer this Passion, as (following the
counsel which Athenodorus give to Augustus,) he can repeat over the letters
of the Greek See Master Downam his Treatise of Anger.
Alphabet, ere he execute any Mulct and penalty in his anger? But rather as
bruit Beasts, incensed Tigers, and enraged Unicorns, inflamed and wholly
fiered with this Passion; carried as with a tempest or whirlwind, as besides
our selves, as he acknowledged in the Apud Plaut.
Comedian: in a short fury Ira furor brevis est: animum rege Hor. l. 1. Ep.
or frenzy, with sparkling Et ex oculis Micat. acrius ardor: Lucr. l. 3. de
rer. Nature. scintillant oculi, dicis facisque quod ipse, non sani esse hominis:
non sanus Juret Orestes, Pers. Sat. 3.
eyes, stammering Ora tum. Ira. Ovid. l. 3 de Art amandi.
Tongues, gnashing Morde^t. labia Jracandu^ describit Homer. Odys: 1. in
procris Jratis, in Telemach.
Teeth, grinning like Lumina Gorgoneo, Savins angue Micant, Lucr.
Dogs, foaming like Jracundaque men's, vicest vi^lenta Leon.
Boares, (as this Atae is set out) we play often such mad prankes, as did that
haire-brained Ajax in Homer: that Medea Actu.
in Euripides; that lunaticke Charles the sixth, in the French history; that
Alexander in Quintus Curtius: when he stabd his dear Apud Plutarc. and
Strigell. in Ethic. lib. 1. p. 247
Clitus, and cut off his valiant Apud and Curtium, et Bodinum, lib 4. de Repub.
c. 7. p. 736.
Philotas; as Soliman in the Turkish history, when he strangled the martial
Mustapha; yea, as Apud eundem, page 74 1. Et apud Patritium, l. 6. de rep. tit.
5. page 289.
Pausanias, that passionately murdered King Philip; or enraged Herod, that
leaped out of his Bed and killed Iosippus; as that choleric Contaren the
Venetian, who (rejected in an Office) stabd the Duke of De isto Co^tareno Codro
et Herod: vide, Democritum Juniorem, de Melanc^lia.
Venice; as Anthony Vry (called the Learned Codrus) that for the loss of his
burnt Library, dyed mad; and as that carnal Cardinal Hypolitus, who full of
fury in an angry Frenzy, pulls out the Eyes of his Brother Count Guic^ard. in
his history of Italy.
Iulio, as his Corrivall in his Love or lust; or as that Ninacheturin the noble
Governor of Malacha, who being Commanded by Alphonse, the Lieutenant of the
Portugal King of the Petr. Hispal. et Maffa^s, de rebus Jndicis.
East Indies, to resign his Office, immediately makes a fire and burns
himself.

15. So who is so free from Envy and Emulation, at his Colleagues, Copartners,
or Corrivals, (chiefly, if they in place, pains, parts, or praise parallel or
exceed him) but he finds an inward grudging? If not gnawing, about his heart?
As the Moath (says Cyprian,) gnawes the Garment; or as the Eagle in the Poet,
is fained to gnaw the heart of Prometheus: and the Worm the Gourd of Jonas, 4.
Jonas: yea, we cannot see our Inferiors advanced, but we labor of that
Disease, which Lypsius found in himself; we cannot look upon the^, our selves
being neglected, Sine gemitu and fremitu, without grieving and grudging, every
man would be ant Caesar, aut nullus: either Caesar, or no body: either a
Knight; or a Knitter of caps: as the practice of proud spirits, verifies the
Proverb.

Conclusio totius.
Thus in this Peroration, at last to draw to a Conclusion: we see the
Tumultuations, roulings, revolvings, and restless reekes, of our inordinate
affections misplaced, or too vehemently fixed upon wrong Objects. Now let
Clodius, Aegistus himself, or the loosest Libertine and licentious wretch in
the world be judge, that has any feeling or knowledge of these passages,
speculative, or experimental in himself, or others: if the Soul of man
(which is the point I still aim at) can have any true contentation: assured
Consolation, or solid satisfaction: (which is still as the conclusive undersong
to the discanting of my larger Ditty) in these tossings, tumblings,
blusterings, bickerings, bandyings, and exorbitances of the unruly passions? Is
there any rest in these, more than a man can sleep quietly in a surging
Tempestuous Sea? Or on a Galloping Horse? Only when the affections are rightly
tuned, and (as the right Gauntlet put on the right hand, the right saddle (as
they say) put on the right Horse: the right Lines met in the right Center)
truly and duly placed upon God, man's sole and sovereign good: there they rest;
when the Love is so placed on God, as the souls spiritual Bridegroom, that
all false and Adulterous Loves are abhorred and abandoned. 2. The filial
fear, so fears GOD only, that Men, Devils, Tyrants, the Creatures, are not
feared: as by Faith curbed, by dependancy from a superior Power. 3. The full
difference betwixt a Carnal sorrow and a Christian, a natural and spiritual,
see in Dike his deceitfulness of man's heart: and Negus, of Man's active
obedience, in 4.
When the sorrow is turned from a natural, or adventitiall melancholy, from a
Carnal, deadly, desperate sorrow, such as is in Mat. 26.57
Worldlings, Hypocrites and Reprobates, into a godly sorrow, (such as was in
Psalm. 6.6.
David, Mat. 26.57
Peter, Luke 7.44
Mary) merely for sin; because it is sin, and not as in Genesis 3.13
Cain, Exo 9.27
Pharaoh, Mat. 27 34
Judas, Carnal Deu. 1.45.
Israel, Heb. 12.16
Esau merely for the punishment of sin 4. When our Joy is not as the
Sodomites, and sensual Wordlings, in Luke 17.27 28.
Eating, drinking, marrrying, and such good blessings abused: nor in Lusts in
their own Nature sinful: such as Chambering and Romans 13 13, 14
Wantonness, Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and all Sabyritish, Epicurish
Voluptuousness: in which profane spirits wallow (as the Eele in the mud, the
Scarabean Flea in the Dunghill; the Swine in the Mire) but it is placed as was
David's; and the Pristine and Primitive Saints; in the Psalm. 32.1^
Lord: in his Christ, in the Joys of the spirit: in the Word, in the Ps. 119 72
Law, in the Promises, in Gods Ordinances, and in the Saints, which Psalm. 16.3
excel. 5. When our Jealousy is turned (as was Jobs and David's) to our
selves, and our own ways, that we offend not. 6. Our Anger turned against our
own sins: into a holy revenge: and to a zeal of Gods glory, such as was in
Ex. 32.19 29.32
Moses, Nu^. 25.7.11
Phinees, 1. Ki^. 19.10.
Elias, Acts, 2.14.
Peter, Act. 13.10.
Paul, 2. Sam. 6.20.
David, and our Psalm. 69.9. and Ioh. 2.17.
Savior himself. 7. When as a Clock all the strings of our affections, thus
set, strike right: then and not before, as the crying Child that sucks his own
desired Dug? We receive from the Lord, the blessed Influence of plenary
Consolation, all sufficient Contentation.

CHAP. XIX. These outward things used out of Christ in Carnalities, in the
abuse of Christian liberty: ever leave a sting in the Conscience more or less:
which deprives of all true Peace, and Contentation.
LAstly, my last Meditation runs briefly in this: that all these externals, be
what they will be, (not needing to particularize them again in their
severals) even the choice, and chief of them; nay all of them, disioyned, and
disioynted from the fear and service of the true God: used and abused (as the
fashion ever is) by Wordlings, Naturalists, and mere Civil honest men, (which
neither know nor regard, that sanctified use of the Creature, to the honor and
glory of the Creator, which is taught only, by the Word: in the School of
Grace, and not by the practice of the world, or the precepts of morality, in
the School of Nature) all of them I say, thus enjoyed, or ioyedin: or rather,
merely usurped by vain men, like Felons and Traitors incroaching on Gods best
blessings, or purloyning to their own abusive ends, his best Creatures; cannot
but leave a sting in the Soul, and a prick in the Consciences of their
dearest Favorites: unless they be wholly 1. Tim. 4.2
seared, cautherized, and hardened, as the nether Millstone, as was once Exodus
c. 7. chapter 8, 9, per totum.
Pharaohs, and stark dulled and dead, as that 1. Sam. 25
Nabal: no more penetrable, than the Adamant, or scales of a Dragon: For we
must know, that the Conscience does not only gall, and cut, and sting, in the
perpetration of great and notorious sins, which (though they be transcient in
Act) leave behind them a stain, a blot, a spot, and a permanent Rack: such as
Cain, Nero, Caligula, Maximinus, Maxentius, Antiochus, Epiphanes, Herod,
Pilate, Judas, and many others, felt as their greatest torment (this Guilt
haunting them in their very sleeps and dreams; chiefly, when the hand of God
was upon some of them, in the extremities of their diseases, in the hour of
death: in the times of Lightning, Thunder, and other manifestations of Gods
power, presence, Justice; as themselves have acknowledged, as appears by the
Marginall De horrore terrore vindicto, et Judicio malae Conscientiae in his et
aliis instant et Antiqui and Moderni, inter alios. Ambr. l. 5. Epist. 18.
Authors: the guilt of Conscience ever following and dodging sin, as the hew
and cry does the Felon, and overtaking it, as the Storm and Tempest the
Fugitive Jonas:) but Iaverre further, that the Wicked have no Peace of
Conscience, even in the use of these things, that in their own Natures, are
the good gifts of GOD, even positive blessings. Gold, Silver, Riches,
Revenewes, Houses, Lands, Farms, Friends: H^alth, Strength, Honors,
Dignities, Wife, Children, what ever they call and account good, are not good
to them: or for them: no more than Wine is good for him that has a Burning
Fever, Eeles and stirring meats for him that has an Irish Ague: or much
drink for him, that has a Method of Physic, l. 3. c. 2. p. 156
Dropsy; nay no more, than a Knife is good for a child, a Sword in the hand of
a B^dlam or Madman, with which he wounds himself or some other: their very
Table (that is all their external Prosperity) is a very snare to them, as the
Psalmist speaks, it is as the Limb^-bush to the Bird, the Trap which the great
Nimrodian Hunter the Devil, sets for their Souls, and as they have no good by
them: so (which is the point I drive at) they have no true and solid Comfort in
them: there is no peace to the Wicked, says my Esa, 57.21 On which Text read
Adams Sermon.
God: no kind of true Peace in any thing that they set their hands too, and
their hearts on; their Hearts, and their consciences being Tit. 1.15.
defiled the very in^als and ^wards of their souls, being polluted; how can
the clear streams, the sweet fruits of Peace, proceed from such a heart,
such ^roo^, such a fountain, as is unpurged, and unpurified, by Grace? Since
Grace, and Peace are always (as that Eneas and Achates) Grace and Peace as
Husband and Wife seem married together, Ro^. 1. v. 7. 1. Cor. 1.3. 2. Cor. 1.2.
inseparable, and individual Companions, true Relatives as the two Cherubins
looking one directly toward the other, one answering the other, as face
answers face in a Glass: as the Apostle speaks of Love, it holds too of Joy,
the other Sister, both proceeding from the same Progenitors, a pure 1. Tim. 1.5
heart, and a good Conscience: and as in some Births, the Mother and the
Daughter, both live; or both As in the Caesarian Section, Insta^ces are give^
by Geu^ out of Rousset and Banhin, and other Physicians, Hist. p. 259 ad 267.
dye: so it holds in this; their hearts, are dead in respect of any Grace,
therefore this root, being dead, there can be no fruit; nay, no bad, no
blossom, of any sound and solid peace: they have these outward things indeed,
often times, in great abundance, even to the grudging and repining sometime of
GODS Children, (as appears in the querulous Complaints of Psalm. 73. v.
1.2.3.4. and v. 21.22.
David, ^ob. 1. per to^um.
Job; ^er. 12.1.2
Jeremy, who as the Elder Brother, in the Lu. 15.29
Parable, seem to be neglected, in respect of these prophainer Prodigals, as
though they had not an aequall portion; of that their Father were partial in
sharing: allowing the rich purpled Ch^rle, dainty Lu 16.19
cates, when Lazarus had not Verse. 21.
crumbs Iezabels false Prophets 1. Kin. 11.19
feasting, when good Elias was kept fasting: the I^o^s Philistines being Ioviall
and tryumphant all in their Puff, and Iollity, swelling with pomp and 1. Kin.
17.11.13
pride, when Sampson the Nazarite, was mourning and grinding in the Judges. 16
23.24
Vars. 21.
Milne, NABAL feasting as a King, and in 1. Sam. 25.36.
superfluities, when good DAVID and his people, were Verse. 8.
distressed, for want of necessaries: yet nevertheless; GODS Children have
more Comfort, and Contentation in a Sallet of herbs, in a little 2. Kin. 4.2
Oil in a Cruce, and a cake of 1. Kin. vt supra.
Meal: than these pampred, lust fed Stallions of the world, Ier. 5.8.
in their stalled Oxen, more peace in pease and pulse, with Daniel and his 3.
Dan. 1.12.
Companions: than the other, the increase of their Wine and Psalm. 4.7
Oil: because they have them as dutious Children their Portions, though never
so poor, with their Fathers blessing; as obsequious Servants they receive
these gratuities, as tokens and Pledges of their Masters Favor: as Rebeccha
received Ge^. 24.22
Jewels, as Testimonials of Isaacks love, whereas the other have their abused
blessings, from God (as Sampson had Dalilah, and the Tymnites Daughter from the
Judge. 14.4
Philistines, merely to ensnare them; as the Trojans had the Palladian Horse,
from the Greeks, to entrap them: God gives them these things in wrath: as he
did give 1. Sam. 8.11.12.
Saul, to the discontented Jews: as that Jupiter in the Fable, gave to the
croaking Apud Aesopum.
Frogs: a destroying Storke, for a King: having the Creatures without the
Creator, they have no more comfort in them, than a vain Man the misspent Dowry
of that Woman, whom he neither loves, nor ever was beloved of her, his
Matrimony being merely aimed a matter of money, which God never joined, nor
ever blessed. Now the premises considered, these outward things sequestrated
from the assurance of Gods love (being accompanied (in all unsanctified hearts)
either with too-working and waking a conscience:) as in Saul, whom every thing
troubled, friends, foes, Philistines, David, Jonathan, Michol, the Priests of
Nob; yea the Evil Spirit it self, enjoying no peace, though he were a valiant
and victorious King; Or else with too Lethargicall, cautherized, and drowsy
conscience: as in Naball, who lived like a Belly-God, and dyed like a Beast,
which is no Peace, but a perilous security, the Herald and Prologue of their
approaching destruction. In either of these, what true contentation has the
Soul? More than a Traitor in his Rack, Securitaetis Comes ruina, Mel^eth.
Tom. 2. page 431.

Penc. de Divinatione p. 67


a Felon in his Iaylor his Executioner? More than the Eye in the Moate or
Pearl that pains it? The heel in the thorn that pricks it? The Toe in the
corn that pesters it? Or the foot that is pinched in the Shoe-makers Stocks?
This Vanity is vexation of Spirit.

CHAP. XX. The Peroration or Conclusion of this Tract.
THus in these discussions, discourses, discoveries, and demonstrations, from
premises truly grounded, both from Philosophy, and Theology: The principles of
Art, Grace, and Nature, we have etrxacted our Conclusion at first propounded;
as truly Orthodoxe (though to the bleare-ey'd world, it may seem a Paradoxe)
that as in the darker Night we have all the glimmering light of the Stars,
yet we want the Sun, which is Instar omnium, in steed of all: yea more than
all, to the illumination of the World, to the chearing and refreshing of Men
and Beasts: so in the dark Night of our Ignorance and Vanity, we may
participate of all the glistering and glimmering comfort and contentation which
is in the Creature, and yet as children of Darkness, roman still
disconsolate; Vbi Cimmerij extitere, est de Pr^verbio Tenebrae Cimmeriae. Pli^.
l. 3 c. 8. et 6. c. 6 Melancth. lib. 1. c. 4.
as in Egyptian and Cimmerian darkness, and in the shadow of Death, wanting
the vivification, inlightning and inliving, which is from that Son of
Righteousness, that Father of lights, that GOD of all Comfort and consolation
unto his Elect ones, the Children of Light.

And therefore (to knit up all in one word) as its the only fishing in the
Sea, with Peter, James, and Ioha, especially when CHRIST is present: and the
only drinking at the Fountain, rather then at dry puddles, standing waters,
marrish bogs, or broken pits: So (since Pacem te poscimus omnes) All would have
true Joy, peace and contentation, its the best course, and most compendious way
to seek it where it is to be had, in the fountain in the wellspring, and
Original of it, in GOD the one, and only Author, donor, and giver of this
true Comfort. Seek not the living among the Dead, as the Angel revealed
concerning CHRIST; so I say concerning that Consolation which is sought for of
every true Christian. Resurrexit non est hic, its Risen (yea and ascended too)
it is not here. It is an Eagle mounted up above, (as that vltima Coelestum,
quae terras Astraea reliquit) Its returned to Heaven from whence it ever came,
it is not to be found here below, in these things terrestrial, they are too
low, unworthy, the affections, love and desires of that heavenly infused Soul
which came from above.

Finally, in this case, the counsel of the Apostle is worthy our observation,
worthy our imitation. Set your affections (therefore) on things that are above,
and not on things beneath. Col. 3.2.
Mortify your earthly Members; whether Concupiscible, Verse, 5.
as Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil Concupiscense, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry; Verse, 8.
Or Irascible, as Wrath, Anger, Malice, Blasphemy, and the like; Verse
For which things sake (not only) the wrath of God comes on the children of
Disobedience, whereby they are liable to an unsupportable curse, but also, they
do even so much disappoint, disorder, and distress the Soul that is with
them infested; that they utterly deprave it, deprive it, and make it incapable
of any true Peace, comfort and content.

I might here amplify at large upon these Uses of Exhortation and
Dehortation, and use diverse Motives to both of them, to make these
Considerations sink deeper into the drowsy conceits of our bewitched
Worldlings, and also to spur forward, the slow motions of other tardy
Christians: But (by these that warily peruse the Works) enough may be found
(dispersed in the Body thereof) to these and the like purposes.

Besides, the Volume is swollen far ^ger in the Press, then I suspected by
the Manuscript, I will therefore drive this Part no further. The Apostles
practice to the Hebrews shall be my pattern. I beseech you Brethren suffer the
words of Exhortation, Heb. 13.^2
Galat. 6.18
for they are but few. The Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, be with your Spirit,
AMEN.

FINIS.
LONDON. Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAUCET, M.DC.XXXI.


