A new treatise in manner of a Dialoge / which shows the excellency of man's
nature / in that he is made to the Image of God, and wherein it restyth / and by
how many ways a man does blotte, and defyle the same Image.


Remember man, thou art earth plain
And thereto shall, return again.
Job. OF late as I lay, musing all alone
Reuoluynge a certain thing in my mind
Which troubled me so, that my heart was gone
But being compelled, remedy to find
Mine old custom, not being yet resynde
I ^ose from my bed, and forth did depart
And then herd I a bird sing, O man vnkynd^
I say remember thou man, what thou art.
Which thing so heryng, made me much to muse
And as I looked, what bird it should be
She spyde me and said, now feign thine excuse
For truly I have, a quarrel to the
And with that, I saw her sit in a tree
Which made me I tell you, glad at my heart
But she spyenge that said, streyghe unto me
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
I perceive by thy countenance, quod she
That thou do much rejoice, in my presence
But little cause have thou, thou may trust me
For now art thou, with me out of credence
Because thou have not done, thy dylygence
To perform thy promise, made on thy part
Therefore in reproach, of thy neclygence
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Why what matter quod I, have thou to me
That thou shludest me, thus spytefully reprove
Matter enough, I warant the quod she
For that thou dyddest not, as did the behoue
What is it quod I, tell me for my love
Have I in my promise, ben ouerthawrte
Ye none excuse quod she, can it remove
Therefore remember, thou man what thou art.
Thou dydest promise me, if thou call to mind
To set forth a song, which I sange to the
And now because untrue, I do the find
Thou do me provoke, displeased to be
That song forth quod I, thou may trust me
I se no proof quod she, for who does reuarte
From their vice reprouyd, not one I ca^se
Therefore remember, thou man what thou art.
It is forth quod I, though small pro^yte ape^e
Consernynge of man's life, the amendment
Thou may reprove sin, and never the nere
We are unto the flesh, All this world is set on myschefe. 1. John. ^.
so fully ben^e
Then my labor quod she, in vain have I spent
But no doubt at length, for it ye shall smarte
Oneles that by grace, your fault ye repent
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Thou art but vile earth, and shall turn to dust
Though all the worlds good, Job.
thou had at thy will
At the last co^mes death, and then hense thou must
There is no treasure, can keep the here still
Therefore thou vain man, why do thou fulfill
Thy flesshely lust, and from god do reuarte
Wylt thou for thy flesh, thy soul deadely kill
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
God has appointed, of his meare goodness
How each man should live, Let every man abid^ in his calling when in he is
called. 1. Co^. 7.
in his vocacyon
And scripture does, unto you all express
So that ye can make, no excusacyon
But that ye provoke, your own dampna^yon
Oneles ye repent, or death with his darte
Of body and soul, make seperacyon
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Somewhat I have, toched to the before
How most people here, In the (...) of the myse^y of the world.
does live out of frame
Not one shall thou ^ynde, sca^^y in a score
That lives in his Office, unworthy blame
Nay clean to necele^^e, yet they have no shame
Or else they abuse it, so ouerthwarte
That they seem not, to have a christen name
Remember therefore thou man what thou art.
What needs thou quod I, this thing to rehearse
It is superfluous, as far as I here
In thy song before, in many a verse
Thou have touched this, as well does apere
What though said she, I am never the nere
I se no man grafte, my words in his heart
Therefore I warn the again, plain and cl^re
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
I showed the ones, and so I do again
How every creature, without blame
Does keep their course, ^ake we en^ to our ^wne lykenes and (...).
as nature does constrayne
But thou man which God, so nobly did frame
Unto his image, thou wylt grant the same
And yet like a beast, from God ouerthwarte
Thou defylest his image, to thy great shame
Therefore remember, thou man what thou art.
I know quod I, that thou toldest me all this
Trouste thou that I have, so dull memory
To forget what gods goodness, to me is
Ye said she, I believe it verily
For thou art so replete, with mysery
No thing can move the, from sin to reuerte
But yet when thou fedest, thy lust besely
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
What thou meanest said I, I can not tell
I pray the show me, what thou do intend
Thou checkest me, me think for not living well
And yet with no fault, do me reprehende
Have I not said she, how do thou attend
Unto my words, which enter not thy heart
But in all thy time, that thou do here spend
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Did not I say, how in sin thou do live
By which thy soul, thou do most foully defyle
Which God of his goodness, to the did give
Made to his image, and like no beast vile
And yet the devil, from the for to excyle
He suffered death here, with paynfull wounds smarte
Amend therefore, and every mean while
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Thy soul thou know, well is made immortal
Having will reason, and understanding
In which thou do deffer, from beasts brutall
And therein to God, thou art resembling
But now in what case, thy soul thou do bring
I purpose to show the, or thou depart
That for fear, thou wylt quake at the herynge
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
First thou ha^^ reason, a gift excelent
Which to the father, is apropryate
Because that he is, always permenent
And did his person, never derogate
Note ones altrynge, but in deuyne es^ate
He always abides, and can not reuarte
For which by reason, he is fygurate
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Now sith that by reason, thou do represent
In thy soul, to the Father eternal
Which syngnyfyeth, thou must be dylygent
To ^^aye to reason, the power pryn^yall
But how thou from reason, daily do fall
Thou may be asshamed man of thy part
As somewhat herafter* tell the I shall
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
So long as to reason, thou do agree
In all thy works, and conuersacyon
So long aperyth, i^ thy soul to be
Thymage of God, by his creacyon
Let reason than, have domynacyon
Follow not will, and set reason aparte
Put not the Father, from his mancyon
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
I trow quod I, thou know not what thou say
Thou have forgot clean, what thou dyddest begin
Me think thou do spend, many words in waste
Wylt thou not, the other two powers bring in
Yes quod she, but because thy wit is thine
I would that to reason, thou should conuarte
Which thou daily, do so foul blot with sin
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
But for thy sake quod she, I am content
The other two powers, to the to express
Whyll in thy soul, does the sone represent
For as much as he did, (...)
him always dress
To do his fathers will, with great meekness
Wyllyngly suff^ynge, for thy sinful heart
Thus christ of good will, thy sins did redress
Therefore remember, thou man what thou art.
Now like as Christ, only of his good will
Took here thy nature, (...) 53.
and redeemed the
From the devil and sin, which did thy soul kill
He will not his death, thy sauegarde shall be
Onelesse thy will, freely to his agree
Not compelled, ^^e that Lo^yth me kepi^h my commandments. John. 15.
but by love from thy heart
This mean by Justice, apoy^ted has he
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Now stay there quod* I, I pray the be still
Let me in this point, understand the well
Wylt thou affirm here, that man has fre will
Thou say that God, does not man's will compel
Mary sir if I, that abroad should tell
Some would say that I, the truth did peruarte
Will they quod she, against that thing rebel
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
A thou wicked man, now well I perceive
Thou would find, away thy vice to excuse
For if thou could prove, God lemp^yth (...) to evil. Ia^^. ^.
the no free will to have
Thou would for thy sin, gods goodness accuse
Because thou wylt say, he would not infuse
Grace in to thy soul, from sin to conuarte
Alas man do not, thy life so abuse
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
God offryth his grace, (...)
to the man daily
Knocking at thy soul, by many away
Declarynge his will, most mercyfully
To have the saved, if thou say not nay
Therefore if thou wylt, God ^old have all (...).
be saved thou may
Gods help is ready, if thou do thy part
Thou may consent, if thou wylt I dare say
Remember therefore, If thou ^ylt (...) to lyf^ keep the co^maund^mentes. (...)
thou man what thou art.
In this quod I, thou have peased my mind
But may ha^ all other, so will not be
For in this matter, great fa^te they will find
When so ever they shall, it read or se
What tho and they do, I pray the quod she
Truth will be truth, though they would it peruarte
Therefore to all them, as well as to the
I say remember, thou man what thou art.
I pass not said she, what any does say
So long as the truth, I do demonstrate
To please all minds, I do not know the way
Onelesse I should, gods pleasure vyolate
And that will I not do, for none estate
Nothing shall cause me, from truth for to starte
But let all this pass, early and late
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
If thou have said I, in this said thy mind
I pray the, in thy first purpose prosede
Con^ent said she, I have it not resynde
Though I did degresse, as I thought it need
Understandynge, is now the next in deed
Or memory which twain, can not depart
In this the holy ghost, thy soul does led
Therefore remember, thou man what thou art,
By understanding, well may syngnyfy
In thy soul the Image, of the holy ghost
Because it is a power, which inwardly
Does work, (...).
in thy soul a thing which does most
Profit thy soul health, this well I dare bost
For thereby gods will, thou know in thy heart
Without which, thou should, be blind as a post
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
None I trow said she, thou does plain perceive
How to gods image, that thou art create
And in what it restyth, opened I have
Now sith that God, in the is socyate
Let not his grace, in the be vacuate
Keep this image pure, in every part
So shall thou with him, be peticipate
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
What need (...)
That thou (...) thing de^yle
For now I se plain, the work^^ do report^
Thou have done it ready, by thy (...) ^yle
For which cause I se, I must turn my style
To show how thou do, these th^^ powers peruarte
By which I fear me, thou (...) god excyle
Remember I s^y, thou man what thou art.
First for as m^che, as I told the before
That reason is the power, most pryncypall
By which only, thou dy^^erest e^ermore
From all other be^^^es, the which be brutall
For set reason aside, and prove I shall
That beestes may compare, with the in some part
Consernynge the powers, which be natural
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
The lion in strength, does man greatly pass
And so does the Egle, in clerenesse of sight
In herynge also, compare may the ass
The grayhounde to run, most nemble and light
In smelling the hounde, by day or by night
And in memory beestes* in plough and ^arte
Now if they had reason, pass the they might
Therefore remember, thou man what thou art.
But now as scripture, (...).
to the do record
It has pleased god, for to ordain the
Over all beestes of the earth, ^o be lord
And them (...)
But how, by reason, or else thou (...)
If beestes of reason, had now^ any pa^^e
By the in no (...) they would be
Therefore remember, thou man what thou art*
Now bee^^es by reason, thou do make (...)
To serve the (...), as God dye them ordain
And so must reason, also (...)
Rule all thy (...)* whi^he in the remain
With all thy works; which prosede from the plain
But worse is thy acts, reason to conuarte
Then al brute beestes, which the world does contay^^
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art*
Sensualyte in the, beryth such ru^e
That when reason, should have domynacyon
Froward will, causes him for to recule
To thy great shame, and defamacyon
For will ought to be, in gubernacyon
Of reason, fro whom he ought not to starte
But will does rule all, I se probacyon
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Reason would thou should, to god have respect
Always considering, his goodness to the
But that most unkindly, thou do reiecte
Abusing reason, that daily I se
Unreasonable, thou semyst to be
From gods law, thy life is so ouerthwarte
Which way I will declare* or else blame me
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
To thy fylthy carkase, (...).
thou have such dely^e
That thou love it more, then god or his law
What thing can bynd^ the, from thy^e apety^e
Can scripture cause the, (...) lust to withdraw^
From the foul fedy^ge, of thy beestly (...)
Nay truly, th^^ do thou reason peruarte
A beeste and thou, does not dyffer a stra^^
Remember I say, tho^ man what thou art.
(...)
Now thou man quod she, thou say very well
That Christ commanded, that thou should fast here
Against which, if tho^ do rebel
To be christ's discyple, thou do not apere
But most like a be, (...).
against reason clear
Thou regardest no time; but do gods law peruarte
Christ's insample, with the no rule does ^ere
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Good reason would, that thou should sacrafyce
Thy carnal body, (...).
to our lord above
Which is by fasting, and other such wise
But thy vile carkase, so much thou do love
That neither law, nor reason can the move
To cause thy body, by fasting to smarte
But do like a be, such virtue reprove
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Thus of thy belly, a god thou do make
And to that stynkynge Idol, do sacrafyce
For pleasure of it, more pain thou do take
Then thou for god, wylt do in any wise
Ye, to please it, gods law thou wylt clean dispyse
As though from hence, thou should never depart
Reason against this, daily on the cryse
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Truly quod I, I confess this to the
That in this matter, I have none exscuse
But yet me think, this a small fault to be
And if I my soul, a right to god use
Ye mary quod she, but thou do it abuse
As and if thou harkyn, that shall here part
Therefore to here, my words do not refuse
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
To make thy ^oule, a sacrafyce perfyte
Thou oughcest it, to our lord to elyuate
By deuou^e prayer, A (...) heart god does not despise. Psalm. (...).
wherein he does delight
If it come from a heart, inmaculate
But alas man, when thou art in that estate
Thou go about, good prayers to subuarte
By which thy soul, thou doste sore vulnerate
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Christ taught the truly, ^ath. 6.
how y^ thou should pray
Knowlegynge thy need, and great mysery
And not ceasing, ^. ^im. ^. ^
but as saint Paul does say
Make prayers to God, Watch and pray that ye enter not into temtacyo^. ^ath.
^6.
contynually
And thou should also, as Christ does testefy
Watch in prayers, with all thy mind and hart^
This is the sure mean, thy soul to mundefy
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
By prayer Moses, Exodus 17.
optayned victory
By prayer the red see, Exodus 14.
also divided
By prayer king David, ^. heg. 1^.
optayned mercy
By prayer Hely, 1. Reg. 1^.
the deed child reuyued
By prayer Susan, Dan^el. (...). Ios^a. x. The prayer of the ^^ghteous^ a^ayle
the much. Jacob. 5.
from death was saved
By prayer of Iosue, the son did reuarte
Thus prayers of the just, God never depraved
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Now prayer of all works, being most hye
For the which our lord, great wonders has wrought
Why doste thou not man, thy self more apply
Wnto this virtue, in heart, will and thought
But alas it seems, thou regardes it naught
For all times thou thynkyst, long spent in that part
But no short time to play, thy lust has sought
Remember I say*, thou man what thou art.
If good prayers, thou regardest nothing
Thy soul to god, thou can not sacryfyce
Then into what case that thou d^est it bring
Reason can tell that, thou do that despise
By which thy soul, trewly to god should rise
And it moves the daily, to conuart
But reason can not thy foul flesh suffyse
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Thou haste in this quod I, been somewhat plain
For in prayer in deed, man is neelygente
But yet for all this, one doubt does remain
Whether that scripture, of vocal prayer mente
Or ^lles of mental, which is most excellent
By my troth quod she, thou art ouerthwarte
I have much a do, thy mind to content
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
With vocal prayer, (...).
when that thou do pray
Thy heart from god, then being alyenate
That prayer does not merit, I dare say
For vain thoughts, does make thy prayer frustra^e
But mental prayer, of more hye estate
If thou use it, to vice will not ^euarte
But does thy heart pure, to god elyuate
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Then quod I, Lord (...) to y^ (...) of my prayer. Psalm. 129.
I se I need not all
To pray with the voice, for that is but vain
If the effect rest, only in prayer ment^all
I mean not so quod she, I tell the playue
For when the heart, with the voice does remain
Two ways thou doste merit e^he in his part
Where as one does, but half so much obtain
Remember therefore* thou man what thou art*
When that thou do pray, but in hare only
It is known to god, and he does it here
But that does not, (...) before (...) that they may se your go^ works* and
^ath. 5.
thy neighbor edify
Because good example, does not apere
Therefore double merit, thou shall have clear
When the voice does show, what is in the heart
This kind of prayer, to god is most dear
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art*
Thou have my mind, quod I well satysfyed
Consernyng prayer, in every thing
That is marvel quod she, for I have spyed
It is hard in thy head, virtue to bring
For which with sorrow, thy hands thou may wrynge
But thou do not care, until time that thou smarte
Yet in the mean while, I give the a warning
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Now have I told the, how thou ought always
Thy body and soul, to god to sacrafyce
Which thou can not do, unless thou obaye
Unto reason, and thine own will dispyse
But how thou doste that, (...) thin^ own will Eccl. 1^.
thy living well tryse
Will does rule the, like a horse in a carte
What shame is this to the* that should be wise
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
But in the matter, farther to proce^e
Reason would also, that thou should truly
Thy goods sacryfyce, in heart will and deed
Unto our lord* ^^^^owlegyng thereby
That he is the gyuer, of them only
After what sort* I will show the a part
How thou must use them, unto gods glory
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
First give thanks to god, ^ake you friends of the wicked ^ammon that they
may receive you into eternal tabernacles. Luke. 16.
for thy richesse all
And help the poor, in their necessyte
And unloose those, which are in prison thrall
Forget not the wedowe, in her mysery
Nor the fatherles child, in thynfancy
Take the poor how^les, under thy couarte
Suffer not the poor, in the street to dye
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
This should thou do, (...).
which has riches at will
Sacrafyce to god, with ryghteouse abell
Which offrede the best, gods law to fulfill
And not the worste, for which to him be^ell
That his offrynge, did please our lord right well
His fire brent bright, declarynge his good heart
But caynes did smolder, the cause I will tell
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Good Abell thought, the best was not to good
To give to god* the gyuer of all thing
But cursed Cayne, which no grace understood
Thought the worste* to good to burn in offrynge
For which his sacrafyce, brent all smoldrynge
Which declared, that he from god did reuarte
But this matter, now in thy mind nothing
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
It is not mete quod I, in our time I am sure
To burn our goods, to god for sacrafyce
That is truth quod she, but they in figure
Burnt their offerynges, in many so^dry wise
Which figure in truth, ye must excersyse
As thus Abelles fire, burning bright in each part
Sygnyfyeth charity, which all good works tryse
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
The bright fire, causes the sm^ke to assend^
And so does charity, cause thy good works all
Before god to have reward at the end
As says, (...).
the holy apostell saint paull
But when that thou from charity do fall
Thy works does smolder and thou playest Cayues part
Abusyng gods gifts, with thy life bestyall
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Now of those that offer with good Abell
A little before I have showed to the
And now of another sort I will tell
Which does offer with Cayne in each degr^
And of these no small nombre there be
I can scantly think on them all by heart
Therefore though I hap some to over se
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
The first that be fygured by Cayne chefely
Be those that there tenthes untruly does pay
Gyuyng unto god irreverently
The worste of every thing that they may
Tushe it is good y^ough for the priest they say
And yet they here scripture call it gods part
This offryng smuldreth with Caynes musty hay^
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
No more of that quod I, and thou love me
For if I abroad should plain report this
The priests proctor straight called I should be
But from that report I will me sure bliss
My tongue shall not yet run so far amysse
What quod she wylt thou now from truth reuar^^
Dare thou not now tell the truth as it is
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Well quod I, I pray the if thou intend
To proceed farther, show forth thine intent
Marye quod she, thou doste me reprehende
When I would show the, my mind euidente
But trippe me no more, and I will not s^ente
Till I have showed the, my hole mind and heart
And whatsoever, I say here present
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
All such as money, (...).
to their neighbors lend
Thereof to have profit, by vsurye
With cursed Cayne, our lord they do offend
Because that their work, does lack charity
For against gods word, no good work can be
Let them gloss what they can truth to peruarte
They are a curste of god, from heaven on hye
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
To speak more of that, quod I, shall not need
For thou doste, but throw stoness against the wind
Do quod she, then will I forth proceed
To those that offer, in another kind
With cursed Cayne, (...).
and they be those I ^ynde
which gives large money their neyboures to subuarte
Which way, I will tell the as comes to mind
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
All such as gives money, leaces to take
Of their neyboures houses, for the intent
That they themselves so, the rytcher would make
By unreasonable, raysyng of the rent
To their neighbors great hurt, and detremente
Poor men cry out for this, in every part
These with cursed Cayne, shall have punyshmente
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Next cosyne to these, be all such trewlye
Which does their neighbor, by craft cyrcumuente
By going about, preuely to spy
Such houses as they think, for them conuenyente
Not passing on the poor men, there in resydente
Let them go and beg, or else drive a carte
Trow these to escape hell, unless they repent
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Because thou speak, of dryuyng carte quod I
Some says, that both carts and plowes decays
All those that so says, quod she, does not lie
For I am a bird, that flies many ways
And where I was wont, to feed many days
Upon sweet corn, which comforted my heart
Now is there nothing, because the plowe stays
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
To what use quod I, then serves the ground
For pastor quod she, for beasts for to feed
So where many poor men's, lyuynges was found
Now twain or three, their lives alone does led
Not forsyng at all* for the poor man's need
These do the commonwealth, falsely subuarte
But for this at last, hell shall be thy mede
Remember I say, thou man what thou art
It boots not quo^ I, to speak more of this
The cause why, I could to the plain express
Ye quod she, I know full well where it is
Those men which chefely, should this thing redress
Have vauntage thereby, therefore nothing less
Entende they, then to speak on the poor man's part
This is true surely, all men will confess
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Say not so quod I, though thou doste so think
No more I will quod she, I have all said
But thou know, the ca^te at sweet milk can wynke
When she feeds thereof, and is well apayde
And so can such, this can not be denayde
Wynke at that, which from their wealth does reuart
But this thing among them, being well wayde
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
^ush, quod I, I pray the tell me no more
Of this matter, I love it not to here
To rehearse it quod she, does grieve me sore
But yet to speak this, I could not forbear
Sith that my mind is, for to show the clear
The truth, how thou dos^e reason peruarte
In all these sorts, it does well apere
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Farther now quod she, thy mind to fulfill
Even like as thou doste, thy reason abuse
In like manner, so thou do thy frewyll
As I will prove, thou caust make none excuse
For gods grace daily, thou do here refuse
From which thy will ought never to reuarte
Thou blottes gods Image, which y^ should well use
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Will as I told the, ought to be subject
Unto reason, in every degree
And to consent to nothing in effect
Which against reason, any thy^g shuldbe
The which if thou do, I dare assure the
I mean, if will from reason do not starte
God his own Image, in thy soul does se
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
But as I before, have told unto the
Thou say that frewyll, in the has no place
But only to sin, in that it is fre
And not unto virtue, though thou have grace
Which saying is false, but yet in one case
Thy words is well proved, true on thy part
For the pathe of sin, thy will does still trase
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
In one case, I say, thou do prove trewlye
That unto sin, thy will is ever fre
For wholly to sin, thou do thy well aplye
And then doste affirm, the chief cause to be
For that, there is no virtue in the
It is because, god will the not conuart
So is he the cause, of thine iniquite
Remember I say, thou man what thou art,
The highest gift, which god to the has lent
Above all creatures, on earth create
Is thy frewyll, by which thou may consent
To virtue or vice, both early and late
For if thou could not, frewyl were frustrate
And all gods precepts, in every part
In vain to the, they were all promulgate
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
If frewyll can not, but to sin consent
Thou can not prove it, a frewyl to be
For if will can not chose, this indifferent
Virtue or vice, there is necessite
Which compels will, to sin thou may se
And then is not will, fre in any part
But god as a dome instrumente, does use the
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Thy phrase of speech quod I, is very obscure
Thou say me think, that man's will is not fre
If it can not chose, for to put in ure
As well virtue as vice, in each degree
If not, than thou say god must needs be
The cause of my sin, in deed or in heart
And that can I prove, be thou sure quod she
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art
First thou must grant, thou art a christen man
And p^a^ted, in Christ's church by help of grace
I speak to the, and not a to pagan
For I know ye twain, are not in one case
Thou with that grace, I say may purchase
To have further grace, from sin to conuarte
Even by thy frewyll, thou can not this deface
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
Now since thou must needs, grant this to be true
That by thy frewyll, thou may always consent
Not only to sin, but also to virtue
By help of grace, which is ever present
Now to say frewyll, is not permynent
In thy soul, the dyuell does the man peruarte
As I will prove to the, even contynent
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
When that thou doste say, thou haste no frewyll
Thou may as well say, no fault is in the
For that, that thou can do nothing but ill
Thou can, in no wise to virtue agree
And then, (...).
for lack thereof condemned to be
Thou would prove god, to play a tyrauntes part
But leave that error, and learn this of me
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
By that reason quod I, I se in deed
That I should prove god, the cause of my sin
And the farther me think, that I proceed
In this matter, more blyndnesse I fall inn
Therefore I will leave, for naught I do win
Nor they neither quod she, which does take thy part
To defend an error, thy wit is to thynne
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
In denyenge frewyll, now thou may se
That thymage of god, thou doste full defyle
For by will, gods sone is fygured to be
In thy soul, from which thou would him exyle
But beware thy self, thou do not begyle
For will, I fear me will make the to smarte
Thou doste so abuse it, every mean while
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art.
How will does rewle, It is not good to have respect of person i^ Iugeme^ (...)
to reason contrary
I reporte^^e, to true experience
Does not most iuges, from Justice vary
Yes yes, and that well knows, their conscience
Judgment is defarde, but for what pretense
I know not, for I can not, search the heart
Unless I may judge, with the wise man's euydence
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
What says the wyseman quod I, in that thing
Does he against Judges, any thing surmyse
Ye mary quod she, his words I will bring
Forth unto the, thou shall here what he cryse
Gifts and rewards says he, does blind the ^eyese
Of Iud^es, which has a covetous heart
Causyng them, true judgment clean to dispyse
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
I could ^hewe the scriptures, (...).
many (...)
Which does reprove such, as judge not ryghtly
Oh what curse is that, when god does cry w^
Unto all rewlers, in auctorite
Which does not maintain right and equity
O man thynkest thou not from hence to depart
And that as thou doste judge, judged thou shall be
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
What rewle does frendshyp now bear in each place
Without dew respect had to the offense
Favor does Justice, (...).
even clearly deface
Being by frendshyp now brought in presence
And if I lie look on experience
Does this with gods law agree, in any part
A judge to sit, in a chair of pestilence
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
But the cause hereof, what is it but will
When he does rewle, and has reason reiecte
It is (...) thou say, such things to fulfill
Trewlye so it is, thou show the effect
But can thou turn now, or art thou subject
So much to this vice, thou can not conuarte
Then art thou damned without more respect
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Soft quod I, me think thou speakyst very large
Against Judges as though all did amys
Wylt thou with fautes of some, all the rest charge
Me think in that small charity there is
Nay quod she, thou may understand, in this
That all such, as does play a true Judges part
Are not blame worthy, for doing Justice
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
In that quod I, thou have answered me well
But yet in one thing, thou do^e me offend^
Thou say, I must needs be damned in hell
So thou would make me despair, at mine end
Mary quod she, if thou wylt still d^fende
That god does give the, no power to conuarte
Then may thou despair, for thou can not amend
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
If god did not offer, to the his grace
Which by thy frewyll, thou may leave or take
Of justice he could not, damn the in that case
But sith wylfully, thou do it forsake
Thy mo^st grievous pain, in thinfernall lake
Shall Be for that thou, would not here reuart^
From sin, but wylfully gods precepts brake
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Do lewd preest^ lack grace, These are cursed children leu^ng the right way
and are geu^^^ (...) ^rrours ^. Pet. ^.
which keeps not their
Do ry^he me^ lack grace, which help not y^ pore (vows
Do lawer^ lack grace, which from the right bows
Does that man lack grace, which does keep an hoore
Does those men lack grace, which do false me^ succoure
Does he lack grace, which does gods word peruarte
Does he lack grace, which does poor men devour
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Will thou say quod I, that these lack not grace
Yes forsooth quod she, they lack grace in deed
But why, because they will it not inbrace
For god does off^e it, their souls clean to wede
From all fylthynesse, and forth would them led
To farther virtue, if they from it hot starte
So that they lack thereof, of will does proceed
Remember therefore, thou man what thou art
Now thou wretched man, here thou may perceive
How thou do offend, through thy wickedness
Even worse then a beast, thou doste thy self behave
No threatnyng nor preaching, can thy life redress
No plage of god, ca^ turn thy wylfulnesse
Surely I believe, thou haste Pharos heart
That thus abusest will, against gods goodness
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
I pray the quod I, speak no more of will
For truly I feel, in my conscience
The fault is in me, if I my soul kill
For of gods will, I have experience
If I peryshe, it is my neclygence
Is it so quod she, then thou may conuarte
Why do thou thereto, slack thy diligence
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Now to leave will, and to another thing
The which I told the, that thou do abuse
It is gods hye gift, of understanding
The which the holy ghost, in the did infuse
Joined with reason, so that none excuse
Of yngnoraunce, thou should aleage on thy part
But knowing good and ill, and how them to use
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Understandynge, as I told the before
Is in very beasts, in a certain kind
Through which they, are brought evermore
To serve the man, according to thy mind
And when disobedient, thou do them find
With correction, thou make them to smarte
And then as a lamb, the strongest thou may bind
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
But understanding, now being in the
Thou haste it, with reason for to discus
All things, which are good or bad in degree
And them to use, to gods honor as thus
All good things to use, as gifts gracious
And evil things perceiving, from them to reuarte
But how thou doste use it, it is marvelous
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
As god has made, beasts to be under the
So art thou under god, him to obaye
And because to know his will, sure thou should be
Understandynge he has given the always
Not like to a beast, and yet I may say
Sooner do thou make, a beast to conuarte
Then thou will, to god by night or by day
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
The beast by sore beatyng, here thou do ^eache
To know thy mind sure, and it to fulfill
But god in his ministers, to the does preach
Declaryng daily, unto the gods will
But thou like one, which thereof cold no skyll
Wylt not obaye god, although thou doste smarte
And yet will say, thou art gods darlyng still
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
In that quod I, me think I could answer the
By the words of the wise man, written plain
The child whom the father does beat, says he
The same does he love, and will him maintain
Now by this I may say, to the again
God scourgynge us, plays a good fathers part^
That is truth quod she, but more grace to obtain
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Like a father, god does the admonys^e
Many sundry ways thy soul for to win
And with diverse plages, he does the punyshe
But when to conuarte, wylt thou once begin
Nay rather thou wylt defend, thy foul sin
How art thou gods child, in deed or in heart
When thou for his law, does not pass a pynne
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Therefore unless, thou thy life do amend
To call g^d father, thou art not worthy
For such father such son, shall not contend
Therefore god, unto his children does cry
Be holy says he, (...)
as I am holy
Turn unto me, and from sin reuart^
And eternal death, (...)
ye shall never die
Remember I say, thou man what thou art,
Thus god is god, to the man most unkind
To call the by grace, which thou do abuse
Understandynge, in the does seem to be blind
^or as he should be, (...)
thou do him not use
Thou thynkest to be gods child, and yet do refuse
To do that pertayneth, to a good chyldes part
Which is to please him, thou should daily muse
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Thou ought, understanding hole to aply^
Unto gods honor, with a faith perfyte
But thou from god, turnest it clean a wrye
By taking scripture, to thine apetyte
I pray the, what virtue can I resyte
But that thou fyndest, scripture it to peruarte
By false understanding, from gods truth quyt^
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Of this sort, If th^^ make ^ ^owe unto god be not (...) to perform it. Eccl.
5. Dent* 2^. (...) 6.
thou have full many a one
As priests chefely, which there vows do not keep
And if kytte will come, they will not lie alone
^ushe say they, we are another stones nor sheep
This makes them to make, when other does sleep
Such understand, gods word ouerthwa^te
They fear not, ne think the pains of (...) deep
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Some says quod I, that they ought to have wives
For they say in deed, they can not live chaste
They must needs ^o quod she, whom the dyuell dryues
For of virtuous living, they have no taste
As to fast and pray, nay (...) of that haste
They will feed, and play a reuelers part
For to say their service, they count ^^yme waste
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
They use not the means, to live a chaste life
For where as they, should be solytary
Con^rarye, to all pleasures they are ry^e
And commonly, count light company
Then reason they, there is no remedy
We must needs mary, our flesh to subuarte
Thus for their vows, they care not a butterfly
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Thus of understanding, the grace they distroye
And like beasts they live, without godly respect
Uery Epicures, seeking belly joy
With which, all the realm they have i^fecte
Fasting is now, so clearly re^ecte
That no good preacher, can make them conuarte
Well, I say no more, but this in ef^ecte
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
I pray the quod I, of them speak no more
Nor yet of none other, it is ^yme to end
I se well, virtue decays very sore
I have herd as much, as I do int^^de
Art thou weary quod she, god the am^nde
^o here thou may se thy myscheuous heart
Thou thynkest time long, thy life to reprehende
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
I have done quod she, but now thou may se
That I have kept promise, as I did say
Have I not proved the, so wicked to be
That thou gods image, in thy soul do decay
^o much as lies in the, thou can not say nay
I have not flattered the truly, in no part
^ut now thou art warned, conuart while thou may^
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
Defarre not amendment, lest time do fail the
Uncertayne thou art, when death shall the kill
Therefore to be sure, take warning of me
^aste, watch, and pray, and do not thy soul spyll
Turn thou to god, and turn to the he will
I can say no more, for now I will depart
But yet at my going, keep this in mind still
Remember I say, thou man what thou art.
When she had thus spoken, away she flewe
Mountyng wonders hye, into the wind
So that where she became, I never knew
Then did I reuolue, her words in my mind
And when that I, the next leisure did find
I wrote out her sentence, hole with my pen
Wherein I perceive, how people are blind
Whom god graunt^ to mende, say we all amen.
FINIS.
The ^enuoy of the Auctor.
^^^rthe my book, speak thy mind
And flatter none, of no degree
All men, be men of Adams kind
Without any diversity
For all men's souls created be
To gods image, as thou do tell
Which they foul blotte, as they may se
If that they do, peruse the well.
And I pray the, tell all men this
If chance I fail, in any thing
That I err not, of no malys
In error, any man to bring
But am ready to reformynge
In any thing, that thou do say
But truly, to my knowlegynge
Thou tellest the truth, nere as thou may
And where, as lacks eloquence
To make the pleasant, for to read
Axe pardon, for my necligence
For I confess, in very deed
That of learning, surely I need
To make the, a more pleasant style
But a rude wit, rudely does led
So rudely needs, I must compyle
And all doutes, clean to put away
Who was thine auctor, the to frame
Say Miles Hogarde, so swe^e thou may
Though some does think, he settes his name
To that, which other men might clame
But of that, no man proof can bring
And if they can, ^et them him shame
As well they may, prouyng that thing.
But now an end, of the to make
Trusting thou shall, be taken well
God grant us all, vice to forsake
And to think on both, heaven and hell
With fear and love, not to rebel
Against gods law, in any case
And then no doubt, but we shall dwell
With him, in his most joyful place.
FINIS. God save the King.
Imprynted by me Robert wyer, dwellinge in S. Martins paryshe at Charynge
Cross.

Ad (...).


