THE fall and evil success of Rebellion from time to time Wherein is
contained matter, most meet for all estates to vewe. Written in old English
verse, by Wilfrid Holme.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Binneman dwelling in Knightriders streate, at
the sign of the Mermaide. And are to be sold at his shop at the Northwest
door of Paul's Church. Anno. 157^ February. 9.

To the Reader.
WHat lookst thou for in this discourse,
(Good Reader) let me know:
Of loyal Subjects that do live?
No, of Rebels overthrow.
From time to time since Moses was,
The rage of Rebels ire
Has hit still just on their deserts,
And gained them their hire.
As haultie Holme in lofty style
Has paint their doings trim:
Oh rebels rue your wretched case,
And warning take by him,
Who tells full plain, your faithless force
Had always overthrow,
And shall do still, till loyally
You Prince and duty know.
Farewell good Reader for this time,
Let Holme the sequel show,
Who lets the faithful subject see
The Traitors folly and woe.
R. S.

The fall of Rebellion.
WHen Phoebus abated from the abundant fragiditie,
And Ianus Bifrons past his situation,
When Vere nigh entered to his humiditie,
Soon after Februa y^ Goddess dedication,
When Sol in Pisces took his habitation:
Then mused I the Zodiak instabilitie,
And how that nature is naught but variation,
Reserved the Astripotent of his benignity.
Thus compassing my senses, soon after Aurora,
When Lucifer the watch Star was past his illucident,
In the surrection of Titan then took I my journey,
To a River in a Mountain toward the Occident,
Where beams of Ipergeus come from the Orient,
Glystring in resplendishor right goodly to behold,
Where Nayades the Nymph had done her denorment,
And scummed the water more clear than any gold.
For the bemes with the glemes were fair and refulgent,
More clearer than Carbuncle, Electrum or Crystal,
With rasis and trasis, al silver and orient,
Whose pulchritude to behold it seemed supernatural:
Thus gasping and gasing, I heard a voice vocal
Languishing in dolor, lament and complain,
Am I a Queen (quod she,) or Empress imperial?
Nay Aposlata, like Dalida, a Meretrix certain.
At the clamor all obstupefact, I started in that steed,
And fatally I saw a Lady mystical,
With a Crown of gold, and a Diadem on her head,
Dight all with Diamonds and Rubies so royal,
With Emeraudes and Iacincts, and many Gemmes general,
As Turkas, and Topasion, with Saphirs blewe and bise,
That Plinius in his practice could not discribe them al,
Nor yet Pithagoras was able to sum the prise.
But Pigmalion, the Mason in craft artificial,
Could not transform so woeful a Creature,
Nor yet Appelles the Pictor principal,
So macerate and lean a doleful portraiture,
In a Frock black as Sables, dark citrine and obscure,
With a Kyrtle bloody of color bombesine,
And a Rail all to ryuen more blonkysh than azure,
With an antic deaurate with letters argentine.
She sobbed and sighed with ample tears lacrimable,
But with asper voice and clamor vehement
In a fury (quod she with words intolerable,)
Holme, I am Anglia the Princess excellent,
Whose renoumed benignity through causes negligent
Is like to be exturped, expulsed, and expelled
Through insurrection and copious detriment,
Of people perverse amongst themselves rebelled.
Immediately to me her Servant obedient,
She commanded to pronounce some stories of sedition,
I replied unto her grace, she being not discontent,
Me for to pardon and therefore have remyssion,
For I was timorous and afraid of punition,
And as a Gemme without gloss vnpullished to shine,
With senses obtused, and brain in oppression,
For default of Literature, and lack of discipline.
But so importunate forsooth was her request,
That ignorance notwithstanding I began to descriue,
How that in the Historiographie it is plain expressed,
That Graccus by suggestion falsely did contriue
The Romans to rebel with the Senators to strive,
Chalenging equipolent all things to be divided,
Through whose discention as Oroke does discriue,
Much ruin there befell, and many men occided.
Also the triumphant Troyans victorious,
By Anthenor and Aeneas false confederacy,
Sending Polidamus to Neoptholemus,
Was vanquished, and subdued by their conspiracy.
O dolorens fortune and fatal misery,
For multitude of people was there mortificate,
With condign Priamus and all his progeny,
And flagrant Polixene that Lady delicate.
The iugling of Iugurth with strife and dissension,
Destroyed all Numidie, (as Salust does declare)
And Percius of Macedone with crafty invention
Rebelled (says Eutropius) with the Romans to compare.
His host was destroyed, and who will contemplare.
Trogus declares that in prolixitie,
Where as before, but contributers they were,
They were after subdued to their great misery.
Titus Liuius, (de gestis Romanorum)
Describes when ye Combres and Numides were destroyed,
Ex Maurio condigno flore Senatorum,
Then Maurius would have had his office feign renewed,
To the seventh time Consul, but Silla that eschued,
Through which sedition and high ingratitude,
I say more mischief to the Romans ensued,
Than did by Haniball for all his fortitude.
The dissension of two brethren the sons of Oedippus,
Which resolved the problem of the Shpinx in the ^^lie*
Was the principal cause of destruction of Thebes,
Which Amphion builded with the Harp of Mercury,
The stones lept up with the harmonious melody,
Which fiction Poetique is nothing to be tried,
But by prolixing and pronouncing in facunde Retorie,
The Commons them selves the City edified.
Petrus Comestor in his storye Scolasticall,
Publishes and declares, how Aristobilus
Discorded with Hircanus his brother natural,
Through whose occasion the noble Pompeius,
With power potentiall and acts victorious,
W^nne all Jerusalem, with the place dedicate,
With great occision to them calumnious,
Difringing the Walls with ways most toxicate.
The Roman Topographie declares how Marcellus,
With the excellent Pompeius, by their biplicitie
The Lauriat triumph denied unto Julius,
Whose nobleness surmounted with great famositie,
Which was the occasion of great mortality:
For Pompeius was slain by this altercation,
With mortal battles and great calamity,
To the Romans damage and great desolation.
Diverse cruel battles amongst the Romans has been,
One was Lepidus fought against Catullus,
In an other the Commontie fought with Cateline,
And Antonius with Octauianus,
Another, Sertorius was against Pompeius,
Wherein was slain by this last detraction,
Twelve hundred Kings, and that right cheualrous,
Of worthy parentage and valiant extraction.
Was not Julius Caesar the victor bellipotent,
Occided and slain by people maleuolent?
But Octauian his Nephew the Emperor excellent,
Repugned with those Rascals and Traitors fradulent:
For Marcus Anthonius and he, by consent,
Destroyed those choorles and rebels furibund,
Both Brutus and Crassus the harlottes rabient,
With diverse Senators, and many a Uacabund.
Such murder, such treason, and such disobedience
As the Romans have had, was never specified,
For Decius slew Phillip, to have the pre-eminence,
And Emilaine, Gallus, and Luciane mortified,
And Probus, and Gordaine, as plain is notified,
Were slain by villains to Romes great perdition,
And four civil battles by Otho was magnified,
But poverty at the length was the diffinition.
Rose not Maxencius, with Knights of the Pretorie,
Against Seuerus and Galerius Augustus?
And Seuerus Knights betrayed him by Treachery,
And then came assistaunce of noble Herculius,
Which was only father to the said Maxentius,
Provoking Dioclesian, for to take the dignity,
But in my conjecture this was to them dolorous,
Pondring this mutable and sodeine diversity.
There Marcus the Consul, in Italy confounded
Three score thousand Riotors of that domination,
And also Metredas, in force which abounded,
Contrary to alegiance, made great litigation
Above twenty years, with great confutation,
But in the sequel, as Fortune did execute,
Destroyed was he and his procreation,
His posterity slain, his Regions destitute.
The Bible is evident, how Sichem congregation,
By slaying of Abimeleck them selves made fatigate,
And the storye Iudicum makes clear declaration,
How a Concubine was wrapped with lechery insatiate,
Whose husband in twelve her members mutilate,
Sending to the Tribes with great lamentation:
Wherefore Israel had almost abrogate
The whole tribe of Benjamin for their abomination.
In the second book of Samuel it is plain expressed,
How Absolons disobedience and false peruersitie,
Made himself to be slain and Israel oppressed,
With great effusion of blood by his dualitie,
By the doughtinesse of David, and his nobility,
And eke Achitophell the counselor sapient,
Was so dispaired and in perplexity,
That he hanged himself the traitor negligent.
Five hundred thousand of Israel were slain and necated
Of the house of Jeroboam, their king and principal,
In Paralipomenon it is clear dilated,
How Abia of Judah destroyed them for beliall,
And Iehu slew Achab, and his sons collateral
Uanquished his blood, his stock and Genealogy,
And also Ochosias of Judah most royal,
Was slain and his brethren by Iehues conspiracy.
Sundry ingratitudes amongs the Jews have been,
As Saul against David, and Ioab with Abnere,
And the seed of Ochozias, with Alathia the Queen,
With dividing of Kingdoms as plainly does appear,
Of Judah and Israel which was the cause clear
Of their captivity, and the transmigration,
For diverse heads made diverse Gods seyre,
Wherefore God gave them up to their great damnation.
The books of Machabes discribeth the perturbance,
Of the male Caliditie that came by Alcinous,
To them pestiserous, and to their great doliance,
Besides the destruction of noble Machabeus,
And eke the discord of young Antiochus,
Against Phillip the Traitor disloyal,
With the treason of Triphon against King Demetrius,
With the vniustnesse of Jason the thief most unnatural.
In Josephus we may see, that the Jews for Rebellion
Were conquered of Titus the son of Vaspasian,
And other stories say there was slain a Mylion,
With a hundredth M. more and C. thousand taken,
And afterward, contempt oppressed them by Adrian,
And clean deiect them from their habitation,
Making in Jerusalem Foreners remain,
And now pay they tribute in every other Nation.
What should I recounte the Rebellion of Cresius,
With a thousand such more, to make macrologie,
My matter to prolong? it were but superfluous.
But yet I will rehearse to touch somewhat briefly,
As concerning England, our own native Country,
For why, the Auctors do wonderously dissent,
Therefore I will rehearse to this antilloquie,
But only the cognisaunce which appears verament.
This Region was maculate, and put to rapacitie
With the force of the Danes, by Buerne contention,
And slain was King Edmund, King Osbridge, and Ellee,
And over this, one Mordred, he made false prevention
With Arthur his Sovereign, with such great dissension,
That only it caused not great desolation,
But also perturbed the Royal intention,
From the Roman Diadem, with the Coronation.
Julius Caesar, for all his audacitie,
Was twice expulsed of Cassibolanus,
And made to recuile for all his Artillery,
To the maledict conflict of one Andragius
The Earl of London, a Traitor contagious,
Whose aid, procurement and false introduction,
Foundred al Britain from the estate prosperous,
And made us be subject, to our great destruction.
Since the Conquest has been mischief inestimable,
As against king Stephen, Maude the Empress excitation.
But Henry the younger, an act more myrable,
Contended with his Father, with strife and mination:
What sapience was here in this procuration,
To subdue his Father by his conuexitie,
Was not the Devil in this inclination,
To make such discord amongst the commontie?
The well redoubted king, in act as most martial,
Richard Curedelion, from his Conquest ineffable
Was made to recule by his brother natural.
Pretending the Crown with ways inexecrable.
But alas for sorrow, this Prince inexpugnable
Was taken by the way, but yet difficulate
At the last was he, with Raunsom innumerable,
And his enemies were taken and clean exuperate.
I am ashamed to pronounce, to publish and declare
The Baronage commotion, against John their King,
And how to extringe his Son they did compare,
It museth my mind such naughty demeaning,
But what was the final that came by transgressing?
Murder and death to the Realm right exial,
Destroying of Fortresses, which yet is remaining,
Subduing of Towns, to us all prejudicial.
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, was hanged and decollate,
With sixtene Barrons more in Edward the seco^ds days,
The filthy demeanor that then was approbate,
I abhor to recite, they took such naughty ways.
For Tullius were not able, at the full to disprayse
The naughtiness of the Queen, with her malignitie,
But GOD does requite with a corrosie always:
For Mortimer was slain, for all his pompositie.
Jack Straw, Wat Tiler, yt Chiestains of Essex and Kent,
Against Richard the second began to make pretense,
But after a little rumor on Gallous were they hente,
By forty, by fyftie, this was their best defense,
And the Ear^^ of Ratcot bridge, which had the pre-eminence,
By process were slain and with does enterlarded,
For iniquity by Justice of very congruence,
Against true alegiance is often thus rewarded.
The Dukes of Surrey and Exeter with treason infect,
With the Earl of Gloucester and the Earl of Salisburie,
Pretended in a mumming, like traitors detect,
To ^lea their liege Lord the noble fourth Henry:
But headed were they with all their affinity,
By the Commons purveyance and the divine regiment.
In likewise with battle was slain the young Percie,
His Uncle hanged and drawn, of Gallous first pendent.
The Archbishop of York with the Earl Marshall of England,
For their insult was hanged and their inquietude,
And the Lord Bardolfe, with the Earl of Northumberla^d,
Was instigate to insurge their Prince to illude,
To their intermission the verity to conclude,
For by the Commons they were hanged and inquinate.
Here may be perceived how that a small valitude,
Will reskue a Prince from subjects insaciate.
In the days of the sixth Henry, Jack Cade made a brag
With a multitude of people, but in the consequence,
After a little insanie they fled tag and rag:
For Alexander Iden he did his diligence,
So interuention was Jack Cades recompense,
And the commons were hanged in diverse parts seere,
By the kings justices and his magnificence,
By due execution by Oyere Determinere.
The field of Saint Albons was a battle violent,
Another the Lord Audley with the Earl of Salisburie,
The field of Northampton was a cruel cruciament,
Again at Saint Albons was great immiserie*
And at Mortimer Cross was much languitude.
But at Pamleson field was most lamentation,
The deity gave the battles of his true equity,
Considering the title and true generation.
In Henry's days the seventh of famous memory,
The Blackheath field to the commons was pernicious,
Martin Swarth and his adherents for all their policy,
Was slain and percuted with clamor languishous.
And Bladis that burned York, was too impetuous,
But the judgment of a traitor to him was adiect.
Thus was he rewarded for his act injurious,
With diverse other principals the which were suspect.
But for conclusion to end and define,
Contributers and homagers, the which has rebelled,
Almost all stories says, the truth to combine,
They were slain and subdued, or from their realms expelled*
As Ireland, Scotland or France when they meddled
Within this our region: and as for sedition
Within realms politic, it has clean compelled
The invasion of aliants to their great submission.
When I had thus finished, I had thought to have named
The blandishing Scorpions with discord most violate,
The Bishops of Rome for my espirites confremed,
But yet I refrained the stories most maculate,
Supplying to Anglia the Princess prenominate,
Beseeching her honor, by the way of protestation,
What ample thing more she would have determinate,
And why she commanded me this declaration.
Her bounteous benevolence made me thus reply,
A Holme, Holme, my servant inseparable,
This same late commotion that was the cause why,
Wherefore I beseech thee, their rising so variable
To me to declare, with their causes detestable.
I reconed to her grace I durst not bring it to pass:
God will defend thee quod she, for he is not variable,
For invincible is verity, so says Es^ras.
The Insurrection.
Then briefly I declared how the old Leuiathan
Whispered with the Papists, this region to divide,
And they like true advocates declared to every man,
How Antechriste was borne, this rumor went full wide.
For of Abbeys they said there might not one abide,
And churches and chapels they shall be oppressed,
Fasting and prayer, and good works are set a side,
And ye sacraments shall be naught, these words they expressed.
When this could not avail, then properly they invented
Friars, Pardoners to the people for to prate,
How burials and marriages they should be presented,
With churchings and christenings to pay a noble rate.
Plough nobles yearly, they were clear determinate,
And Hen, Chicken, Goose, Capon, Pig and Cony,
They should not be eaten but with men of estate,
Nor yet no white bread without a sum of money.
Also a perpetuity of horse and beast a grote,
With a penie a sheep: now these words fascinorous,
They moved the ignorant and debill wits God wot,
Thus persuaded by intisement of priests auaritidus,
A Cobbler pretended a title ambitious,
In Lowth in Lincolnshire, and made insurrection,
Some of worship was of counsel, but mo was contrarious
But as for the commons to arise had affection.
This noise and rumor redounded in Yorkshire,
Then by appointment one Robert Ask gentleman,
Took in hand for captain to accomplish their desire,
Then Houldeine and Beuerlay to insurge they began,
They would with Holdernesse collected to them than,
Thus of a small union was aggregate a more,
Many men of woorship to fortresses they ran,
Some had their cattle taken, and their goods spoiled therefore.
Then Hul made a brag, but anon it was yielded,
Then Yorkshire in general, it was nigh collected,
York received them for there they abode, and builded
Til the Countries adjacent with the rumor were infected*
And as I suppose they had letters directed,
Whereby was raised all Richmondshire and Tindale,
The borders of Lancashire began to be suspected,
Bishoprike rose clear, with Sedbare Dent, and Kendale.
They spoiled and robbed those which were fugitive,
To the Abbeys suppressed the people they restaurate,
Rudent incessantly with clamor excessive,
Faith and common weal, and in the way obuiate
They were with procession and ringing insaciate,
And the Sacrament Christ's body called Eucharistia,
Was borne by Prelates with the crucifixe associate,
With pipes, Drums, Tabrets, and Fiddlers always.
A little beside Doncaster they came to Scanceby leyes,
And furnished their battle, and set forth their vaward,
They were.xxv.M. of able men's bodies,
Well horssed and harnessed right puissant to regard,
The noble men were surrepted, the truth to awarde,
Of these Countries predict from their purpose indeuided,
But took upon hand, and was not retrograde,
This handful following excepted and forprised,
The Earl of Northumberland, for he was diseased,
The Earl of Westmerland, for he had the Podagree,
The Earl of Comberland the commons displeased,
Lying in Shipton castle with all their artillery,
Like to his ancestors, his allegiance to fortefie,
And the Lord Dacres at the rising so variable,
Like an honorable man, his truth to magnify,
Went strait to the South, and there abode perdurable.
Sir Henry Sauil, sir Marmaduke Constable,
Sir Bria^ Hastings, sir John Neuil, the king they assisted,
Master Euers at Scarburgh to them was agreeable,
With all his companions, and would feign have resisted.
The Maire of York would, but the commons he mistrusted,
William Maunsel also, and Knolles of Hullcleere,
With the Archdecon of Duresme of ye same part co^sisted,
And flee from the Riotors did Leonard Bequet Esquire.
Doctor Stephens, physician to Therle of Northumberland,
And Ratclif had done well, if York had been contented,
The Parson of Castlegate was of the same comnant,
And the Bishop of Duresme of the same part consented:
I know but another which ought to be presented,
But which after spoyler to the commons did resort:
Yet sir Thomas Curwen earnestly invented.
With sir Thomas Wharton to stay their counterporte.
Then with an ardent fury quod Anglia and frouned,
Holme it is but fiction I say thou doste devise,
Shewedst thou not me that gentlemen and men that were renoumed
Fled to Castles and fortresses, what made them then to rise?
And it like your grace quod I, because they were not wise,
Yet diverse were co^pelde, for the Commons did them take,
But mo were seduced with the Papists devise,
Drinking the venom of Aspes which never can awake.
They noysed the Emperor with them was participate,
And the Bishop of Rome with the Scottish king co^nuxed,
With them to commilitare they were clearly fundate,
And Ireland and Wales of their part was fixed,
The Earl of Darby outlawed, and of their part mixed,
And the Duke of Norfolk every cause accounted,
Al commoners co^moned with the Earl Staffort enixed,
And as for they of Lincolnshire a great sum surmounted.
But the duke of Suffolk with such a power invaded
Lincolnshire predict, that they had small esperaunce,
The lord Admiral and sir Anthony Brown the^ persuaded
With Richard Cromwell esquire there master of thordina^ce,
Their wepo^s and armor was lost by gods purucia^ce,
They did I assure you behave themselves nobly,
To requite the kings grace they had good perseverance,
Ponde^ing the preferment by his magnanimity.
This notwithstanding the commons besides Doncaster,
Ascribed a Carter to a King coequall in degree,
With coshe Crommoke coshe, I would we had thee here,
Like savage beasts loosed and put to their liberty,
Enjoying in the splendent after obscurity,
Devising and inuenting Articles presumptuous,
Every one discording from other verily,
Two Gentlemen did open their quarrel contentious.
But one lantern of England and patron of defense,
A shield for us Borials, and flower of audacitie,
The Duke of Norfolk with all his violence,
To the kings army Royal to Doncaster came he,
With the noble prince Pere of the kings consanguinitie,
The Marquis of Exeter nigh to the blood Royal,
With the ancient Lord therle of Shrewesbury,
Whose truth in decrepitie approves the trial.
Their verity to their Prince my heart has enrachened,
Like a woman ravished with the raze of love esprised,
And many nobles mo them selves so well demeaned,
That of me their worthynesse it can not be devised,
As Therle of Surrey with these Earls comprised,
That is to say, of Huntington and Rutlande also,
With many other nobles which was there surmised,
And as for Lords honorable there was many mo.
Thus lay they in Doncaster with Curtall and Serpentine,
With Bombard and Basilisk, with men prone and vigorous,
The Commons knew it not, to them it was claudestine,
That made them more malapart, and also more rigorous,
For they sent home for money their hearts was so furious,
Purposing openly at London to hold a Parliament,
But the king herald came to know their minds furious,
Uiewing them twice or thrice with fair words and dilligent.
But ere the Battle was ready procincte and proponed,
Sir Arthure Darcy knight with ye commons was segregate,
And fled to the kings grace, and by the way commoned
With the duke of Norff. where promtly he promulgate
All the Commons priuitie, and I suppose effugate
He was by the consent of his brother confiducion,
For at the first rising sir George with letters ornate,
Advertised all gentlemen to leave that ill conclusion.
But when the duke of Norf. of the Barons had intelligence,
And so many knights and squires with the commons in defense
It incrampished his heart that they should make pretense,
Weying his fathers honor by their magnificence,
Their antique zeal and amity he thought to recompense,
Bringing both the parts to a communication:
So diverse of the principals met with diligence,
Concluding a purpose with good deliberation.
So sir Rafe Ellerker, and Robert Bows Esquire,
With the articles entitled went to the kings majesty,
The battles both prorumped and went every where,
For the duke behight to interceede in their sedulitie
In causes reasonable, but not in their cecitie,
And so within a month according to promission,
An answer correspondent to their secularitie,
Was made by the kings grace to their whole petition.
The first Article.
To the first article, Faith, the kings grace replied,
It was a term to general that which they did present,
But if they meaned christ's faith, he was ye prince ye certified,
That the sincere purity thereof was his intent,
And like a valiant prince he spoke these words urgent:
Who dare set his foot to ours the contrary to prove,
And said he reckned learned he was what the faith meant,
Marueling that ye ignorant in this thing should him move.
To the Article.
To know which faith was prudence, perceiving we Christians
He has herd of such heresies, as of the Selcucians
Of Sabelline and Neotus with the Patrispassians,
The Origenistes, the Ebionites and the Donacianes,
The Epicures, the Iacobites, with the Nestoriens,
Of Seuerus, of Menander, and eke of Valentine,
The Antropomorphites, and also the Spalmeniens,
The Ariens and Manacheis of Pallas and Scotine.
Also of Marcio, Basillid es, and Saturnius,
Of Carpocrates, of Photyne, and of Macedonius,
Of Chiliastes, of Corinthius, and of Heluidius,
Of Eutiches, Galanus, and also Seleucius,
Of Eunonius, Elsesates, with many a sect mo,
Of Montanus, of Apelles, and also Nouatus,
And Samosatenses, and Appolinarius also,
With Antichrist the Roman the Idol monstrous.
4, Reg 22. Zacha. 10. Dan. 14. Dan. 8. Luc. 18.
This is the grove image which the sinful world Manasses
Put in the congregation the house perpetual,
This is the Idol shepherd which Zachary does express,
And also the deuourer the false God Baall.
An vnshamefull King with faces Daniell does him call.
This is the Judge in earth in the xviij. of Luke expressed,
For we have lost our Husband Christ with his blood royal
And Satan our enemy he is not yet oppressed.
2 These. 2. Apoca. 18. Psalm. 72.
This is the child of perdition prophesied of by Paul,
In our conscience sitting, Gods Temple verament,
The Apocalips fysgyg the whore Babilonicall,
Of whom Prophets, and Apostles rehearses words t^rg^t
Now to this particle faith, was it not expedient,
They to have recognized what faith was their intention,
For besides Christ's faith there reigns faithes negligent,
As Turk, Jew, Pagane, with Mah^mites invention.
As touching Christ's faith sithence Christ's incarnation,
Neither Emperor nor king, nor prince of nobility,
Was like to the kings grace, for in his convocation
The Anabaptists and Pelagians confuted has he,
And permitted shadows positive of old antiquity
For error of the people by a new altercation,
And also showed like Gods knight elect in fidelity,
Christ's blood and his death with the true justification.
Of Faith.
But to the misbeleeuers I put this proposition,
By way of interrogatorie, if one of them should dye,
And know no refuge nor no propiciation,
But in Mormet in fistill they should ever lie,
And the prince they offended should fortune come the^ by,
And say, love my friends, and forgive as I will thee,
And when thou can not repent my son shall for thee die,
And do but this to day, and rewarded shall thou be,
For to morrow thy riches shall abound like to Croesus,
Thy force* like Hercules, thy sapience like Solomon,
Thou shall have meats delicate far above Vitellus,
In fame like Alexander, thy fortune like Gedeon,
The lust of Augustus, the pulchritude of Absolon,
The science of Aristotle and his Philosophy,
As facunde in Rethorike as was king Amphion,
With the health of Galen, and age of Methusalie.
What man living considering this gratitude,
But for love of this Prince, and fear of this misery,
And for hope of this joy, but with his fortitude
He would one day labor and suffer adversity,
And pass for no riches, nor yet of iocunditie,
Nor of no fortune dolorous, nor yet of no pain,
Nor of meat, drink, ne cloth, ne no felicity,
But would feign have to morrow this glory to obtain.
Then may we consider Adams disobedience,
By whose transgression equity has given death eternal:
Gene. 3. Romans 5. Math. 1. John. 1. Math 4. Mark. 1. Math. 3. Romans 5. Esai. 53.
Math. 8. Peter. 2. John. 3. Romans 6. Romans 8.
And as for Moses law it gathered more offense
To the high deity and Plasmator potentiall,
Took pity and mercy to make his son carnal,
And Sathanas has lost him for all his temptation,
He has pleased his father, and given life perpetual
By his true obedience, and made justification.
He has overcome death and sin by his painful affliction,
And borne our iniquities upon the cross crucified,
And made us revive by his resurrection:
And by him and by Baptime from sin we are mortified,
And as he is, shall we in joy be glorified:
So that we believe it without mutabilitie,
For he is our Savior by all Prophets prophesied,
Therefore let us trust him with hope and fidelity.
For his pain and death he asks our amity,
To observe his precepts his kindness to revive,
But for this life ^iurnall, which in equality
To any part sempiternall no man can contriue
As a day to Methusalie or any life alive,
And the furies infernal, and the joys celestial,
Exceeds man's brain and nature to describe,
As things incomprehensible above things natural.
Now having this affirmitie of gladness and dolor,
A man would work for the glory or for the pain repent,
Math 3. Mark. 1. Luke. 3. John. 14. Acts. 1.
But to him that thinks justified he is by our Savior,
Baptized is he with the espirite omnipotent:
Which comforter by instinction delivers the talent,
To some less or more with charity inflated,
To love God and his neighbor in spite of the Serpent,
From the ground of his heart, and his sins shall be abated.
And if the flesh rebel seven times on a day,
Yet by faith and hope he shall be tutelate
Again to revive and his sin done away,
With perfect charity in his heart condurate:
This confessed makes the law and him coadunate,
With grounded repentance to walk of a new,
And when he does not, Christ's faith is vacillate,
And he must turn again to make his charter new.
But this faith has no man but by inspiration,
Though they can speak Ebrue, Greek, Latin or Caldie,
For they are borne of God, John. 1.
and elect in creation,
And trust not to their works like to a Pharisie,
But inward from their hearts they work them of duty,
So that Scripture command the^ by gods divine testament: Timoth. 2. John. 1.
Psalm. 126.

For by christ comes their favor, their truth and their verity,
And the house is built in vain without God consent.
And Christ for his brethren in baptism regenerate,
Gods sons by adoption does ever make atonement,
As though they be damned by their ill works operate,
As Well as for Adam, as often as they repent,
And one may get heaven to fulfill every commandment: Romans 2.

But nature can not that without Gods coaction:
For Adam for an apple was damned by the Serpent, Genesis 3.

And never was able to make satisfaction.
For the man Microcosinus the which was wounded sore
With the thieves disobedience and incredulity, Luke. 10.

The Priest nor the Leuite would not him restore,
But Gods son the Samaritane Christ full of pity,
With wine and oil anointed his malady,
And cast him on his horse, and had him to his stable,
And gave two pence to the keeper to see his enormitie,
And paid the sum total to heal his wounds miserable.
But our Prelates believes that vice naturally,
Destroyed the body by Aristotle's lore,
And that virtue by Zeno and mo in Philosophy,
Gives quietness of mind, and the body does restore,
But for life everlasting they do not look therefore,
And though they ascribe the soul intellectiue
Or immortal, yet they think it flies evermore,
But mo think like beasts our souls be but sensatiue.
But think ye that Plato or the Philosophers old,
Would have judged Adam and his posterity
To be damned by an element either hot or cold,
Or by nature working by moisture or deciccitie:
Or the sacrifice of a beast should give fertility,
And make atonement where there was offense?
Oh here the blind Balaams may evidently see,
How love asks love with perfect obedience.
Now he that works good works shall be saved,
And he that trusts in his works shall be damned,
And that works not good works shall be damned,
And he that dies in ill works shall be damned,
He that dispaireth for his works shall be damned,
Luke. 5. Mark. 9.
And that thinks he sins not shall be damned:
For Christ came not for the righteous deliverance,
But for to call sinners to perfect repentance.
The second Article.
Now to the second article, to their proposition
To answer said the king, it needs a distinction,
But if we knew (quod his grace) of what Church ye meant
We doubt not a response to your incitament:
But mean what Church ye will by your improbitie,
And we will prove therein we have naught institute,
But Gods law and man's for all your procacitie,
With more ground tha^ our auncesters before have execute.
He showed the^ Edward the first, with the.v. and. vj. Henry,
His noble auncesters of famous memory,
To their own use subverted of Abbeys a multitude,
Some a hundred some mo, then accounted no turpitude,
In like wise his gra^dmother, ten bishops with the Cardinal,
The^ marvelled he that rather they had a knave or twain,
To lead a profane life, than he their Prince natural,
To enjoy them from forenners, his charges to sustain.
To the Article Church.
It was reason to know their purpose effrenate,
Whether they meaned Christ's church the christen congregation
Or the Lapidous sinagoge procript and relegate,
The great city I suppose of the whore of Babylon: Apoc. 18 Romans 9 1. Peter. 2
Esaias. 28 Dan. 8

For Christ of the true Church he is the corner stone,
The which the edifiers and builders refused,
But alas for pity, his church is almost gone,
These Antechristes with faces them self have so abused.
For Paul says that we are the temple sanctificate,
And Cephas, John, and James, seemed pillars for to be, 1. Corin. 6 Galath. 2
2. Peter. 1 2. Corin. 5 John. 4.

Peter and Paul, tabernacles them self do nominate,
And Christ to the Samaritane said, woman trust me,
The time is and shall, that in espirite and verity
The true honorers shall honor, but not in the mountain,
Nor yet in Jerusalem, for my father verily
Is a spirit, and requires such honor for certain.
They confess and deny not that the christen congregation Gene. 28 Exodus 25
3. Reg. 6. Math. 23 Hiere. 7 Esaias. 55 John. 2 Math. 21

Is a Church espiritual, but they Jacob signified,
The other Church moral, pouring out of the stone,
And after the Tabernacle the temple was edified,
And Christ said, the temple, the gold sanctified,
And my house shall be called the house of oration,
Where he whipped them in the temple, these words he specified
And a place for to work in it needs to salvation.
But I say the stone, tabernacle and temple that stood,
Was figures of Christ, for by disobedience
Of Adam, the earth was maledict of God.
Wherefore God and his word, with man's true diligence,
Sanctified those things to give God reverence
Psalm. 32 1. Timo. 4
But now all creatures are blessed and dedicate,
By Gods word and his prayer by Christ's due obedience,
And worthily restored to their first estate.
Now where Christ said the temple the gold sanctified,
John 2 Hiere. 7
And that my house shall be called the house of oration,
At that time these shadows might well be specified,
For they were not full defined to his mortification.
John. 2
But where he whipped the sellers for their il ornation,
It was not only for their indecent acts onerous,
But signified our prelates with the whips of damnation,
For selling Christ's sheep, and his doves most amorous.
And least the elect should have judged the thing permanent,
Mark the prompt purueiance of the divine deity:
For the Jews asked a sign for to prove him negligent.
John. 2
Destroy this temple quod he, and within days three
I shall build it again, and John says verily,
He meaned of his body the temple omnipotent,
Thus to the Jews parables he spoke in obscurity,
Math. 13
But to his disciples he showed the truth indigent.
The Apostles remembered after the resurrection,
John. 2 Mark. 15
What Jesus Christ said, and understood the scripture,
And the temple veil roue at his death and passion:
Which signified by similitude, the temple lost his cure.
Act. 7 Act. 17
Saint Steven, and S. Paul this thing do discure,
Saying of a surety, who will understand,
That the highest of all dwells not, I make you sure,
In no temple nor mansion made with man's hand.
Moreover Saint Steven took scripture to record,
Esaias. 66
The Prophet says heaven is my seat, and earth is my footstool
Then what house will ye build for me says the lord,
Or what place shall I rest in, to make my propre soil?
Has not my hands made all this by my ministration?
Meaning who can edify a better thing than I,
And all things I sanctified in the inchoation,
And the earth curssed for Adam, for Christ do I sanctify.
To these words predict Esaias the Prophet, Esaias. 66

He says to what thing should I regard too than,
But only to the pure, simple, contrite espirite,
And the fearer of my words, meaning by a man,
And sacrifice he dispraiseth, in as odious ways as he can, Esaias. 1

So does David also with the outward operation,
Accepting a faithful, humble, contrite man,
And another stone ne place, ne foren demonstration.
Jesus commanded to make our supplication,
In our conclaue privily, and to shut fast the door,
And Paul intmate his mess and his iteracion,
In a chamber where the young man fell in the store. Math. 6

Whom to life he revived after his fall and pressure,
And two years in his lodging he made his predication, Act. 20 Act. 28

Without superaltare I dare make you sure,
Thus said he his mess with a heavenly incantation.
To the Hebrews we may see the things ceremonial,
Are extinct and expired, Heb. 9 Heb. 10 Deuteronomy. 5 Exodus 20 Galath. 3 1. Corin. 12
and clearly abrogate
By Christ our savior, and if they were moral,
Fructuous abundance comes by their works operate,
But life everlasting that is by Christ preparate,
And we are sons to Abraham, and his heirs natural,
By faith and fidelity, but not of flesh carnate,
And in likewise Gods temple, and one body mistical.
Yet this notwithstanding it is convenient,
To have places appointed by laws positive,
Where the congregation may meet indifferent,
To receive Christ's sacraments, their faith to revive,
And to pray in Communion with hearts intentive,
And to hear Christ's words and true Euangelion.
So men in their hearts could faithfully discriue
Every place, as necessary as it for salvation.
Of Religion.
Now touching the Abbots to live with pain solitary,
It is a moral virtue, for so did Elizeus,
Elias and John, and since Christ's mortality,
Diverse Monks and women have led a life virtuous,
Both together confecte, so says Eusebius,
In likewise did Ephraim, Macarie, and Martine,
And also Saint Jerome and Hellodorus,
Living in poverty like to Christ's discipline.
These with perfect love and with a pure devotion,
Knowing that by Christ they were justified and redeemed,
They kept them self solitary upon their own mere motion
By no man's coaction, but freely unconstrained.
They passed of no living, nor yet the world esteemed,
But sold that they had, and took wilful poverty,
Thus living sole alone, thereby they rather deemed
To follow Christ's cross with all their simplicity.
They watched and abstained when that the flesh rebelled,
To mortify themselves to keep perfect chastity,
Many virtues voluntary they wrought uncompelled,
Math. 15 Esaias. 29
As prayer with the mind, but not with lips only.
Loving one God in their communion busily,
The profession of baptism, was their whole intention,
Galath. 4 Ezod. 20
They passed of no belles, no senser nor ceremony,
But to keep gods commandments, yt was their inue^tion.
They lived by works industrious as did the Apostle Paul
And I suppose sectante to his fibralitie,
Was better than theirs and more beneficial,
For many were converted by such public liberty.
For to be made a gasing stock, he thought no inanitie,
Yet the laws of God in him was irrefragable,
He lived chaste and sobre always in mendacitie,
For where God inspireth, man is not culpable.
There followed after Palla and Marcill,
Eustochin and other with contemplation,
Then Gregory, and Montane began an other spell,
So did Benet make Religion after an other fashion,
Putting in old Uessels new wine of delectation,
And patched a new clout to a broken garment old, Math. 9. Luc. 5. 1. Timo 4.

Professing this and that, by a new altercation,
Thus mark with a hot yro^ their conscience needs they would.
But Saint Bernard reformed those little abusions,
After that Frauncis Norberius and Dominick come to,
And of them is come Sects with diverse ill conclusions,
As Collectes and Mynors, and Obseruaunts also,
With a monstrous multitude of Friar beggars more,
Professing Coule and Cap, with things of ociositie,
Not trusting Christ, a mean sufficient in woe,
But mixeth him with others for their opportunity.
But now Religion is a vile abomination,
For Peter's name was Cephas which is a very stone,
And we are living stones, by Peter's declaration,
And Christ is the head Capital, and other head is none,
But they have this reuersed and left this Church alone,
And have gotten a new God, Dani. 9. Dani. 12.
even Daniels desolation,
And have set up Cragges coopert with houses many one,
To cloak their deeds libidinous and incest fornication.
They incline with their heads to figure humility,
With garments dysguised as the Pharisees did before, Nume. 15.

But alas, they lack their pricks to put them in memory,
And the precepts described in their garments evermore, Nume. 15.

But Tunica inconsutilis, that is not in their lore,
Thereat muse I much in their acts scrupulous,
But tu^he it were to cold, it is abject therefore,
And they need mediators more than Christ Jesus.
They mumble with their lips, with rich Copes and kels,
And chaunting with their chastes like Owls in a frost,
They duck and they sense, and they trumpe up their Bells
Nume. 18.
And sprynkle water fast, but the red Cow is lost,
Candles are illuminate and let on every post,
Before a gorgious Idol fresh figured and gylt,
And though it may be suffered, yet thereby has been lost
Many a Christian man, and many a soul spylt.
Of Images and Religion.
1. Cor. 6.
But let us leave things leeful, and keep things expediente,
For I may eat, drynk, and sleep, but it profits not my soul,
But in my conjecture that is not expediente,
The which may provoke to a thing prejudicial,
And questionless the first commandment is moral,
3. Reg. 6.
Although there were Cherubyns in the temple edified,
It was but a shadow, and these things ceremonial,
By Christ were replete before he was gloryfied.
And in case one commanded their Pastors to refrain
From putting in of Catell in his great close several,
And afterward commanded they should put in twain,
Which after he repelled, then by their minds actual,
They should eat up the close against their accomptall,
But might he say then he being discontent,
Because he put in twain, they thought it judicial?
To this resembles the aforesaid argument.
Yet Images no doubt they might be permanent,
If they were used according to the kings convocation,
But that will not be, men are so negligent,
For one showed me of two Roods besides the Friars habitation
In Greenwitch, which would sweat for equal ministration,
S. William of york (quod an other) will sweat with abundance
To keep House bridge from floods, now this abominatio^
Our Prelates say, is scripture and Gods divine purueyance.
So the Jews when they honored Astroloch and Baall,
With the grove Images and Gods of gentilitie,
I think they believe they had a God Judicial,
But yet they suffered other to get more fertility,
Then may it be said, sure they forsook him truly,
To myx him with the Stars in the sky stelliferall,
And other Gods being bound to serve him only,
Now as they did do we, Esaias. Math. 7.
with our sense allegorical.
The ceremonies of Religion are a hundred and more,
As bread, and ashes, and Organs verily,
With Te Deum laudamus Simbalis and organo,
But David meaned to love God in every iocunditie,
I marvel they dannce not as he did properly,
For the dumb dogs have lost Gods Organs most diligent,
Suffering Wolves to devour his Sheep with rapacitie,
For defaulte of declaring the truth of his Testament.
For dame Nice and dame Wanton, they set in the quire,
Cheeping like a Gosling, and loking one sir John,
They had rather than five pence to have him elsewhere,
If one ask how I know it, I will ground on this stone,
They are fat, and fair of flesh blood and done,
And have not received the spirit of verity,
And seeing they be carnal, I may judge them every one,
To be frail and incontinent with fleshly lubricitie,
None enters to religion with any true devotion,
For the most part be infantes, and put in by coaction,
And none of free will, except for promotion,
Or else for despair to do satisfaction,
And some for very sloth to do no worldly action,
Professing obedience, poverty and chastity,
To which three essentialls they make their contraction,
And to many trifles more the which is but vanity.
And as for their poverty, there is neither Knight nor Lord,
Earl, Marquis, nor Duke like them in abundaunce:
And as for their obedience, al men can record,
They are high Rebellions against true allegiance,
Having both their King and their God at defiance:
And as for their chastity the visitours knows well,
Gene. 18.
For Sodom and Gomor had never such ordinance,
Their polution and ways, I ashame for to tell.
Now believing in works is despair and carnalitie,
Their vows are like Jews vows, therefore they be vacuate:
For here is Christ, or there is Christ, and hope not in him only
Is like to the devils faith from hope clearly separate:
Therefore they may marry and leave their fond estate,
Because they were ignorant and make reuocation,
For small avails baptym though they be regenerate,
Where after they despair in Christ's justification.
The iij. and iiij. Article.
Now to the iij. and iiij. Articles, Laws and common weal,
Was replied this xxviij. year, we being a King,
We think in those things our wit should more excel,
Than in our adolescence, or yet our beginning:
And he reckned his constant subjects for all their contriuing
Would account an^ repute and describe none other ways,
And what should they redargue, naught but commons being,
Which knew not the usage concerning friendly affairs.
To this and of the iij. Estates of the Church.
Now to the right of this request contumelious,
And has not the King condemned mortuaries,
And proving of Testaments which was right tortuous,
With the abusion of tot quots and pluralities,
And the fermholdes of Prelates and their ill qualities,
With Hariots and much to us right odible:
As the warwolfe of Rome devouring thesaurizes
Of region and soul to us right odible?
For I would it were noted, that every other sect
Not being under grace, comprehends one estate,
And we that are Christened Gods children elect,
Comprehend an holy Priesthood and a Church dedicat^, 1. Peter. 2

Which in three estates has long time been nominate,
First the spirituality, and then the temporaltie,
The third the Commons, which in my consent,
The using thereof has caused much heresy.
For all are spiritual in baptim regenerate,
And Gods sons by adoption to a new reuocation,
Believing in Christ, and repenting their estate,
They be brethren coequall of one generation,
Though there be diversity in the mynistration:
And I suppose verily this Church called mylitant,
May be signified like the heavenly habitation,
With orders nine a very Church triumphant.
These orders notwithstanding may well proceed of three
Even as it does of Hierarchies celestial,
And in likewise we may resemble the Trinity,
Three estates undivided and one deity at all:
For we are one body and Christ the head capital, Romans 12. Ephe. 4.

Therefore I think in mine imagination,
It were well done we all were called spiritual,
By names thus following by this protestation,
The spirituality of the eternal ministration,
The spirituality of the temporal Justification,
The spirituality of the mundane occupation,
Now these men are one, but not their operation:
For think ye that Moses was not as good as Aaron, Reg. Job. Iud.

And was not David, and Job and Judith right virtuous?
Leuit. 10.
And Nadab and Abihn of ill conversation.
And many more than they with deeds supersticious.
It is not Frauncis gyrdle nor Aarons myter hye,
Nor yet sir John's crown, nor gentle sir Thomas typpet,
That makes a more virtue, nor yet a greater degree,
But blessed are the hearers of Gods word which is kept,
Yet if an ill man may minister heavenly ministration,
The influence should be good, it appears very well,
Though an ill tree hear no good fruit of his own operation
Yet of ye tree it is grafted, me think this fruit should smell.
These should follow Christ with all their simplicity,
To mortify themselves as nyghe as nature can,
With poverty, with pain, and in humility,
Without ypocrysie to give light to every man,
Their virtues should resplendsh, as does the bright Tita^
Math. 5.
To gloryfie their father which is celestial,
They should be salt to season, to subdue Leuiathan,
And abstain from sins, and pass of nothing carnal.
They be free to wed or not, it is at their liberty,
1 Cor. 9 1. Cor 7. Math 14. 1 Tmo 3 Titus 1 Cor 9.
If either were commanded, the other were inhibite,
Howbeit, it were well to follow Christ in chastity,
For Jesus says himself, who as may let him take it,
But it is better wed than burn, so says ye apostle Paul,
It is leefull he says both to Titus and Timothy,
And he says that Peter and the Lords brethern all,
Led Sisters to wives without ambiguitie.
1. Cor. 9.
In this chapter Paul shows great liberty,
They that sow things spiritual, should reap things carnal,
And that as mynisters used of old antiquity,
So should they have for preaching the truth Euangelical,
But yet in his Epistles this is the sum total,
Cor. 7. Ma^h. 10.
The workman his meat and reward should be devised,
And so says Christ him self, wherein concludes Paul,
That they ought with meat and clothes to be suffised.
These should preach with true predication, Genesis 3. Romans 5. Gala. 3. Romans 10.
Eze 20. Lu^. 16. Romans 7. Gala. 3. Deu. 27. Math. 5. Luc. 20.

How that disobedience has given death and damnation,
And how the law was given to know to reconcile again,
Whose works wrought outward is little more than vain
For thereby comes abundance and copious fertility,
But inward from the heart that gives life eternal,
But if one once think against it by Gods true equity,
There is death and condemnation unto the pains infernal.
And after these things timorous they should preach repentance
And remission of sins by our savior christ's diligence,
As a lamb undefiled he has made deliverance,
And made our atonement by his true obedience,
His death has slain death and all the Devils pretense:
To them that believes it and made justification,
After they be baptized they have for their defense
The gift of the holy ghost to keep them to salvation.
Now who believes not this with this key is bound,
That it can not be dissolved with the Roman Acheron,
Nor with all his children living on the ground,
As Aletho, Megers, nor yet Tesiphone,
Nor by his own works, nor no man's optation,
But believing this truth the other key dissolueth,
For on this stone is builded the Christen congregation,
which ye edifiers must build on, 1. Cor. 3.
or else it naught profits.
Thou art Christ quod Peter, the son of the living God,
Here Peter confesses al, Math. 16.
not knowing it no fail
Of him self, for he spoke it not of flesh and blood,
And against this Rock hell gates nor sin can prevail,
Christ promised the keys of knowledge because the wits are frail:
In the same chapter to declare it Christ began,
I must dye and rise (quod he) to Peter let his tale, Math. 16

Spare thy self master he said, thou offe^dest me quod christ satan,
Thou finellest worldly things (quod he) but not things celestial. Math. 16.

Here is to be noted that Peter reckned plain,
That he was Messiah or a Savior temporal,
Therefore Christ behight the Keys the truth to certain.
Math. 18
In the eyghteene of Mathewe he shows more again,
For bynding of Heresies unto the apostles al,
Ioh 20.
In John we may see the Keys they did obtain,
To lose and bind sins and that with power coequall.
Luc. 16.
Christ commanded says Luke before his ascension,
The apostles to go to the world universal,
To preach his tidings glad and true Euangelion,
And who is baptized and believes it, they shall be saved all.
Now this key loses from all sins in general:
And who believes it not, damned shall he be,
Now this key binds, and Christ in especial,
Of faith wrought the miracles in his humanity.
In Jerusalem the Apostles by inspyration,
Act. 2.
Were inflamed by instinction of the holy ghost,
And received new tongs, with the declaration
Equally divided as well to least as most,
Act 15. Gala. 2.
In the xv. of the Acts, there James he ruled the roast,
And Paul checked Peter this appears verament:
I marvel why then of Peter that they best,
For their power and their deeds were all equipolent,
Every Apostle, Priest, Deacon, and Senior,
In his See or personage or his habitation,
Should after twice monishing call every Lepor,
Denying Gods laws before the congregation,
And if he repent not then is their ministration,
To expulse him as an erroneous Publican,
1. Cor. 5. 1. Timo. 1.
And give him to the Devil by excommunication,
As was Himeneus and Alexander and the Corinthian.
But when he believes with perfect repentance,
2. Cor. 13. Math. 18.
They must edify and not destroy, and absolve him again,
And it be seue^ti times vij. times they must make deliverance
But for close sins confession in sinketh not in my brain
In the ear so particular for to be had so plain,
As to show quo, 2. Reg. 12.
vbi, quomodo, quando,
For David said to God peccaui for certain,
And confitebor tibi in toto cord meo.
As concerning confession particular,
There is no private Scripture, nor yet auriculer,
Except the veterous antique shadow old, Leuit. 16.

Of the escape Got with the sins upon her horn inrold:
But by saint John Baptist, and Scripture much more,
General confession that is evident, Math. 3.

So should our Prelates by their office evermore
Give absolution unto the men penitent,
And minister the Sacraments with good reformation,
To eschew from sins, and to live in amity,
To love God and their neighbors, Gala. 5. 1. John. 3. Jacob. 2. Math. 6.
and in their predication
Declare how the law is grounded on charity,
And as they remit others, forgiven shall they be,
Instructing from debate, rancor and detraction,
And if this avail not, then belongs it properly
To the power of justice to correct by coaction.
Here may we fetch the temporal justification,
By the father commanded to Noe to do equity, Gene. 9.

As death to have death, and for reformation
Judah would have brent Thamar for incontinence, Gene. 28. Exodus 21. Exodus 22. 1.
Reg 10.

And Moses had laws for debts and for felony,
For lechery and murder, and things m^ a multitude,
And after Judges kings had the same authority,
For punishment of sins with the outward turpitude.
Some happily will say this power was abrogate,
I confess it and deny not, unto a man righteous
There is no law given, but for sinners intoxicate:
But inasmuch as the tares would destroy ye corn fructuous
And many be called and few chosen, this power must be prosperous,
To correct al tyranny by a brotherly zeal,
And there is no man living so perfect and virtuous,
But the old Adam in his flesh sometime he will feel.
Though the gospel know no laws, but grou^deth on charity,
Yet we may take in hand for the disobediente,
Which will not reconcile them by humility,
To complain to the judge to make them to be shente,
And he to the Minister to give the prefermente,
To put them irremediable into captivity
Till they have paid the last farthing, this in not tegent,
Math. 6.
But permitted by Christ in Matthew we may see.
Who lays hand on the sword (quod Christ unto Peter)
Shall perish with the same, and for the thieves crucified
Math. 26.
He gave no rebuke, and he said to the Minister,
If I have said ill, record ill, these words he specified,
John. 18. Math. 8.
To the Centurion soldiers was nothing notified,
Yet Christ praised his faith and humble submission.
Saint John to the soldiers these words modefied,
Luke 3
Be content with your wages, and work no oppression.
Thus it follows these men should be as virtuous,
As the other power should but for ministration,
By a brotherly zeal to correct things tedious,
As murder, rape, theft, felony or treason,
Sin, incest, adultery, stuprum, and fornication,
Extortion, oppression, simony, and usury,
And every detestable outward abomination,
As disceite, perjury, buggerie and Sodomie.
The third office, the mundayne occupation,
Was commanded to Adam in Genesis we may see,
Gene. 3.
And by the holy ghost and his inspiration
The influence thereof has much diversity
For the profit of man and his utility,
And in Moses law commanded was the same,
And Christ of his goodness and benignity,
This office and power did not correct ne blame.
He commanded not to care for meat drink and cleth, Math 6. Luk 12. Psalm. 4.
1. Pet. 3. 1. Timo. 5. 1 Pet. 2. Ephe 6. Col. 3. Titu 2.

As who say, our minds on such things should not be,
But to provide it and have it he has confirmed both,
For he used it him self in his cathedralitie.
Paul says, worse than an Infidel in cenositie
Is he which will not for his household provide,
Peter and Paul to servant for industry,
Commanded to obey their masters for their guide.
Much Scripture records this office not profane,
If they be wrought in faith they be good works no doubt,
These should be always operous men's needs to sustain,
And not inpro^pt, but assiduous their works to bring about
As to delue, to dike, to spin, to grind or boulte,
For their household charges and their reparation,
Be it Tinker or Cobbler which sets but on a clout,
They may work when they need, and hinder no salvation.
For necessity Paul wrought and made diverse tents, Acts. 18.

And for error of the weak as I suppose and guess.
But our Prelates should not so, having leefull stipends,
For fear of filthy lucre, and hindering their office,
Artificers and laborers should work this business,
And Iusticiers do justice with all their might and puissance.
Here the hand and the foot can not well express,
Nor the foot to the loins, I need not thy assistance.
This church or body must have a head general,
Which is Christ God and man, our Lord essential,
And his general minister for gracious influence
Is the holy ghost promised by his magnificence,
And I am with you said he unto the worlds end, Math 28.

That is, with us say the prelates, for his church can not err:
That is not so say I, marry God defend,
For of all creatures there is no men werre.
Was the holy Ghost in him that deceived Celestinus,
With a trumpe in his ear, and so got the Papasie?
Or with him that took out of his grave Formosus,
And dight him in a chair in his pontificalitie,
And stroke of his head to revenge his old injury,
And one deprived another without any fail,
And made him ride to Rome to his incommoditie,
With his face reuersed spectant to the tail.
One bequest him self long life by the spirit of prophecy,
And soon after brake his neck without incolumitie,
And through discord in seven years there were puppets nine
And one through strife put out another eyne:
And Semachus, and Laurence, and many mo did come
To the Roman See with great abomination,
And forty mo then these in Catholico pontificum,
Their deeds are not described for their great detestation.
Three at once was a trifle for the room to compare,
Or with the Arians opinion Liberius infecte,
Their vice in ten volumes one can not well declare,
As Ioane English, a woman their puppet elect,
Which traveled in procession, which is an ill respect,
That the holy Ghost with them should govern and domine,
For let their deeds be wayed unto a true effect,
And by all gracious virtue their works has lost the sign.
I marvel by what signs they do thus inherit,
By three crowns, or by crosses, or pillars principal,
Or orders devised should thus have the espirite,
Or Myters, Crochet or Crowns, or hattes Cardinal,
With ^ippets or rochets, or garments Pharisaicall:
Christ used not this, nor his Apostles dear,
But were prudent as Serpents, and simple as doves all,
With poverty and pain to make their faith appear.
They spoke with new tongs without humane instruction,
Acts. 2. Acts. 24.
Some revived the dead and maladies mortiferous,
To palpe Serpents ne venime to them was destruction:
Some Disciples prophesied with many signs virtuous,
And said not master, master, and used things sumptuous,
For when Christ said, I am with you unto the worlds end
That was with you, and with such elect to faith prosperous,
My grace by instinction will I ever send.
Of the supreme head of the Church in earth.
Now to punish, not proceeding upon the holy Ghost,
Within realms politic there must be heads capital,
And to command those things to be done to ye uttermost,
With all humane business and justice terrestial.
Our prelates should not their works should seem temporal
Christ's kingdom was not here, then who should have the power
But the owners of the soiles to keep truth legal
Be he Marquis or Duke, Prince, king, or Emperor?
All power in heaven and earth quod Christ is given to me,
Our prelates can challenge by this no domination, Math. 18

For they must follow Christ in his humility,
And not in the power of his glorification,
Who would be master, Math. 10
must serve to do ministration,
And the disciple above his master should not be,
It is enough to be equal by Christ's declaration,
Now our Prelates by this should have no great souerainty,
When Christ said all power, that is to understand,
Both kings power, Math. 28.
and every power by my father constitute
As now corroborate and put into my hand,
Their offices under me to do and execute:
For he came to lose no laws by his father institute,
But to make that perfect which should give life perpetual,
And that should those ministers always execute,
And preach to all creatures the truth evangelical.
In the same Chapter it follows apparent,
His precepts should be observed before which he had said,
Math. 28.
And which is Gods give it God, these words are illustra^t,
And which is Cesars give Caesar, no man can this persuade,
And Peter for Christ and him tribute to Caesar paid,
Luke. 22 Math. 20 Mark. 10
some will say like gentiles, they should have no king ne lord,
This makes not for their purpose by no reason made,
But against their Roman Uiper al scripture to record.
When Christ said there shall be no king over you,
That was, your righteousness all other should transcend,
Ye should need no law, for vice ye should eschew,
For Christ came to minister all virtue to amend,
And not to have a minister for that he would offend,
But for obedience and under governance,
When he paid the tribute that does the truth pretend,
And Peter proves it plain Gods divine purueyance.
Some will say in the Acts, and by Paul we may see
That the Apostles to Princes were not obedient,
In election ne usage, but among them selves free
To them I put the case by way of argument.
If the kings grace should send by his mind beneuolent,
Twelve discrete persons to the regions of Asia,
To the Turks lands or Sophies to preach Christ omnipote^t
And to Prester John's, and the great Canis of Catha,
These would elect those which in faith were constant,
To minister and preach and make predication,
And clean abiecte those in faith which were variant,
And of the Turk and the Sophie make no reputation,
Of Prester John nor the Cane, nor their laws of damnation,
Yet peradventure they would consult in one,
To persecute for their laws and make indagacion,
To mixed them with Christ's to make their faith more prone
But if they had once their purpose obtained,
As to convert the great Turk or any such potestate,
Were it reason that then the Prince should be constrained
To relinque and forsake the power of his principate?
No, for reason would this, he should be onustate,
To command and see Christ's laws in execution,
And to keep temporal justice by his laws inueterate,
So they repugne not from Gods constitution.
To this may resemble the Apostles usage,
As to elect Mathias and other for certain, Act. 1

And to mix with Moises law the people to encorage,
Commanding from strangled and blood to abstain,
And Timothe was circumcised, Act. 15 Act. 6 Act. 21
this does apeare plain,
And Paul made a Jewish vow at James request.
Thus diversely they wrought their purpose to obtain,
Sometime depriving laws to bring all to the best.
Paul says, among Jews he became as a Jew,
And a Gentile with Gentiles, thus was his direction,
But when he perceived the men firm and true
Converted to Christ with faith and perfection,
He used no cautel nor no such suggestion.
This is evident where to his friend Timothee,
He commanded for kings to make intercession, 1. Tim. 2 Tit. 3

And to Titus to obey to power and authority.
To the Romans he says, Romans 13
let every soul submit
Him self to the authority of the higher powers,
Concluding of God constitute is it,
And who as it resists Gods ordinance deuoures
To his own damnation, and he says, governors
Bear not a sweard for naught, nor only to take vengeance
Of the iricund and ill which be malefactors,
But also must be feared as touching unto conscience.
For this cause pay ye tribute further there says he,
For they are Gods ministers for the same serving,
And Peter all this with words of facunditie
In his Epistle does express without a word swaruing,
Further commanding by a Paraphrase speaking,
To honor their king: now these things iterate,
Do prove all powers of God from beginning.
Without any question or any thing excusable.
Gene. 17. Gene. 34.
Now all powers being by the Apostles approbate,
These indoct dulbarts with senses obtusate,
In the Bible may see how fathers always,
As Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Judah,
In the law of nature ruled over circumcision,
Iudic. 6 Iudic. 7. Nume. 15.16.
And in the law written Judges of habitacle,
As Moses, Iosue, Samson and Gedeon,
Commanded priest and Leuite to rule in the tabernacle.
And in tabernacle and temple kings had the duction
Of Prophet Priest and Leuite, and every thing sacrate,
Reg. 10.
Saul had not only this, but by Gods instruction
The virtuous had the same, as David veterate,
Ezechie, Josias, and Iosaphat sanctificate,
Solomon and all after the captivity,
The imperial gentiles ruled the Church dedicate,
And often by the prophets confuted much heresy.
Nabuchodonosor was one, and Darius also,
Dan 14.
At Daniels intercession destroying false Baall,
Search the Bible through and ye shall find mo
Authorities than these by a thousands clear several,
Yet if the greedy Griffons and vile todes terrestiall,
Which fears the world by their auiditie,
Believe expositers more than truth canonical,
Then let them look Hamo for their security.
Et Epistola Gregorij ad Mauricium,
Et Epistola Gregorij ad Theodorum,
Et descriptio Augustini contra Cresconium,
Et Epistola Augustini ad Bonifacium,
Et diuus Thomas de regimine principum,
And the writing of Isidore with Origens declaration,
And many mo than these too long to show or sum,
Unso mefull and sourrill to length such protestation.
What can they say now, but by a Counsel general
Contrary was determined with great sagacitie,
The which cannot err, and there was all scrutal,
To them I respond and their naughty semitie,
That Counsel had not the spirit of verity,
For then they believed not Christ's justification,
But mixed it with works, the which made properly
Their Counsel to be naught to Christ's derogation.
For that not in scripture it is naught but sin, Romans 14 Ios. 1 Deute. 5
Deute. 17 Deute. 4 Deute. 13 John 15. Math. 25.

Ergo, it is naught their Counsel is vacuate,
From the left nor the right hand they may not begin,
Nor ad nor detray from Gods law most dedicate,
All plants that he planteth not they must be eradicate,
And thirdly Princes thinking it was good devotion,
To have Gods laws from worldly things sequestrate,
They consented to a Governor upon a small motion.
This was done conditionally the faith to refirme,
And not for traditious and false Ipocrisye,
And if there were no more for the whole aphorism,
This was sufficient to defeat the false papacy,
And James of Jerusalem was the first Bishop verily,
And who so list to search in the Counsels of Neceyne,
Among four Patriarchs Rome had the lest Auncientie,
As of Antiochia and of Alexandrine.
Constantinople said they were superior,
When Focas the Emperor elect the fourth Boneface.
Questionless Rome was rather inferioure
To this, usurped power al right did deface,
Who list to know the truth, read the story of ^ocas*
And we have no authors but by Apocripha,
That do testify that ever Peter was,
At Rome in his life, but at Antiochia,
And Paul records to the Gentiles he preached, Gala. 2. Romans 11 Acts. 9.
Ephe. 3 Romans 15

And also Ananias in the acts does declare,
How the Kings of the gentiles by Paul should be teached:
Now what can the Locustes aleage or yet pare,
Except a wrong custom who will contemplare,
For after Christ's days this is plain manifest,
Six hundred year the custom was contrary,
Therefore have they plain confirmed their Antichrist.
Of Holidayes.
In an other thing than this, our Prelates have devotion,
That is, to have days for Halowes sabbatizate:
Who would think such acts nebulous, to be of gods motion,
Gala. 4. Collos. 2
When ye Saboth day, for god which was only preparate,
Seems by Paul to be more than semilacerate?
For he says, it is a shadow of certain things future,
Math. 12. Luke. 6
And Christ said he was Lord over the Saboth figurate,
And affirms it made for man, and man not for it sure.
And this is plain, who gives honor spiritual
Exodus 20 Deute. 5
To any creature, but unto God alone,
He breaks the commandment, the which is most principal:
And to fast and keep Saboth but unto him in throne,
Math. 19 Mark. 10 Luke. 18
From the Metaphore of Christ themselves they do sepone.
For to the yongman which said to Christ, good master
What shall I do to get heaven? Christ answered,
There is no man good, but in heaven my only father.
And if men will aleage with reasons rubiginous,
As to honor God in Saints with such turpiloque,
Their reasons are naught but devilish words rixous,
The Apocalips is plain against their authority,
Apoc. 19 Apoc. 22
For the Angel said to John, kneeling in humility,
Take heed thou do it not: but honor God he said.
Now this is sufficient, at a brief micrologie,
All Sillogismes and reasons shortly to persuade.
Of Purgatory.
Also for polling they have picked up a Purgatory,
Spoiling Christ's blood and his misericorde,
And by Machabeus they make such authority,
^. Macha. 12
That precation for the dead it need to our Lord,
Yet in the Old testament of a better record,
David for his son which he had by Barsabee, 2. Reg. 12

After he was dead, would never concord
To pray any whit for his souls salubritie.
And in the ninthe chapter of Ecclesiastes, Eccle. 9

These words are contrary to the book of Machabees,
Which says, that dead men the truth to discuss,
Have no part of the work that is done under Phoebus.
And in case this were not any thing dissonant
To the prayer and oblation done to Machabeus,
Yet to us now it is clean discordant,
For we have atonement in light, and not vmbrous.
For our heavenly father these words did express,
That he would be to us a father of all mercy, Gene 23 Math. 1 1. John. 1 Heb
10 Gala. 3. 1. John. 3

And he has given us Christ to fulfill his promise,
Which has purged us with his blood without rusticitie,
And has satisfied for our sins to our taciturnitie,
And by him we are righteous, perfectly justified,
And to make right no right, it is no verity.
Thus naught is their purgatori which they have specified*
And if one would aleage to the Corinthians, where is said
How our selves shall be saved, 1. Cor. 3.
yet as it were by fire,
That is, by Christ the foundation which is laid,
By whose deserving the spirit does inspire
With the burning zeal of charity only at his desire, 1. John. 2 Math. 6.

To love God and our neighbors, causing repentance,
Making us to remit all trespasses and ire,
Whereby we obtain of our sins deliverance.
For God him self is charity, 1. John. 4
and who abides in it
God remains in him, and ^e in God again,
In the forsaid Chapter it is showed every whit
By Paul's exposition, though it be not so plain,
For following immediate, he says these words again:
Are ye not ware that the temple of God are ye?
And Peter in his Epistle he does concord again 1. Cor 3. 1. Peter. 4

To much of this purpose without nebulositie.
For Peter says that God would have al men to repentance,
Certifying that the elements shall waste with caliditie,
1. Peter. 4
The heavens and the earth with every work and distance.
As who say, who repents shall pass that minacitie,
And repentance proceeds upon grounded charity.
Now, what can our prelates allege for their excuse,
Except by a usage of a false sequacitie,
This word poenitentia the which they do abuse?
Diverse have pronounced the truth of this word,
As Erasmus and other, right rutil of record.
How be it, I would that infants both great and small,
Knew how it comes of penitet the verb impersonall,
Which is to forthinke, and that with heart contrite,
And not to do penance our selves to justify
But to walk of a new and therein to delight,
Which is great penance our usage to pacify.
John. 8
It is plain how Christ to the woman of Cananie,
Commanded to sin no more, other penance gave he none,
Nor yet to no other, nor to the thief verily,
But said in Paradise thou shall be with me soon,
Leuit. 23.
And if we knowledge our sins, he is faithful says saint John.
And just to forgive us our sins int^^icate
1. John. 1
And to cleanse us from all unrighteousness in one,
Now this makes purgatory to be clearly frustrate.
The fifth Article.
To the fifthe Article where as was required,
Seven Bishops with others which they called heretical,
That proved (said the king) they shall be surely punished.
Howbeit we esteem them true teachers substancial,
And this not proved, then is it judicial,
They to have like punishment, which do this thing impute,
And being so far distrust, he thought their words prodigal,
Never ^earing ne seeing them (...) ne execute.
To this Article.
This request does resemble a story in Isidore,
Which recounteth how king Philip besieged Athenes,
And but only ten wise men, he asked no more
To be delivered to put them to distress:
But then the Philosopher called Demostenes
He gave counsel nay to that work ruinous,
And for to eschew that formidolous business,
He put forth this fable to them commodious.
Wolves sometime (quod he) friendship to shepherds profred,
On condition that they would deliver their hou^ds to the^,
For your dogs are those said they, which has our friendship barred:
Whereupon the shepherds delivered the same,
The^ afterward the wolves devoured the^ to their shame.
And in likewise (quod he) would they to our gra^itude
With great ferositie confound us to our blame,
For default of men sapient our City to delude.
Thus our wolves irat these Duns doctors rixant,
If they had obtained, would have followed this fable,
Devouring the elect all Christ's laws mitigant,
Depriving the truth, to rumpe every syllable
By crafty Silogysmes and reasons variable,
With counterfeit gloses, and sense tropologicall,
Craftily sophisticate with reasons appliable,
Making them to appear to seem anagogicall.
Thus would they have ruffled and rashed in their relatiues,
Searching night and day manupulus curatorum,
With the exoruatory of Curates and many inuentiues,
As Dorme secure, and Gesta Romanorum,
With the annall usage of Ceremones parati,
And the negotious search of Sermones discipuli,
And many mo than these besides their decrees,
With constitutions and decretals, with such subtle lies.
Albertus de Secretis with Phisionoma Scoti,
With much Art Magike, as Negromancie,
Some would study Orminancie, and some Piromancie,
Some Idromancie, some Geomancie,
Some Pedomancie, and some Ciromancie,
Some Palmistrie, with the science Mathematice,
Lacking Christ's music and his geometry,
With all his astrology, and all his arsmetice.
And also with their Metaphisiks, and arts supersticious
Over many to rehearse, with their Philosophy,
Would have hindered Gods word to good me^ meticulous,
But thanks be to Christ, and the high deity,
Their purpose is defeted with all their vapiditie,
To the honor of god and our most christened Monarchy,
Our prince imperial and flower of Nobility,
Which the Prelates named an unjust Heresiarchie.
Apoc. 14. Apo. 19. Mark. 14. Luke 21. Dan. 8. Math. 24 Luke. 21.
Now therefore let all men which have inspiration
Look for a sickle, for the harnest does approach,
Let them sing alleluia, and make iubilation,
For the winter is past, and the sominer does incroche,
To the Roman Antichrist and all his friends reproach:
Yea the Figtree is green both fair and pulchritude,
My self of the small buddes a Sallet did incroche,
And me thought it was pleasant, right sweet and dulcitude.
For (thanked be God) saint Frauncis cowle is spied,
And saint Brides head, with saint Hellyns quickingtree,
Their girdles invented, and their fair hayres died,
With their chaulke oled for the milk of our Lady.
Saint Sith and Trenians fast, with works of idolatry,
As saint Nicholas chair and saint Anthonies hell,
With Turpine stone and Moses yard so thee,
With S. Katherins knots, and S. Anne of Buckstones well
And S. Wilfred Foorne of Ripon to keep cattle from pain,
And his needle which sinners can not pass the eye,
With S. John and H. Peter's grease for to co^serue ye brain,
And S. Thomas hoode of Pomfret for migreme and the rye,
And S. Cuthberts sta^derd of Duresme to make their fees to fly,
And S. Benets bolte, and S. Swithens hell.
And saint Patrikes staff and saint Williams head pardy,
And saint Cornelis horn, with a thousand mo to tell.
The sixth Article.
To the sixth article, where the Commons swarued,
Finding fault that the Counsel should be of small progeny,
At this said the king, we are greatly marueled,
For we are not obliuious of what ability
This our Counsel was at our incepte entry,
For we had not very noble, but only Earls twain,
And the lord Merney and Darcy of a mean generositie,
To they were preferred by our father and us plain,
Lawyers and Priests (quod he) were all mo than these,
Therefore he marvelled they were so obstinate,
Considering his counsel now so noble in degrees,
As two dukes, one Marquis, with three Earls associate,
Two lords, two knights, with four bishops congregate,
And because they thought it more than somewhat necessary
To have men learned, to have their minds approbate,
The lord Cromwell and lord Audley they put in authority.
And I perceue (quod ye king) that some of you do enterprise
As counsaylers to us, which we never did admit,
But we well advise you to leave such prejudice,
And to meddle not of us and our counsel any a whit,
For certainly for our part we will not take it,
Therefore eftsoon eschew such things exprobate,
For we have wit sufficient our counsel to admit,
And need for that matter no counsel interrogate.
To the Article.
Now doubtless the devil poured out his venom here,
To provoke them to demand so naughty a request,
For of the seven bishops, there was but one clear
Of the kings counsel, as plainly was expressed,
And how transuerse was it reason to complain of the rest,
And to rail and to riot with great words tumultuous,
And by a cloked color to say they were oppressed,
And all to obtain their heresy voluptuous.
To find fault with their blood, that was a great vanity,
For true nobleness proceeds upon man's condition,
And not by inheritance upon old antiquity,
For then were virtue to riches in subjection:
Of Gaius Haminius who list to have inspection,
Against Publius Cornelius did allege the same,
And let the^ see how gentleness came at the first inception
And they shall be abashed unto their own shame.
And further let them look upon their own gentleness,
Their estates, their blood, and their long annositie,
And few of them shall find their own worldly nobleness
Five degrees constant without mutabilitie,
For fortune turns her wheel sometime to great furnitie,
And sometime to illumine to a great donation,
As from an Earl to a gentleman of small ability,
And a squire to a duke, thus is her mutation.
And among experience it may well be noted,
Of the lord Audley and the lord Cromwell, the which they do diffame,
Whose Auncetors ere this were Barons well promoted,
Til their fortune was tra^sact, yt which subdued their name
And by credible information descended are these same,
Of these two Barons of a worthy parentage:
Therefore I marvel these people did not shame,
To make such petition in such a furious rage.
To speak of very noble, where may one compare,
The kings grace reserved, whose high progenitors
Have reigned kings in Britain above a thousand year
Before Christ's nativity, as the first inheritors
To Cadwallader surseased, and his mother predecessors,
Have reigned (...) the conquest, and of king Priamus,
Before ye reign of England his blood have been governors
Sithe^ce the condign reign of ye an^iont prince (...).
Therefore why ye devil did the slowormes (...) such (...),
As to rail of so noble a prudent prince purueyaunce,
When Michael the Archangell durst not be so hault,
As to the fetous Devil to give railing sentence, Zaca. 3.

Striving for Moses, and for his deliverance?
Peradventure to this text some will replye,
Why raylest yt then thy self with such trenous distance,
To whom I do answer, this is the reason why.
For mine own cause I do it not, but only for displeasure
Done to my God and Prince, against divine ordinance,
And Christ rebuked the Pharesies, Math. 23 John. 2 Gala. 3.
and whipped by incussion
Diverse which were naught for his fathers constitution,
And the Galathians were rebuked very sore by Paul,
And diverse more than they over long for rehearsal.
Now here is to be noted how Michaell the Archangel,
For the words said to him with the Devil would not rebel*
Thus of the Articles to make a short conclusion,
If they say they do it for the faythes reformation,
The scripture is against their false cloked collusion,
Over that it is well known their false imagination
For avarice was the cause to their own preservation,
Inuenting such a tale by a false unanimity,
To provoke all other to have mitigation
In their minds, for defense against their obscenitie,
The end of the Insurrection.
Then Anglia the Empress inclusiue
Said, Holme thy long process and thy prolixitie,
Has last so long from our matter fugitive,
That almost I am east into a liturgy,
And drowned in a dumpe with a tremous ecstasy,
Therefore I beseech thee in this thing contentious,
To show what the commons did after this replye,
For the truth greatly to know I am desirous.
And i^ like your grace (quod I) to reason of this responsio^,
The Commons met at York to Counsel in this thing,
And there being permanent about the same conclusion,
They had to them delivered a letter from the King,
His graces pleasure to them there pronouncing,
That the Duke of Norfolk with other more of grauitude,
Should meet them at Doncaster there to have co^moning*
This matter to exsolue or else not to conclude*
To this the commons agreed universal,
And so the day was set at Doncaster to meet,
Whereunto the commons appointed men several,
By the Baronage advise whom they thought discreet,
Thus they appointed their number whole complete,
Of every wapintage whom they thought florulent,
And provided seven thousand to be phalarate at Pomfrei,
Conduct together as a stale for entisement.
So at the day appointed both the parts met,
At Doncaster predict to make their placitation,
But as soon as they had their matter trounsed and bet,
The commons part abashed of their shameful obiurgatio^,
Howbeit the kings counsel to make a good pausation,
Promised if faults were they should be amended,
So it could be proved by any true probation,
Those articles or things the which they had pretended.
And so by the Duke of Norfolkes intercession,
There was granted a pardon and that in general,
From Done to Twede for their whole transgression,
Of all contemptes and trespasses as well as things vital,
Nine only reserved for whom with promise cordial,
The Dukes grace behight for them to make providence,
And so was al acquit for these causes actual,
And mercifully pardoned for all their ill offense.
Yet this ought to be marked in time of vacation,
Or the pardon was given by the Kings magnificence,
U. thousand Cotes offense by the countries preparation,
Was wrought and made for their corporal defense,
And Boys went a processio^ as they would make pretense,
And Mynstrels soong songs with many more abusions,
More like beasts than men to make so great offense,
To vilipend their Prince with such naughty illusion.
The later Insurrection.
Thus of the first rising I made a definition,
But yet the Lady Anglia took me by the sleeue,
And said ( Holme) I have more inquisition,
Of a latter commotion which greatly does me grieve,
Done by sir Frauncis Bigot which makes my heart fremeske.
For he was reconed one of the verity perculent,
And what a shame was it contrary to flameske,
And to forsake the truth such wrongful things petent?
According to the proverb and it please your grace quod I, P^o. 21. 1. Peter. 3.

The Dog is reuersed unto his vomit again,
And the Sow clean washed in her puddle will she lie:
What now (quod Anglia) I see thou do but feign,
For shewedst thou not me, who as believe plain,
Had the holy Ghostes gift to keep them to salvation,
That saying (quod I) I will not once refrain,
If it please your grace to hear with good deliberation.
It follows not the gift should keep always from sin, Romans 7. Gela. 5.

For the old Adam will rebel and the Devil is inuidious,
The flesh with the spirit to repugne he will begin,
That is, the il spirit with the good is evermore contrarious,
To make thorns to grow to let the corn fructious, Esaias. 43. Act. 1.

Howbeit the holy Ghost to them which be elect,
At the last will subdue the old Satan viscous,
And keep to salvation this is the true effect,
And I doubt not his repentance who knows it inwardly,
Though the Devil for to syft him his heart did resarcyne,
By poverty and vain glory to have frugalitie,
To make him prove to intend for to facyne,
Well quod Anglia, no more, but now of this defyne,
And show me how he ro^e and the insurrection,
Forsooth Madame quod I, I will the same combine,
And it please you give audience unto his ill suggestion.
Truth it is after the commons had their pardon,
The king sent Ask and diverse more than he,
And like a condign Prince to their costage and guerdon,
Some had twenty pound, some sortie and some more verily,
But Bigot this perceived with all his affinity,
And thought the king would stay the matter by his prudence,
And or ever they came home by their peruicacie,
They purposed by craft to take Hull for defense.
So Monks, Friars and Chanons, and Eigot altogether,
With many more of counsel, they sent for to espy Hull,
One Halame a yeoman, but when he came thither,
Knowles had an inkling of his coming at the full,
Which manfully took him and there brake his skull,
And rypping him found letters of a great pauitude,
Which purposed plain clearly to disanull
The Kings purpose before by their high gratitude.
But when Bigot heard that Halame was in captivity,
He burned up a Bekyn and raised nygh twenty score,
And sent fourth diverse letters to collect more company,
Himself toward Hull drawing ever more and more,
And sent to them thither, Halame to restore,
Craftily coloring that was his whole pretense,
But by that Ask came home, the Captain before,
Which wrote him a letter to leave his frowardness.
When Bigot perceived this letter described,
Not only by Ask, but by more of ability,
Of his counsel before, then shortly he contrived,
To devise in his heart this crafty subtlety,
To call the Burgeses of Beuerley to him openly,
Beseeching them record, he did not pretend
The kings grace ne his counsel any ignobilitie,
But Halame to obtain an ill deed to amend.
And of this stale away suddenly from his host,
With a knauish Friar or a Paliard or twain,
After that diverse Gentlemen being of the coaste,
Took of them who^ they thought most busiest for certain,
By deed obligatorie bynding each for other plain,
To appear at York at the consequent repair
Of the kings counsel, thither to answer again,
Such faults and injuries as should be showed then there.
All other hearing this beginning for to rise,
Casting in conjecture another time was better,
Surseased of their purpose and naughty enterprise,
For openly they knew by many sundry letter,
The Duke of Norfolk would come, this nugous thing they herd
And thought the^ more ample their purpose to obtain,
For they perceived he would amongst them long retard,
Therefore they regarded not their fact for to refrain.
But mark the provision which God did provide,
For the king commanded Justices at Hull for to sit,
To inquire and to see what fault might be espide,
And there by the country was determined every whit,
Among them selves they could it not remyt,
But condemned Halame with other two so thee,
Thus hanged were they three for the fault they did commit,
As Haman in the steed of Mardocheus verily. Hester.

Soon afterward the Duke to their news according,
Came down by commandment Justice to redress,
By the way diverse of Bigots counsel meeting,
Commanded by the king to apeare for their business,
But proceed did the Duke more wrongs to oppress,
And keept at York a Oyer Determiner,
Where by due execution were hanged for their frowardnes
Ten of pertinacitie of Bigots party clear.
At that time present in a chapel in Cumberland,
Bigot was taken and had to Carlyle Castle,
Then by Priests inticements rose the commons of Westmerland
With Cumberland associate, purposing to expel
Bigot from the Castle, but then the city Carlyle
According to aligiaunce, their malice did floxipend,
Esteeming them as traitors so falsely to rebel,
And them perturbed manfully their city to defend.
The Duke then intending more justice to execute,
In diverse other places this Insurrection hering,
Gathered a great number these traitors to confute,
For Rychmondshire and Kendal came at a short monishing,
And there was of Yorkshire in his train following,
Diverse gentlemen furnished to this battle vigorous,
But at Barney Castle when they were there gathering*
The Commons had a brawle to them ignominious,
For at Carlisle they lost with shooting at the City,
Al their arrows their artillery most principal,
And then fled away from their villainous enormytie,
This perceived by the city and gentlemen patrimoniall,
They came forth with Spears v.C. substantial,
Well horsed in array following in a chase,
By whom they lost their Cross their standard principal,
And had three hundredth taken within a little space.
The other fled away as Sheep with Wolves chased,
Some oppressed, some spoiled, some with lamentation,
Thus six thousand, by five hundred were utterly defaced
Latrant like Dogs for their abomination,
But after these news and this expiation,
The Duke of Norfolk as a Prince not in hebitude,
Came swiftly to Carlyle to do ministration
Of justice for their faults to their great penitude.
For there was hanged upon their heads capital,
Three score and sixteen unto their friends puderous,
On trees in their Gardens to record for memorial,
Thus here was the end of this act periculous,
But then began Tyndale like traitors contencious,
To riot up with Rydsedal as they would make a brawle,
The Duke heering this as a raged Lion furious,
Resorted to th^se countries to prove their acts meutall.
Those countries seeing this, with all the Dukes parature,
By a small entisement did humbly them submit,
As a Hawke from his pray entised to the lure,
Whereby by favor their trespass was remyt,
Reserved pledges taken because they should not flyt,
And so the Duke departed resorting again,
To York to do justice on Traitors to sit,
Where there were four hanged approved traitors plans,
After that to Duresme the Duke did repare,
And there by execution fourteen did apprehend,
And thus in all parts they were taught to compare,
Hanging in the places where they did offend,
Some on trees some on gallows, to learn them to pretend
With diverse Priors and Chanons as traitors wauing hye,
To teach them eftsoon their Prince to paruipend,
As Babes to be busy with such petulancy.
Then sir Frauncis Bigot was had up to London,
Entreated as a traitoure with hands and feet bounden,
And Ask the first Captain and diverse more than he,
Was sent for to London and put in captivity,
Because they were paranymphes to Bygots insurrection*
And for that they were traitors of a later consent:
Thus being in prison, Gentlemen of discretion
Indicted them in Yorkshire, as traitors evident.
Now after that the Duke had sitten on this Commission*
They were arained at London before the Kings Counsel*
And by open proof attainted of Treason,
And condemned by true Justice, for that they did rebel:
Yet some there were fortunate, the which escaped well.
But what will ye more? their Isagog so naughty
Has brought all the other to durous death fell*
Disheriting their children by his false operacitie.
There was of this number Ask and Bigot Captains,
A Baron, a Barons son, four Knights and a Squire,
Two Priors, three Quondams, and two false Chaplains,
Which Prelates have caused to be confuted clear
Four principal Abbayes as plain does appear,
And diverse hang on Gallows in irons well parate,
And many of their adherentes in sundry countries seere,
As fugitives and vagabonds they are clearly fugate.
Ah ah (quod Anglia) then make me to smile*
But I pray thee why show thou not Lincolnshire rebellion*
Nor yet of Norfolk why do thou not compile?
And it pleased you (quod I) for this consideration,
The shires are very far distant from my habitacion,
Therefore it is more meet for other to discriue,
Howbeit the final of their abomination,
As the other said before, was complete finitiue.
For the Duke of Suffolk has caused in Lincoln shyre,
As great execution to the country lamentuous,
Beside in yrons hanging which began to conspire,
And some was headed at London for their act injurious,
And as for in Norfolk the gentlemen salubrious,
Took their Captains at the first ere they could fully rise,
And after they were hanged for their fact scelerous,
With sore execution to teach them to be wise.
But and it please you (quod I) this rising to pernote,
Ios. 8 Iud. 7
It is like as Joshua when he reached out his spear,
And as God with three hundred Gedion did promote,
The Medianites to confound by their own brawlege clear.
So these men with deeds more bitter than I paxere,
Must needs fortune like, considering that the King
Sets forth Gods word like as the true Elixere,
Turning brass into gold by his mynerall working,
Of the Mouldwarp.
But there is one thing (quod I) which I dare scantly move,
What is that quod Anglia? forsooth Madame quod I,
All the time of this bloonder to their own reprouse,
Like furious Bulls baited they spoke of a prophecy,
Ascribing the king like traitors in treachery,
To the Mouldwarp which Marline does account,
And I can prove plain their false feigned fantasy,
Is not against his grace for ought they can account.
It is thy duty quod Anglia herein to descriue
To the public cognisaunce of every creature,
Whereby true men their spirits may revive,
And to make the king joyous thou ought to do thy cure,
That his grace may perceive their fantasy so obscure,
Therefore do it (quod she) and be not desidecious,
For herein to labor thou may be firm and sure,
The Papists to perturbe, though they be prodigious,
Then cried I to the altitude to the Jupiter superne,
In the autentique mount of Hellicon so hye,
Surmounting Pernassus Alpha and o eterne,
To inspire me with his grace in s^eede of Terpsi^orie,
Herein to pronounce the perfect verity
To the laud of my king and my prince natural,
For I lacked Calliope and the Muse Melponione,
With all the sciences which are sermocinall.
Yet I took upon hand, and these words I said,
Ye Palyardes imprudent so prompt and prone to prate,
To search well the Chronicles your self it shall vpbraide,
For of the six kings by Marlin nominate,
The third Henry was the first of that number preparate,
And his son Edward, and Edward that made three,
And of very consequence the number of that date
By royal succession that was the fourth Henry.
And as for the kings grace he is the twelfth king,
Therefore that way your reasons be vacuate,
And if by Edmonde Crochbacke ye would make your reckening,
Your number is not right nor yet well perambulate,
And further than that ye should clean perfigurate
The prophecy of naught and of no reputation,
For Edward and Edward they are twain declarate,
Which descended not of him, as by true probation.
What can ye say now, except ye skippe at pleasure,
To take here one and there one your purpose to defend?
Then what deed ignoble were it above measure,
To so prudent a prince as the king for to condiscende,
To ascribe it to him his grace to naucipende?
Oh people lusolitous, way me the prophecy,
And there may ye prove how greatly ye offend,
For no word is like unto the kings majesty,
The prophecy of the Mouldwarpe, declares he shall be
A Caitife, a Cowarde, with a helderly skin:
But is he a Caitife, when plainly we may see
His portrature and vigor a very Herculine?
And is he a cowarde the truth to define,
When in France and in Scotland his noble chivalry,
And in many places mo so gloriously does shine,
That he is accounted a Gemme in actiuitie?
And has his grace a henderly skin like a Got,
When his pingued of nature will cause his pubertie
Long time to appear: Oh Dawcockes ye dote,
To nihilipende your prince with such perputilitie,
But ye pass not of Antichryst for all his ill prauitie,
For him ye would inhaunce with all ye could indite,
To skip, to transalpine, over mountains for to fly,
And to stumble at a straw not so much as a myte.
Peradventure ye will say the words of the prophecy
Does nothing resemble to the outward intent:
Then with a cheer risible to that mitalogie,
I will plainly concord, agree and consent,
And to all other particles in that prophecy meant,
For prophecy locute by profane men always,
And responsions by devils they be things stultent,
Perfructe by the figure called Amphibologia.
As by Nigromancie Gerebert had answer
To sing at Jerusalem a Mass or ever he dyed,
And the Puppet sang at Rome in a Church or a Quere,
Called by that name or ever the spirit he espied.
And one Stephin of Angeo, by a spirit had specified
That he should dye in Pluma, by which words ociabund
He was resident from feathers, and might them not abide,
And in a Castle so named he died like a vacabund.
One Alberice also Earl of Northumberlande
Had answer by a devil Grecia to obtain,
Which made him resulte and joyous to take in hand
To conquer all Greece to his ligitious pain,
And made him to pampereske and to return again
To the country of Normandy, where he had pollicite
By king Henry of England a widow for certain
A wife called Grecia, thus was his chance finite.
Pirrhus of Appolline had such a like responcion,
With diverse mo than these over long determinable,
But other ways than this there is much prevention
By the figure said before, as a spirit ineffable
Might say to a married man these words comfortable,
Thou shall have to thy wife lady Rosa or thou dye.
Here were a doubt whether he should wed the flore venerable,
Or to have her to his associate wife company.
Also one might say, thou shall have viuacitie
As many years as this yard wand is inches of length,
Now some would mete the inches and think no duplicitie,
Yet one might sure pernoske another way such strength,
As to rumpe or burn the yard, or to burn it to dust,
For then were the yard not an inche of length at all,
And it not inches long, then might a man prove just,
The destenie may be done by this color duall.
Also if a woman sold geese in the fair
To one called Pecock, and another swan nominate,
I had Geese, Swans and Pecocks she might well declare.
Also one might by this color figurate,
Of a man called Fox buy Turues parate,
And say, I bought Turues which I thought to leide,
The which was Foxes: thus double words ornate
Will make a false sense true, and a true a lie in deed,
Over this, prophesies by true declaration
Does more resemble to nature, than to words of vanity,
As Daniell figured regions to beasts and variation,
So may we think for rapine the Clergy,
And for true nobleness a Lion to the Lai^ie,
May not Marlin mean thus by his words miraculous*
And a Dragon for his venime to compare to ye co^montie,
This does appear better than plain reasons linguous.
A thousand such ways in prophesies are contrived,
And Peter says the good has no private exposition,
Then must the ill with subtlety and ill be devised,
As plain it does appear by many an ill peruersion,
And specially in Yorkshire at this last commotion.
For amongst diverse people there was one right profou^d,
Whose end to perceive there can be no direction,
Howbeit the beginning made diverse not fremebounde.
Now this was their prophecy and their nugacitie,
Without a word added, or a word of minority:
Forth shall come a worm, an Ask with one eye,
He shall be the chief of that meinye,
He shall gather of chivalry a full fair flock,
Half Capon and half Cock,
The Chicken shall the Capon slay,
And after that shall be no May.
Of the first part of this we may have some inspiration,
But the last part is colored too far from man's mind:
Thus are devilish prophesies made by such objection,
That falshod in the end, that is their proper kind.
Of the Mouldwarpe who will scrute he shall the same find,
For three of the last prophesies by Marline pagynate,
No man can find true, but abscondent and blind,
And I can prove them plain both past and depopulate.
For in the English Chronicles who list to aspicer,
In the last chapter of king Cadwalader,
They may perceive an angel said ye will of god was plain
How the Britons should never more in Britain reign,
Till the prophesies said before by Marlin be fulfilled,
And that time should never be unto the time future
That the relics of his body into Britain were translated
From Rome, with the relics of other saints sure
That has been hyd for the Paynim folks persecution,
Which shall be published, and found, and openly showed,
Then should they of that laud have perfect restitution.
Here may be noted Marlins prophesies subdued,
For Henry the seventh Cadwalladers blood renewed,
And the kings grace makes Britons by the number plural,
Which is very relikes it cannot be eschued,
Of flesh, blood and bone, of the same stock paternal.
Which is from Rome translated, and that false obedience,
As supreme head in earth under Christ to sustentande,
And Gods word the relics of other saints pretense,
Which for persecution of their sore fire brand,
Is now openly showed all heretics to granand.
Now thanks be to God for his great largition,
Now before the seventh Henry, this does promulgand
The prophesies of Marlin have ended their condition.
And this is the meaning of Marlins prophecy,
Where he says that the right heirs of England shall end,
That is, to continue shall that genealogy,
For evermore as the angel did pretend
To Cadwalader, when he promised his blud again to send*
And where Marlin says six of the last kings,
In that of the last half he did comprehend
To take where he list, these were his meanings.
And by the seventh Henry it is plain manifest,
As for calling the same to be the land of conquest,
And it seems ye fourth Edward the Mouldwarp for to be
For diverse causes, but for one most specially,
Which sows his seed fatherless in a strange land,
That is by the king of his own procreation,
which has lost his Romain father the truth to understand,
Of whom therefore good men have made declaration.
This is the Britishe Lion by Sibilla prophesied,
This is the Egle surmounting, which Festome has notified,
This is the king anointed, which S. Thomas specified,
This is the three fold Bull which Siluester magnified,
This is the king which S Edward in words glorified,
Which should win Jerusalem with all the holy land,
And many realms mo with the cross yt Christ crucified,
By his abundant fortitude without dint of hand.
Is not his grace a Lion and account his audacitie,
And a prodigious Egle high volant in things divine,
And anointed with faith by the spirit of verity,
And of faith, hope and charity, a fierce Bull in trine:
He has obtained Christ's cross as they did vaticine,
With the heavenly Jerusalem above Ezechias,
Repairing the true temple in vbertuous ways to shine,
Maumetrie destroying as the virtuous Josias.
Ye this is he which has made all the Romain bells to ring
Without pull of hand, their false tongs papistical,
Having oil in his lamp he is a maiden king,
Though they take it otherwise by their senses carnal,
And in the true vale of Iosaphat the scripture canonical,
There no doubt but his grace is sepelite.
For doubtless all the English prophesies autentical,
Concerning these matters by the king is whole condite.
Lo leprous lurdeins lubrike in loquacitie,
Uah vaporous villeins, with venim vulnerate,
Prohprating parentecides plexious to pinnositie,
Fie frantike fabulators furibund and fatuate,
Out oblatrant oblict obstacle and obcecate
A addict algoes in acerbitie acclamant,
Magnall in mischief malicious to mugilate,
Repriuing your Roy so renoumed and radiant.
Thus ending the pretending of their naughty abusion,
I mused how they perused them self as a feticine,
To perturbe and disturb through such naughty illusion.
Then Anglia like Flora more fragrant than Columbine,
All gorgeous and dangerous, she looked like Eglantine
Tripping and skipping, anormed most shine.
With purles and cuts, and broderie right fine,
Of stone, gold and pearl above Gwaner the Queen.
She was as trick as Tamer, and like bony Barsabee,
More dapper than Dido, more ruddie than Rosamund,
She flourished like Florence, as pretty as Penelope,
As lowly as Lucrece lascivious and ludibund.
Plasmate like Polixene, both joyous and iocund,
More mystical than Melusin, or any nymph alive,
For the muse Erato could not make such redound,
With melody armonious, so dulcet to derive.
Adieu Holme quod she, and with that a cloud descended
More oderous than Balsamie or Pomander imperial,
Like Mirrhe in suanitie or Gummes of Saba blended,
With perfume so Aromatike it passed sense natural.
With that she ascended unto the sky stelliferall,
Included with the cloud, most glorious to devise,
By power of the Lord eterne and potenciall,
Gaudent and plaudent among the three Hierarchies.
On a white horse there was a king in arms martial,
With a Lamb undefiled more ruddy than a Rose,
Which the strumpet vulnerate the whore Babilonicall,
Then Cherubin did clarion, and sing athanatos,
And Seraphin did Symphane kyrie eskyros,
The thrones to their trompes, they sang Osanna,
The dominations droned up this word Agios,
And the Uirtutes with virginals they sang Alleluya.
The potestates and principates, they piped Eleyson,
The Angels they sang Sabbath Sother vnigenitus,
And the Archangels Rabi Messiah Tetragramaton,
Emanuel adonai in excelsis sanctus,
Jehovah and abba primus and nouissimus,
O saluator mundi with that they gave a shout
All with one concord, and sang Jesus Christus,
The Lamb undefiled does justify no doubt.
Deo gratias quod I, Et te Deum laudamus,
God the Father, God the Son, God the Spirit vital,
One in three, three in one te glorificamus,
Not three Gods but persons, and one God essential,
To whose potenciall justice, be loving eternal,
And to the sapience of the son of his misericord,
And to the gracious espirit in unity all coequall,
Equipolent and vniate, one God and one Lord.
The deity of him self eterne not proceeding,
And Christ less than the father being but a man,
And the word of the father essent ever being,
Not made ne creat, but got, or ever the world began,
And the everlasting spirit he proceeds than
Of the father and the son equal God associate,
Whose power, deeds and will concordeth against satan,
To whom give we honor with our Christ incarnate.
Beseeching his prohennitie for the kings magnificence,
That he may have long life, Gods word to fortify,
And to send us of his body heir male for our defense,
All true espirites Anglice for to rejoice and magnify.
Thus concluding by correction of the kings majesty,
And his counsel honorable, with all those perfidious,
That with firm trust and hope believes Christ to justify
By his deed and his promise to make us all righteous,
The.xiiij. day of July componed and compiled,
In the.xxix. year of the reign of the.viij. Henry royal,
By Wilfrid Holme unlearned, simply combined,
As a Pigme to writing with Hercules for trial,
In Huntington in Yorkshire commorant patrimonial,
Pretending and intending with Gods grace, to endeuer
My self to worship the Lord sempiternal,
Whereby I may be just to my God and Prince for ever.
FINIS.
per VVilfridum Holme.


