THIS GALLANT Caualiero Dicke Bovvyer, Newly acted.

LONDON Printed by Simon Stafford for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, near S. Austens gate. 1605.

The History of the trial of Cheualry.
Enter Jews, King of France, Philip his son, Katharina, his daughter,
Rodorick, and Flaunders with Drum and colors, and soldiers at one door: at the
other, enter Nauar, Ferdina^d, Bellamira, and the Earl of Pembrooke, and
Burbon. DVke Rodorick, and my noble cozen Flaunders,
Are your Battalions ready for the charge?
Rod. Ten thousand men of Orleance I command,
And those are bravely marshald on the plain,
Ready to be commanded by your Highness,

Flaund. As many of the warlike brood of Mar^
Do call me General: those, my gracious Lord,
Together with my self I recommend,
To be commanded by your Majesty.

Lew. Thanks, Earl of Flaunders, Duke of Orleance, thanks,
What lets us that we charge not on the Foe?

Nauar. My Lord of Pembrooke, are your Englishmen
Squadron'd with ours, and ready for the charge?

Pem. The French and English make one warlike body,
Whereof your Highness is the moving head:
Or peace or war, as pleases you, direct.

Nau. Then war; and give the signal through the Host.

Lew. Nauar, Nauar, submission were more meet,
Then to add blood to wrong.

Nau. What wrong, King Jews?
The Kingdom of Nauar we will acknowledge
To hold of none but of the King of Kings.

Lew. Three hundred years prescriptions on our sides*
So long thy Ancestors by ^^al^y
Have held thy Kingdom of the Crown of France.

Pem. Talk not of years, years limit not a Crown,
There Is no prescriptions to inthrall a King:
He finds it written in the Rowles of time,
Nauar's a Kingdom solely absolute,
And by collusion of the Kings of France,
Because it lies so fitly upon France,
The people speaking all one mother tongue,
It has bin wrested for a Royalty,
Untruly due unto the Crown of France.
That Pembrook speaks the truth, behold my sword,
Which shall approve my words substantial.

Rod. Pembrooke, you are too plain in your discourse.

Bur. I tell thee, Rodoricke, Pembrooke soldier-like
Has truly opened, what ten thousand lives
Will hardly do, if war be made the Judge.

To. If war be Judge? why, shallow-witted Burbon,
Who shall decide this difference, but war?
Has not the Judge put on his Scarlet Robe?
Is not the field prepared? our men in armor?
The Trumpets ready for the sound of death?
And nothing hinders us but our own words?
Leave idle parley, my dread sovereign Lord,
And soon resolve the Duke in fire and smoke,
That he maintains a title false and forged,
And that Nauar is a usurping Lord.

Na. On that i will hazard all these valiant lives.
Sound Drums and Trumpets, make King Jews know,
He makes his best friend prove his greatest foe.

Lew. Why pause our drums? our tru^pets, speak as loud,
Till the bright air be made a purple cloud.

Phil. Pause, gracious father.

Ferd. Noble father, pause.
Let Ferdinand thy son so far prevail,
That peace, not war* may end this difference.

Bell. For Bellamiraes sake* abstain from war.

Phil. Philip* thy son* humbly desires a peace.
Let not my father sheathe his warlike sword
Within the bowels of his Countrymen.

Kath. Thy daughter Katharina prays the like.

Nau. From whence proceeds this sudden sound of peace?
Comes it from me? what, from my Ferdinand?
From Bellamira my sweet second self?

Lew. Or rather comes it ( Jews) from thy soul?
Thy Philip, the true Image of thy self?
Thy Katharina, thy hearts chiefest joy?

Rod. Princes, you ask, you know not what your selves.

Pem. Rodorick, they ask a sweet and pleasing boon.

Rod. Why, they ask peace, and we are set for war.

Fer. It Is a bad peace exceeds not a just war.

Phil. We will not rise from this submissiue ground,
Till we obtain, if not a peace, a truce.

Fer. Nor shall our feet be guilty of new steps,
Till I obtain a truce from murdering war.

Lew. Show me some reason (son) for this demand.

Nau. Show me some reason (children) for this prayer.

Fer. I love the daughter of thine enemy.
Fair Katharina has inthrald my heart.

Phil. I love the daughter of thine enemy,
Fair Bellamira has inthral'd my heart.

Pem. Is love the cause? then wherefore wage we war?
What matter is it who wears both Diadems,
When the Succession lives in eythers heir?
If Ferdinand be crowned King of Nauar,
Fair Katharina shall be crowned his Queen:
If Philip wear the Diadem of France,
Fair Bellamira, made his lovely Queen,
Swayes half the Scepter. See what heaven can do,
Provide for peace, even in the jaws of war!

Kat. How sweetly does the Earl of Pembrooke speak!
Now, trust me, I am ravished with his voice.

Lew. What says Nauar? what, is it war or peace?

Na. A truce for three months, so it please your Highness;
During which time our children shall have leave,
With Drum and Trumpet to surueigh the Camp,
To Court our daughters, and to feast themselves,
As fits the sons of honorable foes:
And if it prove a match between them both,
There end all difference, I Will bequeath my Crown,
As a rich offering to their nuptial Rites.

Lew. Here, strike the truce upon my kingly hand,
Which is as surely ratified in this,
As by the testimonial of a world.
So now, for three months space all wars surcease,
Our thoughts are wholly fixed on love and peace. Exeunt.

Manent Rodorick, and Burbon. Rod. Zounds, here is a truce made up by miracle.

Burb. I Will cross it by a wi^y stratageme.

Rod. What stratageme?

Burb. By love to Bellamira.
Oh could I diue into the Princes heart,
By any insinuation never so base,
How easily might I effect my plot,
To make the Kingdom of Navarre mine own.
'Twere but a dram or so unto the son,
And a small thing would send the old man hence.
What, noble Rodorick, to gain a Crown,
A Duke would do much.

Rod. More then poison two:
But you, my Lord, forget your self too far;
Know you to whom you have disclosde your heart?

Burb. Why, to the Duke of Orleance.

Rod. The dear friend of Jews the French King.

Burb. King me no Kings,
Although we seem to be of several sides,
Rodorick, we love together like true friends.
This Truce gives aim to our intention:
Assist me (worthy Orleance) to effect,
First, my desired love, and next the Crown.

Rod. Peter de Lions is your Lordships servant,
A boon companion, and a lusty Knave:
He is in love with Bellamiraes maid,
And by that love he may bestead your Highness,
More then your best friends in your best designs,
Call him forth. Enter Peter.

Burb. What Peter.

Pet. Here, my Lord.

Burb. Why do thou look so wildly?

Pet. Not with drink, nor yet with rage.

Rod. His looks are wild with love.

Pet. With love surreuerence? can there be a face
In all the world patcht up with eyes and lips,
A forhead, and a pair of Crimson cheeks,
To make me dote on, to make me look wild?

Rod. Come, come, it is known that you love Thomasin.

Pet. Zounds, they that know that, know my heart and all;
I have not the power to deny it, it is most true.

Burb. And it is most true that I love Bellamira:
Now if thou art in favor of thy wench,
Many a meeting thou may help me to,
And learn besides what suitors seek her love,
And whom she most affects. These things once known,
Twere worth a Dukedom, Peter.

Pet. 'Sbloud, give me a Dukedom, and i will warrant you
The knowledge of these ^^^ngs ten times over.

Rod. There Is Angels f^^ thee, Peter, think on them,
And do thy best to help thy master's ^^ue.
Well, howsoever I smooth it to the Duke,
My thoughts are bent on his destruction.

Pet. You have my heart in your purse, i will do any thing for you.

Bur. And thou shall want no gold, and so farwell. Exeunt.

Pet. I cannot choose but farewell, and have the good Angels to comfort me; yet
I am melancholy. Heeres gold to make me merry: O but (hey ho) here is love to
make me sad. To avoid prolixity, I am crossed with a Suitor, that wants a piece of
his tongue, and that makes him come lisping home: they call him Caualiero
Bowyer, he will have no nay, but the ^^^ch. By these hilts, such another
swash-Buckler lives not in the nine quarters of the world: why, he came over
with the Earl of Pembrooke; and he limps, and he limps, and he deuoures more
French ground at two paces, the^ will serve Thomasin at nineteen. If ever he
speak French, to avoid prolixity, he will murder the tongue. I Will provide for
him, there is but small choice, either he shall renounce the we^ch, or forsake
his lame legs, his lisping tongue, and his life to^for by S. Denis, I had rather
dye in a ditch, then be bob'd of my fair Thomasin. Exit.


Enter at one door Philip and Rodorick, a Drummer before the^, with his Drum at
his back: at the other door, Ferdinand and Pembrooke with their Drummer. Ferd.
Whither goes royal Philip thus prepared?

Phil. On what adventure goes Prince Ferdinand?

Fer. To conquer all the world, fair Katharine,
Whose beauty in mine eye surmounts it far.
Virtue and love conducts me to your sister.

Phil. On the like voyage are my fortunes bound,
I go to win thy sister.

Ferd. Some fair Star,
On our great hopes shine fair and debonaire.

Pem. Amen, says Pembrooke.

Rod. Amen, says Rodoricke.

Ferd. This way my Love dwells.

Phil. In this air breathes mine.

Both. Farewell.

Phil. Prince Ferdinand, if these cross loves
Enjoy a wished success, peace here shall dwell.

Ferd. And we be friendly Brothers.

Phil. True.

Both. Farewell. Exeunt Philip, and Rodoricke.

Pem. Pity such true love, which like blessed seed,
Sown in such fertile soil, his princely breast,
By the rough stormy brow and winters hate
Of adverse parents should be timelesse nipt,
And dye e're it attain maturity:
For I have heard, the Princess whom he serves,
Is hotely courted by the Duke of Burbon,
Who to effect his choice, has in these wars
Furnished your father with a gallant power:
His love may happily then disable Philips.

Fer. O no, my father does affect the Prince:
Besides, my sisters heart is so combined
To his in perfect love, that Burbons hate,
Nor all the world that knot can separate.
Then sorrow not for him, but turn the stream
Of gentle pity on thy wretched friend,
Within whose bosom love has kindled fire,
So ardent, that the flames will bury me.
Philip is throued in my sisters eyes:
But in my love disdain and hatred lies.

Pem. Does she not pay true kindness with the like?

Fer. As stepdames, orphans, night, the cleer-fac't day,
So does she hate me, and return my woes,
Like a steeld Anuill backward on my self.
She is all hate, yet such a lovely foe,
That I must kiss the sword that wounds me so.

Pem. Interre these thoughts, this is her fathers tent.
Drum, give a friendly summons to the King.

Fer. Forbear a while (dear Pembrooke:) by our vows,
Which in the book of heaven are registered,
By all the rightes of friendship, by that love
Thou bearst thy native Country, I conjure thee,
This day to be the Trumpet of my worth,
To speak the passions of thy grieved friend,
To Katharines ears, till those pure Iuory gates,
Pearst with the volley of thy battring words,
Give way to my laments to touch her heart:
For this have I extracted the from many,
Made thee my fellow Pilgrim to her shrine,
Knowing thy thoughts from loves Religion free,
When my prayers fail, thy tongue may plead for me.

Pem. Must I be spokesman? Pembrooke plead for love?
Whose tongue tunde to the Instruments of war,
Never knew strain of fancy on my breath:
Affection never dwelt, but war and death.
But if thou lou'dst to have thy soldiers fight,
Or hearten the spent courages of men,
Pembrooke could use a style invincible.
Lou'dst thou a town, I Would teach thee how to woo her,
With words of thunder-bullets wrapped in fire,
Till with thy Cannon battry she relent,
And humble her proud heart to stoop to thee.
Or if not this, then mount thee on a Steed,
Whose courage never awde an iron Bit,
And thou shall hear me hollow to the beast,
And with commanding accents master him:
This Courtship Pembrooke knows; but idle love,
The slicke-fac't object of an amorous brain,
Did never clothe mine eye balls, never taught
This tongue inurde to broils and stratagems,
The passionate language of a troubled heart:
I am too blunt and rude for such nice service.
Yet since my friend inioynes me to this task,
Take courage, i will both speak, plead, woo for thee,
And when I want fit words to move her mind,
I Will draw my sword, and swear she must be kind.
Drummer report our presence to the King.

A parley, and answered. Enter France, Flaunders, and attendants. Lew. Prince
Ferdinand, and honored English Pembrooke,
Now by S. Denis, welcome. One run straight,
And give our daughter notice of these ghests.
What man, we know you come prepared to woo:
To woo, to win; now by our sacred life,
We wish in soul our daughter were your wife.
Our son is with your sister, fair hap wayt:
For peace or war lives in your love or hate.
Welcome once more; first, we will go see your love,
After, to banquet, and from thence to woo.
Be merry, then we will share a friendly part,
But you shall triumph in our daughters heart. Exeunt,

Enter Katharina, her man Bowyer, and a Paynter. Kath. See that the Tent be
ready furnished.
By this, my father and those Lords are met,
Among whom, the noble Pembrooke, like the Sun.
Out-shines the borrowed glory of the rest:
And well I may compare him to the Sun,
That but once looked upon with his fair shape,
Hat dazzled my poor senses, and left me blind.
But sir, where is the man I bade you bring?

Bow. If you can judge of colors (Madam) this is he.
Paynter, stand forth.

Kath. An earnest cause (my friend) importunes me,
Wherein I am to crave thy cunningst Art.

Pain. Such as it is, you may command, fair Princess.

Kath. But are thy colors fresh? thy pensill smoothe?
Thy hand vnwauering? and thy head dislodged
Of all unquiet harsh encumbrances?
For thou must draw proportion of those parts,
Whose worth to tell, my tongue wants utterance.

Pain. Fear you not (Madam) I am well prepared.

Kat. Then hither strait with youthful Ferdinand,
Nauars stout son, there comes an English Knight,
Pembrooke they call him, honorably borne:
Him (whilst we are in conference) thou shall mark,
And to the life set down his counterfeit.
Nor is it needful I should show him thee,
The goodliest person in the train, that is he.

Bow. Let me alone to give the Paynter destruction, I know him as well as the
Beggar knows his dish: he wears a white Scarf in his hat, and an Orange
tawny feather upon his arm.


Kath. Fool, indirectly thou describ'st another:
That's Prince Nauar, Pembrooke his plume is Azure,
A little intermixed with spotless white,
Prefiguring the temper of the Sky,
With whose hye motion his great mind does move.

Bow. Orange tawny and Azure, all is one, all is but feather, there is no
difference I am sure but in color.


Kath. Why, that's as much as may be, is it not?


Bow. Not so, i will prove the contrary: You are fair, and I am foul, is that
all the difference between you and I? there is another thing in it, if you
mark it well.


Kath. I prithee peace, and with thy ignorance
Draw not the Paynter likewise into error.
Here take thy stand, thou know him by these marks
I lately spoke of: seem to excel thine Art,
And I will study to requite thy pains.

Enter Jews, Ferdinand, Pembrooke, Rodoricke, and Flaunders. Lew. Thus did the
Greeks, when they begirt the walls
Of strong built Troy, sometimes with friendly cheek
Entertayne peace, and spend their frollick hours,
In courtly feasting of each other foe.
Welcome (young Ferdinand) I promise you,
It cheeres my spirit we do embrace you here,
And welcome too (brave Lord) we cannot say,
As if we were in Paris; we might say,
Your viands shall be costly: but presume,
Such as the Camp affords, we will have the best.
Daughter, I prithee bid* them welcome.

Kath. My Lord, I do
That with the Congy of a bended knee:
But this with my true hearts loyalty.
Lords, you are welcome, by my fathers leave.

Lew. Why, now thou do content thy father, Kate,
When wholly unto merryment inclined,
Thou answerst with like simpathy of mind.

Fer. But yet her looks are haggard and obscure,
Which makes me doubtful she will not stoop to lure.

Lew. Princes, let us enter: come, I Will lead the way*
The feast is mine, you are my ghests this day.

Fer. Now Pembrooke, show thy friendships true effect,
Obtain her love, my life thou shall protect. Exeunt.

Kat. He stays behind the rest, O happy hour!
Work on (sweet Paynter) to enrich mine eye
With that, which else procures my tragedy.

Pem. Fair Madam, in this confluence of sweet joy,
When every one resorts unto the feast,
Me thanks you should not thus retire alone,
As seeming, your best fare were heavy mo^e.

Kat. I am not (Sir) alone, nor do I starve
My appetite with any wil-full fast,
I have a banquet of sweet pleasing thoughts,
That is more precious then the costliest feast.

Pem. But at your fathers board there sits a ghest,
To whom the cup of Ganimede will seem
But juice of Hemlocke, and the daintiest dish,
As much unsavory as the Pomice stone,
Unless your presence season his delight.

Kat. I am sorry I want skill to serve his diet.
I have not bin instructed to such end.

Pem But I will teach you (Madam) if you please.

Kat. Rather the party grieved first should show
Wherein we err, else how can we discern
What is our fault, or how we may amend?

Pem. That office he commits unto my tongue.

Kat. Is he not able then to speak himself?

Pem. Yes, Madam, I have heard when Ferdinand,
With whom in Padua I was conversant,
So spoke in the assembly of the learnd,
With such a grace and well composed phrase,
As many thought grave Tullies eloquence
Flowed like a honey River from his lips.

Kath. He wants then belike sufficient courage.

Pem. Never lived Knight less preiudic'd in that,
Then valiant Ferdinand, whom I have seen,
Couch his staff Lance with such dexterity,
As if the god of battle had himself
Entered the Lists, and preassing to the midst
Of steele-composed troops, like lightning fly,
Till he had made a passage with his sword.

Kat. So puissant in his fortitude with men,
And daunted with a silly woman's looks?
How can that be?

Pem. Yes, when you weygh the force
Of your resistlesse and controwling beauty,
It is your beauty: were his power and spirit
Ten times more hauty ventrous then it is,
Compels it stoop in homage to your foot,
As trembling Lambs, when they to Lions couch.

Kat. 'Twas well he chose so good an Orator,
To plead the imperfection of his cause.

Pem. I should have that opinion of my self,
If for my sake your Grace would favor him.

Kat. Yes, for your sake we have endured his name;
And for your sake we tolerate his suite:
But when you cease to speak, then all that praise
You have attributed to his desert,
Seems borrowed from your self, you are the man
Whose eloquence compares with Ciceroes.
You are the man, whose knightly fortitude
Lives in the world vnpreiudic'd of any.
You vanquish beauty, and inthrall the mind
Of female weakness, with no lesser awe,
Then Indian vassayles stoop unto their Lords.
The name of Ferdinand you have mista'ne:
Say it is your self, and then your whole discourse
Observes the perfect method that it should*

Pem. Should I be false and treacherous to my friend?
I am entreated but to speak for him.

Kat. But for your self would be more acceptable.
Oh pardon me, nor let immodest strain
Cleave to my brow, my love is chastely bred,
Other then Pembrooke, Katharine never vows,
Shall be inthroniz'd in hermayden thoughts.

Pem. Mistake me not, I say it is Ferdinand
Dies in affection to your Deity.

Kath. But in affection I survive to none,
But only Pembrooke.

Pem. Will you be esteemed
A cruel murdresse of a loyal friend?

Kat. Will Pembrooke triumph in a woman's fall?

Pem. You anger me, respect young Ferdinand.

Kat. You please me not, to speak of Ferdinand.

Pem. Nay, then it is time to go, or wrong my friend.
Since, Madam, what I would I cannot do,
Mine honor here bids me leave off to woo. Exit.

Kat. Stay, Pembrooke, Katharine will sue to thee,
So shall thou keep thy faith and loyalty.

Bow. Tarry, sir, tarry, we want the length of your nose: nay* if you will not
hear, i will be so bold as follow your nose. Sir, tarry, tarry. Exit.


Kat. He will not hear, nor (too unkind) look back.

Pain. But, Madam, spite his heart you shall see this.

Kat. Give me his picture: Image far more kind,
Then is the substance, whence thou art derived!
Which way soever I divert my self,
Thou seemst to follow with a loving eye.
Thee will I therefore hold within mine arms, Enter Ferd.
As some small comfort to increasing harms.

Fer. What means my second self by this long stay?
I cannot rest till I be certified,
What good or bad success my suite returns:
But he is gone, and in fair Katharines hand
I see his picture. What may this pretend?

Kat. Thou have done well indeed, in every part
Thou shewst complete and cunning workmanship:
His eye, his lip, his cheek are rightly framed;
But one thing thou have grossly ouer-slipt.
Where is his stubborn unrelenting heart,
That lurkes in secret as his master does,
Disdayning to regard or pity me?

Pain. Madam, his heart must be imagined
By the description of the outward parts.

Kat. O no; for then it would be tractable,
Mild and applausiue as the others be.

Fer. No Prince, but Pembrooke dwells in Katharines eye,
Whose that disturbs our pleasing solitude.

Fer. Know you not me? my name is Ferdinand,
Whose faithful love Lord Pembrooke late commenc't?

Kat. Speak then for Pembrooke as he did for you,
Or else your bootlesse suite will soon be cold.

Fer. Why, he was Orator in my behalf:
If I should speak for him, as he for me,
Then should I breathe forth his passions, not mine own.
I, I, it is so, the villain, in my name,
Has purchasd her affection for himself,
And therefore was he absent from the feast:
And therefore shuns my sight, and leaves behind
This counterfeit, to keep him still in mind. Enter Bowyer.
It Is so, it is so, base Traitor, for this wrong
My sword shall cut out thy perfidious tongue. Exit.

Bow. I have run till I sweat, sweat till my shirt cleaues to my back, cried
till I am hoarse, and am hoarse till I cannot cry, and yet he will not come
back.


Kat. No matter, fellow, I have here a pledge, Enter Jews.
Which I will zealously deuote me to*
There Is thy reward, withdraw, my father comes.

Lew. Where are these Lords? the one has sat with me,
And suddenly is risen from the board:
The other came not at all. Daughter, saw you
The Prince or Pembrooke, which way they are gone?

Kat. Back to their Tents, my Lord, as I suppose.

Lew. Back to their Tents, and take no leave of us*
Nay, then I fear their meaning was too smoothe,
And some black Treason covered in their smiles,
Which we will seek immediately to prevent. Exeunt.

Enter Dicke Bowyer, and soldiers, with Drum and colors. Bow. Stand, give the
word along, stand.


Lieu. Stand there.


Bow. Lieutenant.


Lieu. Captain.


Bow. Is the watch set in the Kings quarter yet?


Lieu. An hour ago.


Bow. Zounds, what foolish Canaanits were they, to run in debt to their eyes
for an hours sleep, sooner then they needed? Sergeant.


Ser. Anon sir.


Bow. Anon sir! s'hart, the Rogue answers like a Drawer: but it is the trick of
most of these Sergeants, all clincum, clancum. Gods dynes, I am an Onyon, if I
had not rather serve foremost in the forlorn hoope of a battle, or run point
blancke against the mouth of a double charged Cannon, then come under the
arrests of some of their pewter pessels: zounds, it is hotter a great deal then
hell mouth, and Dives burning in Sulphur: but thou art none of the genealogy of
them. Where must we watch to night?


Ser. In the furthest Trenches that confront the enemies Camp.


Bow. That's the next way to have all our throats cut.


Lieu. That cannot be, you know, Captain, there is a peace toward.


Bo. A pox a peace, it keeps our Ancient whole; but s'hart our gaberdines go to
wrack: but futra: it is well known, since Dick Bowyer came to France, he has
showed himself a gentleman and a Caualiero, and sets fear at's heels: and I
could escape (a pox on it) the other thing, I might haps return safe and sound to
England; but what remedy? al flesh is grass, and some of us must needs be
scorcht in this hot Country. Lieutenant Core, prithee lead my Band to their
quarter, and the Rogues do not as they should, cram thy self, good Core, down
their throats, and choke them. Who stand Sentronell to night, sir?


Sol. That must I, Captain.


Bow. You, Rafe Nod? zounds, soldiers, follow my discipline, say your prayers,
you are all dead men, all dust and ashes, all worms meat.


Lieu. How so, Captain?


Bow. Do you make him Sentronell? s'hart, he^le nod presently: and he do not
sleep sitting upon the point of a Spanish needle, Dicke Bowyer's a very
shittlecocke. Nod! zounds, he is one of the nine sleepers, a very Dormoose: and
I had a Pageant to present, of the seven deadly sins, he should play Sloth:
and he did not sleep when he should speak his part, I am a Badger.


Soul. That Is true, you have half the nature of a Badger, for one leg is
shorter then another.


Bow. Zounds, you Rogue, do not you know that? I Will tell you: s'hart, and I
lie, call me Iebuzite. Once as I was fighting in S. Georges fields, and blind
Cupid seeing me, and taking me for some valiant Achilles, he took his shaft,
and shot me right into the left heel, and ever since, Dick Bowyer has been
lame: but my heart is as sound as a bell, heart of Oak, spirit, spirit.
Lieutenant, discharge Nod, and let Cricket stand Sentronell, till I come.


Lieu. He shall, Captain.


Bow. On before, strike Drum, march soldiers, keep your place* Nod: lusty my
hearts, for the honor of England, and our brave General, the Earl of
Pembrooke. So, I have discharged my self of these. Exeunt soldiers.

Hot shot! now to my love: some may say, the tale of Venus loving Mars, is a
fable: but he that is a true soldier, and a Gent. as Dick Bowyer is, and he do
not love some varlet or other, zounds, he is worse then a gaping Oyster without
liquor. There Is a pretty sweet faced mother that waits on the princess, that I
have some mind to; but a whorso^ Achitophel, a parasite, a rogue, one whose
face looks worse the^ a Tailors cushen, of old shreds and colors; zounds, like
a weauers leg, in an old ditch feeding horseleaches, and this trotter is my
ryual, and loves Thomasin: his name is Peter de Lions; but s'hart (I will not
swear neither) if I do not turn Rich. Cor de Lion with him, if I do not tear
out his heart and eat it with mustard, Enter P^ter, (...) let him say Dick
Bowyer's a Mackarell. Yonder he comes with my Property hand in hand. Zou^ds, I
say nothing: but i will hear what they say, and determine afterward.


Pet. Thomasin, you know me, I hate prolixity: in a word, my humor is thus, I
love you.


Bow. And I do not spoil that humor, so --

Pet. Your answer compendiously, and avoid prolixity.


Tom. Mary (...)! by Jesus, I scorn to humble the least part about me, to give
answer to such a trotting question: as I live, it ioults mine ears worse in
hearing* then the princes coach on a broken cawsey.


Pet, Thomasin, leave this pace, and take me with you: my Lord loves your Lady,
yet I hear say, she is this night betrothed to the Prince of France: so I love
you, and shall I lose you? No, I hate prolixity: in a word, the end is, i will
mary you.


Tho. Pretty, as God save me! what will Captain Bowyer say to that, if he
should know it?


Bow. A good Rogue, by Jesus.


Pe. Bowyer a Captayn? a Capon, a button mould, a lame haberdine, a red beard
Sprat, a Yellow hammer, a bow case, a very Iackdaw with his tongue slit.


Bow. Zounds, what a Philistine is this? what a dictionary of proper names has
the Rogue got together? heart, his tongue crawles as fast as the Cheese does in
Germany, I Will pearce you for this, you Lobster.


Pet. Bowyer, mordu futra for him; and that sour crab do but leere at thee, I
shall squeeze him to vargis.


Bo. And you squeeze me, I may haps grow saucy with you, you whoreson burnd
Pudding pie, you dry Parsnip: kiss me, Thomasin: so, dare you stand to your
word now, and squeeze me?


Pet. Stumps, I challenge thee for this indignity* Bowyer, I will gyrd my self
with thy guts, I am a Soldier and a Captain.


Bow. Captain? s'hart, and thou have under thy charge, any other then Pigmies,
I am Gogmagog. Do thou hear (sowgelder?) and I do not with six Cranes (well
marshald) ouerrunne thee and thy hundred and fifty, say Dick Bowyer's a coward.


Pet. For that word, draw.


Tho. Hold, Gentlemen.


Bow. Peace (good Thomasin) silence, sweet socket. Peter, do see this sword?
this sword killed Sarlaboys, that was one Rogue: now it shall kill thee, that is
two Rogues, Whoreson puttock, no garbage serve you but this? have at you.


As they fight, enters Pembrooke. Pem. Who Is this at enmity within our Camps?
What, Bowyer, and the servant to great Burbon?
Both sheathe your weapons: by our martial law,
This act is death.

Bow. I Will be hanged then. Do thou hear, noble General? Dick Bowyer knows
what belongs to service: we did not draw of any malice, by this element of iron
and steel, but to measure which of our swords were longest. I Will save you for
once, you Sarazen, because I see you will hang scuruily: but the next time --


Pem. Good Captain Bowyer, let our English troops
Keep a strong watch to night: my throbbing heart,
Like to a Scritchowle in the midnight hour,
Bodes some black scene of mischief imminent.

Bow. Never fear (General) if Julius Caesar rise up against us, e're he do my
Lord any wrong, zounds, i will be cut smaller then pot-hearbs. I Will to the
trenches, come Thomasin. Leere not, Lobster, lest I thum that russeting face of
yours with my sword hilt, till that it look as pyde colored as the Rainbow. By
Jesus i will do it, and therefore follow me not. Exeunt.


Pem. Why should this load of grief lie on my heart
With such a ponderous weight? I know no cause,
Unless it be by thinking on the wrong
My friend receyues in the unmatched love,
Which Katharine bears me: yet my faith is sound,
And like a solid Rock shall check her tears.
Katharine loves me; yet for my friends delight,
Pembrooke will hate her love, and fly her sight. Exit.

Enter Burbon, Nauar, Philip, Bellamira, Rodoricke, and attendants. Bur. Nauar,
you sprinckle me with foul rep roch,
And dim the luster of our royal name,
With colors of dishonor.

Nau. Hear me, Burbon.

Bur. What words can satisfy so great a wrong?
Have you not with consent of all your Lords,
Promisd your daughter to this generous prince?

Nau. Their true love forced us to it.

Bur. True love? it is fayn'd.

Phil. Ha, Burbon.

Bell. Gentle Philip.

Phil. With my sword,
I Will prove my love unfeigned, thee a false Lord.

Bur. This like a Sanctuary frees thy tongue,
And gives thee childish liberty of speech,
Which else would fawn and crouch at Burbons frown.

Phil. Now by S. Denis --

Burb. I Will not chat with boys.
Nauar, to thee I speak: thy daughters looks,
Like the North Star to the Sea-tost Mariners,
Has brought me through all dangers, made me turn
Our royal Palace, to this stage of death,
Our state and pleasures, to a bloody Camp,
And with the strength and puissance of our force,
To lift thy falling and decayed state,
Even to her pristine glory, in thy quarrel
Burbon has set himself against his King,
And foyld his greatness with a Traitors name.
Now when our worth expected rich reward,
Fair Bellamira, wonder of her time,
Must Philip have her?

Phil. Burbon, she is mine.

Bur. Mordew: i will be revenged, by heaven I will,
Or I will paue these plains with the dead bodies
Of our dear subjects: we have sworn thy fall,
That oaths thy death, our rage thy funeral.

Nau. Hear our excuse.

Bur. We will not credit air.
Peter, watch Rodorick, when the prince is gone,
Tell him, I Would speak with him.

Pet. Enough, it is done.

Bur. Nauar, this setting Sun, which sees our wrong,
Shall e're his morrowes beams guide the proud East,
View Himens rites turned to a tragic feast. Exit Burbon.

Na. His anger bears him hence, young prince of France,
Since to reduce our enmity to love,
And thereby like a fair and lovely Bryde,
To mary peace to France, we are content,
To bring the sea-tost bark of your affects,
Half shipwrackt with the tempest of these wars,
To their desired port, as we agreed:
Go to your father, and inform him thus:
If personally heel view our friendly Tents,
And seal these Articles of peace proposde,
This night you shall be troth^ plight to our child.

Phil. Were it to search the furthest Northern clime,
Where frosty Hyems with an y^ie Mace,
Strikes dead all living things, I Would find it out,
And borrowing fire from those fair sunny eyne,
Thaw Winters frost, and warm that dead cold clime:
But this impose i^ nothing, honored King,
I Will to my father, and conduct him hither:
For whilst my soul is parted from her sight,
This earth is hell, this day a tedious night.
Come Rodorick, you shall bear me company. Exeu^t Phil. Pet. and Rod.

Pet. He shall not, for i will stay him instantly.

Nau. 'Twere pity to keep two such loves asunder.
Daughter, you and your Ladies to your tent, Exit Bella.
And deck you richly to receive the prince. Enter Pemb. after him, Fer.
My Lord of Pembrooke, happily returned:
How dot^ our son? See where he comes himself.
Speak, boy, how spedst thou with fair Katharine?

Fer. I know not how: Is trothlesse Pembrooke there?

Nau. Be not dismayed, at length she will pity thee.
Son, bid our Officers adorn our Court
In her chief glory: for this happy night
Shall set a period to this sma^ting war.
Your sister shall be troth-plight to Prince Philip,
And France and we made friends about it then.
Pembrooke, have you the charge to see our Captains
Prepare a martial welcome to the King.
I Will not be idle: since Nauar was crowned,
Our heart with so much joy did never abound. Exit Nau^r.

Fer. Nor mine with so much hate. Pembrooke, a word.

Pem. What wills your Grace?

Fer. That Pembrooke is a villayne.
Look not so strange, I speak it not your friend,
But he that in his soul has sworn thine end.

Pem. A villayne? and my death? I am amazed.
Art thou awake? or is all this a dream?

Fer. A dream of death: meet me to morrow morning,
As thou art Pembrooke and a Gentleman,
By you fair River side, which parts our Camps.
You know the place, come armde, and so farewell*

Pem. Dear friend.

Fer. Push, meet me.

Pem. Ferdinand, I will.

Fer. Revenge, smile on, thou shall drink blood thy fill.

Exeunt. Enter Peter standing sentronell. Pet. This is my waiting night, it is
for no good,
That I stand Sentronell. Well good or ill,
I care not greatly, so I get the gold: Enter Burbon, and Rodorick,
Therefore to avoid prolixity, here walk I.
Here comes the men that must reward my pain.

Bur. Have you the poison?

Rod. And a strong one too.
Here Is a preservative to save your hand.
When Rodoricke fayles your Lordship, heaven shall fail,
To illuminate the world with cheerful light.

Bur. Then here about should Peter wayt for me:
For this is the Pauilion of the Princess.

Pet. My Lord.

Bur. Peter.

Pet. Here is the key that opens to the Tent,
I stole it from my sweet heart Thomasin.
Enter without prolixity, woo and win the Lady:
But give me gold (my Lord) and I Will to Dice*

Bur. Hold, take thy fill.

Pet. And it shall go as fast.

Bur. Now gentle Peter, get thee unto rest:
My business craves the absence of the world:
None but my self and Rodoricke shall behold
The secret complot that I do intend.

Pet. I go, my Lord. Exit.

Burb. Now blessed key, open unto my love,
Do more then loving lines or words can do:
My letters have bin answered with disdain:
Her father I have moved to gain my ^oue,
But he is frosty in my fervent suite,
And now perforce I will obtain my love,
Or ease her puling hatred by revenge.

To. You stay too long, i will help to turn the key.

Discover her sitting in a chair asleep. Bur. What do I see? the majesty of
heaven,
Sit in a maiden slumber on the earth?
What, is my Bellamira turned a goddess,
Within the table of her glorious face!
Me thinks, the pure extraction of all beauty
Flows in abundance to my loue-sicke eye.
O, Rodoricke, she is admirably fair:
And sleeping, if her beauty be so rare,
How will her eyes inchaunt me if she wake!
Here, take the poison, i will not stayne that face,
For all the treasure of the Western Island.

Rod. I see no such admired perfection.
Waken her, Burbon, and this loving charm,
Which now has led your senses prisoner,
Will vanish, and her speech full of reproof,
Beget a new phantasma all of hate:
Thou will detest her when ^he shall deny thee.

Bur. Wake^ her, Rodorick, for I want the power.

Rod. I hope I am disguisde sufficiently,
That Bellamira cannot know my face.
Madam, fair Bellamira.

Bell. Here I am, who calls on Bellamira?

Burb. I, fair love,
The Luke of Burbon that does honor thee.

Bell. The Duke of Burbon in my Tent so late*
Where is my Guard? what Peter, Thomasin.

Rod. Step to her, and restrain her, lest she call:
I Will be a looker on, and be unknown.

Bur. What needs your Highness call for any guard,
Since you are guarded with a faithful friend?
Behold me, Madam, humbly on my knee,
Come to renew my suite, vouchsafe me love,
Or with this weapon take away my life:
Much better 'twere a thousand times to dye,
Then live in torment of your scorching eye.
You have inflamed my heart, oh quench that flame,
Or into cinders turn my hapless truncke:
Hapless, in being vnbelou'd of you.

Bell. My Lord of Burbon, you presume too much
On th'extremity of passion.
Have I not answered many an idle letter,
With full assurance that I cannot love?
Have I not often, viua voce checked
Your courtly kindness? frownd upon your smiles*
Used you unkindly, all to weane your love?
And do you still persevere in your suite?
I tell thee, Burbon, this bold part of thine,
To break into my Tent at dead of night,
Deserves severe correction, and the more,
Because it brings mine honor into question.
I charge thee, as thou art a Gentleman,
Betake thee to thine own Pauilion,
And let this answer satisfy for all:
Burbon, I cannot, nor I will not love thee.

Bur. Cannot, nor will not? zou^ds, Madam, but you must.

Bell. Must I?

Bur. And shall.

Bell. You will not force me to it?

Bur. Or force that sparkling beauty from your face.
Look not so fiercely, nor cry out for help:
For if you do, this makes you cry your last.
Seeing neither words, kind letters, hearty sighs,
Humble entreaty, nor a world of pain,
Can move you to take pity of my love:
But Tyrant-like, your beauty seeks my life,
I will blot out that beauty with this juice.
Thus, thus I wipe away my passions:
Thus do I heal the torments of my love:
Thus do I ransom my inthralled eye,
And by depriving of the cause of life,
Kill the effect, which was a world of sorrow.
Farewell, foul Bellamira, I am pleased
In this revenge, that no way could be easde. Exit.

Rod. Zounds, he has don't: now, Rodorick, joy thy fill*
Burbon is thine, the Dukedom is thine own:
For only he in the Inheritance
Stood as an obstacle, to let my claim.
This deed of his will take away his life:
And then let me alone to enjoy his land.
I Will steal away unseen, cause unsuspected:
I would not for the world be once detected. Exit.

Bell. Poison my face! oh most inhumane wretch*
Revenge more vile, then to abridge my life*
What, Thomasin, what, brother Ferdinand:
My kingly father: is there none that hears?
Then Treason, treason, let that waken you:
For capital is this offense to me.

Enter Nauar, Pembrooke, Ferdinand, and Thomasin. Tho. O Jesus, mistress, what
ails your face!

Nau. Her face!

Ferd. It Is spotted like a Panthers skin.

Pemb. O, were those spots as kindly beautiful,
Then were fair Bellamira vndeform'd.

Nau. O, what divine power has sent this Leprosy?

Ferd. Say, beauteous sister.

Pemb. Speak, fair Bellamira.

Tho. Speak, my good mistress.

Nau. My sweet daughter, speak.

Pem. Her silence argues a tormented spirit.

Fer. Thy countenance argues a deceitful soul.

Enter Jews, Philip, Rodoricke, and Flaunders. Lew. Where is Nauar?

Phil. Where is fair Bellamira?

Bell. My Philip, oh give leave to fly his sight.

Nau. Stay, gentle daughter* heel not iniure thee.

Lew. Here are the Articles concluded on,
I could not rest, till I had signed them,
And brought them to your Highness. A month hence
The marriage shall be fully solemnized,
So please your Majesty and your fair daughter:
Are you content?

Nau. To live in discontent.

Phil. Me thinks, this royal presence has dim looks:
Is it because they are in the arms of night,
Which sets a leaden luster on the eye?
Or has some accident occoasted them,
That troubles their aspect with melancholy?
Is Nauar well? is Ferdinando well?
Is Pembrooke well? Is Bellamira well?
O, where is Bellamira? tell me, Princes,
For now my tongue has struck upon her name.
I feel a kind of killing ecstasy.
Where is she? in her Tent?

Bell. Deny me, father,
I would not see Prince Philip with this face.

Phi. Why speak you not? what, have I touched the string,
Whereon the burden of your sorrow lies?
Father, look round about, see you my love?
Rodoricke, look round about, see you my love?

Lew. I see her not.

Rod. Nor I.

Phil. I say not so.
The garments that she wears, mine eye should know.
What Lady's this that hides her heavenly face?
Here are no Basilisks with killing eyes:
You need not hide your beauty: sweet, look up,
Me thinks I have an interest in these looks.
What Is here, a Leper amongst Noblemen?
What creatures this? why stays she in this place?
Oh, it is no marvel though she hide her face:
For it is infectuous: let her leave the presence,
Or Leprosy will cleave unto us all.

Bell. O let me leave the presence, gentle father,
When Philip bids his Bellamira go.

Phil. My Bellamira!

Lew. How? my sons beloved!

Phil. Is this my love? was this your beauteous child?

Nau. My child.

Ferd. My sister.

Pemb. Beauteous Bellamira.

Nau. Spotted.

Ferd. Disfigured.

Pemb. Made a loathsome Leper.

Rod. How came this sudden alteration?
For she was comely, lovely, beautiful,
When the day left his Chariot to the night.

Na. That heaven does know, and only Bellamira.
Daughter, I charge thee, tell me how it came.

Bell. Burbon, oh Burbon.

Lew. Did he do the deed?

Bell. He came into my Tent at dead of night,
And rubd my face with an infectuous herb,
Because I would not grant unto his love.
I cried for help, but none did succor me.

Rod. I know he did, and laugh to think on it.

Lew. And he shall rue his treason.

Phil. Threaten not,
Leave the revenge to me whom it concerns,
It Is I am robbed of a delicious look,
A heavenly sparkling brow, a starry eye,
A countenance fayrer then Auroraes looks,
When all the East is gilded with her blush*
It Is I will be revenged: but not before
I have espousde my lovely Bellamira.

Lew. Espoused her!

Nau. How! marry a face deformed!

Ferd. A leprous creature!

Pem. An infectuous maid!

To. One, whose sores are perchance incureable!

Phil. Be they incureable, it is my Love,
And for my sake she has endured this wrong,
And, should I now forsake her thus distressed,
I could not merit a true Lovers name.
To show I love her, I will marry her,
Before the month expire: nay in the morn:
Delays, perchance, may make her think I scorn.

Bell. Marry with me? fetch me a looking glass,
That I may see how sweet a Bride I am.
Oh, I detest my self: Dear, hate me too:
I am not to be married but to death.
Though I were Empress of the spacious world,
I Would lay my self and Kingdom at thy feet.
Live, noble Philip, ioysome happyer match:
It Is my unworthiness makes me deny thee.

Phi. Think thou, because thy face is spotted so,
Thou art not worthy of thy Philips love?
Thy face to me was but a Marshall,
To lodge thy sacred person in my mind,
Which long ago is surely chambred there:
And now what needs an outward Harbinger?
I do affect, not superficially:
My love extends further then the skin.
The inward Bellamira it is I seek,
And unto her will Philip be epousde.

Nau. Oh admirable love!

Lew. Oh, my dear son,
Thou make me famous by thy loyalty.

Rod. I never heard the like.

Pemb. Pen never writ
A worthyer Story to posterity.

Fer. Pen never writ of a more treacherous friend,
Then, Pembrooke, thou have proved to Ferdinand.

Phil. Sweet Love, prepare thee to be Philips Bryde:
For here I swear, as I am royal borne,
I Will marry thee, before the mornings Sun
Has run the third part of his glorious course.
Father, good night: dear friends, dear Love, good night:
Marriage, I hope, will make my spirits more light. Exit.

Nau. Good night, sweet son. King Jews, stay with me,
Be thou my comforter, i will comfort thee. Exeunt Kings.

Fer. Pembrook, remember that thou fail me not. Exit.

Pem. O God, what may these moody looks intend?
Me thinks, I should have better from my friend. Exit.

Bell. Now, Bellamira, thou have time to think
Upon these troublous matters: should I suffer
So brave a Gentleman as Philip is,
To wed himself to my unworthy self,
It would be counted virtue in the Prince;
But I were worthy of a world of blame.
No, Philip, no, thou shall not wrong thine honor,
Nor be impeacht by Bellamiraes spots.
In some disguise i will steal away to night,
And never appear more in my Philips sight. Exit.

Enter Dicke Bowyer. Bow. There is no toil to this walking of the Round:
S'hart, I have been stumbling up and down all this night, like a Brewers
horse, that has never a good eye in his head: It Is as daarke as Pitch. I can
resemble our Camp to nothing better then hell, save that in hell they are
always waking, and here the villaynes are as drowsy as swyne. Lieutenant
Nod! why, you might have shot a double Cannon in his ear, and never have wak^e
him: I iogd, and I iogd; I showted, and I showted; and yet the mungrel snorted,
you might hear him to Dover: at last, I dragd him by the heels into a ditch
of water, and there left the Lobster crawling. A the the other side, Core being
appointed to stand Sentynell upon the Wallounes quarter, s'hart, the Loach gets
me into a Sutlers bath, and there sits me drinking for Ioanes best cap: but by
this hand, and as Dicke Bowyer is a Soldier, and a Caualiero, he shall sit in
the boults for it to morrow. My comfort is in these extremities, that I brought
Thomasin to her La^ies Tent, leaving her new-come Lover to pick strawes: but
soft, qui v^ula?


Enter Ferdinand. Ferd. My name is Ferdinand.


Bow. Stand.


Ferd. Why, Captain, thou do know me well enough.


Bow. Know, or not know, without the word you pass not.


Ferd. Soliman.


Bow. So, allie, allie, Monseur.


Ferd. First, tell me, saw thou Pembrooke come this way?


Bow. I saw him not.


Ferd. Farewell. Exit.


Bow. As much to you. Zounds, these Frenchmen think to outface us with a card
of ten: but, and his beard were made of brass, Dicke Bowyer will make him know
the discipline of war. Here comes another.


Enter Pembrooke. Pem. Who Is there? Dick Bowyer?


Bow. Some call me so, what then?


Pem. Pembrooke salutes thee.


Bow. Oh, good morrow, my Lord, good morrow.


Pem. I prithee, Captain, sawst thou Ferdinand,
Son to Nauar, as thou did walk the round?

Bow. Even now, my Lord, he past along this way.


Pem. Himself alone? or had he company?


Bow. Nay questionless, he was alone, my Lord.


Pem. Could thou discern his face? how did he look?


Bow. Faith, scuruily, my Lord, like a green cheese, or the inside of a rotten
Pumpian.


Pem. There is Crowns for thee to drink. Exit Pem.


Bow. I thank your Lordship. To see the difference between these French
Curres, and our English Caualiers: there is as much bounty in them, as there is
Marchpane in a dish of Almond butter. I might have stood here till my teeth
chatter in my head, e're the the other Launceprisado would have said, Here,
Captain Bowyer, there is a Cardi^ue, to wash down melancholy. But had I known
as much, I would have basted him, till his bones had rattled in his skin.


Enter Core and other Soldiers, bringing in the Clown. All. Come, sir, you
shall answer your walking before our Captain.


Clow. Well, sirs, take heed what you do, I am a Princes man, if you stay me
upon the Kings hye way, I can ^ay fellowship to your charge.


Core. But sir, we can lay Treason to thine, for being without the word.


Clow. Without the word! O pernicious Frenchman! without the word! why, I have
called thee Villayne, him Rascal; this, Slave; that, Rogue; and am I still
without the word?


Core. I, sir, the word that must serve your turn, the Watchword.


Clow. Faith, you are like to watch this tweluemoneth, ere you have any other
words at my hands.


Bow. How now masters, what calfe are you dragging to the slaughterhouse
there? ha?


Core. A straggler, and a spy: Captain, I pray examine him.


Bow. So, Lieutenant Core, you are crept from your cups at last, I Will talk with
you anon: but, sir, to you: From whence come you?


Clow. I came, sir, from the King of Fraunces camp.


Bow. So, what is your name?


Clow. My name, sir, is Bow wow.


Bow. S'hart, what a name's that! the Hedgehog mocks us: Bow wow, quotha? what
kin art thou to the generation of Dogs?


Clow. No dog, sir, would you should know it, though I be encompast with curres.


Bow. Zounds, he calls us curres, hang the hotch-potch up in a fathom or two of
match.


Clow. Not you, sir, I call not you so: I know you to be a very insufficient
ill-spoken Gentleman.


Bow. Well, sir, whom do you serve?


Clow. My master, sir, is the Lady Katharine, the French Kings daughter: I have
bin abroad about some business of hers, and am now going back again.


Bow. An honorable Lady, sir: let him go: it is against the law of arms to stay
him.


Clow. Stand of: but soft, I do not know your name, sir, that my Lady may give
you thanks.


Bow. My name's Dick Bowyer.


Clow. Then, master Dicke Bowyer, after my hearty commendations, adue: but as
for the rest, I shall, I say no more, I shall -- Exit.


Bow. How now, Core? how can you answer your being a tippling, when you should
stand Sentinel?


Core. Believe me, Captain, I had but a whiffe or two: for I was passing dry.


Bow. Thou art always dry: the whoreson Mault-worm has a throat like the
burning Clyme, or a Glasse-makers Furnace: But your remove from thence has
saved you from the boults. How now, what Water-Spanyell have we here? Enter
Nod.


Core. It Is Lieutenant Nod.


Nod. Captain, deride me not: I protest, I came by this mischaunce by good
service, by following a spy, that came to discover our army.


Bow. O notable Rogue! did not I find thee asleep, and threw thee into a ditch?


Nod. Was It you? by this light, I took you for a spy.


Bow. Yet saw me not, no more then a Molewarp* this is an egregious Rogue.


Nod. Yes, I saw you well enough, and I did but try how you would use me.


Bow. By this flesh and blood, many one that lies in his grave, was not half
so senseless: but the Watch breaks up, every one to his quarter, away. Exeunt.


Enter Clown. Clow. It Is true, they are gone together, and I am sent to watch
Prince Ferdinand, and the Earl of Pembrooke: this way they went; but they are
got out of sight. I were very bad to be a Hound, that have no better a sent: if
they were hares, as they are men, I should think them squatted: but hushed, here
comes one of them.


Enter Ferdinand. Ferd. The morn looks red: red mornes do threat a storm,
That storm shall light on Pembrooke or my self.
This is our meeting place: here runs the stream
That parts our camps: the time consorts the place;
And (Pembrooke) if thy reputation hold,
It is thy q. to enter. Enter Pembrooke.

Clow. Here comes the the other, this is luck upon luck* now will I run and
fetch my mistress, the Lady Katharine, to part their fray. Exit.


Pem. Good end succeed my early heaviness:
Three times my feet, as loath to guide me hither,
Have stumbled in a plain and even way,
My sword forsook his scabberd once or twice,
Blood from my nostrilles thrice has spowted forth,
And such a dymnesse ouerrunnes my sight,
That I have taken a tree to be a man,
And questioned with it about serious things*
This is the place where I must meet my friend.
Yonder he stands* Good morrow, Ferdinand.

Fer. Good morrow to thy death: draw, Pe^brook, draw,
The ground thou treadst upon, must be thy grave.

Pem. Draw upon Ferdinand?

Fer. I, upon me.
Dally not, Pembrooke, I am bent to fight,
And that with thee for the best blood thou bearst.

Pem. You have some reason for this resolution.

Fer. My will.

Pem. A sorry argument to kill your friend.
I must have better reason then your will,
Or i will not draw upon my Ferdinand:
Our love is older then of one days growth,
A years continuance has united us.
Have we not made an enterchange of oaths,
Sworn love to one another twenty times,
Confirmd that friendship by society,
Encreasde it with the simpathy of mind,
Making one pleasure, pleasure unto both?
And shall this bond be broken upon will?

Fer. Then you will not draw?

Pem. Yes, nearer to thy person,
In friendly sort to embrace thee, Ferdinand.

Fer. Thou art a coward, and thou dare not fight.

Pem. Thou know the contrary: for we have fought
At every weapon, to approve our skill.

Fer. Go to, you are a villayne and a coward,
And by the royal blood that gave me life,
I Will kill thee, Pembrooke, though thou do not draw.

Pem. Kill me? thou will not wrong thine honor so?

Fer. Zounds, but I will: and traitor, take thou that. wounds him.

Pem. Wound me so desperately? nay then i will draw,
Not to offend, but to defend my self.
Now I perceive it is my blood thou seekst:
Witness you heavens, and all you gracious powers,
That stand auspicious to this enterprise,
That Pembrooke draws forth an unwilling sword.

Fer. Why so, now manfully defend thy self.

Pem. Another wou^d? then Pembrook, rowse thy spirit,
And bear no longer with this haire-braynd man.
Yet (Ferdinand) resolve me of the cause,
That moves thee to this unkind enterprise:
And if I satisfy thee not in words,
This double wound shall please thee with my blood.
Nay, with my sword I Will make a score of wounds,
Rather then want of blood divorce thy love.

Fer. I hate thee deadly, and I seek thy life:
What other reason, Pembrook, would thou have?
Prepare, prepare, in this conflict to ^how,
Thou art a Knight, and can over come thy foe.

Pem. And if I spare thee not, impute the cause
To thine own rashness, and mine aching wounds.

Fight, and hurt each other, both fall down as dead. Fer. I hope I have slain
thee.

Pem. Oh, I fear thy life: how fares my Ferdinand?

Fer. What, live thou yet? then my fare is ill.

Pem. I am marked for death,
I feel a general faintness through my lymmes:
Expense of blood will soon expend my life.

Fer. The like debility my joints do feel.

Pem. Then we must both dye in the latest of death.
Tell me, oh tell me, whence proceeds this hate?

Fer. I fear not (Pembrooke) to discover now.
Thou were my Spokes-man unto Katharine,
And treacherously thou stol'st away her heart.
Oh, I can say no more, my spirits do faint.
Pembrooke, farewell, I have revenged my wrong.

Pem. Oh* yet a little longer, gracious time,
Detayne his princely spirit to his breast,
That I may tell him he is misse-inform'd,
And purge my self unto my dying friend:
But death has laid his num-cold hand upon me:
I am arrested to depart this life.
Dear Ferdinand, although thou be my death,
On thee i will friendly breathe my latest breath.

Enter Forrester. For. How full of pleasure is this Forest life!
My Park I liken to a Common wealth,
In which, my Bucks and Does are Citizens:
The Hunters Lodge, the Court, from whence is sent
Sentence of life or death, as please the King:
Only our gouernment's a tyranny,
In that we kill our subjects upon sport.
But stay, what Gentlemen do here lie slain*
If any spark of life do yet remain,
I Will help to fan it with a nymble hand:
The Organ of his arm does play apace,
He is not so far spent, but that with help,
He may recover to his former state.
How is the other? I do feel soft breath
Break from between his lips. Oh, for some aid,
To bear them to the Forest, to my Lodge:
But as I am, i will try my utmost strength,
To save their lives: first seen, shall be the first:
Patience, and i will return and fetch the other. Exit.

Enter Fisherman. Fisher. My angle-rod is broke, my sport is done;
But I will fetch my net, to catch some fish:
To lose both fish and pleasure, is too much.
Oh what contentment lives there in the brook!
What pretty trains are made by cunning hands,
To int^ap the wily watery Citizens!
But what art thou that lie upon the ground?
Sleepst thou? or art thou slain? has breath his last?
No spark of life appears: yet from his eye,
Me thinks I see a glymmering light break sorth,
Which wanting strength, is like a twilight glimse.
If there be any hope to save his life,
I Will try my utmost cunning. To my house,
Poor Getleman, I Will bear thee as a ghest,
And either cure thy wounds, or make thy grave. Exit.

Enter Forrester, missing the other taken away, speak^ any thing, and Exit.
Enter Clown and Katharine. Clow. Just in this circle I left the two Princes
ready to draw; for I read the whole discourse of the Combat in their red eyes.


Kath. Here lie their weapons, and here flows their blood.


Clow. Have they not slain one another, and buried themselves?


Kath. Peace, fool, it is too sure, that they are slain.


Clow. O Lord, then let me turn my self into a Ballad, and mourn for them.


Kath. Thou angrest me, with jesting at my sorrow:
Hence from my sight, my heart is full of grief,
And it will break, the burden is so great.

Clow. Go from your sight? then let me go out of your company: for I had as
leeue leave your sight as your company. Is this my reward for watching and
watching? Oh Mistress, do not kill me with unkindness: I shall, I shall --


Kath. What shall you?


Clow. Weep out mine eyes, and fill the holes with salt water.


Kath. I prithee leave me, I am not displeasd,
But feign would vent my sorrow from my heart.
Hold, take my purse, spend that, and leave my presence:
Go every where, enquire my Pembrooke out:
And if thou bringst me to his breathless truncke,
I will reward thee with a treble gift.

Clow. Well, I were best be going, now I am so fayrely offered. Mistress, your
reward has stopped my tears, and entic'de my legs to be walking. Farewell, I
will go, God knows whither, to seek and to find both, and neither.
Farewell, sweet Mistress. Exit.


Kath. O Pembrooke, let me kneel unto thy blood:
And yet I know not whether't be thy blood,
Save that my soul by a divine instinct,
Tells me it is the treasure of thy veins.
If thou be dead, thou mirror of all men,
I vow to dye with thee: this field, this grove
Shall be my receptacle till my last:
Content with that that feeds the ayry souls,
My pillow shall be made a bank of moss,
And what I drink, the silver brook shall yield.
No other camp nor Court will Katharine have,
Till fates do limit her a common grave. Exit.

Enter France, Nauar, Philip, Flaunders, Thomasin, and attendants. Nau. Our
daughter fled! when? whither? which way? how?

Tho. I know not.

Phil. Bellamira, my lives joy,
Upon those pinnyons that support her flight,
Houers my heart, you bear away my soul.
Turn, turn again, and give this earthly frame
Essential power, which for thine absence dies:
Thou art the sweet of sweet, the joy of joys:
For thee was Philip borne. O turn again,
And Philip is the blessedest of men.

Lew. We are glad she is gone, though we dissemble it.
Son, bridle this affection, cease these laments,
She did not value them.

Nau. Jews, she did,
Till savage hate that shape disfigured.

Phil. O, she was worthy to be Queen of heaven.
Her beauty, e're it suffered violence,
Was like the Sun in his Meridian Throne,
Too splendant for weak eyes to gaze upon.
She was too bright before, till being hid
Under that envious cloud, it took the place
Of a dark ground, to show a louelyer face.
That Leprosy in her seem^ perfect beauty:
And she did gild her imperfections over
With virtue, which no ^oule calumnious breath
Could ever soil, true virtues dye is such,
That malice cannot stayne, nor envy tuch.
Then say not but her worth surmou^ts these woes.

Nau. She grieved to tie you to a hated bed,
And therefore followed Burbon for revenge.

Phil. Burbon? who names him? that same verbal sound
Is like a thunderclap to Philips cares,
Frighting my very ^oule. Sure, you said, Burbon,
And to that prodegie you joined revenge:
Revenge, that like a shadow follows him.
'Twas he that made me bankrout of all bliss,
Sude the divorce of that pure white and red,
Which decked my Bellamiraes lovely cheeks:
And shall he escape unpunished?

Lew. Join your hands,
And all with us swear vengeance on the Duke.

Phil. Not for the world: who prosecutes his hate
On Burbon, iniures me: I am his foe,
And none but I will work his overthrow.

Lew. What means our son?

Phil. To hunt him for revenge.
The darkest angle of this universe,
Shall not contain him through the bounded world:
I Will prosecute his flight with ceaseless steps:
And when long travel makes them dull or faint,
Bayting them fresh with Bellamiraes wrongs,
Like Eagles they shall cut the flaxen air,
And in an instant bring me where he is.

Lew. Where goes our son?

Phil. To hell, so that in that kingdom,
Fate would assertayne me to meet with Burbon.
Where ever I confront him, this shall kill him.

Nau. Thou shall have aid to compass thy revenge.

Phil. No aid, but this strong arm. Farewell, farewell.
Since Bellamira has forsook her friend,
I seek destruction (Burbon) and mine end. Exit.

Lew. Stay him: this fury will betray thy life.

Nau. Poor king made wretched by thy daughters loss.

Lew. Poor king made wretched by thy desperate son.

Enter Messenger. Mess. Spend not your woes too fast, but save some tears
To dew the obsequies of your dead son.

Nau. What, Ferdinand?

Mess. He Is slain by Pembrokes hands,
And Pembroke left breathles by Ferdinand.
Their quarrel is uncertain, and their bodies
By some uncivil hands conuayed away,
And no inquiry can discover them.

Nau. Our son slain? Bellamira poisoned?
Navarre, tear off these hayres, and raging die.

Enter Rodoricke. Lew. More Tragedies at hand, what news brings Rodoricke?

Rod. Such as will make the hearers, senseless truncks.
Why does your highness in your foe-mens tents
Revel away the time, and yield your person,
To the known malice of your enemies,
Whilst in your own tents, rapine and foul lust,
Graspes your fair daughter to dishonor her?

Lew. Our daughter?

Rod. She is slily stolen from thence,
Yet none knows whither, save one Sentinel,
Who does report he heard a wretched Lady
Exclaim, false Ferdinand would ravish her.

Lew. That was my child dishonored by thy son.

Nau. You wrong him, France.

Lew. Thou have betrayed us, king,
And traynd us to a loathed festival,
The marriage of thy staynd and leprous child.
Whilst in our absence, Ferdinand unjust,
Has staind our daughters beauty with vild lust.

Flaun. If you remember, he and English Pembroke
Last day forsook your Camp, as discontent.

Lew. That proou'd their loves were faynd, and of set malice,
He came to view our Camp, how he might act
That deed of obloquy, and escape with life.

Nau. It Is France has done the wrong: you have co^menst
This deed of death on Pembrook and our son;
And now to cover it, suggest and feign
Our guiltless son a gu^^ty rauisher:
But render me their bodies.

Lew. Where Is our Child?

Nau. Seek her.

Lew. Seek Ferdinand.

Nau. France.

Lew. Petty king,
For this our wrong, look to be underling.

Nau. What Drum is this?

Lew. Are we intrapt, Nauar?

Rod. Fear not, on yonder hill, whose lofty head
Orelookes the vnder-valleyes, Royal Burbon,
Attended by ten thousand Soldiers,
Craves peace and fair accord with mighty France*

Nau. Burbon, that was the ruin of my Child?
Summon our forces straight and charge the slave*

Fran. In Burbons rescue draw our forces up.

Nau. What means the king of France?

Rod. To join with him.

Nau. What? with a Traitor and a murderer?

Lew. He did a deed of merit and of fame,
Poisoned the Sister of a rauisher,
A Tarquin, an incestuous Tereus,
And our poor Child the wronged Philomell:
Arayne our Battles straight, and join with Burbon.

Nau. Hear what we will urge.

Lew. Speak then in war and death:
In other terms, our rage will spend no breath.

Nau. And we will speak so loud, that heaven it self
Shall echo with the clangor: both our children
We Will race from our remembrance, and advance
No other thought, but how to plague proud France.
Conioyne with Burbon, e're three Suns shall set,
In the vast Kingdom of Oreanus:
In a pitched field we will meet the King of France,
And that false Traitor Duke.

Lew. Nauar, thou dare not.

Nau. Now by Saint Denis, and our Grandsires tomb,
We Will meet thee.

Lew. Welcome. O, bring valiant men.
Weel think on naught but graves and to^bs til then. Exeunt.

Rod. Ha, ha: I laugh to see these Kings at jar.
Now civil discord like a raging flood,
Swelling above her banks, shall drown this land,
Whilst Rodorick on her ruins builds his hopes.
The King of France through my suggestion,
Thinks Katharine his daughter ravished,
Who only wingd with love, is fled the Camp:
Pembrooke and Ferdinand, in mutual strife,
Slain by each other, does confirm my words,
And for revenge whets keen the two Kings swords. Exit.

Enter Pembrooke armde, and the Forrester. Pem. I tha^k thee, Forrester, whose
rough grown walks,
Wild in aspect, afford more courtesy,
Then places smoother for ciuility.
My life redeemd by thy industrious hand,
Remaynes in love and duty bound to thee.

For. Fair Knight, prevention of sad death, by health,
More joys my soul, then thanks or rich reward.
But is your armor easy? sits it well?

Pem. I never in my life was better fitted.
This should be that unlucky fatal place,
Where causlesse hate drew blood from Ferdinand.
Behold the grass, a purple register,
Still blusheth in remembrance of our fight.
Why wither not these trees? those herbs and plants?
And every neighbor branch droup out their grief?
Poor souls, they do, and have wept out their sap,
Yet I have paid no duty to my friend.
Where is the Tomb I wild you to erect?

Forr. See, valiant knight, proportiond and set up,
As well as my poor s^ill would suffer me:
And here his picture hangs.

Pemb. You have done well:
Your hand I see's a perfect Architect
In sorrows building: once more let suffice
I quite your painful travel but with thanks:
Now leave me to my self, for here I vow
To spend the remnant of my haples days:
No knight nor Prince shall ever pass this way,
Before his tongue acknowledge Ferdinand
The faythfullest lover and the louingst friend
The world contaynes: I Will have his Sepulcher
As yet but naked and ungarnished,
E're many days hang richer with the spoils
And vanquished Tropheyes of proud passengers,
Then was the Romans wealthy Capitol:
So, gentle Forrester, bequeath thy prayers
In my assistance; that is all I crave.

Forr. The God of power give power unto your arm,
That you may prove victorious fortunate.

Pem. Farewell, kind Host: and now let me embrace
This empty Monument of my lost friend.
Oh! were so happy to enshrine his bones,
How blessed should Pembrooke be? but they are torn
By the fierce sauadge Wolf, whose filthy mawe
Is made an unfit grave to bury him.
But if (without offense) I may desire it,
I wish his soul from Paradise may see,
How well his name is kept in memory:
These eyes that saw him bleed, have wept for him:
This heart deuisde his harm, has sighed for him:
And now, this hand, that with ungentle force
Depryu'd his life, shall with repentant service,
Make treble satisfaction to his soul.
Fortune, thou do me wrong, to suffer me
So long vncombatted: I prithee send
Some stubborn Knight, some passenger,
Whose stout controuling stomach will refuse
To yield to my prescription, but by force.
I hate this idle rest of precious time.
How now! derid'st thou my devotion, goddess? Enter Kathar.
Thou sendst a woman to encounter me.
Henceforth i will hold thee for a feigned name,
And no disposer of my Christian hopes:
But soft, I know that face: oh! I, it is she
Was unjust cause of all this misery.

Kath. Long have I wandered with unquiet mind,
To find my Pembrook: that they fought, I hear:
That they were wounded both to death, I hear:
But whether cur'de or dead, I cannot hear:
Nor lives there any (if deceasde) can tell,
Within what place their bodies are interred.
Since therefore all my travel is in vain,
Here will I take a truce with former care.
This cursed nooke was that unlucky plot,
Where cursed Ferdinand did kill my Love.
What Knight is this? i will question him, perhaps
He can resolve me where my Pembroke is:
Joy and good fortune, sir, attend your state.

Pem. Your wishes come too late.
What seek you, Madam?

Kath. Tell me, sir knight, for so you seem to be:
Know you this dismal place you do frequent?
Or have you heard of that unhappy fight,
Was here performed by Pembrook and his foe?

Pem. Yes, Madam, I have heard of it long since,
And, to my grief, knew both the Gentlemen.

Kat. But can you tell me if they live or no?
Or dead, what hand has given them buryall?

Pem. Rest you assured, Madam, they are dead:
The one of them to whom I was allied,
And nearly knit in friendship from my youth,
By me lies buried here: a brauer Knight,
And truer Lover never breathd in France.

Kath. O tell me, is it Pembrooke? if for him
You have erected this fair monument,
Perpetual honor I will do your state.

Pem. Not only, Madam, have I built this tomb
In his memorial: but my self have sworn
Continual residence within this Wood:
And for the love I bare him, wear these arms,
That whatsoever Knight, aduenturer or other,
Making his journey this way, and refusing
To do Knights homage to my breathless friend,
By this assayling steel may be compeld.

Kath. Oh, let me know your name, so kindly moved,
To dignifie my Pembrookes high deserts.

Pem. You did not hear me say'twas Pe^brook, Madam*
What is become of him, I do not know,
Nor greatly care, since he did wrong my friend,
And first in kindled this dissensious brawle.
This buried here, is noble Ferdinand,
His fathers comfort, and his Countries hope.
Oh Madam! had you seen him as I did,
Begirt with wounds, that like so many mouths,
Seemed to complain his timelesse overthrow:
And had before bin inward with his virtues,
To think that nature should endure such wrack,
And at one time so many precious gifts
Perish by death, would have dissolved your heart.
He was the very pride of fortitude,
The house of virtue, and true frendships mirror:
Look on his picture, in the arms of death,
When he was ready to give up the ghost,
I causde it to be drawn: if at that time,
In that extremity of bitter pangs,
He looked so lovely, had so fresh a color,
So quick a moving eye, sored a lip,
What was his beauty when he was in health?
See with what courage he endured the combat,
Smiling at death for all his tyranny.
Had death bin ought but what he was, stern death*
He would have bin enamored with his looks*

Kath. A certain soft remorce
Creeps to my heart, persuades me he was true,
Loving, and virtuous: but my self unkind,
Coyly to scorn the proffer of his mind.

Pem. O that in Justice of her former hate,
She now would hopeless doat on Ferdinand!
I Will do the best I can to bring her on:
Despair and madness, fetch her off again.
Madam, how say you? wast not a grievous thing,
So rich a Iem, should lie raked up in dust?
So sweet a flower, be withred in his prime?

Kath. Death was a villayne for attempting it,
And so was Pembrooke for effecting it.
No bloody Scythian, or inhumane Turk,
But would ha trembled to ha touched his skin,
Or spilt one drop of his Heroic blood.

Pem. Had not that Lady then an iron heart?
A rude ungrateful mind? a sauadge spirit?
That knew this virtuous honorable Knight,
This gracious shape, and unmatched excellence,
To be entangled with her fervent love,
To serve her in all loyalty of heart,
To reverence and adore her very name,
To be content to kiss the lowly earth,
Where she did set her foot: and when he sued
For grace, to scorn him, to deride his sighs,
And hold his tears and torment in contempt?
Of all that ever lived, deserved she not,
The worlds reproach, and times perpetual blot?

Kat. Heard you him ever speak of such a one?

Pem. Often times: but chiefly then, when he perceyu'd,
His hurt was mortal, and no way but death.
At every groan, he called upon her name,
As if that sound were present remedy:
And when insulting death drew short his breath,
And now was ready to close up his eyes:
Farewell, quoth he, where e're I find a shrine,
My soul fly thou to beauteous Katharine.

Kat. That ruthlesse mind, that iron savage heart,
So greatly loved, and so little loving,
Breathes in this breast, 'twas I returned disdain,
For deep affection; scorn for loyalty:
And now compassionlesse shall pine my self.
Oh Ferdinand, forgive me, Ferdinand:
Inioyne me any penance for that wrong;
Say I shall tread a tedious pilgrimage
To furthest Palestine, and I will do it.
But peace, fond woman, these exclaimes are vain:
Thy Ferdinand is dead and cannot hear,
As thou wast sometimes deaf, and would not hear.

Pemb. A just reward. Come, Madam, have you done?
Give me the picture I may hang it up.

Kath. Oh take it not away: since I have lost
The substance, suffer me to keep the shadow:
Me thinks, so long as this is in my hand,
I claspe my Ferdinand between mine arms:
So long as I behold this lively form,
So long am I refreshed by his smiles:
So long, me thinks, I hear him speak to me.
Knew I the Paynter drew this counterfeyt,
I would reward him with a mynt of gold.

Pem. If such a pleasure you receive by this,
I tell you, Madam, I shall shortly have
His whole proportion cut in Alablaster,
Armd as he was when he encountered here,
Which kneeling, shall be set upon his tomb.

Kath. On that condition I will gather flowers,
And once a day come straw them at his feet:
And once a day pay tribute of choice thanks*
To you the furtherer of my happiness:
Till then, I place the picture where it was.

Enter Clown, and Bellamira. Clow. Come on, Madam, me thinks now a mask would
do well: but I perceive your drift, I smell your policy, you think a bald face
has no need of a black mask. Shall I tell you what you look like? A broyld
herring, or a tortur'de Image made of plaster work.


Bell, So, sir, you may scoff my misery.


Pem. Still haunted with these women? are men vanished?
Or what occasion leaves the Realm of France,
So void and empty of aduenturous Knights?

Clow. Out of peradventure, Madam, the ghost of Saint George is come out of
England, to see what hospitality S. Denis keeps in France.


Pem. Poor Bellamira, I lament thy state;
But I must still suppress my discontent.
What are you so deformd with loathsome spots?
And what that Anticke keeps you company?

Clow. Anticke! thou lie, and thou were a Knight of ginger-bread: I am no
Anticke, the whole parish where I was borne will swear, that since the reign
of Charlemain there was not a better face bred or brought up amongst them.


Pem. Away, ye russeting.


Kath. Have patience, Knight, how ever thus deformed,
This Lady is the daughter of Nauar.
Madam, it joys me I have met you here,
Though much laments me of your heavy plight.
There needs no repetition of your wrong:
I know, the villayne Burbon did the deed,
Whom my incensed brother will revenge.

Bell. For Philips sake I have bin martyrd thus,
And for his sake left King and Courtly life,
To entertayne a Pilgrims paynefull habit.
But on what strange adventure stays this Knight,
Within this desolate forsaken wood?

Kat. For love of Ferdinand your princely brother,
Whose Hearse he gards in honorable Arms.

Bell. Is this my brothers Hearse? is this the place,
Where I was shipwrackt of a brothers name?
Oh, let me spend a loving sigh for him,
And sacrifice a sisters holy rites:
For ever rest, sweet Ferdinand, in peace,
Until thy body glorified from heaven,
Become immortal by thy souls return.

Pem. Poor Bellamira, how I pity thee!
Yet must forbear to comfort thy distress.

Clow. Is my young Lord buried here? I say no more, but
I pray God send him a joyful insurrection.

Kath. Enough, sweet Bellamire,
These leprous spots, it is time they were removed.
Come, go with me. Since I left Aquitayne,
And came acquaynted with these private walks,
It was my happy chance to meet an Hermit,
Whose skill in Phisike warrants present cure,
And pure refining of your poisoned blood:
I Will bring you thither: afterward select
Delicious sweets, to deck your brothers tomb.
Come, sir, follow us. Exeunt.

Clow. Do not think, Madam, that i will forsake you. And so, sir, you that walk
in pewter vessayle, like one of the worthyes, will you be ruled by me?


Pem. Wherein?


Clow. To set a gyn for Woodcocks, and catch your self first. Exit.


Pem. Hence, beetle-head. And Pembrook, now bethink
How great a tide of miseries breaks in.
First, thou art taxed with the loss of him,
Whom equal with thy self thou hold dear:
Next, Bellamira is become a Leper,
Whose absence Philip carefully laments*
Then treacherous Burbon ioynes himself with France,
And both the Kings are angerly incenst:
But last, which is some comfort to the rest,
Disdaynfull Katharine wastes with fruitless love.
Would all so minded like mishap might prove.
But by this signal there are Knights at hand,
I must provide their valors to withstand.

Enter France, Burbon, Rodoricke, Peter de Lions, at one door: at the other,
Nauar, Flaunders, Dicke Bowyer, and Soldiers, Pembrooke between them. Pem.
Stay your intended march.

Lew. What Peer of France,
Or in the world so haughty resolute,
Dare breathe the word of stay to mighty France?

Na. Or what art thou presum'st to stay my course?

Pem. A Knight I am, and to adventures bound:
This monument erected for my friend,
By me is guarded: If you mean to pass,
You must do homage, or els^ ^^ght with me.

Lew. Homage of me! Know ^ am King of France,
And in subjection to no earthly power.

Nau. Thou know not what thou say, to challenge us,
Of any such inferior privilege.
What homage is it thou requir'st of us*

Pem. First, to acknowledge him lies buried here,
The faythfulst Lover, and most valyant Knight,
That in this time drew sword, or managed horse.

Bow. And what was he? Ascapart, or your Countreyman Gargantua, that stuffed
every button of his coat with a load of hay* 'Shart, we have met a fellow;
here is all mouth, he speaks nothing but Monarch. Do thou hear, King? give
me leave to encounter this puckfist: and if I do not make him cry Peccaui, say
Dicke Bowyer's a powdered Mackrell.


Pet. My blood begins to boil, I could be pleased,
To have this fellow by the ears, but that
There Is many of my betters here in place.

Fland. King of Navarre, let Flanders cope with him.

Burb. Imperial France, give Burbon leave to try
The hazard of a combat with this Boaster.

Pem. Dispatch, Navarre, one of you come forth,
To enterchange a warlike blow or two.

Lew. First let us know what penalty thou setst
Upon thy self, if thou be vanquished.

Pem. A recantation of my former words,
A servitude to him that conquers me:
But who so ever is by me subdued,
Must leave his Shield to beautify this shrine.

Bur. Let not Nauar, my Lord, rob us of honor:
Say, Burbon first shall break a Lance with him.

Rod. A scribe that privilege, my Lord, to me:
And Rodorick will have death, or victory.

Lew. No, noble Rodorick, Burbon shall begin,
And as he speedes, we will employ your power.

Pem. Provide thee, Burbon, I Will not favor thee.

Bur. Be sure I Will show thee like hostility.

Lew. Hold, the advantage is on thy side,
The Duke of Burbon shall hang up his shield.

Pem. I Would rather have his life, then al your shelds:
Who is next?

Bow. Zounds, I think he has a patten to take up all the Shields ith Country,
hang me if thou wantst work, heeres for Nauar, the earl of Pembrok and
Caualiero Bowier: Fight A thousand pound to a Tailors bodkin, this fellow has a
familiar: but howsoever, thou may thank my lame leg: there is my shield.


Lew. Now Rodorick, betake you to your task. Fight.

Rodor. My fortune's answerable to the rest.

Lew. Since all miscarrie, France will put his chance
Upon the hazard of the Dice for once.

Pem. You are an Honorable foe, my Lord: Fight.
By law of Arms, you must hang up your shield.

Lew. I yield to law and thy approved valor.
King of Nauar, will only you sit out?

Nau. No, king of France, my bloud's as hot as thine,
And this my weapon shall confirm my words. Fight.

Bow. Nauar down too! Shart, this fellow has the trick of it: If he be not a
witch or some Devil, let me be stickt into a Carbinado.


Nau. Thou son of Chivalry, let me now entreat,
To know his name, for whom thou reapst this honor:
Or what he was, whose body's here interde?

Pem. A valiant Knight, his name, young Ferdinand,
Slain by misfortune of a friendly hand.

Nau. Is it my son thou make thy valors prise,
And striu'st so to eternize with thy sword?
Let me embrace thee. Not alone my shield,
But I will leave my heart upon his shrine.
My dearest Ferdinand, I would my sighs,
Or sad lamenting tears might have the power,
Like Balm to quicken thy benumbed joints,
Then would I drown this marble e're I went,
And heat it hot with vapor of my breath.

Lew. Nauar, this now may testify thy wrong,
In false accusing me for his remove.

Na. Thou may be guilty still for ought I know:
For though I find him dead, I find not yet
The Tragic manner of his haples end.
Thou may as well have murdered Ferdinand,
As favor him has poysond Bellamira.

Lew. Injurious king, it was base Ferdinand,
On whom just heavens have shown just vengeance here,
Ravished my Katharine and conuayed her hence,
Where I shall never more behold her face.

Nau. It Is false, and we will mayntain it with our swords.

Lew. It Is true, and we will mayntain it with our swords.

Pem. By heaven, the tongue prophanes the sacred name of Ferdinand with any
villainy*
I Will cut it out, or stop his throat with blood,
And so dam in his blasphemous vpbraydes.

Nau. Content thee, knight, I Will ease thee of that labor.
To morrow is expired the time of truce.
France, on with thy Battalions to the plain
Thou wast prepared before to pitch upon,
I Will meet thee there.

Lew. And I will meet with thee.
Sound Drums and Trumpets: honored knight, farewell:
Who shall survive next morn, strange news shall tell. Exeu^t.

Pem. Thus heady rage, blind in her rash resolve
Drew Ferdinand and me into the field,
As now it does these hot incensed kings.
Were not my vows prohibit my desire,
To stay the inconvenience of this fight,
I would discover where their Daughters are,
To show the error they are shrouded in:
But Time has run a desperate course with me,
And desperate let them run to misery:
Here comes a Straggler of their Army. Stand.

Enter Philip. Phil. What voice is that presumes to bid me stand?

Pem. His that can force thee, if thou will not stand.

Phil. By this bright air reflecteth on my sword,
If the whole Army of Nauar had said
As much to Philip, yet he would not stand.
And thou but one, how dare thou profer it,
Knowing how sharp a Spur does prick me on,
The death of Burbon for my Bellamire?

Pem. Hang up thy shield, as other knights have done,
Upon the Hearse of noble Ferdinand,
And thou may freely pass without control.

Phil. The Hearse of Ferdinand! I honor him,
He was the brother of my dearest Love,
What Is this I see? my fathers batterd shield!
The shield of France! of Flaunders! Burbons too!
It can not then impeach or prejudice
The name of Philip, to consort with such,
Especially being done for Ferdinand.
There is my shield: and Knight, but for my haste,
I would expostulate of other things:
But after traytrous Burbon I have slain,
Knight, look for me, i will visit thee again.
Now Rodorick, keep thy word, and I am blessed:
But if thou fail, i will forward with the rest. Exit.

Pem. Succesfull action sit upon thy sword:
This net of sorrows, I perceive, intangles
Not only Pembrooke, but the Court of France.
Nauar and his associats are all touched.
Time look upon us, and at last determine,
This heart-disseuering tumults with a peace.

Enter Ferdinand. Ferd. Since* Ferdinand, by gracious providence,
Thou art recovered of thy mortal wounds;
With the new life thy body is reuiude,
Revive the ancient passions of thy mind,
Think on thy friend, on Pembrook take remorse,
Whose honored life, thy hasty hand cut off:
This is the place, as I remember me.
What Is here? a Tomb? who has prevented me
In my religious duty to my friend?
You, Knight, I doubt not, can resolve me.

Pem. What art thou? stand.

Ferd. A Knight, and feign would know,
What sacred monument and Tomb this is?

Pem. His, whilst he lived, that of the worlds increase,
Was the most loyal friend, and valiant Knight:
Which thou must likewise ratify with me,
And hang thy shield up to adorn his Hearse,
Or venture Combat for denying it.

Fer. His name, I pray thee.

Pem. Ferdinand.

Fer. What Is he acquainted with my name? belike some one
Loved Pembroke, and supposing (wrongfully)
Me slain by him, to satisfy for that,
Observes this honor in my memory:
Be not thou Ferdinand ungrateful then,
But stand for Pembroke, as this knight for thee.

Pem. What answer give thou? shall I homage have?

Fer. Not for his sake thou nam'st, not for Ferdinand:
There lived a knight excelled his petty fame,
As far as costly Pearl the coursest Pebble:
An English knight called Pembroke, were his bones
Interred here, I would confess of him
Much more then thou requir'st, and be content
To hang both shield and sword upon his Hearse.

Pem. How comes this stranger by my name? Belike
He was affected unto Ferdinand:
And for his sake (hearing he did me wrong)
Couets to make amends, or means to prove
If I embrace him with unfeigned love.
He shall not doubt of that, once more I say,
'Twas Ferdinand was the renowned Knight
Of all the world.

Fer. But I deny that saying,
Giving to Pembroke that preeminence.

Pem. For Ferdinand my valor will I try.

Fer. In Pembrooks valor I will fight and die.

Discover each other in fighting. Pem. Either I dream, or this is Ferdinand.

Fer. My sight deludes me, or stout Pembroke lives.

Pem. Thrice happy honored, I do embrace my friend.

Fer. Welcome, oh welcome Pembrok, to mine arms,
Whom I imagined, death had taken from me.

Pem. The like did I by Princely Ferdinand:
But that he lives, my soul confounds with joy.

Fer. Tell me, dear friend, since our unlucky fight,
Have you heard ought of my disdainful Love?

Pem. Of her and all the rest: Her father lives:
This is his shield, and this is great Nauars:
This Rodoricks, the Duke of Orleance,
And this malicious Burbons: all the which
I forced from them, to beautify thy shrine.
But it is of Katharine thou desir'st to hear:
She likewise has bin here; her flinty heart,
So much before inclind to cruelty,
Now waxes tender: she no sooner saw
Thy picture here; but by heavens providence,
Or how I know not, she so doats on it,
As I supposde she would a dyed for love.

Fer. Has then my shadow and supposed death
Brought that to pass my living substance could not?

Pem. It has, and never Lady more enamored,
Then now is Katharine of her Ferdinand.
I told her, and no more then truth I told,
A cunning Caruer had cut out thy shape
And whole proportion in white Alablaster,
Which I intended here should be set up.
She earnestly entreated she might have
A sight of it, and daily be permitted
To deck thy tomb and statue with sweet flowers.
She Is but even now departed to that end.
And will (I know) be quickly here again.
Now for assurance I dissemble not,
Instead of thy resemblance cut in stone,
Kneel here thy self, and hear her pitious moan.

Fer. Content, I hold your counsel for the best:
We Will once conclude our sorrows with a jest.

Pem. Soft, there is a cushe^: nay, you must be bare,
And hold your hands up, as the manner is.

Fer. What if I held a book, as if I prayed?

Pem. 'Twere best of all; and now I think upon it,
Here is a book: so, keep your countenance,
You must imagine now you are transformed.
Yonder she comes, in any case stir not.

Enter Katharine. Kath. I fear I have detracted time too long.
In my determinde service to my Love:
But I Will redeem my fault with double care.
See where his statue is set up: kind Knight,
For ever Katharine will record thy truth.

Pem. How say you, Madam, 1st not very like him?

Kath. As like, as if it were himself indeed.
And would to God my prayers might be heard,
That as the Image of Pigmalion once,
Life might descend into this senseless stone:
But that was faynd, as my desire is fond,
Relentlesse death withholds my Ferdinand;
And no entreaty may recover him.
In token then I do repent my scorn,
That I was cruel to so kind a friend,
Thou the presenter of his absent person,
Receive these sweets, thy temples be adornd
With this fresh garland; thy white Iuory hand
Boast of this Ring, which if thou were alive,
Should bind our faythes up in a nuptial knot:
But for thou can not be revived again,
I Will dwell with thee in death: and as my spirit
Mounts to the happy mansion of thy spirit:
So to accompany thy shadow here,
I Will turn my body to a shadow too;
And kneeling thus, confront thy silent looks,
With my sad looks: this is the Instrument,
Now Ferdinand, behold thy Katharine comes.

Fer. And she is welcome unto Ferdinand.

Pem. I Will play the clark for both, and say Amen.
Nay, muse not, Madam, it is no senseless Image,
But the true essence of your wished Love.

Kath. I am ashamed to look him in the face.

Fer. Hide not those splenda^t lights, hereafter be
A constant wife, it shall suffice for me.

Kat. Heaven cast her off, if Katharine prove not so.

Pem. Of that no more: now let us haste from hence,
To quiet the dissension lately sprung
Between your parents, Philip likewise gone,
To be revenged on Burbons treachery,
Perhaps may stand in need of friendly aid:
To him and them our vows must next be paid,

Fer. What Pembrook counsels, we consent unto. Exeunt.

Enter Rodericke and Philip. Rod. Now whilst our Armies wearied with the heat
That the bright sun casts from his midday throne,
Abstain from bloody intercourse of war,
I Will lead thee Philip unto Burbons Tent.

Phil. Rodoricke, thou highly fauourest me in this,
And doubt not, if my complot take effect,
I Will make thee Duke of Burbon.

Enter Jews, Flaunders, and Burbon. Rod. Stay your speech, here comes king
Lewis.

Phil. They can not know me, I am so disguisde.

Burb. Follow my counsel, and immediately begin the Battle.

Lew. Why, the heat's great,
It burns in our Armor as we march.

Flan. It burns the enemy as well as we.

Bur. It warmes our Soldiers spirits and makes them fire:
I had rather dye, then when my blood is hot,
Be awde by counsel, till it freeze like Ice:
He is no Soldier, that for fear of heat,
Will suffer victory to fly the field.

Rod. My Lord of Burbon, ye are more hot then wise.

Bur. Rodorick, me thinks you are very peremptory.

Rod. It is in zeal of the general good:
Go to your Tent, refresh your vnscorcht lymmes:
There draw your battles model: and as soon
As the cool winds have fand the burning Sun,
And made it tractable for trauaylers:
Arm you, and mount upon your barbed Steed,
Lead forth your Soldiers, and in good array,
Charge bravely on the Army of our foe.

Lew. The Duke of Orleance has counseld well,
I Will in and recreate me in my Tent.
Farewell, my Lord, when you resolve to fight,
Proclayme your meaning by a Canons mouth,
And with a volley I will answer you. Exit Jews.

Bur. If you will needs retire, farewell my Lord.
Ha Rodoricke, are not we fine Polyticians,
That have so quaintly wrought the King of France
Unto our faction, that he threatens war,
Against the almost reconcilde Nauar?

Rod. But this is nothing to the acts we will do:
Come, come, my Lord, you trifle time with words:
Sit down, sit down, and make your warlike plot:
But wherefore stand these murdrous Glaues so nigh?

Phil. Touch them not, Rodorick, prithee let them stand.

Bur. Some paper, pen, and incke. Enter Peter.

Peter. My Lord.

Bur. Post to the Master Gunner,
And bid him plant his demi culuerings
Against the kings pauilion.

Peter. Presently.

Bur. But first, bring pen and incke and paper straight.
Rodoricke, thou shall assist me in this plot.

Rod. Do it your self, my Lord, I have a charge
Of Soldiers, that are very mutinous,
And long I dare not stay, for fear my absence
Be cause of their revolt unto Nauar.

Bur. Then to your Soldiers: I will to my plot.

Phil. Away my Lord, leave me unto the Duke.

Rod. Kill you the Duke, and after I Will kill thee.

Bur. This pen is stabbed, and it will not write,
The Incke that is in the Standage does look black,
This in my pen is turned as red as blood.

Phil. The reason that the platform you would make,
Must by this hand be written with thy blood.

Bur. Zounds, what art thou that threatens Burbon so?

Phil. One that is as desperat-carelesse of his life,
As thou art timorous, and fearst to dye.

Bur. Come thou to kill me?

Phil. If I should say no,
This weapon would condemn me, which I seyz'd
Of purpose, Burbon, to bereave thy life.

Bur. Why, fond man, mad man, know thou what thou do?

Phil. I know it, Burbon, and I know besides,
What thou would say, to daunt my resolution.

Burb. What would I say?

Phil. Why, that this place is death,
As being thy ^ent, enuiron'd with thy slaves;
Where if I kill thee, it is impossible.
To escape with life: this Burbon, thou would say:
But Philip is not to be moved with words.

Burb. Philip!

Phil. I Philip, Bellamiraes Love,
Whose beauty, villayne, thou have poisoned:
For which I have vowed thy death, and thou shall dye.
Therefore betake you to what fence you will,
Amongst this bundle choose one weapon forth,
And like a worthy Duke prepare thy self,
In knightly manner to defend thy life:
For I will fight with thee, and kill thee too,
Or thou shall give an end unto my life.
But if thou call unto thy slaves for help,
Burbon, my sword shall nail thee to the wall:
And think Prince Philip is a Prince indeed,
To give thee this advantage for thy life.

Bur. Boy, I will scourge your insolence with death.

Phil. Come on.

Fight, and kill Burbon. Bur. Oh, I am slain.

Rod. Murder, murder, Burbon the Duke is slain.

Phil. Peace, Rodorick, I am Philip thy dear friend.

Rod. Thou art a counterfeit, I know thee not.

Phil. Did not thou guide me unto Burbons Tent?

Rod. I guide thee to the Tent? I know thee not.
What, murder, ho: will no man hear my voice?

Enter Peter, and 2. or 3. soldiers. Pet. Yes, here are those can hear well
enough.
Where is the murdered, and the murderer?

Rod. Peter, behold thy masters breathless truncke,
And there is Prince Philip that has murdered him.

Pet. To avoid prolixity, I Will kill him:
Yet first give me leave to weep for my master.

Rod. First, seyze the murderer, and after weep.

Phil. He that first ventures to attach my life,
Let him be sure he has a life to spare:
For I will send one breathless to the grave.

Pet. You that have nine lives, assault the gentleman.

Rod. What peasants, dare you not attach the slave?
I Will raise the whole Camp, but i will apprehend him.
Alarm drums: Soldiers, incircle him,
And either apprehend or slay the wretch.

Enter Pembrooke, and Ferdinand. Pem. It Is princely Philip, help to rescue him.

Rod. What slaves are these that dare oppose themselves,
In rescue of a murderer against an Host?

Fer. Such as will make thee, Rodorick, fly for life.

Pet. Zounds, men are mortal; to avoid prolixity, my Lord of Orleance, your
best course is flying, and therein I will be your follower.


Rod. Fly before three, and be thus strong?
'Twere madness.

Pem. We trifle time, let us drive them from the Tent.

Alarm, and drive away Peter and Rodoricke. Pem. Live, worthy Philip,
Pembrooke bids thee live,
That did suspect this complot at the tomb,
When in the honor of Prince Ferdinand,
You did resign your shield.

Phil. The Earl of Pembrooke!

Fer. And Ferdinand that loves thee as his soul.

Phil. Two lives I owe my stars, beside mine own,
In sending me two friends of such import.
Durst you adventure through the enemies Camp,
And put your lives in danger to save mine?

Pem. The rumor of the Duke of Burbons death,
Has so possessed the Camp with admiration,
That they regardlesse suffer all to pass:
Only this, Rodorick wakens them a little;
But cannot weane them from their wondering minds.

Phil. That Rodorick is a perfect villayne turned:
For though he guided me unto his Tent,
And gave his liking that the Duke should dye;
Yet how the villayne cried to murder me.
But come, in this confusion let us be gone,
It Is dangerous to abide in Burbons Tent.
Rodoricke, thou art the next must taste of death:
That task once done, we shall with little pain,
Our angry fathers reconcile again.

Alarm, Enter Nauar, Bowyer, Nod, Core, Soldiers, drum and colors. Nau. The
Alarm sounded in the enemies Camp.
Now for Nauar and Fame, stand to it, sirs.

Bow. Heart, stand to it? here is some of us knows how to run away, and they
be put to it: Though we have lost our brave General, the Earl of Pembrooke,
yet here is Caualiero Bowyer, Core and Nod, by Jesus, sound Cards; and Mahound
and Termagant come against us, we will fight with them. Couragio, my hearts, S.
George for the honor of England.


Nau. The adverse part comes on, fight gallantly.

Enter France, Flaunders, and Soldiers, with Drum and Colors. Lew. Is false
Nauar so thirsty to drink blood,
That he must join the Squadron of his troops,
Before the signal of the battel's given.
Belike you thought to take us vnpreparde.
No, king, our wrong hangs like a watch before us,
And makes us number every short-lynd minute,
Till your lives answer for our Daughters death;
Charge, brave spirits: Saint Denis now for France.

Nau. Saint Denis for Nauar: Alarm Drums.

Alarm, they fight, France put to the worst, enters Rodorike and Peter, the
fight continued, and Nauar driven in. Lew. Nauar and his weak forces make
retire:
Pursue them, Sirs, the victory is ours.

Rod. Be like starved Lions amongst a heard of Beasts,
Ruthelesse and bloody slaughters all you meet,
Till proud Nauar be slain, or kiss your feet:
Saint Denis, and cry murder through the host.

Alarm, enter Pembrooke, Ferdinand and Philip. Pem He that steps forward with
a murdring thought,
Marries him self to death. France, cease the fight:
They are Frenchmen you pursue, French men you should save.
Dig not for Traitors love your subjects grave.

Lew. What frantic knights are those that dare oppose
Their single force against our multitudes?

Phil. Those that wish you and France bright fames increase.
So you would chase hence war, and welcome peace.

Rod. That was the Traitor, that slew royal Burbon.

Pet. Down with the villaynes.

Rod. Soldiers, seyze on him,
And then pursue Nauar with sudden death.

Fer. E're the least hair fall from his kingly head,
Rodorick, thy base trunck shall be butchered.

Pem. Will you accept of peace?

Lew. Follow Nauar.

Pet. Down with that murderer.

Fer. Zounds, then inspight,
We Will save Nauar, and chase you hence in fight.

All. Ha, ha.

Pem. Nay, smile not, though our number's few,
Our great hearts tell us, we shall conquer you.
Alarm, and S. George.

Alarm, they fight. Enter Nauar and his forces: France chaste away. Nau.
France and his daunted forces gives us ground:
Charge, charge again, and we are Conquerours.

Phil. Stand, or never stir again.

Nau. What mean these Knights?

Pem. To stop your passage this way, great Nauar*
I charge thee, by the duty of a King,
Thy love to Justice, and thy subjects lives,
You sound retreat, and make a peace with France.

Nau. A peace, and have the vantage of the day?

Bow. That Is a trick, by Jesus, to mock an Ape: we will none of that.


Nau. We Will have no peace, but what our swords can make.
Follow the chase.

Phil. Are you grown insolent?
For one light puff of fortune proves it so*
Nay, then our swords turn to your overthrow.

Alarm, they fight, and drive in Nauar. Fer. That was my father that you
fought against.

Phil. You did as much to mine.

Pem. Princes, agree: force cannot end this war, but policy.
Therefore dispearse your selves, and let our Squires,
With Trumpets in their mouths sound loud retreat,
Where you perceive the fight most violent.
The strangeness of which act will straight amaze,
When they shall hear both peace and war denounced,
And one self instant, they will soon retire.
To know the issue, Princes, fall to work:
It Is work of charity, 'twould do me good,
If we could end this battle without blood.

Fer. I hope we shall: farewell, i will to my charge.

Pem. The like will Pembrooke.

Phil* Philip is not last.
Yet though I seek the safety of my friends,
Rodorick shall lose his blood, e're this fight ends.

Alarm, excursions. Enter Peter leading Thomasin. Pet. Struggle not, strive
not, your sweet heart Bowyer cannot save you. Without prolixity, you must go
with me.


Tho. Help, help.


Pet. And the God of war come in thy defense, my humor is to kill him. Come
away.


Enter Bowyer. Bow. By Jesus, and you go this way, you must pay custom. Zounds,
you pickt-hatch Caualiero petticote-monger, can you find time now to be
catching Thomasin? come, deliver, or by Zenacrib, and the life of king
Charlemayne, i will thrash your coxcombe, as they do hens at Shrouetyde: no,
will you not do, you Tan-fat? zounds, then have at you.


They fight, Bowyer has the wench, rescued by France, recovered by Nauar:
Philip meets Rodorick, rescued by Peter: retreat is sounded, the enemies begin
to retire, Rodorick chased by Philip: Enter at several doors, after retreat
sounded, Pembrooke and Ferdinand. Fer. Are the Kings seuerd? will they bow to
peace?

Pem. Peace is a welcome ghest unto their hearts:
But Rodoricke, like a greedy envious churl,
Fearing to spend his wealth, still keeps them back,
It Is he exasperates the Princes hate:
And when our Trumpets call them to retire,
He with wars clang or sets them on again.
Unless he be remoou'd, our labor's lost.

Fer. It shall not; for i will seek him through the Host,
And with this sword pare off the Traitors head.

Pem. Do, and i will scowre these ranks: if Pembroks eye
Encounters his, he meets his Tragedy.

Alarm, Enter Philip, pursuing Rodoricke. Phil. Stay, warlike friends, and aid
me in revenge.

Fer. That is Rodoricke.

Pem. Here Is the Traitor, strike him down.

Phil. Who lifts his arm at him, strikes at my breast.

Rod. Why have you thus ring'd me about with swords?

Phil. To show thee thou must dye.

Rod. What have I done,
That thus you labor my destruction?

Pem. Thou were a party in all Burbons wrongs.

Fer. Falsely termed Ferdinand a Rauisher.

Pem. Set discord 'twixt these Kings.

Phil. Practiced my death.

Pem. Villayne, for this, our swords shall stop thy breath.

Fer. Stand not to argue, let us all run at him.

Phil. Now as you love my love, or prize mine honor,
Touch not the Traitor, he is Philips foe;
And none but I must work his overthrow.
Thrice in the battle he was rescued from me:
But now he is fallen into the Lions paw,
From whence the whole world cannot ransom him.
Preseruers of my life, heroic friends,
Be you my safety, keep the Souldyers off,
Whilst in the midst by fair and equal fight,
I send this Traitor to eternal night.

Ferd. By heaven agreed.

Pem. Here Pembrooke takes his stand:
Come France and all the world, I will not start,
Til Philips knightly sword pearce Rodoricks heart.

Rod. Accursed, I am betrayed, incompast round:
Now life and hope and state must kiss the ground.

Phil. Rodorick, thou see, all ways are stopped to fly,
Be desperate then, fight bravely, and so die.

Alarm* they fight: enter to Pembrooke Nauar, Bowyer, and Soldiers: to
Ferdinand, France, Flaunders and Soldiers: they fight and keep them back:
Rodoricke would escape, still kept in the midst, and killed by Philip. Phil. Now
are his trecheries repaid with death:
Philip and Pembrooke, sound your retreat^
With better hope; in him all hatred ends:
The kings will now love peace, and soon be friends*

Exeunt. Enter Peter wounded, Bowier following. Bow. Zounds, never run for
the matter, a scratcht face can not serve your turn, we must have bloody
noses: stand on yout guard: and I do not make haggasse puddings of your guts,
I Will never dominier in the long Alleyes again.


Peter. Cymnell, I Will crack you for this, I Will teach you to deal with Peter de
Lions, and that without prolixitie.


Bow. Do: have at you in earnest: S. George, you rogue.


Alarm, fight: Bowyer kills him. Bow. So, there is for your prolixities:
there is for Thomasin: the Thornbackly slave, and he were made of any thing but
gristles, I am a pumpian: 'Shart, he had no mettle in him: yet how the villayne
crak't and dominierd when he was living: ah, sir, never gryn for the matter,
it is Captain Bowyer that speaks it. When thou meetst the great Devil, commend
me to him, and say, I sent him thee for a new years gift: and there is one
Sarlaboys to, as arrant a bloud-sucker, and as notable a coward, as ever drew
weapon in a bawdy house: he carries my mark about him: if Dicke Bowyer be not
writ a bountiful benefactor in hell for my good deeds, in sending thither such
Canibals, I am a Rabbit-sucker: yet I scorn to vaunt of my deeds too. They
sound a retreat: farewell, Peter, and learn hereafter what it is to be rival
to an English gentleman, Caualiero Bowyer, one of the nine worthyes.


Exit. A retreyt. Enter at one door, France, Flaunders, and Soldiers: at the
other door Nauar, Bowyer, and Soldiers. Lew. Nauar, why have you sounded a
retreyt?
Will your proud heart decline and call us Lord?

Nau. We thought by the faint language of your drums,
France would have known his error, and begged peace.

Lew. France beg a peace!

Nau. Nauar call you his Lord!

Flan. Why did you cease the fight, and sound retreat?

Bow. Not we, by this beard: not we, by the life of Pharo.

Nau. Your Trumpets guided by your faynting breath,
Dehorted us from war, and sounded peace.

Lew. Nauar derides us.

Nau. France, it is you that do it.

Lew. Sound war, and bravely let us once more to it.

Enter in the midst, Pembrooke, Ferdinand, and Philip. Pem. Kings of Nauar
and France, why do you thus
With civil butchery wound this blessed land,
Which like a mother, from her melting eyes,
Sheds crymson tears, to see you enemies?
Jews of France, wherein has great Nauar
Dangerd your state, that you should prosecute
War with her largest ruin? how has France
Sowed such inueterate hate within your breast,
That to confound him, you will undergo
The orphants curse, the widows tears and cries,
Whose husbands in these wars have lost their lives?
E're you contend, discourse your grieuances.

Lew. False Ferdinand his son, ravished our child.

Fer. Now by my Knighthood, honor, and this gage,
France, ^le approve you wrong that Ferdinand.

Phil. Who can accuse him?

Lew. That did Rodorick.

Pem. That Traitor, for a deed so false, so foul,
Has answered it by this, even with his soul.

Nau. Our son, and valors bloome, The English Pembrooke,
By Jews treachery were butchered.

Phil. Were the whole world joined in so false a thing,
Alone I Would combat all, and clear the King.

Pem. France never had dessigne in their two deaths.

Nau. He leagued with Burbon, that destroyed my child.

Lew. He poisoned her deservedly.

Phil. That deed of shame
Cut off his life, and rac'd out Burbons name.

Lew. His death shall be thy death; for thy hand slew him.

Nau. This other in the battle twice to day,
Made us retire, France, shall we join in league,
Till we have veng'd our malice on these knights?

Lew. Nauar, agreed. Soldiers, this kyld your Lords.

Nau. And this our fame: let us mangle them with swords.

Pem. Take truce a while with rage: hear what we will vrges
This knight flew Burbon, this inforst you fly;
Therefore you hate them, and for hate they die.
Since then true virtue is disfigured,
Desert trod down, and their heroic worth,
In justice doomd on Traitors merits, Death:
Behold these two, which thousands could not daunt,
But your ingratitude, on bended knee,
Yield up their swoords to bide your tyranny.
'Twas he killed Burbon: if you love him dead,
Show it by paring off this valiant head:
Do you the like: to this revenge apace.
They fear not threats, and scorn to beg for grace.

Lew. And they shall find none.

Nau. Knights, triumph in death,
We are your headsmen, Kings shall stop your breath.

They take off their Helmets. Lew. Philip, my son!

Nau. Young Ferdinand my joy!

Pem. Call them not sons, whom you would feign destroy.

Nau. Hold not our age too long in deep suspect.
Art thou Ferdinand?

Lew. And thou Philip?

Fer. We are the friendly sons of adverse parents,
Your long lost children, though supposed slain,
We live, and come to joy your age again.

Nau. Welcome all earthly bliss.

Lew. Welcome, dear child,
Thy presence half our sorrow has exiled.

Pem. How soon this Scene is cha^g'd! those that eue^ now
Were sworn wars servants, now to peace do bow:
Then Pembrooke, strive to make their joys more full.
See, kingly father, to that princely son.
Pembrooke, the hated murderer of his friend:
Pembroke, that did divide thee from his sight,
And cut so many passages of death,
In his indeared bosom, humbly thus
Forgets his honor, and from your hye hand,
Inuokes revenge for wounding Ferdinand.

Fer. Still he surmounts me in an honored love.
Rise, friend; or if thou striu'st to have the world,
In me, as in a glass, see a false friend.
Behold, I kneel, and here proclayme to all,
My friendship's broke, but thine substantial.

Na. Model of virtue, honored Pembroks Earl,
Rise in as dear regard as Ferdinand.
Oh, had I Bellamira once in hold,
Age would turn youth, and I should never be old.

Lew. Had I my Katharina once again,
Our joy were then stretched to the highest strain:
But she was ravished, and then murdered*

Phil. Bear not that hard opinion: Rodoricks tongue
Slaundred that Prince, and did his virtue wrong.

Pem. Lewis of France, hear what an English Earl
Speaks in the front and view of all thy Host:
If ever Ferdinand staynd Katharines honor,
I was a party: yet in all your Camp,
Who dares step forth and call me rauisher?
No, France, know Pembroke is an Englishman,
Highly derived, yet higher in my thoughts;
And for to register mine acts in brass,
Which all-deuouring time shall never race out,
Have I through all the Courts of Christendom,
In knightly trial proved my virtue sound,
Raisd Englands fame aloft; and shall I now,
In her next continent, her neighbor Realm.
France, on whose bosom I may stand and see
That blessed soil, that bred and fostred me,
Soil all my late got honor, to consent
Unto a royal Princes rauishment?
I Would sooner from a mountain cast my self,
Or from a hungry Lion tear his pray,
Then dare to act a deed so infamous: Enter Katharina.
But words are air: Lewis, behold this face;
This proves our honor clear from all disgrace.

Lew. My Katharine!

Phil. My dear sister!

Fer. My fair Love!

Pem. See, Princes, loves effect: she flies your hand,
To live embraced with her dear Ferdinand.

Lew. And heaven forbid that we should sunder them.
Nauar, reach me thy hand: grym war is fled,
And peace shall end the same in a nuptial bed.
Son Philip, ratify your sisters choice.

Phil. Even with my soul: for ever live you blessed.
Oh Bellamira, had not cursed Burbon,
For beauty robbed thy cheeks with Leprosy:
Had thou but stayed with me, as is their state,
So had bin mine, happy and fortunate.

Enter Clown attyred like a Gentleman, Bellamira following with a Scarf on
her face. Clow. By your leave, sweet bloods: may a Gentleman or so, deceive two
or three ounces of words in this assembly?


Lew. You may.


Clow. Is there not a young Kings son amongst you, who treading the steps of
his father, is called Philip?


Phil. I am the man thou seekst.


Clow. Then the old saying is verified, He that seeks, shall find. Here is a
poor kinswoman of mine would desire some private conference with you, or so.


Phil. With me? whom see I? Bellamira!

Nau. Daughter!

Phil. Do not deride my woes, speak, speak, I pray.

Pem. Look not so strange, it is thy lovely Love,
Thus managed, to approve thy constancy.
Embrace her then: and now Nauar and France,
Here end your strife, and let all hatred fall,
And turn this war to Hymen's festival.

Nau. This Pembrooks counsel we subscribe unto.

Lew. The like does France: Lovers embrace your Loves;
And Captains, join your Bands, mix power with power,
And let those swords, which late were drawn for death,
Sleep in their sheathes. You, worthy Pembrooke,
And all your followers, shall receive our favors,
In plenteous largess: so, set on to Court;
Sound Drums and Trumpets, deaf the air with cries,
And fill each subjects heart with joys increase,
T'applaud our childrens love, and this days peace.

FINIS.

