THE CHRISTIANS Two Chief LESSONS, Viz. Self-denial, And Selfe-Tryall.

AS ALSO THE PRIVILEGE OF ADOPTION And TRIAL(...) ^n three TREATISES (...)EXTS
following: Viz. MATT. 16.24. 2 COR. 13.5. JOHN 1.12, 13.


By T. H.

LONDON, P(...) ^y T. B. for P. Stephens and C. Merc^ at the ^olden Lion in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

To The HONORABLE and truly Religious LADY, the Lady ANNE WAKE, Grace and
Peace through Jesus Christ be multiplied.
Most honored Madam,
HAving had some years experience of Your zeal for God, love to the Truth,
and members of Christ, continual exercising your self in religious duties,
and careful endeavor so to adorn your profession in foreign parts, that the
name of God and his doctrine might not be profaned by any of your family
among such as are strangers to it, and having observed how your spirit has
been stirred, when you have seen the superstitious and idolatrous practices of
other nations; and ^et with much affability, and sweetness of carriage, applying
your self to those people by all offices of courtesy and charity, seeking to
gain their affections, and credit to the Gospel; having also had special
helps and encouragements of your Ladyships example and counsel to further my
self in the ways of Christ: I have emboldned my self to take this occasion to
testify to the world, that I have great cause to bless God, that ever I had
the happiness to live under your roof. And well knowing how welcome Books of
piety and devotion are to you, as a small acknowledgement of my dutiful
respect, and thankfulness for many favors; I here dedicate unto your
Ladyship these ensuing Treatises of a grave and godly Author.

If the Copy had been sent to the Press immediately from the Author, it
would have come forth more exact and perfect; but sure I am, if I or some
other, had not taken some pains in the perusal and transcribing thereof,
after it came into the Printers hands, it would have passed the Press more
imperfectly then now it does.

The Printer, tendering the Authors reputation, and the Readers benefit, has
been a some cost to have it reviewed, and corrected; and one that was inwardly
acquainted with the Author has labored with me in this task; yet we durst
not make so bold, as to alter his phrase, or add any thing ^f our own; only
we amended such errors as would have been imputed to the Author through the
oversight of the Scribe*

The matter handled therein, is of such importance, that I doubt not but the
publishing thereof will be very acceptable and useful to such as desire to be
more thoroughly instructed in the way of the Lord, and in matters of their own
salvation.

The two great and difficult lessons of Christianity concerning Self-denial
and Selfe-tryall, are here largly discoursed of, and such as would not
willingly through Self-love, and Selfe-deceit, hazard the irrepairable loss
of their immortal souls, may learn in the first Tract, upon Mat. 16.24. how
to make their calling and ellection sure, upon what terms they may have
interest in Christ, and benefit by him; what it will cost a man ^o be a
Christian, and what he must resolve and lot upon to do, to suffer, what good
to forgo, and what e^^lls to undergo, if he will be Christ's Disciple.

In the second, on 2 Cor. 13.5. The duty of Selfe-examination, sundry
selfe-deceits, rules of discovery, and helps to discern betwixt true and
counterfeit grace are laid open.

And in the third on John 1.12.13. The privilege of Adoption, and trial
thereof by Regeneration, is briefly and pithily discussed.

Though I may perhaps be blamed by some for meddling in another man's labors,
yet if any poor soul shall reap benefit hereby (as J doubt not, but through
Gods blessing many will) J shall more comfortably undergo the censure of such
as mistake my aim herein. Such as cannot keep pace with the reapers in the
Lords harvest, may yet do some good in the field by gleaning what others
scatterd; and they that are not able to adorn the Spouse of Christ with
curious needle-works of their own making, or present her with rich robes, in
bracelets upon their own cost, may yet be someway serviceable to her, in
helping to dress her, and pin on those ornaments, that others have been at
the pains and cost to provide for her. In the building of Solomon's Temple,
there was room and use for porters to carry burdens, as well as for curious
Artificers, and Master builders.

Thus hoping, your Ladyship will pardon my boldness, in publishing this Book
under your protection, and countenance it with your gracious acceptance, I
humbly commend it to your Patronage and perusal; and your Ladyship to the
gracious protection of Almighty God.

Your Ladyships humbly devoted in all Christian service. Z. S.

A Table of the Contents, of the Treatise of Self-denial. On MATTHEW. 16.24.
Doctrine 1.
THe best of Gods servants need spiritual Counsel. page 3
Reason.
In regard of their weakness in four respects. 4
Uses.
1. Reproof to carnal men that reject counsel as needless. Ibid. Their
cavils against it answered. 5 2. Exhort. To seek counsel, and willingly
submit to it. Ibid.
Doctrine 2.
Then spiritual counsel is most seasonable, when carnal counsel is
suggested by others. 7
Doctrine 3.
There must be sound resolution to follow Christ before it can be soundly
practiced. Ibid. The nature of this resolution opened. 9
Reason.
Because Resolution is the root and poize of all a man's actions. 11
Use.
1. To inform us why men fall off, and follow not a Christian course stoutly,
viz. want of sound resolution. 12 2. Exhort to labor for it, if we would
follow Christ. 13
Means to get it.
1. Judge according to the word, not according to the world; nor present view;
but look to the end. 15 2. Labor to discover to thy heart a greater worth in
spiritual, then in temporal things. 16
Doctrine 4.
The Lord Jesus is the Captain of his Church. p. 17.
Reason.
1. He has most right to it. 18 2. He is most fit for it. 18
Use.
1. Look to Christ for guidance and direction. Ibid. 2. Terror to such as
oppose Christ, or his followers. 19 3. Comfort to weak Christians, 1. Against
opposition of enemies. 21 2. In temporal afflictions. 3. In spiritual
temptations. 22

Doctrine 5.
Faithful service and Obedience is a following or coming after Christ. 23 Jn
what manner we must follow Christ. 24 How we should follow Christ, 1.
Universally. 2. Sincerely. 3. Constantly. 26
Reason.
1. Because Christians have the same spirit, that Christ has. Ibid. 2. They
have the same law and rule to guide them. 27
Use.
1. To instruct us how to carry our selves, viz. look to our Leader, and do
as he does. Ibid. 2. To examine whether we be Christians; by following in the
steps of Christ. 28 Three sorts excluded.
1. Open opposers against Christ. 29 2. Apostates. 30 3. Secret Conspiratours
(i.) cunning hypocrites. 31
3. To show us, that Christian profession must be accompanied with pain and
labor. 32 4. Exhort. to follow Christ.
Motives.
1. Its Honorable. 32 2. Pleasant and comfortable. 3. Profitable. 33
Means.
1. Deny-Selfe. 35 2. Take up Cross. 35
Deny-Selfe.
What self is. A fourfold self. 1. Natural. 2. Corru^t. Ibid. 3. Civil.
4. Gracious. 36
What it is to Deny-Selfe. 37
Doctrine 6.
A man's self naturally is a God to his soul. 38
Reasons.
1. Every natural man seeks in and from himself help in what ever he does.
39 2. He aims at himself, and does all for himself. 40 3. Man naturally
being blind conceives his own credit and excellency to be the chiefest good.
41
Use.
1. Instruction. Why wicked men's hearts are so opposite to Gods word, and so
troubled at it, viz. because it seeks to pluck away their Gods from them. 42
2. It teaches Selfe-seekers what to expect from the Lord, viz. the fierceness
of his wrath, because he is a God jealous of his honor. 43
Doctrine 7.
Selfe-denyall is a special means to make us Christ's Disciples. 44
Selfe-cenyall is to be expressed in three particulars. 1. In renouncing the
authority of self, laying down all at Christ's feet. 45 2. In not expecting
sufficiency in any thing, but Christ. 46 3. In not suffering our affections to
hanker after them. 47

Reasons.
1. Because Christ and selfs service cannot stand together. Ibid. 2. Because
we owe Christ chiefest service. 48
Use.
1. Instruction. Its not an easy thing to be a Disciple of Christ. 49 2. It
shows the reason why many deny Christ in times of trial, viz. want of
Selfe-denyall. Ibid. Quest. How far self is in the children of God. 51
Quest. Who they be that deny self. 4. Trials of it. 53 3. Exhort. Begin with
Selfe-denyall, if you will persevere in following Christ. 57 Means to attain
it three. 58 1. Consider the baseness of selfe-seeking. 1. In the nature of
it. Its base slavery to, 1. Sin. 2. Satan. 3. A corrupt mind.
59 2. The evil that comes by it in 3. things. 60 2. Consider the good that
comes by Self-denial in 2. things 61 1. Selfe-denyall is the only way to
preserve all. Ibid. 2. If we deny our selves, God will not deny us. 62 3.
Maintain in thy soul the authority of the Word. 63
Take up his Cross.
The words explained. 64
Doctrine 8.
Every follower of Christ has affliction allotted to him as a child's part. 65
Use.
1. Instruct. Afflictions are no arguments, Of Gods displeasure. Of a man's bad
condition.
Ibid. 2. Terror to the wicked. Their Portion will be destruction. 66
Doctrine 9.
The followers of Christ must cheerfully undergo what ever afflictions are
allotted unto them. 68 This duty consists in three things. 70
Reasons
1. Because of Gods wisdom, and fatherly love, who sends them. 71 2. Because
of the benefit of them. 72 3. Because we have deserved them. Ibid. Quest When
is a man called to suffer. Answ. 1. When God stops all means of avoiding it.
73 2. When by withdrawing we should dishonor the Truth, omit duty, or hurt
other. 74
Uses.
First, It reproves 1. such as would be Christians, but would have no crosses.
75 2. Such as stoop, and lift as the Cross, but will not bear if heavy. 76
All grounds of soundness referred to two heads. 1. Hatred to sin. 78 2. Love
of Christ. 78
Secondly, Comfort to such as cheerfully undergo the Cross. It is a note of
the sincerity and truth of grace in them. Ibid. Three Rules to discover an
hypocrite from a Saint in suffering. 79 Thirdly, Exhort. Take up your Cross
cheerfully if you will be Christ's followers. 80 Means to fit a man to take up
his Cross, 5. 81 1. When we enter upon a Christian course, look for crosses.
2. Conclude, what ever cross betide us, will be 1. Small in respect of time
and substance. 82 2. The issue of it will be good. 83 3. Every day cross thy
corruptions. 4. Look to Christ, when thou see the Cross coming. Ibid.
Looking to Christ affords succor under crosses 3. ways. 84 Fourthly,
Instruct. If they be Christ's servants that bear the Cross, they are Satan's
slaves who make it. 85
Doctrine 10.
Self-denial is a special means to fit the soul for suffering. 86
Reasons.
1. It takes away the sharpness of the Cross, and keeps it from pinching,
and that 3. ways. 87 2. It takes away the weakness that is in us to bear the
Cross, and that 2. ways. 90
Uses.
1. Instruct. It lets us see the reason, why men fly off from Christ in times
of trouble: viz. Selfe-fulnesse. Ibid. 2. Examine. How fitted to stand for
Christ if suffering times should come, by our skill in this Lesson of
Self-denial. 91 3. Direct. How to prepare our selves for the fiery trial.
viz. Learn this Lesson of Self-denial. 92
Doctrine 11.
Afflictions should not, nay cannot hinder the obedience of the faithful. 93
An objections against it, answered. 94
Reasons
1. Because God allows not of starting at any time. 96 2. The more opposed,
the more ^^solute and constant ^ Christian should be: the more love is opposed,
the more violent and resolute it is. 97 3. Afflictions (through Christ's power
over-powering them) do further obedience, and that 2. ways. 1. Weaning the
soul from love of the world, and scowring off corruption. Ibid. 2. Stirring
up, and setting an edge on Grace. 98

Use.
Instruct No affliction can ^cuse us for not following Christ. 99
The Contents of the Treatise of Selfe-triall. On 2 CORINTHIANS. 13.5.
Doctrine 1.
COnversion of souls is a sure testimony of the truth and lawfulness of that
ministry by which they are converted. 203
Reason.
Because there is no promise of the Spirits assistance to accompany any
Teachers, but such as God sends. 204
Use.
To confute sectaries, who reject the ministry of the Church of England.
Ibid.
Doctrine 2.
It is possible for a man to know, whether he be in the state of Grace, or no.
204
Use.
1. To confute that tenet, that no man can be assured of his salvation. 205 2.
Exhort. To use all means to get assurance of our being in the state of Grace.
Ibid.
Doctrine 3.
Men are naturally apt to mis-judge themselves touching their spiritual
estate. 206
Reason.
1. Ground is taken from the deceitfulnes of man's heart. ^07 2. From Satan's
continual endeavor to corrupt the judgment, and make a natural man well
conceited of himself. Ibid.
Use.
Not to believe our own deceitful hearts, and perverted judgments in the
matter of our salvation. Ibid.
Doctrine 4
A man's spiritual estate is not always discernable to himself. 208
Reasons.
1. God orders it so, to keep the heart humble, etc. 209 2. To punish our
former careless respect of his mercy to us. 210
Use.
Comfort to Christians that are dejected for want of assurance, that they
belong to the election of grace. Ibid.
Doctrine 5.
Every one is bound carefully to examine his own estate to Godward, (i.)
whether he be in the state of Grace, or no. 211
Reason.
1. Because the heart is so deceitful, that it is difficult truly to know a
man's own estate. 212 2. Because the state of glory depends upon our being in
the state of grace here. Ibid. Three sorts of men think themselves in the
state of Grace, who are deceived with the false shadows of it. 1. The Civil
man. 2. The Formalist. 3. The Temporary Professor.
213 What Civil Righteousness is. Ibid. What the Grounds of Civil
Righteousness are. 214 What the Deceits are* whereby the Civil man beguiles
himself. Ibid. The Civil man's first Self-beguiling Deceit: viz. applauding
himself in his good dealings and good meaning, discovered 3. ways. Ibid. 2.
Deceit, In a comparative Righteousness, discovered 4. ways. 216 3. Deceit, In
a restraint from the outward act of sin, answered 3 ways. 218 4. Deceit, In
out-stripping many Professors in his Practice, discovered three ways. 219 5.
Deceit, In his harmless conversation, discovered 2. ways. 221 6. Deceit, In
being well esteemed and reported of among his neighbors, discovered 3. ways.
222
The second false Shadow.
Formal Righteousness. 223 What it is. 224 Formalists may perform 6. sorts
of duties of the first Table. Ibid. What the Grounds of Formal Righteousness
are, and of resting in it. 3. 225 The Formalists first Deceit, whereby he
gathers confidence that his courses are approved of God: viz. In that he
endures scoffs and troubles for the duties he performs, discovered 3. ways.
227 2. Deceit, In good men's applauding him in his courses, discovered 3. ways.
229 3. Deceit, In the seeming agreement betwixt him and the most forward
Professors in Religious duties, discovered 2. ways. 230
Use.
Exhort. To beware of resting in Formal Righteousness, ^ pressed by 4.
Mo^ives. 231, 232 The 3. false Harbor wherein the soul rests it self: viz.
Temporary Righteousness. 233 What it is. Ibid. What the Grounds of it are. 234
The Temporaries first Deceit; Jn that he can rejoice in the Word. 235 A
fivefold difference betwixt the joy of the Temporary and the Elect, in hearing
the Word. Ibid. 2. Deceit, Jn his inward sorrow for sin, discovered 4. ways.
238 A twofold difference betwixt the Temporaries sorrow for sin, and the true
Christians. 239 3. Deceit, In his good motions, desires, and purposes. 240 A
threefold difference between the Temporaries desires, and those in true
Converts. Ibid. 4. Deceit, In his forwardness to good duties, discovered 3.
ways. 241 5. Deceit, In that he finds the Lord rewarding him for what he
does, discovered 2. ways. 243
Use.
Exhort. Not to rest in these imperfect motions that are common to the
Temporary. 244 Motives to perseverance. 3. Ibid. Four particulars discussed
for direction in the duty of Selfe-triall. 246 1. What Graces are of the
Essence of a Christian. 2. What their nature is. Ibid. 3. What is the least
measure of them. 4. What be the several marks of them.
1. Faith, what it is, and what is the least measure of it. 248 Marks of true
faith. 6. 250 1. It purifies the heart. 2. Spirit of Prayer. 3. It follows
legal humiliation. 251 4. It is assaulted with doubtings. 252 5. It is wrought
and increased by the Word. 6. It breeds conteniment in all estates. 253

Use.
To discover the faith of most to be counterfeit. 254 2. Godly sorrow, what it
is, and the least measure of it. 256
Marks of it.
1. It springs from sense of Gods mercies. 258 2. It is lasting. 3. Of general
extent. 4. Cured only by consolations of the Scriptures. 260 5. Attended with
a train of other graces. 261
Use.
Not to rest in legal affrightments, or worldly grief in stead of godly
sorrow. 262 3, Change of mind, what it is. 263 The least measure of it. 264
Marks of it.
1. It is total. 2. It makes a man victorious. 265 3. It is wrought by the
word. 266 4. It causes to differ from natural men in diverse properties. 267
5. It causes difference in the manner of sinning. 269
Use.
To discover diverse living in the Church not to be living members of it. 270 4.
New obedience, what it is, the least measure of it. 271
Marks of it in general.
1. It is grounded on the Word. 273 2. It is universal. Ibid. 3. It is
constant. 275 4. It is of a growing nature. 278
Marks of it in particular.
1. Love to good men for goodness sake. 279 2. Meekness of spirit. Ibid. 3.
Mercifulness. 280
Use.
To discover the obedience of 5. sorts to be unsound. Ibid.
Use.
Exhort. To the practice of the duty propounded in the former Doctrine: viz.
exactly to try our selves whether in the state of Nature, or of Grace. 281
Motives.
1. No sound comfort to be had, till we know our selves to be in the state of
Grace. Ibid. 2. We are many ways subject to be mistaken in judging our estate.
282 3. The irrecoverablenesse of the danger of being mistaken herein. 283 4. In
other things men count it wisdom to try before they trust. Ibid. 5. It is a
maine end of our time allowed us, to gain the assurance of a better life. 284
The Contents of the Treatise of ADOPTION. On JOHN 1.12, 13.
Doctrine 1.
All the faithful are the adopted children of God. 287
Reasons.
1. Ground of it is our union with Christ. 288 2. End of it. To entitle us to
the heavenly inheritance. Ibid.
Doctrine 2.
None are the children of God by Adoption but such as are so by Regeneration.
289
Reasons.
1. Ground of Regneration is our union with Christ, wrought by faith and Gods
spirit. 290 2. End of it, To prepare and fit us for our heavenly Inheritance.
291
Uses.
1. Inform. The great Dignity of Believers. 292 2. It should stir us up to
believe in Christ. 294 3. Examination. Try our Adoption by our Regeneration.
295 Quest. How to know that we are regenerated. Ibid. 4. The Duty of
Regenerate, to live as becomes the sons of God. 297
5. Comfort.
1. Against sense of our unworthiness. 2. Poverty. 299 3. Against contempt of
worldlings. 300 4. Against fear of want. 301 5. Against spiritual
infirmities. 302 6. Against Afflictions. 7. Injuries. Ibid. 8. Against dangers
and distresses. 303
Errata.
PAge 12. lin. 3. for storm, read stern, p. 20. l. 26. for sell, r. set, p.
27. l. 1. for will to judge, r. rule to guide, p. 36. l. 3. for it. r. is p.
49. l. 8. for gare, r. gate, p. 67. l. 4. for end, r. and, p. 9^. l. 25. for
one, says he, resolved r. one says, he resolved, p. 9^. l. 8. for person, r.
prison, p. 204. l. 21. for enforced, r. inferred, p. 220. l. 5. for by fall to,
r. to fall by, p. 235. l. 23. for threefold, r. fivefold.

THE CHRISTIANS First Chief LESSON, Viz. Self-denial.
MAT. 16.24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, if any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.


OUR Savior Christ, having told his Disciples in the 21. Verse of those
troubles that should shortly befall himself and them, viz. That he must suffer
many things at Jerusalem of the Elders, and chief Priests, and Scribes, and
be killed, etc. The matter now comes to this, how Peter carried himself upon
this occasion; He grieves that Christ should be deprived of honor, and of an
earthly Kingdom, and that he should die, and therefore he controls Christ,
verse 22. Where he argues either Christ fearfulness, or rashness; either
that Christ should not go, or if he went, that this should not be: Thus Peter
would do that, which would undo the whole world. Hence Christ speaks to
Peter, and checks him sharply; for he saw Satan in Peter tempting him;
therefore as he reproves him, he speaks again to the Apostles to fortify
themselves against the stumbling block Peter had laid, and he tells them what
shall befall them, and himself too; for if the head be wounded, the members
must needs feel it also; if you will be Christ's Disciples, you must take up
your Cross, as Christ did.

In the Text are three things considerable.

1. The Preface. 2. The Duty. 3. The Reason, in 25. and 26. Verses, both
verified by Christ, verse 28.
In the Preface there is 1 The Parties to whom, 2 The time when.


In the Duty there is, 1 The Act, follow. 2 The Ground, there must be a
Resolution. 3 The Means used, and they are,


Twofold, 1 To deny a Mans-selfe. 2 To take up the Cross.


Now to the Preface where I observe two points.

1. The Parties he speaks to, His Disciples.

That even the best of Gods Servants need seasonable Counsel and Advice.

He said to his Disciples, q. d. Let not Peter deceive you, you must have
Crosses, you must not dream of Crowns; therefore expect a Cross, for it will
befall you. Hence come all those Exhortations, Heb. 3.13. Heb. 3.13.
Exhort one another daily, there is none excepted* this must not be seldom,
but daily, and not hereafter, but now, while it is called today. But what need
is there of it? lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
As who should say, there is great reason; for there are many distempers, we
are bad of our selves, and ready to be led away to sin; therefore exhort.
This is the reason of all those Caveats, 2 Pet. 3.17. 2 Pet. 3.17.
Beware lest ye be led away with the error of the wicked: He exhorts also
the like in other places. Beware, that implies there is a need, for the heart
is open to many dangers. So Luke 12.4. Luke 12.4.
I say unto you, my friends be not afraid, etc. It is friendly counsel, not to
the wicked, but to Gods own; the strongest bones need sinews, an Arm cannot
lack the least bone; the greatest Pillars have need of the less things: So in
the Church, the strongest members in the same need advice, and support; the
richest man must use the Market; so none can live without the Market of the
society of Saints; and there is need of help to the best. Thus we see, even a
Disciple, the best Saints need the help of others.

In regard of their weakness.

1 The wisest man understands not every thing.

2 What we know, we oftentimes forget.

3 Though we know, and forget not, yet we are unconstant to follow that we know.

4 Though we know, and remember, and are not unconstant, yet our hearts are
not so affected with the truth, as they should. Therefore, for all these causes
we have need the best of us, of Counsel and advice; for what we know not it
may reveal; what we remember not, it may recall; what we consider not, it may
help; what we affect not, it may stir up to, Act. 15.32. Judas and Silas
exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them, (i) settled and
grounded them better in the faith: Even, Moses had his hands held up. So we
stand in need of savoury Counsel.





are our Brothers Keepers except we be Cains, and will have Cains wages:
therefore he has to do with thee, if he love thee as he should.



Sam. 2. Old Elies sons despised Counsel, and why? the Text says, God had a
purpose to destroy them. It is an Argument God has a purpose to destroy a man,
when he refuses Counsel, Exodus 10.28. Exodus 10.28.
When Moses had often spoken to Pharaoh, at last he cast him out, and bad him
see his face no more, get thee gone, I will have no more of thee. Mark how
Moses answers: I will see thy face no more; he came no more to counsel him,
but God came to plague him: therefore take heed thou that say, away with
counselling and preaching: Brethren, if that comes not, take heed lest God came
with vengeance.

better then a man that is a stranger, now it were a mad thing to say, it was a
child that directed me, therefore I will not go that way, John 4. If the
people had not gone to Christ, because a woman told them of Christ, but had
said tush, it was a woman that told us of it, therefore we will not go, they
had never seen Christ. Therefore frame your hearts to yield to advice, and
bless God that ever he bestowed it, seeing it is so needful.



David was counseled by Abigail a woman, and he blessed God for it, and laid
down his weapons: so when thou go on in a wicked course, though it be a
servant o^ a child that reproves thee, yet submit: David was above Abigail, and
yet he submitted to her counsel, and blessed God.

The Time When: Then] when Peter spoke to withdraw him.

When any persons shall out of carnal respects, labor to with draw a man from
God, then spiritual Counsel is most seasonable.

When Peter counseled carnally, then Christ counseled spiritually, Malach.
3.16. Mal. 3.16.
When proud men spoke stoutly, then spoke they that ^^ared God, that was a fit
opportunity, Gal. 2.5. Gal. 2 5.
When Peter had dissembled, then Paul withstood him, it is with the soul, as
it is with the body; we are most careful where most danger is: In the plague
time, when the air is infected, we get Antidotes to keep us from the infection
of the air: therefore let us get Antidotes of wholesome advice and counsel.

Thus much of the Preface.

Now we come to the Duty, which was the second General, wherein are these
things 1. the Act. In which two things.

1. The Ground, If any man will. 2. The Nature of it, Come after Christ.
So that faithful walking is a following of Christ. If any man will] he
leaves it not to any man's liberty, but directs what he should do: if you
follow Christ, you must Resolve on the matter.

There must be a sound Resolution to follow Christ, before it can be done, and
sound^ ^ctised.

As who should say (...) ^olve on the matter? if there be a so^ ^esolution, it
may be then it will thrive; but if not, all is to no purpose, Act. 11.23. Act.
11.23.
There is a fine passage; the Text says, Barnabas was a good man, and exhorted
them to cleave unto the Lord, but how? with a decree of heart, as who should
say, make a Decree according to the laws of the Medes and Persians, never to
be revoked, and called back, never to be removed from God, my God I must have,
let honor and all stay: pray I must, though the world lie at six and seven, I
will keep a good conscience to the worlds end: the Gospel shall prevail with
me, come what will come: after this Resolution you will buckle to the truth, 1
Pet. 4.1. 1 Pet. 4.1.
be armed with the same mind, every man must have the same mind that Christ
had, what is that? Psalm. 40.8. Psalm. 40.8.
It is my heart to do thy will, Christ, though he foreknew the crosses that
should come, yet it was his mind to do his Fathers will, therefore put on this
Resolution, as Armor of Proof, I will do any thing God bids me; and I will
not do it by fits and turns.

For the opening of this point observe two particulars.

1. What this Resolution is.

2. Why we must resolve before we practice; not to be fly-backs; oh it is to
be feared, that that man will be as dry leaves in Autumn, and as stubble
before the fire, which wants his Resolution.

Q. 1. What makes up this Resolution, and this Will?

Answ. It is made up in two things.

1 The Judgment must be convinced of the goodness of the cause we have in
hand; else if it be but a humor, it will never hold in trouble* but when
sound Arguments, sound Scriptures are alleged, then the heart should be f^lly
swayed; this is one part of Resolution, when the mind is thus settled, and the
understanding thus poized, there is a great part of Resolution 1 Cor. 2.2. 1
Cor. 2.2.
I determined to know nothing among you, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified;
he determined, that is, he judged thus, he had an Argument for it, Hebr.
11.25.26. Heb. 11.25, 26.
Moses judged affliction better then all the treasures of Egypt, his
understanding was fully set down, and convinced of it: therefore get good
Arguments, which may bear up the heart.

2 When the understanding is informed, then also the Will must work to make up
a sound Resolution: The Will must say Amen, I will have it; it ratifies that
which reason said, and now Resolution comes according to the nature of Good,
and so chosen by the Will, the best thing is most resolved upon* Now Christ is
the best, therefore to be most resolved on. It is best to suffer for God, says
the Understanding, is it not* yes says the Heart, it is better to have Christ
in a Prison, or at the stake, then to be without him, say Heart, is it so
Heart? then says the Will, I will have it, come what will come to the
contrary. The Understanding says, the ways of God are peace and
pleasantness, I will therefore have them; and when the Understanding says
this, the Will also says the same; this makes up a Resolution, Ruth. 1. Ruth
1.1^.
Naomi reasons with Ruth to persuade her to return, now she went for God, and
for Religion; and therefore all things to the contrary, being propounded verse
18. She was steadfastly minded to go; God and misery was the best, and
therefore she resolved here, this is Resolution. Now it is right, and the
failing in any of these two breaks it; if a man say, I know and do not Will
it, that is folly: If a man say, I will, and have no reason for it, it is
obstinacy, and not a sound Resolution. And so when the Understanding is
informed, and the Will is not settled on it, it is only Consultation; but the
Will says, I will not have it thus: A man may be good in Consultation, but not
in Resolution: when the Drunkard is convinced, it is an evil to be drunk; and
so the Usurer, but yet will be so still, and with the Addar turn the deaf
ear, and will continue in it still, and the Adulterer is convinced of his sin,
when he goes in to the Adulteress, he shall never return, here the
Understanding is clear, but the Will comes not off, and so he will have his
sin still: so when the Persecutor is convinced, that persecuting Gods Saints
is a sin, and hates it, this is clear to the Understanding, yet the Will
will be malicious still: the heaviest part is the Will. As in a Parliament.
Consultation, they must propound all to the King, and he must ratify, and
confirm it; now when the Will says, I will not ratify that, I will not leave
that sin, nor take up that duty, now all this while it is not ratified, till
the Will come off. Away with these pieced and patched Resolutions and purposes,
as to say, it were good, it were so, and I would all would do so, and I could
afford to be so, but all the world would persecute me: this is a
Halfe-Resolution; away with these patched Resolutions, to have Reservations at
every turn, it is nothing else but hypocrisy, and dissimulation: say
therefore; Is not the sanctification of the Sabbath day, better then the
profanation of it? say Heart, is not preciseness in a Christian course better
then with the Harlot to wipe the mouth, and say all is well? and all truth,
though the least) that God reveals, is it not better then all the world? if it
be, Will, do thou close with it, and say within your selves, here are reasons
clear, let heaven and earth meet together, though all the dust on the earth,
and sands on the shore, and spires of grass in the fields were Devils, I will
have that which the word reveals, though I die for it. This is a happy heart;
when the soul sees, the greatest good is holiness, and resolves to have it,
this is a sound Resolution.

Romans 6.17. Romans 6.17.
the Text says, They obeyed from the heart: when the heart resolved, it was
done; hence God so often requires the heart; for if that goes forward, then all
goes forward too: as in a fortified City, the Castle commands all the town; so
Resolution commands the whole man, tongue, hand, and all; if a man will sail
on the sea, he must have a storm to guide the ship: so of the sailing of the
soul in the world, if thou will sail aright, and come to the right haven,
Resolution must be the stern, and that must guide all; so that the Argument
stands thus, If Resolution be the root of every act, then it must go before
every act; but it is so, therefore Resolution must go before practice.

Romans 1.18. Romans 1.18.
generally the fault is not ignorance, that men fall off, but the Will breaks
the bargain, and says, I will not be in prison, or be brought to the stake
for the truth, and yet we will make great profession too. I will, say some,
never be a Papist, etc. what a Resolution is this? the tongue speaks well, but
what says the Will? if that resolves not of it, it is nothing. If the King set
not down his hand to laws, I have nothing to do with them, they are of none
effect: Therefore they are said to withold, and detain the truth in
unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. Romans 1.18.
you know you should do righteously, but you will not; thus you hold down the
truth; many think to go to heaven, and yet buy and sell on the Sabbath day,
and think to go to heaven with a sleepy profession, and yet never make this
Resolution, but they are deceived.

David's fee^, and he had many troubles, but what then? his heart was fixed,
Psalm. 57.6. Psalm. 56.6, 7.
that was his bottom, he held fast setledly resolved in God; let them do what
they could, yet he knew what to do; so your heart will never be sound, till
your heart be fixed on God; thus a man must do, if he will walk holily:
that of Daniel, Dan. 1.8. Dan. 1.8.
Many feare-intanglements would have hindered him, but he purposed with his
heart to walk with God, Ruth. 1 18. Ruth 1.18.
When she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, she left off
speaking to her; as who should say, spare your breath, I am resolved of it, the
house stood fast, because it was built upon a Rock, by Rock is meant a sound
settling in Religion; and he that has this, he persevereth, Act. 11.23. Acts
11.23.
Cleave to God with a decree of heart, it is not a matter of speculation, let
the heart be there: oh, but what shall become of life, liberty, children and
profit? If I may have these and God, then welcome, no, a soul that is
gracious, will not do thus, but it faith, If I have not these, yet my Decree
is, God is mine, though I die for it, this is the right way indeed, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
Deuteronomy. 5.29.
When God gave the Law, he passed by fearfully like a flash of fire, here was
the Law given with judgment, then they feared and trembled, then every one
would be a Professor, and do what ever he commaads them, then they would
hear it, and do it: this they s^y: b^t oh, says the Lord, that there were
such a heart in them, to do as they say, you say well, these are good words,
but it is nothing without an heart, where is that sound Resolution? oh that you
had a heart to these things; that whatsoever comes, though earth shake, and
Devils rage, yet having a heart resolved you may persevere, and hold out for
ever.

Q. But how shall I get this Resolution?

A. Labor for two things, that so thou may attain unto it.

1. Judge according to the Word, not according to the world, for otherwise you
will misudge, and not resolve, Psalm. 73. David judging by the outside of the
world, almost stumbled and slipped: Therefore judge upon these two grounds.

1. Judge not by friends and neighbors, and the like, but judge according to
the balance of the Sanctuary, judge by the Word. It is a fine and pleasant
thing to be in honor; yet it is but a lying vanity, says the Word, there is
but one thing necessary, Psalm. 62.9.10. Psalm. 62.9.10.
If riches increase, set not thy heart upon them; at the day of death your
riches cannot comfort you, therefore set not your hearts upon them, judge them
by the Word, that says, there is but one thing necessary.

2. Judge not by the present view, but by the consequent, and consider what
will be at that day; you think, liberty is sweet, but look not at the
present; but the glory of a good course is afterward; mark the end, and so
look at Dives and Lazarus, none would be in. Lazarus his condition now, in
this life, who would not be a Dives now? to go in brave satin, and fare
deliciously every day; but look to the end, they both dye, and Lazarus goes
into Abraham's bosom, that is, into heaven, and Dives to hell: whether had
thou rather be Dives, or Lazarus now? I make no question, but all will say, it
were better to be a Lazarus now; so judge of these things by the end, and
consequence, whether is it better to study the word, and to lay down pride, or
to vaunt it, and play the Ruffian? one is praying, another is playing, which is
easiest? the one is not troubled, but merry, and that were best, if it would
hold; but judge by the end, and imagine the day of judgment came, whether
would you be then, a broken heart, or a Ruffian? 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. 2 Thessalonians.
1.7.8.
and to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, nor obey his Gospel. God comes, and says to the
troubled, Rest: thou have been troubled before ever eased; but as for him that
ruffins it out now, the Lord Jesus will come with flaming fire in vengeance
against him, on whom will God take vengeance? the text says, on them that know
him not: Now judge by the end, whether of these is best: say Conscience,
whether would thou have God find thee sporting, or prayi^g at that day? is it
not better now to be troubled, then hereafter everlastingly to be confounded?
Judge with righteous judgment, it is tedious to be with Paul in prison, but
it is not tedious to be with him in heaven; Judge therefore as the word
judges, and ye shall not be deluded.

Q. But how shall I get my heart to it?

A. Look up to God, and labor to set the highest price on God, and heavenly
things; and that by two helps.

1. Daily suggest, and discover to thine heart a greater worth in spiritual,
then in temporal things, there is some good in these things, but be ready to
convince thy heart, that there is more good in spiritual things: The Devil
would fore-stall the Market, and set a higher price upon these things, then on
spiritual; but labor thou to see more worth in Grace, then in other things;
when thy covetous heart says, I will be rich, oh then presently say, what
inheritance is there like heaven? when thy voluptuous heart says, I must have
my pleasure; presently say thou, what pleasure is there like the pleasure the
soul has in Christ? look at those joys in Christ for ever, that is better
then all this, this joy is madness, thus when the soul would be stealing
away, offer the best things: would the soul have case? why it is better to be
bound in prison, then to be bound in unbelief; as a man when he goes to buy a
commodity, he desires to see the best things, Psalm. 73.25. Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven or Earth, but thee O Lord? we have him here now in
mercy, and we sh^l have him in mercy hereafter and in glory; and what would we
have more then this? when Satan lays disgraces and discouragements upon good
courses, and also miseries and vexations that come thereby, then be thou ready
to show more misery in bad courses; have reasons to cry down those cracked
commodities; and when he says, to burn for the Gospel that is a miserable
thing, then say thou, it is better to burn here then in hell hereafter. The
Devil says wicked men are brave men, yea, and they shall be damned too; the
Devil says as Balack, thy God keeps thee from honor* but answer him, if I
had it, it might be my destruction; I am here troubled, but I shall be for ever
comforted; therefore regard not what Satan shall buzze at the ear of thy heart
concerning trouble and the like, but say thou, though I am here troubled, yet I
shall be saved; thus let not Satan fore stall thy heart with these temptations.

The next Point is taken from the nature of the duty;

Come after me.

The Lord Jesus goes before, and is the Captain of his Church, Ioh. 10.4. Ioh.
10.4. Psalm. 79.13.
He goes before his sheep, and they follow him. Psalm. 7^.13. We thy people and
the sheep of thy pasture will praise thee, Exodus 13.21. Exodus 13.21.
The Lord was a pillar of Cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night to lead
them, that was a type of the Lord Jesus, who ever goes before his servants,
Ios. 5.13, 14. Ios. 5.13, 14.
as a Captain of the Lords Host am I come; it was the Lord Jesus Christ.

Christ is a Captain two ways.

1 By his spirit, Ioh. 16.13. when the spirit of Truth is come, he will guide
you into all truth.

2 By his Word, the silver trumpet which speaks openly and secretly, and the
Spirit and the Word go together.

Ephesians. 1.22. he has put all things under his feet, Heb. 2.10. for it became
him to make the Captain of their salvation perfect.

2 He is fit for it, he knows where all the enemies are, he knows the
Devil, and the heart: he is most wise, and most powerful; he is an ancient
Captain, and knows how to deliver his; he can go beyond any, he has an Iron
Scepter to crush his enem^es, Psalm. 2.

Psalm. 85.8. Psa. 85.8.
I will hear what the Lord will say. The Camp goes to the General for
direction. Go to Christ you doubting hearts; you say, trouble is coming, but
see what Christ says, and follow him; learn the watchword, Heb. 12.2. Heb.
12.2.
Looking to Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, when troubles come,
look up to Christ, and say, our eyes are toward thee. Oh look up to Christ to
be guided, Psalm. 119.125. Psalm. 119.125.
I am thy servant, O give me understanding; so in all weakness go to Christ
and say, I am thy servant, teach me to keep thy Commandments, Ios. 10.6. Ios.
10.6.
Stack not thy hand, etc. when the Gibeonites had made a league with Ioshuah,
all the Nations of the kind conspired against them, and mark whither they send,
to Iosuah to Gilgal, saying, slack not thine hand, but come and help us; so it
is with a poor sinner, that has made a league with Christ, all the rabble of
Ruffians follow him, satan by temptations labors to entangle him, the world
by scoffs and reproaches labors to withdraw him from God and a good course;
now send to Ioshuah to the Camp in Gilgal, send to the Lord Jesus Christ, and
say, slack not thy hand from thy servant, but save and help me, Psalm. 80.1, 2.
Psalm. 80.1, 2.
Give eat O Shepherd of Israel, but mark what follows, before Ephraim,
Benjamin and Manasses, come and help us: the meaning lies thus, it is a phrase
taken from the Children of Israel in War, 3. lay Eastward, 3. Westward, 3.
Southward, and the Arc in the midst. Now these three Tribes Ephraim, Benjamin
and Manasses, lay behind the Arc, and before them Christ rises, before weak
sinful cr^^tures Christ stirs himself*

Ashur, Hos. 8. are not my Princes altogether Kings? Thus he counts the day
to be his; so it is with many wicked and proud men, they think all the world
is theirs; it is true, your politic wisdom is greater then the godlies is,
but poor Good man such a one, and poor Good wife, such a one, they are
simple, yea but Christ the Commander of the Lords Hosts incamps about them;
therefore let me speak plainly, if there be any soul in this place guilty of
this, to that soul be it spoken, he is an opposite to the Lord Jesus Christ,
Isa. 37.23. Isa. 37.23.
ma^k how the Lord takes it to himself when Hezekiah was spoken ill of, whom
have thou reproached, and blasphemed* against whom have thou lift up thy voice,
and exalted thine eyes on high? even against the holy one of Israel, therefore
at such a time let them know that they deal with a wiser then the wisest of
them, and he will crush them hereafter if he do not convert them here; you
love Christ you say, but you hate his members because they are hypocrites;
tush, that is a fancy; can a man say, I love your head well, and yet would chop
off your arms? therefore hear, and fear for ever, and let your hearts shake
and tremble, because you have opposed the Lord Jesus Christ, the Captain and
Admiral of his Church, and wonder with your selves that you live; good Lord,
that I that have been such an opposite should live! 1 Samuel 4.7. 1 Samuel 4.7.
woe, woe to us, for the great God is come into the Camp. Brethren, shall I tell
you the meaning of it? The Ark was a type of Christ: now when the Arc was
brought into the Camp, mark how the cry was, woe to us, for God is come into
the Camp; these are the Gods that sent plague after plague upon Pharaoh; this
was but a type of Christ, Ye therefore that sell your selves against the Israel
of God, ye malicious contemners of Gods truth and goodness, it is a wonder
that the great God of heaven and earth has not consumed you* it was that
Christ that had a rod of Iron to crush his enemies whom ye have opposed,
therefore think not Gods Children are simple, for the more feeble they are,
the more God will help them, Deuteronomy. 25.17. Remember what Amaleck did unto thee
by the way; Amalek took advantage of them when they were weak, therefore
remember Amaleck, and he remembered him indeed, for in 1 Samuel 15. God bid Saul
s^ay Amaleck and utterly destroy him* I doubt not but God is the same God now
as ever he was, God ruinates opposers especially. God says, I remember such a
man opposed me, let plagues pursue, and vengeance overtake him speedily God is
just and true, therefore let him that opposed heretofore, persecute no more
now; take heed now of meddling with Gods weak ones, for Christ is their
Captain.



Brethren, this is that which will stand by you one day, remember Christ is
yours, John 6.17, 18, 19. Ioh. 6.17, 18, 19
the sea raged, night approached, and their hearts trembled to see Jesus
walking on the Sea, mark what Christ says, it is I; as who should say, It is
a tempest makes you shake, but it is I that deliver you; the night is dark to
trouble you, but I am here to comfort you: the world is the Sea, the soul the
Ship, miseries the tempest; and when you see all these things threatening
poverty and anguish, yet remember, it is I; art thou in prison? Remember I am
there to deliver you, and as long as CHRIST is there to help you, steel your
faces; who would not be a Soldier to have Christ his leader and Captain?
therefore see and consider, there is the Lord Jesus Christ, he is in misery to
help and succor his.

It is a great comfort in two Cases. 1. In temporal afflictions. 2. In
spiritual temptations.


1. For the time of temporal trouble and afflictions, that place is p^egnant
for this purpose, Micah 4.5. Micah 4.5.
Every one will walk in the name of his God. The Philistines ^ad their god
D^gon, the rich man walks in the name of his god riches, but mark what the
Text says, we will walk in the name of our God for ever and ever. Your good
god riches will be gone in misery and sickness, and when you have most need of
comfort, where is your god riches now? but let us walk in the name of our God
for ever; in the name of Christ who lives for ever. That also of David who slew
Kings for their sakes, Og the King of Bashan, for his mercy endures for ever;
how ever misery end^reth, yet his mercy endures for ever. Therefore walk thou
in the name of thy God; wicked men endure yet a while haling, yet mercy
endures for ever comforting of GOD's Children. Let thy heart therefore be
comforted with this.

2 In temptations, you are weak and have little help; but have an eye to thy
Leader, what ever thy blindness be, yet thy Leader can inform thee; that
place is mavelous sweet, Isa. 58.8. Isa. 58.8.
Righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy
rereward. Here the Lord Jesus appears like an armed man of War, and there
are two parts in the Army, besides the body, the Vanguard and the Rere-ward,
both these defend the body; so the righteousness of Christ is the Vanguard:
satan says, thou have sinned, Christ's righteousness says, I have suffered,
now the righteousness of Christ goes before, the guilt and punishment that is
taken away; conscience says, thou have sinned, righteousness says, Christ
has suffered. Then secondly, the glory of God that is in the Rere-ward, that
is the glorious grace of God, taken out of that of the Romans, they were
deprived of the glory of God, that is, the glorious Grace of God that shall be
the Rere-ward. Says the soul, sin yet pesters me, it is not subdued as it
ought to be, yea, but the glorious grace of God will sanctify that heart of
thine. The righteousness of Christ is the Vanguard, the glory of Christ thy
Rere-ward; there is righteousness going before thee, and grace after thee;
therefore thine enemies shall be subdued. You see then mavelous comfort.

Now we come to the next point, following: Follow me] that is perform
obedience to me.

Faithful service and obedience is a following of Christ, or coming after
him. His practice is a president to us, his action a copy for us to imitate.
The proof of this point is evident, 1 Cor. 11.1. 1 Cor. 11.1.
be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ, and therefore, Genesis 5.24. Genesis 5.24.
Enoch was said to walk with God, that is, to do as God does. The Point is of
great use, therefore give me leave to make known three things.

First, In what we should follow Christ. Secondly, How far we should follow
Christ. Thirdly, The reason why service is following of Christ.
For the first, Namely, In what we must follow Christ.

And that is, 1 Partly as he is God. 2 Partly as he is Mediator. 3 As he is
Man.


I will cast it into two conclusions which discover, 1. In what we must follow
Christ, as he is God. 2. In what we must not imitate our Savior.

1. We must know there are some inward properties in God that the creature
cannot imitate the like. No creature can create, or be Infinite, or the like,
and it is blasphemy to think it.

2. There be other qualities that God does vouchsafe to leave an impression of
in the creature, and the creature is said to imitate God therein, be holy as
God is holy; and be merciful as God is merciful; but the Scripture does not
say, imitate God in Infiniteness, Matthew. 5.48. Mat. 5.48. 2 Pet. 1.4.
2 Pet. 1.4. a man must be partaker of the divine nature of God; the Lord is
holy, and patient, be thou so too. Express the virtues of God, as that 1 Pet.
2.9. 1 Pet. 2.9.
and therefore we must and ought to imitate Christ. A christian should so live,
as men might say, God is holy, for his Saints are holy.

2 Look at our Savior as he is Head of the Church, there we must be like him
in three things, as a Prophet, as a Priest, as a King. He was a Prophet to
teach others, so should we be, daily endeavoring to instruct and teach our
families. He was a Priest to offer sacrifice, and so should we, to power out
our souls for others in prayer to God. He was a King to subdue sin and
satan, Revel. 1.5. Revel 1.5.
He has made us Kings and Priests to God the Father. Christ is the King of his
Church; so we have a part of his office. He was a Priest, so are we made
spiritual Priests; He was a Prophet, so are we made spiritual Prophets.
Christ has made us Kings to domineere over our base distempers and
corruptions; we should be Priests to offer our selves souls and bodies as a
living sacrifice and acceptable, Romans 12.1. Romans 12 1.
in all th^se we must imitate Christ.

3. Look at the Lord Jesus as he was Man, and whatever he did, as he was Man,
we must (when the like occasion is offered) do the same, he being a child
obeyed his Parents; if thou be a child, thou must do so too; He humbled
himself, so do thou; he used no guile, do thou so likewise. Look in what
relation thou art in that he was in, do thou as he did.



Christ in all those things formerly mentioned; you are Kings then; if you are
Christians, you are Kings over all your sins.

Object. But is it possible to crush every distemper?

Answ. Look as it was with Christ, he lay three days under the power of the
grave, but he rose again; so it may be with thee; the violence of satan may
keep thee under, but thou shall get the better, having greater care to master
these: though the stone of hard-heartednesse he rolled over, yet thou shall
rise again. Thus we must do, Acts 13.22. Acts 13.22.
David had a heart as Gods heart; how? In that he did all his will. Thou must
not patch, but labor to subdue all.

2. We must not do it Universally only, but Sincerely. It is not possible for
a sinner to come to perfection of exactness; but what he cannot do in
exactness, he will do in sincerity. A Scholar cannot write so well as his
copy, but he will imitate his copy, John 5.30. Ioh. 5.30.8, 50.
John 8.50. I seek not my will, but the will of my Father; so the will of God
should carry a faithful soul, he will not seek his own will, but Gods will 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Amaziah did that which was good in the sight of the Lord, but not
with a perfect heart.

3. We must follow him Constantly, Not by fits and starts; No, these aguish
fits are nothing; if you belong to Christ you must do it constantly. Thus it
was said of Caleb, Numb. 14.24. Numb. 14.24.
the Text says, he followed God fully; so it must be with thy soul, thou
must follow GOD so, that thou may attain the end of thy hope. Thus
Universally, thus Sincerely, thus Constantly, thou must follow Christ in the
former Conclusions.

Christ has, Romans 8.13. Romans 8.13.
If the same spirit that raised up Christ from the dead be in you, etc.] Look
what spirit is in Christ, the same is in the Saints.

Ier. 31.33. Ier. 31.33.
I will put my law into their hearts, as it is said of our Savior, It is in
mine heart to do thy will, Psalm. 40 8. Psalm. 40.8.
So the Saints having the same Rule to guide them, the same spirit to enable
them, they must needs have the same course. Look as it is with two Clockes
that have the self same poizes, and the self same wheels, they will strike
both together, so it is with the heart of a Christian, the spirit of Christ is
the poize of the heart, and his grace the wheel, therefore he performs duties
like Christ.

Lord Jesus going before you, and then go on comfortably. You know what Gideon
said, Judge. 7.13. Judge. 7.13.
Look upon me and do likewise: So Christ says, how ever he be in the
heavens, yet he speaks out of his word, Look on me and do likewise. I was
meek, let the same mind be in you. You know what the Psalmist says, Psalm.
16.8.
I have set the Lord always before me, the word is in the original, I have
equalled him with my eye. So see Christ, equal him, and step no farther then
he goes before thee.

Ob. But this is mavelous hard; what, to be fetterd to nothing but the
thoughts of Christ; how irksome is this?

Sol. It is no matter of bondage; it is liberty, John 5.19. John 5.19.
The Son can do nothing but what he sees the Father do; was this the mind
of our Savior? let the same mind be in you. Let every one say, I can do
nothing but that which Christ does before me; and in all our actions, let this
be the question, would Christ do so? then will I.

But how shall I learn the will of God?

Ephesians. 5.10. See the pillar of fire, that is, the word of God, go before you.
Would you know whether you may buy, or sell, or bowl on the Sabbath day? Ask,
would the Lord Jesus bowl, or buy, or sell, on the Sabb^th day? Would he drop
into Ale houses? And if thou know these things and wilt not reform them,
thou walk not in the ways of Christ.



Christ. The child that knows not the way to the market, when he is weary, he
cries, father, father, lead me, and then his father takes him and carries him
in his arms. Oh you little ones! you younglings in Christ; go as fast as you
can; follow your father; what Christ did perform, do you; do not go away,
and say I cannot pray; have thou the Spirit of Christ, and can thou do
nothing with it? endeavor what you you can; and when you cannot, seek to
heaven, and cry, my father help me; call on your Father, and he will carry you
on Eagles wings, and though you have not then ability, you will have it
afterward. He that is free in duty, will be the better able to do it. Enquire
which way Christ went, and go that way to thy everlasting comfort.

Examination* Here we may see whether we follow Christ or no. Therefore examine
your selves whether it be so with you or no; whether we follow the steps of
Christ: here we may see whether we be Christians or no; if a man should call
you an Infidel, you would be very angry; but now try yourselfe. See, if you
follow Christ; if not, you are no Christians, Judge. 13.6. Judge. 13.6.
try as they did when they came for spies; they were thus tried by the word
Shibboleth, they pronounced it Sibboleth, and so were found out; and there fell
forty two thousand of them. So every man's tongue discovers him. Try thy self
by sincere obedience; can thou speak the language of Universal Obedience?
if not, you are not true Christians. This word Shibboleth will discover you;
can you walk as Christ did; then you are a Christian: but if you say
Sibboleth, and have a lisping profession, then you are no Christians. Set your
hearts at ease, you were never true followers o^ Christ. And here are three
sorts to be excluded.

1. See what will become of those that set th^mselves in desperate opposition
against GOD; such as are enemies to the Lord Jesus, Revel. 12.7. Rev. 12.7.
And there was war in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the
Dragon, and the Dragon and his Angels fought, etc. Michael is Christ* and his
servants, they suffer: The Dragon is the Devil, and his instruments they
persecute. Now on his side you be, whose Soldiers you be. Paul did many things
contrary to the Lord Jesus, Act. 26.9. Acts 26.9.
he opposed his servants; and if thou do so, thou art one of the Dragons
servants; thou art not a follower, but a persecutor of the Lord Jesus, a
fighter against Christ, he went not that way. Do thou oppose the power of the
word when as it is preached? then thou hate and persecutest Christ, and art
no follower of him. The word says, It was of Christ's heart to do his fathers
will, that is the good and ancient way; can thou walk in this? but if thou
say thou will not walk in it, it is clear, thou art no follower of Christ.

Psalm. 78.9.
2. Apostates, and Back-sliders, Psalm. 78.9. The Children of Ephraim being
harnessed and carrying bows, turned them back in the day of battle* so men
forsake Christ being armed with bows, that is, with GODS Ordinances; They
follow Christ so far as they may keep company with ease, liberty, and their
old lusts; they will follow Christ to the Cross; and if he will come down
from the Cross, they will follow him; like Dema^ they will follow Christ so
long as their pleasure lasts, Matthew. 8.19. Matthew. 8.19.
one came to Christ and said* I will follow thee whithersoever thou go; will thou says Christ; then thou must fare as thou find; the birds have nests,
and the Foxes holes, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head; and
when he heard this, he went his way, we hear no more of him. So many now a
days seem to be great Professors, but when times are dangerous, then
farewell all profession. Men indent with the Gospel, and if the word pitch
them higher, then they say as they John 6.60. Ioh. 6.60.
this is a hard saying, who can abide it? What so strict? To be pinioned to so
nice courses? What never take up a gay fashion, but always creep into a
corner, to deny a man's self, with a company of leather coat Christians, and
to walk by such a strict rule? oh this is a hard saying. But they can follow
their fashions, and courses of the world, and yet would be Christians, and
followers of Christ. Christians? away with them; show me but one footstep of
Christ in their courses; sure he never went that way. Show me that ever Christ
swore faith and troth, show me where Christ said, you must not be pure and
singular: but must shun the Puritan Cut. It was meat and drink to him to do
his fathers will; and thou art weary of it. Now thou art an Apostate, and not a
follower of Christ.

3. Such as do openly profess, but secretly work against the Gospel, that
howsoever they are not backsliders, yet they are workers of Conspiracies in
secret: With Judas kiss Christ, and kill Christ; sit at Table with him, and
betray him, these are cunning hypocrites, that profess and betray Christ; for
they have their lusts and secret haunts, Job 22.17, 18. Job 22.17, 18.
they say to the Almighty, depart from us, the counsel of the wicked is far
from me. The counsel of the wicked is a secret purpose to depart from the
command that crosses their corruptions. The covetous man will have his wealth,
there is a consultation in the affections, he will rather resolve to be unjust
and sinful then to part from his wealth, if one should show obedience to the
King* and another should prove to his face that he has plotted treason, it
would be a trouble to him; so will you be called followers of Christ? what if
it be proved you are a conspiratour against Christ? Call conscience, It will
tell you, your hearts have often said, shall I forsake the comforts of the
world, love and honor? No, I will not. Say you otherwise? but we will
determine it so; arraigne that man, let him be hanged, drawn and quartered for
a Traitor, and not a true follower of Christ.

Christ. Follow me, it is not stand, and look on me. Men are Neuters now a
days, which stand and see which side is best, and there they will be. No, no,
you must march courageously; Profession is marching, not seeing, and saying
what news; but you must go out with God against the mighty, Matthew. 2.5. Matt.
2.5.
they said Christ should be borne in Bethleem, but followed not the S^ar; so
many sleepy professors say, the times are dangerous, but follow not the Star.

Christ? A household servant to Christ? go on courageously. The world has
three motives to draw things. Honor, Profit, Pleasure; Now all these are here.

1. It is Honorable, a man shall do as his master does. A servant would not
be a Scullian, but if his Master should say, you shall do, as I do, he cannot
have more honor. So you shall do but as Christ does, to bear his colors;
the world thinks these silly simplicians, poor peasants, it is not a
Gentleman's spirit. I tell you, they are the greatest puissants in the world,
Psalm. 45.16. Psalm. 45.16.
whom thou may make Princes overall the earth. Every one in Christ's Camp is
a Prince; therefore who would not be Christ's follower for such honor?

2. It is pleasant and comfortable. You shall fare as Christ fares, all
rost-meate, John 14. God will come and sup with them that follow him. There are
no wants, but Rivers of pleasures and delights; the same dainties that Christ
has, the peace of God that passes all understanding; the joy of the Holy
Ghost, the love of God, all these are in us; but it is not so with the wicked;
the Devil holds his drudges to hard meat; the Adulterer has his pleasure,
and his conscience flies in his face. The wicked are the devils hackneyes; he
hackneyes a drunkard to the Alehouse, and a proud heart to hell, and then at
his deathbed deals as men with their hackney horses; ride them all day, and
then at night turn them out with galled backs. So he hackneyes the wicked all
their life, and at their death he turns them to hell with galled consciences.
But as for the godly, it is not so with them, but peace upon all that walk
after this rule, Gal. 6.16. you that are led by GOD shall have peace with him;
you that war for Christ, shall have the spirit and comfort of Christ.

3. The profit that comes by this is better and greater then all other. The
wages will make amends for all; Matthew. 19.27. what shall we have who have
forsaken all? I promise you a great All, a company of rotten boats, and torn
nets. Yet mark what Christ answers, he will not dye in their debt. You shall
sit with me in my kingdom, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Rejoice all
ye that walk with God, ye shall have an everlasting kingdom, and shall
condemn the wicked, condemn those profane drunkards, and cursed swearers,
whom you have before reproved, and who have despised you. Oh what a happy
condition is this? you shall be persecuted, that is sharp sauce to your
meat; but what of that? a rich crown of glory and immortality is laid up for
you in the richest place, in the highest heavens, 2 Timothy 4.7. 2 Timothy 4.7.
Paul had fought a good fight, but a crown of glory was laid up for Paul; and
not only for him, but for all the soldiers of Christ, that look for his
appearance. The Lord sends me to press a Deborah, Judge. 5. her heart was with
those that were willing; be encouraged therefore brethren to come, you see
your Captain, you see your condition: oh say then, we will be soldiers, then
resolve with Joshua, I and my household will serve the Lord. Away with that
almost being a Christian. As Agrippa said, when Paul preached to him; thou
have, says he, persuaded me, almost to be a Christian. Oh says Paul, I
would, thou were not almost, but altogether as I am except these bonds. So many
would be almost Christians; but Brethren, do you resolve upon the matter
seriously, and be Christians altogether. If one be in a good family, happily he
will wish his friend there also; so you that see what it is to follow Christ,
oh wish others to it. Have you any friends that are dear? Oh you tender
Mothers, would you have those little ones saved? oh bring them up hither,
train them up to be soldiers of Christ, it is admirable being here. Oh
husbands and wives, you have a care to leave Legacies to your children. Would
you have them rich and honorable? Then bring them up in following Christ, that
is best of all; bid adieu to all sins and lusts, and come to Christ. Now who
are those that offer themselves? who are true subjects? Who subscribes to this
invitation? you see the honor, the profit, the wages, therefore be followers
of your Savior, that you may be everlastingly blessed by our Savior.





1. Deny self. 2. Take up Cross.
Open, 1. What is meant by self. 2. What to deny self.




Christ; wherein soever we place sufficiency or excellency besides in Christ,
that is self. This is that which troubles all people, world and self do
every thing, and nothing well.

There are four selves.

1. A man's life, for that is the best thing in nature. This is Natural Self;
A man naturally makes life the chiefest good* skin, for skin, and all will a
man give for his life, Acts 19.31. Acts 19.31*
They desired Paul, that he would not adventure himself to go into the
Theater, this is natural self.

2. There is a corrupt self. Corruptions creep in upon the heart and sway and
show sovereign power there, for they command nothing but it is obeyed. Thus
covetousness, looseness, and profaneness it self. It is covetous, and
malicious so far as I am over-powred with it. For the Adulterer that seeks
to obey his lusts must needs seek to obey himself, because he is under the
command of his lust. So pride is especially self, self prays, preaches,
professes; all self, that is sin, and corruption, Jude 18. Jude 18.
who walked after their lusts, their own selfe-lying, and selfe-svvearing,
Romans 16.18. Romans 16.18.
they serve their own belly, their base gluttony was their self, they served
it. So every ruling sin is a corrupt self.

3. Abilities of gifts or learning which GOD gives, I call it Moral, or Civil
self. Common graces are self to a civil man, because he counts them the best
things he has, 2 Cor. 4.5. 2 Cor. 4.5.
we preach not Our selves, says Paul; so a man may preach self, when he
preaches learning it is preaching self. Me learned, and me judicious, etc.
So in conference, he would have it known that he is learned, and full of
knowledge, that is self. So an hypocrite will pray with others, and not alone,
this is selfe-praying.

4. A man may make even his graces and spiritual abilities self, when a man
prankes up himself, and expects something from grace, this is a gracious
self. He makes grace a God, he rests on that, not on Christ; the heart claps
it self on the back by this, and says I can do so and so, and expect to be
saved, the having of these properly is not self, but when the soul sets a
supremacy and excellency in these; when a man will do any thing for life,
lusts, parts, gifts, graces, and makes as it were Idols of them, and worship
them. Now all these must be denied; and cast such a man into the Sea, he will
shift for himself well enough I warrant you.

What is it to deny our selves?



1. When the soul renounceth the supremacy and authority of all these four
selves, casts off the yoke as not its rule, when it shakes off all these, as
having nothing to do with it.

2. When it does not acknowledge any fullness in them to believe what they
promise: as when sin seems pleasant, and ability seems good, then the heart
says, it is not in them, there is no such matter, there is nothing in them
that can give any content to the soul; the soul says, it is not to be had
in these.

3. The soul refuses to be subject to, or work for any of these as its
Master, 1 Cor. 6.19. 1 Cor. 6.19.
ye are not your own, not your selves. Its not in our aurhority to do what
we will: not what Self will, but what the Lord will. The phrase is taken from
a similitude, when a man renounceth to be under the government of another. I
will not meddle with it, says he, this is to deny a thing: thus the soul
deals with Self, and says, the Lord only has authority over me, and shall
command me, Matthew. 26.72. Matthew. 26.72*
Peter denied Christ with an oath, that he knew not the man, that is, Christ
is not my Master. I know him not; So the soul says to Self, when in time of
persecution life pleades, and says, what shall become of me, the soul says,
I know thee not, thou art not my Master. If lust tempts the soul, answer I know
not my sin, I know not the man. Covetousness bids sell on the Lords day; but
the soul answers I know not covetousness; so Pride says, why should I endure
this or that injury? Why should he speak against me, etc? then says the
soul, what care I for gainsaying, I know not pride, Hosea 14.3. Ashur shall
not save us, but with the Lord we shall find mercy; this is to deny Self.

The points then are two.

A man's self naturally is a God to his soul. For why else should CHRIST lay
this weight on them; as who should say; look to it, for it will crowde into
dive^se duties, this Pope-like sin will row in every man's boat, it would be
universal in every estate; oh this self is in every man, and swayes there.
Therefore our Savior gives caution concerning this, to which we are subject.
But the last, namely, the gracious self is not so much intended here, though
this be too. But especially the three former are here intended, Psalm. 12.4. Our
tongues are our own, who shall be over Us? the wicked stout it out against
God, and will have no other God then their own selves. Reproof shall not
control them, our tongues are our own. We will hold our old course still;
tell us not of swearing, we will swear still, Matthew. 15.6. Matthew. 15.6.
The Scribes made Traditions the Rule, and themselves gods; and thereby made
the command of God of none effect, that is, Vnlorded them, and lorded it over
them. Conceits must rule, Ier. 2.31. Ier. 2.31.
We are Lords, we will come no more at thee. As who should say, thou think
to command us, but thy command shall not prevail; thus they lord it, and will
be above God and his commands, this is to be a god to himself, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2,
3. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3.
they walk after the will of the Gentiles, not what God will, but what a
Gentiles corrupt heart will command, that is done: thus you idle persons, and
such as follow pleasures, and Cards, and Dice, on the Sabbath; God forbids you,
but you will have them. Wherefore they be your Gods; and unless your will be
satisfied, you fall out with heaven and earth, and all; this self must be
denied.

Self a God, Isa. 10.13. by my wisdom I have done it; he thinks with his
wisdom and power to do all. His own power is his God; he is sufficient to
do it, and who can cross it. He thinks, no God can command him, but thinks
he can do what he pleases, Dan. 4.30. Dan. 4.30.
Nebuchadnezars va^nt of Babell, which he had built, when he had gone up into
his Tower, he does not say, is not this Babel which God has built, but he
says, is not this great Babel which I have built? he thought he had all the
power in himself, therefore after, when he was humbled by God, and had been
sent out a grazing amongst the beasts a while God made him see, He was the
worke^ Ver. 3^. Ver. 34*
he savv then, God did what he would, (...) he thought before, it was in his
own hand; this is to be a God; and this is in the heart of every natural man.
Life, Lusts, Parts, are the three Gods in the world, and in men's hearts.
Drunkenness svvayes the Drunkard; swearing is the chief commander over the
black-mouthed swea^er, the money of the rich man is his commander. The word of
God says, Thou shall not have this and that; but the heart says, I must have
it so, and will have it so; and it must be so; thus rich men will do what
they list; because they are richer then others; thus Riches is their God, and
they make it the first cause, and their commander.

Genesis 11.4. Genesis 11.4.
they would build them a Tovver to get them a name; They would build it as
Authors of it themselves; and then the end, to get themselves a name. So self
was in all that they did, and aimed at. So Dan. 4.30. Dan. 4.30.
Nebuchadnezzar did build Babell for the honor of his name. Thus he made
himself a God in building of it; and a God in the end, and aim of it; he
works all of himself, and for himself. Thus men make themselves gods; as all
Rivers come from the Sea, and flow th^ther again, so we think, all is done
for us and by our selves. It is my parts, my gifts, and my credit, all is mine,
and all self. Many Selfe-lovers, that in the time of Queen Mary made a
denial of God, and sinned against Conscience, and against Nature, and all for
selfs sake (...) because their God, Life and Safety commands it. So again
afterward in Queen Elizabeth's time, then they would turn again, and say all
is well: thus a natural man is nothing but self; so it is in every particular.

Adam fell for this, he would feign be a God; man being next to God, and is the
chiefest good of all other creatures, and sees all other creatures are
inferior to him, and therefore the soul of man being the chiefest good next
God, and so missing of the right God, he makes that which he conceived to be
the best, his God, that is, self: this is the reason: God-selfe is best next
to the God of heaven: so a man sets up Self above all, and it will be a God.
When there was no King in Israel, every man did what was good in his own eyes;
when there was no King to rule them, then every man was his own King; so every
man is his own God. Ephesians. 2.12. Ephesians. 2 12.
the text says, They walked without God in the world. as the Prophet said, As
thy cities are, so are thy gods, O Judah, Ier. 2.28. Ier. 2.28.
So, as thy sins are, so are thy Gods, O thou wretch. God-Covetousnesse,
God-Selfe, God-Pride is in every thing; the creature missing of Gods
sufficiency, will make his own self sufficient; and missing the commanding
God, he will command himself.

God of heaven by the word would pluck away these Dunghill-Gods: hence comes an
uproare in the town and family, here is the reason, he would take away their
Gods, Judge. 18.24. Judge. 18.24. Ier. 2.11.
Ier. 2.11. Has any nation changed their Gods, etc. They will not change their
Gods, but maintain them still; and can you blame them that they maintain
their Gods? So now when the God of heaven comes by his word, and plucks at
God-Covetousnesse, and God-Pride, and God-Lusts, Oh Labans Gods are going, he
must needs pursue them. So Demetrius his God-Covetousnesse was going, as well
as Diana, therefore he stood stoutly for it. Great was his covetousness, the
Text says, Great was the profit that came to him by Diana, the profit was that
that stuck in his stomach, and therefore he stood for Diana. Act. 19.
And this is the reason why drunkards rail at the Ministers, Oh the cup is
plucking from their nose, they would have their God Bacchus still, and
therefore they are up in arms to maintain it. If an English man should go to
the French King, and pluck off the Crown from his head, do you think there
would not be an uproare? So when the King and God-Selfe is uncrowned, Oh what
an uproare is there to maintain the Godhead of Corruption! Hence the power of
the word is very troublesome to them; Oh they cry out they are undone. Judge.
18.24. Judge. 18.24.
Micah thought, God could not but bless him when he had a Levite in his house;
but when the Danites carry away his Priest and his Gods too, he follows them,
and cries out very much, and they ask him why he did so? says he, You have
taken away my Gods, and ask you me what I aile? They were his Gods, and he was
the God-maker: so it is in the world, when the God-Sin, and the God-Selfe is
packing away from them, then they play Micah, cry after their Gods, and they
must by force be carried away, or else they will not be suffered. It grieves
the drunkard to part with his God; this is the reason, why they cry out so; Oh
these base courses are their Gods, and you take them away; that is the reason
of all their stir.

viz. The fierceness of his displeasure, the heavy hand of his wrath; and
indignation, for he is a jealous God of his honor; and what greater wrong can
you do, then admire Self, and contemn God; to prefer the gift before the
giver, to prefer life before God, and to let sin justle God out of his
throne, if we could; and so set up a company of idols: nay, what greater
dishonor can you do to God, then to advance lust, and Deifie sin, and let
God be neglected? How dares a poor creature do this? Is it not enough to have
these, but to thrust God out by them? How shall God bear and endure this at
your hands* Dan. 4 31. Dan. 4 31.
While Nebuchadnezzar was vaunting himself, God sent him p^eking to graze
among the beasts. What, strike at the Almighty? What, none else? Oh the wrath
of God will be upon thee, while thou art so doing, and he will make thee see
God is God, and he only is to be worshipped. Act. 12.23. Act. 12.23.
While Herod was admiring himself, the Lord sent vermin to devour his
carcass; and he immediately died like a beast as he was. As if the Angel should
have said, Is it good now to be a God? vengeance came presently from heaven. Oh
you that be sinful, and will still sell, and talk vainly on the Sabbath day,
and sit prating at your doors still: On God will come and push down all these
idols of yours; yea, when you shall howl to him for help, he will send you
to them for help; all you profane drunkards, and cursed swearers, the great
God of heaven will come down, and pluck away all your Gods here, and the Lord
will bid you go to your idols for help, and then they will leave you in the
lurch; and unless you leave them, God will send you and them to hell. Exodus
12.12. Pharaoh was a stout-hearted man, and cared not for Jehovah, but God
says, I will smite him, and execute my fierce wrath upon all the firstborn
in Egypt. Moses told him, Jehovah commanded it, but says he he, What care I
for Jehovah? I know him not: but mark what followed, God plagued him afterward
for it. If there be any Pharaoh in this Congregation, let him know, the Lord
will make him stoop; and he will pluck away all your idols from you. Do you
think, he will be justled out of his throne? No, no; and that you shall know
one day.

If a man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself.

Self-denial is a special means to make us Disciples of Christ.

This is the way we must walk in, we must have no other Lord then Christ; and
then, come after Christ, or else no following of him: but Denying all, makes a
sound Disciple.

This truth is made known in three particulars. Our safety, sufficiency and
the like must all be laid down, before we can be Christ's Disciples. Our self,
life, and all, must be laid down at Christ's feet.

Act. 15.26. Act. 15.26.
It is a commendation to them, that they hazarded their life for Christ to do
what he would with them. Act. 21.14. Act. 21.14.
He had in a readiness, not only to be bound, but to die for the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ; as who should say, What thou will Lord, life, or wealth,
or what thou will, it is here, Lord take it. I will lay it down at Christ's
feet. Philip. 2.30. Epaphroditus was commended for that he was nigh unto death,
not regarding life, but gave up himself: so must we, give up our selves, not
regarding life, or any conceited excellency of wit, learning, understanding,
etc. all must lie in the dust: a man must be a fool, that he may be wise. 2
Cor. 10.5. 2 Cor. 10.5.
Casting down imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self, and
bringing into captivity every thought unto the obedience of Christ. You say, I
will never bear this, Oh you must down with these, they are treasonable
thoughts, and must be captivated so also our wills, they must down. God will
not have you women, to take up these vain fashions, you must deny them all,
Act. 9.6. says Paul, Lord, what will thou have me to do: I will do any thing, I
will lay down any thing: you must not have your wills, but lay down all at
Christ's feet; and thou that wilt not lay down every lust for Christ, shall
never have him. Christ prayed, that if it were possible, that cup might pass
from him, but he would have his Fathers will be done. So we must do what God
will have us to do; yea, all the violent affections of the world must down.
Matthew. 18.9. Matthew 18.9.
If thy eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out; out with all these right eyes:
Oh you love them dearly, but out with them; and resign up reason, will and
affections, as a man that sails by a castle, or the like, he must pull down
the top sail in token of submission; so we must pull down our ma^^s, or else
the cannons of the vengeance of the Almighty will let fly against us.

Ier. 1^. The way of man is not in himself. Therefore see the vileness of
these things, and m^st not to them, for they will surely fail* Jonah 1. Jonah
1.
Jonah would make a shorter out to go to Nine^^th, and go to Tarshish; but
God sent a whirlewind, and cast him into the sea, and then he had enough of
following himself. Jonah 2.8. Jonah 2.
And therefore he concludes, They that follow lying vanities, forsake their
own mercy: this you shall find, in following lying vanities, you shall
forsake your own mercy: before Jonah thought it was best to go to Tarshish;
but after, he saw it otherwise. Therefore let us (...) out own sufficiency in
our selves as nothing, nor expect any thing from it. Therefore because it is
not in us to help our selves, let us lay all at the feet of Christ, and expect
nothing from Self sufficiency, but all from Christ.

Matthew. 4 20. They left their Nets and followed Christ. Matthew. 8. When the
Disciple would go bury his father, Christ would not let him return again,
Let the dead bury the dead, says our Savior: so let not us have our hearts
hankering after them, when we have rid our fingers of them, as Lots wife did
after Sodom; therefore look not back, bestow not thy heart upon them; and if
thou can thus follow him, thou art a Disciple of our Savior: but if you know
any thing that has authority, or sufficiency, or is to be loved besides
Christ, in a fit opportunity you will forsake Christ, and stick to it:
therefore, I beseech you, look to it.

England, and the King of Spain; for the King of Spain commands to go to
Mass; the King of England commands to serve the true God according to the
Gospel; a man cannot fight for the King of Denmark, and the Emperor too: so
Christ commands to kill your lusts, and you will keep them; these two commands
cannot stand together, there cannot be two Suns in one firmament, nor two
Gods in one heart; therefore sin must be first down, before Christ can be up
in the heart. If a man be a hired servant, he must not be at his own dispose,
but at the disposal of his master; so if you be Christ's servants, you must
serve him; but if you will live as ye list, and be free from his power, you
cannot be his Disciples; but if you will have Christ to be your King, you must
not do what you list, but submit to him. Romans 8.7. For the wisdom of the
flesh is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; therefore avoid
it, submit not to the authority of it.

John 21.15. Peter stood it out, and yet after denies Christ. Mark how our
Savior tryes him, love thou me more then these? Feed my lambs; as who
should say, if thou love not me more then these, then thou can not serve me.

Then the point is clear, if without Self-denial the authority of Christ
cannot be acknowledged; if our hearts cannot be bestowed on Christ unless we
trample on our selves; then it is clear, we must deny our selves before we be
Christ's Disciples. The deluge of miseries has overspread other countries, and
it is near us; therefore it is fit to deny our selves, to prepare for a Cross.



therefore in conclusion, they deny our Savior; they that take up the
profession of religion, and forsake it when opportunity is offered, the reason
of it is, they did not forsake themselves, therefore they forsake our Savior,
the way of Self-denial Christ walked in, John 8.50. John 8.50.
he sought not himself and his own glory, nay, he emptied himself when he
led captivity captive, he laid down all; had not he denied himself, woe had
been to our souls; but he laid down his life, and if you purpose to be his
Disciples, you must lay down life and self too; this is the reason why those
who in former times thought their money as good silver as another, yet they
have turned away in the day of battle, and are become the deadliest enemies to
Christ that are, here is the ground, Self stuck behind, Matthew. 7. Strive to
enter in as the strait gate, for strait is the gate, and narrow the way that
leads to happiness: there is a strait gate before a narrow way, and because
men go not through the strait gate, they go not through the narrow way: the
strait gate is Selfe-denyall, you must strip your selves stark naked; hence
one stumbles, and another staggers in the narrow way: the way is narrow, you
mist the strait gate, and so fall short of the narrow way. Idle travelers when
they come in dirty ways, will break a gap, and wandering a great way, and not
finding the way, they are forced to come back, and go the same way they went
at the first* so men will be Christians so long as they may keep ease, the
drunkard would go to heaven, if he might carry an Alehouse on his back, etc.
but when they come to any difficulty, they break a gap in a Christian course:
it befalls many a professor as it does an idle buyer, he will be cheapning, but
will not buy, because he will not come to the price: therefore take notice of
it, you come to cheapen, you would have grace, and you would be saved, but you
will not have it on Christ's terms, you will not deny your selves, which must
be, if ever you be saved by Christ.





First, I will show how far this is in Gods servants.

Secondly, I will come to the maine trial, to show who they be that deny self.

First, how far Self is in the Saints, by way of caution.

And the cautions are three:

First, the best of Gods servants, those of the highest form, and greatest
strength, they have some self in them, but they are not self, Phil. 2.21.
Phil. 2.21.
all seek their own; it is a disease that will pester the best Saints more or
less, 1 Samuel 5. 1 Samuel 5.
when the Arc was set before that cursed Dagon, the head of it was broken
down, but the stumpe remained still; so that although the Arc, the blessed
spirit of God has been in the heart of the Saints, and the necks of their
Dagon corruptions be broken, yet the stumps of Dagon remain in ^he best Saints.
Paul that was a Lieutenant, or Colonel in Christ's camp, yet he had not learned
this lesson without book, 2 Cor. 1.9. we had the sentence of death in our
selves, that we should not trust in our selves, it came off mavelous hard:
Christ was feign to fling him off from his horse on the ground, that he might
not trust in himself. Experienced Paul must learn this self-denial, there
is some stumpes of this in every man.

2 It is mavelous stirring, and it will slip into the best of our services,
to hinder our souls in duty: this self takes greatest hold, and is hardly
removed. In nature, though the senses be gone, yet there will be a pulse
stirring so long as there is any life in a man: so in this body of sin, this
original sin spreads it self, how ever some base lusts fall off, yet the
pulse Self is on every occasion hindering, John 21.18. John 21.18.
they shall carry thee whither thou would not, etc. although Peter was an
aged Christian, after all troubles that had betided him, one would have thought
he would have lain down easily, being one foot in the grave already, but our
Savior tells him, they should carry him whither he would not.

3 It not only stirs, but is also too strong for us many times. It is one
thing to have the motions of it, and another thing to be overcome by it;
therefore in the third place Self may carry a man to that which crosses his
desire: hence Abraham told a lie, David fained himself mad, Abraham feared his
life, therefore speaks falsely: David feared his life, therefore expresses
foolishness in his practice. Selfe-sufficiency, and selfe-practise made Peter
deny his Master, and yet not withstanding all this, the Saints do deny
themselves. And the trials thereof are four.

1 See what a price thou put upon life and safety, whether thou art not
content to part with them, or whether thou partest with all that may cross
them: if thou put such sufficiency in life and parts, know thou art no
selfe-denyer. It is easy for a man to be frequent in service, that may further
credit, but when it comes to the pinch, that either Baal must be God, or that
Christ must be God, art thou then content to take the wall of Christ? then as
yet thou art a god to thy self, Acts 20.24. Acts 20.24.
I count not my life dear unto me, that I may finish my course with joy: the
finishing of Paul's course is a careful perseverance for the glory of God, as
who should say, had I put a price on safety, I had never been able to
discharge the duty of an Apostle, but it is not precious, as who should say, I
weigh it not: he that serves himself by serving Christ, makes Christ serve
him, he serves not Christ. Satan accused Job thus, Does Job serve God for
naught? as who should say, he does not serve God, but himself in serving of
God, he serves his own honor, that serves Christ for honor: he that does
service for riches, does not serve Christ, but his profit and riches. When
Pilate would see whether they would have Christ, he says, Matthew. 27.21. Matthew.
27.^^.
Will you that I let loose to you, Christ or Barabbas? as who should say, I
shall see now whether your hearts are toward him, they reply, not Christ, but
Barabbas, as who should say, we will have none of Christ. Let me make
Proclamation, will ye have the glory of God, or safety? shall I give to you the
commodity of prayers or profit? whether shall I let loose to you meditation on
the word of God, or profaneness on the Lords day? says one, let me have
profit, says another, let me have profane sports, take you your prayer,
preaching, etc. says another, if Popery come, I will be a Papist: yea says
the drunkard, give me my cups, and take you the repetition of sermons; what is
this in English, but to say, we will have Barabbas? the case is clear, you
are drunkards still, and selfe-seekers still, what shall become of me and mine,
says one, shall we beg? shall not we follow our riches and our usury, but
beg for our living? yea better beg and burn too, then deny Christ, and live
in any known sin, as swearing, drunkenness, usury, etc.

2 As we should see what we put most price upon, so in cold blood, and sad
consideration, try thy self whether thou art not willing to take notice of
such truths as do threaten the hazzarding of thy life; if thou can not
hearken to such because thou would not suffer, the truth is, as yet thou art
a God to thy self, Ier. 2.11. Has a nation changed their Gods for th^se that
are no Gods? this is made as a maine affection they have to Idols, it is
observeable, none would change his God. Observe this in thine own soul,
pride, lust, etc. and art thou lorh to change them? and art thou loath to hear
it is unlawful to sell on the Lords day? or to put thy money to usury? Oh then
there is a God at home: oh you are loath to change god-credit and god-profit.
Many men say, it is good to pray, but I shall beflouted, and men will say, what
are you turned Professor? but men for credits sake will not do it; here are
your Gods: oh your God-credit sticks upon you, therefore you are loath to hear
those truths: oh undeifie your credit, John 12.42. John 12.42.
Many assented to the faith, but durst not discover it, lest the Pharisees
should cast them out: as who should say, the truth is good, but if we profess
it, the truth is, there is but one way, we must be cast out: oh take heed this
be not in thee. It befalls the soul as it did Rachel, she stole Labans Gods,
and laid them under her: she was content all should be ransackt for them, but
she sat upon the Gods, they must not be seen* so have thou an Idol of profit
in thy profession, do thou make profession a stalking-horse for credit? the
case is certain, thou art an Idolater.

3 Consider what it is that gives thy soul contentment in duty; no man spends
his time, but he will expect some good: so see what it is that sweetens thy
service, do thou eat thy bread with joy, because God accepts thee, Eccles.
9.7. Eccles. 9.7.
is thy heart sustained, because God accepts thee in prayer, in hearing is this
the sweet of thy labor? is this thy rejoicing, the testimony of a good
conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. 2 Cor. 1.12.
in the midst of reproaches, disgraces of thy name, malicious dealing to thy
person, does this quiet thee? in the midst of all wants is this thy rejoicing,
even the testimony of thy conscience? is thy heart here contented to let all
ease and liberty to go for Christ? if it be so, then God is thy God, 1 Samuel
30.6. 1 Samuel 30.6.
when Ziglag was taken, and David's wives carried away, etc. yet David,
comforted himself in his God, as who should say, It is enough, God is mine,
what ever becomes of this life, I am sure of a better but is it so, that thou
professest Christ only because of the applause of christians, and when respect
fails, does thy endeavor fail? the case is clear, thou art Self still. The
soul that has God, cannot be content without God; but if thou slingest away
all, because thou have not what thou would have, thou art a God to thy
self. The Winde-Mill stirs no further then the wind stirs it, so the wind
of applause stirs thy soul to pray, this is Self, 2 Samuel 18.33. 2 Samuel 18.33^
Oh my son Absalom, my son Absalom, etc. It is a lively pattern of a
selfe-loving soul. But mark how Ioab takes him up in the 6 v. of the 19, 2 Samuel 19.6.
chapter. Now I see who carried David's heart; if you might have had your fine
Absalom, it would have pleased you well though all we had dyed: so in the time
of opposition do thou sit like Rachel, and wilt not be comforted, because
Profit is not? and though Christ, and grace, and duty, be neglected, thou
weighest it not; I say as Ioab this day, I see it and know it. If grace had
never been communicated, if thou had thy Absalom of honor, it would have
pleased thee: know for certain, that that which this contents thee, is a God
to thee. God was never God to thee yet.

4 The fourth note is most pregnant. See if thou be content to give up all to
Christ, give money, parts, profits, and praise, and let Christ do what he will
with them; art thou content to resign up all into his hands, if Christ may be
honored with any thing of them? art thou content to loose it? then have thou
denied Self: if the heart resolves to let Christ alone with them, I have
nothing to do with any, then let Christ take life and parts, and whatsoever it
be to procure his honor and praise: nay, a selfe-denying heart is content
Christ should take away his corruptions, and counts it a great blessing too.
The soul has nothing to do with Prosperity and Liberty, therefore submits
and obeyes Christ, Acts 2.45. Acts 2.45.
All those (says the Text) that were to profess Christ, sold all, and none
had any thing of his own: so let that be the frame of thy heart, sell all, and
say, I have no honor, liberty, or ease, but I give all to Christ, and let him
do what he will with them. In time of persecution, say liberty is not mine,
let Christ dispose of all, this is a heart worth gold. But when thou have some
reservations, I will profess Christ, but he shall yield to me in this, to
give me life; this I will not part with in any case; this heart never denied
Self. Therefore let us do as Mephi^^sheth, Let him take all, since my Lord the
King is returned in peace; 2 Samuel 19.30. 2 Samuel 19.30.
so is it here, if carnal reasoning be parting stakes with Christ, no, says
the soul, let him take all, since God is mine in Christ. Lay now your hearts to
this touchstone: do thou find these? then thou art grounded on a good
foundation; thou may be shaken, but shall not be overthrown, but if in
examination and trial, thou can not find all these in thee; thou art a
colored hypocrite, varnished over for a while, but it will not hold, and in
the end, thou and thy profession will vanish like smoke. Christ will purge
thee of this Self, or else he will never do good to thee.

and you shall persevere in the narrow way, John 15.19. John 15.19.
I have chosen you out of the world. He that will be a servant, must do two
things: first, he must renounce all other Masters, secondly, he must renounce
his own liberty, so we must renounce the masterdome of sin and the world,
and be content to be commanded by Christ, and then follow him: you cannot serve
God and Mammon. Renounce all, and serve Christ.





First, the nature of it. It is the basest slavery, when a man will attend his
own corruptions. Isreal's bondage (...) Egypt and Babylon were but shadows of
this: a poor Negro that tugs under the Turks is a freeman to this. And the
misery appears in three degrees.

First, sin is the supreme ruler in every carnal heart: hence it is said to
give laws, Romans 6.12.19.20. Romans 6.12.19.20.
Servants to sin, and free from righteousness: as who should say,
righteousness has nothing to do with thee. Temperance has nothing to do
with the drunkard; the adulterer has given himself to uncleanness.

Secondly, Satan by sin domineeres over the soul, it is under his command,
Ephesians. 2.2. Ephesians. 2.2.
they walk after the Prince of the power of the air, as lusts and Satan
would have them, so they lived, 1 Cor. 12.2. carried away unto dumb ^dols as
they were led. Satan is a slave to sin, and thou art a slave to him. It is a
base thing to be a scullion, but to be a slave to a scullion no man can bear.

Thirdly, he is a servant to a corrupt mind: we are slaves to our own
souls, which are servants to Satan who is a slave to sin. This every
selfe-seeker does, he serves his corrupt mind, servant to Satan who is slave
to sin, a slave to the servant of a servant. Hear this, oh ye contemners,
drunkards, usurers, etc. come and see your slavery; you boast of your brave
spirits, that you can break the bonds of the word, but holy men, you think,
are drudges; what always hear and pray? to be thus fettered all ones life
time, this is a slavery. No, no, you are the slaves, the drunkard must ask the
devil leave to be sober, a drunken devil leads him by the nose to a smoaky
Alehouse: thou that art proud, be meek if thou can, no, no, thou must ask a
proud heart leave to be humble; there is no difference between Satan and
thee, only that he is cooped up in hell, and thou art cooped up under sin.
You freemen, I tell you, you are the basest vassals under heaven, let therefore
the drudgery drive you out of the house, and think with your selves, shall I
be led by my base corruptions, like a fool to the stocks? will you be slaves
to sin and Satan? fly the country rather; now the service of the Lord is
perfect liberty, Iam. 1.25. John 8.32. Iam. 1.25. John 8.32.
the truth shall make you free. Now is it not better that the spirit of God
which is freedom, should rule you, then sin and slavery should guide you?
for shame labor to come out of this slavery.

Secondly, the evil that comes by this selfe-seeking, all the ordinances of
God, as the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, you and they are accursed so far as you
seek your self by them: they that preach for themselves, God curses them and
their preaching too* he that hears for Self, his hearing is accursed, for
Self is the Master and commands thee, as a ship that is never so well
furnished with tacklings, if it run upon a rock, it splits; so though thou be
never so frequent in all sorts of holy duties, if thy aim be naught, and you
split upon the rock of Self, all is accursed. Math. 6.23, Mat. 6.23.
if thy light be darkness, how great is that darkness? that is, if thy
conscience be deluded, thy case is sinful.

This evil that comes by selfe-seeking, appears in three things.

First, God entertaines no such sacrifice: why? it is that which is
dishonorable unto God, and can he accept it, Isa. 58.5. Isa. 58.5.
a company of hypocrites sought their pleasure, now says God, can thou call
this a fast? Is this such a day as I have chosen? no, I accept no such service.

Secondly, God assists not, he rewards not any such service: why should God
do the work, and we take the praise? Matthew. 6.3. Mat. 6 3.
they gave alms to be seen of men, but what follows? you have your reward,
says our Savior, as who should say, you did it to be seen of men, and you
were seen: I will not reward you, you serve not God but Self, let Self
therefore reward you.

Thirdly, it takes away the comfort of a man's conversation: this will shake the
souls of many hypocrites at the day of death, after all the pains of outward
performance of duty, because he sought himself: he sinkes in sorrows, and
all the Min^sters in the world, and all the carnal friends under heaven cannot
comfort him: when carnal friends come and tell him he has done so and so, and
has been an ancient Professor, and a good neighbor, etc. yea, says he, I
have served my self, and not God in it, therefore to hell I must and shall
go, because of this: this will break the neck of many hypocrites, when an
humble selfe-denying heart, though his abilities be but small, yet being humble
hearted, his prayers shall be heard and accepted, when the prayers of many a
glorious Professor that was an hypocrite, shall fall to the dust: as therefore
you would have your prayers heard, fly away from this selfe-seeking.



First, it is the way to have our selves, and whatsoever is in us (not sinful)
our safety, comfort, sufficiency, credit, it does not remove these, but only
rectify them; it is a groundless suspicion of carnal hearts, they think if
they lay all at stake, they must take their leave of all, profit and comfort
and all. No, denying of a man's self, does not take all these away, but
maintains them. The only way for a subject to be preserved, is to yield
homage to his Prince, but if a man prove traitor to the Crown, he shall be
hanged for a traitor; so life, sufficiency, safety, are good subjects so far
as they serve God, but if they take the wall of Gods will, and will be rulers,
you may be hanged as traitors, whereas otherwise you might have been honored
as subjects, Math. 16.25. He that loses his life, shall save it: the losing
of a man's life is the next way to save it: it does not take away pleasure:
rejoice evermore, though not in drunkenness: it proves a greater good then if
we had served Self: the denying of Self is the improving of Self, and the
renouncing of sin is the next way to get pardon of it: if we lay down our
wit, behold a greater wisdom to direct us: empty your selves of frothy
vanities, and you shall be wholly possessed of the glory of Christ, who would
not then change for a better? Come out of Self, and you shall have a Savior,
2 Cor. 6.17.18. 2 Cor. 6.17.
Come out of her my people, and I will dwell in you: come out of your own
power, and the Lord will bestow strength; lay down God-selfe, and the great
God will cheer you, Matthew. 19.29. Mat. 19.29.
they forsook their fathers, and their nets, and mark what Christ adds,
whosoever forsakes father or mother, wives or children, or lands for my sake,
and the Gospels, shall receive an hundred fold; that is, you have taken delight
in a carnal course, lay down those, and you shall have a hundred fold more,
deny that selfe-loosenesse, and you shall have joy unspeakeable and glorious;
if you have left riches, you shall have unsearchable riches in Christ, and what
can you have more?

Secondly, again, if we can deny our selves, God will not deny us, the time
will come, we shall be ashamed of selfe-safety, when the time of persecution
approaches, or when the day of death comes, and you are going the way of all
flesh: where then is the glory and beauty of all that you expected? what now is
become of your wit and policy that you doted upon? then all those parts and
gifts, all that pride add stoutnesse, all will fail you, miserable comforters
that they are: now the carnal wretch will say I prized life before Christ, now
I must part from it; here now is all the comfort I can find in these, I may
go to hell. It is just, God should deny us, if we deny him. God may say, go
to those Gods whom you have honored: go now to your Cups and Queanes, and let
them pacify your consciences: thus it is just God should deny us, because we
have denied him, but if we deny our selves, God will not deny us.

David, he went to Achis^, and then he thought himself free from Saul, so
give up thy self to ^he command of God, so Saul and Self will not seek after
thee, because there is a greater God there, Romans 8* 2. Romans 8.2
The law of the spirit of life has made me free from sin and death: look
to the word daily, set up the (...) of the spirit of life in thy heart, and it
will free thee from the law of sin and death; as now in conference, in
reproving of sin, a man would have his parts seen, but set up a command;
reprove, and do all in virtue of that, that Self may shake his ears and be
gone, Gal. 5.16. Gal. 5.16.
Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Many
times the Saints are much perplexed, because that self presses into duties,
that they are weary of the work; they cannot pray, but pride presses in upon
them, though Self stir, yet fetch a command against it; attend not to the
stir of distemper, but take a command. If there be a flaw in the Evidence of
a man's land, he will keep his land still, but he will mend his title; so if
Self carry thee to duty, keep duty still, but mend thy tenure. John 4.44.
John 4.44.
The woman of Samaria comes into the City, and tells of Christ; now that was an
occasion to them to hear Christ, but their faith was set upon the word of our
Savior: so go to the truth, and take up duty, not because Self eggs, but
because God commands. Look how high an action begins, so high it will end: let
Gods command rule us, and it will be to his glory.

Thus you have seen the first means, viz. Self-denial. Now we come to the
second. Take up the Cross. You must not think to go to heaven on a
feather-bed: if you will be Christ's disciples, you must take up his Cross, and
it will make you sweat. By Cross we understand troubles, because the death of
the Cross was the bitterest and most accursed, therefore it is put for all
misery, trouble, affliction, and persecution. He must take up his Cross, that
is, because it is his own. Every man has his particular affliction: by taking
up is meant a cheerful undergoing of misery and affliction. God loves a
cheerful sufferer, as well as a cheerful giver.

The points are three.

Every follower of Christ has affliction allotted to him as a childs part.

1 Hence it is said to be the Saints diet, Psalm. 80.5. Psalm 80.5.
Thou feedest them with the bread of sorrow, and give them tears to drink
in abundant measure.

2 As it is their food, so it is their badge, Gal. 6.17, Gal. 6.17.
I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. It is not a wodden Cross as
the Papists imagine, that is a foolish dotage; no, but a whipped Apostle, and a
scourged Apostle. I (says Paul) carry about with me the marks of the Lord
Jesus.

3 It is the Way of a Christian, Acts 14.22. Acts 14.22. Romans 8.17.
Romans 8.17. We are the heirs of Christ, but we must be spit upon with Christ,
and then we shall be saved with him.

4 It is their Portion, In the world ye shall have tribulation, John 16.33.
Rev. 2.10. John 16.33. Rev. 2.10.
Satan shall cast some of you into prison; the prison is their portion, ten
days is the time, Satan by his instruments is the Iaylour, each man has his
cross.

Jobs friends, the folly of David, that he condemned the generation of the
righteous, Cant. 1.5. Cant. 1.5.
I am black, says the Church, yet comely: that is, black in persecution, but
comely in grace; though persecuted, yet gracious; condemn not then the
generation of the righteous. There is no Christian but has his particular
cross: does any reason on this manner, it is ill ground because men plow it?
ill met^le because it is melted? no, it is a sign it is good, and that the
Goldsmiths will make it a vessel of honor because he melts it. Affliction is
the plough, and persecution is the fire, the wicked make long furrows on the
backs of Gods servants, therefore it is a sign they are good ground, the
rather because they are plowed. No man says a man is not a soldier because
he is wounded; no, but he will say the rather he is a soldier, because he
is wounded; a child the rather because corrected, sanctified the rather
because persecuted and afflicted.

Pet. 4.17. 1 Pet. 4.17.
The time is come that judgment shall begin at the house of God, what shall
then be the end of those that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ? their eyes
stand out with fatness: I grant that, but what shall be their end? they are
opposite to Gods house: you have the name of Christians, but you are none of
Gods house; you can stout it after a satanicall manner; but what will your end
he^ if the S. of God be persecuted, what will the end of wicked opposers and
drunkards be? their end will pay for all; if the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the sinner and ungodly appear? Lazarus lived meanly here, you
would think it hard to live so. Di^es fared deliciously every day, end went in
purple and fine linen, who but Dives then? but mark the end, Lazarus died,
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom; he was attended on by
Angels, that is observable; how ever you scorn poor christians, yet I tell
you, the blessed Angels attend upon poor christians, though they dwell in a
smoaky cottage, and go in a leather coat, therefore despise them not. The rich
man dyed also (for all his riches) and what became of him? the devils dragged
him to hell, and there he is scorched, and cries to Abraham, but mark how he
answers him; Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasure, as
also Lazarus pain, but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Poor
Lazarus that was afflicted, is now relieved; but thou had thy pleasure,
therefore thou shall be for ever tormented, that was the end of Dives. If the
father deal roughly with his child, what will he do with a traitor? if the
righteous scarcely be saved; he is feign to pray for his life, and yet after
all endeavor, he comes as Paul to the haven scarcely saved* if Abraham
scarcely come to happiness, ^h where shall the ungodly appear? where shall
the ha^ghty person that will not come in appear* how shall thou loo^ mercy in
the face? Consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there be (...) to deliver you. You Alehouse-keepers, and Alehouse-haunters, God
is there and sees (...) if God correct those that live soberl^, ^ha^ will
become of thee that live like a swine? God speaks thus into thee, oh thou
drunkard, and thou adulterer, thou have done this* I will se^ them in order
before thee, and then the Lord will tear thee in pieces. You must not think
to despise God and his servants, and go away so; no, no, consider this lest he
tear you in pie^^s, and there be none to deliver you; God has rods for his
own, but Scorpions for the wicked; if God correct his servants that thrive
under the means, what will become of those that despise the means? if a
follower be scourged, an enemy shall be condemned.

Come we then to the second point, that is the duty: a man must not start
aside, but take up his Cross. By Cross, I told you, was meant troubles and
afflictions. This a man must take up cheerfully. Takeup.

The followers of Jesus Christ must cheerfully undergo what ever afflictions
are allotted unto them: they must not have them whether they will or no.
Afflictions are a burden, and we must not only lift at them, but take them up
cheerfully, as if Christ had said, if you will walk uprightly, you shall have
many blocks that you cannot leap over, but you must go away with them
cheerfully. It is not only here required, but it is elsewhere commanded, Iam.
1.2. Iam. 1.2.
Co^nt it all ^oy when ye fall into diverse temp^ation^; not some joy when ye
fall into some temptations, but all joy when ye fall into all temptations* It
is the excellency of a Christian to under go affliction cheerfully. God loves
not only a cheerful give^, but a cheerful sufferer, Matthew* ^. Math. 1.
Wh^ (...) speak all manner of evil against you (it is observeable, wicked
men's tongues are tipped from hell, they speak all manner of evil, and as the
Apostle Saint James says, are set on fire from hell) and what then? must you
go into a corner and howl? no, rejoice and be exceeding glad, or, as the word
carries, a man should leap for joy; nay, it has been the behavior of some
worthies in former times that have been in the forefront of the battle, Acts
20.22. Acts 20.22.
when it was foretold Paul that he should be bound at Jerusalem, mark what he
replies, behold, I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem: that is, he was
willing to undergo it before he had it; though troubles befell him, yet he
went on cheerfully, Acts 5.41. Acts 5.41.
they went away rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ,
Phil. 2.30. Phil. 2.30.
not regarding life: the Saints should have it in a readiness, Acts 21.13.
Acts 21.13. Matthew. 27.32.
we must not deal with our Cross as Simon did, Matthew. 27.32. they compelled
him to carry it; but a Saint must carry his Cross cheerfully: the Mariners
take foul tempests as well as fai^e galus, so we that are sailors and
soldiers must fare as we find.





1 It must be our own. Let him take up his Cross; that is, that affliction
which God has allotted for our particular port^on; we must not bring misery
on our selves, there is no credit no^ comfort in this. The text does not say,
let him make his Cross, no, it is ma^e already: so long as we have the world
and our own corrupt hearts* and as long at the^e are Di^els in hell, there are
troubles enough. It is folly for a traveller to go through a slough when he
may escape it, so we must not needlessly run into troubles, but if it be
allotted, we must travel in winter, and drink of the cup of sorrow and
affliction. The Patient that takes physic, if there be five or six more
sick in his chamber, and there be diverse potions sent, one man must not take
every man's potion, but he must take the physic prescribed for him: so
afflictions are potions, one has disgrace, another poverty, every man must
take his own potion, Ier. 10.19. Ier. 10.19.
It is my sorrow, therefore I will bear it.

2 When we see the Receipt under Gods hand, we must stoop, we must put our
necks to the yoke, and our shoulders to the burden, Heb. 11.25. Heb. 11.25.
Moses chose rather the reproach of Christ, the crown of thorns in Christ's
service, then all the gold in Egypt, any for ought I know, he might have worn
the crown of Egypt, he was not forced to it, the Text says, he chose it
rather.

3 We must quietly carry it, with a meek disposition, not snarling at the hand
of the Almighty, nor yet disquieted with affliction, though it pinch him sore;
but we must do a^ David, Psalm. 39.9. Phil. 39.9.
I held my tongue and sp^ke no word, because thou did it. You know oftentimes
the Parent makes the child not only bear the rod, ^ut also kiss the rod, so
should we, not only bear afflictions, but kiss the rod, and willingly
undergo them: the Text says of Christ, he went as a sheep to the slaughter,
and gave his neck to the smiter. Patience by force is nothing, but when it is
done voluntarily, it is something, 1 Samuel 3.18. ^ Sam. 3.18.
Eli does not fall out with God, as Jonah, (I do well to be angry to the
death.) But mark what he says, It is the Lord that has done it. He takes
those blows with meekness. We hear of no quarrelling at I^be hand, but,
Naked (says he) came I into the world, and na^ed shall I go out; and blessed
be the Name of the Lord; not a word more. Then you see, It must be suffered
willingly, and undergone patiently.

John 18.11. John 18.11.
Shall I not drink of the c^p which my Father gives me? There is the force of
the argument. God prepares it, therefore drink it. So the Apostle reasons. Heb.
12.9. Heb. 12.9.
Our fathers in the flesh corrected us, and we submitted: As who should say, We
bo^e the afflictions of our fathers in the flesh, when they s^ew upon us in a
passion, and they that we^e nearest, they sped worst; and shall we not rather
bear, and be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live? God would have
us live. If the Patient be persuaded, the Physician has skill, he will ^e
willing to receive the potions prescribed by him: so our Father is our
Physician, and a father will (...) the child nothing that shall (...); let us
therefore submit to what ever God lays upon us, whether sweet or sour, we
must not only have cordialls which are sweet, but bitter potions and pills;
Does God provide it, and shall not we take it? Isa. 38.15. Isa. 38.15.
What shall I say, he has spoken unto me, and himself has done it, I shall
go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul. God bids him set his
house in order, he should die. God has said it, says the Text, and I will do
it.

Lam. 3.27. Lam. 3.27.
It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth. Who would not be cut that
he might be cured? Afflictions are painful, but there is good in them; a man
is content to bear the knife of a Surgeon, to be healed. Matthew 19. When
Christ measured out their condition, he says, Ye shall have houses, etc. but
they shall be with persecution. We eat salt to make our meat savoury. So
afflictions are salt to make us relish the mercies which we receive, the
better.







1. If a man be not called to it, it is a duty to avoid it; rather to shun the
s^are then to be caught by it: and this stands upon three commands at the least.

2. When a man is called to affliction, and God has put him into the battle,
that trouble and misery come, then to fling away the Cross is a fearful
thing; the unbeleeving and fearful are coupled together, and shall be coupled
together in hell. It is that which God suffers not; you know that place, That
he that denies me before men, that turns his back in the day of battle, and
starts off when afflictions come, he that denies the Lord now, and will bear
nothing for him, the God of heaven will deny him; he that plays fast and loose
with Christ, and now he will be a Disciple, and now he will not; when he cries
for mercy, God will say, No, no; you would not know me, therefore depart, I
know you not: he that denies God in trouble, God will deny him introuble.



Dan. 3.16. Dan. 3.16.
The three Children when they could not avoid it, stood it out stoutly; we are
not careful to answer thee in this, O King. But Elias, the stoutest man that
earth bare, when he was threatened by Iezebel, and had a way to escape, he flew
from Iezebel, 1 Kings 19. 1 Kings 19.
If the three Children had had the like liberty to fly that Elias had, they
would and might have fled; but because there was no way to prevent it, they
stoutly bore it.

2. But if the Lord do give liberty, and set out a way that it is possible to
avoid persecution, yet if by withdrawing, either dishonor will come to the
truth, or if by it a man shall omit a duty on which the salvation of many
souls depends, rather then a man should fly off from the truth formerly
taught by him, and so discourage others, let him die, and feale the truth with
his blood, and rather die then dishonor the truth, and omit duty, and hurt
others.

1. First then, if the truth shall suffer hazard by our shrinking aside, it is
a sin. 2 Timothy 4.16. 2 Timothy 4.16.
At his first answer all forsook him, they put him in the forefront, and left
him there, they went one to this, and another to that; I love Paul, says one,
but my shop must be served; I love Paul, says another, but the truth is, I
must look to my lands; Did these do well in it. No, says Paul, I pray God it
be not laid to their charge. Thus we see, if the truth shall suffer any hazard
by our flying, though we can escape, yet in this case we ought not to fly
troubles.

2. If duty be omitted; If a man be in place or office of authority, and
forsakes duty because of persecution, he sins fearfully.

3. Concerning the salvation of others; If a Minister hazard the good of his
Congregation by flying, woe to him. Observe this rule, and it will go a great
way; all afflictions that lie betwixt me and duty, undergo them, though hell
gates were open: It is not necessary, a man should want a Cross, it is
necessary a man should want sin; rather die therefore then be wanting in
service. Acts 20 24. Acts. 20.24.
I count not my life dear that I may finish my course with joy, as who should
say, whether life or blood, it is not necessary I should live; it is necessary
I should perform duty. A traveller that must needs go home, be the way never
so bad or dangerous, home he will: so say you, to my duty I must, therefore what
ever befalls, it skils not. Yield then when God calls to suffer, and woe to that
soul that will not bear it: a Cross you must have, and you must take it up
too, if you be a disciple to Christ.



1 Such as will dwell in the house of our Savior, but the bread of affliction,
and the water of tears will not down with them, they must have dainties, or
else nothing will down with them; these are unfit for our Savior. Does any
one take a servant on this proviso, that he must never be corrected, and that
he must fare daintily, whatsoever his Master has? Nay, no man will take a
servant on these terms, yet this is the madness of many, you are content to
be Professors, but you must have dainties; you would be sons, but you would
not be corrected; no, God takes none but whom he corrects. There is a
generation that would be christians, but they would have no Cross: they
christians? we have a name that we are alive, but we are dead; if a man should
tell you, you are none of Christ's, you would think it very ill: whereas your
conscience tells you, you are not able to bear the breath of the wicked in
scorns and scoffs, how then will you bear the weight of all the Cross? it
is with such men as with Hushai, they would be on the best side: if prosperity
and peace forsake the Gospel, men forsake it, 2 Samuel 16.18. 2 Samuel 16.18.
Hushai comes to Absalom, and Absalom says, Is this thy kindness to thy
friend? nay says Hushai, but whom the Lord and this people shall choose, him
will I serve: so if Popery should come, if the Priests should ask men why they
forsake their religion: nay, would many men say, but what religion the Pope and
his shavelings shall choose, will I be of: oh if persecution should come, this
Cross would scare many thousands, Matthew. 27.42. Math. 27 42.
If he will come down from the Cross, we will believe him. Oh there is a
company of dissembling hypocrites that will say to our Savior, if it be an
imprisoned Savior, they will none of him, but if not persecuted, never saved,
if not bear the Cross, never look to wear the Crown, either both or none.

2 Those dissembling hypocrites, that now and then profess through a little
wash-way; they stoop and life at the C^osse, but yet when it comes to the
up-shot, they cannot bear the burden; these come to the fire of affliction to
be warmed, but not to be scorched, as he said, they cannot burn for religion.
When Paul was in bonds, he would not have them ashamed of his chains; this is
a thing mavelous frequent. The Papists have a foolish dream, that their
Cross, their airy Cross will scare devils; that is but a dorage, but this
Cross will (I had almost said, scare the Devil) I am sure will discover
devils, that is, hypocrites; bring them to the Cross, and you shall see them
fall before it like lightning.

First for Officers, if there be an Alehouse comes to be indicted, when it comes
to a dead lift, he will lift, and say, it is pity you keep such ill orders in
your house, I would it were not so; me thinks it should be otherwise, that
you should not do so, living under such means, therefore I wish you would
amend, etc. he gives them warning, and let them look better to it hereafter;
he wishes them well, etc. but he sees, if he should cross the drunkard and
blasphemer, oh then the Cross would come; the drunkard would forsake his shop,
and he should lose custom: upon this consideration, he flings off all duty,
rather then have a Cross.

Secondly, come down again to carnal Gospellers, you shall see them lift at
the Cross: tell him of praying in his family* and family duties of religion,
and then he will pray now and then, and he will set his house in some order,
but he feels the Cross coming, his carnal friends will say, how now? what
you turned puritan? and the very breath of carnal friends stops him, and then
he seeks to shift for himself, and one stands out and cavils, and says, why
should we pray? oh that is not the matter, there is another thing in the way,
there is a Cross you think will follow after: do thou think thou art the
disciple of Christ all this while? all the followers of Christ take up their
Cross, but you take not up your cross, therefore you are none of the
disciples of Christ: what argument of uprightness have you?

All grounds of soundness are referred to two heads.

1 Hatred of sin. 2 Love of Christ.
Now lay but these level: first, for hatred of sin, whosoever hates sin,
as sin, hates every sin; therefore in himself especially, as also in any
other, and he that hates will destroy it; now examine when thy place requires
it, thou do nothing against sin, do thou hate it? where hatred of sin
is, there will be a killing of sin, but thou let it live, therefore thou
hate not sin.

Secondly, for the love of Christ: can you say, you love Christ, when your
hearts are not with him, Judge. 16.15. Judge. 16.15.
when Christ and a customer comes in competition, and you despise Christ, what
do you love then? why, it is plain, thy profit: therefore thou must seek
grace, for as yet thou have none. Whosoever hates poverty more then sin, or
loves honor more then Christ, is no follower of Christ, but these men are so,
therefore no followers, not no disciples of our Savior.

is heart of Oak; but if it bend, it is sappy: so if thou give way to the
weight, hold with the Hare, and runnest with the Hound also, woe to thy
soul, thou art not right, 2 Cor. 6.4. 2 Cor. 6.4.
in all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God: what is that
approvement? it is when a christian is able to bear wind and weather; as a
free horse makes wash-way of all. It is reported by shepherds, that those
sheep which are sound, are made good by the cold, but they that are not, dye:
so it is with the sheep of Christ, there be many of the rascal c^ew, when
winter comes, when the sharp chill cold air of persecution comes, they fall
off: to keep ground here is an argument of a good sheep, but if thou be
loose because of persecution, thou art a coward, because thou bear not the
Cross, Luke 21.13. Luke 21.13.
this shall be to you for a testimony, as who should say, the world knew not
whether you loved me indeed, but this will cast the balance, when there is no
credit to honor a man, but a bare Christ, then to be content to suffer, this
will give the testimony.

Peter to deny Christ? and for an hypocrite to dye in the profession of Christ?



1 An hypocrite is content to bear much, but when you fret him to the
heart-veyne, he is dead; he that bears through pride, will bear any thing but
contempt, Luke 8.13. Luke 8.13.
Matthew. 13.21. yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a while, for
when persecution or tribulation arises because of the word, he is offended;
there is an opportunity of temptation, and season of sorrow: a proud man's hold
is credit, take away credit and honor, and he is gone, but all comes alike to
a Saint.

2 It may be possible, that a good man may be over-borne with troubles, and an
hypocrite may be thus: but a sound christian when he recovers himself, that
he has gotten his fence, he takes shame, and is courageous afterward; but a
carnal hypocrite, what he has done, he will defend, but he considers not
arguments that may make him to take up his Cross, he takes a brow of brass,
and out-faceth all; and will bear any thing that is against him, but they that
join with him are loved, and his arguments are commended: Peter did not stand
on terms, but he remembered the words of Christ, and wept.

3 Both may dye in the maintenance of the truth, and yet both may differ, for a
sound christian labors to credit the Gospel in dying, he takes up the Cross
of Christ, for Christ's glory; but a carnal hypocrite has his base aims and
ends. A man may dye through pride, as a Ruffian, rather then he will bear the
lie, he will fight it out, he does not maintain his life, but his base lust.
Papists will come over and play the traitors, that they may be canonized for
Saints: a man may dye without love, but a gracious heart suffers for the love
of the Gospel.

able cheerfully to take up the Cross, he is the only christian.



Paul did, Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should glory in any thing, save in the
Cross of Christ. Welcome Christ's Cross, as they did, Acts 5.41. Gal. 6.14.
Acts 5.41.
they went away rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ.
But can such men rejoice in Christ that cannot abide his presence? art thou
content that Christ should look over thy shoulder, when thou art railing and
cursing, because the Dice fall cross to thee? art thou content God should
strike thee down dead, and call thee to judgment in the midst of thy game and
swearing? I doubt not but all thy fellow-gamesters would run away if they
could: should a man tell you, you should redeem the time because the days are
evil, would he not spoil your sport? do you not then hate Christ? If a man
should pray but half an hour, you would think it death: but oh the cards and
dice can be sat at many hours; as who should say, Christ came to pardon
sin, that we might commit sin. God will send such men and their practices to
hell, is this the rejoicing in Christ? will you rejoice in Christ? then rejoice
in disgrace for Christ?





befall you, ye may be able to undergo it: his has quashed the courage of
many a christian, when they hear and read, they promise to themselves they
shall have honor, and when their expectations fa^le and are crossed, their
hearts faint. He that sows, observes not the wind, and the traveller does
not observe the dirty ways, Matthew. 10.34. Mat. 10.34.
think not that I come to send peace, as who should say, be not taken with
that dream that you shall have peace, that you shall have dainties; know this,
troubles and persecutions must come, and then if this befall you, you will say,
there is nothing come but that I looked for, Luke 14.28. Luke 14.28.
He that will build a tower must first count the cost: so count the cost, you
must part with your right eye, and right hands, it will cost you dear to be a
christian indeed.

2 Conclude what ever shall befall you, will be but first, small, and secondly,
the issue will be good: first, small; and that first in the time and
continuance, secondly, in the thing and substance, but small in time and
continuance; all tribulations are but short* it is but a day of trouble, Psalm.
50.15. Isa. 26.20. Psalm. 50.25. Isa. 26.20.
Come my people, enter into thy chamber, and shut thy door about thee, hide
thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be over-past:
it is but for a moment, life is but a bubble if we lose it: and secondly, the
substance that we lose; if we lose honor, it is but the breath of man; if we
lose wealth, it is ^s nothing; why do thou set thine eyes upon that which is
not? Pro. 23.5. Pro. 23 5.


Secondly, as the affliction will be but small in respect of time and
substance, so consider the issue; look beyond affliction, and mark the good
of it, and ever judge the Cross according to Gods judgment of it, Heb. 10.34.
Heb. 10.34.
you have in heaven a better, and more enduring substance: would not a man lay
out an hundred pounds to have it doubled? you do not lose riches, you shall be
rich in grace. Moses had an eye to the recompense of reward: had but Joseph
thought his imprisonment would have brought him to honor, he had borne it
gladly: had David thought the loss of Ziglag would have brought him to his
kingdom, he would have endured it; so Romans 8. afflictions are not worth the
crown of glory. the crushing of the grapes makes wine, so when a proud heart
is crushed, he is humble, 2 Cor. 4.17. 2 Cor. 4.17.
there is a crown of glory laid up; when the Lord is pursuing with misery,
think the Lord is preparing a crown be not poring on misery, here is misery,
but here is help too, Luke 21.19. Luke 21.19.
In patience possess your souls; as who should say, resolve on this, do not
put your hand on your sore; no, the Lord will recompense all.

3 Look every day to cross your corruptions, and then your cross will seem
easy indeed, 1 Cor. 15.31. 1 Cor. 15.31.
I dye daily. if a man had a great many petty deaths, the great death would not
trouble him: many a Saint is more quiet in persecution, then he that
persecutes: the Porter lifts a little and a little, at last he gets up his
burden.

4 The next means is out of Heb. 12.2. Heb. 12.2.
Looking to Jesus, etc. when thou see a Cross, see Christ too: look up to
that power, and beg of him, and receive of him that which may be helpefull.
This looking to Christ affords succor three ways: first, Christ despised the
Cross, and what became of it? he now sits at Gods right hand. Was Christ
smitten, and shall not thou be disgraced? arm your selves with the same mind,
1 Pet. 4.1. 1 Pet. 4.1.
if it were so with Christ who had no sin, what will it be with thee who have
sin? secondly, Christ is with thee in trouble, Isa. 63.9. Isa. 63.9.
In all their afflictions he was afflicted. Joseph was imprisoned, and God was
with him. The child chooses to be with his father, though it be in a smoaky
cottage, so if God be with thee, be quieted, John 16 33. John 16.33.
In the world ye shall have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace: thou art in
prison, but in Christ enlarged, here weak, but in Christ made strong. Thirdly,
remember that Christ has promised to take all trouble from thee, 1 Pet. 5.7. 1
Pet. 5.7.
humble your selves therefore under the potent hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time: thou art poor, let Christ bear the care, and as long as
Christ bears the care, why should not we bear the cross? Christ will be
with thee in six, and deliver thee in seven troubles, Job 5.19. Job 5.19.
Porters lay something between the burden and their shoulders, so lay the
promises of Christ upon thy shoulders, lay mercy under the Cross: if a man
bear a burden quietly, he carries it easily, so look to Christ, and bear
thy burden willingly.

5 Lastly, consider, if thou will not take up a Cross, God will give thee a
curse. You will not have your credit crossed, drunkards must not speak ill of
you; take thy sin then: all the sins of those drunkards and swearers are
thine, if thou reprove them not, and the curse of God with them, the vengeance
of God will break thy back. Dives would not have the Cross; take thy
pleasure, says God, and the worm that never dies, Iam. 5.3. Iam. 5.3.
the rich men would have their wealth: take your wealth, says the Apostle, but
it is cankred, and it will witness against you. Every six pence will come as
so many witnesses: witness (says this shilling) I was plucked out of the
mouth of the poor, you will have a wealthy talent, and you shall have wrath
with it. You that are now careless, you fear to sanctify a Lords day, you
will not be crossed, God will bid you go to your neighbors to be saved, for
them you loved, and them you obeyed; whether then will you have the Cross of
Christ, or the rage of the Almighty? rather bear the Cross of Christ, then
the indignation of the Lord of hosts?

accuser of the brethren: Rev. 12.
and an undoubted argument that they are of the devil, that lay heavy burdens
on the backs of Gods servants, Phil. 1.28. Phil. 1.28.
It is to them a token of perdition, but to you of salvation: to be persecuted
is a sign of your salvation; but to persecute the faithful servants of God,
is a token of perdition, as a man that has the plague tokens, we say, The Lord
have mercy upon him, and we give him over for dead, and the bell tolles for
him; so see thou a man that after a satanicall manner cuts and carves our
crosses? it is a token of perdition, and there is scarce any hope of such a
soul, Gal. 4.29.30. Gal. 4.29.30.
he aims at the story concerning Ismael and Isaac, he persecuted Isaac by
railing. Contempt, disgraces, reproaches be persecutions, and as Ismael
persecuted Isaac, so it will be to the worlds end. But what says the
Scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son: you are severed from the
Church here, and you shall be separated from God hereafter. As it is an
argument of a Saint to bear a Cross, so it is an argument of a devil to make
a Cross.

Let him deny himself, and take up his Cross. First, deny, then take, both
deny and take.

Selfe-denyall is a special means to fit the soul for suffering. Therefore
these two go hand in hand, he that is a selfe-denyer, will be a cheerful
sufferer, it is not only here expressed, but in other places mentioned, Revel.
12.11. Rev. 12.11.
there is a description of a man that shall conquer; they overcame the Dragon,
because they loved not their lives unto death: that is to say, they were
contented to lay down their lives, Luke 14.33. Luke 14.33.
when a man has laid down himself, then he may follow our Savior, 1 Cor.
7.29. he makes this the armor, wherewith a Christian should be furnished
against the day of trial: the time is short, what remains? the text says,
Let him that is married, be as if he were not married: that is, let him have all,
but let him deny all. When Peter denied his life, he never denied Christ any
more; so when Jonah denied his stout stomach, he never forsook the message of
God any more.





1 When the Cross is too keen or sharp.

2 The weakness that is in us, that we are not able to bear it. Now
selfe-denyall removes both these.

1 That selfe-denyall takes away the keenness and sharpness, and the
argument is this. If selfe-denyall keep the Cross from pinching, then it is a
special means to take away the sharpness, and so to make us bear it; the
first is clear, therefore the second must follow. Then that it may appear
that selfe-denyall takes away the sharpness, observe, that the Cross does
not take away any spiritual thing: trouble and persecution does not take away
faith; fa man were in a dungeon, he might be faithful; the fire does not
consume the metal, but take away the dross; so outward things are only
consumed, the other are not touched; now then since the sharpness lies in
outward things, selfe-denyall beats back the blow, so that it cannot trouble
him: the only way to take away the fire, is to take away the fuel; so when
the fire of persecution is flaming, selfe-denyall takes away the fuel, on
which affliction should burn. Now it does this thr^ ways.

1 A selfe-denying heart does basely esteem of these base things: so much as
you prize a thing, so much you are grieved for the loss of it; a woman that
marvellously esteems her child, when she loses her child, she loses her
life: if men would esteem jewels as pebbles, the Ieweller would be no more
grieved for the loss of them then for pebbles; so he that esteems his
honor, (as the ambitious) his life, as the natural man, his honor and his
life are his Gods; take away his God, and he sinkes; but a selfe-denying heart
places no worth in these; if riches be gone, there is but a shadow gone; if
life be gone, there is but a bubble broken, Acts 20.24. Acts 20.24.
Paul counted not his life dear, as who should say, if he had counted his life
dear, he had not finished his course with joy. A rich man cares not to lose
six pence, so says Paul, I count not my life dear: all men forsook Paul,
save only the house of Onesiphorus, yet this troubled not Paul, because he had
this selfe-denyall.

2 It loosens a man's affections from delighting in any thing here below, Luke
14.26. Luke 14*26.
a selfe-denying heart hates wife and children so far as they hinder him from
Christ: he that loosens this knot, may easily untye it: love a thing
immoderately, and be grieved for the loss of it excessively; a foolish speech
cast upon a proud person, how discouraged is he at it? but a selfe-denying
heart cares no more for it, then for the barking of a dog: what can prison take
from him? he has given his liberty to Christ before; he that casts the dust on
the dunghill, cares not though the wind (...) it away; but a selfe-denying
heart counts all things dung, and therefore he is not troubled, if he lose all
to gain Christ. It is with a selfe-denying heart as with a dead man, he feels
nothing, Gal. 6.14. Gal. 6.14.
He is crucified to the world, and the world to him: if you will take away
glory, and lay shame upon him, he feels it not; he is dead to the world; if
you disgrace him, he cares not; you touch not him; it is easy for a man to
loose that he has not; now a selfe-denying heart, that has honor, is as if
he had no honor; if you take away his joy, he is not troubled; he is as if he
had it not, he has lost nothing, because he left all before in affections.

3. It takes away that boisterous disposition whereby he opposes the
Providence of God, that brings the Cross. We by pride oppose the providence of
God, bringing the Cross; therefore we are troubled with it: now self-denial
takes away this; therefore all the trouble is removed. First, the bird beats
her self, therefore she is troubled with the Cage; the colt is untamed,
therefore troubled with fetters; when he is tamed, he may live well with the
fetters: so as that which makes affliction tedious is our wayward heart, till
God have weaned us; then a dungeon is as good as a house.

Secondly, self-denial takes away that weakness that is in us to bear the
Cross; and that two ways.

1. It makes way for deriving of spiritual graces; this made the Martyrs so
constant, that the Massacrers cried out, they were weary with killing; it came
not from flesh and blood, but from self-denial; he that is constant to deny
his own strength, the strength of the Lord shall supply him; the Lord is able
to support him: now a selfe-denying heart makes way for this strength, he is
nothing in himself; therefore Christ is all in all in him. Phil. 4.13. I can do
al things in Christ who strengthens me. Phil. 4.13.
There is a virtue given from Christ to a selfe-denying heart to bear trouble.

2 It brings refreshing from Christ. Two things there are in common reason to
bear a burden.

1. Strength. 2. Cheerfulness.
So self-denial gives strength and sweetness; we may easily swallow these
pills, because they are sugered* Luke 1.53. He has filled the hungry with good
things. Isa. 57. Luke 1.53. Isa. 57.15.
He reviveth the spirit of the humble. The traveller must have a bait; so God
gives a sweet bit which is a daily bait, that a selfe-denying heart may go on
his journey with comfort, as he speaks, 1 Samuel 1.8. Am I not better to thee
thou ten children? So Christ says to thee; Am I not better to thee then a
thousand credits? Thus the soul is refreshed.



Job 4.5, 6. Job. 4.5.
It is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it touches thee, and thou art
troubled. Many a man that has made a great profession, when the wet comes he
shrinkes basely; he denied not himself, therefore he denies the Cross, and
that crushes him. It is with us, as with a wild colt, an untamed horse; he is
notable to bear the fours, but slings off the rider; but if he be rid hard, he
will bear any burden, because his stout stomach as come down; so is it with
a proud heart, that is full of himself; when the burden comes, then the
covetous man wincheth, and would renounce God and his Gospel rather then he
will bear misery; but a self denying heart is willing to take up his Cross,
because he has laid down himself; hence come those carnal shifts; men see
some bear the burden, and they wish well to it; but says one, I have a family
to care for; those are to be honored that do so, but it is otherwise with me;
the great ones are fittest, they have no trades to look to; and the poor ones
have no riches to look to: oh you have somewhat to lose, there is the
business; then belike thou have no mercy to loose; thou have not denied thy
self, therefore thou art no follower of Christ. Take thy Gods and perish with
them; thou will not suffer, because thou have thy self; therefore thou shall
burn with thy self in hell.

Judge. 7.5. Judge. 7.
When Gideon was to fight with the Midianites, those that were afraid we bade
them return, and they went almost all away. Now, God gives them another
trial, they that lapped, went; and they were three hundred. Therefore in the
Psalm. 110. Psalm. 110.
it is said, Christ shall drink of the brook by the way; That is, he shall
take a lap by the way, and go cheerfully to his work: if the Lord should try
us thus, all that are fearful to suffer, would fly into the Low Countries;
there would be but a few, if God should say, by those that sip at the world, by
those I will defend my Gospel, how few would there be! for men will part with
nothing: take a company that live in the Church, they are (many of them) not
able to bear the power of the word; thou that wilt not part from a lust, how
will thou be able to part from thy blood? Now, what shall we think of those
that will not have commodities crossed? Rather loose conscience then six pence;
how shall we think these will loose their estates, their blood and life?

meditations, and when you have found what is dearest, then bring your souls
to a holy contempt of it: what a man tramples upon, he is content another
should tread on: soldiers when they come into the field, do accustom
themselves to hardness: the truth is brethren, we know not how soon God may
call us to suffer; were the enemies on our borders even now, how would you
bear it? would you then be willing to renounce the honor you have esteemed,
the riches you have embraced? then renounce them now, and you will not be
perplexed when you leave them. If Satan goes against you, and pursues you, and
says, if you follow these courses, you must part from these and these
comforts, if you take this way, you must look for misery, you must look to be
despised of father and mother, and brother and kindred. You must never look to
come to preferment, etc. now, will you be fenced; renounce all aforehand, do
you tell me of honor, says the selfe-denying heart, let honor look to it
self; but say to him, what will become of your liberty? your liberty will be
gone, says the soul, let liberty look to it self, I will look to duty: this
is once, and all that is required at my hands.





Afflictions should not, nay cannot hinder the obedience of the faithful.

The text does not say, let him take up his cross and leave me, no, but take
up his cross and follow me; as who should say, persecution will stand with
perseverance in obedience, Christ and a cross accord, Numb. 14.24. Numb. 14.24.
the Lord himself speaks of Galeb, that he followed him fully; the children
of Israel, when they came out of Egypt, were driven into the wilderness, and
were in crowds of extremity; famine on the one side, the enemy pursuing on the
other, yet Caleb followed God fully, nothing hindered him from following God,
Psalm. 44.17.18.19. Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19.
Thou have cast us into the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of
death, yet we have not forgotten thee, etc. Dan. 6.10. Dan. 6.10.
when the King had made a decree and sealed it, was Daniel daunted? did he
start aside? no, he set open his window, that though all the canon shot was
about his ears, though the decree was sealed and gone out, yet Daniel was the
same man, Acts 4.19. Acts 4.19.
when the Scribes and Pharisees were violent, the Apostles were resolute, when
they had been forewarned, they answered, whether it were fittest to obey God or
man, judge ye: and in the 29. verse, the bolder they were in persecuting, the
bolder they were in suffering. Birds will sing in storms, so Gods birds will
sing cheerfully in the greatest storm of persecution.





1 Opposition may stop the outward actions a man would perform, but the inward
gracious disposition cannot be hindered; they cannot take away his heart, he
has as great a heart to love duty, and when a man's actions are by force
hindered, God accepts the will for the deed, 2 Cor. 8.12. 2 Cor. 8 12.


2 Though a man cannot follow God in one kind, yet he may in another, though
some graces may be hindered, yet others will be furthered, and that is the duty
God requires at that time, Iam. 1.4. Iam. 1.4.
Let patience have her perfect work, that is, God puts a man on several
trials, sometimes in person, sometimes in disgrace; now patience plays at all
weapons, and when she has borne all, she conquers all. Look, as it is with
soldiers in summer, they go into the field, and in winter they lie in
Garrison, yet they are soldiers still; so some duties are summer-duties, as
hearing and the like; these are in the time of prosperity, but when the winter
of persecution comes, and besieges the heart, then God calls for patience. You
hear the word, that is a summer-duty, but when you are scattered asunder, God
requires patience, and selfe-denyall, yet in both we follow Christ. If a Saint
should dye, yet he forsakes not obedience, for he has followed Christ as
far as he can* nay Christ could go no further then death, after death a man
is considered as a conqueror, then the battle is ended, Heb. 12.4. Heb. 12 4.
John 21.18.
Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, John 21.18. The Lord Christ the General
of the field, knows how to dispose his servants: when Peter was young, God
sent him to preach, when he was old, he sent him to dye, when he could not
preach.





1 Because God allows of starting at no time; the Law binds at all times, to
all times, is an old rule in Divinity; there is no time wherein sin is to be
granted; our condition may alter, but duty is that which God ever calls for:
poverty may take away riches, but no condition should take away duty, but some
duty is to be performed, though not this nor that, yet a good conscience is
always to be preserved: there is a necessity for a man sometimes to have
afflictions: God gives them, but God never gives a necessity to sin: it is
not necessary to be rich, but it is necessary to be holy in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 Pet. 1.15.
nay, secondly, the more opposition a man has, the more resolute he should be,
for then there is most need of courage: the Captain requires most courage in
the battle, and in harvest, if a storm be coming, we work hardest, so a man
should be most constant in the time of trouble, Jude 3. Contend for the faith.
Contention implies opposition, the more trouble, the more courage God requires.
Sound saving grace will never slip away, in the greatest opposition, then is
the time for love to do most: a brother (says Solomon) is borne for
adversity: love is like lightning, it is most fiery where it finds most
opposition: so when love is in most opposition, it is most violent in
resolution, Acts 4.20. Acts 4.20.
We cannot but speak the things we have heard, as who should say, we have a
warrant from God, therefore we cannot but do it, and in the second verse, the
lame man being cured, the Scribes and Pharisees were grieved at it, the
Disciples having taught concerning Christ, and the glory that came to the
Gospel: the Scribes and Pharisees thought to crush the business, now says
Peter, verse 9. if we be examined concerning the good deed; as who should say,
you Scribes and Pharisees use to convent people for good deeds. Therefore be it
known unto all you men of Israel, as who should say, you Pharisees would have
Christ hidden, therefore all ye men of Israel, be it known, that by the name
of that Jesus whom ye have crucified, this man stands whole; thus zealous was
he, though convented: the spirit of the Lord is a kingly spirit, therefore it
will make a man leap over all blocks, Ruth 1.16. Ruth 1.16.
Naomi having alleged many arguments to dissuade Ruth, mark how she resolves,
entreat me not, for thy God shall be my God. the more love is opposed, the more
violent and resolute it is: there are no trees fall by a storm, but those that
are rotten, those that are good grow the faster; so it is with a heart that
loves Christ in sincerity, he bears down all.

3 Afflictions are so far from hindering, that they further obedience, there
is no thank to the Cross for it: in it self it is a kind of poison, but
this Cross that would hinder a man, the power of Christ over-powring it* helps
a man, and that in two particulars.

1 Because the Cross weaneth a Christians soul from the love of those things
here below; he that prided himself in gay coats, present before him all the
fine feathers at his death bed, and ask him, will you go to heaven in these?
then he hates them, affliction takes away the love of all, Deuteronomy. 28. the
dainty Damsel shall lick the earth in time of famine, the soul in
affliction cleaves to God: when the wheels are scoured, they go the better,
so afflictions take away the rust of immoderate pleasures and desires, Job
36.10. Job 36.10.


Three things afflictions ^oe.

1 They open the eye.

2 They boar the ear, a poor man's tale may now be heard.

3 God commands a loose heart to stoop by them: when the three children were
in the fire, it burned their bonds, but hindered not their walking, so
afflictions burn our lusts, but hinder not our walking with God.

2 As afflictions are made useful and beneficial to Christians, in respect
that they weane them from the love of the world, and scowre off corruption. So
also secondly, because the Cross stirs up our graces, afflictions set an edge
on graces, Acts 17.16 his spirit was stirred with indignation: Acts 17.16.
it is with grace, as it was with Sampson, when the Philistines were not there:
he slept, but when they were upon him, he rent all in pieces; so our graces are
asleep, if misery come upon us, it provokes us to shake our selves: all the
men in a ship are quiet in a calm, but in a great tempest all are busy, every
man is stirring, one runs to the pumpe, another to the stern; so all the
while we are in a calm, patience lies still, but when we are rossed, if here be
any grace, then it will be stirring. Faith lays hold, patience bears, it is
admirable to see what men will do in sickness: it is a common Proverb, there
would be admirable good men, if men were as good always as they are in
sickness. Take a great persecutor: and let but God let in a vein of
vengeance, O then what resolutions are there? but when that is gone, all
promises fall to the ground.

Peter denied Christ* he did not say, Lord, I was in great fear, I loved thee
well, yet denied thee basely: we hear no such matter, but he wept bitterly, he
saw his sin, and was ashamed of it: this should be our course, Phil. Phil.
4.8.
If there be any thing that is honest, any thing that is pure, think upon
these: a man might reply, the cause is good, there are honest things, but
trouble accompanies them; what of that? yet if there be any thing that is pure,
think on that; yea say some, the practice is pure, but it is reproachful: now
says the Text, there is no pretended inconveniency that should be a hinderance
in a christian course: do not think of reproaches, but if there be any thing
honest, any thing pure, think on that. All you Ismaels that scoff at purity,
if Paul were good, ye are naught, Heb. 13 4.5. Heb. 13.4.5.
When we are married, we must look to our families; no says the Text, avoid
covetousness, do not say, the cause is good, but my family must be looked to:
drunkenness should be hated says one, but then I should lose my custom. It
is good to pray, for the Scripture says, Pour down thy wrath on such as call
not on thy name, but it takes up time; and I should be scoffed at, and counted
a Puritan, and therefore I pray have me excused. I cannot excuse you, for is
there not a God to be pleased, as well as a customer? when the heavens shall
b^rne, and the works thereof be consumed, do you think this will excuse you,
to say, I would have prayed, but my Master would have beat me, my neighbors
would reproach me, etc. If you fear your neighbors more then God, then get
you to hell with your neighbors, and then let them succor you; these are not
sufficient excuses, therefore delude not your consciences; will you tell God, a
cross troubled you? he will tell you, you should have taken it up: had Christ
said to us, I wish you had been saved, but then I must be spit upon and
crucified, but that I will not, woe had been unto us, had not Christ been
forsaken, I had been damned, do not think to drive the bargain to the last
farthing: let God be honored, though I troubled, this is right; but to say let
God be honored, but I will not be troubled: ah poor wretch, have thou any
share in Christ? he that suffers not with Christ, shall not have glory with
him: therefore as you desire to have comfort, lay away these figge-leaves, that
will not avail to shelter you. Because thou will not take up a Cross, thou
shall not have a Christ to save thee.

THE CHRISTIANS Second Chief LESSON, Viz. Selfe-tryall.
2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be reprobates?


THe intent of Saint Paul is to justify his Ministry, upon occasion of that
contempt, which by reason of the baseness of his outward estate was cast upon
the same by the suggestion of false Apostles. This he does in this place by
appealing unto the consciences of his hearers in respect of the work of grace
by his Ministry wrought in their hearts: so that the coherence stands on this
manner; if ye have bin effectually called to the state of grace by no other
means then by my Ministry, then notwithstanding the weakness of my flesh,
you must needs acknowledge me a lawful Minister of Jesus Christ. But so it
is, that you have been converted by my Ministry alone, and brought to the
estate wherein ye now are, therefore ye must needs acknowledge me a lawful
Minister. Now for the further proof of this effect of his Ministry in them,
he wills them to consider whether they be in the faith or no.

We have to consider here two things. First; what they must look after in
themselves, viz. whether they be in the faith. Secondly, what they must do
that they may attain to this knowledge* viz. they must examine themselves.

By Faith synecdochically we are to understand all the graces or virtues which
are mainly necessary to set a man in the state of grace; one for all, and this
carries the bell away from all the rest; all other graces springing from this
as from a fountain. To be in the faith then is to be effectually called to be
partaker of the graces and virtues of Jesus Christ. To prove this is by an
experimental trial to make enquiry; To examine is a word borrowed from
Goldsmiths manner of trial which they use, which is of all other the most
accurate, by the touch and test. To prove and examine our selves is a work of
the spirit, whereby the soul reflecting and turning into it self, does
exactly weigh and consider in what estate it stands. The Commandment is
doubled, to betoken the important necessity of the duty enjoined, as which does
most nearly concern a Christian.

The meaning of the words, if you take them together, may be thus: O ye
Corinthians, since you make a question whether Jesus Christ spoke in and by me,
yea or not, do but (for your conviction in this behalf) take a survey of your
own estate, diligently examine your selves, whether ye be truly and
effectually come out of the state of nature into the state of grace, yea or
no^; by this you may come to some certainty touching the undoubted truth of my
M^nistery.

That an effectual conversion of soul is a sure testimony of the truth, and
lawfulness of that Ministry by which they are converted.

This is gathered from the coherence and agreement betwixt the third and fifth
verse, it is also proved, Ier. 23.22. Ier. 23.22.
If they had stood in my c^^nsell, and had caused my people to hear my words,
then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of
their doings. No Minister can convert another, who has not stood in G^ds
counsel, that has not been sent by him, Romans 10.14.15. Faith in a hearer
does argue a Teacher sent of God; Acts 26.18. Romans 10.14.15. Acts 26.18. Ephesians.
4.11.12.
I send thee, that thou may turn them, etc, Ephesians. 4.11.12. Christ sends
them Pastors for the repairing of the Saints. The repairing of the Saints is an
argument of a Pastor given of Christ, 1 Cor. 9.2. 1 Cor. 9.2.
If I be not an Apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am unto you, for ye are
the seal of my Apostleship in the Lord.

Matthew. 28.28. I am with you (whom I send) to the end of the world, not with
any other.

England, together with the Ministers, as no Ministry nor Ministers, in regard
of some defects accidental, not substantial in the same. We for our
justification refer our selves unto the whole armies of Converts, which are
the glory and crown of many godly teachers among us.

Luke 10.20. Luke 10.20.
Rejoice that your names are written in heaven: now there is no ground of
rejoicing, but for that whereof we may attain a certain knowledge, 2 Pet.
1.10. 2 Pet. 1.10. 1 John 3.10.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, 1 John 3.10. In this
are the children of God known.

Psalm. 15. 1 John 5.13. 2 Pet. 1.10.

2 Because we have the spirit promised to inform us that these marks are in
us, Romans 8.16. the spirit of God bears witness to our spirits, that we are
the children of God.

Psalm. 77.8, 9, 10. Psalm. 42. verse 5. yet in the end faith gets the victory.

viz. That no man can be assured with such a certainty, wherein he may not be
mistaken touching his salvation, as also that a man must doubt of it; and that
it is presumption to grow to a resolution; a mavelous uncomfortable and
desperate doctrine, we may say of the Authors of it, that they are miserable
comforters.

2 For exhortation, to provoke men to use all means that they may be assured
touching the welfare of their estates. Let men's diligence in looking to make
sure inheritance, lands, manors, whereof they have any promise, whet on us to
be much more careful to get some security of Gods favor, heaven and
happiness. If they be so earnest for earthly blessings which they must forgo:
how hot and eager should we be in the pursuit of getting of an assurance of
those spiritual good things which shall never be taken from us! Let the
unspeakeable comfort that issues from this assurance, the endless joy that
arises hence, make us careful seekers of so great a benefit; if we were
instantly to go out of the world, we would desire nothing more then some
earnest penny of an heavenly inheritance; that which then we would chiefly
wish, let it be our wisdom to make a timely provision for the obtaining it.
But alas, how careless and negligent are we in this point? any groundless
surmises, idle supposals, fl^shing imaginations, will serve the turn, give a
slubbered contentment; I hope well says one, I trust, says another, God is
merciful. Take heed of this presumption, which is as a broken tooth and a
sliding foot.

Every man by nature is apt to be deceived, and to misjudge himself touching
his spiritual estate, to think all is well, when nothing less.

Thus much is insinuated in the Commandment, to try and examine, as if
otherwise we were subject to mistake, Pro. 14.12. Pro. 14.12.
There is a way which seems right to a man, but the issues thereof are the
ways of death, Acts 26.9. Acts 26.9.
I also verily thought that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of
Jesus, says Paul of himself in the state of Pharisaisme. Those of whom we
read, Luke 13.26. Luke 13.26.
which were shut out of the kingdom of heaven, no doubt thought themselves
cock sure while they lived, as we may see by their reply to the Master of the
house, we have eaten and drunken in thy presence, and thou have taught in our
streets. So the proud Pharisee overweening himself with his own conceit,
speaks confidently, giving God thanks, that he is not as other men are, or as
the poor Publican; yet how is he (for all his good conceit of himself)
rejected, and the poor Publican preferred before him? Luke 18. Luke 18.
The Church of Laodicea gives testimony to the truth of this doctrine, in that
her glorious vaunt that she makes, professing that she is rich, increased
with goods, and has need of nothing, when as not withstanding at the same
time, she is discovered to be wretched and miserable, and poor and blind,
and naked, Rev. 3.17. Rev. 3.17.


The grounds of this mistake are two. Ier. 17.9. Ier. 17.9.
it works by all means to deceive a man, yea and that in the greatest matter
of moment, namely the salvation of the whole man. Who wonders then to see a man
in regard of the good estate of his soul to grope at noone day as in the
twilight, to put light for darkness, and darkness for light, to put bitter
for sweet, and sweet for bitter!



requiem to us, and cry peace, peace; believe them not, they are the most
notorious impostors, most cunning deceivers, such as have shaken hands with the
common adversary of our salvation, that so they may work our eternal woe;
they are those friends that speak peaceably to their neighbors, and yet lay
up malice in their hearts. It shall be our wisdom to consider whether they
speak by the direction of the spirit, according to Gods word; examine their
pleasing suggestions by the law and testimony, if they speak not according to
these, it is because there is no truth in them.

That a man's spiritual estate is not always discernable to himself.

There are seasons when as the work of grace is so overshadowed, that a man
can scarcely judge of himself how it is with him. This I collect hence, in
that it is one thing to think that we be in the state of grace, another thing
by proof and examination to find it so to be. We may be in the state of
grace, and yet the same not so appear to our selves, until we have made
trial of our selves: the work of Gods spirit is sufficient, whose manner of
working is to us unknown, John 3.8. John 3.8.
as the wind, and to have this known unto us, we must try and examine our
selves; in which examination, who doubts but we may often mistake? thus was
David himself mistaken, Psalm. 22. Psalm. 22.
he judges himself forsaken of God in regard of his own feeling, Psalm.
31.22. Psalm. 31.22. Isa. 40.27. Isa 49.14.
I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight, Isa. 40.27. Jacob complained
his way was hid from the Lord, Isa. 49.14. Sion complains, the Lord has
forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me, Isa. 50.10. Isa. 50.10.
there is a time wherein Gods children walk in darkness, and see no light.

The means of this misjudging our selves are twofold.

1 Satan's cunning, that where he cannot prevail to rock men asleep in
security, there he assaults them with false fears, to make their lives
uncomfortable to them, and drive them, if it be possible to despair; this is
not the least of his stratagems.

2 A confusion in our judgment from the remnant of our corrupt nature
whereunto we are other whiles for just causes given over of God; whereby we
are not able distinctly to apprehend the work of grace in our selves, but even
deem our selves reprobates when we are highly in Gods favor.





Solomon in his royalty, so have they their winter, wherein their sap retireth
to the root, the branches seem to be withered, as if they were not the same,
no life in them: so is it with the graces of God in man's soul, they have their
spring and summer seasons, they have also their winter, wherein they seem
clean blasted and decayed, as if there were no seeds of grace in their hearts;
and as we must not call in question the vegetative power and life that is in
plants and herbs, by reason of the little appearance thereof in the dead time
of the year; no more must we make question of the truth of grace in our
hearts; in regard of the little show that it makes to us, little beauty that we
can discern of it. Do we not see that men may be so miscarried in their
judgments, as to think themselves to be beasts when they are men? as we see
in Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.30. Dan. 4.30.
why not? much more in their spiritual estate, so to be misinformed, as to
think themselves children of wrath, when notwithstanding they are heirs and
coheires with Christ Jesus? Let the examples of Gods dear ones, who have been
thus misled, the equity and great reason God has thus to exercise our troubled
souls, which otherwise would be too calm and secure, be as a word spoken in
due season to us, that are weary in this kind.

That every one that lives in the Church is bound seriously, and with great
diligence to try and examine his estate, how it stands betwixt God and
himself, in respect of the work of saving grace wrought in his soul.

This is the maine duty intended in this scripture, and so directly issuing out
of it, as that he that runs may read it, Psalm. 77.6. Psalm. 77.6.
I communed with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search; namely,
how the estate of my soul stands, whether God has cast me off, yea or not; or
whether there be in me any marks of his favor: in regard whereof I may gather
comfort to my self, Gal. 6.3, 4. Gal. 6.3.4.
If any man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives
himself in his imagination. But let every man prove his own work, and then
shall ^ee have rejoicing in himself, 1 John 4. 1 John 4.
we are commanded to try the spirits of other men, whether they be of God,
much more then to try and examine our own spirits; whether they speak unto us
in the name of the Lord, or from their own deceitfulness.

Ier. 17.9. Ier. 17.9.
The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it? it is a very
easy thing to be deceived by it, a most hard thing to know it; therefore we
must set our selves more earnestly to work, to try and examine our estate.



Now for that the practice of this doctrine is of excellent and most necessary
use in the life of a Christian, I will therefore more largely pursue the same,
as desirous to give direction how to perform this duty, so as it may be most
for our comfort. And because I find a spring of matter offering it self, I
think it good to bound that which I purpose to say, within these two points.

1 In considering what be the false shadows of the state of grace.

2 What be the essential parts of him that is in the state of grace, together
with the several marks of the same.

Among the false and appearing tokens and shadows of the state of grace, I
find three that are remarkable, and above others to be encountered with. viz.

The estate of 1. The Civil man. 2. The Formalist. 3. The Temporary Professor.
All these make goodly flourishes, carry themselves upon a persuasion of Gods
favor, think themselves somewhat, when they are nothing in the state of grace.

Concerning the Civil man, who first offers himself, as one who is most
confident, though he have least cause, I propound these four things.

1. What Civil righteousness is. 2. What is the ground of it. 3. The gloss
and deceit whereby it prevails. 4. A discovery of them in their kind.


All these have I kept. So likewise among the heathen we have famous many
examples of this kind; of Aristides, Socrates, Alexander.



Genesis 20.6. Genesis 20.6.
The Lord said to Abimelech* that he kept him that he should not sin in
defiling Abraham's wife.

Amos 5.19. Amos 5.19.






which he would most of all seem to practice; for whereas good dealing, and
good meaning, must fetch their direction from the knowledge of Gods word, which
is the only sufficient Schole-master to this purpose; The civi^l man does
measure it by the scan^ling either of his own judgment, which is corrupt by
nature, or else by the received customs of the world. Do not many pretend in
many gross injuries, and wrongs done to God and man, their good meaning* Does
not generally the good dealing that is among natural men no longer keep
within the rule of righteousness, then while it concerns themselves? And when
it touches a man in this particular, the greatest injustice shall be dawbed
over with the untempered mortar of good dealing.

Secondly, Even in those things wherein he is most glorious in his own eyes,
practicing some shreds of righteous dealing, so far forth as his natural
light guides him; he sins against God, in that he does not that good which he
does in obedience to God, and out of faith in his word, without which
whatsoever men do, is but sin in the doer, though good in it self, Heb.
11.6. Heb. 11.6.
Romans 14.23. Romans 14.23.


Thirdly, Consider this good meaning, and dealing in the highest price of
goodness whereunto it would seem to attain; you shall find a manifest
gross transgression of the duties of the first Table that do more immediately
concern the worship of God: for do we not see, that these men are most of
them negligent regarders of the ministry of the word, make little conscience
of an oath, if they be urged; break the Sabbath, live in affected ignorance,
and yet by virtue of this supposed good meaning and dealing, they think
themselves blameless; what great and heinous sins do they shroud under this
shelter, I refer my self unto the daily experience of such as know any thing
in the conversation of these men; as if the Lord would accept of any sacrifice,
though never so blind, lame, or maimed: offer this service unto thy Prince,
and see if he will accept it. For shall it be a good plea for a traitor
against the state to pretend his righteous dealing with his fellow subjects? No
more will God accept of such a service, where there is high treason against his
Majesty, though there be some petty duties performed to men.



By this manner of reasoning, a man might conclude, the coursest cloth that is
to be fine; because, if you compare it with a Rug, it makes a fair show; will
not comparisons make those things that are naughty in themselves seem good?
Let that alone be held for good, that is good in it self, whose goodness is
to be found in the nature of the thing, not in the respective reference only
to that which is worse then naught. In a word, what so bad in a kind that
might not be justified, if it were lawful thus to trifle^ might not some
naughty and sinful men that live in the breach of some of Gods great
commandments, hope for heaven, if a comparative righteousness would be
accepted* for are there not numbers, though vile in their courses and abhorred
of God and good men, yet if you compare them, you shall find whole swarms of
such as do exceed them? Secondly, learn further the absurdity of this
reasoning, and that by another similitude taken from the clean contrary
practice of men in earthly things: if a man have some competency of wealth, he
for the further enlarging of it looks not back, how many there be poorer then
himself, so he might think himself a rich man; but his eye is always
looking how many richer there are then himself? why should we not do so in
spiritual things* not to look how many have les^e then we, to consider rather
how many go before us, exceed us in the graces needful to a better life:
Shall it be no root of contentment for wealth, that we are richer then many
million in the world? and yet in matters of salvation, any thing shall serve
the turn, to satisfy our hearts, that we are in better case then great troops
who shall never see God in the life to come. In the running of a race, a man
may leave many behind him, yet lose the goal, so in the seeking of the Crown
of life, we may outstrip a number, and yet miss of the salvation of our
souls: we must therefore be careful so to run, that we may obtain.

Thirdly, if this righteousness would carry a man out which leaves company
behind in greater impiety, then the Pharise should have had wrong, when the
poor P^blican was preferred before him, who notwithstanding was not as other
men, extortioners, unjust, etc. Luke 18. Luke 18.


Fourthly, we must in judging our selves righteous, look to the rule of Gods
laws, which judge our inward thoughts: this was it which informed Paul, who
without the law was alive, but when the law came, sin revived, etc.



Answ. 1. That saving grace does not only cause a forbearance of the outward
act, but suppresseth the first motions unto sin, ki^s them in the cradle,
makes conscience of them as mortal sins, whose wages is death, Ier. 4.14.
Ier. 4.14.
How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within the^^ Act^ 8.22. Act. 8.22.
Repent, that if perhaps the thought of (...) heart may be forgiven thee, 2
Cor. 10.5.
2 Cor. 10.5. The word of God brings every thought into the obedience of Christ.

2 A man's corruption may be restrained and kept in from any actual breaking
out, not for any good that himself shall reap thereby, but for others
benefit, for the good of society in general, the good of some in special*
Abimelech was kept from Abraham's wife, not for any favor to him, but for
Abraham's sake. Labans churlish nature was sometimes restrained, so that he
could not sometimes speak an unkind word unto Jacob; not for his cause, but
for a favor unto Jacob.

3 God does judge of man's estate by the frame of the heart, that he mainly
desires to be given to him to be renewed, that to be cleansed and rectified,
that to be applied to wisdom, though there be never such a fair outside, a
smooth carriage, a painted visage, yet if the hear^ be unsound, rotten,
unregenerate, all is of no value before him. God sees not as man sees,
neither would he have man judge as outwardly there is an appearance. There may
be seven abominations in the heart when men speak favorably, Pro. 26.25. Pro.
26.25.
our corrupt nature is signified by Wolves and Bears: shall we think a Bear
no longer a Bear when he is chained up from doing harm? or a Wolf to be no
longer a Wolf, for that he is manacled so as he cannot stir?



Answ. It is an evil that is much to be lamented, that such as do profess
religion, are not careful to adorne^ their profession with the fruits of
righteousness. But for satisfaction to the civil man, he must know his error*

First, he makes no difference of Professors, considers not that there are,
and shall be some, who shall have a form of godliness, but not the power
thereof, who shall be shut out of the kingdom of heaven. Now what comfort can
this be to a man, that he is i^ as good estate as others who shall never
obtain salvation? for shall not unhonest religion find as good favor with
God, as irreligious ho^sty.

Secondly, I doubt not but in some particular sins, some civil men have a
greater command over themselves, then many truly religious; David was given
over of God by fall to bloody adultery, wherein I doubt not, but many thousands
of civil men might plead themselves not guilty; yet no question to be made but
that, the ^ne was the child of God, the other in the snare of the devil held
captive to do his will: for the affection of sinful anger, many of Gods
children are more apt to offend by it, the temper of their natural disposition
enclining that way, then many civil men in whom there is no work of
regeneration; and all this no disparagement to Gods children, since the Lord
does out of these infirmities in his wisdom, make a sweet confection that
purges pride out of their hearts, makes them more watchful, more diligent in
prayer, hearing, (...) ^tion.

Thirdly, it is often the fau^t of the world, who bury many good things in the
children of God, those that be professors, if but one sin (it may be which
the Lord has left in them to humble them) shall appear in their conversation,
the unthankful and censorious world continually eyes and speaks of it, never
mentioning the many good things that be in them: on the contrary, if a civil
man have many evils, live in some grosser sins, yet if he have by virtue of a
common gift of the spirit, some one commendable property, that one shall cure
and commend all his other deformities. No marvel then if professors of
religion, being subject to so unequal and partial a judgment, be thought to
be short of a civil man.

5 A fifth deceit. A civil man does therefore flatter himself, and grow too
high in his own opinion, and take contentment in his estate, because he does
no man any harm, he does not willingly injure any man; makes no question but
this harmless righteousness will justify him.

Answer. It deserves commendation, that a man should so demean himself, as
carefully to avoid the doing of wrong to another: yet the insufficiency of his
estate appears on this manner. If we take a view of that righteousness which
the Lord requires, we shall find, that it is not only in not doing harm, but
in doing good duties, the omission whereof is damnable, Matthew. 3.10. Mat. 3.10
Every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire, Isa. 1.16. Isa. 1.16. Rev. 12.9. Mat. 25.
Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Romans 12.9. abhor that which is evil,
cleave to that which is good, Matthew. 25. Christ will proceed in judgment
against wicked men, not only for that they have pulled meat from his mouth,
but also because they have not fed him: for look as in an Orchard, it is not
sufficient that a tree do no harm, but further that it may be counted a good
tree, it must be fruitful: so in the state of a Christian, he who is barren of
good works, shall as well undergo the judgments of God, as he that is a
practiser of wickedness: we do not rest contented, in that our servants
plead they have done us no harm, but in that they have brought profit to us:
why should we not think that the Lord expects as much from us who are his
servants, as we do from ours?

Secondly, men do vainly deceive themselves, when they think they do no
evil in not doing good; for the Scriptures do account him as one that harms
his neighbor, and does that which is evil, when he does no good: he that is
not with me, is against me, says our Savior, and he that gathers not with
me, scatters abroad: not to save when we may, is to destroy, as appears by
the speech of our Savior, Luke 6.9. Luke 6.9.
when he was challenged for curing a sick man on the Sabbath day, his answer
was, whether is it better, ^o save life, or to destroy it?

6 A sixth deceit: In that they are well thought on among their neighbors, are
of good credit and esteem, they have every man's good word, no man can say,
black is their eye, and commonly they make no question but they are in good
estate to Godward.

Answer. That a good report is a special blessing of God, that deserves to be
well accounted of, it is as ointment, and makes the bones fat. But a civil man
must understand that a main thing that makes a report good, is when it comes
from them that are good; such as seek God, and endeavor themselves in his
ways. Now let the civil man consider whether such persons do give good
testimony of them, for otherwise a man may be well thought of among those that
are as himself, and yet be far from that goodness which God approves of.

Secondly, such must remember, that to have every man's good word, is no sign
of a man in Gods favor, Luke 6.26. Luke 6.26.
We be to you when all men speak well of you: and many have the greater cause
to suspect their estate in the general applause of men, then thereby to grow
secure. The Pharisees may seem to have gained a great approbation from men,
they were thought to be the only religious men of their times; yet how does
our Savior censure them, even in that wherein they took most pride, namely,
the esteem of the vulgar, Luke 16.15. Luke 16 25.
ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your
hearts: for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abominable in the
sight of God; and that godly saying of a good Writer, may here have place, That
in many things where men can find no fault, God has just cause to condemn.

Thirdly, the Scripture does plainly lead us from the applause of men in the
trial of our estates, and seeks to draw us to a searching into our own
hearts, Gal. 6.4. Gal. 6.4.
Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself, and not in another: this made Saint Paul so lightly esteem the
judgment of men touching his estate before God, 1 Cor. 4.3. 1 Cor. 4.3.
I pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment: that is his
commendation, that God accepts of him: his praise is not from men, but from
God, Romans 2.29. Romans 2.29.


The second false shadow under which men do shelter themselves, and rest in as
a state of grace, when it is nothing less, is formal righteousness, where
consider, 1 What it is. 2 What be the grounds of it. 3 What be the deceits. 4
The discovery.


1 Formal righteousness is the practice of the outward duties of the first
Table, joined with a neglect of the duties of the second Table, and that by
giving way to some gross corruption. We may see a pattern of this, Ier. 7.9,
10. Ier. 7.9.10.
will you steal, murder, and commit adultery, and come and stand before me in
this house, where my name is called upon? Pro. 7.14.15. Pro. 7.14.15^
the whorish woman conjoynes the paying of her vows to God, her
peace offerings with the breach of wedlock, Matthew. 23 14. Man. 23 14.
the Pharisees devoured widows houses, under color of long praye^^.

Touching the duties of the first Table whereunto the formalist attaines, they
are these.

1 He is in respect of the outward man, a diligent repairer to the public
assemblies, a hearer of the word, receiver of the Sacraments; he will not
stick to go a mile or two to the hearing of a a Sermon; all this was in
Herod, in those that profess to our Savior that they have eaten and dru^ke in
his presence.

Secondly, he may be a means to draw on others, and to say with those, Isa.
2.3. Isa. 2.3. Ezekiel. 33.30*
Come, let us go up to the mo^^tai^ ^f the Lord, Ezekiel. 33.30. Ezekiels hearers
though but formal, can say; every man to his brother; Come I pray you, and
hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord.

3 He may grow to get a great measure of knowledge, to be able to discourse to
the purpose of the Scriptures, and what is taught in the public ministry; so
we read of some, Matthew. 7.22. Mat. 7.22.
that have attained so much knowledge, that they have been able to prophecy,
that is, to preach in Christ's name, and yet mere formalists.

4 He may take up a solemn form of prayer, have his time and place for his
devotion, Luke 18.10. Luke 18.10.
the Pharisee goes up to the Temple of purpose to pray, and that the old Jews
were very frequent in this, it appears, Isa. 1.15. Isa. 1.15.
though ye make many prayers, yet I will not hear.

5 He may proceed to humble himself in fasting, join with others in the
solemn exercises to that purpose, 1 Kings 21. 1 King. 21. Isa. 58.3.
Ahab thus abased himself, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou
see not?

6 He may outwardly reverence the Preachers of the word, as Saul did Samuel,
Herod, John Baptist; give entertainment to them, as the Pharisee, Luke 14.
Luke 14.
who invited our Savior, yea make words of love to them.

2 Grounds of this formal righteousness, declaring how a man comes to set up
his rest in so deceitful an appearance.

1 It is the devils policy, when he cannot draw men to a false worship of God,
to set up Idols, then he labors mainly to detain men in the shell and
shadow of an outward worship, to make them quiet themselves in this as all that
God requires. Thus were the old Jews exceedingly beguiled, while they placed
all religion in outward sacrifices; by this men are kept from the life and
power of godliness, while they are so far seduced by Satan, as to rest in
the Paradise of a formal service of God.

2 Man by nature is devoted beyond measure to his natural corruption, so as
what he wills, that he wills with his whole strength; so loath are men to part
with their corrupt practices, that skin for skin, and all that a man has,
will he give rather then forgo any part of that which he is by natural
apprehension bent unto. Hence the Scripture terms the sins that a man is
more specially inclined unto, his right eye, his right hand, then which, what
is not a man more willing to lose? hereupon the heart of man seeks, and having
by seeking found such a righteousness, as wherein it may be something with
God, and yet retain his own selfe-liking sins, by all means embraces this
form of service of God, takes great con^entment in this; and such a one is
this formal righteousness, which makes a fair show, promising great matters
both unto others, and our own seduced hearts; and in this do men willingly
rest, as that which gives a dispensation unto some partial sins, and yet
carries a goodly appearance amongst men. This formal service of God will bring
whole rivers of outward service, even the first borne of his body, for the
sin of his soul, so be it he may retain his own will.

3 The honorable and glorious things that the Lord has spoken of outward
services; the Lord ascribes the greatest work to the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, the opening of the eyes to the blind, the working of faith, the
cleansing of the heart, the salvation of body and soul; so to prayer and
fasting, how much does the Scriptures attribute, making them the very means
whereby the very treasures of heaven are opened, and all good things
communicated to us! Hereupon the deceitful heart of man is so ravished by
these worthy effects wrought by these ordinances, as that it makes no question,
but if it shall serve God in these, all other things must needs follow of
themselves; though a man be failing in other duties of the second Table, yet
the excellency of these shall make a recompense, and give satisfaction to God.



Answ. It is no sure argument of the truth of a man's profession, that he
endures trouble for it. No question but Judas had his part in those crosses
that did accompany the preaching of the Gospel, and yet who doubts of the
rottenness of his profession? but among others, Alexander, of whom we read,
Acts 19. chapter, 33. verse, Acts 19.33.
that he was near unto death for the Gospels sake, and yet of the same man
(as Calvin thinks) does Saint Paul give a heavy censure, when he prays that
God would reward him according to his works, 2 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 4.14.


Secondly, the worlds hatred of a Christian profession is not directly against
it, as it is sound and sincere, joined with truth in the inward parts; it
looks only upon that which shows it self in religious performances, that
is the object of wicked men's malice, they pry not into the truth of grace in
the heart; but if a man do join himself with the people of God in the holy
exercises of religion, that is it which provokes their malice. In matters of
enmity betwixt differing parties, it is enough to endure the ill will of the
one, but in show and appearance to join with the other; and so it is no sure
and infallible mark of a friend of God, for a man to say that he has suffered
in the cause of religion: the very outward face of religion, sets the devil
and wicked men on work.

Thirdly, there may be great deceit in suffering, wherein a man can have no
comfort, as if it were an inseparable companion of sincerity: men may seek
themselves, their glory, honor, and have worldly respects in yielding their
necks to affliction for the Gospels sake. If any man (says our Savior) will
be my Disciple, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow me,
Matthew. 16.24. Math. 16.24.
We must look that our suffering have a denial of our selves and our own
affections, else they shall nothing avail us. A man's affliction for religious
duties performed, is then only an argument of the truth of grace, when a man
being tossed in them, lives only by faith in Gods word, and is not fed with
the hope of glory, with an expectation of succor and relief from man.

2 Deceit. That many good men applaud them in their courses, yea godly and
faithful Ministers commend them, encourage them; now would they honor an
imperfect profession of religion?

Answ. 1. No doubt but it may and ought to be a good comfort to us, that we
have the approbation of such as fear God in those ways wherein we walk: but
notwithstanding it is a sure rule, that of another man's estate before God, no
man can judge with a judgment of certainty; for whereas one man judges of
another only by fruits of the spirit, what outward work of the spirit of
grace is there, which the pride of men's hearts, and the devil together, cannot
counterfeit? they will make a semblance of faith, of repentance: other men
though good, yet mistake us even when they do their best, it being beyond
their reach to determine of another man's estate. The uprightness of any man's
heart in the duties he performs, it is possible only to God and himself to
know, Pro. 17.3. Pro. 17.3.
The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, but the Lord tries
the hearts of men, and no man knows the heart of a man, save the spirit of a
man that is in him, 1 Cor. 2.11. 1 Cor. 2.11.


Secondly, we reason deceitfully, if from men's approbation of our courses
wherein we walk, we conclude an allowance of our estate, that all is well with
us, because something is deemed to be upright. It is all one as if a dishonest
person performing an honest action, and receiving just commendation for the
same, should thence gather a general resolution for his honesty. Good men
approve us in our hearing the word, prayer, fasting, but good men will not
approve us as every way good, because good in these: besides, the actions we
perform in attending on ordinances, may be good in their nature, and yet we
may mar them in the manner of performing them.

Thirdly, we must know that good and godly Ministers in this profane and
wretched age, are glad to apprehend and cherish the least blossoms of goodness
that do show themselves; are ready to encourage men in any good courses, by
giving them their dese^^ed commendations. Gods Ministers deal with Professors,
as the servants of Benhadad did with the King of Israel, glad when they can
catch but as a good word, hear but of the frequenting of a good exercise. Our
Savior hearing the young man making such a profession of his obedience, though
it was only in regard of the outward man, yet it is said, he looked upon him
and loved him: and so in like manner, why should it not be lawful for us to
love and like a man accordingly; to testify our liking of those in whom we
perceive any good beginnings, in pious and religious exercises? and yet this is
no warrant for such to rest in those outward forms of religion, as if all were
perfect in them.

3 Deceit. That there seems to be an agreement betwixt them and the most
forward professors, they join in the same parts of Gods worship with like
diligence; frequent Gods ordinances; why may we not from thence conceive all to
be well with them?

Answ. 1. That whatsoever a child of God will do by virtue of sincerity in his
heart, that same will an hypocrite do out of the pride and vanity of his
heart: the web of hypocrisy is most cunningly spun, scarcely to be discerned
but by him that has the spirit of discerning more then ordinary. Compare the
reformation of Iehu, with that of Josiah, and you shall see little difference;
he pretends as great zeal, is as ho^ in the rooting out of the idolatrous
worship of Baal, as was Josiah in the like kind: had not Iehu discovered
himself in setting up the idolatry of Jeroboam, he might have kept his
credit: therefore an appearing outward agreement is not that which may give a
hope that our profession is sound, but we must have an eye to the integrity of
the heart in the performance thereof.

Secondly, we have examples of some in Scripture, who have witnessed an
universal agreement in their profession, even unto the parting from their
lands and possessions, as Ananias and Saphi^, and yet all proved in the end but
counterfeit: so Judas, of whom no doubt but that speech had its truth. We have
forsaken all and followed thee: this concurrence in the same outward duties,
did flow from hearts diversely affected, and accordingly in time it was
apparent. It is a corrupt manner of reasoning, to conclude a total agreement
from a partial, an inward from an outward. Let all Christians be exhorted and
persuaded, that they beware how they build upon this same seeming formal
righteousness, that they do not bless themselves in it as a state of
al-sufficiency to salvation: as if green leaves could make good trees, or
formal profession good Christians; it will deceive them that trust it in their
greatest needs: and for the better enforcing this exhortation, that it may more
lively pierce the hearts of all formal professors, consider these motives.

Motives.
1 The Scripture tells us that it is deceiveable righteousness, Ier. 7.4. Iam.
1.22.
Ier. 7.4. trust not in lying words, Iam. 1.22. be ye doers of the word, not
hearers only, deceiving your own selves. Now what wisdom is it for a man to
cast his salvation upon that which the spirit of truth has witnessed, will in
the end prove as those Brooks that Job speaks of, that fail men when they
have most need of water.

2 The Lord does of all other services, reject this formal righteousness,
Psalm 50.8. Psalm. 50.8. Isa. 1.14.
Isa. 1.14. My soul hates your new Moons, and your appointed feast^, they are
a burden to me, I am weary of them, verse 13. Incense is an abomination to
me, etc. Who will then go about to make his heart believe that the outward
usage of Gods ordinances will commend a man to God.

3 It is among the sins of these times prophesied, 2 Timothy 3.1.5. 2 Samuel 3.1.5.
that in the latter days shall come men having a form of godliness, but not
the power. Now we ought to be so much the more careful to avoid it, as we are
more subject to it, in regard of the prevailing of it, in the age wherein we
live.

4 We must know that the end of all Gods ordinances, is the renewing of Gods
image in us, the making of us new creatures, the fashioning of our hearts to
his will; therefore we hear, pray, receive the Sacraments, that we may have
the graces of faith and repentance stamped in our souls. Now then when we
attain not this benefit by them, we lose all our duties, the ordinances become
as a dead letter, the very sacrifice of fools.

The third Harbor wherein the soul of man rests it self is, Temporary
Righteousness, such a service of God as carries a goodly show for the time,
but after vanishes away.

Consider, 1. What it is. 2. The grounds of it. 3. The deceits of it. 4. The
discovery.


1. Temporary Righteousness is a work of the spirit, whereby a man being
enlightened to see the privileges that are in Christ for a time rejoices in
them, yields some obedience to them; yet afterward he utterly falls away. It
is a work of the spirit, Heb. 6.4. Heb. 6.4.
they that have it are said to be partakers of the Holy Ghost. Whereby a man
is illightned to see the privileges that are in Christ and rejoices in them.]
Luke 8.13. Luke 8.13.
the stony ground which represents the temporary professor receives the word
with joy, yields a measure of obedience, Matthew. 12* 43. Matthew. 12.43.
the unclean spirit is said to go out of a man for a time, wherein the
temporary Christian is understood; now in the time wherein he departs, the
temporary Christian, out of whom he goes, yields some measure of obedience, yet
so as afterward he falls away. So the righteousness of temporaries is
compared to the morning dew, that vanishes away with the Sun; and that this
is his estate to fall away is insinuated, Hebr. 6. Examples of this estate two
more eminently known. Saul of whom in the begin^ing of his reign, we hear of
many good actions; his wisdom in his patient bearing with those wicked men that
murmured against him, 1 Samuel 10.27. 1 Samuel 10.27.
his humility in refusing to take the estate of a King upon him, ver. 22. his
mercy in succouring the men of Iabesh Gilead, Chap. 11. 1 Samuel 11.
his Justice in pu^ting down the witches, 1 Samuel 28.3. 1 Samuel 28.3.
and yet afterward fearfully did he fall away from God. The other is the
example of that famous hypocrite Iehu, how zealous did he carry himself in
rooting out the posterity of Ahab, and how did he in all pretend the work of
the Lord, how did he put to death all the Priests of Baal, and brake all the
Images; yet dies with this brand, that he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam.

2. Grounds. 1. That these men were never truly engrafted into the Vine Christ
Jesus; they were never truly sodered, and united into Christ as parts of his
mystical body, whereof he is the head, and accordingly being never truly
conjoined unto him, no marvel if in time they be drawn dry, and become as
branches unprofitable; that which they do is by a common influence of the
spirit of God enabling them unto some duties, whereby he pleases to glorify
his name, and as that whereby we continue and persevere in the state of grace,
is our union and society with the Lord Jesus, whereby we become one with him,
and none shall take us out of his hands; so that which makes the fruit of the
spirit to wither and come to nothing in us after a time, is the want of this
conjunction with Christ, because the seed of God is not in us; such are
nourished not from the power which diffuseth it self from the head to the
members, but from some external cause and work of the spirit, but out of the
mystical body of Christ.

2. There is a d^fferent manner of receiving the word; some receive it into the
uppermost face of their hearts: others so receive it, that it sinkes more
deeply into the soul; takes a firm rooting; with some their knowledge
swimmes in their brain, casts a reflection upon the affections from the light
that is in the understanding; o hers are changed into their knowledge, their
knowledge does exe^cise a commanding power over the faculties of soul and
body. Now this different manner of receiving of the word makes a difference
between Professors of whom some hold out, others fall away; this is the
difference betwixt the stony ground and the good earth, Mat. 13. So that the
reason why this righteousness fades and comes to nothing, is that, because it
not being stamped deep enough into the soul, when temptations make an
assault, it is not of ability to resist.

3 Deceits. 1. He imagines himself in good case, for that he can rejoice in
the word when he hears it.

Answer. There is a threefold difference, betwixt the joy of the temporary and
the Elect in hearing, the word. The temporary rejoices in hearing of the
glorious privileges of the Christian estate, being convicted of the goodness
and excellency of them; like as a man is affected with joy to behold with his
eyes a Vine plentifully ^aden with grapes, or a field of corn that is goodly
to see to, in regard of the large and plentiful crop, though he have no part
in it; even such may be the joy of the temporary, caused not from any
persuasion of propriety and interest in the things, but only from the glorious
hiew and beauty of the things themselves: But as for the elect of God, their
joy arises from an evidence of that assurance, they have of their interest in
them, that they are peculiar to them, and that they are within the promises.

2. The joy of the temporary is a joy that arises from a slight taste that he
has of Gods mercies and the Christian prerogatives; whereas the joy of the
true converts springs from that good they find even from a perfect nourishment
that they receive, finding themselves justified and sanctified by virtue of
that they have gotten in the ministry of the word. The Apostle in the words
last spoken of the temporary professor, Heb. 6. gives occasion of this
difference, for even as it is one manner of joy that a man conceives upon the
tasting of good meat, when the same notwithstanding is never perfectly
digested and turned into good blood; another when a man so joys in that he
tastes, as it is converted into perfect nutriment; such is the difference
betwixt the joy of the temporary and the persevering professor.

3. The joy of the temporary in the word is sometimes accidental; with respect
to such ci^cumstances as the word comes clothed withal; as, for the novelty
and strangenes of it, so many are delighted to hear some points of divinity
discussed which formerly they have not heard, there is love to the Preacher in
whom they are glad to see such excellency of gifts, as also in the pleasing
delivery, so Ezekiel. 33.32. Ezekiel. 33.32.
Lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can sing well. But as for the joy of the elect, their joy is in the
word of God, with respect unto the goodness that is in it for it self, for
that beauties sake that shines in it; they behold an inward glory, Ier. 15.16.
Ier. 15.16.
Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy
and rejoicing of my heart.

4 The joy of the elect in the word, is a joy that springs up by certain
steps, arising from the sense of misery, feeling of Gods anger, hungring after
grace; for the heart of man humbled with this spiritual wretchedness, abased
and cast down in the sense of his misery and wants, flies unto the sanctuary
of the word, where finding gracious promises, and the loving nature of God
described at large, recovereth it self; and out of the sweetness of Gods
promises apprehended by faith, curing the wounds of our distressed souls, does
greatly rejoice in the same; the word becomes sweeter then the honey and the
honey comb; but the joy of the temporary is sudden, as a flash of lightning,
and therefore deciphered by the sprouting up of the seed in the stony ground,
Matthew. 13.

5 The joy of the temporary is of a vanishing nature, it soon fades; as the
corn that grows out of the stony ground withers forthwith for want of
earth, so is it with the temporaries joy, it is as the crackling of thorns
under a pot, soon in, soon out: hereupon his delight is compared to him that
coming into a pleasant garden, is delighted while he is within the smell: but
the elects joy is more permanent, continued longer, he has a posie of those
sweet flowers, wherewith he refreshes himself, even when he is gone out of
the Garden.

Deceit 2. He pleases himself in this, that he has some inward compunction
of heart for his sins, that he is pricked in conscience, troubled for sin,
feels a horror in his soul; thence he conceives his estate to be as the
estate of Gods children, since he is in this like them.

Answ. 1. If these gripes of conscience were infallible notes of one that is in
the state of grace, then might Esaus weeping, Ahabs humbling himself, Judas
his sorrowing, plead an interest in this estate, whom notwithstanding the
Scripture has marked with the black coal of reprobation.

2 There is a worldly sorrow, as well as a godly, both have sin for their
object, 2 Cor. 7. 2 Cor. 7.
and yet the one causes death eternal. This sorrow for sin cannot give any
man comfort touching the welfare of his estate further then he is assured it
is a godly sorrow, whereof more shall be said hereafter. The devils have a
horror in their souls, wherewith they tremble at the righteous judgments of
God; are afrighted with legal terrors, yet never a whit the nearer the state
of grace.

3 The sorrow of those men does not lie long upon them, it is not of a lasting
nature; but like a vapor that now appears, and anon vanishes away. Many are
Sermon-sicke, as those that are sea-sicke, exceeding ill at ease, queasie
stomachs, while they are on the Sea; yet the same men when they come on land,
are as well as ever they were so we have many who in the hearing of the word,
seem to be much troubled, exceedingly cast down; yet the same men when
coming abroad, they are but acquainted with the air of the world, their pangs
of sorrow pass away: such was the sorrow of Felix, who while he heard Paul
disputing of righteousness and temperance, and of judgment to come, he
trembled, Acts 24.25. Acts 24 25.
yet no sooner was Paul departed, but his covetous heart prevailed over him:
whereas the nature of the sorrow which may give a man comfort touching his
estate, as that whereby he is advanced into the glorious condition of Gods
children, is an abiding sorrow, goes to bed, and rises with us, as David
witnesses, Psalm. 42.3. Psalm. 42.3.
my tears have been my meat day and night.

4 If we consider the effect of these sorrows, whereby this temporary is
stricken; they work no alteration nor change in his life; he goes softly,
clothes himself with sackcloath, hangs down his head like a bul-rush, but so
as he lickes up the vomit of his sins, keeps iniquity close under his
tongue: Esau even when he cried out for grief, yet had this resolution in him,
that when the days of mourning for his father were past, he would be avenged
of his brother by killing him, Genesis 27.41. Genesis 27.41.
So Ahab, even soon after he had sorrowed for Gods judgments denounced
against him for his murderous oppression of Nabeth, he imprisoned Micaiah, 1
King. 22.27. 1 King. 22.27.
whereas the sorrow that accompanies him that is in the state of grace, brings
such a reformation of heart and life, as we may see in Paul.

Deceit 3, He has good motions, holy desires and inclinations, whereby he
resolves for the best ways, and what do the most righteous more?

Answ. 1. That good purposes, unless they be brought into practice, they are
as untimely birth; no good comes to them in whom they are: for even as that
infant which is only conceived and never borne, is counted as if he had never
been, so is it with these abortive and miscarrying purposes. It is the very
glory and perfection of these good motions when they are beautified with an
actual performance of that which was purposed, otherwise our hearts deal with
us in good purposes, as Zarah when he was to be born; make a fair show, as if
they would come out of sin, and yet give back, all is naught worth: our
desires in this kind are no other then a man may find in hell mouth. What
benefit was it to those Jews, John 6.34. John 6.34.
that they cried out, Lord evermore give us that bread, when notwithstanding
they did not use the means to compass it, as appears, verse 36. what good
had Agrippa by being persuaded almost to become a Christian? or was Balaam ever
the nearer to heaven, for that he desired to dye the death of the righteous?
why then does the temporary carry himself so stiffely upon his good purposes
and desires?

2 If we take an account of those desires, by comparing them with those that
are found in men truly converted, we shall find many notorious differences.
Those desires of the temporary are like them of the sluggard, who lusts, but
his soul has naught, Pro. 13.4. Pro. 13.4.
they are lazy, faint, without any violence offered to the corruption of our
nature; but those of the converted are painful, laborious, joined with a most
earnest using of the means; those in whom they are all called violent, Matthew.
11.12. Mat. 11.12. Phil. 3. Mat. 5.6.
yea, they are said to press forward, Phil. 3. to hunger after righteousness,
Matthew. 5.6. yea, secondly, these of the temporary feel no grief for the want
of that they desire: but those of true converts are joined with an inward most
affectionate mourning toward him whom they desire; their soul faints, they
are sick after that they desire, Psalm. 42.1. Psalm. 143.7. Psalm. 42.1. Psalm.
143.7.
Hear me speedily O Lord, my spirit fails, etc. Thirdly, those of the
temporary (as all beginnings of grace) are fickle, vanish away, come to
nothing; these other are constant, hold out, give no rest to their eyelids,
till they have gained something wherein they may rest.

Deceit 4. That he finds himself more forward then many of those that have
been ancient professors; is more hot and earnest in many good duties, even
then they of whose conversation no man had ever cause to doubt.

Answ. That the stony ground (by which one kind of the temporary is to be
understood) is mavelous forward in sending forth the blade; as it lies not
deep, but in the face of the earth, so it sprouts and shows it self more
speedily, Matthew. 13. Mar. 4. So it is mavelous to behold some of these
temporary professors, how soon they are ripe, how violently forward; but
according to those violent beginnings, they do as soon fade and wither away.
It is with them as with men that are over-forward in the morning at their
business, in the afternoon constrained to give over: it is an ill sign of
perseverance in good duties, when a man is forward and zealous beyond the age
of his christianity; and look as we must not lay any great hope upon children
that are witty and forward beyond their age, so likewise we should not think
any whit the better of our selves, by reason of our sudden over forwardness.
Our Savior speaks of some who were last, who shall be first, and first that
shall be last: why may not the hot and over-earnest temporary suspect himself
for one of these?

2 We must in our forwardness consider wisely whether nature has not a hand
in it as well as grace, or beyond it. For I doubt not but when some seeds of
religion fall into the heart of a young man, or a man of a stirring spirit, they
do receive a great impression of heat from the natural warmth that is in him;
he pursues things that be contrary to him with greater intension, not of zeal
alone, but of zeal set on fire by the strength of nature. It shall be wisdom
therefore for men to examine and try their zeal and their forwardness. Peter
being a man of a fiery and sudden spirit by nature. Religion was many times
preposterously set on work by nature, and he made a show of more forwardness,
and yet I doubt not but as much, if not more substance of zeal was in the rest
of the Apostles.

3 He may mistake ancient professors, when he shall measure the substance of
inward grace, by an outward blaze of forwardnes. In many this forwardnes
out-runs judgment, wisdom, holy discretion, and accordingly makes a great show
in the eyes of the beholders. In others soundness of judgment, wisdom,
experience have over mastered affections, so as they are no whit less zealous,
but more wise, discreet, better ordered; managing their practices with no whit
abatement of sincerity, but with much more comfort to themselves, and good to
others.

5. Deceit, That he finds the Lord rewarding him for that which he does; sees
some of Gods temporal promises made good unto him, both in mercies
communicated, and judgments withdrawn.

Answ. If this might give any assurance of the soundness of grace in the
heart, then might Ahab put in for a part among the sons of God, of whom it is
recorded that the Lord regarded his temporal and but seeming humiliation (for
it was not with his whole heart) with a translation of the judgment that should
have been inflicted, from his days to the succeeding generation. So likewise
Iehu went not unrewarded for that which he did in destroying the house of Ahab;
2 King. 10.30.
his children were to sit upon the throne of Israel to the fourth generation.
Yea further, such has been Gods justice, that he would not have heathen men
do any thing that he had appointed to be done without a reward. Wicked
Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. 29.20. Ezekiel* 29.20.
shall have the land of Egypt given him for his labor wherewith he served
against it, because they wrought for me says the Lord, and some of the ancient
fathers have imputed the long continuance of the Roman Empire as a reward in
Gods justice given to the practice of civil virtues, wherein many of them were
famously renowned.

Secondly, The temporary might in his well doing more comfort himself, as an
argument of saving grace in him, if God did not reward him in this life; he
might look then for a reward at the general Judgment, where God gives the
reward of eternal life; but that God rewards him here in this life, the Lord
signifies that he will not be indebted to him; now he has all that he must
look for.



Demas, his estate is worse at the end, then it was at the first, for look as
it is with water having been once heat, if after it be cold again, it is more
easily frozen; so it is with men that have been once warmed with the
sunshine of grace, if after they grow cold, they are more easily frozen in
their impiety, more hardened in the courses of sin, Matthew. 12. Mat. ^2.
the end of that man, where there is a re-entry of Devils, after their
ejection, is worse than the beginning, 2 Peter 2.21. 2 Peter 2.25.
It had been better for them not to have known the good ways of God* then
after they have known them to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them.

2. Our departing from good ways after we have made progress in the same,
argues in us extreme folly, we cannot enter the lists so much as of a
temporary profession, but we must look to suffer many things, we must betyed
to the means; deprived of much of that which the flesh calls liberty. Now shall
we suffer all this in vain? shall we with the Israelites come out of Egypt,
undergo many sorrows in the wilderness, come to the borders of the land of
Canaan, and then give over and faint by the way? Shall we do, as he that
takes a long and chargeable journey to buy a commodity that is needful for
him, and when he comes to the place, parts for a penny, and goes home again
without it? Ezekiel. 18.24. Ezekiel. 18.24.
If he turn away, all his righteousness that he has done, shall not be
mentioned.

3. Consider, That all the promises of God are entailed upon the grace of
Perseverance, Matthew. 24.12, 13. Mat. 24.12* 13.
Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold, but he that
endures to the end shall be saved, Revel. 2.10. Revel. 2.^^, ^^.
be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life,
ver. 11. he that overcommeth, shall not be hurt of the second death, Revel.
3.12. Revel. 3.12.
him that overcommeth will I make a ^r in the Temple of my God.

Wherefore let us at any hand be admonished to search and try our Profession;
not deceive our selves; we may make a show to others, and our hearts may make
us believe all is well; but let us not trust them till we have tried them. It
is the fool that will believe every thing. Many have set forward in good
ways, a^ Na^mies two daughters, that would needs accompany her into the land
of Judah, saying, we will return with thee unto thy people, and yet how easily
was Orpah entreated to go back? So there are many Orphats, that seem as if
they would travail to heaven, yet give over in the midway; let their examples
be admonitions to us.

Thus far of the discovery of the false harbors of the Christian esta^e. Now
I come to the means of inquiry.

In the inquity to be made for the direction of a Christian in the duty of
self trial, fo^re special^ies are to be discussed.

1. What graces are of the essence and being of a Christian.

2. What their nature is.

3. What is the least measure of them* less then which a man cannot have, and
be in the state of grace*

4. What be the several marks of these graces essentially necessary?

For the first, I find, that the Scripture does enclose all in these two
duties, Faith and Repentance, Mark. 1.15. Mark. 1.1^. Acts 20.2^.
Repent and believe the Gospel, Acts 20.21. Witnessing to Jews and Grecians,
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. By these two we
pass from death to life, from the power of Satan to God. Now the latter of
these duties being unfold^d, there are these three maine branches of it.

1. Godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10. 2 Cor. 7.10.
that is the beginning of it, and as it were the first step; whence it is said,
to bring forth Repentance to salvation, ver. 10.

2. A change of mind, called the New Creature, fleshy heart, renovation of the
spirit of our minds, employed in the word repent; which properly signifies a
transmutation or alteration of the mind.

3. New obedience, Matthew. 3.8. Matthew. 3.8.
bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life, Romans 12.1. Romans 12.1.
give up your bodies as a living sacrifice. So that the issue of all is, that
to set a man in possession of the state of grace, there be four maine works
of the spirit. 1. Faith. 2. Godly sorrow. 3. Change of mind. 4. New obedience.


Within these is comprehended whatsoever appertains to the being of a
Christian. Many complementall graces are further found in him, who is in the
faith, as appertaining to his well-being: these and these only do estate him
in that blessed tenure of the sons of God.

Secondly, What these are in their particular nature.

Faith is a work of the spirit whereby we are enabled to apply to our selves
the promises made in Christ for our reconciliation with God. It is a work of
the spirit of God,] Ephesians. 2.8. Ephesians 2.8.
It is the gift of God. [we are enabled] Our wills are lifted up above their
natural condition and ability by a special infusion of grace; for howsoever
faith be begun in the understanding, yet the perfection of it is from the will;
this is apparent from the object of saving faith, which is not only truth, but
also good, and good to us. [To apply to our selves] So John 20.28. John 20.28.
Thomas shows himself to be a believer, when he says, My Lord, and my God,
Galath. 2.20. Gal. 2.20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for
me* [The promises made in Christ] they are the matter whereabout our faith is
exercised, Romans 4.21. Romans 4.21.
Abraham's assurance was settled upon the promise. [ For our Reconciliation with
God] this is the benefit of it, that upon believing God is reconciled, we have
an atonement, Romans 5.11. Romans 5.11.


Thirdly, what is the least measure of saving faith?

Answer. It is a constant earnest desire of the pardon of sin flowing from an
humble heart, joined with a conscionable use of the means, I say, constant, to
difference this desire from the moody passions that are in natural men, to
whom God disclosing the fearfulness of the vengeance to come, they do for
the instant desire a remove all of their sins. I say earnest, with respect to
the sluggish wishes that are in the unregenerate; as also to that fervency of
desire which experience shows in the godly, Psalm. 42.2. Psalm 42.2.
my soul is a thirst for God. I say further, that it is set on work by an
humbled soul, a soul touched with his own miseries, a wounded spirit, a
broken heart, Psalm. 10.17. Psalm 10.17.
thou have heard the desire, but it is the desire of an humbled soul, of the
poor in spirit. Last of all, this desire expresses it self in a careful and
diligent use of the means, whereby it may be increased, as Prayer, hearing the
word, receiving the Sacraments. This is that faith which is termed by the
smoking flax; and bruised reed, Matthew. 12.20. Matthew. 12.20.
which promise of Christ is, not to break the one, nor quench the other. This
to be in Gods acceptance, as saving faith appears, in that God rewards this
hungring desire with everlasting life, Matthew. 5.6. Luke 1.33. Matthew. 5.6. Luke.
1.33. John 7.37. Isaiah 55.^.
he fills the hungry with good things, John 7.37. If any man thirst; let him
come to me, and drink, Isa. 55.1. H^ every one that thirsts, etc.

Secondly, for that such desires are the grace it self desired; for if a
desire unto sin be the sin it self before God, as Matthew. 5.27. Matthew. 5 27.
he that looks upon a woman and lusts after her has comm^tted adultery with
her; why shall not much more an earnest desire or the pardon of sin be an
obtaining of it? an earnest desire to believe be accepted for belief it self?

Thirdly, where ever the spirit of God is working saving grace in the heart,
there must needs be faith; but where ever such a desire so qualified is, there
must needs be the spirit of God; for these desires not being the fruits of the
flesh, must necessarily come from the spirit. And doubtless they are sent as
an earnest penny and pledge of everlasting life: yea, look as a desire to live
cannot come from a dead man, no more can the desire of the life of grace in us
proceed from us, as we are natural men dead in sin. Thus we see what is the
least measure of saving faith; less then which if we have, we are not
believers, and consequently, not in the state of grace.



Marks of faith^ Acts 15.9.
The marks of true faith are first, that faith does purify the heart, Acts
15.9. the heart of man by nature is a sink of abominations, the very
imaginations evil, and that continually: it breaths forth nothing but
uncleanness, hatred, self-love, worldliness, with whole swarms of evil
thoughts: it is evil, and wholly evil, even in all the corners of the will,
understanding, memory, affections, full of corruption, overspread with the
leprosy of sin. Now the office of faith is by virtue of strength from
Christ, and grace from his fullness, as also in consideration of those promises
whereunto it does entitle the believer, to sweep the nasty corners of the
soul, to stamp it in another mould. So faith enlightens the understanding,
that was nothing but darkness, makes the will to incline and follow after
righteousness, whereunto it was before most rebellious; sanctifies the
^ffections, sorrow, fear, anger, etc. draws them from earth to heaven;
infuseth into the memory a retentive faculty of that which is good, in respect
whereof it was before as a riven dish. Would thou then know whether thy
faith be such as will abide the touchstone? weigh with thy self what strength
it gives thee to purge and cleanse thy soul; if none at all, then there is no
truth nor soundness in it.

Romans 8.26. Romans 8.26.
The spirit makes intercession for us with gronings which cannot be uttered. It
is an infallible mark of the spirit, and consequently of faith, when our
sighs and groans in the feeling of the want of grace, are such as fill heaven
and earth, are unutterable, we wish for more then we can express. Now then as
we would be assured of the truth of our faith, let us consider whether the
spirit of God has taught us thus sensibly, and feelingly to pray* to call God
Abba, Father, to have recourse with boldness to the throne of grace, hoping to
find mercy in time of need. If we want this spirit of prayer, it is an
argument of our want of faith; for how shall they call on him in whom they have
not believed?

Acts 2. Act^ ^
they were pricked in their consciences, and said, Men and brethren, what shall
we do to be saved? so Acts 16. the Iaylour, his faith follows his
humiliation; he came in trembling before them, and said, Sirs, what shall I
do to be saved? these legal humiliations are the harbingers of faith: as the
needle goes before the thread, and the wind, fire, earthquake went before the
still voice, when the Lord spoke to Elias; so the Lord rends the heart with the
mighty wind and purging fire of his word, causes an earthquake in the soul,
and then he speaks peace to it, visits it with the light of his countenance,
apprehended by faith. As we would therefore find comfort in our faith, let us
carefully consider the order how it is descended into our hearts; if it has
sprung up from a secure, untroubled, quiet spirit, that has continually cried
peace, peace, we may at no hand dare to rely upon it. The spirit of grace and
saving faith is as a calm after a boisterous storm; an honor that follows
humility.

Matthew. 12.25. Mat. 12.25. Luke 11.21.
Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation, and Luke
11.21. when a strong man armed keeps his Palace, the things that he
possesses are in peace. This combat therefore betwixt believing and distrust
must needs grow from two contrary principles, namely the spirit and the flesh.

Romans 10.14. Romans 10.14.
Faith comes by hearing, Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians 1 13^
In whom also ye believed after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of
your salvation, Acts 10.44. Acts 10.44.
while Peter spoke the Holy Ghost fell on them. So then if thy heart will
testify with thee; that thy faith has been conceived in the womb of the
holy us^ge of the ministry of the Word and Sacraments, if then thou have had
this ass^rance wrought in thee by that thou feel thy faith nourished,
increased, gathering strength in the day of temptation; thou may resolve thy
self of the truth of it.

his contented mind; he is as a m^n that having obtained his desired purpose,
neglects all in comparison of that he enjoyes; he so rejoices in things
spiritual, that the want of outward comforts does not much trouble him, Psalm.
4.8. Psalm 4.8.
Thou have given me more joy then they have had, when their corn and wine and
oil abounded, Romans 5. Romans 5.
We rejoice in tribulations, because the love of God is s^^d abroad in our
hearts, the feeling of Gods love by faith will raise ou^ dejected souls in
their greatest abasement, Philip. 4.11. Phil 4.11.
I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content. I can be
abased, and I can abound; I can do all things through Christ who strengthens
me; that is, while he lets me see the love of God toward me in the pardon of
my sins. Thus does faith raise a man's thoughts to the beholding of such
p^iviledges as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard; from whence the
spiritual man looking downe-ward upon the mountains whether of outward
blessings or croffes, they seem as mole-hils; the afflictions of this life are
not worthy of the glory which shall be revealed, faith the Apostle, 2 Cor.
4.17. 2 Cor. 4.17.
and Moses by faith having an eye to the recompense of the reward neglected the
privilege that he might have enjoyed by being counted the son of Pharaohs
daughter, Heb. 11.26. Heb. 11.26.
so likewise, Hebr. 11.8, 9. Heb. 11 9.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were contented with their pilgrims estate, because
they looked for a better City.

whereby men profess they believe in Christ, hope to be saved as well as the
best, and yet their hearts and lives over spread with worldly and fleshly
l^sts? they are not washed from their uncleanness; they send forth nothing but
noisome and damnable corruptions. Shall we conceive that the day star of
salvation has risen in their hearts, who are nothing but darkness in their
understanding, ha^ing to be reformed in their will and affections, their whole
lives a running with greedines to the excess of riot; is not this a
counterfeit faith that works no more glorious fruits of reformation of heart
and life? so likewise when men's prayers are only lip-devotions, uttered
formally from the teeth outward, are they not an undoubted argument of the want
of the Spirit, which makes men affected with their own miseries to power out
their hearts like water, to send up loud cries to the throne of grace.

As also that assurance of Gods favor which many of unhumbled and insensible
hearts, not groaning under their own miserable condition do brag of* may we
not reject it as a deceitful staff, that will in the end deceive them that
leave thereon? So likewise that faith which never doubted, which is not
incombred with distrustful thoughts; that faith which has crept into men's
hearts, either without the means of the word preached, and the Sacraments; or
else by a slight and regardlesse usage of them; that faith which is constrained
to feel all its contentment from the base and transitory things of this life,
that has no contentment without them, that is best at ease in the hunting
after them; all these kinds of faith we may by this doctrine discover as
unsound, hypocritical, and only a seeming faith.





Gods Commandments* and out of this grief judges himself worthy to be
destroyed, it is called the wounded spirit, the contrite and broken heart. I
say, It is a work of the spirit, Ezekiel 36.27, 31. Ezekiel. 36.27, 31
I will put my spirit within them; then shall they remember their own evil
ways, and shall loath themselves in their own sight, and judge themselves
worthy to be destroyed. I ^ay further that it is a grief with respect to the
breach of Gods law; to difference it from the legal sorrow that grieves at
sin with respect to the fearfulness of the punishment that is to be
inflicted, and is only led with respect to that; this set on work by fea^e of
the whip, that other by a child like love. Lastly, I add, that this sorrow
makes a man his own condemner; and to fling the first stone at himself, 2 Samuel
24. Let thy hand be upon me and upon my fathers house.





First, ^nward alone* consisting in this, that a man is truly displeased with
himself for his sins as they are an offense to God.

Secondly, This inward sorrow is joined with a bodily moving of the heart,
which causes weeping; this last is commendable, and that whereunto men must
endeavor to attain; even that their flinty souls may send forth rivers of
tears; but its not a necessary condition, as without which our sorrow is no
sorrow.



So that we may resolve this question touching the least measure of godly
sorrow; namely that it is an inward displeasure with a man's self for that he
has offended God, joined with a grief, that a man can grieve no more, this
dislike of a man's self in regard of the breach of Gods law, and grief for not
grieving enough, is that which the Lord (if it be in sincerity) accepts; as who
respects more in this case the contrite and broken hear^, then he blubbered
cheeks, who sees that a man may with dry eyes mourn heartily for his sins.

The sufficiency of this sorrow I prove, for that the Lord in all his services
does mainely insist upon the di^position of the heart; so more especially in
this, because thine heart did melt, 2 King. 22.1^. Psalm. 51.17.
I will gather thee to thy Fathers, The sacrifices of God are a contrite
spirit: a broken and a contrite heart o God thou will not despise, Isa. 57.15.
I the Lord dwell with him that is of a contrite heart and humble spirit, Isaiah
61. Christ was sent to bind up the broken in heart.

Secondly, we have some examples of penitentiaries, whose repentance God
accepted of, and yet no mention of that degree of sorrow which expresses it
self by tears. Zacheus, Luke 19. came down hastily, and received Christ
joyfully, so Acts 16. Lydia, who if she had been cast down with any great
measure of sorrow, could not so readily have given entertainment to the
Apostles.

Matthew. 5. In a word therefore to conclude, the least measure of godly sorrow,
less then which there is none, is to be truly displeased with our selves, for
that we have transgressed the law of so good a God, and withal to grieve for
that we are not more deeply grieved.

Marks of godly sorrow.
The marks of this godly sorrow whereby it may be known, are these.

the midst of our bowels, Zach. 12.10. Zach. 12.10.
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn, as one
mourns for his only son: on the other side, the legal sorrow is
occasioned by the fearful curses of the law, by the horrors of the vengeance
to come, by the grifly face of eternal death; these pierce the hearts of
natural men, and make them as one that travelleth continually with child,
whence it is, that the Apostle makes the difference of the spirit of the law,
from that of the Gospel, Romans 8.15. Romans 8.15.
We have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but we have
received the spirit of adoption, crying, Abba Father; so that godly sorrow is a
child-like sorrow, whereby we are grieved that we offend a Father that is kind
and loving unto us.



Psalm. 80.5. Psalm. 80.5.
thou have fed them with the bread of tears, and given them tears to drink
in great measure: and if we must every day ask forgiveness of sins, then
we must every day have our sighs and groans for them. Now the sorrow of the
natural man, though a sorrow for sin, yet how soon dies it? it vanishes
away all in a moment, or if it belong, then they sing to the sound of the
Violl, they drink wine in bowls, eat the lambs out of the flock, and the
calves out of the midst of the stall, and anoint themselves with the best
ointments, that so sorrow and mourning may flee away.

David, whose heart was smitten for cutting off but the lap of Saul's garment.
For secret sins as well as for open, for such sins as men applaud and
countenance, as well as for those they cry shame of, for that sorrow which is
caused by the conscience we have of the breach of Gods commandment, makes no
difference of sin, whether open or secret, approved or disliked by men; since
the conscience is equally bound, as well in the one as the other. Hence it is
that Gods children do weep in secret for such sins as none can accuse them
of, and accordingly cease not to pray to be cleansed from them, Psalm. 19.12.
Psalm. 19.12:
O cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Isa. 50.4. Isa. 50.4. Ezekiel. 34:
the broken hearted are sent for cure to the shepherds, Ezekiel. 34.4. these be
the flaggons wherewith the Spouse of Christ is comforted when she is sick of
love, Can. 2.5. Cant. 2.5: Romans 15.4:
the Scriptures are called Scriptures of comfort, Romans 15.4. as for worldly
sorrow, that is healed and driven away by worldly means. So Cain did rid
himself of his sorrow by building Cities, inventing musical instruments: so
do natural men put away the legal fears wherewith other-while they are
stricken, by merry companions, music and revelling, sports and recreations.
Now it is otherwise with the godly in their sorrow that arises from the fear
of Gods displeasure; that travels far and near, runs through all variety of
outward delights, finds no comfort in any thing but the word of God.

Cor. 7.11. 1 Carfulness, that is, an earnest bethinking our selves, joined
with diligence in the means whereby we may avoid the sin we mourn for. 2
Clearing of our selves, which is an endeavor to approve ourselves in the
dislike of that we mourn for by the contrary deed done, Luke 19.8. Luke 19.8.
Acts 16.33
Behold, the half of my goods I give to the poor, Acts 16.33. Indignation,
whereby a man is even angry with himself, loathes himself, is even weary of
himself, Ezekiel. 36.4 Fear, Ezekiel. 36.
which is an awful regard, whereby we are afraid both of the sin, and of all
the occasions of it, with respect to Gods displeasure, Pro. 28.14. Pro. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always. 5 A vehement desire, whereby we are
so affected, that we do not more strongly long for any thing, then to be
preserved from that evil, by which we have fallen, and also to do the
contrary good, Psalm. 119. Psalm. 119.
My heart breaks for the fervent desire it has to thy commandments. 6
Zeal, when upon the consideration how we have dishonored God by our sin, we
are so much the more desirous of his glory by all well doing; this is apparent
by Paul, who was so much the more zealous in the propagating of the Gospel, as
he had been furious in persecuting it. 7 Revenge, when a man shows his
displeasure against sin, by punishing the instruments and occasions of it,
Acts 19.19. Acts 19.19.
they that used curious arts brought their books, and burnt them before all
men. So we read of C^a^er, that thrust that hand first into the fire, which
had subscribed the Popish Articles.

So that godly sorrow may be discerned by this train of graces wherewith it is
accompanied, that worldly sorrow wants, at least in the truth of them, though
it may have some shadows of them.

be thy best cordials to comfort thee, whether Gods word, or natural means*
but of all, advisedly consider whether thy sorrow be attended with the
forenamed carfulness, clearing of thy self, indignation, fear, vehement
desires, zeal, revenge, accordingly thou may be comforted in thy mourning,
or discouraged in respect of thy estate.

change of mind.



John 3.5. John 3.5.
By the image of God, I understand that conformity and agreement which is
betwixt Gods law, and the faculties of the reasonable creature consisting in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4.
this is said to be repaired, for that being defaced in the fall of Adam, it is
in part restored again; so as those who are thus changed, are said to be new
creatures, to have a new spirit put into them. I say further, it flows from a
hatred of sin, and love of righteousness, to difference it from those
purposes that are wrung from men in respect of some grievous hand of God upon
them, by the smart of the rod, by the fear of punishment only.

So that a man that would prove himself whether his mind be changed, must
consider whether the spirit of grace has so altered the powers and faculties
of soul and body, so as they are content to be subject to the law of God,
renouncing their former ungodliness.





Now this settling, and disposing of the heart to the ways of God to be the
form and life of a changed estate, it appears, in that Gods children are
deciphered by it, Acts 11. Acts 11.
that they with purpose of heart cleave unto the LORD, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. 2 Chronicles.
20.3.
Iehosaphat set himself, to seek the Lord, Psalm. 119.57. I have determined to
keep thy ward. A constant purpose to be changed is in Gods acceptance, as
also in its own nature, a change that argues a man in the state of grace; for
if it be the fruits of a man's corrupt nature, not to have so much as a desire,
or will, that enclines to this change, but even wholly averse and untoward;
then surely for a man to see so much of his own misery, and to be persuaded so
far of the good estate of him that is changed, as unfeignedly to purpose a
change, it must needs be the proper work of the spirit, Luke 15. In the
Prodigal son the very purpose of a change is both accepted and commended, as
the change it self.

Marks. Marks of this change, otherwise called regeneration* or new birth.

First Mark; That it is to tall; a whole change, casting a new form upon soul
and body; the whole man; for as the corruption did over spread all the powers
of man, so in the restoration the spirit of grace is as large in repairing as
sin was in defacing, whence the man thus renewed is called a new man, a new
creature; is said to arise from the dead; and accordingly the Scripture makes
it a work of the whole man, 1 These. 5.23. 1 These. 5.23.
The God of peace sanctify you throughout, this is expressed to be the whole
spirit, soul and body. The mind must be changed, Col. 3.9, 12. The will, John
8.47. Col. 3.9, 12. John 8.47.
affections, Col. 3. Memory, Psalm. 119. Conscience, all sanctified more or
less. The kingdom of heaven, that is, the work of grace is compared to
leaven, in regard of its diffusive, and spreading nature; it alters the whole
lump, Matthew. 13. Matthew. 13.
hence the work of grace is set out by a comparison from the light; for as that
according to the measure of it enlightens all the house at once, not first one
place of it, and then another, so is it in the renewing of the soul, it
receives the spirit of grace into every part, with one act of the spirit.

To conclude therefore, look as the ointment that was poured on Aarons head
ran down even to the skirt of his garments; so the holy anointing with the
oil of grace, drencheth even the lowest and basest parts of soul and body,
working in them a change of grace.

Second Mark, That it enableth us by faith in Gods word to overcome the world;
makes the man in whom it is, a Conqueror, so as he gets the victory over the
corrupt lusts of his own heart, and the enticements that come from the world
or the devil, 1 John 5.4. All that is borne of God overcomes the world. So
then a special property of him that is changed is, that he has strength
infused into him, whereby he withstands sinful motions in the heart; fashions
not himself to the world; resists the devil. By our natural condition we are
servants to our corrupt hearts; they have an entire command over us, so as, we
both obey them, and have no power to do otherwise. Now where the spirit
works this change, there sin reigns no longer, so as we should obey it in
the lusts thereof, neither do we give our members as weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin, but we give our selves unto God, as they that are
alive from the dead, Romans 6.12, 13. Romans 6.12, 13.
as thou desire therefore to know whether thou art changed or not, so
consider how thou prevailest in crucifying thy corrupt affections, beating
back satan's and the worlds temptations.

John 15.3. John 15.3. John 17.17.
Now are ye clean through the word that I have spoken to you, Ioh. 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is truth, 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 Peter 1.23.
being borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, the word of God,
Psalm. 19. It is the law of God that converts the soul. So then see how this
change is wrought in thee; Is it effected by the power of Gods word? or
proceeds it from other sinister respects? as fear or favor of men, want of
means to do otherwise, danger in thy estate. That change which is wro^ght by
these means, is not a change of grace, but of nature.

Fu^ther, the Word is the means whereby this is increased. We have the
testimony of Peter to this purpose, 1 Peter 2.2. 1 Peter 2 2.
As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow
thereby.



First, that he minds earthly things; is wholly taken up with the care of
them, Romans 8.5. Romans 8.5.
He savours the things of the flesh; and that so, as the things of the spirit
are unsavory to him, Romans 13.14. Romans 13.14.
he takes thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Secondly, He opposes the will of God, by refusing to become subject to it,
Matthew. 23.37. Matthew. 23.37. Psalm 50.17.
I would, but ye would not, Psalm. 50.17. hates to be reformed: and in the room
of Gods will sets up his own lusts, Tit. 3.3. Tit. 3.3.
We in times past were disobedient, serving diverse lusts.

Thirdly, He has no delight in Gods ordinances, Job 21.14. They say unto God,
depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

Fourthly, He hates him that reproves him; he cannot brook him that crosses
his corrupt courses; the scorner loves not him that rebukes.

Fifthly, He loves not the company of good men for their goodness; b^ all his
delight is in natural men, in whom there is no seed of grace; the scorner will
not go to the wise. For further practices and properties of natural men,
consider Ephesians. 4.18, 19. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. Tit. 3.3. 1 Pet. 4.3.
Tit. 3.3. 1 Pet. 4.3. And now, as we would be assured of our change. Consider
how we differ from natural men in those ways and courses wherein they are
described unto us. Are we not such as mind earthly things? but set we our
affections on things above, Col. 3.1. Col. 3.1.
are we not such as withdraw our hearts from being subject to Gods law, but
desire to be ruled and guided by his will, not our own; his laws to be our
Counselors, Psalm 119. are we not such to whom Gods ordinances are a
burden, we having no savor in them, no delight? but do we desire by all
means to be exercised in them, are they the joy of our hearts, and do we
claim them as our heritage, Psalm 119. are we not such as hate them that
reprove us for our evil ways? but do we rather love them, yea desire that our
heads may be broken with their balm? are we not such as shun the fellowship
and meeting of Gods Saints, but all our delight is in them, Psalm 16.2. Then
we may assure our selves that we are truly changed from the state of nature
into the state of grace, Romans 12.2. Romans 12.2.
men are known by this to be changed, by the renewing of their minds, while
they fashion not themselves like unto this world in the practices and
properties of men of the world, 2 Peter 1.4. ^ Pet. 1.4.
the faithful are said to be partakers of the divine nature in this, for that
they fleethe corruption that is in the world.

is a great difference in the manner of sinning betwixt him who is changed, and
the unregenerate man; so that howsoever both be overtaken with the same sin,
yet if a man observe himself in the d^sposition of his heart before, in, and
after sin committed, he shall be able to resolve himself whether he be in
the state of nature, or in the state of grace, for the regenerate man is
troubled before the sin, as also in the act of sinning, not doing either with
a full consent of his will; which so far as it is renewed, resists; so far
as it is corrupt, provokes unto evil; neither yet lying in the sin without
recovery of himself: whereas the unregenerate man sins with full consent of
will; and that because he is all flesh, no spirit: as also sleeps in his
sins. Hence be those different voices, the natural man says, I do the
sin I would, and will to do; but the regenerate man says, he does the sin
he would not, Romans 7. Romans 7.
this mark of the newborn Christian we find, 1 John 3.9. 1 Ioh. 3.9.
He that is of God sins not, neither can he sin, because he is borne of
God. Sin he must needs; but sin he cannot either as wholly consenting unto
it, or lying in it, so as he rises not by repentance. By this we may grow to a
trial of our selves, whether we be borne again, yea, or not.

Object. Natural men have this trouble and reluctance before they sin as
Pilate.

Answ. 1. This fight that is in the regenerate, is of the will with it self;
but in natural men it is of the conscience with the will; the conscience
proclaims sin to be sin, which the will would wish were no sin.

Secondly, This trouble is incident to natural men only in great sins, such as
the light of nature condemns, not in smaller.



The fourth grace is new Obedience.



Answ. It is a work of the spirit, whereby a man that is already justified does
by virtue of grace received bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life. [It
is a work of the spirit.] Ezekiel. 36.27. Ezekiel. 36.27.
I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. [Of him
that is already justified] that is, acquitted of his sins, and made righteous
in the sight of God, Romans 5 1. Romans 5.1, 6, 1.
etc. 6.1. etc. After the doctrine of justification follows the doctrine of
new obedience; to let us understand in what order they are in the Christian
estate. [Doth by virtue of grace received from Christ,] John 15.4. Ioh. 15.4.
As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no
more can ye except ye abide in me, Phil. 4.13. Phil. 4.13.
I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. [bring forth fruits
worthy of amendment of life] Such works as do beseem a man altered and
changed, that professes another course of life; these are those duties that
concern God or man comprised in the Scriptures, Philip. 1.11. they are termed
the fruits of righteousness. So that he that would approve himself to his own
soul to be a practiser of new obedience must consider whether he adorn his
profession with the performance of such religious duties, as the Lord commands.



God commands according to the rigor of his law. In this the endeavor through
Gods mercy is accepted for the deed done. I say, an unfeined endeavor, to
difference it from the glorious show which hypocrites may and do make. Lastly,
I say, it is constant, with respect to the endeavors of the temporary, which
are soon out of breath, and die before they come to perfection. Now that this
unfeined and constant endeavor is accepted as the deed done, it appears,
first in the example of Abraham, of whom the Scripture says, Heb. 11. that he
offered up his son Isaac; yet it is plain that he did not sacrifice his
son, the Lord by an Angel from heaven forbidding him; whereby we gather,
that in Gods acceptance he was offered up, for that there was a faithful
endeavor on Abraham's part.

Secondly, The godly and upright men are said Psalm. 119. To do no iniquity.
Now we know this, that there is none that sins not. Only for that the just
man endeavors, and does his best to do no iniquity he is accepted of God,
as if he did none. So of David it is reported, that he sinned only in the
matter of ^^iah, when as notwithstanding he s^ned many ways else, in his
raging anger at Nabal, in c^okering his children, and likewise, in his unjust
dealing with Mephib^she^h; but yet for that in all these David's heart was
faithful in endeavoring to do Gods will, they are not taken notice of, being
^s ^yed in Gods acceptance, who measures obedience not by the effect, but by
the affection of the doer.

Thirdly, The Lord is said to deal with his as a father with his children the
matter of obedience, Mal. 3.17. I will spa^^ them, as a father spares his own
son that serves him. Now if a man sets his son a task enjoining him to
write a Copy, if he sees that he does but his best e^deavour, he accept it,
commends and encourages his child; even so does the Lord deal with us when he
perceives a faithful laboring on our part^ to do what he commands, he
accepts i^ this case the will (...), and accordingly rewards it.



Marks. They are general or special. Psalm. 18.22. Psalm. 18.22.
the ground of David's obedience was this, all his laws were before me, and I
did not cast his Commandments from me, Psalm. 37.30. Psalm. 37.30.
The mouth of the righteous will speak wisdom, for the law of God is in his
heart, Job 22.23. as the ground of turning to God, (says Eliphaz) receive I
pray thee the law at his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart. Many
perform good duties, that are moved thereunto by fear of punishment,
displeasure of man, fear of discredit, with a desire of praise, that they may
be seen of men, as loath to sustain damage in their outward estates: all
these do not render to God that new obedience that the Lord requires; the
Lord delights not in such sacrifices, the performers can have no assurance that
herein they please God.

Psalm. 119. Psalm 119.
I shall not be confounded when I have respect to all thy Commandments.
Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments of God, Heb. 13.18. Heb.
13.18. we trust we have a good conscience in all things, desiring to live
honestly. And great reason is there for this equal eye to be had to all Gods
Commandments, since they all lay a bond upon the conscience; and the majesty
of the Commander shines as well in the one as in another. Now that a man may
the better examine his obedience, I will propound a five-fold difference of
Gods Commandments, by which the heart of man is apt to deceive it self.

Commandments are first, either such as concern the outward man, as keeping
the Sabbath, just and righteous dealing amongst men; or inward, as confidence
in God, cleansing of the heart from evil thoughts. Now new obedience must
equally respect both, 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Cor. 6.20.
Glorify God in your bodies, and in your souls.

Secondly, they are either the greater Commandments, or such as are of less
importance, as the speaking of a vain word, idle mirth; Christian obedience
must have an eye as well to the one as to the other, Matthew. 23.23. these ought
ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone.

Thirdly, Commandments are differenced according to the two Tables: some
concerning duties to God, others respecting duties to men. Accordingly who ever
would have comfort in his obedience, must obey God in both; not strict in the
one, loose in the other, Isa. 58.7.8. Isa. 58.7.8 14*
and 14. duties of the first and second Table are both enjoined, not only to
keep Gods Sabbath, humble thy self with fasting; but also the practice of
mercy and justice among men.

Fourthly, the Commandments of God are either such as concern our general
calling, as we are Christians, whereby we call upon God, hear his word, seek
the good of Jerusalem; or our personal calling ( i.) that estate and condition
of life wherein we are placed to serve God in serving of men, as to be a
Magistrate, or Minister, a Master of a family, or servant. Now we must obey
God not only in the duties of our general calling, but also of our
particular; that is, a professor must not only be a hearer of Gods word, a
receiver of the Sacraments, bu^ he must look, that he be a good governor of
his family, to wife, children, and servants, Iosuah 24.15. Ios. 24.15*
I and my house will serve the Lord.

Fifthly, commandments of God either respect the common sins of man's nature,
or the personal infirmities whereunto either by the temper of their bodies,
place where they live, or persons with whom they live, men are more subject,
then to others. This difference I ground, as also the practice of our obedience
to God in it, on the 18. Psalm, Psalm. 18.23.
where the Prophet professes, verse 23. I was upright also with him, and have
kept me from my wickedness. To conclude then, as we desire to have comfort
in our obedience, as a testimony that we are in the state of grace, we must be
careful, that we cast an equal respect to the whole revealed will of God.

Third mark. That new obedience, where it flows from the seed of grace in
the heart, is joined with perseverance, continuance, holding out in the good
ways we walk in: so that howsoever there be through our weakness and
Satan's malice, actual infirmities, yet there is always an habitual
disposition of the heart for well-doing, Psalm. 119.112. Psalm. 119.112. Pro.
23.17.
I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always, even unto the end, Pro.
23.17. Let thine heart be in the fear of the Lord continually, Luke 1.75. Luke
1.75:
We are redeemed out of the hands of our enemies, that we should serve God in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. New obedience must not
be only in a good mood, and then given over, but it must be steady, constant.
Now we shall make trial of the constancy of it. 1 If we do not lose our hold
even when we are provoked by many occasions and temptations unto evil, then
to forbear, and cleave close to the Lord, is an argument of the truth of our
obedience, in regard of continuance. It is nothing to be chaste where we have
no allurements to unchastity; nothing to be meek, when no injuries to
distemper us, nothing to be good among good, so are men that are stark naught:
but to be good among evil, to be meek in the midst of wrongs and injuries; to
be chaste among unchaste provocations, that is the true means of discovery. Out
of temptation, sin forbeares us, not we it; and a Christian is no more for
obedience, then he is in the day of temptation: if then he faint, it is because
his strength is small, or nothing at all. Noah's renown was, that he was
righteous in that wicked age. Lots commendation, that he was chaste in Sodom;
Joseph's chastity for ever approv^d, for that it held out in the day of
temptation; the Philippians, that they did shine as lights in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation, Phil. 2.15. Phil. 2.15:


Secondly, trial of our constancy, If we hold out, not dismayed with the many
discouragements that Satan and wicked men shall cast in our ways, Heb. 10.32.
Heb. 10.32. etc.
etc. It was the glory of the obedience of those Christians, that they did
undergo many afflictions, loss of goods, content to be made a gazing stock,
and yet in all they clave close to their profession, knowing that they had in
heaven a better, and an enduring substance, so 2 Cor. 6.8. 2 Cor. 6.8.
Paul justifies his constancy in his Ministry, in that he went through good
report, and evil report.

Thirdly, the constancy of our obedience is known, if, when all outward helps
and furtherances are taken away, we keep our integrity, perseverance in good
duties. Many men make a fair show while they are propped up with some good
helpers, who afterward fall away, as if they had never been the men. The
people served God all the days of Joshua, and the E^ders that had seen the
great works of God that he had done for Israel; but when he was dead, they
corrupted their ways, Judge. 2.18.19. Judge. 2.18.19.
Iehoash was to see to, a good King, while he was tutored by Ieho^ada the high
Priest; but after, when flatterers came in the room of good Iehoiada, he
became a wicked Governor, 2 Chronicles. 24.17. 2 Chro. 24.17.
So are there many wives good with good husbands, servants orderly, live within
compass with religious masters; children while backed with good Governors;
but all these removed from them, they fail in the practice of those former
duties wherein they have given good hope: so then by these notes we may
discern our obedience, whether such as will deserve to be accounted as of a
continuing nature that fades not, if being thus tried it holds its own.

Col. 1.9. Col. 1.9. 2 These. 1.3.4.
that they might increase in the acknowledging of God, so 2 These. 1.3, 4. We
give thanks, that your faith increases exceedingly, and the love of every one
of you toward each other abounds, Psalm. 92, 13. Psalm. 92.13.
Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the house of
our God, they shall still bring forth fruit in their age, Psalm. 84.7. Psa. 84.7.
they are said to go from strength to strength, till they appear before GOD
in Sion. On the other side, such whose obedience is not sound, it decreaseth,
withers away, comes in the end to nothing.

Thus far of the general marks to try our obedience.

Now for the particular. These are some special works of the spirit, which
are honored above others in this, that they are badges of the estate of grace.
Among others, I select these.

Mark 1. To love a good man as he is good, and bears the image of God, is
such a part and branch of new obedience, as whereby a man may be assured, that
the Lord has marked him out to eternal life: for naturally we hate all
goodness, as that which is a secret condemner of us, and is opposite to our
nature: so that when we love the Brethren for goodness sake, it is an argument
that we are crept out of our natural estate, 1 John 3.14. 1 John 3.14.
We know that we are translated from death unto life, because we love the
brethren; he that loves not his brother, abides in death, 1 John 4.7. 1 John
4.7.
Beloved, let us love one another, for love comes of God, and every one that
loves, is borne of God, and knows God, 1 John 5.1. 1 John 5.1.
Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of
him. Now lest our hearts deceive us, we must be wise to try, whether we love
good men for the goodness that is in them, or for some carnal respects; as
either for that there is an agreement and similitude betwixt our natural
inclinations, or for some civil qualities, natural dexterities that we
observe in them, as pleasing to us, or for their bounty to us, or for their
outward greatness in the world. Observe therefore thy self, whether thou love
goodness, where it is stripped of all these fleshly respects.

Secondly, consider whether thy love be diminished or increased, according as
thou see the work of grace, to receive either abatement or increase.

Thirdly, whether thou do dislike, and take no content in such men as have
no seed of grace in them, though otherwise furnished with many outward pleasing
conditions.

Mark 2. Meekness of spirit, whereby we can bear injuries and wrongs,
without desire of revenge; can forbear and forgive, as Christ forgave us, Col.
3.12. Col. 3.12.
As the elect of God, put on meekness, long-suffering, forbearing and
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against another, even as
Christ forgave you, so also do ye, Matthew. 6.14. Mat. 6.14:
If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you.

Mark 3. A merciful affection to those that be in misery, does argue a man to
be in the state of grace by new obedience, Isa. 58.10. Isa. 58.10.
If thou pour out thy soul to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soul,
then shall thy sight rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noone day,
Mat. 5.7. Mat. 5.7. Iam. 3.17.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Iam. 3.17. The
wisdom that is from above, is known by this, that it is full of mercy,
Philemon verse 7. Phil. 7.
We have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels of the
Saints are refreshed by thee, brother, 1 John 3.17. 1 John 3.17.
Who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up
his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?



Secondly, such as obey God in sundry good duties, but reserve some special
sins, wherein they live and lie; dealing here as Saul did in the spoil of
Amaleck, who destroyed all the vile things that were naught worth, but the best
things he spared: so many men cast out of their conversation many sins it may
be that are of little account with them, and yet reserve the chief sins;
this partial obedience is not found.

Thirdly, Such as will be in good ways for a time only, and then return to
the vomit of their sins.

Fourthly, Such in whom there is no increase, and growth in the work of grace,
who are as dwarfes in the course of Christianity.

Fifthly, Such as have not hearts replenished with a love of the brethren, a
holy meekness of spirit, a Christian compassion in respect of other men's
infirmities and miseries, all these are discovered from hence to be unfound in
the grace of new obedience.

Motives. A general use for exhortation, That considering the necessity of the
duty, the means of trial that have been discovered, as also the discovery of
the false harbors wherein Christians are apt to deceive themselves; all such
as have any thoughts of their salvation, would address themselves to an exact
and diligent enquiry, how the case is with them; whether they be natural men,
or such as are begotten again to a lively hope. And for the whe^ting of the
dull and slow spirits of men to this business; let us consider.

Luke 10.20. Rejoice because your names are written in heaven, Gal. 6.4. Luke
10.20. Galat. 6.4.
We must prove our selves, before we have any rejoicing in our selves. How
wavering is the joy of carnal men; how is the end thereof heaviness! how
suddenly is their mirth turned into mourning, when they do but think of their
estates, as they remain in the gall of bitterness, as not being assured of
Gods favor. Whereas the assurance of the welfare of our spiritual estates, in
that the Lord loves us, that we know that our Redeemer lives; this shall be of
force to make us to lift up our heads with comfort in the midst of a sea of
sorrows, as it did holy Job, Job. 19.25. Job 19.25.


Ephesians. 5.6. Ephesians. 5.6. Gal. 6.7. 1 Cor. 6.9.
Let no man deceive you with vain words, Gal. 6.7. Be not deceived; they that
sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, 1 Cor. 6.9. 1 Cor. 15.33.
Be not deceived, neither fornicators, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven, 1 Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived, evil words corrupt good manners. Now
our easiness to be misled in judging our estates appears first, in that
there are infinite many by-ways by which men may miscarry, Matthew. 13.3. Matthew.
13.3.
etc. There are three errors in the hearing of the word, why may we not be
deceived by one of them?

Secondly, In regard of the similitude to the state of grace; they seem almost
all one, these by-ways are spun with so even a thread, as that a man, till he
seriously try, cannot know the difference, Matthew. 7.26. Matthew. 7.26.
The house built upon the sands makes as fair a show as that built upon the
rock, glisters as gloriously in a sun-shiny day, no difference to be discerned.

Thirdly, In respect of our own self love; which blindes our judgments; this
would persuade us that the least appearance of grace is grace it self, that
every outward performa nce of a good duty is the fulfilling of the law; as in
the young man, Matthew. 19.20. Matthew. 19.20.
seeing therefore we are exposed to so many ways of seducements, so easily
surprised by an error in our wills, we must be the more diligent in the
trial.

Matthew. 7.23. Matthew. 7.23.
Such as counted themselves jolly fellows while they lived, they thought
themselves great professors; yet being deceived in this kind, the reward of
their error is, I know you not, depart from me. If a man lay all his estate on
a purchase, he will look that the title be good, examine his evidences, advise
with his learned counsel, and all for that, if it should prove naught, he is
utterly overthrown. Why are we not as wise for our souls? that seeing our
whole estate of future happiness depends upon the truth of grace wrought in this
life in our hearts, we be careful to sift, and examine our selves?

he will try it, not willingly take a piece of money, but try it; not entertain
a servant, but try him; nothing almost that we deal withal, but we desire
trial; and yet how is it, that we can rest in a faith, a repentance, and never
try them? examine them according to those rules that the Scripture has given
in that kind, shall we be so scrupulous in the gew-gawes of this life, and for
the heavenly graces of the spirit not make the same inquiry?



Let us therefore in the name of the Lord be exhorted, that in the consideration
of these premises, we do carefully set apart some solemn times, when we may
use our best endeavors to prove our selves whether we be in the faith.

THE PRIVILEGE OF ADOPTION, And Trial thereof by REGENERATION.
John 1.12, 13. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.

Which were borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God.


THe blessed Evangelist Saint John in the entrance into this Gospel
discoursing of the admirable mystery of man's Redemption describes first, the
Author of it, Christ the Son of GOD, and that according to his twofold Nature.

1. His deity or God head in the first verse, (...) all are (...).

2. His H^^anity or Man hood in the 14. ver. in time assumed unto him.
Secondly, in the midst between both he describes the benefit which hereby
redounds to all the faithful, partly by their adoption, in the 12. verse,
partly by their Regeneration, in the 13. verse. For the former there is,

First, The persons to whom this benefit does accrue; and they are such as
entertain Christ not outwardly, but inwardly; not into their houses, but into
their hearts.

2. He shows what manner of entertainment it must be; not corporal but
spiritual, by trusting in Christ, or believing in his name, which are in
effect both (...).

For the other, the benefit it self that does accrue unto them, that is
described

1. In general, it is a privilege or prerogative.

2. More particularly, they are said to be the adopted sons of God.

Now because this Adoption may be hid with God, and so may not be known unto
themselves who are adopted; There follows therefore hereupon a real change in
them; which change is described in the 13. verse (...) the manner of it, that
is a new casting, moulding (...) and partly by the Author, (...) whereby it is
wrought laid down

First, Negatively, not a bloody or fleshly breeding, according to natural
concupiscence, as it is in part described, Ezechiel 16.

Secondly, Positively, or affirmatively, that is, of the spirit; as our Savior
says, unless a man be borne again of water, and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God, John 3.5. John 3.5.
yea the words of Peter may be a comment on my Text, 1 Peter 1.23. 1 Pet. 1.23.
where he says, being borne a new not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and abides for ever. And so
much for the sum or substance of these words, with their several branches.

Not to stand upon the nature of faith at this time, (because we have had
occasion to speak of it formerly, and may likewise have hereafter) as also to
pass by diverse instructions that may be from hence observed; I will pitch only
at this time upon two, which the Evangelist mainely intends in this place.

First, That all the faithful are the adopted children of God.

Secondly, None are the children of God by adoption, but only such as are so by
Regeneration. The former being the sum of the 12. ver. the latter of the 13.
ver.

Doct. 1. All the faithful are the adopted children of God.

There are says one (who goes under the name of Gregory Nazianzene) three
sorts of sons of God. 1. By Generation. 2. By Creation. 3. By Adoption.


1. By Generation, and so is Christ alone.

Luke 3. Job 1.6. Gal. 3.26.
2. By Creation, so Adam, Luke 3. and the Angels, Job 1.6.

3. By Adoption, and so are all the faithful, Gal. 3.26.

This point will more fully appear, if we consider the ground and end of our
Adoption.

First, The ground of it, which is our union to Christ the natural Son of
God. We are alive, says the Apostle, to God in Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans
6.11. Romans 6.11. Romans 11.23. 1 Cor. 12.27.
Being grafted in him, Romans 11.23. and so we become one with Christ, 1 Cor.
12.27. as therefore a sienne taken out of one stock, and so inoculated into
another, or as a child taken out of one family and translated into another,
even so we are taken out of the household of Satan, and inserted into the
family of God; yea into the mystical body of Christ, for the head and the body
make but one Christ, Gal. 3.16. Gal. 3:16.
he says not to the feeds, as speaking of many, but unto thy seed, as of one,
which is Christ, and so he and the faithful make but one Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12.
1 Cor. 12.12.
This was the end of his Incarnation, to make us the sons of God. The Son of
God became the son of man, that we sons of men might become the sons of God,
Gal. 4. 4, 5. Gal. 4:4, 5.


Secondly, Consider we the end of our Adoption, that we might have a right and
interest unto our heavenly inheritance.

The end of Christ's Incarnation is our adoption; and the end of our Adoption is
our right and title to that inheritance without the which we could not have
had it, that therefore which is called Adoption, Romans 8.15. Romans 8.15.
Is called the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. Ephesians. 1.14.
Yea the inheritance it self is called by the name of Adoption, as Piscator
observes, Romans 8.23. Romans 8.23.
for our Justification restored to us is no more then Adam had before his fall.
But our Adoption advances us to an higher estate which Adam never had, nor
(for ought we know) had never promised him before his fall.

We pass now to the second point.

Doct. 2. That none are the children of God by Adoption; but such as are so by
Regeneration.

There are (says Augustine) three sorts of adopted sons.

1. There are (says he) sons of God in our account, which are not so in Gods,
Genesis 6.1. Genesis 6.1.
The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and so are all
false and counterfeit Christians, which are Christians in name and title only,
not in deed and truth, they are so in shadow and outward semblance, and
profession, and yet but a counterfeit generation; a bastardly brood.

Secondly, There are some that are sons in regard of God, but not in regard
of us; nor may so be in regard of their own esteem neither; and so are all
the elect as yet uncalled and ungathered together, as the Evangelist speaks,
John 11.52. John 11 52.
they are for all that (as Augustine says) in their fathers role, and
predestined to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to
the purpose of his will, Ephesians. 1.6. Ephesians. ^* 6.
as a man may purpose to adopt one, and set him in his will, though it be a
long time ere it be known to the party so adopted.

3. There are sons of God really, that are already received into the family
of God, and actually incorporated into the body of Christ; the former shall be,
but these are so already, these are adopted, and regenerated also, and the son
ship both by adoption and regeneration, we shall find conjoined, Romans 8.10, 11.
Romans 8.10, 11:
where also he makes one to argue the other.

This point also will appear more evidently, if we consider, as before the
ground and end of our Regeneration.

1. The ground of our Regeneration (as before of our Adoption) is our union
with Christ our head, and this is wrought by faith on our part, and by the
spirit on Gods part. First, I say, by faith on our part, which is a most holy
faith, Jude ver. 20. Jude 20. Tit. 1.1. Iam* 2.19.
to difference it from the faith of reprobates, Tit. 1.1. and from the faith of
devils, Iam. 2.19. the one being holy, the other unholy. This faith of Gods
Elect purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. and Act. 26.18. Acts 15.9. Acts 26.18.
Ephesians. 3.17.
Hereby Christ dwells in our hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. and where he dwells there he
moulds fashions, frames, and renues the heart, there he makes a new Creature,
yea I may say, a new Christ. My little children, of whom I travel in birth
again, until Christ be formed in you, says the Apostle, Gal. 4.19. Gal. 4.19.


Secondly, by the spirit on Gods part, he that is joined unto the Lord is one
spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. 1 Cor. 6.17.
By which spirit it he knits and fastens us to Christ, Gal. 2.20. Gal. 2.20.
I live, as the soul in the body; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the
life that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the son of God. And
mark what the Apostle says excellently to this purpose, Romans 8.10, 11. Romans
8.10, 11.
Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit because the spirit of God dwells
in you, and verse 10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin,
but the spirit is life for righteousness sake, and ver. 11. If the spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because of his spirit
that dwells in you. This is that seed of God, which whosoever has abiding in
him has the power of sin quelled and subdued in him, 1 John 3.9. 1 Ioh. 3.9.
And unless ye be borne again by water, and the Holy Ghost, says our
Savior, John 3.5. Ioh. 3.5.
Ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

The second thing that confirms the point is the end of our Regeneration. As
the end of our Adoption is to give us a right and title to our heavenly
inheritance, so the end of this is to prepare and fit us for the same. For
unless we become new Creatures, that place is not for us; that is a pure and
an holy place, into the which no unclean thing must enter, Revel. 21.27.
Revel. 21.27.
If some beggarly roagne were taken up to attend upon some great man (much more
if to be the adopted son to a Prince) he must be s^ript of all his rags; and
washed and purified, and even (if it could be) have a new heart put into him
too; as Saul had, 1 Samuel 10.9. 1 Samuel 10.9.
and as Rehoboam took Abijah, and set him to be ruler over the people, and for
that purpose inscr^cted him, that so he might deme^ne himself according to
that state whereunto he was advanced, so when we (wretched and forlorn
creatures) are admitted not to be attendants only, but to be the sons and
heirs of the King of ^eaven, we should be stripped of our natural defilements,
and rid of our filthiness; Ephesians. 4.23, 24.
put off the old man, Ephesians. 4.23.24. that so we may be fit to live with them,
which are holy, as Acts 26.18. Acts 26.18.
To have an inheritance among them that are sanctified, without holiness no
man shall see God, says the Apostle, Heb. 12.14. Heb. 12.14.
and except ye be borne again, says our Savior, John 3.3. John 3.3.
Ye cannot see the kingdom of God; if we cannot see God, or his kingdom
without holiness, much less can we enter into it, and so we see the second
point also proved.

Christ; so great and so high, that the Apostle speaks not of it without
admiration, 1 John 3.1. 1 John 3.1.
Behold what love the Father has showed us in that we are called the sons of
God. And indeed, it is a wonder, that we can think of it without wondering.
When it was told David that he might be the Kings son in law, what (says
David) think you it a small matter to be the son in law to a King? 1 Samuel
18.23. 1 Samuel 18.23.
How can we then think it a small thing to be not a son in law, but an
heir, not to a mortal, but to an immortal King; the King of Kings? How can
we but deem it a special and unconceivable favor for us vile, wretched,
wicked, and miserable sinners, dust and ashes, silly worms, vessels of wrath,
and vassals of Satan, to be preferred to so great a dignity, as to be sons
and heirs apparent unto the kingdom of God!

Consider it, I beseech you, by some degrees. It is no small matter to be an
Attendant unto a Prince, or to some great man under the Prince, as it is said
of the prudent, He shall stand before Princes; and the Queen of Sheba
accounted Solomon's servants happy that stood before him, 2 Chr: 9.7. 2 Chronicles.
9.7.
But how much greater an honor is it to be servant to Almighty God? Which
title not only the Apostle Paul took unto himself, and styled himself by in
the beginning of sundry his Epistles; but also the blessed Psalmist entitles
the 18.36. and diverse other Psalms, A Psalm of David the servant of the Lord;
as a matter of excellent dignity; as Theodosius thought it a greater honor to
be the servant of God, then to be Governor of the people of God.

But yet a greater honor is it to be the Kings friend, as Zabud is termed, 1
Kings 4.5. 1 Kings 4.5. James 2.23. 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Isa. 41.8.
but not only Abraham is called the friend of God, James 2.23. (taken out of 2 Chronicles. 20.7. and Isa. 41.8.) but also all the faithful, the sons of Abraham.
John 15.14, 15. Ioh. 15.14, 15.
Ye are my friends, if ye do what I command you.

But yet further, because the servant abides not in the house for ever, John
8.35. John 8.35.
but the son abides for ever; thou art always with me, and all that I have
is thine; as he speaks in the parable, Luke 15. Luke 15.
even this high privilege we have also by our adoption, as the Apostle says,
Gal. 4.7. Gal. 4.7.
Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son: and what follows
thereupon? Now if thou be a son, thou art also the heir of God, through
Christ, Romans 8.17. Romans 8. ^^
If we be sons, then are we also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs
annexed to Christ. And therefore as Christ is heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.
Revel. 21.7. Heb. 1.2.
so also are we, Revel. 21.7. for whether they be things present, or things to
come, all are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. 1 Cor.
3.22, 23.
It is not with God as with great men, Abraham could make but one son his
heir; and ^ehoboam only might succeed Solomon in the kingdom, 2 Chronicles.
11.22. 2 Chronicles. 11.22
but Christ has made us (even all that are regenerate) Kings and Priests to
God his Father, Revel. 1.6. Revel. 1.6.
God will give a crown, a kingdom, unto every one of his children* Fear not
little flock* for it is your fathers good pleasure to give you a kingdom, Luke
12.32. Luke 12.32.
and Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world, Matthew. 25.34. Matthew. 25.34.
This is the first use, to set forth the great dignity whereunto the faithful
are advanced; so great, as greater cannot be conceived.

Jesus Christ, by a true and lively faith offered unto us in the word of God,
the Gospel of salvation. We see how ready men are to creep and insinuate
themselves into great men's favors where they have some hope to get somewhat by
them; especially if he be a rich man that is without posterity. But here is an
inheritance beyond all in the world, and yet how few labor and strive for it!
we should then check our selves for our backwardness; and labor for a true
and a lively faith, whereby we may because the adopted sons of God. And so
should we be as careful of our children, not only to bring them unto
baptism, but that they may have the fruit and effect of it; to labor to unite
them, as to the politic body of Christ, so unto his mystical body; not to
teach them (as most Parents do) civilly only, but christianly too.

Sir; All this exhortation is needless, and might well have been spared, for
we are the sons of God already, and so have right unto the heavenly inheritance.









1. A producing of a new creature. Now it is a rule in Philosophy, that the
generation of one is the corruption of another. So in the spiritual birth, the
old man must be put off, before the new be put on, Romans 6. Romans 6.1.
There must be a death unto sin ere there can be a life of Grace; a dying to
sin before a living to God; as the seed cast into the earth must dye, ere it
can quicken, 1 Cor. 15. 1 Cor. 15.
Unless therefore we find in our selves that sin is not only curbed and
restrained, but even quelled and killed, we are not as yet borne a new.

2. Breeding is of some-living thing; so in the spiritual birth, Ephesians. 2.5.
Ephesians. 2.5. Ezekiel. 36.26.
You has he quickened which were dead in trespasses and sins, Ezekiel. 36.26. A
new heart will I give unto you, and there will be an alteration and change in a
man when he is once regenerated; a new joy, new love, new fear, new desires;
and the Sabbaths of God, which formerly were wearisome and burdensome unto
him, are now delightsome; and so of the rest. In a word, he will love what
before he loathed, and loath what before he loved.

3. Breeding is a producing of an entire body; children have at the first not a
rude mass, but an organicall body, all the parts and lineaments of a man. So
it is in this spiritual breeding likewise; put on the new man, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4.
when men therefore shall seem to be renewed in some part alone, and not in the
rest, they are not regenerate, they are not borne again, if they deny
themselves in some lust, and not in others, so long as they live in any not
controversed, but confessed sin.

4. Breeding must be the producing of a Creature after the image of the party
producing; every living creature begets his like; a sheep brings not forth a
wolf, nor a Pigeon hatch a Kite. Even so GOD begets not young devils, but
saints like himself. Those whom he foreknew, he predestined to be like unto
the Image of his son, Romans 8.29. Romans 8.29.
But now if God be pure, and thou a professed Impuritan (as I may say) one to
whom the very name of purity is reproachful* if God be holy, merciful,
humble, and thou be unholy, cruel, proud, thou may assuredly hereby
know, thou art not as yet regenerate; and so consequently can have no
assurance of thy adoption.

Peter, 1 Peter 1.14. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 17.
as obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to your former lust
in your ignorance, verse 15. but as he which calls you is holy, so be ye
holy in all manner of conversation, verse 17. and if ye call God father, who
without respect of persons judges every man's work, pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear.



It had been a shame for Saul after he was made King to follow his fathers
Asses; it had been a shame for David after he was made King, to follow the
Ewes with young, as before Psalm 78.71. Psalm. 78.71.
It had been a shame also for Agathocles a Potters son, to be raking in the
dirt and mire, when he was a King. In like manner must it needs be a shame for
us, who are heirs apparent to the kingdom of heaven, to be grovelling among
things of this life with others; but as we are partakers of that heavenly
calling, Heb. 3.1. Heb. 3.1.
So should we have our conversation in Heaven, Phil. 2.20.

Gal. 4.7. Gal. 4.7.
but that frees us not from Gods service, and from our obedience unto him, as
many would take occasion by these words likewise of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.23. 1
Cor. 7.23.
Ye are bought with a price, be not ye therefore the servants of men: to shake
off all bondage and service to man; whereas on the contrary it is to be
understood, that because now they are professed Christians, being redeemed and
bought by Christ, they should now serve men, not as the heathen did, but as the
children of God; in singleness of heart as unto Christ, Ephesians. 6.5. Ephesians. 6.5.
Even so should we serve God now professing to be his children, in a more
free and honorable manner then heretofore; not for fear of the whip, or for
hope of wages, but for love, the love of Christ constra^neth us, 2 Cor. 5.14. 2
Cor. 5.14.
It stands us upon now therefore to be more circumspect over our selves, and
more careful of our courses, then ever heretofore we have been, that ye might
walk worthy of the Lord, says the Apostle, and please him in all things being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God, and
giving thanks to the father who ha^ made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance, of the Saints in light, Col. 1.10, 12. Col. 1.10, 12.
If we be sons, then must our light so shine before men, that they seeing
our good works may glorify our Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 5.16. Matthew.
5.16.
There is a good speech of Nazian^em* If thou art a slave, then serve God for
fear of the whip, if an hirel^ng, ^hen for h^re: but if a son, then for love;
more affectionately, diligently, lovingly, cheerfully, and freely, then ever
heretofore.



Christ Jesus, and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by
promise, Gal. 3.29. Gal. 3.29.
What if a rich man will take up a rogue, and make him his heir; who can
hinder him? or what if a Prince (that has power to dispose of his crown)
should bestow it upon a Peasant wh^re he lists, what shall let him? so wha^ if
it pleases God to take me and thee, and bestow upon us me^rely of his own
good will, a crown of life, an heavenly inheritance? who shall hinder him?
though it were presumption in any to have moved God in it, unless God should
merely upon his own free love and good will have offered it.

God has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of
eternal glory, James 2.5. James 2.5.
and blessed be ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of heaven, Luke 6.20.
Luke 6.20.
Matthew. 5.3. who would think much to live in a poor and low mean estate for
a while, if he knows he shall soon come to a rich and wealthy estate,
especially if he knows he shall be advanced to a kingdom: as Joseph therefore
was bid to tell his brethren, that they should not regard their stuff, for the
best of all the land of Egypt was theirs, Genesis 45.20. Genesis 45.20.
So all the want and poverty which the faithful suffer should no whit dismay
them; when their thoughts are set upon their heavenly inheritance. This made
the faithful suffer with joy the loss of their goods, knowing that in heaven
they had a better and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. Heb. 10.34.


1 Ioh. 3.1.
Behold, says the Apostle, what great love the father has showed upon us that
we should be called the sons of God! but this the world knows not. Will a
great man be troubled if a beggar scorns him? what if base wretches (for they
are no better) should contemn and despise Gods children, what need they care?
when our King went into Spain disguised, was he troubled (think ye) because
he was not respected according to his worth by those amongst whom he came? No
surely; he knew that when he returned he should find royal entertainment with
his father. In like manner the faithful need not be troubled for that the men
of the world set so light by them, seeing God has them in so high account and
estimation; and seeing a time shall come when those persons, by whom they are
so undervalued now, shall be trodden under their feet, as the Prophet speaks,
Mal. 4.3. Mal. 4.3.


Matthew. 7.7, 8, 9. Matthew. 7.9, 10.
Which of you having a child that shall ask you bread, will ye give him a
stone? or if he ask a fish, will ye give him a serpent? If ye that are evil
know how to give good things unto your children that ask you, how much more
will your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him? As
he said by Hezekiah, The King my Master can deny you nothing. So in Matthew.
6.26. Matthew. 6.26.
Consider the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barnes, yet your heavenly Father feeds them: are not ye much
better then they? He is but their Creator, he is your Father. Will any man be
so unnatural, as to feed his hawks and hounds, and suffer his children to
want food? And will God our heavenly Father take care (think you) for crows
and ravens, and suffer his children to want?



Augustine) he that will grant a crown will he deny a crumbe? Fear not
little flock, Luke 12.32. Lu^ ^
It is as easy a matter for God to bestow upon us all the wealth in the world,
as for us to bestow a crumbe upon a beggar.

Psalm. 103.13. Psalm. 103.13.
I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him. Mal. 3.17.
Mal. 3.17.
A small thing, we know, done by a son is more acceptable then a great deal
done by a servant; a man respects his weak child that cannot get his bread;
as much as him that can earne his own living: Will fathers thrust their
children out of doors because they are not able to help themselves? No they
will the more tender them, and bear with them. In like manner our heavenly
Father makes account of his weakest children notwithstanding their manifold
infirmities.

Isa. 49.14, 15. Isa. 49.14, 15.
he will lay at no time more upon us then we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. 1
Cor. 10.13.


Zach. 2.5, 8. ^
Men are commonly as chary of their children as of themselves, and had rather
many times suffer wrong then their children should. So says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 2. Psalm. 2.
Kiss the Son lest he be angry; take heed how ye offer any indignity to Gods
Son; and what is there said of Christ, is true of all the co^heires with
Christ, whosoever shall offer the least injury unto them, shall be sure to
smart for it. It were better for him to have a millstone hanged about his neck,
and he cast into the sea, then to offend one of Gods little ones, Mat. 18.6.
Matthew. 18.6.
For he that redeemed them is mighty.

Psalm. 125.1. Psalm. 125.1.
The Angel of the Lord is about those that fear him, to guard them and keep
them continually. Nay mark that famous place in Esaias, Isa. 43.1, 2. Isa. 43.1,
2.
Thus says the Lord, fear not, for I have redeemed thee; when thou go
through the water, I will be with thee, that the waves drown thee not, that the
billows swallow thee not up: and when thou go through the fire, thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Let afflictions, let
perils like the raging seas fall upon thee, let dangers fiery and fearful
overtake thee; here is comfort against the worst, God will be with thee. He
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

FINIS.

