CERTAIN Sermons, or Homelies, appointed by the kings Majesty, to be
declared and read, by all persons, Uicars, or Curates, every Sunday in their
churches, where they have Cure.

Anno. 1547.

A TABLE of the Sermones or Homelies, contained in this present Uolume.
j. A Fruitful exhortacion, to the readyng of holy scripture. ij. Of the
misery of all mankind. iij. Of the salvation of all mankind. iiij. Of the
true and lively faith. v. Of good works. vj. Of Christian love and Charity.
vij. Against swearyng and perjury. viij. Of the declinyng from God. ix. An
exhortacion against the fear of death. x. An exhortacion to obedience. xj.
Against whoredom, and adultery. xij. Against strife and contencion.
FINIS.
THE PREFACE.
THE Kings most excellent Majesty, by the prudente advise of his most dear
beloved Uncle, Edward duke of Somersett, Governor of his Majesty's person,
and Protector of all his hyghnes Realms, Dominions and Subjects, with the
rest of his most honorable Counsayll, most graciously considering the
manifold enormities, which heretofore have crept into his graces Realm,
through the false usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, and the ungodly
doctrine of his adherentes, not only unto the great decay of Christian
religion, but also (if Gods mercy were not) unto the utter destruction of
innumerable souls, which, through hypocrysy and pernicious doctrine were
seduced, and brought from honoryng of the alone, true, living, and eternal
God, unto the worshippyng of creatures, yea, of stocks and stones, from doing
the commandments of God, unto volu^tary works and phantasyes inverted of
men, from true religion, unto Popish Supersticion: considering also, the
earnest and fervent desire, of his derely beloved Subjects, to be delivered
from all errors and supersticions, and to be truly and faythefully instructed
in the very word of God, that lively food of man's soul, whereby they may
learn unfeignedly, and according to the mind of the holy Ghost, expressed in
the scriptures, to honor God, and to serve their King, with all humility and
subieccion, and Godly and honestly, to behave them selfs toward all men:
Again calling to remembrance, that the next and most ready way, to expel
and avoid, as well all corrupt, vicious and ungodly living, as also erroneous
doctrine, tendyng to Supersticion, and Idolatry, and clearly to put away all
contencio^, which has heretofore risen, through diversity of preaching, is
the true setting furthe, and pure declarynge of Gods word, which is the
principal guide and leader unto all Godliness and virtue: Finally, that all
Curates, of what learning soever they be, may have some Godly and fruitful
lessons in a readiness, to read and declare unto their parishioners, for their
edifiyng, instruction, and comfort: has caused a book of Homelies, to be
made and set furthe, wherein is contained certain wholesome and Godly
exhortacions, to move the people to honor and worship almighty God, and
diligently to serve him, every one according to their degree, state, and
vocacion: the which Homelies, his Majesty commands and streightely
charge, all Persons, Uicares, Curates, and all other, having spiritual
cure, every Sunday in the year, at high Mass, when the people be most
gathered together to read and declare to their parishioners, plainly, and
distinctely, in such order, as they stand in the book, (except any Sermon
be preached) and then for that cause only, and for none other, the reading of
the said Homely, to be differed unto the next Sunday following. And when the
foresaid book of Homelies is read over, the Kings Majesty's pleasure is,
that the same be repeted, and read again, in such like sort, as was before
prescribed, unto such time, as his graces pleasure shall further be known in
this behalf.

Also, his majesty commands, that the said Ecclesiastical persons, upon
the first holy day, falling in the Weke time of every quarter of the year,
shall read his Iniunccions openly and distinctely to the people, in manner and
form in the same expressed: And upon every other holy and Feuall day through
the year, likewise falling in the weke time, they shall recite the Pater noster,
the Articles of our faith, and the te^ne commandments in English, openly
before all the people, as in the said Iniunccions is specified: that all
degrees and al ages, may learn to know God, and to serve him, according to
his holy word. AMEN.

A fruitful exhortation, to the readyng and knowledge of holy scripture.
The praise of holy scripture.
Unto a Christian man, there can be nothing, either more necessary, or
profitable, then the knowledge of holy scripture: forasmuch, as in it, is
contained Gods true word, settyngefurth his glory, and also man's duty. And
there is no truth, The perfeccion of holy scripture.
nor doctrine, necessary for our iustificacion, and everlasting salvation, but
that is, (or may be) drawn out of that fountain, and well of truth. The
knowledge of holy Scripture is necessary.
Therefore, as many as be desirous, to enter into the right and perfect way unto
God, must apply their minds, to know holy scripture, without the which, they
can neither sufficiently know God and his will, To who^ the knowledge of holy
scripture is sweet and pleasant.
neither their office and duty. And as drink is pleasant to them, that be
dry, and meat to them that be hu^gery: so is the readyng, hearing, searchyng*
and studiyng of holy scripture, to them that be desirous to know God, or them
selfs, and to do his will. Who be enemies to holy scripture.
And their stomachs only, do loathe and abhor the heavenly knowledge, and
food of Gods word, that be so drouned in worldly vanities that they neither
savor God, nor any Godliness: For that is the cause why they desire such
vanities, rather then the true knowledge of God. An apt similitude, declaryng
of who^ the scripture is abhorred
As they that are sick of an ague, whatsoever they eat or drink (though it
be never so pleasant) yet it is as bitter to them, as wormewoode, not for
the bitterness of the meat, but for the corrupt and bitter humor, that is in
their own toungue and mouth: even so is the sweetness of Gods word, bitter,
not of it self, but only unto them that have their minds corrupted with long
custom of sin, and love of this world. Therefore, An e^hortacion unto the
diligent reading, hearing, and searchinge of the holy scriptures.

Matthew. iiii.


forsakyng the corrupt judgment of carnal men, which care not, but for their
carcass, let us reuere^tly hear and read holy scriptures, which is the
food of the soul. Let us diligently search for the well of life, in the
books of the new and old Testament, and not run to the stinkyng podelles of
men's tradicions, devised by man's imaginacion, for our iustificacion and
salvation. The holy scripture is a sufficient doctrine for our salvation.

What things we may learn in the holy scripture


For in holy scripture, is fully contained, what we ought to do, and what to
eschew, what to believe, what to love, and what to look for at Gods hands at
length. In those books we shall find the father, from whom, the son, by
whom, and the holy Ghost, in whom, all things have their being and
co^seruacion, and these three persons, to be but one God, and one substance.
In these books, we may learn to know our selfs, how vile and miserable we be,
and also to know God, how good he is of himself; and how he co^municateth his
goodness unto us, and to al creatures. We may learn also in these books, to
know Gods will and pleasure, as much as (for this present time) is convenient
for us to know. And (as the great clerk, and godly preacher saint Iho^
Chrysostom says) whatsoeur is required to salvation of man, is fully
contained in the scripture of God. He that is ignoraunte, may there learn and
have knoweledge: he that is hard hearted* and an obstinate sinner, shall there
find eternal torments, (prepared of Gods justice) to make him afraied, and
to mollifye him. He that is oppressed with misery in this world shall there find
relief in the promises of eternal life, to his great consolacion and comfort.
He that is wounded (by the devil) unto death, shall find there, medecin,
whereby he may be restored again unto health. If it shall require to teach any
truth, or reprove false doctrine, to rebuke any vice, to commend any virtue, to
give good counsel, to comfort, or to exhort, or to do any other thing,
requisite for our salvation, all those things (says s. Chrysostom.) we may
learn plentifully of the scripture. There is, (says Fulge^tius) abundantly
enough, Holy scripture ministers sufficient doctrine, for all degrees and ages.
both for men to eat, and children to suck, There is, whatsoever is
convenient for all ages, and for all degrees, and sorts of men. These books
therefore, ought to be much in our hands, in our eyes, in our ears, in our
mouths, but most of all, in our hearts. For the scripture of God is the
heavenly meat of our souls, Matthew. iiii. Luke. xi. Ihon. xvii. Psalm. xix.
the hearing and keeping of it, makes us blessed, sanctifies us, and makes us
holy: it co^uerteth our souls: it is a light lantern to our fete: What
commodities and profytes, the knowledge of holy scripture brings.
it is a sure, a constant, and a perpetual instrument of salvation: it gives
wisdom to the humble and lowly hearts: it comforts, makes glad, chereth and
cherishes our consciences: it is a more excellent jewel or treasure, then any
gold or precious stone: it is more sweter then honey, or honey comb: Luke. x.
it is called the best part, which Marie did chose, Ihon. vi.
for it has in it, everlasting comfort. The words of holy scripture, be
called words of everlasting life: Collos. i.
for they be Gods instrument, ordained for the same purpose. They have power to
convert through Gods promise, and they be effectual, through Gods assistence:
and, Hebre. iiii.
(being received in a faithful heart) they have ever an heavenly
spirituall-woorkyng in them, they are lively, quick and mighty in operacion,
and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through, eue^ unto the
diuidyng a sonder of the soul, and the spirit, of the joints, and the mary.
Christ calls him a wise buylder, Matthew. vii. Ihon. xii.
that buyldeth upon his word, upon his sure and substanciall foundation. By
this word of God, Ihon. xiiii.
we shall be judged: for the word that I speak, (says Christ) is it, that
shall judge in the last day. He that keeps the word of Christ, is promised
the love and favor of God, and that he shall be the mansion place or temple of
the blessed Trinity. This word, whosoever is diligent to read, and in his
heart to printe that he reads, the great affeccio^ to the transitory things
of this world, shall be minished in him, and the great desire of heavenly
things, (that be therein promised of God) shall increase in him. And there is
nothing, that so much establishes our faith, and trust in God, that so much
conserueth innocence, and pureness of the heart, and also of outward Godly
life and conversation, as continual readyng and meditacion of Gods word. For
that thing, which (by perpetual use of readyng of holy scripture, and
diligent searchyng of the same) is depely printed, and graven in the heart, at
length turns almost into nature. And moreover, the effect and virtue of
Gods word, is to illuminate ye ignorant, and to give more light unto them,
that faithefully and diligently read it, to comfort their hearts, and to
incorage them to perform that, which of God is commanded. It teaches
patience in all adversity, in prosperity, humblenes: what honor is due unto
God, what mercy and charity to our neighbor. i. Regum. xiiii ii. Para xx. i.
Corin. xv. i Ihon. v. Who profit most in readyng Gods word.
It gives good counsel in all doubtful things. It shows, of whom we shall
look for aid and help in all perils, and that God is the only geuer of
victory, in all battles, and temptacions of our enemies, bodily and Ghostely.
And in readyng of Gods word, he most proffiteth not always, that that is
most ready in turnyng of the book, or in saying of it without the book, but he
that is most turned into it, that is most inspired with the holy ghost most
in his heart and life, altered and transformed into that thing, which he
reads: he that is daily less and less proud, less irefull, less
covetous, and less desirous of worldely and vain pleasures: he that daily
(forsakyng his old vicious life) increases in virtue, more and more. And to
be short, there is nothing, that more mainteineth Godliness of the mind, and
expels ungodliness, then does the continual readyng, or hearing of Gods
word, if it be joined with a Godly mind, and a good affeccion, to know and
follow Gods will. For without a single iye, pure intent and good mind, nothing
is allowed for good before God. Esaie. v. Matthew. xxii. i Corin. xiiii. What
incommodities, the ignorance of Gods word. brings.
And on the otherside, nothing more obscureth Chrste, and the glory of God nor
induces more blindness, and all kinds of vices, then does the ignorance of
Gods word. If we profess Christ, why be we not ashamed to be ignorant in his
doctrine? Seeing that every man is ashamed to be ignorant in that learning,
which he professes. That man is ashamed, to be called a Philosophier, which
reads not the books of Philosophy, and to be called a lawyer, and
Astronomier, or a phisicio^, that is ignorant in the books of law, Astronomy,
and Physic. How can any man then say, that he professes Christ, and his
religion, if he will not apply himself, (as farfurthe as he can or may
conveniently) to read and hear, and so to know the books of Christ's Gospel
and doctrine. Gods word excels all sciences.
Although other sciences be good, and to be learned, yet no man can deny, but
this is the chief, and passes all other incomparably. What excuse shall we
therefore make, (at the last day before Christ) that delight to read, or hear
men's fantasies and inuencions, more then his most holy Gospel, and will
find no time to do that, which chiefly (above all things) we should do, and
will rather read other things, then that, for the which, we ought rather to
leave readyng of all other things. Let us therefore apply our selfs, as
farfuth as we can have time and leisure, to know Gods word, by dilligent
hearing and readyng thereof, as many as profess God, and have faith and trust
in him. But they that have no good affeccion to Gods word, Uain excuses
dysswadynge from the knowledge of gods word. The first.
(to color this their fault) allege commonly, two vain and fained excuses.
Some go about to excuse them, by their own frailnesse, and fearfulnes, saying:
that they dare not read holy scripture, least, through their ignorance, they
should fall into any error. Other pretend, The second^*
that the difficulty to understand it, and the hardness thereof is so great,
that it is meet to be read, only of Clearkes and learned men. As touching
the first: ignorance of Gods word, is the cause of al error, as Christ
himself affirmed to ye Sadduces, saying: that they erred, Matthew. xxii.
because they knew not the scripture. How should they then escheue error, that
will be still ignorant? And how should they come out of ignorance, that will
not read nor hear that thing, which should give them knowledge? He that now
has most knowledge, was at the first ignorant, yet he forbear not to read,
for fear he should fall into error: but he diligently read, lest he* should
remain in ignorance, and through ignorance, in error.

AND if you will not know the truth of God, (a thing most necessary for you)
least you fall into error: by the same reason you may then lie still, and never
go, least (if you goo) you fall in the mire, nor eat any good meat, least
you take a surfeit, nor sow your Corn, nor labor in your occupacion, nor use
your marchau^dise, for fear you lose your sede, your labor, your stock, and
so by that reason, it should be best for you to live idly, and never to take
in hand, to do any manner of good thing, least peradventure some evil thing
may chance thereof. And if you be afraied to fall into error, by readyng of
holy scripture: How most commodiously and without all peril, the holy
scripture is to be read.
I shall show you, how you may read it, without danger of error. Read it
humbly, with a meke and a lowly heart, to the intent, you may glorify God, and
not your self, with the knowledge of it: and read it not without daily praiyng
to God, that he would direct your readyng to good effect, and take upon you,
to expound it no further, then you can plainly understand it. For (as saint
Augustine says) the knowledge of holy scripture is a great, large, and a high
palace, but the door is very low: so that the high and arrogant man, cannot
run in, but he must stoop low, and humble him self, that shall enter into
it. Presumpcion and arrogancy, is the mother of all error, and humility,
needs to fear no error. For humility will only search, to know the
truth, it will search, and will confer one place with another: and where it
cannot find the sense, it will pray, it will inquire of other that know, and
will not presumpteously and rasshely define any thing, which it knows not.
Therefore, the humble man may search any truth boldly in the scripture,
without any danger of error. And if he be ignorant, he ought the more to
read and to search holy scripture, to bring him out of ignorance. I say not
naie, but a man may prospere, with only hearing, but he may much more
prospere, with both hearing and readyng. This have I said, as touching the
fear to read, through ignorance of the person. Scripture in some places is
easy, and in some places hard to be understand.
And concerning the difficulty of scripture, he that is so weak, that he is
not hable to brook strong meat: yet he may suck the sweet and tender milk,
and differ the rest, until he wax stronger, and come to more knowledge. For
God receives the learned and unlearned, and casts away none, but is
indifferent unto al. And the scripture is full, as well of low valleis, plain
ways, and easy for every man to use, and to walk in: as also of high hills
and mountains, which few men can ascend unto. God leaves no man untaught,
that has a good will to know his word*
And whosoever gives his mind to holy scriptures, with diligent study and
fervent desire, it cannot be, (says saint Ihon Chrisostom) that he should be
destitute of help. For either God almighty will send him some Godly doctor,
to instruct him, as he did to instruct Ennuchus, a noble man of Ethiope, and
threasorer unto Queen Candace, who having a great affeccion to read the
scripture (although he understood it not) yet for the desire, that he had unto
Gods word, God sent his Apostle Phillip, to declare unto him the true sense of
the scripture, that he read: or else, if we lack a learned man, to instruct
and teach us, yet God himself from above, will give light unto our minds, and
teach us those things which are necessary for us, and wherein we be ignorant.
How the knowledge of scripture may be atteined unto.
And in another place, Chrisostom says: that man's humain and worldly
wisdom, or science, needs not to the understanding of Scripture, but the
reuelacion of the holy ghost, who inspireth the true sense unto them, that
with humility and diligence do search therefore. He that asks, Matthew. vii.
shall have, and he that seeks, shall find, and he that knocks, shall have
the door open. If we read once, twice, or thrice, and understand not, let us
not cease so, but still continue readyng, praiyng, askyng of other, and so by
still knockyng (at the last) the door shall be opened (as saint Augustyne
says). A good rule for the understanding of the scripture.
Although many things in the scripture, be spoken in obscure mysteries, yet
there is no thing spoken under dark mysteries, in one place, but the self
same thing in other places, is spoken more familiarly and plainly, No man is
excepted from the knowledge of Gods will.
to the capacity, both of learned and unlearned. And those things in the
scripture that be plain to understand, and necessary for salvation, every
man's duty is to learn them, to print them in memory, and effectually to
exercise them. And as for the obscure mysteries, to be contented to be
ignorant in them, until such time as it shall please God, to open those
things unto him. In the mean ceason, if he lack either aptness or
opportunity, God will not impute it to his folly: but yet it behooves not, that
such as be apt, should set aside readyng, because some other be unapt to
read: nevertheless, for the difficulty of such places, the readyng of the
whole, ought not to be set a part. And briefly to conclude, What persons would
have ignorance to continue.
(as saint Augustine says) by the scripture, all men be amended: weak men
be strengthened, and strong men be comforted. So that surely, none be enemies
to the readyng of Gods word, but such, as either be so ignorant, that they
know not how wholesome a thing it is, or else be so sick, that they hate the
most comfortable medicine, that should heal them: or so ungodly, that they
would wish the poeple, still to continue in blindness, and ignorance of God.

THVS we have briefly touched some part of the commodities of Gods holy word,
The holy scripture is one of gods chief benefits.
which is one of Gods chief and principal benefits, given and declared to
mankind, here in earth. Let us thank God heartily, for this his great and
special gift, beneficial favor, and fatherly providence. Let us be glad to
revive this precious gift, of our heavenly father. Let us hear, read, and
know, The ryght^ readyng, use, and fruictful studiyng i^ holy scripture*
Psalm. l.
these holy rules, iniunccions, and statutes of our christian religion, and
upon that we have made profession to God at our baptism. Let us with fear,
and reverence lay up (in the cheste of our hearts) these necessary and
fruitful lessons. Let us night and day muse, and have meditacion, and
contemplacion in them. Let us ruminate, and (as it were) chewe the cudde,
that we may have the sweet ieuse, spiritual effect, mary, honey, kirnell,
taste, comfort, and consolacion of them. Let us stay, quiet, and certify our
consciences, with the most infallible certainty, truth, and perpetual
assurance of them. Let us pray to God, (the only aucthor of these heavenly
meditacions) that we may speak, think, believe, live, and depart hence,
according to the wholesome doctrine, and verities of them. And by that means,
in this world we shall have Gods proteccion, favor, and grace, with the
unspeakable solace of peace, and quietness of conscience: and after this
miserable life, we shall enjoy the endless bliss, and glory of heaven,
which, he grant us all, that died for us all, Jesus Christ: to whom, with the
father, and holy ghost be all honor and glory, both now and euerlastyngly.
AMEN.

An Homely of the misery of al mankind, and of his condempnacion to death
everlasting, by his own sin.
THe holy Ghost, in writing the holy scripture, is in nothing more diligent,
then to pulle down man's vainglory, and pride, which, of all vices, is most
universally grafted in all mankind, even from the first infection of our first
father Adam. And therefore, we read in many places of scripture, many notable
lessons against this old rooted vice, to teach us the most commendable virtue
of humility, how to know our selfs, and to remember, what we be of our
selfs. In the book of Genesis, Gene. iii.
almighty God gives us al, a title and name in our great grau^d father Ada^,
which ought to admonish us al, to considre what we be, whereof we be, from
whence we came, and whether we shall, saying thus: in ye sweat of thy face,
shall thou eat thy bread, til thou be turned again into the ground: for out of
it wast thou taken, in as much as you art dust, and into dust shalt thou be
turned again. Here (as it were in a glass) we may learn to know our selfs, to
be but ground, earth, and ashes, and that to earth and ashes, we shall
return.

Also, the holy patriarche Abraham, did well remember this name and title,
dust, earth, and ashes, appointed and assigned by God, to all mankind: and
therefore he calls himself by that name, when he makes his earnest prayer for
Sodom and Gomore. And we read, that Judith, Hester, Judith. iiii. and.ix. Job
xlii. Hier. vi. and* xxv
Job* Hieremie, with other holy men and women, in the old Testament, did use
sack cloth, and to cast dust and ashes, upon their heddes, when they bewailed
their sinful living. They called and cried to God for help and mercy, with
such a ceremony of sack clothe, duste and ashes, that thereby they might
declare to the whole world, what an humble and lowly estimacion they had of
themselfes, and how well they remembered their name and title aforesaid, their
vile, corrupt frail nature, dust, earth, and ashes. The book of wisdom also,
^ap^en. vi^.
willing to pull down our proud stomachs, moves us diligently to remember
our mortal and earthly generation, which we have all of him, that was first
made: and that all men, as well kings as subjects, come into this world, and
go out of the same in like sort, that is, as of our selfs full miserable, as
we may daily see. And almightye God commanded his prophet Esaie, to make a
proclamacion, Esai. ^^
and cry to the whole world: and Esaie askinge, what shall I cry? The Lord
answered, cry, that all flesh is grass, and that all the glory of man
thereof, is but as the flower of the field: when the grass is withered, the
flower falls away, when the wynd of the Lord blows upon it. The people
surely is grass, the which dries up, and the flower fades away. And the
holy prophet Job, having in himself great experience of the miserable and
sinful estate of man, does open the same to ye world, in these words. Man
(says he) that is borne of a woman, living but a short time, Job. xiiii.
is full of manifold miseries: he spryngeth up like a flower, and fades again,
vanishyng away, as it were a shadow* and never continues in one state. And
do thou judge it mete, (o Lord) to open thine eyes upon such a one, and to
bring him to judgment with the? Who can make him clean, that is conceived of
an unclean seed? And all men of their euilnesse and natural pronesse, were so
universally given to sin, that (as the scripture says) God repented that
ever he made man. Ge. v.^.vi.
And by sin, his indignacion was so much provoked against the world, that
he drouned all the world with Noes flood (except Noe himself, and his little
household.) It is not without great cause, that the scripture of God, does so
many times call all men here in this world, by this word: earth. O thou
earth, earth, earth, says Jeremy: Hiere. xxi^^.
hear ye word of the Lord. This our right name, vocacion, and title, earth,
earth, earth, pronounced by the Prophet, shows what we be in deed, by
whatsoever other style, title, or dignity, men do call us. Thus he plainly
named us, who knows best, both what we be and what we ought of right to be
called. And thus he describes us, speaking by his faithful Apostle S. Paul:
all men, Jews, and Gentiles, Roma. iii.
are under syn: there is none righteous, no, not one: there is none that
understands, there is none that seeks after God, they are al gone out of the
way, they are all unprofitable: there is none that does good, no, not one: their
throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used craft and
deceit, the poison of serpents is under their lips, their mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness, their fete are swift to shed blood destruccio^ and
wretchedness are in their ways, and the way of peace, have they not known:
there is no fear of God before their eyes. Roma. xi.
And in another place S. Paul writes thus: Galat. iii.
God has wrapped all nations in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. The
scripture concludes all under sin, Ephe ii.
that the promise by ye faith of Jesus Christ, should be given unto them that
believe. S. Paul in many places, painteth us out in our colors, calling us the
children of the wrath of God, when we be borne: saying also, that we cannot
think a good thought of our selfs, much less we can say well, or do well of
our selfs. And the wiseman says in the book of Proverbs: Pro. xxiiii.
the just man falls seven times a day. The most tried and approved man Job,
feared all his works. S. Ihon the Baptist, Luke. i
being sanctified in his mothers womb, and praised before he was borne,
called an Angel, and great before the lord, replenished eue^ from his birthe
with the holy Ghost, the preparer of the way for our savior Christ, and
commended of our savior Christ, to be more then a prophet, and the greatest
that ever was borne of a woman: yet he plainly grau^teth, that he had need to
be washed of Christ: he worthily extolleth and glorifieth his Lord and master
Christ, Matthew. iii.
and humbles himself, as unworthy to unbuckle his shows, and gives all honor
and glory to God. So does s. Paul, both often and evidently confess himself,
what he was of himself, ever geuyng (as a most faithful servant) all praise
to his master and savior. So does blessed s. Ihon the Evangelist, i. Ihon. ^.
and. ^^.
in the name of himself, and of all other holy men (be they never so just) make
this open confession: if we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selfs, and
the truth is not in us: if we knowledge our sins, God is faithful and just,
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from al unrighteousness: if we say,
we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. Wherefore
the Wisema^ in the book called Ecclesiastes, Eccle. vii.
makes this true and general confession: there is not one just man upon the
earth, that does good, and synneth not. And s. David is ashamed of his sin,
but not to confess his sin. How often, how earnestly, Psalm li.
and lame^tably does he desire gods great mercy, for his great offenses, and
that God should not enter into judgment with him. Psalm. xxlii.
And again, how well weighs this holy man his sins, when he confesses,
that they be so many in number, and so hid, and hard to understand, that it
is in manner impossible, to know, utter, Psalm. xix.
or number them. Wherefore, he having, a true, earnest, and deep contemplacion
and consideracion of his sins, and yet not coming to the botome of them, he
makes supplicacio^ to God, to forgive him, his privy, secret his sins: to
the knowledge of the which, he ca^ not attein unto. He weighs rightly his
sins, from the original root, and spring head, perceiving inclinacio^s
prouocacio^s, stirrynges, stingynges, buddes, branches, dregs, infeccio^s,
tastes, felinges, and sentes of them, to continue in him still. Wherefore he
says: mark and behold, I was conceived in sins: Psalm. li.
he says not, sin, but in the plural nu^bre, sins, forasmuch as out of one
(as fountayn) spryngeth all the rest.

And our savior Christ says: Mark. x. Luke. xviii Ihon. xv. Luke. xvi^*
there is none good but God: and that we can do nothing that is good, without
him: nor no man can come to the father, but by him. He commands us all to
say, that we be unprofitable servants, when we have done all that we can do.
Luke. xviii.
He prefers the penitent Publicane, before the proud, Matthew. ix.
holy, and glorious Pharisey. He calls himself a physician, but not to them
yt be whole, but to them that be sick, and have need of his salve for their
sore. He teaches us in our prayers, to reknowledge our selfs sinners, and to
ask forgeuenes and deliverance from all euilles, at our heavenly fathers
hand. He declares that the sins of our own hearts, Matthew. xii.
do defile our own selfs. He teaches that an evil word or thought,
deserves condempnacion, Matthew. xv.
affirmyng, that we shall give an account, for every idle word. He says, he
came not to save, but the sheep that were utterly lost, and cast away. Therefore
few of the proud, just, learned, wise, perfect, and holy Phariseis, were
saved by him, because they justified themselfes, by their cou^terfeit holiness
before men. Wherefore (good people) let us beware of such hypocrisy,
vainglory, and iustifiyng of our self. Let us look upon our fete, and then,
down pecockes feathers, down proud heart, down vile clay frail and britle
vessels. Of our selfs, we be crabbe trees, that can bring forth no apples. We
be of our selfs, of such earth, as can bring furthe but wedes, netles,
bra^bles, briers, cocle and darnell. Our fruits be declared in the *v. Chap.
to the Gala. Galat. v.
We have neither faith, charity, hope, patience, chastity, nor any thing else
that good is, but of God: and therefore, these virtues be called there, the
fruits of the holy Ghost, and not the fruits of man. Let us therefore,
acknowledge our selfs before God, (as we be in deed) miserable and wretched
sinners. And let us earnestly repent, and humble our selfs heartily, and cry
to God for mercy. Let us all confess with mouth and heart, that we be full
of imperfeccions. Let us know our awn works, of what imperfeccio^ they be, and
then we shall not stand foolishly, and arrogantly, in our own conceiptes, nor
challenge any part of iustificacion, by our merits or works. For truly, there
be imperfeccio^s in our best works: we do not love God so much as we are
bound to do, with all our heart, mind, and power: we do not fear God, so much
as we ought to do: we do not pray to God, but with great and many
imperfeccions: we give, forgive, believe, live, and hope imperfectly: we speak,
think, and do imperfectly: we fight against the devil, the world, and the
fleashe, imperfectly. Let us therefore, not be ashamed to confess plainly, our
state of imperfeccion: yea, let us not be ashamed to confess imperfeccion,
even in all our own best works. Let none of us be ashamed, to say with holy
s. Peter. I am a sinful man. Luke. v. Psalm. ^vi.
Let us al say with the holy prophet David: we have sinned with our fathers,
we have done amiss, and dealt wickedly. Let us all make open confession, with
the prodigal son to our father, and say with him: we have sinned against
heaven, and before the, Luke. xv.
(O father) we are not worthy to be called thy sons. Let us al say, Baruch.
^i.
with holy Baruch: O Lord our God, to us is worthily ascribed shame and
confusion, and to the, righteousness: We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we
have behaved our selfs ungodly, in all thy righteousness. Daniel. ^i.
Let us al say with the holy prophet Daniell: O Lord, righteousness belongs
to the, unto us belongs confusion. We have sinned, we have been naughty, we
have offended, we have fled from the, we have gone back from al thy precepts,
and judgments. So we learn of all good men in holy scripture, to humble our
selfs: and to exalt, extol praise, magnify, and glorify God.

Thus we have heard, how evil we be of our selfs: how, of our selfs, and by
our selfs, we have no goodness, help, nor salvation: but contrariwise, sin,
dampnacion, and death everlasting: which, if we depely weigh and consider, we
shall the better understand the great mercy of God, and how our salvation
comes only by Christ. ^^. Cor. iii.
For in our selfs (as of our selfs) we find nothing, whereby we may be
delivered from this miserable captivity, into the which we were cast,
through the envy of the devil, by transgressing of Gods commandment, in
our first parent Adam. Psalm ^.
We are all become unclean, but we all are not able to cleanse our selfs, nor
to make one another of us clean. Ephe. ii.
We are by nature, the children of Gods wrath, but we are not able to make
our selfs the children, and inheritors of Gods glory. We are sheep that
run astraie, but we cannot of our awn power, ^. Pet. ii.
come again to ye shepefold, so great is our imperfeccio^ and weakness. In our
selfs therefore may not we glory, which (of our selfs) are nothing but
sinful: Neither we may rejoice, in any works that we do, which al be so
imperfect and vnpure, that they are not able to stand, before the righteous
throne of God, as the holy Prophet David says: Psalm. ^xliii.
enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no man that lives
shall be found righteous in thy sight. To God therefore, must we flee, or else
shall we never find peace, rest and quietness of conscience in our hearts.
ii. Corin. i.
For he is the father of mercies, and God of all consolacion. He is the Lord,
with who^ is plenteous redemption. He is that God which of his own mercy
saves us, Psalm. cxxx.
and sets out his charity, and exceeding love toward us, in that of his
own voluntary goodness, when we were perished, he saved us, and provided an
everlasting kingdom for us. And all these heavenly treasures, are given us, not
for our own deserts, merits, or good deeds (which, of our selfs we have
none) but of his mere mercy, freely. And for whose sake? Truly, for Jesus
Christ's sake, that pure and undefiled lamb of GOD. He is that dearly beloved
son, for whose sake, god is fully pacified, satisfied and set at one with
man. He is the lamb of God, Ihon. i.
which takes away the sins of the world: of whom only, it may be truly
spoken, i. Peter. ii.
that he did al things well, and in his mouth was found no craft nor
subtilitie. None but he alone, may say, Ihon. xiiii
the Prince of the world came: and in me he has nothing. And he alone may
say also: Ihon. viii.
which of you shall reprove me of any fault? Hebre. vii.
He is that high and everlasting priest, which has offered himself once for
all, upon the altar of the Cross, and with that one oblacion, has made
perfect for evermore, them that are sanctified. He is the alone mediator, i.
Ihon. ii.
between God and man, which paid our ransom to God, with his own blood,
and with that has he cleansed us all from sin. He is the Physician, which
heals al our diseases. He is that savior, Matthew i.
which saves his people from all their sins. To be short, he is that
flowyng, Ihon ^.
and most plenteous fountain, of whose fullness* all we have received. For in
him alone, are all the treasures of the wisdom, and knowledge of God hidden.
And in him, and by him, have we from God the father, all good things,
perteinyng either to the body, or to the soul. O how much are we bound, to
this our heavenly father, for his great mercies, which he has so plenteously
declared unto us, in Christ Jesus our Lord and savior? What thanks worthy and
sufficient can we give to him? Let us all with one accord, burste out with
joyful voices, ever praisyng and magnifiyng this Lord of mercy, for his
tender kyndnesse showed to us in his derely beloved son, Jesus Christ our
lord.

Hitherto have we heard, what we are of our selfs: verily, sinful, wretched,
and dampnable: again we have heard, how that of our selfs, and by our
selfs, we are not hable, either to think a good thought* or work a good
deed, so that we can find in our selfs, no hope of salvation, but rather
whatsoever makes unto our destruccio^. Again we have heard, the tender
kyndenesse and great mercy of God the father toward us, and how beneficial
he is to us, for Christ's sake, without our merits or deserts, even o^ his
own mere mercy and tender goodness. Now, how these excedyng great mercies
of God, set abroad in Christ Jesus for us, be obtained: and how we be
delivered, from the captivity of sin, death, and hell, it shall more at
large (with Gods help) be declared in the next Homely. In the mean season,
yea, and at all times, let us learn to know our selfs, our frailty and
weakness, without any ostentacion, or boostyng of our own good deeds and
merits: let us also knowledge. The excedyng mercy of God toward us, and
confess, that as of our selfs, comes all evil and dampnacio^, so likewise
of him, comes all goodness and salvation, as God himself says, by the
prophet Oze: O Israel, thy destruction comes of thy self, Oze. xiii.
but in me only, is thy help and comfort. If we thus humbly submit our
selfs in the sight of God, we may be sure, that in the time of his
visitacion, he will lift us up unto the Kingdom of his derely beloved son
Christ Jesus our Lord: to who^ with the father and the holy Ghost, be all
honor, and glory for ever. AMEN.

An Homely of the salvation of mankind, by only Christ our savior, from sin
and death everlasting.
BEcause all men be sinners, and offenders against GOD, and breakers of his law
and commandments, therefore can no man by his own acts, works, and
deeds, (seem they never so good) be justified, and made righteous before God:
but every man of necessity, is constrained to seek for another righteousness,
or iustificacion, to be received at Gods own hands, that is to say, the
remission, pardon, and forgiveness of his sins and trespasses, in such
things as he has offended. And this iustificacion or righteousness, which
we so receive by Gods mercy, and Christ's merits, embraced by faith, is
taken, accepted, and allowed of God, for our perfect and full iustificacion.
For the more full understanding hereof, it is our parts and duty, ever to
remember the great mercy of God, how that (all the world being wrapped in
sin, by breakyng of the law) God sent his only son, our savior Chrste
into this world, to fulfill the law for us: and by shedyng of his most
precious blood, to make a sacrifice and satisfaccion or (as it may be called)
amends, to his father for our sins: to assuage his wrath and indignacion
conceived against us, The efficacy of (...) and (...).
for the same. In so much that infantes, being baptized, and diyng in their
infancy* are by this sacrifice, washed from their sins, brought to Gods
favor, and made his children, and inheritors of his kingdom of heaven. And
they which actually do sin after their baptism, when they convert and
turn again to God unfeignedly, they are likewise washed by this sacrifice from
their sins, in such sort, that there remains not any spotte of sin,
that shall be imputed to their dampnacion. This is that iustificacion, or
righteousness, which saint Paul speaks of, when he says: Roma* iii*
no man is justified, by the works of the law, but freely by faith in Jesus
Christ. And again he says: we believe in Christ Jesus, that we be justified
freely, Roma. viii.
by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, because that no
man shall be justified by the works of the law. And although this iustificacio^,
be fre unto us, yet it comes not so freely unto us, that there is no ransom
paid therefore at all. Objection.
But here may man's reason be astonished, reasonyng after this fashion: if a
ransom be paid for our redemption, then is it not given us freely: For a
prisoner that paieth his ransom, is not let go freely, for if he go freely,
then he goes without ransom: for what is it else to go freely, then to be
set at liberty, without payment of ransom.

This reason is satisfied by the great wisdom of God, in this mystery of our
redempcio^, An answer*
who has so tempered his justice and mercy together, that he would neither,
by his justice condemn us, unto the perpetual captivity of the devil, and
his prison of hell, remediles for ever, without mercy: nor by his mercy,
deliver us clearly, without justice, or payment of a just ransom: but with
his endless mercy, he joined his most upright and equal justice. His great
mercy he showed unto us, in deliueryng us from our former captivity, without
requiryng of any raunsom to be paid, or ame^des to be made, upon our parts:
which thing, by us had been impossible to be done. And where as it lay not
in us, that to do, he provided a ransom for us, that was the most precious
body and blood of his own most dear and best beloved son Jesus Christ: who
besides his raunsom, fulfilled the law for us perfectly. And so the justice of
God, and his mercy did embrace together, and fulfilled the mystery of our
redemption. And of this justice and mercy of God knit together, speaks
saint Paul, in the.iii. Chapter to the Romans: (...) iii.
al have offended, and have need of the glory of God, justified freely by his
grace, by redemption, which is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to us,
for a reconciler, and peace maker, through faith in his blood, to show his
righteousness. And in the.x. Chapter: (...)
Christ is the end of the law, unto righteousness, to every man that believes.
And in the.viii. Chapi: (...). viii.
that which was impossible by the law, in as much as it was weak by the
flesh, God sendyng his own son, in the similitude of sinful flesh, by
sin dampened sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law, might
be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Three things must go together i^ our ^^stificacion.
In these foresaied places, the Apostle touches specially three things, which
must concur and go together, in our iustificacion. Upon Gods part, his
great mercy and grace: upon Christ's part, justice, that is, the
satisfaccion of gods justice, or the price of our redemption, by the offryng of
his body and shedyng of his blood, with fulfillyng of ye law, perfectly and
thoroughly: and upon our part, true and lively faith in the merits of Jesus
Christ, which yet is not ours, but by Gods workyng in us. So that in our
iustificacion, is not only Gods mercy and grace, but also his justice, which
the Apostle calls the justice of God, and it consists in paiyng our
ransom, and fulfillyng of the law: and so the grace of God, does not exclude
ye justice of God, in our iustificacion, but only excludes the justice of
man, that is to say, the justice of our works, as to be merits of deseruyng
our iustificacio^. And therefore saint Paul declares here nothing, upon the
behalf of man, concerning his iustificacio^, but only a true and lively faith,
which nevertheless is the gift of God, and not man's only work without God.
And yet that faith, How it is to be understand that faith justifies, without
works
does not exclude repentance, hope, love, dread, and the fear of God, to be
joined with faith, in every man that is justified: but it excludes the^ from
the office of iustifiyng. So that although they be all present together in him
that is justified, yet they justify not all together. Nor that faith also,
does not exclude the justice of our good works, necessarily to be done
afterward of duty, toward God (for we are most bounden to serve God, in
doing good deeds, commanded by him in his holy scripture, all the days of
our life): But it excludes them, so that we may not do them, to this
intent, to be made good by doing of them. For all the good works that we can
do, be imperfect, and therefore not able to deserve our iustificacio^: but our
iustificacion does come freely, by the mere mer^ie of GOD, and of so great and
free mercy, that whereas all the world was not able of their selfs, to pay
any part toward their ransom, it pleased our heavenly father, of his
infinite mercy, without any our deserte, or deseruyng, to prepare for us the
most precious iewelles of Christ's body and blood, whereby our ransom might
be fully paid, the law fulfilled, and his justice fully satisfied. So that
Christ is now the righteousness of all them, that truly do believe in him.
He for them paid their ransom, by his death. He for them, fulfilled the
law in his life. So that now, in him, and by him, every true Christian man
may be called a fulfiller of the law, forasmuch as that, which their
infirmity lacks, Christ's justice has supplied,

Before was declared at large, that no man can be justified by his own good
works, because that no man fulfilleth the law, according to the full
request of the law. And saint Paul, in his Epistle to the Galathia^s,
Galath. ^ii.
proves the same, saying thus If there had been any law given, which could
have justified, verily, righteousness should have been by the law. And again
he says: if righteousness be by the law, then Christ died in vain. And
again he says: you that are justified by the law, are fallen away from
grace. And furthermore, he writes to the Ephesians, Ephesians ii.
on this wise: by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selfs: for it is the gift of God, and not of works, lest any man should
glory. And to be short, the sum of all Paul's disputacion, is this: that
if justice come of works, then it comes not of grace: And if it come of
grace, then it comes not of works. And to this end, Acts. x.
te^deth all the Prophets as saint Peter says, in the tenthe of the Acts:
Of Christ, all the Prophets (says saint Peter) do witness, that through
his name, al they that believe in him, shall receive the remission of sins.
Faith only justifies, is the doctrine of old doctors.
And after this wise to be justified, only by this true and lively faith in
Christ, speaks all the old and ancient aucthors, both Greeks and Latyns.
Of whom I will specially rehearse three: Hillary, Basil, and Ambrose. Saint
Hillary says these words plainly, in the ninth Canon, upon Matthewe: Faith
only iustifyeth. And saint Basil, a Greek aucthor writes thus: This is a
perfect and a whole reioysyng in God, when a man auaunteth not himself, for
his own righteousness, but knowledgeth himself, to lack true justice and
righteousness, and to be justified by the only faith in Christ: And Paul
(says he) does glory in the contempt of his own righteousness, Philip. iii.
and that he looks for his righteousness of God, by faith.

These be the very words of saint Basil. And saint Ambrose, a Latin
aucthor, says these words: This is the ordinance of God, that he, which
believes in Christ, should be saved, without works, by faith only, freely
receiuyng remission of his sins. Consider diligently these words: without
works, by faith only, freely, we receive remissyon of our sins. What can
be spoken more plainlye, then to say: that freely, without works, by faith
only, we obtain remission of our sins? These and other like sentences,
that we be justified by faith only, frelye, and without works, we do read
oftymes in the most best and ancient writers. As beside Hillarye, Basil, and
saint Ambrose, before rehearsed: we read the same in Origene, saint
Chrysostom, saint Cypriane, saint Augustine, Prosper, Oecomenius, Phocius,
Bernardus, Anselme, and many other aucthors, Greek and Latin. Nevertheless,
this sentence: that we be justified by faith only: is not so mea^t of them,
that the said iustifiyng faith is alone in man, without true repentance,
hope, charity, dread and fear of God, at any time or ceason. Nor when they
say: that we be justified freely: Faith alone (...) it is to (...) ^nderstande.
they mean not, that we should or might afterward be idle, and that nothing
should be required on our parts afterward. Neither they mean not so to be
justified without our good works, that we should do no good works at all,
like as shall be more expressed at large hereafter. But this proposicion, that we
be justified, by faith only, freely, and without works: is spoken, for to take
away clearly all merit of our works, as being insufficient, to deserve our
iustificacion at Gods hands, and thereby most plainly to express the
weakness of man, and the goodness of God, the great infirmity of our selfs,
and the might and power of God, the imperfectnes of our own works, and the
most aboundaunt grace of our savior Christ. And thereby whoey to ascribe the
merit and deserving of our iustificacio^, unto Christ only, and his most
precious bludshedyng. This faith the holy scripture teaches: this is the
strong rock and foundation of Christian religion: this doctrine all old and
ancient aucthors of Christ's church do approve: this doctrine, The profit of
the doctrine of faith only justifies. What they be that impugn the doctrine
of faith only justifies.
aduau^ceth and sets furthe the true glory of Christ, and suppresseth the
vain glory of man: This, whosoever denies, is not to be reputed for a true
christian man, not for a setter forth of Christ's glory, but for an aduersarye
of Christ and his Gospel, and for a setter forth of me^nes vainglory. And
although this doctrine be never so true, (as it is most true in deed) that we
be justified freely, A declaracion of this doctrine: faith without works
justifies
without al merit of our own good works (as S. Paul does express it) and
freely, by this lively and perfect faith in Christ only, as the ancient
aucthors use to speak it: yet this true doctrine must be also truly
understand, and most plainly declared, lest carnal men should take unjustly
occasyon thereby, to live carnally after the appetite and will of the world,
the flesh, and the devil. And because no man should err, by mistakyng of this
doctrine, I shall plainly and shortly so declare the right understanding of
the same, that no man shall justly think, that he may thereby take any
occasion of carnal liberty, to follow ye desires of the flesh, or that
thereby, any kind of sin shall be committed, or any ungodly living the more used.

First, you shall understand, that in our iustificacion by Christ, it is not
all one thing, the office of God unto man, and the office of man unto God.
Iustificacion is not the office of man, but of God: For man cannot iustifye
himself by his own works, neither in part nor in the whole, for that were
the greatest arrogancy and presumpcio^ of man, that Antechrist could erect
against God, to affirm, that a man might, by his own works, take away and
purge his own sins, and so justify himself. But iustificacion,
Iustificacio^ is the office of G^d only.
is the office of God only, and is not a thing, which we render unto him, but
which we receive of him, not which we give to him, but which we take of him,
by his free mercy, and by the only merits, of his most derely beloved
son, our only redemer, savior, and iustifier, Jesus Christ. So that the
true understanding of this doctrine: We be justified freely by faith, without
works: or that we be justified by faith in Christ only, is not, that this
our own act to believe in Christ, or this our faith in Christ, which is
within us, does justify us, and merit our iustificacion unto us (for that
were to co^pte our selfs, to be justified by some act or virtue, that is
within our selfs): But the true understanding and meaning thereof is, that
although we hear Gods word, and believe it: although we have faith, hope,
charity, repentance, dread, and fear of God within us, and do never so many
good works thereunto: yet we must renounce the mertte of all our said
virtues, of faith, hope, charity, and all our other virtues, and good deeds,
which we either have done, shall do, or can do, as things that be far to
weak, and insufficient and imperfect, to deserve remission of our sins, and
our justification, and therefore we must trust, only in Gods mercy, and in
that sacrifyce, which our high priest, and savior Christ Jesus, the son of
God, once offered for us upon the cross, to obtein thereby Gods grace, and
remission, as well of our original sin in baptism, as of all actual sin,
committed by us after our baptism, if we truly repent and convert
unfeignedly to him again. So that as saint Ihon Baptiste, although he were
never so virtuous and Godly a man, yet in this matter of forgeuyng of sin, he
did put the people from him, and appointed them unto Christ, saying thus unto
them: Behold, yonder is the lamb of GOD, Ihon. i.
which takes away the sins of the world: Even so, as great and as Godly a
virtue as the lively faith is, yet it puts us from it self, and remitteth or
appoints us unto Christ, for to have only by him remission of our sins, or
justification. So that our faith in Christ (as it were) says unto us thus: It
is not I, that take away your sins, but it is Christ only, and to him
only, I send your for that purpose, renou^cyng therein all your good virtues,
words, thoughts, and works, and only puttyng your trust in Christ.

Thus you do se, that the very true sense of this proposicion: We be justified
by faith in Christ only: (according to the meaning of the old ancient
aucthors) is this: we put our faith in Christ, that we be justified by him
only, that we be justified by Gods free mercy, and the merits of our savior
Christ only, and by no virtue or good work of our own, that is in us, or
that we can be able to have or to do, for to deserve the same, Christ himself
only, being the cause meritorious thereof.

Here you perceive many words to be used, to avoid co^tencion in words with
them, that delighte to braule about words, and also to show the true
meaning, to avoid evil talking and misunderstandyng: And yet peradventure all
will not serve with them, that be contencious: but co^tenders will ever forge
matter of contencion, even when they have none occasion thereto.
Notwithstanding, such be the less to be passed upon, so that the rest may
profit, which will be more desirous to know the truth, then (when it is plain
enough) to contend about it, and with co^tencious, and capcious cauillacions,
to obscure and darke^ it. Truth it is, that out own works, do not iustifye
us, to speak properly of our iustificacion (that is to say) our works do not
merit or deserve remission of our sins, and make us of unjust, just before
God: But God of his mere mercy, through the only merits and deservings of
his son Jesus Christ, does justify us. Nevertheless, because faith does
directely send us to Christ for remission of our sins, and that by faith
given us of God, we embrace the promise of Gods mercy, and of the remission of
our sins, (which thing, none other of our virtues or works properly
does) therefore scripture uses to say, that faith without works does justify.
And for as much, that it is al one sentence in effect to say: Faith without
works, and only faith does justify us, therefore the old ancient fathers
of the Church, from time to time, have uttered our iustificacion with this
speech: Only faith justifies us: meaning none other thing, then saint
Paul meant, when he said: faith without works justifies us. And because, all this is brought to pass, through the only merits and deseruinges of our
savior christ, and not through our merits, or through the merit of any
virtue, yt we have within us, or of any work that comes from us: therefore,
in that respect of merit and deseruyng, we renounce (as it were) altogether
again, faith, works, and all other virtues. For our own imperfeccion, is so
great through the corrupcio^ of original sin, that al is imperfect, that is
within us: faith, charity, hope, dread, thoughts, words and works, and
therefore, not apt to merit and deserve, any part of our iustificacion for
us: And this form of speaking we use, in the humblyng of our selfs to God,
and to give all the glory to our savior Christ, which is best worthy to have
it.

Here you have heard the office of God in our iustificacion, and how we
receive it of him, freely, by his mercy, without our deserts, through true and
lively faith. Now you shall hear the office and duty of a christian man
unto God, what we ought on our part, to render unto God again, for his
great mercy and goodness. Our office is, They that preach, faith only
iustyfieth, do not teach carnal liberty, or yt we should do no good works.
not to pass the time of his present life vnfruictfully and idly, after that
we are baptized or justified, not caryng how few good works we do, to the
glory of God, and proffite of our neighbors: much less it is our office,
after that we be once made Christ's me^bres, to live contrary to the same,
making our selfs members of the devil, walking after his inticementes, and
after the suggestions of the world and the flesh, whereby we know, that we do
serve the world, and the devil, and not God. For that faith, which brings
forth, (without repentance) either evil works, or no good works, is not a
right, pure, and lively faith, but a ded, Deuilishe, counterfeit, and feyned
faith, as saint Paul, and saint James call it. For even the deuilles know and
believe, The devils have faith, but not the true faith.
that Christ was borne of a virgyn, that he fasted forty days, and fortye
nights, without meat and drink, that he wrought all kind of miracles,
declaryng himself very God: They believe also, that Christ for our sakes,
suffered most paynfull death, to redeem us from eternal death, and that he
rose again from death the third day: They believe, that he ascended into
heaven, and that he sits on the right hand of the father, and at the last
end of this world, shall come again, and judge both the quick and the dead.
These articles of our faith, the deuilles believe, and so they believe all
things that be written, in the new and old Testament to be true, and yet for
all this faith, they be but deuilles, remainyng still in their dampnable
estate, lackyng the very true christian faith. For the right and true christian
faith is, ^
not only to believe that holy scripture, and all the forsaied articles of our
faith are true, but also to have a sure trust and confidence in Gods merciful
promises, to be saved from everlasting dampnacion by Christ: (...) that (...)
in (...) have not true faith
whereof does follow a loving heart, to obey his commandments. And this true
Christian faith, neither any devil has, nor yet any man, which, in the
outward profession of his mouth, and in his outward receiuyng of the
Sacraments, in coming to the church, and in all other outward apparaunces,
seems to be a Christian man, and yet in his living and deeds, shows the
contrary. For how can a man have this true faith, this sure trust and
confidence in God: That by the merits of Christ, his sins be remitted, and
he reconciled to the favor of God, and to be partaker of the kingdom of heaven
by Christ when he lives ungodly, and denies Christ in his deeds. Surely, no
such ungodly man, can have this faith and trust in God. For as they know
Christ to be the only savior of the world, so they know also, that wicked
men, shall not possess the kingdom of God. They know, Psalm v.
yt God hates unrighteousness that he will destroy all those, that speak
untruly, that those that have done good works (which can not be done without
a lively faith in Christ) shall come forth into the resurrection of life, and
those that have done evil, shall come unto resurrection of judgment: and very
well they know also, that to them that be contencious, and to them that will
not be obedient unto the truth, but will obey unrighteousness, shall come
indignacion, wrath, and affliccion. etc. Therefore, to conclude, considering
the infinite benefits of God, showed and exhibited unto us, mercifully
without our deserts, who has not only created us of nothing, and from a
piece of vile clay, of his infinite goodness has exalted us (as touching our
soul) unto his own similitude and likeness: but also, whereas we were
condemned to hell, and death eternal, has given his own natural son, being
God eternal, immortal, and equal unto himself, in power and glory, to be
incarnated, and to take our mortal nature upon oim, with the infirmities of
the same: and in the same nature* to suffer most shameful and paynful death,
for our offenses, to the intent to iustifye us, and to restore us to life
everlasting, so making us also his dear beloved children, brethren unto his
only son, our savior Christ, and inheritors for ever with him, of his
eternal kingdom of heaven.

These great and merciful benefits of God (if they be well considered) do
neither minister unto us occasion to be idle, and to live without doing any
good works, neither yet stirs us* by any means to do evil things* but
contrariwise, if we be not desperate persons, and our hearts harder then
stones, they move us to render our selfs unto God wholly, with all our will*
hearts* might and power, to serve him in all good deeds, obeyng his
commandments, during our life's: to seek in all things, his glory and honor,
not our sensual pleasures and vaynglory, evermore dreadynge, willingly to
offend such a merciful God and loving redemer, in word, thought, or deed.
And the said benefits of God depely considered, do move us, for his sake
also, to be ever ready to give our selfs to our neighbors, and as much as lies
in us* to study with all our endeavor, to do good to every man. These be the
fruits of the true faith, to do good (as much as lies in us) to every man.
And above all things, and in all things, to auaunce the glory of God; of whom
only we have our sanctificacion, iustificacion, salvation, and redemption* To
whom be ever glory, praise, and honor* world without end. AMEN.

A short declaration of the true lively, and Christian Faith.
THE first entry unto God, Faith.
(good christian people) is through faith: whereby, (as it is declared in the
last Sermon) we be justified before God. And least any man should be deceived,
for lack of right understanding thereof, it is diligently to be noted, that
faith is taken in the scripture, two manes of ways. There is one faith, A
deed faith.
which in scripture is called a dead faith, which brings forth no good
works, but is idle, barrain, and unfruitful. And this faith, by the holy
Apostle saint James, is compared to the faith of deuilles, James. ii.
which believe, God to be true, and just, and tremble for fear, yet they do
nothing well, but al evil. And such a manner of faith, have the wicked and
naughty thristian people, which confess God (as saint Paul says) in
their mouth, Tit^.
but deny him in their deeds, being abominable, and without the right
faith, and to all good works reproueable. And this faith is a persuasio^ and
belief in man's heart, whereby he knows that there is a God, and assenteth
unto all truth of Gods most holy word, contained in holy scripture. So that
it consists only, in believing of the word of God, that it is true. And
this is not properlye called faith: But as he, that reads Cesars
Commentaries, beleuyng the same to be true, has thereby a knowledge of Cesars
life, and noble acts, because he believes the history of Caesar: yet it is not
properly said, that he believes in Caesar, of whom he looks for no help, nor
benefit: Even so, he that believes, that all that is spoken of God in the
Bible, is true, and yet lives so ungodly, that he cannot look to enjoy the
promises and benefits of God: although it may be said, that such a man has
a faith and belief to ye words of God, yet it is not properly said, that he
believes in God, or has such a faith and trust in God, whereby he may surely
look for grace, mercy, and eternal life at Gods hand, but rather for
indignacion and punishment, according to the merits of his wicked life. For as
it is written in a book, entitled to be of Didimus Alexa^drinus: forasmuch as
faith without works is ded, it is not now faith: as a ded man, is not a man.
This ded faith therefore, is not yt sure and substancial faith, which saves
sinners.

A lively faith.
Another faith there is in scripture, which is not (as the foresaid faith)
idle, unfruitful, and dead, but works by charity (as S. Paul declares.)
Gal. v. Galat v.
Which, as the other vayn faith, is called a ded faith, so may this be
called a quick or lively faith. And this is not only the common belefe of the
Articles of our faith, but it is also a sure trust and confidence of the mercy
of God, through our lord Jesus Christ, and a steadfast hope of all good things
to be received at Gods hand: and that although we, through infirmity, or
temptacio^ of our ghostly enemy, do fall from him by sin, yet if we return
again unto him, by true repentance, that he will forgive and forget our
offenses, for his sons sake our savior Jesus Christ, and will make us
inheritors with him, of his everlasting kingdom, and that in the mean time,
until that kingdom come, he will ^e our protector and defendor in all perils
and dangers, whatsoever do chance: and that, though sometime he does send us
sharp adversity, yet yt evermore he will be a loving father unto us, correctyng
us for our sin, but not withdrawyng his mercy finally from us, if we trust in
him, and commit our selfs wholly unto him, hang only upon him, and call upon
him, ready to obey and serve him. This is the true, lively, and unfeigned
christian faith, and is not in the mouth and outward profession only: but it
lives, and stirs inwardly in the heart. And this faith, is not without hope
and trust in God, nor without the love of God and of our neyghbors nor without
the fear of God, nor without ye desire to hear Gods word, and to follow
the same, in eschewyng evil, and doing gladly all good works.

This faith, Hebre. xi.
(as saint Paul describes it) is the sure ground and foundacio^ of the
benefits, which we ought to look for, and trust to receive of God: a
certificat and sure expectacion of them, although they yet sensibly appear not
unto us. And after he says: he that comes to God, must believe, both that he
is, and that he is a merciful rewarder of well doers. And nothing commends
good men unto God so much as this assured faith, and trust in him. Of this
faith, iij. things are specially to be noted. First, Three things are to be
noted of faith
that this faith, does not lie ded in the heart, but is lively and fruitful in
bringing forth good works. Second, y^ without it, ca^ no good works be done,
yt shall be acceptable, and pleasant to God. Third, what manner of good works
they be, yt this faith does bring forth.

Faith is full of good works.
For the first, as the light cannot be hid, but will show furthe it self, at
one place or other: So a true faith cannot be kept secret, but when occasion is
offered, it will break out, and show it self by good works. And as the living
body of a man ever exercises such things, as belongs to a natural and
living body, for nourishement and preseruacion of the same, as it has need,
opportunity and occasion: even so the soul, that has a lively faith in it,
will be doing always some good work, which shall declare that it is living,
and will not be unoccupied. Therefore, when men hear in the scriptures, so high
co^mendacions of faith, that it makes us to please God, to live with God, and
to be the children of God: if then they fantasy* that they be set at
liberty, from doing all good works, and may live as they list, they trifle
with God, and deceive themselfes. And it is a manifest token that they be far
from having the true and lively faith, and also far from knowledge, what true
faith means. For the very sure and liuelye christian faith is, not only to
believe al things of God, which are contained in holy scripture: but also, is
an earnest trust, and confidence in God, that he does regard us, and has cure
of us, as the father of the child, whom he does love, and that he will be
merciful unto us, for his only sons sake: and that we have our savior
Christ, our perpetual advocate and priest, in whose only merits, oblacion,
and sufferyng we do trust, that our offenses be continually washed and
purged, whenever we, (repentyng truly) do return to him, with our whole
heart, steadfastly determinyng with our selfs, through his grace, to obey and
serve him, in keeping his commandments, and never to turn back again to
sin. Such is the true faith, that the scripture does somuche commend, the
which, when it sees and considers, what God has done for us, is also moved
through continual assistence of the spirit of God, to serve and please him, to
keep his favor, to fear his displeasure, to continue his obedient children,
showing tha^kefulnes again, by obseruyng his commandments, and that freely,
for true love chiefly, and not for dread of punishment, or love of temporal
reward: co^sideryng how clearly, without our deservings, we have received his
mercy and pardon freely.

This true faith will show furthe it self, Abac. ii.
and cannot long be idle. For as it is written: The just man does live by his
faith. He neither sleapeth, nor is idle, when he should wake and be well
occupied. And God by his prophet Hieremie says: Hiere. xvii.
that he is a happy and blessed man, which has faith and confidence in God.
For he is like a tree, set by the water side, that spreedeth his roots
abroode toward the moisture, and fears not heat when it comes: his leaf
will be grene, and will not cease, to bring forth his fruit: Even so
faithefull men, (puttyng away all fear of adversity) will show furthe the
fruit of their good works, as occasion is offered to do them.

The Wisema^ says: he that believes in God, Eccl. xxxii.
will harken unto his commandments. For if we do not show our selfs
faithful in our conversation, the faith which we pretend to have, is but a
feigned faith: because the true Christian faith, is manifestly showed by good
living, and not by words only as saint Augustine says, Lib^o, de fide et
operibus. Capit. ii. Sermo. de lege et fide.
good living cannot be separated from true faith: which works by love. And S.
Chrysostom says, faith of it self, is full of good works, as soon as a man
does believe, he shall be garnished with the^. How ple^tifull this faith is of
good works, and how it makes the work of one man, more acceptable to God
then of another, S. Paul teaches at large in the.xj. chap. to the Hebr.
saying: Hebre xi
that faith made the oblacion of Abell better, then ye oblacio^ of Cain. Gene.
iiii. Gene. vi. Eccle. xliii. Gene. xi.
This made Noe to buyld ye arcke. This made Abraham to forsake his country,
and all his friends, and to go unto a far country, there to dwell among
strangers. So did also Isaac and Jacob, dependyng only of the help and
trust, that they had in God. And when they came to the country, which God
promised them, they would build no cities, towns, nor houses, but lived like
strangers in tents, that might every day be removed. Their trust was so
much in God, that they set but little by any worldly thing, for that god had
prepared for them, better dwelling places in heaven, of his own foundation and
buylding. This faith made Abraham ready at Gods commandment, Gene. xii.
Eccle. xiiii.
to offer his own son and heir Isaac, whom he loved so well, and by whom he
was promised to have innumerable issue, among the which, one should be borne,
in whom all nations should be blessed: trusting so much in God, that though
he were slain, yet ye God was able by his omnipotent power, to raise him from
death, and perform his promise. He mistrusted not the promise of god,
although unto his reason every thing seemed contrary. He believed verily, that
God would not forsake him in dearthe, and famyne, yt was in the country. And
in all other dangers that he was brought unto, he trusted ever yt God would be
his God, and his protector, whatsoever he saw to the contrary. Exodus ii.
This faith wrought so in the heart of Moses, that he refused to be taken for
King Pharao his daughters son, and to have great inheritance in Egypt,
thinkyng it better with the people of God, to have affliction, and sorrow, then
with naughty men, in sin to live pleasauntly for a time. By faith, he cared
not for the threatenynge of king Pharao: for his trust was so in God, that he
passed not of the felicity of this world, but looked for the reward, to come
in heaven, setting his heart upon the invisible God, as if he had seen him ever
present before his eyes. Exodus xiiii. Iosue. vi.
By faith the children of Israel passed through the red sea. By faith, the
walls of Hiericho, fell down without stroke, and many other wonderful
miracles have been wrought. In all good men, that heretofore have been, faith
has brought forth their good works, and obtained the promises of God.

Faith, has stopped the Lions mouths: Daniel. vi. Daniel. iii.
faith has quenched the force of fire: faith has escaped the swords edges:
faith has given weak men strength, victory in battaill, overthrown the
armies of infidels, raised ye dedde to life: faith has made good men to take
adversity, in good part: some have been mocked and whipped, bound and cast
in prison: some have lost all their goods and lived in great pouertye: some
have wa^dered in mountains, hills and wilderness: some have been racked,
some slain, some stoned, some sawe^, some rent in pieces, some hedded, some
brent without mercy, and would not be delivered, because they looked to rise
again, to a better state.

All these fathers, martyrs, and other holy men, (whom saint Paul spoke of)
had their faith surely fired in God, when all the world was against the^. They
did not only know God to be the Lord, maker and governor of all men in the
world: but also they had a special confidence and trust, that he was, and
would be their God, their comfortor, aider, helper, mainteyner, and defendor.
This is the Christian faith, which these holy men had, and we also ought to
have. And although they were not named christian me^, yet was it a christian
faith that they had, for they looked for all benefits of God the father,
through the merits of his son Jesus Christ, as we now do. This difference
is between the^ and us, for they looked, when Christ should come, and we be in
the time: when he is come. Therefore says saint Augustyne: In Iho. ^ra. ^lv.
ii. Cor. iiii.
the time is altered, but not the faith. For we have both one faith in one
Christ. The Same holy Ghost also, that we have, had they, says saint Paul.
For as the holy Ghost does teach us to trust in God, and to call upon him as
our father: so did he teach them to say, Esaie. xliii.
(as it is written): Thou Lord; art our father and redemer, and thy name is
without beginning and everlasting. God gave the^ then grace to be his children,
as he does us now. But now by the coming of our savior Christ, we have
received more abu^da^tly the spirit of god in our hearts, whereby we may
co^ceyue a greater faith, and a surer trust, then many of them had. But in
effect they and we be al one: we have the same faith, that they had in God, and
they the same, yt we have. And.s. Paul so much extolleth their faith, because
we should no less, but rather more, give our selfs wholly unto Christ, both
in profession and living now, when Christ is come, then ye old fathers did
before his coming. And by all the declaracio^ of.s. Paul, it is evident, that
the true, lively, and christian faith, is no dead, vain, or vnfruictfull thing,
but a thing of perfect virtue, of wonderful operacion and strength, bryngyng
forth all good mocions and good works.

All holy scripture agreably bears witness, that a true lively faith in
Christ, does bring forth good works, and therefore every man must examine
himself diligently, to know, whether he have the same true lively faith in his
heart unfeignedly or not, which he shall know by the fruictes thereof. Many that
professed the faith of Christ, were in this error, that they thought they
knew God and believed in him, when in their life they declared the contrary:
which error, i. Ihon. ii.
saint Ihon in his first Epistle confutynge, writes in this wise: Hereby we
are certified, that we know god, if we observe his commandments: he that
says, he knows god, and observes not his commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. And again he says, whosoever synneth, i. Ihon. iii.
does not se God, nor know him: let no man deceive you well-beloved children.
And moreover he says: i. Ihon. iii*
hereby we know yt we be of the truth, and so we shall persuade our hearts
before him: For if our own hearts reprove us, i. Ihon. iii.
God is above our hearts, and knows al things. Well-beloved, if our hearts
reprove us not, the^ have we confidence in God, and shall have of him
whatsoever we ask, because we keep his commandments, and do those things,
that please him. i. Ihon. v
And yet further he says: every man that believes that Jesus is Christ, is
borne of God: and we know, that whosoever is borne of God, does not sin:
but the generation of God, purges him, and the devil does not touch him. And
finally he concludes: and showing the cause, why he wrote this epistle says:
i. Ihon. v.
For this cause have I thus written unto you, that you may know, that you
have everlasting life, which do believe in the son of God. And in his third
Epistle, ^ii Ihon. i.
he confirms the whole matter of faith and works, in few words, saying: he
that does well, is of God, and he that does evil, knows not God. And as s.
Iho^ says: that as the lively knowledge, and faith of God, brings forth
good works: so says he likewise of hope and Charity, i. Ihon. iii.
that they cannot stand with evil living. Of hope, he writes thus: we know
that when God shall appear, we shall be like unto him, for we shall se him, even
as he is. And who soever has this hope in him, does purify himself, like as
God is pure. And of charity he says these words: He that does keep Gods
word, or commandment, in him is truly the perfect love of God, i. Ihon.
ii.
And again he says: i. Ihon. v.
this is the love of God, that we should keep his commandments. And s. Ihon
wrote not this, as a subtle proposicion, devised of his own fantasy, but as
a most certain and necessary truth, taught unto him by Christ himself, the
eternal and in fallible verity, who in many places does most clearly
affirm, that faith, hope, and charity, cannot consist without good and godly
works. Of faith, he says He that believes in the son, has everlasting
life, Ihon iii. i. Ihon v.
but he that believes not in the son, shall not se that life, but the wrath of
God remains upon him. And the same he confirms with a double oath, saying:
Ihon. vi.
Forsothe and forsothe, I say unto you, he yt believes in me, has everlasting
life* Now, for as much as he that believes in Christ, has everlasting life, it
must needs consequently follow, that he yt has this faith, must have also good
works, and be studious to observe Gods co^maundemetes obediently. For to the^
that have evil works, and lead their life in disobedience, and transgression
of Gods commandments, without repentance, pertains not everlasting life,
but everlasting death, as Christ himself says: Matthew. xv.
they that do well, shall go into life eternal, but they that do evil, shall go
into ye eternal fire. And again he says, I am the first lettre and the last,
Apoc. xxi.
the beginning and the endyng: to him yt is a thirste, I will give of the well
of the water of life freely: He that has the victory, shall have all things,
and I will be his God, and he shall be my son: But they yt be fearful,
mistrusting God, and lacking faith, they yt be cursed people and murderers, and
fornicators, and sorserers, and Idolaters, Charity brings forth good
works. Ihon. xiiii.
and all liars, shall have their porcio^ in ye lake, that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. And as Christ undoubtedly affirms,
that true faith brings forth good works: so does he say likewise of
charity. Ihon. xiiii.
Whosoever has my commandments and keeps the^, yt is he, yt loves me. And
after he says: he that loves me, will keep my word, and he yt loves me
not, keeps not my words. And as the love of God is tried by good works, so
is the fear of God also, as the Wisema^ says: ye dread of God puts away
sin. And also he says: he that fears god will do good works. Eccle. i.
Ecc^e. xv.
A man may sone deceive him self, and think in his own pha^tasie, that he by
faith knows God, loves him, fears him, and belongs to him, when in very
deed he does nothing less. For the trial of all these things, is a very
godly and christian life. He that feleth his heart set to seek Gods honor and
studieth to know the will and commandments of God, and to conform himself
thereunto, and leads not his life after the desire of his own flesh, to
serve ye devil by sin, but sets his mind to serve God, for gods awn
sake, and for his sake also to love al his neighbors, whether they be fre^des
or adversaries, doing good to every man (as opportunity serves) and willingly
hurtyng no man: Such a man may well rejoice in God, perceiuinge by the trade of
his life, yt he vnfamedly has ye right knowledge of God, a lively faith, a
constant hope, a true, and unfeigned love and fear of god* But he yt casts
away ye yoke of gods commandments from his neck, and gives himself to
live without true repe^tau^ce, after his own sensual mind and pleasure, not
regarding to know Gods word, and much less to live according thereunto: such
a man clearly deceives himself, and sees not his awn heart, if he thinks,
yt he either knows god, loves him, fears him, or trusts in him. Some
peradventure pha^tasie in themselfes, yt they belong to God, althouh they live
in sin, and so they come to ye Church and show themselves as Gods dear
children. i. Ihon. i.
But.s. Iho^ says plai^ly: if we say, yt we have any company with God, and
walk in darkness, we do lie. Other do vainly think, that they know and
love God, although they pass not of his commandments. i. Ihon. ii*
But s. Ihon says clearly: he yt says I know God, and keeps not his
commandments, he is a liar. Some falsely persuade themselves, yt they love
God, when they hate their neighbors. But s. Ihon says manifestly: if any man
say, I love god, and yet hates his brother, he is a liar. i. Ihon. iiii. i.
Ihon. ii.
He that says, yt he is in the light, and hates his brother, he is still i^
darkness. He yt loves his brother, dwells in the light, but he yt hates
his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not
whether he goes: for darkness has blinded his eyes. And moreover he says:
hereby we manifestly know the children of God, i. Ihon. iii.
from the children of the devil: He that does not righteously, is not the
child of God, nor he that hates his brother.

Deceive not your selfs therefore, thinking that you have faith in God, or
that you love God, or do trust in him, or do fear him, when you live in
sin: for then your ungodly and sinful life, declares ye contrary,
whatsoever ye say or think. It pertains to a christian man, to have this
true christian faith, and to try himself, whether he has it or no, and to
know what belongs to it, and how it does work in him. It is not the
world, that we can trust to* the world, and all that is therein, is but
vanity. It is God that must be our defense and protection, against all
te^ptacion of wickedness, and sin, errors, supersticio^, ydolatrie, and al
evil. If all the world were on our side, and God against us, what could y^
world avail us? Therefore let us set our whole faith, and trust in God, and
neither the world, the devil, nor al ye power of the^, shall prevail against
us. Let us therefore, (good christian people) try and examyne our faith what it
is: let us not flatter our selfs, but look upon our works, and so judge of
our faith, what it is. Christ himself speaks of this matter, and says: The
tree is known by the fruicte. (...).
Therefore let us do good works, and thereby declare our faith, to be ye
lively christian faith. Let us by such virtues as ought to spryng out of
faith, show our eleccio^ to be sure and stable, i P^^er. ^.
as s. Peter teaches. Endeavor your selfs to make your calling and election
certain by good works. And also he says: minister or declare in your faith,
virtue, in virtue, knowledge, in knowledge, te^peraunce, in te^peraunce,
patience, again in patience, Godliness, in Godliness, brotherly charity, in
brotherly charity, love. So shall we show in deed, yt we have ye very lively
christian faith: and may so both certefie our conscience the better, that we be
in the right faith, and also by these means confirm other men. If these
fruictes do not follow, we do but mock with God, deceive our selfs, and also
other me^. Well may we bear ye name of Christian me^, but we do lack the true
faith, that does belong thereunto. For true faith does ever bring furthe
good works, as s. James says: James. ii.
show me thy faith by thy deeds. Thy deeds and works, must be an open
testimonial of thy faith: otherwise, thy faith being without good works, is
but the devils faith, ye faith of ye wicked, a phantasy of faith, and not a
true christian faith. And like as the devils and evil people, be nothing the
better for their counterfeit faith, but it is unto them the more cause of
da^pnacion: so they yt be christened, and have received knowledge of God, and
of Christ's merits, and yet of a set purpose do live idly, without good
works, thinkyng ye name of a naked faith, to be either sufficient for the^, or
else setting their minds upon vain pleasures of this world, do live in syn
without repentance, not vtteryng the fruits, yt do belong to such an high
profession, upon such presu^pteous persons, and wilful sinners, must needs
remain ye great vengeance of God, and eternal punishment in hell prepared for
ye devil and wicked livers. Therefore, as you profess ye name of Christ, (good
christian people) let no such phantasy and imaginacion of faith, at any time
beguile you, but be sure of your faith, try it by your living, look upon the
fruits yt comes of it, mark the increase of love and charity by it,
towades God and your neighbor, and so shall you perceive it to be a true lively
faith. If you feel and perceive such a faith in you, rejoice in it, and be
dilligent to maintein it, and keep it still in you: let it be daily increasing,
and more and more, by well workyng, and so shall ye be sure, yt you shall pleace
god by this faith: and at the length (as other faithful me^ have done before)
so shall you (when his will is) come to him, and receive the^de and final reward
of your faith (as s. Peter names it) the salvation of your souls: the which,
God grant us, i. Peter. i.
that has promised the same unto his faithful. To who^, be al honor and glory,
world without end. Amen.

An Homely, or sermon, of good works annexed unto faith.
IN the last Sermon was declared unto you, what the lively and true faith of a
christian man is: that it causes not a man to be idle, but to be occupied in
bringyng furthe good works, as occasion serves.

No good work can be dooen without faith.
Now by Gods grace shall be declared the second thing, that before was noted of
faith, that without it can no good work be done, acceptable and pleasant unto
God. For as a branch cannot bear fruit of it self (says our savior Christ)
except it abide in the vine, so cannot you, except you abide in me: I am the
vine, Ihon. xv.
and you be the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, he brings
furthe much fruit: for without me, you can do nothing. And S. Paul proves,
that Enoche had faith, because he pleased God. Hebre. xi.
For without faith (says he) it is not possible to please God. Roma xiiii.
And again to the Romay. he says: whatsoever work is done without faith, it
is sin. Faith gives life to the soul, and they be as much ded to God that
lack faith, as they be to the world, whose bodies lack souls. Without faith
all that is done of us, is but ded before God, although the work seem never so
gaie and glorious before man. Even as the picture graven or painted, is but a
ded representacion of the thing it self, and is with out life, or any manner of
mouyng: so be the works of all unfaithful persons before God. They do appear
to be lively works, and in deed they be but ded* not auailyng to the eternal
life. They be but shadows and shows of lively and good things, and not good
and lively things in deed. For true faith does give life to the works, and
out of such faith come good works, that be very good works in deed, and
without it, no work is good before God: as says saint Augustine: In
prefati. Psalm. xxxi.
we must set not good works before faith, nor think that before faith, a
man may do any good work: for such works, although they seem unto men, to
be praise worthy, yet in deed they be but vain, and not allowed before God.
They be as the course of a horse, that runs out of the way, which takes
great labor, but to no purpose. Let no man therefore (says he) recke^ upon
his good works before his faith. Whereas faith was not, good works were
not: the intent (says he) makes the good works, but faith must guide and
order the intent of man. And Christ says: Matthew. vi.
if thine iye be naught, thy whole body is full of darkness. The iye does
signify the intent (says saint Augustine) wherewith a man does a thing. In
prefati. Psalm. xxxi.
So that he, which does not his good works with a Godly intent and a true
faith, that woorketh by love, the whole body beside, (that is to say) all the
whole nu^bre of his works) is dark, and there is no light in it. For good
deeds be not measured by the factes theimselfes, and so disseuered from
vices, but by the ends and intentes, for the which they be done. If a
Heathen man clothe the naked, feed the hongerie, and do such other like
works: yet because he does them not in faith, for the honor and love of God,
they ^e but ded, vain and fruitles works to him.

Faith is it, that does commend the work to god: (for as s. Augustine
says) whether thou will or no, that work that comes not of faith, is
naught: where the faith of Christ is not the fou^dacion, there is no good
work, what buildyng soever we make. There is one work, in yt which be al good
works, that is, faith, which works by charity: If thou have it, thou have
the ground of all good works. For the virtues of strength, wisdom,
temperaunce, and justice, be al referred unto this same faith. Without this
faith, we have not the^, but only the names and shadows of them, (as s.
Augustine says.) All the life of them that lack the true faith, is syn: and
nothing is good without him, that is the aucthor of goodness: where he is not,
there is but feined virtue, although it be in the best works. And s. Augu.
declaryng this verse of the psalm: the Turtle has found a nest where she may
keep her young birds: says, that Jews, heretics, and pagans, do good
works: they clothe the naked, feed the poor, and do other works of mercy,
but because they be not done in the true faith, therefore the birds be lost.
But if they remain in faith, then faith is the nest and sauegard of their
birds, that is to say, safeguard of their good works, that the reward of them
be not utterly lost. De vocati Gentium. Lib. i. capi. iii.
And this matter (which s. Augustine at large in many books disputes) s.
Ambrose concludes in few words, saying: he that by nature would withstand
vice, either by natural will or reason, he does in vain garnishe the time of
this life, and atteineth not the very true virtues: for without the worshippyng
of the true God, that which seems to be virtue, is vice. And yet most
plainly to this purpose, writes s. Ihon Chriso. in this wise: you shall find
many, which have not the true faith, In sermons de fide, lege and spiritu scto^*
and be not of ye flock of Christ, and yet (as it appears) they florishe in
good works of mercy. You shall find them full of pity, compassion, and given
to justice, and yet for all that, they have no fruit of their works, because
the chief work lacks. For when the Jews asked of Christ, Ihon. vi.
what they should do to work good works, he answered: this is ye work of
God, to believe in him whom he sent. So that he called faith the work of god.
And as soon as a man has faith, anon he shall flourish in good works: for
faith of it self is full of good works, and nothing is good without faith. And
for a similitude, he says, that they which glister and shine in good works,
without faith in God, be like dead men, which have goodly and precious
to^bes, and yet it avails them nothing. Faith may not be naked without good
works: for then it is no true faith: and when it is adjoined to works yet is
it above the works. For as men that be very men in deed, first have life, and
after be norished: so must our faith in Christ go before, and after be
norished with good works. And life may be without norishment, but norishment
cannot be without life. A man must needs be norished by good works, but first
he must have faith: he that does good deeds, yet without faith, he has no
life. I can show a man that by faith without works lived, and came to heaven
but without faith, never man had life. The thief that was hanged when Christ
suffered, did believe only, and the most merciful God did justify him. And
because no man shall obiecte, that he lacked time to do good works, for
else he would have done them: truth it is, and I will not contend therein: but
this I will surely affirm, that faith only saved him. If he had lived, and
not regarded faith, and the works thereof, he should have lost his salvation
again. But this the effect that I say, that faith by it self saved him, but
works by them selfs never justified any man. Here ye have heard the mind of
saint Chrysostom, whereby you may perceive, that neither faith is without
works (having opportunity thereto) nor works can avail to eternal life
without faith.

What works they are that spri^g of faith*
Now to proceed to the third part (which in the former Sermon was noted of
faith) that is to say, what manner of works they be, which spring out of true
faith, and lead faithful men unto eternal life: this cannot be known so
well, as by our savior Christ himself, Matthe xix.
who was asked of a certain great man the same question. What works shall I
do (said a Prince) to come to everlasting life? To whom Jesus answered: Matthew.
xix.
If thou will come to the eternal life, keep the commandments. But the
Prince not satisfied herewith, asked farther, which commandments? The
Scribes and Phariseis had made so many of their own laws and tradicions, to
bring men to heaven, besides Gods commandments, that this man was in doubt,
whether he should come to heaven by those laws and tradicions or by the laws
of God: and therefore he asked Christ, which commandments he meante?
Whereunto Christ made him a plain answer, rehersyng the commandments of
GOD, saying: Matthew. xix.
Thou shalt not kill, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal,
thou shalt not bear false witness, honor thy father and mother, The works
yt lead to heaven, be the works of Gods commandments.
and love thy neighbor as thy self. By which words, Christ declared, that
the laws of GOD, be the very way that do lead to eternal life, and not the
tradicions, and laws of men. Man from his first falling from Gods
commandments, has ever been ready to do the like, and to devise works of
his own phantasye to please God withal.
So that this is to be taked for a most true lesson taught by Christ's own
mouth, that the works of the moral commandments of God, be the very true
works of faith, which lead to the blessed life to come. But the blyndenesse
and malice of man, even from the beginning, has ever been ready to fall from
Gods commandments. As Adam the first man, having but one commandment,
that he should not eat of the fruit forbidden, notwithstanding Gods
commandment, he gave credit unto the woman, seduced by the subtle
persuasion of the Serpent, and so followed his own will, and left Gods
commandment. And ever since that time, al his succession has been so blinded
through original sin, that they have been ever ready to decline from God and
his law, and to invent a new way unto salvation, by works of their own
devise: so much, that almost all the world forsakyng the true honor of the
only eternal, living God, wandered about their own fantasies, worshippyng
some the Sun, the Moon, the sterres: some Jupiter, Juno, Diana, Saturnus,
Apollo, The devises and Idolatrye of the Gentiles.
Neptunus Ceres, Bacchus, and other dedde men and women: Some therewith not
satisfied, worshipped diverse kinds of beasts, birds, fish, foul, and
serpents every Region, town, and house, in manner being divided, and setting
up Images of such things as they liked, and worshippyng the same. Such was
the rudenes of ye people, after they fell to their own fantasies, and left
the eternal living GOD and his commandments, that they devised innumerable
Images, and Gods. In which error and blindness they did reamain, until such
time as almighty GOD, pitiyng the blindness of man, sent his true prophet
Moses into the world, to reprehende this extreme madness, and to teach the
people to know the only living God, and his true honor and worship. But the
corrupt inclinacion of man, was so much given to follow his own pha^tasies,
and (as you would say) to favor his own bird, that he brought up himself,
that all the admonicions, exhortacions, benefits, and threatenings of God,
could not keep him from such his inuencions. For notwithstanding all the
benefits of God, The devises and Idolatrye of the Gentiles.
showed unto the people of Israel, yet when Moses went up into the mountain,
to speak with almighty God: he had tarried there but a few days, when the
people began to invent new gods. And as it came in their heddes, they made a
calfe of gold, Exodus xxxii.
and kneled down and worshipped it. And after that, they followed the Moabites,
and worshipped Beelphegor the Moabites God. Read the book of Judges, the books
of the Kings and the Prophets, and there shall you find, how inconstant the
people were, how full of inuencions, and more ready to run after their own
fantasies, then Gods most holy commandments. There shall you read of Baall,
Moloche, Chamos, Mechom, Baalpeor, Astaroth, Beel the dragon, Priapus, the
brazen serpente, the twelve signs, and many other: unto whose images, the
people with great devotion, invented Pilgrimages, preciously deckyng and
censyng them, kneling down and offering to them, thinking that, an high merit
before God, and to be esteemed above the precepts and commandments of god.
And where at that time, god commanded no sacrifyce to be made, but in
Jerusalem only, they did clean contrary, making aulters and sacrifyces every
where, in hills, in wooddes, and in houses, not regardyng Gods
commandments, but estemynge their own phantasyes and devotion, to be better
then them. And the error hereof was so spread abroad, that not only the
unlearned people, but also the priests and teachers of the people, partly by
glory and avarice were corrupted, and partly by ignorance blindly seduced with
the same abhominacions: So much, that King Achab, having but only Helyas a
true teacher and minister of god, there were eight hundred and fifty priests,
that persuaded him to honor Baal, and to do sacrifyce in the woddes or groves.
And so continued that horrible error, until the three noble Kings, as
Iosaphat, Ezechias and Josias, Gods elect ministers, destroyed the same
clearly, and reduced the people from such their feigned inuencions, unto the
very commandments of GOD: for the which thing, their immortal reward and
glory, does and shall remayn with GOD for ever.

And beside the foresayed inuencions, Religions and sects among the Jews.
the inclinacion of man to have his own holy deuocions, devised new sects
and religions, called Phariseis, Sadduces, and Scribes, with many holy and
godly tradicions and ordinances (as it feined, by the outward apparau^ce and
goodly glisteryng of the works,) but in very deed, all tendynge to Idolatrye,
Supersticion and Hipocrisye: their hearts within, being full of malice, pride,
coueteousnesse, and all iniquity. Against which sects, and their pretensed
holiness, Christ cried out more vehemently, then he did against any other
persons, saying and often repetyng these words: Matthew. xxiii.
Woe be to you Scribes and Phariseis, ye Hypocrites, for you make clean the
vessel without, but within you be full of rauyn and fylthinesse: thou blind
Pharisei, and Hypocrite, first make the inward part clean. For
notwithstanding all the goodly traditions, and outward shows of good works,
devised of their own imaginacio^, whereby they appeared to the world, most
religious and holy of all men: yet Christ, (who saw their hearts) knew that
they were inwardly in the sight of GOD, most unholy, most abominable, and
farthest from God of all men. Therefore said he unto them: Matthew xv. Esai.
xxix.
Hypocrites, the Prophet Esaie spoke full truly of you, when he said: This
people honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me: they
worship me in vain, that teach doctrines and commandments of men: For
you leave the commandments of God, to keep your own tradicions.

Man's laws must be observed and kept, but not as Gods laws.
And though Christ said, they worshypped GOD in vain, that teach doctrines
and commandments of men: yet he meant not thereby to overthrow all men's
commandments, for he himself was ever obedient to the Princes and their
laws, made for good order and governance of the people: but he reproved the
laws and tradicions, made by the Scribes and Phariseis, which were not made
only for good order of the people (as the Civil laws were) but they were so
highly extolled, that they were made to be a right and sincere worshippinge of
God, as they had been equal with Gods laws or above the^: for many of Gods
laws could not be kept, but were fayn to give place unto them. This arrogancy
God detested, that man should so advance his laws, to make them equal with
Gods laws, wherein the true honoryng and right worshippyng of God stands,
and to make his laws for them to be omitted. God has appointed his laws,
whereby his pleasure is to be honored. His pleasure is also, that all man's
laws, being not contrary to his laws, shall be obeyed, and kept, as good as
necessary for every common weal, but not as things, wherein principally his
honor rests. And all Civil and man's laws, either be, or should be made, to
induce men the better to observe Gods laws, that consequently, God should be
the better honored by them. Howbeit, the Scribes and Phariseis were not
content, that their laws should be no higher esteemed, then other positive and
civil laws, nor would not have them called by the name of other temporal
laws, but called them holy and godly tradicions, Holy tradicions were esteemed
as Gods laws.
and would have them esteemed, not only for a right and true worshippyng of God
(as Gods laws be in deed) but also to be the most high honoryng of God, to
the which, the commandments of God should give place. Luke xvi ^oly
tradicions (...).

(...) of (...) is commonly occasion that GOD (...) offended.


And for this cause, did Christ so vehemently speak against them, saying: your
tradicions, which men esteem so high, be abhominacion before God. For
commonly, of such tradicions follows the transgression of Gods
commandments, and a more devotion in the obseruyng of such things, and a
greater conscience in breakyng of them, then of the commandments of God. As
the Scribes and Phariseis so supersticiously, and scrupulously kept the
Sabbath, that they were offended with Christ, because he healed sick men:
Matthew xii.
and with his Apostles, because they being sore hungery, gathered the ears of
corn to eat, upon that day. And because his disciples washed not their
hands so often as the tradicions required, ye Scribes and Phariseis quereled
with Christ, Matthew. xv.
saying: why do thy disciples break the traditions of the seniours? But Christ
objected against them, that they for to observe their own traditions, did
teach men to break the very commandments of God. For they taught the
people such a devotion, that they offered their goods into the treasure house
of the temple, under the pretense of Gods honor, leaving their fathers and
mothers (to whom they were chiefly bound) vnholpe^: and so they brake the
commandments of GOD, to keep their own tradicions. They esteemed more an
oath, made by the gold or oblacion in the temple, then an oath made in the
name of God himself, or of the temple. They were more studious to pay their
tithes of small things, then to do the greater things commanded of God, as
works of mercy, or to do justice, or to deal syncerely, uprightly, and
faythefully, with God and man (these says Christ ought to be done, Math.
xxiii.
and the other not omitted). And to be short, they were of so blind judgment,
that they stombled at a straw and leped over a block. They would, (as it
were) nicely take a fly out of their cup, and drink down a whole Camel.
And therefore Christ called them blind guydes, warning his disciples from
time to time, to eschew their doctrine. For although they seemed to ye world,
to be most perfect men, both in living and teaching: yet was their life but
Hypocrisy, and their doctrine but ^ower leue^, mixte with supersticion,
Idolatry, and preposterous judgment: setting up the tradicions and ordinances
of man, in the stead of Gods commandments.

Thus have you heard, how much the world from the beginning until Christ's
time, was ever ready to fall from the commandments of God, and to seek other
means to honor and serve him, after a devotion imagined of their own heads:
and how they extolled their own tradicions, as high or above Gods
commandments, which has happened also in our times (the more it is to be
lamented) no less then it did emonge the Jews, and that by the corrupcion, or
at the least, by the negligence of them, that chiefly ought to have preferred
Gods commandments, and to have preserved the sincere and heavenly doctrine
left by Christ. What man having any judgment or learning, joined with a true
zeal unto GOD, does not se, and lament, to have entered into Christ's
religion, such false doctrine, Supersticion, Idolatry, Hipocrisy, and other
enormities and abuses, so as by little and little through the ^ower leven
thereof, the sweet bread of Gods holy word has been much hindered and laid
aparte. Never had the Jews in their most blyndnesse, so many Pilgrimages unto
Images, nor used so much knelyng, kissyng, and censyng of them, as has been
used in our time.

Sects and Religions among christian men
Sects and feined religions were neither the forty part so many emonge the
Jews, nor more supersticiously and ungodly abused, then of late days they
have been emonge us. Which sects and religions, had so many Hypocritical
works in their state of religion (as they arrogantly named it) that their
lamps (as they said) ra^ne always over, able to satisfye, not only for their
own sins, but also for all other their benefactors, brothers, and sisters of
their religion, as most ungodly and craftelye they had persuaded the multitude
of ignorant people: keeping in diverse places (as it were) martes or markettes
of merits, being full of their holy relics, Images, shrines, and works of
supererogacio^, ready to be sold. And all things which they had, were called
holy, holy Coules, holy Girdels, holy Pardoned Beads, holy Shoes, holy Rules,
and all full of holiness. And what thing can be more foolish, more
Supersticious, or ungodly, then that men, women and children, should wear a
Friars coote, to deliver them from agues or pestilence, or when they dye, or
when they be buried, cause it to be cast upon them in hope thereby to be saved.
Which supersticion, although (thanks be to God) it has been little used in
this realm: yet in diverse other realms, it has been, and yet is used, both
emonge many, both learned and unlearned. But to pass over the innumerable
supersticiousnesse, that has been in strange apparel, in silence, in
dormitorie, in cloister, in chapter, in choice of meats and in drinks, and in
such like things: let us consider, what enormities and abuses have been, in
the three chief principal points, which they called the three essencialles of
religion, that is to say, obedience, chastity, and wilful pouertye.

First, The.iii. chief vows of religion.
under pretense of obedience to their father in religion (which obedience they
made them selfs) they were exempted by their rules and canons, from the
obedience of their natural father and mother, and from the obedience of Emperor
and King, and all temporal power, whom of very duetye by Gods laws, they
were bound to obey. And so the profession of their obedience not due, was a
renu^ciacion of their due obedience. And how their profession of chastity was
observed, it is more honesty to pass over in silence, and let the world judge
of that, which is well known, then with unchaste words, by expressing of
their unchaste life, to offend chaste and Godly ears. And as for their wylfull
pouertye, it was such, then when in possessions, jewels, plate and riches, they
were equal, or above merchau^tes, Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, and Dukes: yet by
this subtle sophistical term, Propriu^ in co^muni, they deluded the world,
perswadyng, that notwitstandyng all their possessions and riches, yet they
observed their vow, and were in wilful poverty. But for all their riches, they
might neither healpe father nor mother, nor other yt were in deed very nedye
and poor, without the license of their father Abbot, Prior, or warden. And yet
they might take of every man, but they might not give ought to any man, no, not
to them, whom the laws of God bound them to help. And so through their
tradicions and rules, the laws of God could bear no rule with them. And
therefore of them might be most truly said that, which Christ spoke unto
the Pharisees: you break the commandments of God by your tradicions: Matthew.
xv.
you honor God with your lips, but you hearts be far from him. And the
longer prayers they used by day and by night, under pretense of such holiness,
to get the favor of Widows and other simple folks, yt they might sing
Trentals and service for their husbands and friends, and admit them into
their suffrages, the more truly is verefyed of them the saying of Christ: woe
be to you Scribes and Phariseis, (...)
Hypocrites, for you devour Widows houses, under color of long prayers:
therefore your dampnacion shall be the greater. Woe be to you Scribes and
Phariseis, Hipocrites, for you go about by sea and by land, to make mo Nouices
and new brethren, and when they be admitted of your sect, you make them the
children of hell, worse then your selfs be. Honor be to God, who did put
light in the heart of his faithful and true minister of most famous memory,
King Henry the.viij. and gave him the knowledge of his word, and an earnest
affection to seek his glory, and to put away all such Supersticious and
Pharisaicall sects by Antichrist inverted, and set up against the true word
of God, and glory of his most blessed name, as he gave the like spirit unto
the most noble and famous Princes, Iosaphat, Josias, and Ezechyas. God grant
all us, the Kings highness faithful and true subjects, to feed of the sweet
and sauorie bread of Gods own word, and (as Christ commanded) to eschew
all our Pharisaicall and Papistical leven of man's feyned religion. Which,
although it were before God, most abominable and contrary to Gods
commandments, and Christ's pure religion, yet it was extolled, to be a most
Godly life, and highest state of perfection. As though a man might be more
Godly and more perfect by keeping the rules, tradicions and professio^s of men,
then by keeping the holy commandments of God. And briefly to pass over the
ungodly and counterfeit religions: let us rehearse some other kinds of
Papisticall supersticions and abuses, as of Beads, of Lady Psalters and
Rosaries, of.xv. Oos, Other devised and supersticions.
of saint Bernardes Uerses, of saint Agathes letters, of Purgatory, of Masses
satisfactory, of Stacions and Iubilies, of feyned Relics, of hallowed Beads,
Belles, Bread, Water, palms, Candelles, Fire and such other: of
Supersticious fastings, of Fraternities, of Pardons, with such like
merchaundyse: which were so esteemed and abused to the great prejudice of Gods
glory and commau^deme^tes, that they were made most high and most holy
things, whereby to atteyn to the eternal life, or remission of sin. Yea
also, vain inue^cions, vnfruictfull Ceremonies and ungodly Laws. Decrees and
Decretalles
Decrees and Counsayles of Rome, were in such wise aduau^ced, that nothing was
thought comparable in authority, wisdom, learning, and Godlynes, unto them.
So yt the laws of Rome, (as they said) were to be received of all men, as the
four Eua^gelistes: to the which all laws of Princes must give place. And ye
laws of God also p^rily were omitted and less esteemed, that the said laws,
decrees and Counsayles, with their traditions and Ceremonies, might be more
duly observed and had in greater reverence. Thus was the people, through
ignorance so blinded, with the goodly show and apparaunce of those things,
that they thought ye obseruyng of them to be a more holiness, a more perfect
service and honoryng of God, and more pleasyng to God, then the keeping of Gods
commandments. Such has been the corrupt inclinacio^ of man, ever
supersticiously given to make new honorynge of God, of his awn hedde, and then
to have more affection and devotion to observe that, then to search out Gods
holy commandments and to keep them. And furthermore, to take Gods
commandments, for men's commandments, and men's commandments for
Gods commandments, yea, and for the highest, and most perfect and holy of
all Gods commandments. And so was all confused, that scant well learned men,
and but a small number of them, knew, or at the least would know, and durst
affirm the truth, to separate Gods commandments from the commandments of
men: whereupon did grow much error, Supersticion, Idolatry, vain religion,
preposterous judgment, great contencion, with all ungodly living.

Wherefore, An exhortacio^ to the keeping of Gods commandments.
as you have any zeal to the right and pure honoryng of God: as you have any
regard to your awn souls, and to the life that is to come, which is both
without pain, and without end, apply your selfs chiefly above all thing, to
read and to hear Gods word: mark diligently therein, what his will is you
shall do, and with all your endeavor, apply your selfs to follow the same. A
brief rehersall of Gods commandments.
First you must have an assured faith in God, and give your selfs wholly unto
him, love him in prosperity and adversity, and dread to offend him evermore.
Then, for his sake, love all men, friends and fooes, because they be his
creacio^ and Image, and redeemed by Christ, as ye are. Cast in your minds, how
you may do good unto all men, unto your powers, and hurt no man. Obey al your
superiors and governors, serve your masters faithfully and diligently, as well
in their absence, as in their presence, not for dread of punishment only, but
for conscience sake, knowing that you are bound so to do by Gods
commandments. Disobey not your fathers and mothers, but honor the^, help
the^, and please the^ to your power. Oppress not, kill not, beat not, neither
slander nor hate any man: But love all men, speak well of al men, help and
succor every man, as you may, yea, even your enemies that hate you, that
speak evil of you, and that do hurt you. Take no ma^s goods, nor couete your
neyghbors goods wrongfully, but content your selfs with yt, which ye get
truly, and also bestow your own goods charitably, as need and case
requires. Flee all Idolatrye, Withcraft, and perjury: commit no manner of
adultery, fornicacio^, nor other unchasteness, in will nor in deed, with any
other man's wife, wydowe, maid, or other wise. And trauailynge continually,
during your life, thus in the observing the commandments of God, (wherein
consists the pure principal, and direct honor of God, and which, wrought in
faith, God has ordained to be the right trade and pathe way unto heaven:)
you shall not fail, as Christ has promised, to come to that blessed and
eternal life, where you shall live in glory and joy with GOD for ever. To
whom be laud, honor, and imperie, for ever and ever. AMEN.

An Homely of Christian Love and Charity.
OF all things that be good to be taught unto christian people, there is
nothing more necessary to be spoken of, and daily called upon, then
charity: as well, for that all manner of works of righteousness be contained in
it, as also, that the decay thereof, is the ruin of the world, the banishment
of virtue, and the cause of all vice. And for so much as almost every man,
makes and frames to himself charity after his own appetite, and how
detestable soever his life be, both unto God and man, yet he persuades himself
still that he has charity: therefore you shall hear now a true and plain
descripcion of Charity, not of men's imaginacio^, but of the very words and
example of our savior Jesus Christ. In which descripcion, every man, (as it
were in a glass) may considre himself and se plainly without error, whether
he be in the true Charity or not. What Charity is.


Charity is to love God with all our heart, al our life, and all our powers and
strength: With all our heart, that is to say, that our hearts, The love of GOD.
mind and study, be set to believe his word, to trust in him, and to love him
above al other things that we love best, in heaven or in earth: With all your
life, that is to say, that our chief joy and delight be set upon him, and his
honor, and our whole life given unto the service of him above all things, with
him to live and dye, and to forsake all other things, rather then him. For he
that loves his father or mother, son or daughter, Math. x.
house or land, more then me (says Christ) is not worthy to have me: With
all our powers, that is to say, that with our hands and fete, with our eyes
and ears, our mouths and tongues, and with all other parts and powers, both
of body and soul, we should be given to the keeping and fulfillyng of his
commandments. This is the first and principal part of charity, The love
of thy neighbor.
but it is not the whole: for charity is also, to love every man, good and
evil, friend and foo, and whatsoever cause be given to the contrary, yet
nevertheless to bear good will and heart unto every man, to use our selfs well
unto them, as well in words and countenance, as in all our outward acts and
deeds: For so Christ himself taught, and so also he performed in deed. Of the
love of God, he taught in this wise, unto a doctor of the law, that asked him,
which was the great and chief commandment in the law? Love thy Lord God
(said Christ) with all thy heart, Matt. xxii.
with all thy life, and with all thy mind. And of the love that we ought to
have among our selfs each to other, he teaches us thus: you have heard it
taught in times paste, thou shall love thy friend, and hate thy foe, Math. v.
but I tell you, love your enemies, speak well of them that diffame you, and
speak evil of you, do well to them that hate you, pray for them that vex
and persetute you, that you may be the children of your father that is in
heaven. For he makes his sun to rise both upon the evil and good, and
sends rain to just and unjust. Math. v
For if you love them that love you, what reward shall you have? Do not the
Publicans likewise? And if you speak well only of them, that be your brethren
and derebeloued friends, what great matter is that? Do not the Heathen the same
also? These be the very words of our savior Christ himself, touching the love
of our neighbor. And for as much as the Phariseis (with their most pestilente
tradicions, false interpretacions and gloses) had corrupted, and almost clearly
stopped up, this pure well of Gods lively word, teaching, that this love and
charity perteyned only to a man's friends, and that it was sufficient for a
man to love them, which do love him, and to hate his fooes: therefore Christ
opened this well again, pourged it, and scoured it, by geuyng unto his Godly
law of charity, a true and clear interpretacion, which is this: that we ought
to love every man, both friend and fooe, addyng thereto, what commodity we
shall have thereby, and what inco^moditie by doing the contrary. What thing can
we wish so good for us, as the eternal heavenly father to repute and take us
for his children? And this shall we be sure of (says Christ) if we love every
man without exception. And if we do otherwise (says he) we be no better
then the Phariseis, Publicans, and Heathen, and shall have our reward with
them, that is, to be excluded from the number of Gods elect children, and from
his everlasting inheritance in heaven.

Thus of true Charity, Christ taught, that every man is bound to love God
above all things, and to love every man, friend and fooe. And thus likewise he
did use himself, exhorting his adversaries, rebukynge the faults of his
adversaries, and when he could not amend them, yet he prayed for them. First
he loved God his father abouee all things: so much that he sought not his
own glory and will, but the glory and will of his father. Ihon. v.
I seek not (said he) mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. Nor he
refused not to dye, to satisfy his fathers will saying: Mat. xxvi.
if it may be, let this cup of death go from me, if not, thy will be done,
and not mine. He loved not only his friends, but also his enemies, which (in
their hearts) bare exceeding great hatred against him, and in their tongues
spoke all evil of him, and in their acts and deeds pursued him, with all
their might and power, even unto death. Yet all this notwithstanding, he
withdrewe not his favor from them, but still loved them, preached unto them,
of love, rebuked their false doctrine, their wicked living, and did good unto
them, patiently accepting whatsoever they spoke, or did against him. When they
gave him evil words, he gave none evil again: when they did stryke him, he
did not smite again: and when he suffered death, he did not sle them, nor
threaten them, but prayed for them, and referred all things to his fathers
will. And as a sheep that is led unto the shambles to be slain, Esai. iiii.
Acte^. viii
and as a lamb yt is shorn of his fleese, make no noise nor resiste^ce: eue^
so went he unto his death, without any repugnaunce, or opening of his mouth,
to say any evil.

Thus have I described unto you, what charity is, as well by ye doctrine, as by
the example of Christ himself. Whereby also every man may, without error, know
himself, what state and condition he stands in, whether he be in Charity,
(and so the child of the father in heaven) or not. For, although almost every
man persuades himself to be in charity, yet let him examine none other man,
but his own heart his life and conversation, and he shall not be deceived, but
truly decerne and judge, whether he be in perfect charity or not. For he that
follows not his own appetite and will, but gives himself earnestly to God to
do al his will and commandments, he may be sure that he loves God above all
things, and else surely he loves him not, whatsoever he pretend: as Christ
said, if ye love me, keep my commandments. For he that knows my
commandments, Ihon. xliii.
and keeps the^ he it is (said Christ) yt loves me. And again he says, he
that loves me, will keep my word, and my father will love him, and we will
both come to him, and dwell with him. And he that loves me not, will not keep
my words. And likewise, he that bears good heart and mind, and uses well his
tongue and deeds unto every man, friend and foo, he may know thereby, yt he has
charity. And then he is sure also, yt almighty God takes him for his dear
beloved son, as s. Ihon says: i. Ihon. iiii.
hereby manifestly are known the children of God, from the children of the
devil: for whosoever does not love his brother, belongs not unto god.

But the perverse nature of man, corrupt with sin, and destitute of Gods word
and grace, Against carnal men, that will not forg^ue their enemies.
thinks it against al reason, that a man should love his enemy, and has many
persuasions, which induce him to the contrary. Against all which reasons, we
ought as well to set the teaching, as the living of our savior Christ, who loving
us (when we were his enemies) does teach us to love our enemies. He did
pacientely take for us, many reproaches, suffered beatyng, and most cruel
death. Therefore we be no members of him, if we will not follow him. Christ
(says s. Peter) suffered for us, ^. Pet. ii.
leauyng an example, that we should follow him.

Furthermore, we must consider, that to love our friends, is no more but that,
which thiefes, adulterers, homicides, and al wicked persons do: in so much
that Jews, Turks, Infidels, and all brute beasts, do love them that be their
friends, of who^ they have their living, or any other benefits. But to love
enemies, is the proper condition only of the^, that be the children of God,
the disciples and folowers of Christ. Notwithstanding, man's froward and
corrupt nature, weighs over depely many times, the offense and displeasure
done unto him by enemies, and thinks it a burden intolerable, to be bound
to love them, that hate him. But the burden should be easy enough, if (on the
otherside) every man would consider, what displeasure he has done to his
enemy again, and what pleasure he has received of his enemy. And if we find
no equal reco^pense, neither in receiving pleasures of our enemy, nor in
renderyng displeasures unto him again: then let us po^dre the displeasures,
which we have done against almightye God, how often, and how grievously we have
offended him. Whereof, if we will have of God forgiveness, there is none other
remedy, but to forgive the offenses done unto us, which be very small in
comparison of our offenses done against God.

And if we considre, that he, which has offended us, deserves not to be
forgeuen of us, let us consider again, that we much less deserve to be
forgiven of God. And although our enemy deserve not to be forgeuen for his own
sake, yet we ought to forgive him for Gods love, considering how great and many
benefits we have received of him, without our deserts, and that Christ has
deserved of us* yt for his sake we should forgive the^ their trespasses
committed against us. A question.
But here may rise a necessary question to be dissolved: if charity require to
think, speak, and do well unto every man, both good and evil: how can
magistrates execute justice upon malefactors with charity? How can they cast
evil men in prison, take away their gooddes, and sometime their life's,
according to laws, if charity will not suffer the^ so to do.

Hereunto is a plain and a brief answer: An answer
that plagues and punishments be not evil of them selfs, if they be well
taken of innoce^tes. And to an evil man they are both good and necessary, and
may be executed, according to charity, Charity has two offices.
and with charity should be executed. For declaracion whereof, you shall
understand, ye charity has.ii. offices: the one contrary to ye other, and yet
both necessary to be used upon me^ of contrary sort, and disposicio^. The one
office of charity is, to cherish good and innocent me^, not to oppress the^
with false accusacio^s, but to encorage the^ with rewards to do well and to
persevere in well doing, defendyng them with the swourd from their adversaries.
And the office of Bishops and Pastors, is to praise good men for well doing,
that they may persevere therein, and to rebuke and correct by the word of God,
the offenses and crimes of all evil disposed persons. For the other office of
charity is, to rebuke, correct, and punish vice, without acceptacion of
persons, and this to be used against the^ only, that be evil men and
malefactors. And that it is as well the office of charity, to rebuke, punysh,
and correct them that be evil, as it is, to cherishe and reward them that be
good and innocent: S. Paul declares, (writing to the To.) saying: Roma. xiii.
that the high powers are ordained of God, not to be dreadful to them that do
well, but unto malefactors, to draw the swourd, to take vengeance of him that
commits the sin. And S. Paul bids Timothe, ^* Timo. v.
constantly and vehemently, to rebuke sin, by the word of God. So that
both offices should be diligently executed, to impugn the kingdom of the
devil: the preacher with the word, and the governor with ye swourde: Else they
love neither God, nor the^ whom they govern, if (for lack of correccion) they
wilfully suffer God to be offended, and the^ whom they govern, to perish. For
as every loving father corrects his natural son, when he does amiss, or
else he loves him not: so all governors of realms, countries, towns, and
houses, should lovingly correct them, which be offenders under their
governance, and cherish them, which live innocently, if they have any respect,
either unto God and their office, or love unto them, of who^ they have
governance. And such rebukes and punishementes of them that offend, must be
done in due time, least by delay, the offenders fall hedlynges into al manner of
mischief, and not only be evil themselfes, but also do hurt unto many me^,
drawyng other by their evil example, to sin and outrage after them. As one
thief may both rob many men, and also make many thefes, and one sedicious
person may allure many, and noye a whole town or country. And such evil
persons that be so great offenders of God, and the commonweal charity
requires to be cut of from the body of the commonweal, lest they corrupt
other good and honest persons: like as a good surgio^ cutteth away a putrified,
and festered membre, for love he has to the whoole body, least it infect other
members adjoining to it. Thus it is declared unto you, what true charity or
christian love is, so plainly yt no man need to be deceived. Which love,
whosoever keeps, not only toward God (who^ he is bound to love above al
things) but also toward his neighbor, as well fre^d as foe, it shall surely
keep him from al offense of God, and just offense of man. Therefore bear well
away this one short lesson, yt by true christian charity, God ought to be
loved above all things, and all men ought to be loved, good and evil, friend
and foo, and to all such, we ought (as we may) to do good: those that be
good, of love to encourage and cherish, because they be good, and those that be
evil, of love, to procure their correction and due punishment, that they may
thereby, either be brought to goodness, or at the least, yt God and the common
wealth may be the less hurt and offended. And if we thus direct our life, by
christian love and charity, then Christ does promise, and assure us, that he
loves us, that we be the children of our heavenly father, reconciled to his
favor, very members of Christ, and that after this short time of this present
and mortal life, we shall have with him eternal life in his everlasting
kingdom of heaven: therefore to him with the father and the holy ghost, be al
honor and glory, now and ever. Amen.

Against swearyng and perjury.
Almighty God to the intent his most holy name should be had in honor, and
evermore be magnified of the people, commands that no man should take his
name vainly in his mouth, threatenyng punishmente unto him that irreverently
abuses it, by swearyng, forswearyng, and blasphemy. To the intent therefore,
that this commandment may be the better known and kept: it shall be
declared unto you, both how it is lawful for christian people to swear, and
also what peril and danger it is, vainly to swear, or to be forsworn.
First, when Judges require oaths of the people, How and in what causes it is
lawefull* to swear
for declaracion of the truth, or for execucion of justice, this manner of
swearynge is lawful. Also when men make faithful promises with attestacion of
the name of God, to observe couenau^tes, honest promises, statutes, laws, and
good customs: as Christian princes do in their conclusio^s of peace, for
conseruacion of common wealths: and private persons, promise their fidelity
in Matrimony, or one to another in honest and true frendshippe: and al men,
when they do swear to keep common laws, or local statutes and good customs,
for due order to be had and continued among men: when subjects do swear to be
true and faythefull to their King and souereygne Lord: and when Judges,
Magistrates, and officers swear, truly to execute their offices: and when a
man would affirm the truth, to the setting furthe of Gods glory (for the
salvation of the people) in open preaching of the Gospel, or in geuyng of
good counsayll, privately for their souls health. All these manner of
swearynges, for causes necessary and honest, be lawful. But when men do swear
of custom, in reasonynge, biyng, and selling, or other daily communicacion
(as many be common and great swearers) such kind of swearyng is ungodly,
unlawful, and prohibited by the commandment of God. For such swearyng is
nothing else, but taking of Gods holy name in vayn. And here is to be noted,
that lawful swearynge is not forbidden, but commanded of almighty God. For
we have examples of Christ, and Godly men in holy scripture, that did swear
themselfes, and required oaths of other likewise. And Gods commandment is:
Deuter. vi.
Thou shalt dread thy Lord God, and shall swear by his name. Psalm. lxii.
And almighty God by his prophet David says: all men shall be praised, that
swear by him.

Thus did our savior Christ swear diverse times, saying: verily verily.
Ihon. iii. ii. Cor. i. Gene. xxiii^.
And S. Paul swears thus: I call God to witness. And Abraham (waxyng old)
required an oath of his servant, that he should procure a wife for his son
Isaac, which should come of his own kyndred: and the servant did swear that
he would perform his Masters will. Abraham also being required, Gene. xxi.
did swear unto Abimelech, the king of Geraris, that he should not hurt him,
nor his posterity. And so likewise did Abimelech swear unto Abraham. And
David did swear, to be, and continue a faithful friend to Ionathas: and
Ionathas did swear to become a faithful friend unto David.

Also, God once commanded, that if a thing were laid to pledge to any man,
or left with him to keep, if the same thing were stolen, or lost, that the keeper
thereof, should be sworn before Judges, that he did not co^uey it away, nor
used any deceit, in causyng the same to be conveyed away, by his consent or
knowledge. Hebre. vi.
And s. Paul says: that in all matters of controversy between two persons,
whereas one says yea, and the other nay, so as no due proof can be had of the
truth, the end of every such controversy must be an oath ministered by a
Judge. And moreover, Hier. iiii.
God by the prophet Jeremy says: thou shall swear the Lord lives, in truth,
in judgment, in righteousness. So that whosoever swears when he is required
of a Judge, let him be sure in his conscience, that his oath have these three
conditions, and he shall never need to be afraied of perjury.

What co^dicions a lawful oath ought to have.

The ^irste.


First he that swears, must swear truly, that is, he must (secludynge all
favor and affeccion to the parties) have the truth only before his eyes, and
for love thereof, say and speak that, which he knows to be truth, The
second
and no further. The second is: he that takes an oath, must do it with
judgment, not rasshely and unadvisedly, but soberly, considering what an
oath is, The third
The third is: he that swears, must swear in righteousness, that is, for
the very zeal and love, which he bears to the defense of innocence, to the
maintenance of the truth, and to ye righteousness of the matter or cause: all
profit, disprofite, all love and favor unto the person, for friendship or
kyndred, laid a part. Thus an oath (if it have with it these three conditions)
is a part of Gods glory, Why we be willed i^ scripture to swear by the name
of God.
which we are bound by his commandment, to give unto him. For he wills
that we shall swear only by his name: not that he has pleasure in our
oaths, but like as he commanded the Jews to offer sacrifices unto him, not
for any delight that he had in them, but to keep the Jews from committyng of
Idolatry: so he commau^dyng us to swear by his holy name, does not teach us,
that he delights in swearyng, but he thereby forbids all men to give his
glory to any creature in heaven, earth, or water. Hitherto you se, Esaie.
xlii. Psalm. ^l.
that oaths lawful, are commanded of God, used of Patriarchs and Prophets,
of Christ himself, and of his Apostle Paul. Commodities had by laweful oaths
made and observed.
Therefore Christian people must think lawful oaths, both godly and
necessary. For lawful promises and couenauntes confirmed by by oaths, Princes
and their countries are confirmed in common tranquillity and peace. By holy
promises, with attestacion of Gods name, we be made lively me^bres of Christ,
when we profess his Religion, receiuyng the sacrament of baptism. By like
holy promise, the sacrament of matrimony, knitteth man and wife, in perpetual
love, that they desire not to be separated, for any displeasure or adversity,
that shall after happen.

By lawful oaths, which Kings, Princes, Judges, and Magistrates do swear,
common laws are kept inuiolate, Justice is indifferently ministered, innocent
persons, orphans, widows, and poor men, are defended, from murderers,
oppressors, and thiefes, that they suffer no wrong, nor take any harm. By
lawful oaths, mutual society, amity, and good order, is kept continually
in all commonalties, as boroughes, citees, tounes, and villages. And by lawful
oaths, malefactors are searched out, wrong doers are punished, and they which
sustein wrong, are restored to their right. Therefore, lawful swearyng cannot
be evil, which brings unto us, so many Godly, good, and necessary
commodities. Uain swearyng is forbidden.
Wherefore, when Christ so earnestly forbad swearyng, it may not so be
understood, as though he did forbid all manner of oaths: but he forbids all
vain swearyng, and forswearyng, both by god, and by his creatures, as the
common use of swearyng, in biyng, sellyng, and in our daily communicacion, to
the intent every Christian man's word, should be as well regarded in such
matters, as if he should confirm his communicacion with an oath. For every
Christian man's word (says saint Hierome) should be so true, that it
should be regarded as an oath. And Chrysostom witnessyng the same, says: It
is not convenient to swear, for what needs us to swear, when it is not
lawful for one of us, An obieccion.
to make a lie unto another. Peradventure some will say: I am compelled to
swear, for else men that do common with me, or do bye and sell with me, An
answer.
will not believe me. To this answers. S Chrysostom, that he that thus
says, shows himself to be an unjust, and a deceiptfull person: for if he
were a trusty man, and his deeds taken to agree with his words, he should not
need to swear at al. For he that uses truth and plainness in his bargainyng
and communicacion, he shall have no need by such vain swearyng, to bring himself
in crede^ce with his neighbors, nor his neighbors will not mistruste his
sayings. And if his credence be so much lost in deed, that he thinks no
man will believe him, without he swear, then he may well think, his credence
is clean gone, For truth it is (as Theophilactus writes) that no man is
less trusted, then he, that uses much to swear. And almighty God, by the
wiseman says: Eccle. xxxiii.
that man which swears much, shall be full of sin, and the scourge of God,
shall not depart from his house.

But here some men will say, Another obieccion.
for excusing of their many oaths in their daily talk, why should I not
swear, when I swear truly* An answer
To such men it may be said: that though they swear truly, yet in swearyng
often, unadvisedly, for trifles, without necessity, and when they should not
swear, they be not without fault, but do take Gods most holy name in vain.
Much more ungodly and unwise men, are they, that abuse Gods most holy name,
not only in biyng and sellyng of small things daily in all places, but also
eating, drinkyng, plaiyng, co^monyng, and reasonyng. As if none of these
things might be dooen, except in doing of them, the most holy name of God
be commonly used, and abused vainly, and vnreuerentely talked of, sworn by and
forsworn, to the breakyng of Gods commandment and procurement of his
indignacion. And as well they use the name of GOD in vain, that by an oath make
lawful promises of good and honest things, and perform the^ not, as they,
which do promise evil and unlawful things, and do perform the same. Of such
men that regard not their godly promises confirmed by an oath, Lawful oaths and
promises would be better regarded. Iosue. ix.
but wittyngly and wilfully breaks them, we do read in holy scripture two
notable punishementes. First, Iosue and the people of Israel made a league,
and faithful promise of perpetual amity and frendshippe with the Gabaonites:
notwithstanding, afterward in the days of wicked Saul, many of these
Gabaonites were murdered, contrary to thesaid faithful promise made. Wherewith,
almighty God was so sore displeased, that he sent an universal famyne, upon
the whole country, which continued by the space of three years. And GOD would
not withdraw his punishment, until thesaied offense was revenged, by the
death of vii. sons, or next kinsmen, of king Saul. ^. Regum. xi.
Also, whereas Sedechias, king of Jerusalem, had promised fidelity, to the
king of Chaldea: afterward, when Sedechias, contrary to his oath and
allegeaunce, did rebel against king Nabugodonosor: this Heathen King, by Gods
permission, inuadyng the land of Iewry, and besiegyng the city of Jerusalem,
compelled thesaied king Sedechias to flee, and in fleyng, took him prisoner,
slew his sons before his face, and put out both his iyes, and bindyng him
with cheines, led him prisoner miserably into Babylon.

Thus does GOD show plainly, how much he abhors breakers of honest
promises, Unlawful oaths and promises are not to be kept.
confirmed by an oath made in his name. And of the^ that make wicked promises
by an oath, and will perform the same: we have example in the scripture,
chiefly of Herod, of the wicked Jews, and of Iephthah. Herod promised by an
oath unto the dam^sel, Matthew. xiiii.
which daunsed before him, to give unto her, whatsoever she should ask, when
she was instucted before, of her wicked mother, to ask the hedde of saint
Iho^ Baptist. Herod, as he took a wicked oath, so he more wickedly performed
the same, and cruelly slew the most holy Prophet. Likewise did the malicious
Jews make an oath, cursyng themselfes, if they did either eat or drink,
until they had slain.s. Paul. Acts. xxiii. Iudicum. xi.
And Iephthah, when God had given to him victory, of the children of Ammon,
promised of a foolish devotion unto GOD, to offer for a sacrifice unto him,
that person, which of his own house should first meet with him, after his
return home. By force of which fond and unadvised oath, he did sle his own
and only daughter, which came out of his house, with mirthe and joy, to
welcome him home. Thus the promise, which he made most foolishly to God,
against Gods eternal will, and the law of nature, most cruelly he performed,
so committyng against God, double offense. Therefore, whosoever makes any
promise, bindyng himself thereunto by an oath, let him forese, that the thing
which he promises, be good, honest, and not against the commandment of
GOD, and that it be in his own power, to perform it justly. And such good
promises must all men keep, evermore assuredly. But if a man at any time
shall, either of ignorance, or of malice, promise and swear, to do any thing,
which is either against the law of almighty God, or not in his power to
perform: let him take it, for an unlawful and ungodly oath.

Now some thing to speak of perjury, Against perjury.
to the intent into the house of the false man, and into the house of the
perjured man, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and consume him,
the timber, and stones of his house. Thus you se, how much God does hate
perjury, and what punishment God has prepared for false swearers, and
perjured persons.

Thus you have heard, how, and in what causes, it is lawful for a Christian
man to swear: ye have heard, what properties, and conditions, a lawful oath
must have, and also how such lawful oaths are both Godly, and necessary to
be observed: ye have heard, that it is not lawful to swear vainly, (that is)
other ways, then in such causes, and after such sort, as is declared: and
finally, ye have heard how da^pnable a thing it is, either to forswear our
selfs, or to keep an unlawful and an unadvised oath. Wherefore, let us
earnestly call for grace, that all vain swearyng and perjury set apart, we
may only use such oaths, as be lawful and godly, and that we may truly,
without al fraud, observe the same, according to Gods will and pleasure. To
who^ with the son and holy Ghost, be all honor and glory. AMEN.

A Sermon, how dangerous a thing it is, to declyne from God.
OF our going from God, the Wyseman says, Eccle. x.
that pride was the first beginning: for by it ma^s heart was turned from god
his maker. For pride (says he) is the fou^tain of all sin, he yt has it,
shall be full of cursings, and at the end, it shall overthrow him. And, as by
Pride and sin, we go from God, so shall God and al goodness with him, go from
us. And the prophet Ozee does plainlye affirm: Ozee. v
that they which go away still from God, by vicious living, and yet would go
about to pacifye him otherwise, by sacrifice, and enterteigne him thereby, they
labor in vayn. For, notwithstanding al their sacrifice, yet he goes still
away from them. For so much (says ye Prophet) as they do no apply their
minds, to return to god, although they go about with whole flocks and
herdes, to seek the Lord: yet they shall not find him, for he is gone away
from the^. But as touching our turnyng to god, or from god: you shall
understand, that it may be done diverse ways. Some times directly by
Idolatrye, as Israel and Judah then did: some times men go from God, by lack of
faith, and mistrustyng of God, whereof Esaie speaks in this wise: Woe to them
that go down into Egypt, to seek for healp, Esaie. xxxi.
trustyng in horses, and having confidence in the number of chariottes, and
puissaunce of horsemen. They have no confidence in the holy God of Israel, nor
seek for the Lord: But what follows? The Lord shall let his hand fall upon
them, and down shall come, both the healper, and he that is helped. They
shall be destroyed altogether.

Some time men go from God, by the neglectyng of his commandments,
concerning their neighbors, which commands them to express hartye love
toward every man, Zacha. vii.
as Zachary said unto the people in gods behalf: Give true judgment, show
mercy and compassion every one to his brother: Ymagen to deceit toward
widows, or children fatherles and motherles, toward stranger or the poor:
let no man forge evil in his heart, against his brother. But these things
they passed not of, they turned their backs, and went their way, they stopped
their ears, that they might not hear, they hardened their hearts, as an
Adamant stone, yt they might not lysten, to the law and the words, that the
Lord had sent through his holy spirit, by his ancient Prophets. Wherefore
the Lord showed his great indignacion upon them: It came to pass (says the
Prophet) even as I told them: Hier. vii.
as they would not hear, so when they cried, they were not heard, but were
dispersed into all kingdoms, which they never knew: and their land was made
desolate. And to be short, all they, that may not abide ye word of God, but
following the perswasio^s, and stubbernes of their own hattes, go backewarde,
and not forward (as it is said in Jeremy) they go and turn away from God.
Hiere. vii. Orige. super Exodi. homi. xii.
In so much that Origene says: He that with mind, with study, with deeds,
with thought and care, applies himself to Gods word, and thinks upon his
laws, day and night, gives himself wholly to God, and in his precepts and
commandments is exercised: this is he, that is turned to God. And on the
other part (he says): Whosoever is occupied with fables and tales, when ye
word of god is rehearsed: he is turned from God. Whosoever in time of readi^g
Gods word, is careful in his mind, of worldly business, of money, or of lucre:
he is turned from God. Whosoever is enta^gled with ye cares of possessions,
filled with coueteousnes of riches: whosoever studieth, for the glory and honor
of this world, he is turned from God. So that after his mind, whosoever has
not a special mind to that thing that is commanded, or taught of God: he
that does not listen unto it, embrace and print it in his heart, to the intent,
that he may duly fashion his life thereafter, he is plainly turned from god,
although he do other things of his own devotion and mind, which to him seem
better, and more to gods honor. Which thing to be true, we be taught and
admonyshed in ye holy scripture, by ye example of King Saul, who being
commanded of god by Samuel, i. Regum. xv.
that he should kill all the Amalechites, and destroy them clearly with their
goods, and cattals: Yet, he being moved, partly with pity, and partly (as
be thought) with devotion unto god, saved Agag their King, and all the chief of
their cattail, therewith to make sacrifice unto god. Wherwithal god being
displeased highly, said unto the prophet Samuel: I repent, that ever I made
Saul a king, for he has forsaken me, and not followed my words: and so he
commanded Samuel to show him. And when Samuel asked, wherefore (contrary to
Gods word) he had saved the cattail: he excused the matter, partly by fear,
saiynge he durst do none other, for that the people would have it so: partly,
for that they were goodly beasts, he thought God would be content, seeing it
was done of a good intent and devotion, to honor God, with the sacrifice of
them.

But Samuel, reprouyng all such intentes and deuocions (seem they never so
much to Gods honor, if they stand not with his word, whereby we may be
assured of his pleasure) said in this wise: Would God have sacrifices and
offeringes? or rather that his word should be obeyed? To obey him, is better
then offerynges, and to listen to him, is better then to offer the fat of
Rams: Yea, to repine against his voice, is as evil as the sin of
diuinacion, and not to agree to it, is like abominable ydolatry. And now,
forasmuch as thou have cast away the word of the Lord, he has cast away
the, that thou should not be King.

By all these examples of holy scripture, we may know, that as we forsake
God: so shall he ever forsake us. The turnyng of God from man.
And what miserable state does consequently and necessariely follow thereupon, a
man may easily consider, by the terrible threatenynges of God. And although,
he considre not all the said misery, to the uttermost, being so great, that it
passes any man's capacity, in this life sufficiently to co^sydre the same: yet
he shall soon perceive so much thereof, that if his heart be not more then stony,
or harder then the Adamant, he shall fear, tremble and quake, to call the same
to his remembrance.

First the displeasure of God toward us, is commonly expressed in the
scripture, by these two things: by showing his fearful countenance upon
us, and by turnyng his face, or hiding it from us. By showing his dreadful
countenance, is signified his great wrath, but by turnynge his face or hidinge
thereof, is many times more signified, that is to say: that he clearly
forsakes us, and gives us over. The which significacions be taken of ye
properties of men's manners: For men toward them, whom they favor, commonly
bear, a good, a cheerful, and a loving countenance: so that by the face or
countenance of a man, it does commonly appear, what will or mind he bears
toward other. So, when God does show his dreadful countenance toward us;
that is to say, does send dreadful plagues, of sword, famyne, or pestilence
upon us, it appears; that he is greatly wroth with us. But when he withdraws
from us his word, the right doctrine of Christ, his gracious assistence and
aid, (which is ever joined to his word) and leaves us to our own wit, our
own will and strength: he declares then, that he begins to forsake us. For
where as God has showed to all them, that truly believe his Gospel, his face
of mercy in Jesus christ, which does so lighten their hearts, that they (if
they behold it, as they ought to do) be transformed to his Image, be made
partakers of the heavenly light, and of his holy spirit, and be fashioned to
him, in all goodness, requisite to the children of God: so, if they after do
neglecte the same, if they be unthankful unto him, if they order not their
lyfes, according to his example and doctrine, and to the setting forth of his
glory, he will take away from them his kingdom, his holy word, whereby he
should reign in the^, because they bring not forth the fruit thereof, that he
looks for. Nevertheless, he is so merciful, and of so long sufferau^ce, that
he does not show upon us, that great wrath suddenly. But when we begin to
shrink from his word, not believing it, or not expressing it in our liuinges:
first he does send his messengers, ye true preachers of his word, to
admonish us of our duty, that as he for his part for ye great love he bare
unto us, delivered his awn son to suffer death, that we, by his death, might
be delivered from death, and be restored to the life eternal, evermore to dwell
with him, and to be partakers, and inheritors with him, of his everlasting
glory, and kingdom of heaven: so again, that we for our parts, should walk
in a godly life, as becomes his children to do. And if this will not serve,
but still we remain disobedient to his word and will, not knowing him, not
loving him, not fearing him, not puttyng our whole trust and confidence in him:
and on the otherside, to our neighbors behauing us uncharitably, by disdain,
envy, malice, or by co^mittyng murder, robbery, adultry, gluttony, deceit,
liyng, swearyng, or other like detestable works, and ungodly behauioure: then
he threateneth us by terryble co^minacions, Hebre iiii. Psalm. xcv.
swearynge in great angree, that whosoever does these works, shall never
enter into his rest, which is the kingdom of heaven.

Now, if this gentle monicion and comminacion together, do not serve, then god
will show his terrible countenance upon us, he will power intolerable
plagues upon our hedes, and after, he will take away from us, all his aid and
assistence, wherewith before he did defend us, from all such manner of calamity.
As the Eua^gelical prophet Esaye, Esaie. v.
agreyng with Christ's parable, does teach us, saying: Matthew. xxi.
That God had made a goodly vineyarde, for his beloved children: he hedged it,
he walled it round about, he planted it with chosen vynes, and made a Turret
in the mids thereof, and therein also a wine press. And when he looked, that
it should bring him forth good grapes, it brought forth wild grapes: and after
it follows: Now shall I show you, (says God) what I will do with my
vyneyarde. I will pluck down the hedges, that it may perysh: I will break
down the walls, that it may be trode^ under foot: I will let it lie wast, it
shall not be cut, it shall not be didged, but briers and thorns shall
ouergrowe it, and I shall command the clouds, that they shall no more rain
upon it.

By these threatenynges we are monyshed, yt if we, which are the chosen
vyneyarde of God, bring not forth good grapes, yt is to say, good works, yt
may be delectable, and pleasant in his sight, when he looks for the^, when he
sends his messengers, to call upon us for the^, but rather bring forth wyld
grapes, yt is to say, sower works, vnswete, unsavory and vnfruictfull: the^
will he pluck away all defense, and suffer grievous plagues of famyne, and
battle, dearth and death, to light upon us. Finally, if these do not yet
serve, he will let us lie wast, he will give us over, he will turn away from us,
he will dygge and delue no more about us, he will let us alone, and suffer us
to bring furthe, even such fruit as we will, to bring forth, bra^bles, briars,
and thorns, all naughtynes, all vice, and that so abundantlye, that they shall
clean ouergrow us, suffocate, strangle, and utterly destroy us. But they,
that in this world, live not after god (but after their own carnal liberty)
perceive not this great wrath of god toward them, that he will not dygge,
nor delue any more about them, that he does let them alone even to them
selfs. But they take this for a great benefit of god, to have all their own
liberty: and so they live, as carnal liberty were the true liberty of the
Gospel. But god forbid (good people) that ever we should desire such
liberty. For although, god suffer sometimes ye wicked, to have their pleasure
in this world: yet the end of ungodly living, is at length eternal destruction.

Nume. x^.
The murmuryng Israelites, had that they longed for: they had quayles enough,
yea, til they were weary of the^. But what was ye end thereof: their sweet meat
had sour sauce: eue^ whiles the meat was in their mouths, ye plague of God
lighted upon the^, and suddenly they died. So, if we live ungodly, and God
suffers us to follow our own wylles, to have our own delights and
pleasures, and corrects us not with some plague, it is no doubt, but he is
almost utterly displeased with us. And although it be long or he strike, yet many
times, when he strikes such persons, he strikes the^ at once, for ever. So,
yt when he does not stryke us, when he cease to afflict us, to punysh or
beat us, and suffers us to ru^ne hedlinges into al ungodliness, and pleasures
of this world, yt we delight in without punyshme^t and adversity, it is a
dreadful toke^ loves us no le^ger, that he cares no longer for us, but has
given us over, to our own selfs.

As long as a man does proyne his vines, does dig at the roots, and doeh
lay freashe earth to them, he has a mind to them, he perceives some
toke^ of fruitfulnes that may be recovered in them: but when he will bestow no
more such cost and labor about them, then it is a sign that he thinks,
they will never be good. And the father, as long as he loves his child, he
looks angrely, he corrects him when he does amiss: but when that serves
not, and upon that he cease from correction of him and suffers him to do
what he list himself, it is a sign, that he intends to disinherite him, and
to cast him away for ever. So surely, nothing should perce our heart so sore,
and put us in such horrible fear, as when we know in our conscience, that
we have grievously offended God, and do so continue, and that yet he strikes
not, but quietely suffers us in the naughtines that we have delight in. Then
specially it is time to cry, and to cry again, as David did: Cast me not
away from thy face, and take not away thy holy spirit from me. Psalm. i. Psalm.
xxvi.
Lord turn not away thy face from me, cast not thy servant away in
displeasure. Hide not thy face from me, least I be like unto them, that go
down to hell. Psalm. cxlii.
The which lamentable prayers of him, as they do certify us, what horrible
danger they be in, from whom God turns his face, (for that time, and as long
as he so does) so should they move us, to cry upon God, with all our heart,
that we may not be brought into that state, which doubtless, is so sorrowful,
so miserable, and so dreadful as no toungue can sufficiently express or any
heart can think.

For what deadly grief may a man suppose it is, to be under the wrath of God,
to be forsaken of him, to have his holy spirit, the aucthor of all goodness,
to be taken from him, to be brought to so vile a condition, that he shall be left
mete for no better purpose, then to be for ever, condemned to hell. For not
only such places of David do show, that upon ye turnyng of Gods face from any
persons, they shall be left bare from al goodness, and far from hope of remedy:
but also the place, recited last before of Esaie, does mean the same, which
shows, that God at length does so forsake his unfruitful vineyard, that he
will not only suffer it, to bring forth wedes, breirs, and thorns, but also,
further to punish the unfruitfulness of it, he says: he will not cut it, he
will not delue it, and he will command the clouds, that they shall not rain
upon it, whereby is signified, the teaching of his holy word: which saint
Paul, after a like manner, expresses by plantyng and wateryng, meaning, that
he will take that away from them. So that they shall be no longer of his
kingdom, they shall be no longer governed by his holy spirit: they shall be
frustrated of the grace and benefits, that they had, and ever might have
enjoyed through Christ. They shall be deprived of the heavenly light, and life,
which they had in Christ, whiles they abode in him. They shall be, i. Reg. xv.
(as they were once) as me^ without God in this world, or rather in worse
taking. And to be short, they shall be given into the power of the devil, which
bears the rule in all them, that be cast away from God, as he did in Saul
and Judas, and generally, in all such, as work after their own wills, the
children of diffidence and infidelity.

Let us beware therefore (good christian people) least that we, rejecting Gods
word, (by the which we obteyn and retin, true faith in GOD) be not at length
cast of so far, that we become as ye children of infidelity, which be of
two sorts, far diverse, yea, almost clean contrary, and yet both be very
far, from returnyng to God. The one sort, only waiyng their sinful, and
detestable living, with the right judgment and strayghtnes of Gods
ryghteousnes, be so destitute of counsel, and be so comfortles, (as all they
must needs be, from whom the spirit of counsel and comfort is gone) that they
will not be persuaded in their hearts, but that either God cannot, or else that
he will not take them again to his favor and mercy. The other, hearing the
loving and large promises of Gods mercy, and so not conceiuyng a right faith
thereof, make those promises larger, then ever God did: trusting, that although
they continue in their synful and detestable living never so long, yet that God
at the end of their life, will show his mercy upon them, and that then,
they will return. And both these two sorts of men, be in a dampnable state:
and yet nevertheless, God, Eze. xviii. And.xxxiii.
(who wills not the death of ye wicked) has showed means, whereby both
the same (if they take heed in ceaso^) may escape. The first, Against
desperacion.
as they do dread gods rightful justice in punishing sinners, (whereby they
should be dismayed and should despair in deed, as touching any hope that may be
in themselfes) so if they would constantly believe, that Gods mercy is the
remedy appointed against such despair and distrust, not only for them, but
generally for all that be sorry and truly repe^taunt, and will therewithal
stick to Gods mercy, they may be sure they shall obtein mercy, and enter
into the port or haven of sauegarde, into the which, whosoever does come, be
they before time never so wicked, they shall be out of danger of everlasting
dampnacion, Eze. xxxiii.
as God by Ezechiel says: what time soever the wicked does return, and take
earnest and true repentance, I will forget all his wickedness.

Against presumpcion.
The other, as they be ready to believe Gods promises, so they should be as ready
to believe the threatenynges of god: as well they should believe the law as the
Gospel: as well that there is an hell and everlasting fire, as that there is an
heaven, and everlasting joy: as well they should believe dampnacion, to be
threatened to the wicked and evil doers, as salvation to be promised to the
faithful in word and works: as well they should believe, God to be true, in
the one, as in the other. And the sinners, that continue in their wicked
^iuyng, ought to think, that the promises of Gods mercy and the Gospel,
perteyn not unto them, being in that state, but only the law, and those
scriptures, which conteyne the wrath, and indignacion of God, and his
threatenynges, which should certifye them, that as they do over boldly presume
of gods mercy, and live dissolutely, so does God still more and more withdraw
his mercy from them, and he is so provoked thereby to wrath at lenght, that
he destroys such presumers many times suddenly. For of such, saint Paul
said thus: when they shall say, it is peace, i. Thessa. v.
there is no danger, then shall sodayn destruction come upon them. Let us
beware therefore, of such naughty boldness to sin: for God, which has
promised his mercy to them, that be truly repentaunte, (although it be at
the latter end) has not promised to the presumpteous sinner, either that he
shall have long life, or that he shall have true repentance at the last end.
But for that purpose, has he made every man's death uncertain, that he
should not put his hope in thend, and in the mean season (to Gods high
displeasure) live ungodly. Wherefore, let us follow the counsel of the
Wisema^: let us make no tariyng, to turn unto the lord: let us not put of,
from day to day, for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in time of vengeance,
he shall destroy the wicked. Let us therefore turn betymes, and when we turn,
let us pray to GOD, as Ozee teaches, saying: Forgive us all our sins,
Ozee. xiiii.
receive us graciously. And if we turn to him, with an humble and a very
penitent heart, he will receive us to his favor and grace, for his holy names
sake, for his promise sake, for his truth and mercies sake, promised to all
faithefull beleuers in Jesus Christ, his only natural son. To who^ the
only savior of the world, with the father and the holy ghost, be all honor,
glory, and power, world without end. Amen.

An exhortation against the fear of Death.
IT is not to be marueyled, that worldly men do fear to dye: For death
depriueth them of all worldly honors, riches, and possessions: in the fruition
whereof, the worldely man compteth himself happy, so long as he may enjoy
them at his own pleasure: and other wise, if he be dispossessed of the same,
without hope of recovery, then he can none other think of himself, but that he
is unhappy, because he has lost his worldely joy and pleasure. Alas
thinks this carnal man, shall I now depart for ever, from all my honors, all
my treasures, from my country, friends, riches, possessions, and worldly
pleasures, which are my joy and hearts delight? Alas that ever that day shall
come, when all these I must bid farewell at once, and never to enjoy any of
the^ after. Wherefore, it is not without great cause spoken of the wiseman:
Eccle* xli.
O death, how bitter and sower is the remembrance of thee, to a man that
lives in peace, and prosperity in his substance, to a man living at ease,
leading his life after his own mind, without trouble, and is therwithal well
pampered and fed? There be other men, whom this world does not so greatly laugh
upon, but rather vex and oppress with pouertye, sickness, or some other
adversity: Yet they do fear death, partly because the fleashe abhors
naturally his own sorrowful dissolucion, which death does threaten unto them,
and partly, by reason of sickenesses, and paynfull diseases, which be most
strong pangues and agonies in the flesh, and use commonly to come to sick
men, before death, or at the least, accompany death, whenever it comes.

Although these two causes some great and weighty to a worldly man, whereupon
he is moved to fear death, yet there is another cause much greater then any of
these before rehearsed, for which in deed, he has just cause to fear death:
and that is, the state and condition, whereunto at the last end, death brings
all them that have their hearts fixed upon this world, without repentance and
amendeme^t. This state and condition, is called the second death, which, unto
all such, shall ensue after this bodily death. And this is that death, which
in deed ought to be dread and feared: for it is an everlasting loss without
remedy, of the grace and favor of God, and of everlasting joy, pleasure, and
felicity. And it is not only the loss for ever of all these eternal
pleasures, but also it is the condempnacion, both of body and soul, (without
either appellacio^, or hope of redemption) unto everlasting pains in hell.
Unto this state death sent the unmercifully and ungodly richeman, Luke. xvi,
(that Luke speaks of, in his Gospel) who living in all wealth and pleasure
in this world, and cherishyng himself daily with dainty fare, and gorgeous
apparel, despiced poor Lazarus, that lay pitifully at his gate, miserably
plagued, and full of sores, and also grievously pined with hunger.

Both these two, were arrested of death, which sent Lazarus the poor
miserable man by angels anon unto Abraham's bosom: a place of rest, pleasure
and consolacion. But the unmerciful richman, descended down into hell, and
being in torments, he cried for comfort, complainyng of the intolerable pain
that he suffered in that flamme of fire, but it was to late. So unto this
place, bodily death sends all them, that in this world, have their joy and
felicite: all them, that in this world, be unfaithful unto God, and
uncharitable unto their neighbors, so diyng without repentance, and hope of
Gods mercy. Wherefore it is no marvel, that the worldly man fears death,
for he has much more cause so to do, then he himself does considre.

The first.
Thus we se three causes, why worldly men fear death. One, because they shall
lose thereby, their worldely honors, riches, possessions, and all their hearts
desires: The second
Another, because of the painful diseases, and bitter pangues, which commonly
men suffer, either before, or at the time of death: but the chief cause, above
al other, The third
is the dread of the miserable state, of eternal dampnacion both of body and
soul, which they fear, shall follow, after their departing out of the worldly
pleasures of this present life.

For these causes, be all mortal men, (which be given to the love of this
world) both in fear, and state of death, Hebre. ii.
through syn (as ye holy apostle says) so long as they live here in this
world. But (everlasting thanks be to almighty God for ever) there is never one
of al these causes, no, nor yet they altogether, that ca^ make a true Christian
man afraied to dye, (which is the very membre of Christ, i. Corin. iii.
the temple of the holy Ghost, the son of God* and the very inheritor of the
everlasting kingdom of heaven) but plainly contrary, he conceiueth great and
many causes, undoubtedly grounded upon the infallyble and everlasting truth of
the word of God, which move him, not only to put away the fear of bodiely
death, but also for the manifold benefits and singular commodities, which
ensue unto every faithful person, by reason of the same, to wish, desire, and
long heartily for it. For death shall be to him no death at all, but a very
deliverance from death, from all pains, cares, and sorrows, miseries, and
wretchedness of this world, and the very entry into rest, and a beginning of
everlasting joy, a tastyng of heavenly pleasures, so great, that neither
toungue is able to express, neither eye to se, nor ear to hear them, no, nor
for any earthly man's heart to conceive them. So exceeding great benefits they
be, which God our heavenly father by his mere mercy, and for the love of his
son Jesus Christ, has laid up in store, and prepared for them, that
humbly submit themselfes to Gods will, and evermore unfeignedly, love him, from
the botome of their hearts. And we ought to believe, that death being slain by
Christ, cannot keep any man, that steadfastly trusts in Christ, under his
perpetual tira^ny and subjection, but that he shall rise from death again
unto glory, at the last day, appointed by almighty God, like as Christ our
head, did rise again, according to Gods appoyntement, the third day. For
saint Augustine says: The head going before, the me^bres trust to follow,
and come after. And saint Paul says: if Christ be risen from the dead, we
shall rise also from the same. And to comfort all Christen persons herein,
holy scripture calls this bodiely death a sleep, wherein ma^s senses be (as
it were) taken, from him, for a ceason, and yet when he awaketh, he is more
freash, then he was when he went to bed. So, although we have our souls
separated from our bodies for a ceason, yet at the general resurreccion, we
shall be more freash, beautiful and perfect, then we be now. For now we be
mortal, then we shall be immortal, now infect with diverse infirmities, then
clearly void of all mortal infirmities: now we be subject to all carnal
desires, then we shall be al spiritual, desiryng nothing but Gods glory, and
things eternal. Thus is this bodiely death, a door, or entering unto life,
and therefore not so much dreadful, (if it be rightly considered) as it is
comfortable, not a mischief, but a remedy of all mischief, no enemy, but a
friend, not a cruel tyrau^t, but a gentle guide, leadyng us, not to mortality,
but to immortality, not to sorrow and pain, but to joy and pleasure, and that
to endure for ever, if it be thankefully taken and accepted, as Gods messenger,
and patiently borne of us, for Christ's love, that suffered most paynfull
death, for our love, to redeem us from death eternal. Roma. viii.
According hereunto, saint Paul says: our life is hid with Christ in
God, but when our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in
glory. Why then shall we fear to dye? considering the manifold, and
comfortable promises of the Gospel, and of holy scriptures? God the father
has given us everlasting life, (says S. Ihon) and this life in is his
son: Ihon. v^.
he that has the son, has life, and he that has not ye son, has not
life. Ihon. vi.
And this I wrote (says S. Ihon) to you, that believe in ye name of the son
of God, that you may know, that you have everlasting life, and that you do
believe upon the name of the son of God. And our savior Christ says: Ihon.
vi*
he that believes in me, has life everlasting, and I will raise him from
death to life, at the last day. i. Corin. ^.
Saint Paul also says: that Christ is ordained and made of God, our
righteousness, our holiness and redemption, to the intent that he, which will
glory, should glory in the Lord. Saint Paul did contemn, and set little by
all other things, estemynge them as dunge, which before he had in very great
price, that he might be found in Christ, to have everlasting life, true
holiness, righteousness and rede^pcion. Finally, Collos. iii.
S. Paul makes a plain argument in this wise: If our heavenly father would
not spare his own natural son, but did give him to death for us, how can it
be, that with him he should not give us all things? Therefore, if we have
Christ, then have we with him, and by him, all good things, whatsoever we can
in our hearts wish or desire: as victory over death, sin and hell: we have
the favor of God, peace with him, holiness, wisdom, justice, power, life, and
redemption: we have by him, perpetual health, wealth, joy, and bliss
everlasting.

All those therefore, have great cause to be full of joy, that be joined to
Christ with true faith, steadfast hope, and perfyt charity, and not to fear
death nor everlasting dampnacion. For death cannot deprive them of Jesus
Christ, nor any sin can co^dempne them, yt are graffed surely in him, which
is their only joy, treasure, and life. Let us repent our sins, amend our
lyfes, trust in his mercy and satisfaction, and death can neither take him from
us, nor us from him. For then, (as s. Paul says) whether we live or dye,
Roma. xiiii.
we be the Lords own. And again he says: Christ did dye, and rose again,
because he should be Lord, both of the dead and quick. Then if we be the
Lords own, when we be dead, it must needs follow, that such temporal
death, not only cannot harm us, but also, that it shall much be to our
profit, and join us unto God, more perfectly: And thereof the christian heart
may surely be certified by the infallible truth of holy scripture. It is God
(says saint Paul) which has prepared us unto immortality, and the same is
he, which has given us an earnest of the spirit. Therefore let us be always
of good comfort, for we know, that so long as we be in the body, we be (as
it were) far from God in a strange country, subject to many perils, walkyng
without perfect sight, and knowledge of almighty God, only seeing him by
faith, in holy scriptures. But we have a courage and desire, rather to be at
home with God and our savior Christ, far from the body, where we may
behold his Godhead, as he is, face to face, to our everlasting comfort. These
be saint Paul's words in effect, whereby we may perceive, that the life in
this world, is resembled to a pilgrimage, in a strange country far from God:
Hebre. xiii.
and that death, deliuerynge us from our bodies, does send us straight home,
into our own country, and makes us to dwell presently with God for ever, in
perpetual rest and quietness. So that to dye is no loss, but profit and
winnynge to all true christian people.

What lost the thief, that hanged on the cross with Christ by his bodiely
death? Yea, how much did he gain by it? Luke. xxiii.
Did not our savior say unto him, this day thou shall be with me in Paradyse?
And Lazarus, that pitiful person, Luke. xvi.
that lay before ye richemans gate, payned with sores, and pined with hungre,
did not death highlye profit and promote him? Which by the ministry of
Angels, sent him unto Abraha^s bosom, a place of rest, joy and heavenly
consolacion? Let us think none other, (good christen people) but Christ has
prepared the same joy, and felicity for us, that he prepared for Lazarus and
the thief. Wherefore, let us stick unto his salvation, and gracious redemption:
and believe his word, serve him from our hearts, love and obey him, and
whatsoever we have done heretofore contrary to his most holy will, now let us
repent in time, and hereafter study to correct our life, and doubt not, but we
shall find him as merciful unto us, as he was either to Lazarus, or to ye
thief: whose examples are written in holy scripture, for the comfort of the^,
that be sinners, and subject to sorrows, miseries, and calamities in this
world, that they should not despair in Gods mercy, but ever trust, thereby
to have forgiveness of their sins, and life everlasting, as Lazarus and the
thief had. Thus I trust every christen man, perceyueth by the infallible word
of God, that bodiely death cannot harm nor hinder them, that truly believe in
Christ, but contrary shall profit and promote the christen souls, which being
truly penitent for their offenses, depart hence in perfect charity, and in
sure trust, that God is merciful to the^, forgiuinge their sins, for the
merits of Jesus Christ, his only natural son.

The second cause, why some do fear death.
The second cause, why some do fear death, is sore sickness, and grievous
pains, which partly, come before death, and partly, accompayneth death,
whenever it comes. This fear, is the fear of the frail fleashe, and a
natural passion, belonginge unto the nature of a mortal man. But true faith,
in Gods promyses, and regard of the pains and pangues, which Christ upon
the cross suffered for us miserable sinners, with consideracion of the joy,
and everlasting life to come in heaven, will mitigate those pains, and moderate
this fear, yt it shall never be able to overthrow the hearty desire, and
gladness, that the christian soul has to be separated from this corrupt
body, that it may come to the gracious presence, of our savior Jesus Christ.
If we believe steadfastly the word of god, we shall perceive, that such bodiely
sickness, pangues of death, or whatsoever dolorous pains we suffer, either
before or with death, be nothing else in Christian me^, but the rod of our
heavenly and loving father, wherewith he mercifully corrects us, either to
try and declare the faith of his pacient children, that they may be found
laudable, glorious, and honorable in his sight, when Jesus Christ shall be openly
showed, to be the Judge of all the world: or else to chastise, and amend in
them, whatsoever offends his fatherly and gracious goodness, lest they
should peryshe everlastingly. And this his correctynge rod, is common to all
them, that be truly his. Therefore let us cast away the burden of sin, that
lies so heuye in our necks, and return unto God, by true penance, and
amendment of our lyfes. Let us with patience run this course that is
appointed, sufferyng (for his sake that dyed for our salvation) al sorrows and
pangues of death, and death it self joyfully, when God sends it to us,
having our eyes fixed ever upon the head, and capitayn of our faith, Jesus
Christ: Who (considering the joy, that he should come unto) cared neither
for the shame, nor pain of death, but willingly, conformyng his will to his
fathers will, most patiently suffered the most shameful and paynefull death
of the cross, being innocent. Philip. ii*
And now therefore, he is exalted in heaven, and everlastingly sits on the
rigtht hand of the throne of God the father. Let us call to our remembrance
therefore, the life and joys of heaven, that are kept for all them, that
patiently do suffer here with Christ: and consider, that Christ suffered all
his paynfull passion, by sinners, and for sinners, and then we shall with
patience, and the more easyly, suffer such sorrows and pains, when they come.
Let us not set at light, the chastisinge of the Lord, nor grudge at him, nor
fall from him, when of him we be corrected: for the Lord loves them, whom he
does correct, and beats every one, whom he takes to be his child. What
child is that, (says saint Paul) whom the father loves, Hebre. xii.
and does not chastise? If ye be without Gods correction (which al his
well-beloved and true children have) then be you but bastardes, finally regarded
of God, and not his true children.

Therefore, seeing that when we have in earth our carnal fathers to be our
correctors, we do fear them, and reverently take their correction, shall we
not much more be in subieccion to God our spiritual father, by whom we shall
have eternal life? And our carnal fathers some time correct us, even as
pleases the^, without cause: but this father, justly corrects us, either
for our sin, to the intent we should amend, or for our commodity and
wealth, to make us thereby partakers of his holiness. Furthermore, all
correction, which God sends us in this present time, seems to have no joy
and comfort, but sorrow and pain: Yet it brings with it a taste of Gods
mercy and goodness toward the^, that be so corrected, and a sure hope of
Gods everlasting consolacion in heaven. If then these sorrows, diseases, and
sickenesses, and also death it self, be nothing else, but our heavenly fathers
rod, whereby he certifieth us of his love and gracious favor, whereby he tries
and purifieth us, whereby he gives unto us holiness, and certifieth us, that
we be his children, and he our merciful father: shall not we then, with all
humility, as obedyent and loving children, joyfully kiss our heavenly fathers
rod, and ever say in our heart, with our savior Jesus Christ: Father, if
this a^guishe and sorrow which I feel, and death, Mat. xxvi.
which I se approach, may not pass, but that thy will is, that I must suffer
them, thy will be done.

Now the third and special cause, The third cause why death is to be feared.
why death in deed is too be feared, is the miserable state of the worldly and
ungodly people, after their death: But this is no cause at all, why the godly
and faytheful people should fear death, but rather contrariwise, their godly
conversation in this life, and belief in Christ, cleaving continually to his
merits, should make them to long sore after that life, that remains for
them undoubtedly after this bodily death. Of this immortal state, after this
transitory life, where we shall live evermore, in the presence of god, in joy
and rest, after victory over all sickness, sorrows, sin, and death: there be
many, both plain places of holy scripture, which confirm the weak conscience
against the fear of al such dolours, sickenesses, sin and death corporal,
to assuage such trembling and ungodly fear, and to encourage us with comfort
and hope, of a blessed state after this life. Saint Paul wissheth unto the
Ephesians, Ephe. i.
yt God the father of glory, would give unto them, ye spirit of wisdom and
reuelacion, that the eyes of their hearts might have light to know him, and to
perceive, how great things he had called the^ unto, and how rich
inheritance, he has prepared after this life, for the^ that perteyne unto
him. Phil. i.
And saint Paul himself, declares the desire of his heart, which was to be
dissolved and losed from his body, and to be with Christ, which (as he said)
was much better for him, although to them, it was more necessary, yt he should
live, which he refused not, for their sakes. Even like as saint Martyn said:
good Lord, if I be necessary for thy people to do good unto them I will refuse
no labor, but else for mine own self, I beseech the to take my soul.

Now, the holy fathers of the old law, and all faithful and righteous men,
which departed before our savior Christ's ascencion into heaven, did by death,
depart from troubles unto rest, from the hands of their enemies into ye
hands of God, from sorrows and sickenesses unto joyful refreashing into
Abraha^s bosom, a place of al comfort and co^solacio^, as scriptures do
plainly by manifest words testify. The book of Wisedo^ says: Sapien. iii.
yt the righteous men's souls be in the hand of God, and no torment shall touch
the^. They seemed to the eyes of folishe men to dye, and their death was co^pted
miserable, and their departing out of this world, wretched, but they be in
rest. And another place says: that the righteous shall live for ever, and
their reward is with the Lord, and their minds be with God, who is above al.
Therefore they shall receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful croune, at
the Lords hand. And in another place, Sapien. iiii.
the same book says: ye righteous, though he be prevented with sudden death,
nevertheless he shall be there, where he shall be refreshed. Of Abraha^s bosom,
Christ's words be so plain, that a christian man needs no more proof of it.
Now then, if this were ye state of ye holy fathers and righteous me^, before
the coming of our savior, and before he was glorified, how much more then,
ought all we to have a steadfast faith, and a sure hope of this blessed state
and condition, after our death? Seeing that our savior, now has performed
the whole work of our redemption, and is gloriously ascended into heaven, to
prepare our dwellinge places with him, and said unto his father: Father, I
will that where I am, Ihon. xvii.
my servants shall be with me. And we know, that whatsoever Christ will, his
father will the same: wherefore it cannot be, but if we be his faithful
servants, our souls shall be with him, after our departing out of this
present life. Saint Stephin, Acts. vii.
when he was stoned to death, even in the midst of his torments, what was
his mind most upon? When he was full of the holy Ghost, (says holy
scripture) having his eyes lifted up into heaven, he saw the glory of God,
and Jesus standinge on the right hand of God. The which truth, after he had
confessed boldly before the enemies of Christ, they drew him out of the
city, and there they stoned him, who cried unto God saiynge: Lord Jesus
Christ, take my spirit. And does not our savior say plainly in saint
Ihons Gospel? Uerely, Ihon* v*
verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word and believes on him yt
sent me, has everlasting life, and comes not into judgment, but shall
pass from death to life. Shall we not then think that death to be precious,
by the which we pass unto life? Therefore it is a true saiynge of the
Prophet: Psalm. ^xvi.
the death of the holy and righteous me^, is precious in the Lords sight.
Holy Simeon, after that he had his hearts desire, in seeing our savior that he
ever longed for all his life, he embraced him in his arms, and said: Now
Lord, let me depart in peace, Luke. ii.
for mine eyes have beholde^ that savior, which thou haste prepared for all
nations.

It is truth therefore, that the death of the righteous, is called peace, and
the benefit of the Lord, as the Church says in ye name of the righteousness
departed out of this world: Psalm. cxiiii.
My soul turn the to thy rest, for the Lord has been good to the, and
rewarded the. And we se by holy scripture, and other ancient Histories of
Martyrs, that the holy faithful, and righteous, ever syns Christ's ascencion,
in their death did not doubt, but that they went to be with Christ in
spirit, which is our life, health, wealth and salvation. Apoc. xiiii.
Ihon in his holy Reuelacio^, saw a.C.xl. and.iiij.M. virgins and innocents,
of whom he said: These follow the La^be Jesus Christ wheresoever he goes. And
shortly after, in the same place he says: I heard a voice from heaven, saying
unto me: Write, happy and blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord: from
hencefurthe (surely says the syirite) they shall rest from their pains and
labors, for their works do follow them. So that then they shall reap with
joy and comfort that, which they sowed with labors and pains. They that
sow in the spirit, of the spirit shall reap everlasting life. Let us
therefore never be weary of well doing, for when the time of reapynge, or
reward comes, we shall reap without any werines, everlasting joy. Therefore,
while we have time (as saint Paul exhorts us) let us do good to all men,
Galat vi. Matthew. vi.
and not lay up our treasurers in earth, where ruste and mothes corrupt it,
which ruste (as saint James says) shall bear witness against us, James. v.
at the great day, condemn us, and shall (like most brennynge fire) tormente
our fleashe. Let us beware therefore, (as we tender our own wealth) that we
be not in the number of those miserable coueteous men, which, saint James
bids mourn and lament, for their gredy gatherynge, and ungodly keeping of
goods. Let us be wise in time, and learn to follow the wise example of the
wicked Stuarde. Let us so prudently dispose our goods and possessions,
committed unto us here by God for a ceason, that we may truly hear and obey
this commandment of our savior Christ's: I say unto you, (says he) make
you friends of the wicked Mammon, that they may receive you, into everlasting
tabernacles. Riches, he calls wicked, Luke. xvi.
because the world abuses them unto all wickedness, which are otherwise the
good gift of God, and the instruments, whereby Gods servants do truly
serve him, in using of the same. He commanded them not, to make them rich
friends, to get high dignities, and worldly possessions, to give great gifts
to rich men, that have no need thereof, but to make them friends of poor
and miserable men: unto whom, whatsoever they give, Christ accepts it, as
given to himself. And to these friends, Christ in the Gospel gives so
great honor and preeminence, that he says: they shall receive their
benefactors, into everlasting houses: Not that men shall be our rewarders, for
our well doing, but that Christ will reward us, and take it to be done unto
himself, whatsoever is done to such friends.

Thus making poor wretches our friends, we make our savior Christ our
friend, whose members they are, whose misery, as he takes for his own
misery, so their relief, succor and help, he takes for his succoure,
relief, and help, and will as much thank us and reward us for our goodness
showed to them, as if he him self had received like benefit at our hands,
as he witnesses in the Gospel, saiynge: Whatsoever ye have done to any of
these simple persons, Matthew. xxv.
which do believe in me, that have ye done to my self. Therefore let us
diligently forese, that our faith and hope, which we have conceived in
almighty God, and in our savior Christ, wax not faynte, nor that the love
which we pretend to bear to him, wax not could: but let us study daily
and diligently to show our selfs to be the true honorers and lovers of God,
by keeping of his commandments, by doing of good deeds unto our nedy
neighbors, releuynge by all means that we can, their pouertye with our
abundaunce, their ignorance with our wisdom and learning, and comfort
their weakness, with our strength and authority: calling all men back
from evil doing, by Godly counsayll and good example, persevering still in
well doing so long as we live. So shall we not need to fear death, for any
of those three causes before mentioned, nor yet for any other cause that can be
imagined. But contrary, considering the manifold sickenesses, troubles and
sorrows of this present life, the dangers of this perilous pilgrimage, and the
great encombraunce, which our spirit has by this synful flesh and frail
body subject to death: considering also the manifold sorrows and dangerous
deceiptes of this world on every side, the intolerable pride, coueteousnes,
and lechery in time of prosperity, the impacient murmuring of them that be
worldly in time of adversity, which cease not to withdraw and pluck us from
God our savior Christ, from our life, wealth, or eternal joy and
salvation: considering also the innumerable assaults, of our Ghostly enemy
the devil, with all his fiery darts of ambicion, pride, lechery, vainglory,
envy, malice, detractio^, with other his innumerable deceiptes, engines and
snares, whereby he goes busely about to catch al men under his dominion,
ever like a roreynge Lion, i. Pet. v.
by all means searchynge whom he may devour: the faithful Christian man,
which considers al these miseries, perilles and incommodities, (whereunto he
is subject, so long as he here lives upon earth) and on the other part,
considers that blessed and comfortable state of the heavenly life to come,
and the sweet condition of them, that depart in the Lord, how they are
delivered from the continual encombrau^ces of their mortal and sinful body,
from all the malice, crafts and deceiptes of this world, from all the assaults
of their ghostly enemy the devil, to live in peace, rest and perpetual
quietness, to live in the fellowship of innumerable Aungelles, and with the
congregation of perfect just me^, as Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs and
Confessors: and finally, unto the presence of almighty God, and our savior
Jesus Christ. He that does consider all these things, and believes them
assuredly, as they are to be believed, even from the botome of his heart, being
established in God, in this true faith, having a quiet conscience in
Christ, a firm hope, and assured trust in Gods mercy, through the merits of
Jesus Christ, to obtain this quietness, rest and eternal joy: shall not only
be without fear of bodiely death, when it comes, but certainlye (as saint
Paul did) so shall he gladly (according to Gods will, Phil. i.
and when it pleases God to call him out of this life) greatly desire in his
heart, that he may be rid from al these occasions of evil, and live ever to
Gods pleasure, in perfect obedience of his will, with our savior Jesus
Christ: to whose gracious presence, the Lord of his infinity mercy and
grace, bring us to reign with him, in life everlasting. To whom, with our
heavenly father, and the holy Ghost, be glory in worlds without end. AMEN.

An exhortacion, concerning good order and obedience, to rulers and magistrates.
Almighty God has created and appointed all things, in heaven, earth, and
waters, in a most excellent and perfect order. In heaven, he has appointed
distinct orders and states of Archangelles and Angels. In earth he has
assigned kings, princes, with other governors under them, all in good and
necessary order. The water above is kept and raineth down in due time and
ceason. The sun, moan, sterres, rainbow, thu^der, lightning, clouds, and al
birds of the air, do keep their order. The earth, trees, seeds, plants,
herbs, corn, grass, and all manner of beasts, keep the^ in their order. All
the parts of ye whole year, as winter, somer, months, nights and days,
continue in their order. All kinds of fishes in the sea, rivers and waters,
with all fountaynes, sprynges, yea, the seas themselfes, keep their comely
course and order. And man himself also, has al his parts, both within and
without: as soul, heart, mind, memory, understanding, reason, speech, withal
and singular corporal me^bres of his body, in a profitable, necessary and
pleasant order. Every degree of people, in their vocacion, calling, and office,
has appointed to them, their duty and order. Some are in high degree, some in
low, some kings and princes, some inferiors and subjects, priests, and
laimen, masters and servants, fathers and children husbands and wifes, rich
and poor, and every one have need of other: so that in all thinged, is to be
lauds and praised the goodly order of God, without the which, no house, no
city, no common wealth, can continue and endure. For where there is no right
order, there reigns all abuse, carnal liberty, enormitie, syn, and
babilonicall confusion. Take away kings, princes, rulers, magistrates,
judges, and such states of Gods order, no man shall ride or go by the high way
vnrobbed, no man shall sleep in his own house or bed vnkilled, no man shall
keep his wife, children, and possessions in quietne: sall things shall be
common, and there must needs follow all mischief and utter destruction, both of
souls, bodies, goods and common wealths. But blessed be God, that we in this
realm of England feel not the horrible calamities, miseries and wretchedness,
which al they undoubtedly feel and suffer, yt lack this godly order. And
praised be God, that we know the great excellent benefit of god, showed
toward us in this behalf. God has sent us his high gift, our most dear
sovereign lord king Edward ye sixth, with godly wise, and honorable cou^sail,
with other superiors and inferiors in a beautiful order. Wherefore, let us
subjects do our bounden duties, giving hearty thanks to God, and praiyng for
the preseruacio^ of this Godly order. Let us al obey even from the botome of
our hearts, al their Godly procedynges, laws, statutes, proclamacions, and
iniunctio^s, with all other Godly orders. Let us considre the scriptures of the
holy ghost, which persuade and command us all obediently to be subject:
First and chiefly, to the kings majesty, supreme had over all, and next, to
his honorable counsel, and to all other noble men, magistrates and officers,
which by Gods goodness be placed and ordered: for almighty God, is the only
aucthor and prouider of this forenamed state and order, as it is written of
God, in the book of the proverbs: through me, kings do reign: Prouer. viii*
through me counsailors make just laws, through me, do princes bear rule,
and all judges of the earth execute judgment: I am loving to them, that love
me.

Here let us mark well, and remember, that the high power and authority of
kings, with their making of laws, judgments, and officers, are the
ordinances, not of man, but of God: and therefore is this word (through me) so
many times repeted. Here is also well to be considered and remembered, that this
good order is appointed of Gods wisdom, favor, and love, specially for them
that love god, and therefore he says: I love them, yt love me. Also, Sapien. vi.
in the book of wisdom we may evidently learn, that a kings power,
authority, and strength, is a great benefit of God, given of his great
mercy, to the comfort of our great misery. For thus we read there spoken to
kings. Sapien. vi.
Hear o ye kings and understand: learn ye yt be judges of thendes of the
earth: give ear ye, that rule the multitudes: for ye power is given you of ye
lord, and the strength from the highest. Let us learn also here by the
infallible word of God, that kings and other supreme and higher officers, are
ordained of god who is most highest, and therefore they are here dilige^tely
taught, to apply themselves, to knowledge and wisdom, necessary for the
ordering of Gods people, to their governance committed. And they be here also
taught by almighty God, that they should reknowledge themselfes, to have al
their power and strength, not from Rome, but immediately of god most highest.

Deu. xxxii.
We read in the book of Deuteronomy, yt al punisheme^t pertains to God, by
this sentence: vengeance is mine, and I will reward. But this sentence we must
understand, to pertein also unto ye magistrates, which do exercise Gods room
in judgment and punishing, by good and godly laws, here in earth. And the
places of scripture which seem to remove from among al christian men,
judgment, punishment, or kyllyng, ought to be understand, that no man (of his
own private authority) may be judge over other may punish, or may kill. But
we must refer al judgment to god, to kings and rulers, and judges under the^,
which be gods officers, to execute justice, and by plain words of scripture,
have their authority and use of ye swourd, granted from god, as we are
taught by S. Paul the dear and elect Apostle of our savior Christ, who^ we
ought diligently to obey, even as we would obey our savior Christ, if he were
present. Thus. S. Paul writes to the Roma. Roma. xiii.
Let every soul submit himself, unto the authority of the higher powers, for
there is no power, but of God, the powers that be, be ordained of God,
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, but
they that resist, shall receive to themselves dampnacion: for rulers are not
fearful to the^ that do good, but to the^ that do evil. Will thou be without
fear of the power? Do well then, and so shall thou be praised of the same: for
he is the minister of God, for thy wealth. But and if thou do that, which is
evil, then fear, for he bears not the swourde for naught, for he is the
minister of God, to make vengeance on him, that does evil. Wherefore ye must
needs obey, not only for fear of vengeance, but also, because of conscience,
and eue^ for this cause pay ye tribute, for they are Gods ministers, seruyng
for the same purpose.

Here let us al learn of S. Paul, the elect vessel of God, yt all persons
having souls, (he excepteth none, nor exempteth none, neither priest, apostle,
nor prophet, says. s. Chriso.) do owe of bounde^ duty, and even in
conscience, obedience, submission and subjection, to the high powers, which be
constituted in authority by god, forasmuch as they be gods liuetenauntes,
Gods presidentes, Gods officers, Gods commisioners, Gods judges, ordained of
God himself, of whom only they have al their power, and all their authority.
And the same. s. Paul threateneth no less pain, then everlasting da^pnacion to
al disobedient persons, to al resisters, against this general and common
authority, forasmuch as they resist not man, but God, not man's devise and
inuencion, but Gods wisedo^, Gods order, power, and authority. And here (good
people) let us all mark diligently, that it is not lawful for inferiors and
subjects, in any case to resist the superior powers: for. s. Paul's words be
plain, that whosoever resists, shall get to themselves da^pnacion: for
whosoever resists, resists the ordinance of God. Our savior Christ him
self and his apostles, received many and diverse injuries of the unfaithful
and wicked men in authority: yet we never read, that they, or any of the^,
caused any sedicion or rebellion against authority. We read often, that they
patiently suffered al troubles, vexacions, slanders, pangues, and pains, and
death it self obediently, without tumulte or resistance. They committed their
cause to him, that judges righteously, and prayed for their enemies heartily
and earnestly. They knew that ye authority of ye powers, was Gods ordinance,
and therefore both in their words and deeds, they taught ever obedience to it,
and never taught, nor did the contrary. The wicked judge Pilat said to Christ:
Ihon* xix.
know thou not that I have power to crucifye the, and have power also to
lose the? Jesus answered: Thou could have no power at all against me,
except it were given the from above. Whereby Christ taught us plainly, that
even the wicked rulers have their power and authority from God. And therefore
it is not lawful for their subjects, by force to resyst the^, although they
abuse their power; much less then it is lawful for subjects to resist
their godly and christian princes, which do not abuse their authority, but
use the same to Gods glory, and to the profit and commodity of Gods people.
The holy apostle S. Peter commands servants to be obedient to their
masters, i. Peter. ii.
not only, if they be good and gentle, but also, if they be evil and froward:
affirmyng, that the vocation and calling of Gods people, is to be pacient, and
of the sufferyng side. And there he brings in, ye patience of our savior
Christ to persuade obedience to governors, yea, although they be wicked and
wrong dooers. But let us now hear S. Peter himself speak, for his awn words
certifye best our conscience. i. Peter. ii.
Thus he utters them in his first Epistle: Servants obey your Masters
with fear, not only, if they be good and gentle, but also, if they be
froward: For it is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God,
suffers grief, and suffers wrong undeserved: for what praise is it, when ye
be beaten for your faults, if ye take it patiently, but when ye do well, if you
then suffer wrong, and take it patiently, then is there cause to have thank of
God: for hereunto verily were ye called. For so did Christ suffer for us, i.
Peter. ii.
leauyng us an example, that we should follow his steps. Al these be the very
words of.s. Peter.s. David also teaches us a good lesson in this behalf, i.
Reg. xiii.xix. and.xx*
who was many times most cruelly and wrongfullye persecuted of king Saul, and
many times also put in ieoperdy and danger of his life, by king Saul and his
people: yet he never resysted, neither used any force or violence against king
Saul, his mortal enemy, but did ever to his liege Lord and master king
Saul, most true, most diligent, and most faithful service. In so much, yt
when the lord God had given king Saul into Dauides hands in his awn cave, he
would not hurt him, when he might without all bodily peril, easly have slain
him: no, he would not suffer any of his servants, once to lay their hands
upon king Saul, but prayed to god in this wise: lord, keep me from doing that
thing unto my master, the lords anointed: keep me that I lay not my hand
upon him, seeing, he is ye anointed of the lord: for as truly as the lord
lives, (except the lord smite him, or except his day come, or that he go
down to war, and in battaill perish) the Lord be merciful unto me, that I
lay not my hand upon the lords anointed. And yt David might have killed his
enemy king Saul, it is evidently proved, in the first book of the kings, i.
Reg. xxiiii.
both by ye cuttyng of ye lap of Saules garment, and also by the plain
confession of king Saul. Also another time (as it is me^cioned in the same
book) when the most unmerciful, and most unkind king Saul did persecute poor
David, God did again give king Saul into Dauides hands, by castyng of king
Saul and his whole army, into a dead sleep: so that David and one Abisai with
him, came in the night into Saules host, where Saul lay slepyng, and his
spear stacke in the ground at his head. Then said Abisai unto David: God has
delivered thine enemy into thy hands, at this time, now therefore let me smite
him once with my spear to the earth, and I will not smite him again the
second time: meaning thereby to have killed him with one stroke, and to have
made him sure for ever. And David answered, and said to Abisai, destroy him
not: for who ca^ lay his hands on the lords anointed and be giltles? And
David said furthermore: as sure as the lord lives, the lord shall smite him, or
his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into battaill, and there perish.
The lord keep me from laiyng my hands upon the lords anointed. But take thou
now the spear yt is at his head, and the cruse of water, and let us go: and so
he did.

Here is evidently proved, that we may not resyst, nor in any ways hurt, an
anointed king, which is Gods liuetenau^t, vecegerent, and highest minister in
that country, Objection.
where he is king. But peradventure, some here would say, that David in his
own defense, might have killed king Saul lawfully, and with a safe
conscience. Answer.
But holy David did know, that he might in no wise resist, hurt, or kyl, his
sovereign lord and king: he did know, that he was but king Saules subject,
though he were in great favor with God, and his enemy king Saul out of gods
favor. Therefore, though he were never so much provoked, yet he refused utterly
to hurt the lords anointed. He durst not, for offending God, and his own
conscience, (althought he had occasion and opportunity) once lay his hands
upon Gods high officer ye king, who^ he did know to be a person reserved (for
his office sake) only to Gods punishment and judgment. Therefore he prays so
often, and so earnestly, yt he lay not his hands upon the Lords anointed. And
by these.ii. examples s. David (being named in scripture a man after Gods own
heart) gives a general rule and lesson, to all subjects in the world, Psalm.
lxxx. and.viii.
not to resist their liege lord and king, not to take a sweard by their private
authority, against their king, gods anointed, who only bears the sweard,
by gods authority, for the maintenau^ce of the good, and for the punishment
of ye evil: who only by Gods law, has the use of the swearde at his
commandment, and also has all power, jurisdiction, regiment, and coercion,
as supreme governor of all his realms and dominions, and that, even by the
authority of god, and by gods ordinances. Yet another notable story and
doctrine, is in the second book of the kings, that makes also for this
purpose. When an Amalechite, by king Saules awn consent and commandment, had
killed king Saul, ii. Reg. i.
he went to David, supposing to have had great thank for his message, that he
had killed David's mortal enemy, and therefore he made great have, to tell to
David the chance: bringyng with him king Saules croune, that was upon his head
and his bracelet that was upon his arm, to persuade his tidings to be true.
But godly David was so far from reioysyng at these news, that immediately he
re^t his clothes of his back, he mourned and wept, and said to the
messenger: how is it, that thou wast not afraied, to lay thy hands on the
lords anointed, to destroy him? And by and by, David made one of his
servants to kill ye messenger, saying: thy blood be on thine own head, for thy
awn mouth has testified against the, grauntyng yt thou have slain the Lords
anointed. These examples being so manifest and evident, it is an intolerable
ignorance, madness, and wickedness for subjects, to make any murmuryng,
rebellion, resistance, commocion or insurrection, against their most dear and
most dread sovereign lord and king, ordained and appointed of Gods goodness,
for their commodity, peace, and quietness. Yet let us believe undoubtedly, (good
christian people) that we may not obey Kings, Magistrates, or any other,
(though they be our own fathers) if they would command us to do any thing,
contrary to Gods commandments. In such a case, we ought to say with the
Apostles: (...). v.
we must rather obey God, then man. But nevertheless in ye case, we may not in
any wise resist violently, or rebel against rulers, or make any insurrection,
sedicio^, or tumultes, either by force of arms, (or otherways) against the
anointed of the Lord, or any of his appointed officers. But we must in such
case, patiently suffer all wrongs and injuries, referryng the judgment of
our cause only to God. Let us fear ye terrible punishment of almighty God,
against traitors, or rebellious persons, by the example of Chore, Dathan, and
Abiron, which repined and grudged against Gods Magistrates, and officers, and
therefore the earth opened, and swallowed them up a live. Other for their wicked
murmuryng, and rebellion, Nume. xi.
were by a sudden fire sent of God utterly consumed. Other for their froward
behavior to their rulers, and governors, Gods ministers, were suddenly
stricken, with a foul leprosy. Nume. xii.
Other were stinged to death, Nume. xxi.
with wonderful strange fiery serpents. Other were sore plagued, so that there
was killed in one day, Nume xvi.
the number of fourtene thousand and seven hundred, for rebellion against them,
who^ God had appointed to be in authority. ii. Re. xv^ii
Absalon also, rebelling against his father king David, was punished with a
strange and notable death.

And let no man think, that he can escape unpunished, that commits
treason, conspiracy, or rebellion, against his sovereign Lord the King,
though he commit the same never so secretly, either in thought, word, or deed:
never so privily, in his privy chamber, by himself, or openly communicatyng,
and consultyng with other: For treason will not be hid: treason will out at the
length. God will have that most detestable vice, both opened and punished,
for that it is so directly against his ordinance, and against his high
principal judge, and anointed in earth. The violence and injury, that is
committed against authority, is committed against God, the common weal, and
the whole realm, which God will have known, and condignely punished, one way
or other. For it is notably written of the Wiseman in Scripture, in the book
called Ecclesiastes: Eccle. x.
wish the King no evil, in thy thought, or speak no hurt of him in thy privy
chamber: for a bird of the air shall betraye thy voice, and with her feathers,
shall she bewraye thy words. These lessons and examples are written for our
learning.

Let us al therefore fear the most detestable vice of rebellion, ever knowing
and remembering, that he that resists common authority, resists God and
his ordinance, as it may be proved by many other mo places of holy Scripture.
And here let us take heed, that we understand not these, or such other like
places (which so straightly command obedience to superiors, and so
straightly punishes rebellion, and disobedience to the same) to be meant in any
co^dicio^ of the pretensed power of the bishop of Rome. For truly the
scripture of God allows no such usurped power, full of enormities, abusions
and blasphemies. But the true meaning of these, and such places, be to extol
and set furthe, Gods true ordinance, and ye authority of Gods anointed
kings, and of their officers appointed under them.

And concerning the usurped power of the bishop of Rome, which he most
wrongfully chalengeth, as the successor of Christ, and Peter: we may easily
perceive, how false, feined, and forged it is, not only in that, it has no
sufficient ground in holy scripture, out also by the fruits and doctrine
thereof. For our savior Christ, and s. Peter teaches most earnestly and
agreably obedience to kings, as to the chief, and supreme rulers in this
world, next under God: but the bishop of Rome teaches immunities, privileges,
exempcio^s, and disobedience, most clearly against Christ's doctrine and s.
Peter's, He ought therefore rather to be called Antichriste, and the succcssor
of the Scribes and Phariseis, then Christ's vicar, or s. Peter's successor:
seeing, that not only in this point, but also in other weighty matters of
Christian religion, in matters of remission of sins, and of salvation, he
teaches so directly against, both s. Peter and against our savior Christ: Who
not only taught obedience to kings, but also practiced obedience, in their
co^uersacio^ and living. For we read, that they both paid tribute to the king.
And also we read, Matthew. xvii.
that the holy virgyn Mary, mother to our savior Christ, Luke. ii.
and Joseph, who was taken for his father, at the emperors commandment, went
to the city of David, named Bethleem, to be taxed among other, and to declare
their obedience, to the magistrates, for Gods ordinances sake. And here let us
not forget ye blessed virgin Mary's obedience: for although, she was highly in
Gods favor, and Christ's natural mother, and was also great with child that
same time, and so nigh her travail, that she was delivered in her journey:
yet, she gladly without any excuse or grudgyng (for conscience sake) did take
that cold and foul winter journey, being in the mean ceason so poor, that
she lay in the stable, and there she was delivered of Christ. And according to
the same, lo, how s. Peter agrees, writing by express words, in his first
Epistle: i Pet. ii.
submit your selfs, (says he) unto kings, as unto the chief heddes, or unto
rulers, as unto them, that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers,
and for laud of the^ that do well, for so is the will of God. I ^ede not to
expound these words, they be so plain of themselves. S. Peter does not say:
submit your selfs unto me, as supreme head of the Church, neither he says,
submit your selfs from time to time, to my successors in Rome: but he says,
submit your sels unto your king, your supreme head, and unto those, that he
appoynteth in authority under him. For that ye shall so show your obedience,
it is the will of God. God will that you be in subjection to your head and king.
That is Gods ordinance, Gods commandment, and Gods holy will, that the whole
body of every realm, and all the members and parts of the same, shall be subject
to their head, their king, and that (as S. Peter writes) for the Lords sake:
and (as S. Paul writes) for conscience sake, i. Pet. ii. Roma. xiii.
and not for fear only. Thus we learn by the word of God, to yield to our
king, that is dew to our king, that is, honor, obedience, paimentes of dew
taxes, customs, tributes, subsidies, love and fear. Thus we know partly our
bounden duties to common authority: Matthew. xxii. Roma. xiii.
now let us learn to accomplish the same. And let us most instauntly and
heartily pray to God, the only aucthor of all authority, for all them that
be in authority, according as S. Paul wills, writing thus to Timothe, i.
Timo. ii.
in his first Epistle: I exhort therefore, that above all things, prayers,
supplicacions, intercessions, and giving of thanks be done for all men, for
kings, and for all that be in authority, that we may live a quiet and a
peaceable life, with all godliness and honesty: for that is good, and accepted
in the sight of God our savior. Here s. Paul makes an earnest and an
especial exhortacion, concerning geuyng of thanks, and prayer for kings and
rulers, saying: above al things, as he might say, in any wise principally and
chiefly, let prayer be made for kings. Let us heartily thank God for his
great and excellent benefit and providence, concerning the state of kings.
Let us pray for the^, that they may have Gods favor, and Gods proteccion. Let
us pray, that they may ever in all things have God before their eyes. Let us
pray, that they may have wisdom, strength, justice, cleme^cie, zeal to Gods
glory, to Gods verity, to christian souls, and to the common wealth. Let us
pray, that they may rightly use their swourde and authority, for the
maintenance and defense of the catholic faith, contained in holy scripture,
and of their good and honest subjects, and for the fear and punishment of
the evil, and vicious people. Let us pray, that they may faithfully follow
the most faithful kings and capitaines in the Bible, David, Ezechias,
Josias, and Moses, with such other. Judith. v*
And let us pray for our selfs, that we may live Godly, in holy and
christian co^uersacio^: so we shall have God of our side. And then let us not
fear, what man can do against us: so we shall live in true obedience, both to
our most merciful king in heaven, and to our most Christian king in
earth: so shall we please God, and have the exceeding benefit, peace of
conscience, rest and quietness here in this word, and after this life, we
shall enjoy a better life, rest, peace, and the eternal bliss of heaven:
which he grant us all, that was obedient for us al, eue^ to the death of the
cross Jesus Christ: to whom with the father, and the holy ghost, be al honor
and glory, both now and ever. Amen.

An Homely of whoredom and uncleanness.
ALthough, there want not (good christian people) great swarms of vices,
worthi to be rebuked, (unto such decai is true godlynes and verteous living
now come) yet above other vices the outrageous seas of adultery, whoredom,
fornicacion, and uncleanness, have not only braste in, but also ouerflowed,
almost the whoole world, unto the great dishonor of God, the excedyng
infamy of the name of Christ, the notable decay of true religion and the utter
destruction of the public wealth: and that so abunda^tly, that through the
customable use thereof, this vice is growe^ into such an height, that in a
manner among many, it is compted no sin at all, but rather a pastyme, a
dalliaunce, and but a touch of youth, not rebuked but winked at, not
punyshed, but laughed at: wherefore it is necessary at this present, to
entreat of the syn of whoredom, and fornicacion, declaringe unto you, the
greatness of this syn, and how odious, hateful, and abominable it is, and has
always been reputed, before God and al good men, and how grievously it has been
punished, both by the law of God, and the laws of diverse princes. Again, to
show you certain remedies, whereby ye may, (through the grace of God) eschew
this most detestable sin of whoredom and fornicacion, and lead your lyfes,
in all honesty and cleanness. And that ye may perceive, that fornicacion,
and whoredom are (in the sight of God) most abominable sins, ye shall call
to remembrance this commandment of GOD: thou shalt not commit adultery: by
the which word adultery, Exode. xx.
although it be properly understand, of the unlawful commixcion of a married
manne with any woman beside his wife, or of a wife, with any man beside her
husband: yet thereby is signified also, all unlawful use of those parts,
which be ordained for generation. And this one commandment (forbiddyng
adultery) does sufficiently painte, and set out before our iyes, the
greatness of this sin of whoredom, and manifestly declares, how greatly it
ought to be abhorred of all honest and faithful persons. And that none of us
all, shall think himself excepted from this commandment, whether we be old,
or young, married, or unmarried, man, or woman, hear what God the father says,
by his most excellent Prophet Moses: there shall be no whore, among the
daughters of Israel, nor no whoremongers, Deute. xxiii.
among the sons of Israel.

Here is whoredom, fornicacion, and all uncleanness forbidden, to all kinds
of people, all degrees, and all ages, without excepcion. And that we shall not
doubt, but that this precept pertains to us in deed: hear what Christ (the
perfect teacher of all truth) says in the new Testament: Matthew. v.
ye have heard (says Christ) that it was said to them of the old time:
thou shalt not commit adultery: but I say unto you, whosoever sees a woman
to have his lust of her, has committed adultery with her all ready in his
heart. Here our savior Christ, does not only confirm and stablishe the law
against adultery, given in the old Testament of God the father, by his
servant Moses, and make it of full strength, continually to remain among the
professors of his name in the new law: But he also (condempnyng the gross
interpretacion of the Scribes and Phariseis, which taught, that the aforesaied
commandment only required to abstein from the outward adultery, and not from
the filthy desires and vnpure lusts) teaches us an exact and full
perfeccion of purity and clennesse of life, both to keep our bodies
undefiled, and our hearts pure and fre, from all evil thoughts, carnal
desires, and fleshly consentes. How can we then be free from this
commandment, where so great charge is laid upon us? May a servant do what
he will in any thing, having a commandment of his master to the contrary? Is
not Christ our Master? Are not we his servants? How then may we neglecte
our Masters will, and pleasure, and follow our own will and fantasy? Ihon.
xv.
Ye are my friends (says Christ) if you keep those things, that I command
you. Now has Christ our Master commanded us, that we should forsake all
uncleanness, and lechery, both in body and spirit: this therefore must we do,
if we look to please GOD. In the Gospel of saint Matthewe, we read that the
Scribes and Phariseis, Matthew. xv.
were grievously offended with Christ, because his disciples did not keep the
tradicions of the fore fathers: for they washed not their hands, when they
went to diner or supper, Matthew. xv.
and among other things, Christ answered, and said: hear and understand:
not that thing, Matthe. xv.
which enters into the mouth defiles the man, but that, which comes out
of the mouth, defiles the man. For those things, which proceed out of the
mouth, come forth from the heart and they defile the man. For out of the heart,
proceed evil thoughts, murders, breakyng of wedlock, whoredom, theftes,
false witness, blasphemies: these are the things, which defile a man. Here
may we se, that not only murder, theft, false witness, and blasphemy, defile
men: but also evil thoughts, breakyng of wedlock, fornicacion, and whoredom.

Who is now of so little wit, Ihon. xiiii. Titus. i.
that he will esteem whoredom, and fornicacion, to be things of small
importance, and of no weight before God? Christ (which is the truth and
cannot lie) says, that evil thoughts, breakyng of wedlock, whoredom, and
fornicacion, defile a man, that is to say, corrupt both the body and soul
of man, and make them, of the Temples of the holy Ghost, the filthy
dunghill, or dungeon of all unclean spirits, of the Mansion of GOD, the
dwelling place of Satan. Again, in the Gospel of saint Ihon, Ihon. viii.
when the woman taken in adultery, was brought unto Christ, said not he unto
her: Go thy way and sin no more? Does not he here call whoredom sin? And
what is the reward of sin, but everlasting death? If whoredom be sin,
Roma. vi.
then is it not lawful for us to commit it. For. S. Ihon says: i. Ihon. iii.
he that commits sin, is of the devil. Ihon. viii Roma. vi.
And our savior says, every one that commits syn, is the servant of syn.
If whoredom had not been syn, surely S. Ihon Baptist, would never have rebuked
king Herod, for taking his brothers wife: but he told him plainly, that it
was not lawful for him, to take his brothers wife. He wynked not at the
whoredom of Herod, although he were a king of great power but boldly reproved
him, for his wicked and abominable living, although for the same he lost his
hedde. But he would rather suffer death (then see GOD so dishonored, by the
breakyng of his holy precept) then to suffer whoredom to be unrebuked, even in
a King. If whoredom had been but a pastyme, a daliaunce, and a thing not to
be passed of (as many coumpt it now a days) truly, Ihon had been more then
twyse mad, if he would have had the displeasure of a king, if he would have
been cast into prison, and lost his hedde for a trifle. But Iho^ knew right
well, how filthy, stynkyng, and abominable, the sin of whoredom is, in the
sight of GOD, therefore would not he leave it unrebuked, no, not in a king. If
whoredom be not lawful in a king, neither is it lawful in a subject. If
whoredom be not lawful in a public officer, neither is it lawful in a
private person. If it be not lawful, neither in king, nor subject, neither
in common officer, nor private person, truly, then is it lawful in no man,
nor woman, of whatsoever degree, or age they be. Acts. xv.
Furthermore, in the Acts of the Apostles, we read, that when the Apostles
and Elders, with the whole congregation, were gathered together to pacify the
hearts of the faithful dwelling at Antioche, (which were disquieted through
the false doctrine, of certain Iewishe preachers) they sent word to the
brethren, that it seemed good to the holy ghost, and to them, to charge them
with no more, then with necessary things: among other, they willed them to
abstein from Idolatry, and fornicacion, from which (said they) if ye keep your
selfs, ye shall do well

Note here, how these holy and blessed fathers of Christ's Church, would
charge the congregation with no mo things, then were necessary. Mark also, how
among those things, from the which they commanded the brethren of Antioche
to abstein, fornicacion and whoredom is numbered. It is therefore necessary, by
the determinacion and consent of the holy ghost, and the apostles and elders,
with the whole congregation, that, as from Idolatry and supersticion: so
likewise we must abstein from fornicacio^ and whoredom. Is it necessary unto
salvation to abstein from Idolatry? So is it, to abstein from whoredom. Is
there any nigher way, to lead unto dampnacion, then to be an Idolater? No,
even so, neither is there a nerer way to dampnacion, then to be a fornicator,
and an whoremonger.

Now, where are those people, which so lightly esteem breakyng of wedlock,
whoredom, fornicacio^ and adultery? It is necessary, says the holy ghost, the
blessed Apostles, the elders, with the whole congregation of Christ: it is
necessary to salvation (saiethe) to abstein from whoredo^. If it be necessary
unto salvation, then woe be to them, which neglectyng their salvation, give
their minds to so filthye, and stinkyng sin, to so wicked vice, to such
detestable abhominacion. But let us hear, what the blessed Apostle saint
Paul says to this matter. Writing to the Romans, he has these words:
Rom^* xii*
Let us cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armours of light.
Roma. xiii.
Let us walk honestly as it were in the day time, not in eating and drynkyng,
neither in chambrynges and wantonness, neither in striefe and enuiyng, but put
ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts of it. Here the holy Apostle exhorts us to cast away the works
of darkness, which (among other) he calls gluttonous eating, drinkyng,
cha^beryng and wantonness, which all are ministeries unto that vice, and
preparacions to induce and bring in, the filthy sin of the flesh. He calls
them the deeds and works of darkness, not only because they are customably
dooen in darkness, or in the night time, Ihon. iii.
(for every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes he to the
light, least his works should be reproved) but that they lead the right way
unto that utter darkness, Matthew. xiii.
where weeping and gnashyng of teethe shall be. And he says in another place of
the same Epistle: They that are in the flesh, cannot please GOD. We are debtors
to the flesh, not that we should live after the flesh, for if ye live after
the flesh, Roma. viii.
ye shall dye. Again he says, fly from whoredom, for every sin that a man commits, is without his body, but whosoever commits whoredom,
synneth against his own body. i. Corin. vi.
Do ye not know, that your members are the Temple of the holy Ghost,
which is in you, whom also ye have of GOD, and ye are not your own? For ye
are derely bought: glorify GOD in your bodies. etc. And a little before, he
says: Do ye not know, that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I
then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an whore? God
forbid. Do ye not know that he, which cleueth to an whore, is made one body
with her? There shall be two in one flesh (says he): but he that cleueth to
the lord, is one spirit. What Godly reasons does the blessed apostle s. Paul
bring forth here, to dissuade us from whoredom, and al uncleanness? Your
members (says he) are the Temple of the holy Ghost: which, whosoever does
defile, God will destroy him as (says s. Paul. If we be the Temple of the
holy Ghost, how vnsittyng then is it, to drive that holy spirit from us,
through whoredom, and in his place to set the wicked spirits of uncleanness
and fornicacion, and to be joined, and do service to them? Ye are derely
bought (says he) therefore glorify God in your bodies. Christ that innocent
lamb of God, i. Corin. vi.
i. Peter. i.
has bought us, from the servitude of the devil, not with corruptible gold and
silver, but with his most precious and dear heart bloudde. To what intent?
That we should fall again unto our old uncleanness, and abominable living?
Naie verily: Luke. i. Esaias. xxxviii.
But that we should serve him, all the days of our life, in holiness, and
righteousness: that we should glorify him in our bodies, by purity and
clennesse of life. He declares also, that our bodies are the members of
Christ. How unseemly a thing is it then, to cease to be incorporate and one
with Christ, and through whoredom to be joined, and made all one with an
whore? What greater dishonor, or injury can we do to Christ, then to take
away from him, ye members of his body, and to join them to whores, devils,
and wicked spirits? And what more dishonor can we do to our selfs, then
through uncleanness, to lose so excellent a dignity and fredome, and to become
bond slaves, and miserable captives, to the spirits of darkness? Let us
therefore considre, first the glory of Christ, and then our state, our
dignity and fredome, wherein God has set us, by geuyng us his holy spirit,
and let us valeauntly defend the same, against Satan, and all his crafty
assautes, that Christ may be honored, and that we loose not our liberty, but
still remain in one spirit with him.

Ephe. v.
Moreover, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, the blessed Apostle wills us, to
be so pure, and free, from adultery, fornicacion, and all uncleanness, that we
not once name them among us (as it becomes saints) nor filthiness, nor
foolish talkyng, nor iestyng, which are not commely, but rather geuyng of
thanks. Galath. v. i. Corin. vi.
For this ye know (says he) that no whoremonger, either unclean person, or
coueteous person, (which is an Idolater) has any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ, and God. And that we should remember to be holy, pure,
and free from all uncleanness: the holy Apostle calls us saints, because we
are sanctified, and made holy in the blood of Christ, through the holy ghost.

Now, if we be saints, what have we to do with the manners of the Heathen? i.
Peter. i.
Saint Peter says: as he, which called you, is holy, even so, be ye holy
also, in all your conversation, because it is written: Be ye holy, Leui. xi. ^
xix.
for I am holy. Hitherto have we heard how grievous a sin, fornicacion, and
whoredom is, and how greatly God does abhor it, throughout the whole
scripture. How can it any otherwise be, then a sin of most abhominacion,
seeing it once may not be named emonge the christians, much less, it may in
any point be committed. And surely, if we would weyghe the greatness of this
sin, and consydre it in the right kind, we should find the sin of
whoredom, to be that most fylthy lake, foul puddle, and stynkyng synke,
wherinto all kinds of sins, and evils flow, where also, they have their
resting place, and abydinge.

For has not the adulterer a pride in his whoredom? as the Wisema^ says:
They are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in things that are stark
naught. Is not the adulterer also idle, and delights in no godly exercise,
but only in that his most filthy, and beastly pleasure? Is not his mind
abstracte, and utterly drawn away, from all vertous studyes, and fruicteful
labors, and only given to carnal imaginacions? Does not the whoremonger give
his mind to gluttony, that he may be the more apt, to serve his lusts, and
carnal pleasures? Does not the adulterer give his mind to couetuousnes, and
to pollyng and pillyng of other, that he may be the moreable to mainteyne his
harlottes and whores, and to continue in his filthye, and unlawful love?
Swells he not also with envy, against other, fearing that his preye should
be allured, and taken away from him? Again, is he not yrefull, and
replenished with wrath and displeasure, even against his best beloved, if at
any time, his beastly and deuyllishe request be let* what sin or kind of
sin is it, that is not joined with fornicacion and whoredom? Is it a monstre
of many heads: It receives all kinds of vices, and refuses all kinds of
virtues. If one several sin brings dampnacion, what is to be thought of
that sin, which is accompanied with all euyls, and has waiting on it,
whatsoever is hateful to God, dampnable to man, and pleasunt to Satan?

Great is the dampnacion, that hangs over the heads of fornicatours, and
adulterers. What shall I speak of other incommodities, which issue, and flow
out of this stinkynge puddell of whoredom? Is not that treasure, which before
all other, is most regarded of honest persons, the good fame and name of man
and woman, lost through whoredom? What patrimony, what substance, what
goods, what riches, does whoredom shortly consume and bring to naught? What
valiauntes and strength, is many times made weak, and destroyed with
whoredom? What wit is so fine, that is not doted and defaced through
whoredom? What beautye (although it were never so excellent) is not obscured
through whoredom?

Is not whoredom an enemy to the pleasant flour of youth? and brings it
not gray hears and old age, before the time? What gift of nature (although it
were never so precious) is not corrupted with whoredom? Come not the French
pockes, with other diverse diseases of whoredom? From whence come so many
bastardes and misbegotten children, to the high displeasure of God, and
dishonor of holy wedlock, but of whoredom? How many consume all their
substance and goods, and at the last fall into such extreme poverty, that
afterward they steal, and so are hanged through whoredom? What contencion and
manslaughter comes of whoredom? How many maidens be deflowred, how many wyfes
corrupted, how many wydowes defiled, through whoredom? How much is the
public weal impoueryshed, and troubled through whoredom? How much is Gods
word contempned and depraved by whoredom and whoremongers? Of this vice,
comes a great part of the divorces, which (now a days) be so commonly
accustomed and used, by men's private authority, to the great displeasure of
God, and the breach of the most holy knotte and bond of matrimonye. For when
this most detestable sin is once crept into the breaste of the adulterer, so
that he is entangled with unlawful, and unchaste love, streyghtwayes, his true
and lawful wife is despyced, her presence is abhorred, her company stynketh,
and is loathsome, whatsoever she does, is de^prap^ed, there is no quietness in
the house, so long as she is in sight: Therefore to make short tale, must
she away, for her husband can brook her no longer. Thus through whoredom,
is the honest and innocent wife put away, and an harlot received in her stead:
and in like sort, it happens many times in the wife, toward her husband.
O abhominacion? Christ our savior, very God and man, coming to restore the
law of his heavenly father, unto the right sense, understanding, and
meaning, (among other things) reformed the abuse of this law of God. Math.
xix.
For where as the Jews used, of a long sufferau^ce, by custom, to put away
their wyfes at their pleasure, for every cause: Christ correctyng that evil
custom, did teach that if any man put away his wife, and marieth an other,
for any cause, except only for adultery, (which then was death by the law) he
was an adulterer, and forced also his wife so divorced, to commit adulterye,
if she were joined to any other man: and the man also, so joined with her, to
commit adultery.

In what case then are those adulterers, which for the love of an whore, put
away their true and lawful wife, against all law, right, reason, and
conscience? O, dampnable is the state wherein they stand. Swifte destruction
shall fall on them, if they repent not, and amend not: for God will not ever
suffer holy wedlock, thus to be dishonored, hated and despyced. He will once
punish this carnal and licencious manner of living, and cause, that his holy
ordinance shall be had in reverence, and honor. For surely, Hebre. iii.
wedlock (as the Apostle says) is honorable emonge all men, and the bed
undefiled: But whoremongers and fornicatours, Hebre. iii.
God will judge, (...) is to say, punish and co^dempne. But to what purpose
is this labor taken, to describe, and set forth the greatness of the sin of
whoredom, and the incommodities that issue and flow out of it, seeing that
breath and toungue shall sooner fail any man, then he shall, or may be able to
set it out, according to the abhominacion and haynousnes thereof?
Notwithstanding this is spoken to the intent, that all men should flee
whoredom, and live in the fear of God. God grant, that it may not be spoken
in vain. Now will I declare unto you in order, with what grievous punishments,
God in times pass, plagued adulterye: and how certain worldly Princes also,
did punish it, that ye may perceive, that whoredom and fornicacio^ be sins,
no less detestable in the sight of God, and of all good men, then I have
hitherto uttered. Gene. vi.
In the first book of Moses we read, that when mankind began to be multiplied
upon the earth, the men and women gave their minds so greatly to carnal
delectacion, and fylthy pleasure, that they lived without all fear of God. God
seeing this their beastlye and abominable living, and perceiving that they
amended not, but rather increased daily more and more, in their sinful and
unclean manners, repented that he ever had made man: and to show how greatly
he abhorred adultery, whoredom, fornicacion, and all uncleanness, he made all
the fountaynes of the deep earth, to burste out, and the ^^uces of heaven to
be opened, so that the rain came down upon the earth, by the space of forty
days, and forty nyghtes, and by this means, destroyed the whole world, and
all mankind, eighte persons only excepted, that is to say, Noe, the preacher
of righteousness (as Saint Peter calls him) and his wife, his three sons,
and their wyfes. O what a grievous plague, did God cast here upon all living
creatures, for the sin of whordome? For the which, God took vengeance, not
only of man, but also of beasts, fowls, and all living creatures.
Manslaughter was committed before, Gene. iiii.
yet was not the world destroyed for that, but for whoredom, all the world
(few only except) was ouerflowed with waters, and so peryshed: An example
worthy to be remembered, that ye may learn to fear GOD.

Gene. xix.
We read again, that for the filthy sin of uncleanness, Sodom and Gomorre,
and the other cytyes nyghe unto them, were destroyed, with fire and brymstone
from heaven, so that there was neither man, woman, child, nor beast, nor yet
any thing that grew upon the earth, there left undestroyed. Whose heart
trembles not at the hearing of this history? Who is so drowned in whoredom
and uncleanness, that will not now for ever after, leave this abominable
living, seeing that God so grievously punysheth uncleanness, to rain fire and
brymstone from heaven, to destroy whole cities, to kill man, woman, and
child, and all other living creatures there abydyng, to consume with fire,
all that ever grew? what can be more manifest tokens of Gods wrath and
vengeance against uncleanness, and impuritie of life? Mark this hystorye,
(good people) and fear the vengeance of God. Gene. xiii.
Do we not read also, that GOD did smite Pharao, and his house, with great
plagues, because that he ungodly desired Sara, the wife of Abraham? Gene. xx.
Likewise read we of Abimelech, King of Gerar, although he touched her not by
carnal knowledge. These plagues and punyshme^tes, did God cast upon filthy
and unclean persons, before the law was given, (the law of nature only
reignynge in the hearts of men) to declare, how great love he had to
matrimonye: and again, how much he abhorred adulterye, fornicacion, and all
uncleanness. And when the law that forbad whoredom, was given by Moses to the
Jews, did not God command, that the transgressors thereof, should be put
to death? The words of the law be these: Leuit. xx.
Who so commits adulterye with any man's wife, shall dye the death, both the
man and the woman, because he has broken wedlock with his neighbors wife. In
the law also it was commanded, that a damsel and a man taken together in
whoredom, should be both stooned to death. In an other place we also read,
that God commanded Moses, to take all the head rulers, Number. xxv.
and princes of the people, and to to hang them upon gybbets openly, that every
man might see them, because they either committed, or did not punish whoredom.
Again, did not God send such a plague emonge the people, for fornication and
uncleanness, that they dyed in one day, three and twenty thousand? I pass
over for lack of time, many other historyes of the holy Bible, which declare
the grievous vengeance, and heavy displeasure of God, against whoremongers,
and adulterers. Certes, this extreme punishment appointed of God, shows
evidently, how greatly God hates whoredom. And let us not doubt, but that God
at this present, abhors all manner of uncleanness, no less then he did in the
old law: and will undoubtedly punish it, both in this world, and in the
world to come. For he is a God, Psalm. v.
that can abide no wyckednes: therefore ought it to be eschewed of all, that
tender the glory of God, and the salvation of their own souls.

i. Corin. x.
Saint Paul says: all these things are written for our example, and to
teach us the fear of God, and the obedience to his holy law. For if God
spared not the natural branches, neither will he spare us, that be but
graftes, if we commit like offense. If God destroyed many thousands of people,
many cities, yea the whole world, for whoredom, let us not flatter our
selfs, and think we shall eschape free, and without punishment. For he has
promised in his holy law, to send most grievous plagues upon them, that
transgress his holy commandments. Thus have we heard, how God punishes
the sin of adulterye: let us now hear certain laws, which the cyuile
Magistrates devised, in diverse countrays, for the punishment thereof: that we
may learn, how uncleanness has ever been detested in all well ordered cities
and common wealths, L^wes devised for punis^^^nt of whoredom.
and emonge all honest persons. The law among the Lepre^ans was this, that
when any were taken in adultery, they were bound and carried three days through
the city, and afterward, as long as they lived, were they despiced, and with
shame and confusyon reputed, as persons desolate of all honestye. Emonge the
Locreusyans, the adulterers had both their eyes thrust out. The Romans in
times paste, punyshed whoredom, sometime by fire, sometime by swourde. If a
man emonge the Egyptians had been taken in adulterye, the law was, that he
should openly in the presence of all the people, be scourged naked with
whippes, unto the number of a thousand strypes. The woman that was taken with
him, had her nose cut of, whereby she was known even after, to be an whore,
and therefore to be abhorred of all men. Among the Arabians, they that were
taken in adulterye, had their heads stricken from their bodies. The Athenians
punyshed whoredom by death in like manner. So likewise did the Barbarous
Cartarians. Among the turks even at this day, they that be taken in adultery,
both man and woman, are stoned streightewayes to death, without mercy. Thus se
we, what godly acts were devised in times paste of the high powers, for the
puttyng away of whoredom, and for the mainteynyng of holy matrimony, and pure
co^uersacio^. And the aucthors of these acts, were no christians, but Heathen:
Yet were they so enfla^med with the love of honestye, and pureness of life, that
for the maintenau^ce and conseruacio^ of that, they made godly statutes.
suffering neither fornicacio^, nor adultery, to reign in their realms,
unpunished. Christ said to the people: The Ninevites shall rise at the
judgment, with this nacio^, Luke. xi
(meaning the unfaithful Jews) and shall condemn them. For they repented at
the preaching of Jonas, but behold (says he) a greater the^ Jonas is here,
(meaning himself), and yet they repent not. Shall not (think you) likewise
the Locreusians, Arabians, Athenians, with such other, rise up at the
judgment, and condemn us, for as much as they ceased from whoredom, at the
commandment of man, and we have the law and manifest precepts of God, and
yet forsake we not our filthy conversation? Truly, truly, it shall be easier at
the day of judgment, to these Heathen, then to us, except we repent and
amend. For although death of body, seems to us a grievous punishment in this
world for whoredom: yet is that pain nothing, in comparison of the grievous
torments, which adulterers, fornicatours, and all unclean persons, shall
suffer after this life. For all such shall be excluded, and shut out of the
kingdom of heaven, as s. Paul says: Be not deceived, for neither
whoremongers, i. Coun. vi. Galath. v Ephe. v
nor worshippers of Images, nor adultrers, nor softelinges, nor Sodomites, nor
thefes, nor covetous persons, nor dronkards, nor cursed speakers, nor pyllers,
shall inherit the kingdom of God. Apo. xxi.
And S. Ihon in his reuelacion says: that whoremongers shall have their
part, with murderers, sorcerers, enchaunters, liars, ydolaters, and such
other, in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. The punyshme^te of the body, although it be death, has an end, but
the punishment of the soul, which s. Ihon calls ye second death, is
everlasting: there shall be fire and brimstone: Math. xiii.
there shall be wepinge and gnashing of tethe: the worm, that shall there
gnawe the conscience of the dampened, Luce iii.
shall neeur dye. O whose heart distilleth not even drops of blood, to hear,
and consydre these things? If we tremble and shake at the, hearing and naming
of these pains, oh, what shall they do, that shall feel them, that shall
suffer them yea, and ever shall suffer, worlds without end: god have mercy
upon us. Who is now so drowned in sin and past all godlynes, that he will set
more by a fylthy and stynkyng pleasure, (which sone passes away) then by the
loss of everlasting glory. Again who will so give himself to the lusts of
the flesh, that he fears nothing at all the pains of hell fire? But let us
hear how we may eschew the sin of whoredom and adultery, that we may
walk in the fear of God, and be free from those most grievous, and
intolerable torments, Remedies whereby to avoid fornicacion and adulterye.
which abide all unclean persons. To avoid fornicacio^, adultery, and all
uncleanness, let us provide, that above all things, we may keep our hearts
pure and clean, from all evil thoughts, and carnal lusts. For if that be
once infected and corrupt, we fall hedlonge into all kind of ungodliness. This
shall we easly do, if, when we feel inwardly, that Satan our old enemy
tempts us unto whoredo^, we, by no means consent to his craftye
suggestions, but valiauntly resist, and withstand him, by strong faith in
the word of God, obiectinge against him always in our heart, this
commandment of God: Scriptum est, non moechaberis. It is written, thou shall
not commit whoredom. It shall be good also for us, ever to live in the fear
of God, and to set before our eyes, the grievous threateninges of God, against
all ungodly sinners, and to consider in our mind, how filthy, beastly, and
short, that pleasure is, whereunto Satan moves us: And again, how the pain
appointed for that sin, is intolerable, and everlasting. Moreover, to use a
temperau^ce and sobriety in eating and drynkyng, to eschew unclean
co^municacio^, to avoid al fylthy company, to flee ydlenes, to delight in
reading holy scripture, to watch in godly prayers, and virtuous meditacions:
and at all times, to exercise some godly trauayles, shall help greatly unto
the eschewynge of whoredom.

And here are all degrees to be monyshed, whether they be married, or unmarried,
to love chastity, and clennes of life. For the married are bound by the law
of God, so purely to love one an other, that neither of them seek any strange
love. The man must only cleue to his wife, and the wife again only to her
husband: they must so delighte one in an others company, that none of them
couit any other. And as they are bound, thus to live together in all godliness
and honesty, so likewise is their duetye, virtuously to bring up their
children: and to provide, that they fall not into Satan's snare, nor into any
uncleanness, but that they come pure and honest unto holy wedlock, when time
requires. So likewise ought all masters and rulers to provide, that no
whoredom, nor any point of uncleanness, be used emonge their servants. And
again, they that are single, and feel in them selfs, that they cannot live
without the company of a woman, let them get wifes of their own, and so live
Godly together. For it is better to mary, then to burn. And to avoid
fornicacion, says the Apostle, let every man have his own wife, i. Corin.
vii,
and every woman her own husband. Finally, all such as feel in themselfes,
a sufficiency and ability (through the operacion of Gods spirit) to leede a
sole and contynent life, let them praise God for his gift, and seek all means
possible, to maynteyne the same: As by readyng of holy scriptures, by godly
meditations, by continual prayers, and such other virtuous exercises. If we
all on this wise will endeavor our selfs, to eschew fornicacion, adultery,
and all uncleanness, and lead our lyfes in all Godlynes, and honestye, serving
God with a pure and clean heart, and glorifiynge him in our bodies, by
leadynge an innocente life, we may be sure, to be in the number of those, of
whom our savior Christ speaks in the Gospel, on this manner: Blessed are
the pure in heart, Math. v
for they shall see God: to whom alone, be all glory, honor, rule, and power,
worlds without end. AMEN.

An Homely against contencion and braulynge.
This day (good christen people) shall be declared unto you, the
unprofitableness, and shamfull vnhonesty of contencion, strife and debate: to
the entente, that when you shall se (as it were in a table painted before your
eyes) the euilfauorednes, and deformity of this most detestable vice, your
stomachs may be moved, to rise against it, and to detest and abhor that
sin, which is so much to be hated, and so pernicious and hurtful to al me^.
But among all kinds of contencion, none is more hurtful, then is contencion
in matters of religion. Eschew (says saint Paul) foolish and unlearned
questions, i. Timo. i i. Timo. ii
knowing, that they breed strife. It becomes not the servant of God, to
fight or strive, but to be meke toward all men. This contencion and strife
was in saint Paul's time, emonge the Corinthians, and is at this time, emonge
us English men. For to many there be, which upon the Alebenches or other
places, delight to propounde certain questions, not so much perteyning to
edificacion, as to vainglory and ostentacion: and so vnsoberly to reason and
dispute, that when neither party will give place to other, they fall to
chiding and conte^cion, and sometime from hot words, to further
inconuenie^ce. Saint Paul could not abide to hear among the Corinthians,
these words of discord or dissencion: I hold of Paul, I of Cephas, and I of
Apollo. i. Corin. iii.
What would he then say, if he heard these words of contencion: (which be
now almost in every ma^s mouth) he is a Pharisei, he is a gospeler, he is of
the new sort, he is of the old faith, he is a new broched brother, he is a
good catholic father he is a papist, he is an heretic. Oh how ye church is
divided. Oh how the cities be cut and mangled. Oh how ye coote of Christ,
that was without seame, is all to rent and torn. Oh body mystical of Christ:
where is that holy and happy unity, out of the which, whosoever is, he is not
in Christ? If one membre be pulled from another, where is the body? If the body
be drawn from the head, where is the life of the body? We cannot be ioynted to
Christ our head, except we be glued with concord and charity, one to another.
For he that is not in this unity, is not of the church of Christ, which is a
congregation or unity together, and not a division. Saint Paul says: i. Cor
iii.
that as long as emulacion, contencion, and factions, be emonge us, we be
carnal, and walk according to the fleshly man. And saint James says: James.
iii
If you have bitter emulacion and contencio^ in your hearts, glory not of it:
for where as contencion is, there is inco^stancy, and al evil deades. And why
do we not hear.s. Paul, which prays us, where as he might command us,
saying: I beseech you, in ye name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will speak
al one thing, i. Cor. i
and yt there be no dissencion among you, but that you will be one whole body,
of one mind, and of one opinion in ye truth. If his desire be reasonable and
honest, why do we not grant it? if his request be for our profit, why do we
refuse it? And if we list not to hear his peticion of prayer, yet let us hear
his exhortacio^, where he says* I exhort you, that you walk, as it becomes
the vocacion, Ephe. iiii.
in the which you be called, with all submission and mekenes, with lenity and
softenes of mind, bearing one another by charity, studiyng to keep the
unity of the spirit, by the bond of peace: For there is one body, one spirit,
one faith, one baptism. There is (he says) but one body, of ye which he can
be no lively membre, that is at variaunce with the other members. There is one
spirit, which joins and knitteth all things in one. And how can this one
spirit reign in us, when we emonge our selfs be divided? There is but one
faith, and how can we then say, he is of the old faith, and he is of the new
faith? There is but one baptism, and the^ shall not all they, which be
baptized, be one? Contencion causes division, wherefore it ought not to be
among christians, whom one faith and baptism, joins in an unity. But if we
contempne saint Paul's request and exhortacio^, yet at the least, let us
regard his obtestacion, in the whithe he does very earnestly charge us, and
(as I may so speak) conjure us in this form and manner: If there be any
consolacion in Christ, Philip. ii.
if there be any comfort of love, if you have any communion of the spirit, if
you have any bowelles of pity and compassion, fulfill my joy, being all like
affected, having one charity, being of one mind, of one opinion, that
nothing be done by contencion, or vainglory. Who is he, that has any bowelles
of pity, that will not be moved with these words so pithy? whose heart is so
stony, but that ye sword of these words (which be more sharp then any two
edged swoorde) may not cut and break a sondre? Wherefore, let us endeavor
our selfs to fulfill s. Paul's joy, here in this place, which shall be at
length to our great joy in another place. Let us so read the scripture, that
by reading thereof, we may be made the better livers, How we should read
the scripture.
rather then the more contencious disputers. If any thing is necessary to be
taught, reasoned, or disputed, let us do it with all mekenes, softnes, and
lenity. If any thing shall chance to be spoken uncomely, let one bear
another frailty. He that is faulty, let him rather amend, then defend that,
which he has spoken amiss, lest he fall by contencio^, from a foolish
error, into an obstinate heresy: for it is better, to give place mekely, then
to win ye victory, with the breach of charity: which chau^ceth, where every
man will defend his opinion obstinately If we be christen men, why do we not
follow Christ, which says: learn of me, Matthew. xi.
for I am meek and lowely in heart. A disciple must learn the lesson of his
scholemaster, and a servant must obey the commandment of his master. He that
is wise and learned (says s. James) let him show his goodness by his good
conversation, and sobernes of his wisdom. James. iii.
For where there is envy and contencion, that wisdom comes not from God,
but is worldly wisdom, man's wisdom, and deuilishe wisdom. For the
wisdom that comes from above, from the spirit of God, is chaste and pure,
corrupted with no evil affeccions, it is quiet, meke and peaceable, abhorringe
all desire of contencio^: it is tractable, obedient, not grudgyng to learn,
and to give place to them, that teach better for their reformacion. For there
shall never be an end of striuinge and contencion, if we contend, who in
contencion shall be master, and have the ouerhande: if we shall heap error
upon error, if we continue to defend yt obstinately, which was spoken
unadvisedly. For truth it is, that stifnes in mainteyning an opinion, bredeth
contencio^, braulyng and chiding, which is a vice among all other, most
pernicious and pestilent to common peace and quietness. And as it stands
betwixt two persons and parties, (for no man commonly does chide with him self)
so it comprehends two most detestable vices: the one is picking of querelles,
with sharp and co^tencious words: the other stands in froward answering,
and multipliyng evil words again. The first is so abominable, that saint
Paul says: if any yt is called a brother, i. Cor. v.
be a worshipper of ydols, a brauler, or piker of querels, a thief or an
extorcioner, with him that is such a man, se that ye eat not. Now here
considre that saint Paul numbreth a scolder, Against querell pickinge.
a brauler, or a picker of querels, among thiefes and ydolaters: and many times
comes less hurt of a thief, then of a raylyng tongue: for the one takes
away a man's good name, the other takes but his richesse, which is of muh
less value and estimacion, then is his good name. And a thief hurts but him,
from whom he steals: but he that has an evil tongue, troubles all the town
where he dwells, and sometime the whole country. And a raylynge tongue is a
pestilence so full of contagio^, that saint Paul wills christian men to
forbear the company of such, i Cor. vi
and neither to eat nor drink with them. And where as he will not, that a
Christian woman should forsake her husband, although he be an infidele, nor
that a christian servant should depart, from his master, which is an
infidele and Heathen, and so suffer a christian man to keep company with an
infidel: yet he forbids us to eat or drink with a scolder, or a querel
picker. i Cor. vi.
And also in ye.vi. chapi. to the Cor. he says thus: Be not deceived, for
neither fornicators, neither worshippers of ydols, neither thiefes nor
dronkards, neither cursed speakers shall dwell in the kingdom of heaven. It
must needs be a great fault, that doeeh move and cause the father, to disherite
his natural son. And how ca^ it otherwise be, but that this cursed speaking,
must needs be a most dampnable sin, the which does cause God, our most
merciful and loving father, to deprive us of his most blessed kingdom of
heaven. Against froward answeryng. Matthew. v.
Against the other sin, that stands in requiting taunt for taunte, speaks
Christ himself: I say unto you (says our savior Christ) resist not
evil, but love your enemies, and say well by them, that say evil by you, do
well unto them, that do evil to you, and pray for them, that do hurt and
pursue you, that you may be the children of your father, which is in heaven,
whoo suffers his sun to rise, both upon good and evil, and sends his
rayn both to the just and unjust. To this doctrine of Christ, agrees very
well the teaching of saint Paul, that elect vessel of God, Roma. xii.
who cease not to exhort and call upon us, saiynge: bless them that curse
you, bless (I say) and curse not, recompense to no man evil for evil, if it
be possible (as much as lies in you) live peaceablye with all men.

Dearly beloved avenge not your selfs, but rather give place unto wrath, for
it is written: vengeance is mine, Deu. xxxii.
I will revenge says the Lord. Therefore, if thine enemy honger, feed him,
if he thirst, give him drink, be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil
with goodness. All these be the words of s. Paul. An obiec^ion.
But they that be so full of stomach, and set so much by them selfs, that
they may not abide so much as one evil word to be spoken of them,
peradventure will say: if I be evil reviled, shall I stand still like a goose,
or a fool, with my finger in my mouth? Shall I be such an ydiot and diserde,
to suffer every man to speak upon me, what they list, to rail what they
list, to spewe out al their venyme against me, at their pleasures? Is it not
convenient, that he that speaks evil, should be answered accordingly? If I
shall use this lenity and softnes, I shall both increase mine enemies
frowardness, and provoke other to do like. Such reasons make they, An answer
that can suffer nothing, for the defense of their impacience. And yet, if by
froward aunsweryng to a froward person, there were hope to remedy his
frowardness, he should less offend, yt should so answer, doing the same not
of ire, or malice, but only of that intent, that he that is so froward or
malicious, may be reformed. But he that can not amend another man's fault, or
cannot amend it without his awn fault, better it were ye one should perish,
then two. Then if he cannot quiet him with gentle words, at the least let
him not follow him, in wicked and uncharitable words. If he can pacify him
with suffering, let him suffer: and if not, it is better to suffer evil, then
to do evil, to say well, then to say evil: For to speak well against evil,
comes of the spirit of God, but to render evil for evil, comes of the
contrary spirit. And he that cannot te^per ne rule his awn ire, is but weak
and feeble, and rather more like a woman or a child, then a strong man. For the
true strength and ma^lines, is to overcome wrath, and to despice injury, and
other me^nes folishnes. And besides this, he that shall despice the wrong
dooen unto him by his enemy, every man shall perceive, that it was spoken or
done without cause, where as contrary, he that does fume and chafe at it,
shall help the cause of his adversary, geuynge suspicion that the thing is
true. And so in going about to revenge evil, we show our selfs to be evil,
and while we will punysh and revenge another man's folly, we double and augment
our own folly. But many pretenses find they, that be wilful, to color their
impacie^ce. Mine enemy (say they) is not worthy to have gentle words or
deeds, being so full of malice, or frowardnes. The less he is worthy, the
more art thou allowed of God, the more art thou commended of Christ, for
whose sake thou should render good for evil, because he has commanded the,
and also deserved that thou should so do. Thine neighbor has peradventure
with a word offended the: call thou to thy remembrance, with how many words
and deeds, how grievously thou have offended thy lord God. What was man, when
Christ dyed for him? Was he not his enemy, and unworthy to have his favor and
mercy? Even so, with what gentleness and patience does he forbear, and
tolerate the, although he is daily offended by the? Forgive therefore a light
tresspace to thy neighbor, that Christ may forgive the, many thousands of
trespasses, which art every day an offender. For if thou forgive thy brother,
being to the a trespasser, then have thou a sure sign and token, that God
will forgive the, to whom all men be debtors or trespassers. How would thou
have God merciful to the, if thou will be cruel unto thy brother? Canste thou
not find in thine heart to do that toward an other, that is thy fellow, which
God has done to the, that art but his servant? Ought not one sinner to
forgive another, seeing that Christ which was no sinner, did pray to his father
for them, that without mercy and dispitfully put him to death? Who, when he
was reviled, i. Peter. ii.
did not use reuilyng words again, and when he suffered wrongfully, he did not
threate^, but gave all vengeance, to the judgment of his father, which
judges rightefully. And what crakest thou of thy head? If thou labor not to be
in the body, thou canste be no membre of Christ: if thou follow not the steps
of Christ, Esai. iiii.
who (as the Prophet says) was led to death like a lamb, not opening his
mouth to reuilyng, but openyng his mouth to praiynge for them that crucified
him, saiynge: Father, Luke. xxiii.
forgive them, for they cannot tell what they do. The which example, anon
after Christ, saint Stephin did follow, Acts. vii. i. Cor. iiii.
and after saint Paul: We be evil spoken of (says he) and speak well, we
suffer persecucion and take it pacie^tly: Men curse us, and we gently entreat.
Thus s. Paul taught that he did, and he did that he taught: Bless you (says
he) them yt persecute you, bless you, and curse not. Is it a great thing to
speak well to of and thine adversary, to who^ Christ does co^mau^d the to do
well? David when Semei did call him al to naught, did not chide again, but said
patiently: suffer him to speak evil, it perchance the Lord will have mercy
on me. Hystories be full of examples of Heathen men, that took very mekely,
both opprobrious words, and injurious deeds. And shall those Heathen men,
excel in patience, us yt profess Christ, the teacher and example of all
patience? Lisander when one did rage against him, in reuilinge of him, he was
nothing moved, but said: go to, go to, speak against me as much, and as often as
thou will, and leave out nothing, if perchance by this means thou may
discharge the of those naughty things, with the which it seems, that thou
art full laden. Many men speak evil of all men, because they can speak well
of no man. After this sort, this wise man avoided from him, the injurious
words spoken unto him: imputyng and laiyng them to the natural sickness of
his adversary.

Perycles, when a certain scolder, or a raylyng fellow did revile him, he
au^swered not a word again, but went into a galery, and after toward night,
when he went home, this scolder followed him, ragyng still more and more,
because he saw the other to set nothing by him. And after that he came to his
gate, (being dark night) Perycles commanded one of his seruau^^es to light a
torche, and to bring ye scolder home to his awn house. He did not only with
quietness suffer this brawler pacie^tly, but also reco^pe^sed an evil turn with
a good turn, and yt to his enemy. Is it not a shame for us that profess
Christ, to be worse then Heathen people, in a thing chiefly perteyning to
Christ's religion? Shall Philosophy persuade them more, then Gods word shall
persuade us? Shall natural reason prevail more with them, then religion shall
do with us? Shall man's wisdom lead them to that thing, whereunto the
heavenly doctrine cannot lead us? What blyndenesse, wilfulness, or rather
madness is this? Perycles being provoked to anger with many contumelious
words, answered not a word. But we stirred but with one little word, what
tragedies do we move? How do we fume, rage, stamp, and stare like mad men?
Many men of every trifle, will make a great matter, and of the spark of a
little word, will kindle a great fire, taking all things in the worste part.
But how much better is it, and more like to the example and doctrine of
Christ, to make rather of a great fault in our neighbor, a small fault,
reasoning with our selfs after this sort. He spoke these words, but it was in
a sudden heat, or the drink spoke them, and not he, or he spoke the^ at the
mocion of some other, or he spoke them, being ignorant of the truth: Reasons
to move me^ from querel picki^g
he spoke them not against me, but against him whom he thought me to be.
But as touching evil speaking, he yt is ready to speak evil against other
men: first let him examyne himself, whether he be faultlesse and clear of
the fault, which he fyndeth in an other. For it is a shame, when he yt
blames an other for any fault, is giltye himself either in the same fault,
either in a greater. It is a shame for him that is blind, to call an other man
man blind: and it is more shame for him that is whole blind, to call him
blinkerd, that is but pore blind. For this is to se a straw in another man's
iye, when a man has a block in his own iye. Then let him considre, that he
that uses to speak evil, shall commonly be evil spoken of again. And he that
speaks what he will for his pleasure, shall be compelled to hear that he would
not, to his displeasure. Moreover, let him remember that saying, that we
shall give an account for every idle word. Matthew. xii.
How much more then shall we make a reconyng for our sharp, bitter, braulyng,
and chidyng words, which provoke our brother to be angery, and so to the
breach of his charity. And as touching evil aunsweryng, although we be never
so much provoked by other men's evil speaking, yet we shall not follow their
frowardnes by evil aunsweryng, if we consider, that anger is a kind of
madness, and that he which is angery, is (as it were for ye time) in a
phenesy. Reasons to move me^ne from froward answeryng.
Wherefore, let him beware, least in his fury he speak any thing* whereof
afterward he may have just cause to be sorry. And he that will defend, that
anger is no fury, but that he has reason, even when he is most angery, then
let him reason thus with himself, when he is angery. Now I am so moved and
chafed, that within a little while after, I shall be otherways minded: wherefore
then should I now speak any thing in mine anger, which hereafter, when I
would fainest, cannot be changed? Wherefore shall I do any thing now, being (as
it were) out of my wit, for the which, when I shall come to my self again, I
shall be very sad? Why does not reason? Why does not godliness? Yea, why does
not Christ obtein ye thing now of me, which hereafter, time shall obtein of me?
If a man be called an adulterer, usurer, drunkarde, or by any other
contumelious name, let him consider earnestly, whether he be so called truly or
falsely: if truly, let him amend his fault, that his adversary may not after,
worthily charge him with such offenses: if these things be laid against him
falsely, yet let him consider, whether he has given any occasion, to be
suspected of such things, and so he may both cut of that suspicion, whereof
this slander did arise, and in other things shall live more warely. And thus
vsyng our selfs, we may take no hurt, but rather much good, by the rebukes
and slanders of our enemy. For the reproach of an enemy, may be to many men a
quicker spurr to the amendment of their life, then the gentle monicion of a
friend. Phillippus the King of Macedony, when he was evil spoken of by the
chief rulers of the city of Athens, he did thank them heartily, because by
them, he was made better, both in his words and deeds: for I studse (said
he) both by my sayings and doings to prove them liars. This is the best
way, to refell a man's adversary, so to live, that all, which shall know
his honesty, may bear witness, that he is slaundered unworthily. If the
fault whereof he is slau^dered, be such, that for the defense of his
honesty, he must needs make answer, yet let him answer quietly and
softely, on this fashion, that those faults be laid against him falsely. For it
is truth yt the wiseman says: Proverb. xv.
a soft answer asswageth anger, and a hard and sharp answer does stir up
rage and fury. The sharp answer of Nabal, i. Regum. x^v
did provoke David to cruel vengeance, but the gentle words of Abigaill,
quenched the fire again, that was all in a flamme. And a special remedy,
against malicious tongues, is to arm our selfs with patience, mekenes, and
silence, least with multipliyng words with the enemy, we be made as evil as
he. An obieccion.
But they that cannot bear one evil word, peradventure for their own
excusacion, will allege that, which is written: he that despiceth his good,
name is cruel. Also we read: answer a fool, according to his folishnesse.
Prouer xxvi. Ihon. xix.
And our Lord Jesus did hold his peace, at certain evil sayings, but to some,
he answered diligently. He heard men call him a Samaritain, a carpenters
son, a wine drinkar, and he held his peace: But when he heard them say,
thou haste a devil within thee, he answered to that earnestly. An aunswer^
Truth it is in deed, that there is a time, when it is convenient to answer
a fool according to his folishenesse, least he should seem in his own
conceit to be wise. And sometime it is not profitable to answer a fool,
according to his foolishness, least the wise manne be made like to ye fool.
When our infamy is joined with the peril of many, then is it necessary, in
aunsweryng, to be quick and ready. For we read that many holy men of good
zeales, have sharply and fiercely, both spoken and answered tyrauntes and
evil men: which sharp words, proceeded not of anger, rancor, or malice, or
appetite of vengeance, but of a fervent desire to bring the^ to the true
knowledge of GOD, and from ungodly living, by an earnest and sharp obiurgacion
and chidyng. In this zeal saint Ihon Baptiste called the Phariseis, Matthew.
iii.
Adders brood, Galathi. iii.
and s. Paul called the Galathians fools, and the men of Crete, Titus. i.
Philip. iii.
he called liars, evil beasts, and sloggishe bellies, and the false Apostles,
he called dogs and crafty workmen. And this zeal is godly, and to be
allowed, as it is plainly proved by the example of Christ, who although he were
the fountain and spryng of all meekness, gentilnes and softness: ye he
calls the obstinate Scribes and Phariseis, Matthew. xxiii.
blind guydes, fools, painted graves, Hypocrites, serpe^tes, adders broad, a
corrupt and wicked generacio^. Matthew. xvi.
Also he rebukes Peter egerly, saying: go behind me satan. Likewise S. Paul
reproves Elimas, Acts. xiii.
saying: O thou full of all craft, and guile, enemy to al justice, thou
ceasest not to destroy the right ways of God: and now lo, the hand of the
lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind, and not se for a time. Acts. v.
And s. Peter reprehe^deth Ananias very sharply, saying: Ananias, how is it
that satan has filled thy heart, that thou should lie unto the holy ghost?
This zeal has been so fervent in many good men, that it has stirred the^ not
only to speak bitter and eger words: but also to do things, which might
seem to some, to be cruel, but in deed, they be very just, charitable, and
Godly, because they were not done of ire, malice or contencious mind, but of a
fervent mind to the glory of God, and the correccion of sin, executed by men,
called to that office. For in this zeal, Ihon. ii.
our Lord Jesus Christ did drive with a whippe, the biars and sellers out of
the temple. Exodus xxxii.
In this zeal, Moses brake the two tables, which he had received at Gods
hand, when he saw the Israelites daunsyng about a calfe, and caused to be
killed.xxiii.M. of his own people. Nume. xxv.
In this zeal Phinees the son of Eleasar, did thruste through with his
sword, zambry and Cozby, But these examples are not to be followed of every body
but as men be called to office and set in authority. James. iiii.
whom he found together joined in the act of lechery. Wherefore now to return
again to contencious words, and specially in matters of religion, and Gods
word (which would be used with all modesty, soberness and charity) the
words of s. James ought to be well marked, and borne in memory, where he
says: that of co^tencion rises al evil. Prouer. xx.
And the wise king Solomon says: honor is due to a man that keeps himself
from contencion, and all that mingle themselfes therewith, be fools. And
because this vice is so much hurtefull to the society of a common wealth, in
all well ordered cities, these common braulers and skolders, be punished with a
notable kind of pain: as to be set on the cokyngstole, pillery, or such
like. And they be unworthy to live in a common wealth, the which do as much
as lies in them, with braulyng and skoldyng, to disturb the quietness and
peace of the same. And whereof comes this contencion, strief, and variaunce,
but of pride and vain glory? Let us therefore humble our selfs under the
mighty hand of God, i. Peter. v. Luke. i.
which has promised to rest upon them, that be humble and low in spirit.
If we be good and quiet Christian men, let it appear in our speech and
tongues. If we have forsaken the devil let us use no more deuillish toungues.
He that has been a railyng skolder, now let him be a sober counsailoure. He
that has been a malicious slaunderor, now let him be a loving comforter. He
that has been a vain railer, now let him be a ghostly teacher. He that has
abused his tongue in cursyng, now let him use it in blessyng. He that has
abused his tongue in evil speaking, now let him use it in speaking well. All
bitterness, anger, railyng, and blasphemy, let it be avoided from you. If you
may, and it be possible, in nowise be angery. But if you may not be clean
void of this passion, then yet so temper and bridle it, that it stir you to
contencion and braulyng. If you be provoked with evil speaking, arm your self
with patience, lenity, and silence, either speaking nothing, or else being very
soft, meke and gentle in aunsweryng. Overcome thine adversaries with benefits
and gentleness. And above all things, keep peace and unity, be no peace
breakers, but peace makers. And then there is no doubt, but that God, the
aucthor of comfort and peace, will grant us peace of conscience, and such
concord and agreement, that with one mouth and mind, we may glorify God,
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom be all glory now and ever. Amen.

HEreafter shall follow Homelies, of fasting Praiyng, Almose deeds: of the
Nativity, Passion, Resurreccion, and Ascencion of our savior Christ: of the
due receiuyng of his blessed body and blood, under the form of bread and wine:
against Idleness, against Gluttony and dru^kennesse, against Coueteousnesse,
against Envy, Ire and malice* with many other matters, as well fruitful as
necessary, to the edifiyng of Christian people, and the increase of Godly
living. Amen.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON, THE LAST DAY OF IVLII, IN THE FIRST YEAR OF THE REIGN
OF OUR SOVEREIGNE LORD KING EDWARD THE.VI. BY RICHARD GRAFTON PRINTER TO HIS
MOST ROYAL MAJESTY.

ANNO. 1547.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

SVSCIPITE ^^CITVM VERBVM ^ACO ^1




