THE Use of both the Globes, Celestial, and Terrestrial, most plainly
delivered in form of a Dialogue.

Containing most pleasant, and profitable conclusions for the Mariner, and
generally for all those, that are addicted to these kind of Mathematical
instruments.

Written by T. Hood Mathematical Lecturer in the City of London, sometime
fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson. 1592.

To the Welwillers of the Mathematical Lecture T. Hood, wishes all felicity.
IT is not unknown unto you most friendly and courteous auditors, that the
worshipful William Sanderson, besides the great cost, which he has
heretofore employed in the searching out of the Northwest passage unto China,
and the Moluccas, and to a relieved our countrymen in Virginia) has now of
late with no small charge for the farther honor and benefit of the
commonwealth caused two Globes (the Celestial and the Terrestrial) to be set
forth. And for so much as the Globes of themselves without their use (which is
most singular of all other Mathematical instruments) are more delightful to
the eye then profitable to the professor thereof, he did with a friendly
consideration inuit me to pe^ne this treatise concerning their use, the which
I thought good generally to dedicate to the tuition of you al, rather then to
any one (as the common use is) in this respect. I am credibly informed of late
that certain men, whereof one (how profoundly soever he thinks of his
learning) not being hable either to wright true English, or Latin, has gone
about to form an out rageous, and most impudent Pamphlet to my disgrace, and to
commit it to the press, an other not being hable either to write or read,
runs up and down, both the Court, and City (pretending I know not what
skill in Mathematical matters) seeking to discredit al me^ in respect of him
self, and me not modestly among the rest. For So Much therefore (most loving
auditors) as these men and such like without any cause (except my well doing
move them thereunto) have gone about to Kendell a most vile conceit against me
in your minds: my request therefore unto you all is this, that you will
friendly and favorably peruse this work: and conferring it with the profit
which you have acknow^edged in my reading, vouchsafe to be my patrones against
such undeserved ill willers of mine, and that so much the rather, because in
this Book I have set forth certain things, whereof I have not had any
direction from other authors, but have grounded them upon mine own study,
and experience guided by reason, which if it shall please you to do, you shall
find me most willing, as I have always bin, to be profitable not to you only
privately, but to my common wealth publicly in what I may. Farewell.

Yours Thomas Hood.

The use of the Celestial and Terrestrial Globe.
M. ALl hayle Philomathes, what news?


P. No news Sir, but this is the cause of my coming, to have a little
conference with you touching the Globe.


M. You know that my mind, and affection toward all men of honest disposition
has been such, that I am ready to pleasure them so far forth as I may. Say
therefore briefly, what will you have the end of our communication.


P. My desire is to be instructed by you in the use of the Globe: and that so
much the rather, because lately by our painful countryman Master Mollineux,
at the great cost and charge of that worshipful gentleman, and ^ouer of
learning M. William Sanderson, there have bin two Globes set forth, and for so
much as they are now in the hands of many with whom I have to do, I would not
be altogether ignorant in those matters.


M. In good time Philomathes, is this requested at my hands, for I my self
have been very liberally invited ^o him to pen a Book, concerning the use
of both the Clobes, for the better profit of our countrymen. So ^^at your
request is but an hastening forward of that work, which in respect of his
liberality I cannot but be willing to undertake. Go to therefore let us come
to the matter: and to the end your desire may be fully satisfied, move you the
question, and I will answer.


P. Very well: First resolve me in this, what diffe^e^ce do you put between a
Globe and a Sphere. Me thin^eth by the common phrase of speech there should be
a difference between them, for I hear some men say, that they will learn the
use of the Globe, and others are desirous of the Sphere.


M. If you regard the proper signification of the word, they differ nothing
but this, that the one is the Greek word, the other the Latin. But in their
improper signification there is a difference between them, for the Greek
word (...), as it is used improperly, signifies that, which the Latin word
Globus cannot. The word Sphere taken improperly betokens such a body as is
round on the outside and hollow within (as that which is made of two round
dishes joined together by the brimmes) the which body the Latins properly
call Orbis, an Orb: in this sense also is the word Globus used. Moreover the
word Sphaera signifies that instrument made of brazen hoopes (we call it
commonly a ringed Sphere) wherewith the Astronomers deliver unto the nouices of
that Science, the vnders^anding of things which they imagine in the heaven. In
this sense we cannot use the word Globe, except we imitate the ignorant
people who not knowing how to call a thing rightly, will now and then term the
ringed Sphere a Globe.


P. What is the proper signification of these word and how are they defined?


M. A Sphere or Globe, which in truth are all on^ is a round bowed Solid: such
a one is the whole fram^ of the world consisting of heaven and earth.


P. What am I to observe in this definition, for the better understanding of
the present matter which we hau^ in hand.


M. You are especially to note the word (round^ and thereby to gather this,
that whether the Globe be Mathematically conceived in mind, or sensibly
delivered to the eye, it is contained and enclosed under one surface. Also
because nothing is made round without a center, therefore in the midst of
the Globe we must conceive a point to be, the which we call the center of the
Globe, from whence all the right lines drawn unto the vtte^ ^ost surface of
the Globe are equal. Ite^ for so much as the body cannot be made round
without a circular motion, and there is no circular motion without some rest,
and that rest cannot be simply within the Globe, therefore likewise in the
uttermost surface of the Globe you must especially observe the two points upon
which the Globe moves, and upon which it rests whilst it is moved. These
points are called the Poles of the Globe. In the Poles this is to be noted,
they are but two, they are right opposite one to another, they are equally
distant from the Center of the Globe. And in regard that the Globes (which we
use) represe^t some principal part of the world, therefore we call these
foresaid Poles, the Poles of the world and speaking either simply of the
Poles, or of the Poles of the world, we have relation only to those points
upon which the Globe moves, whereof the one is termed the North, the other
the South pole. Last of all from the one Pole to the other we must imagine a
line to be drawn through the Center of the Globe, the which right line is
called the axeltree of the Globe, which in the revolution of the Globe never
moves but stands still. Thus much generally concerning those things which
are to be noted in the Globe, so far forth as it is simply called by that
name. Let us now proceed to the division thereof. The surface of the Globe, as
we have hitherto spoken of it, is to be understood as a blancke having nothing
inscribed in it, yet fit to receive any inscription: therefore according to the
inscription of the Globe we divide it two several ways: so that the Globe is
said to be either Celestial, or Terrestrial. The celestial Globe is that
which contains in the conuenitie thereof certain circles of the heaven, and
the fixed stars, with their Astronomicall appertinences. Of this Globe I
mind God willing to entreat first, and then of the terrestrial Globe.


P. By your definition I perceive that your whole discourse shall be either of
the circles belonging to the Globe, or else of the Stars with their
Astronomical appertenences as you call them. But before we enter into the
discourse of these matters, I must crave a word or two with you, concerning
the particularities of your definition, that by comparing it with the thing
defined, and with the thing signified by the Globe, which is the heaven, I may
the better understand the matter. First therefore in that you say that the
Globe is round, would you have me by these words understand the Heaven to be
so?


M. Yea that you must, and to confute that fond opinion of Lactantius, who
affirmed the Heaven to be flat, there are sundry arguments alleged by the
Learned, whereof some are probable, the other necessary, the arguments are
these: First it has pleased God in the form of the heaven to set forth a
resemblance of his eternity, that as in this figure, so in him there is
neither beginning not ending. 2 For so much as the heaven was to co^prehende
all corruptible things, and without it is neither time nor place, therefore it
has received a sphericall form, which of all Isoperimetrall figures is most
capacious, and fittest to contain. 3. If the Heavens were not round, but
three or four square, or of some such like figure, that monstrous absurdity
which nature does so much abhor, that is to say an emptiness must be
granted. 4. This roundnes being denied, it must needs follow, that
wheresoever, and of what sort soever the situation of the earth were, the
distance from it to the heaven would not be the same, so that the qua^tities of
the same Stars and their distances would be unequal to those that dwell in
any one place of the earth.


P. And by your leave Sir it seems so: who is he that has not seen the full
Moon to rise as big as a bushel, the which not withstanding being mounted
higher seems nothing so great. Again in a fair day, if we look round
about us, toward each part of the Heaven, does it not seem further from us
near unto the ground, than over our heads? So that if we should make our eyes
judges of the roundenes of Heaven, we can not auerre it to be so, because the
Stars appear in several quantities, and each part of Heaven seems not to
be of an equal distance from us.


M. In deed it is somewhat which you say but most easily answered, even by a
familiar example. A man reading his book sees the quantity of each letter,
and which way so ever he turns himself keeping the book in one distance
from his sight the letters appear of the same quantity, but if he put on his
spectacles he conceaueth the letter to be greater tha^ it is, because the
visible form thereof is enlarged by that means. The like must be understood
in the Stars, namely that which way soever they move they would appear of
the same magnitude, were it not that near unto the earth, when the Sun is
ready to set, there is a dampe or miste which is unto our sight as the
spectacles are, whereby the visible form of the Stars seen is so enlarged
and dispersed, that our sight cannot comprehend them in their proper
Magnitude. The like unto this is to be perceived in the water, which causes
any thing cast into it to seem greater, than it would appear in the same
distaunce lying on the bare ground. As for the second objection which you
make, you must understand this, that the sight is not an immediate judge of a
distance assigned, but gathers it by means, that is by the interposition of
a certain number of men or houses, or trees, or hills, or some other such
like thing betwixt the eye and the thing seen. Which things interposed if
they be many, we affirm the thing seen to be far off, because reason
tells us that they cannot be contained in a small space: contrariwise if they
be few we judge the distaunce to be the lesser. Hereupon it comes to pass
that our eye running along by the ground and beholding so many housen,
churches, hills, and trees between us and the heaven, we judge and affirm
it to be far from us: but for so much as in looking up toward heaven, there
is nothing to be seen directly in our sight, except a cloud or two which (as
the Philosophers affirm) cannot be above three miles or there aboutes distant
from the earth, therefore we think that part of heaven to be nearer: so that
the argument taken from the equal apparent magnitude of the stars cannot be
but true, and infers the roundenesse of the heaven. The. 5. argument is set
from the motion of the stars, which is circular. 6. Again the Sphericall
figure is fittest to move, and therefore most ^^tte for the heaven, whose
motion is continual without intermission. 7. Moreover by the form of the
parts namely the Stars, we infer the form of the whole. 8. Also this
stands with reason, that the most perfect body should have the most perfect
form, and therefore the heaven being so pure and perfect that the Philosophers
wanting a name for the subject matter whereof it is made, have called it a
Quintessence, it ^equireth also the most perfect form which is Sphericall and
round, as may appear by all the works of God, where in this roundenesse is
especially to be observed. 9. Last of all we may take an argument from our
Astronomicall instruments which are most fit being round and are derived
from a circle. Thus much for the form and figure of heaven.


P. You say then that the heaven is most perfectly round: and not only that,
but you will have it also to be accounted a Solid body. By the word Solid
we commonly understand that body which being made of some massy matter is not
hollow within, but whole and entire through out. Must I conceive the heaven to
be so?


M. Common sense denies that conceat. For you see the earth, the water, and
whatsoever element else, or Elementate thing there is to be contained within
the coape of heaven, in so much that the matter of the heaven is not entire and
Solid thorough out. But to the end you may understand this Soliditie aright,
hearken I pray you unto my words, and let the material Globe alone for a
while. The whole world is divided into two principal parts, the one
Etheriall, the other Elementall. The Elementall part compacted o^ the 4.
Elements, the fire, the air, the water, and the earth is environed on every
side with the Etheriall part which is the Heaven: which from the element of
the fire upward is Solid and has no emptines in any place. Yet i^ it not so
Solid but that it is distinguished into certain^ Spheres or (as we ought
properly to term the^) Orbs, whereof each one moves diversely. These Orbs
are in number. 10. as may be gathered by the motion, occultation, and parallaxe
of the Stars. The 10. which is the uppermost of all is called the primum
mobile, it moves from the East directly toward the West upon the poles of
the world, expressed by the poles of the Globe, within the space of 24. hours,
and imparting his motion to the other. 9. it carries them with him round about
in the same time, so that whereas we see the Sun, the Moon, and all the
Stars to rise and set within that space, it comes to pass not by their
own proper and peculiar motion, but by the violent and swifte motion of this
first mooueable. The inferior. 9. Spheres move from the West toward the East
not directly in a line against the other, but from the West Southwest they
bend toward the East Northeast. Some of these. 9. Spheres are beautified with
Stars the other have none. The ninth Sphere has never a Star, it is
usually called the Christalline heaven (although that name be common also to
the foresaid Sphere) because it is most clear, and transparent, having no one
part thicker than an other. It makes his proper and perfect revolution as
Ptolome affirms in 36000. as Albategnius writes in 23760 as Alphonsus
gathers in 49000. years: the which time is thought to be Plato his great
year, wherein he said ^ach thing should return to the former estate. Of those
^pheres which are beautified with stars, some have but ^^e star, the other
has many: that which has many is ^he, 8. Sphere, otherwise called the
Firmament, either because being the uttermost of all (as antiquity judged) it
^^rmely keeps in and inco^passeth the rest, or else because (...)
co^prehendeth those stars, whose distance one from an ^ther is firm and
fixed, and not uncertain as the other ^re, and therefore also is called the
Sphere of the fixed ^tarres. This. 8. Sphere albeit it be partaker of the. 2.
uppermost (for as I said each uppermost Sphere imparteth his motion to all his
inferiors) yet has it a motion properly belonging to it self, not perfect and
absolutely ^phericall, as the other motions are but winding from ^he North to
the Southward, in. 3500. years it reuolueth ^he same way in the same time,
making his whole access and recesse in. 7000. years. This motion is called
the motion of Trepidation. The other. 7. Spheres which suc^eede are each one
decked with one only star called a Planet, that is by interpretation a
wandering Star; not that it runs at randon uncertainly, (for the motion of
them all is most certainly known, as may appear by the Eclipses which are
foreseen an hundred year before they come) but because their distance one
from an other is never the same being, sometimes nearer, and sometimes farther
of, therefore are they termed wan^ring stars. The uppermost of these. 7. is
the Sphere of Saturn, whose motion is complete in. 29. years. 155. ^ayes. 3.
hours. 47. min. 44 sec. Jupiter next under him co^passeth the Heaven by his
proper course, in. 11. years, ^14. days. 13. hours, 12. min. 4. sec. The
Sphere of Mars finisheth his race in one year, 321. days. 16. hours. 34.
min. 44. sec. The Spheres of the sun, Venus; and Mercury run their course in
one year, that is in. 365. days, 5. hours. 55. min. 26. sec. 10. thirds. 56.
fourths. The which space of time is commonly called, a solare year. The Moon
which is lowest of all and next to the Elementall region, makes her revolution
in the space of. 27. days, 7. hours. 43. min. 7. sec. So that hereby you are
to understand that albeit both the heaven it self and the celestial Globe be
called a Solid body, yet there is this difference between them that the
Globe consists of one piece, but the heaven of many Spheres or Orbs, and
those as you have heard moving sundry ways and in diverse manners.


P. I do believe you because, as the Proverb is, a learner must believe, but
it seems impossible that the one Sphere should move one way, and the other
an other way.


M. It is no more impossible for the one Sphere to move one way and the other
an other way, than it is impossible for the Master of a ship to walk from
the prowe to the poupe, that is from the South Northwarde, whilst the ship
runs from the North Southwarde.


P. Which of all these. 10. Spheres does the celestial Globe represent?


M. It represents especially the. 10. Sphere.


P. But you said before that the stars are in the 8. Sphere which is the
firmament.


M. It is true: but because the motion of the fixed Stars following the
motion of the ninth Sphere from West to East, is so slow and so little, that in
a man's life time it can hardly be perceived, therefore without any great
inconvenience we may place the fixed stars in the ^^^face of the Globe,
though it properly in respect of the ^^^cles represent the tenth.


P. Why do you in the definition of the celestial ^^obe put in these words
(co^tayning in the co^uexitie)?


M. Thereby is expressed an other difference between that which we behold in
the heaven it self, and on the celestial Globe. Our eye not being within the
Globe beholds every thing described thereupo^ on the outside: whereas
notwithstanding we see the stars on ^^e innerside of heaven.


P. Why do you say certain circles, are there any more to be understood in
the heaven, than are expressed in the Globe.


M. Yea a great many, the which I will both name and describe unto you as
occasion serves. But for so much as these on the Globe are sufficient for a
young be^inner or a Nouice in Astronomy, therefore there are ^o more described.
Whereof one is Real, the other are imaginary.


P. What say you that some of these circles are imaginary. What mean you
thereby, would you have us think them to be devises of an idle brain?


M. Not so, their commodity is singular in common life being well understood
and applied to use: but therefore they are called Imaginary because they are
not expreslie to be seen in the heaven, but are in mind to be conceived.


P. Well, let us now come to those things which you said are principally to
be observed in the celestial Globe, that is the circles and the stars with
their Astronomicall appurtenances.


M. Here I will use a Hysteron proteron as the Rh^toricians term it, and will
set the carte before the hors^ that is I will first speak of the Stars, and
then of the Circles, for so I think it fittest for your instruction.


P. As you please Sir, but what Method and ord^^ shall we observe in them.


M. I think it not amiss to have consideration (...) these two things:
First, of the writing which I tearme^ before the Astronomicall appertenances,
then of the stars themselves.


P. I pray you do so. I perceive in the Globe that b^^ many of the Stars
there are set down the Character^ of the Planets, sometimes one alone, as in
the thighe (...) Gemini, what does it signify.


M. The Character does express the nature of the Star unto which it is
adjoined, according as the Character does importe. If it be the Character of
Saturn, signifies the Star to be of his nature: if it be the Character of
Jupiter, it signifies the star to be of his nature, and so forth of the rest.


P. Sometimes there are two Characters togethe^ as in the fish.


M. They betoken that star to admit the nature (...) both the Planets.


P. Sometimes between the two Characters ther^ stands the letter P.


M. It signifies the star to be of the nature of the Planet unto whom the
first Character does belong, ye^ partly also of the nature of the Planet, to
whom the other Character apperteineth.


P. Sometimes the Characters are not joined with any one star but are set
down by themselves alone, and before the Character there stands a letter as
in the Lion.


M. It signifies that all those stars to whom that ^^^ter is adjoined, to be
of the quality of that Planet, before whose Character the same letter stands.


P. I find in the Globe certain syllables, but they make not perfect words:
as Card, or Car. Alf. or Al^^^. Reg.


M. Card. or Car. signifies Cardanus, whose stu^^^ in these sciences has
been singular, and therefore his authority is great, and is often alleged not
only for the ^^gnesse of the Stars, as where it is written Reg. Car. that is
to say, Cardane counts it a princely Star, or a ^^arre of the first
magnitude. But also for their quality (...) where you see it written by the
bow of Sagittarius the archer, the meaning is that Cardane accounts that
^^arre to be of the nature of Jupiter and Mars. The like (...) to be understood
of Alf. or Alfon. which signifies Alphonsus king of Aragon, whose great
travail and ^^st in those studies has purchased unto him an eternal ^^me.


P. Let us now come to the Stars for I see nothing ^^s to be doubted of, what
order shall be kept in discour^ng of them.


M. I think it sufficient to speak of their adjuncts, ^amely of their
quantity and quality.


P. Then you mind not to speak of the division of ^^e Stars into several
kinds, nor of the matter whereof they are made.


M. No, for the stars expressed in the Globe are all of one kind, that is
fixed, and differ only in quantity or ^ualitie, as for the matter, that
belongs not to the Astro^omer, but to the Philosopher: so that whether they
be the thicker part of their Orb, and are to their Or^ as a knot to a tree,
or whether they be made of fire are fiery stones let the Philosophers look to
that. I pu^pose only to entreat as I have said of their quanti^ and
quality. The quantity of the stars is to be consid^red either in their
number, or in their magnitude.


P. How many are there in the Globe?


M. There are 1025.


P. Are there no more in the heaven? We say commonly that they are in number
infinite.


M. It is without question that there are more (...) heaven, but yet they are
not infinite in number, for (...) is written. Psalm. 147. He counts the
number (...) the Stars and calls them all by their names. If the^ may be
counted and named, they are not infinite. Therefore when we say that they are
infinite, our meaning (...) that their number is exceeding great, as it
appears. Genesis 22. verse. 12.


P. Why then do the Astronomers keep an accor^ of no more seeing their number
is so great?


M. The heaven is to the Astronomer as a book therefore even as a man looking
upon a book lying farr^ of from his sight, does only account those letters
which he does see and discern: eue^ so the Astronomer, althoug^ he see a great
number of stars, yet makes he accou^t^^ no more then these because he can
distinguish no more.


P. Have there no more been noted heretofore, o^ since the time that this
number was first ratified?


M. Yes, for the Portugales traueling into Indi^ have brought home news of
certain little clouds near unto the South pole, and certain stars, the which
stars a^ you may see are set down by M. Mollineux in the Celestial Globe.
Some of them being comprehended within ^^e Cross, and are commonly by our men
called the Cro^ers, some of them are included in the South triangle, ^^hers are
left in formed. So that their report argues ^^at all the fixed stars were
not observed by Ptolomie ^^mselfe.


P. There is yet one question remaining touching the number of the stars. I
observe that in the winter the ^umber of the stars seems more than in
Summer: that should be the reason thereof?


M. You must note this that it most commonly fal^^th out so when the weather is
coldest, and the nights ^re frostie: and thereby I gather the chiefest reason,
why (...) the winter the stars appear so many to be this, (...) Summer the
cold having no place left unto it where^^ to be, but the middle region of the
air, where it ^axeth at that time most forceable by reason of the
An^peristasis of the heat, it so engrosseth and thickeneth ^^e air, that the
stars of the lesser magnitude being ^ut weak in their beams cannot pearse
it, and come to ^ur sight: In winter this cold breaking the prison wher^^ it
was pend before, and gathered thick together, sprea^eth it self and becomes
more thin, so that the air being more purged, and the grossenes thereof
being ^^ken away, yields to the stars of smaller light, a free and ready
passage through which they may send there ^eames unto our sight. An other
reason is thus alleged, (...) winter because the air is more purged, the
stars do ^ine very forceably, whereupon it comes to pass that our sight
may be deceived in them, and causes us to ^hinke, that we perceive more
stars than indeed we we do: where as we do not see more stars, but
only certain appearances of them procured by their vehement brightness and
twinkling, and by the wavering of the air. Let this also be an other reason:
the nearer the Sun is to the ground the more lightsome is the air above it,
the more lightsome the air is the fewe^ Stars are seen: therefore
considering that in Summer the depression of the Sun is but little, and in
winter great, whereby the air in the night time in Summer, is more lightened
than in winter, hereupon it comes to pass that the stars seem fewer in
Summer than in winter.


P. Thus much for the number of the stars: wha^ is their Magnitude?


M. Their Magnitude is a certain quantity whereby the stars differ one from
an other. The several Magnitudes observed in the stars are six, unto the
which are adjoined certain other which are called of the Latins Nebulosae,
and Obscurae, cloudie and obscure o^ dark stars. All there Magnitudes are
expressed in the Globe, with several forms set down before the nose o^ the
Greater Bear, so that having an eye to those forme^ you may easily learn what
Magnitude any star has that is placed in the Globe.


P. How many stars are there of each several Magnitude.


M. There are. 15. of the first Magnitude: of the second. 45. of the third.
208. of the fourth. 474. of the fifth. 217. of the sixth 49. The cloudie stars
are. 5. the obscure. 9. But you must still remember this, that in this account
those stars are not contained which are inscribed in the Globe according to
the report of the Portugals, yet their several Magnitudes may be known by
their form.


P. So I suppose, but yet these which you have now counted make but 1022. you
reckoned before 1025.


M. It is true: but you must note this, that com^o^ly in rehearsing the number
of the stars, the Astro^omers omit those which are in the hair of Berenice,
if ^hey be added the whole number is 1025.


P. Of what bigness may the stars be?


M. Some of them are 107. some. 90. some. 72. times ^igger than the earth. But
of this matter I have written ^argely in my Book concerning the use of the
Celestial Globe in Plano, wherein you may satisfy your self concerning their
quantity.


P. The next thing to be spoken of touching the ^tarres is their quality:
what have you to deliver concerning that?


M. This word quality has a very large signification, and may be applied
almost to what soever is not of ^he substance of the Stars. But I will speak
only of their twinkling and figure.


P. What is the cause why the stars do twinckle?


M. The continual motion of the air: in which ^here are two motions to be
considered: the one is pro^^er to the air, which is upward in a right line:
the other is improper received from the Heavens. For as the Heaven is carried
about in the space of 24. hours, so does it ^ead with it what soever is
moveable within it, whereby ^t comes to pass, that the form of the Stars
appea^ing in it is greatly distracted, so that it seems to us to ^^ast forth
sparkles, which we call the twinkling thereof. This may easily be confirmed by
the water which running on swiftly causes the Stars which are by reflexio^
^eene in it, to twinckle much more than they do in the air, by reason that it
is a grosser body, and the motion thereof is to us more sensible than the
motion of the air


P. If the motion of the air be the cause of the twinkling of the Stars,
why should not the Plane^^ twinckle as well as they?


M. The reason why the Planets do not twinckle i^ their nearenesse unto us,
whereby it comes to pass^ that their beam is lesser troubled and distorted.


P. Does the twinkling of the Stars signify any thing?


M. It does signify the motion of the air generally: but if it be more than
usual it signifies wind Thus much concerning that matter, now follows the
figure of the Stars. The figure is either common o^ peculiar. The common
figure considered in every one is the roundenesse, for this we hold that the
figure of every Star is round, and not three or four square: of this there
are sundry arguments. First, our sense which judges the Stars to be
round: again the most noble body as I said before requires the most noble
form: the most excellent bodies are the heavenly bodies: therefore they crave
a round figure for that of all other is counted most excellent. To conclude
the Moon gives us a most certain argument of this roundenesse: for she does
not only appear so at the full, but at all other times she receaueth her
light circularly from the Sun.


P. Yet that is not always so, for in the first quarter and the third her
light is parted with a right line.


M. The reason of that is yielded by the Masters of Perspectiue, who truly
affirm that every great circle in Sphericall body standing full before our
sight, ^^emeth to be a right line, This therefore shall serve for (...)
confirmation of the common figure belonging to every Star, which is their
roundenesse. The peculiar fig^re is that which is considered but in some, and
is called a Constellation.


P. What is a Constellation?


M. A Constellation is a certain number of stars r^presenting by there
place, and order (after a certain sort) the form of some natural, or
artificial thing. It is otherwise called an Asterisme, form or figure.


P. Are all the stars enclosed within these co^stellatio^s.


M. You may easily see by the Globe they are not: there are. 108. exe^pted by
the ancient Astronomers which the called (informs) unformed, yet of later
time. 6. of the^ ^^ue been reduced into the figure of Antinous, and ^^ree into
the hair of Berenice.


P. Why were the stars brought into co^stellatio^s?


M. For instructions sake: things cannot be taught without names: to give a
name to every one, had been both troublesome for the Master and for the
Scholar: ^^oublesome for the Master to devise, troublesome for the Scholar
to remember. As the merchant therefore ca^eth all his bills of one kind into
one box: and out of ^^at box can fetch them as occasion serves: even so the
^stronomers have reduced many stars into one Con^^llation, that thereby they
may tell the better where to ^^eke them, and being found how to express them.


P. Why did they bring them into these figures and into none other.


M. There be. 3. several reasons which induced the^ ^ereunto. First these
figures express some property of the Stars, as those of the Ram to be
hot, and dry, so^ so is the Ram: Andromeda chained betokens imprisonment.
The head of Medusa cut of signifies the loss of that member. Orion with his
terrible, and threaning gesture imports tempest, and terrible weather: the
Serpent, the Scorpion, and the Dragon, signify poiso^ the Bull insinuates a
melancholy passion, the Bear i^ferreth cruelty etc. Secondly some of the
Stars if no^ precisely, yet after a certain sort do represent such a
figure, and therefore that figure was assigned them: as for example the Crown
both North and South, the Sco^pion, and the Triangle partly represent the
figure which they have. The third cause was the continuance of the memory of
some notable man, who either in regard (...) their singular pains taken in
Astronomy, or in regard of some other notable deed, had well deserved of
mankind, as Hercules, Perseus, etc.


P. Are these constellations of any antiquity, and wh^^ was the first author
of them?


M. I never read who was the first author of eac^ particular constellation, we
receive them of Ptolomee and he received them of the Platonickes, so that the^^
antiquity is great. Thyestes the brother of Atreus is sai^ to have invented the
constellation of the Ram: More over in the 38. chapter of Job, there is
mention made o^ the Pleiades Orion, and Arcturus and Mazzaroth which some
interpret the 12. signs: Job lived in the time of Abraham as Siderocrates
makes mention in his Book, De commensurandis locorum distantijs.


P. How many constellations are there, and which are they?


M. There are 48. besides the Cross and the South ^^^angle, which are newly
added in the last Globes. In the ^orth part there are. 21. namely. 1. Vrsa
minor, the les^^ Bear. 2. Vrsa mayor, the greater Bear. 3. Draco, the Dragon.
4. Cepheus. 5. Boots or Arctophylax. 6. Corona Borea, the North crown. 7.
Engonasis, the ^^eeler. 8. Lyra, the Harp. 9. Olor, the swanne. 10. Cass^peia.
11. Perseus. 12. Heniochus or Auriga, the ^^^^ter. 13. Serpentarius, the man
holding the Serpent. (...) Serpens, the Serpent. 15. Sagitta, the Arrow. 16.
A^^ila, the Eagle. 17. Delphinus, the Dolphine. 18. Equis^ctio, the less
Horse. 19. Pegasus, the winged Horse. (...) Andromeda. 21. Triangulus, the
Triangle.

In the Zodiac of the 8. Sphere or firmament there (...) 12. according to the
number of the Signs. 1. Aries, ^^e Ra^me. 2. Taurus, the Bull. 3. Gemini, the
Twins. (...) Cancer, the Crabbe. 5. Leo, the Lion. 6. Virgo, the ^^rgin. 7.
Libra, the Balla^ce. 8. Scorpius, the Scorpion. (...) Sagittarius, the Archer.
10. Capricornus, the Goat. (...) Aquarius, the Waterman. 12. Pisces, the
Fishes.

In the South part there are. 15. 1. Cetus, the Whale. (...) Orion. 3.
Fluuius, the River. 4. Lepus, the Hare. 5. Ca^^^ mayor, the greater Dog. 6.
Canis minor, the le^^^r Dog. 7. Argo nauis, the Ship. 8. Hydra, the Snake.
(...) Crater, the Cup. 10. Coruus, the Crow. 11. Ceutau^is, the Ce^taure. 12.
Lupus, the Wolf. 13. Lar, or Ara, ^^e Altar. 14. Corona Austrina, the South
Garlande. (...). Piscis Notius, the South Fish.


P. Yet me thinks there be 2. which you have not ^^amed, that is Antinous and
Berenices hair.


M. Those two were divised since, and therefore are ^ot usually counted in the
number of the Constellations ^ut are reckoned among the informed Stars, as I
said before.


P. Do all Astronomers retain these constellation and his number?


M. No, some count but. 44. some. 46. some. 52. some 72. But by the chiefest
Astronomers the foresaid number is retained.


P. Of which of all these Stars ought I to take notice especially?


M. It is good to know them all, or at leastwi^^ those which are of the first,
second, and third Magnitude. But you must especially be acquainted with the
lesser Bear: for the Star which is in the end o^ her tail is called the
Pole Star, by reason of the nearenesse thereof unto the Pole, it is also
called the North Star, and for the excellent use, which it hat^ in
Cosmographie, it is called simply the Star. An^ the North pole in respect of
the nearenesse of the lesse^ Bear, is called the pole Arcticke (for Arctos
amon^ the Grecians signifies a Bear) and the South pole because it is
opposite, and right against the pole Arcticke^ called the pole Antarcticke.


P. I could wish (if it were not troublesome) th^^ you would deliver to me
the poetical reasons of these constellations because it is very pleasant.


M. It shall not need if you desire them, you m^^ find them set forth at
large in that little book which I named before called the use of the Celestial
Globe (...) Plano.


P. Well then let them pass, and let us now^ come to the Circles of the Globe,
and in them I would gladly learn these two things, what they are, and wha^
use they have.


M. With a good will: but first you must no^ ^he manifold signification of the
word, otherwise ^ou may mistake your self greatly. The word Cir^le is taken
sometimes properly, sometimes vnproper^y. Properly a Circle is a round plane
as Ramus ^efineth it, or according to Euclide, it is a plain figure contained
under one Line, which is called a Cir^umference, unto the which all right
lines drawn from the Center are equal one to an other. In this ^ence we
never simply use the word Circle, speaking ^f the Celestial Globe, but we
utter it periphrastical^e in this manner, the plane of the Equinoctial Circle,
the plane of the Horizon, or Horizontall circle, etc. The word Circle taken
improperly, signifies either a circumference which is a crooked line without
breadth, or else it signifies a surface, in both these significations, the
word Circle is used in the Celesti^ll Globe: be they perfectly round or no,
whereupon we make this division of the Circles in the Globe: The Circles are
either perfectly round or vnperfectlie round.


P. Is it possible that there should be a circle in the Globe that is not
perfectly round?


M. Do you not see in the Globe a space contained and enclosed on each sides
with pricks, which has certain divisions and goes not on directly, and even
as the other circles do.


P. Yes, it passes by the bow of the Archer, and from thence ascends to the
Eagle, and so continues to the Swanne, and to Cassiopeia, and down to the
Archer, compassing the whole heaven round about: what may that circle be?


M. It is that great white circle which is really to be seen in heaven, by the
Grecians it is called Galaxia by the Latins Lactea via, or Lacteus circulus,
and by us expressing word for word, it is called the milk waie^ The best
opinion touching this circle is this, that it is the part of the firmament,
neither so thin as the other parts thereof, nor yet so thick as the Stars
the^selues^ If it were so thin as the other parts of heaven the^ could it
not retain any light, but the light would pass through it, and not be seen:
if it were as thick as the Stars then would the light be so doubled in it,
that i^ would glister, and shine as the Stars themselves do but being
neither so thin as the one, nor so thick as the other, it becomes of that
whitenes which we see If you desire to read the poetical fables or other
discourses touching this circle, you shall have them also in my book of the
Globe in Plano.


P. What use has this circle in the heaven?


M. First, it limiteth the tropicall points whereof w^ shall speak hereafter:
Secondly, it is an argument unto us to prove, that the Stars move not in
the firmament, as fishes in the sea, or as birds in the air: For if that were
so, it is most certain that the Stars which are in this Circle at this
present, would presently shifte the same, and pass aut of it into some other
place of the 8. Sphere which never falls so out: but common experience
witnesses this, that the Stars which are now in the milk way, have been in
it ever heretofore, and we shall see them still continue therein, so long as
the heaven indureth. Thus much for the imperfect real circle which is but one.
Let us now come to the perfect circles of the Globe, which are not really to be
seen but in imagination to be conceived, upon which the principal use of ^^e
Globe depends: A perfect round circle is that which lies uniformly
between his terms. In these ^ircles this is first to be noted, that unto
every one of ^^em belongs Poles, and Graduation either expressed (...)
understood. The Poles of a circle are. 2. points concea^ed in the surface of
the Globe, equally distant from eue^^ part of that circle whose Poles they are
said to be. Graduation is the dividing of a circle in to certain parts, whereof
every one is called a degree. The parts wherinto ^uery circle of the Globe
either is actually or imaginarily understood to be divided are. 360. Therefore
a degree in nothing else but the. 360. part of a circle So that when as we
speak simply of a degree either of heaven or earth, or generally of a degree
of any circle, it is not to be vnder^^ood as a thing, that may be limited, and
set down by any certain measure, as by passes, or yardes, or miles, or
inches, or such like quantities, because it is not of a cer^^ine greatness
every where, but as the circle is greater or lesser, so does the degree
increase or decrease, and is ^ide to be the. 360. part of it, be it of what
quantity soever.


P. I pray you let us wade a little farther into this matter, tell me what was
the reason why a circle was divided into these parts and not into any more or
less?


M. The reason is this. The Cosmographer whether he have to deal with heaven
or earth, has many occasions to divide a circle into sundry parts, therefore
it be^ooued him to choose such a number in the division of a circle, as might
most conveniently be divided by many diuisors: now for so much as there could no
number be found of so small a quantity, that might be divided by so many
diuisers as this number. 360. may be (for it man be divided by.
1.2.3.4.5.6.8.9.10.12.15.18.20.24.30.36.40.45.60.72.90.120.180.) therefore they
made (...) special choice of this number, rejecting the custome^ Eratosthenes
and Hipparchus, who were wont to divide a circle into. 83. parts. Neither do
the Cosmographers only graduate a circle, dividing it into simple degrees, but
they go on farther and part a degree into 60. minutes, a minute into. 60.
secondes, a second into 60. thirdes, a third in. 60. fourthes, and so forth
until they come to tenthes beyond which number they do^ not lightly pass.


P. Then I gather by your words, that a minut^ is nothing else but the. 60.
part of a degree, and a second is the. 60. part of a minute, and a third is
the 60. part of a second, and a fourth is the. 60. part o^ a third, etc.
But why did they choose this number. 60.


M. The Cosmographer was induced to choose this number. 60. by the same reason
whereby he wa^ moved to choose the foresaid number. 360. As in dividing of a
circle so likewise in dividing a degree, a minute, a second, etc. He thought
it most convenient to take such a number as being but small might be divided
into most parts, and therefore to avoid the tediousness of greater
divisions, he choose. 60. rather than any other, because there is none of so
small a quantity, that will admit so many partitions for these number^ may
divide it. 1.2.3.5.6.10.12.15.20.30. Thus much concerning the significations of
the word circle, and the common accidents thereof, which are Poles and
Graduation, now I will proceed to their several kinds. The perfect round
circles imaginarily conceived in the ^eauen, and adscribed with the Globe, are
either great ^t little. A great circle is that which cutteth the Globe unto two
equal pieces. As touching the Poles of the ^reat circles this rule is
general, that if. 2. great circles ^ut one an other at Right angles, the Poles
of the one ^ircle are in the other: also, if. 2. great circles cut one ^n other
at oblique angles, the Poles of the one are di^^ant from the Poles of the
other, so far, as the grea^er declination or distance of the one circle is
from the other. A great circle is either mooueable or fixed. A mooueable circle
is that, which moves with the motion of the Globe. A mooueable circle, eythe
lies between the Poles of the Globe, or passes thorough them: The moveable
circles, which lie between the Poles, are. 2. whereof the one lies just
between them in the very midst, and is called the Equinoctial ^or Equator.
So that the Equinoctial may be defined to be a great mooueable circle of the
Globe, lying just in the midst between the. 2. Poles of the world: The other
circle lies not just between the. 2. Poles, but leans toward either of
them, and is called the Eclipticke, so that the Eclipticke may be defined to be
a great mooueable circle, leaning toward each pole of the world, always
cutting the Equinoctial at oblique angles. The two points wherein it cutteth,
the Equinoctial are called the Equinoctial points, and the two points wherein
it swarueth most of all from the Equinoctial, are called the Solstitiall
points, or Tropicall points, the reason whereof I will declare hereafter. The
moveable circles passing through the Poles of the Globe are. 2. and they cut
themselves at Right angles in the Poles: the one is called the Equinoctial
color, the other is the Solstitiall color. The Equinoctial color is a
moveable great circle draw by the Poles of the world and the equinoctial
points. The Solstitiall color is a moveable great circle, passing thorough the
Poles of the world, and the Solstitiall points, A great fixed circle, is a
circle which follows not the motion of the Globe, but stands still whilst
it turns about. The fixed circles are. 2. cutting one another a^ right
angles, namely the Horizon, and the Meridian. The Horizon is a great fixed
circle of the Globe, dividing the part of the heaven which is seen, from tha^
part of the heaven which is not seen. The Meridia^ is a great fixed circle of
the Globe, cutting the Horizon at right angles. Thus are all the perfect great
circles expressed in the Globe. A little circle is that which divides the Globe
into 2. equal pieces, and are all equally distant to the equator: The little
circles of the Globe either touch the Eclipticke, or are severed from it.
Those which touch the Eclipticke, are called Tropickes. A Tropicke is a little
circle in the Globe, parallel to the Equinoctial, touching the Eclipticke in
the Tropicall point. Those little circles, which touch not the Eclipticke, are
called Polare circles: A Polare circle is a little circle in the Globle
Parallel to the Equinoctial, passing by the Poles of the Eclipticke. Thus
have you the brief definitions of the usual circles of the Globe, the other
circles shall be defined as occasion serves.


P. I pray you, now let us draw near to that, which I so greatly desire, that
is the use of the Globe.


M. The use of the Celestial Globe is either simple or mixte. The simple use
of the Globe, is when we work and perform, a conclusion by the Globe it
self, without the help of any foreign instrument: and that either by ^^ch
circle alone, or by two or more of them taken to^^ather. The mixed use of the
Globe is that, which be^^e the Globe requires the use of foreign instruments.
And for so much as these several uses of the Globe can^^t so be distinguished
one from another, but that of ^^cessitie now and then they must go jointly
together, I think it not a miss therefore before I go any further, to make
you acquainted with the instruments.


P. Do so I pray you, and I will move such que^^^ons concerning them, as I
shall think convenient for my instruction.


M. The instruments are these: First a pair of Calaber co^passes, whose feet
must be bent inward according a^ you see in the figure. A. The second is a
Square with a ^^u^met line, made in such form as you see the figure B. The
third is an hour circle as we call it, with his In^ex, expressed in the
figures C. and D. The fourth is a thin ruler of brass, bowed according to
the conuexi^ie of the Globe, and divided into the. 90. degree, made fast at
the. 90. degree to a little buttone of brass, this instrument is called, the
Quadrant of Altitude, and is expressed in the figure. E. The fifth is an half
circle of brass called a circle of Position, as in the figure F. The sixte i^
an Index, which we call a Sphericall Gnomon, the form whereof is expressed
in the figure G. The seventh. is a Needle touched with the Load stone.


P. To what end serve the Calaber compasses?


M. With them we take the distance of any two things what soever propounded
upon the Globle, as of two Stars, or of any circle from a Star: or of. 2.
circles one from an other.


P. In what manner shall I take the two stars, and how shall I infer their
distance.


M. Stretch the one foot of your compass from the center of the one Star,
unto the center of the other, then apply the feet of your compares to the
^quator, the degrees of the Equator contained between^ the feet of your
compasses, express the distance of the two Stars.


P. But what is that distance?


M. It is their distance only in degrees, for we^ cannot simply express it
otherwise, yet if you desire for your pleasure sake to know what number of
mile^ any two stars in the Globe are distant, one from an other, note these
my words and you shall know it. The Astronomers considering the huge quantity
of the stars compared with the Globe of the earth, have concluded the
compass of the firmament to be in the outside 1017562500. miles, and each
degree to contain 2826562. Therefore knowing how many degrees any. 2 Stars
are distant one from an other, if you multiply the number of degrees by the
number of miles answereable to each degree, you shall find the distance in
miles, the centers of the. 2. stars being supposed to be in the conuexitie of
the firmament.


P. I pray you give me leave to have a little more conference with you
concerning the taking of the distance of any two Stars, or what soever
things else upon the Globe. You say, that I must stretch the one foot of my
compasses from the center of the one star unto the center of the other, and
afterward apply my compasses to the Equator, the degrees of the Equator
contained between their feet express how many degrees the two Stars
assigned are distant one from an ^^her. I take this rule to be certain and
true, when the ^^e foot of the compasses being set in the beginning of ^egree,
the other foot lights just in the end of the ^^^e, or of some other
degree. But put case that the f^^te of the compasses should fall between the
begin^ng, and end of a degree, what shall I then say?


M. You must pronounce the Star to be distant (besides the whole degrees) so
many minutes, as are contained between the beginning of the last degree, and
the ^^^der foot of your compasses.


P. But how shall I know how many minutes they are?


M. This question was conveniently moved by you Philomathes, and gives me
occasion to deliver unto you a rule, whereby not upon the Globe onley, but upon
your Astrolabe also, or any such like Mathematical instrument, you may find
out, how many minutes there are cut (...) above the whole degrees, in this
manner. When the ^^ote of your co^passes lights between the beginning ^^end
of any degree, make a prick, where the said foot lights: then take the
distance between the beginning of the last degree, and the prick, and count
it (beginning at which degree you please, and noting well where you began) in
the Equator. 60. times. The number of the degrees comprehended between the
place where you first began your account, and the place wherein you finished the
s^^e, express the number of minutes contained in the foresaid space. As for
example put case that the space contained between the beginning of some one
degree, and the prick made in the same degree, being counted. 60. times in the
Equator do run over. 30. whole degrees of the said circle, then must you
pronounce, that space to comprehend. 30. minutes. If being counted. 60. times
reaches but unto. 15. degrees, then does the said spa^^ contain. 15.
minutes, if it ouerrunne. 45. degrees, the^ does it answer to 45. minutes, etc.


P. I understand you well. But again suppose tha^ the space contained between
the beginning of the la^^ degree, and the prick therein be so little, that I
cann^^ take it with my compasses, because (as it may fall ou^ their feet will
not come close enough together: Ho^ shall I then know, how many minutes are
contained (...) that small space.


M. When it happens so, that you cannot take the space between the beginning
of the degree and the pric^^ then take that space which is contained between
the prick, and the latter end of the degree. Count that. 60. times in the
Equator marking how many degrees yo^ do run over, subducte the number of
those degre^^ from. 60. the remainder shows you, how many minute were
comprised in the small space aforesaid. This also to be noted, that as you
find out the minutes, so man you find the secondes and thirds, etc. of a
degree. For if (the small space aforesaid being counted. 60. times i^ the
Equator) the foot of your compasses does not ligh^ precisely upon the end of
some degree, then take the space between the last prick made with you
co^passe^ and the beginning of that degree, wherein that prick (...) made,
count it. 60. times in the Equator, as you did the other before, the number of
the degrees, which you runn^ over, express the secondes, etc.


P. In this thing also I conceive your meaning, le^ us proceed. Is there any
thing to be observed in taking the distance between two circles of the Globe,
o^ between some point assigned in the Globe, and a ^^rcle?


M. Yea, that there is, for you must take heed of this, that setting the one
foot of your compasses in the one ^^rcle, you do but touch the other circle
with the other ^^ote: for the distance between two circles assigned, or
between a point, or star, and any circle is the shortest extention that may
be: no the shortest extention from ^^rcle to circle, or from point to point is,
when the feet ^f your compass (standing in the one circle) cut not the other
in two several places, but touch it in one only.


P. To what use serves the Plummet line?


M. It serves to set the Globe upright, which in ^ome conclusions is
necessarily required.


M. Unto what part of the Globe must it be applied?


M. It is most conveniently applied to the Horizon.


P. Unto how many places of the Horizon must I ^pplie it?


M. You must apply it unto. 3. several places at the ^east, for setting it
but in two you may chance to be deceived.


P. The third instrument which you spoke of is the hour circle, of what
quantity is it to be made?


M. The quantity according to the usual manner is at your own pleasure,
respect being had to the quantity of the Globe. The greater Globe may abide a
greater hour circle, the lesser Globe a lesser, yet I would wish you rather
to exceed in the quantity, that fail therein, because we take this for a
general rule in any Mathematical instrument, that the greater it is the more
preciseness and pleasure is in the use thereof.


P. Of what fashion would you have it?


M. Of this fashion which here you see in the fi^^gure C. But of what fashion
soever it is made, it must b^ so contrived that it may be taken of and on, from
the Globe at your discretion.


P. Where must this hour circle stand?


M. It must stand upon the Meridian, so th^^ the axeltree of the Globe come
just through the cente^ of it, and the circumference of it be equally distant
from the Pole. Also you must observe this: some Globe are so fastened to their
Meridian, that the axeltree comes just through the midst of the thickenesse
of the Meridian: Other Globes have their axeltree fastene^ to the right, other
to the left side of the Meridian: the^^fore when soever you set the hour
circle on the Meridian, you must so place it that the line of, 12. a clock
both above, and beneath, be answereable directly to that part^^ of the
Meridian, unto which the axeltree of the Globe i^ fastened.


P. Do you like this fashion of the Index?


M. Yea: yet if it were but half the length of the Diameter it were
sufficient: but howsoever you make it, you must take heed that the points of
it be just in a right line, with the center of the hour circle.


P. What is the use of the hour circle with his Index?


M. The particular use thereof shall appear better hereafter in several
examples. The general use is whenever there is my question made of time, or
the parts thereof, as of a day, or hour, when the Sun rises, and sets,
etc.


P. What say you concerning the quadra^t of altitude?


M. The use of this quadrant and where it must ^^nde, shall be declared
herafter in the particular propo^ions.


P. What would you have noted in the circle of position?


M. The breadth of it is at your pleasure, the compass of it is the half of
the Horizon: But in my conceit it were much better if it were of such a
Diameter, that the innerside standing upright upon the Horizon it may fall even
with the outside of the Meridian, for so it might be made fast to the Horizon,
and the conclusions whereunto it serves might be wrought the better, if there
were added unto it a small squire of brass which might move up and down upon
it always at right angles.


P. What is to be said touching the Spherical Gno^^^on, of what length would
you have it made?


M. As it is usually made the length thereof is never limited. What length
soever it have you must take^^ed of this one thing, that it be so framed, that
it may rise always at right angles from the Globe.


P. How shall I find that?


M. Find some place in your Globe where two great circles meet together, as
for example the point where the Equator, and the Eclipticke cut one an other:
set one foot of your Compasses in their intersection and extend the other at
your pleasure, making therewith ^or 4. privy marks in the circles that cut
one another on each side of there intersection one. Then set your Sphericall
Gnomon on this foresaid intersection, and keep it fast, that it stirs not,
afterward set the one foot of your compasses in one of these privy marks,
and ^^te^d the other foot to the top of your Gnomon, if the foot of your
compasses thus extended, will reach from the top of the Gnomon unto all the
other marks, it (...) a certain argument that it is perpendicular to yo^^
Globe.


P. The last instrument which you speak of is a n^^dle touched with the Load
stone. How would you ha^^ it made, and where should it stand?


M. Each man may follow his fancy, yet for my se^^ I would have the box made
so square as might be, breadth answereable to the Horizon of the Globe, the
bottom of the box I would have the. 32. points the compass, with certain
subdiuisions as occasion sho^^ serve either more or lesser: also I would have a
li^^ drawn according to the variation of the Compass, would not have it
fastened to any certain place of t^^ Globe, but applied only to the Southside
of the Glo^^ so close as may be, unto the East or Westside of the M^ridian as
occasion requires. Thus much for the inst^^ments belonging to the Globe. Now
you may take wh^^^ course you please for the circles and their use, either
si^^plie alone, or jointly together, or as they crave the hel^ of these
instruments.


P. I must needs confess mine ignorance in the (...) matters to be great, and
therefore I am willing to ta^^ the more pain, I pray you give me leave to
ask, wh^^^ I think good and I will take the Globe unto me, and b^ginne with
the Equator following from one to one, v^ till I have run them over all. You
say that the Equator is a great circle lying just in the midst between the
two Poles: therefore first I conclude this, that the Po^^ of the world are the
Poles of the Equator: as for the d^grees of the Equator, I see that they are.
360. and that the number goes on continually from one to. 360. beginning that
point of the Globe where the Eclipticke crossing ^^oth bend toward the North
pole.


M. You say true: These degrees for distinction sake from the degrees of other
circles the Grecians do call ^^^vot, the Latins Tempora, that is times:
because by them the several times of the day, and night are limited, (...)
when soever there is any question made of any time be it a day, or the parts
thereof, it may well be resolved by the degrees of the Equator, yet the hour
circle whereof we spoke before does serve for that purpose.


P. What is the reason of this name?


M. It is so called because when the Sun is under this circle the day, and
night are of an equal length.


P. By your leave Sir, why do you say (under this ^^cle) in common phrase of
speech we say, that the ^^nne is in the Equinoctial, and in the Eclipticke,
and in (...) Meridian, etc.


M. It is true that we say so, but in these kind of speeches we use the
word (in) for underneath, or right against. I told you before, that these
circles, which are described in the Globe, are especially to be conceived in
the. 10. Sphere, and considering that the Sun is in the. 7. Sphere beneath,
therefore we cannot truly say that he (...) in the Equator, etc. But when we
say so, our meaning it this, that he is underneath, or right against some one
(...) there circles, so that a right line drawn from the cen^^^ of the world,
through the center of the Sun, and continued up to the. 10. Sphere, would
light upon that circle in the which the sun is said to be. Wherefore to
^eturne to my former speech, when soever the Sun is (...) (that is to say
underneath) this circle, the day, and the night through out the world are
equal, wheresoeu^ the Sun rises, and sets within the space of. 24. hour
and therefore it is called the Equator. The Grecia^ call it (...), which word
for word may be teamed the Equidiall, but the Latins following the
pleasantness of the word, have chosen rather the Equin^ctiall, deriuing the
name from the night, and not from t^ day, as the Grecians do. This circle is
also termed (...) girdle of the world, in regard that it possesses the
mi^dle place between the poles, as a girdle on the body a man. The seafaring
men for the excellent use there do call it the Line.


P. In that this circle lies in the midst betwe^^ the two Poles, what have I
to note thereby.


M. Hereby the Globe is divided into. 2. half^ which we call Hemispheres,
whereof the one is the No^ Hemisphere from the Equator to the Northpole, the
oth^^ is the South. Item the Equator lying as it does, is the b^ginning of all
declination, whenever therefore you she hear hereafter of the declination of
the Stars, of (...) declinatio^ of the Su^ne, or of the signs, it must be
cou^^^^ from this circle, and whatsoever is precisely in, or vn^ this circle
has no declination. Last of all, in that the (...) quator lies just in the
midst between the two Pol^^ of the world, we are to note this, that it
must need move uniformly according to the motion of the heaven, at no time
faster than at an other, but look how many degrees thereof arise, and set in
one hour, so many degrees arise, and set in every other hour: as you you
self may prove hereafter, and therefore as I said it is the measure, and rule
of all time. Thus much concerning the Equator simply considered in it self.


P. In the Eclipticke (for that is the next) me thin^^th there do many doubts
arise. You defined it to be a great mooueable circle of the Globe, cutting the
Equinoctial at oblique angles, and declining from it 2^. d. 30 m. toward each
pole of the world. Therefore by your general rules set down before
concerning the Poles of the great circles, I may conclude, that the poles of
the Eclipticke are. 23. d. 30 m. from the poles of the world. But what is the
chiefest end of the Eclipticke?


M. The chiefest use of this circle is to lay forth unto us the proper motion
of the Sun, for even as you see the Eclipticke line to trauerse the heaven
obliquely, and to decline both to the North, and to the South poles, even so
does the Sun keep his course never waruing from this line, but going on
every day from the West to the Eastwarde, almost one degree of this cir^^, that
is to say. 59. m. 8. sec. 19, thirds, 37. fourths. He fi^^sheth his course
within the space of. 365. days, 5. hours (...) min. 26. sec. 10. thirds, 56.
fourths, which is the length of a year. Also this circle is the beginning of
all Latitude, so that whatsoever is distant from this circle, either toward the
one pole, or toward the other, is said to have a Latitude, as you shall see
hereafter, and whatsoever is in or under it has no Latitude.


P. Then belike the Sun never has any Latitude, for, as you said even now,
the Sun never swarueth from the Ecliptike line.


M. You say true: this circle also serves for the Longitude of all Stars, or
what soever else is called in question in the heaven, the which Longitude how
it is to be found I will declare unto you hereafter: It serves also for the
Eclipses of the Sun, or Moon, as you may gather by the name, for there is no
Eclipse, but wh^^ the Sun or Moon are both precisely in, or very near unto
this circle. To conclude, whenever there is an question moved of the rising,
or setting, or any other thing else concerning the Sun, we must have recou^^
to this circle, because it represents as I said even not the progress of
the Sun, and there is no day, but the Sun possesses one degree, or an
other of this circle the which degree must always be sought out whenseuer
there is any conclusion to be wrought concerni^^ the Sun, or the place of the
Sun.


P. Are the degrees of the circle as many as the d^grees of the Equator?


M. I told you before that every circle of the Glob^^ is either expressly
divided into 360. degrees, or else it is (...) be understood to be so divided.
But herein is a differe^^^ the degrees of the Equator go on continually from.
1. (...) 360. but the degrees of the Eclipticke do not, for they (...)
c^^tinue but unto. 30. and then begin again.


P. What is the reason of that proceeding?


M. That the year and the Eclipticke might be a^swereable one to an other, as
the year is divided into. (...) months, and every month usually has. 30.
days, so the Eclipticke is divided into. 12. parts, whereof every on is
called a sign, and every sign contains. 30. degrees.


P. What is a sign?


M. A sign is taken properly or improperly: Properly a sign is the twelfth
part of the Eclipticke. So tha^ if we draw a line from the center of the
world to the Eclipticke, what soever Planet, or Star falls precisely upon
that line, is said to be in such or such a sign a^ that line tends unto.


P. What is a sign improperly taken?


M. If you mark my words, I will easily deliver the whole matter unto you but
you must pluck up your understanding, for that whereof I speak is not to be
seen but to be conceived in the Globe. First therefore imagine, that in the
surface of the Globe there were two circles drawn parallel to the Eclipticke,
the one on the one side thereof. 6. degrees distant from it, the other on the
other side according to the same distance, so that from the one circle to the
other there were. 12. degrees. These circles thus drawn must enclose within
them a surface.


P. I understand you: in the ringed Sphere I remember it is called the
Zodiac, and it is parted into. 12. equal pieces, whereof every part is
called a sign consayning in breadth. 12. degrees, and in length thirty, and
^esembleth that figure which the Geometricians call a Parallelogramme.


M. That is one signification of a figure. Then imagine that from the. 4.
corners of this Parallelogramme there were drawn down to the center of the
Globe (which represents the center of the world) a right line, so that they
met altogether in one point, these lines with the Parallelogramme aforesaid
must needs enclose a solid figure like a Pyrarnis: this is the second
signification of a sign, and whatsoever is within the compass of this
pyramidicall figure, is said to be in such or such a sign according as the
denomination of the base does importe. Thirdly, imagine that from the Poles of
the Eclipticke there were drawn. 6. great circles dividing the Eclipticke
into. 12. equal parts, between each two half circles next adjoining there
must needs be enclosed a surface like unto that of the Globe, which (...)
contained between the Equator, and the Eclipticke, the which are in number.
12. and each of them is called a sign (...) whatsoever therefore is contained
from the one pole of the Eclipticke to the other within any of these surfaces,
is said to be in such or such a sign as the denomination of each part of
the Eclipticke does infer, contained in any one surface. Last of all, if from
each side of this surface you imagine. 2. half circles to be put into the
Globe, so that they may concur together in the axeltree, those half circles
together with this crooked surface, will comprehend a Solid body, not
unlike unto the twelfth part of an apple being divided equally: of these
bodies their will be twelve, whereof every one is called a sign: and hereby it
comes to pass that what soever is within the world may be referred to some
sign. Thus much for the signification of the word.


P. Yet me thinks you have omitted one signification: for I have heard these
Constellations which are set forth upon the Globe called by the name of the
twelve signs.


M. You say true and commonly in sun Dials, you shall see the 12. signs
painted according to these const^^lations, but they are most improperly termed
so: and in the use of the Globe you must especially take heed that when there
is mention made of any sign, you have not recourse to these constellations but
to the equal partition of the Eclipticke which are properly called the signs.


P. What other thing is to be noted in the signs?


M. Their expression, and their division. The signs are expressed two manner
of ways, either by Characters, or else by names, both of them are diligently
to be observed for their use is manifold. Their names and Characters are
these: 1. Aries, the Ram.. ^. Taurus, the Bull. 3. Gemini, the Twins.. ^.
Cancer, the Crabbe.. 5. Leo, the Lion.. 6. Virgo, the Virgin. 7. Libra, the
Balance.. 8. Scorpio, the Scorpion. 9. Sagittarius, the Archer.. 10.
Capricornus, the Goat.. 11. Aquarius, the Waterma^.. 12. Pisces, the Fishes..
Every sign as you see excepting one, receaueth his name from some living
^aeature, and therefore that broad circle in the ringed Sphere, which you
mentioned before (the which also is to be understood in the Globe) is called
the Zodiac by the Grecians, who in their language call a living creature Zoon
and Zodion. Yet some will have it so called of Zoe life, because the Sun
passing to and fro in it, procures life unto living creatures.


P. What is the reason why they chose these names and none other?


M. Names are best taken from familiar things, wherewith we are best
acquainted: For so much therefore as the effects of the Sun in the course of
the year are greatly correspondent so certain properties found in these
common things, therefore the Astronomers thought it good to entitle the signs
by their names. As for example: we know the Ram to be of nature hot and
dry, carrying his chief credit in his forehead, such is the effect of the
Sun in this sign. Therein he begins to make show of his heat, and with
his heat he infers a dryness, as may be seen by the March winds, which
then begin to blow when the Sun enters into this sign. The second sign is
the Bull, whose force is more than the Rams, and his complexion is
Melancholicke, even so is the heat of the Sun augmented, and that
mela^cholike humor begins to abound. The third sign is Gemini the
twins, which expresses the doubled force of the Sun, and the natural
inclination of each living thing unto copulatio^ at that time of the year. The
fourth sign which is the Crabbe, expresses the return of the Sun, and his
going backewarde as it were: for the Sun after he is come to the head of this
sign declineth no more from the Equator, but returns again nearer and
nearer to that circle and here upon the head of this sign is called the
Tropicall point, and that tropicke which touches the Eclipticke in that point,
is called the tropicke of Cancer. Moreover for so much as the Lion of all other
creatures is the strongest, and the hottest, and never freed of an ague,
therefore the sift sign is called the Lion, to signify the mighty strength
that is in the heat of the Su^ne, and the subjection of our bodies unto fevers
at that time of the year. The sixte sign is the Virgin, which signifies that
the Sun in that sign brings forth no new thing, but hasteneth every thing
forward to a ripeness: even as the Virgin of her self is barren, but grows
every day riper and riper, as the course of nature does require. The Balance
which is the seventh sign does import the equality, and equal passing of the
day and night, which are then of one length, when the Sun enters into this
sign, so that the head of this sign and Aries are the Equinoctial points.
The eight sign, which is the Scorpion, signifies that even as, if you take
not heed of the fair countenance of that beast, you may be privily, and at
unawares smitten with his stinge, so also if you take not heed to your self,
at that time when the Sun possesses this sign, his fair show in the
morning may so deceive you, that you may be overtaken with a cold not thought
on before night: Likewise the pearcing cold of the frost and snow falling in
the month of November is resembled by the arrowe of the Archer which is the
ninth sign. The tenth sign is the Goat: the Sun coming unto this sign
declineth no farther from the Equator, but begins then to clime, and mount
alofte in respect of us, that dwell to the Northwarde of that circle, whereupon
that tropicall circle which touches the Eclipticke line in the head of
Capricorn, is called the tropicke of Capricorn: This mounting and climing of
the Sun, the Astronomers have thought good to express by the figure of this
beast, which of all other of that bind climeth most high, and is by nature
Melancholicke answeareable to the season of the year. The Waterman in the. 11.
sign, who puts us in mind of that abundance of humors which reign at
that time. Last of all the Fishes ^^^ng the. 12. sign, do admonish us that
when the Sun is (...) his sign, the rain is usually so plentiful that
every thing may swim therein, as the fishes in the Sea. There are other
reasons of these names taken from the course of the vital blood, and other
humors felt in man's body when the Moon possesses the foresaid signs, the
which for brevity sake I omit.


P. But are these reasons general and may they go for current, as well on the
other side as on this side the Equinoctial?


M. Not so: but for so much as Astronomy was bredde on the Northside of the
world, the Astronomers therefore have applied their reasons especially unto
that part. So that when we are in that part of the world which is beyond
the Equator, we must understand the contrary to that, which we say, whilst
we are or this side, as for example, we say the spring beginne^^ when the
Sun enters Aries, and the Summer when he enters into Cancer, but to them it
falls out contrariwise, and the beginning of the Spring must be ascribed unto
Libra, and the Summer unto Capricorn: etc as hereafter you shall hear more at
large.


P. Why is the first place among the signs ascribe to Aries?


M. The Astronomers allege certain reason for it, which must be received
favorably, because the are not necessary, though sufficient to persuade a we
willing mind: the reasons are these: 1. The Sun coming unto this sign,
each thing begins to flourish, and that season is most fittest for the
generation of all things, therefore it carries the preh^minence. 2. The North
part of the world has a dignity above the South, in respect of the creation
and the bi^^ of our Savior, and whatsoever excellent thing has been since the
world was made. 3. The Astronomers inhabiting the North part o^ the world,
have given the first place unto this sign, because it is the first of all
those a which lean from the E^quinoctiall Northwarde. 4. Last of all, there be
that affirm that the Sun* when he was created, possessed this sign, and in
that respect it ought to have a dignity above the other.



P. I pray you, now tell me are the signs all of on^^ kind, or are they
severally divided and distinguished one ^^^m an other?


M. They are not all of one kind, but are divided by their place and their
quality. By their place they are distinguished four several ways, which are
not to be neglected because they have much use in Astronomy. First, in respect
of their place some signs are said to be Northern, other are called
Southern. The Northern signs are those which decline toward the North pole:
as...... The Southern signs are those which decline to the Southwarde: as
(...)..... Secondly, the sign in respect of their place are said to be
opposite: as. to.. (...).. to.. to.. to.. to.

Thirdly, some signs are named Cardinal, some Equinoctial some Tropicall,
and Solstitiall. The Cardinal signs (...)... so called because they are the
main ^ointes, and as were the things whereupon the four quarters of the
year are turned round, and have egresse and regresse. For the Sun coming
to the head of. the spring begins, and the signs from thence to the head of
Cancer, are called the Vernall signs, or the signs of the spring time,
namely... When the Sun comes to the head of. the Summer comes in, and the
three signs from thence, that is.. (...) appertain to that season. The
Harvest displayeth it self when the Sun enters into and. and these three
signs... are called Autumnall signs, and are appropriate to that season. The
winter begins when the Sun touches the head of Capricorn, and these
signs... are attributed to that quarter of the ^^^re. The Equinoctial signs
are. and. because the Sun in those two points only, and no more touche^^ the
Equinoctial line (as you may perceive by the Glob^^ and then only are the
days and nights equal. The tr^picall and Solstitiall signs are all one,
namely a^^. yet diversely denominated because of sundry effec^ which fall out in
them. For so much as the head of (...) and.. are the limits and bounds of the
Sun eyth^^ coming to the Northward toward us, or declini^^ from us to the
Southwards, so that he passes not bey^^^ them, but returns presently toward
the Equator, th^^^fore these signs are called the tropicall signs (as I
pa^^ly noted before) and the head of either sign is calle^ tropicall point.
These signs and points are called a^^ Solstitiall, because as the water, when
it is a full sea, (...) near a full sea, does flow or ebb so slowly, that
(...) think it to stand still, and therefore call it a still wa^^ even so the
Sun coming to these points is said to sla^^ (though his motion be continual
without ceassing) (...) that his declination from, or toward the Equinocti^^
can hardly be discerned for the smalnesse thereof. T^^ signs also are diversely
distinguished according to the quality, but it is not for me in this place to
reckon the^ because they belong to Judicial Astronomy, which c^^leth some of
them Masculine, some Feminine, some ^^^urnall, some Nocturnall, some Mooueable,
some Fix^^ some Common, etc. The qualities whereby the sig^^ are usually
distinguished are either Elementall or Hum^rall. So that the signs are divided
according to the. 4. ^^^ments, and humors reigning in our bodies. The
elem^^tall qualities are such as are in the elements, as heat (...) cold,
moisture, and dryness. The fire is hot and dry, (...) are some signs, and
are therefore called fiery, as. (...) (...) which because they are but. 3. in
number, are called (...) the fiery triplicitie. The air is moist and hot, so
(...)... which make the ayrie triplicitie. The water is cold and moist, so
are... making the wa^^^^ triplicitie. The earth is dry and cold, so are...
^^ich make the earthly triplicitie. The humorall qualities are such, as are in
the. 4. humors of our bodies, and are answereable to the qualities of the. 4.
Elements. The first ^^mor is choler, which is hot and dry like the fire,
where^^ on the fiery signs are called also choleric. Blood an^^ereth in
quality to the air, which is hot and moist, ^^^rfore the airie signs are
also Sanguine. The water and (...) me agree in quality, being both cold and
moist, so that (...) watrie signs are called flegmaticke. Melancholy and
(...) earth are dry, and cold, the earthly signs therefore are ^^^ed
Melancholicke. And to the intent that you may ^^st easily carry these
qualities of the signs in memory (...) this: Choose. 4. fingers of your hand,
and call the first (...), the second earth, the third air, the fourth water:
^^en in beginning at count the. 12. signs upon your four ^^^gers, so shall
you find which are fiery and choleric that is hot and dry, which earthly
and melancholicke, that is dry and cold: etc.


P. There arise in this place. 2. doubts wherein I would gladly be resolved:
First the Philosophers have (...) down this as a principle, that in heaven
there is nei^^er heat nor cold, in what respect then are the signs ^^de to
be of these qualities. Secondly the natural pla^^^g of the Elements is this,
the fire is first and the air su^ceedeth, and then the water, the earth it
self is last of all, what is therefore the reason of this disorderly placing of
^^e signs, why are the earthly signs in the second place?


M. The ancient Astronomers, men of great exper^ence, and pains, observing the
sundry changes and alt^rations of all things here upon earth, noted that the
Su^^ and other planets coming to certain places of the he^uen, did move some
of these inferior bodies more th^^ othersome, and stirred up their qualities
more or lesse^ or otherwise diminished the^. The qualities, whose au^mentation,
diminution, and alteration they especially o^serued, were these beforenamed,
because they were mo^^ subject to common sense. And considering that as black
a^^ white, so heat and cold, drynes and moisture cannot (...) in one, and the
same subject being contraries: therefo^^ they affirmed certain places to be
hot, others to be col^^ some to be moist, and some to be dry, not actually as
the elements are, but vertually by their virtue and power From this experience
I might draw an answer to yo^^ second question, that because they observed in.
which is the second sign, the earthly qualities, that is drougth^ and coldness,
therefore they placed the signs as they b^ Yet I pray you also note this in the
elements, there are (...) qualities one intensiue and predomina^t, which is the
chi^fest of the two, the other is remiss: as in the fire the pr^domina^t
quality is the heat, the remiss quality is the di^^nes, these elements are
changed one into another, not a^^ all adventures, but successively from one to
another thi^ natural change is fitly expressed by the placing of the n^^
signs. The fire which is intensiue hot cannot becom^ moist immediately, but it
is always dry, yet may it lose hi^ heat and become cold and dry, which are the
qualitie^ of the earth. The first sign therefore being fiery, the second is
earthly, to signify this natural alteration. Again the air is intensiue
moist, and remissiue hot, therefore it cannot be dry, but it may lose his
heat, and be^ome cold, as the water is, and therefore those 2. signs succeed
one an other. I might derive also a reason of this disorder from the several
aspects of the signs, which is not to be neglected in the eclipticke, for in
this circle they are to be accounted.


P. What mean you by that word, aspect, which you say, is to be observed in
the signs?


M. An aspect is a position of the signs (it is a thing incident also to the
planets) in a determinate di^^ance of the ecliptic line, from whence they may
as it ^ere behold one another.


P. Hour many aspects are there?


M. Having regard unto the Planets, there are five ^spects, for they may be
right under one an other, or else ^hey may be in one and the same great circle
drawn from the poles of the eclipticke through the center of ^ach Planet: this
aspect is called conjunction, and is expressed with this character. the other
aspects are sextile, quadrature, trine, and opposition: these 4. are only in
the signs, for the signs are not said to have conjunction. Sextile is an
aspect of the signs (or planets) when they are distant one from an other the
sixth part of the eclipticke that is 60. degrees, as. and.. and. etc. it is
expressed thus. *. Quadrature is an aspect of the signs when they are distant
one from an other 90. degrees, which is the fourth part of the eclipticke, as.
and. or and. it is thus expressed. Trine, which ^s also called trigonall, or
triangular, is an aspect of the signs, when they are distant one from an other
the third part of the eclipticke, which is 120. degrees, as and the character
of this aspect is this. Opposition is an aspect of the Signs when they are
distant. 180. degrees, which is half the Eclipticke, so that the one sign is
in the one end of the Diameter, and the other sign in the other end: as.
and. or. and. this aspect is expressed thus.


P. What is the reason that the quintile is exe^pted?


M. If you mark it, there is no aspect hitherto named, but the number, which
gives the denomination thereto, will exactly divide. 12. for so much therefore
as 5. from whence the quintile aspect, if there were any such, is to receive
his denomination cannot divide. 12 exactly, therefore that aspect is excluded
by the Astronomers. Thus much for the quantity, that is the number of the
aspects.


P. If there be any thing to be said, touching their quality, I pray you let
me hear it, it cannot be much besides the text.


M. The quality of the aspects is either certain or uncertain. The certain
is either good or badde both of them are either perfect or mean. The perfect
good aspect is the trine because the signs, which behold one an other in that
aspect, agree in both their qualities: as. and. are both hot and dry: as.
and. are both dry and cold, etc. The mean good aspect is the Sextile,
because the signs placed in that aspect do in quality partly agree, and
partly disagree: as. and. agree in heat, but the one is dry the other moiste,
yet are they not directly opposite. The badde aspects are the Quadrature and
the opposition. The uncertain aspect is the conjunction for it is sometimes
good, sometimes badde, according to the Planets which meet together. Out of
the consideration of these aspects arises that disorderly placing of the
Signs which was mentioned before. The Astronomers perceauing the contrariety
which fell out ^implie now and then in the quartile aspecte, that the Signs,
which were so placed, did oppugn one the other sometimes in both the
qualities, as. and. whereof the one is fiery, the other watrie, they could not
dispose of the signs in that order as the elements are placed, for by that
means the first sign should never have oppugned the fourth in both qualities,
but they should always have agreed in the one, which thing was contrary to
their observation. Thus have I briefly run thourough those things which are
simply to be respected in the eclipticke. Let us now proceed to the Colures.


P. What is the reason of that name?


M. Colurus properly signifies Cauda Mancus, maimed in the tail, for these
circles (excepting one position and situation of the sphere whereof I will
speak hereafter) do always appear imperfect. Their office is this, to
distinguish the. 12. Signs, according as they are answerable to the four
seasons of the year, for you see them to divide the Zodiac into four
parts, whereof the one contains the Vernall signs, the other the summer
signs, etc. Moreover, the Solstitiall colure passing through the head of.
affords us always the two poles of the eclipticke in this manner. If you
turn the head of toward you, this is a certain rule, that look now far the
head of Cancer is above the equator, so far is the north pole of the
eclipticke beyond the north pole of the world, and the south pole of the
eclipticke is so far on this side the South pole of the world. If you turn
the head of Capricorn toward you, it falls out contrariwise.


P. I perceive it well, for then the north pole of the eclipticke is on this
side the north pole of the world, and the south pole of the eclipticke is
beyond the south pole of the world so far as the head of Capricorn is
distant from the equator. Where are the poles of the 2. Colures?


M. There is no great use of them in the Globe, yet if you desire to know
where they be, the former general rules will lead you to them: you shall
find the poles of the equinoctial colure to be in the intersections of the
equinoctial, and the solstitiall colure: and the poles of the solstitiall
colure to be in the intersections of the equinoctial colure, and the equator
(...) self. The graduation of the colures in the celestial Globes usually is
omitted, but in M. Mollineux his Globe, the equinoctial colure is gratuated
from the equator toward each pole of the world the solstitiall colure is
gratuated from the eclipticke toward each pole thereof, to the intent that the
Globe may be ready both for the declination and latitude of the Stars. Let
us now come to the Horizon. Wherein you must first understand, that the breadth
which is given to the Horizon, or any other circle else generally belonging to
the Globe, is not given unto it as an Horizon (for simply as it is an Horizon,
or a circle of the sphere, it is a line without any breadth) but the breadth is
allowed it for the degrees and other things necessary for the use of the Globe.


P. I understand you well, but I pray you express unto me particularly what
things these are that are inscribed in the Horizon, and what use they have?


M. There are inscribed in the Horizon the 12. s^^nes, the 12. months of the
year, and the 32. winds (which are commonly called the points of the
Compass) both in english and latin.


P. Nay by your leave Sir. I am not yet fully satis^^ed, I mind to go more
particularly to the matter. What degrees are those which are set in the inner
side of the Horizon?


M. They are the degrees of the 12. signs, and the numbers that stand next
unto them are the numbers of the degrees of each several sign from 10. to 10.
In the third space next unto the Horizon are set the names of the twelve signs
with their characters, the name stands at the beginning, the character at the
end of each sign.


P. But what means the character which is in the ^iddest of every sign?


M. It signifies that the sign is the house of that planet, unto whom the
character does belong, as for example, Aries is the house of Mars, Taurus is
the house of Venus, etc.


P. What is the reason why the first sign is set in the east point of the
Horizon, and from thence successively they go about by the North?


M. That is done to help the memory of the nouice in Astronomy, all the
signs from the east, counting about by the North to the West, are those which
before I counted the Northern signs, the other are the Southern signs. The
partitions which follow the names of the 12. signs, are the days of each
several month: next unto them succeed the number of the days belonging to
each month.


P. But what mean the letters set upon each seu^rall day.


M. They are seven letters of the alphabet answ^rable to the seven days of the
week: the letters a^ iterated according as the days of the year do requi^^
Of these letters, that which is appropriate to the Su^daie, is called the
Dominicall letter for that year.


P. Why? is not every year the same letter appropriate unto the Sundaie?
these letters keep alwaie the same days of the month, for A serves contin^
allie the first of January, B the second, C the third, and^


M. It is true that the letters are answerable (...) those days, yet does the
Dominicall letter change eu^^rie year, and in the leap year there is two
Domi^^call letters. The reason why they change is this, there^^ in the year
one day more than 52. weeks, as you m^^ perceive by the letters, for the last
of December, and the first of January are marked with one letter. If the^ were
just 52. weeks, the Dominicall letter could neue^ change, for then if the
first day in the year were Su^day, the last day would be Saturday, and the
first day (...) the next year continually would be Sunday again, an^ A would
still be the Dominicall letter. But in respect (...) the odd day it falls so
out in every common year that the year begins and ends with the same
day* as if the first of January be Sunday, the last of Decembe^ that year is
Sunday also, the first of the next year being Monday, the Dominicall letter
must needs change, and being A, it becomes G, thus much shall suffice for
that matter.


P. In that space where the number of the days are expressed, I note certain
letters to be written, name^^^ K. N. and I. to what use serve they?


M. They signify the manner which the ancient (...) manes observed, in
expressing the days of every ^^oneth. They did not count their days from one
to 30 or 31. as we do, but they divided their month into three several
parts, which were Kalends, Nones, and Ides, according as the three foresaid
letters do import. The first day of every month was called the Kalends, and
therefore the letter K. is applied unto it throughout the horizon. The other
days of the Kalends, were they more, or less, did not succeed in the same
month, but did go before in the former month, and were counted backward. As
for example, the Kalends of January did not follow the first of January, but
went before in the month of December in this manner: the last of December
which is the 31. day, they called the day before the Kalends: the 30. of
December was the third of the Kalends of January, the 29. of December was the
fourth (...) the Kalends of January, and so they counted them to the 14. of
the month of December, which was the 19. of the Kalends of January. Which
month had more Kalends, and which had less, may be gathered easily out of the
horizon by the place of the letters. Also you may find which month had more
Nones, and which had l^sse. The number of the Ides in every month was e^^^all,
namely 8.


P. But were the Nones and the Ides counted backward as the Kalends were?


M. Yea, for where you see the letter N stand, that was the first of the Nones.
As for example, the 5. of January was the first of the Nones of January, the
last of the Nones was the 2. of January, so that the Romans account was
contrary to ours. Likewise, the 13 of January was the first of the Ides, the
last of the Ides wa^ the sixth of January. These things are to be regarded
especially by the learned sort, that they may be skilfu^ in the account of the
ancient Romans.


P. The next space which follows contains the names of the months. I pray
you let me have a wo^^ or two with you concerning them, because not being
skillful in the Latin Authors, I cannot satisfy my sel^^ in many things,
which I would gladly know. Tell (...) I pray you has this number of months
been continual, I speak of the Romans.


M. No, for Romulus the first King of Rom^ counted but 10. months to the
year, according to th^^ time which a woman bears her child in her womb Numa
Pompilius succeeding him, added other tw^ months, namely January, and
February, so that he^^ by he made the months of the year answerable to t^^
12. signs. This number of the months has continue still.


P. Has the order of them been all one from the beginning.


M. Romulus, who was the first author of the year, began it at the month of
March, in the honour^ Mars his father. Numa Pompilius adding two other months,
made January the first, and February the la^^ month of the year, because it
was consecrated to the infernal gods. The Decemuiri afterward joined January
and February together, and made February the second month of the year.


P. What is the reason of their unequal quantity?


M. It was not possible that they should all be (...) (...) quantity, because
of the motion of the Sun making (...) several days of the year, if the Sun
had gone ^^^iselie every day one degree of the Eclipticke, then ^^^ht every
month of the year have had just 30. da^es, but considering that there is five
days more in the year than there are degrees in the Eclipticke, it is (...)
possible, but that five months must have one odd ^ai^ more.


P. But now there are 7. months which have 31. ^^^es, and one month has but
28.


M. It is so: first there were but five months that had 31. days, but Julius
Caesar took one day (...) February to put to Iulie, that as he thought
him^^^^ inferior to no man, so his month should have as ^^^y days as any
other. Augustus Caesar succee^^^g him, and being as ambitious as his
predecessor, ^^h drew an other day from February, and joined it (...) his
month August, to the end that it might not be ^^^rior to Iulie in the number
of days.


P. Have these names of the months continued ^^^m the first beginning?


M. No. For the month of Iulie, because it was the fifth from March, was called
in old time Quintilis, and August being the sixth, was called Sextilis.
More^^er, Domitianus Germanicus Emperor of Rome, ^^^nged the name of
September, and called it Ger^^^nicus, because in that month he ouerthrewe the
G^rmanes. He changed also the name of October, and called it Domitianus after
his own name, but after his decease, those two months received their ^uncient
names again.


P. What is the reason of these names?


M. The month of January has his name of (...) latin word Ianua, which
signifies a gate, a door, o^ entry, because it is the first entrance into the
year. (...) else it receaueth his name from Ianus the two fa^^ God, to whom
this month was consecrated. Feb^arie received his name from the word Februus,
wh^ was the infernal God, otherwise called Pluto, to who^^ in this month the
Romans did sacrifice: or else of ^^brua, which were sacrifices, and ceremonies
for p^^ging of souls, which in this month especially they ^^fred to the Gods
beneath. Some derive it from the w^^ Febris, an ague, because in this month
they were so^^ what rife. March receaueth his name from Mars^^ father of
Romulus, and God of war, as the Roman accounted him, and in this month they
began the warlike provision. April, this month was conse^^ted to Venus the
mother of Aeneas, from whom (...) Romans fet their descent. The Grecians
called her (...) phrodite, to signify, that she was bred of the foame^ the
sea, which is by them called aphros, and from the^^ they fet the name of this
month, striking out the^ calling it April as it were Aphrill. But Varro
think^ it more convenient to derive the name from the La^^ word aperio, which
signifies to open, because the ea^^ begins then to be free from the binding
force of (...) frost, and to send forth the grass and other fruits. (...)
month of May has his name derived sundry way^ Some will have it taken from
the word Maius, that (...) Jupiter. Others derive it from the Goddess Maiest^^
daughter (as the poets will have) of Honor, and Re^^rence, because in this
month the first worship of the^^ ^^ds began. Others take the name from Maia,
the (...) of Vulcane, unto whom, Vulcans high Priest (...) sacrifice in the
Kalends of May, which is the first of (...) month. Others say, this month was
so called of ^^^ia the daughter of Atlas, and mother of Mercury (...) of
Merchants, because in this month the Mer^^^ts offered sacrifice to Mercury,
and Maia. Last of (...) me affirm, that in this month Romulus divided (...)
people of Rome in maiores, and minores, that is, (...) the elder, and younger
sort. Hinc sua maiores tri^^^e vocabula Maio. So that this month received
(...) ^ame from the maiores, that is, the elder sort. (...) has his name also
derived from sundry things, ^^e fetch the name from Iunius Brutus, by whom,
^^quinius, and the name of the Kings were expulsed ^^me. Others derive the name
from Juno Moneta, (...) whom for her good admonition, and counsel in ^^^ng
the fearful earthquake at Rome, the Romances ^^cated a Chapel the first of
this month: so that the ^^^eth was called Iunonius, and afterward Iunius, to
^^de the length of the word. Others call it June a ^^^endo of joining, because
in this month the Ro^^es and Sabines were joined together in one city. ^^ers
take it from Iuuenta the Goddess of youth, (...) wife of Hercules. Ovid
writes thus, Iunius a ^^^num nomine dictus adest, that as May was deri^^ from
the maiores, that is, the elder sort, so June ^^ld be derived from the minores,
that is, the younger (...) Iulie is derived from Julius Caesar, who was borne
(...) is month: it was first called Quintilis as I said ^^re. August takes
his denomination from Augu^^^ because in that month he greatly augmented the
Empire of Rome, and came three times triumphing (...) the City. September is
so called, because it is Septi^^^ a Vere, the seventh from the spring time, at
which (...) as I noted before the ancient Romans began t^^ months. Likewise
October is the eight, Nouem^^^ the ninth, December the tenth from the Spring.
T^^ you hear the reason why every Month is called by (...) name. The great
space which is next to the name^^ the months contain the names of certain
days the which those that are written in the greater Rom^ letters, are the
names of the festival days observed (...) the Church of England.


P. What is the general use of placing the sig^^ and the months in the
Horizon?


M. They serve to this purpose, the day b^ given to find the place of the
Sun in the Ecliptic that is, what sign of the Eclipticke, and what degre^^
every sign he does possess, with his entrance into (...) sign: and
contrariwise, the degree which the Su^ possesses being known, and the sign
to find the (...) of the month, the which things are very necessari^ the use
of the Globe. For many questions cannot e^^ be answered, except the place of
the Sun be know^ The day therefore of the month being found out in (...)
Horizon, the degree which stands right against (...) day is the place of the
Sun. But considering that in (...) Leap year there is a day more than in
the other the years that went before it, and that day is put in (...) ways
immediately after the 24. of February, theref^^^ in that year after the
foresaid 24. day of Februa^^ if you seek the place of the Sun, you shall
add (...) day more than the number of the day is in w^^ ^^u seeks the place
of the Sun. As for example. If ^^u seek it the eight and twentieth of
February, you (...) all take the first of March: and if you seek it (...)
first of March, you shall take the second of ^^rche, etc. For so shall you
come nearest to the ^^^th.


P. Why then does not this table afford the pre^^^^ place of the Sun?


M. No, but it is done to help the nouice in ^^^ronomie, until he attain
unto farther know^^ge in that Art, and this is sufficient for him, be^^^se in
common practice he shall never by sense find ^^ifference between this, and
the exact place of the ^^nne.


P. What mean the names of the months that ^^owe, how chances it that they
are twice set ^^wne?


M. The first of them is the new reformed Al^^nacke of the Romans proclaimed
by Gregory Pope (...) Rome. The other is that which our Countreyman (...).
has lately set forth, containing the true compu^^on and reduction of the
months to their first and ^^^cient seats, the which were therefore set down
in (...) Horizon belonging to this Globe, that thereby ^^^ght be seen the
difference that is between our Ka^^^dar, and that of the new style, and also
that we may ^^^dily keep an account according to our own, and ^^^ir Calendar.


P. I pray you give me some instructions touching this matter: for I see some
Globes that have ^^^yr Horizon described after the new Roman Al^^^nacke
(namely, those Globes which were made at Amsterdame, by Ieames Floris) the
which tro^bleth me many times, because I cannot reduce them (...) our account.


M. You see this, that the new Roman Alm^nacke preuenteth our 10. days, and
the other preue^teth our 15. days, one rule applied orderly to th^^ both
shall be your direction in them: in this mann^^ If the day of the month be
assigned according to (...) account, and you having none other Horizon butt t^^
which is made after the new style, would notwithstanding know what degree and
sign the Sun possesse^ add ten days unto the number of the day
propounded, and seek that out in the horizon the degree of (...) sign which
is correspondent to that day is the place (...) the Sun. As for example, the
11. of August I desire (...) know the place of the Sun by the Horizon made
aft^ the new style. I add 10. to the number of the day it m^keth 21. which
number I seek in the Horizon, and rig^ against it I find the 27. degree and
30. min. of.


P. But put case the question were propounded concerning the 24. of August, if
I should put 10. to the number, it makes 34. how shall I make answer he^^
considering that August has not so many days?


M. If the two numbers added together excee^^ the number of the days belonging
to the month ass^^ned, take the days of the month assigned from the t^tall
sum, the number remaining is the days of the month following, as in your
example 24. and 10. ma^^ 34. August has but 31. days, take them from 34. the
(...) mainder 3. refers me to the third of September: the degree answering
unto that day is the place of the Su^ Contrary wise, if you know what degree
of the Eclip^^^ke the Sun possesses, and by the Horizon of the ^^^w style
you would know what day of the month it is (...) cording to our account, first
seek in the said Horizon (...) day opposite to that degree, and if it be
possible, sub^^^ct 10. from the number, the remainder gives the day (...) the
month according to our account: as for ex^^^ple, if against the degree of the
Sun you find the (...) day of any month, the day upon which the Sun
^^ssesseth that degree according to our account, is the 11. (...) of the same
month.


P. But put case I cannot subduct ten from the ^^^mber of the day which
stands against the degree ^^^gned?


M. Then add that number to the number of the ^^^es belonging to the month
next before it, and sub^^ct 10. from the total sum, the remainder is the
(...) of the month immediately going before, according ^^^our account. As for
example, the day answering to (...) degree of the Sun in the Horizon of the
new style, ^^^he sixth of August, for so much as I cannot subduct 10. ^^^m this
number, therefore I add it unto the 31. days (...) Iulie, the total sum is
37. from whence I take 10. (...) remainder is the 27. of Iulie, upon which day
the ^^^ne possesses the same degree (namely, the 13. d. 5. m. (...)) which he
possessed the sixth of August according (...) he new account. This that I have
said touching the (...) Roman Calendar, may be said of the other next
^^^oyning to it, taking the number 15. for 10. To con^^^de, this is a general
rule for you to note, that what ^^gree soever in the Horizon you find the
Sun to ^^ssesse the same degree, must be sought out in the E^^^ticke: the
which degree we call many times simply the Sun, sometimes we call it the
place of the Sunn^ and therefore whenever we say bring the Sunne^ the
Meridian, or bring the place of the Sun to (...) Meridian, etc. our meaning
is, that you should bri^^ the degree of the eclipticke which the Sun
possesse^^ to the Meridian, or to the Horizon.


P. Do these degrees of the signs continually a^swere to the same days of
the month?


M. No, but they may serve the turn 24. year, (...) 30. without great
inconvenience. That they do (...) keep the same days of the month, you may
see^ the entrance of the Sun into the equinoctial poin^ and into the
solstitiall points: for the vernall eq^noctiall at the Incarnation of Christ,
was the 25. (...) March, and the summer solstice was the 24. of Iu^^^ The
Nicene Council found the vernall equinoctial (...) be the 21. of March, and
now it is the eleventh of (...) said month. The reason of this difference is,
in (...) Julius Caesar's Almanac which we follow, presupp^seth the year to be
365. days and 6. hours, which ^^ing greater than the year of the Sun, it
comm^^ hereby to pass, that the Solare year preuenteth (...) year of Julius
Caesar, and draws by little and (...) nearer unto the first day of the month,
so that in (...) to come the entrance of the Sun into the head of ^^ries,
which is the equinoctial point, will be the first (...) March, if there be not
a correction used. In the oth^^ spaces that follow are set the names of the
wind^^ which commo^lie we call the 32. points of the comp^^ both in english
and latin, to the intent that not only (...) learned, but the ignorant also
might have use of them (...) the latin names the author thought good to follo^
(...). Lemnius, both in respect of the learning of the ^ame, and also because
the names which are used by ^hers savor rather of the Italian speech, than of
the ^^cient Roman tongue. The use of them is excellent as ^^al be declared
hereafter, both for the place of the rising and setting of the fixed stars,
and the Sun, and also for their coasting round about the heaven.


P. This is one thing that I would feign be resolved (...), why in saying the
compass as the mariners term (...) they begin at the North point, and so go
on from ^^ence Eastward, were it not as good to begin at the ^^ast where the
Sun always rises?


M. In deed if the Sun did always rise full East, (...) were convenient the
compass should begin there: ^ut they follow the Sun, and for so much as the
vt^rmost rising of the Sun is at the North point of the ^^orizon, and beyond
that he cannot rise, as you shall see ^^ereafter, therefore they begin there.
Thus much con^^erning those things which are described upon the Ho^^zon of the
Globe, whereof the points of the compass ^ust be understood in the Horizon of
heaven, and be^^des them certain degrees: for the quarter from the East to the
South, from the West to the South, also from the East to the North, and from
the West to the North, is to be vn^^^ood to be divided into 90. degrees, the
number of which ^^egrees is not usually expressed, because the degrees of ^^e
signs next unto the Globe may easily supply them. The reason why each quarter
must be understood to be ^^us divided, is the difference which is between the
lear^ed and the common mariner. The common mariner seeing a star or the Sun to
rise and set, usually names the point ^f the compass upon the which it
appeared, as, that it rises East, Northeast, or East, and by South. The l^^ned
Astronomer he counts how many degrees the rise from the East, and how many
degrees they set from the West, as that the Sun rises 22. degrees 30. min^^
the Northward, or 11. degrees. to the South wa^^ Therefore that you may
quickly understand them both (...) you must accustom your self to turn the
degrees (...) each quarter into the points of the Compass, and contrary wise
the points of the compass into degrees, (...) this manner. The whole circle is
divided into 360. ^^grees, therefore the 32 points of the compass, and (...)
360. degrees are equal, the quarter of the circle cont^neth 90. degrees, and
8. points of the compass, eu^^ point of the compass therefore contains 11
degr^^ two points contain 22. degr.. three points conta^^ 33. degrees.. four
points contain 45. degrees. N^^ demand what you think good concerning the
Ho^^zon, as it is to be conceived in the heaven.


P. I have diverse things to ask concerning (...) circle, I will fet them out
of the definition: which (...) this. The Horizon is a great fixed circle of the
Glo^^ dividing that part of the heaven which is seen, f^^^^ that part of the
heaven which is not seen. First tell (...) what is the reason of the name?


M. You observe this, that when you stand (...) plain champion country,
where there is nothing (...) hinder your sight, that round about you there
seeme^^ circle to be described, which is a representation of (...) circle
whereof we speak: beyond this circle you^ (...) nothing, neither does your
sight pass it, but end^^ there, whereupon the Grecians have called it the
Ho^^zon, of the word (...), which is finio, to end, the ^^^^^^es also call if
finitor, that is the ender, because it limi^^h our sight.


P. You say it is a fixed circle: what means that?


M. My meaning is, that it never stirs nor mo^^^h, as it may be proved by a
most certain argument ^^ken from the poles thereof in this manner. The
Horizon, as you may perceive by the Globe, cutteth the meridian at right
angles, the poles therefore of the Horizon (by that general rule which I gave
you at the first) must ^^edes be in the Meridian, the one of them is that point
(...) the Meridian, or that point of the heaven which is ^^^ht over our head,
and is called the Zenith, the other is ^^e point right under our feet, and is
called the Nadir: (...) then the poles be the points directly above, and
di^^ctlie beneath us where we stand, and no pole can ^^me nearer to his
circle in one place than in an other, ^^t is always equally distant on every
side from it, it must needs follow, that so long as we stand still, the
Horizon must be fixed, for if it should rise upward, it ^ust come nearer, if it
should move downward, it ^ust fall farther from the vertical point which is
our ^^nith, and the pole of that circle.


P. What then? does the Horizon move when we move?


M. Not so: but that Horizon stands still, and ^^u transport your self into
another, so that you are ^^yd to change your Horizon.


P. Are there then so many Horizons?


M. Herein is the difference between the other circles of the Globe before
named, and the Horizon, they are but one in the heaven, as one equator, one
e^^ipticke, etc. But the Horizons are infinite, not to be numbered, every man
has his Horizon in truth, yea a^ many points as there can be conceived, in the
half (...) the heaven so many Horizons are to be understood though not
sensibly to be discerned in a small space for the sensible alteration of our
Horizon can hard^^ be perceived in 400. furlongs, which amount unto (...) miles.


P. You say that the Horizon divides the heaven, b^ how does it divide it into
equal, or into unequal parts


M. It is a great circle, therefore it divides it in^^ equal parts.


P. When I look round about me standing in (...) plain champion feeld, do I
see just the one half of the heaven?


M. Here you must understand, that the Horizo^ is taken two several ways, the
one is called rational (...) natural, because it is the true horizon
represented by (...) horizon of the globe, and not by sense, but by geomet^^
call reason, to be comprehended to divide the heau^^ equally. The other is
sensible and apparent: that i^ it is that space of the land and sea which our
eye sig^^ beholds, and from thence runs on unto the he^uen. And for so
much as the center of the Horizon is (...) our sight, the which is far
distant from the center (...) the world, through which the diameter of the true
Horizon does pass, therefore reason tells us this, tha^ it cannot be so
great as the other is, and consequently (...) cannot divide the heaven into two
equal parts: ye^ considering that the Globe of the earth in respect of the
heaven is insensible, so that our sight cannot make^ sensible distinction
between each Horizon, therefore although our reason affirm an inequality,
we acc^^nt them equal.


P. Have you any thing else to be added touching (...) Horizon?


M. As the equinoctial is the beginning of all declin^^ion, and the ecliptic
is the beginning of all latitude i^ ^he celestial globe, so is the Horizon the
beginning of all elevation, altitude, or height. Whatsoever is in the Horizon
has no elevation, whatsoever is above it, has a^ elevation more or less, as
hereafter you shall hear. ^^s the beginning also of all depression. In it are
coun^^d the amplitude of every thing, that rises or sets in the heaven, and
the several coasting of the Sun or stars, which is called the Azimuth or
vertical circles, etc. But (...) us now come to the Meridian. You see that it
cutteth the Horizon at right angles, and stands so upon (...) that it leans
neither to the one hand nor to the o^^er, therefore the poles of it must needs
be in the Ho^^zon, in the East and West points thereof. In it are con^^ined the
poles of the world, and the poles of the Horizon, which I called before the
Zenith, and the Nadir. The degrees thereof are 360. not continued as the
degrees of the equator, but are counted from 1. to 90. for so it is most
convenient for the raising of the pole, and the equator above the Horizon. The
use of it simply considered in it self, is the dividing of the heaven into
two equal parts, whereof the one is the East, and the ^ther the West.
Whatsoever is toward the rising of the Sun, is the East, whatsoever is toward
his setting is the West part of the world, and by it the day is distinguished
equally. From it (as you heard before) we begin to account the points of the
compass, and the variation thereof.


P. Are the Meridians many in number, or (...) there no more than one, as we
see in the Globe?


M. The Meridians are not so many as the Ho^^rons in number, yet are they so
many, that we m^^ term them infinite in respect. Which way soever yo^ go
the Horizon differs, because your vertical po^^^ differs, but the Meridian
differs only between (...) East and West. If you go North, or South, your
Me^dian continually is the same, because your Zenith, (...) vertical point is
always in the selfsame line: so th^^ the Meridians in truth are so many in
number as the^ are points between the South and North part of the Globe, as
you see it divided by the Meridian, though (...) sense they cannot be
discerned. Notwithstanding, w^^ commonly count those that are of one Shire, or
Ci^^^ or Town, to be under one Meridian, because the se^sible distinction of
one Meridian is not perceived scare^ly in 300. furlongs, which are 37. miles.
Thus mu^^ touching the great circles of the Globe, as they are simply
considered by themselves, now of them jointly on^ with an other, and first
generally without respect ha^^ unto any certain position of the Sphere. Here
the^^ things do offer themselves to be considered, 1. the equal division of
the great circles by the Horizon, 2. the uniform motion of the equator, 3. the
declination, 4. the longitude, 5. the latitude, 6. the four cardinal points
o^ the world, 7. the goodness of the Globe. Howsoever the Globe is situated in
the Horizon, be the pole higher o^ lower from it, or just in the same, the
great circles of the Globe are equally divided by the Horizon, except they be
conicident, and hid therewith.


P. May they then be hid with the Horizon?


M. Yea, there is none of them excepting the Meri^^an, but in some position of
the Sphere it may be just in ^^e Horizon, and covered with it: as thus for
example. (...) the two poles of the Globe be in the Horizon, the two ^^^ures
interchangeablie are in the Horizon. If the pole (...) rased 66. degrees 30.
min* above the Horizon, the E^^^pticke is sometimes covered therewith, namely,
when that tropicall point, which is next to the pole elevated, ^^mmeth to the
North side of the Meridian. Last of all ^^en the pole is in the Zenith equally
distinct on every ^^e from the Meridian, then is the equator continually in
the Horizon. What is to be noted thereby I will de^^^re unto you hereafter,
only mark you my words at (...) time. Otherwise the great circles are equally
divided (...) the Horizon: whereby you shall note this touching (...) equator,
that whenever the Sun comes unto ^^^t circle, the day and the night is of
an equal length. ^^^o concerning the Eclipticke you see this, that there (...)
always six signs above, and six beneath (saving (...) that very moment of
time, which I spoke of even ^^w) and therefore when any sign does rise, the
opposi^^ sign does always set, as if arise, does set, if (...), does arise.
And contrary wise, the second thing to be noted, is the uniform rising and
setting of the equa^^^* which (howsoever the Globe be set) rises and set^^^^
neither faster nor slower at any one time more than (...) ^n other, whereupon
as I said before it is the measure of all time, the entire revolution of it is
the measure of ^4. hours, and the rising of every 15. degrees is the m^^ sure
of an hour.


P. How shall I induce my self to believe this uniform motion of the equator?


P. First, the situation of the equator in the middes^ of the globe between
the two poles, may move you t^ believe it: even as therefore the motion of the
heaven is certain and does not move but equally, so does the (...) quinoctiall
move also. Secondly, it makes the same angl^ with the Horizon in any certain
position of the Sphe^^ without alteration, which thing the ecliptic does not*


P. How shall I know that?


M. Raise the the pole of the globe as high as yo^ please above the Horizon, as
for example 50. degree^ The angle which the equator makes with the horizo^
will be 40. broad, as you may perceive by the degrees (...) the meridian
intercepted between them both. The turn the globe round, and that angle will
still continu^ of the same quantity: but the angle which the eclptic^ makes
with the horizon will vary diversely. Last of (...) the uniform rising and
setting of the equator, may (...) perceived by the hour circle, for if you
place it as yo^ were taught before, and apply the index unto twelue^ clock,
and then mark what degree of the equator is (...) the East or West side of the
meridian, in moving (...) globe, until the Index light upon one a clock, you
sh^^ find 15. degrees of the equator to rise, and to set, and consequently it
will fall out from hour to hour. A^ here I must put you in mind of one
thing, that for (...) much as the equator is the measure of time, the you^
students in Astronomy ought diligently to endeavor the selves to be cunning, and
ready to convert the degree minutes, seconds, etc. of the equator, into parts
of tim^ and contrariwise the parts of time into degrees of the ^quator, the
which thing is most easy unto them that (...) skillful in the rule of
proportion, for if 15. degr. do ye^ hour, they may easily infer what 30. or
40. degr. etc. ^^l yield: and again, if 1. hour give 15. degr. what shall 2.3.
or 4. hours yield, etc. The third thing which cra^eth no certain position of
the Sphere is the declinatio^, a thing to be noted by all students in
Astronomy. Declination is the distance of any thing in the celestial Globe
from the equator measured by the degrees of a great circle drawn from the
poles of the world.


P. But what great circle is that, by whose degrees the declination is to be
measured?


M. It is that great circle which is drawn from the poles of the world through
the center of that thing whose declination I would know by the globe. But for
so much as it were an infinite and an impossible work to draw through every
point assigned a circle, therefore we make (...) meridian the common instrument
to find the declination. So that whether we seek the declination ^^^ny
star in the heaven, or whether we seek the de^^^ation of any point assigned
in the eclipticke (which ^^^earmed also the declination of the Sun, because
the ^^^ne always possesses one degree or other of the e^^pticke) this is your
rule: If you bring the star or any assigned degree of the eclipticke unto the
meridian, the degrees of the meridian intercepted between the equator, and the
asigned star or degree, express the declinatio^.


P. You say that I must bring the star or degree as^^^ned to the meridian,
but is it no matter unto which ^ide of the meridian I bring it?


M. Yes, it is a great matter. Here therefore you must call to mind that which
I told you before, concerning the applying of the hour circle unto the
meridian. If the ^^elcree of the globe come through the midst of the meridian,
or be aplied to the right or left side of the merid^an, the star or degree
assigned, whose declination yo^ would know, must be aplied to the Meridian
accordin^ly, either to the midst, to the right or left side there^^*


P. You said before, that the equator was the b^ginning of all declination, and
whatsoever is under the circle, has no declination, whereupon I may infer^^
this, that the heads of and have no declination.


M. It is true: but what point soever is either (...) the one side, or the
other of the equator, it has a dec^^nation according to the denomination of
the pole ^^ward which it declineth.


P. Then all declination is either Northern or So^therne, whether it be of the
Sun or Stars. But wh^ is the greatest quantity that they may have?


M. The terms and limits of the declination as y^^ have heard is the equator,
and the thing propounde^ whose declination you would know. The greatest
dec^^^nation therefore of any thing propounded, cannot (...) more than 90.
degrees, because nothing can be farth^^ distant from the equator than 90
degrees, the po^^ therefore have the greatest declination, and whatsoe^^ it is
that comes nearest unto them, has a gre^^ declination than that which is
farther off from the^^ whatsoever is nearest the equator, has the least
decli^^tion. The chiefest regard of the greatest declination is (...) the
eclipticke, wherein 2. points have greater declinati^^ than all the rest,
namely, the heads of and, whi^^ decline according to the latter observations
23. d. 28. (...)


P. Why has there been a difference found in tha^


M. As there has been a difference found in the declination of the fixed
stars by reason of the moti^^ (...) the ninth Sphere, so in regard of the
motion of trepi^^tion belonging to the eight Sphere, the Sun does ^^^nge his
greatest declination. Ptolemee found the ^^atest declination to be 23. d. 51.
min 20. s. Io. Regio^^^ntanus avouched it to be 23. d. 30. min. Copernicus
pronounced it to be 23. d. 28. m. All the other points of (...) eclipticke are
of a lesser declination, according as they are nearer to the equinoctial, and
in them this is a general rule, that those points of the eclipticke which
(...) opposite, or equally distant from the equinoctial points have equal
declination, as and. being opposite, item and. or and. which are of equal
^^stance from the equinoctial points, have equal declination.


P. Hitherto you have made the Meridian the ^^mmon measurer of the declination:
but may I not ^^de it otherwise?


M. Yes you may find it by your compasses more ^^ecisely in this manner: set
one foot of your com^^sses in any star propounded, or in any degree of the
^clipticke, whose declination you desire, and turn the other foot of them to
the equator, or any other circle parallel unto the equator, putting the said
foot out, or pulling it in, until you do but touch the circle. Then app^^e
your compasses to the equinoctial line, and observe the number of degrees
intercepted between them, for they express the declination.


P. What commodity does the knowledge of the declination bring?


M. First, it helps us to find the height of the pole, as I will teach you
hereafter when I speak of the ^eigth of the stars and Sun. Secondly, it
brings us to the knowledge of the place of the Sun. Last of a^^ it brings
forth the day of the month.


P. Tell me the declination being known (as s^ example, suppose I know the
Sun to decline 11. de^^ 30. m.) how shall I find the place of the Sun?


M. For So Much as 4. mean points of the ecliptio^ have equal declination (as I
said even now) there m^^^ therefore consideration be had of the time of the
yea^^ as, whether the Sun be supposed to have this declin^tion in the spring,
or in the summer, etc. For the dec^^nation propounded, must be sought out only
in that p^^^ of the eclipticke which is correspondent to the season then is
your rule this: if the quarter of the ecliptic (...) swerable to the season
propounded, be applied to (...) meridian, the degree of the eclipticke, which
falls (...) under the assigned declination, is the place of the Sun^^ so if
it be spring time, the Sun declining 11. d. 30. (...) must needs possess
the head of. if it be summer, (...) possesses the head of etc.


P. Hereby me thinks I could answer the (...) proposition my self.


M. Let me see: the declination of the Sun be^^ given, how can you find the
day of the month?


P. If the degree which the Sun possesses being fo^^ out by the former
proposition, be sought for afterwa^^ in the horizon of the Globe, the day of
the mon^ which stands right against it, is the day required, (...) for
example, the Sun in the Spring time declineth (...) d. 30. m. by the former
proposition I find his place to (...) the head of. unto the which in the
horizon of t^^ globe I find the end of the tenth of April to answe^*


M. You say true: the fourth thing which craue^^ (...) certain position of
the Globe is the Longitude: this ^ay belong to any point assigned in the Globe,
but generally we seek the longitude either of the Stars, or of the degrees
of the eclipticke, whereby also we count ^^e longitude of the Sun. The
beginning of longi^^de is the head of, the circle wherein it is counted and
measured is the eclipticke. The extremity or end of the longitude in respect
of the Stars which are distant from the eclipticke toward either pole
thereof, is ^^at point of the eclipticke, upon which, that great ^^cle
lights, which is drawn from the poles of the ^^lipticke through the center
of the star. But in re^^^ct of the eclipticke it self, or in regard of any
star, (...) the sun supposed to be in the eclipticke, the end or ^^^it of
longitude is that degree, which the sun or star is supposed to possess.
Hereupon we define the ^^^gitude thus. The longitude is an arcke of the
eclip^^^ke, contained according to the natural succession of the signs
between the head of, and that great circle, which is drawn from the poles of
the eclipticke, through the point assigned in the Globe. Here you must note
this, that for so much as the head of is the beginning of all longitude,
therefore whatsoever is contained under the half of that great circle, which
is ^^^wen from the one pole of the eclipticke through that ^^int unto the
other, has no longitude at all. The other ^^ints assigned in the globe, may
increase in longitude ^^to 360. degrees, than the which there can be no
greate^, because they are the degrees of the whole eclipticke.


P. You say, that the longitude is an arcke of the eclipticke, but how shall I
express it: as for example. (...) I be demanded of the Longitude of the
Star called the Lions heart, what shall I say, that it is an ar^^^ of the
eclipticke, etc? me thinks that were somewh^^ absurd.


M. If you should answer so your answer we^^ true: but for your instruction
note this, that when (...) be demanded of the Longitude of the Sun or starr^
we make answer two several ways, sometimes by (...) degrees of the sign
upon which the great circle fallen which is drawn from the poles of the
eclipticke throu^^ the center thereof: so we say, that the Longitude of (...)
Lions heart is the 23. d. 43. m. of Leo. Sometimes (...) answer by the
continual succession of the degrees contained in the arcke of the eclipticke,
for we say the Lio^ heart has Longitude 143. d. 43. m.


P. But the degrees of the eclipticke are not (...) down in continual
succession upon the Globe.


M. It is true, and therefore the Longitude vp^^ the Globe is not found, but
according to the signs, (...) their degrees. Yet if for every whole sign you
co^^ 30. degrees, and unto that sum add the odd degre^ and minutes
remaining, if there be any, the total is (...) Longitude according to the
continual succession, as (...) example, the Lions heart is in the 23. d. 43. m.
of Leo. ^^fore Leo there are 4. whole signs, therefore I take for times 30.
which make 120. unto which I add the o^^ degrees, and minutes remaining, which
are 23. d. 43. (...) the total sum 143. d. 43. m. is the Longitude,
acco^ding to the continual succession of the degrees.


P. You said, that in finding the declination, (...) meridian circle is a fit
and convenient instrument: (...) what shall we have to find the longitude.


M. It were convenient for this purpose and for (...) latitude whereof I am to
speak, to have a semicircle ^^^de fast to each pole of the eclipticke when
occasion ^^^uld serve, divided into 180. degrees, so that the quar^^^ from the
eclipticke to each pole should contain 90. ^^^erwise you must use the quadrant
of altitude, ap^^^ng the 90. degree thereof unto the pole of the eclip^^^^e,
and bringing the edge of the quadrant through (...) center of the star. But
if you could so order the ^^^ter that the Globe might be taken off from the
me^^^^an, and the poles of the eclipticke fastened thereto ^^^he poles of the
equator are, then were it most com^^dious for this purpose, and for the finding
of the la^^^^de of the stars, which is the fifth general thing to be ^^^ed in
the use of the Globe, without any certain po^^^n regarded.


P. What is the Latitude?


M. I told you, that as the equator was the begin^^^g of all declination, so is
the eclipticke the beginning ^^^ll latitude in the celestial Globe. Whatsoever
there^^^ is just under the eclipticke, has no latitude, as the ^^^ne who
keeps always underneath it. The lati^^^e then which is afforded by the
celestial Globe, is of (...) stars that are not under the eclipticke, it is
defined (...). Latitude is the distance of a star from the eclip^^^^e
measured by the degrees of a great circle drawn (...) the poles of the
eclipticke through the center of (...) star propounded.


P. Therefore if I take the quadrant of altitude, or the half circle, which
you spoke of before, and apply it to the poles of the eclipticke, bringing it
close to (...) star assigned, the degrees which are contained ^^^weene the
eclipticke, and the star, express the latitude thereof. But put case I
wanted both of the^^ might I not find the Latitude by the Compasses?


M. Yes in such manner as I taught you to fin^^ the declination. If you set one
foot of your compa^^^ in the center of the Star, and take the shortest
exte^tion (as we call it) between the said center and the ^cliptick, the
degrees of the equator contained betwe^^ the feet of your Compasses afford the
Latitude, (...) which must be pronounced to be either North or So^^^ according
as it leans to the Poles. What Star s^^uer leans from the eclipticke
toward the North p^^^ has North latitude, and what soever leans tow^^^ the
South pole, has South latitude.


P. What use has the longitude and the latitude


M. They serve to find out the Stars of the Glo^^ which are easily found if
I know these two things (...) I apply the quadrant of altitude to the pole of
the ^clipticke either North or South as the denominatio^ (...) the Latitude
does direct me, and bring the end the^^ to the degree of Longitude, the
Latitude being coun^^^ in the quadrant, will bring me directly to the place^
the Star. Moreover, we cannot so conveniently (...) the celestial Globe,
or rather we cannot make it a^^^ without the knowledge of the longitude and
latitud^^ the Stars.


P. You have taught me how to find out the de^^^nation longitude, and latitude
of the Stars, so (...) forth as they are inscribed in the Globe. Now put
(...) that I should find in the heaven some Star which (...) not in the
Globe, may I notwithstanding by the Gl^^^ find out the longitude, latitude,
and declination of (...) Star?


M. Yea that you may. Can you tell how to find (...) distance of Stars?


P. Yea that I can, I learned it at your Lecture when (...) read your book
concerning the use of the cross ^^^fe, and there it is set down.


M. Then when you epsy any star in heaven not ^^^ressed in the celestial
globe, first make choice of two ^^^res in a reasonable distance from that which
you espy, ^^^e any two, it makes no great matter which, only ^^^y must not be
in a right line with the star seen, but ^^her choose them in a triangle.
Secondly, take the distance of each star from the star newly seen:
Thirdly* find out those two stars upon your Globe, which (...) made choice
of in the heaven, then extending your ^^^passes at several times, unto so make
degrees of the ^^^ator, as the several distance of each star does re^^^re.
Set the one foot of your Compasses in the one ^^^re, whose distance was first
taken, and according to (...) distance make a circumference either upward or
^^wneward, according as the situation of the star ^^wly found out does
admonish you. Also set the foot (...) your Compass in the star whose
distance was ^^^nd out at the second time, and according to that ^^^^nce make
an other circle which shall cross the for^^^ in one place or an other, the
intersection of those (...) circles is the true place of the star, whose
declina^^^^, longitude and latitude may be found by the rules ^^^e said.


(...) I perceive your meaning, the practice of it will be de^^^htsome,
proceed now I pray you to the sixth thing (...) ^e noted in the circles of the
Globe, considered ^^tlie one with an other, without any certain position of
the Globe, which is the finding of the four cardinal points.


M. This is certain, that where the meridian cu^teth the Horizon, there are
the two cardinal poin^ which are called the North and South: and where t^^
equator cutteth the Horizon, there are the other (...) which are called the
East and West: so that if by (...) help of the needle touched with the Load
stone y^^ turn the fore part of the meridian to the Southwar^ the four
cardinal points will appear, howsoever (...) pole of the Globe be raised more
or less above the H^rizon, so that it be not made your Zenith.


P. Why do you put in that caveat?


M. They that dwell under either pole, have (...) equator just in their
Horizon, so that it makes no i^tersection with the Horizon, and therefore in
that ^^spect they cannot say that this place or that place is i^ East or West,
but which way soever they look, i^ South unto them. The last general thing to
be noted (...) the circles, is the goodness of the material Globe it se^^^ And
here I must tell you this, that concerning a^^ Globes, which our countreyman
has made, the bo^^ upon which the printed papers are pasted, is most pe^fectly
round, as by the trial I have found them, and (...) therefore to say it, that
he may receive commenda^^ons for his pains, and artificial handling of the
sa^^ If there be a fault, it is either in the papers or in the H^rizon or
meridian: which whether it be, the circles (...) bewraie it, in this manner. If
the great circles which (...) drawn from the poles of the world, being applied
(...) the meridian, do not precisely answer it, and fall i^ underneath it,
without bowing one way or an oth^^ ^^ere is a fault in the pasting of the
papers, or else the ^^ridian it self is crooked. The papers cannot be hol^^,
the meridian may. If the equator, in the revolution (...) ^he Globe, do not
keep just under the middle of the ^^^idian where the degrees begin, there is a
fault in the (...) be, for it is a sign, that it sincketh down to much ^^^ard
the nethermost pole, or else is raised to high ^^^ard the uppermost pole. If
the equator in the reuo^^^on of the Globe do not rise and fall just upon the
(...) and West point of the Horizon, there is a fault as ^^^ore, or else the
papers are not pasted just in a circle. (...) ^he just half of the meridian be
not above and be^^^th the Horizon, there is a fault, either in the Hori^^^ it
self, which warpeth, or else in letting of the me^^^an into the Horizon, which
may be remedied either ^^raysing it higher, or letting it sincke lower. If the
Ho^^^on do not cut the equator into two equal pieces, ^^^re is the same fault
in the Globe also, except the Ho^^^on warpe. Thus have I delivered as briefly
as I ^^^ld those things which are to be considered in the ^^at circles of the
Globe jointly one with an other, ^^hout regard had unto any certain position
of the ^^ere, it remains therefore now to speak of them ^^^ey require a
certain position which we commonly (...) the rectifying of the Globe.


P. What is it to rectify the Globe?


M. To rectify the Globe is so to situate it, that it ^^^y be answerable to
the heaven, so that the meridian (...) ^he Globe, the poles and axeltree, with
the Horizon, (...) answerable to the same circles in the heaven, whe^^^r it be
a right Sphere as we term it, or a crooked.


P. What mean you by a right Sphere and a crooked?


M. You see this, that howsoever you place (...) Globe in the Horizon, the
equinoctial either make^ an angle with the Horizon, or is parallel unto it,
a^ falls just within it. If it make an angle with the Hor^zon, the angle is
either right or oblique. According (...) this angle the Sphere is called either
right or obliqu^ A right Sphere is that wherein the equinoctial and (...)
Horizon cut one an other at right angles: therefo^ the poles of the
equinoctial (which are the poles of t^^ world) are in the Horizon, and
co^trarywise, the poles (...) the Horizon are in the equinoctial, so that the
equin^ctiall passes both directly over our head, and under (...) feet. The
Horizon in regard of this concurse at rig^^ angles with the equator, is called
also a right Horizo^ And here you are to note this diligently for your ease^
using of the Globe, that the meridian may supply (...) place of a right
horizon, because it has all the prope^ties thereof. For as the Horizon of a
right Sphere cu^teth the equinoctial at right angles, so does the me^^dian, as
the poles of the world are in the right Horizo^ so are they in the meridian: as
the right horizon di^deth all the circles of the Globe, be they great, or li^^
into two equal parts, so does the meridian: whereup^^ we take this for a
general rule, that what conclusion^ ever in the use of the Globe is to be
tried by the horizo^ of the right Sphere, the same may with lesser trouble
(...) tried by the meridian.


P. By that which you have spoken of a right Spher^^ I may easily gather what
an oblique (or as we tearm^^ it) a crooked Sphere is, I think I may rightly
define (...) oblique Sphere to be that, wherein the equator make^^ an oblique
angle with the horizon: whereupon the (...) needs follow as a consequent,
that one of the ^^s is always above the horizon, and the other be^^h, either
more or less.


M. You say true: and therefore this also does ensue, (...) an oblique Sphere
may admit all the degrees of ^^^parison, that is, it may be oblique, it may be
more ^^^que, it may be most oblique. It is oblique when the (...) is raised
never so little above the horizon: it is most ^^^que when the pole is raised
most above the horizon, (...) is, when the pole is in our Zenith, and the
equi^^^tiall is coincident with the horizon. The horizon in ^^^rd of this
oblique angle made with the equator, is ^^ed also an oblique horizon. Moreover,
you must ^^e this, that whether the Sphere be right or crooked, ^^arre as the
equinoctial is distant from the horizon, ^^^rre is the pole of the
equinoctial distant from the (...) of the horizon which is our Zenith. And
again, ^^arre as the Zenith is from the equator, so far is the ^^e from the
horizon. If the equinoctial be 90. de^^es above the horizon, the Zenith is 90.
degrees di^^t from the poles of the equator. If the equator be (...) degrees
above the horizon, the Zenith is 30. degrees ^^^ue the pole. If the equator and
the horizon do ^^^se one with an other, the pole and the Zenith are (...) ^he
one point.


(...). What am I to learn by this for mine instruction?


M. Hereby you may learn how to set the quadrant ^^altitude in his due place:
for if from the pole vp^ard you count so many degrees of the meridian, as (...)
contained between the equator, and the horizon: (...) otherwise, if from the
equator upward you count (...) many degrees of the meridian, as are contained
between the pole and the Horizon, there is the (...) place unto which you must
fasten the said quadran^


P. Let us now return from whence we depar^ Tell me I pray you, is it always
requisite that the Glo^^ should be in situation just correspondent to the fac^
the heaven?


M. No. In most conclusions it is only requis^^^ that the pole of the Globe
should be raised accord (...) to the pole of the heaven, for otherwise we
cannot ^^^taine to the truth of the question. But the setting of^^ Globe due
North and South by the help of the nee^ or the setting of it level by the
plommet line, are (...) always necessary, when they are necessary, I will
(...) you hereafter. The height of the pole must either given, or be sought out.


P. I perceive your meaning. Now to the purp^^^ concerning the use of the
circles of the Globe, when (...) Globe requires a certain position, or as you
calle^ a rectifying, with which circle shall we begin?


M. With the Horizon, for either in that, or from that most of the propositions
do arise. First of all let (...) call in question the rising and setting of the
Sun (...) Stars: the rising and setting of the Star is to (...) gathered
by the Star it self, the rising the setting (...) the Sun is to be
gathered by the degrees of the ^clipticke.


P. When is a Star, or the Sun said to rise and se^^


M. If the center of the Sun or Star commi^^ from the inferior Hemisphere
do mount above our Horizon, he is said to arise. If descending from the super
i^ Hemisphere, his center falls beneath our Horizon, (...) is said to set. If
mounting upward, or descendi^^ ^^wneward, the center does but touch the
Horizon, (...) is said then neither to rise nor set, but is rising.


P. Go to then, answer me to this, any elevation (...) ^he pole being given,
how shall I find by the Globe ^^at stars do arise and set, what stars
never set, and ^^at stars never rise?


M. Rectify your Globe, that is, raise the pole of (...) Globe according to
the elevation assigned, so shall (...) presently answer your self by the
revolution of (...) Globe. If both the poles be in the Horizon, you ^^ll see
every star and every degree of the eclipticke (...) ^rise and set. If one of
the poles be in your Zenith, ^^u shall see all the stars and degrees of the
eclipticke ^^^m the equator upward never to set, and contrariwise ^^^se that
are from the equator downward never to (...). If the pole be raised 66. d 30.
m. you shall see all the ^^^res from the one tropicke upward never to set, and
^^^m the other tropicke downward never to rise, and (...) Sun being in the
tropicke next to the pole that is ^^^uated, does but touch the Horizon with his
center, (...) being in all other places of the eclipticke, he does (...) the
rise, and set. To conclude, this is a general rule to (...) gathered out of
the declination. If the declination ^^^^er of the Sun or Star be lesser
than the comple^^^nt of the height of the pole, the Sun and Star a^^^th and
sets. If the declination be greater, they ne^^^ set, or else never arise. If
the declination be equal, ^^ey touch the Horizon, but never set, or else never
a^^^^. The next thing to be considered in the Horizon is (...) ascension and
descension of the Sun or Stars, ^^^h the difference thereof. Ascension is
the portion of (...) equator contained (the orderly succession of the degrees
being observed) between the head of, a^ the horizon, at the time of the rising
of the Sun, (...) Star. Descension is the portion of the equator contained
in like manner between the head of, and the horizon, at the time of the
setting of the Sun (...) Star. Therefore whatsoever is in the horizon wi^^
the head of, has neither ascension or descensio^ Ascension and descension is
either right or crooked otherwise called oblique. Right ascension is the
portion of the equator contained between the head of Ari^^ and the meridian,
at the time of the coming of a^^ either sun or star unto the meridian.
Descensio^ may be defined in the same manner by the departi^^ from the meridian.


P. How comes it to pass that you define the right ascension by the meridian
and not by the ho^^zon, as you did generally define it before?


M. I define it by the meridian, because I would ha^^ you remember that which I
told you before, namel^ that the meridian of the Globe may very fitly supply
(...) place of the horizon in a right sphere. Therefore if y^^ would know the
right ascension of the sun or starre^ bring the degree of the eclipticke
which the sun p^sesseth, or else bring the star assigned to the meridia^
and there observe what portion of the equator is contained between the head of
and the meridian, (...) that is the right ascension. Here this is to be no^^
that the right ascension and descension are always on^ for the same degree of
the equator which comes (...) the meridian, the same degree goes from the
meridia^ with the sun or star. Moreover, there is no degre^ of the
eclipticke, nor no star, but it has a right ascen^^^, and descension,
excepting those which were gene^^^ excepted before, namely, those which are
just vn^^^ the meridian with the head of.


P. By your words I gather, that the oblique ascen^^^^ is the portion of the
equator contained between (...) head of, and the horizon of an oblique sphere,
at ^^^rising of the sun or stars. Descension also may (...) ^efined in the
same manner by the setting. So that if ^^sire to know the oblique ascension, I
must bring the ^^^^ee of the eclipticke, or else the star assigned to the
^^^^zon, and there observe what portion of the equator ^^ntained between the
head of and the horizon, (...) that on the East side of the horizon is the
oblique ^^^nsion, on the West side it is the descension.


M. You say right. And here note this, that the ^^^que ascension and descension
are never the same. (...) some stars and the sun likewise have neither
^^^ension or descension, namely, when they neither rise (...) set.


P. What is the difference of ascension which you ^^^red before?


M. In searching out the right and crooked as^^^sion, you shall find this
continually to be true, that of ^ne and the same sign or star the several
ascensi^^ never agree: the one is always either greater, or ^^^r than another:
therefore having found out the ^^^t and crooked ascension of any one star,
subduct (...) lesser from the greater, the degrees of the equator ^^^ch
remain, is called the difference of ascen^^^^.


P. To what end serves this ascension, and diffe^^^ce of ascension whereof
you speak?


P. It serves to diverse purposes, whereof I sh^^ make mention hereafter, now
let us follow the mat^^ which we have in hand. We use in the Horizon to
o^serue with what degree of the eclipticke any Sta^^ does arise or set, which
thing is done only by mou^^ the Globe up and down, until the Star assigned
comes to the East or West side of the Horizon, the d^gree of the eclipticke
which is then in the Horizon, (...) the degree required.


P. By this means also I may know what degr^^ comes to the meridian, for if
I bring the Star p^^pounded to the meridian, the degree of the ecliptic which
is under the meridian with the star, is the ^^gree required. But what does
the knowledge of (...) avail me?


M. Hereby you may learn upon what day of (...) uery month every Star is to
be seen rising or s^^ting, or in the meridian at midnight, in this manne^
Bring the Star propounded to the East side of the H^rizon, mark what degree
of the eclipticke is in the H^rizon with it when the Sun shall possess the
oppo^^ degree, that day shall the assigned star arise at the ^^ting of the
Sun.


P. But how shall I know that day?


M. I told you before, that whenever there any degree of the eclipticke
assigned, it must be sou^ out in the Horizon, and right against it you shall
fin^^ the day of the month wherein the sun possesses the degree. Take an
example: the little dog arises in o^ Horizon with the 5. d. 30. m. of Leo,
the degree oppos^ to this in the west side of the Horizon, is the 5. d. 30. m
Aquarius, the sun possesses that degree as I perce^ ^he Horizon the 16. of
Januarie, therefore upon that ^^at the setting of the Sun the little dog
arises ^^e Horizon. Contrariwise, bring any Star to the (...) side of the
Horizon, mark the degree of the e^^^icke which comes to the Horizon with it:
^^^n the Sun possesses the opposite degree, on that ^^at the rising of the
Sun the said Star shall set in (...) West. And here is the first means
offered to find (...) elevation of the pole. This is certain, that there is
(...) elevation wherein one and the same Star arises or ^^^eth with the same
degree of the eclipticke with ^^^ch it rises, and sets in an other
elevation, but a Star in each several elevation of the pole, has ^^uerall
degree of the eclipticke, with which it rises (...) sets every day. If the
lesser dog arise in one ^^e with the head of Leo, in an other place he
arises (...) the 10. or 20. of Leo. Therefore if you can observe (...) Star
rising in the Horizon when the Sun does (...) or setting in the Horizon when
the Sun does a^^^^ note the day of the month in the Horizon, and the degree
of the eclipticke answerable to that day: find out also the opposite degree,
then if you noted the Star to arise, bring the Star to the East side of the
Horizon, and raise or depresse the pole of the Globe, until the ^^^^re and the
degree of the eclipticke fall both together in the Horizon, for then shall the
pole of the ^^^be be at his true elevation.


P. If I noted the Star to set, I must work this conclusion on the West side
of the Globe.


M. It is so. Moreover, if you note with what degree any Star comes to the
Meridian, seek out the opposite degree, when the Sun possesses that degree,
then at midnight you shall see the star in the meridian: but we cannot from
hence infer the elevation of the pole, because every where be the pole higher
or lower, the stars continually come to the meridian with the selfsame
degree of the eclipticke. Here is occasion offered to deliver unto you the
cosmicall, achronicall, and helicall rising and setting of the signs and
stars, which are not to be neglected of young students, especially such as
are conversant in reading of the Poets, because in many places they can hardly
be understood, without the knowledge of these things, Cosmicall rising and
setting of the stars generally taken, is their ascending and descending at
any hour of the day whatsoever. Likewise, we define generally the
Achronicall rising and setting of the signs and stars to be their ascending
and descending in the night. But properly they are applied to that time only
at which the Sun does arise or set. Therefore the degree which the Sun
possesses being applied to the East side of the horizon, the sign or stars
which are then on the East side of the horizon with the Sun, are said to
arise Cosmicallie, and they which at the same time are in the West side of the
horizon, are said to set cosmicallie. Furthermore, the degree which the Sun
possesses, being brought to the West side of the horizon, the sign or stars
that are on that side with the said degree, do set Achronicallie (that is by
interpretation in the edge of the night) and they on the other side arise
achronicallie. Whereby this appears, that what sign or stars soever arise
cosmicallie, the same do set achronicallie, and contrariwise. Likewise what
star or sign soever rises achronicallie, the same do set cosmicallie, and
contrariwise. The helicall rising of the stars is their appeara^ce after they
have bin hidden by the beams of the sun. The helicall setting of the stars
is the hiding by the beams of the Sun. For this you must note, that the
Sun moving from the West to the East, does by little and little gather upon the
stars which are Eastward from him, and coming near unto them within some
15. degrees, little more or less, according to the quantity of the stars, by
his brightness he obscureth their light, and then are they said to set
helicallie. Afterward the Sun keeping on his course, leaves the stars to
be seen toward the West, then are they said to rise helicallie. By the Globe
you shall gather the helicall rising and setting thus, turn the degree which
the Sun possesses to the East side of the horizon, the stars which are
alitle above it, are those which are risen helicallie, for the Sun has left
them to be seen before his rising. Again, turn the degree which the Sun
possesses to the West side of the horizon, the stars which are alitle above
it, are those which are ready to set helicallie, for the Sun will come upon
them from the West. The next thing to be noted, is the amplitude of the Sun
or stars.


P. Tell me what it is, how it is divided, what use it has?


M. The amplitude is to be consider at the instant time of the rising and
setting of the Sun or stars, and not else. The amplitude is the distance of
the Sun or stars from the true East or West measured by the arcke of the
horizon. Therefore you must bring the place of the Sun (that is the degree of
the ecliptic which the Sun possesses) or the star assigned to the East or
West side of the horizo^, according as the time requires, then mark how many
degrees of the Horizon are contained between the Sun, or the Star, and the
true East or West point of the Horizon, for those degree^ express the
amplitude. Amplitude is either North or South. North amplitude is the arcke of
the Horizon counted from the true East or West Northward. South amplitude is to
the Southward. The seafaring men keep account as I told you before by the
points of the Compass, but it is better to observe the amplitude by degrees.
The Sun or Stars under the equator have no amplitude, because that circle
always rises and sets full East and West: for the other points of heaven
this is general, that those which have equal declination, have equal
amplitude, be it to the North, or to the Southward. In a right Sphere the
declination and amplitude of the Sun and Stars is of one quantity, so that
knowing the one, I know the other: therefore if at any time in travailing, we
find the declination and amplitude of the Sun or Stars to agree together,
it is a certain sign that we are then under the equator, and our Zenith is
just in that circle.


P. Then may I infer this also, that for so much as the meridian of a right
Sphere, and the Horizon may be counted as one, if the distance of the Sun or
Stars from one Zenith be equal unto their declination, we are just under
the equinoctial.


M. You say true: in any oblique Sphere the declination and amplitude of the
Sun or Stars does always differ, for the amplitude does exceed the
declination, yet is it never more than 90. degrees. Where the pole is elevated
(as you may perceive by the Globe) 66. d. 30. min. the amplitude of the Sun
in the tropicall points, is 90. degrees. Where the pole is in our Zenith, there
is no account made of the amplitude, because there is neither rising nor
setting of the stars. The use of the amplitude is in the finding of the
elevation of the pole. Each several star in each several elevation, has a
peculiar amplitude, so also have the several degrees of the eclipticke, whose
declination does differ. Therefore the amplitude of the Sun or star being
known, if you bring them to the horizon, and raise the pole of the Globe, or
depresse it, until the star or Sun come to his just amplitude, the pole
shall have his true election.


P. Me thinks contrariwise I may infer this: the amplitude being known,
and the pole having his due elevation, to find the degree which the Sun
possesses: for that degree which touches that amplitude, ^s the degree of the
eclipticke fought for.


M. You say well: but considering that two seue^all degrees in the North part,
and two in the South have equal declination, and therefore equal amplitude,
you must in answering this question have an eye to the ^ime of the year, that
you may make choice of the sign which is correspondent to the season,
according as it has bin noted heretofore. Moreover, the amplitude either of
the Sun or Stars being known, and the pole of the Globe being raised as it
ought to be, you may find the variation of the compass in this manner. Pitch
your compass in some convenient place, take the amplitude of the Sun, or any
other star arising or setting, then bring the degree of the eclipticke which
^he Sun possesses or the star observed, unto the horizon of your Globe, if
the amplitude found out be correspondent to that which the Globe affords,
then has your compass no variation, otherwise the variatio^ is so much, as
the difference between the observation made with your compass and the Globe
amounts unto.


P. But how would you have the compass framed, for the performance of the
conclusion?


M. You may take any how so ever they be made, but for the young beginner that
compare is fittest which has the Needle set just under the North and South
point.


P. I pray you tell me this: the pole being raised as it ought to be, how
shall I find at what time the Sun or any other star arises.


M. The rediest way to perform this is by the rectifying of the index
belonging to the hour circle.


P. How is the index to be rectifyed?


M. The degree which the Sun possesses being brought to the Meridian of your
Globe, and you^ hour circle being fastened to the Meridian orderly, (...) you
place the index upon 12. a clock, then is the inde^ said to be rectifyed. This
thing you shall note diligently, that there be no more repetition made thereof
when soever the mention shall be made rectifying the index of your Globe. The
index being rectifyed if you bring the degree of the Eclipticke which the Su^
possesses to the Horizon the index will express the time of his rising or
setting, according as it is applied either to the East or West side of the
Horizon. Likewise the index being rectifyed if you bring any Starr^ assigned to
the East or west side of the Horizon, yo^ shall find the time when it ryseth or
sets.


P. But put case I wanted mine hours circle, and the ^ndex, may I not find the
time of the Suns rising and ^etting otherwise?


M. Yes, you may find it by the difference of ascen^^on as I will teach you
hereafter. Thus much concer^ing those things which are to be observed when the
Sun or Stars are in the Horizon. Now let us come to those things which are
to be noted when the Sun or ^tarres are either above or beneath the Horizon.
Among the which, the first to be considered is the altitude of the Sun or
Stars.


P. I pray you let me have your instruction in this ^atter, for I take it to
be a thing expedient to be known, because I hear many men brag of their
cunning in taking the altitude of Sun and Star.


M. The Horizon is the beginning of all altitude height or elevation: therefore
what soever is in the ho^zon has no altitude, height, or elevation. The
extremi^^e of all altitude is the Zenith, for nothing can be high^r above the
Horizon than that point, which being 90. ^egrees above the Horizon is equally
distant from it ^n every side. Moreover this you must understand, that from the
Zenith to each several point of the Ho^zon a great circle may be drawn,
which because they ^ome from the vertical point, are therefore called ver^call
circles, in some one of these circles is the altitude to be counted,
whereupon we define the altitude to be the distance of the Sun or Star
from ^he Horizon, expressed by the degrees of the vertical ^^rcle, which is
drawn from the Zenith through the ce^^r of the Star propounded. The
instrument serving ^or this purpose is the quadrant of altitude which must ^ee
fastened as you were taught before unto the Zenith.


P. How shall I find the altitude thereby?


M. Lay the quadrant of altitude upon the place o^ the Sun, or any other
degree of the eclipticke; o^ upon any star, and observe the degrees contained
between it and the horizon, for they generally express^ the altitude required,
the Sun or star being supposed to be in such or such a place of the heaven.
The altitude of the Sun or star is either meridian, or intermeridian. The
meridian altitude is the distance between the star and the horizon, when the
star i^ just in the meridian, the quantity whereof is expressed by the
degrees of the meridian circle. Therefore if you bring either the Sun or
star assigned to the meridian, you shall find the meridian altitude thereof,
the pole of the Globe being raised to his due height.


P. Why do you put in that caveat?


M. Because as the pole rises higher or lower, (...) does the meridian
elevation of Sun or stars alte^ In a right Sphere the meridian elevation of
the Sun or stars is always equal to the complement of declination: as if
the Sun decline 23. d. 30. min. his elevation is 66. d. 30. etc. In the most
oblique Sphere the meridian altitude is always equal to the declination
therefore where the pole is 90. degrees above the Horizon, you shall never see
the Sun mount higher that 23. d. 30. min. which is his greatest declination.
In other situations of the Sphere the meridian altitude is four in this manner
if the Sun or star decline to the po^^ elevated, the declination of the
star being added t^ the elevation of the equator, gives the meridian
altitude: as for example, if the Sun decline 23. d. 30. min^ toward the North
pole, the elevation of the equator being supposed to be 38. d. 30. m. his
meridian altitude will be 62. degrees. Contrariwise, if the Sun or star
decline from the pole elevated, the declination being taken from the elevation
of the equator, leaves the meridian altitude: as if the Sun decline from the
North pole 23. d. 30. m. the elevation of the equator being supposed to be 38.
d. 30. m. his meridian altitude will be but 15. degrees.


P. Is there any excellent thing to be gathered by the meridian altitude of the
Sun or star.


M. Yea, for it brings us to the elevation of the pole, for considering that
each several elevation of the pole has a several and peculiar elevation of
the Sun or stars, therefore by it we may know the elevation of the pole.
If the elevation of the Sun or stars be equal to the complement of their
declination, then are we just under the equator, and both the poles are in
the horizon. If the elevation be equal to their declination, then are we just
under the pole. The other eleuations of the pole are found by addition or
subduction, ^n this manner. If the Sun or star decline toward the pole
elevated, the declination being subducted from the meridian altitude, leaves
the height of the equator, which is always the complement of the elevation of
the pole, therefore if you take the height of the equator from 90. you have the
elevation of the pole. If the Sun or star decline from the pole elevated,
their declination added to the meridian altitude, gives the height of the
equator, and consequently the height of the pole.


P. But what if the Sun or star have no declination?


M. Then is this a general rule, that the Sun o^ star is then in the
equator, and therefore the Meridian altitude expresses the height of the
equator, which being subducted from 90 gives the pole. Thus much concerning
the meridian altitude of the Sun or Starr^ The intermeridian altitude is the
distance of the Sun or Star from the Horizon, when they are in some other
place of heaven, and not in the meridian: This altitude is either antemeridian
or postmeridian. The antemeridian altitude is the distance of the Sun or
Star from the Horizon at any time before noone: the post meridian altitude is
the distance of the Sun or Starr^ from the Horizon after noone. And for so
much as the Sun or Star by their proper motion make but sma^ difference in
their place, so that it cannot sensibly be perceived in the after noone a that
they have move from that place wherein they were in the forenoone therefore we
say that the antemeridian and postmeridian altitude of the Sun or Stars is
all one, this being supposed that they be equally distant from the meridian.
(...) searching out the antemeridian or postmeridian altitude of the Sun or
Stars the rule is all one with that general rule which I gave you before, so
that the Sun o^ Star be supposed to be in any place above the Horizon bet
ween it and the Meridan.


P. But put case that I did not suppose the Sun or Star to be in any
place? may not I find out b^ the Globe their certain and true altitude which
the have in heaven.


M. This you must understand that some things ar^ found out immediately, some
things mediatly by certain means. If the Sun shine he will bewray his own
height by the help of the sphericall gnomon, but the height of the stars
cannot so be found out, for they require the knowledge of the hour or some
other such like thing, as you shall perceive hereafter.


P. Tell me then, how shall I find the height of the Sun by the sphericall
gnomon.


M. Rectify your Globe perfectly in the open air where the Sun shines, so
that it may stand precisely North and South, and that the Horizon be leuel, and
the pole raised as it is convenient: set your spherical gnomo^ upon the place
of the sun, on the East or West side of the globe, acording as the time
requires, and turn the globe to and fro until the gnomo^ give no shadow:
the^ if you fasten the globe, that it move not, and bring the quadrant of
altitude over the place of the sun, the degrees thereof intercepted between
the place of the sun, and the Horizon will expres the true height of the
sun. Thus much concerning the altitude of the sun or stars.


P. Now teach me how I may know how long they continue above the Horizon.


M. Here you must note this, that for so much as the sun is the efficient
cause of the day, therefore to know how long he continues above the horizon is
to know the length of the day, which is found in several manners. First thus.
Bring the degree which the sun possesses to the East side of the horizon,
then rectify the index, setting if upon 12. a clock in the hour circle. Turn
the globe about until the said degree come to the West side of the Horizon:
the hours (which the index runs over) express the continuance of the sun
above the Horizon: in like manner may you find how long any star continues
above the Horizon.

The second way to find out the continuance of the Sun or star above the
Horizon, is by the difference of ascension taken twice.


P. Why do you take the difference of ascension?


M. This you shall perceive by the Globe, that in a right Sphere there is no
point of heaven which does not rise and set within the space of 12. hours, so
that the day is never longer than 12. hours, neither does any star continue
above the Horizon longer than that time. But in an oblique Sphere (if the Sun
or stars be not in the equinoctial) the day is either longer or shorter than
12. hours. If the Sun or stars decline toward the pole elevated, their
continuance is longer, if from that pole their continuance is shorter above the
horizon than 12. hours, by the difference of ascension twice taken as I find
before.


P. But why take you this difference twice?


M. The one declares how much the Sun or any Star arises sooner or later
in an oblique, than it does in a right Sphere, the other tells how much
sooner or later it sets, and thereupon we frame our rule thus, if the
difference of ascension of the Sun or star declining toward the pole
elevated be twice taken and added to 180. degrees, the total sum converted
into hours and parts of hours as occasion offers, shall declare the
continuance of them above the ground. Again, if the difference of ascension of
the Sun or star declining from the pole elevated be twice taken and
subducted from 180. degrees, the remainder converted into hours etc. declares
their continuance above the ground.


P. The length of the day being found, what may be inferred thereupon.


M. Many things both pleasant, and profitable in Astronomy, as the elevation
of the pole. If the day be continually but 12. hours long, then are we
precisely under the equator. If the day be 6. months long, then are we
directly under the pole. The other eleuations are found out thus. Divide the
length of the day into two equal parts, and convert the hours into degrees,
as if the day be 16. hours long, the half thereof is 8. hours, which
contain 120. d. From the head of Aries count these degrees in the equator to
the West side of the Horizon, and set fast the last degree under the meridian,
so that it stir not from it: then in the equinoctial colure count the
declination of the Sun for the day propounded either upward or downward from
the equator, according as the place of the sign requires. Last of all, raise
or let fall the pole of the Globe until the degree of declinatio^ does touch
the Horizon, so shall the pole have his just elevation, the like may be done by
any fixed star. The second thing to be noted in knowing the length of the
day, is the time of the Suns rising or setting, for if the length of the
artificial day be divided into two parts, the one declares the hour of his
setting, the other being subducted from 12. ^ffordeth the time of his rising:
as if the day be 16. hours long, he sets at 8. and rises at 4. a clock.
The like may be done concerning the rising and setting of the stars. The
third thing is the length of the night: for the length of the day being
subducted from 24. hours, yields the length of the night.


P. But may not these three last things be performed by the Globe it self?


M. Yes very conveniently I taught you before how the time of the sun his
rising and setting may be found out. The length of the night is known in this
manner* Seek out that degree of the eclipticke which is opposite to the place
of the sun: Bring it to the East side o^ the horizon, set the index of the
hour circle upon 12. a clock, turn the Globe about until the said degree
touch the horizon in the West, the hours which the index has passed over,
express the length of the night. The fourth thing to be gathered out of the
length of the day being known, is the length of the planetarie hour. The
planetarie hour is the twelft part of the artificial day or night: therefore
sometimes it is longer than the common hour, sometimes shorter, sometimes
equal^ unto it, in a right sphere, the common hour and the planet hour, both
of the day and night are equal, in an oblique sphere if the sun dicline from
the pole elevated, the common hour of the day is lesser than the planetary
hour, but the common hour of the night is greater: contrariwise if the sun
decline toward the pole elevated, the common hour of the day is greater than
the planetary hour, but the common hour of the night is lesser. The next
conclusion is to find the hour of the day by the sun shining.


P. Why do you say by the sun shining, may not the hour be found, if the
shine not, or may it not be found by the stars.


M. If the sun shine, he leads us unto the knowledge of the hour by his
light, but if he shine not, there must be one thing or another granted, and
given, o^ else we cannot come to the knowledge of any particular thing be it
hour, or height, or coasting: the like is to be said of the stars whose
beam being so weak, that it cannot make a shadow, inforceth us to crave some
one thing granted unto us, before we can infer any conclusion.


P. I perceive your meaning, first therefore tell me what I may do by the
shining of the sun: and then I will crave the other conclusions.


M. The hour of the day by the sun shining is found thus, Rectify your globe
perfectly, seek out the place of the sun, and rectify the index, bring the
place of the sun either to the East or West side of the meridian according as
the time of the day shall advise you, set the sphericall gnomon upon it, and
turn the globe to and froe until the gnomon cast to shadow, then will the
index in the hour circle give the hour of the day. Now mark how many
things follow upon this work: First, so soon as you have found the hour,
if you fasten the Globe that it stir not, and bring the quadrant of altitude
over the place of the sun, you shall find his altitude above the Horizon.
Item the globe being fastened, and the quadrant of altitude being brought over
the place of the Sun, you shall find upon what point of the compass he is,
with his distance either from East, West, North, or South. Item, the hour being
found: you have all the Stars above the Horizon at that hour. Item you may
by the Globe perceive what Stars are in your Zenith at that time. Item, if
you note what point of the Eclipticke is under the Meridian, both above and
beneath the Horizon, and also what point of the Eclipticke is in the East and
West, you may thereby very well know the four Cardinal points of Heaven, as
we term them, and consequently the beginnings and endings of the 12. housen
of heaven which is commonly termed the erecting of a figure.


P. All that you have mentioned before is easy, but I do not perceive this
last conclusion.


M. I will help your understanding so well as I can. First therefore a figure,
as we take it commonly in this sense, is the division of the heaven into 12.
parts by certain great circles drawn from the intersections of the meridian
and the horizon, through equal partitions of the equator, dividing the
eclipticke into 12. unequal parts. Each part of heaven thus divided is called
an house. The beginning of them is in the East, and from thence the rest are
accounted under the horizon to the nether part of the meridian, and from thence
upward to the West, and so by the South side of the meridian to the East
again, for so the revolution of the heaven requires. The instrument whereby
the housen are found out, is that half circle which we commonly call the
circle of position whereof I spoke before. The manner of finding the^ out is
this. The hour being known by the shining of the Sun, the 4. cardinal
points do straightway offer themselves, whereof that which is in the East is
called the first house, that which is under the horizon in the meridian is the
fourth house, that which is in the West is the seventh house, and that in the
South part of the meridian is the tenth house. These being noted severally
according as you see in the figure following, from the point of the equator,
which is under the meridian, you shall count 30. degrees toward the East, over
the thirtith degree bring the circle of position, and note what point of the
eclipticke it crosses, for that is the beginning of the eleventh house, and
the degree opposite unto that degree of the eclipticke is the beginning of the
fifth house. Again, from the point of the equator, which is under the meridian,
you shall count 60. degrees toward the East, and over the said 60. degree bring
the circle of position, and note what point of the eclipticke it lights upon,
for that is the beginning of the twelfth house, and the opposite degree of the
eclipticke under the Horizon is the beginning of the sixth house. The beginning
of the ninth and eight house are found out in the same manner on the West side
of the Globe, as the eleueth and twelfth house were found out on the East side.
The beginning of the second house is the degree opposite to the eight house,
and the degree opposite to the ninth house is the beginning of the third house.


P. Is there any thing else to be found out by the shadow of the sphericall
gnomon.


M. The Sun being in the meridian, the height of the pole may be found out
thus. Rectify the Globe precisely in the open air, not regarding the
elevation of the pole of the Globe at his due height. If the gnomon cast a
shadow, the pole of the Globe is either higher or lower than it should be, and
therefore must it be raised, or let fall.


P. But how shall I know when I am to raise it, and when to let it fall?


M. If the shadow run toward the pole elevated, you must raise the pole of
the Globe, if it run from the pole toward the equator, you must let the pole
fall.


P. Is there any thing to be gathered out of the former propositions, touching
the variation of the compass.


M. Yea, for if you remember it, I told you, that when the spherical gnomon
casts no shadow, then do we find not only the hour of the day, but also
the coasting of the Sun, that is, the point of the compass upon which he
shines: Compare therefore your Compsse with the Globe, and you shall easily
find, whether it does vary yea or no, and how much the variation is, so that
the Globe be rectified precisely as it ought to be: for if the Sun shine
upon the same point of your Compass, upon which the Globe signified him to
be, then has it not variation at all, but if they differ, their difference
will express their variation. Thus much concerning those conclusions, which
may be performed on the Globe by the shining of the Sun, and the Sphericall
Gnomon. Let us now come to those propositions, which require a certain
supposition, or the granting of some one thing or another, and may be
performed without the sun shining: and thus, for example. The hour being
given to find the height that the Sun shall have, at that same hour.
Rectifye your index, turn the Globe either to East, or West side of the
Horizon, according as the hour assigned does require, until the index fall
upon the said hour, then fasten the Globe, and bring the quadrant of altitude
over the place of the sun, the degrees of it intercepted between the place
of the Sun, and the Horizon, express his height at that hour.


P. Here me thinks I may reuerse the former proposition, and by the height of
the sun given, I may find out the hour.


M. You say well, for if you rectify your index, and move the globe to and froe
as the time requires, until the place of the Sun fall upon that degree in
the quadrant of altitude, which you supposed the sun to have, then will the
Index express the hour.


P. May I not also by the height of the stars find the hour of the night?


M. Yes, if so be you know the stars of heaven, and can compare them with
your Globe.


P. Put case I did know them (for afterward I will be bold to crave the
knowledge of them) how shall I find the hour of the night.


M. Take the height of some known star, rectify your index, turn the globe
about until the same star found out in your globe, have the same elevation
in the Quadrant of Altitude, which you found him to have in the Heaven, so
shall the Index express the hour.


P. Here also I may infer this proposition. The ^oure of the night being
given to find not only what ^eight the stars shall have above the horizon,
but also what stars are then above it.


M. You may, in this manner: rectify your index, ^urne your Globe about,
until the Index fall upon the ^oure assigned, so shall you have the stars in
your Globe answerable to them which are seen in heaven: then applying your
quadrant of altitude unto them, you shall find the height of each several
Star.

Now mark you well how many things follow ^ereupon. By this means you may
come unto the knowledge of the stars, especially if you set the Glob^ North,
and South, for then the Globe will be so answerable to the heaven, that you
cannot but know the stars of the heaven by the stars of the Globe, for
that star in the Globe which in place and height (...) answerable to the like
star in heaven, affords the name and title thereof. Item, the hour being
found b^ the stars height, or the height being found by the hour, as I
taught you even now, if you fasten the globe and bring the quadrant of altitude
over the center of the star, you shall find upon what point of the compa^^^
any star is, and how many degrees it is distant from either of the four
cardinal points of the Horizon. ^tem, you shall find the culminant stars,
that is, tho^^ stars which pass over your Zenith. Item, you man thus find
the four cardinal points of heaven, with the beginning of the twelve housen,
and how far the Sun is distant from the Horizon, according as I delivered
it before, in speaking of finding the hour of the day by the Sun.


P. But may the height of the pole be found by the stars, as it was found by
the Sun?


M. It cannot be found by the shaddowe of the sphericall gnomon, because the
beam of the stars i^ so weak, that it cannot cause a shaddowe, but the
meridian altitude of any star being given, the height of the pole is
presently found by the Globe in this manne^^ Bring the star whose meridian
altitude is known vnt^ the meridian of the Globe, either to the North, or
Sou^^ side thereof, as the star it self does admonish you then raise, or let
fall the pole of your Globe, vnt^ there be so many degrees of the meridian
contayne^ between the center of the star, and the horizon, as ^he height
found out amounted unto, so shall the pole of the Globe have his dew elevation.


P. Let us now return to our former purpose: you ^^id even now that by
supposition of some one thing or another, many conclusions may be performed by
the Globe without the sight, or shining of the sun, or ^^arres as you showed
it by example in supposing the ^eight of the sun, or stars to be known, or
the hour ^f the day, or night, and from thence you derived ma^y other
conclusions. Have you any other proposition ^ending to the same effect?


M. Yea there are many, for out of any one thing al^ost all the other may
arise: because there is in them a ^ertaine reciprocation, and a necessary
consequence from ^he one unto the other: as thus. If the hour be known, and
the height of the sun, we may find his place: the ^^dex being rectifyed.


P. That may be easily done by the height of the ^^nne at twelve a clock
having consideration of the ^ason of the year, because in each quarter of the
eclip^cke each several degree has a certain altitude in the ^eridian. But
how it should be done at any other hour ^ther before, or after noone, I do not
see.


M. You must suppose that when your index was ^ectifyed, you did then know the
place of the Sun: ^ut when you went about to take his height you forgot
(...): if therefore you desire to know it again, turn the ^obe to and froe,
until you bring the index to the hour ^ssigned, fix the Globe and apply the
quadrant of alti^^de to the ecliptic, that degree of the eclipticke, which
under the quadrant of altitude answers to the height of the Sun known, is
the place of the Sun, Which being found, we may proceed by a necessary
consequence to all the former conclusions whatsoever. As to the point of the
compass upon which he shines, to his distance from the East, West, North, o^
South, etc.


P. Then if I perfectly know the distaunce of the Sun from the East, or
Weste, together with hi^ height, I may find his place in any elevation of the
pole.


M. You may, having consideration of the time of the year, which is always
requisite in these propositions, which lead us to the place of the Sun For
if you set the Quadrant of altitude to the point of the Compass, upon which
the Sun is said to shine, or upon that distaunce from the true East, or
West, which the Sun is said to have, and turn that quarter of the ecliptic
which the time of the year requires, unto the quadrant of Altitude, that
degree which under the Quadrant answeareth to the supposed height of the Sun,
is the degree which the Sun possesses. Contrariwise we may by the place of
the Sun, and the point of the compass, upon which he shines, find the
height of the Sun.


P. Me thinks that that is easy: for if I set the Quadrant of Altitude
against the point of the Compass assigned, and bring the place of the Sun
unto it, the degrees of the Quadrant contained between the place of the Sun,
and the Horrizon express his height.


M. You say true: this proposition also is performed with the same facility.
The point of the Com^asse being given, and the place of the Sun to find ^^e
hour of the Day, in this manner. Rectify your ^ndex, set the Quadrant of
Altitude upon the point ^f the Compass assigned, then bring the place of the
^unne to the edge of the Quadrant, so shall the ^ndex express the hour.

This also is another consequent: the point of the com^asse being given, and
the height of the Sun to under the time of the rising or setting: you know
that ^^e point of the compass, and the height of the Sun ^ust necessarily
lead us to his place, having found his ^lace, rectify the Index, then bring
the place of the Sun (...) the East side of the Horizon, so will the Index
point ^ut the time of his rising: again turn the place of the ^unne to the
West side of the Horizon, and the index ^ill express the time of his setting.


P. I find it now true which you said before, name^ that the supposition of
some certain things brings (...) the consequence of all the other. For me
thinks ^^at I my self knowing the point of the Compass, and ^^e height of
the Sun, could easily infer by your ^xample the declination, the right
and crooked ascen^on of the Sun, the length of the day, or night, the
^eridian Altitude, and whatsoever has been spo^en of before. For the height
of the Sun, and the point ^f the compass, upon which he shines leads me
to ^e place of the Sun, the place of the Sun being brought (...) the meridian
gives his declination, and also his right ^cension, and his meridian altitude
likewise the same ^ace being brought to the Horizon affords his croo^ed
ascension, then keeping the place of the Sun at the horizon, if I set the
index upon 12.2 clock, and turn the Globe about to the West, I cannot but
find the length of the day: etc. Let us now proccede.


M. Hitherto you have heard those co^clusions which may be inferred by the
Globe, the Sun or Stars being supposed to be either in the horizon or
about it: there are some which belong to the Sun or Stars, being under the
horizon. Among the which 3. or 4. only are usually sought after: the other
either because they are not greatly profitable, or because they are easily
performed by that which has bin delivered heretofore, are neglected. The first
of them is to find the depression of the Sun at any hour assigned: but
especially at midnight.


P. What means the depression of the Sun?


M. The depression is opposite unto the altitude: and it is the distance of the
Sun from the horizon downward, it is found thus: Seek out the degree of the
eclipticke opposite unto that degree, which the Sun possesses, bring it to the
South side of the meridian above the horizon, the degree of the meridian
between it and the horizon express the depression of the Sun at midnight.
Whereby is gathered how he is unto them which are our antipodes.


P. But put case I would know the depression of the Sun at any other hour,
how shall I find it?


M. Bring the opposite degree unto the meridian, rectify the index, turn the
Globe about until the index fall upon the same hour, fasten the Globe, and
then bring the quadrant of altitude over the said degree, the portion of the
quadrant between it, and the horizon express the depressio^ of the sun at
the hour assigned. The second concerns the dawning of the day. That is ^ound
in this manner. Bring the degree of the Sun ^o the meridian, rectify your
index, then seek out the degree of the ecliptic opposite to the degree which
the Sun possesses, move it toward the West side of she Horizon, and by the
help of the quadrant of altitude ^et it 18. degrees above he Horizon, the
hour upon which the index falls, expresses the dawning of the ^ay.


P. I pray you tell tree this, what is the reason why ^ou bring the opposite
degree to the West side of the Horizon?


M. As before in seeking the depression of the Sun, ^he opposite degree being
brought to the South side of ^he meridian declared how low the degree of the
Sun ^as under the Horizon in the North side, even so here ^he placing of the
opposite degree 18. degrees above the Horizon in the West, causes the true
place of the Sun ^o be 18. degrees under the Horizon in the East, at which
^istance the dawning does begin.


P. What if the opposite degree cannot have 18. degrees of elevation, but
falls underneath it.


M. Then must you conclude, that the twilighte ^ontinueth from the setting of
the Sun until his ri^ing.


P. Is the dawning of the day in all places at the same ^oure the Sun
possessing one and the same degree?


M. No, for the more oblique the sphere is the daw^ing beginnineth so much the
sooner, because the Sun ^reepeth his course continually nearer to the
Horizon, and ^herfore lighteneth our hemisphere so much the sooner. The third
conclusion concerns the length of the dawning, which is the time from the
first breaking of the day unto the rising of the Sun: the conclusion is
wrough^ thus, Seek out by the former proposition the time (...) the dawning,
then seek also the time of the Sun* rising, the difference of these two
times express the length of the dawning, which is more or less according to
the obliquitie of the Sphere. The fourth conclusion concerns the length of
time wherein any sign a arises above the Horizon.


P. What, is one sign longer arising than another I thought that as they were
all equal, so the time (...) their rising or setting was also equal: and this
is certain, that any six Signs arise and set in 12. hour.


M. That is true, if you take them jointly together otherwise being taken
severally, the one is longer a ^sing than the other: whereupon there arises
another distinction of ascensio^, which in respect of the time limited unto
each sign is said to be right or oblique without respect had to the situation
of the sphere as it was before Those signs have a right ascension, with whom
the^^ arise more than 30* degrees of the equator: that is to say that are
longer arising than 2. hours, contrariwise if there arise with the sign fewer
tha^ 30. degrees of the equator, that is to say, if the sign arise in lesser
time than 2. hours, then is that called an oblique ascension. Either of these
ascensions may be found out 2. several ways: by the degree of the Equator, for
that is the measure of all time, o^ else mechanichally by the hour circle. By
the degrees of the equator, the length of time, that is the ascentio^ of any
whole sign is found thus in any situation of the sphere Bring the head of any
sign to the East sign of the horizon, mark what degree of the equator is in
the horizon with it, the^ move the globe, until the end of the said sign
^o^meth to the horizo^, mark the degree of the equator in the horizon, subduct
the lesser from the greater, the remainder converted into hours, and minutes
if need require expresses the assention of the sign propounded. By the hour
circle the length of time wherein any sign arises is thus sought out. Bring
the head of any sign to the East side of the horizo^, set the index upon 12. a
clock, move the globe west ward, until the end of the said sign come to the
horizon, the index in the hour circle will express the length of time wherein
the sign did arise. These are the chiefest questions moved concerning those
things which happen under the horizon.


P. I pray you has the circle of position no other use then to rectify a
figure.


M. Yes, for it finds that circle whereof it receaueth his name, that is the
circle of positio^, which is but a great circle drawn from the one
intersectio^ of the horizon and meridia^, unto the other, through the center of
some star, or any point else assigned in the heaven, dividing the sphere into 2.
pieces. By it in erecting of the 12. housen, we find what notable stars, or
what planets are in any of the housen. The distance of any circle of position
from the meridian is found thus. The circle of position being raised from the
horizon unto any point assigned in the globe, move the quadrant of altitude
(fixed to the Zenith) to the east or west point of the horizon as occasion
requires: the degrees of the quadrant contained between the said circle of
position and the meridian express the quantity of the angle which it makes:
each circle of positio^ may supply the place of half an horizo^, and in that
respect it has singular use in astronomical and geographical matters, as shall
be declared, if God spare me life and ability to perform that which I have in
hand. It remains now to speak of the lesser circles of the Globe.


P. But by your leave sir, you have said nothing of making the dials by the
Globe: which is a matter mentioned by all Astronomers in handling the use of
the Globe.


M. It is true, and therefore I did omit it, because it is the matter which I
have now in hand, the which I am so much the more desirous to perform, because
it has binne earnestly required by a friend of mine, whose forwardnes in these
in studies I would help so much as lies in me. Therefore let me at this
instant crave pardon for that matter, until such time as I shall particularly
discourse thereof.


P. Well then proceed in the use of the lesser circlet of the celestial Globe.


M. You see that the four lesser circles of the globe divide the whole surface
thereof into 5. parts. Every one of them is called a Zone.


P. What means chat word Zone?


M. It signifies among the Grecians a gyrdle, or a swaddling band, and
therefore it is fitly applied unto these portions of the globe, because they in
their figure represent after a manner such a thing. Of the Zones some are
enclosed with one only limit some with two: those which are enclosed with one
only limit, namely with the circle arcticke, and antarcticke are the two Zones
which lie about each pole, which because of their distance from the eclipticke,
and place of the sun are called cold. Not that there is either heat or cold
in heaven, but because they which dwell on earth under that circuit of the
heaven, feel not the Sun so forceable in his heat by reason of his
obliquitie, as others do. The other 2. Zones are limited on each side: That
which is in the midst, being limited on the one side with the tropic of
Cancer, on the other side with the tropicke of Capricorn, ^s called the
burning Zone, because the Sun keeping ^his course continually within it does
greatly heat that part of the earth which is subject unto it. The other two
being nether too near the Sun, nor too far of are called temperate,
because they are nether so hot as the ^one, nor so cold as the other: that
which is to the Northward is limited with the circle arcticke, and the
tropic, of Cancer, the other to the Southward is enclosed with the circle
antarcticke, and the tropicke of Capricorn: The breadth of each cold zone is
47. degrees: the breadth of the burning Zone is as much: each temperate Zone
has 43. degrees in breadth. As they are described on the celestial globe,
they express unto us what stars are enclosed within each several Zone,
which are to be no^ed, because they add somewhat according to their nature
unto the quality of the Zone making it more hot or cold. Thus much concerning
the use of the celestial Globe, wherein if I seem to have bin ouerlong, I do
therefore crave pardon, because I have witten it for the behoof of our
country men, who being not thoroughly seen in the Latin tongue might from
hence gather that in some measure, which might further their knowledge, and
satisfy their desire in these kind of matters.


The use of the Terrestrial Globe.
WE are now come Philomathes, to the terrestrial Globe, whose use I am so much
the more desirous to teach you, by the more I find you willing to learn: follow
you therefore your accustomed manner in moving of questions, and I will endeavor
my self to shape you answer to your demand: for so I judge it best for your
instruction.

P. Seeing it is your will I should doc so, I pray you te1 me, what mean you by
the terrestrial Globe, and how do you define it?


M. The thing it self tells us, that we may define it to be a solid round
body containing in the co^uexity thereof the description of the land, and sea,
with certain lines necessary thereunto.


P. For so much as I have now the definitions of the two Globes before I go any
further to the use of this: tell me wherein the celestial and terrestrial
Globe agree, and wherein they differ?


M. Concerning their agreement: first you see they have their form common, for
they are both round.


P. It is so: but herein me thinks the terrestrial globe is faulty, because
it does not represent the true form of the earth, as the celestial globe does
resemble the heaven, for the earth is not round.


M. Take heed what you say Philomathes, the rou^dnes of the earth both in
breadth and length ii so substantially confirmed, that he is almost accounted
an heretic among the geographers that denies it. Their arguments are set,
not only from the proportion, but also from the manner of the rising and
setting of the stars, and the raising and depression of the poles. Item
besides the eclipse of the moon and the natural course of the water, that
which appears to our sight in going from, or coming near the shore, is an
evident token of the foresaid roundnes.


P. But for all these arguments I say, that the globe does not represent the
just form of the earth, which being full of hills and dales does greatly
disagree from a perfect round. yea my sight also witnesses such a thing, for
which way soever I look, both the water and the earth for the most part
seems plain.


M. It is is somewhat Philomathes which you say, but there are diverse reasons
which moved the Cosmographers in setting forth the terrestrial globe, to do
that which they have done, that is, to make it round. First because it was not
necessary to make these hills and dales, it was sufficient to express their
place, and to say the truth it was impossible to set them forth as they are
indeed. Secondly, the earth in regard of the heaven does not seem otherwise
than round: as you may perceive by the shadow thereof, which in the eclipse is
most sphericall, and round: thirdly, these hills and dales in regard of the
whole earth, are but as a mole, or wart upon a man's body, or the small
pimples on an orange. And as for the playnes which I see, be it either on the
water or land, it aryseth of the huge circuit of the earth, which is so great,
that each part thereof which we see, cannot but seem unto our sight to be a
right live.


P. Well then the first agreement of these 2. globe^ is in their form, they
are both round, albeit the earth be not to be conceived to be so precisely
round as the heaven is. In what else do the Globes agree?


M. They have the same poles, the same axletree, the same imaginary circle. So
that what conclusion soever may be performed by any of these on the celestial
Globe, the same may be performed on the terrestrial Globe, excepting those
proportions which concern the fixed stars.


P. I thought that these things had belonged especially to the celestial
Globe.


M. So they do: but they are therefore expressed in this, because the globe of
the earth and water being contained within the heaven, and being in respect the
center thereof, we may hereby gather what part thereof is subject to any part
of the heaven. Thus much concerning their agreement, their difference appears
first in their inscription, as their several titles do import, the one
containing the stars of heaven, and the circles thereof, the other expressing
the earth and water. The second difference consists in the manner of the
description: For as I told you, the stars which we behold in the concauitie
of heaven are described on the conuexity of the celestial Globe: but in the
terrestrial Globe the earth is described on the outside even as we behold it.
The third difference is in certain circles and lines expressed in the
terrestrial Globe, but not in the celestial: namely the circles of longitude
and latitude, and the Rhombes.


P. Do you not mistake your self: there are in the celestial Globe circles
of longitude and latitude, for otherwise how should we find the longitude and
lati^ude of the stars?


M. Put case it were as you say (which is seldom or never seen) that the
circles of longitude and latitude were ^escribed on the celestial globe: yet
are they not the same with those of the terrestrial Globe, for the longitude
and ^^titude in both these Globes is not accounted in one ^inde of circles, as
I will declare unto you, when I shall ^aue occasion to speak of the use of
this Globe. This hall suffice for the difference of the Globes which constech
in these four things. 1. In the general subject ^atter. 2. In the manner of
describing the same. 3. in the ^rcles of longitude and latitude. 4. in the
Rhombes. Let ^s now come to the use of the Globe, wherein I will ^roceede even
as the subject matter inscribed does af^ord, not meddling with any of the former
conclusions ^t down in the use of the celestial Globe, but speaking ^f those
things only which the terrestrial Globe does ^ade us unto.


P. Go too then: what do I learn by the circles of ^e Globe, first by the
equator?


M. It deuideth the earth into 2. pieces, the North, and South: the North is
that which is from the equinoc^all round about subject to the North pole, the
South that, which is from the equinoctial round about toward the South pole.


P. Do you say then that al they which are between ^he equator and the North
pole, are the northren peole, and so likewise of any several place?


M. Yea that I do, what think you of mine assertion.


P. I can hardly think it to be true: for then why do we call Cape Saint
Vincent the South Cape? and why does the Scripture call the Queen of Saba the
Queen of the South, seeing they be both on this side the equator?


M. You must note this, that North and South are not taken after our manner of
way: neither East or West. North and South is taken three manner of ways. One
way, simply as I spoke of it even now: the other are in respect: as first for
example, what soever is from our Zenith toward the North pole is said to be
Northward, and what soever is from thence toward the South pole, i^ said to be
Southward: and in this respect is cape Saint Vincent called the Southcape being
compared with cape sinister because it is toward the South pole in respect of
this. Again North and South are taken in respect of the eclipticke, whereupon
every star distant from the Ecliptic toward each pole is said to have North
or South latitude according to the pole toward which it bends: as for
example, the star called the lesser dog in respect of the eclipticke is
said to have South latitude, because it leans from the ecliptic toward the
South pole 39. d. 10. m. yet in respect of the equator it is counted Northern
because it declineth from the equator toward the North pole. 5. d. 57. m.


P. I understand you well: what either use has the equator in the terrestrial
Globe.


M. You heard me speak in the use of the celestial globe of a right sphere,
and of the diverse accide^ts belonging thereto, as that the day and night
therein was always of on equal length, and that the stars did rise and set
in 12. hours: the equinoctial line therefore in the terrestrial globe,
expresses, who they be that have the right sphere and see the accid^^ts
belonging thereto. As those of the ^e Island Gilolo, of Celebes, of Borneo, of
Taprobana, ^f part of Africa, and America. Moreover the degrees ^f the Equator
are the common scale of the terrestrial ^obe whereby we know what distance
there is from ^ace to place in this manner, set the one foot of your ^ompasse
in the one place assigned, and extend the other ^ot unto the other place:
apply your compass so extened unto the equinoctial, the degrees intercepted
beweene the feet of your compass express the distance,


P. In deed I find hereby how many degrees of ^e equinoctial are contained
between the feet of the ^ompasse, but how shall I express their distance,
either (...) miles or leagues?


M. You must express that according as the allow^ce is of several
cosmographers. Ptolomee allows unto every degree of any great circle
described on the ^^rth 500. furlo^gs or 62 miles and. We allow 60. miles or
(...). leagues. The French man allows 16. leagues and. ^he Spaniard makes
every degree 17. leagues and: So ^at if you multiply the number of degrees
intercepted beweene the feet of your compass by any of the foresaid ^u^bers
the product gives the distance of the 2 places ever in miles, or leagues
according to the denominatio^ of ^e multiplier. Another use of the equator is
this: in it the ^gitude of any place is found, the latitude is counted from it.


P. Here accordinng to your promise, I pray you in^ruct me in these things,
that I may know readily how (...) distinguish the longitude, and latitude of
the terrestrial ^obe from them of the celestial globe.


M. That will I do so plain as I can: the lo^gitude of the ^elestial globe
begins at the head of Aries, in terrestrial Globe it begins in the
equator at that great circle, which being drawn from the Pole of the World
through the fortunate Islands (as Ptolemee will have it) cutteth the equator at
right angles. Again the longitude celestial is counted in the eclipticke the
terrestrial longitude is counted in the equinoctial. Thirdly, the celestial
longitude is counted from the head of Aries in the Eclipticke unto that great
circle which is drawn from the pole of the Eclipticke through the star, or
any point else assigned in the heaven, unto the eclipticke: the terrestrial
longitude is counted in the equator from the foresaid great circle unto that
which is drawn from the poles of the world unto the equator, through the
City, or any other point assigned in the terrestrial Globe. Last of all, the
longitude in the celestial Globe is found ou^ by the quadrant of altitude
applied to the poles of the eclipticke: in the terrestrial Globe it is found
out by the meridian. In regard of these differences, we define the
terrestrial longitude to be the arcke of the equinoctial contained between
the great circle passing through the for tunate or Canary Islands, and the
great circle drawn from the poles of the world through any point assigned in
the Globe: according to the degree of that arc so is the longitude assigned to
be, as if the degrees be 20.30. or 40. etc. The place or point assigned is said
to have 20.30. or 40. degrees of longitude.


P. Give me leave here to move certain question for mine instruction. First,
why is the longitude counted in the equator, and not in the meridian from pole
to pole, or in some other great circle?


M. You know it is an usual custom when a thing is offered to us that is both
long and broad (the dimensions being unequal, to call that the length of the
thing which is the greatest, and that dimension which is the shortest we call
the breadth. The Geographers therefore taking survey of the world, and finding
the inhabited part thereof to be more between East, and West, than between
North and South, they gave the name of longitude to that part following or
accustomed manner in these dimensions.


P. In speaking of the beginning of longitude, you said that according to
Ptolemee, it was to be counted from the meridian of the Canarie or fortunat
Islands: why did you put in those words?


M. There is a diversity in the beginning of longitude among the Cosmographers,
and therefore I thought good by my words to insinuat so much unto you, Ptolemee
and the ancient Cosmographers began their account at the foresaid meridian. But
the later men have begun it at the meridian, which runs through the Island
of S. Michael, as you may see upon the terrestrial Globe wherein this
meridian is divided into degrees, that it may be the better distinguished from
the other.


P. Why did they begin at this place, and why did they account from thence
Eastward?


M. Ptolemee began at the forenamed meridian of the Canarie, or fortunate
Islands, because in his time they were the furthest places of the world
discovered toward the setting of the Sun, and he did therefore reckon to the
Eastward, because from the fortunate Islands to the Westward, there was not any
hope of more land, out to the Eastward there was. The later age began at ^he
meridian of Saint Michael, because under that meridian the compass has no
variation, but respects duly the North and South as most men affirm, though
other say it has his just position under the meridian of Corno and Flores: and
others between the Islands of Flores and Faiall, which are all in the number
of those Islands that are commonly called Acores: They accounted also the
longitude the same way that Ptolemee did, thinking indeed, that beyond that
place there was nothing but sea. But since the world has bin found to be
habitable round about: there have bin some that have begun the longitude at
some such certain place as liked them best, and have counted to the West ward:
as for example, the Spaniards who traveling much unto the West india, have
begun their longitude at Toledo and counted it Westward.


P. What difference make you between a circle of longitude and the meridian:
me thinks by your words they are confounded.


M. It is so, they are confounded for every circle of longittude is a meridian,
and contrariwise every meridian is a circle of lo^gitude, but they are
distinguished by their office: so far forth as the circle drawn through any
place assigned limiteth the distance in the equinoctial, which the said place
has from the meridian passing through the Canarie Islands, or any other
meridian from whence the longitude is accounted, in that respect it is called a
circle of longitude. But in regard that when the sun comes to this circle
it is then high noone or midday, it is therefore called a meridian.


P. Are there then so many circles of longitude as there be meridians?


M. Yea that there are, although upon the globe all the circles of longitude
are not expressed, as for example upon M. Moleneux his globe they are drawn
but through each tenth degree.


P. How is the longitude of any city or town assigned upon the globe to be
found out?


M. The instrument serving for this purpose is the meridian of the Globe, it
supplyeth the want of all the circles of longitude which are not expressed.
Therefore if you bring the city assigned to the meridian of the globe the
arcke of the equator contained between the said meridian, and the first
meridian of longitude expresses the longitude of the place assigned: so that
the said arcke be taken and accounted according to the orderly succession of
the degrees of the equator.


P. I pray you express the meaning by some example on the globe.


M. I will. I bring Jerusalem to the meridian, and find between it and the
first Meridian of longitude 72. degrees, 30. minutes of the Equator: so much I
pronounce the longitude of that place to be, because the succession of the
degrees of the Equator is orderly taken: again I bring the city of Mexice in
America to the Meridian: and albeit between the meridian of that place and the
first meridian of longitude there be contained but 90. d. 30. m. yet must I
not affirm that to be the longitude of Mexico, because counting from the first
meridi^n to the meridia^ of Mexico I count against the orderly succession of
the degrees; therefore I must have regard unto the said succession and pronounce
Mexico to be from the first meridian 269. degrees, 30. minutes. But that yon
may not be deceived in counting the longitude, let this ^e a general rule,
and easy unto you: if the first meri^ian of longitude be on the left hand of
the meridian of the Globe which is taken for the meridian of the place
assigned, then begin at the first meridian, the degrees of the shortest arcke
of the Equator from the left hand toward the right express the Longitude. But
if the first meridian or circle of longitude be on the right hand of the
meridian of the Globe then beginning at the first meridian the degrees of the
greatest arcke of the equator from the right hand to the left, declare the
longitude of the place assigned.


P. Me thinks by your words that the longitude of every place must be
accounted continually by degrees.


M. Yea, it must be so accounted, but if it be your pleasure to know how many
miles or leagues etc. it is distant from the said first meridian: Extend the
foot of your compasses, from the place assigned to the first meridian of
latitude according as you were taught before in taking the distance from place
to place, and apply your Compasses afterward unto the equinoctial line, the
degrees thereof intercepted between the feet of your compasses being
converted into miles or leagues, will give the distance.


P. You said, that if I bring the place known unto the meridian I shall find
the longitude, whereupon as I think I may contrariwise infer this, that if
the lon-longitude of any place known be brought unto the meridian I shall be
sure to find the place under the meridian if it be expressed in the globe.


M. You say true, and hereby also you may learn thus much, that many places
may have one and the same longitude because many places of the terrestria^
globe many be contained under one and the same meridia^


P. But have they all one lo^gitude that are under the same meridian?


M. Not so, for as you see by the Globe, each circle of longitude makes 2.
several intersections with the equator the one on the one side, the other on
the other side right opposite: whereupon it comes to pass, that those places
which are under one and the same meridian may differ 180. degrees in longitude.
Those places therefore are said to be in one longitude which are under that
half of the meridian, which is contained between the 2. poles from whom there
cannot be imagined a right line to be drawn parallel unto the diameter of the
Equator. But if the one place lie upon the one side of the meridian and the
other place beyond the pole on the other side of the meridian, then cannot they
have the same longitude.


P. They that have the same meridian, have they any thing common, and what have
they differing one from another in respect of the things appearing in the
revolution of the heaven?


M. I cannot conveniently answer unto this question, until such time as I
have instructed you in the latitude, let it rest therefore until then, and
note this in the mean time, that as two or more places may have one longitude,
so many may differ in longitude.


P. Is it expedient for me to observe the difference of longitude between
place and place, then tell me how I may find it by the Globe?


M. The longitude of the two places being severally sought out, as you were
taught before, bring that place which has the lesser longitude, unto the South
side of the meridian: if the other place be either just under the North side of
the Meridian, or on the East side thereof, subduct the lesser longitude from
the greater, the remainder gives his difference of longitude: But the place
which has the lesser longitude being brought to the South side of the
meridian, if the place which has the greater longitude be on the West side
thereof, subduct the greater longitude from 360. degrees, add the remainder to
the lesser longitude, the total sum gives the difference of longitude:
otherwise if you be not skilful in Arithmetic, the place which has the lesser
longitude being as I told you brought unto the meridia^, the degrees of the
equator contained between it etc the longitude of the other place, afford the
difference of longitude.


P. The difference of longitude being known, what may I infer thereon?


M. First you may infer your course from the one place to the other ca^ never
be north and south: but upon some other point of the compass. Secondly they
never have the same hours of the day or night: for if it be noon or midnight to
the one, it is past, or before noone or midnight unto the other: yet in the
opposite hours they may agree as if it be 6. in the morning it may be 6. at
night to the other, if it be noone to the one, it may be midnight to the other,
the difference of longitude being just 180. degrees.


P. If they that differ in longitude do thus differ in their hours, how shall
I know by the globe (comparing two places together) which of them preuenteth
one the other.


M. Bring either of the two places unto the meridian, if the other be to the
Eastwaad thereof. I say that that place which is under the meridian is
prevented in the time. As if the question were between London and Rome. London
being brought to the meridian, Rome is found on the East side thereof,
therefore I say that London is prevented in the time, and that at Rome it will
be 6. 7. or 8. a clock in the morning etc. before it be the same hours at
London. Contrariwise if one of the 2. places being brought to the meridian, the
other be found on the West side thereof, then does the place under the meridian
prevent the other, as for example. London and Mexico being compared together,
London being placed under the meridian, Mexico is on the West side thereof,
therefore London preuenteth Mexico: whereby I may conclude, that it is 6. a
clock in the morning at London before it be 6. a clock at Mexico. etc.


P. You have taught me to know which place preuenteth the other, tell me now
how long the time is wherein the one place preuenteth the other?


M. If you convert the difference of longitude into hours and parts of hours
as is convenient, you shall easily find out what the time is, wherein the one
place preuenteth the other. Otherwise you may do it thus: bring the westermost
of the two places assigned unto the meridian, set the index of the hour circle
upon 12. a clock, turn the globe Westward until the other city come to the
meridian, the Index expresses how long the time is wherein the westermost of
the two places is prevented. As for example, if the index light upon the third
hour, then does it signify that it is but 9. a clock at the westermost place
when it is 12. a clock at the other etc. and what eclipse or other celestial
appearance the Westermost place sees at 12. a clock, the other sees it at 3.
a clock after noone etc.


P. What have you else to say of the equinoctial circle?


M. It is the beginning of latitude.


P. Let me thoroughly confer with you about this matter: how do you define
latitude in resspect of the terrestrial Globe?


M. It is the distance of any point assigned in the terrestrial Globe from the
equator, limited by the degrees of a great circle drawn from the poles of the
World through the point assigned.


P. Then by your words I gather this, that for so much as the beginning of
latitude is in the equinoctial, what so ever is under that circle, can have no
latitude. Also the latitude may be counted toward either of the poles, so that
it is either Northern or Southern according as the pole is, toward which the
place bends from the equator. But when you say that the latitude must be
accounted from the equinoctial to the place, do you not mean the Zenith?


M. Yes, you must always so understand it: for albeit the word latitude be
applied to the terrestrial Globe, yet is it sought out by the circles of
heaven, and commonly being demanded what the latitude is, we answer that it
is the distance of our Zenith from the equator, notwithstanding it is
sufficient speaking of the terrestrial Globe, to say that the latitude is to
be accounted from the equator to the place assigned.


P. What great circle is it in which the latitude must be accounted?


M. It is that great circle of longitude which is drawn from the poles of the
world through the place assigned, but because it were an infinite work to
draw a great circle through every place, therefore in seeking out the latitude
we make the meridian of the Globe to serve our turns in this manner. Bring
the place assigned to the meridian of the Globe, the degrees of the meridian
intercepted between the equator and the place assigned, express the latitude
of it: so I say, that the latitude of London is 51. degrees, 30. min. because
London being brought unto the meridian falls underneath that degree and
minute, and is so far distant from the equator.


7. Is the latitude of London 51. degrees. 30. min? I took that to be the
elevation of the pole at London.


M. So it is also, for the elevation of the pole and latitude are all one in
number: for this is usually to be seen upon the Globe, that so far as any
place is distant from the equator, so high is the pole from the horizon:
Therefore when you desire to raise the pole of your globe unto his due height,
seek out the latitude of the place assigned, according to that raise the pole
above the horizon.


P. The greatest longitude is 360. degrees what may be the greatest latitude?


M. Nothing can be further distant from any circle then the pole, which is but
90. degrees, so that the greatest latitude is no more.


P. Be the circles of latitude expressed on the globe?


M. Yea as many circles as are parallel to the equator, may rightly be called
circles of latitude, albeit some of them admit particular names.


P. Thereupon I think it comes to pass that we confound those phrases of
speech to have the same la^itude, and to be in the same parallel.


M. You say right: for a place to be in the same parallel with London, is
nothing else but to be in the same latitude, and to be of equal distance with it
from the equator.


P. You said before, that if I see any place what soever upon the Globe,
bringing it unto the meridian I shall find the latitude thereof. Contrariwise
therefore if I know the latitude of a place and seek it out in the meridian
either toward the North or South pole, according as the situation of the place
requires, I shall be sure to find out the place in the revolution of the
globe, if it be inscribed in the globe.


M. That also is true: but if both the longitude, and the latitude of a place
be given, you cannot but find it out presently in this manner. Bring the degree
of longitude unto the meridian, set the Globe fast, and in the meridian seeking
out the latitude you shall be sure to find the place, or at leastwise where it
should be, if it be not expressed in the globe. Thus much concerning the
longitude and latitude.


P. Then must I trouble you with a question propounded before, which was this,
what thing they have common, and wherein they may differ that have on^
longitude: the which question you promised to satish me in, when you had
discoursed of the latitude.


M. I will do what I can, especially becuse I know it is most pleasant. You
see by the Globe that of the several inhabitants of the Earth dwelling either
on the North or South side of the equator. Some may have diverse longitudes, but
the same latitude, as the German^ the Muscouites, the Tartaria^s etc. differing
in longitud% have notwithstanding the same latitude with the Englis^ men, These
inhabitants generally considered are calle^ Perieci: they have their Zenith in
the same parallel: the stars rise and set unto them all upon the same point
of the compass, and at the same hour, and have the same height above the
horizon. They have the day and night increasing and decreasing alike unto them
all: and the seasons of the year changing after one manner and at one time,
yet they that dwell to the Eastward of the other prevent the other dwelling to
the westward in the time: as thus, they in Germany may see the Sun rise at
six a clock, so may we in England, yet their 6. a clock preuenteth ours by
an hour more or less, according as they are more or less unto the Eastward,
so that when the sun rises unto them at six a clock, it is then but five a
clock to us that dwell fifteen degrees more unto the Westwarde, and the Sun
will have been up unto them an hour, when he begins but newly to rise
unto us. And if we happen to see the moon eclipsed at nine a clock they that
dwell forty five degrees from us Eastward, shall fee her eclipsed at twelve a
clock, yet shall it be but six a clock to them that dwell as many degrees
from us to the westward. Here you are to understand this, that albeit the word
Perieci according to the signification thereof, may be generally applied to
all them that have the same latitude, yet properly in Geographie, it is
attributed unto them that have the same meridian, but dwell on the contrary
sides thereof, and have their difference of longitude 180. degrees and one of
the poles of the world always in the midst between their vertical points,
such are they that dwell in Arabia, Felix on the one side, and in Hispania noua
on the other side of the meridian.

These men differ one from another in this, that when it is high noone to the
one, it is midnight to the other, and contrariwise: item when the Sun sets
to the one, he rises to the other, and contrariwise: item the South side of
our meridian is their North side: all these communities and differences may be
easily found out upon the Globe either by ayplying a thredde unto the Globe in
stead of another Horizon, or else by comparing the two globes together: The
thredde must cross the meridian so many degrees distant from the pole as the
pole is distant from the horizon: as if the pole of the place assigned be 50.
degrees, the thredde must cross the meridian in the 50. degree on this side
the pole. From the meridian, it must be directed to the East point of the
Horizon, and from thence crossing the nether side of the meridian in the 50.
degree from the pole, it must be directed to the West side of the horizon until
it come to the upper side of the meridian again. So shall you most easily
perceive all those communities, and differeces of the Perieci to be true,
whereof I spoke before: as that their days and nights being severally
compared are of an equal length: that the stars and the Sun rise and set
at the same hours etc.


P. If I were desirous to try this by two several globes how shall I go to
work?


M. You may go to work diverse ways, as yo^ think best for your own
capacity: having raised the poles of each globe according to one and the same
elevation: set the Globes so one by the other, that the Ea^point of the one may
join with the West point of the other, or that the South points of their
horizon man close and join directly all together, or which (...) take to be
better their Northren points, Set also the Zeniths in their places according
as the elevation of the pole does direct you. Here must you conceive this, that
the greater arcke of the meridian is the noonesteed line and the lesser arcke
from the pole downward to the Horizon, and under it is the line of midnight:
then seek out the place of the Sun for any day propounded, and bring it to
the East side of the one globe, and ^o the West side of the other (for of them
that are pecu^atly called Perieci, the one sees the sun and stars ^etting,
when the other sees them rising) afterward ^urne the Globes so about, the
one from you, the other toward you in such sort; that the place of the Sun
^rysing to the one may fall under the horizon of the other, for by that means
you shall find out the commu^ities and differences spoken of before.


P. I do partly perceive the matter I hope by practice (...) understand it the
better. Proceed now I pray you in that, which I requested at your hands.


M. As some of those which inhabit either the North ^r South part of the earth
may have the same latitude, ^ut diverse longitudes: so again some may have the
^^me longitude but diverse latitudes, as they here in Eng^^nd have the same
longitude, and are under the same meridian which the Spaniardes, and those that
dwell to ^he West side of Africa, yet do they al differ in longitude: ^hese men
have the self same hours of the day and ight, with the four seasons of the
year. But in many ^ther things they differ as they dwell nearer or further
^om the pole, or nearer or further from the equator. ^hey that dwell nearer the
equator have the Sun al^aies higher above their Horizon than the other that
well further of: also they which dwell nearer to the equator have a longer day
in Winter, but a shorter night, than they which dwell toward the pole: but in
Somme^ they which dwell toward the pole have a longer day, and a shorter night
than they that dwell toward the equator as for example, in Winter the Spaniardes
day is longer than ours, namely whilst the Sun is in the Southern signs
from the 13. of September to the 11. of March: but from the eleventh of March
to the 13 of September our day is always longer than theirs. Again from the
13. of September to the eleventh of March their night is shorter than ours, but
from the 11. of March to the 13. of September our night is shorter than theirs.
Moreover the Sun never rises unto these men at one hour, ercept he be in
the equator: as for example to us and the Spaniards. Whilst the Sun is in
the North signs he rises more early and shines longer to us, than to them,
but the Sun being in the South signs, he rises more early and shines
longer to them than to us: Last of al^ the Sun never rises or sets to
them and us on the same point of the compass. etc. all which things you may
easily perceive to be true by those rules which you have heard before in the
celestial globe, if you do bu^ find out by the terrestrial globe their,
feuerall latitudes that dwell under the same meridian, and then raise the pole
severally, working the conclusions aforesaid according as you have bin taught.


P. Have not these people any peculier name which dwell under one meridian, but
differ in latitude?


M. No, but there are another kind of people having one longitude which have a
peculier name, and are called Anteci. They are such inhabitants of the earth as
dwell under one meridian, and have the same longitude and also the same
latitude, but toward diverse poles: so that as far the one dwells from the
equator northward, the others have the same distance from it Southward, and as
high as the North pole is raised to the one, so high is the South Pole raised
to the other. Such are they that dwell in the West side of Arabia twenty
degrees Northward, and they that dwell in Madagascar in the same longitude
twenty degrees to the South ward. These men have the day and night of equal
length, the Sun rising and setting at the same hours on the same point of
the compass, but at diverse times and the seasons of the year are opposite: as
when it is Summer to them which dwell in A^abia, it is Winter to them in
Madagascar. And con^rariwise, when the day is longest to them in Arabia, it ^s
shortest to them in Madagascar. Furthermore, if the Sun rise 25 degrees from
the East to them in Arabia, he rises so many degrees from the East to them in
Madagascar, but to the one in Summer, to the other in winter if the day be
fourteen hours long to them in A^abia it is so long also to them in
Madagascar, but he possesses contrary signs. These things may severally be
tried by the globe, or by comparing your 2. Globes together, and raising the
North pole of the one, and he South pole of the other above the Horizon, so
shall you see that that degree of the Eclipticke which ^ontinueth longest above
the horizon to them that dwell Northward, continues the shortest above their
Ho^izo^ that dwell Southward. Moreover also you may per^eaue this, that they
which dwell Northward see the Sun rising, and the Heavens moving from the
left and to the right, but they which are to the Southward see the Sun
arysing, and the heavens moving from the right hand to the left. Besides these
inhabitant before named there are other to be noted, which because they go
foot to foot right opposite one to the other, they are therefore called of the
Grecians Ant^podes, and Antichthones, because they dwell in opposite places of
the earth.


P. Me thinks it is impossible that you speak o^ how can they that are
under us walk upon the ea^^ without falling. Can two men walk the one on the
to of a wheel, the other on the nether side thereof with out tumbling down?


M. Your reason is not alike in the wheel and (...) the earth. All they that
dwell upon the earth have o^ common center in the Globe of the earth, unto
whi^^ they do naturally tend in respect of their gravity, an^ therefore where
soever they stand they cannot fall from the earth, but bend naturally unto the
center thereon But they which stand upon a wheel, or any such roun^ thing else
have not any one point in the wheel, or (...) the round body, unto the which
they do natural bend, and therefore whenever he comes unto an^ such place
of the wheel, wherein his legs cannot keep the weightines of his body
perpe^dicular and imminent the center of the Wheel, he must needs fall from
the wheel toward that center, unto which naturally he i^ clineth, which is the
center of the earth. This is certai^ both by reason and experience of our own
countrie^^ that there are Antipodes, and therefore let the tru^ prevail with
us more than the opinions either of A^gustine or Lactantius, who have stoutly
denied t^^ Antipodes, yea Lactantius (as I remember) held it heresy, and
counted them accursed that said there were ^ntipodes.


P. How do you define the Antipodes?


M. They are certain inhabitants of the earth right opposite one to another in
the extremities of the diame^er of the Globe. Therefore the antipodes have the
same meridian, yet they differ in longitude one from the other 80 degrees. They
have the same horizon indeed, but ^iffering in reason, namely thus, that the
Zenith or ver^icall point of the one is the nadir to the horizon of the other:
and contrariwise, they have also the same latitude, but bending toward
contrary poles.


P. How shall I readily by the globe find out who ^e antipodes one to another?


M. Bring any point or place assigned in the globe into the meridian, and note
what latitude it has, the ^oint or places having the self same latitude in
the me^dian under the Horizon is the habitation of them, that ^^e antipodes to
the former. Such are the inhabitants of Trinideda and Iaua mayor, also the
inhabitants of old, and new Guinea, with infinite other places of the earth,
whose antipodes are not yet discouereed. The Antipo^es have all things
contrary (excepting those that dwell under the equinoctial) if the heaven move
to the one ^^om the left hand to the right it moves contrary ways into the
other, if it be day to the one it is night to the ^ther, if the Sun rise to
the one he sets to the other, (...) the day or night increase to the one, it
decreaseth to ^he other, if it be Summer to the one, it is Winter to he other
etc.


P. Why do you make exception of those that dwell under the equator.


M. Because they being as well Perieci, as antipodes, have all the seasons of
the year agreeable, and the same length of day and night, and the Sun rising
and setting at the same hour, yet when he rises to the one, he sets to the
other, and the hours of day and night are opposite, for when it is high noone
to the one, it is midnights to the other: when it is 11. a clock in the
morning to the one, it is 11. a clock at night to the other etc. Thus briefly
concerning the co^munities and differences incident to sundry inhabitautes of
the earth in regard of their difference and agreement either in longitude or
latitude. Let us now speak of the meridian.


P. Me thinks that it has the same use in dividing the terrestrial, which
it has in dividing the celestial Globe into two several parts, whereof the
one is the East, the other the West: So that what people or countries soever
are toward the East side from the meridian of any place may be called the
Eastern people, and the other toward the setting of the Sun may be called
the Western people.


M. It is true that they may be so called, but it is respectively, only in
regard of the place wherein you dwell, otherwise the true East and west parts
of the terrestrial Globe are limited by the first meridian, or circle of
longitude: what countries soever lie from that meridian Eastward an hundred and
eighty degrees are called the East countries, and the other are called the
West: yea the names of these places by means o^ the first inuentors of
Geographie are known so authe^ticall, that they are not changed as the other
be, which only are spoken respectively, for albeit it so fall out (a^ many
times it does in travailing sarre) that Hispaniola or Cuba, Brasill, and all
that cost of America do lie from us to the Eastwarde, yet do we commonly call
them the West India. Again thongh that Sumatra, Borneo, the Moluccas, and
diverse other places also thereaboutes be from us toward the setting of the
Sun, yet do we term and call them by the name of East India.


P. What are the partitions in the meridian?


M. Those which are next unto the Globe are the legrees, which have no other
use tha^ has bin spoken of, ^ther in the celestial globe, or heretofore in the
terrestri^ll, when I spoke of finding the latitude of any place. But ^esides
the degrees, there are other partitions serving ^articularly unto the
terrestrial Globe. Those partitions which are next above the degrees express
the quantity ^f the longest day, so that when you shall hear the day (...) be
13.15.24. hours long, or 1.2.3. months long etc. You may by these partitions
find out what people ^^ey are which have the day of such a length. The upper
^ost partitions are the climates.


P. What is that which you call a climate?


M. It is nothing but a certain space of the earth ^ntained between two
imaginary circles parallel ^^to the Equator: From the beginning of which
space ^^to the end the longest Day admits the diffe^^nce of half an
hour. As for example, the space of the trestriall globe between the 12. d.
45. min. of latitude ^here the longest day is 12. hours and three quarters, to
the latitude of 20. d. 30. m. where the longest day is thoures is called a
climate.


P. How many climates are there?


M. The number of the climats are diverse. The ancient Cosmographers made but 7.
beginning at the 12. d. 45. m. of latitude, and ending at the 50. d. 30. m. But
they which succeeded, added two other, and made 9. climates the which number is
expressed upon the meridian of the Globe. Others made 19. neglecting the
ordinary increase of half an hour in the longest day, and the place also
where the ancient Cosmographers began their climates. Others made 23. others 47.


P. Why did the ancient Cosmographers begin (...) the 12. degree 45. minutes of
latitude, and end at the 50. d. 30. m.


M. They thought that that part of the earth between those two paralleles to
be habitable, and therefore had only respect to them. But the latter
Cosmographers knowing the earth to be more habitable, ertended their climates
over the whole surface thereof from the equator to the pole.


P. Me thinks the Climates on the meridian, a^ extended but toward one pole,
are they not also to be considered toward the other pole.


M. Yes, in the self same distance from the equ^tor, but with contrary names.


P. Has each climate, a several name?


M. Yea, for they are denominated according to the name of certain notable
places, which are in the midde^ of them, as appears in the Table following:
the C^^mates to the Southward are called by the same name the word anti (which
signifies against) being put there unto: as for example, that which is the
next beyond three equator to the Southward is called anti dia Meroes, because it
is as far beyond the Equator as that Clima^^ which passes through Meroe is
on this side thereof, etc.

Lo here is the Table of the ancient Cosmographers, wherein is expressed the
number of the Climates with their limits, etc. as you see it set down in the
front thereof.

(g) By this Table, as also by the Globe you may gather (Philomathes) the whole
difference of time from the beginning of the first climate to the last to be 4.
hours and an half: but the diversity of the height of the pole is 42. d. 49.
m the breadth of them according to Ptolemee is 2359. miles: but according to
our account, that ascribe to every degree of a great circle 60 miles, it
amounts unto 2569. miles. The other things which may be said concerning the
Climates, as that the beginning of the one climate is the end of the other, and
that the climates next unto the equator are greater than those which are
further of etc. I leave them to your own contemplacion because you may gather
them not only out of this table, but also out of ehe globe it self. Yet this
I must tell you that the Cosmographers have divided each climate into two
parts, whereof each part is called a parallel. So that in this sense a
parallel may be defined briefly to be the limite of half a Climate or
otherwise, it is a portion of the terrestrial Globe contained between two
circles from the beginning whereof unto the end the longest day admits the
difference of a quarter of an hour. But of this matter let this suffice. Let
us now speak of the eclipticke.


P. With a good will, to what end serves that circle, me thinks it should
be needles in this globe.


P. No, for hereby the terrestrial Globe is not only made fit to serve for all
those propositions, which in the Celestial globe are performed by knowing the
place of the Sun, but hereby also we learn whether the Sun passes by the
Zenith of any people yea or no, and what people they be by whose Zenith he
passes not, and how many times he passes by them, and how far he is distant
from their Zenith, with other conclusions more, whereof I will speak
hereafter, as they come to my memory.


P. How shall I know whether the Sun passes by the Zenith of any place yea
or no?


M. You know, that the Eclipticke expresses the high way of the Sun:
therefore as many as dwell within the obliquitie thereof between tropicke and
tropicke must needs see the Sun in their Zenith, the rest from either tropic
to each pole never have the Sun in their Zenith.


P. How often may the Sun be in the Zenith.


M. Not above twice to any nation, and to some but once. As many as have their
latitude equal to the greatest declination of the Sun, they never see the
Sun in their Zenith but once, such are all they that dwell just under the
tropickes. But as many as dwell within the two tropickes have the Sun
perpendicular over their heads twice in the year, namely at that time, when
the declination of the Sun, and the latitude of the place are equal one to
the other, for then the Sun declining from the equator comes to their
Zennith, and passes beyond it to the tropicke, and descendinge from the
tropicke he crosses their vertical points again.


P. Then in seeking out the declination of the Sun, and the latitude of any
place, I shall not only know whether the Sun comes to the Zenith of the
said place, but also at what time he comes thither.


M. You say well, for if the declination of the sun, and the latitude of the
place either are, or may be equal, then will the Sun pass by the Zenith, but if
the latitude be greater than the declination of the Sun may be, the Sun
never comes to the Zenith. Again when the Sun possesses any degree of the
eclipticke having a declination equal unto the latitude of the place assigned,
that day will he cross the vertical point of the said place.


P. If the Sun be not in the Zenith, how shall I know his distance from it by
the Globe?


M. Seek out in the meridian the declination of the Sun, and there make a
mark, seek out also the latitude of the place assigned, there also make a
mark, the degrees of the meridian intercepted between the two marks express
the distance of the Sun from the Zenith: So shall you find the Sun in
Cancer to be distant from our Zenith here at London 28. degrees, but being in
Capricorn, he is distant from it 75. degrees. If you desire to know this by
rule, the rule is: the place assigned being without the Tropickes, and the
Sun declining toward the pole elevated, the declination of the Sun taken
from the latitude gives his distance from the Zenith, as the Sun declining
northward twenty degrees, twelve minutes, is distant from our Zenith at London
thirty degrees, eighteen minutes. If the Sun decline from the pole elevated,
his declination added to the latitude, gives his elongation from the Zenith.
Item, if his place assigned be within the two Tropicks, his declination toward
the pole cleuated, compared with his latitude, and the lesser: being subducted
from the greater, the remainder gives his distance from the Zenith: Otherwise
if the Sun decline from the pole elevated, the total sum made of the
declination, and the latitude affords the foresaid distance. If the place
assigned be under the equator the declination of the Sun is equal to his
distance from the Zenith according as you may perceive by the Globe.


P. What other use has the eclipticke in the terrestrial Globe.


M. We are hereby certifyed of the several seasons of the year in each
several place. Summer is caused by the access of the Sun unto our Zenith:
Winter, by his recesse from the same. Hereby therefore we may gather what
people have two winters and two Summers: also who have but one winter and one
Summer: as many as dwell under the tropicks, and from thence toward the poles
have but one, because the Sun falls from their Zenith, and comes toward
them but once in a year, they which dwell within the tropicke have two,
because the Sun crosses their Zenith twice, and falls twice also from it,
once to the North, and again to the Southward. But between their Summers and
Winters there is not an equal distance unto any of them, those only excepted
which live under the equator: who being just in the midst of the Suns
proper motion have the several seasons of their year distinguished equally in
common sense. The other have their seasons divided unequally, as they that
dwell in the 20. d. 12. m. to the Northward have from their first Summer to the
second two months, but from the second to the first Summer following in the
next year, they have ten months, namely all that time, wherein the Sun is
going from Leo to Gemini: Furthermore this is generally to be noted by the
eclipticke, that they which dwell on several sides of the equator have never
the same seasons falling out at the same time: for if it be Winter to them that
dwell to the Northward of the line, it is Summer to them that dwell to the
Southward, and contrariwise.


P. But they that dwell on one and the same side of the Equator have their
Summer and Winter at one time.


M. Not so, as many as are under or without the tropic toward the pole have
their Winter and Summer at one time, namely, when the Sun enters the head of
Cancer, but they that dwell from the equator to the tropicke have their Winter
and Summer only then, when the Sun is furthest from their Zenith, or else
crosses it. As they that do dwell under the equator have their Summers when
the Sun enters into Aries and Libra, and then crosses their Zenith But
their Winters fall out when he comes to the tropicall points, and is furthest
distant from their Zenith: they that dwell 11. d. 30. m. to the Northward of
the line, have their Summers when the Sun enters into Taurus and Virgo, but
their Winters are in his entrance into the tropickes, for that is general to
them that dwell within the tropickes, that howsoever their Summers alter their
times, their Winters always keep their appointed days, which are those,
wherein the Sun enters the tropicall points.


P. Shall we now proeceede unto the other circles of the Globe.


M. Not yet, there is one rhing remaining to be noted in the terrestrial globe
concerning the shadows, that are made upon earth at noone wherevpo^ the
inhabitants reccaue diverse names, for some of them are called Ascij, others
Amphiscij, others Heteroscij, and others Periscij. They are called Ascij who
having the Sun in their vertical point do want the shadow of any thing that
stands upright upon the ground, for the Sun beam falling perpendicular upon
the earth does illuminate the thing, which stands upright round about, so
that the shadow thereof cannot be seen until the Sun declineth from the
Zenith. Such are all they that dwell either under or within the tropickes, as by
experience you may prove upon the terrestrial Globe by the sphericall gnomon.


P. In what manner I pray you?


M. Rectify your globe perfectly in the open air, where the Sun does shine,
and set your sphericall gnomon either upon the degree of the eclipticke, which
the Sun does possess, or upon any place of the globe having a latitude
answerable to the declination of that degree which the Sun does possess, then
turn the globe toward the Sun, and the gnomo^ being right against him will cast
no shadow, or otherwise bring the gnomon close to the meridian, and there set
it fast until noone, for then the Sun will fall so just upon the point of the
gnomon that it will yield no shadow.


P. What are they whom you call Amphiscij.


M. They are such as have a shadow falling two several ways, one while to the
Northward, and another while to the Southward. These dwell within the two
tropickes, as you may perceive by the terrestrial globe This you know stands
with reason, and common sense proves it true, that the shadow bends to the
opposite place from the Sun, as if the Sun be South ware the shadow runs
Northward, whereupon this must needs follow, that for so much as they which
dwell within the tropicks have the Sun sometimes to the northward of their
Zenith (as those in the Island of S. Thomas) and sometimes to the Southward,
they must of necessity have the shadow be^ding to the same places, as when the
sun is in the north signs, the shadow of any thing standing upright upon the
horizo^ must at noone run Southward, when he is in the south signs the shadow
will bend northward. You may try, if you will abide the trial of it, by the
spherical gnomo^: rectify your globe, place the gnomo^ upon the Island of S.
Thomas, or upon any degree of the equator, or any other degree of the
ecliptic, bring the guomo^ to the meridia^ when the sun approaches near unto
that degree, and mark which way the shadow falls and after the sun is past
that degree either ascending or descending do the like again, and you shall
find the shadow of the gnomo^ to fall toward a contrary place to that, toward
which it fell before: the Hetroscij are those whose noonstid shadow falls but
one way only: such are all they that dwell between the tropickes and the circle
arctick or antarcticke: they that dwell between the tropic of ca^cer, and the
circle arctick never see their noonstid shadow be^ding but to the northward
because the sun is always south unto the^: contrariwise they which dwell to
the south between the tropic of capricorn, and the circle, antarctick never
see the noonstid shadow, but bending southward. You may try this also by the
globe, for the globe being rectified, and the gnomo^ applied to any place
between the foresaid circles, and then brought unto the meridian, and there
set fast, you shall not at any time find the Sun to cast the shadow any way
but one.

The last of these are the Periscii whose shadow runs round about them to
every point of their Horizon in one and the same day, wherein they differ from
the Amphiscii: For albeit their shadow being also unto all parts of their
Horizon, yet upon one and the same day it tends but toward one half of the
Horizon that is either to the Northward or to the Southward. But the Periscii
have their shadow going round about in one day. Such are they that dwell
within or under the circles Arcticke or Antarcticke: The reason whereof is the
long continuance of the Sun above the horizon, who never sets sometimes
until he have compassed the horizon round about. Now let us come unto the
Horizon.


P. Is there nothing then to be said of the two colures?


M. No, for they have no use but this, that the degrees of longitude begin at
that place where theequinoctiall colure and the head of Aries concur in the
Equator, so that it may in that respect be counted the first meridian or first
circle of Longitude.


P. Well then, let us discourse of the horizon: what use has it in the
terrestrial globe?


M. It seuereth the antipodes one from another, how soever the globe is
situated, and is common to them both. And whereas in the Celestial Globe you
were taught to find the length of the artificial day, with the time of the
Suns rising and setting: upon the terrestrial Globe you may readily see who
they be that have the day of such a length, and the Sun rising and setting at
such a time.


P. How is that to be found out, I pray you rub my memory but with one
example.


M. The length of any day being propounded seek which degree of the eclipticke
the Sun possesses, that present day, as for example, the day being 16.
hours long, I suppose the Sun to be in the head of Cancer: then in the
first meridian or circle of longitude which is distinguished into degrees count
his declination, and at the end thereof make a prick, which in this example
sells out to be in the very intersection of the tropicke, and the foresaid
circle of longitude: thirdly divide the length of the day into two equal
parts, and convert the hours into degrees of the Equator, which as this
example requires are 120. from the head of Aries toward your right hand count
so many degrees in the equator: apply the end of that number close to the
meridan, raise or let fall the pole of the Globe until the mark of the
declination made in the circle of longitude, do touch the Horizon: the cities
or other places of the terrestrial globe which are then 90. degrees distant
from the Horizon in the reuolution^ of the globe are those, which have the day
of such a length: or otherwise, as many as have their latitude correspondent to
the eleuaon of the pole are those, whose day is so long as it was propounded to
be.


P. I remember now very well, that you taught me the like of this in that
proposition of the celestial globe, wherein I learned the length of the day
being given to sinde the height of the pole.


M. You say true: this is the only difference, that here we must have an eye
to the latitude, because the true place of any city or to wne upon the
terrestrial Globe is found rather by it than by the cleuation of the pole,
albeit in number they be all one. By that which I taught you even now, this
also may be gathered, that if the Sun being in any certain sign assigned do
rise an hour two or three either sooner or later unto others, than unto me, I
say I may know what people they are as for example, if the sun in Cancer rise
unto me at 4. a clock, and to another at 3. or 2. a clock in the morning or
to another at 5. clock: how far do they differ in latitude from me either to
the northward or to the southwarde.


P. I pray you tell me, how this may be dispatched readily.


M. The chiefest consideration, which is to be had in this matter is in what
half of the Zodiac the sun is. If the sun be in the northren signs,
they which have the longer day have the pole higher elevated, than they which
have a shorter, but the sun possessing the southern signs, they which have the
longest day have a lesser latitude, if you remember this you cannot err, so
that the situation of the places be both toward one pole, or one of them under
the equator.


P. Let me try if I my self can hammer out this question: the Sun in Cancer
rises to me at London at 4. a clock and 45. minutes in the morning how far do
they dwell from me either Northward or Southward, that is to say otherwise, how
do they differ in latitude from me, to whom being in the same sign he rises
at 3. a clock 45. minutes. First I conclude this, that they dwell to the
Northward, because their day is longer, the Sun possessing the Northren
signs: then do I raise the pole according as the fatitude of London does
require, and afterward bring the intersection of the first circle of
ongitude, and the tropicke unto the Horizon, setting fast the Globe that it
stir not, and notinge what degree of the Equator is under the meridian. (...)
do consider moreover how much their day is longer than ours: in this example
it is longer by an hour convert that time into degrees, and count from that
degree of the Equator, which is under the me^idian to the Westwarde (where as
otherwise if their ^ay had begun after ours I should have counted them (...)
the Eastwarde, that is, I should have subducted them) I turn that degree to
the Meridian, and afterward raise the pole of the Globe until the foresaid
^^tersection of the tropicke and the circle of longitude, ^oe touch the
Horizon, for then is the pole at his due eight, from whence if I subduct the
latitude of Lon^on, I shall find them to be the Northward of us 5. derees.


M. You have concluded well: and in like man^^r may you find, how far
another is to the Southward, and which of the two poles is raised above the
round: but I leave these things to your hammering, ^eing you can hammer them
out so well. Let us now ^ll in hand with those things which are inscribed in
the ^orizon.


P. I had thought that you had sufficiently discoursed (...) them in the
celestial globe.


M. Yet there is in regard of the terrestrial globe peculiar use of the
points of the compass, or winds we commonly term them. For by them may we
now how one coast or country bears from another, which way it lies, either
East, West, North or South, (...) otherwise.


P. I imagined that thing to be known by the crooked lines described upon the
terrestrial Globe, which you called the Rhombes.


M. Not so, indeed they teach us how to direct our course to any place: but
they teach us not how one place lies from another: and therefore the Latins
in this case use 2. several words, whereof the one is Plaga a coast, the other
directio, a direction. Whereof the one greatly and always differs from the
other, except the two places assigned, whose coast or direction I seek for lie
under the same meridian, or near the equator.


P. This seems to be a Paradox unto me, must not direct my course unto a
place according as it lies from me?


M. No, except the places lie North, and South: for a place may be East or West
from you, as the Islands (...) Maldinar, which lie East from London, yet if
you d^^rect your course by the East, or West point of the compass, you shall
never come there.


P. What do you call a coast?


M. A coast is an Arc of the horizon contained between two vertical circles,
whereof the one is alwaie^ the meridian, and the other is the circle, which
passe^^^ from our Zenith through the place whose position from us we seek
for. This arcke and position of the place usually is denominated according to
the point of the compass, upon which the vertical circle lights in the
Horizon: as for example, if the vertical circle light upon the Northeast
point of the Horizon, I pronoun^ the place to lie Northeast from me.


P. By what means shall I find upon the terrestria^ globe, how any City does
lie from me, and toward what coast.


M. First rectify your globe according as the latitude of your place does
require wherein you are, then fasten ^he quadrant of altitude to the Zenith,
and bring the ^nowen place unto the meridian, turn the quadrant of ^ltitude to
the city, or town assigned, whose coasting ^om you, you desire to know, and
mark upon what soint of the compass it lights in the Horizon: for ac^^ding
thereunto you must pronounce the place to lie ^^om you, northeast or Southeast,
or otherwise as it fal^th out.


P. Is there any other use of these points of the com^^sse described upon the
Horizon of the globe.


M. Yea, for being at Sea the latitude being given, and ^e point of the
compass whereupon any known land ^escried does bear from you, you shall
know how far ^^u are from it: In this manner: raise the pole of your ^^be
according to the latitude, bring the quadrant of ^itude to the Zenith, and then
turn it to the point of ^e compass upon which the land descried does bear
^^m you, bring the said point of the land close unto ^e quadrant, and see how
many degrees of the quadra^t ^e contained between it, and your Zenith, those
de^ees converted into miles or leagues (as you were ^^ght before) do yield the
distance. Here also note this ^at as you do in one so you may do in two or more
head ^^des if you descrie them being at sea. Thus much con^ning the use of the
greater circles of the terrestrial ^^be, it remains now to speak of the
lesser: but for much as this matter whereof I have now last of all in^ated has
great affinity with the Rhombes, if it please (...) I will instruct you in
them, and their use before I fall in hand with the lesser circles.


P. I pray you do so, and for so much as I cold never see any Author which did
write of them, give me leave to require what I doubt of them and their use?


M. With a good will, I will do what I can to ^a^tissy you.


P. What is the reason of this name, and why are they called Rhombes?


M. We in our speech all the^ the points of the c^passe: but the name of Rhombe
is received from th^^ Spaniard the reason of the name is this, as I gather it.
Among the geometricians as you know this kind of sigu^^ is called a Rhombe: for
so much therefore as the points of the compass described upon the globes, but
especially in the plain sea card, do represent such a like form, hereupon the
Spaniard has given this name unto these lines, translating the name from the
plain Sea card to the Globe. And here I m^^ crave leave of you to use this
name, because I find it is teaching to be most convenient, for there is such
affinity in your English tongue between the point of the compa^ used in failing,
and the point of the compasses used i^ making of Circles, and other Geometrical
descriptions that many times it breeds an error: so that when soever I shall
have occasion to speak of any line of direction, I think it best to call it a
Rhombe.


P. What use have they in the terrestrial globe?


M. Their use is manifold, as I will teach you by several propositions whereof
this shall be the first, because is most general, and chiefly respects these
lines: any (...) places, or points being assigned in the terrestrial globe,
^^find their rhombe, that is, upon what point of the compass I am to direct my
course from the one unto the other


P. The^ as it should seem by your words, these spiral and winding lines,
which you call the rhombes, do imitate the winding nature of the Mariners
compass.


M. They do so, for if you mark them, they make always one and the same
angle with the meridian of any place, and do run on by little and little as
the very nature of the compass would direct you, if you should follow any one
point thereof. In these rhombes you may note this, that the rhombe of north or
south is always some meridian or other, but the line of East, and west is
parallel always to the equator, whereby you may perceive that to be true,
which I told you before, that it is one thing for a place to lie or coast East
and west from you, but it is another thing to direct your course East and west,
for he that directs his course according to the Rhombe of East and west
never alters his latitude, but keeps always in one distance from the
equator, whereas he which runs continually upon a great circle must of
necessity at length make an intersection with the equa^or. The other Rhombes
trauerse the globe more or less according as they come nearer unto, or are
further off from ^he meridia^. Let us return to the proposition propounded.


P. Go too then, two places being propounded, how shall I find upon what
Rhombe I am to direct my ^ourse?


M. Take your Quadrant of Altitude, or some ^ther Brazen ruler bowed according
to the circumfe^ence of the Globe, lay it precisely upon the two places
^ssigned, and mark where it cutteth any 2. circles of lati^^de on the globe,
set one foot of your co^passes in the on ^terfectio^, exte^d the other foot
unto the other interfectio^ then come down unto the equator, and wheresoever
you see these rhombes to meet together (we call it commonly the center of the
slye or rose) there set the foot of your compass and extend the other compass
to the next circle of latitude to the equator, the Rho^be, upon which the foot
of your compass does light, will give you you^ direction.


P. I must needs trouble you with certain questions, because this matter is
very strange unto me. Where I set the onefoot of my compass in the ce^tre of
the fly, is it not material, which way I turn the other foot, either upward,
or downward to the right hand, or to the left.


M. As for turning your compasses upward to the parallel next above, or
downward to the parallel next beneath the equator, it is not greatly
material, yet you must consider this, that if you turn your compasses upward
to the parallel the center of the fly does represe^^ the nethermost place of
the two, if you turn it dow^ward it represents the uppermost. As for turning
you compass to the right or to the left hand you must take a^ especial care of
that: this rule you must observe that you compasses must always imitate the
situation of your (...) ler that if the upper end of your ruler bend to the
right hand or to the left, the upper foot of your compasse^ must do the like,
and this must be your continual pro^^uiso, that the feet of your compasses
touch the two parallelles exactly.


P. But I perceive this, that albeit the compasse^ light upon the parallel,
yet it will not always light upon a Rhombe.


M. That is true, if it light upon a rhombe, then our direction from place to
place precisely according (...) the denomination of the Rhombe: As for example,
if light (being turned upward) upon the the third Rho^be, ^om the meridian to
the right hand, then must your diction be from the nethermost place upward
North^st, and by North. But from the uppermost place downward it is South west
and by South.


P. Does one and the same line give me always two rections.


M. Yea, according as you move from one place another, if you bend your course
under the meridian ^om the North pole to the South, then is your directi^^
southward, but from the South pole upward it is forth, though the line of
direction, that is, the Rhombe ^^e all one, so likewise descending, one and the
same ^ombe is Southwest, which in ascending is North^^t.


P. If the foot of my compass lighting upon the pallell does not exactly
touch any Rhombe, what shall I (...) then?


M. Mark unto which Rhombe the compasses come ^arest, let that give the
denomination to your directi^^, adding these words, and a little more, or a
quarter a point more, to the Eastward or to the Northward ^c. as falls out.


P. Yet there arises another doubt: in searching the ^ombe between Trinidada,
and Cape verde and lay^^g my ruler upon them as you willed me, I perceive the
^ersections of it, and the parallells to fall out so far a^^der, that my
compasses cannot conveniently reach ^m. In this case, what shall I do for to
find the ^ombe?


M. You must understand, that so long as you can reach the intersections of
the Parallelles, with your Compasses, that rule which I have set down is most
ready for use, otherwise let this serve your turn which does ensue. When the
lands assigned bears near unto the East and West, or upon any other Rhombe,
with a black lead applied close unto the meridian, from the places assigned
describe two obscure parallells of a sufficient length, then with your
compasses take the distance of the one land from the other, and guiding your
compasses continually upon the two parallells, see which (...) the Rhombes
contained between them will best agree or come nearest unto the extention of
their feet, th^^ is the Rhombe of your direction. As for example, bei^^^
desirous to know the Rhombe, which is to direct me from Cape D'al Cuer on the
Coast of Maroco, to the Southermost side of the Island of Coruo, from the said
places I describe parallelles, then taking the cances of those places, I guide
the feet of my compases upon the parallells, to the westward: but I find that
they will not exactly agree with any of the Rhombes, but that which comes
nearest unto the is the Rhombe of North West and by West, which must be my
direction, saving that I must bear somewhat less than half a point unto the
West ward.


P. I must confess this to be an exact way, but fears me with the hurt of
my globe by making so many paralles on it.


M. Then take this rule, whereby you shall ne^^ hurt your globe. Suppose
always that one of the t^^ places assigned, wheresoever they be were the
cen^^ of the Fly described upon the Equinoctial line, then with our pair of
Compasses take the distaunce of the two places as they lie on the Globe, and
with another pair take the difference of their Latitude. Set the one
Compass in the Center of the Fly, and guide the other as you see occasion
either Eastward or Westward, Upon the Equator from the said Center until the
two compasses do coneurre, the Rhombe next unto the Feet of the Compasses
meeting together, is the direction which you seek for. Thus much concerning
the finding of the Rhombe, whereby you are to direct your course from place to
place: Now learn another Proposition, which is ^his, the Rhombe being given,
and the latitude to find the place wherewith you fall, or wherein you are: ^he
which proportion is performed in this manner. Seek ^he rhombe upon the globe,
upon which you directed your course, in it (by the help of the meridian) mark
the atitude of the place from whence you come: and the la^tude also of the
place with which you fell: take the di^ance of those two marks made in the
Rhombe: then ^etting one foot of your compasses in the place from whence you
came, turn the globe to and froetoward the neridian, until the other foot
light under the meridian upon that degree of latitude with which you fell, that
is ^e place wherein you are. As for example, put case I put ^ff from the
Lizarde Southwest, and came unto the ^ortie degree of latitude, in the Rhombe
of South^est I note the latitude of the Lizarde, and the for^e degree also of
Latitude, I take the distaunce of ^ose two marks, and setting the one foot of
my com^asses in the Lizarde I turn the other foot to the forty degree of
latitude, whereby I perceive I am wide o^^ the Coast of Portingall unto the
Westward thirti^ leagues.


P. I understand you well: now tell me, how shall find how many leagues I have
run upon that Rhombe?


M. The second mark being made in the rhombe assigned as you were taught even
now, take with you compass one degreeof the equator or of the meridian which
according to our account is 20. leagues, and according to the Spanish account
17.. measure there with the portionof the Rhombe contained between th^^ two
marks, so shall you find the distance which you have run.


P. Before you taught me to take the distance of the two places assigned
otherwise.


M. You say true, for then you sought not the d^^stance according to the course
which you did run, b^^ according to the great circle imagined to be draw
between them: which kind of measuring, if it should be observed in your
cour5e you should greatly decea^ your self, as you may perceive in this
example, put ca^^ you run under the 60. parallel either East or West, until
you passed half thereof, taking your distance as you were taught at the first
in a great circle the two place can be but 1200 leagues asunder: but your
distance being taken according to your course as I taught you ever now
amounts unto 1800. leagues. Therefore the be way is this, especially if your
course made upon a^^ rhombe fall out to be great.


P. Let this be the fourth proposition concerning the Rhombes, the Rhombe being
given, and the distan^^ known to find the latitude, with which I fall, how
shall (...) do this?


M. In the Rhombe given, make a prick according ^o the latitude of the place
from whence you departed, from that prick, count the distance, which you have
^unne, at the end thereof make a note bring that note ^o the meridian, the
degree of the meridian expresses ^he latitude, which you seek for.


P. May I not also make this conclusion upon the ^lobe, the rhombe being given,
and the distance to find ^ow far I am parted from my meridian.


M. Yes most readily: in the Rhombe given the la^^tude of the place being noted
from whence you depar^ed, and the course also which you have run, bring ^he
first mark unto the meridian of the globe, fix the ^obe that it may not
stir, then setting the one foot of our compasses in the second mark, take
the shortest actention between it, and the meridian, the degrees of ^^e
equator contained between the feet of your com^asses being converted into
leagues, or miles will give you ^^e distance from the meridian, from whence you
de^^rted.


P. Me thinks this rule may lead me to the longi^^de.


M. So it will, for the Rhombe being given, and the ^^sta^ce or else the
latitude wherewith you fall, it is an easy ^atter to find the longitude
according to your globe: ^he marks being made in the rhombe as you were ^ught
even now, bring the mark which represents ^^e place from whence you departed
unto the meridian, ^^d note in what place it cutteth the equator, bring also
^^e ^econd mark unto the meridian, and note in what place the equator is
cut, the degrees of the Equator intercepted between those marks express
the longitude between the two places.


P. There is yet another question to be answered. If I run upon any Rhombe
may I not know how many leagues I have run having raised, or let the pole
fall a degree?


M. Yes that you may, and you may also find this how far you are distant
from your meridian. Here note this, that in the performance of these
conclusion^ without any great error you may reckon five or ten degrees of the
meridian to be but as one, yet with this caveat, that if you count five degrees
as one, every degre^ is twelve minutes or miles, if ten be taken for one, ther^
is every degree six minutes or miles, but it is best no^ to exceed five or
ten. To answer therefore to the first of these two questions: come to the
Center of the Fly, which is in the equator, and count the ten^^ degrees of
the meridian either next above, or next be neath it to be but as one, and every
degree to be sin miles, or two Leagues: then if you measure fro^^ the Center of
the Fly unto the interiection, which any Rhombe makes with the tenth circle
of latitude you shall readily, and easily sinde how many leagues (...) miles
you run upon any Rhombe, in raising or leting fall the pole a degree. Again
if from the said Intersections of the Rhombe, and the Parallel, you measure
the distaunce unto the Meridian, accounti^^ as you did before each degree to be
but six miles or leagues, you shall find the distance from the maridian Is
there any thing else which you desire concerning use of the Rhombes.


P. Yea there is one thing, which has trobled me most of all, and that is the
traversing upon the globe: as thus, sometimes I run South about 60. leagues,
sometimes South Southwest as many leagues, then South and by East 100. leagues,
then after that Southwest I know not how far, but I find my self to be in
four degrees of latitude South ward. How shall I observe this course upon the
Globe?


M. If you were perfect in that which I have taught you, you would not make a
doubt of this: but for so much as you are but yet a nouice herein, I will
exempli^ie the matter unto you, that by this one example you may gather what
you have to do in the rest. The example shall be that which you have
propounded, supposing the place from whence we set sail to be the Southermost
side of cape de verde, at that place where the tenth ^^eridian or circle of
longitude touches the land. First Therefore in that meridian I count 60.
leagues, which are degrees where I make a mark, whereby I find my self ^o be
in 11. degrees of latitude, and under the same messdian: from thence you ran
according to your suppo^tion 60. leagues: from the mark which I made in the
(...), circle of longitude I draw with a black lead an ob^ture parallel,
which shall cut the Rhombe of South ^outh west, in that Rhombe I account 60.
leagues (which ^^e three degrees) as I did before, and from thence pre^ntly
toward the Cape I draw a parallel to the equator, ^^en taking with my
compasses the 6o. leagues noted in ^e Rhombe of South Southwest, I set the one
foot of ^y compasses in the mark made in the 10. circle of lon^tude, and
stretch the other foot westward to the paral^^ which was last drawn, and
there make a mark. Here I find my self to be almost in the eight degree of
latitude, and from the place of my departure a little more than six score
leagues, and from the meridian thirty leagues Afterward you suppose your
course to be South and by East an hundred leagues: continuing the last
parallel unto that Rhombe I count in it an hundred leagues: making a mark
therein as I did before, and from it also drawing a parallel line toward the
cape, then my compass being extended to an hundred leagues I set the one foot
in the mark made in the former parallel, and turn the other Eastwards
according to my direction until I touch this last parallel which was
described, there also I make a prick: your last course was Southwest, you know
not how far, but you found your self to be in four degrees of South
latitude: I bring the meridian to the rhombe of Southwest, and there make a
note under the fourth degree of latitude, and from thence I draw another
parallel toward the Cape: then taking as much of the Rhombe of Southwest as
was contained between these parallel lines, I set the one foot of my compass
in the mark which was last made, and extend the other foot to the last
parallel, making a mark therein, which is the place of my being: and thereby
I gather that I am fallen to the Southward of the line four degrees, and am
distant from cape verde 390. leagues, and from the meridian from whence I
departed 140. Thus much concerning the use of the rhombes described upon the
terrestrial globe. There remain now Philoma a these none of the circles of the
Globe to be spoken of but the lesser circles only, which are the limits of
the sieve Zones, whereof mention was made in the end of the celestial Globe.
The use of the which circles in the terrestrial Globe is no more than this, to
signify what inhabitants of the earth, do dwell in every Zone, and who they
be which feel that distemperature, or temperature of heat and cold. Whereby
you may perceive how great^y they erred, which though the temperate Zones only
to be habitable, and the other by means of their extre^mitie of heat and cold
to be uninhabited.


P. Concerning the qualities of the 5. Zones I would gladly be resolved in
those questions, first whether each part of the burning Zone be of a like
heat: and if they be not, which is the hottest. Secondly, whether the other
Zones be of a likely condition, or if they be not, which exceeds one
another in their qualities.


M. I will willingly satiffy your desire, and that so much the rather because
some of the arguments used in deciding those questions may be expressed on the
globe. You must here note what be the efficient causes effects are counted 3.
First the heat is caused by the perpendicu^tity. Secondly, the long abroad.
Thirdly, the neerenes of the Sun: The cold therefore must be effected by the
obliquitie, by the ^mall abode and by the elongation of ^he sun. This also
stands with reason, that where here are most causes there must be the
greatest heat or old: Let us therefore examine them in the Zones, begin^ing
first with the burning Zone. For so much as the bur^ing Zone is contained
within the Tropickes, so many therefore as inhabit that Zone must of necessity
have the ^unne perpendicular unto them, so that in that respect, shey are all
equal, though in the other causes they disare^e. The abode of the Sun is
lesser under the Equa^^r than under the tropickes, for the day is but of 12.
hours under the equator but under the tropickes it (...) 13.. And somewhat
more. Moreover the Sun coming toward the Equator, and depatting from it,
declineth almost in one month so much as he does in months, near to the
tropickes: Last of all, the Sun coming toward the equator, keeps on his
course (...) rectly, not coming that way again till half a yea^ be past, but
coming toward the tropickes as he h^teth the earth mightily by his slow
ascending, so does increase the heart by his slow descending, and his so dait
return. The heat therefore near unto the tropickes greater than under the
equator.


P. Then which is the hotter of the two tropickes


M. Then tropicke of Capricorn, for it has not only the Sun perpndicular
and continuing a long ti^^ above the horizon, as the other tropicke has. But
(...) hereafter you your self will confess according as y^^ go one forward
in these studies. Hereupon the cond question may be resolved, that of the two
^^zones the antarcticke is the colder, and in the tem^rate zones the winter is
colder to the Southward the to the Northward: for albeit he be oblique to the
both, and continue a like time above either of their (...) rizons: yet for so
much as in Winter he is neer^^ them that dwell in the Northren zones, than to
th^^ that dwell in the Southern zones: they therefore h^^ the warmer Winter,
and consequently the colder Su^mer. Having now answered your questions, it
maineth Philomathes to advise you to acquaint y^^ self thoroughly with your
globe, not only that you (...) be ready to perform those conclusions, which
you (...) learned, but also that you may know, and distinguish the several
parts of the world with the chief Kingdoms, Cities, Capes, necks of land,
Seas, Streightes, and Rivers throughout the whole world, for it will be unto you
a great disgrace, especially in this our traveling age, not ^o be cunning in
these things: which cunning you may ^asily attain unto, if you do but
furnish your study with the Globes, and now and then as your leisure ser^eth,
look upon them.


P. I will do mine endeavor, especially, because as I ^ue a good hope of the
profit that may ensue, so I find ^^e pleasuce to be exceeding great. And to
you sit for the ^ines which you have taken in furthwering my study, I al think
my self greatly beholding so long as I live.


M. That is my desire Philomathes, to make ^^ng students to be beholding unto
me, and if so be here^er you shall stand in need of my help, either through
getfulnes or hardness of that, which I have taught, you, if you will repair to
my poor lodging in Abchurch lane, you shall find me ready to do you what
pleasure I can. And so farewell.


FINIS.

