TEN BOOKS of Homers Iliades, translated out of French, By Arthur Hall Esquire.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Ralph Nevvberie. 1581.

Cum Priuilegio.

To the right Worshipful his very good friend Sir Thomas Cicill Knight A. H.
wishes all prosperity.
ABout two or three years past (good Knight) ransacking diverse old and aside
cast Papers of small moment: I found some fragments of Homers Iliades
translated out of French verse into English meter at such time as I groped
thereat, being a Scholar with you in my L. your fathers house: which when I had
considered, and found of as small reckening as the rest they were stored up
with, which was in truth none at all, I was about to bequeath the^ to the fire.
But being either better or worse advised, for in your allowing and disallowing
of this my proceeding consists the same: I took them again in hand, and not
only as my leisure and capacity did serve me, somewhat corrected my first
Tra^slatio^, which God knows needs eue^ now much meriding, and therefore in
likelihood very roughly hewed at the first: but also proceeded to finishe up
ten whole Books. The which having performed this year, I have till now
rested in diverse minds touching the Publication of them. In which war with
my self, I first did deal with mine own want of ability to write any thing,
much less to translate, and that out of verse into the same kind, in my
opinion the hardest matter belonges to the pen. Also I found always my
self in such disquiet of mind, by means of some practice of my contraries (I
must say undeserved by me) such vexation in Law, and careful turmoyle to
preserve somewhat to my poor house, in a manner overthrown by my ungoverned
youth: that I was fully persuaded I could not go through well with my desire,
being so harried otherwise, for your self best knows, that to a Poet there
is no greater poison, than vexation of sprite. Again, when I considered of the
ripe wits of this age, and had read diverse works so exquisitely done in
this kind by our own Nation. As the travail of M Barnabe Googe in
Palingenius, the learned and painful translation of part of Seneca by M.
Jasper Heywood, the excellent and laudable labor of M. Arthur Golding, making
Ovid speak English in no worse Terms, than the Authors own gifts gave him
grace to write in Latin, the worthy works of that noble Gentleman my L. of
Buckhurst, the pretty and pythie conceits of M. George Gascoyne, and others in
great number, no more to be liked than praised, and not so much to be praised,
as to be recorded for their eternal commendation. These persons, whose books
I am not worthy to carry, when I minded, I wished I had been otherwise
occupied, I condemned my travail, I scratched my head as men do, when they
are greatly barred of their wills. But when I lighted on M. Thomas Phaers
Virgilian English, quoth I, what have I done? am I become senseless, to
travail to be laughed at, to presume, and to be scorned, and to put forth my
self and not to be received: for I was so abashed looking upon M. Phaers
Heroical Virgill, and my Satiricall Homer, as I cried out, envying Virgils
prosperity, who gathered of Homer, that he had fallen into the oddest man's
hands, that ever England bred. And lamented poor blind Homers case, who
gathered of no body, to fall to me poor blind soul, poorly and blindly to
learn him to talk our mother Tongue. These stoppes laid before me, and
considered, made me for a while cast my papers behind me. But as it is a
property of every man soon to find a reason to will him proceed with his
own humor, be it never so unreasonably grounded, in like case fell it with
me: for these were my Arguments against these sound persuasions objected to
stay me. First I remembered that about. 18. or. 19. years past walking with M,
Richard Askame, a very good Grecian, and a familiar acquaintance of Homer,
and reciting upon occasion of talk between us, certain verses Englished by
me of the said Author, he animated me much, with great entreatie to go
forward with my begun enterprise. The like did also about that time the erst
named M. Jasper Heywood, a man then better learned than fortunate, and since
more fortunate than he has well bestowed (as it is thought) the gifts God and
Nature has liberally lent him. Secondly, I suppose also that indifferent
Judges will say, I have my wares at the second hand, as by France out of
Greece, because I am not able to travail so far for them, not understanding
the language. Thirdly for as much as I did assure my self (good knight) that
you, to whom I have long vowed my labor, would regard my good will, more than
the worthiness of my Translation, which if you do. I have with a most
contented mind made holiday. And wholly presuming thereof, it has made me blind
Bayerd, as bold as ever blind Jade was: And that in putting my simple skill to
the carping judgment of so many as well learned, as unskillful heads: which
latter sort, though they be as blind as my milhorse with never an eye, no doubt
will be busier to judge colors, and think they do it better then Poliphemus
could, who had one perfect eye right in his forehead. Well, put case they do
mislike, what help? If I thought I should in any Action please all men, I were
fondly minded. And if I would go about to content each ones humor, I were
meeter to carry Esopes Ass, than to be wisely occupied. My Author that most
famous Poet had Momus and Zoilus, to take exceptions, and pick quarrels to his
books, and that at such time, as no man could justly commend them enough. I
may not think the Apprentise to be greater than his Master, neither yet the
Translator to be compared to the first writer, wherefore for such persons the
care is taken. As touching the Author himself, I know you shall find him
worthy the Englishing, though not worthily done. What fruits are to be
gathered out of him, is lost labor to rehearse, your own judgment, when you
have read him, will tell you more than I can, who have dealt no small time with
him. That happy conqueror Alexander the great, would not sleep without him
under his beds head. He teaches the duties of many no small Babes, and in
such sort as it shall not repent any man of his time employed to read him, as
I have said you can best judge, and therefore for that here an end. Some men
have condemned him heretofore, and do, for his fond fabling of the Gods,
truly I cannot allow them therein, for I am not persuaded his belief was so
gross touching them, but that he observed a Poetical manner of discourse, in
citing so often the heavenly powers, as then they were taken, and that he had
some peculiar meaning therein, which I conceive in my opinion, and you I doubt
not but will find. In the latter end of the French second Book, mention is
made of the Cataloge of the Grecian Princes, that came from all parts to the
besieging of Troy, and of the Troyan leaders and diverse foreign Kings and
Captains, that brought their people to the aid of Priamus state: but looking
to have the same follow in the end of the said Book, I perceive the French
Translator has omitted it (...) yet considering how necessary the recital
of the same is, I fought out the Latin, and there found it, the which I have
also added in his place. I earnestly beseech you to take in good part my good
meaning, which I always have, and do bear toward you, bound thereto, not
only by that honorable and rare favor of my L. your father, even from my
childhood daily continued, yea maugre of such my contraries, who ever wanted
good disposition to love worthily his Lordshippes virtues. and never wanted
good will cross me with careless extremity. To rehearse the particulers of
your own friendships toward me, will ask long time, they are so diverse and
many, and in this place not so needful to repeat, as needful in all other
places for me to study how I may requite some part of them. To blase abroad
the blessings of mind and otherwise, which God so abundantly has bestowed on
you, and makes me the more to honor you, will less content you to hear your
own praise, than all the world well knows you worthy thereof. And therefore
wishing you all prosperity, I commit you to him, who is best able, and no
doubt will send you enough.

Yours most assured to command. A. H.

The first Book.
I Thee beseech, O Goddess mild, the hateful hate to plain, Proposi^ of the
A^ thor. v^ith innocation of hi^ M^

Whereby Achilles was so wroong, and grew in such disdain,
That thousands of the Greekish Dukes, in hard and heavy plight,
To Plutoes Court did yield their souls, and gaping lay upright,
Those senseless trunckes of burial void, by them erst gaily borne,
By ravening ^rres, and ^rreine souls, in ^ces to be torn.
Against Agamemn of Jove his ^rnth, s^kindled was the fire,
That he Achil ^o dear, and cross s^ deeply did conspire.
O Lady show what God began this hateful quarrel thus,
It was the heir of Latona, the gallant gay Phoebus,
Who had to sire that mighty God, who down his lightning throws, Narta^.

With storms of hail, and th^ercl aps: the God incholler grows,
That Agamemn roughly a suite h^ Chryses Priest res^.
In Greekish ^p his plages he flings, their state which ^retly bruso.
At that time Chryses did repair unto the ships, that lay
At ancker before Troy besiegde, in the Port of Sig^, The coming of Chryses
to the Greeks ca^.

With verdant crown, wherewith Apoll his seemly head had clad,
With scepter eke, with things of price, which he for ransom had,
His da^ghter captive held by Greeks by worth her home to buy,
To both Atrides and other kings, he breaks thus humbly:
O Princes great, the lofty Gods adorde in earth below Chryses ^o Agamemnon,
Me^ laus, and (...) the^ (...)

Do send you luck, this Priams town to sack and overthrow,
And laden with the troia^ wealth, ye sale ^o Greece retire:
I sp^ie in your hearts have place, if willing ye desire
To reuer^te thy God I serve, if feeble aged days,
A worthy ^ee; Nabilitie may temper any ways,
Let my mishap obtain, I pray Chryses so dear to me,
O Kings accept these goodly gifts for ransom here that be.
His suit was taken in that sort, that all the Greeks did cry
(...) is gifts, to y^we Chryses, and use h^n reverently.
Agamemn was so far ^due with this so gentle maid,
Such suits he could not he abide, to Chryses grimme he said, Agamemno^
aunsvveres Ohryses and threatens hin^.

Shaking alofte his ster^ head: O hateful dotard thou,
Henceforth in these quatters again take heed I see not you.
For no scepter, not Apolloes, shall hole my hand from thee;
Think not efts^ne Chryseis ^o have, ^ie shall remain with m^
In C^ry (...) t^y Coun^y (...), (...) w^ll t^ ^nne and ^rght,
And bed to make, till (...), who^ ^arie age shall light.
Hence^ (...), ^oue ^se (...), I read thou take good heeds,
If safe and sound vn^ your (...) homward mean to speed.
The ^ood old man thu^ th^led here, g^uts pla^e, Both not a^de
He hides his gr^, (...) ^y (...) ^ines (...).
Bu^ (...) i^ (...), (...) his (...),
With prayers: (...) Gods (...).
Apollo (...) he (...) ^d (...), wh^ rul^ the I (...) ^iue, Chryses prayer to
Apollo.

Cilla, Chrisa, Smi^he, Te^, with (...),
O Phoebus he (...) my (...), (...) Greens,
T^ (...) I h^e (...) had (...)
Thy holy (...) has (...) with (...) th^e,
(...) when (...) ^geith (...)
On these (...) p^re sire have ^ay to so ^w,
To plague ye wrong, (...) ^que the (...) the wounding of thy ^ow.
He pr^d ^thus (...) ^are, (...) ^ing w^ght t^ ground Apollo de scendes to,
the ca^pe, and sends therein a plague.

Be g^te with (...) h^he g^e ^endful T^d,
Lea^g (...) his (...), ^o ^ad (...),
He draws the (...) ^y ^n the (...) ^fte he losde
The noi^as s^ge, the loose was sm^le, the shot so far it (...),
The ^anked Mo^es they ^e, and Dogs (...) and running fit.
But sinc^ the ^aely ^ehe sent (...) the (...) h^st, ^seriptio (...) Greeks
pestilence.

In numbers ^uge the (...) he (...) they ^st
Hard by the ships ((...) at) the (...),
Nine days Apollo ven^ and sho^, me them with (...) ^sped.
But puissant (...) ^desseth (...) (of (...) ^santor true
During this ^ar) of the in hard (...) p^re ganne to (...). Achilles assembles
(...) council

She (...) Achilles he, the (...) he ^al,
To seek (...) helps (...) ^he ha^ (...) whith so does ^eere the (...)
As much was done, in his ^te (...) was (...) man,
Achilles putting forth himself this ^ale to them began: ^

O worthy Kings, abode is vain, our hope it will not (...),
To Greece, to Greece we must return: For why, it may not he,
That we the Trojans force do daunt, I dread a matter more,
God grant the weapons of our foes, do not our bowels gore,
You see how in this wretched war our people do decay,
And now this deadly morreine plague does make the rest away,
Wherefore my Lords, it needful is to seek and search about,
Of some Divine, Augur, or Priest to try the matter our,
What is the cause: For who that dreams, can true interpret well
(Since that from Jove the dreams proceed) the why shall quickly ^el.
He soon will say whether Phoebus this direful plague has sent,
For that to do him sacrifice we have been negligent,
Or that unto his holy house he worthy offerings crave,
Or sheep and goats, whereby appease, some shielding we may have
Achilles had no sooner faide, he sat him in his place, (...) ex^ (...) pro^

Calchas arose, which from his youth Phoebus did yield such grace,
The present times he ^newe full well, the past he not forgot,
Of such as were tn^ee, he wist, what was the secret lot.
This (...) was the Prophet he, for to direct their ways,
The Greeks did th^se in this exploite, and sagely thus he says:
Achilles friend unto the Gods, thou counselst I should show,
Unto the hearers here, from whence Apolloes wrath does grow,
I will it do, but swear thou shall my safety to defend,
(...) such out (...) ^uries, which some on me will bend.
I much do d^bt that ch^est one who shall my speeches hear,
Yea he, who^ all the camp obeyes, will greatly seem to dear
And much amaz^e. Ost mighty Lords, although conceal, they wu^
A cross receivds of simple wight, yet pay they at the full:
^cancea cease not, ^it they de yield their vengeance due
Asspire me then with your defense here^, what way ensue. Ca^ (...) A^.

Sap what ^walt queth Achilles, for by the God of might,
Whose secrets thou so well do ^nowe, I will defend thy right.
None of the Greeks, whereas, I am, shall wrong or iniure thee,
No not the greatest of regard, not Agamemnon he.
Then Calchas thus, assurde by word p^e ^unst in ove^ sigh^
Ye Greeks, this (...) conti^ not, (...) ^or that cause did light, Calchas do
^areth the^ cause of the pestilence.

It fell not in the camp (I say) for want of sacrifice
To Phoebus bright in Country ^r: this mischief whole does rise,
For that you have irreverently, the aged Chry^s used,
His daughter should have been (...), and not his gifts refusde,
Til mends be made of this our fault, I think it will not cease,
The blackenied Lady to her home (...) she be brought in peace,
No ransom had, in numbers tho our offerings let us slay,
To purchase favor of the God, and turn his with away.
Agamemnon forth stands strait, with rage inflamed so, Agamemnon to Calchas.

As like a burning brand his eyes did twinckle to and fro,
And thus he says, looking askance on Calchas furiously:
Unluckie Prophet that thou art, for (...) happily
Ought do thou show, and badly (...), (...) bad do tell,
And me to spite, now do^ thou preach, forsooth a proper spel,
Auouching, that unto the camp this plague is from above,
Because I Chryses do withholde, whom I so greatly love.
Her beauty gay, and gallant glee, has conquered so my will,
As well I hop^e ^he in my house should have r^yned still
With Clytemnestra wife of (...), who^ (...) I d^ r^garde, Clytemnestra wife
to Agamemnon.

And justly ^o, before her she is much to ^e pr^rde,
For countnaunce good, for col^r clea^e, for (...) and body gay.
But ^th I needs must yield her up, (...) this sore away,
(Ah) take her then, I do agr^, hi^ wan^ I (...),
Than that this people here* (...) not (...) have:
But (...) look in (...), (...) me (...),
You well ^hal know, of al (...) I will (...) be the ^ut.
Achilles ((...) of the Greek^s) to him replied thus,
In presence of the Pr^ces a^: Thou sonn^ of Atreus, Achilles an ^vvers Aga
memnon.

Thou p^nching Pr^nce; (...) heart, thou lofty ^inded h^,
Where do thou think (...) ^her (...) for (...)?
In guerdon ^owe of all that war, do the no^ ^owe thy self
Long time ago among us al^ d^ed is the^lfe?
Belike we must ^he spoils ama^, which is not easily done,
And bring the camp to mutine to: (...) not thy ^inde s^ (...),
Obey the G^ds, (...) up the (...), and (...) times richer (...)
Thou shall possess, if Jove vouchsafe that we the Trojans reign,
And Towers hap to lay full low. Straight Agamemnon tho
Said: thou Achill think not (I read) thy credit such, no, no, Ag^non (...).

Although thy force in show compare with such to Gods belong,
Think not that I will follow thee, or bear this open wrong.
Does reason bear, that each his part, have of the wealthy prays?
Think thou it fit I leave the maid, and empty go my ways
Unrecompens^e. I her forgo, as reason so it would,
But see that I considered be, as fit it is I should:
Else mangre thee and all thy might, that thine by thee possessed,
Or Ajax, or Ulysses theirs, I Will have as I think best. Ag^non (...) le^, (...)
and (...).

And care who list, who then shall deers, that I his portion take
And here an end. I think it good to Sea we ready make
A vessel strong with skillful guides, and eke that one of you
Accompany the Lady home unto her father now,
With honor due religiously the Aultars high to rear,
To sacrifice that Apollo, with favor us forbear.
When Achilles had hearkened well to Agamemnons tale,
Disdainfully he lookte at him, and blewe this bitter gale:
Thou impudent, thou iangler thou, what Greek shall ready make
Himself to fight at thy command, thy party for to take? Ach^ exci^ of ^non.

I came not from my Country I, the Trojans stout to scarre,
Or to revenge my self on them: for in no broiles of war,
They ever out my region fruits or cattaile took away,
Too large a sea, too mighty hills, them deserts wild do stay,
And champaines wi^e their forraies bar, tweene us which are defense:
But I am co^, and (...) my train, cutting the seas from thence
Under thy leading, not at al for any cause of ours,
But Menelaus wrong to venge, a brother he of yours:
Not ^ding thou the good we do (thou face and dogshead thou)
In place of thanks I should receive, thou deeply threatens now,
To take away my good, my good, for so in truth it is:
For by my valor in the ^elde I gained it ywis,
And which the Greeks in witness large did give of my desarte,
Of all the spoil: I have more cause than thou to take at heart
These actions aye. Of pillage still I always have the worst,
The victory of wont is mine, infront I am the first,
Yet what they give, I will accept Since home is peacer quie^
Better than with a tyrant war, I war no more will try it.
The working ^ea I will go seek in point of morning gray,
With Sail and Ore to Pthie land my country taking way. Pthie country of A
chilles.

And making here thou thy abode, dishonor thou shall gain,
Thy substance great and (...) wealth withal to waste in vain.
And will you so (quoth Agam^) Amen, farewell, adue,
I list not your abode ent^ate, (...) for your presence fue. Agamemno^ to
Achilles

There are ynow will here abide, and tender my renown,
Ne unprovided mighty Jove will leave me in this rowme.
Of all these Kings and Princes here, thou do delight Achill
To bite and sting me of the no^st, and (...) bendes thy will,
Contentiously maintaining hate, presu^ (...) much
Of force proceeding from the Gods: in the (...) such
Farewell, your godly Myrmidones, comm^nd the^ at your pleasure,
And your ago and fury thus I Will care for at my leisure.
But herewith your audacitie that further I do^ daunt,
Since that Apolloe^ pleasure is, and ordaines (...) ^raunt
That I Chryses resto^e again, with (...) as much as (...),
To old Chryses ^y people (...) to (...).
To thy Pauillion will I send trick, Br^sida to bring
Thy best bel^ued, that al men knowe^how ^nsaunter a King
I am than thou, and that hen^eforth (...) hard in ^olde
To put up head to match (...), (...).
^, Achilles grows in choler with Agamemnon.

Wit^ ^
Agamemn dead, or to appease the wr^ (...),
To hold him still, to part them f^o. and ^pany to lea^e.
Yet (...) in spite of reason ruled, his ^lade (...).
But (...) hear^e from Welkin high thi^ (...)
The bickering th^s so near (...) them, (...) will defend^
And Pallas straight from lofty (...) she (...) descend
Approaching to Achill, softly she took him by the (...) Pallas keeps
Achilles from killing Agamemnon.

Who speedily retirde, knowing, the Goddess to be there,
With twinkling eyes vn^easingly, (...) never a man,
But only to himself, to whom his speech he thus began:
You heavenly daughter Pallas you, do I your presence see?
Would you it know how Agamemn does wrong and iniure me? Ach^ (...) Pall^.

Give me some leave, and for his pride you shall see by and by
Before you here upon the grass his headless truncke to ly.
Thy grief to ease quoth Pallas is this coming here of mine, Pall^ (...) Ach^.

If to be ruled by heavenly saw thy self thou can incline.
Dame I^no seeing this dangerous strife, who favors both so much,
Did bid me down, thee to advise in no wise him to touch.
Put up thy sword it does not well, with words do words repay:
Assured (...) for his great ^ult thou shall another day
And these thy harms; have gallant gifts, yea laid in thy lap,
If to obey this counsel mine thy mind and meaning hap. Achi^ (...) that
(...) say, (...)

Its more than meet quoth Achilles, and reason so does will,
That what the Gods command us men, we wholly do fulfill,
Though sur^ would us thence withdraw: Of Gods ye puissant might
Obedience does (...), in every manner wight.
And from his best who does ^ot swerve, in favor still we see.
His m^ssie fal^ saying thus, in sheath of brightsome blee
Of silver brave he puts up, Pallas away she wears,
She leaves the Greeks, to Gods aloft in Heaven she repaires.
The valiant Greek in fury still on Agamemn does stare,
His rage abides, him thus in speech he raging wise forbear.
Thou tipled Knight, a snarring curre, to sight and show thou art,
Than Stagge beset at bay about more fearful yet of heart,
Among the Kings a cowarde vile, a slouthful shifting Ox,
Assaults, alarms, and battals fought, thou fearst for dread of knocks.
And less thou darste ambushments lay, for doubt to quail or dye,
Thou tyrant great, who do devour the people cruelly.
Oppressor thou scourge of the pore, delighting to disgrace
All men unto thine appetite consenting gives not place.
If I my courage followed had, thou should no more have harmde,
Al graceless straight thy carcas here, to death I would have charmde.
But hark, for by this royal Mace, by which I now do swear, The (...) of
Achil^.

A worthy ornament to show, in right hand which I bear,
Who having lost the sap of wood, eft greenenesse cannot draw,
True ornament for judges all, who execute the law
Of Jupiter on mortal men: the day before thou wist, The Author often names
He ctor a mur derer.

Will come, when to be shielded from sir Hectors murdering fist
(Who shall hacke down the Greeks in heaps) ye I shall be entreated,
And thou (thy lewdness fond contest) shall thoroughly be heated,
To have despised carelessly, who most deserves ^oes.
Thus said, from him in fury great his scepter down he throws,
He sittes him down. Agamemnon, whom anger forward strains,
Minding fair Bryseis still to have, the quarrel he maintains.
That speaker sweet delighting tongue therewith duke Nestor rose, Nestor had
lived 300. years.

From Heaven had, much pleasannter than Harry front him flows,
By grace divine, of triple life the years he also bare,
He to the assembly as they sat his knowledge both declare.
O what mishap, what parant loss see I on Greece to fall? Nestor to Achilles
and Agam^o^

What joy and hope to Priamus his sons and subjects all,
When as shall come unto their ears, that in this camp of ours
By kindled heat in quarrel thus our greatest Princes lours?
This discord leave, this sury fly, than yours my years are more,
Your greaters and your grauers to, I known have heretofore,
Who have my counsel ay obeyed: I never knew nor know
More bold and mighty mortal men, than these and Perithoe,
Dryas in Prudence thief of price, Exadiuss, Polipheme,
Ceneis equal with the Gods, who by their three extreme
The Giants and the Lapyths slew, whereby their glory fled
To Heaven high, I called I, with them I often yedde
To battles great and dangerous, in bloody martial mart,
Whose force no lusty living tho to frunt in fight had heart,
They always ^uill so on my word, as none would cross my speech,
Well shall you do, if you perform by counsel what I reach.
And first to y^ Agamemnon, be (...) also great ^de,
Though chief thou be, perforce to take Bryseis, who is assignde
By all the Greeks his lust reward: Achill I think it good
You silence use, with farring words forbear to cross in mood. The
authority of Kings com meth from Jupiter.

Of all the sceptred Princes none so high is sea^ed down,
As over hi^ Jove app^nts the (...) and the crown:
In force if so you more avail, (...) Thetis that it retches
Your mother she, but yet than yours his puissaunce further stretches,
For Nations more do him obey. And Agamemnon take it,
Appease your rage and your abuse, let not your calling make it.
Achilles, for the love of me, if true, I true report,
Forget this jar, to Greekish camp in old and wonted sort
Show forth your self a bulwark sure: Thou aged worthy sire, Agam^ ansvv^ N^.

Quoth Agamemn, what thou haste said, best reason does require,
But here this mate by gallant heart triumphing Lord will go,
He will command, he all will rule: but soft, he shall not so,
If I may choose: his force is great, as sib to power divine,
Has he then leave all wrong to do, as fancy shall incline?
Achilles straight full restless yet, from him the speech he took, Achill^
(...) Agam^

I were (quoth he) a coward leude, if I agreed to brook
Thy governance, after thy will I ruled will be no more,
For no obedience look of me, others command therefore,
And build on this: For Bryseis fair, no quarrel I will make
With any man, fith obstinate you bent are for to take
The gift on me which was bestowed: but have regard to dare
(Yea for thy life) to touch the Gods in my possession are,
And be aboorde my vessels, thou, a bootelesse work should have.
And if thou be so gallant set, or yet so beastly brave,
Advance thy self, thy valor show, and al men shall behold
Me with my Lance to shed thy blood, and lay thy carcass cold,
The case debated thus at length, the Council al they rose,
Achilles with his company to his Pauillion goes. The (...) cell br^ up.

A ship well furnishte Agamemn on sea he causes rise
With twenty Ores, forgetting not things meet for Sacrifice,
And pueell Chryseis fitly there he shipped honest well,
And Ulysses for patron put, who Greeks did all excel Ulysses goes (...)
Chryseis (...) hi^ (...).

In good advise, and pleasant speech, the waves at will they ^ice,
With wind in poupe, they hope full soon to find her father Chryse.
Again home offerings more to fit, Agamemn hyeth fast, With ^crifice (...)
puri^ (...) cam^

To cleanse the camp, and in the sea the ordure for to cast.
Then to the Altars reared high on shore right beautiful,
He bids bring the wanton Goat, the Sheep and mighty Bull,
Devoutly for the army all, on Phoebus to bestow,
Whereof the smell and vapor thick to heaven right does go,
As burnt they were, the people eke in many sundry wise
Unto the Gods sent their demands, their prayers, and their cries.
But Agamemns wrath swageth not, he still in rage does roste,
Till he at pleasure Bryseis have, for Chryseis he has lost.
Two Heraultes straight he bids to come, he thought of best respect,
Talthybe, and Eurybate, to whom he spoke to this effect: Talthybe and
Eurybate two Heraults of the Greeks.

O Heraults here seek out Achill, who in his tente now is,
Bring Bryse away, if he withstand, I present will not miss,
Spite of his teeth tofetche her I, and well unto his pain.
Such were his words, outrageous, more fond and foolish vain.
To place the Heraultes quickly came, where lay ye valiant Greek,
They him no sooner saw, but that their dreads were not to seek,
Aghast to touch so mighty a Prince, of whom when he did hear,
Although in grief he welcomde the^, and shewde the^ pleasant cheer.
You Heraultes high, come on quoth he, no danger dread at all, Achilles to the
heraults

For by your disarde king, not you, this wrong on me does fall,
Agamemn, who will me bereave by force and tyranny
Of Bryseis liking presence, which so dear is in mine eye.
Petroclus mate and brother mine, of beauty fetch the dame,
Give her in hands to Heraults these: And here I do proclaim
Before the Gods, ye Heraults eke, al people vn^ Sun,
This tyrant too, whose senses still to worse and (...) do run:
To witness I do call you al, hereafter, if perh^es
The Greeks have need of my relief by means of afterclappes,
And peril coming to the camp, this doting ^led Ass,
He knows not good discourse, nor yet what er^ (...) council was.
He minds not, who hitherto has bin the armies ^eld,
He knows not who has the power to save the (...) in field.
Herewith Patroclus brings forth Bryseis the Dan^y, Bryseis is brought to
Agame^non.

He gives her in the Heraultes hands, who onwarde ^re their way
Apace to Agamemnons ships to lead the Lady fair.
Who much against her will, to him does make her new repair.
By this farewell, the pleasures al of valiant Achill quails,
He martirde so is with the grief, with sheadding tears he wailes,
And from his people goes aparte. And better to ^ide
His bitter pain, unto the shore he steals there aside,
Thus to his mother Thetis often showing his woeful case:
Since in my birth by fate full hard few years I do embrace
Of life, then Jove (quoth he) who sees al things from Welkin hye, Ach^ (...)
his (...)

Some honor should have given me, before the time I dye,
And not to suffer Agamemn my solace thus to sterue,
By power to take that noble gift, which well I did deserve.
From deapth of wide and hollow sea, her son complaining thus
With piteous noise, Thetis gave ear, leaving Oceanus
The aged sire in Marine Court, in likeness of a cloud
With speed she comes to Achilles, in dolor where he stood.
Kind countenance and show she makes: Alas dear son quoth she, The^ (...)
son.

What ayleth thee? whence commes thy grief? Alas, what man is he
That has thy mind disturbed thus? let me the occasion see,
That of thy doleful deering here, partaker I may be.
He sighing said, must I to you declare my martyring throws; Achill^ (...)
his (...)

The wrongs to me now lately done your self too too well knows.
You know full well how for to harm King Priame and his kin,
Many a subject town of his, and neighbors, quite have bin
To ruin, sack, and booty brought, the walls of Aetion
The puissant king, by me were torn, whereof to every one
The spoils were parted equally: Chryseis of beauty most
Was left to Agamemnons choice, who kept her in the host.
Chryseis the sire shortly in camp his daughter fair he sought,
And for her ransom also due he gallant presents brought.
Unto us all in humble wise he lowly made request,
And eke to him that had her rule, with whom the Maid did rest.
Of Phoebus clear, old Chryses was, cladde with the worthy weed,
Thereby to purchase more regard. By us it was agreed,
That she in freedom should be set, and gifts had in exchange,
But here our Chieftaine our advise he took it very strange:
And maugre al, with choler full, the hoarie hairs he chode:
His presents thus refusde, good Chryse, right sorrowful abode.
To Phoebus clear he prayed hard, who put him not abacke:
For shortly numbers great, by plague are put to direful lack.
This woeful plight, when plain I saw of Greeks by death yspent,
Which Calchas wise said from Apoll proceeded (...) content,
I did persuade the people al, the God to pacify,
Thereby displeasing Agamemn, himself so gloriously
And stern who bears. With outrages and threats he eke began,
And said, his loss must healed be of me, I was the man:
He failed not to execute his filthy mind so false.
Chryseis in Galley scarce was put, and haled up the halse,
But that they Bryseis fetch away, whether she will or no
Out of my Tent, King Agamemn to him will have her go.
I this way of the goodly gift, which all the Camp me gave
Defrauded am. But if that you such might and puissaunce have
(As well I know your force is great) then yield thou some relief
Unto your woeful son, whose soul is paulde with inward grief.
Ascend, and license crave of Jove that I revenge may take,
For once from danger you him drew, for mends let him this make.
I mind it well, I often have heard you largely vaunt and boste,
That, but for you and for your help, he life and laud had lost. Conspyracie
of the Gods against Jupiter. The fable of Briareus had an hundred hands.

For Neptune joined with Pallas, and Juno Dame that shrowe,
Had enterprisde to bind his hands, and down the heavens him throw.
But their malicious hard devise prevented was in time:
For you descending, to the Heaven you caused for to clime
Briareus callde Aegeon, the hundred handed Giant,
The fiercest of all mortal wights, who fiercely there resiant,
Did so aghast the Seaish God, and other Goddish powers,
That Jove as sovereign still remains, and none against him stoures.
Go get you to him mother mine, and lowly on your knees
Mind him of this your service done, demanding for your fees,
That he vouchsafe the Troyans send such courage to embrace,
That slain or burnt, the Greeks to shore do fearfully give place.
This mischief byding by their King, who then his fault shall spy,
And lofty liking of himself, so little care, looselie
Minding his prowess, who of all in valor bears the Bell.
Thetis again Achill her son thus answers very well,
With heavy heart and weeping eyes: Alas (she said) my son, Thetis to
Achilles.

Have I thee hither thus brought up? thy life have thou begone
(Since in a trice it is cut off) Why blisfull is it not?
Have I conceived thee dear son, to this unhappy lot?
What, is thy fate so hard, to give thee short and doleful days?
Well, thee to please, I will to Jove, persuading diverse ways,
In telling this, that to thy loss he be a setter an,
But two days past he with the Gods is gone the ocean,
Whereas the Aethiopes do inuit the ancient Gods to cheer,
Eleauen days it will be full, ere he return I here.
But then a suter will I be, til when I wish (my child)
You from the battle do abstcine, and not your weapons wield.
Disport your self upon the waves, a ship-boorde take no care,
That it be wist unto the Greeks how great your dolours are.
With this she leaves her son Achil. A boorde he keeps in pain
For Brisies gone, he feels the smart, that thrils through every vain. ^ues
in the I Will of Christ (...) delivers Christ (...)

That while Vlisse with wind in poupe, and travail of the Ore,
Of fertile Chrise he with the dame approaches to the shore
And pleasant port: down come the sails, and round they roll the^ fast,
Upon the deck haeled adowne is laid the mighty Mast.
And then from Poupe with Cables hard the toothed Ancres fling
Their hold to take, and lay alande provision which they bring
For sacrifice: Ulysses does the maid with careful charge
Upon her saddle set, conduct to Phoebus temple large,
With mind full mild, where-to her sier he gives her in his hands,
And with these words: Thou Chrises Priest, so happy thou yt stands,
Agamemn, who commands the Greeks, to thee has sent me hither Ulysses (...)
Christ.

To bring thee home thy daughter here, and with her eke together
Such vows to offer to Apol, to pacify his anger,
That Greeks thereby so deeply pinde, be therewith plagde no la^ger.
The good old man did joy apace his daughter to possess,
And forthwith had to sacrifice they all things ready dress.
And Barley cakes he calls to bring, and fingers washed fair,
Aloude he lifts up his voice, and joined hands does rear.
Oh puissa^t Phoebus (thus he prays) whose darts do al things tear, Chrises
prayer (...) Apoll^.

Thou Phoebus clear, Apollo God who silver bow does bear,
And Cyl, Chrysa, and Tenedos does rule unto thy liking,
If any time thou have vouchsafte to grant at my besiking
To show the working of thy wrath on Greeks afflicted sore,
Who wholely yield unto thy will, O Phoebus grant therefore The plague cease
in the Greeks Camp.

To change thy mind, and from this Ca^pe this bitter plague ^o banish,
No sooner prayde, but Phoebus heard, and plague it straight did vanish.
Full furnishte were the offerings, when ended was to pray,
The sheep are slain, their skins of plucked, and to the fire they lay
Sacrifice.

The gigots plumbe, and cut off legs: good Chrise with wine so red
The Altar thoroughly does perfume: himself he careful sped
About the service of the God, and fire great does kindle,
The loins of the oblations dead, and other flesh they mingle,
And roundly roast on broches five, and gridorne on the Coals,
And every one prepares himself unto his cheer and boales.
A seemly sight it was to see the seamen plye their teeth,
Wherewith the Cups apace they walk, they well content therewith.
Refreshed thus, Ulysses and the Greeks they do not spend
Idle the day, they Himnes do chaunt, and ferly songs do send
Apollos praise to herrie hie, whero^ the pleasant tunes
Resounding in the God his ears, he pleasure great resumes.
At night Ulysses coucheth him within his galley low,
At peep of day each one prepares to pluck, to bale, to row. Ulysses
returns to the Greeks Camp.

To lofty seas the Maste they hoyse, Gods aid they do not lack,
For shortly with ye wind he gave (which made their sails to crack)
In port of safety they ariue, where bloody war does rore,
And taking land, their vessel they do draw upon the shore.
To his pauilion each retires, or hieth him abroad.
This while Achilles keeps his tent, for matters of the sword
He neither makes nor medles with, nor yet to counsel co^mes,
In mind with trouble ouerchargde, he grieved sits, and glo^mes,
Pyning away his valiant corpse, a pattern odd produced.
Unto the world of worthy shape: when as should be induced
Alarm among the Greeks, he gapes, whom Troyans should assail,
Good proof to show his help, to them to be of great avail.
The day now come of Jove's return from th'Occean solemn feast,
One morning Thetis from the sea to heaven her self does pressed.
The God aside the sitting saw, approaching to him-nie,
His knees her left hand does embrace, with countnaunce curteously^
Her right to chin she moved soft, and humbly thus she prayde:
If any time (redoubted sire) that I have with mine aid
Thy high and mighty majesty relieved in thy want, The Jupiter.

I thee beseech this my request O father do it grant,
Since life is short, his honor to ^te, yield thou unto my son,
Let Agamemnon shortly know what wrong he has him done,
Yielding the Greeks a thorough fear, the Troyans courage hie,
So that the wracked Camp restore his credit worthily.
To this the Goddesses mild speech, the great God answered not,
But sadly musing with himself he still, in silence sat.
The Goddess eftsoone weary now, this silence long that spies,
In humble sort upon her knees entreats in this wise: T^ (...) ^oue ^teth Iup^

Say yea, or no, Oh Jupiter, end both my hope and fear,
For you of whom to stand in dread, I know none life does bear:
Say on therefore, that I may see, in favor how I stand,
How small regarded or esteemde, I crave it at your hand.
With fetched sigh Jove aunsweres thus: Oh hard and heavy case, Jupiter (...)
The.

Since my wife Juno I must stir, and have her froward grace.
It Is she, it is she of all the Gods with me that most does jar,
Alleging that I Priams part support do in this war.
That she do not our meaning find, down straight desce^d your ways,
And your demand I will fulfill, assurde without delays.
And that you know my promise sound, I will you show a sign Token (...) the
^tie of Iup^ters p^

To ease your doubt, this shall it be, to bow my head divine,
A token aye that never fayles, when any thing of weight
Unto the Gods I do behight. His head he shakes straight,
And bended brows so raises he, that of his holy hear
By only shake, Olympus large does tremble fast for fear. The (...) pu^ (...)
Jupiter (...) turns (...) Heaven.

Thetis to depth of sea descendes, the God his mansion keeps,
In Welkin Country he remains, with other Gods he meets,
In troop, not missing no not one, themselves they humbly show,
Amid them all right glorionsly on throne he sits tho.
Then Juno chased at the full, now found the secret trick
Of Jove, to wrack of Greekish Camp, which touchte her atye quick.
With heart audatious thus she says: thou God with malice frought, Juno angry
with Jupiter.

What subtle joy, what pretty pra^ke, have you (I pray you) wrought
With that my masters Mariner: from whence now does it grow
That I with you must not confer, nor must your counsels know?
Delighting that your dealings close to other known be,
I fur aloufe a stranger I. Hope not then aunsweared he Jupiter to Juno.

My secrets I acquaint you with, y^ gain it would be l^sse,
Although my wife and sister both, you are, I do confess.
In Counsayles which are fit for you, y^u full shall have your right*
None ^alde so soon, no not the God, that greatest is of might.
If, what I have determined plain, none is shall know the matter,
Then let me rest, to search it out you ought not thus to patter.
Out cried the Goddess loud, alas, O crabbed rusticke Jove,
So like an Ass or indiscreet, when did I ever roue, Juno to Jupiter.

To seek the things of secrecy, but still I am excluded,
You crabbed you, your secret deeds without me are concluded.
Which made me careful, when I saw Thetis that spiteful peate
This morning here so perting sit at elbow by your seat.
I greatly dread her son to venge, obtainde some suite she has,
Whereby to danger down the Greeks, and work their harm and scath.
To this the God did call her hag, (quoth he) I cannot shift, Jupiter to Juno.

But thy suspicious jealous head aye finds out my drift.
But how much more (I smell) you think to alter what I mean,
I so much more in spite of you do still contrary clean,
The rather for your kicking thus. If I unto Thetis
Have promised any thing at all, (...) so my pleasure is,
And you it know, why should not you agree as well as I?
Go sit you down, and talk no more so fond and foolishly,
Least moved I, with both my fistes I give you hanging laws,
And in such sort, as no God here can save you from my claws.
By this so great and dreadful threat, dame Juno more she fears,
She quiet gr^wes, she goes her ways, and visage down she bears,
Among the Gods she takes her place: this while the heavenly route,
By this contention grieved are, and troubled through out.
Whereby with pity Vulcane bare to Juno, which he had,
With doubt this snarling would proceed to worse, which was to badt
With (...) s^h he did his best, to comfort her, as thus:
My mothe^ dear, if this (...) remain, and that with us Vulcan^ to Juno his
Mother.

Immortal G^ds we quarrel have, for mortal peoples case,
I surely see decay to fall upon this goddish race.
The banquets shall be brought to naught, and quailed with disquiet,
Whereat we all are still refresht, and reason why, for royot
In mischief like makes better ^ad, than better can attain.
You must more kind and loving be: oh noble dame refrain
Your choler now unto my sire, how, best your self does know,
Else by this rigor of debate the case will fall out so,
As all the Gods, both you and I, shall find no little grief,
If once he grow into a rage. He mighty is and chief,
He from the heavens will us hunte, whereby our iunkets gay,
Our sport, our chat of loving toys shall clean be taken away,
And port of this our mansion hie, all counsels ended quite.
I you beseech to have some care this danger do not light,
Agree your self unto his will, with words of mild allay, Vul^ present^
drink (...) I^.

And what you list, you shall obtain, he can you not denay.
With this a boule of Nectar full, in hand sir Vulcane took,
And to his mother did present it with a comely look.
Bear mother mine, (quoth he to her) refuse not to obey
To Jove, though care does master you, and wills you answer nay,
Least greater shame you hap to have, he laying you on the Hide,
And though I would, no help at all I could for you provide,
Nor yet resist his power divine: have you forgot so soon,
How you to rescue from his hand, he had me almost done
To death? when so his fury woxe, from skies he did me through
Down by the foot, where in the air I tumbled too and fro, Vulca^ once
throvve^ out of Heaven (...) in (...) I Will.

A whole day through, and fell at last with bones and body burst,
In Lemnos I Will, in manner dead, whereas I fell at furst.
Whereas I was well entertainde there by the Lemnos dweller,
With bounty great. When Juno heard thus Vulcane for to tell her,
She was appeasde, and began to smile, the cup to lips she set, Juno drinks of
Ne ctar and in appe^.

With Nectar sweet, celestial juice, her mouth and heart she wet.
It was a pastime to behold the pleasannt Vulcane God,
In taking say to all the rest, with halting haunches plod.
Whereat the Gods do laugh apace, much liking of the jest. The Gods feast.
Phoebus (...) the (...)

And then prepared is forthwith, the high and heavenly feast,
From morning clear which unto night was drawn out along,
With great and glorious array, (...) Muses with their song
(...), and Phoebus (...) Harp does strike
Agreeing in ^eete Har^ie, wherewith they greatly like
The worthy route^the sun gone down, each one with heavy eyes
Retires unto his several home, in buildings which do rise
By skill of ly^ping Artysane: Jove to his Chamber hies, Jupiter and the Gods to
rest.

And down he coucheth on his bed, and Juno by him lies.
Finis Libri primi.
The second Book.
THe Heavenly ^ires and mortal folk passed the night as tho
In (...), yielding to it (...) free of care and woe* Jupiter can not ^leepe for
the care he has of Achilles.

But Jove sticking with tooth and nail still unto his behest
To Thetis made, with irksome cheer (...) was of his rest,
Casting how he Achilles (...) unto the stars might raise,
And move some br^ in the Greeks Ca^pe to their loss any ways.
John dreaming God he callde (...) him, that God chief God of il,
Common (...) carrier of every lie, thus saying him his will:
Thou cankerde dream think on thy charge, and leave thy seat now here
Jupiter to the God of dream.

And straight to Ag^ ships this message see thou bear,
Without abode (...) the do arm ethe Greekish crew and band,
His enterprise to end, my self will put an helying hand.
For now the Gods do all agree that Troy to ruin go,
Among them though has been great tug whether it should be so.
Thoroughly by Juno brought thereto, whose will and whole desire
Is both the Troyan town and folk to d^unt with sword and fire.
Having his errand thus from Jove, the dreaming God him s^ed
Forthwith to Agamemn that Prince, whom he found then abed,
By sleep refreshing so his sprites of toil and travail gone,
Of Nestor old that famous wight the shape that God put on,
Saying: Oh valiant Atreus heir, sleepst thou or do thou wake? The dr^ to
Ag^ (...).

A Princes duty is not thus himself to sloth to take,
Who has the charge of such a crew of knights and army big,
For not throughout to sleep a night the care of them would twig. A prin^
(...) war (...) not to (...) the vv^ night.

Since Jove so much thy fame desires, and eke thy name to raise,
And for thy sake has causde such broils he bids without delays,
That next when Titan shows his face this, Orizon to light,
In order you your armies range of battle for to fight.
For now the time is right at hand, yea this is now the day,
Wherein the Troyan City shall be given to Greeks in pray.
The Gods as now yield all thereto, agreeing in this case
Willing to follow Iunoes vain, whom great desires embrace
Of Troy to see the Towers down torn, and euend with the ground,
And Jove that God, of others most, that string does wholly sound.
The Troyans little to esteem his Godhead he does know.
Think on oh King that I have said, my message do not slow.
His errand done, as he was willde, he took his flight from thence,
Leaving Prince Agamemnon then in dumpe and in suspense.
And casting for to make exployte and end without delays,
To spoil the Troyan town and line, and not to take more days. Aga^ thinks
of his drea^.

But the great Calfe mist of his count, for Jove had laid a bayte
As well the Greeks as Dardanes kind them both a shame to wait.
But then he rose, leaving his bed, and sitting down thereon,
He clad himself with garments new, and put a Mantle on, Aga^ and (...).

And on his feet full delicate clean shoes right feate he set,
And to his (...) a sword he girt, with golden nails ybet.
Thus clad, holding in his right hand his own paternal Mace,
Went from his tent unto the ships to consult of the case.
When as Aurora began to clime upon Olimpus hie,
And brought to men message of light before the Sun in sky, The S^ rising.

Agamemnon went to counsel his (...) crying out,
Both great and small, yea more and l^sse of all the Greekish route
Came to the call, but ere he would his mind to them declare
He callde the auntients of the host, they that most worthy were,
Whose counsel was the best esteemde, to whom he thus began The Counsel
asse^bles

Somewhat with joy in Nestors ship that famous worthy man.
How this last night the dream divine did set my thought on fire Aga: tells:
his dream.

Hear now my friends, when as he came resembling this old sire.
This rest beco^mes thee not, quoth he, you child of Atreus kind,
But rather on thy charge to think, and there to set thy mind.
A wise man the which subject is to every kind of ill,
Ought not in rest spend all the night, or sleep therein his fill.
Give ear therefore unto my words: since Jove now willing is
T'aduance thy name and great renoume, commands, thou do not miss
But in the field to raunge thy power to morrow for to fight,
For therein thou shall bring adowne the Troyan pride and might,
And sack their City, since the Gods no more are at discord,
To succor them, their so Juno, has wrought them to accord.
And namely Jove against Priam will follow his revenge,
And as a foman, so of him, himself himself will venge.
This message done, the dream me left, and I address likewise
My self to you my friends, to know your counsel and advise,
How to furnish this enterprise: but ere we do begin
Our armor to put on, lets see what minds our men be in.
If ye think good, to Country home I will them will to hie,
And with fair words will counsel them, and willing seem will I.
But you shall argue and reply against that my request,
Constrayning them by word and deed to tarry and arest,
Til that a through end be made: then Nestor up did rise Nestor persuades the
Greeks to believe Agame ^non

Straight at his tale, and to them al he ^n speak in this wise.
Oh Princes famous of re^me, if any presontly
But Agamemn should count this tale, we s^uld it hold a lie,
And making him a laughing stacke, his credit should be small:
But since this tale is his, who has the leading of us al,
We must to it our credit give, not spending time in this,
But to assent is my devise unto shese word of his.
Encouraging our sould^ (...) for (...) comitte to wind,
And to ^nce our ^gne all ^th c^ good and mind.
This sentence of Nestor allowde, Agamemnon straight rose,
The Peers accompanying him, ye rout with zeal of news now goes,
He, who has seen the busy Bees, when Prime time first forth leaps, Si^ of
Bees.

Issuing off the sliued rocks, flying in swarms and heaps,
To smell the odor of the flowers, of the small blossomde trees:
Suppose, that from al quarters came, both great and small likewise,
Following their chieftains at the heels, for news to hear they cast,
Together so to the sea stronde they hyed them to haste.
The messenger of Jove so swift with wing as may be thought, The famous ^ger of
Iupi^.

Fame with the help of his strong pens, did leave no place unsought,
But stirs each man with doubled words to haste unto the rout,
That with ye noise of those that came the earth trembled throughout:
And in the air the brute resoundes, right happily he was set,
That could by chance find out some place among such prease so great, The pr^ast.

He preaseth him, him he again, shouldring each one his feere,
They labor still with heave and shoue, each one to draw more near.
But the Heraults silence to make, nine times th'Oies did cry, The Heraults m^
silence.

To the Kings words praying the Greeks to hark attentively.
Agamemnon him ready made, and on a place of state
He mounted up, in his right hand his Scepter deaurate Agam^ Scepr^.

Wrought lately by the God Vulcane, to Jove it with great care
Did he present, este by whose gift eke Mercury it bare,
And Mercury in present gave it to Pelops the great,
Who it did yield to Atreus, and in his haud it set.
And Atreus yielding up the Ghost, to Thyestes the strong
He it bequeathde, with other things which to it did belong.
This Scepter Agamemnon held, and it possessed indeed,
For to the soil of Argos rich as heir he did succeed,
And eke to other Cities more in land right firm and fast,
With Isles, whose beauties to behold each mind would be aghast.
Wherefore vaunting this royal Mace in his right hand before,
Which eke Pelops his auncestor had borne himself of yore,
With stately look upon his crues, he set and fixed his eyes,
With stretched lims he began him shroude, and spoke the^ in this wise: Agamem^
to the (...) diours (...) feel the (...).

With griesly plague not to be borne, O host of Greekishe soil,
Famous by Arms, Jove has me deeerde, and put me to the foil,
And il has fauourde our affairs: for promise he did make
To me, that long ere this we should the town to flame betake
And that we should to Greece return al safe in prosperous plight
But I see he has laid a train to trappe us if he might.
For changing now his just devise: he counsels at the last
Home to return, when at this siege great perils we have past,
Which we this long time have sustaind: thus will this God of power
Bring down men's force if he so please in moment of an hour.
And Cities huge he lays in dust, even as his pleasure is,
And brings cche mighty strength to ruin: oh what mishap is this?
Such warped keeles for to behold fleeting upon the seas,
And dead so many worthy Knights on the earth sundry ways,
And Troy to sack have had no might, who now cannot abide?
For if a present proof were made, and that it might be tryde, Comparion.

That Trojans as our friends and feres were numbered a^l in one,
And that we Greeks divided were, by tens and tens each one,
Appointing to each troop of us but one Troyan by name,
To retche the Cup at our requests, when we call for the same,
A man should see thousands of Greeks (the Troyans be so scant,)
That calling in their thirst for drink, their butlers they should want,
So much our number theirs surmounts, which be of Troyan blood,
But truth it is, that numbers great are come of nations good,
Resolved wightes themselves have vowde to dye in their defense.
Which not a little grieves me now, and casts me in suspense,
Not being of force for to prevail, and yet nine years throughout
We have this Troy strongly besiegde on each side round about.
Yet they our Machins have withstoode: what hope then in the same
Of them to gain should we now have, but mere reproach and shame?
And of our ships the deckes be broke, and whole there is no sail,
Our sail yards rotten, our masts yspent, and tackling ginnes to fail.
For our return to take in hand they are in sorry plight.
And yet again our dolorous wives do wish of us some sight,
And have done long with ardent zeal, hearing the guiltless cries
Of the small babes, with our return wishing to bait their eyes.
And we now brought into distress, and void of our purpose,
Our honor, fame, and good renown, and like our time we lose.
For well we know, and certain be, that we can not destroy,
Nor put to flame this City now impugnable of Troy.
And other council I know none, but this for best I choose,
That to our houses we return, and not our honors loose.
Doing as reason eke requires, let us the Gods obey,
And that each man hie to his home, let no man think of stay.
These words at pleasure thus pronou^ct, did yield ye Greeks a mind
Of full desire of their return, and so they ganne to wind, The (...) describ^
the inco^^ cie of the multitude by two fine comparisons.

With whispering noise, yielding a sound, as ost the seas we see
The storm the boistrous surge to raise, weltring now low now hie,
And with the strength of southern blast is driven against each rock,
It does redound with griesly roar, when on them it does knock:
Or else, when as the western wind does meet a field of grain,
In harvest time, and cause the ears to whush throughout the plain.
Each man such have made unto ship, that yet before their cries
The dust into the air was raisde alofte into the skies.
Which was a grief unto them al, yet such desire they had
Of their return, that each his friend began thereof to glad,
And council gave their Masts to hoise, and eke their sails to spread,
With such a noise, as to the stars their cries and clamors yed.
In truth the self same morning then each his return did hie,
And al agreed were of the same, maugre the destiny:
Had not Juno spit on her hands, and taken better hold,
And prayed Pallas of her help when these things wared cold.
Minerua thou my friendly mate, shall we before our eyes Juno (...) Pallas.

Suffer upon these Greekishe bands such infamy to rise,
And shamefully to take their flight by arms not sacking Troy,
Not winning Helene, who is cause of all this great annoy,
To King Priames immortal fame, and honor of his kin?
If often thy godly wisdom has preuaild men's hearts to win,
And them to change from sentence set, the same now for to use
Is meet, to cause the Greeks to change, and this their way refuse.
And that from Troy no ship depart, haste down I thee desire,
Till Greece, who has receivde this wrong, do venge hirselfe by fire,
When as ye green eyed Goddess thus had heard dame Iunoes talk, Pal^ d^
cendeth (...) co^ (...) Ulysses.

To find the wily Ulysses straight down she took her walk.
Who having left the other Greeks in care, then plunged was,
With sorrow sore, seeing how ill the war was brought to pass.
Who semblance none, nor countna^ce made, homward to take ye sea^,
Nor once t'imbarke himself, this end so much did him displease.
Is it agreed, said Pallas then, O thou Ulysses wise, Pallas to Ulysses.

That this shameful departure thus be taken in this wise?
Shall thus the Greeks be seen to fly, and Troyans to enjoy
That beauty, which al Greece to win, brought their whole strength (...) Troy?
These rauishing beasts her to possess, to see do you not burn?
I pray thee have with pleasant words to stay the Greeks return,
Here to abide, until such time, as ye have seen each one
The Troyan town within the walls and tower of Ilion.
The wary Greek hearing the voice divine, without delay
Threw off his weed, and to the camp he took the nearest way,
The lighter clad to make more speed, and meeter to make haste,
The which an Herault straight took up, and followed him as fast.
And Agamemnon as he ran, he met right in the face. Ulysses ^akes
Agamemnons Scepter.

Of whom (the more to be esteemde) he took his golden Mace.
By hap, if in this hurly burle, with Prince or King he met,
With gentle speech he causde them stay, these words he forward set,
Ah fellow mine, it is not meet, that we, who bear the port Ulysses speaks
cur^ously to the Princes.

Of Kings and heads, should show our selves as do the meaner sort,
Daald dastards, but our part it is, from sloth them to refrain,
And to lead them by counsel good, to things more for their gain.
Agamemns fetch you do not feel, who by a gentle way
Does prove to see which Grecian heart most fails and faints away,
Or who holds out: so his reward or punishment to bestow,
He is too wise that each man should his mind and secrets know.
Wherefore we ought all to foresee, that he find cause no where
In us to stir: for a Kings wrath is burden great to bear. The wrath of a
King.

For that power, by the which he rules, proceeds from grace above,
And who commands here in Gods place, him God does always love. The reign comes
from God. Ulysses ^hastiseth mutinous soldiers.

Ulysses to his fellow Knights thus courteously did say,
Not irously, but if he found a knave careful of pray,
Or mutinous, who made as though he home would pass the seas,
With his Scepter he dealt some blows, and, beastly wretch he says:
Becomes it thee, thou Hedgehog thou, who loves no toil but ease,
With murmorous words to go about thy Captain to displease?
Retire and stand, my friend I say, with those are of ^y band,
To ^eare the Kings, who can appoint what is meetst to take in hand. The (...)
all (...) vve^. Obedie^ to Kings.

Each one of honor may not be a King and Ruler straight,
For worthy Fame and great renoume are things that are of weight,
If they be Marshalled by one: wherefore in every case
Let us obey that King, whom Jove has set here in his place.
Such gentle words Ulysses used, that so they did retire,
And straight they left their ships, in troops and plu^ps y^ kings to hear,
Making such noise as does the sea, when with some boisterous brag
It makes the shore whistle along, with beating on each crag. Comp^.

Each one did choose himself a place, whereas he hear might best,
Save Thersites among them al without a room did rest.
This Thersits was a surly knave, and eke a dogged swine, Homer (...) the name
(...) Thersi^ des^ sedition person.

Not knowing honor nor his good, and always spent his time,
And took delight to mock and scorn, and use with trifling toys
Even the chief: and in such tricks consisted al his joys:
Thinking that it became him well, when he did them contrary:
And worse: he was the vgliest beast, that ere the earth did carry: The^ was
(...) me^.

It seemde Nature had sought her wit his foulness for to shape:
Ill limmde he was, and for his head, it pillde was like an Ape,
A Crassum c^put, and his ears they were of Asses last,
His limbs gourdie, crooked, and lame: in fine, take this at last,
His form was monstrous to behold, his shape none ever had,
He reaked not, though he were thought in trouble still to gad.
All his contention and debate was broadly to gainsay
Ulysses and Achill, and often like part, yea, would he play
With Agamemnon, who, because he knew th'ole host of late,
Or most of it, did stomach then, for that so fond debate,
Because he held Bryseis the fair: he speedes to him amain,
Thus scornfully to anger him, and move him in each ^aine.
What doste thou lack Agamemnon, t'accomplish thy desire? The^ Ag^*

What would thou have? what grieves thy heart? and sets it so on fire?
What does it else demand* for first thy coffers full they be
Of gold, silver, and jewels heapt, thy ships and tents we see
Beset with passing Damsels through, which we the Greeks bestow
In gift on thee, when by assault we bring a City low.
If to us chance a prisoner rich, we can thee not deny,
But bring to thee (strangely me think) his ransom by and by:
For all these things at thy desire, yet art thou not content,
But if thou see a captive, whom nature has beauty lent,
Her straight to abuse thy courage serves: wherefore what should me^ say,
Shall we al our allegiance bear, and such an head obey,
Or honor him, we very beasts and Greeks infamde? nay, nay,
Not Greekish knights, but Grecia^ dames, what get we here to bide?
This Avarice here let us leave, that perish may this pride,
And he of causing wrong debates may know the irksome gains,
Lets leave him here, and he shall know what wrong Achill sustaines,
For Agamemn thou had good hap when as the quarrel grew,
For, if that he revenge had sought, down there he had thee slew.
Vlysse hearing this arrogant fool, with au^ere look drew near, Ulysses to
Thersites.

And looking through his brows at him, he spoke as you shall hear:
Thou knave defamde, thou busy Jack, although I know by kind
Thou art a rayler, hold thy tongue, and set not thus thy mind,
Aught in reproach of him to say, whom we as chief do choose,
For not the best, even of us al, ought him in words misuse,
And much less thou, who of the camp art refuse and outcast,
What a trim Counselor is this, who prorates and talks thus last.
Of our departure from this siege, without respect to know
Whether our good or loss it be? and (his vile mind to show)
Commes here to taunt Agamemnon, and casts in his teeth
The gift, which his desert did crave, and we rewarded with?
But hark thou Jack, and be thou sure, that if little or much Ulysses
threatens Thersytes. O^he of V^ysses.

I find thee chatte against the Kings, or else their honor touch,
That from my neck my head I loose, I pray the Gods above,
And that mine only son do dye, whom I entirely love,
If straight as cruelly as I can, I strippe thee not of all,
Yea mother na^te, no not thy shirt to cover thee withal,
And then in each my hands a whip I scourge thee through the plain,
Careless the Greeks and thou thy self shalt hide for shame and pain.
So saying, with his Mace he hent him six or seven bangs,
That on his crooked back and bombes, the bloody drops so hangs. Ulysses
stri^es The^ with his Scep^.

Then Thersites set up with shame, grunting with cheer full ill,
Dreading that worser broiles might hap, with sobs so held him sti^.
Which made the assembly all to smile, (though troubled as before)
Laughing at him with open mouth, and at this skirmish sore.
Each one lauding Ulysses much, they thus report of him: The o^ on h^ (...)
Ulysses.

O what good zeal and wisdom great, with care of him so trim.
His valyantnesse we know long since, and each man well espies
He peerless is, hardy in war, and eke in council wise:
Yet never did he better deed, than coursing this rebel,
For henceforth nothing shall he move, which duty thinks not well.
And Pallas played the Heraultes part, exclayming to each one
To hold them still, the flowing Greek to hear, second to none. Pallas
(...) the (...) ^lt ^o (...) ^lence. Ulysses to Aga^ and the*

Who seeing them al so whusht to hark, spoke thus before the thro^g:
Agamemnon thou worthy Prince, thou haste too open wrong,
Of al these Greeks under thy charge, to Greece who homward would
Against the promise they have made, which rather keep they should,
The which they made not to return, til Troy were in thy hand,
Like Babes and Widows full of rage, themselves alone to stand,
Desiring to their pleasure thus their Country earth to gain,
Which rather they should flee, knowing their toil has bin in vain,
And truth it is, that the pilot a whole month on the seas Com^ of a (...) of
the (...)*

Toste with the surge and weltring wave, is pensive diverse ways,
And on his house, and wife at home, his whole desire does go:
Likewise these men some reason have, to griene and sorrow so.
But if we should well weigh our case, Reproach we cannot fly,
But lose our honor and renoume, which loss is now too (...),
When men shall know our long abode: I do advise and pray,
Al you my friends, pluck up your hearts, for your own wealth I say.
What, suffer now yet one year more, that we Greeks know thereby
Whether the knowledge of Calchas truth told or else did lie.
What he declarde by Prophecy, I think you all well knew,
In Aulis town of Beocie, he then as Prophet true. The (...) appeared (...) the
Greek^ (...) the (...) of Au^ (...) Beo^.

Where all the Greeks assembled were revenge for to devise
Against Priam, it happened then in doing sacrifice,
To Jupiter to be our guide, under a Beeche right green
With shadow fresh, by which to rise a lively spring was seen,
That of the Greeks who stoutest is, his heart for dread was cold,
From th'aultars foot, a Dragon crept, so hideous to behold:
For huge he was, and to all sight right terrible in shape,
The color painted on his scales, was as the scarlet Grape.
The Dragon drawing to the tree, to highest branch did creep,
Where in the leaves he sparrowes found 8, young that loud did peep,
Which suddenly he rauend up, and her birds to forgo,
The Damme alone lamenting much, he straight deuourd also:
But by and by his figure chaungde, when he had eat the Damme,
And of a monstrous Serpent tho, a rock he straight became,
We present there, and looking on, and eke astonished all
At this so dreadful beast and chance, that erst did so befall.
Then Calchas said: O people Greek, what makes thee in this maze, The prophecy
of Calchas.

The mighty heir of Saturn high thine honor means to blase,
And has declarde a perfect sign of thy renown to raise,
The time shall serve, though long it be. to thine eternal praise.
And as the Dragon did devour these seely little ones,
And eke the Damme, in number nine, did swallow all at once:
Likewise great dangers we shall pass in this our war of Troy,
For nine years space, we shall return to our twice double joy.
For in the tenth year we shall see Troy sackte, and Priame slain:
Thus Calchas told this secret hid, which hitherto is plain.
Behold the end at hand: Wherefore a while attend the same,
That having victory of this town, we part with lasting fame.
Ulysses words and zeal so well receivde was of the rout,
There of the Tents, the ships, and shore, bare witness al about,
Resounding with the peoples noise, praising his judgment wise,
Which being stilld, the hoare Nestor to speak then straight did rise.
Oh hateful case, worthy reproach, thus Nestor did begin,
O ye most variable folk, what mischief are we in: Nestor to the Greeks

As for our braueries heretofore, and councels diverse ways,
As far as I see, are but toys and little childrens plays,
Who travail with their whole delight in foolish trifles more
Than things aught worth, where are ye vows and promises erst swore:
The oaths so deep and plighted faiths? where is the hatred great:
Against Priam remaynes it yet, or else the cruel threate,
No, no, all these things quite are gone, and clean you do forget
You mind them not, your idleness has you so fully met,
That without harming any ways our enmies here of Troy,
We strive among our selves in words of each invented toye,
And none there is so wise, which minds how now may ended be
This war begone: Agamemnon, the thiug belongs to thee,
And if thy duty I declare, thy pardon I require:
Together for to pluck thy spirits should be thy chief desire,
And on these Camps, as reason is, to set thy care and mind,
As to the chief of all the host, and chiefetaine is assignde.
And if some one withdraw himself, and will not bide the fray,
And do refuse what thou commaundst, leave him for naught away.
(Having endured such hurrie hard) what Greek will here request
For to depart, no knowledge, whether the plighted hest
Which Jove did make, be true or no? for sure by letting fall
The dreadful flames of lighnting fire among us Grecians al, The lightning on
the right (...) good, (...) for the Greeks.

On our right hands we martching on, did give us for to know,
That he himself would point a mean, and once the time would show
Wherein we should clean take away by sword the Troyan route.
What? courage sirs my selowes al, and yet a while hold out,
For we are almost at a point: wherefore what needs this have,
Til that each one here of us al, at will and ease be plast
With Troyan Dames, and of Priam some daughter eke of his
Their own parents and husbands by, to venge us of Paris,
That wicked whelpe, who took in hand, and that so lewdly durst
Ravish from us, and steal away from Greece our Heleine furst?
And in mean time, if any wretch or coward darelesse knave,
Do hardly bear this our abode, or else misliking have,
And home will run, him hang you up: and much you ought to heed,
And be aduisde with careful mind, how al things do proceed,
Confer, both give and counsel take, but who the best are tryde,
Those follow still: I think it good your Camp you do divide
By nations sere, as they do martch, some distance leave between,
That if apart they hap to fight, they shall be better seen,
Than if confusedly they went: and plainly shall you see
Which of them best their duties do, and whether so it be
That for prolonging of this war the Gods do it agree,
And still continue do the same by heavens hie decree,
Or that the fault is in their Camp which lists not to frght.
To this good counsel Agamemn aunswers the aged wight:
What joy quoth he, is for to hear in wisdom how you pass,
Oh worthy sire, each Grecian Prince that is, or ever was.
Oh Jove, oh Phoebus, oh Pallas, would God such Nestors ten
Me for to comfort now I had, you should see quickly then
By their good conduct Priam taken, and down his City torn,
The Gods so would, and my mishap that I to fury borne
So hateful against Achil should be, for love sole of a dame,
For which I only am in fault, and no man else to blame:
But if it please thy heavenly grace, that we two may agree,
Maugre all force, son Ilion quite in Ashes you shall see.
To make us stronger, let us dine, and then draw out our power,
To front our foes more valiauntly, and each one for to scour
His gallant brightsome armor trick, let him some care apply,
And trim their shields and bucklers all, your Chariots also hie
To bind so fast, they stagger not, and chief, as best is wont,
Do thoroughly prouend well your Horse, for they must bide the brunt.
The battle and the murder will endure til sun does set,
Where many a lusty soldier shall under his Baudrike swet,
In playing the man with Target borue himself for to defend,
And laying from him with his sword to bring his enmies end.
And eke ye steeds orehaeld by draught, shall scarce have power to blow.
In fine, if any Greek there be so lewd, that I may know
The fight to fly, and for to run out of the troop and bands,
In ship himself to hide, no help shall save him from my hands
But forthwith die, yea die he shall, to grave none shall him bear,
The dogs and flying souls for food shall him asunder tear.
This speech which Agamemnon had, does greatly joy the Greeks,
They such a noise and whirring made, as round the air it strikes:
The sound was like unto the sea when as the whirling blasts
The fleeting wave it roaring loud, on rockie mountains casts.
Each one repaireth to his tent, and dines contented well
To mighty Gods they sacrifice and to their prayers fell.
They pray that that days journey end, and to their danger none.
To Jove oblation does prepare also Agamemnon,
As best beco^mes the Captain chief: an Ox of five years old
Full thick and fat, to dine with him the Prince also he would
Have of the Camp the chiefest Peers, who sent for, there did meet:
Nestor of all came first, and then Idomene king of Creete,
The Ajax twain, Diomede fifth, the sixth Vlisles fly,
To whom also then Menelau presents himself them by,
Full certain of the burden great, his brother then did bear
Sole for his sake in those turmoyles: they all assembled there.
And th'offring brought into the place, and cakes on Altar laid,
As best denotion then did bid: Agamemn thus he prayed:
Of Gods thou Jove the sovereign chief, and Lord of Welkin hie
Of air, and of this earth below, who lets the thunder fly,
The storms of Hail and pashing showers, grant me this day thy grace
That I this City set a fire, or night do come in place
Which has so long westood our force, grant ye my sword do sheare
This day the shirt of Hector stout, on breast which he does wear,
And that by me he end his days, viewing his soldiers al,
Enforcing them to save his life, in bloody death to fall.
He prayed thus: but Jove was deaf, he pleased not to hear,
For all his offering there so great, he does him greatly dear.
Then is the hostie slain and flayde, and part on gridorne put,
The liver and lights they comely sees and every little gut.
The gigots and the other flesh in pieces they did spit,
Which roast, tippling the pleasant wine they down to table sit.
At pleasure having fed their fill, old Nestor was the furst
Who could not rest, but with these words their talking tales he burst:
It is no time Agamemnon to laugh or chat at all,
But execute we must the thing, to which Jove us does call.
Command then all the Heraults here that they go cry amain,
And hither warn the Camp to come, and then let us again
Each one in field go raunge his band, and there with courteous words
Exhort them, that right soldier like they weelde, and use their swords.
Agamemn bids the Heraults good to go from band to band,
And call ye Greeks, who Heraults heard, and came straight out of hand,
A seemly sight it was to see th'array in every thing,
And armor of the warlike Greeks each following his king:
But goodlier was it to behold, those great and mighty Kings,
What pain they took, the multitude who there in order brings.
With them stood Pallas al unknown, come down from Welkin hie:
Of Jove the God inuin^ible, who lives immortally,
The Target hung, and gastful so, she on her shoulder bare,
About the which hanging of gold an hundred pendants were.
So richly framde, as each was worth of ^eues an hundred told.
So armde, of doughtie Grecians so the hearts she does embolde
To play the men, with dreadlesse minds, and do as soldiers right:
They nothing more wish, than their lives to venture, and to fight.
The shining of their armor bright, great Targets, shields of weight
Amid the plain, was like in show to those on mountain height,
As is the fire in forest made, which men do see a far:
So shone their harneis against the sun, and weapons for the war.
And like a gay great heard of Cranes, or flock of swans like snow,
Or Geese a lesser foul, with Charm, and sundry singing go,
Hard by the pleasant Caister flood, under the clothed trees,
That all the places round about do sound in fundry wise:
So Greeks armde at Scamanderbanke, for fight in every thing,
Such noise they yield, as fur aloof they make the meadows ring.
With treading of the Horse likewise the valley long did sound
To battle martch, as many Greeks, as flowers on the ground.
And as you see great swarms of flies, fly often out hollow hoales,
And come in skul into the place whereas the shepherd foldes,
And gathers at the spring the milk, which of his sheep he reapes:
Even so suppose the Greeks, they came out order al in heaps.
But their good leaders them, dispose, as heardsmen who with care
At even aye their flocks in field, to sever do prepare.
Whom al above, Prince Agamemn himself did show at full,
As chief in name, so chief in deed, who brauing as a Bull
Came fierce, triumphs, and rule he will, over the Dren breed:
So he the puissant King commaundes how matters shall proceed.
For head he looked that day like Jove, like Neptune for his breast,
You would have iudgde him presently God Mars for all the rest.
It was the pleasure then of Jove such deckings to bestow
In Agamemu, that more thereby his honor he might show.
Now Muses who in heaven hie your place and dwellings have,
The favorers of virtuous works, teach me I humbly crave,
To tell that now I cannot write, ye all and all do know,
Recite the Princes who to Troy did with the army go,
Recite their countries and their ships: but hearesay, naught have we,
It shall suffice to tell the names of those, who chiefest be.
For no man can with all his wits rehearse of all the men
The number and the proper names, though tongues, yea, fully ten
Right good he had, and mouths like, well speecht that open were:
If everlasting voice I had, and breast of brass did bear,
Without your favor I may have, in this, I am but lost.
Of Jove you daughters Goddesses, of grace and virtue most,
Oh teach me then to name the kings and ships of Greekish host.
The Cataloge of the Grecian Princes, and of their navy that came to the siege
of Troy, and also of the Troyan Dukes, and foreign Kings who came to Priams
aid: Translated out of the Latin.
TO Troyan cost from Beotie five warlike leaders cum,
Pencle, Prothaeno, and Leiton, Arcesilaus, Clonlum,
These people has Beotia land, they who do hyries ear, The Beotia Dukes. The
places of Beotia.

With Scaenon, Scolon, Aulida, which s^onie earth does bear,
And also (...) Eteonum, be^pred wi^h Maiora^,
Thespia, Graea, M^ales, and to^n L^gam
With Haxma old, the Ilesy, and those that pasture on
The ancient soil of Erythra, and men of Eleon,
Of Peteon, and Hilis eke, and those in Copae dwell
And in Med^on, (...) for walls in pride does so excal,
With Thisbes, which does so abound with doves of wanton will,
Who Eutresis, and Coron^e, and Plate^ gay do til.
Th'inhabitaunts of Aliarte, which is so fraught with grass,
And who do stately Thebes hold, and live about Glissas,
Orcheston too, with sacred grove to Neptunes godhead ^owde,
And Arnen, where ye trees of vines with weight of grapes are ^owde,
Midea fair, Niss^ divine, and lastly, who do live
In Anth^do, whose fields about do fraught of flowers give.
With fifty ships they come full stuffed with weapon and with men, (...) Beotian
ships.

Each one an hundred soldiers brought, and also double ten.
Who from watered Orchomenon, with Minyeus flood, Orchomeniens.

Whose City is Aspledona, two knights of Mars his blood
Ascalaphus and Ialmen lead: Astyoche the fair
While she a virgin Actors child, did by her self repair
To Parler sole, Mars her deflourde, and forth she brought the twinne,
Those two welfurnisht at the full with thirty sail come in.
From Phocis opposite against, such numbers as were sent,
With Sch^us and Epistrophus two soldiers odd they went. The Captains of
the Pho^nses.

Them Iphitus Eubole begat: they all of Cyparis,
Of rockie Pytho, of Cr^ssa, of P^op and Daulis,
Of lofty Hyampole, and wholly on Cephisson floold,
In Anemore, whose dwellings to, at head of Lilee stood,
From whence Cephissa river r^es with forty ships they sweep,
And as Beotians faithfu^ates, their left hand side they keep.
The diverse armed Locrenses; valiant Orleus son
The noble Ajax he did guide, who did as swiftly run Locrenses.

As ^sterne winds* but less in fact and eke in name likewise,
For near to Ajax Telamo^ in height (...) did not rise,
But weaker much with members less, yet bare he mighty bre^,
And for the throwing of a ^rt ^e (...) all the rest.
These lands the Locrenses do hold: Cynon, Opoes, Scarphen, The (...) o^ (...)*

Calliaron, the pleasannt Auge, Thronium and Tarphen,
Bessa, and people who do bide about Boager bank,
All ioynde to war, with forty ships to Troy they come in rank.
Against sacred Euboea shore the Locri^s region lies.
The Abantes who hold Euboea, out whose mouths for^e out flies, (...)*

Who Cbalcida, Eretria, and wine Histia have,
Cerinth^m by the sea, the town of Jupiter so brave,
With Car^ston, and in Styra who dwelling do abide,
Those* does a martial worthy Prince Elphenor Captain guide,
The Calcyens eke a guider stout, of the Abantes bands,
Who were the best throwers of Darts, that ever threw with hands,
And cunning shakers of the staff to hit their foe a far,
These also forty: Bottomes big did bring unto the war.
From mighty walled Secrops town where people so do flourish
Of Erechthus, whom br^d in field Jove's daughter great did nourishe,
To him a Temple Athens raisde, on them he first did reign, Athen^

For yearly sacred offerings there both neat and lambs are slain,
The doughtie mighty Menesthe the army out he leads,
No man his match for placing Horse, and furnishing of steades,
And marchaling of soldiers close, wherein though Nestor ware
His better both for use and years, therein he durst compare.
With fifty warlike Keeles he came from Athens straight as line,
And twice six Ajax Telamon did bring from Salamine, The (...)*

The which he plast hard on the shore, the Cecrop sails them by.
Who Greekish Iunoes Argos holds, and Tyrinth walled hye,
Hermiones, and Asines, Troezene hie in shore,
Eione sacred Epidaure, of ^ines which has such store,
Who are in wealthy Egina, and in Masita bred,
Those Diomedes big of voice, and Stheneleus led D. (...), Sten^* lu^, and H^*
rialus the^* (...).* (...)*

The son of noble Capanus, two men of prowes odd,
With them the third Eurialus, in virtue like to God.
Mecest of Telaios was his sire, but doughtie Diomede
Did rule as chief, with fourscore sail they came right well arayde.
Who do Mycenas stately frontes inhabit and maintain,
Who in rich Corinthes walls of pride, and in Ornias reign, The (...) My^*

Who in Cleonas building brave, and Araethyra but,
With fruiteful fallowes round beset, and live S^cion in
Where once Adrastus great was king: Gon^es on the Hill,
Hyperesis, Pelle^is, and Aegion, who do til,
All who dwell on the crooked shore, and in the region large Aga: king 100. ships.

Of Helissen, those Agamemn Atrides has in charge.
Galleys and Gallions riggde he brought an hundred for relief,
Whom people and the Princes all did choose to be their chief.
For as in power he passed furre, his valor was not small,
Wherefore by Greeks consent he had the government of al.
Who people do the Bulwarks proud of L^cedaemon town
Fishing surnamde, who lofty Sparte, and Par in low adowne, The Lacedaemonians
and their dvvellings King Menelaus. 60. ships.

Who Messis full of doves, and Auge, that is so pleasant aye,
Brysas, and who of Amyclare enjoy the greenes so gay,
Who Helon, and the fennish shore, and Tylon do frequent
With Laan, these with threescore sail with Menelaus went,
With men and weapons furnished full, a man of doughtie pride,
Well toungde, he also brother was unto the great Atride,
His wife by stealth him taken fro, to deadly wrath he grew,
For Helenes sake with tears and plaints the Greeks to war he drew.
Who keep in Pilon Neleida, and in Areius tillde, The Pyli^s and their
dvvellings.

Thryon, and Alphes meeting foordes, and Epy hielie hillde
With towers aloft, Cyparissa, and Eneo^ always green,
And who in Pteleon and Helos, and (...) dwellers been, The fable of Thamyris,
deprived by the mus^s, of versifying.

Where Muses did bereave of Thrace Thamyris of his skill
Of versifying, with whom he met with hap unlucky ill,
When from Eurythus he did come, of Oechalie the king,
And sweeter than the Goddesses he boasted he did sing,
If they durst try with him in song: Jove's children greevde thereat, D Nester,
90 ships.

His song and H^rping they do mar, so vainly who did chat.
These soldiers bring^ Duke Nestor he, the oldest for his years,
With ninety strong and warlike barks well armed he appears.
The nations of Arcadie towns, which so does swarm with men, The Arcades and
their dvvellings.

And who do dwell about the foot of mountain hie Cyllen
Hard by the (...) so highly he apt, where mighty bodies lie,
Of many worthy warlike (...), who in the war did die,
In Pheneon, who lead their lives, and in rich Orchomen,
By means of Lambs so finely fleesde, in Rhipes Stratien.
In Enispes, subject always to wind where so it blow,
Tigea, and Mantina gay, and who in Stymphalo,
And stately seated Parrhasis: to these Agapenore
Is Prince, the worthy Ances son, who came with full threescore
Right roomy keeles, with soldiers fraught, but they him given was
By the great king Atride, the sea of Nigropont to pass,
Because the Arcades far from sea, and shore thereof do fare,
They little reake for marine work, and small for shipping care.
The native men of Buprasis, and of Elidadie,
Of Hyrnim, of furthest Myrsin, hard to the ridges hie The Ep^ens and (...).

Of craggie Olen, and who dwell as far as Alise old,
These forward came with doubtie Dukes full four in number told.
Each one with twice five vessels armde, as any could desire,
Amphimach first, sharp Thalpy next, to whom Eurite was sire,
And Eteato to Amphimache, third Amaryncis was
D^ores cleapte, Polyxen fourth in shape who so Dis pass,
Jove's son by Auge, of Epeis they did bring a mighty mass.
The nations of Dulichium, and set alofte in waves, Dulichiens.

Sacred Echinald, Elidis for Region fine that braues,
Meges a match for Mars himself, their Captain him they wull,
With t^les of war, he Brigants brought in number forty full.
The rider good Phileus Auge at Duliche, got him there,
When from his wrathful sire he fled, whom Jove did favor bear.
The warlike bands of Cephalee, with crags and rockie hills,
And of Neriton sterile earth, which mighty trees so filles, Cep^ens, and
their box^ dures.

And of the little I^hache fields, so barraine and so bad,
Of hard Crocilia, and the soil of Aegelipee clad,
With bareness strange, and torn Torres of Samon, of Zacin,
Whose pastures be so full of woodde, and all the folk within
The Country hie, the sea aloof, Vlysse a Jove for head,
Did overrule, twelve ships he brought, their sternes al okard red.
The Etolien men of Pleuronis and lofty Olenon
Of Chal^is nie, high Pyles shore, and stony Calydon,
Andraemons son Duke Thoas ruled, the Etoles all he lead,
For all Oeneas stock was failde, himself eke lately dead, Cretenses.

Nor yellow Meleager did live, with vessels ^oure times ten
He did augment the navy, and with thousands so of men.
The worthy souldior Idomene the Cretian crues he brought,
Levied out of Gneson and Gorthyna walld alost,
And Lycta old for buildings famde, and Lycast white as Snow,
With Phest, Milet, and Rhytion, well peop^ed towns you know
The whole supply of Creta, which the ^oomie sea (...), 100 Cities of Creta.

With Cities large an hundred full, doubtie Idomene fets,
And Meryan a Mars indeed, with fourscore in in tale,
And harnest Hulkes, with picked men they come with merry gale.
Great Tlepoleme great Herculs son, for war and bones a m^
The Rhodians they in number great with him to navy ran, The Rhodi ans.
Their Towns

With Galleis nine of fertile Rhodes, where men trick so their h^
Of Lindus, Ialisse, and Camire, who snowish hew does wear.
With them to Toy Tlepoleme commes, of great Alcidas seed,
Whom it is said Astyoche bare, when Alcide did proceed
His mightie-sire to conquer realms, he him from Ephyre took,
And out that country brought him home from nie Sellen^ees broo^
Where growing now to riper years, he flewe his fathers frien^
Allide in blood, a virtuous wight, Licymnion had his end,
An aged man by slaughter his. Which done, his mates he calle^*
And hasting straight unto the sea, to flight he forward falls:
For all the flock of Herculs breed themselves to vengeance ^ast,
He scapte them al, with sundry toiles he seas and countries (...)* Nir^us
Captain of the Symei 3 ships. Next Achil les he was the godliest man.
Calidneiens and other Insulans, whose prin ces were Phidippus and Antiphus
thirtye ships. Pelasgiens. Thessaliens

And light at Rhodes, which I^e beset three Cities namde before,
The which, for his sake mighty Jove did bless with wealthi^ (...)
With fore gates three from Syma went Aglaies Nireus,
A King he had to ^ather his that hight Caropaeus,
Of all that came to Troy, he was a man for making odd,
Achill except, yet few he lead, because he was a lobbe.
The Nysire youth Capathus, Cast, and Euripile, not great,
And all the Isles Calidnee cleapt, whereon the waves do beat,
Phidippus and Antiphus brings, Thessalees sons that were,
Amphytrios nephews, Carauels they seas with thirty shere
The Kreekers of Pelasgicke, Arge, Alopen, and Alon,
Trac^ small, well walld Pthie, and many a Myrmidon,
Bred of full of many mothers fair, Achaes and Helens hight, Myr^* Hellades
etc. whose leade^ vv^ Ach^es ^0. ships.

Who are also the Hellades eke, these Achill led aright
To Troy, there fifty Argosies, both big and small he brought,
These idle people of the wars vnhapppy never thought.
The mates who set their mind on muck no man will bring to fight,
^chill then loytering kept aboard, doled with grief and spite,
and wroth for leaving of Bryseis his trick and gallant trull,
For whom he taken had such toil when as he down did pull
The Bulwarks proud of Lyrnessis in strong and warlike mart,
and won her there, and Thebes sackte, and also claue the heart
Of Minite and Epistrophon, who sons of Even were,
and also brethren unto her, whom now he held so dear,
and for whose sake he mourning lies, with dreaming still of her,
That absent was, yet he again to turn unto the war.
Who seated are in Philaca, and in Pyrrhason wood
^o ^ully fraught with Ceres plants, and Iton breeder good Phylaceens and their
dvvellings.

Of weighty felterd felled sheep: and Antro in the shore,
With Pteleon of Wedlockes rytes that makes so great a store: Protesilau^ ruler
(...) ships.

To these was Prince Ptotesilau, with forty sail he hyed
^traight unto Troy, a souldior right, whereas he quickly dyed.
For whom his wife Laodame with tears full mourning is,
and wayling stands that princely Court, who does ye Master miss.
He was the first of all the Greeks on Phrygian shore that lepte, His slaye^
is taken to be Hector.

Who there a worthy warrior slew of Troy to him that stepte.
These people were not Princelesse yet, nor left unarmed quite,
^odarce rich, Ip^clus his son, them rules, a warlike wight,
Brother to stout Protesilau, but less of years and deed,
A good man yet, and therefore glad his soldiers forth to lead.
The folk of Pheres and B^ben, Glaphyre, and Bebeid^, Phercie^.

In fennish site, Iaolcon which in houses bears such show.
Eumel with five well harnest Hoyes augments the navy there,
Who to Admetus Alcest, breed, of beauty odd, did bear.
The garrison of Methonie, and next Taumacie fields
Melibae, and Olizenes, which stony country yeeldes, Methoni^s, and their
borders.

The cunning shot Philoctetes in seven ships does bring
And mates they were not eas^y matched with such as Iauelins flin^ ^loctetes
vvounded, and left in Lemnos, of whom is a G^eckishe Tragedy.

In each ship fifty soldiers were: but left in Lemnos he
Was by the Greeks, where wounded sore his chance it was to b^*
With festered wound, that deerde him so, ystroke with Hydras blou^
The Argiues yet him do desire, not Dukelesse though they stood.
To them is Medon Coronell, the bastard of Oiley,
To whom his mother Rhene him bare, then Medon leads the wa^*
The Triccen men, and who abide in rocks about Itho, Triccenses, Ithomenien
ses, and Occhaliens.

And Oechalie, which Euryte ruled, with sail thrice ten they go^*
Their Generals were brethren two, their sire Coronis bare
Nephews to Phoebus, in Physic they cunning Doctors ware,
Both men of war, Machaon one, and Podalire his mate.
Of Ormen who and Hypen spring, nie Aster holds the state Ormeniens with
their borderers.

By top of Titan full of snow: their Duke was Eurypile
Euemons son, he vessels brought forty to Troy that while.
Argissa lads on Peneid shore, and who do Gyrtho till, Argissei with their
borderers.

Orthen, Elone, white Oloos they follow with good will,
Meneptoleme a doubtie chief, he was Perithoes son,
Whom Jove on Hypodame begote, where Pelis mount does run^
So nigh the skies, and where he sire the hairie Centaures bred,
And to Macedon coaste removde, yet was he not the head
Of them alone, Leonteus was ioynde with him in charge,
A captain good Coronus son, with many an armed barge,
And furnysht foist, yea forty full, they come in for an aid.
From Cyph^ town Guneus brought, barks twenty two array*
Whose ensigns the Eniens and eke the worthy Perebs would Ciphei.

Fast follow on, and at Dodo, who dwell in country cold,
And who about Titaresis, which ay so softly floes,
As though sweet Peneon runs therein, not mixed with it, it goes*
Perhaps for there the iu^ces fat of Pallas Olives run,
The head from S^ygian Lake, by which the Gods to swear do (...)*
The standards of Magnesia, begot by Terthredon Magnetes, and Prothous their
prince An other Prothous 40. Ships.

Prothous leads, but people else of pleasant Peneon
And Pelion so beset with wood, an other Prothous namde
A forward man does order he, with two score galleys framde
Fit for the fight: these two do come, and lo, here have I told
The King and Princes every one, to Troy that came so bold. The goodness of the
men and horses in this war.

Now say my Muse, which of the Greeks the best and worthiest was,
And which horse of the horses all in praise did there surpass,
Which came to the Dardanian walls by conduct of Atride,
The Mares of Eumel were the best, as swift as though they flyde,
Both of a year, both of a hair, and both in color like, Eumels Mares the
best.

And like the smooth and ryped Grapes, their backs were soft and slike,
Apollo in Pieria their dammes he fosterd stout,
With mighty breasts, from nostrels whose they fury breathed out.
Ajax Telamon bare the name of all the Greekish crues Ajax Telamon the best
soldier nex^ Achilles. Achilles horses the best.

Next to Achill, who waxing wroth the battle did refuse:
Of the Achiues he was the prime for strength, for bones, for pith,
His horses eke they odd one were, but now at variance with
Atride the Chieftaine of them all, aboard he loyters still,
His mates yet met, in diverse mirth the shore in sporting fill.
Some quaite, some exercise their bows, and on the dankey shore
The Chariots stand, the steedes do feed in manger them before,
Great foyson of their liked food, wild Smallage was their fare,
While that their Chariots to the field the Princes do prepare.
To these so forward to the fight when as they do request
A hand victorious them to lead, the no he does protest.
Through all the camp they up and down do roile and linger on,
There is no leave that they may fight or else to battle gone.
But now of Greeks the army whole does martch with stately grace, Comparion
of the Gree kish march.

And al their brazen armor shone, as of the earth the face
Had bin on fire, and all the fields had flamed ore with flashe,
And like as Jove wood mad lightning and thunder down does dashe, An other
comparison

With drisling shoures, so large about the fields they do resound
With rushing of the weapons bright, and stamping on the ground.
Oras when on Typhoeus tomb, whereon huge mountains lies,
He scourges with his tempest black, ysent from Arimise,
The Giants Cave, as it is said, such noise their trampling yields,
They moving in a body whole, hasting out further fields.
And Iris Pursiuant to Jove, from heaven takes her flight,
To Troyan state brings doleful news, and at the gates does light
Of Priam King, where on a plumpe consult both young and old,
Of things of weight, quick Iris there to them this tale she told.
The fained shape and voice she took, of Polite Priams son
So swift of foot, to Eesites tomb, whom Priam made to run
Aloft to view, and word to bring, if Greeks did happily stir,
Light Iris like to him in legs, she enters in thus furre.
Delightst thou still O aged sire (quoth she) to spend thy time
In needless talk, as when in peace did stand this state of thine:
Great wars and destiny thee deeres, and here upon the green
Such swarms and millions flock of men, as never has bin seen.
To sand and leaves they are much like, their number is so great,
They fill the ample fields: this town they harry will they threat.
Do thou now Hector take the charge, since thou have in thy walls
Such great supply, and nations seere as best it now befalles,
Command the people ruled be by Princes of their own,
Assign each language leaders like, and ensigns to be known.
Thus Iris spoke, but Hector well the voice divine he knew,
The Council brake, from quarters all to town the soldiers drew,
And wide they open all the gates, the footmen forth they rushe,
The Cornets of the horsemen placed eke in order forward pushe,
With tumult and with clamor great, and now with heat they try:
In sight amidst of all the field yplaced is on hie,
A sepulcher lofty and large, which men Batia call,
But Gods Myrynes tomb it cleape: here meet the Troyans all, Batias sepulcher.

The Battaillons and Phalanges of footmen Marshald be,
The troops of horssemen eke, to which the Captains see.
Gay Hector was the Troyans chief, of Priam King the son, The Catalogue of
^he Tro^an ^aders.

Under whose ensigns many a feate of doubtie war was done,
He ioly forward soldiers had, men meet for Sword and lance.
To Dardans stout and beautiful Aeneas leads the dance, Dardaniens

Whom Venus white unto Anchyse of Dardanie did bear,
In clothed shade of Ida hills, with him when ioyde she there.
Enee alone not ruled all, with him appointed are
Antenors sons, Archilach, and Acamas men of war.
The bands of Zele in Lycie land, at foot of Ida springs,
The Aphnees brave, Lycaons son the noble Pandare brings, Aphneiens

The Aesapes eke, who daily bib of Troes that water black,
Who golden Apollo taught to shoot, and bow to bear at back. Adrastien^*
whose le^ ders were Adrastus and Amphiu^.

The aids of the Adastreans sent out Pytiean,
And Apease rich, and Ter^i hie, to these the Dukes were than
The sons of Mecops, Percosis, Adraston, Amp^on,
Whose sire the future haps did know, yet forward would they on,
All his persuasions set aparte, unto that deadly war,
They would withstand the destiny, which both the men did mar. Percosi^.
Sesticus. Abdye^.

Who Percot and Praction towns, who Sestos, and Abide,
Who hold Arisbaes Princely walls, a King full noble tried.
Asius Hyrtacis gouernde, from rich Arisba sent Asius Pric^ of the Ar^beiens.
Hippolochus and Pyle us Dukes of the P^lasgiens. Acamas and Piro^s Princes of
the Thracians. Euphemus captain of the Cicons. Pyrechnes duke of the Peo^es.
Pylemenes ruler of the Paphlago^es Eneti.

With worthy coursers for their feate, from river Selleent.
The willing people of Pelasge and Larisse fertile lands,
Hippothous and Pyleus both brethren, lead their bands.
Of Thracians, and next Hellespont, to war the crues are brought,
By worthy Acam and Peiro, a haughty Hero thought.
The launced troops of Cicones al Euphemus does command,
The noble son of Traezenus Ceada hight le Graunde.
The cunning shot of Peony, Pyrecheies Marshals all
Far off from Amydon that came, where Axius brook does fall
So wholly with his glassie hue. Pylaemen Prince is found
Of Paphlagons from Enet sent, where numbers so abound
Of clownish breed: to these the seats, to Cytor joined nie
Sesamon one, and Erythnie on mountain placed hie,
And Cities proud, Cronna, and eke Aegiah gay to look,
Y placed on the pleasant banks of Partheneia brook. Epistroph* and Dius
Dukes of the Halizone^. Eunomus and Chromus Capitaines of the Mesie^s The Dukes
of the Phry giens, Phor cis, and Asc^ nius. Antiphus, and Mest^les brought the
Meoniens.

On Halizons Epistrophus and Dius Rulers raignde,
Of Alyb far whose soil full deep with silver Ore is vainde.
Two warlike youths of Mysiens, Cromis, and Eunomus
Did guide: the last a Prophet good, yet could he not discuss
To flee his fate, and escape the fist, and fierce force of Achill,
When he so many wretches drounde, and field with Mortes did fill.
The mighty Legions of Phrygie to Phorcis did obey,
And to Ascanius proud of form, who both had taken their way
From Ascame, a country far, the love of war it brings
Two gallants gay armed at full to fight they fly with wings.
With brethren Mesthles and Antyph the Meons came to fight.
Who dwell nie Tmole, Gyga their Dame, their sire Pylemene hight.
The Cares, the Dullardes in our speech, of Mileton the ranks,
And men of P^hiront shaded Mount, and of Maeander banks, Amphimachus and
Nastes brought the Cares and Milesie^s.

And who dwell on Michales hills, them, as they did desire,
Amphimach ioynde with Nastes ruled, to both was Nomion sire.
Amphimach, like some wanton wench in golden robes was cladde,
And so into a stubborn war did thrust himself as mad.
No fence in gold, death fled he not, he falls in the flood
Aeacis does bereave his gold, and eke there spilles his blood.
On lusty laddes of Lycie land, Sarpedon bears sway, Lyciens.

Drawn from his Country Xanthus far, where that brook takes hy^ way,
With him was feere unto the field in armor Glaucus gay.
Finis Libri secundi.
The third Book.
AFter the Troyans troops came forth new raunged on the soil
With manly minds and courage good to put their foes to foil,
In sudden with a majesty, they martch on Greekish host,
And like the Cranes they to the skies their cries and clamours tossed,
Who leave their hills and mountains hie, great shoures knowing to fall,
And seek their food by Neptunes shore, where they their armies call,
For the Pygmeis, with whom full often war cruel they do hold,
With stroke of wing, of bil and foot, if they their force unfold.
The Greeks again come forward on, yielding no noise nor cry, Comparion of
the Cranes who war with the Pigmeis

Full wood with rage them to revenge with fury they drew nie,
With ardent mind for the desire of victors only fame,
Each rescuing his feere, who fought to death to gain the same.
And as you see in winter time full often how fares the mist, Comparion of the
mist.

Which western winds scouring ye plains on mountains hie does kest,
As much unto the sheapheards loss as to the robbers gain:
For who can see a stones throw of ought thing in land or plain?
Even so the troops, when they approcht, the dust was rearde on hie
That neither Troyan, ne yet Greek could one another spy.
And when the armies both were raundge, Greeks by the Troyans hard, The
ras^nesse of provoking the Greke^ to the combat. Paris his armor.

Paris with stalking pace aduauncde himself to the Greeks ward
Stoutly calling of the Greeks the valiantst to the fight,
Body to body was his demand, to show thereby his might.
The armor which he bare that day, was of Leopardus skin,
With bow stifbent, and with quiver, and many a shaft therein,
His sword in hand, and two brave Darts armed with steel at all,
Which he began shake, when as the Greeks to combat he did call.
But Menelau his boldness spyde, of whom he knowledge had
To be his foe, his heart it leapes, for joy he grows glad, Comparion of a
Lion meeting (...) Heart.

Most Lion like meeting an Heart or Got he seeking pray
Amid the woods, forced by the Hounds, and Hunters to the bay,
It killed, he taking his repast, is pleased at his good chance:
The Greek so choosing Paris out, for very joy does dance,
The Occasion offered to revenge the wrong him lately done,
And armed as he was, he leapt down from his Chariot soon.
But Paris who saw Menelau this fight in hand should take, Fear and covvardise
of Paris.

Could not hold out, but yea almost for very dread began quake.
And hasting straight reculde, he dred the danger in this case,
And did retire among his feeres to raunge him in his place,
Even as the traveling man full often passing Hills great and hie, Comparion of a
traveler meeting a Dragon.

Not looked for right in his way finding a Serpent lie,
Does shun the way, and step abacke, with color pale and wan,
With trembling limbs, more like the death than any living man.
With this so villainous retreat sir Hector gay was wroth, The vehement spe^ of
Hector to Paris.

The slander seeing now would grow, chid Paris for his sloth.
Unhappie Paris, bearing show as doughtie as the best,
Yet in effect but feminate, with luxure to detest.
Oh would to God thou cowarde vile, in birth thou had been lost:
Such shame to bring they dolorous sire, and eke thy Country cost:
See thou the mirth the Greeks do make for this thy vile retreat,
Who thought thy corpse for braune and bones of arms to bear the feate.
And this is each man's speech and cry, behold the Greekish sides,
Behold a Mass of flesh, wherein no sprite or strength abides.
You were of force, I know, ere now, your ships to arm and band,
And hoyse your sails, and turn your course to fetch a strangers la^d:
And like a young man being receivde, into a Princes house
Did steal away against all right a worthy King his spouse,
To the dishonor and reproach of all the Troyan name,
And by the same there does redounde to King Priam a shame,
To Greeks a joy, to thee a grief, and yet thou were afright
And erst for dread began to pale with Menelau to fight.
This is thy fear, thou castest thus, that he should thee of life
Deprive, whom thou unworthy have deprived of his wife. Menelaus.

Thy voice so sweet, thy pleasant tongue, thy lims so feately laid,
Thy bush so seemly to thy sight, thy gifts if all be wayed
Which Venus has bestowde on thee, should serve to little end
Thy life to save, if in the field with him thou should contend:
Thy coward heart has in such case now brought each Troyan wight
Seeing in thee naught worthy praise, that they refuse to fight.
Thy deed deserves to great reproach, wherefore now hie thee hence
Out of my sight, go pack the fourth, and hide in some defense.
Hector chiding Paris thus, trick Paris straight confessed, Paris to Hector.

Oh brother dear, of right to me this speech you have addressed.
For why, your force is of such favor your courage eke so hie, Comparion of
Hectors force to an A^.

That toil and travail is there none it can be hurt thereby.
No more than does the workmans axe turn edge, or waxes blunt
When timber trees, his work to end, the man to hew is wont.
But yet of God the gifts ye ought not thus cast in my teeth,
For Gods the same on men bestow for to reward them with:
And since of Gods those gifts they have, let them yield him ye praise,
Not metting them by their deserts, but by his will always.
Well, if you will with Menalau the combat I attend,
Appoint the place, that of this strife we two may make an end. Paris will
fight.

Turn us two lose here, in the Greeks and in the Troyans sight,
Placed about us, let them see of us the martial fight.
Who victor shall be, let him have to recompense his p^ine,
To make him merry, all the pray, let him possess Heleine,
And let the Troyans unto Troy, the Greeks to Greece repeare,
And covenant firmly for to keep, let both the nations swear.
Hector seeing Paris thus, buskle unto the fray,
Maruailes with joy, before his bands he steps out in the way,
His pike in midst aloft he bears, he wills them al to hold,
And stay themselves, which straight they did as soldiers well co^trold:
The Greeks cease not to martch, their stones and darts at rando^ fly,
Gauling the Troyans, til such time Agamemnon did cry,
Cease, cease, (quoth he good Greeks I say) no more do shoot or through,
Agamemn^ to the Greeks.

To stay his men, out of the troop the king does also go:
Content ye young and worthy lads, I yonder Hector see,
To talk with us he by his signs does willing seem to be.
The shafts they cease, and straight the Darts no man does see to fly,
Obedience of the Greeks.

The Camp was still as possible might in twinkling of an eye.
Hector seeing such silence made between the hosts, began,
These were the words among them all of that most worthy man.
Hear oh ye Greeks and Troyans both what Paris does offer Hector to the
Greeks and Troyr^

Unto you all, my brother here the author of this war.
He thinks it good to make an end of this so mortal fight
That ye aside your weapons lay, and to decide the right
Twixt him and Menelau, he would sharp weapons should it try,
Fair Heleine should the victor have him rendered by and by.
With all the pray, and that forthwith, to morrow else by day
Assurance made to keep the pact each one depart his way.
The worthy Hector scarce an end had made now of this case,
But stout and forward Menelau spoke thus in open place:
Give ear ye Greeks and Troyans both unto these words of mine, Menelaus to
the Greeks and Troyans.

Who shall declare unto you al my grief and grievous pine,
I do agree now for to end this dangerous debate,
Considering erst the travails great and mischiefs, which of late
And long since by both camps sustainde, for the adultery,
And the just cause which pricks me forth to venge this misery,
That all men rest, and that Paris against me come, whereby
All ye shall see, who ordainde is by fate to live or dye.
And to effect that all be done, th^oblation which of due For the sacrifice.

The Gods in such case ought to have, the pacte to hold more true,
It needeful is, by the Troyans two lambs there be assignde,
The one coal black, the other white, Male and Female by kind,
White be the Male, the female black, unto the sun most clear An old
ceremone.

To shed their blood, and to the earth, of all men dame so dear,
Benign and ancient mother of man, and we a third will bring,
Which shall be offered unto Jove that great and mighty King.
I would also for surety more, one went for old Priam,
That for this pact and covenant made, he ratify the same,
For his children all Greece well knows, are promise breakers all,
Falsers of Faith, and unto change young heads are always thral: Youth
inconstant.

The old man if he swear the oath, if bound he see he be,
He will abide no treason then, nor offer injury.
This fight agreed, the Citizens, and soldiers strange of Troy
The Troyans all, the Greeks each one, hereof begin to joy,
In hope an end shall now be made of this their wretched war,
With busy toil they round about do place their horse afar,
And keeping order, forthwith then they from their Chariots light,
Their shields, their lances down they lay, and harness fit for fight,
Leaving good scope between them both, full fit by fight to try. Herault.

The ioly Hector Heraults two to Troy sends by and by,
Two Lambs to fetch, and have Priam t'allowe all this accord.
Talthybius eke went to the ships, commanded by his Lord
Agamemn, to fetch the Lamb unto the company,
Which was appointed as before, for the ceremony.
This while from the Olympus high Iris made her repair Iris messenger of the
Gods. Laodices daughter of Priame.

To Troy, to tell these news to her, who fairest is offaire.
The shape she took of her sister belovde, fair Laodice,
Who married had Elicaon, Anthenors son the wise.
She found the fair not idle tho, but working busily,
She in her chamber made a piece of worthy Chivalry, Helins exercise.

Wherein was wrought of Troyans and of Greeks the worthy Acts,
Most cunningly in portrature, their sallies and their facts,
Their chargings often, their cruel fight, their meetings one to one,
Which both the Camps continually, made for her love alone.
Arise quoth Iris, come Heleine, and in the plain hard by,
The City here thou straight shall see things wondrous to thine eye:
Those whom thou have each day beheld, in wont deal doleful blows,
In dangerous war, thou shall see rest, together in sundry rows.
And some there leaning on their shields, well weary of their toils,
And Menelau with Paris shall (to end these wars and broils)
Fight hand to hand, and he who shall the better part obtain,
Thee shall he have by one consent, as glory of his gain.
These news declarde, with a desire this Heleines mind is sped Helein^ mind
does (...)

Of her first spouse, and country town, wherein she first was bred,
Of her parents, to see them once, a time this Heleine prays
With them to lead her life again, and furnish forth her days.
She rises up, and deckes her self with gorgeous attire,
And out she goes, distilling tears, as they well saw stood by her.
And not alone, she with her led Climean and Aethrea,
And goes unto the greatest port that named is Sciea.
Where on the Bulwarks they might see at ease the fields so wide, The old
Troyans for counsel.

There king Priam with Lords of state was set on every side,
To shrowde them in the shade within the pentus of the Wall,
Tymets, Lampus, Clytus, Panthus, in virtues famous all.
Hicetaon renoumde in war, also Vcalegon
Of late that was of boysteous brain, and eke Anthenor one,
As good a man of war as they, but now for council out,
The aged dads there closely sit, the scortching heat they dout.
As Grasshoppers the old men chat, when two or three are found
In Summer time amid the Grass, and make a charming sound. (...) of
Grasshoppers.

They loking on the heavenly Greek, good cause confessed, why
Both camps should make such toil and stir, and eke so long should try,
Her beauty, wayed that was more than any earthly work,
Which in her Goddess visage there did shine and seem to lurk:
Yet they anoucht, it better were to yield her home to go, Advise of the
Troya^s to render Heleine.

Without abode, for to eschew the mischiefs, which might grow
By keeping her still as they did: as she arrived than
Whereas they sat, the king her callde, and thus to her began.
Come thou to me my daughter fair, here down by me do sit, Priam ^o Heleine.

Leave off thy moan, leave off thy tears, which from thine eyes do ^lit.
Do not consume lamenting thus, come see thy husband here,
And all the Greeks thy kinsmen eke, and coosins all so dear.
Oh Jove's will is not that in thee I should the occasion lay
Of my mishaps, which yeeldes my grief, no, no, the gods are they
Who for the better to revenge themselves of me and mine,
Desire by this wretched war t'afflict us all with pine.
Come near, and leave your bashfulnesse, and of the Greeks declare
Your neighbors kindred and alies, and who you nearest are.
What, who is he is foremost there, of middle pitch and bone,
With countenance grave, as I forethinke, I never saw yet one
Since I was borne, so well beseene as he in every thing,
And sure he bears the port and show, and grace of some great king.
Then answerde Heleine thus the King with humble voice and said,
My most dear Lord, thy reverent state does yield me well afraid, Heleine to
Priam.

When to thy presence I resort, but would to God by death
Before the turmoyles of this war I yielded had my breath:
And chiefly when to follow with thy son, I was so mad,
Leaving my husband, many a Dame and gentle pheere I had,
My brethren, and my daughter both, then both we free from woe
Had been as now, but what help when il luck will have it so?
Sent for to do your graces will, who does command the same:
For him you ask, that prince he has Agamemnon to name. Heleine shows Agam:
to Priam.

A King both wise and stout in war, of Atreus eke the heir,
To whom the Camp in all obeyes, and their alliegance bear.
Who now long since, when we in peace and surety al did swim,
Was unto me brother in law, and I sister to him.
The peerless fair holding her peace, Priam with marvel mazde,
Hearing Agamemnons honor thus declarde, set forth, and blazed,
Could not himself then hold his peace, but began his praise to cry, Priam
commends Agamemno^

O fortune good, thou Agamemn art more than twice happy
Since worthy Prince of chilualrie, the hie Gods in thy hands
To thy good hap do put the Greeks, to lead and rule their bands.
So that by thee is gouernde now, conducted at thy will,
So great an host arrived here, which does al Phrigie fill.
When I was young, and valiance had, and prowess, I do mind,
That on this land the Amazones did war, women in kind, Amazones.

Yet folk in war of great exploites, whose force for to withstand,
We driven were to call such strength, as nere was in this land.
Then Otrus and Migdon marching against them in their way,
Their footmen and their horsemen both did in a valley stay,
Nie Sangar floude with stream so long, to their succors I came, Sangar.

They made me chief, yet our gay bands ye Greeks now pass ye same.
After he castes his sight aside on Ulysses, and says, Pryame (...) Helene.

Ah gods, daughter mine yet once again come on your ways,
Tell me what Greek is that I see, with shoulders, breast, and wast
So well beset, and not so high as Agamemnon last,
Who with so good a grace, and armd goes round about the Greeks, Comparion of
the deep vvoolled Ra^es.

As does the mighty Belweather with hairie cote and cheeks,
Who for the better keeping in the goodly flocks of sheep,
Goes by them still, and round about, and from them does not keep.
It is (quoth she) Ulysses of a good and seemly shape, Helene declares Ulysses.

Yet wiser in his fetchers, who, although he had the hap
To be brought up in Country rude among the country clownes,
Yet he in head and wit does pass the Greekish Kings renownes. Ithache I Will.

Worthy Princess, thou say most true bespake Anthenor then,
My self does know it very well: for I remember when Antenor to Helene. Ulysses
and Menelaus Ambassadors once to Troy.

Both he and Menelaus did Ambassadors come hither,
They were then lodgde at my pore house, whom I receivde together,
And made them such cheer as I could, as they my sons had been,
Where I their counsel, mind, and gifts do think my self have seen.
Or my conjecture thought them great, and chiefly when to us
In counsel they themselves were called, their message to discuss. Description
of Menelaus and Ulysses

Menelaus standing up was taller for his height,
But being set, Ulysses seemde more grave in things of weight,
And abler ^o maintain the case, for Menelaus was
A man of few words, and in vain from him did nothing pass.
His speech was pithie, wise and apt, and full of gentleness,
And though Ulysses had more years, he used no excess
Of words, but when it came to point that speak Ulysses should,
Were near so little, in the air cast up his head he would.
And would a while cast down his sight most like a senseless loute,
As one by rage and choler were from reason clean put out.
Which well was showed by his Mace, which he unhandsome bare, Vlesses eloquence.

But when he spoke, he eloquence most heavenly did declare.
His words came forth like winter snow, such store he did unfold,
As having dove, none with him durst any coutention hold,
Nor yet of any thing he said did any doubt at all,
Nor question ask, his talk was such, as to the Gods befall.
King Priam curious more to know, had cast aside his eyes, Priame to Helene.

And finding Ajax, of Heleine enquired in this wise:
Who is that goodly Prince, (to ask the old man does begin)
Who is a Giaunt to the rest, none of them retch his thin.
She unto this made answer thus: It is Ajax the strong,
Who is best hope, defense and wall, that to the Greeks belong. Helene to
Priame shevving him Ajax Telamo^ Idomene king of Crete.

And he, who stands hard by him there, is the good king of Creete
Idomene, among his folk obeyed with honor great,
As if some mighty God he were, whom often I have seen
(He passing by) with Menelau at our house to have been.
And many more, as well as he, whose names I well do know,
But not to see my brethren here, does cause my grief to grow.
The Castor gay that worthy knight with Pollux without Peer
In feats of arms, in they in this war have not vouchsaft I fear Castor and
Pollux.

To take a part, but if they did arrive here with the rest,
The irksome sorrow, grief and care, which has their minds oppressed,
To see my wants and my mishaps, and chance, yea very filth,
Has sent them home, and they abasht, with cares their hearts it kilth.
Thus said the fair, but her brethren long ere these things befell
Were dead, and in the town of Sparte they were intombed well. Castor and
Pollux dead in Spart. Preparation forth ceremonies Wine the ^our com mended.

This while the two Heraults they did prepare all things at full,
That best should serve, they from the flock two la^bes of choice did cult
And with good wine that licour likt, of Goat a full great hide
They filled top up, the which was brought by th'Arault called I Would
They for the mystery most meet a massy basen brought
Of polisht gold, and eke of gold two cups most finely wrought.
Thus furnished, to king Priam they showed their Embassaide The Heraultres to
Pryam.

They willing him to come himself, these were the words they said:
O peerless king of all renown, we fear we have been sloe,
The chiefest of thy subjects all in feld attend thee ^oe,
The Greeks will now make such accord, in mind that ay shall last,
Your son Paris his right to try, with Menelau does cast,
By hand to hand and force of fight, who victor shall arise,
Shall in reward have fair Helene, and gifts of worthy price.
All discordes by this mean shall end, for Greeks to Greece shall hie,
Troyans shall have for war sustaind, their peace wishte earnestly.
Without your Grace naught can be done, for it is meet you swear.
For full surety of this combat which is agreed on there.
The good old man was fearful straight, for well he knew, in hand
Fondly was taken this enterprise, whereto they mean to stand: Priam and
Antenor g^ to the ca^p^.

Yet he commaundes his Chariot, and for his horses calls,
They ioinde to it, all things were done, which in such case befalles.
With him he took Antenor old, and to the field they haste,
Who scouring with a sweeping pace, came to the camp at last,
And in the midst present themselves: and lighted when they were,
Ulysses grave, and Agamemn, did come and meet them there. Ulysses.

The Heraults there eke shewde themselves, right gay and richly clad
With ornaments which longs them to, and no delay was had, The a^ntitie of
Heraults.

But straight proceeds before them all to the ceremony:
And first with good and pleasant wine, they skinke the cups on hie
To the chief Lords, this pacte t'allowe, to wash one water bears:
The great Greek then does draw his knife, ye which he always wears
By his left side, and of the Lambs the wool he does cut out
From twixt the brows, for the Heraults to part amids the rout
To the Princes, that hereafter repent none of them can.
The wool receivde, his hands eke washed, Agamemn thus began,
With joined hands, and lifted up, his prayer thus did make:
O mighty Jove, who do vouchsafe thy dwelling for to take
On Ida hill, and there to rule, O Sun most bright I call,
Who sees this plain, and knows all things: O earth and rivers all,
I you beseech my prayers hear, you God infernal eake
So full of power, who al mischief so egerly do wreake,
Of fondling folk, who call the Gods their witness when they swear,
And straight to be most false forsworn they neither care nor fear,
Be Testes here, cause this accord so sacred be fulfilld:
If it so be, that by Paris, or Menelau be killd,
Without repining we agree fair Helene shall be his,
The goods he shall enjoy, the which he rauend once amiss,
Here promising to raise the siege, and straight to Greece return,
If Menelau my brother like (if hap so serve his turn)
With hand this Paris do subdue, that then this Gretian fair
With worthy mends for wrong sustaind to us forthwith repair,
And yearly that there be some rent, or tribute for the same
Assignde our heirs for our renown, to show their fault and shame,
And if that he should vanquish thus, and Priams sons refuse
To keep their oath and promise made, and so the Gods abuse,
If King Priam shall also hap for lack and want of heart
To fault the same: I here protest I will not hence depart
This country fro, nor turn elsewhere, until I see it wast, Agamc^no^s Oath.

The Troyans slain, their City burnt, and therein fires plaff.
Thus having said, then with his knife the two young lambs he slne,
And weakly sprawling in their blond, on ground from him he threw,
And many present in that place, the same did also vow,
And pouring wine upon the earth thereof they did allow.
Among the which some Troyan Knight, or Onea souldior Greek
Now spent and worn with the wars, thus made his prayer eke: A soldiers
prayer.

O Gods of mercy, who well sees, what here is done always,
O grant that he for whose default now this accord shall stay,
(As rebel unto your decrees) with brayning be he sped,
And for his gilte, let of his ympes the brains be also shed.
And let an other have his wife theirprayer thus did go.
But for all this their just request, the Gods yet would not so.
Again Priam perceiving well, that thus this gear would fodge, Priam to the
Troya^s and Greeks

Said to the Greeks and Troyans both, I think it best I trodge,
If you my Lords so think it good, my grief will not, in sight
That I this quarrel for to end, should see my son to fight.
The mighty Gods agree, that death for one shall be his gain,
And have appointed which of both with conquest shall remain.
Forthwith with him he took the La^bs, and mounteth on his chair, The place
of the combatemet out by He ctor and Ulysses.

And Antenor, and from the preasse to Troy they straight repair.
The lusty Hector and Vlysse this while do go about
To met the place, most fit for fight, the which they measure out
In mids between the armies both: and then for proof they crane,
Of the first stroke for t'assaile who shall the honor have:
Two lots they make, as in such case the custom is to try,
And in an helmet they do put two billets by and by,
For each of the Combatants one: who first was drawn by lot, Lot which of
the ^vvo sho^ give the ^rst blovv^ The prayer of the Grek and Troy^ soldiers.

Of first assailing of his feere the license thereby got.
The soldiers all careful to see, did fix their minds and eyes
On this helmet, and to the Gods with heart thus sent their cries:
O Jove thou God of Gods, of men high king, and king most chief,
Grant thou that grace this day, that he, who causes this mischief,
May down to the infernal shades descend, and there arest,
And that the Greeks and Troyans free, may live in peace and rest.
Hector from his helmet then his countnance having wried, Paris lot is first
dravv^

To part the lots did turn them often, them better to divide.
He puts in his hand, and out the lot of Paris drew,
And forthwith straight to void the place himselfech man withdrew,
And glad each one sits round about: and Paris who assail
Must Menelau, at all points well to arm him does not fail.
Then first his gallant greues he took which customly he ware, Paris is armed
with other-ar^.

His Cuysses which were fastened to by art and mickle care,
With buttons gay, and buckles great of silver therevppon,
And of Lycaon strong and sure he put the Curets on. Lycao^.

One would have thought (they seemd so fit) it molded was for him:
A massy sword he girt, which hong with silver nails full trim.
And on his shoulder he does cast a strong and mighty targe,
His head to hap an helmet rych, with crest right long and large,
Gastful to see, made of the fail of some horse very great,
As often as he cast up his head, it also seemd to threat.
In fine, an armed Darte with steel to his right hand does yield,
And thus with port, and visage fierce, he commes into the field.
There was no souldior, no so stout, for fear who did not quake,
To see the hazard of the case, when they began to shake
Their Darts at their approach, and more, their marks and gestures bold.
Paris stoutly stalking out, first there the field does hold, Paris ^leth
first.

He manly first assailes, and forth his dart does strongly lance,
The which in mids of the Greeks shield did stiffly hit by chance,
But only save the utter skin, no force it had to stir,
The shields defense so put it back, that pierce it could not furre.
For this yet was not Menelau one whit appalld at all,
He did the blow, and stepping forth, to prayer thus does fall:
O mighty Jove, who knows the right, the man do thou me make, Menelaus prayer
to Jupiter.

Who of his foe for his offense now just revenge may take.
Direct good Lord, that he may dye, as his deserts do crave,
That babes not born, may hear and know what stroke his fault should have,
To make them fear their friendly Ius, as wretches to defile,
Where strangers are with ciuiltie well used every while.
Forthwith he shook his spear, when as these words he did rehearse,
And with such force at Paris threw, that it his shield did pierce,
His Curets eke it thirled throw, and all the cloutes he ware
Hard to his shirte, and eft the steel had kissed his carcass bare,
But then that Paris wried at last, and so the blow did shun.
After the stroke, then Menelau his gorgeous blade begun
Out of his silver sheath to draw, which heauing up he takes,
And striking him upon his helm, his foe amazed makes.
Still laying on, at the third stroke his sword in pieces flue, Menelaus
blasphemeth.

Wherewith, as one distraught he cried: O Jove, thou God untrue,
I now well see you can do naught, Of all the Gods you are
The most malicious, yea of all, who in the skies repair:
Alas I thought the time was come my foe I should confound,
But now my Iauelin I have sent, not causing any wound,
My sword in two: yet raging wood upon him he does fly,
And by the Crest he caught him fast, enforcing mightily
To drive and thrust him out of field, as one had conquest won,
By means his chin band chokte him so: the same then had he done,
But Venus who his safety would, did cause it break in twain,
So save his morreyne, Menelau had naught else for his gain: Venus saves
Paris.

Which he among his mates does throw, and meaning for to pay
His bared pate, the Goddess tho, forthwith conveyed away Venus.

The Carpet Knight, bewrapping him in cloud of mistie air,
She brought to town, where she pluckte off the armor which he ware,
His bones to rest, she plaste him in, one of his Chambers all,
Which most did smoke with pleasant smells, and Helene went to call, Helene.

Who in a Tower past the time, about her many more,
Both Troyan Dames and gentle folk devising to and fro.
Venus not willing to be known, in human shape appears
In Greas form, the good handmaid, now well ystept in years,
In broiderie work a minion odd, no less in spinning eake, Grea the (...) to
Helene.

Who pulling Helen by the skirte, did thus the silence break.
Madame, your Paris does command, that I should will you hie
His lodging to, where in such ray, you shall there find him lie, Venus to
Helene.

You will not trow he looks so fresh, he commes now from the fight,
You Will judge he coms from dancing sport, he seems so trick a wight.
Thus spoke the amorous Goddess tho, inspiring in her sprite,
The mighty flame, who knowing well, her breast and neck so white,
Beholding well the flaming eye there of the heavenly stock. Helene to Venus.

What mean you quoth she by this trade me this wise for to mock:
What, now yet once again as wise to give me do you mean
In Phrigie towns or Meonie, or in some further realm,
For to reward some servant thine, since he, who by strong hand
Took me away, thou vanquished see, and I to Greekish land
Yet once again must make return? and wherefore do you use
This fained talk, and hyde your shape me only to abuse?
I do believe the blind desire of this thy Paris love
Which helds thee now, has causd thee leave the skies and Gods above,
To be the slave and Concubine of him thy darling dear,
Since it is so, then plie him well, stir not but tarry here.
I Will couche no more with thee good knight, within a pair of sheets,
(I force no deal) I promise him, with me he nener meets.
The Dames of state and Troyan wives might scorn at me their fill,
With fleering tau^ts and stinting sleights, for spite which would me kill.
When as the Goddess heard these words, which forth in heat she ^o^g, Venus
thr^ neth Helen.

She spoke her thus: you wretched else I read thee hold thy tongue,
Strive not with me if thou be wise, least if thou stir mine ire,
And that I kindly co^ thee to, little to thy desire.
And least that as I have bin friend I do become thy foe,
And seek such means as Goddess now to move against thee so:
The Greekish hearts and Troyans both, yea al thy hope clean gone,
The death with one consent they shall bestow on thee anon.
The fair was mated by this rage, she with a countnance sour, Helene
follovveth Ve nus to seek Paris.

Covering her face with her rich robe coms down straighte from the tower,
And softly followed Venus there, who her to chamber brought,
The train to talk, and some to weaue, and some the distaffe caught.
The place was trickly decked up, the place where Helene sat
By Venus will was placed there before her husband flat,
Who did him earnestly behold, and swelling yea with wrath,
The very botome of her mind she does declare, and says:
Then you are come you sorry sir, and luckie carpet knight Helene to Paris.

From this combat so dangerous, and eke fierce warlike fight.
O would to God my first husband had hapt thy life to daunt,
In field with thee he durst not cope thou wonted were to vaunt,
You would have eat him at the first, and now you run away:
Leave him, and be no more so brag his force for to assay,
If that you love your self: the Greek brast out these words in rage,
But Paris courteously desires her fury to assuage.
Sweet heart (quoth he) this passion leave, and with me be not grieved,
Though that the Greek have ward me now, for yc he was releued Paris to
Helene.

By Minerua, the time will be, that I shall be his rod,
And vanquish him, when as I shall be favored by some God:
I know I am not so far gone out of their favors clean,
But in my great affairs somewhat to aid me they do mean.
I pray thee now mine own sweet heart some better countnance show,
Be merry once, and unto rest let us together go.
For (as me think) greater desire I had not any while,
No, when with thee I cabband first within Cranee the I Will.
After these words, the fair was brought to bed so gorgeous dressed, The I Will
Crance. Paris lies with Hele^

Where without further do they both two lovers went to rest.
This while Menelau raging wood, more furious than the wild
And savage beast, does naught but seek his foe about the field, The Trojans
stirred against Paris for his want of valor.

To rid him quite, but no Troyan, nor of themselves not one
Could him descrie, for they wist not, now whether he was gone,
And if they had, to keep him close, there serve no friendship could,
But to the camp to show him forth they meant and surely would.
For now th'aduoutrie broad and known, and laid thus in their d^ Agamemno^ to
the Trojans.

For sudden end and fearful death with hate the soldiers wish.
Agamemnon then seeing plain that there to each man's sight
The famous conquest did belong to Menelau of right,
If so that they would rightly judge, stepped forth, and thus he spoke,
Ye Troyan crues, and forraines, who their quarrel good to make,
Come under their ensigns to war, I peale unto you all,
You Menelau have seen by force (your faith and truths I call)
And martial fight to overcome your Paris, who is fled.
Restore the Greek, and wealth wherewith once thief away he yed.
Cause that we now be satisfied, and more for honor due
Which is deservd, do ye to Greeks a certain rent renew,
To us and our posterity by Troyans to be paid.
Herewith his soldiers praise him much, and lo the words he said.
Finis tertij Libri.
The fourth Book.
THe Gods were in the Pallaice gay of Jove so curious wrought, Hebe Cup* bearer.

To council come, whom Nectar sweet the gentle Hebe brought.
Whereof they trypled each so well, the golden Cup so fine
Among the rout from one to one, did pass with pleasant wine.
And having always their regard, with sight and mind they view
The long besieged C^tie thus, which weary now does rue.
Then Jove disposd he of his wife to make a s^orte afar,
To nettle her a talk began, which quickly tickled her. Jupiter to the Gods.

In this combat (quoth he) the Gods immortal put in hand
Know ye, to Menelaus help two Goddess do stand,
Who now at pleasure joy their fill, to laugh they co^ers seek,
Our Juno one gir^es in her sleeue, with puissant Pallas ^e.
But courteous* Venus she again with fi^ger in her eye,
On the other side does sorrow mur^e her Paris hap to spy,
She having made no sm^ll ado, to shield him from his end:
He neither force nor heart she knew in field had to contend,
Against the Greek, who victor stood. Well now we must adu^,
To which of both their pleasures most our favor ought to rise.
If best to make them enemies still, or cause them to agree,
A stable concord to them both must surely welcome be.
For by Helens return, the Greeks their soldiers they shall ease,
Of travels great, and Priams town, whom fame so much does raise,
Shall ay with people fraighted be: those fained words agog
So set the Goddesses; that they in anger began to shog,
But Pallas kept her anger in, against her kindly sire,
And meekely bare her self, though spite did boil in her as fire.
But Juno rash and careless bold (hap yea what happen can)
Could not her fury once refrain, but thus her tale began: Juno to Jupiter.

O crabbed husband why to mine still diverse is thy mind?
Such treason for to use with me^hat reason do thou find?
Would thou the sweat and travails great of me, and of my horse
Of heavenly race all bootelesse toil, and be of silly force?
In calling to this place such crues: have thou found out the means
To get a safeguard for the state of Priam and Troyans?
Do what thou can, the time will come, that Totnam French shall turn
The Gods and I will so provide, but that shall serve ou^ turn
Shall hap at all But mighty Jove seeing her ^hus to ^et,
Replied again, and from his breast a sigh he deeply set.
Thou cankred Goddess, what mischie^, what harm, what hate, what wrongs
Has Priam done, or yet his sons, yt so their ^ain thoulongs Jupiter to Juno.

And mournest still the Troyan town, if that thou should not see
By Gretians (...); and in such p^ght, as wars may make it be?
I surely think but for the shame which causes thee to stay,
And somewhat does surmount the rage, thou would have taken way
Long time ere this to Troy; where like a fool enraged there
The skin and flesh of Priam King with teeth thou would tear.
That only (...) at all, t'assuage thy furious ^it.
Since so it (...)* (...) on me lay no excuse of it:
(...) mind, and what exploytes you list do enterprise,
There shall against thee let nor word he used in any wise.
In time to come my wrath to appease, when I shall happily mean,
The fairest of thy Cities all, by ground to raze it clean,
Think not my mind then to withstand, for copper thou might get,
Since he^ein to content thee now thy will I nothing let.
I do agree the overthrow of the most famous rich
City under the heaven cope, and of a king so much
Renoum of al, whom most I love, and honor most I ought
Of Duty, for to honor me al ways al means they sought
Unto my Godhead day nor night, their hosties they do spare,
At no time of oblations ^t my Altars empty are.
The^ (...): fully satisfied in having got her will,
Aunsweared^oh Jove three towns I have, which many people fill,
All governed by (...), the which I love at heart,
Argos the rich, Mycene the gay, and eke the mighty Sparte,
When you shall please of one or all the glory down to rake The Cities dear
(...) Juno.

Your will h^ (...) shall gainesay, or yet resistaunce make:
And though I (...), you are so great, I know I could it not,
To your great power both gods and men obey in every i^te.
And I likewise great wrong should have, if that my purpose now
Should naught preu^ile, for a goddess, I am as well as you
A God, a Saturn impe, and borne to him in eldest place:
Why should not I then as your spouse esteemde be in each case
Above the rest? let peace be made, contention banish quite,
And let us both as in this point our hearts in one unite.
Wherewith then shall the heavenly routes, who often troubled are,
And often moved by our iarres, shall be of mercy fare.
And shall in fine our minds allow: command Minerue to hie
Unto the Camp, there for to move some braule and broyle, whereby
^he Troyans may the pact infringe. The God consenting tho
To Pallas said, you daughter mine, see straight to Troy you go, Jupiter (...)
Pallas.

And covertly the promised league stir up some Troyan crew
To break, their Greekish enemies assailing them of new.
Yet after this he wills her have, wherewith such speed she makes,
That with the speed the goddess came, on earth men dreadful quakes.
For Venus Jove does send the glore of flash and lightning brande* Comparison
of the lightning.

Which often does cause the fighting folk at gaze and fearful stand,
And think within themselves with those, who do the seas frequent,
That of a mischief to them like it is a token sent:
The Goddess in like sort descendes, as star with flame and flash
Amid the Camp, wherewith ^he does the bands and armies bash.
And of them there were certain said, with wonder and afright
This token shows us luckie chance, or some mishap to light:
Either we shall have by and by the happy peace we crave,
Or else the war continued, for long time shall we have.
Pallas into the plain come down, she straight her self enrold^
In shape of one of the children of the Antenor old,
Laodoc soldier trick and stout: with Troyans then ^he throng^
And forth with for to hear some news of Pandarus she longs, Pandarus.

That valiant Archer good and sure: she sought so in the route,
That there with gorgeous armor girt, at last she found him out.
Enuironde with a warlike sort, who al his leegies were,
Bred up by Asop^ the flood, who happy thought them there,
Under a lusty leader such to show proof of their strength.
The green eide Goddess then drew me, and spoke him thus at lengt^ Pallas to
Pandarus.

Uictorious prince, one of the brood of grave Lycaons stock,
An enterprise it self presents, whereto if so you shocke,
Men shall thee call the happiest this side the Ocean fur:
It thee behoues with piersing girde to cause thy arrow skirre
To wound the sturdie Menelau: if thou that martial act
Fulfillst, what fame shall thou obtain by that victorious fact?
What thanks of Alexander eke, when he shall see to flow
His enmies blood? gay gifts with joy on thee he shall bestow.
Well courage then* and ready make your bow with vows adrest
To offer to Phoebus such sheep; as in your flocks are best,
If he will grant you t'accomplish the bo^d which you do frame,
And give you power and time your town Zelye to see again.
The cokesing words causde Pandarus too fondly to agree,
Whereof he soon repented him, out of the case then he Abovve made of the
horns of a vvilde Goat.

Drew out his great and gallant how: garnisht with polisht brass,
Which of the horns of a wild Goat right strangely shaped was.
Whom Pandarus so well did hunt upon a mountain side,
He girt and hurt him in the ^ankes, and of his horns beside,
By cunning workmanship was made a fine and proper bow
Sixteen pace the horns were long, full hard it was I trow
To make it serve to be shot in, but erst the workmans craft
Was so employde, that now a bow they ser^de, and shot a shaft:
And gorgeouser to make the bow appear to all men's sight,
He hornde and tipped the ends right well with beaten gold full bright.
Then Pandarus without aboade drew out his bow to bend, Pandarus breakee the
agreement.

And that now of his enterprise none of them all should wend,
He causd his soldiers hap him well with buckler and with targe,
Least that the wily subtle Greeks might find his mind at large.
And sudden broyle his enterprise might let, and turn to naught:
His bow in point, an arrow he out of his quiver cought,
Sure steelde at end with piercing head, and finely featherde well,
Most fit by cruel wretched death an enemy to quell.
He nockes the shaft, and then his vows to Phoebus God does make, Pandarus
(...).

And him behights his pretty lambs, if so his have do take
God place and proof by Phoebus means, his vow he thus ending
With such a force he drew his bow, as that he ha^lde the stryng
To his right pay, and straight the head, when as it even stood
Hard with the back, he losde it quick, as (...) sure and good.
Wherewith the bow with sturdye string, when forth the shaft it ^oong
A clange so great and strong it gave, as wide abroad it roong.
(...) The Gods as then^h Menelau they were not far from thee,
It was no time, Pallas her self stout armed there was she,
Of thy welfare her self she showed as careful as she could,
As when her pretty son does sleep the tender mother would, Comparison of
the mother helping his child.

Have good regard and charie eye, least that the busy fly
His tender flesh should bite or harm, or come his visage nie.
A^ ne with like care Mynerue did, put by the mortal blow,
Yet stroke, his ba^dricke in the midst, and it it pierced so,
The buckle great of massy gold, which did his girdle tie
Was pierst, and through his Curats eke and steeled head did fly,
And past so fur, of the stout Greek the flesh it thirled in Menalau^ hurt.

And presently before them all the blood was seen to spin.
Yea even as on the ^ie why (...) the (...) of C^ry ^ft Comparion

Do work the purple, and ^mbost with ^yderie aloft,
To make the gallant gorgeous raines for coursers brave and gay,
Which for a king a decking is, it is so rich array:
The die was like and fairer much on the trim Gretians flesh
With scarlet blood, which by his thigh down to his heels did desh,
The great Agamemnon with this so sore and sudden shot
Was grieved much the wound eke see^e the hurt man dolor got,
And color chaundge: he sighing sore his brother gay drew nie,
And took him by the hand, of Greeks most part then standing by.
He piteously begins his moan, and thus he says, alas, Agamemno^ bevvaileth
his brother

My only hope, my brother dear, who as assured was
In assayling the Troyan freake, shall it be now the mean
That after this holy accord thou covertly be slain?
The oath before the Gods so sworn, where it is now become
Of these perjured wicked folk? can Gods justice be mum
Alas at rancour so much faynde? I hope it will not so,
For though the Gods do wink thereat a while, and let it go,
Yea though men's faults they seem to slip, at end they pay for all,
Great time (...), does cause the smart with rigor on them fall.
In time these ^thy traitors shall so plagde be for their hire,
Themselves, their sons, and eke their wives: and from the skies the fir^
With hideous storm they shall behold to light upon their pate,
I know ere long Troy shall to wrack, and Priam with his stafe
Shall pass the (...) Gods wrath which does the deeds of al me^ si^
Is now against him so stirde up, as the^of is no shift.
But what mishap, alas, what grief shall hap to be my share,
If I should (...) you here behind, and death to be your fare,
With grave a^cke, in foreign land, how will all Greece cry out
At my return, al Argos folk, and C^trey round about,
When they shall v^erstand your death? and they who with us are,
Shall they not set of their return thei^y ^linde and care?
Shall they not leave to Troyans false the luckie glory at hand?
Shall they not leave to us the shame? your carcass in this land
(Which most me dea^s) shall they not leave? shall they not leave Helleine
Whereby hereafter to your tomb, there shall came some Troyan,
And loubring on the grass, shall cry, al puffed up with pride,
To all Agamemns practices God grant like end betide,
God grant the Greeks here long abode, may have the like success,
And after they may hie them home with shame and wretchedness?
The Troyan fierce he thus may chat, then not to be alive
I do beseech the immortal Gods, but that the earth do cliue
And swallow me. Although the hurt did cause a grievous pain, Menelaus to Aga^
his brother

Yet Menelau with cheereful look thus aunswerde him again,
And manlike to his brother said: rejoice thou brother mine,
And courage take, for well thou may by this mourning of thine
Impute such fear in the Greeks hearts, which eft they cannot fly:
I feel full well the blow is such thereof I cannot die,
The golden buckle of my belt, my Curet good I know
Wherewith I armed am before, has surely stayde the blow.
My friendly brother would to God (quoth Agamemnon he) Agamemno^ to Menel.

You were out of this danger here, and that it so might be
You might be healed of this wound: a surgeon good I wot,
Who should so well attend you then, that this your wounding got,
Which irkes you so, he should delay: this said, he causes plod
Taltibius, to seek the son of Esculape the God,
Macaon hight, from band to band he wills the Herault pry Machaon Physician
^o Esculap^.

Him out, praying thither to him, that he come by and by,
To visit Menelaus there, his wound to search and feel,
Which one of Licie or of Troy has forced by stroke of steel,
In traiterous guile, thinking to Greeks there should redound thereby
Notorious shame, to Troyans all to joyful victory.
So diligent Taltibius goes, amidst the Camp, that out
At last he finds the Physician, enuironde round about
With strength of soldiers which he brought from his great town of Trice
Where horses plenty are, and whence by grass great wealth does rise,
His message to him he declares, beseeching him, that he
Will come to Agamemn the king, there Menelau to see,
And careful to look to his wound, he straight at the first dash
Obeyes, but yet the sudden chance his mind does greatly bash.
He co^mes, ^d there on heaps he finds the Greekish princes stand
Loking for him, with mindful hearts the hurt to understand.
The lech divine straight for his work made all things very ^tte,
And first the shaft he softly drew, and grievde him not a whit,
But tho the sharp and bended barbe in plucking out it brake,
He soft vnarmes him, and his scarce, and Curet off does take,
That he, what harm ye wound has done, might have ye better sight,
How deep it was and whether it in speeding place did light.
After he had beheld the stroke, and washte away the blood, Machaon heals
Menelaus.

And tended it, he laid unto his ointments perfect good
T'aswage the pain: the which whilom the cunning Chyron taught
To Esculape, and Machaon of him his knowledge caught,
Which were Probatum often to heal. This while the Troyans go The Greks and
Troyans prepare to the battle.

To arm to fight, and battle wise in field themselves they shoe.
The Greeks again the cruelty of them, them picking out
Were straight in order armed well yea forward, fierce and stout,
Their case on Troyans to revenge: then Agamemn appeard The diligence and care
of Agamemnon.

No whit to yield, or else retire, or ought with fear was steard,
But willing was as chieftaine tho, and king of valiant heart,
To die and take such part as they and from his chair he start
And it unto Eurymedon his trusty guider gave,
And him commaundes to follow him, and horses ready have
To mount again, if toyled he shall feel himself to be,
In passing through and through the ranks their order for to see.
The armies of this worthy host to view, a foot he went,
And those whom manly martch he sees, their courage does augment,
And comforts thus: my very friends, of Greece ye flowers al, Agamemno^
praises his soldiers.

Forget not your accustomde force, this day your prowess call
To mind: think not that Jove will rue on these false Troyan freaks,
Who thus unjust and faithlesly their oath and promise breaks.
This is the time of our revenge, the dogs their bones shall pick,
And Uultures tear their flesh, and down shall now both stone and stick
Of their buildings, their wealth bereft, their daughters, sons, and wives
Shall in our bottomes carried be, and we with victors lives
Shall to our country back, and see our home and children both,
The good king thus he spoke: but such in martch he knew to sloth,
He took them up, and threatens thus: O ye of Grecian race Agamemno^ ^lameth
the ^vvbacks.

The dishonor, of your reproach has shame with you no place?
Do ye not blush, thus fearfully to be by terror frodden,
Even as the timorous hearts do houe, with head and horns laden, Comparion of
the vv^ry Ha^.

And pressed and hard being laid unto by, hunters, in the field
Do lag, and fearful are intrapt for force begins to yield.
What? will you stay your martch, til that your foes your blood do spil
And that you see them take their ships, and murder at their will.
What? think you that some God will come, and fight for your behoof,
And save your lives, unless by fight your selves do make some proof.
This done, he goes whereas he found the soldiers al of Creete
Preparing them about their Prince, who then in order set,
And goodly raundge them as they should: and Meriones who hight
His friend, far of, to come forward makes all the have he might.
The great Greek then bespake ye king with kind and courteous cheer: Agamemno^
to Idomene king of Crete.

Idomene, of all the Kings who^ we have followed here
From all the Greekish provinces, thy honor most I meant,
Yea still in public and in war, or private in my tent,
Or else in open show, when routes at banqueting were met.
It to be true, thy cup of wine is always top full ^et
When as my greatest friend has his with wine but half repleate,
Because I would declare to thee my favors they be great,
Always thou having at my hand what so thou do request,
Thou to deserve this my good will this day be ready pressed,
And let me see that thou at full thy self do now acquit,
As often you say among the stoutst be forward in the fight.
He answerde straight, amid ye press, you shall me surely find Idomene to Agam^

As I have said, that al men know I bear you faithful mind
And honor due, but do you have, and will the fight to guide
So carefully, that we abate the Troyan glorious pride,
By which, and by their arrogance from stricken pact they start.
Herewiih Agamemn joys to see Idomens loyal heart,
Wherewith he leaves him thus: and forth the king is forward gone,
And meets in teeth the both Ajax, their armor buckling on: The two Ajax.

The which a great and gallant crew of footmen in a roe
With buckles long, and tricksie Darts well furnished, after go.
One would have took them for a cloud full of some dristing shower, Similitud^.

Or hail, which to the seaward coast, the wind does often power,
Which when the fearful shephearde sees, to light upon him like,
Constrainde, to hap his flocks and him, some ha^ging cliffe does seek.
Uiewing this band, you to exhort (quoth he) I little need Agam: to Ajax.

My mates to put your men in plight, you now make better speed
Than any other do: would God that all in order such
Were pressed and furnished as you, and couraged as much:
Our enemies should soon be put to take their flight abacke,
Their City straight destroyed be, and cruel put to sack.
Nestor the wise, the good old man, as further on he goes, Nestor.

He finds, who toyling on the plain his soldiers to dispose,
Five valiant Dukes and leaders stout, with worthy Nestor was,
Pelagon, Emon, Alastor, Chronnyus and Brias,
His men in order for to raunge, and not to let them pass
His ordinance and his command, in any kind of case:
His Chariots first he puts in front, the force to bear and break,
His choice footmen the rereward kept, in midst he plast the weak.
That in such sort enclosed thus, although they were afraid
Each one should fight, constraynde of force, in spite yea of his head. Nestors
instruction to his soldiers for their order in fight.

He shewde his horsemen, in no wise that single they should press
Out of their rank, where they were plast, their fomen to suppress:
Ne to defense, nor fight begin, ne that they should in horse
Commit more trust and confidence, than in their proper force.
For in forsaking their array so fondly, weak they wax,
Whereof ensues disorder great: again with sword or Axe
He telth them that it is not best with Chariots for to join,
But rather with the shot and lance at them to prick and foyne.
Thus doing, many ancient crues have sundry Cities held,
And valiant deeds of warlike facts (says he) did often welde,
In doing after my advise: thus spoke the worthy sire,
In the army he to show his help, does greatly now desire.
Then Agamemn he spoke him thus: ah Prince of great renown, Agamemno^ to
Nestor.

Oh would to God for this affair, the Gods would send thee down
From heaven above at my request into this corpse of thine,
Such strength and force as wisdom does thy sprite and senses line,
Alas, why is not this your age bequeathed to some lad
Whom whilom time has taken a way? ye youth, which once you had,
Why see we not est to revive, to us to be a stay.
O good old sire, now young again, why are you not I say?
I would (quoth he) that now I were as lusty and as strong, Nestor to Agamemn^

As when Eurethali the stout these hands did lay along,
And slew: but what, all that is past, the Gods do nere bestow
Upon us men all things at once, but always order so,
That after our unbridled youth coms sage and wrinckled years,
Me young, now old my self I feel, as to you all appears,
And far unmeet exploites to welde, as touching force of hand,
Yet for all that to do my best in council will I stand.
It is the honor of the old to council men aright,
And of the young the glory is, stoutly to deal in fight.
Who then can strike, lay he it on, and I assuredly
Will have me to the horsemen here to raunge my self thereby,
And will instruct their deed to guide: Agamemnon right glad
In heart does wax, and does rejoice when Nestor heard he had.
A good bow shoot not further off warlike Menesthee stood, Menes^ Athemen*

Whom there he meets with his Captains amid his soldiers good
Of Athens town: next him full still afoote Ulysses king
Of Cephelonie was great routes him eke accompanying. Ulysses.

They stand both close, martch do they not, the skirmish they do hark,
The which the soldiers should begin to set them all awarke. Agamem^ to
Menesthee and Ulysses.

The chieftain of the Greekish camp their negligence does blame:
O Menesthee and Ulysses, what do you fear? for shame
Where is your forwardness (quoth he) what mean you thus to lag?
What look ye for? why do you not with first and foremost wag?
In my good cheer, in hiest place you always I do put,
The flesh most trimmest roasted ay, for you is also cut,
And when you fancy for to drink, the sweetest wine you have.
Therefore in fight your selves should be more forward and more brave
Than are the rest that lag, and onward with such willing mind,
As of your friends ten bands you might in danger leave behind.
The wise Greek grieved at this talk, whose choler now does rise, Ulysses to
Agame^

Makes answer thus, with bended brows a front his settled eyes:
O Atreus son, what say thou here? thou Agamemnon trowes
Us dastards and faint hearted folk, t'approche the Troyan foes:
What, braule no more, but if thou please, thy self come, and behold
Who does his duty best this day, whether the father old
Of people of Talemach kind, both shields and Curets crush,
And give into the Troyan prease the first of all the push,
In better point than any prince: this heat he being in Agamemno^ to Ulysses.

Atridas saw, wherefore again he gently does begin:
I^tustre Prince, the impe and heir of good Laertes line,
Thy valiant acts are well approvd by that same hand of thine.
I will not thee reproach at all, I wrong thee should too much,
Greatly surpass thy worthy deeds, the council good is such
Of thy sage head, thy prowess eke all men is laid before:
Content thy self, and of my words I pray thee think no more:
In time to come mends shall be made, for this time I thee pray
To show, and so behave thy self, as al men of thee say,
And take the words, which I have spoke, as simple fond, and baine.
He ending thus, does leave him there, and onward goes again,
A little off, he finds the Prince Diomedes the stout
Upon his chare, not minding he of further setting out,
But talks with his Chariot guide, called Stenelus by name,
Capanees son, to nothing he this journey minds to frame.
Atridas rushing forth thus says, when he his countnance saw, Agamemno^ to
Diomedes. The father of Diomedes.

O Tides heir, whom doubt you here? of whom stand you in awe?
Belike you stay till we have fought, and tried in field at length,
Would you we should for you prepare an entrance in the strength
Of Troyans? well, thy whilome sire had stomach more at full,
He never quaild in mortal join, ne yet in perilous pull,
But sole has gone to front his foes: as often I have bin told
Of such as kept him company, and were his quaintance old.
My self I never saw the man, yet many do report
That he was at Mycenas once, my country twone, and forte:
That time, when as he warred on the warlike Thebanes town,
He came then to demand some aid with Polynices down,
Such as their soldiers should refreshe, and we with willing heart Polynices.

His army would have easd at full, and taken eke his part,
If Jove my friends and lieges al by signs apparent plain
Had not quite turnde, whereby aid less he did return again,
After he long abode had made, unto his camp ypitched
By Asope flood, with store of grass whose bancks are much enriched.
There Tydee, as report does go, long bid not in his tent:
For even that day, yea al alone, the Gretians forth him sent
Ambassador to Thebane ^oes, and to their king, who hight
Etheocles, to town he came well armd with iron bright, The history of the
vvarr^.

Whereas he found the king in shade, with many a Thebane stout,
Discoursing this and that, and when he told his message out,
And showed his courage and his might, he tild them for to try
And prove with him the combat there, and dead by him they dye.
For Goddess Pallas did increase his force and hautie mind:
The Thebanes paid, do threat revenge, and it with oath they bind.
The same to do, they ambush lay, which doubtie Meon lead,
With Mneptoleme, who tumbled often so many wolves adead.
These leaders two full fifty men chose fit for such a feate
And secretly conduct him down with weapons hid to beat.
What came thereof? he slew them all, he did them soundly souse,
Of all the traitors Meon sole he home sent to his house.
Whereby before all men he might the Thebanes lewdness lay,
And his valor. Such was the king of Aetoly I say,
The race is failed in the son, a goodlier man he is,
And better tongde to tell a tale, no souldior like ywis.
So Agamemn Diomede prickte, who nothing did reply,
Ashamde, he doubted for to move the kingly state so hie,
His mate who well the matter heard, his speech he takes and says
O Agamemn, since that the case is sure no manner ways,
As you report, I you beseech, the truth do not disguise,
Nor do (I crave it at your hands) therein us so despise.
For as for us, I dare avouch, and stand to it to your face
Our force and valiantness full far ore-meetes in every case,
That of our ancient fathers past, as men more traind in war.
The seven gated Thebes town had not withstoode so far,
Ne yet her walls, if so we two besiegde her had about.
For soon you should have seen them torn, and turned up from the rout,
Our fathers where in that assault by folly dead are done:
Then hold your peace, and father do not praise above the son.
Diomede was full ill content, thus hardly for to hear
His fellow speak, he thus him blames in anger as he were:
What moves you for to talk thus much? your tongue can you not hold
Out prattling in this case of weight: Agamemn may be bold
For to complain, and fault to find, with such, as fly the fight:
For if he conquer, as to him belongs the honor right,
So if he conqu^rd ^e, again with shame he shall be sped,
The honor and reproach of al does lie upon his head,
And as for us, let us go show what men of war we be.
With this he leapes, his Chariot down, and as down leaped he,
His gay and gorgeous armor rich so sounded in the shake,
As yea the fiercest fighter there almost thereat did quake.
There might you see the battles rangd, and raking in aroe,
The gallant Greeks, and at the heels thereof their leaders go.
Like as the waves within the sea, so large, so hie, so deep,
Forced by some flaw, yields whushing noise, and shoring banks do sweep.
The Captains cease not to exhort with words their soldiers still,
Who to their chieftaines bear good mind, and them obey they will,
They on do martch, and nothing dread, to them they list their ear,
As still as stones, they would have said tongue tied they had bin there.
But contrary, the Troyans martch, they cries and clamors yield,
And therewith rings the country round as they prepare to field:
Unto the goodly flocks of sheep compard in every thing,
Which shepherd to his Masters Pen does safe together bring,
The old and young together put, the milk of them to take,
The Ewes do bleate, the Lambs do bey, and noise not small do make.
Like clamors do the Troyans use, the meadows ring at hand
With sundry sound, and diverse tongues, as they of sundry land.
The Gretians by Minerua they were boldned to the blade,
And Troyans they by cruel Mars were full courageous made.
Terror and dread did tend them both, and did their doings guide,
Strife mate and sister unto Mars eke in the plain was spide.
This Goddess namde, although she be but ^oore and bas^ly bred,
Yet rests she not till that she touch hie Heaven with her head,
And yet on earth still keeps her feet. Now came she in a throw,
Of purpose, quarrels and debate, and mortal strife to sow,
Whereby thereafter might proceed a bad and woeful state,
With sobs and sighs, the which should bring repentance, but too late,
In place for fight the armies meet, the darts and arrows fill
The air aloft, and in the approach full many a man they kill.
But when it came to handie strokes, much more the murder was,
Naught heard but dying groans, ye which from yielding sprites did pas,
And joyful cries of conquerors: he wing of harness tough,
Shearing of shields, and who erst brave, now falls, and has enough.
Of this flaughter the purple gore so runs from them that bled,
And as the springs mountain top, which ore the valleys spread,
Rushing with noise the shepherds hear, aloof that lodged are,
Even so the noise of them that fight is heard both nie and far.
Of all the Greekish famed Knights was first Antilochus
Did there of arms the first deed do, he slew Echepolus,
Fighting in foremost Troyan ranckes: his top of helm he hit,
And with such force and courage stout the blow so doubled it,
That of the staff the steeled point made in his forehead way,
And pierced down so in his mouth, that dead along he lay.
He fell as does a tower hie, which men do mine about:
His fall when as Elphenor saw, he like a souldior stout,
Did forye his body for to spoil: but Agenor he sent
His Iaueline to his bared flanckes, that backward down he went.
The fight for these two bodies dead more fierce and mortal grew,
As egre Wolves the soldiers all on one another flewe.
The ioly Ajax then came in, Symosius he did daunt.
Symosius he a yonker was, who Troyan town did haunt:
So called was he of his friends, because nie Symosis head
That water clear, his mother there, of him was brought abed:
She tar^ife taken, coming to view what pasturing then had
Her flocks upon the meadow bancks. The young man's luck was bad:
To parents he could never show what honor due he ought,
For bitter and too hasty death too soon his carcass cought.
Stout Ajax with his cruel lance so pierced his right pappe,
As like a mighty Poplar green he down on earth does flappe,
Which by the water growing hie, by workmans force it reeles,
His Axe it felles, a wood full fit to forge the trolling wheels
Of chariots, and also yokes, which on the river banckes
He leaves long time to dry, or else upon some bourded planckes.
This Priams son, gay Antyphus to heart he does it take,
His death to venge, his seemly dart to Ajax he does shake,
But misste the man, and Leucus hit, who was Ulysses friend,
He through his guts and bowels thrust, and of him made an end.
Vlysse his friend thus seeing dead, in fury forth he fares,
Unto the foremost Troyan ranckes, whereas he stands and stares,
And studies whom he should assault, his enemies gave place,
And swayde aside, when as they saw such fierceness in his face:
Yet forth his staff full stiff he flong, and took up by the way
Democoon bastard to Priam, as he did run away,
But all too late: his temples both the steel it through stepped,
He dies. Long time in Abydos King Priam had him kept.
From whence he came, and left the steeds and coursers of his sire,
To go abroad a venturer then was it his desire.
The Troyans all discomfited, retire, and almost fly,
The son when they saw of their King all dead in field to lie.
Hector himself, who had the charge and leading of the host,
Does ma^mer eke what is best to do, least that his life be lost.
In truth the war had ended bin, if not Apollo he
Had turned the chance from sacred walls, the Troyans he did see
Out order, broke, the field they left, amain he cries and calls,
He stays them straight, and that they fight he to exhort them falls.
Take heart (quoth he) ye Troyans stout, I pray you do not sink,
Dread not the Greekish bravery? a Gods name do you think,
That they of stone or steel are made, and that your sturdie Darts
And Cimyters cannot suffice to pierce and sheare their hearts?
Advance, advance, and surely hope that conquer needs you must,
For Achilles that mighty bugge (to me I tell ye trust)
Who at his pleasure wonted was your heads and helmes to cleave,
Does keep aboorde in mourning rage, the battles he does leave.
The Troyans at the heavenly call renew again the fray,
And Pallas bolds ye Greeks, and blames whom fear does there dismay.
In this conflict Diorus fell, Pirus a Thracian Lord
With pibble great his leg he struck and burst each vain and cord,
And with his sword his breast he s^iste, and guts on grass he laid,
With arms abroad before the Greeks he falls, as asking aid.
Wherewith sir Thoas thrusts in, and with a deadly bloe
His cruel darte did Pirus wound, the head of it did go
Under his pappe unto the lungs, and yet not pleased is,
But ruthlesse cuttes in mids his paunch, with hand and sword of his:
And after forces al he may, the carcass out to train
The prease, his armor and his weed to conquer for his pain.
The Thracians sorry for their Prince, and hap that was so hard,
The doubtie Thoas do resist, and stand upon their guard,
And that so well he carried naught although he were so strong:
The bones of these two valiant Dukes together lie along.
And numbers great of soldiers more with them died alas.
And if Minerue had granted then a souldior old to pass
Unhurt at all the armies through, to see who there did best,
With wonder he, such slaughter like, was near he would proteste.
Finis quarti Libri.
The fifth Book.
PAllas she willing to set forth Diomedes his praise,
Among the Greeks his fame t'aduance by any worthy ways,
Divinely does inspire his breast with stout and haughty heart,
And to his person force and strength dame Pallas she does part.
His armor she does yeeldeful bright, and eke his weighty targe, Comparion of
the S^ which is called Ori ons Dogg^ Dares Vulc^ (...).

His harness shone as does the star within the heaven large,
The which in Autumn time is raisd amid the mighty sky,
And bathes it self in Occean flood: afoote then by and by
The puissant Goddess brings him in the thickest of the host.
Now of King Priams subieas one, of all as rich as most,
Was Dares Priest of Vulcane God, the service tended he:
Two sons he had, one Phegeus, the second called Idee,
Whose valiance in the Trojan camp did cause their fame to flow:
Above the other soldiers much, the armor shining so,
When as they spide of the stout Greek, no time they tarryed then, Phegeus and
Ideus sons of Dares assail Diomedes.

But fiercely assaild him from their chair, and yode with him like me^:
Phegeus there advanced throws his dart, a souldior stout
Which does no harm, his polorone it does strike and flies out.
Diomedes the mortal lance he girdes with better hap,
The which he sends to his foe, and wounds him on the pap, Diomedes flayes
Phegeus.

And Phegeus the bloody death received by the wound,
And from the Chariot there (good soul) he falls to the ground:
His brother slain, straight Idee left the Chariot where it stood,
And no resistaunce made, for why defense would do no good.
For dyed he had, but that Vulcane he of his heavenly grace
Preservd the man, and with a cloud he hapte him in the place, vulcane saues
Ideus

With pity he respecting now the Dares good forgone,
Who childlesse sonke with sorrow great, his age would end anon.
The filthy flight Diomede saw, to sue he nothing spedde,
The horses brave he gave his man, who them to haven led.
When Troyans saw these brethren two discomfit, as you hear,
One put to flight, the other slain, they greatly ginne to fear,
The war they deem not well for them, wherefore dame Pallas than Pallas to
Mars.

To Mars she co^mes, and takes his hand, and friendly thus began:
O bloody Mars and gastfull God, O mighty Mars in rage,
Who towns and Castles in their force, and fighters still does gage,
And rasest quite when pleases thee: is it agreed that still
We disagree, why, let the Greeks and Troyans fight their fill,
By teeth let them the matter try, our discord bid farewell,
Let us not break our heads with them, or with their quarrels mell:
Who Jove the victory will give, that all men well may know,
To leave this enterprise as now my council would it so.
And surely so I think it best: well, let us hence I pray,
Take heed we stir not upon us, Jove's furic any way. Mars leaves the
battle.

The Goddess sage now ending thus: she softly from the rout
Of Scamander a pleasant shade to banckes she brought him out:
He gone, the Troyans host does quayle, and yield to shameful flight,
Whom Gretians now as conquerors do follow all the night:
And then the Captains well did show their worthy prowess hie.
Agamemn leader of the war, to earth he manfully
Of Alisones Odius hight, a doughtie Duke he doong, Agam^ Odius.

The chin he cleaues, and pierst his breast with Dart he strongly floong,
Wherewith he from the Chariot fell, whose fall (the noise was such)
Causde well be heard his trembling corpse and eke his armor rich.
Idomen Phestus also slew, the virtuous Meons heir, Idome^ king of Creete
(...) Phesius.

The courtous Phestus from Tarnee his province did repair
That fertile was, renown to get, but die (alack) he must,
In his right side the Cretane does his bloody ianeline thrust:
He falls down, black death he feels, by soldiers he is spoylde,
His carcass all besmerde with blood and filth, lies foully foilde.
On the other side his valiantness well shows Menelaie, Menelaus kills
Cama^der the hunter.

With stiff and sturdie lance he does Camander hunter stay.
Him Diane she did honor so, to him so friendly was,
Him cunning gave and courage too, t'assayle the beasts of chase:
The Goddess and his goodly art in quiver and in bow
Full ill do serve, he in his flight behind receives the blow,
And down on earth he dead does lie: Phereclus may no starte,
Meriones hand, a Carpenter, so cunning in his art Meriones kills Phereclus,
vvh^ made the ships (...) stale Heleine VV^

That work was none so excellent that any man did frame,
But that Phereclus by his skill with tool cauld cut the same,
Minerua wise so favored him, for Paris he of Troy
Did build the ships, which were the cause of all this great annoy,
And to his City and himself such spoil and mischief brought.
For to the Gods, who nillde ye same, he would not weeld his thought:
Without revenge he yields the ghost, him Merione does smite
Upon the haunch with steeled spear, and pierst his bladder quite,
When as he feels his breath to part, he falls on his knees,
With better tears, since die he must, distilling from his eyes.
Meges also fiercely fought for Phegeus wise and bold
Kight down he slew, the bastard son of Antenorus old, Meges (...) Phegeus
Antenrs Bastardso^

Whom Theana his mother in Law had nourisht with great care
To please his sire, even as though legitimate he were, The Poet to move the
more pity, names the race and bringing up of these are slain. Euripilus kills
Hipsenor Priest of Scamander.

By great mishap unto the teeth, the dart does tear his skul,
He on the plain does die, his mouth with blood and iron full.
Hard by the bastards body there Euripilus does quell
Hipsenor Priest of Scamander, who servde the Temple well:
Whose manners good were liked much, yet forced, he rested there
In field: his right hand at a blow his falchon off did shere:
Wherewith him suddenly receivde the dark and duskie death,
Which darkness throws upon his eyes, and takes from him his breath.
While that the kings they fought, and down in flight ye Troyans flew,
A man right hardly Diomede for Greek or Troyan knew,
He through and through the Camp does go withouten any stay,
And nothing finds can him resist, no any kind of way.
Like as a spring throughout a plain falling from mountain top, Diomedes
lickned to an ouer^o vving River which spoils all.

Disorders all, both bancke and bridge, and no where finds stop
Which it not breaks in spreading forth his mighty course on fields,
On vines, and fertile Gardens eke, and Meadows often yields
Frnitelesse, that erst were fruiteful much, and frls them full of Sand:
Even so this Gretians haughty deeds, and valiance of his hand
Makes way through Troyans every where, he finds none does resist,
No band or battle in defense that stand against him list.
Pandarus then beholding thus the folk of Troy to fly, Pandarus the archer.

Does bend his bow minding to strike Diomede mortally:
He lets fly a shaft at him, and pierst his Curet flap
On his shoulder, and in the flesh it gave a pretty knap,
As well appeared by the blood abundantly that sproong, Diomedes vvounded by
Pa^darus

Wherewith the archer ginnes to brave, that all the field it roong.
Oh valiant Troyans al, (quoth he) come see, and here behold
The luckie hit of this my shaft, take heart and wax ye bold. Pandarus to the
Troyans.

Advance my friends, now hurt I have one chiefest of our foes,
Believe that long he cannot stand, of force to die he goes,
If so Apollo do not spoil, and yield my travail vain,
And take from me this worthy glore, which now I seem to gain.
Thinking that victour now he stood, thus Pandarus does brave
At the stout Greek, who feeling well himself a wound to have, Sthenelus
plnckes the arrow out of Diomed.

He draws back, but not aghast, and Sthenelus his friend
He wills to come down from his chair, and softly take by end
The steel, and pluck it out the hurt, with ease as much as may:
As best he could, the piercing shaft he drew, and cast a way.
Wherewith the golden buckle gaie, the which he ware before,
And Curets did together hold, was stainde with purple gore.
Diomedes thus painde alite, cast up to heaven his head,
With heart he Pallas does entreat, and thus to her he said Diomedes prayer to
Pallas.

Oh Pallas great, the daughter thou of Jove the God so hie,
Give ear, and grant thy servant suite, which craves it earnestlye:
If ever thou Tydee my sire, or else now me his son
Have prospered well against forceful foes, where we exploite have done, Tideus
Diomedes father.

Grant I beseech, thy favor now, that I may send to Hell
This gallant, who me having hurt, he thinks he bears the bell,
Believing sure, seeing from me my scarlet blood to run,
I cannot hold, but am depriude from ever sight of sun.
The Greek no sooner said his suit, but Pallas would it so,
She came, and straight to al his parts did double strength bestow, Pallas to
Diomedes

And spoke him thus: Go, fiercely fight, thy foes to daunt not fear:
The gifts of force are now in thee, which in thy father were,
And more, the vale I take away long erst before thy sight:
That thou may know both gods and men the better in thy fight:
Yet take good heed, if any God present himself to thee,
That one to dear him with thy hand thy mind, do not agree.
If Venus fair do hap to come, then do thy forces plie,
And hurt her corpse, if so thou can, composde so tenderly.
Minerua left him with these words, with courage fully frought,
And to the Troyans then he made, and one them fiercely fought.
Who, though full fierce in war he were, and forward always bent
Before his hurt, a third part now he finds his strength augment:
Wishing revenge most Lion like, the which the simple heard Comparison of the
Lion chased.

Does gaul with shast or skirring dart in keeping of his heard,
Wherewith the beast is more enradge, the blow does make him grin,
The which the heardman when he sees, for fear begins to spin,
And to the savage Lion leaves his cattaile and his fold
To do his will, who does perform his losses manifold,
And comes out a conqueror: ene with like valiant heart
The mighty Greek the Troyans scoures amazde in every part. Diomedes s^ayes A
^ous.

Astinous and Hipenor, two puissaunt Dukes to tell,
By weapon of the worthy Greek in field the Princes fell.
For thwart the Pap the one he stroke, his lance so held the trade,
The other smote his weighty sword twixt neck and shoulder blade:
The cruel blow he stroke, the joint no whit it mysste at all,
The body and the shoulder both to earth together fall.
After he cut in pieces there Polidus and Abant Diomedes kills Abant and
Polidus the so^ns of Eurima^tes the Prophet.

The children of the Prophet great cleaped Euridamant.
Who prophesies and dreams though true he could interpretate,
The hoarie fire yet had not cast his sons unlucky fate.
And in the rank by his right hand the self same dance now runs
The brethren Thoon and Xanthus, rich Phenops only sons,
And to the old man's grief, since fate no children did him leave
He forced was his stored wealth to strangers to bequeaue. Theon and Xanthus
s^ayne by Diomedes.

And passing forth, a Chariot met Diomede in the face,
Wherein were two, king Priams sons, with wise and warlike grace,
Who well did know the feats of war, Echemonone that hight, Echmon and Chromius
Priams sons s^aine by Diomedes Comparion of an hungry Lion.

Chromius eke fell dead in field ydaunted by his might.
For even as the Lion proud for hunger set to pray,
In pasture finds an heard of neat, and seeks to force away
One of the troop, with strength on him he seaseth with his paws,
And fiercely holds him by the neck, and forth the booty draws:
Even so the hardy Greek did joy, and plucked them from their chare,
His mighty hand of both their bloods the badge and token bare.
Off them their armor then he tare, their horses eke he sent
Fourth by his friends unto his ship, or else unto his tent.
When as Eneas thus beheld the Troyans go to wrack,
With wounds and slaughter only one to put them al to sack,
And at his pleasure play the Bug, he forward straight does pass,
And in the throng he thrusts in, whereas it thickest was:
Seeking he asks of his folk for their Duke Pandarus,
The Lycian head, whom when he found, he cheerely spoke him thus:
Oh courteous knight, thy piercing shafts where are they, and thy bow? Encas to
Pandarus.

Are they in pieces al to pasht, whereof thou boasted so?
Thy great renown and worthy fame, wherwyth al Lycie roong,
And eke our Camp, and often the Greeks with dread and terror doong,
What, is it out yquenched clean? alack thy bow take yet,
And nocke the mortalst shaft thou have, and send it right to hit,
And pray the Gods to further thee against this Gretian fell,
Who cruelly our chiefest folk does chase, destroy and quel:
I greatly fear some mighty God descended is from skies
To punish us for our offense, whose fury now does rise
For having not his honors due, if that way go the gear,
We quiet must content, for why, their rage is great to bear.
O noble Troyan quoth Pandare, as touching now this Greek, Pandarus to Encas.

The prudent heir of Tydeus he seems to be leeke:
Like targe he bears, his lofty crest and armor does agree,
His horses also make me think that well it may be he:
I dare not yet affirm the same, for no man mortal sure
Is to be thought, whose deeds of arms such valiaunce does procure.
Perhap it is one of the Gods in mortal armor bent,
Or else some one, to whom the Gods have secret favor sent,
And turns aside the wounds and blows, which should upon him fall,
If not, my shaft had sent him erst to good king Plutoes Hall.
But now I see him in the fight more furious than before,
And more I know some mighty God has me displeasure bore.
For here I nothing have to arm and front me to the fight,
My strong and shining chariots brave, my coursers eke so light,
And mighty band alack, I want: oh (no good reason why)
Far hence I left them at my home, the more unhappy I.
I have eleauen armed well and richly wrought throughout
With goldsmithes work, and gallauntly embroydred round about.
Two horses tough each one it has, the Iades they are not dull,
Of Barley white, of Rye and Oats they feed in mangier full. Licaon father of
Pa^ datus.

Licaon when I did depart the good old man me bad
To take them with me, for to show what force in fight I had,
I do fore think, for that I would my fathers hest obey,
And did forsake his counsel good: I only fearde always,
(Knowing with siege this City girt) I doubted to come by
The wo^d food my ho^ses had, wherefore unhappily
Trusting unto my (...) ^owe, I here am come a foo^e,
And have them left, which bow of mine has servde to little boot,
I having often provde the same: two of my shots did prick
Both Menelau, and Diomede, and thrust them to the quick,
And al in vain, for thinking I, with death their bones to bore,
I nothing did, but stirde them up more furious than before.
Wherefore I justly now may say, unlucky was my fate,
To bring my bow or souldioure else to fight in any rate
Under the Troyan ensigues here, or put my helping hand
Hector the noble prince to aid, and subjects of his land.
If Gods do please that eft I may my wife and Country see,
For this my grievous great mishap, I willingly agree
And am content some stranger do cut off this head of mine,
If bow, if shafts, and quiuers too, as right as any line
In fire and flame I do not cast, with most despite to b^rne
Which with my pain in this exploite so il have servde my turn.
This spoke the Lycian Pandarus, do not thy self thus dear, Encas to Pandarus.

Quoth Eneas unto him, but be of better cheer.
Let us together join, and leave this fancy wood,
Let us assail this soldier stout, if so you think it good.
Come up into my Chariot here, do you my horses try
How light they are, how well to hand to such as do them gye
To scour apace, or else to stop, to join to gallop swift,
To turn, and how to help us to at any sudden lift.
Choose which you list* take you the rain, and guider be to me,
While I do go and fight with him, or I will guide to thee.
It best is that you take the charge quoth Pandare by my reed,
For they will better gouernde be by him, who does them feed, Pandarus Eneas.

Than by a foreign, for I fear when so we should retire,
With bit in teeth they still would stand: and horses will require
The chearing of their wonted g^ide* and so it might befall,
That he the Greek assayling us* may reign and govern all.
Wherefore do you your horses rule, and let me now in faight
My force and prowess put in proof: these words be ended straight
And both the lusty soldiers there in martch do forward go,
And valiauntly do shake their (...) Sthenelus do^ know, S^nelus to Diomedes

He calls his friend and says him thus* (...) are here,
Who force themselves to join with us, and now are drawing near,
Both warlike men, one cunning much in shooting very straight,
The Troyans praise the other stout, and wise in things of waighte,
Esteemde and honourde over all, the old Anc^ses heir,
The which he vaunteth he begot on lovely Venus fair.
Wherefore herin is danger much, and therefore I you pray
Re^ire a while, have not so much the hap of war t'assaie.
For doubt that this our forwardness may yield us both to die.
Diomede hearing thus his mate to counsel him to fly,
In choler great does answer him as miscontented much: Diomedes to Sthenel.

Think not thy foolish counsel can yield fear or terror such
In me, no, no, al men of us great villainy would say,
No soldier following at our backs to see us run away.
I answer can a greater cause than this yet with my force,
That it is true, I will not take my Chariot nor my horse
To deal with them, let me alone, Minerua she does grant
This victory it shall be mine, one of them I must daunt,
And reaue from him his vital breath, believe it true to find,
At least I will constrain them here to leave their chare behind.
Good friend remember well my words, part not from me away,
If so it hap, and fortune, that I both those Troyans stay,
Or if in field they mangled lie, make have in any case,
Their horse and Chariot to my hall I pray you lead apace.
These goodly beasts are of the race of these great coursers trim,
Which Jupiter to Tros the prince presented unto him,
When as he meant Ganimedes from Troy to steal and catch Eneas ^ses of the
heavenly Race.

To serve him in the heavens hie, no where is found their match
For countenance and for courage, not, under the morning gray,
Nor yet beneath the shining sun, Anchise well knew the way
The race and kind for to come by, for since the same in gift
Laomedon would never grant, he finds a pretty shift,
Into the pasture privily he puts his goodly Mares,
To cover them the Stalions stout and coursers nothing spares:
Six colts so had he beautiful of which he chose him four
To serve him at all times of need, and made of them great store,
Th^e two he gave Eneas here so gay and richly clad,
O what a pray were this, if Jove, would I the booty had?
So spoke the Greek, who even thinks the deed already done: P^arus to
Diomedes.

In mean time both the Troyans do against him jointly run.
Then spoke Pandare, oh cruel Greek, since so it is befall,
That erst my mortal piercing shaft could not thee hurt at all,
To cleave thy Curets once again I now will try my dart.
And when he ended had these words, his lance he threw so smart,
That through he thirlde his buckler quite, and to his Curet fled, Pandarus
vanteth to foolishly.

And further not, yet thinking there that he the Greek had sped,
Does vaunt aloude: O Diomede the deed now is it done,
Whereby I justly judge my self the happiest under sun.
This blow so deep it pierced has thy side, and pretty poke
Of guts, as die of force thou must, receiving thus the stroke.
Diomede naught afright him said: thy strength it is too young
Thou art deceivde, for by the same I nothing now am wroong. Diomedes to Pandar.

I will thee show another trick, thou shall not so well brook,
My lance shall send thee to thy grave, at my hands do not look
For better grace, but it in blood of one of you to bathe:
He with these words at Pandarus does throw it strong and rathe:
Then Pallas to the Lycians face directs the weapon right, Diomedes kills Pan.

Which mightilye thrusts through the same, and cuts in two his sight,
His nose, his teeth, his tongue and all, and there remains in
A good piece of the steel and staff, the head from out his chin
Does pear, and down he falls dead, the horses start withal,
Hearing the noise that there did make his armor in the fall:
His armor bright and finely wrought, but filld with blood so raw,
And hewde throughout, this great defeite when as Eneas saw,
Most Lion like he venters forth, and loud the Prince does cry,
With sword and targe in hand, in have he runs desperately,
Minding mortally to wound, the Gretian first he met,
But Diomede then well aduisde, a weighty stone does fet,
Which scarcely two good (...) could heave or lift upon the ground, Diomedes
vvoundeth Eneas.

Wherewith he hits him on the thigh, and does Eneas wound,
So sore, his fi^ewes he does pash, and muskles tears in two,
As forced kal^e dead (...) he was, headlong on knees to go,
And groueling stard him with his hands, he bitter death had cought,
If so his tender dame had not his present suc^or sought:
Who viewing well the danger great, which to her son did hap,
To rid him out the hard distress, her cloak she does bewrap
Him round about, and hawseth him, wherewith he was so clad
As in a forte, else thousand darts him over happed had.
And then to lead him out the prease, Venus does her deuore.
And Sthenelus remembering what his friend had willd before,
Aeneas horse does take, his own aside does lead a while
The Troyans horse he does betake his trusty mate Deiphile, Stheneius Diomedes
guider tak^ Aeneas horses.

To guide unto Diomedes tents: this Deiphile was the same
Who well belovde of all the camp, of Knighthoode bare the name*
His own coursers he mounteth on, and follows speedily.
Diomedes, whom then he finds with all his might to hie Diomedes purs^eth Ven^.

After the Goddess, her to fell, and Venus down to beat,
Well knowing she is none of them, in whom is power ^o great,
As in the two maidens Minerue, and in the fierce Bellon, Minerua and Ballon^.

A weak and dainty parnell she, in whom is goodness none.
He in the prease does find her out, he follows on so fast,
Whether th'immortalls will be hurt, to prove he now does cas^e.
His dart with poudred Emins lynde does pierce the gallant cloak, Venus
vvounded in the hand by Diomedes.

And in her fine and Goddess hand there forward hit the stroke:
The kind and dainty dame is hurt, wherewith she waild her ill,
And heavy in her heart she feels the heavenly juice distill,
And scarlet blood, which was not like as mortal men do bleed,
For, forasmuch as heavenly folks on fruits they do not feed,
And do abstain themselves from wine, their h^nors do not gree,
With us are men, therefore we say immortal that they be.
Venus she grieves, and chafeth much, being thus forste to pine
By hand of one that mortal is, and loud begins to whine,
For^eare she is constraind to leave, and forsake Aeneas,
Whom Phoebus helps at a pinch, and does him there embrace,
She haps him with a cloud, and keeps him from the Greekish spite,
Which for the purpose, when he came, she straight had therein sight.
In mean time Diomedes does at Venus gibe and floute,
Prouokes her wrath, in fight (quoth he) he^ceforth no more come out,
Let it suffice you with your wiles pore women to deceive,
The trade of war and warlike acts I read you for to leave:
For if the battle thus you haunt, your self you will beguile,
One day you will be paid for all, that you will curse the while.
The Grecian spoke the Goddess thus, for grief who sorrows sore,
Not only for the wound that painde, no less, but rather more
She does lament thus to be mockte, wherewith her color gay
So bright that was, begins to swarte, and seems to fade away.
Wherefore Iris with pity woonde, unto her draws nie,
And for good will she brought her out, and to a place there by Iris brigeth
Venus our of the batel

On the left hand she led her in, where Mars did stand and groile,
As ill disposd, and did behold the bloody fight and broile:
He sitting in a duskie cloud, his Mounter by him there,
He leans sadly on his lance, as though he weary were.
Then Venus on her maribones thus prays him earnestlye:
Good brother Mars so well belovde, to mounte^ Olympus hie, Venus to Mars.

And heavenly palace, lend me now your chair, great pain I have,
Alack with treason Diomede, that fierce and cruel knave
He has me wounded in the hand, that fierce and cruel curre,
I think he Jove would also hurt he keeps such a stir.
Mars willing grants her request, his chare and horse he lent, Mars ^endeth
Venus his chariots who ascen death into heaven.

She mounts, and Iris takes the rain, for guide with her she went:
The goodly Genets cut the air, they rather wish to fly,
And in a moment they are come unto the heaven hie,
And found the mansion of the Gods, where Iris straight her spedde
To dress them well, and there with meats immortal she them fed.
Then Venus found her mother dear, and fell down in the place,
Half sounding, whom Dione does lamenting there embrace,
And courteously does thus entreat: Good daughter, whom I love,
Whose hand has bin so cruel bold of all the Gods above,
That dared dear thy tender flesh? no worse they could have used
The ranckes^ driuel, who hirselfe most filthy had abusde.
Diomede that rebel (quoth she) has given me the gelpe,
When as I meant my tender son Aeneas for to help, Venus to her mother.

Else died he had, and now I see that Greeks not only war
With folk of Troy, but do in fight the Gods both hurt and scarre.
The worthy Goddess Dione then this furious rage to stay,
A while to quiet at her harm does lovely Venus pray. Dione to Venus.

My daughter sweet, content your self, for many Gods there are,
Whom mortal men dispitefully have wronged with hateful care,
But yet in time have felt at full the guerdon of their fault:
Ephalte, Otus, stout Oloeus sons Mars God they did assault,
And so preuaild against the God, that thirteen months long,
They bound and kept him prisoner in prison sure and strong:
Where he had dyed by long abode, but that with pity fraught
Euribea their mother in law Mercurius she besought
In favor of the God distressed, who stale him in a braide,
And secretly conuayde him forth, without whose present aid,
The fetters and the stinking air had there consumde him quite,
His nature so divine it was. Juno for all her might Juno (...) in the right
breast by Hercule^.

On her right breast was wounded sore, and stricken so did stand
By triple he adedshee ring shafte, ysent by Herculs hand.
What shall we say of Pluto black, who rules in each behoof
The Infernal powers as only God? has he not had good proof
Of Herculs darte, when as he was in Pili^ country soil:
Among the murdered carcasses, where so receivde the foil
His Godhead, that if possibly a God could die or wast, Pluto (...) by
Hercules. Pluto was healed by Peon physician to the Gods.

The wound on shoulder which he caught had bin his vtas last.
But to the lightsome mansion tho, of Jove be hies amain
To seek a help there for his hurt, where Peon takes pain,
His grievous wound he dresseth well, and quite does heal the same:
O Hercules, unhappy thou, too foolish and too blame,
Who feared not to deal in fight, and strive offensiuely
Against the Gods, who always seek revenge assuredly.
But daughter trust this Greek durst not have hurt you any way,
But by Mineruas help, who wills you all the ill she may.
A good pore fool, who does not know the man that does contend
Against the Gods with envious pride, must have a wretched end.
This only fault another day (at home) shall make him miss
His preatie babes to call him Dad, and there his knees to kiss.
He surely ought to think, if they, who be of greater force
Then you, would not revenge your case, so driven by remorce,
That your power can well suffice his punisher to be
In his own land, that is to say, by his wife Egialee:
Who waking out her heavy sleep, seeling the burning prick
Of loves desire, to quench her heat, some roag she shall not stick
To tice unto her husbands bed, and sport with many a fit,
As merrily as Cock and Pie, he nothing wotting it.
To cheer her daughter thus she said, and softly dressed the sore,
She swagde the pain, and Venus was more eased than before. Dione appeaseth
Venus.

But when as Juno and Minerue did see her thus arrayed,
In flouting wise, O Jove they said, be you not ill apayed?
O holy father (quoth Pallas) of this ymery be, Pallas to Jupiter mocking Venus.

Venus a Greek to Troyan camp to bring there minding she
To give to one whom well she likte, in leading forth the man,
Her hand with buckle of his belte (she hardly leaning an) Ironia.

Is hurt, the tongue has thrust her in, and then it may befall
Good cause to ask some ready help, the wound it is not small.
At this good jest the God of Gods smyleth with merry cheer,
And kindly came and spoke her thus: Venus my daughter dear,
It is not yours to rule an host, nor deal in bro^les of war, Jupiter to
Venus.

But love and marriages to make, for you they fitter are,
Meddle with them, your brother Mars to him leave you the fight,
And to your sister Minerua, as due to them of right,
In love your office only is, thus Jove does pleasant jest,
And talking so they to and fro, he sportes among the rest.
In the mean while Diomedes, Aeneas he had slain,
And misste but small, but Apollo defended him again.
For the desire that then he had, the Troyan for to slay,
And gain his goodly furniture, al judgment took away,
Apollo thrice there guarded him, him thrice the Greek did charge,
Apollo still did strike aside his weapon and his targe:
The fourth time dead he had him down, or laid him on the flower,
But that with grimme and griesly looks Apoll does threat and l^re.
In have retire I read (quoth he) how trim a man you are, Apollo to Diomedes.

So saucy with the immortal Gods, and boldly ^s compare?
And henceforth this consider to, far different is the power
Of men, who leads their lives on earth, and (...) die every hour,
From that of Gods immortal who and heavenly never dies.
Herewith the hasty Greek, apace (well fearde) away he flies.
Then Phoebus there out of the fight the Troyan took away,
And on the City wall he plaste him in the Temple gay,
Unto him consecrated, large, and sumptuously wrought,
As in a fortress sacred much, and most assured thought:
Unto the end that Diana, and his sister Latone,
More carefully might help to heal his wounds, which causd his moan,
And straight the armies to abuse he used a Stratageme,
Animage like unto Enee himself (it so did seem) An Imag^ of (...).

He did erect, about the which the bloody gore did run,
And round about the same, many a doubtie deed was done
By Knights of Greece, and Troyans both, the one their travel spent
It to defend, it Greeks to spoil their might and forces bent.
When as Enee Apollo had in good sure safety set,
Another way he helps, for, he mighty Mars does get
By his great means in Troyans aid, and him he bourded thus: Apollo to Mar^.

O Mars thou God invincible, Mars fell and furious,
O bloody Mars with gastful looks, against whom no batteld wall,
Nor armor tempred nere so well, can scarce resist at all:
What, can you suffer here this Greek to brave throughout the host
And glory thus? will you not plague and scowre him to his cost
For this so saucy his attempt? for he would make no stop
An enemy to be to Jove, and ride upon his top,
Who made no bones so ill t'array Venus thy sister here,
And has prepared against me to, a mad man as he were.
Apollo ending thus his words, upon the wall did rest, Mars in (...) ^y kenelle
(...) Acamas (...) horteth the Troyans

And Mars the puissant God himself to battle ready pressed.
He commes into the Troyan camp, presenting in the face,
And furniture, one Acamas, a mighty Prince of Thrace.
The ranckes he cheares, and comforts up, namely King Priams sons:
His voice he lifts up and calls, disordred now who runs,
O valiant ympes, whom erst I took so worthy and so strong,
To see pour folk thus murdered here without your help, how long
Will ye forbear? what, stay you till your Knights be beaten down*
And that your foes do come and fight at gates before your town?
What greater grief (oh) can there be for you, than to behold.
Enee a Troyan of such price, so valiant and so bold,
Another Hector well esteemd in danger here to ly,
And such a friend to rescue out not one of you will try?
These words made many Troyans show good face and courage take,
Whereby Sarpedon worthy Knight to Hector thus he spoke, Sarpedon to Hector.

With choler seeming somewhat mood: O Hector sage and wise,
Where is the prowess that sometimes extold was to the skies,
When thou did boast that thy brethren, and thy allies alone
Could bid good welcome to the Greeks, and well defend your own
Without the force of strangers aid? where is thy great kindred?
Thy brethren, cousins, and adheres? surely they all are fled,
I see not one, no, no. like Dogs, whom Lion seeks to tear,
They leave thee here in danger great, and run away for fear. Comparion of
Dogs assailed by a Lion.

They leave not thee, but us also, who here are come not strest
In thy quarrel to spend our blood, and through have done our best.
To Troyan King I am no liege, ne with him kindred have,
I have no country lies so near, which I need seek to save.
Yet here I come from Licie land, a country furre that lies,
Provoked by thy great report, which famde is to the skies.
I there have left my loving spouse, my babes, such good and gold,
Wherewith such men as want the same, greatly rejoice they would.
I hazarding with most good will my life and state for thee,
I cannot now but marvel much: for why, alas I see
Thy friends and soldiers run away, and I and mine to stand,
Thou holdst thy peace, who ought revoke, and bear them hard in hand,
No more thus to abandon thee, declaring to them all
The mischief, wherein they and theirs is happily like to fall:
The which shall be as simple beasts ywrapped in the snare, Comparion of beasts
taken in Nets.

Their great and famous City spoil^, ysackte, and pilled bare.
You better ought to mind this gear, and go unto the chief,
And tell them, that there yet remains great hope of good relief:
And that by stoutly standing to it, the victory may be had:
So men of you will deem right well, else judge of you too bad.
Sarpedon thus prickte Hector on, the prince nothing replied,
But in his armor as he was from Chariot straight he hied, Hector begins the
battle again^.

And leaped down, holding in hand of darts a goodly pair,
Which there he fiercely shakes, and does unto his folk repair:
Where, with commaundment and request his bands he orders eft,
Who taking heart, forward advance, to gain the place they left.
When Greeks the Troyans thus perceivde themselves in rancks to weaue,
Their crues they clappe together close, the^ surer to receive,
And souldior like do ready make, to bide the fight they mean:
And even as men out of the barn fanning their corn clean,
Often by greatness of the wind the chafe abroad that blows,
The filth does white the husbandmen, which out the corn goes:
The dust was likewise great, when as the Troyans near appearde,
The soldiers and their armor all with dust were all besmeard.
Then did the cruel war begin with great and sorer tewe
Than erst before, they fight it out, and shieldes in pieces hew.
Mars runs up and down the fields, the Troyans he exhortes
In covert wise, and cheares them up with speech of sundry sorts.
Phoebus (quoth he) does take your parts, and Pallas is your foe,
Wherefore some worthy deed of Arms, it you behooues to shoe. Aeneas (...)
turns to the (...).

The self same time Aenee reurnes all fresh into the field,
Apollo brought him in, whom when the Troyans whole beheld,
And not to do like as a man that hurt or maimed were,
But like a strong and valiant Knight, they greatly ginne to cheer.
At him they could not gaze their fill, some would have talkte with him
But now the broile and bickering begone was very brimme:
Apollo, Mars, the Goddess fond Contention took the parts
Of the good Troyans, enflaming to war their warlike hearts, Apollo, Mars. and
Con^ for the Troyans.

The valiant Knights the two Ajax on the other party do it,
With Diomede and Ulysses they pray the Greeks stand to it,
The which obey: like men of war they stand and keep their ground:
For as the clouds the mountains tops do close and compass round
Comparis^ of the clouds of the mount^.

Maugre the winds, by Jove his means, who else no way abides
The blasts and blustering northern puffes, ty thrusts at heart their sides:
Likewise with stout and valiant minds the Greeks well armed stand,
Seeing with them the worthiest Dukes of all the Greekish land.
And Agamemnon does command, where need he thinks most,
And travails carefully about to order all the host.
O warlike Grecians (quoth he) tho, if ever men have seen
Your warlike deeds perform them now, no less than they have bin,
Take courage sirs, and with one mind now charge upon your foes,
The souldior who esteems his name, for surety do suppose,
And for the same does stir his stumpes, more dangers does escape
Than cowards do, who from the fight to flee do only gape.
We sooner see go to the hacke, the dull and fearful foke,
Than hardy soldiers in the field, who wish with foes to yoke.
The sprite, the which for honors sake has not more lively grace,
The body faints, and mated eke, to death it gives place.
He with these words does she we the way, his Iaueline to his foes
He gyrdeth forth, and dead in field Deicoon overthrows, Deicoon slain by
Agamemno^

Dear friend unto the great Aenee, through all the camp Troyene
So honored and esteemd, as he King Priams son had been.
Not only for his iolitie, and for his strength and might,
But that he always still would be the foremost in the sight.
The Dart his massy Target does and Baudricke through bear,
So down it goes to his paunch, and dead he falls there.
The self same time Aeneas slew Crethon, Orsilochus:
Who had of the City Pheree to sire Deocleus, ^neas kills Crethon and
Orsilochus.

Abounding both in power and wealth, whose petigree they fetch
From Alphe brook in Pilie land, so largely which does stretch.
Orsilochus was Alphes son, a King of worthy name,
Who did beget Deocleus, a Prince of no less fame:
Of whom descended these two heirs, Orsiloche and Crethone,
In feats of war, in Greekish camp their betters was there none:
And chiefly for their times, who more their honors to increase,
Had followed hard even to Troy Agamemn through the seas,
Supposing they it honor great as soldiers for to go
Under the guide of such a chief: as often it happens so,
That two young whelps of Lions race, close in some corner by
The Forest, led by Lioness who in the country nie
Spoiling their cattaile and their foldes, an Ox they sometime slay,
Sometime an Horse, sometime a sheep they kill and run away, Comparison of
two Lions surprised by the sheepehearde.

Shall be at length yet ouertane, and by the sheepheards caught,
They not bearing their harms, who well will cause the^ to be watched.
Likewise Aenee courageous ^ueld (against whom there was no boots)
The Gretians two, who fell like Pines ytournde up by the roots Similitude of
two Pine trees ^elled.

By force of wind, then Menelau hereat does greatly grieve
To see his friends thus murdered here, whom he co^mes to relieve.
Through armed well, in his right hand a Darte right bright he bare
Mars let him pass, that by Aenee his hand he murdered were.
Antilochus him folowes hard when as he forward went,
He thought the hazard was not small, nor he sufficient
Alone to make his party good, which when Eneas saw,
Although he weelded well in fight, himself he did withdraw.
To deal with two he danger thought, no sooner he retires,
But that to draw the bodies forth the other two desires,
And gave them to their fellows there, and then to fight they gone, Menelaus
kills Pylemen^s.

In this conflict Pilemene fell, the king of Paphlagone.
With Mydon loyal guider, who his royal Chariot drivde,
The shoulder of the foresaid king there Menelaus clivde.
At Mydon mazde Antilochus a weighty stone did throw, Antilochus kills (...)

He crushed his arm, constrayning him the bridle to let go:
Beside this blow, he on his face gave him a schochelade,
Whereby he fell down to the ground islaine by his blade.
He fell not straight, the Palfreys did trayle him upon the mould,
Antilochus til he them stayde, and led them where he would.
Then Hector prince by chance came by, right as the deed was done,
Seeing the good king thus distressed to wax in heat begone:
And therewith al he cries so loud, that every Troyan leapes
That heard his voice, and with good heart they follow him in heaps.
The furious Mars, and stout Bellone, on them the charge do take Mars and
Bellone with Hect.

To martch before the Troyan bands, and dreadful noise do make.
Mars shakes his redoubted lance, he never Hector left,
Sometimes before, sometimes behind he oftentimes does shift,
In fine, it was a goodly thing a God to have for guide.
Diomede seeing Mars to martch, for fear may not abide, Comparis^ of a
traveler vv^o stopped by a t^uer, returns.

But did recule a foreign like, who ryding by the way
To some far land, does find a flood, whose breadth does him affray,
He stopped is by the swift course, and surging so amain,
That he his business leaves undone, and home returns again.
Pea even so the puissaunt Greek his soldiers does advise,
Himself withdraws from the sight, and spoke them in this wi^ Dio. to the
Greeks.

My friends quoth he, marvel no whit that Hector is so stout,
And pressed himself to sight with you, and hence to drive you out.
With him to lead him in the field a guider God does go,
Erst in human and mortal form I Mars the God did know,
Who man's him thoroughly at the full, wherefore sirs by my read,
I would persuade you tarry time, and stay but for a bread.
Turn not your backs but do retire, for doubt what happen mig^
Provoking here the mighty Gods, who for the Troyans fight.
The Greeks a little leave their ground, the Troyans hie as fast,
And Hector first of all the rest his iauelins he does cast
Wherewith two warlike soldiers he does slay, Menesthes strong Anchialus and
Menesthes slain by Hector. Ajax kills Amphius.

And Anchiale, whom from their chare on earth he laid along.
The stout Ajax did pity much their fall, the which he spied,
Wherefore his piersing dart he threw, wherewith Amphius dyed:
His armor could not bear the blow, but that his guts it gorde,
This Amphius was Selags son, of Pese the wealthy Lord,
Come far to Troy in Priams aid, who there does leave his course,
And sturdie Ajax seeks to spoil his furniture by force.
But Troyans on his target threw so many darts at once,
The carcass they it took him fro, for all his mighty bones.
Saving his lance, he nothing had, which he was feign to pluck
With both his hands the body out, so deep in him it stuck.
This done, by Troyans put aback, himself away he wryde
Almost well weary of the toil, again on th other side
By fortune hard and fate does fall valiant Tlepoleme, son
To Hercules, with hardy heart, who forward there does run,
And puts himself in place to join, with stout Sarpedon knight,
Who meeting both together round, and ready to the fight,
These words Tlepoleme to him says before his dart he flings: Thepole^us to
Sarpedon.

What weighty cause, what great affairs, what need thee hither brings
Thou coward knight of none account, unhappy here to dye?
Who told thee Jove to be thy sire, they coaxt thee pretily
Thy faintness with his heavenly race does greatly disagree:
Think thou in valiaunce to approach Hercule my father he,
My loving sire, with Lions heart so hardy and so haute,
Who with six ships he brought from Greece, took Ilion by assault,
To take revenge of broken faith of Laomedon tho,
Who promised on him in reward his horses to bestow?
Thy force and strength is far from his, and here before thy face
Thy Lycian soldiers are forehayde, and no man rues thy case.
What stead can thou the Troyans stand? thou letst thy me^ be hackt,
But al is one, for why? my lance to Hell shall send thee packt.
Sarpedon at his foolish threats does move and bash no whit, Sarpedo^ to
Tlepole^.

He takes his tale out of his mouth, (quoth he) full true is it,
That for the great abuse and fault to Hercules thy sire
They did, Troy it was sacked, and al her buildings set on fire:
But as for thee, here die thou shall ymurdred by my hand,
To my renown, and send thy soul to low and darksome land.
They make an end of words, their darts each shakes with his good will, The
light betvv^ne Sarpedo^ (...) Tlepolem. Tlepolem. slain and Sarpedon vvounded.

To slay his foe, and so it fell, as either had his fill.
Sarpedons lau^ce stroke through the Greek, who dead in field does ly,
The Greek his lance Sarpedon pierst in the sinister thy.
So deep the steel stacke in the bone, Sarpedon it had killed,
^e had not told who had him hurt, but Jupiter it nilde.
The soldiers when these two great Dukes on earth they thus saw laid
Themselves they ply, their proper prince apace they come to aid.
The Lycian Lord they took first up, and brought him out the host,
In evil plight, and very faint, he so much blood had lost.
As him they bear, the iaueline still trayled upon the ground,
They had no time there gently to pluck it out the wound.
The Greeks take Tlepoleme aside, they lay him in a nooke,
At this defaite and overthrow as Ulysses does look,
And saw Sarpedons safe retire, he does the chance bewail,
And does forethinke which better is, the victor to assail,
Or else to charge the Lycians, and them in pieces hew:
But following goddess Pallas mind, he there does them pursue.
Fate had not willd that Ulysses Sarpadons death should be,
Gods providence had kept it for a worthyer man than he.
But there in pieces he does cut Alastor, Chronius, Ulysses ^ay ^th seven
Lycian^.

Ceranes, Nomon, Alcander, Prytanes, Halius:
And but that valiant Hector came, he more had servde of trust,
But Hector hied to succor them, and in the ranckes he thrust. Sarpedon to
Hector.

Yea fearing with his armor bright the hardiest of the Greeks,
Sarpedon ioyeth this to see, and running down his cheeks
The trickling tears, thou Priams son (quoth he) I hartly pray,
Unto the Greeks in this distress, oh leave me not this day:
Cause me to Troy to be conuaide, there let me end my days,
Forsake me not, I well do know I may no manner ways
My Country see, and home return to see my loving wife
Nor children cheerish, for I feel now ends my fading life.
The worthy Hector aunswerde not, among the Greeks he romes,
Them, who withstoode him for to send unto their longest homes.
The Lycians on a moole-hill set the wounded Sarpedon,
The dart draws ont his friend and mate the faithful Pelagon,
He sounded in the plucking forth, his life it faded clean,
With groans and sighs far fet, his breath by little comes again,
Whereto the shadow well does serve, and eke the open air,
Which coolly blew right in his face, as he lay dawing there. Sarpedo^ in
plucking out the dart svvouns.

Hector his arm and Mars the gods the Gretians in all steades
So foul affray, as they dare not once martch, or show their heads.
They leave their order and array, in field they turn their backs,
And to retire to shameful flight the Gretian soldiers packes.
Well, let us tell what Greeks were slain by Hector in this broyle,
The valiant Theutras he was first, in fight who bare such coil, ^ector by
the fauoar of Mars stays many Greeks.

As he was wont to conquer still, then their Orestes lay,
The cunning rider of great horse, Threcus did in the fray,
Stout Helenus, who with the Greeks for knighthoode bare the bell,
Oenom, last Oresbius by Hectors hands he fell:
Oresbius a prince of power, with Scepter and with Crown,
The which right princely he did bear in Hile his proper town:
His neighbors all he did exceed in wealth, having his good
By Cephise take in Beocie, whereas his City stood.
Juno seeing this wretched plight the which the Greeks were in,
Does find her self beguilde, and chaft to Pallas does begin:
Oh daughter of the mighty Jove, what? nothing else but kill?
Is it agreed we al shall die? if so we suffer still Juno to Pallas.

This cruel Mars to fool so long, I see it very plain,
The promise made to Menelau to have Heleine again
After the siege and sack of Troy, shall turn unto a jest,
And that his travail he shall loose, if longer here he rest.
Go we my wench, and let us show this dizarde here at full,
What power and puissance ^two have, when use the same we wul.
Dame Pallas she consented straight, and Juno she does hie
Forthwith to put her horse in point, and to her Chariot tie:
Again the gorgeous Chariot trimde Hebe on the other side,
As did belong thereto, whereon the Goddess she must ride, Hebe mak^ ready Iu^
Charyot.

And then the wheels she fastened fast, well forgde of perfect gold,
Strong bound with brass and iron nails, we spokes twice four full told,
Of self-same bright and glittring brass, ye naues of silver mas,
The ends of steel with silver beam as brave as cristal was.
The seat with goldsmithes work bedaubde, and in such cunning wise,
As no man wist whether the work or matter more to prise.
Minerua made her ready while to dress the chare they sought, Discriptio^ of
Pallas armor.

And off the puts her right attire which she her self had wrought.
She claspeth on the Curets stiff which Jove does wear in fight,
And on her shoulder she does cast the mighty targe, in weight
That is so peasaunt, and so broad, environed with fear,
Contention, terror, braules, horror, and fury every where,
With boldness, noise, and gastful threats of horrible Gorgon,
The gastful dreadful monster, there the head was painted on,
Which frights al such as lokes thereat, a heavy helmet she
Puts on her head, of gold most fine, with crests ycrested three,
Which would suffice to hap the heads, yea of so many folk,
As well an hundred Cities has, in fight if they should yoke.
Thus armde, she lightly leapeth up the chair with spear in hand,
Against the which (she angry) not the demigods can stand.
Dame Juno of the tried horse in hand does take the raynes,
To be the conductour and guide her self will take the pains. The hou^ porter
of heaven.

They scour so fast, to gates they come there of the Welkin large
Fast shut: as porters of the same the hours have the charge,
And govern all the sky, and rule the hye Olympus eke,
And clouds to call together too, and force them for to break.
The hours to the goddesses do open readily,
And forth they let their coursers out; who pass the champio^ sky,
They soon come to the hugie hill of the Olympus ^rim,
Where Jove in throne does govern it, and near they draw to him.
And Juno keeping still her chare, thus tells him her annoy: Inno to Lupiter.

My brother, and you husband mine, what pleasure or what joy
Have you to see thus Mars your son before Troy Greeks to kill
So cruelly without respect, to please the foolish will
Ofenuious Venus and Apoll, of force, what, must you cloak
This hateful and malicious part with faith and promise broke?
I pray thee grieve no whit at all this fury for to stay,
If I descend and do my best to chase him (hurt) away. Jupiter to Juno.

I am content answered the God, but in your place I vise
For better end, that Pallas she do take the enterprise.
For Mars cannot defend himself against her, nor resist,
For she shall often conquer him, and mate him if she list.
This answer likes Juno well, she slakes the raynes and hies,
Her coursers run, and keep the way between the earth, and skies, The way
which the horses keep between heaven and earth.

They scour aloft as far from us, as men can well discrie
A ship, which sails aloof in seas, from of some tower hie.
And thereabout the horses keep their way, which down discende,
And soon they came against the town, and down to Troy they bend.
They quickly fall upon the ground, and down do set their feet,
Where clear Scamander her brother flood Simois does meet.
At Simois there Juno left her chare and horses brave,
Who well do taste the heavenly flood, and store of vitayles have.
The Paragons like two white doves, and yet with valiant hearts
Do martch to ye Greeks ca^pe, with mind to play some worthy parts
Where stout approved folk they find, who spare no more her foes,
Than Lions great, or wild swine, which hungry a praying goes.
Juno took the habit on of Stentor Greekish knight,
Whose voice was more than fifty men's, crying with all their might: Stentor
who had the voice of 50. men.

O what dishonor and reproach, oh Greeks that of your shame
So small account, unhappy Dukes and princes yet in name,
But in effect more fearful much than simple serving men,
If not, the usage of you thus why do you suffer then?
When as Achilles sought with us, they fled for fearful heart,
No Troyan stout durst any way from gates of Troy depart,
They dreaded so his valiant lance, but now good God what hap.
They fight not only out their town, but kill, and down they clap
Us and our soldiers at our ships, thus cried she amain,
The goddess great, wherewith reuivde their hardy hearts again.
The prudent Pallas she again meets Diomede right,
Weary not only of the toil, which he all day in fight
Had taken, but his mighty targe did make him sweat apace,
As he does ply to show himself a knight in every place.
And more, the hurt he lately had, did put him to such pain,
As while he bled, leaving he could seantly himself sustain Minerua to Diomed.

Against his chare, yet nerethelesse Minerua drew him nigh,
And touched the collers of his horse, and spoke him courteously
Full true it is, and as for me, it shall be in my creed
That Tydee that so odd a knight had never of his seed
A son so valiant as himself, he was but dapper he,
But aye so valiant and so wise, as often without me
He to the stoutst and strongst would begin the fight and fray,
And either bow them to his bent, or down in field them stay.
To warlike Thebanes did he not his courage well declare
He once a legate sent to them, when after banquet fare
(He seeing them careless full of chat) with them begins to braule,
And to his glore and great renoume he overthrew them al?
And how? I tenderd him so much, in all his facts, I came
For to conduct him as a guide, as to thee often I am,
And sometime put me in defense thy state and life to save,
And work on Troyans stoutest knights that thou ye triumph have.
And yet as now thou weary art, with sloth and dread distressed,
Among the valiant warlike folk no more I think it best Diomed. to Minerua.

Thou name thy self as Tides son: Diomede does reply,
O dame impute not my retire (I crave it humbly)
To want of heart, nor blame me not: for since I certain know
Your presence here, of my retreat the occasion I will show.
Neither for fear nor fainted flesh, but well in mind I had
Your counsel, which to take in hand against the Gods forbad.
Did you not warn me so, unless on Venus tender fool?
And seeing now against us here God Mars to deal his dole,
Am I blame worthy if I leave and part the combat fro,
And do admonish all my friends that likewise they do so? Minerua to Diomedes.

Quoth Pallas, friend, well, make no bones, if so he come in place,
Be not afraid, but thrust to him, and lay him on the face,
Or any other God that shall afront himself on thee:
Mars is a wrangling craking wretch, a slauering Jack is he,
And worse, a lier: of his words he takes little care:
No longer than this morning last, to me he said and swear,
He in the aid of Greekish crues would come to fight and deal,
And like a fickle fool he fights here for the Troyan weal.
She wills Stenele come down the chair, she wishes for to try
Now she can guide and take the raines and will Diomede guy, Minerua mounteth
Diomedes Chariot, and guides it.

The Chariot began to bow with burden that it bare,
The Axeltree (though great) did bend under the creaking chare,
The goddess for she wayed so much, and eke the champion good,
They go to trump and down to beat the raging Mars so wood.
And Pallas, (least she should be known) had pluckte her face upon
The helmet great half steel and brass of the infernal Pluton,
And when as Mars beheld them thus to come in such a have,
A Greek Etolian, Periphant, whom he to earth had cast,
Did leave: this Periphant renoumde with best they did esteem,
But Mars the warlike Greek to slay, and take his spoils does mien.
And now at ha^o Mars shakes straight his lance, a wound it made
Harmless, under the horses necks, it flies as a shade:
For it the goddess turnde abacke, advised well, and wise
She guides the Dart with her own hand, under the chare it flies.
Diomede threw not so in vain, for Mars his dart he felt Diomedes vvoundeth
Mars.

Which pressed his belly with the steel that hit under his belt.
In bottom of his bulk it thrust so deep entered the blow,
The stroke Dame Pallas for the Greek divinely did bestow.
She woteth well to do the feate, and eft the spear regaine,
Wi^h his great wound and so strange hurt, Mars cries out amain. The
terrible cry of Mars.

His hideous voice and fearful cry, his thundering bleate and rore,
Ten thousand men saulting a town could not have thundered more.
Unto the Greeks and Troyans both, when in their ears it rusht
Full suddenly begin to fear, and all for dread are whusht.
The sorrowful God surprisd with grief, and shame a thousand throes,
Most like a thick and louring cloud to high Olympus goes.
Which in the clear does softly wast, when pirling wind does beat
And makes it part, and yields the earth beneath feel pleasant heat.
Unto the heavenly mansion come, with grief and doleful cheer
He sits by Jove, showing his wound which bled, and spoke him there: Mars
tells love his mi^ap.

Redoubted sire, I cannot tell whether your will it be,
To see the Gods and Goddesses as Cattes and Dogs agree,
For love we only bear to men, and for thy quarrel not,
Whose subjects true we are: Thou haste a daughter ill begot.
So mischeuous, she nere is pleased, but when she wrongs or spites,
A God, or Goddess, when she lists, with pleasure she delites.
No God so mighty or so great, but justly thee obayes,
But she, the frantike lawless Iyll vnpunishte goes her ways.
A cruel Greek she forced has this day the hand to wound
Of Venus sister mine, and eke has made him keep his ground,
And forward come to foil and hurt me, as well see you may,
My Godhead almost had bin lost, but that I ran away.
He so me mangled had and coyld, and so my force decade,
The heaps so great of Troyans dead, by them he me had laid,
Which he in gobbets there had cut: thus spoke unto his sire
God Mars, and shewde his shame and grief, which pricked and burnd like fire,
To whom eft Jove: Thou fickle fool, so wicked and so ill, Jupiter ^o Mars.

Leave thy complaints, with thy foul deeds, thy fathers ears to fill.
Thou art the most malicious God of all the Gods above,
Thy nature full of strife and guile, with cause whom least I love.
Taking wholly after Juno that fond and spiteful shrewe,
A jealous head, past help to mend, like thee, hirselfe does show.
Of thy deep wound she causer is, I truly thee assure:
But, for thou art of both our bloods, my grace it shall procure
Thy to be healde: but think if thou so wicked art and wild,
The fathers favor thou shall want, which from offending child
He does withdraw: it is long since I justice did on thee,
For thy malicious wickedness and cankred cruelty.
Jove does command to heal the wound, Peon does look thereon,
And there so well he does his charge as he it heald anon. Comparion of curded
milk. The heavenly bodies are sooner healed than man's. Pallas and Juno leave
the battle and ascend to Heaven.

And as full often in Summer time their labor men do leese
In putting curdes into the press, which hardly then will cheese:
The immortalls hold of heaven much, from us they differ far,
When as their bodies have a wound they sooner healed are.
Mars sound, Hebe preparde sweet bains, with garments gay in hand,
Mars comes forth in open Court, and there by Jove does stand.
Again victorious Pallas she, with brauing Juno pleased,
To skies return, for chasing Mars and wounding him, well easd.
Finis quinti Libri.
The sixth Book.
AFter the Gods had left the fight, the broile again began
Among the Greeks and Troyans both, and nere so sore as than.
Many a slaying darte was seen on each side in the fray,
That none could judge the doubtful end between them of that day.
In field so many corses fell, where Xanthus river flows,
And Simois spreads her bancks, where store of trees and herbage groes.
The worthy Ajax Telamon of his part was the furst,
The rampire sure of Greekishe camp, that Troyan order burst,
And to his soldiers makes way that victors they may be:
One of the chief, a Thracian Prince in sight there murders he,
Hight Acamas: between the crest and helmet top, he struck A^ax fiaies
Acamas.

So just, that hard unto the brain the scull with brande he brake,
And in the forehead notchte him deep, wherewith the grievous pain
Of wound so wide, with darksome death his eyes it did retain.
And Axilus there Theuthras son, was slain by the hands Dlomede kills Axyl^

Of Diomede, a souldior odd of all the Troyan bands.
His dwelling was ^sba town, with walls well closed round,
Where many a stranger he had lodgde, to whom did often abound
His courtesy to use them well: but yet his usage good
And gentle heart did not so boot, when in this plight he stood,
That he might meet with friend or guest, to yield him help or aid:
The faithful guider of his horse along by him is laid, Calesius slain by
Dimede.

Calesius his servant there, yspitted through with wound,
To keep him company, he falls flat groueling on the ground.
Euryalus bereft of life Opheltius, and eke Euryalus kills Dresus. Opheltius,
Pedasns, and ^sopue.

Dresus, and old Bucolions sons he served with the leeke.
They wist not how to save themselves, the one Pedasus hight,
Both twins, the other Esopus, a well rynowmed Knight,
The gentle and the worthy Nais, called Nymph Abarbare,
Unto the said Bucolion them secretly she bare:
At such time, when from Ilion he, unto the mountain came
To sport himself, and to enjoy the love of beauties Dame,
Who then a simple shepehearde she, the fearney pasture on
Did keep her sheep, he was the son of King Laomedon: Bucasion son of La^
medon.

But leaving sire, and country both, aside their love he laid,
Then caught with fiery spark of love of that so gentle maid.
In self same rank Meneptoleme down dingeth Astile dead, Meneptoleme
killes Astile. Ulysses kills Pidites. Teucer over throvvs Areton. Antilochus
vvoundeth Abler to death. Agame^ non kills Elatu^ Leitus kile Philacus.

Ulysses sword does at a blow strike off Pidices head.
Areton is by Teucer hurt, and tumbles in his blood:
Antilochus eke Nestors son, that forward soldier good
Full well does know to do as much to Abler, there he glides
His Iaueline, wherewith dead he dies, it shot through both his sides.
Agamemn seeing them thus slain, he forward thrusts on,
And Elatus he does fordoe, whose living lay upon
The pleasant bancke of Satnyon flood, whereas it was not small
In Pedase town civil and rich, and stately plast withal.
And Philacus taking his flight, Leytus with death him charms:
Euripilus seeing his friends doing such feats of arms, Euripilus kills
Melanthus.

Does shake his darte, and at the first (he needs not many blows)
He does Melanthius ouerretch, and dead him overthrows.
Among the rest to show himself desires Menelay,
He takes Adrestus there aline, who then does run away:
But by ill luck with Chariot so his horses brave did stumble
Against a stub of Juniper, that down it fast does tumble:
Wherewith the beam full sore it brake, the coursers, who well knew
Themselves at large, to Troy the town in course amain they flewe,
Leaving their Master in the field: but Menelay, that fast
Does follow on, steps at an ynche, when down he sees him cast,
To slay him with his lofty lance upon him he does fly,
But Troyan kissing there his knees, entreats him humblely.
Thou Atreus son, I you beseech, grant unto me I say Virgil has imitated
this in his teuth Book of the Ae^eides.

Pardon of this my wretched life, such ransom will I pay,
As you your self will think right great, if grant my suit you wul:
My sire is rich, a house he has with poison stuffed full,
Of jewels, gold, iron, and brass, which whole shall be your own,
And all he has me to redeem, when well it shall be known
I am alive, to gain this wealth, your mercy grant to me:
As captive Menelaus then to take him did agree,
Thinking to give him to his folk, unto his ship or tent
To lead him safe: A stay does come that fails the mind he meant.
For the great Greek Agamemnon came to the Market than
With his brother, he chaste in rage, and thus to him began: Agamemno^ to
Menel.

Thou coward great, what makes thy mind to pity any whit
Or grieve for these false Trojans here? have they deserved it
Of thee at al? when in thy house as guests they harbourd ware,
Did they deserve so good a turn, as thus thou should them spare?
It shall not boot, for all the brood in pieces shall be torn,
Yea ene the very sucking babes, and such as are not borne,
They die shall all the bitter death, by these, these hands of ours,
And pass the sword, and in short time we shall enjoy their toures.
The chieftaine Greek with these his words turned Menelaus so,
As to his council he consents, this prisoner he does go, Agame^non ^us Adrast.

And thrusts and chases him away, Agamemn was not stanche,
He falls on him, and with a stripe he slayes him in the panche.
But for to pluck his Iaueline out, he forced was to stride
Upon the carcass: in the while there Nestor hard beside,
Tending the fight, exhortes the Greeks, and thus to them he spoke:
O valiant friends you Mars his impes, courageous charging foke,
To gain this victory at hand stick not to take some toil,
Give once a lusty charge, set not your minds upon the spoil,
Til that you see them murdered al, your darts and lances file
Their corpses in before the pray, that ye after a while
The glory had, them at your ease and pleasure ye may strippe,
Then shall we in our roomie keeles their wealthy treasure ship.
These words enflamed so their hearts, that victors they were than:
The Troyans put unto the worse, unto their City ran,
And had forsaken clean the field, but that King Priams son
Sage Helenus did keep them back, as they away did run.
Who viewing well this cruel chase, to Hector there he hies,
And to Aeneas, unto whom, since in you two it lies Helenus to Hector and
Aeneas.

(Quoth he) the leading and the charge of all our men and bands,
As two the experist princes here, that with our faction stands:
My friends, in this defecte you ought this day some means provide,
That it be easd, stay this reproach: what, stan de and do abide,
And shewlyour selves now diligent, do you our soldiers call
Together here before the gates, and do exhort them all
Again the battle to begin, if so they love their lives,
And will not be in pieces cut before their doleful wives,
Yea in their bosoms and their lappes, who seeing so their flight
Shall be ashamde, we in the while will travail all our might
To stay them, though our forces are diminished too much,
It yet will boot, we thus constrainde, because our need is such,
And as for thee O Hector thou, according to my reed,
Thou shall to Troy to Hecuba our gentle mother speed,
And will her for to call to her the women's troop each one,
The chastest and the worthiest, and she with them to gone
Unto the Temple reverent of sage and wise Minerue
Invincible, with such habites, as best she does reserve
In all her Court, the richest stuff, and chief elabourd gear
With simple and with lowly heart devoutly let her bear,
Them on the Goddess heavenly knees with humble mind to lay,
With Orisons to promise her with crouched vow to pay
Each year a solemn sacrifice, her favor so to get,
Of Beeues twelve, or Bulls that yet to yoke were never set.
Which also let them bring with them, that it may please her bend
To take in hand our babes and wives, and people to desend,
As far as may be, keeping off from this City of ours,
The cruel dreadful Diomede: not all the Greekish powers
Together set, as I beleene, can do so much in fight
As he alone, I never saw our folk in such a plight
Forsake their ranckes, and so afeard, no for Achilles he
Namde Thetis son, as I beheld them here away to flee,
By fury and by dreadful acts of this redoubted Greek,
Who to no other mortal man but to himself is leeke.
This was the prudent Helens mind, seeing before his eyes
The danger that his friends were in: Hector to him agrees,
And down he comes from his chare, two gallant darts he held,
Among the stoutest soldiers then forthwith himself he weld,
And like a stout and worthy head he wills them weld their swords
Yet once: The Troyans fiercily stand at those his only words.
The Grecians were constrained then to stay and leave the chase,
And to recule, seeing them thus to show such fearlesse face.
For they did fear some God from skies was come down in their aid,
And made them turn eft to the fight in such a sudden braide:
Where with their courage Hector lauds, and gentelly them cheeres:
O foreign Knights and Citizens, my valiant friendly feeres,
(Quoth he) to show your selves like men the present time it binds, Hector
exhortes his people.

To help the peril we are in, put to your warlike minds:
Now show the prowess often to me you promised to employ,
Marth on with hardy countnaunce now, while I do go to Troy
Our Ladies al, and our good Queen, and ancient Dames ^entreat
To make their prayers to the Gods, and solemn vows beheat,
That from this danger it will please their Godheads us to shield.
The Prince of prowess ending thus, there left them in the field,
To Troy he goes, his targe ytackte, with sable leather thong Hector go^ T^oy

Well hapte him round, from shoulders his unto his heels it hong.
Glaucus advanced forth himself these things a doing thus,
Th'illustre and the worthy son of good Hippolochus,
There man to man to try himself, and show some deed of worth, Glaucus and
Diomedes. are ready to fight together. Diomedes to Glaucus.

To whom the mighty warlike knight Diomede comes forth:
But valiant Diomede at hand and well disposd to fight,
Before they join, does speak him thus: Thou worthy champion Knight
Among the rest a warlike one, a stout and sturdie sire,
That here will come to deal with me, thy name I do desire,
(If so thou will) full much to know, for why, I have not seen
Thee in the war so forward erst, thou hardy art I ween,
And armed well with hope I see, and surely thinks to stand,
And to sustain the weighty blow of this my mighty hand:
Unhappy fathers I have made ynow, their sons can tell,
Who hazarding with me the fight, their souls have sent to Hell.
But seeing this thy haute attempt, I forced am to suppose
Thou art a God from hie come down, or else, himself to loose
Some mortal man with simple sense: if so thou art a God,
Declare thy self, I will give place, and thou shall have the rod.
I will not purchase to my self Licurgus danger so, Licurgus despysing the Gods.

Who for his rashness to the Gods, reward received tho
Ofwretched life and paineful death. On the mountain of Nyse,
It happened that Licurgus there the women did advise
To do to Bacchus service due, his festalls when they were
With slippes of Uine their heads upon: but so he does them fear.
He following on, that each constrainde the sacred Crown they fall,
Whereat (good God) he does rejoice and pleasures therewithal.
For why, the murderer with goade so sore them on did prick,
And scoft his fill, and worse than that, he rashly does not stick
To mind disgrace, yea, to the God, whom rudely he does chase,
And thunders out aloude his threats, but Bacchus flies apace,
And hardly scapeth from his claws, and forth he goes his ways
To marine Thetis, who receives him gently in the seas,
Yea trembling yet for fear to fall into the cruel power
Of such a gripe. At this offense full sore the Gods do lowre, Licurgus lost
his fight.

And forthwith did revenge the same, reauing Licurgus sight,
But for a time: not so content, to punish him aright
His life they ended wretchedly: If so thou please, this while
Tell me thy name, who was thy sire, and use therein no guile.
And if thou art no God, but one that feeds with wine and bread,
Draw nie, if thy desire it be here to be tumbled dead.
Then Glaucus boldly answerde him, and with a comely grace,
Do thou enquire of my descent-quoth he, mankind the race Glaucus answers
Diomedes.

Is frail, and fading like the leaves, and has no longer time:
For as we see the branches green, always when happes the Prime, A notable
speech.

Yclad with leaves, which Autumn winds down tumbles off the trees
With hard and hoarie frostes, wherewith their verdure they do leese,
And when the cold has played his part, their hue again they have:
Ene so mankind to day alive, to morrow in his grave.
And if to day one yield his life, another commes as fast,
One dead, one borne, and so it commes the store it still does last.
But if you long to understand my house, my stock, and kin,
Though almost al men know the same, and worthy it has bin: Glaucus tell his
offspring

Yet hark, and I will tell the same. In Argos goodly land,
The which for feeding bears the name, there Ephyra does stand,
A City of so great report whereas their Court they held
My parents good, and sceptres eke in Princely state did weld.
Of Eolus the first was son, the mighty Sisyphus,
Who did enjoy such mass of wealth, and he begat Glaucus:
Of Glaucus came Bellerophon, such honor great that got,
To whom the Gods as singular, with liberal love did lot
Beside the favor and the shape, which happes to him alone,
Such force and strength, as to the like arrived never none.
That time a King Proetus hight in Greece did scepter hold, Poretus.

Whose wealth was great, under whose reign the immortal Gods so would
Bellerophon his tender years and youth with him he spends,
Who had his lineage much in price: but there the King pretends
Against him, and to procure his death he after does conspire:
Not willingly, but wood thereto by the wicked desire
Of Andia his wife, who then enflamde with whorish love,
Could find no means to have her will, nor young man's fancy move:
No, though she sued earnestly, lamented, whinde, and howlde,
Wherefore in mood she turned to spite, when nothing gain she could.
So that the vehement liking turned to hate, yea, by and by,
One day she commes her husband to with countnance like to die,
And spoke him thus: choose of these two and think to do the one,
Either to die thy self, or else to slay Bellerophon.
Who gone about has to assault thy honor, it to blot,
Meaning by force to ravish me, when as prevailed not
His fawning toys and sewing tales, to end his fond desire
Thus sets the traiterous sade the king with grief and wroth a fire,
Who straight does think to be reuengde, yet deemes not he it well
Because he was one of his house, in house him there to quell, Belleropho^
letters.

He likes of treason in the case, to treason then he goes:
Malicious, false, and full of guile he letters does compose,
Which he unto his father in law king Rheon sends away
The Lycian prince to deal herein, he does king Rheon pray
And that without return of word he cause the bearer die.
When as Proetus thus had writ, the young man presently
He sends forth, he takes his way, with gods his guides he goes,
In Lyce they cause him to arrive, where head of Xanthus flows,
Which flood the province waters: At his first lighting there
The prince receivde him courteously, with joy and ioyly cheer.
Nine days throughout right brave they feast, ye ba^quets were not bad,
Nine chosen Beeues on th'alters laid, the immortal Gods they had.
And all to welcome this new guest: And now when comth ye tenth,
The king then of Bellerophon to know the message menth:
And whether that he letters brought had from his son in law:
The packet false he took the king, which having red, he saw
The treason and the deed deuisde, he fames and holds him still,
Minding the letters whole effect at full for to fulfill,
And for to kill the messenger, his force yet will he say,
Against Chimere he him imployes that monster dire to slay, Description of the
C^mere.

The gastfulst thing that ere was seen: which beast ye Gods on hie,
To see reuengde the hateful facts of human treachery,
Had formde by nature of such shape, full hidious and full rare.
The head and breast right Lion like, the midst the form it bare
Of Goat, behind like Dragon brood, and more, from him there gone
Right terrible flames which forth he breathes. And yet Bellerophon Belleroph^
kills the Chimere.

(Though fell he were as fell might be) the beast he does assail,
With favor of the Gods, and of his will he does not fail.
For after weary toil, in field the beast he stoutely slew, He stays the
Solimois and the Amazones.

That done, the Solymes down he hacks, and quite them overthrew.
Report so goes, him much it pleased the Solymes to have slain,
And yet beside all this, the king commands him again
To try with maine an Amazon, but still he was so steelde
With heart so good, as victor he dead left them in the field.
At length to make an end of him, a bushment does provide Belle flaies an
ambushment of the Lycians.

Of Lycians to set on him, hard by a fountain side.
But al in vain, for no not one of all the packed craft
Did once return unto their home, for murdered them he left.
Wherewith the King repents the guile, he stands amazed dum
And knows well that from the Gods, the victory did come,
Who knew him innocent, himself his deeds does disalow,
With him for his own quiet he does mind to keep him now.
For his preferment him to give his daughter wife to be,
And half the whole of al his reign, to join sure amity
The courteous virgin given him was, and for his place to dwell
The ferti^st soil, two sons he had of this fair Damosel,
A daughter eke, Isander first, the next a warlike knight
Hippolochus, Laodomie his daughter fair she hight,
Whom Jove did wish to have to friend: with brand of love did sweat
Divine Sarpedon in her womb, himself he left her great
But after this it was not long, but that Bellerophon
Did lose the favor of the Gods and stirrde them every one:
He hates himself, he company flies, he corners eke does seek
He wanders up and down his grounds most mad and frantike like,
Therefore his fields are wandering called, again of very spite
God Mars his son Isander stays a man of haughty might
To weelde in war both club and sword, the Solymes force him dye,
Again, Diane as ruthlesly does slay Laodomie.
Of all the three there rested but my sire Hippolochus,
Who Glaucus gave me unto name and hither sent me thus
In Troyan war with many a band here of his Country brood,
And willd me for to purchase price and praise among the good,
Whereby not to degenerate mine ancient parents fro,
Whose great renown Epira walls and Licie land does know.
At your request now have I told my name, my stock, and race, Diomede^ to
Glaucus.

And what occasions any way have brought me to this place.
Diomede at stout Glaucus words long tentife care does hold,
He does rejoice and maruayle much at things that then he told.
His iaueline right he sticks down with words full courteously,
And friendly cheer he thus begins: redoubted sire quoth he,
Between your friends and mine long since I see by your report
Was friendship dear, and great welcome, the which in every sort
Posterity we ought to keep: Oeneus my grandsire
Lodgde twenty days Bellerophon, who styr^de not from his fire,
He using him in all respects like perfect friend and guest:
And at the time he should depart, that friendship still might last,
One friend unto the other then a Princely present gave,
Of the aliaunce to remain as witness for to have.
Oeneus gave a girdle brave enricht with broydery,
Ipickt out of his arming house, of crimson purple die.
Bellerophon a gobblet round of gold full bright he bare
To him again, (which coming forth to war, where now we are)
I left at home. As for my sire and also for your own,
What proof of friendship since they had, to me it is unknown,
I lost him in my childhoode I, when he with mighty power
In Thebes town did lose his life, where then he had the scour
With many a Gretia^ knights he brought. Since so long time does lay
The root of friendship, I do judge to let it not decay.
Whereby, if you should hap to come to Greekish pleasant coast,
You might your lodging take with me your faithful friend and host
For evermore. And I also passing your Country by,
Will take your house, and you as host and friend assuredly.
And for a perfect token now of this accord to smite,
If in this war we hap to meet, let us two leave the fight,
And turn elsewhere, for why me thinks the need it is not so,
We two to deal in doubtful mart having so many a foe
On every side, with whom to join: to cause the standers by
Hereafter not to think it much of this our amity,
It good is we do make a change, give me (if so you please)
Your armor, and you shall have mine, full tough at al assayes,
With this they lighted and took hands, Diomede off him fro
His brazen Armor took, and it on Glaucus did bestow. Di. and Glau cus
change their armor one with another.

Who straight gave him his harneys brave of gold so rich and fine:
To make such change al judgment Jove took from ye Lycians eyne.
For why, his sumptuous furniture was great, of value much,
It well was worth an hundred beeues, the price of it was such.
But, that which he receyude again, to make a just account,
And to esteem it, to the worth of bullockes nine did mount.
This while unto the City comes the iollie Hector he,
Where at the gates in numbers great the women swarming be, Hec. comes to Troy.

Demanding diverse things of him, she asks for her son,
She for her father dear, she what is with her brother done.
Another how her husband fares: but he to all their call
To satisfies them any whit, does answer naught at all,
But wills them pray unto the Gods with sacrifice and tear
Now for the safety of the town, which greatly was to fear.
From thence to Priams sumptuous court, ye virtuous prince does hie,
The palace gaie with marble black is builtfull gorgeously. Description of
Pria^s palace.

In midst thereof king Priamus did fifty lodgings rear,
Unto his children and their wives which only lodgings were.
Twelve more against them he had built, which give away he would
To great and lofty Lords, the which his daughters marry should.
Dame Hecuba his mother old at th'entrie he does meet
Going most courteous Laodice her daughter for to greet. Hecuba to Hector.

She stays, and takes him by the hand, and gently thus begun:
Why leave you thus your tired folk my Hector dearest son?
Goes our affairs now backward still? I fear it so alack,
The Greeks are sure here at our walls, and Troyans go to wrack,
Which makes you thus in have to come, the mighty Jove to pray
For their safeguard: with me a while yet dearest son do stay,
That I to you some pleasant wine may bring, and ready make,
Before you sacrifice shall do, refreshing for to take
Unto your ouerhaled limbs, with toil and travail torn:
Good wine can much to strength yt wight, that weary is and worn.
For fear I feeble wax, no wine bring me quoth Hector he, The foree of wine.
Hector to Hecuba.

By to much drink least of my self forgetful I might be.
And ill it were a smered knight with blood, with dust, and sweat
Not washed before, with prayers his the Gods for to entreat:
But mother mine, the dames of state in Troy assemble ye,
And other Citizens also, you first example be.
Unto Mineruas temple go, her favor do implore,
Bestow on her the costliest roabe you have in all your store.
Devoutly lay it on her knees, on prayers set your care,
Yearly behight twelve Bulls of grease, that never yoked were.
That she these wretched people here in her tuition have,
That she Diomede (of our folk in slaughter who does rave)
Do keep far off, and far aloufe our sacred turrets fro:
My brother Paris I will seek, and will him that he go
Into the Camp, but of my word God knows what will betide. Hector desires the
death of Paris.

Oh would to God, whereas he stands, the ground would open wide
To swallow him in deapth thereof, the Gods have given him life,
Sure to king Priams utter ruin, or to his endless grief,
And of us all his children too, who else in fame and bliss
Might have triumphed with the rest, my only wish it is
That of his latter end I here the carke it would me leave,
That forces now my heavy thought, and makes my heart to heave.
With this the noble prince does part, and Hecuba she bends
Unto her lodging back again, and thence her women sends
To go entreat the worthy dames, that they come to her thither.
She all bewept to chamber comes, well sweet and decked together.
To wardrobe then, whereas were pilde of roabes no number small,
Bewrought with needle Imagrie, of precious stuff them al
Which her trick son sir Paris he, had brought from Sidon tho
With the fair Greek, on Hecuba the same he did bestow:
Among them all the Queen chose one, for work, the best yt might,
The balm in odor it did match, the star eke in his light Hecuba with the
Troyan dames goes to the temple of Pallas Theano Anten ors wife has the
charge of the temple,

No brighter was then it of hue. Also she kept it laid
In bottom of her coffer coucht, above most gorgeous wayde.
With heart devout than waited on with numbers in a row,
Unto the Goddess temple large with others she does go.
In midst of all the palace great no sooner there they came,
But that Theane Antenors wife did open them the same.
The doors of gold she does undo, unfolded, rich, and large
Of this gay Church by Troyans all as priest she had the charge.
Now thither come, the Dames in troop with reared hands on hie
They make their vows, they strike their breasts, and howl with piteous cry^
And then the worthy Theano the royal roabe she laid Th^ones prayer to Pallas.

On Pallas knees with humble grace, and forthwith thus she prayde:
O chaste Minerua, o clemency divine and sacred seen,
Of this fortress and Troyan folk who gardaine sure has been,
The prayers I beseech thee hear, which we to thee commend,
In this thy house, that of our woes we once may have an end.
We pray thee that the stoutest Greek (Diomedes is he)
Be beaten down at Scea gate, his lance eke broken be.
That done, upon the altar we our sacrifice will do
Ofoxen twelve, in thy service as many yearly too,
If so thou help us at this plundge: this prayre she did address,
But Pallas to accept the same in sooth thought nothing less.
This while co^mes Hector to the place, where trick sir Paris lay,
A cunning piece of building, yea both costly, rich, and gay,
Which Troyan master builders had made up in point devise,
A court it had, where Kitchen, Hal, and Chambers round do rise. Paris house

Unto king Priams mansion chief it joined was at hand.
This valiant Prince with steeled lance he holding in his hand
Sire foot in length with golden point, unto the place does draw
So sumptuous, where his brother he Alexander saw
Well occupied in deed of praise, his targe and armor bright
He furbushes, his bow himself he rubs, and seemly dight.
Heleine sits by, amidst her maids, that they may cunning be
She studies, and forethinks some works, that pretiest show may she.
Then Hector thus his talk began frowning with moodie cheer: He. chideth
Paris.

What cause is there oh cursed thou that keeps thee idle here?
What tetishnesse thus to thy house does make thee draw aback,
Since well thou know that for thy sake the Troya^s go to wrack,
And sacked must needs this City be, who have this war begun
Only for thee? thou seeing one, who from the field should run,
Oughtst to cry open shame on him, but now thou hidst thy head,
As ringleader and coward chief of all that ere was bred.
Go quickly now and do thy best, if so thou do desire
To save the town from spoil and wast, and from the Greekish fire.
Tall Paris tho, hearing him chide so roughly in his mood, Paris aunsvvers
Hecurteously.

O brother Hector answerde straight, since of your meaning good
You moved are, yet please it you my scuse for to allow.
No pet nor wrath with any one retire does make me now,
It is but only my mishap, to ease by time I thought
My grief, and curteons Heleine here with me al means now wrought,
Persuading me with mild exhortes mine armor on to pull,
And for to leave this idle fit, and surely so I will,
It gives me this day should be mine, for victory is so,
To day a friend it is to some, and yet to morrow foe.
Stay here a while til I be armde, or else go forward ye,
Straight at this gear, hard at their heels you shall me busy see.
The valiant Hector these his words seemde nothing to regard,
Wherefore with mild and humble grace Heleine drew to him-ward: Heleine to
Hector.

Oh brother mine in law quoth she so worthy of the same,
(If I a wretched woman may of fister have the name,
Who am no better than a dog) when life I was assignde,
Unto some desert mountain top would God some whirle wind
Had cast me up, or in the sea my carcass thrown would,
By ending life, this mischief all avoided then I should:
But though that by the whole consent of all the Gods on hie,
The instrument of all the ils, must needs be none but I:
Yet ought I have a better spouse of wisdom and of sight
To look unto his own affairs, that understand he might
When one does speak to his reproach, that to his blame does fall,
But for to know his wealth or want this has no sense at al.
And what so he shall take in hand, know well shall end as il.
O noble, dear, and brother mine beseech you now I will
Come in, sit down here in this chair, oh thorough grieved wight,
I well perceive and see in you the dolor of your spright,
For us two caytiues you sustain, for that we did offend:
The gods it calling to their minds, do ordain wretched end,
Which shall be soong in every rhyme, and roong in every reign.
Unto dame Heleins courteous words bold Hector says again: Hector to Heleins*

Though this proceed all of good will, it cannot force me stay,
For things I have now in my head, call me another way,
And that I have unto the Camp to comfort and to cheer
Good Troyans all, who greatly wish (I know) to see me there.
And lady mine, you shall do well to will him arm apace,
And if he present follow me, he wisely in this case
Shall do: or take me going forth: for now to see I go
My house, my son, my gentle spouse, for little do I know
Whether at will another day it please the Gods on hie,
That I may see them once again, or else this day I dye.
Ending his talk* his lodging to with pace he stalketh on,
Andromacha the princess great he found that she was gone
Unto a tower with her son, a ^se, and waiting maid,
Where thinking on her husbands broils, forth tears amain she laid.
Unto the Maids quoth Hector then your mistress where is she? Hector to his
vviues maids.

What, is not she now gone abroad some sister hirs to see,
Or to my good sisters there her grief to put away,
And so to pass the time with them? now sirs do quickly say,
Or with my mother at the vows in that deuoutful crew,
Presenting Pallas sacrifice with them does she ensue?
With Hecuba she is not gone, quoth one, since you will know, One of the maids
to Hector. (...)

Nor to her jolly sisters she, alas she tenders so
Your (state oh Hector) that she swelts (she is to careful plain)
For frantike like with her sweet son she ran with might and maine,
Into the keep, supposing that the Troyans lost the fight,
Eke in the journey you had quaylde, and life had ended quite.
With this sir Hector tournes his steps, and then the streets he threeds,
And lanes, that fair and ample were, and forth apace he speedes
To Scea gate where bode the Camp, Andromacha by hap
Does meet him right, her dearest son, and eldest in her lap,
Whom Hector cleapt Scamandrius, but Troyans otherwise Scamandrius.

Astianax, as son to him, from whom their health did rise,
For so did right his name import, the Hector stout this while
Does herewith very pleasant wax, and smothly began to smile.
Uiewing his son as clear as star that cloudlesse heaven bears.
But then his wife with wayling great, and store of gushing tears,
With humble cheer drew to him nie, and thus her tale began,
Clasping his hand: O to thine own most hard discourteous man,
Thy for ward mind shall thee undo in midst of flouring life:
Have thou no pity of this child, ne yet of me thy wife?
Do thou not see the doleful end, that I pore wretch shall gain,
If thou go aid now thy consorts, a widow to remain?
The Greeks conspire against thee all, and travel all they may,
They most do gape to have thy blood, but yet before that day,
O merciless divide thou earth, and me devour alive,
What joy to me when thou art gone, or which way may I thrive?
What, is there love, or wiuely care with mine that match may make?
Shall I hereafter be content another spouse to take?
No, no, I that defy, no mirth can chance me so,
The which of thee can cause me let the sweet remembrance go:
What, shall I to my parents trudge, of them to seek relief?
What, out alas they all are dead: O hell and heavy grief.
Divine Achilles in his deeds, after that he had pilld
And borne away their treasures great, and had the ditches filld
Of Thebes, with the walls thereof, whose fame far strangers knew,
His warlike hands right cruelly in blood he did imbrue
Both of my sire, and of his sons, who strong and valiant were,
The King my fathers armor yet he would not off him tere,
To cindres both he them consumde, and off he did not draw
The furniture, for why, he stood of mighty Gods in awe.
A Tomb to him he rearde, whereas under the branches green
To pleasure take and sport themselves the Nimphs Orestiads been,
Delighting there great store of Elmes be-planted they have made
About the same, where they at ease may play them in the shade.
The father dead, his bow did force the seven sons to yield,
He slew them down in Cicilie encamped in the field.
My mother Queen with pensiveness and sorrow fully frought
Was captive made, who found such means, and so by ransom wrought,
That she delivered was at length, with manner fully rare
Diana wrought against her then, with bow down dead her bare.
O Hector dear, do now behold Andromacha her case,
O^ fire, of dame, of brother eke, and spouse thou haste the place,
I thee beseech this one request of mine may granted be,
Have pity on this pretty boy, an orphane, if thou die,
Have some regard, and call to mind the wretched creature I,
Who life and wid'hoode may not have, into this tower ascend
To keep the same, and round about call soldiers to defend
The wall whereas it lies low: for four times we have seen
The Ajax twain with many a Greek, and also I do meene
With bold and doubtie Diomede, to force al what they can
To mount the same by hautie heart or Augure some set an.
These words dear wife, quoth Hector tho, which will me thus to care, Hector to
Andromacha.

Both day and night, such mind and thought still my companions are,
My head long since hereon I set, yet nothing can I frame
That profit will, I greatly fear that ay reprochful shame,
The which on me this wretched folk with open throat will cry
When absent from this war I am, where I so well do try:
My heart to alter from his wont it also does disdain,
It pricks me forth to purchase fame, that cuer shall remain.
I know right well the time shall come, the Greeks will take this town,
Priam, my parents, kin and friends to death ybeaten down,
My brothers al must pass the sword: To see them so to dye
My sire, my dame, my brothren all, and nearest friends them by,
I shall not grieve for them so much, as grief for thee I have,
And most, to think, that of some Greek thou shall become the slave,
Who to his country shall thee lead to tease and toss his wul,
He shall thee put from day to day to spinne, to pick and pull.
And in the midst of all the heat, from spring his water draw,
Which needs must pinch thee at the heart, but Need it has no law.
And often shall the passers by say, Look who yonder is,
The wife of valiant Hector lo, who in the field with his
Such fame and great renoume did get, when Grecians compast round
The great and mighty town of Troy, and tare it to the ground.
How great to hear my name rehearst shall then thy dolors be,
And that my help thou can not have eft to recover thee,
But ere the waylings I will hear of thee my captive wife,
The earth shall hay this corpse of mine, and I will lose my life.
With this the valiant prince does hide his carke and inward grief,
And out does put his hands to take his son the pretty leese,
A little pretty bulchion fat, seeing the dreadful crest
And armor, cries and calls his nurse, and nouzels in her breast.
With this the courteous parents they smile at the preatie grace
Of that the babe, and Hector he his son for to embrace,
Does set aside his lofty helm, he him does coil and kus,
With pleasant mind he holds him soft and formd his prayers thus.
O mighty Gods, ye sovereign Lords, request this grant to me,
That once this boy triumphantly a doubtie man may be, He^ pray^ to the Gods.

Among his folk as now I am: Also when I am dead,
Give him the honor, that he may the Troyans guide and lead:
That men may say, when they shall see him prosper in such case,
How far the son the father does in deeds of arms surpass.
And when the spoils as conqueror from foreign foes he pull,
His mother she may see the same, her joy it may be full.
The child he gives his mother now, who takes it in her hand,
She smiles therewith, yet in her eyes the water full does stand.
He rues thereat, to her he draws her sorrow to delay,
About the neck he takes her fast, and thus began to say. Hector to
Andromacha.

My dearest spouse these waylings leave, and take not thus at heart
My death, thou know well enough we al must hence depart.
No man can boast that he is free from death and from his blow,
For from the first day of our birth to death we subjects go.
And as for me, this body, who, and life shall part in twain,
Shall pay full dear, and have no cause to glory of his gain.
I shall not die before my time: Good wife for Gods sake go
Home to thy house, be of good cheer, and leave to grieve thee so,
Do pass the time to wind and reele, and with your maids to spinne,
Command, and order take, that they good workewomen may bin,
And let us men see to the field, and look what needful is,
And I (as always) now to be the foremost will not miss.
With this from ground his helm he takes, and on his head it wears
Home goes Andromacha with sighs, and seas of sobbing tears.
When she unto her douse does come she finds weeping eyes,
The servants al do sobbe and howl with shril and heavy cries,
Be weeping Hector thus they say: On this odd knight alack
We never shall set eyes again, this day will be his wrack.
Some fell and cruel Greek this day shall work his death and harm.
Paris again makes no abode, he hastes fast to arm, Paris follows. Hector.
Comparion

He after Hector runs now, he trusts in his force,
And eke in his agilitie. And like unto the horse,
That in the stable halter does and headstall crack in twain,
And slippeth out the house apace into the fields amain,
With many frisks and yerks behind, his head does cast aloft,
At last unto some pleasant stream does pace, and trotteth soft,
Therein to wash and play himself, and happily there does find
Some lusty Mare upon the bancke t'assuage his raging mind:
Ene so sir Paris tall and trick, in city shows full brave,
Unto the sun his Arms and targe the like for brightness have.
As Hector left Andromacha, he meets him in the teeth,
He going forth, he greeteth him, and thus began therewith:
O brother dear and eldest borne, m^abode deserves blame Paris to Hector.

In staying now thus long, since that you willd me haste the same.
All in good time quoth Hector then that doubtie Troyan he, Hector to Paris.

None can thee justly give reproach how worthy that he be,
When to the field thou setst thy mind, thou lusty art and light,
A vauntage great, but slowly often thou drawest to the fight,
Ne will not mend thy pace one whit, nor leave one jot of will,
It grieves me most that so thou givst thy self to pleasure still.
And chiefly, when the Troyans they I see thy doings blame,
They byding many deadly brunts, do babble to thy shame.
Well, let us go against these Greeks, our forces for to lay,
These brutes full well we may appease, if happly come the day.
Having our enemies put to flight, the condign sacrifice
Unto the hie immortal Gods on Aultars they may rise.
Finis sexti Libri.
The seventh Book.
NO we warlike Hector does depart Hector an^ Paris return to the battle.
with Paris out the town,
They willing both in arms to show some deed of great renown.
And like as after stormy flawes that deeres the shipmen sore,
In deepest sea against the wind Comparison.
there strive with arm and ore,
God sends a present calm to cease that dreadful tempest blast:
Even so the Troyans ouerhaeld do comfort at the last,
When as they saw these brethren two marching before their sight,
Who, well they knew sufficient were for to maintain the fight,
They were no sooner come, but that they slaie two Greekish foes, Paris* kyls
Menest^ us.

The stout Menesthius to the ground by Paris hand he goes,
In Arna town he scepter held, of king Areitho bred,
Who young, with fair and glassie eyes Philomedusa wed.
Hector with sharp ypointed lance Ioneus does slaie, Hector slaies Ioneus.
Glaucus kyls Iplunous.

Twene curet, and his gorget both the steel it makes way.
Glaucus does Iphinous ding he down on earth does fall,
The raines eke of his horse the blow did force him lean withal.
The slaughter Pallas seeing now thus of these Grecians three,
And the confusion of the rest, which likely was to be,
Full moovde, and grievde to see the sight, unto the Troyan town Pallas
descends to Troy.

Descends from high Olympe, Phoebus that saw her coming down,
(He sat upon the wall, to view how end the battle shall,
Which in the favor he does wish of Troy and Troyans all)
He finely co^mes unto her straight, quoth he under this Beeche
I count it best you rest your self, and thus began his speech.
You daughter of the mighty God, show me the occasion why Apollo to Pallas.

You now are seen here in this place come down so speedily,
Sure great affairs, or else some cause, which much your mind it leekes,
The victory from Troyans good to give unto the Greeks.
And is not that your meaning now, your purpose and intent
To see the Troyan town destroyed, her buildings all to rent?
It better were (in my advise) this day to cease the war,
And eft they may begin their fields, and fights wherein they are,
Till that such time the city there to sack and pillage go,
Since that you Gods with one remorce, of force will have it so:
The Goddess answerde then: Agreed, for so I mean aright, Pallas to Apollo.

Of purpose I descended down to stay these folk from fight,
Wherefore seek way to sever now from this days war these wights. Apollo to
Pallas.

Apollo soothde: quoth he thereto, of all these gallant knights
Let Hector bold march boldly on, and challenge for to try,
Yea man to man the stoutest foe, with him to live or die.
This brave demand will much amaze the stoutest of their bands,
And they will point some odd man out with him to mingle hands,
And thus this battle shall have end. Apollos saying theed
Unto his grave and learned skill, forthwith it was agreed.
Then sage and prudent Helenus, who there their secret knew Helenus to Hector

By ghost divine, with courteous words lowly to Hector drew.
Quoth he, my dearest brother now, to me thine ear attend,
And marvel not, though to advise, and every way I bend
My self t'aduaunce thy great renown, since brethren both we be,
I cannot choose to do my best, as duty does agree.
Cause Greeks and Troyans to retire with voice and courage hie,
Advance thy self, if any Greek will out this quarrel try
Upon him, do, for by the fates this day thou shall not dye,
I have it from the mighty Gods, whose counsels cannot lie.
Hector right jolly marches on, out of the rancks he goes,
His lance full long in midst he held, he wills the^ leave their blows,
He brings his squadrons back again, the shot he bids retire,
The Greeks stand fast, they order keep, and news they do desire.
Agamemn eke to harken to, made Grecians to abide.
Both Pallas and Apollo then seeing on every side Pallas and Apollo sit on a
Beech

The darts to cease, upon a Beeche of arms a mighty tree
The God and Goddess they do sit, as Uulturs there they be.
They do delight such puissant cries in field to see so still.
The Bataillons yet soundly knit on ground do lie at will,
With tools of war at elbowes end, much like the Ocean wave,
Which working storm, not green, but black does make ye color have Hector to
the Greeks and Troyans.

Then Hector armde at every point thus spoke unto them all,
Hark both ye Greeks and Troyan knights what to your wealth may fall,
Between these camps the treaties sworn, and parts so firmly fast,
Imperfect are, of no effect, as none had ever past.
Jove in this danger has us lapt, n'accord he will allow,
He does determine in his mind, with malice he does vow,
He all a cruel sacrifice of us does mean to make,
As thus: that either you the Greeks our Troyan town shall take,
Or that your journey shall return to you both void and vain,
Or hardly by us Troyans set, quite beaten down and slain.
And now I know it very well, that in your camp you have
As to defend, so to assail both soldiers fytte and brave, Hector (...) the
Greeks to particular Co^bat.

And valiant men, single to me the strong and stoutest knight,
Let him now here his manhood try, and cope with me in fight.
I will abide the man, and truth and faith I give withal,
To which (if so it needful is) I Jove to witness call,
If victor of me for to be so luckie be his chance,
And in my bowels that he do imbrewe his warlike lance
Take he my spoils unto his ships, my body let it rest
Without outrage, let Troyans take it to the fiery feast.
Let them the ashes gather up: And if him under foot
That I do tread Apollo grant, I crave no other boot
But that his harneys I may have, to Ilion thither I,
In temple his a relic sign to set and hang on hie.
And for his carcass send I will, the Greeks they shall it have,
Who in the shore of Hellespont thereon may rear his grave,
That if hereafter to this land a stranger take his way,
And with the tomb do happily meet, full justly he may say:
Here lies intombde the doughtie Greek, whom Hector charging hard Epy^ by
anticipat on.

Down slew, although he shewde the part of knight of great regard.
For valor and for force: and lo, thus shall a foreign say,
Whereby my fame and great renown shall last for ever and aye. Menelaus angry
with the Greeks.

This speech so stunt and sudden said yields all the troop abasht,
Each doubting to accept the fight, they blushing all are dashed.
Menelaus, who marked all, and how they stood, he grew
In fury great, he out does come, and sighs he deeply drew.
O villain Greeks (quoth he) in words each proud and hardy speaks,
But come to deeds, you quail alack like faint and coward freakes.
O Greeks infamed tootoo much, what, Greekish men? not so,
But rather Greekish wives, what shame and filthy speech will go
Of you for this your cowardice? with heart not standing out
With Hector here to join, for why, you dangers dreadful doubt:
And without further moving hence, that ye to earthy molde Transgression
Philosophical.

Do turn (your faults to plague) I pray or else to water cold.
And as for me, I will me arm, the combat I allow,
With hardy mind I it accept, I know it well ynowe
The lofty Gods as best they please bestow the victory:
Thus Menelau does blame his mates, and armor on does tie. Menelaus arms
himself to fight with Hector.

And now at hand O Menelau was end of all thy toiles,
Thy death was sure in Hectors hands, whose skill in warlike brosles
And strength of arm surmounts thee far, and but the Greekish kings
Had come and stayde thee, Agamemn, he by the hand thee wrings, Agamemnon to Me
nelaus.

And much misliking this thy Act, with rage quoth he thou ass,
Thou fondling thou, think thou thy strength of force to bring to pass
To match this doughtie Troyan here, to whom, of Greekish race
Net one, how stout so ere he be, dare boldly show his face?
Achilles no: he greatly doubts with him in field the fraie.
Draw back and quiet keep thy self, we shall find out a way
To end this cause, we shall find one shall make him stir his stumps,
Though that a dreadlesse knight he be, and though in martial iumps,
A souldior bold, nere tirde in war, I hope right well that he
Shall think himself a happy man, if happily so it be
Without his death this quarrel end: and that with humble heart
Upon his knees thank God above, with life for to depart.
Agamemn Menelaus thus persuaded, and he stayde,
His gromes right glad their master saw, out danger to be wayde,
And flock about, his armor one, another takes his shield,
His weapons some, and by his bands he sees him in the field.
Wherewith the reverent Nestor grave stood up, and forth he drew:
O great unfit reproach (quoth he) unto this famous crew, Nestor to the Greeks

O what mishap, if at our home this doleful news be told?
Surely the Prince of Myrmidons Peleus that father old,
And all his province fast will whine: he has inquired of me
Of favor great, the names and race of meanest in degree.
Of all you here: but how abasht, how great shall be his grief,
When he shall hear your cowardice? it sure is my belief,
He clad with care, his prayer will unto the Gods commend,
That ere he see the Greeks so foyld, of him they make an end.
I would the God Apollo, Jove, and Pallas they would grant
I were so young and lusty, as when able I did haunt
The wars, and in the battle fought between the Archads stout
And Pyliens that ancient were, who tried the quarrel out
By city Phee, upon the flood that Iardan has to name, Nestors ^gression,
vvherin h^ tells his former acts, as o^ old me^ do.

Whereas I shewde by perfect proof my valor and my fame.
Among them there, then lived one that Ereuthalion hight,
Who on had put of Areithous the steeled armor bright.
I mean that Areithous that bare the great and massy club,
And therewith fighting, got such praise by force and weelding good,
That syrname he obtainde thereby of Clubber through all,
Whom after, not by force, but slight Lycurgus gave the fall,
And slew him down in strayted lane, where club he could not weeld,
Lycurge with dart did draw him nigh, and therewith through him threeld:
And dead he took his armor gaye, himself to shield and aid
In all the byckerings that he had, and nere was ouerlayde,
As long as that he lyvde, and then to Ereuthalion
He them bequeathd, who bare himself as fierce as any Lion,
And often called the Pyliens with man for man to try,
With floutes ynowe, and when I saw the pride of Arcadie
Th'abated minds, the cowardice, and faintness of my pheeres,
I took in hand to show my worth for all my want in years.
I took him up, I laid him dead by grace of mighty God,
A marvel great to see his corpse, a thing for hugeness odd Nestor co^mes
to his purpose

Falling a long, I wish my youth and courage such, as tho
A champion then to match in fight the Troyans well should know.
And since the hardiest all of Greece be present in this place,
If none of you defend this cause, I think it great disgrace.
The Greekish Lords so pricked to quick this good grave aged sire,
As of the greatest nine he made stand up, with great desire The nine most
worthy Greks.

The combats hazard for to prove: Agamemn first did rise,
Next Diomede, to conquer all which still has been his guise.
The Ajax twain of like exploit, Idomene was the ^ift,
Merion eke, his masters match in every martial drift,
With whom was good Euripilus, the son of Euemon,
And with the rest stout Thoas rose the breed of Andremon,
Of purpose each to be receyude, and Ulysses the sly,
Not to be thought to be aghast or slack in chivalry.
Quoth Nestor hereupon (finding their boldened minds to grow) Nestor cou^
sels to cast lots to know who shall fight with Hector.

Renowned Lords, since thus it stands, full well we all shall know
Who for this combat shall be taken, cast lots, on whom it lights
That forth his bullet first does come, with Hector him he fights,
With surety, he that ouerco^mes, immortal praise to take.
Each of the nine with mark, advise a Bullet for to make,
His Helmet in their lots to put Agamemnon does lend. The Greks pray that Ajax
lot first be drawn.

The while the soldiers good of Greece their prayers thus attend
With reatched hands: O mighty Jove grant so it do befall,
That first of doughtie Ajax he out come the lotting ball,
Or it the son of Tydees his, whose laud so loud does ring,
Or else to please thee to bestow this honor on our King,
Our captain chief, and leader grave. Nestor does often blunder
And shake the lotts within the helm, to part them more asunder,
His hand thrust in, the bullet first of Ajax forth he brings Ajax lot is
drawn.

So much desired, and Herault badde to carry it the Kings,
That they may know which of them all by fate appointed was
In this conflict to deal: he forth with bullet on does pass
By rank and rank through all the field, he open does it bear,
But yet unknown to Ajax bold till he approached were,
Who does rejoice at so good luck, the scripture when he read, Ajax to the
Greeks.

And down he throws it on the ground, and to the Kings he said
Thus, full right like a man of war: My loving friends so dear,
You see that now I am the man, I pray you all to cheer:
My mind assures me that I shall as victor down him strike,
And while I put mine armor on, you softly may beseeke
The hie Gods in my favor now, and Troyans shall not need
To hear your cries: what say I now? I surely do not heed.
For pray you low, or out aloude, I doubtful nothing deem,
For if the breeding up do make men more of men esteem,
If Country soil, if worthy race, do mende the minds of men,
With these three gifts so thoroughly, since I am surnishte then,
You shall not see me run away, I will not turn my back,
To princely blond what does belong you shall not find the lack.
So spoke the bold and manly Greek, his friends with heart devout
To Jove for safety of the man did power their prayers out,
With vows in many sundry sorts: but some that best perceavde: The greeks
prayer to Jupiter.

The hazard great he entered on, their hearts to God they heavde,
And prayed thus: O mighty God, most great most good who stays
On Ida hill beholding this, O Jove who bears the swayes,
And rules all combats at thy will, this favor grant to day,
That this good Greek of this conflict may bring the palm away.
Or if thou do too great good mind unto sir Hector owe,
Grant end this strife, they both alive with honor home may go.
The Ajax strong himself does arm in brave and brightsome brass, Ajax takes
his armor and co^mes to fight.

And forth he co^mes into the camp, in port and show he was
Like Mars the God, when he does martch, he yet a smiling has,
But that his smile a visage shows inflamde and set to wrath,
With notice to his fellows all he was their certain forte:
His countenance stout, his stern martch, when they saw in such sort, Hector
abashde.

And so stiff shaking of his lance, they do begin to joy.
But to this combat he thus pressed, now doubt the men of Troy,
Hector himself being aghast, would have retired sure,
But him they would a cowarde count, he did the strife procure.
Then Ajax hanging at his neck his huge and weighty targe,
Which towerwise so stood aloft, so dreadful and so large, Ajax Turget
compared to a Tovver.

(He Tychius of late it forgde, with seven folded hydes,
With stiff, eke hard, and azerde steel he couerde it besides)
To Hector draws: he show full great, and boldness on does set,
Unto him there these were his words, wherewith he thus does threat.
This day thou Hector well shall know, of Greece the force and power, Ajax to
Hector.

Thou well shall know what heds of knights we have thee for to scour
Achilles out, who keeps abourde, with arms who does not mell,
Because of an unhappy jar between our chief which fell
And him: And here my self t'aduaunce among the rest thou see,
And therefore now begin, begin if of the mind you be.
Hector hearing thus the Greek, does forthwith then reply, Hector to Ajax.

What iollie Ajax are these words so arrogant and hie,
Most like a dame or prentise young guess you to make me shrink?
Sure long ago what longs to war I know, and so do think,
And willing thereto give my self, a charge I can abide,
And charge I can, my massy shield I know to beat, I ride
At hand, and further fight I know, I foot it when I please,
And all these know I how to use, when most they aid or ease.
By sleights my foe I can sometime imbrewe with mortal blow,
But you a man of valor much because I certain know,
No cunning will I use as now, but clap you on the Crown, Description of the
combat.

With arm I will employ my best therewith to pluck you down.
With this does Hector to him draw, his sturdie dart he shook
So large in length, so stifely launcde, that forth the way it took
And pierced to the seventh fold of that his buckler strong:
The toughe and steeled plate with all it teared all a long.
Ajax again his stubborn staff at Hector shaking flings,
With force so great, as through the bosse of Hectors targe it rings,
And further to his paunche does pass, and Curet through does glide,
No harm at all, a small at least the Troyan turned aside: Comparison.

Each out again his lance to pluck does strive the best he can,
Like Lions fierce, invincible, and grisly bores they ran
Together both: Hector does thrust on targe, but all in vain,
The strength thereof does bear it off, and turns the point again.
And Ajax blow did likewise glaunce on Hectors shield aloft,
And peercde his neck, the purple blood it trickled down full soft.
So small a ticke he heedeth not, retyring from the ground
He seeks and takes a coggle black, a mighty and a round. Fight with
stones.

Therewith on Ajax so does lay, on target great it range,
In midst thereof the stone resounds, so soundly he it flange.
Ajax a greater far does ratch, and brawnly so does cast
That he his big and bumpishe targe therewith in pieces brast.
The Troyan on his knees he sancke, perforce on earth he lay Hector falls on his
kn^

With shield behapte, from whence to escape he knew no manner way,
But that Apollo suddenly ariueth in the place,
To yield a safety to the man, and raise him in that case.
Then would they out have bladed it their armor so to tear,
But them between the Heraults came, each did a scepter bear.
And Idee sage, the herault wise there thus in speech he brake: The Heralts
part them.

Dear sons, leave off this cruel strife, herein a breathing take,
To Jove you both are dear, do end this deadly combat now,
And at the pack of mortal men you valiant do allow.
Lo he^e the might which bids you two to grant to my request.
Quoth Ajax then, O Ideus thou well and wisely say,
But I refuse, if Troyan here, who did us al provoke, Ajax to Ideus.

And me assaild, do not entreat this quarrel to revoke,
And if he do, I do agree to grant with all my heart.
Quoth Hector then, since Gods on earth such honor thee impart, Hector to Ajax.

That as of force, good gifts, and wit, so eke of mighty bone,
I do confess of all the Greeks thou art the knight alone.
On Gods name leave this enterprise, again we may begin,
Another time we may it try, who shall the honor win.
The more, because the sun is low, and night draws nie at hand,
Whereby well pleased your mates will be, and Greeks hereby that stand.
And I the dwellers al of Troy again shall greatly glad,
And eke the dames, who deeply deerde, their prayers now have had,
For me, I think it Ajax meet in change we do bestow
Our presents now between us both, that all the world may know,
And say to see our heat so cold: these two were lately foes, Hector gives
Ajax his svvord, and Ajax give th h^ his baudri^ unlucky one for another after.

And now great friends, their enmity to faithful friendship groes.
With this the prowest Hector gave his bright and gallant blade,
With seemly sheath and belt so brave, so trimly which were made.
Again to him does Ajax reach the Bawdrike big he bare,
He pleased therewith, and Ajax does unto his friends repair.
And Hector to his Troyans commes, whom seeing safe and sound,
They joy amayne, they dreaded he, had caught so me mortal wound.
They unto Troy do bring him all, and Ajax strong does go
Forthwith the Greekish faction on, victor with soldiers show,
And in his tent he seeks out Agamemnon the King,
Who chieftaine good, them al to feast commanded every thing.
To Jove for favor forthwith he does sacrifice prepare,
A Bull of grease of five years old the yoke that never bare.
Which straight was lead and offered up, and off they pluck the hide,
And him in pieces al to cut, and them on spits they slide.
And al things fit, each man drew nie, to eat and feed his fill,
And so well vsd, as when they left they liked al at will.
Agamemn does his champion much extol, and presents feate
Of price him gave, in witness of his force and prowess great. The present
was the horns and hyde of a Bull.

When each so much had eat and drunk, as well content they stood,
The Nestor old, whose counsel grave was always proved good,
(Which to declare his last advise it lately servde them well)
To Agamemnon and the Greeks his tale he thus does tell:
Ye lofty Lords and Princes great, ye are not to be taught Nestor to the
Greeks.

This day how many Grecians are to death by weapon brought.
Their bodies laid along the field, their souls to hell are hyed, To bury the
dead.

Some order must be taken herein, their burial to provide,
And for the same the war to cease, to morrow needs must we
To Carrs to join Moyles two to two, and also yokte must be
A number great of Oxen to, the carcasses to bear
More nie the ships, and there with fire the same on heaps to rear.
I wish also that heed there be to save the bones that burn, To save the
bones of the dead. Nestor persvvades the Greeks to fortify them selves.

To give them to their children, if we happily home return.
And eke a common Monument a Trophee let us build,
And more, our vessals eke is best from Troyans them to shield,
(Least happily they vnhaply should in fight the better get)
We towers hie, and bulwarks strong about them nie do set,
With ample gates and issues wide, the Chariots forth to go,
And eke our squadrons with our bands to pass out to and fro,
With trenches large and deep before, with pales impaled strong,
To keep us from the Troyans charge, if happily with their throng
They should assail us where they are. Thus Nestor loud did chau^t,
And that his council all the kings for good did willing grant.
And Troyans to consulting come did greatly grow to muse,
There rose so many diverse minds they know not which to choose.
The Lords and great men of the town, and people many by,
Antenor thus his tale began with voice and speech on hie.
Give ear ye Troyans I you pray, and foreign soldiers to,
Ye Citizens hark what I wish and council you to do: Anten or counsels the
Troyans to deliver Helene and the Gods brought from Grace.

Let Helene to her husband home be sent with all the spoil,
The riches and the things of price were brought out Grecian soil,
The pacte and promise Paris made with oath, for to allow,
For otherwise to plye the field against that concord now,
I surely hope no good at all can hap us in the end.
Sirs, think of this, the care whereof I do to you commend.
This said, Antenor takes his place, and down therein he set, Paris aunsvvers
and gaiysayes Anteno^

And Paris does in choler grow, with him he takes the pet,
And youthly thus does answer him: Antenor well you can
When so you list, give sound advise, and are a pretty man,
To tell a tale, for Troyans good you practice can at full,
But your opinion now declares your senses lost or dull.
And think for truth the Gods have taken (as you a dotarde ware)
From you your wits: And as for me, I contrary declare
My self to that which you have said, and have determind plain,
The Greekish Lady at no hand I will her leave again.
But for to end this strife, I will the treasure eft restore, Paris vvy^ yield
the goods but keep Helene.

And jewels which I took in Greece, and with them thus much more:
The costliest in my house I have, if so accept they will,
These points of peace, and so content remain contented still.
King Priam herevppon, a Prince of prudence bearing bell,
In council grave, to all the rout he thus his tale did tell. Paris to the
Troyans.

Ye Troyans and my other friends hark what I you advise,
Your lodgings home go seek ye al, since now the night does rise,
Your selves with meat repast I pray, and with your supper done
Regard with heed your watch and ward, as they by course do run:
And in the morning shall there go a Herault to the Greeks,
At length who shall to them declare what Alexander leekes
My son, and know their mind therein, and more a matter say
Which hardly they will us deny, that there may be a stay
Of war a while, that each of us in grave the bodies slain,
And burn the carcasses, for us which dead abroad remain:
And then we shall begin to see who shall obtain the price.
No sooner said, but Troyans al obey him in a trice.
They to their supper do depart, some to the watch do hye,
And some their tired limbs to rest on couches down do lie.
Good I Would the herault in the morn to execute his charge,
Commes to the ship of Agamemn, within the vessel large, The Trojan Herault
goes to the Greeks camp to talk with them.

Whereas he found of Greekish Lords the troup in council fast,
Aloft the poupe to whom to say himself he thus does cast.
Ye famous mighty Atreus heirs, and al ye here together,
Ye prudent hardy princes Greeks, King Priam sends me hither,
And all his worthy council wise to show unto you al,
His Paris son (the only cause for whom this war does fall,
Who rather should have suffered death, than such a mischief wrought)
Is now content to yield again the pray from Greece he brought.
And thereto offers for to put good portion of his own.
But Troyans to persuade him much, who all are greatly grown
Dame Helene fair for to restore, their labor lost they take,
He will her hold. Advise now Lords, what answer ye will make,
That I to Troy return the same, my king he eke demaundes,
If that of truce ye will allow, the bodies on the laundes,
Which dead doly by slaughter of this late and last days war,
In fitly graves and sepultures the same for to entarre.
Which done, the peace to have an end, and with our iron to it,
To see who for the victory by force in fight shall do it.
The Greekish Lords the Herault heard, amazed nothing spoke,
Til Diomede that noble Prince he thus the silence brake:
This offer must we not accept (quoth he) if that Helene Diomedes to the Greeks.

They would and all the wealth of Troy with her restore again,
Who does not fully well perceive (if not a fondling babe)
That shortly all the Troyans here shall be our vassals made,
The time at hand this vile reproach with vengeance due to pay: Agamemno^
answers the herault

Herewith they greatly laud the man, and lo what he does say.
Quoth Agamemn the herault to, thou hearst the Grecians minds,
As theirs, my answer is, my will against theirs it not repines.
As for the truce, it granted is as thou thy self do pray,
I may not cross it, from the dead to keep their granes away,
The hate it ought to be forgot when dead the person lies,
Do you amasse the carcases which of your party rise,
And burn, or bury as you list, and we will do the same:
And for a witness of our faith, that it be void of blame,
O Jove I do thee now inuoke, and Scepter up he throws,
His royal one to heavens ward, a sign, true meaning shows. The goo^ Herault
returns to Troy.

The Herault good well hearing al, to Troy with speed he hies,
And Troyans found at council hard, who longde with loking eyes
His coming home, the answer brought the assembly parts away,
And forward forth abroad they go, and in the fields they stray.
One number great does seek the slain, another down does hacke The Greks and
Troyan^ search the de^ bodies.

The weeds, and saggots bind, and Greeks like mind they do not la k.
A whole day long you might have seen the Greeks and Troyans plye
On work they both and often meet no whit displeasauntly.
It pity was in field to see them labourd so and toylde,
And hardly know their kinsfolks blee, with blood they were so foyld.
But often washing them they found, and laid them on their chares,
And armor eke, with bitter tears and sighs that shewde their cares.
King Priam in a mighty flame did throw the Troyans slain,
And subjects would not suffer more in mourning wise to plain.
So with the Greeks dealt Agamemn, and more a mass did rear
Close in the night the slaughtered bones wherein they tumbled were. The (...)
fortify the s^p.

Not resting so, they round about their ships and navy set
Many a strong and sturdie tower, and bulwarks big they bet,
Gates hie and wide, as fit it was in soldiers to retire,
From battle come, or forth to go, to fight when they desire.
Without a gallant ditch they dig full deep, full low and large,
With posts and pales renforced so, it hard was for to charge.
The Gods in peerless Palace set of Jove, this stir espied,
And maruelld much, among the^ where Neptune, who could not hide Neptune to
Iup^er.

His spite conceivde, these words did use: you God of gods alone,
O Jove, in vows, and sacrifise I careful now see none,
Nor yet to rear a work of worth, no men I see to heed
The will of Gods, they at their heels to cast it are agreede.
Do thou not see these peruke Greeks, who us besought no ways
When as their toures they topt aloft, and rampires great did raise?
Their fame all Countries thus shall fill, and of their buildings ring,
And walls by me and Phoebus built they down on ground shall ding,
Their name encreast, our labor lost, the Marine God thus spoke,
Who often by his proper power does force the earth to quake. Jupiter to
Neptune.

In anger Jove straight answered thus: what say thou Neptu^e here,
A meaner God of right then you these doings ought to fear.
You are to great your glory spreads as far as day does start.
For these gay towers and trenches wide, when their hie ships depart
To Greece their Country to return, their work destroy and race,
Drewhelm it clean with sand, thereof, that none may know the place.
The son straight after down it draws, and up the night it gat,
And al things done, the Greeks at rest in their pauilions sat,
And many a beef for supper slew, and there that instant tide
Diverse keeles full fraught with wine from Lemnos fat did ride.
Euneus, fair Hipsiphils son, to Jason which she bare, Runeus. Hipsiphyle.

For traffic some and some to give causde thither to repair.
For of these new and pleasant wines, a thousand tuns he full
Gave to the chiefetaine of the war: the Greeks came down in scul,
And barter for the wine apace, in haven where it lay,
Some brass exchaungde, some iron, some hides, and prisoners some do pay.
Some bullockes from their herds do give, and so they drink content,
That all the night no jot they slept but it in cheering spent.
Again the Troyans full at will possessed what they disirde,
But Jove he did them much amaze, the heaven so it firde
With thunder and with lightning flames, which al ye night did last,
Devout his anger to appease, upon the ground they cast
In sacrifice great store of wine (the time then calm and quiet)
They tend to Cabane at their ease, and sound in sleep lie by it.
Finis Septimi Libri.
The eight Book.
THe morning with the ruddie hew on earth did show his blee, Description of the
da^ning of the day.

When Jove the Prince of lightnings al, to counsels calls he
In welkin bright each mighty God, who set in order due,
And heedie all to hark, thus Jove into his tale he grew:
Ye troop divine give ear to me, attend what now I will, Iupi. to the gods
assembled in counsel.

Which having heard, none of you al be ye of mind so ill,
Whether he male or female be, to deem to change my doom,
Or cross the same: who out the troop shall go and leave his room,
The heavens who shall leave I say in Greeks or Troyans aid,
Him caught, well bumbd I shall him boh, and send him ill apaide
With shame enough unto his home, and if I grow to spite,
I will him tumble headlong down, and cause him for to light
Into the hollow dreadful hole, which Tartare men do tell,
Where Barathrum that gastful gulf does lie so low in hell From (...) in Hell.

With iron gates: so far beneath, as earth from sky remains,
That well to al men it be known how large my power it reigns.
But if you long to feel my sorce, at pleasure you shall see it, The (...) so
(...) of vvriters.

From hence to take a golden chain unto the earth agree it.
All get you down, your heau^nly powers apply with tooth and nail
To pluck me down or me to move, you little should avail,
In fine your toil to naught would turn, but I, if that I lust
To draw you to the welkin up, in spite of you ye must
Amount aloft without my grief, and with you at a pull
I eke would bring the massy earth, and seas of waters full.
One end in heaven I would tie, and let the other hang
That I the chief of God and man the knowledge better rang. Pallas aunsvvers
(...).

This threat and surly speech does yield the Gods amazde and dum,
Til Pallas daughter unto Jove with this her tale does come:
O king of kings, great fire of Gods, whom each and al obayes,
Long skill does tell thy might to pass our forces many ways:
But ifsome one do help the Greeks, it is not in disdain
Or spite of thee, but pity moves to see them daily slain.
Well, since with deed we may not aid, please you it to deny
We counsel give, numbers to save which by your fury die?
With pleasant countuaunce Jove replies: give counsel to ye Greeks Jupiter to
Pallas.

My daughter dear, and favor too as best your fancy likes,
I will at this time pleasure you, you shall no way be chid.
Then Jove his mighty heavenly steedes unto his chare does bid
To tie, his golden roabes he takes, so bright and bravely wrought,
He mounteth up, and to his hand the golden whip he rought,
His horse he beats, the air they cliue, aloft they skimme amain, Iupi.
horses

Between the earth and welkin hie they tread a jolly train.
He plyes them, and so straight does guide, unto the mountain top Iup.
desce^ds and comes to the mountain I Would.

Of I Would hight Gargarus co^mes, and there he makes them stop,
A place of pleasant pasture it, where waters sweet do spring,
Wild beasts great store, on this green hill so likt for every thing
A temple large of antique years was built, and sacred old
By Troyans to his godhead hie, where Jove now stay he would.
Ambrosie for his horse he gets, and least it should be known
That he was come, he with a cloud has quite them ouerthrown.
He from the height of mountain hie the champion low does view, Iupi. from the
mountain beholds the Greeks and Troyans.

The siegers, and besiegde he likes to see, who like do rue.
The more he thinks upon the men, he sees his might the more.
The Greeks having within their tents repast themselves before,
Did not forget to arm them well, their battles out they draw, The Greks and
Troyans make ready so the battle.

And in full seemly order martch, which when the Troyans saw,
And dinde they had, their bands they arm, their town they will defend
A handful they, but forced by need, their minds to valor bend.
Th'assayling Greeks for to resist, and country save at need,
And to protect their native soil, and shield their patrie breed.
Their gatesful open wide they set, and out their cohorts hies,
Their horsemen and their footmen al, not without lofty cries. The ^vvo armies
fight

And to the place of battle come, they to their tackle fling
With shield to shield, and dart to dart, and king does join with king,
And soldier unto soldier goes, most like stout warlike wights
Here one does fall, another here does vanquish in their fights.
One groans along, another does boast of his conquest won,
And in such slaughter rare, apace with blood the fields do run.
This murder from the morning lastes until the noone of day, The victory
doubtful

Both sides so soundly stroke it out, right doubtful was the fray.
Then Jove to see, to whom should turn the victory at last, Iu. Balance.

Their fortune good and eke adverse in balance he does cast:
The Greeks on one side he does put, and justly for to way
The Troyans have the other part, and lets the scales to play.
The Greeks mishap the Troyans much he straight and plainly found
For to surpass, for theirs do mount, the Greeks theirs draw to ground. Iu.
throvvs his lightning on the Greeks. The Greks flee.

Wherefore amongst the Greeks he flings his flash of burning lights
And suddenly with dread thereof appalled were their sprights.
Idomene first his people leaves, and runs away apace,
The king of Creete, Agamemn flies in field he turns his face.
The Ajax twain do stir their stumps, and take them to their flight,
Unto there tackle their do stand no Greekish prince or knight,
Save Nestor sage, who so was forced, a horse of his that drew
Paris so right on head did hit, where first his top out grew.
The beast he fain would have bin gone, he turns, he rears, he thu^ps,
He reeleth with the mortal wound, he flings, he fars, he iumps.
The shaft so surely it was shot, it brake the brain unto,
The man was forced the geares to cut, and so the horse t'vndo.
This while the mighty coursers tho, their master Hector draw
To Nestor nere, who had bin dead, but that the Greek him saw
He Diomede so much in fame, and came unto his aid, Nestor in danger without
Di. who r^ scues him. Di. ^o Ulysses who flees.

And seeing wily Ulysses run, aloude to him he said:
Laertes son, whose cunning kend, and wile is known full wide,
Why, whether now? Are feet thy fence? why do thou not abide?
Have thou no shame: no fear in flight on back some wound to have?
Abide, abide with Nestor here, let us thy person save.
Ulysses heard he would not stay, unto the ships he hies,
Yet Diomede Nestor to help amid the preasse he drives, Di. to Nes^

And come before his horse, he says, The youth of Greece does lay
O Nestor greater toil on thee, than age can bear away,
Hard for thy worn years to abide, whose force thou see to scant,
And foreign vigor erst enioyde the vitals now to want.
Thy chare, thy driuer, and thy seat, a tierd countenance show,
Come down, mount up my chariot too, to prove now in a throw
The swiftness great, the courage od of these my coursers gay,
Which late I conquerde from Aenee, our gromes shall lead away
Thy furniture, we two will forth that Troy and Hector see
Yet once how weapons we can weeld, and soldiers what we be.
The Old man agreed, and to the seat of Diomede does come Nest coms into Diom.
chariot.

In Sthenels place, which Sthenele goes, and takes erst Nestors rome,
Nestor a guider was, but then, Diomede was the knight,
Both passing forth, the doughtie Phrige, Hector to have in fight,
A Hector, who no less desires to meet them in the teeth. Diome. kills He.
driuer.

The mighty Greek to dart he leaves, when Hector first he sees.
The sturdie steeled staff he throws, but mist the man he meant,
The master mist, in driuers womb Enopeus deep it bent.
He Thebes son, a man of price, a valiant man in deed,
The doughtie Hector grieved much to see his servant bleed
Of so good count, and tumble dead, but there he lets him ly,
A like he seeks for force and mind, and to him by and by
Archiptoleme presents himself, the steedes he does bestride, Archeptol. He.
driuer.

The whip and raines he takes in hand and serves him for a guide.
At these two new and sudden haps strange slaughters did appear,
Like lambs unto their force and fold the Troyans do reteare,
And seek their walls for their defense, the Greeks they grew so hot, Iupi.
again throvvs his lightning against the Greeks. Nest. persvvads Di. to fly.

But Jove straight ways his lightning flames we thu^der forth he shot,
That by him near the warlike Greek beheld the flame as't flasht,
His horse they quoke, from Nestors hands the raines are ready dashed,
His fear was such, wherwe (quoth he) perforce does force us now
O Diomede, to hie us hence, the danger see not you?
The glory now the mighty God does give unto our foe,
Another time on us again the same he will bestow.
The mind of man it may not dare the gods for to withstand,
For greatest is of gods the might to rule it takes in hand.
O aged sire (quoth Diomede) thou naught but reason says, Di to Nest.

I do agree, but yet lament, and grievd am diverse ways,
When Hector comes to my mind, who thus shall see me run,
Unto his mates hereafter may, extolling to the Sun
His valiauntuesse, say, to the ships the chase he has me given,
All pity past, I rather crave the earth it here were riuen, Ne. to. Di^.

And I therein were swallowed up, alas quoth Nestor than,
Think you if Hector should report you for a cowardly man,
His tale it would be taken true? your sword in heaps has slain
Too many of the warlike wights, and left their widows plain.
Herewith his horses straight he turns, and with ye Greeks does fly, Diom.
flies

And Hector with his soldiers fast does after forward hie,
With clamors great: And Hector loud his speech does thus begin,
When as they fled: oh Diomede esteemed who has bin
Among the Greeks, yea even thy fill for valor and for fame, He. to Di^.

At board who fed still of the best, and first sat at the same,
Now like a hartlesse fem thou shall be led in prisoner wise,
Make have thou gay and glorious freke, dreadful with flaming eyes,
Believe no more our towers to scale, hope not to ship aborde
Our wives, I Hector, only I sufficient shall afforde,
My force shall serve to stay the strength, and forth to make the pack,
And keep thee from thy ships return, and thee in pieces hacke.
At Hectors words the Greek does stay, he thinks what to do,
To turn again the spite to venge, or forward on to go,
Thereby the danger to avoid, he thrice does venture back, Diomedes in doubt
whether to fly or to abide.

And thrice does Jove him eye, and down he lets the thunder crack,
With lightning flame hard by his ear, a sign most sure and full
The Troyans strong should have the day, for so the Gods they wul.
Herewith aloude does Hector cry his men to harten al: He. exhorts his
soldiers.

O Troyaus, Lycians, ye my friends, to who it does befall
To be my fellow soldiers here, if ever men you be
Think now thereon, and show like men your selves on the enemy.
I know full well we vanquishe shall, the loss it shall be theirs,
Their walls, their forts, which they have made to save them in their fears
By me shall soon be forced down, my horse with easy ships H. threats (...)
^be Gr^ks she.

Shall pass their dikes, and do attend when I am in their ships
To bring me fire to burn them up, they may no more retire,
I will their lims and lives consume with smoke and smothering fire.
Thus Hector comforts up his mates, and speaks his horse, Podarge He. speaks
to his horses

Aeton, Xanthe, oh ye my steedes so swift with buttocks large,
Thou fiery Lampus and divine, for me that sweats and scuds,
Think on the cheer on you bestows Andromacha my fuds
And loving wife, she careful does with Wheat and Dates you feed, Wine given
to horses of war.

With temper eke of pleasant wine, when as she sees need,
Heeding as much to have you dressed, as on my self to tend,
She quirie is: advance your sorce, your courses stoutly bend
To further now your masters facts, that he do fange in field
The Nestor old, and from him take his famous bruted shield, Ne. target of gold.

Report whereof does reatch the skies, of precious gold it is.
Of Diomede his cuyrasse to (he caught) we shall not miss Dl. curate made by
Vulcan.

So counted off, which Mulciber did forge: And all the night
The Greekish host all washed in sea you shall see take their flight.
And thinking for to do as much thus lofty Hector braues.
But Juno hearing this discourse, so spitefully she raues,
Her members quoke, Olimpus shoke, to Neptune straight she co^mes, Juno to
Neptune.

Art thou not grievd (quoth she) to see the Greeks hit on the thumbs,
And suffer in such sorry plight, who daily sacrifice
Gay gifts and hosties unto thee in Egues and Helice? Egues. Helice.

How can thou without heavy cheer, support their heavy case
Thy favor known, which I have seen, that did their state embrace?
O Neptune if thou and the rest would once but say the word,
And from this slaughter them to keep some favor small afforde,
It would be done, my husband Jove for spite would friske and fare,
Yet least he might repent, depart from I Would he would not dare.
Thou frantike sot quoth Neptune tho, think not that I will stur
Or speak against the mighty Jove, whose power does pass so fur, Neptune to
Juno.

To whom each one ought to obey, he is to lofty he,
He is our king, our master Lord, his vassals al we be.
Thus while ye Greeks are driven back, and in the field defeated,
Their forts and trenches they do take, and doughtie Hector heated The Greks
shut up in their streng these by He.

Is Mars himself, the rampires so he forces them to gain,
Between the ships and utter fence they filled all the plain.
Thus back retird and cubberd up, the Troyan stout had burnd
Their vessels, all the (God so would) if Juno had not turned
T'aduise the Greeks, for when she saw this flight and this disorder,
To put in Agamemnons mind their king to pass on forder,
With speed unto the ships for aid. To navy he does draw,
In hand a scarlet roabe he held, the Ad m^rall ship he saw Ulysses ships.

Of the Ithaque king, to it he went, of other vessels more
It stood in midst, the place he chose most meet his mind to shoe.
On one side stood sir Ajax tent, on the other stood Achill, The ten^ of Ajax
and Achilles on the side. Agamem^o^ blames ^n people of covvardise.

So guarded to withstand the force of such assault them will.
Agamemn come into the ship, he mounts aloft to poupe,
He cries aloude: O Greekish kings, O wretched fainting troop,
What shame and mark of infamy this day on Greece does light?
Where is the proud and vaunting speech? where is the promise plight?
Where is the kilcow chatte become in Lemnos which you had
Upon your Alebenche, where you were so impudent and mad?
Then one of you would kill and eat five hundred Troyans full:
It was the cheer, it was the meat and wine you so did gull,
That made you brave and brag so much. I see the matter now,
Lo Hector come, our fort to sack, and al our army cow,
Our Bastion eke and us to burn. O Jove thou father great,
What king of kings so as my self have thou with care beset,
Deprivde of glore, with envy fraught, and wronged to my pain,
Defrauded of the surety sound, wherewith I fed in vain,
When as m'oblations vow I did to please thee Jove withal,
And Troy did think to lay sul low? I see I now must fall
A pray into my enmies lap: thou sovereign God yet grant, Pray^ (...) Jupiter.

(It better grace we may not have) fierce Hector do not daunt,
Nor cruel Troy our people here, but that they escape their swords.
The chieftaine chief thus prayde for all, with tears he spoke the words:
Jove full agreed to his request, his sighs did pity move,
Which he did yield for perishing folk, praying for their behoue. Good tok^
for the Greeks.

For Augure sure an Egle commes, a call with talons tough
Of red Dear hind he brings, and falls, which comfort enough
The whole Nobility of Greece, on Altar down it lights
In sacrifice of puissaunt Jove, reviving much their sprites.
And straight therewith forth make they head of thousands soldiers stout,
And valiant knights, Don Diomede forth first he sallies out
The forte with chare: On Troyan bands to try and show his force,
To one he flies, one only blow martyrde a Troyans corse,
Agelaus hight, Phadmon his son, whole armed for the war,
Yet fled he fast from Diomede, his sight him so did scarre, Diomedes ssayes
Agesilaus.

But through his chin his dart it flue, and through the Curet came,
His armor gave a murmuring noise, he tumbling in the same.
Agamemnon, and Menelau his brother, Ajax twain, The nine most vali^nt Greks
next Achilles.

Princes of great exploite that were, Idomene in the train,
With Merion his gallant guide, a man of courage brave,
Good Eurypile Euemons son, in company they have,
Of all the Greeks a man of choice, these forth from forte do starte,
And on their foes do forward hie, them charging ouerthwarte.
Beside these eight, a ninth with them, a Greek, one Teucer went,
He brother unto Ajax was, his bow he bears bent,
His skill was good to make his best, and straight to shoot withal, Teucer
covered with Ajax shield vvou^ds the Troyaus.

By subtle Art his mortal wounds, did many Troyans thrall:
Under his brothers Target he himself did often hide,
And freely let his arrows fly, where he his vantage spide,
And having sped, to save his life seeks out the Buckler big,
As does the infant oftentimes, the little pretty twigge Comparion.

When he does see displeasaunt sighs, does under garments creep
Of Nurse, or mother dear, and there plays like himself bo peep.
Well, let us tell those lost their lives this Archer lighted on. Eight Troyans
staiue by Teucer.

Ocsilochus, he was the first, Detor, Amapaon,
Ophelest, Ormeyne, Lycophont, Chromius, Menalippe,
Hethrild the^ through with deadly wounds, they down to ground do tip.
Agamemns heart it leaps for joy, his part when thus he plaide Agamemno^ ^o
Teucer.

The sturdie shot, to him he draws, and cheerfully he said:
O noble wight and Prince of same, whom I with honor due
Ought to regard, I thee beseech thy forward factes pursue:
Beside the praise men shall thee give, when as thine aged sire
Thelemon hears of these exploites, he joy shall, with desire,
And hope to see thee shortly home: I know, and not beguilde,
He does thee honor and esteem, though thou no lawful child,
I know that from thy Cradle up, he did thee always bring,
As lawful borne: I swear to thee in promise of a king,
If ever I this City take, of all the gallant pray,
Next me shall thou make choice, and at thy pleasure take away
A rich three footed Cawdron guilt, on thee I will bestow
A Chariot with two goodly steedes, or else with thee to go,
A Troyan fair, a Priams child, or Dame of City breed
To use in bed, and serve thee ay, if so thou be agreede.
Quoth Teucer tho, there is no need, great king my will to mend, Tencer ^o
Agamemo^

Full often I shoot, to noy the foe, my force and care I bend.
Gight valiant foes it is full true my shaftes have deadly slain, He meneth
Hector.

I were full venged, if I could that mastiffe mad attain.
He with these words does pluck his bow, and sends his piercing steel,
To Hector straight, to broach the man, but harm he none does feel:
But yet the shaft on Priams son Gorgythion it light, Gorgythio^.

Of sudden cruel death he dies, his pap it pierced right,
He was the son of Castianire the Goddesses so like,
A noble Nimphe, with her good king in Thrace did marriage strike,
For beauty sake which od she had, and like the growing Poppy, Compariso^^.

As well for fruit as April shoures, does leave his head so loppy
In gardens fat: Gorgythion hurt laden with steel did helm him,
On shoulder lays his head, and dies with weakness which did whelm him.
The Greekish shot to Hector eft, his bow does careful pluck,
But him he misste, his arrow yet under the teate it stuck, Teucer kills
Hectors driuer.

Of strong Archeptoleme, who falls: his squier thus to dye
Hector does grieve to see, and down he lights by and by,
And wills Cebrion for to come, and take the guiders charge, Cebrin^ Hectors
driuer.

Which done, Hector a coggel heaues, a mighty and a large,
With dreadful voice to Teucer flies, Teucer from quiver takes
A shafte again, to slay a foe himself he ready makes,
And ready for to shoot, Hector did reatch him such a bang, Hector strikes Te^
cer.

That down he falls, and out his hands his bow and arrows flang.
The forced stroke did force him so, the blow was deadly sent,
Aloft the breast the neck it hit, where down the head is bent.
His brother Ajax ran apace, when down he saw him doong, Ajax saues his
brother.

To save and to defend the man, the noble prince he floong,
And him with shield so well did hap, as up they took him there,
The wretched archers friends Menest, Alastor they do bear
Him in their arms straight to the ships, ^alfe gone for very pain. The Greks
retire again.

The Troyans strong by mighty Jove ^ided, yet once again
Do force the Greeks to leave the field, and so retyring eft Comparion.

Their trenches, force, and forte to take, which they before had left.
Hector the foremost leads the dance, as fleshed mongrell great,
Trusting in strength and nimblenesse, the Lion beast does heat,
Or wild swine in the forest thick, if either of them do cast
Or turn about to be reuengde, the cur he shifts as fast,
Full light he pincheth deep their flancks, or hangs so at their thies,
As dye they must. So Hector he, does chase his enemies,
Who leave the field, and take to flight, if any lagge behind,
With sword or lance he hits them home, with death of sundry kind.
The Greeks repulsed from their forts, from dikes and tre^ches fly,
With slaughter great confused al in bloody death they dye.
Hard by their ships at last they stay, each comforting his mate,
To play the man, and to the Gods they pray for their estate.
This while the gastfull Hector he, with Mars his dreadful eyes,
And flaming like the Gorgons lights, upon the Greeks he flies, Hector
dreadful to the Greeks.

And terror more does put them in, he stirs, he castes about,
To look how he may clean defeat, and break the Greekish rout.
Then wrathful Juno grieved much, to see the valiant Greeks
So hard distressed, and doubting worse, Pallas she thus beseekes. Juno to
Minerua.

Of Jove dearest daughter thou, can thou this army see
In danger such, without regard to help th'extremitie?
Suffer* shall we them al to quail by this one Hectors hand,
So barbarous a slaughter man? look in what case they stand.
Do thou not see how to their ships he has them forced all,
And will not cease, til in their bloudes he force them each to fall? Minerua to
Juno.

Quoth Pallas then, I know your mind, I find the matter well,
But this so hardy Hector hie, whose deeds are seen so fell,
And so much to be wondered at, shall dye in country soil,
But Jove his will to think to cross naught follow would but foil.
I fear him much, his awkward spite against me often is set,
Too much ingrate, the labor great, and pain he does forget,
Which I for Hercules boot have taken, his forces when to try Hercules.

Unto King Euristeus Court he went so willingly.
The travails truly which he took had mated often the man,
But when he cried, and when he wept, sir Jove he praide me than
To hie to him, which often I did, else he quite overthrown
And taken had been: if in those days I happily then had known,
What reckening he would make of me, in hell had holden binne Hercules in all
his enterprise^ favored by Minerua.

His Hercules for ever and aye, his conquest far to win,
So famous got of Cerberus, that grimme three headed curre,
The hellish flood that Styx is hight, he had not paste so furre,
But had been staide ere there he came, in guerdon of my deeds,
He now for worthy recompense me hates and often chides,
For to allow the sottish will of Thetis Lady white,
Her vain requests he needs must grant, she flatters him so right
With humble speech, touching his bearde, his knees eke kissing low,
Achill her son to set aloft and Greeks to overthrow.
But well I know I shortly shall by Jove be daughter taken,
And be again his girl white, as now I am forsaken.
Your chare to have if so you please now Juno get you gone,
And I will hie unto his house his armor to put on.
This Troyan I will make to feel what grief or jolly glee
The guest shall get when me in war against him he shall see.
And that I have the puissance I, to work him teene and care,
And make his subjects meat for dogs, and flying fowls of the air,
To be reuengde. Minerua mad thus spoke and Juno steares
Right careful for to put in point her horses and their geares Minerua puts on
the armor of Jupiter.

And all the rytes to shining chare. But Pallas she does leave
Her linnowe robes so delicate, which erst her self did weaue,
And happes her with ye cuirates tough, which Jove in battle wears:
So armd, the chariot light she leapes, a lance in hand she bears,
Wherewich the demigods she mates, in anger when she copes,
Unto hi^ heaven gates they come, which freely to them opes.
Of these gaie doors the hours they have, the whole and only charge, This is
written in the fist Book.

Each one a porter is, they rule also the heavens large.
Of clear Olympe they regents are, the clouds at beck they bring,
Or when they come, as soon again away they force them for to fling.
When Jove aloft he looks up, and sees the horses fly,
Which drew the Goddesses, in heat against them he does fry. Jupiter sends
Iris ta the two Goddesses.

He sends Iris unto them that ready winged wight:
My pursiuaunt with golden wings (quoth he) go show thee light,
Go meet these two, and say from me they do retire their pace,
Tell them I bid they do not dare to come before my face,
Tell them they are two fondlings vain, to think to break my host,
Tell them who list least to obey shall taste of little rest.
Their chariot gaie shall straight be burst, and beam from horses torn,
My lightning flames fuil stiffly shot shall send them headlong borne
Down to the earth, and in such plight, as (maugre all their skill)
In ten years long they shall not heal their such received ill.
And then shall Pallas know what shame she does deserve, and shall,
To stir against her sire, Juno I blame no whit at all,
She treads but her wontrd trod, I know her so accursed,
To labor my disquiet still she always is the furst.
Iris his message to fulfill from Ida mount he skores, Iris to Juno and Pallas.

And found them of the heaven hie then coming out the doors.
Whom when he sees, he rests straight, quoth he, O frantic wights,
What fond and foolish sottish gear has poisoned thus your sprightes,
To mean to aid the Greeks, and stir against you Jove his ire?
He does forbid you further pass unless you do desire
Even in a trice your chariot gaie to fly in peers small,
And beam from horses burst, and you in dust and dirt to fall,
By sudden clap of lightning flames so tumbling from the air,
As ten years long of quiet rest shall not your health repair,
That Pallas you do know, that Jove thy master is and dad,
And as for Juno, he well knows she is so leudly bad.
She is no whit at all abasht, she always takes delight
His purposes to contrary, and that in his despite.
But Pallas be not stubborn then as dog of currish kind,
Strive not with him, use not thy staff against his will and mind,
Least thou offend thy sire too far. Iris he flies his ways,
And Juno to Minerua turns, and thus to her she says: Juno to Minerua.

Not to perform our minds set down what can be greater hell?
Yet since that Jove does us gainsay, I do not think it well.
We should herein against him stand, nor for no worldly wight
Such painful danger for to take, his hie and heavenly might
Of their good hap or harm it shall at pleasure his dispose: The Goddesses
return to Heaven. The hour^ handm^ds of Juno.

The steeves with bridle straight she turns, and right to heaven goes.
The hours do loose the coursers brave, and them to mangier ^ye,
The chariot they do fitly place in room appointed by.
Hard by the Gods in golden chaires the lofty Ladies sit,
Who having failde of their intent, they are in grievous fit:
To welkin now eke Jove is come, who is with honor due Jupiter (...) heaven.

Receavde of each, as soon as that of him they had a view.
His goodly steedes the Marine god full quickly he unties,
Their furniture he shuts up, and then he hasty hies
Of Jove the mighty seat to set, it ready at a look,
He down does sit, but clapping down the whole Olympus shook.
Between Juno and Pallas there in midst the God he sat,
No word between them both they had, ne to the God do chat.
But Jove who well did know their thoughts in bitter choler was,
Ladies quoth he, whence does proceed your spite which thus does pass?
Whence co^mes ye seek ye Troyans harm, and never have your fill,
Unless you see their utter fall contrary to my will?
My force since that so great it is are you to learn to know
That neither you nor all the Gods and Goddesses in row
By force can make me change my mind since that my simple threate,
Does make you quake with faces pale, and eke with trembling sweat:
What will you do in bloody mart so dreadful to the sight,
When you shall feel my heavy fist invincible in might:
Hark then, gainsay no more of you, I wish you not to dare:
By hap if fondly ye oppugn my hie decrees that are,
Upon ye, ye shall feel to fall the scortching lightning flash,
Wherewith I thunder with my flames, and down they shall you dash,
On earth to dwell, no means ye have eft hitherto return,
Your chares and steedes in cinders quite and pieces it shall burn.
Hereat Minerua groans for grief, her heart it boiles with rage,
Yet still and coie she held her self, and fury does assuage. Juno to
Jupiter.

But Juno takes the cause in hand, O crabbed Jove quoth she,
What stir is here? we well do know your vassals all we be.
Your power is odd, but if one would the Greekish army aid,
Is it against you to rebel? why should it so be said?
So great an host to see destroyde poor pity makes us rue,
But Jupiter to her again with words does thus ensue:
Their loss let it not trouble you, it double shall to morrow,
I will make Hector Troyan chief, to ding them with a sorrow,
And slaie them down, not ceasing he to kill and drive them back,
Unto their ships, expecting naught but ruin, death, and wrack,
There fighting hard, and round beset about Patroclus bones,
Who^ he shall slaie, whereby Achill shall yield his grievous groans:
Seeing the slaughter of his friend, he shall in fury groe,
Him to revenge, and give them aid, he hasty on shall go.
I will it so, and since that fate to Greeks has so assignde,
For you dame Juno more I joy, the more you have repinde,
A gods name get you in the sea, or furthest earthly felles,
Go seek Iapetus Saturn out, in darkness where he dwelles. Iapetus Saturn.

Where never Phoebus shows his face, nor no delight he takes
To hear the winds, trudge where you list, look after you who makes
None shall you follow by my will, of you I do not reake,
Your feumishe heart with poisoned hate is ready still to break,
This was his speech, the Goddess great full quiet low does lout
The stern God she greatly dreades, and of him stands in doubt.
This while the clear and brightsome sun to the ocean takes his flight,
Description of setting of the sun, and of the night.

As is his wont, and all the earth the brown and sable night
Does wholly hap and cloak about with his so darksome shade,
A night right welcome to the Greeks, but Troyans mad are made
Therewith, The gallaunt Hector draws. and soldiers he commaundes Hector
encampeth out of Troy.

Back from the ships hard to the brook, and comes to the laundes,
Whereas that day with sorrow great the slaughter was so bloody,
There down on foot they lighted straight in council for to study,
To whom Hector, who in right hand a mighty lance did hold The length of
Hectors lance or dart.

As royal mace, lance steeld and guilt, of feet large truly told
Eleven full it was in length, with voice does loudly call:
Ye Troyans stout and strangers eke, I speak unto you all, Hector to the
Troyans.

Ye soldiers and ye citizens, good hope I did conceive
This day, and sure I thought my self them all of life to reaue,
Their vessailes eke to have destroyde, and as a conqueror
To have returned, but my intent I miss in evil hour,
Because the night so soon is come. Wherefore I think it best
Not hence to stir, but here t'encampe and take our quiet rest.
Well, go to then, let every one point here his station out,
With otes and barley bate your horse. And let another route
Hie unto Troy, muttons and beeues ready for us to make,
And others wine and bread to get let them the office take,
Some must before our supper to good store of fuel fell,
To kindle flames, which all the night may light us gaily well,
The Greeks by sea may closely fly, which if they do fulfill,
To charge them frankly in their flight, and cut their tail I will,
That their orethrowe example be to every living wight,
That none do dare to war with Troy, who well knows how to fight
And from the town since far we be, her safety we must heed,
The Heraults let them go to Troy, and tell it is agreed
That all the youth and aged men the city do defend,
And on the walls do make their watch, and Troyan women bend
Themselves to light the fiery flame, to look with careful eyes
Our foes do not surprise the town by fault or otherwise:
As I have said let it be done, each one his work apply.
In morning further we shall talk, and do accordingly.
I hope O worthy warriors mine, we end shall all these broiles
To morrow, and these furious curs shall by our manly toiles
Be hackt and hewde with great distress, well, let us all this night
Repose our selves, and at the peer and dawe of morning light
In battle let us raunge our bands, these furious foes to mate,
Then shall I see sir Diomede in what a soldiers state Hector threatens
Diomedes.

He will be seen, and whether he me from his vessels puts,
Or whether I shall spoil him quite, my darts sent through his guts.
Full trial he shall have, whether he able can sustain
One thrust of this my lance, I hope by me he shall be slain,
And many a friend full dear of his, who would him gladly save,
If such a victory I get, I certainly shall have
Eternal fame, immortal praise I purchase shall thereby,
I do not think, but they to me will raise an altar hye.
In witness of my prowess great, as is to Pallas done
That Goddess she, or to Phoebus that God and brightsome sun.
This said, the Troyans him obey, their good and weary steedes
Unloosde before, to chares again they tie and forward yeedes,
Unto the town, and quickly bring bread, wine and trinkets more,
The beeues and muttons were not few, they brought no scanted store: A
thousand fires kindled in the Troyans Camp. Comparison.

Then in the midst of all the camp a thousand fires they light,
The flames and smoke whereof, the wind to heaven caries right.
And even as men shall often see in fair and pleasant weather,
The Moon being clear the skies aloft: (for light is so together,
As all the hills, the vales, and plains, with light as lightly shows
As in the day) whereby the heard, when up his eyes he throws,
He ioyeth in his cabin poor: Even so from Troyan town,
In night so pleasant and so still, the dwellers looking down,
Rejoice to see the army sit: who when their horse were dressed,
And unto Otes and pasture set, they go to take their rest:
By every fire just fifty men down sittes, as best they may,
In hope of Greeks the morning next shall be the latter day,
Finis Octaui Libri.
The ninth Book.
THe Troyans brave they placed thus, their watch with careful heed:
For loss of field and fellows slain for grief the Greeks they bleed.
For flight the feere, and fellow mate of chilling fear that nippes, Flight
the companion of fear.

Had dastardlike with shame enough them driven to their ships.
And even as we full often see the pontique sea to grow, Comparison.

When Boreas blasts or western gales from Thracian mountains blow.
And make the bellowe so to bolne, as often the brownish waves
From bottom of sir Neptunes sea aloft full hiely braues:
So were the Greekish princes sprites all troubled and to tossed,
Yet of them all Agamemnon he, he was tormented most.
He wills the princes to entreat the Heraults all and some
(Not loud with Proclamations out) unto his tent to come,
To them his purpose to declare. The Heraults they obayed,
And when ye kings the sommon heard, from him no whit they stayed.
Each one set after his degree, with sad and ruthful grace
Agamemn stands up, the tears fast trickling down his face:
Even as the fountain water does out springing from the stone Comparison.

Bedewe the plains, these were his words with sighs and doleful moan.
To deeply Jove he does me dear O all the Greekish Dukes, Agame^non to the
Greeks.

And stays not yet, with sorrow more he further me rebukes.
He promisde me in fire and blood this Troy I should it sack,
(I marvel much) my ill success commaundes me from it back,
And bids me leave the enterprise and home to have to Greece,
My honor lost, my fame forlorn, and host the greatest piece.
So pleases it the mighty Gods all force and might to mate, Sentence which
is in the second book.

Down throwing strength of walls and men all heights he does abate.
Since so it be, I wish it not that we against him strive,
Lets get us home, our pain we loose, here sure we cannot thrive.
Their chieftaine when the council heard, long still they muet sat,
Till big and doughtie Diomede this matter aunsweres flat:
Thy want of skill O Atreus heir (quoth he) persuades me much Diomedes'
^hsvvers to Agame^non

Unto thy words to answer now, thy speeches being such,
And to gainsay the same: therefore against me rage not now,
Nor any else, just council law the privilege does allow
That each in council show his mind: I pray thee truly tell,
When have thou seen this camp afraid or weakly so to mell
In charge, assault, or else Alarmes, as best it should now seem
Our weapons for to leave? do thou so ill their hearts esteem? Diomedes
confesse^ Agame^no^ the gretest of honor but the vvorst s^ diour.

So small hope have thou in their force, as for thy simple tongue
The Troyan conquest we should leave? it is too great a wrong.
These warlike bands so to despise. It skilleth not a fly,
It is thy want, my self the first I have it suffered, I,
Thy thought of me of all this host well knows young and old,
With thee a coward counted I, and meeter for to scold,
Than in the danger of the wars to venture in the same,
Dccasion since I have to speak, I speak it to thy shame.
The heavenly Gods have made thee chief, and scepter for to bear,
And rule this host, stout manly mind in thee it is not there,
Nor counsel sound, in warlike feats, which are the gifts of gain,
Unto those points thou can not come, nor thereto once attain.
Wherefore take heed hence forth to braule or injury the Greeks:
And if to fly, and hie thee hence it so thy fancy leekes,
Get thee to sea, thy stuff it lies right ready on the shore,
Soon to thy town thou shall be brought out trouble any more.
The other Greeks will here abide and willingly attend
The wished day, wherein we shall surprise Troy in the end.
And if that home likewise they will, not forcing any whyt
This high exployt, Esthenelus with me will tarry yet, Esthenelus for Sthenelus.

Nor leave me till the end of all, assurde our coming hither
Unto the coasts directed was by Gods yea altogether.
This speech the Greeks they greatly praise of Tydees son the wise,
They do commend his good advise, wherewith does Nestor rise
That prudent knight, and answers thus: O Diomede thy part Nestor allovves
Diomedes counsel.

In bloody war right stout thou playst, in council good thou art,
I must confess of all the kings thou art the oddest, thou,
Of those thy years. Of all the camp I think no souldior now
Does wish, or will a harmefull truce, yet all thou do not touch,
Concerning this our question here more must be said much.
I, old who am, and may be sire to all these mighty kings,
And eke to thee, will end the rest I hope to their likings,
And even so, as none reprove my council good and sound.
No viler or unhappy man, or wicked can be found,
Nor more unworthy for to live, than civil war who Jove's. Nestor Counsels
what is to be done.

To supper let us get us now, since night so far on shoues,
And stilly for to set the watch with bands of youngest years,
Twene wall and trench to place them so, when Troya^ crues appears
To charge us, they may notice give: Agamemnon you ought
That all the Princes unto you they be to supper brought:
(As I do think) you nothing want to feast them as you wul,
With pleasant wine of Thracian soil your tent is stuffed full,
And as we sup discourse will hap, and serve for council eke
And help, in this so weighty cause we al our wits must seek.
For why, the enmy lies at hand, it is a heavy thing
(God knows) their fires to see, and hear them by our noses ring.
Lo here the night which will us save, if prudent men we be,
But if we sleep, then shall we fall, in hands of th'enimie.
When he had said, and they had heard, his will it was obayd^, Th^se who (...)
chosen (...) the (...) and for scou^.

And Princes seven unto the watch do go right well arayde,
And soldiers they seven hundred take, the first was Thrasimede
Duke Nestors son, and Creons heir, another Lacomede,
Ascalaphe was the third, the fourth was willing Merion,
Aphareus, Ialmen, and Deyphire, they forward passed on,
And made the number seven up, three knights right hard to daunt,
And wights not better^e like to be, where men come in their haunt.
These with their soldiers armed full, with darts and armor bright,
Tween wall and trench they set themselves, and tend the watch al night.
They fires make, some eat, some walk, no one of them does sleep,
With eyes they look for them that come, and ears attentive keep.
On the other side Agamemn he to supper brings the Lords,
They neither thirst nor hunger feel, so well he them afordes. Agame^non suppes
the Greekish Princes.

They supte, Nestor (whose council grave of each was known right well
Unto the chieftaine of the war he thus his tale did tell.
O worthy Prince, of none but you I am here for to say, Nestor to Agamemn

Since you are poynted of these folk to bear the rule and sway:
Since that the Gods have given you power of all the Grecians here,
More counsel and more stoutly mind in you there should appear
Than any other, which should enforce it self to give good ear,
And counsel take, and after good to execute it were.
And chiefly, when you are aduisde a thing that profit will,
And honest is, then who can say by you proceeds ill?
An other thing to counsel you it moves me again,
Which full to follow is your best, not contrary to saine
As erst you did, when raging wood in fury you did fret
Against Achill, and worse than that into your ships did fet
To his despite out of his tent the Bryse in gift he had,
A favorite of all the Gods, the wrong it was too bad
To stir a personage so great. Wherefore we ought to study,
If help may be, how to repair this fact outrageous moodie,
And quietly it to appease with presents gay and ri^h,
Or else by means of courteous speech and by entreatie miche.
Agamemnon thus answered straight: O aged sire, no less Agamemno^ to Nestor.

Whereof thou have accused me the fault I do confess.
I can vouch no excuse at all, I fowlie fell and faild,
I do perceive by the outrage the Greeks have greatly quaild.
Jove loves the man, and whom God loves, in camp where men are full,
Such one is worth a multitude of the unbridled scull,
Who hardly will be ruled at al, but as I am the man
Uniustly who has only done, I Will prove all means I can
To mend the fault, I will bestow in guerdon for the fact
Great gallant gifts of lofty price out of my treasures pacte,
Which I will name unto you here, esteem their price who can: The gifts
which Agamemnon vvil offer Achilles.

First seven goodly Triuets large, which never were set an
The fire, ten talents eke right pure and fine of golden mass,
And twenty Caudrons burnishte brave of gloring shining brass:
Twelve Coursers with their gorgeous barbs and furniture arrayed,
Whose swiftness has in wager been in Greece full dearly paid.
If so much wealth and coin he had, he should not think he needs
As I have got and gained eke by travel of these steedes.
Eke seven dames, whose femine race surpass for countnaunce rare,
Right cunning in Embroderie: which fell unto my share,
When Achill conquered Lesbos I Will, and with them will I yield
His Bryseis flower of Damsels al, as pure and vndefeeld,
As when she first was given me, I by my royal state
And scepter which I hold, I swear, I in no manner rate
Have privately dealt with the maid, she never in my couch
Did rest her self, I never near approchte her once to touch,
As men are wont, when they alone themselves with women find:
Lo here the wealthy gift to him by me is now assignde.
And if that favor do the Gods this enterprise begone,
And that this Troy it may be taken, and it to sack be done,
I do agree that of the spoil, top full with brass and gold
A mighty ship he lade, and eke town dames out twenty told
The fairest of the Troyans al (save Helene) shall be his:
And to my country when I come, I truly will not miss
So dearly to esteem the man with honor vnbeguilde,
As I mine own Orestes do, my dear and loving child.
And if he marriage list to mind, I gladly will him know
My son in law, on him I will a daughter mine bestow:
Take where he please, I three now have which meek and modest are, Agame^non^
three daugh ters.

Chriso^eme fair, wise Laodice, and she of honest care
Iphianas: well, take he one, for dower it shall not skill,
I hope right well she shall not blame my fatherly good will,
(How great the match and princely is) for dower I have prepared:
I seven Cities will bestow with walls right round reparde,
Well stufte with wealth and people eke, fast by the sea of Pile,
That is to say, Enopa one, the second Cardamile,
Pheres divine, Hira enclose with goodly fruitful trees,
Ped^sos, whose fat fertile earth with Uineyards well agrees,
Egea with her gallant seat, and Anthia so commended
For fruitful ^eades and pasture ground which cannot be amended.
And in these seven so good towns such civil people live,
As like a God they will him hold, and presents to him give
Of such their wealth they do possess, with goods and body pressed
To Obey his scepter and his will, as he is pleased best.
These gifts and these good turns are his, if this agreement do,
(Would Gods O valiant Achilles) our strifes were brought unto
A quietness: let Pluto to thy deed such favor send,
That thou thy self no way refuse, but peace may have the end,
Let Pluto grant me so much grace, in years and wealth as I
Far pass Achill, so in like case my suit he not deny.
Then Nestor* heeding well his tale, his speech again does use, Nestor cou^
sels Agame^non to offer the gifts to Achilles, and to send him Embassadoures,

Sir Atreus son these presents told Achill ought not refuse,
For great they are: wherefore provide Ambassadors to go,
Three men sufficient I can choose, if they be pleased so.
The Phoenix good shall be the first, Schoolemaister his that was
Of late of the Embassade chief, and Ajax he shall pass
The second man, and eloquent Ulysses third shall be,
Whom Heraults two shall follow fast, Odius Eurybatee,
Two loyal wights: and fit it is for to confirm the deed,
To wash our hands: you Heraults hie, and water fetch with speed,
And you ye Greeks, (each one aparte) do Jupiter require,
That this legation come to pass, as we do all desire.
The heraults two to Princes hands the water out they skinke,
Who to the Gods their prayers make, and then the wine they drink.
Therewith well filld the Legates part, whom Nestor plyeth still,
To set themselves to purchase home good answer from Achill,
Ere they return Ulysses chief his speech to make the way,
So grave that is, and he there with his courage to delay.
Thus went the pointed Princes forth, with care to be well heard, Ulysses,
Phoenix, and Ajax Ambassadors to Achilles

And lowly to the Marine God their prayers they prefarde,
That of the valiant Greek the wrath so deep and deadly placed,
To end the charge they now are in, more calmed be and raced.
Unto the vessels straight they come, and tents of Myrmidons,
In compass wide and gay to sight, Achilles where he runs,
And on the Uiole Ditties sings, in Music so delights
Of those the hie and lofty Gods, and worthy mortal wights. The Viole or Harp
of Achilles.

This Uioles sweetness matchless was with beauty rare to see,
Well painted ore with silver head, was fine as fine might be,
The which was by Achilles won, when Thebes he did race,
I mean Thebes where Aetion did rule with princely ^ace,
Which Thebes was by hi^ destroyde, no one there was that markie
His music there, save Patroclus, his harmony who harkte.
These Princes when Achilles saw, who long his friends had bin,
He would not fail to raise himself, and wondering does begin
To bid them welcome as he scoulde, Patroclus also rose,
And to receive them ^ut and himself: to speech Achilles goes, Achilles
speaks courteously, receiving the Ambassadors.

Right welcome ^e those my good friends ^d Lords, who with good heart,
Do in my ships come visit me; I take in most good part
The same, and though my wrath be great, you are no cause I say;
I you esteem, I lovde, I love, and love you will for ay.
Thus said, with ^eons (...) ^re he, does bring them on to sit
One after one in sumptuous seats, be hangde with vellet fit:
The hugest cup he had, to bring Patroclus he did will
To make them drink, and well the same with purest wine to fill,
For these (quoth he) here visit me, are knights of valiant breed,
And more than that, my wishers well, and very friends in deed.
His friends mind when Patroclus heard, he does obey the same,
And more a raldron he does take, it round about with flame
He does beset, and in he puts of goat and mutton fat
The vmbles whole, with goodly chine of tender swine with that
Ofone year fed, Antomedon and Achil they do cut The princes (...) the (...).

And brotch the rest, Patroclus while he to the fire does put
Al smokelesse for to make it burn, the wood he couched fit,
Aptly to roast, the coals he spreades, and down he lays the spit,
Whereon the strokes of flesh were brotcht, and salt on them does cast,
The meat to season, and to make it meeter for the taste.
Already thus, Patroclus bread out of a basket laid
He had in hand, and servde the board, and sir Achilles prayed
When he had plast the Greekish Lords, yt they would fall to meat,
And to Ulysses face to fa^e himself he chose his seat.
He bids Patroclus sacrifice eke to the gods their right,
Which done, they eat, they drink, and do with leisure great delight.
The good Phoenix chief messenger, a silent noise began
To warn Ulysses having supt, who knew what meant the man,
He takes the cup, and prays Achil unto him for to drink,
O thou of Greeks the choice (quoth he) I now full meet it think Vlisse (...)
Achilles.

The cause of our Embassade here (now we so well have farde)
Be open laid before your self, and by us plain declarde.
Though you with plenty have us fed, Agamemnon before
Has feasted us, but all this cheer, it cannot heal our sore,
Nor us content, the present time some other thing requires
Than still to feed, and on our meat to set our whole desires.
Our care it is unto our case al careful to provide,
And wisely to in^ some way the Troyan force to abide,
And keep our vessels from the fire, that we in heaps not die,
Which no way we can shun at al, if happily you deny
To put in ure your mighty fist, and eke your self to deck
With mind and force from us to hold the harm lies on our neck.
So hard at hand our foes they be encamped by our side,
They ly us by, they merry make, their fires burning bide.
They vow they will not enter Troy til all the Greeks bestaine,
And by their force defeated quite, yea in the ships. Again,
And more their pride to set a gog, seen has bin in their camp
A token sure of their great good, the lightning for to rampe
On the right hand. And Hector stout now puffed up aloft,
For victory of yesterday, and in a surety brought
Of Jove his aid, does nothing wish, but that the dawning come,
And then he means to burn our ships, and army al and some
To overthrow, he is so brave, so furious, and so fell,
He reekes no whit of God or man, with smoke he will us quel.
This threate has troubled'much our sprites with fear and chilling dreed,
In doubt that fate will have it so, and gods they have agreed
That after long abode this host must wholly have the gelpe,
And in this Country leave our lives. Though you have spaerd their help
Til now (and that although to late) now up your forces pull,
Eft call your heart for to protect this host of dolor full.
Else, when we al shall have the loss, your self will grow right sad
To see your friends so many quailde, and that no care you had,
When need there'was, to save their falls, it better were t'avoyde
This error great, now in their aid your self you soon imployde,
And also st^yde this utter ruin, which never can be helped,
Friend mine, I well do call to mind what Pelcus did open
To you, and gave for sound advice (movde by a fathers care
And tender love) when to these parts you in your voyage ware.
And as I should and best I may, his words I well remember,
That the performance of the same your mind it may well tender:
Minerue the goddess, (son quoth he) and Juno both at once
Shall give thee valiant heart enough, with big and brawnie bones,
But thou with love and modest port those gifts must beautify,
And keep thee from dissembling fault, and filthy fraud defye,
Yield not thy mind unto revenge, and so ofyong and old
You shall be much and hie esteemde, and loved as you would.
These were his words, thus in precept the good old man he gave,
When you he sent, of this gay speech now little mind you have.
Good friend (alas) do cancel clean these discords and these iars,
Full eft in friendship with the chief and captain of these wars,
Who seeking now for thy good will, by us does offer thee
(Which here I count) such goodly gifts, as rich and gorgeous be.
First seven triuets new and round, ten talents next of gold, Vli^. (...) Ag^
to A^

And twenty caudrons bright of hue, twelve coursers fully told,
Who by their swiftness conquerde have right many princes rich,
And as for gold and wealthy ware if one man had as much
As they have purchased to their Lord, and gained by their speed,
He might well vaunt he were not poor, nor worldly muck to need.
And further seven ladies brave right od in needels skill
And beauty rare, which then he had, when Lesboes thou did pill
With thy strong hand, thy Bryseis eke thou shall again receive,
For whom he deeply swears, untouched he does her person leave.
And that she never saw his bed, nor he the maid has known
In pleasure, as the male and fem. All this shall be your own,
These goodly gifts here shall you have, this greement if you strike,
And if to sack this mighty Troy the lofty gods it like,
And that we share the welthy spoils, he will that you lay on
And lade your largest ship with plate and gold, for you alone,
With twenty townish dames of choice, well worthy such a Lord,
And when this war shall ended be, if so you list accord
To haunt his home and dwell with him you love he shall as dear
As Orestes his only son, and if in mind you wear
To take a wife, of al his house, the choice yours freely is:
He daughters there does three possess, the first Chrisotenis
With yealow locks, sage Laodice the second has to name,
Iphianas the third is hight, who have so great a fame
For virtues theirs, the fairst of three at pleasure choose you may,
And lead her to their sire his home, and nothing for her pay.
For he himself for dower will of riches give such store,
As never father daughter gave such portion heretofore:
He means to put under your rule seven great and goodly towns
Hard by the sea, which full of folk with wealthy ware abownes.
Civil Enopa shall be one, and Cardamile so hight,
Pheres divine, fruiteful Hira, Epea great of might,
With Anthia for pasture fat of all that bears the bell,
And Pedases for goodly vines is spoken of so well.
You honorde in these towns shall be, and servde in every case
Most like a God, where people will under your loyal mace
And kingly justice willing live, lo, these the gifts they are,
That is the mends in lieu of fault you shall have for your share.
If you these offers not regard, nor him that gives the same,
Have you no pity of your friends, nor nation here that came
Out your own land? have you no will these silly Greeks to aid,
And help that quite they perish not? of whom if will be said,
As to the gods, so are they bound Achilles unto thee,
When they shall know that by thy means they are deliuerd free,
An act of praise, immortal fame for you to gain thereby.
The Occasion eke it brings, that you with Hector now may try,
Who does so gayly vaunt and boast, (he puffed is with such pride)
No Greek in Camp to be his match that may him once abide.
When he the prudent Greek had heard, to answer thus he start,
Ulysses, that, I answer plain I think it is my part, Achilles answers Vli.

That thou, nor any other else your selves hereafter set
By motions for to trouble me, more of me so to get.
What in my mind I have set down most surely shall be done,
Who says one thing, and in his heart another course does run,
As gates of Hell I do him hate, with all the might I may:
What I concluded have to do here hearken what I say.
Unpossible the matter is, that Agamemnon king
For ye the Greeks or princes great, he may or can me bring
But once on head my helmet set, since who does most desire
With all his force to aid you al, I see to bad his hire,
And of a soldier no more count, whose valor hie does reign,
Than of an hedgehog hid in tent or dastard coward swain:
Who for his part shall more possess of great and worthy spoils,
And higher place, than who deserves most best with all his toils.
I speak this for my self, who have such toil and travel bid,
And many a night in war have wakt, and never have bin hid
From danger great what so it were, and al for your behouse, Comparion.

With semblant care, as pretty bird does busy fly aloof
To seek out meat to feed her young vnfeatherde who do ly,
And nakt in nest, who have no power the champaine air to try,
And far unmeet to meat themselves: who does not understand
The sackes and falls of Cities great, and Islands of this land
My nauale forces conquerde have? twice six the chiefest thought
Eleauen in firm my sword has spoyld, and in subjection brought:
Of all the which the booties whole you al full well do know
Out saved none, your chief he had, which still he did bestow
Where best he pleased, and skild he was the greater part to hold,
But mine and other princes parts were minste and well controlde.
Yet with our sharing pleased well, and none more pleased than I,
Nathlesse by cruel injustice, malice and tirannie
Agamemnon has spoiled me of that my pittaunce small
Was given me, which yet I say, to me did well befall:
The same esteeming very much only I lovde it dear,
Bryseis it was, well his be she, and with her let him cheer,
Answer me you, what cause has fetched so many Princes hither
Of Greece? And Agamemnon who he callde has here together
Such furniture of soldiers good? are they not in the field
The ravish: Heleine to regaine, and force them her to yield?
Does he and eke his brother ween of all that lead here lives,
That they in earth the od men are, which only love their wives.
Have they a dome so blind and bad, to deem each worthy mind
Not to esteem and honor much his love or wife assignde?
For, as for me, I fride in love of Bryseis worthy dame,
And her regarded as my spouse a prisner though she came.
But now perverting justice al, your chiefetaine holds the lady,
And now I have this wrong receivde, and foully made a babie:
With sugared speech and fained words seeks he all means he may
To swaddle up the festred wound? it will not be, nay, nay,
With you and other of the Greeks (if so he thinks good,)
Let him go Counsel to forsee how now may be withstoode
This danger deep, wherein he is Lord, in what wretched plight
He has you brought, look you your selves by his own lewd dispight.
What, shall his fort, his wall, his dikes, his pales, and trenches all
Defend you so, as Hector stout shall not upon you fall?
When I with you did use the field and fought for your avail,
He in his roades and skirmishes durst not so forward rail,
By Scea Troyan gate he fought, my force him kept in awe,
Once at the beech him with intent me to abide I saw,
But straight I made him take his heels and safe he thought him not
Til unto Troy he was arrivde, and therein safely got.
Since al wherein I then did joy is turned now to grief, Achilles threatens to
go his vvayes.

And that my force with Hector his I will not put in priefe,
In morning next I hope depart if winds do happy blow,
With sacrificeto Jove performde, aborde when I do go,
That he do favor my return, and in the lofty sea
Thou shall Ulysses then behold my vessels tall in way,
The which from rock, and wrack of sea if Neptune please to guide,
In three days space at Pthie coast my country I shall ride.
Some balazde deep with blazing brass, and iron bright of blee
And perfect gold, with other wealth and goods that precious be:
Forgetting not the virgins gay, which I alone in war
Have conquered I, for Agamemn does hold and me debar
From booty which fell unto me. Wherefore friend tell you must
In public wise to all the Greeks my quarrel it is just,
And that they heed their chief not wrong them, as he has done me,
For which I here protest, henceforth I will him never see.
I think eke shameless though he be, and vayde of virtue sure,
Own conscience his should him forbid my presence to endure.
And if that forward he would press, and mind to speak me too,
My fury master should I not but mischief more him do.
Suffice it him he has me wrongde, and that his own unright
Does hell him like a man forlorn, and out his senses quite,
And for the presents he presents, I them abhor in mind, Ac. refuses the
gifts.

The gifts and giver I do hate as death in direst kind.
Not ten times, no, not twenty times much more than he does offer,
If all he has, with traffike whole he also meant to proffer
Of these two Cities, Thebes one, and Orchemene to name,
The Egiptian Thebes ancient town renoumde, I mean the same,
With people full so stufly filde, where passes out and in
Through gates an hundred of account, of diverse sorts that bin
The ware and merchandise to see, two hundred carts a day
Out every gate go laden out, and forth are sent away.
And to be short, if all the sand and earthly gritte were told,
And offered me, such mass of wealth content me surely nol^:
It cannot be I should content, my wrath it cannot cool,
Til for his fault he justly smart wherein ^e playde the fool. Ac. refuses the
aliance of marriage.

You also seemed now to touch another point me thought,
That of his daughters one to spouse I should be thereto brought,
Who he says, mild and modest be, if she (as he does vaunt)
More fair than golden Venus were, and that it were to grant
Her chastity and honor past dame Pallas in degree,
He may not hope my father in law that he may named be.
Let him in Greece of his own macke his daughter too to wed
Some other find. As for my part, if, as the gods have sed,
They do vouchsafe my coming home, by Peleus his aid,
My wife she shall provided be, and I in wedlock stayde.
In Pthie and Achaia lands is many a wealthy king,
Who virgins in their houses have, of which to my liking
And their contentment I may take, which course I follow will,
In peace I count it best to live, and use my pleasure still,
And not hereafter to my harm in weapons for to die
In flower of mine age, the gems, the wealth, and riches hie
In Troy that were, ere out of Greece with siege we girt it round,
The sacred goods to Phoebus vowde, and in his church are found,
May not suffice, if dead I were, my life for to restore,
Sheep, Oxen, coursers great, triuets, like stuff and many more
Once lost may eftsoone yet be had, but soul from body parted,
Again into the body left shall never be insarted.
My mother Thetis told me once, die, die that needs I must,
To double fate my life is tied, thereo she bad me trust.
If I abide her waging war, immortal fame I gain,
But die I shall, if home I go, and do at home remain,
Long life and happy days I have, but spoylde of honor hie,
The safer part I mean to take, and further not to try.
I do suppose you shall do well to follow me a right,
Since naught you gain, and Troy to take the hope is vaded quite:
And chiefly saeing the Gods and Jove so sound in their defense,
My friend Vlisse, and Ajax then away depart you hence,
Go tell the Greeks my answer now, and how I will away,
Some other course and what to do let aged heads assay,
And so to feel since my offense what profit they do find:
Here aged Phoenix in my tent this night shall stay behind,
And in the morning home shall go with me, right cheek by cheek,
I mean not maugre his good will, but if himself so leeke.
At this refusal stout and stern the kings amazed stand
And long abasht, but Phoenix grave the matter takes in hand,
The present danger he forsees, which all the camp is in,
With trickling tear of earning mind this speech he does begin: Phoenix to
Achilles.

Though you refuse oh noble prince the safety of this host,
And that your wrath is so confirmde you needs will leave this cost,
Good Lord (dear son) how can you leave your governor and guide,
My self who was appointed so when hither first you hide,
With you my Peleus plast I was, when forth he let you go,
T'instruct your youth, that you a prince of youth were gouernde so,
As what was ^ttst, you should perform, yea both in word and deed,
To make you a soldier for the field and orator at need
A perfect one. The pliant youth and years that tender are
Can hardly reatch unto those parts without a tutors care.
Likewise such gifts plast in a prince do much adorn the man,
Then I, who charge have had of you, suppose you that I can
(O son) thus leave you? no, no, though (whose counsels ay are true)
The hie and mighty gods should say they would again renew
To youth my worn corpse by years, and put it in such plight,
When from my sire Amintors wrath perforce I took my flight, Amyntor father of
Phoenix. Phoenix ob Iernes the custom of old men, who willingly speak of
matters pas sed in their youths.

And him forsook, and all the wealth which is in Hellade his,
Where then he raignde, for love of one his anger grown is.
A damosel thewde and he woe as well, his wife he lovde not so,
Whereat my mother spited much and eke did jealous grow:
Who well her husbands love perceivde, she daily still ^e prayde
With hands held up importunate, to practice with the maid
So far, that with her I might l^ge, that (...) the matter spyed,
My father would no more her keep, it cannot be denied
I did the thing, my mothers will, whereat Amyntor wonders,
And fully fed with furious rage, his bitter curses thunders
Upon my head, inuoking loud the damned furies fell,
With hateful words bequeathing me the hateful harms of hell,
Among the which he prayde I might no father be of heir,
Or at the least no children have, in bosom he to bear,
Or which of nursing he should reake: I soundly did be leene,
That Pluto granted to his plaint, whereat I did so grieve,
When I his malediction knew, that I then leave him would,
And not remain within his house, happen what happen should.
My mates, my friends, my neighbors all, the dearest of my kin,
My near Allies when this they saw, they seek again to win
Most carefully my home abode, which sooner to obtain,
To lofty Gods their vows they make, to the^ right down are slain
Sheep, beeues, and porkets great of grease, whereof they rost-meate make,
And feed thereof, of pleasant wine their tipple in they take,
Which in his house the old man had, and eke thrice three long nights
The doors made fast, they keep the watch, they stand with waked sprites
In order in the palace court, and gates there out that goes:
But al their fires so highly light, their watch and ward they lose.
For still the tenth night out I go, no watch nor maids me heard,
No groom perceiues my stealing forth, nor took thereof regard.
Abroad I tread my country Bees, that large and fruitful be,
Whereyour good father found me out, and then received me.
And more, to show his great good will which unto me he bare,
He gave me rule of Dolopie, and goods that wealthy ware,
Great store he trusted in my hands, with so much favor good,
Honor, and grace, as I had bin an infant of his blood,
Even then Achilles were you borne, wherefore I was desired
By Peleus, the care to take your infancy required,
And it to govern, which I did: your force which passes all,
Your corpse most like the heavenly powers, of bones and body fall,
With me has had the bringing up, and grown to such an one.
Because I lovde you, so I did? No, not for that alone,
But you so dearly did me ^e, that nothing was to name,
Which you would do at all, if I allowed not the same.
From me if you were cravde to sup, thereto you had no list,
They lost their pains, you would noteate but what came out my fist.
To still and please you when they would, they set you an my knee,
If nothing I would have you eat, I must your taster be.
And often when you have sipte the wine, y have laid it on my breast,
As does the pretty babe, who in his nurses arms does rest.
I al these pains most willing bid your self when as I servde,
I thought that I deprivde of child, I was a sire reservde,
For bringing up at least of you, (and I right oldely yearde)
A most sure stay I should have been, when feebleness appearde.
This short discourse (mine own dear son) is only you to pray
Your mind totemper, and to put this wreakful wrath away.
Thimmortal ghosts, who nature have more noble much than man,
By men entreated to forgive, they do both will, and can,
And grant requests of mortal wights: no fault so great to wit,
Which at the prayer of faulty folks the Gods do not remit.
What, know good son that prayers are the taughters true of Jove,
Who for to seek sir Injury out, abroad about do roue,
They follow him, a stronger much and harder mate than they,
For Prayer is both halte and lame, and slowly riddeth way:
But Wrong a mighty monster is, in toil he holds tacke
He treades apace, and far behind leaves Prayer at his back:
But feeble Prayer following him, with pace by pace does pass,
And if she come where as he is, and good accepting has
Of person she is brought unto, she Jove entreats full
In his behalf, and to his wish she does him also pull.
If aukwardle the party do of this wrong more account,
Ashamde eke she being denyde, to Gods aloft does mount,
And tells to them the whole at large, and prays that Injury
May in his house a dweller be that did her so deny.
Truly my son, your honor bids you to accept these Dames,
These presents muster much thereto, whose price the value frames.
If wilful so our chieftaine were, and madness such him hent,
He would by gifts not seek your grace, nor yet himself relent.
I ourst not for the Greeks at al you council or advise
How great so ere the business were: but when before mine eyes
His large and liberal offer stands, and suite in such a rate
For your good will, I think it good your fury did abate,
And that you nothing did refuse: how should you moved be
By prowess here of these two kings, who in nobility
Pass al of Greece, and now are come, and you the message bear?
If naught to move you here unto but the demaunders were,
Their dignity it asks much, for which much should be done
Their good opinion to preserve, least that hereafter run
Of you bad speech, in terming you a proud disdainful one.
The Heroes old of antique age, in time far past and gone,
If happily jar with some they had, with time they were appeasd,
And bid content: yea many times the foe he was releasde,
And pardonde often by gift and suit. Now to this purpose fit,
I mind a story old and true, which (if you so permit) The quared between
the Curetois and Etoliens.

I will you tell, and you my friends. The Curetois they bended,
And fought with them of Etolie, who Calidon defended:
A sorer war was never heard, they fought so stoutly well,
That many of th'inuaders did: but more invaded fell.
The better that you know the cause of this the people slain,
A little higher I must begin. In Calidon did reign
Oneus then a noble Prince, who of his fruits did give
Each year the first in sacrifice to such immortal live. Oeneus king of
Calidon.

And hap it did (it purposly, or he remembering not)
Diana chaste was set at naught, her offering was forgot.
Whereat her indignation grew, and so to punish him,
A wild Bear to his fields she sent a gastful and a grimme,
Which many mischiefs did him do, his people down he flewe,
His ground for frui^s he fowlie spoild, and down his trees he threw: The
vvild Boar of Calidon.

Gay appletrees, and many full with fruit and flower packte,
With whetted shearing pointed tuske, they torn lie and crackte,
The corn and crooked Uines he marres. Meleager the son
Of this good king, when as he saw his country thus to run
To havoc, and his people to, to call the hunters round
To him he does determine straight, with many a hunting hound
The dreadful beast to chase and kill, great troops together storke,
Their forces proving with this beast, do reatch him many a knock.
But in the end, the wicked swine down dead does lie along,
His royal hand him felling down, two nations great and strong
Do for the spoils now grow to strife: the Curets clai^e it theirs,
As both of duty and desert. Of Etolie the heirs
The same do challenge to themselves: hereof does grow the stur,
For this the cruel bitter war, proceeded is so fur.
Thus Calidon besieged tho by crues of Curete land,
A certain time it is releevde by Meleagers hand,
And the besiegers durst not stir: for all their number great,
They drad his deadly sword, wherewith he did them hardly treat.
But happily rage and fury (which do sharp the meekest mind,
And natures good of constant wights) in him their places find,
They which did straight so swap him out, that he determines plain
To lay his armor down aside, and not to fight again.
This warm and bitter wrath it grew of strife, that so befell
With Althea his dame, because he did his brother quell:
She grievde, she howlde, she kissed the earth, she prayde in Plutoes lap
To plague the fault, that he her son may reap like deadly hap.
When as Meleager this heard, in dumpes he falls to spite,
He led at home an Hermites life, he would no more to fight:
His loving wife Cleopatra, of beauty wondrous rare
Accompanied him, she daughter was of Marpyse Nymph so fair,
Belovde, and won by Phoebus god, against whom Idee her make
(In sorrow sowste and jealousy) did dare the combat take,
With how in hand to cause him yield his spoil, but all in vain
His force it would not fodge, whereby his wife he might regaine.
His kindred and the mother chief did many a tear let fall
Their woe to witness: new they name and do Alcion call
The rauishte fem. But for to come unto my purpose first, Alcion.

Meleager he resting still, the enemies they thrust
When it they knew unto the sault, the Towers of Calidon
They batter, and at gates they thump, they put their forces on
To enter by all means they may, then of the wretched town
The chiefest Lords (in danger great to be al beaten down)
Do throng and pray Meleagers help, but nothing could they do,
The Clergy come, and unto him pray for their Masters too.
And offer at his choice great part of all their goodly lands,
His sire Oneus hopes to speed, and at his door he stands,
He him entreats upon his knees to let his anger pass,
And save the City all forlorn, his suite not heard, alas.
With held up hands his mother does the like, his brethren eake,
And all his friends, yet list he not their wretched woe to wreake.
This while the foes past up the walls, and forest the town by fight,
And cruelty none wanting was, that happes in such a sight.
His wife the grunting hearing then, and cries of those did yell,
The piteous fright, the flames, the folk and Citizens that fell:
To him she hastes with hair abroad, and tears she lets fall.
Dear spouse (quoth she) this remnant save (God knows) which is but small,
Both young and old they die ye death, or weapons down they lay,
If women any do survive, they slaves are led away.
Meleager this having heard, his armor on he packt,
And full of fury forth he goes, the enemies he hackt,
Their crowns he pares, and city saues, and yet was all his aid
No whit to them so worthy thanks, because so long he stayde,
And for unto the succor he of the Etoliens yed
Not at their suite, but as the toy did take him in the head.
Oh God thee shield Achilles now to think us so to use, Epil^.

And for to leave us in this brake, such meaning do refuse.
To you what corsee would it be to see the enmies put
Our navy to the wasting flame, and us in pieces cut?
Then were your mighty strength to weak our cases to relieve,
A better way it were (my son) your forces for to prieue
To aid this wretched army here, somewhat does urge the gifts,
And also that so hie renown, which men so hicly liftes.
But if you do forslowe the time to help in our defense,
Your succor slow shall honor want, eke meede and recompense.
The ruler Phoenix here did end: Achill does thus reply, Achi^ aunsvver^ to
Phoenix

This honor now whereof you talk and bribes I need not I,
The praise and glory me contents from God the which arises,
Who is revenger of my wrong, his favor me suffiseth.
Wherefore I yield me to his will, and will in all degrees,
As long as this my body here shall go upon my knees,
As long as life in limbs shall last the world whole shall know,
To aid the Greeks I will no foot out of my vessel go.
And as for you (good Phoenix mine) hear what I say and mark,
Me think there is no reason you with all this stir and carke
So earnestly should me entreat being your friend at full,
To please the mortalst foe I have, and it to seek you wull.
More reason much it were for you, your self a friend to show,
To such I favor, and therein your travail to bestow:
And chiefly, since we equalles are, and do in friendship sound
Possess as parteners all our goods, wherein we so abound.
These princes two they shall return to Greeks my answer right,
But you shall lodge with me, your host I will be for this night.
The morning come, we will consult in journey home to glyde,
Or will perhap persuade our selves here longer to abide.
Therewith Patroclus gave a nodde that they a bed do dight,
A trim and sweet, wherein should rest the noble aged wight.
The worthy Ajax Telamon this heard, right well he knew Ajax to Ulysses.

They lost but time, it bootelesse was them further for to sewe.
Unto Ulysses, friend (quoth he) enough is done, away,
I see this matter will not do, the kings who for us stay,
Let us go tell our message here, least other they pretend:
This man is mad, he shameless is, his senses he does bend
To pride, and recks no whit of friends, full set upon his folly,
There have been many worthy men of mind and manners folly,
Who borne have most heinous factes by filthy foemeus deed,
Who children theirs and brethren near have deadly done to bleed, Ajax
directes his speech to Achilles.

Yet by entreatie have forgiven, what so the offense has been.
Or else they have accepted mendes, and willingly have seen
In time the men who murthrers were. Achill, the immortal Gods
Tweene you and those of courteous molde have set a mighty odds.
Who having suffered no great wrong, great loss, or death of kin,
But only one poor simple fem, and yet you lodge within
Your heart such rage, the gifts are sent seven times more worth in price
The person self, such presents brings you for to please likewise,
As many men would much request, Achilles, do advise
Your self on this, I you beseech, and us not so despise.
Of neighborhood maintain the right, which to us all you owe,
Think on the state of us are sent, your good friends aye you know.
Achilles thus an answer shapes: divine Ajax (quoth he) Achilles to Ajax.

I do allow all that you say, and it of amity
Proceeds I know, but when I mind my wrong had in this war,
The choler grafted in my heart I can no way debar,
And chiefly, when some me account as of a base exile,
Disdaining me, who of the whole is worthiest many a mile.
Friends without more ado proceed, go tell them all therefore,
I minded am not for the Greeks to travail any more.
At least, till by sir Hectors force, and Troyan soldiers I
In tents and ships of Mirmidons behold the fire to fly,
And Greeks slain round about my tent, yet Hector does not dare
I think for fear so near to come, his bane least thence he bare.
This said, each of the noble sort do take a goblet round,
And heave it sipping to their heads, the wine they weakly sound.
On earth the rest they throw, to Gods, to whom they them commend,
Vlysse the wisest takes his leave, and forth does foremost wend?
A goodly bed they then prepare, a mattresse, linen soft, Phoenix lodg^ (...)
Achilles Tent.

Behong with curtines round about, a couerlet fine aloft.
Of woollen weaue, where Phoenix does alone right soundly sleep,
Straight after does the valiant Greek to stately cabban creep
To take his rest: King Phorbas breed did come with him to be Diomede Achilles
svveete heart. Ipius the svveete heart of Patroclus.

In bed, (the King of Lesbos I Will) the fair Diomede
His mate, also to sport himself lies down between his sheets,
With Iphis gaie the same to sleep, Patroclus with her meets,
The which Achilles did him give when Scyros city strong,
Was by his force put to the spoil, down raste, and laid along.
The Princes soon to camp are come of Greeks from whence they went,
The council they together find still in the royal tent:
At their arrival, each presents in many a gorgeous cup
The wines to drink, they welcomde are, and then they rising up,
Do offer place for them to sit, they long the whole to hear,
And of the substance of the cause they wish they privy were.
The chief then spoke Ulysses thus: you glory of Greece that are,
Ulysses O thou noble he, a Gods name us declare Agame^non to Ulysses.

Whether Achill our gifts will have, what hope or comfort tell ye
Of our relief? does he relent, or be in rage still will he? Ulysses answers
to Agamemnon.

Since truth you will (quoth Ulysses) his fury nothing dies,
But daily grows to more and more, your presents he defies,
For your alliance he cares not, and last of all the rest
He bad us bid you fly this worst, if so you thought it best,
And that the dawning next he would depart this country fro,
With like persuasion unto us that likewise we do so,
Since of this war no end will be, now brought to wretched plight,
And that the Gods to Phrigians aid, to us have death behight.
The Ajax hie and Heraults eke can witness well his mind,
If so they list, they heard the talk, Phoenix is staide behind
By Achilles, he lodges there, and home with him he may,
Not by constraint, but if he please, so does Achilles say.
The princes all of Greekish land, the whole assembly quaild,
They stood abasht when this they heard, long while their speech it faild,
Not holding up their heads they sat, till Diomede the Greek
Of them so worthy of account the solemn silence breeke.
You mist the mark Agamemnon, when legates you sent out Diomedes to Agamemnon.

To offer gifts, and him entreat, he is too proud and stout,
And you have set him more a gog with message sent to him,
He thinks himself a jolly man, a goodly and a trim.
Forget him sirs, let him go home, or as it please him tarry,
And when the Gods have heald his rage, which raging him does carry,
He war will when he sees his time, end we this cause in talk,
And to our meat and wonted rest a good luck let us walk,
In morning we in armor all will stand before our sails,
Our horsemen and our chariots all, our footmen in their railes.
Your valor there Agamemnon force you your self to show,
In former rank let men you see Troyans to overthrow,
This speech and council well allowde the princes every one,
And to his Tent or ship to leap they all departed gone.
Finis noni Libri.
The tenth Book.
THe Greekish kings did draw aborde, and down to rest they lie, Agame^non
full of care passes the night with out sleep.

But Agamemn for careful grief no sleep came in his eye.
As often is seen the storms of hail great showers and thunder blows,
Comparison.

The boistrous blasts, the lightning flames, when Jove his flashes throws,
Or when great banks of snow he sendes in country low that lies:
So out the Greekish Chieftaines breast the groves and sighings flies.
His heart does quake, his doleful sprite does stand in heavy plight,
And chiefly, when on Troyans camp hard by he castes his sight: Havvbo^ and
mu^ick in the Troyans camp.

Where he beholdes huge fires to flame, great cries, unwonted noyce,
And round the quarters to resound, with flutes and hie Hawboixe.
Again, when he does turn his eye unto his beaten bands,
A sleep, fordone, at point to fall into their enemies hands,
For grief from head his hair he pulles, and arms he heaues aloft, Agamemno^
sor sorov^ tears (...) hair.

Entreating Jove to pity some his Godhead may be brought.
In this so sore conflict of mind what meetest is to take,
He thinks it best to go in have the Nestor old to wake,
His counselor grave with him t'aduise, and council good to seek,
To thwart this danger from his folk, which happen them is leeke.
He up his wonted robes does take, his shoes on feet he tide, Agamem^ nons
apparel rising in the night.

And from his shoulders down does hang a mighty Lions hyde,
A large and beautiful to see, on ground it trailes be hind,
A dart he took, and to his side his faulchon he does bind.
The while this king does bear himself less careful not a whit,
Was Menelau, for fear and grief his eyes he could not shit, Menela^ cannot
sleep.

Calling to mind the peril great of such a mass of men,
In his revenge who paste the sea to war with the Troyen,
A nation stout and fierce in fight, in hope to gain renown,
His goodly Curets on he puts and Helmet on his crown,
His back a Lyberds skin does hap, and lance in hand he haes, The Poet
gives Menelaus a Leopardes skin, and Agame^non a Lions. Menelaus to Agame^non.

He straight does go right to the ships Agamemnon to raase,
He found him newly full attride, he joys at Menelawes,
Who to him does advance himself, and thus his tale he draws:
You brother mine and eldest borne, what mean you thus to thrust
Your self in arms? the Troyan camp this night abroad you must
Send out a spy to view it well, to get such one I doubt
To serve the turn, the charge belongs to one right bold and steut.
Him answerde Agamemnon thus: both you and I good brother Ageme^non to Menalaus.

Do greatly need good sound advise our people for to further,
And eke our navy for to save from Troyan sword and fires,
And most since Jove does friend our foes, and leaves us in the briers.
I never saw, ne yet have heard one man such parts to play
Of valiancie, as Hector has upon the Greeks this day.
He co^mes not of the Gods their line, yet fly we from his rage,
I leeue the Greeks will nere forget this fright in after age.
I think it best you straight do go unto the Greekish navy
To Ajax and the king of Creete, and tell them that now crave I
They will with speed to council come, and I on the other side
Procure will Nestor to the watch, for our state to provide.
His son is captain of the same ioynde with Meryon, Menclaus to Agamem non.

They both will do what Nestor shall command for to be done.
Your mind performde quoth Menelau shall I return again,
Or will you that till they do come, I do with them remain?
Do you with them abide quoth he, least they do miss the way, Agamemno^
teaches Menelaus to speak courteously to the princes.

The camp it is so full of crookes they likely are to straie.
I further thus do counsel you, when you the princes call,
Do gently use your words and soft, and name their names withal,
Their state recite and eke their race, and do not stuntly talk,
Still with a low and courteous grace let there the speeches walk.
We both must yield our selves thereto, and arm us to abide
Things much unmeet, since Jove that God of us does so decide.
When Agamemnon well had schoold his brother, soft he hies,
And quickly co^mes into the Tent whereas king Nestor lies, Nestors armor.

Unto the good old man he co^mes, in bed he found him laid,
His harneys bright, his helmet brave, his shield that weighty waied,
Two darts withal lay hard him by, and eke his gorgeous belt,
Wherewith he girdes, when Greeks he leads, as on that age not felt.
Nestor hearing Agamemnon with stealing step to stalk Nestor to Agamemnon.

So nie his bed, liftes up himself, and thus begins his talk
Leaning upon his elbowe moovde: a gods name what art thou
That in the night thus romes in camp? to our ships who brings you?
Who sends you forth while others sleep? some mulet do you miss?
Or fellows lost do you enquire? what ho, say what it is,
Tell me what chance you hither sends at time so out of season,
If naught you lack, say on your case out speech, else stay with reason.
O worthy king, O noble fame, of Greeks the glory odd, Agame^non to Nestor.

I am unhappy Agamemn in grief and sorrow sodde,
Agamemnon, whom cruel Jove orechargeth so with shame,
And vile reproach, that naught I hope but mischief to my name.
I to you come, for that I cannot rest in this estate,
The tender care of Greeks I have makes me my bed to hate:
Such dread and shame take hold of me, my heart does trembling quake,
My soul despair does whole assault, my feeble legs do shake:
For grief my weary mind sustaines, this is the chiefest cause,
And eke you rest no more thon I: wherefore now let us pause,
I you beseech this folk to shield, let us some way devise
From wasting hand of Troyan foes, and therefore (friend) arise,
And if you please we will repair whereas the watch they keep,
And view if soldiers ouerhaeld with toil do weary sleep.
Alas our enemies be at hand, and little do we ken
Whether this night they will us charge, what safety have we then?
King Nestor thus to him replies, think you that Jove he will Nestor to
Agame^non

So Hector friend, what Hector list that Jove will it fulfill?
No, no I think that he himself is deerd and gallde at full,
He doubts Achill will leave his pottes, and join with you he wull.
But up I will and follow you, eke you to be about
Call up the cunning Ulysses, and Diomede the stout,
The courteous Meges, and Ajax the second Oilee called,
In whom the prowess of Grecian land so deep and hie is stald.
O would to God some one did bid the Ajax great to stir,
And Idomene, whose side large tents from us are distaunt furre.
Why is not Menelaus here? has he so little care,
He who should wait continually, and watching to repair
With humble suite unto the best, his eyes what can he close,
And of this war leave you the toil, which to such danger groes?
For the good will I bear the man I bitterly must braule,
And with him chide, though him you love, yea fall what will befall.
Thus answered him Agamemnon, you worthy aged sire,
His slacknesse you to reprehend, you know is my desire. Agame^non to Nestor.

No sloth or ignorance him holds, him his assurance stays,
Sometimes which in my Acts he has; the charge on me he lays.
In this he does deserve no blame, but rather worthy praise,
To be imployde, well armde at full he first came me to raise,
To Ajax and our other friends I sent him out erst while,
Lets go, they surely tarry us, hard by the watch Bastile.
He has them said they should not fail but to attend us there:
If brother yours quoth Nestor tho so kindly do him bear, Nestor to Agame^non

And careful be as you do tell, and if he bid and pray
With modesty, the Grecians all him serve will and obey,
As much as you, who is their chief, herewith his bed he leaves
Full soft, and on his royal weed and richly robes he heaues. Nestors ap
parell and armor.

Fine shoes of picked leather out his foot he tieth under,
A scarlet mantell on he throws, for cost to see, a wonder,
Of Lemster wool the best it was, the workmanship was much,
A golden buckle made it fast, he in apparel such
In right hand takes his stubborn lance, to the pauilion
Of Ulysses forthwith he co^mes, him loud he calls on,
And bids him rise, hearing the voice of the good aged man,
He starteth out his sleep, and up to them he thus began: Ulysses to Ageme^non
and Nestor.

Alone why go you up and down in time so dark and still?
What lack or danger are you in? what is it that you will?
Laertes heir so wise (quoth he) of us no marvel think, Nestor to Ulysses.

For very plain necessity has brought us to her brinke:
Come, let us raise some other prince, and what is to be done,
Let us consult, as how to sight, or else away to run.
When Ulysses had Nestor heard, on shoulder straight he throws,
And hanges his target at his back, and after them he goes:
There right against the tent they find of Diomede the Greek, Diomedes
sleeps on a Bulls hide

That mighty man, out which he stepte, his armor not to seek,
For on it was, a mighty hyde of beef him underlay,
For pillow to his head he had a Carpet new and gay.
His mates, his bands, his men of war, they sleep him round about,
Their armor hangs them by, and as the lightning breaking out
Does shine far off, so do the same their darts and bucklers by.
The Nestor old with noise enough does draw the Grecian nigh, Nestor to Diomedes.

His heel he touchte, and therewithal fault finding thus says he:
What, do thou sleep O Diomede descended of Tydee?
Asleep are you, knowing our foes at hand to keep such charm,
And loud to chaunt it in the plains, wherein so thick they swarm?
So wakde, thus answerde Diomede: Nestor, I greatly muse
How that your years can bide and bear such travail as you use. Diomedes to
Nestor.

Why yield you still your self to toil? have you no youthful lads
To send about to call the kings, but Nestor still he gads?
Yes sure I am, but your quick sprite is never dull nor idle, Nestor to
Diomedes vanting of his children and subjects.

Sound friend (quoth Nestor) what you say, as true is as the Bible.
I doubtie children have, with men and subjects not a few,
Who zealous for my quiet rest themselves will try and tewe,
And do what I shall wish them do: but for this urgent bracke
Wherein I see us and our folk, my help I can not slack,
Well knowing, that if presently we make not head with heed,
But slack the time, we cannot hold, but down we al must bleed.
My years if that you pity so, on fellowship call ye
Ajax Oilee, with Meges eke, who son is of Philee,
Straight Diomede him clad with skin of boisteous Lion wear,
And forth he goes, forgetting not his staff and lofty spear,
To the two Greeks he hyed him fast, and soon he found them out,
And them entreates to come to him who rules all the rout.
The Princes straight and all the kings here named, meet at watch,
They find the watchmen all awake, and none with slumber latche,
By course they lively stand and hark, like soldiers fierce they fare,
As mastiffes, who for mighty flocks keepers appointed are, Comparion of
mastiues keeping a flock of sheep.

Do careful heed, the Lions leap down whirling from the rock,
From wood, or field, for to assault the sheep within the flock,
The shepeheards plaste in quarters round about their seemly fold,
Deep scath in night least they receive, hie noise tweene them is trold,
And slumber none from their regard one whit can make the^ stoop,
So careful more, if more may be, was all the Greekish troop.
For sleep was banishte from their eyes, desire of watch augmented:
To whom did Nestor joyfully, (when as he saw thus tented
Their charge in hand) perform this speech: watch, watch my children dear,
Nestor to the vvatch men and scoutes.

Sleep not least yt our hateful foes should now surprise us here,
And wreak on us their spiteful teene, us taking at unawares,
For want of looking to the watch, full great then were our cares.
The Kings with him, he past ye trench, when he these words had said,
And comes straight unto the place, which full of morts was laid,
Where Hector had the day before so highly done in fight,
And bloody victory had prolongde unto the dreadful night.
There down the gallant Princes sit low placed on the ground,
To talk they fall, and Meryon, (whose match may not be found
For valiantness) to council him, and Thrasymede they call
That doubtie knight, next to the kings commended most of all.
Nestor the flower of Knighthood then thus al did speak the^ there, Nestor to
the Greekish Princes.

Beloved friends of you who does in mind the valor bear,
Whose heart and wisdom will him serve the Troyan camp to view,
And seek the mean to bring us word, that we may trust as true,
Whether they mean t'assaulte our ships, or fortify the plain,
And home to go after they have such Greekish number slain?
Some captive of the tail perhap the matter may him tell,
Or harkening where they lie at rest, he may it hear full well.
And if to us he safe return, and do their purpose bring,
He well may say he has deservde, that we his fame do ring.
Beside in guerdon he shall have rich gifts, and not a few,
Each patron of a ship shall give a big black fatted Ewe
Yea with the Lamb, a gift in truth in price for to be had,
In banquets welcome shall he be, and al men of him glad.
He done, good space the hearers stayde, no answer they replied,
Diomede loud before the kings thus to his tale he hied: Diomedes to Nestor.

My burning heart does bid me go, and forth it pricks me on
In this hazard to serve a spy, and doubtie champion,
And go I will, so I may have with me a dreadlesse mate,
For in a case of so great weight the wit of one man's pate,
Is not so good as that of two, when one does council take
He forward fears danger none, him bolder does it make.
But man alone, though stout and strong, yea resolute and wise,
At point sometime does shrink, to him does fear and terror rise.
This offer great heard of the kings so nobly by the Greek,
The Ajax twain will follow him, they al will do the leek:
To live and dye in all assayes with him will Merion,
The gallant Thrasimede so craves, Menelau will be one.
The wise Ulysses he does swear he will the hazard prove,
Who far for wily ingenie was all the Greeks above.
When Agamemnon from this cause did see they did not starte, Agememno^ to
Diomed.

O friend quoth he as dear to me as is yea life or heart,
Since now you see to follow you are ready al and some,
Choose one your self, who nearst will stand, when you in danger come,
Let neither shame nor bashfulnesse cause you right judgment miss,
Choose not for lignage great, but who most sage and hardy is.
No greater harm could be, than worst to have, and best to loose,
So said Agamemnon for fear he Menelau would choose,
Because his parentage was great, which eke his wealth did fit.
Since (quoth he doubtie Greek) to me the choice you do remit, Diomedes names
Ulysses to go with him.

Should I forget Ulysses here, whose wisdom is so famed,
Whose mind in dangers none so great could ever yet be tamed,
Of whom (yea) all the lofty Gods preserve a care and heed,
And chiefly to direct his factes Minerua is agreede?
I think I with this noble mind the fiercest flames to fly,
I know the prudence is so great which in the man does lie.
Chaunt not I pray you (quoth Vlysse) my factes, ne yet me blame Ulysses to
Diomedes.

Before these Kings, my want and skill they know full well the same.
Lets go, the night it runs away, the stars are far agate:
The dawning straight will bring the day, it grows very late. Diomedes and
Vly^ be a^med by the kings.

With this the two renoumed Greeks were armed by the Kings,
His sword vnweeldy Thrasimede to the stout Greek he brings,
Two edged with point of perfect trampe, for he to have the more
His shield and faulchon in his tent he left behind therefore,
And without crest or plume at all his morian on does pull,
Of bullish hyde, a young man's wear, men do it call a scul.
Meryon to Ulysses gives his quiver and his bow, Description of Ulysses sallet.

A massy sword, and for his head does trick attire bestow,
Within of lether fitly framde, and it offensive tanne,
So set with wild swines teeth without, as cut it nothing can,
How keen so ere the weapon be, and notwithstanding that
So stiff it were, yet might one put within it well his hat.
Antilochus full long ago it found, as he begone
To ransacke quite Ormenus house who was Amyntors son,
In Eleon where then it stood, the shape so proper was,
That long who held it noted stood, he hight Amphidamas,
To warlike Molus he it gave, who left it to his heir,
He ay it bare, to the trim Greek, and lent it now to wear.
Thus armd as I have said, right soon they from the others went,
And to them in their way, Minerue a mighty Heron sent, Good sign by the He
ro^s cry.

Who chanted loud his cries aloft, they well might hear the voice,
But nothing see, because of might, yet greatly they rejoice
At the good hap: Ulysses, who the Augure well bewrayes,
Full pleased is, to the Goddess devoutly thus he prays.
Hear me dame Pallas breed of Jove, who vouchsaues me to aid,
In dangers al, in toiles my guide, by whom I still am stayed, Ulysses prayer
to Pallas.

Grant I return with victory, and that I glory gain,
That we two do atchieue some deed unto the Trojans pain.
Eke Diomede thus softly prays, devoutly as he may,
Bow down thine ear thou Goddess mild, thou dame Tritonia, Diomedes prayer
to Pallas.

Thou daughter dear belovde of Jove, be thou my luckie guide,
As to my sire Tydee thou werte, when he in message hide
Ambassador the Thebanes to, the Greeks and them t'agree,
At his return he shewde himself right well by means of thee.
O prudent Goddess grant to me such force and hardy heart,
As he then had, and so me guide, as out this cause I part,
My honor savde: In sacrifice I do thee here behight Diomedes vow.

Thy Altar on an Heiffer fair, on whom yoke never light,
I will command the horns likewise shall be al over guilt,
And with good heart presented thee, if hear me now thou will.
Thus prayed both the noble Greeks, the goddess bowde them to, Comparis^

And granted fully to them both what they wished there to do.
Forth then they martch two Lio^s like the bleeding corpse they tread
So grievous was the Gretians loss, ore all the plain they spread.
His people Hector lets not sleep, the wise and grauest sort
He sommons to his tent, to whom he does his mind report. Hect. to the Troy^

Who here (quoth) will promise me my hest for to fulfill,
He shall be sure of honor due, reward him well I will,
He shall receive of me I say, to recompense his pain
A chariot guided with two steedes the best of Greekish train,
I ask no more but that he go unto the enmies nauye
Whether they mean to tarry us that thereof knowledge have I, less,
If in their ships their wonted watch they keep, or (as I guess)
Thus cowed, they think to run their ways, when we heed nothing
This was his speech, but none that heard did answer to the same,
A Troyan in this counsel was that Dolon had to name,
The only son of Herald good that Eumades was cleapt,
To whom great mass of wealthy store was in his treasure heapt, Dolon (...),
happen, but very ^ignce of foot.

This Dolon was of ougly shape, but fit to do his deed,
Belovde of sire, the last of sire that left was of the breed.
He heeding much the promise great that doughtie Hector told, The Troy. Dol.
offer^, himself to epsy the Greeks.

Straight stands up and thus begins: Hector stout courage bold
Does force my mind to take in hand this voyage, and to bring
Word, whether that the Greeks will stand, or forth to flight will fling.
As chieftaine just swear by your mace you bear by princely laws,
To give me brave Achilles chare, and coursers it that draws.
Dread not your noble enterprise, by me it shall not quail,
I straight will to the Greekish barks, and there I will not fail
To enter in, yea of the hiest, their secrets there to leare.
Quoth Hector then with scepter up aloft into the air, He svveareth to Do^ by
Jupiter.

Since go thou will where I have said, by thundering Jove I vow,
None mount shall on those goodly steedes but only Dolon thou,
Full justly thou them conquer shall, do them possess therefore
A guerdon just for thy desert: thus noble Hector swore
This Troyan to, but he periurde, he bad him forth to gang.
An old woulfes skin does Dolon take, it down his back does hang.
His bow hung on his shoulder bent, his mantel was aloft,
A Sallet new upon his head, of hide of geate not soft:
For made it was yea for the proof, a dart, it brave and bright,
In hand he takes, and deemes himself right soldier like to fight.
Thus being armde, not to return in have he forward hies,
To much beguilde, if hope he have ever to set his eyes
On Hector, much less on his sire, such way he rides amain
That soon he entered was full far into the champion plain.
Vlisse then minding nothing else, but what he had to do, Ulysses to Diomedes.

Aloufe perceiving Dolon come, spoke thus Diomede to:
From Troyan camp behold a foe, a spy he for our foes,
Or some to spoil in battle plain I guess he surely goes.
We shall do well to let him pass til to our ships he draws,
We following hard at heels, on him shall easily lay our paws.
Yet take good heed, if he do strain to fly or run away,
That we to force him to our ships do do the best we may,
Him driving from the Troyan camp, where he will think to go,
Him follow with your reaching staff, and do your valor show.
Here both the Greeks amongst the slain out of the way they got, Comparion
of Moyles and Oxen.

And spy and hark after the spy, who goes a speedy trot.
When as they saw him so far of, as moyles coupled in twain
In travel of the Oxen slow do space before them gain:
They quickly out their ambush start, and fast upon him come.
Dolon hearing the noise they made, supposd them Troyans some
Pertakers with him who would be, his journey staying so.
This while the Greeks approach so nie, as one a dart may through,
But when he found what men they were, he forward runs apace,
And the two Greeks do part themselves, and follow fast the trace.
And as you see two Greyhoundes course in wood a Hind or Hare, Comparion of
two Greyhou^ds follovving an Hare or Hind.

And lay so hard unto the beasts that they their conquests are:
Even so these valiant Greeks do chase this Troyan badly hapt,
Who could not escape, but well he found himself still more intrapt.
So fast did Dolon scour away, that nere unto the scoute
Of the Greeks watch he draws nie, to Diomede the stout
The goddess Pallas does increase his strength and swiftness both,
That other should the honor have (him taking) she was loath.
He with these words him ouertakes: I charge the for thy head Dolonis en tra^t
by the two greks.

No further pass for if thou do, my dart shall do thee dead.
And herewithal hard by his neck he made the same to fly,
And Dolon staide more cold than ice, he stood so tremblingly,
That one full well might hear his teeth together so to shake:
The noble Greeks far out of breath do there the Troyan take,
Who letting fall whole floods of tears does open thus his voice, Dolon to
Ulysses and Diomedes.

O warlike wights do save my life, and at your proper choice
I will it buy, my sire with gold, with brass and iron flows,
And jewels great, which he will give, when he alive me knows,
And prisner in your hands to be: Vlisse of wit so rare Ulysses to Dolon.

Said, Troyan take you heart of grace, and put away this care,
And fear not death here of us two, and tell me not to lie,
Deceive me not in what I ask, nor in what know would I:
What enterprise have you in hand, thus in the night to creep
Unto our camp still and alone when al men are asleep?
Come you to seek some carcass dead, that yesterday was slain,
And it to spoil, did Hector else bid you to take this pain?
Did he send you to spy his foes? by his commaundmente come ye
Or of your self? which of the two? the truth declare to me.
Quoth trembling dreadful Dolon tho, dead like in every guise, Dolon to Vlisse^.

The hope that Hector put me in, it has me made so wise,
That at his will here come I am, whereof I find I miss
To try the thing, he promised me, the chare of Achilles
And all that did belong thereto, so that I to him brought
From out your camp some certain news, and whereupon you thought,
Whether you meant to take the sea, or to your tackle stand,
And chiefly if you kept your watch, and if your ships were mande
Quoth Vlisse with a smyling faint, by your own words I see Ulysses to Dolon.

Your mind does dream on greater things than fit for your degree.
Those coursers are of nature such, no mortling may them guide
Their master, but, whom Jove decreede should come out Thetis side.
Tell me I pray thee without guile, when Hector bad thee hie,
Where was the man? and he vnarmde where does his armor lie
That is so famed over all? and also in what nooke
Do chariots his and coursers lodge, their travel when they brook?
What do his people lie a bed with toil of battle tierd,
Or do they watch, and for to fight is it of them desirerd?
What will they keep the fields, and us charge in the morning tide,
Or with their victory to Troy will they victorious ride?
Ouoth Dolon I will tell you true: when I came on my way,
The worthy Hector at the tomb of Ilus he did stay, Dolo^ to Ulysses Ilus
sepulcher by Troy.

When with the greatst he did consult of matters meetest ware,
To overthrow his enemies it was his chiefest care.
As for the watch whereof you ask, sure Hector does it will,
But smally do his soldiers reack his mind for to fulfill,
They soundly sleep. Some Troyans yet enforst are for their lives
The fires to light, for fear they lose their children, town, and wives,
And naught but for pure need they do. The strangers on them lay
The charge of al, their wives far off, they stick not so to say.
Ulysses further asks him thus: the forraines lodge they where, Ulysses to
Dolo^ Dolon to Ulysses.

The Troyans with, or by themselves? it would I gladly hear.
Unto this question which you ask, I truly will you tell,
And where each band is placed right: The Caries and Peones dwell,
The Caucons, Lelges, and Pelasges along the sea doly,
On the other side to Thimbra hill the Lycians camp them by,
The Phrygians, Meons, Misians, but to what purpose now
Tell I by name the Troyans power? if thither go will you,
Full true you shall my speeches find, the soldiers new from Thrace
Lie far us off, their cariages and they do keep their place:
Where Rhesus I their king did see and steedes of ferlie might,
In color they do pass the snow his horses are so white, Comparion of the
svviftnesse and vvhitenes of Rhesus ^es.

As swift they are as is the wind, when Rhesus will them ride,
His chare I saw of metals two both fine and perfect tryde,
Composde of gold and silver bright, his armor al of gold,
In all the earth is not the like, it strange is to be told.
No living man I worthy think of worthy armor such,
For Jove or for some other God I think of worthy armor much.
I having told you all you would, I humbly do you pray,
Lead me unto your ships, or bound here let me ly I say,
And hastly go vnio our camp, and eyely do behold
If I in ought have failed you, or not the truth have told.
This speech Diomede (loking thwart) to the poor spy did give, Diomedes to
Dolon.

Hope not to escape my hands I say, thou can no longer live,
Although of thee we learned have some things for our behoof,
I know if we should let thee go at liberty aloof
Hereafter thou would spy our camp, or else the same assault,
But as I may, if I thee kill, the Greeks thou shall not sault.
Such were his words, but Dolon thought yet to entreat ye Greek,
And drew nie soft to touch his chin, and favor to beseeke. Dolon slai^ by
Diome.

But in this thought he to his neck his sword so sowrely set,
That down he overthrew him dead, the cords in pieces fet,
Wherewith the head tumbles aside and murmurs in the fall:
His sallet then of geatish skin, his corslet fine withal
Of woluish heir, his bended bow and dart he takes straight,
And to the welkin then Vlisse (heauing his hands on height)
The harneis held, to Pallas prayde with soft and silent voice,
At this oblation here we bring oh goddess do rejoice, Vlises prayer to Muerua.

As worthyest of the immortals all, and most of power and might,
To whom we ought al worthily vows shape and aulters dight:
Offerings of due thy Godhead hie shall have, grant us the grace
That we oh Lady, at this time may come where they of Thrace
Are sound a sleep, oh Lady grant that we those armours see,
Their goodly steedes and Chariot which, is of such golden blee.
His prayer when ended had the Greek, eft up his hands he holds, Do^ns appare
hanged on a Tamarin tree.

Hie in the air, and on an heap the habites then he foldes,
And hangs them on a bow, and cuts a branch of Tamarin
A lofty arm, it sets for mark when they returned bin,
Their way the better for to find, among the dead they pass,
And to the Thracians come at last as it determinde was,
In mighty ranks of numbers three them fast asleep they four, Rhetus K. of
Thrace asleep among his soldiers.

And by each one his furniture lay closely on the ground.
Their stuff, their harneis and their horse, were nere at hand to use:
To sleep in midst of all his men king Rhesus he did choose,
His stout and startling steedes him by, and tied to his chare
With strong and lasting geares at full, they rich and chosen ware, Ulysses to
Diomedes.

This order when Ulysses saw, said, lo the king (my mate)
And horse whereof (when of the camp) our Dolon spoke alate
Now more than ever must you strive, and put your force in bre,
Sallet on head, and sword in hand, for naught must not be sure.
Do one of two, undo these steedes, and I these beasts will kill,
Or take your sword and fly them too, and I unloose them will.
The goddess Pallas did increase the doughtie Greek his sprites, Diomedes
kills the Thracians a sle^pe.

He slayes them dead on every side, and them in pieces smites.
The place is purple with the blood, the grunts and groans are hard
Of such as are in pieces cut, and by his weapon marde. Comparion of a Lion
finding sheep or goats with out a shepherd.

And as a raging Lion, who finds goats and sheep at large,
Out hold and wandering up and down (the shepherd from his charge)
Does fall the on, and with his paws the^ tears, and takes their blood:
Ene so the Greek the Thracians slew, he nothing was withstoode.
Twice six his edged sword did pass, of morts the place is fillde,
The carcases Vlisse aside did draw as he them killde.
He made the way the wished steedes more willing that they went,
Nor should not fear the dead to tread, nor doubt it what it meant.
The king for thirtenth Diomede out life to death does swap Rhesu^he thirte^
that is lain

He sweetly slept, but (silly man) it was a deadly nap,
The which (assisted by Pallas) that night the Greek him brought. Ulysses
endoeth ^e horses and brings ^he^ away.

This while Vlisse t'vndo the steedes he on his office thought,
And hastly through the multitude he brings them as a river,
And with his boystrous stubborn bow he lays on many a fliuer,
For have he had forgot the whip their way which makes them rid.
A little past, spying his friend, who by his business bid, Ulysses vvh^tles
to his fell^vv.

He whistled to him in his fiste, and well the sound he knew,
Straight for to know what he should do Diomede to him drew.
As whether for to draw the chare which full of armor lay,
It by the beam, or on his back to bring it quite away,
Or^se to tend to murder still, or to return him back,
Of these three points the valiant Greek did resolution lack. Palla^to
Diomedes. Diomedes and Ulysses mount the horses and come away.

Wherewith his furthrer Pallas said, the acts which done thou haste
Be pleased with, get thee away, that thou may come at last
Al dreadlesse safe unto thy ships, thou may well doubtsome stop.
And least some God the Troyan power should set upon thy top.
Diomede to Vlisles co^mes, he hearing in this case
The counsel good, each mounts a steed right swift and fleet of pace,
Ulysses laid on with his bow, he made them for to fly.
Again Phoebus with silver bow bestirres right carefullye
The Troyans for. For when he spide Minerua for to chat
With the stout Greek, and follow him, he wroth did grow thereat,
And at the damage lately done, to Troyans straight he hyes, (...) the (...)
for (...) death o^ king Rh^ sus.

And wakes king Rhesus uncle there Hippocoon as he lies,
His uncle and his counselor great, who when he up did rear,
And did behold that (as before) the coursers were not there,
But couerd place with slaughtred men, he cries, he houles, he whines,
Condemn he does the Thracian bands, for soon the loss he finds.
He Rhesus, Rhesus named often, which was his nephewe dear,
And Prince so tenderly belovde. When as the camp did hear
His roarings loud, it moved all, and most of it did run
Unto the place to view the news, and see what there was done,
They marvel at the cruelty, and on the slaughter stare,
They say the Greeks for the exploite of too much courage ware.
When the two kings came to the place where they had slain ye spy,
Ulysses stopte, the other down there lighted by and by Diomedes reaches
Dolous apparel to Ulysses.

The bloody habites him to reatch, which done, he mounts again,
And shortly come unto the ships, where Greeks attend the men.
Among the Kings was Nestor first of al did hear a sound,
And knew they came, thus spoke he them: Of folk of Greekish ground Nestor to
the Greeks attending.

Ye sheepeheards ye, and of this camp so great the guiders grave,
Shall I unto you tell a lie, and what in dream I have?
My mind does will me to believe before I see the thing,
A galloping of certain horse deep in mine ear does ring.
O would to God our champions two were of such cunning sight,
As scaping dangers they could bring two goodly coursers light,
But much I dread these noble men have had some deadly hap.
Scarce had he said, but the two Kings down from their horses flap
Amongst them al: Each one them greetes, good words use every man,
And aged Nestor of them al thus to Vlysse began: Nestor to Ulysses.

O thou the glory of our Greece, of honor worthy king,
Declare unto me I you pray, these horses which you bring
So strange for whiteness of their blee, and like the sunnie rays,
What, has some God them given you, or have you any ways
Won the^ the Troian^ fro? long time with Trojans I have fought,
And of my valor shewde good proof, for age I never sought
Me to withdraw, nor yet to clime my ships, me there to hide,
Yet in the war I never saw two coursers of such hyde.
I think some of the lofty Gods right careful of your good
To you have them a present sent: for Jupiter has stood
Well known a friend unto you both, and Pallas never quailing
Is forward always at your hand, with favor never failing.
O Nestor sage good Neleus son, ^ch steeds and coursers od
Ouoth Ulysses to mortal wight may easily give some God, Ulysses to Nestor.

When they reward will any one their power is more to give,
Than man has power to ask and take, that here does mortal live.
King Rhesus dead not eft to fight them hither lately led,
This country to: As for the horse out Thracia they are bred.
His knife Diomedes has thrust into king Rhesus throat,
And to twelve more him sleeping by: As for this bloody coat
It was the garment of a spy, the which we did entrap,
He slain when we had al he knew, and thus you hear our hap.
The trenches deep the coursers pass, the kings come hard at heels,
This happy gain, and voyage makes them al to joy awheeles.
To the rich tent when Vlysse came of his companion mate,
He careful tide his horses fast, and plaste them in such rate, Ulysses sets
up the horses in Diomedes tent. Diomedes and Ulysses vvash them selves in the
sea, the go to the baines, and are noyn^ed with oil. They go to meat and
sacrifice to Minerua.

As placed were the gallaunt steedes of the ^t Greek in rank,
And where with bread and foder both the Greek his own did ^nk,
He Dolons gear did on the poupe hie in his ship bestow,
And minds to Pallas sacrifice and service ay to owe.
And straight these two so valiant Greeks, through toil who soundly ^et,
To wash and bath their weary limbs into the sea they get,
And there so well do rub their necks, their backs, their legs, and thies,
As they are cleansed of the filth which on their bodies lies.
They neat and well refreshed thus, to pleasant baines do go,
And there with oil they nointed are without from top to toe.
They then to meat, and Pallas aid they pray in humble wise,
And bolles of wine upon the earth they power in sacrifice.
Finis decimi Libri.

