HOMER'S ODYSSES. Translated according to ye Greek By Geo: Chapman At mihi quoth
Viuo detraxerit Jnuida Turba Post obitum duplici foenore reddet Honos.

Imprinted at London by Rich: Field, for Nathaniell Butter.



TO THE MOST WORTHILY HONORED* MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, ROBERT, Earl of
SOMERSET, Lord Chamberlain, etc.
I Have adventured (Right Noble Earl) out of my utmost, and euer-vowed service
to your Virtues, to entitle their Merits to the Patronage of Homers English
life: whose wished natural life, the great Macedon would have protected, as the
spirit of his Empire,

That he to his vnmeasur'd mighty Acts,
Might add a Fame as vast; and their extracts,
In fires as bright, and endless as the stars,
His breast might breathe; and thunder out his wars.
But that great Monarks love of fame and praise,
Receives an envious Cloud in our foul days:
For since our Great ones, cease themselves to do
Deeds worth their praise; they hold it folly too,
To feed their praise in others. But what can
(Of all the gifts that are) be given to man,
More precious then Eternity and Glory,
Singing their praises, in vnsilenc't story?
Which No black Day, No Nation, nor no Age;
No change of Time or Fortune, Force, nor Rage,
Shall ever race? All which, the Monarch knew,
Where Homer lived entitled, would ensew:
-- Cuius de gurgite viuo
Combibit arcanos vatum (...) turba furores, etc. Fx Angeli Politiani Amb^a.

From whose deep Fount of life, the thirsty rout
Of Thespian Prophets, have lien sucking out
Their sacred rages. And as th'influent stone
Of Father Jove's great and laborious Son,
Lifts high the heavy Iron; and far implies
The wide Orbs; that the Needle rectifies,
In virtuous guide of every sea-driuen course,
To all aspiring, his one boundless force:
So from one Homer, all the holy fire,
That ever did the hidden heat inspire
In each true Muse, came clearly sparkling down,
And must for him, compose one flaming Crown.
He, at Jove's Table set, fills out to us,
Cups that repair Age, sad and minous;
And gives it Built, of an eternal stand,
With his all-sinewie Odyssaean hand.
Shifts Time, and Fate; puts Death in Life's free state;
And Life does into Ages propagate.
He does in Men, the Gods affects inflame;
His fuel Virtue, blown by Praise and Fame:
And with the high souls, first impulsions driven,
Breaks through rude Chaos, Earth, the Seas, and Heaven.
The Nerves of all things hid in Nature, lie
Naked before him; all their Harmony
Tuned to his Accents; that in Beasts breathe Minds.
What Fowls, what Floods, what Earth, what Air, what Winds,
What fires Aethereall, what the Gods conclude
In all their Counsels, his Muse makes indude
With varied voices, that even rocks have moved.
And yet for all this, (naked Virtue loved)
Honors without her, he, as abject, prises;
And foolish Fame, derived from thence, despises.
When from the vulgar, taking glorious bound,
Up to the Mountain, where the Muse is crowned;
He sits and laughs, to see the iaded Rabble,
Toil to his hard heights, Thus far Angel. Politianus, for the most part
translated.
t'all access unable. etc.
And that your Lordship may in his Face, take view of his Mind: the first word
of his Iliads, is (...) wrath: the first word of his Odysses, (...), Man:
contracting in either word, his each works Proposition. In one, Predominant
Perturbation; in the other, ouer-ruling Wisdom: in one, the Bodies fervor
and fashion of outward Fortitude, to all possible height of Heroical Action;
in the other, the Minds inward, constant, and vnconquerd Empire; unbroken,
vnalterd, with any most insolent, and tyrannous infliction. To many most souer
aigne praises is this Poem entitled; but to that Grace in chief, which sets
on the Crown, both of Poets and Orators; (...): that is, Parua magne dicere;
peruulgata noue; ieiuna plene: To speak things little, greatly; things commune,
rarely; things barren and empty, fruitfully and fully. The return of a man
into his Country, is his whole scope and object; which, in it self, your
Lordship may well say, is ieiune and fruitless enough; affoording nothing
feastfull, nothing magnificent. And yet even this, does the divine inspiration,
render vast, illustrous, and of miraculous composure. And for this (my Lord) is
this Poem preferred to his Iliads: for therein much magnificence, both of
person and action, gives great aid to his industry; but in this, are these
helps, exceeding sparing, or nothing; and yet is the Structure so elaborate,
and pompous, that the poor plain Groundworke (considered together) may seem
the naturally rich womb to it, and produce it needfully. Much wonderd at
therefore, is the Censure of Dionysius Longimus (a man otherwise affirmed,
grave, and of elegant judgment) comparing Homer in his Iliads, to the Sun
rising; in his Odysses, to his descent or setting. Or to the Ocean robbed of his
aesture; many tributorie floods and rivers of excellent ornament, withheld from
their observance. When this his work so far exceeds the Ocean, with all his
Court and concourse; that all his Sea, is only a serviceable stream to it.
Nor can it be compared to any One power to be named in nature; being an
entirely wel-sorted and digested Confluence of all. Where the most solid and
grave, is made as nimble and fl^ent, as the most airie and fiery; the nimble
and fluent, as firm and well bounded as the most grave and solid. And (taking
all together) of so tender impression, and of such Command to the voice of the
Muse; that they knock heaven with her breath, and discover their foundations
as low as hell. Nor is this all-comprising Poesy, phantastique, or mere
fictiue; but the most material, and doctrinall illations of Truth; both for all
manly information of Manners in the young; all prescription of Justice, and even
Christian piety, in the most grave and high-gouernd. To illustrate both which,
in both kinds, with all height of expression, the Poet creates both a Body and
a Soul in them. Wherein, if the Body (being the letter, or history) seems
fictiue, and beyond Possibility to bring into Act: the sense then and
Allegory (which is the Soul) is to be sought: which intends a more eminent
express^re of Virtue, for her loveliness; and of Vice for her ugliness, in
their sever all effects; going beyond the life, then any Art within life, can
possibly delineate. Why then is Fiction, to this end, so hateful to our true
Ignorants? Or why should a poor Chronicler of a Lord Majors naked Truth, (that
peradventure will last his year) include more worth with our ^oderne wizerds,
then Homer for his naked Ulysses, clad in eternal Fiction? But this Prozer
Dionysius, and the rest of these grave, and reputatiuely learned, (that dare
undertake for their grauities, the headstrong censure of all things; and
challenge the understanding of these Toys in their childhoods: when even these
childish vanities, retain deep and most necessary learning enough in them,
to make them children in their ages, and teach them while they live) are not in
these absolutely di^ine Infusions, allowd either voice or relish: for, Qui
Poeticas ad fores accedit, etc. (says the Divine Philosopher) he that knocks
at the Gates of the Muses; sine Musarum furore; is neither to be admitted
entry, nor a touch at their Thresholds: his opinion of entry, ridiculous, and
his presumption impious. Nor must Poets themselves (might I a little insist on
these contempts* not tempting too far your Lordships Vlyssean patience)
presume to these doors, without the truly genuine, and peculiar induction*
There being in Poesy a twofold rapture, (or alienation of soul, as the
abouesaid Te^cher terms it) one Insania, a disease of the mind, and a mere
madness, by which the infected is thrust beneath all the degrees of humanity:
and ex homine, Brutum quodammodo redditur: (for which, poor Poesy, in this
diseasd and impostorous age, is so barbarously vilified) the other is, Diuinus
furor; by which the sound and (...) healthful, supra hominis naturam erigitur,
and in Deum transit. One a perfection directly infused from God: the other an
infection, obliquely and degenerately proceeding from man. Of the divine Fury
(my Lord) your Homer has ever been, both first and last Instance; being
pronounced absolutely, (...); the most wise and most divine Poet. Against whom,
whosoever shall open his profane mouth, may worthily receive answer, with this
of his divine defender; ( Empedocles, Heraclitus, Protagoras, Epichar: etc.
being of Homers part) (...), etc. who against such an Army, and the General
Homer dares attempt the assault, but he must be reputed ridiculous? And yet
against this host, and this invincible Commander, shall we have every Besogne
and fool a Leader. The common herd (I assure my self) ready to receive it on
their horns. Their infected Leaders,

Such men, as sideling ride the ambling Muse;
Whose saddle is as frequent as the stuse.
Whose Raptures are in every Pageant seen;
In every Wassall rhyme, and Dancing green:
When he that writes by any beam of Truth,
Must diue as deep as he; past shallow youth.
Truth dwells in Gulphs, whose Deepes hide shades so rich,
That Night sits muffl'd there, in clouds of pitch:
More Dark then Nature made her; and requires
(To clear her tough mists) Heavens great fire of fires;
To whom, the Sun it self is but a Beam.
For sick souls then (but rapt in foolish Dream)
To wrestle with these Heau'n-strong mysteries;
What madness is it? when their light, serves eyes
That are not worldly, in their least aspect;
But truly pure; and aim at Heaven, direct.
Yet these, none like; but what the brazen head
Blatters abroad; no sooner borne, but dead.
Holding then in eternal contempt (my Lord) those short-liued Bubbles; eternize
your virtue and judgment with the Grecian Monark; esteeming, not as the least
of your New-yeares Presents,

Homer (three thousand years dead) now revived,
Even from that dull Death, that in life he lived;
When none conceited him; none understood,
That so much life, in so much death as blood
Conueys about it, could mix. But when Death
Drunk up the bloody Mist, that humane breath
Poured round about him (Poverty and Spite,
Thickning the hapless vapor) then Truths light
Glimmerd about his Poem: the pincht soul,
(Amidst the Mysteries it did enroule)
Brake powrefully abroad. And as we see
The Sun all hid in clouds, at length, got free,
Through some forced covert, over all the ways,
Near and beneath him, shootes his vented rays
Far off, and sticks them in some little Glade;
All woods, fields, rivers, left besides in shade:
So your Apollo, from that world of light,
Closde in his Poems body; shot to sight
Some few forced Beams; which near him, were not seen,
(As in his life or country) Fate and Spleen,
Clouding their radiance; which when Death had cleared;
To far off Regions, his free beams appeared:
In which, all stood and wonderd; striving which,
His Birth and Rapture, should in right enrich.
Twelve Labors of your Thespian Hercules,
I now present your Lordship: Do but please
To lend Life means, till the other Twelve receive
Equal atchieuement; and let Death then reaue
My life now lost in our Patrician Loves,
That knock heads with the herd: in whom there moves
One blood, one soul: both drowned in one set height
Of stupid Envy, and mere popular Spite.
Whose loves, with no good, did my least vein fill;
And from their hates,^ I fear as little ill.
Their Boun^^es nourish not, when most they feed,
But where there is no Merit, or no Need:
Rain into rivers still; and are such showers,
As bubbles spring, and ouerflow the flowers.
Their worse parts, and worst men, their Best subornes,
Like winter Cowes, whose milk runs to their horns.
And as litigious Clients books of Law,
Cost infinitely; taste of all the Awe,
Bencht in our kingdoms Policy, Piety, State;
Earne all their deep explorings; satiate
All sorts there thrust together by the heart,
With thirst of wisdom, spent on either part:
Horrid examples made of Life and Death,
From their fine stuff wouen: yet when once the breath
Of sentence leaves them, all their worth is drawn
As dry as dust; and wears like Cobweb Lawne:
So these men set a price upon their worth,
That no man gives, but those that trot it forth,
Through Needs foul ways; feed Humors, with all cost,
Though Judgment sterues in them: Rout: State engrost
(At all Tobacco benches, solemn Tables,
Where all that cross their Enuies, are their fables)
In their rank faction: Shame, and Death approved
Fit Penance for their Opposites: none loved
But those that rub them: not a Reason heard,
That does not sooth and glorify their preferred
Bitter Opinions. When, would Truth resume
The cause to his hands; all would fly in fume
Before his sentence; since the innocent mind,
Just God makes good; to whom their worst is wind.
For, that I freely all my Thoughts express,
My Conscience is my Thousand witnesses:
And to this stay, my constant Comforts vow;
You for the world I have, or God for you.
Certain ancient Greek Epigrammes T^anslated.
(...) stars are (...) up by the fiery S^nne;
And in so much a flame, lies (...) the Moon::
(...) Name, all (...) Death;
(...)
Another.
Heavens fires (...) (...) his Sphere;
Grave Night, the light ^eed of the Day shall (...):
Fresh streams shall chase the (...) shall tear
Her fishie bottomes: Men, in long date dead,
Shall rise, and (...)
Another.
The great Maeonides does only write;
And to him dictates, the great God of Light.
Another.
Seven kingdoms str^^e, in which should swell the womb
That bore great Homer; whom Fame freed from Tomb:
Argos, Chius, Pylos, Smyrna, Colophone;
The learned Athenian, and Vlyssean Throne.
Another.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
THE FIRST BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Gods in counsel sit, to call
Ulysses from Calypso's thrall;
And order their high pleasures, thus;
Gray Pallas, to Telemachus
(In Ithaca) her way addressed;
And did her heavenly lims inuest
In Menta's likeness; that did reign
King of the Taphians (in the Maine,
Whose rough waves near Leucadia run)
Aduising wise Ulysses son
To seek his father; and address
His course to young Tantalides
That governed Sparta. Thus much said,
She showed she was Hea^'ns martial Maid,
And vanished from him. Next to this,
The Banquet of the wooers is.
Another.
(...).
The Deities sit;
The Man retired*
Th'Vlyssean wit,
By Pallas fired.
THe Man (O Muse) inform, that many a way,
Wound with his wisdom to his wished stay.
That wanderd wondrous far, The information or fashion of an absolute man,
and necessary (or fatal) passage through many afflictions (according with the
most sacred Le^ter) to his natural haven and country; i^ the whole argument;
and scope of the (...) (...) given him in the first verse: (...)* Homo ^^ius
ingenium velut per mult^s, and vari^^ (...).
when, He, the town
Of sacred Troy, had sacked, and shiuerd down.
The cities of a world of nations,
With all their manners, minds, and fashions
He saw and knew. At Sea felt many woes;
Much care sustaind, to save from overthrows
Himself, and friends, in their retreat for home.
But so, their fates, he could not overcome,
Though much he thirsted it. O men unwise,
They perished by their own impieties,
That in their hungers rapine would not shun
The Oxen of the loftie-going Sun:
Who therefore from their eyes, the day bereft
Of safe return. These acts in some part left,
Tell us, as others, deified seed of Jove.
Now all the rest that austere Death out-stroue
At Troys long siege, at home safe anchored are,
Free from the malice both of sea and war;
Only Ulysses is denide access
To wife and home. The Grace of Goddesses
The reverend Nymph C^lypso did detain
Him in her Ca^^es: past all the race of men,
Enflamed to make him her loved Lord and Spouse.
And when the Gods had destined that his house,
Which Ithaca on her rough bosom bears,
(The point of time wrought out by ambient years)
Should be his haven; Contention still extends
Her envy to him, even amongst his friends.
All Gods took pity on him: only he
That girds Earth in the cincture of the sea,
Divine Ulysses ever did envy,
And made the fixed port of his birth to fly.
But he himself solemnized a retreat
To th'Aethiops, Neptunes progress to the Aethiops.
far dissunderd in their seat;
(In two parts parted; at the Suns descent,
And underneath his golden Orient,
The first and last of men) t'enioy their feast
Of bulls and lambs, These ^^tes following, I am enforced to insert, (since the
words they contain, differ from all other translations) lest I be thought
(...) err out of that ignorance, that may perhaps possess my (...).
in Hecatombs addressed:
At which he sat, given over to Delight.
The other Gods, in heavens supreamest height
Were all in Council met: To whom began
The mighty Father, both of God and man,
Discourse, inducing matter, that inclined
To wise Ulysses; calling to his mind
(...) translated in this place, inculpabilis; (...) made the epithete of
Aegist^^^^; is from the true (...) of the word, as it is here to be understood:
which is quite contrary. As (...) is to be expounded in some place Diuinus, or
Deo (...); but in another (soon after) contrarius Deo. The person to whom the
^^pithete is given, giving reason to distinguish it And so (...) an Epithete
given to Atlas, instantly following, in one place s^gnifies Mente pern^cio^us:
in the next, qui vn^ uer^a ^^ente gerit^
Faultfull Aegisthus, who to death was done,
By young Orestes, Agamemnons son.
His memory to the Immortals then,
Moved Jove thus deeply: O how falsely, men
Accuse us Gods, as authors of their ill,
When, by the bane their own bad lives instill,
They suffer all the miseries of their states,
Past our inflictions, and beyond their fates.
As now Aegisthus, past his fate, did wed
The wife of Agamemnon; and (in dread
To suffer death himself) to shun his ill,
Incurred it by the loose bent of his will,
In slaughtering Atrides in retreat.
Which, we foretold him, would so hardly set
To his murtherous purpose; sending Mercury
(That slaughterd Argus) our considerate spy,
To give him this charge: Do not wed his wife,
Nor murder him; for thou shall buy his life,
With ransom of thine own; imposde on thee
By his Orestes; when, in him shall be
Atrides self renewd; and but the prime
Of youths spring put abroad; in thirst to clime
His haughty Fathers throne, by his high acts.
These words of Hermes, wrought not into facts
Aegisthus powers; good counsel he despisde,
And to that Good, his ill is sacrifisde.
Pall^s (whose eyes did sparkle like the skies)
Answered: Pallas to Jupiter.
O Sire! supreme of Deities;
Aegisthus past his Fate, and had desert
To warrant our infliction; and convert
May all the pains, such impious men inflict
On innocent sufferers; to revenge as strict,
Their own hearts eating. But, that Ithacus
(Thus never meriting) should suffer thus;
I deeply suffer. His more pious mind
Diuides him from these fortunes. Though unkind
Is Piety to him, giving him a fate,
More suffering then the most unfortunate;
So long kept friendlesse, in a sea-girt soil,
Where the seas nauile is a syluane I Will,
In which the Goddess dwells, that does derive
Her birth from Atlas; who, of all alive,
The motion and the fashion does command,
With his In this place is Atlas given the Epithete. (...), which signifies qui
vniuersa mente agitat, here given him, for the power the stars have in all
things. Yet this receives other interpretation in other places, as above said.
wise mind, whose forces understand
The inmost deepes and gulfes of all the seas:
Who (for his skill of things superior) stays
The two steep Columns that ^rop earth and heaven.
His daughter it is, who holds this (...) is here turned by others, infelix: in
the general collection: when it has here a particular exp^sition, applied to
express Ulysses desert errors, (...), vt sit, qui vix locum inuenire potest
vbi consistat.
homelesse-driuen,
Still mourning with her. Evermore profuse
Of soft and winning speeches; that abuse
And make so This is thus translated, the rather to express and approve the
Allegory driven through the whole Odysses. Deciphering the intangling of the
wisest in his affections: and the torments that breed in every pious mind: to
be thereby hindered to arrive so directly as he desires, at the proper and only
true natural country of every worthy man, whose ha^en i^ heaven and the next
life, to which, this life is but a sea, in continual ^^sture and vexation. The
words occasioning all this, are (...) signifying, qui languide, and animo
remisso rem aliquam gerit: which being the effect of Calypsos sweet words in
Ulysses, is where applied passiuely to his own sufferance of their operation.
languishingly, and possessed
With so remiss a mind; her loved guest
Manage the action of his way for home.
Where he (though in affection overcome)
In judgment yet; more longs to show his hopes,
His countries smoke leap from her chimney tops,
And death asks in her arms. Yet never shall
Thy loved heart be converted on his thrall,
(Austere Oly(...):) did not ever he,
In ample Troy, thy altars gratify?
And Grecians Fleet make in thy offerings swim?
O (...), why still then burns thy wrath to him?
The Cloud-assembler answered: (...) to P^ll^^
What words fly
(Bold daughter) from thy Pale of (...) vallum (...) cl^^strum denti^^: which,
for the better sound in our language, is here turned, Pale of Iv^rie. The teeth
being that ra^pier or pale, given us by nature in that part, for res^raint and
compression of our speech, till the imagination, appetite and soul (that ought
to rule in their ex^mination, before their delivery) have given worthy pass
to them. The most grave and di^ine Poet, teaching therein, that not so much for
the necessary chewing of our sustenance, our teeth are given us, as for their
stay of our words, le^t we utter them rashly.
Ivorie?
As if I ever could cast from my care
Divine Ulysses, who exceeds so far
All men in wisdom? and so often has given
To all The Immortals throned in ample heaven,
So great and sacred gifts? But his decrees,
That holds the earth in with his nimble knees,
Stand to Ulysses longings so extreme,
For taking from the God-foe Polyphe^e
His only eye; a Cyclop, that excelled
All other Cyclops: with whose burden swelled
The Nymph Th^osa; the divine increase
Of Phorcis seed, a great God of the seas.
She mixed with Neptune in his hollow caves,
And bore this Cyclop to that God of waves.
For whose lost eye, th'Earth-shaker did not kill
Erring Ulysses; but reserues him still
In life for more death. But use we our powers,
And round about us cast these cares of ours,
All to discover how we may prefer
His wished retreat; and Nept^ne make forbear
His stern eye to him: since no one God can
In spite of all, prevail, but against a man.
To this, this answer made the gray-eyd Maid:
Supreme of rulers, since so well apaide
The blessed Gods are all then, now, in thee
To limit wise Ulysses misery;
And that you speak, as you referd to me
Prescription for the means; in this sort be
Their sacred order: let us now address
With utmost speed, our swift Argicides,
To tell the Nymph that bears the golden Tres^e
In th'ile Ogygia, Calypso.
that it is our will
She should not stay our loved Ulysses still;
But suffer his return: and then will I
To Ithaca, to make his son apply
His Sires inquest the more; infusing force
Into his soul, to summon the concourse
Of curld-head Greeks to counsel: and deter
Each wooer that has been the slaughterer
Of his fat sheep and crooked-headed beeues,
From more wrong to his mother; and their leaves
Take in such terms, as fit deserts so great.
To Sparta then, and Pylos, where does beat
Bright Amathus, the flood and epithete
To all that kingdom; my advice shall send
The spirit-aduanc'd Prince, to the pious end
Of seeking his lost father; if he may
Receive report from Fame, where rests his stay;
And make, besides, his own successiue worth,
Known to the world; The preparatiou of Pallas for Ithaca.
and set in action forth.
This said, her wingd shoes to her feet she tied,
Formd all of gold, and all eternified;
That on the round earth, or the sea, sustaind
Her ravished substance, swift as gusts of wind.
Then took she her strong Lance, with steel made keen,
Great, massy, active, that whole hoasts of men
(Though all Heroes) conquers; if her ire
Their wrongs inflame, backed by so great a Sire.
Down from Olympus tops, she headlong diu'd;
And swift as thought, in Ithaca arrived,
Close at Ulysses gates; in whose first court,
She made her stand; Pallas, like Mentas.
and for her breasts support,
Leand on her iron Lance: her form impressed
With Mentas likeness, come, as being a guest.
There found she those proud wooers, that were then
Set on those Oxe-hides that themselves had slain,
Before the gates; and all at dice were playing.
To them the heralds, and the rest obaying,
Filled wine and water; some, still as they played;
And some, for solemn suppers stare, puruaid;
With porous sponges, clensing tables, served
With much rich feast; of which to all they keru'd.
God-like Telemachus, amongst them sat,
Grieved much in mind; and in his heart begat
All representment of his absent Sire;
How (come from far-off parts) his spirits would fire
With those proud wooers sight, with slaughter parting
Their bold concourse; and to himself converting
The honors they usurped, his own commanding.
In this discourse, he, first, saw Pallas standing
Unbidden entry: up rose, and addressed
His pace right to her; angry that a guest
Should stand so long at gate: and coming near,
Her right hand took; took in his own, her spear;
And thus saluted: Grace to your repair,
(Fair guest) your welcome shall be likewise fair.
Enter, and (cheered with feast) disclose the intent
That causde your coming. This said; first he went,
And Pallas followd. To a room they came,
Steep, and of state; the Iauelin of the Dame,
He set against a pillar, vast and hie,
Amidst a large and bright-kept Armorie,
Which was, besides, with woods of Lances graced,
Of his grave fathers. In a throne, he placed
The man-turnd Goddess; under which was spread
A Carpet, rich, and of deuicefull thread;
A footstool staying her feet; and by her chair,
Another seat (all garnisht wondrous fair,
To rest, or sleep on in the day) he set
Far from the prease of wooers; lest at meat
The noise they still made, might offend his guest,
Disturbing him at banquet or at rest,
Even to his combat, with that pride of theirs,
That kept no noble form in their affairs.
And these he set far from them, much the rather
To question freely of his absent father.
A Table fairly polisht then, was spread,
On which a reverend officer set bread;
And other seruitors, all sorts of meat,
(Salads, and flesh, such as their haste could get)
Served with observance in. And then the S^wre,
Prowr'd water from a great and golden Ewre,
That from their hands, t'a silver Caldron ran;
Both washed, and seated close; the voicefull man
Fetched cups of gold, and set by them; and round
Those cups with wine, with all endeavor crowned.
Then rusht in the rude wooers; themselves placed;
The heralds water gave; the maids in haste
Served bread from baskets. When, of all prepared,
And set before them; the bold wooers shared;
Their Pages plying their cups, past the rest.
But lusty wooers must do more then feast;
For now (their hungers and their thirsts allaid)
They called for songs, and Dances. Those, they said,
Were th'ornaments of feast. The herald strait
A Harp, carved full of artificial slight,
Thrust into Phemius (a learnd singers) hand,
Who, till he much was urged, on terms did stand;
But after, played and sung with all his art.
Telemachus, Telemachus to Pallas.
to Pallas then (apart,
His ear inclining close, that none might hear)
In this sort said: My Guest, exceeding dear,
Will you not sit incenst, with what I say?
These are the cares these men take; feast and play:
Which easly they may use, because they eat,
Free, and unpunished, of another meat.
And of a man's, whose white bones wasting lie
In some far region, with th'incessancie
Of showers powered down upon them; lying ashore;
Or in the seas washed naked. Who, if he wore
Those bones with flesh, and life, and industry;
And these, might here in Ithaca, set eye
On him returned; they all would wish to be,
Either past other, in celeritie
Of feet and knees; and not contend t'exceed
In golden garments. But his virtues feed
The fate of ill death: nor is left to me
The least hope of his life's recovery;
No not, if any of the mortal race
Should tell me his return; the cheerful face
Of his returned day, never will appear.
But tell me; and let Truth, your witness bear;
Who? and from whence you are? what cities birth?
What parents? In what vessel set you forth?
And with what mariners arrived you here?
I cannot think you a foot passenger.
Recount then to me all; to teach me well,
Fit usage for your worth. And if it fell
In chance now first that you thus see us here,
Or that in former passages you were
My fathers guest? For many men have been
Guests to my father. Studious of men,
His sociable nature ever was.
On him again, Pallas to (...).
the grey-eyd Maid did pass
This kind reply; I Will answer passing true,
All thou have asked: My birth, his honor drew
From wise Anchialus. The name I bear,
Is Mentas, the commanding Ilander
Of all the Taphians, studious in the art
Of Navigations. Having touched this part
With ship and men; of purpose to maintain
Course through the dark seas, the other languag'd men.
And Temesis sustaines the cities name,
For which my ship is bound; made known by fame,
For rich in brass; which my occasions need;
And therefore bring I shining steel in steed,
Which their use wants; yet makes my vessels freight;
That near a plowd field, rides at anchors weight,
Apart this city, in the harbor called
Rethrus, whose waves, with Neius woods are walld.
Thy Sire and I, were ever mutual guests,
At eithers house, still interchanging feasts.
I glory in it. Ask, when thou shall see
Laertes, the old Her^e, these of me,
From the beginning. He, men say, no more
Visits the City; but will needs deplore
His sons believed loss, in a private field;
One old maid only, at his hands to yield
Food to his life, as often as labor makes
His old limbs faint; which though he creepes, he takes
Along a fruitful plain, set all with vines,
Which, husbandman-like (though a King) he proines.
But now I come to be thy fathers guest;
I hear he wanders, while these wooers feast.
And (as The Immortals prompt me at this hour)
I Will tell thee, out of a prophetique power,
(Not as professed a Prophet, nor clear seen
At all times, what shall after chance to men)
What I conceive, for this time, will be true:
The Gods inflictions keep your Sire from you.
Divine Ulysses, yet, abides not dead
Above earth, nor beneath; nor buried
In any seas, (as you did late conceive)
But, with the broad sea sieg'd, is kept alive
Within an I Will, by rude and vp-land men,
That in his spite, his passage home detain.
Yet long it shall not be, before he tred
His countries dear earth; though solicited,
And held from his return, with iron chains.
For he has wit to forge a world of trains,
And will, of all, be sure to make good one,
For his return, so much relide upon.
But tell me, and be true: Art thou indeed
So much (...), Tantus filius. Pallas thus enforcing her question* to stir up
the son the more to the fathers worthiness.
a son, as to be said the seed
Of Ithacus himself? Exceeding much
Thy forehead and fair eyes, at his form touch:
For oftentimes we met, as you and I
Meet at this hour; before he did apply
His powers for Troy. When other Grecian States,
In hollow ships were his associates.
But since that time, mine eyes could never see
Renowmd Ulysses; nor met his with me.
The wise Telemachus Telemachus to Pallas.
again replide:
You shall withal I know, be satisfide.
My mother, certain, says I am his son:
I know not; nor was ever simply known
By any child, the sure truth of his Sire.
But would my veins had took in living fire
From some man happy, rather then one wise,
Whom age might see seizd, of what youth made prise.
But he, whoeuer of the mortal race
Is most unblessed, he holds my fathers place.
This, since you ask, I answer. She, again:
The Gods sure did not make the future strain
Both of thy race and days, Pallas to Telemachus.
obscure to thee,
Since thou were borne so of Penelope.
The style may by thy after acts be won,
Of so great Sire, the high undoubted son.
Say truth in this then: what is this feasting here?
What all this rout? Is all this nuptial cheer?
Or else some friendly banquet made by thee?
For here no shots are, where all sharers be.
Past measure contumeliously, this crew
Fare through thy house; which should th'ingenuous view
Of any good or wise man come and find,
(Impiety seeing played in every kind)
He could not but through every vein be moved.
Again Telemachus: My guest much loved,
Since you demand and sift these sights so far;
I grant twere fit, a house so regular,
Rich, and so faultlesse, once in government,
Should still, at all parts, the same form present,
That gave it glory, while her Lord was here.
But now the Gods, that us displeasure bear,
Have otherwise appointed; and disgrace
My father most, of all the mortal race.
For whom I could not mourn so, were he dead,
Amongst his fellow Captains slaughtered
By common enemies; or in the hands
Of his kind friends, had ended his commands;
After he had egregiously bestowed
His power and order in a war so vowed;
And to his tomb, all Greeks their grace had done;
That to all ages he might leave his son
Immortal honor: but now Harpies have
Dug in their gorges his abhorred grave.
Obscure, inglorious, Death has made his end;
And me (for glories) to all griefs contend.
Nor shall I any more mourn him alone;
The Gods have given me other cause of moan.
For look how many Optimates remain
In Samos, or the shoares Dulichian,
Shadie Zacynthus; or how many bear
Rule in the rough brows of this Island here*
So many now, my mother and this house,
At all parts make defamed and ruinous.
And she, her hateful nuptials, nor denies,
Nor will dispatch their importunities:
Though she beholds them spoil still, as they feast,
All my free house yields: and the little rest
Of my dead Sire in me, perhaps intend
To bring, ere long, to some untimely end.
This Pallas sighed, and answered: O (said she)
Absent Ulysses is much mist by thee:
That on these shameless suitors he might lay
His wreakfull hands. Should he now come, and stay
In thy Courts first gates, armd with helm and shield,
And two such darts as I have seen him wield,
When first I saw him in our Taphian Court,
Feasting, and doing his deserts disport;
When from Ephyrus he returned by us
From Il^s, son to Centa^re Mer^^rus;
To whom he traueld through the watrie dreads,
For bane to poison his sharp arrows heads,
That death, but touched, causde; which he would not give,
Because he feared, the Gods that ever live,
Would plague such death with death; and yet their fear
Was to my fathers bosom not so dear
As was thy fathers love; (for what he sought,
My loving father found him, to a thought.)
If such as then, Ulysses might but meet
With these proud wooers; all were at his feet
But instant dead men; and their nuptials
Would prove as bitter as their dying galls.
But these things in the Gods knees are reposde,
If his return shall see with wreake inclosde,
These in his house, or he return no more.
And therefore I advise thee to explore
All ways thy self, to set these wooers gone;
To which end give me fit attention;
To morrow into solemn council call
The Greek Heroes; and declare to all
(The Gods being witness) what thy pleasure is:
Command to towns of their natiuities,
These frontlesse wooers. If thy mothers mind,
Stands to her second nuptials, so enclinde;
Return she to her royal fathers towers,
Where the one of these may wed her, and her dowers
Make rich, and such as may consort with grace,
So dear a daughter, of so great a race.
And thee I warn as well, (if thou as well
Wilt hear and follow) take thy best built sail,
With twenty owers manned, and haste t'enquire
Where the abode is of thy absent Sire;
If any can inform thee, or thine ear
From Io^e the fame of his retreat may hear;
(For chiefly Jove gives all that honors men).
To Pylos first be thy addression then
To god-like Nestor. Thence, to Sparta, haste
To gold-lockt Menelaus, who was last
Of all the brasse-armd Greeks that saild from Troy.
And try from both these, if thou can enjoy
News of thy Sires returned life, any where,
Though sad thou sufferst in his search, a year.
If of his death thou hear'st, return thou home;
And to his memory erect a tomb:
Performing parent-rites, of feast and game,
Pompous, and such as best may fit his fame:
And then thy mother a fit husband give.
These past, consider how thou may deprive
Of worthless life, these wooers in thy house;
By open force, or proiects enginous.
Things childish fit not thee; thou art so no more:
Have thou not heard, how all men did adore
Divine Orestes, after he had slain
Aegisthus, murdering by a treacherous train
His famous father? Be then (my most loved)
Valiant and manly; every way approved
As great as he. I see thy person fit*
Noble thy mind, and excellent thy wit;
All given thee, so to use and manage here,
That even past death they may their memories bear.
In mean time I Will descend to ship and men,
That much expect me. Be obseruant then
Of my advice, and careful to maintain
In equal acts thy royal fathers reign.
Telemachus replide: You open (fair Guest)
A friends heart, in your speech; as well expressed,
As might a father serve t'informe his son:
All which* sure place have in my memory won.
Abide yet, though your voyage calls away;
That having bathed; and dignifide your stay
With some more honor; you may yet beside,
Delight your mind, by being gratifide your stay
With some rich Present, taken in your way;
That, as a Jewel, your respect may lay
Up in your treasury; bestowd by me,
As free friends use to guests of such degree.
Detain me not (said she) so much inclinde
To haste my voyage. What thy loved mind
Commands to give; at my return this way,
Bestow on me; that I directly may
Convey it home; which (more of price to me)
The more it asks my recompense to thee.
This said, away gray-eyd Minerua flew,
Like to a mounting Lark; and did endue
His mind with strength and boldness; and much more
Made him, his father long for, then before.
And weighing better who his guest might be,
He stood amazed, and thought a Deity
Was there descended: to whose will he framed
His powers at all parts; and went, so inflamed
Amongst the wooers; who were silent set,
To hear a Poet sing the sad retreat
The Greeks performd from Tr^y: which was from thence
Proclaimd by Pallas, pain of her offense.
When which divine song, was perceived to bear
That mournful subject, by the listening ear
Of wi^e Penelope (Icari^^ seed,
Who from an upper room had given it heed)
Down she descended by a winding staire;
Not solel^; but the State, in her repair,
Two Maids of Honor made. And when this Queen
Of women, stoopt so low, she might be seen
By all her wooers. In the door, aloof
(Entering the Hall, graced with a goodly roof)
She stood, in shade of graceful vailes implide
About her beauties: on her either (...),
Her honored women. When, (to (...) mo^'d) thus
She chid the sacred Singer: (...),
You know a number more of these gre^^ deeds,
Of Gods and men (that are the sacred (...)
And proper subjects of a Poets song,
And those due pleasures that to men belong)
Besides these facts that furnish Tr^is retreat,
Sing one of those to these, that round your ^eate
They may with silence sit, and taste their wine:
But cea^^e this song, that through these ears of mine,
Convey deserved occasion to my heart
Of endless sorrows; of which, the desert
In me, vnmeasur'd is, past all these men;
So endless is the memory I retain;
And so desertfull is that memory
Of such a man, as has a dignity
So broad, it spreds it self through all the pride
Of Greece, and Argos. To the Queen, replide
Inspired Telemachus: Why thus enuies
My mother, him that fits (...). Cantor, cu^us tam a^ta est societas hominibus.
societies
With so much harmony, to let him please
His own mind, in his will to honor these*
For these (...) is an Epithet^ proper to Poets* for their first finding out of
Arts and documents tending to elocution and government: inspired only by Jove:
and are here called the first of men: since first they gave rules to manly
life: and have their informatio^ immediately from Jove; (as Plato in (...)
witnesses) The word deduced from (...), which is taken for (...), qui prim^^
(...) in re: And will (...) then be sufficiently expr^st with ingen^^^^^ then
(...) exposition goes further.
ingenuous, and first sort of men,
That do immediately from Io^e retain
Their singing raptures; are by Jove as well
Inspired with choice, of what their songs impell.
Jove's will is free in it; and therefore theirs;
Nor is this man to blame, that the repaires
The Greeks make homeward, sings: for his fresh Muse,
Men still most celebrate, that sings most news.
And therefore in his note, your ears employ:
For, not Ulysses only lost in Troy
The day of his return; but numbers more,
The deadly ruins of his fortunes bore.
Go you then, In; and take your work in hand;
Your web, and distaffe, and your maids command
To plie their fit work. Words, to men are due,
And those reproving counsels you pursue;
And most, to me, of all men; since I bear
The rule of all things, that are managed here.
She went amazd away; and in her heart,
Laid up the wisdom Pallas did impart
To her loved son so lately; turned again
Up to her chamber; and no more would reign
In manly counsels. To her women, she
Applied her sway; and to the wooers, he
Began new orders; other spirits bewraid
Then those, in spite of which, the wooers swaid.
And (whiles his mothers tears, still washed her eyes,
Till gray Minerua did those tears surprise
With timely sleep; and that her woo'rs did rouse
Rude Tumult up, through all the shadie house,
Disposde to sleep because their widow was)
Telemachus, this new-giuen spirit did pass
On their old insolence: Telemachus in new terms with the wooers.
Ho! you that are
My mothers wooers! much too high ye bear
Your petulant spirits: sit; and while ye may
Enjoy me in your banquets: see ye lay
These loud notes down; nor do this man the wrong,
(Because my mother has dislikt his song)
To grace her interruption: it is a thing
Honest, and honored too, to hear one sing
Numbers so like the Gods in elegance,
As this man flows in. By the mornes (...), prima lu^e.
first light,
I Will call ye all before me, in a Court,
That I may clearly banish your resort
With all your rudeness, from these roofes of mine.
Away; and elsewhere in your feasts combine:
Consume your own goods, and make mutual feast
At eithers house. Or if ye still hold best,
And for your humors more suffised fill,
To feed, to spoil (because unpunished still)
On other findings: spoil; but here I call
The Eternal Gods to witness, if it fall
In my wished reach once, to be dealing wreakes,
(By Jove's high bounty) these your present checks,
To what I give in charge, shall add mo^e reins
To my revenge hereafter; and the pains
Ye then must suffer, shall pass all your pride,
Ever to see redrest, or qualifide.
At this, all bit their lips; and did admire
His words sent from him, with such phrase, and fire:
Which so much moved them; that (...)
( Eupytheus son) cried out: Te^^^achus!
The Gods, I think, have rapt thee to this height
Of elocution; and this great conceit
Of selfe-abilitie. We all may pray,
That I^^e inuest not in this kingdoms sway,
Thy forward forces; which I see put forth
A hot ambition in thee, for thy birth.
Be not offended, Upon this answer of Telemach^s; because it has so sudden a
change; and is so far let down, from his late height of heat; altering and
tempe^ing so co^mandingly* his affecti^ns; I thought not am^sse to insert here
Sponda^us further A^notation, which is this: Prudenter Telemachus ioco, furorem
Antino^ ac alpe rit^^e^ emolli^ Nam ita dictu^ illius interpretatur vt
existimetu^ censere iocose illa euam ab Anti^oo aduersum se pronunciata. Et pri
mum ^ronice se Regem esse exopta^ propter commoda quae Reges solent com^tari.
Ne tamen inuidiam in se ambitionis concitet, testatur ^e regnum Ithacae non
ambire, mortuo Vlysse, cum idalij possidere queant se long praestantiores ac
(...) ait* se moliri, vt propriarum aedium and bonorum solus sit dominus, ij^
exclusis ac eiectis, qui vi illa occup^^^ (...) d^^perdere co^^^tur.
(he replide) if I
Shall say, I would assume this emperie,
If Jove gave leave. You are not he that sings,
The rule of kingd^^es is the worst of things.
Nor is it ill, at all, to sway a throne:
A man may quic^^y gain possession
Of mighty riches; make a wondrous prise
Set of his virtues; but the dignities
That deck a King, there are enough beside
In this circumfluous I Will, that want no pride
To think them worthy of; as young as I,
And old as you are. An ascent so hie,
My thoughts affect not: dead is he that held
Desert of virtue to have so excelled.
But of these turrets, I will take on me
To be the absolute King; and reign as free
As did my father, over all, his hand
Left here, in this house, slaves to my command.
Eurymachus, the son of Polyb^^,
To this, made this reply: Tele^achus!
The Girlond of this kingdom, let the knees
Of deity run for: but the faculties,
This house is seasd of, and the turrets here,
Thou shall be Lord of; nor shall any bear
The least part of, of all thou do possess,
As long as this land is no wilderness,
Nor ruled by out-lawes). But give these their pass,
And tell me (best of Prince) who he was
That guested here so late? from whence? and what
In any region bosted he his state?
His race? his country? Brought he any news
Of thy returning Father? Or for dues
Of moneys to him, made he fit repair?
How suddenly he rusht into the air?
Nor would sustain to stay, and make him known?
His Port showed no debaucht companion.
He answered: Thereturne of my loved Sire,
Is past all hope; and should rude Fame inspire
From any place, a flattring messenger,
With news of his suruiuall; he should bear
No least belief off, from my desperate love.
Which if a sacred Prophet should approve,
(Called by my mother for her cares unrest)
It should not move me. For my late fair guest,
He was of old my Fathers: touching here
From Sea-girt Taphos; and for name does bear
Mentas; the son of wise Anchialus;
And gouernes all the Taphians, studious
Of Navigations. This he said: but knew
It was a Goddess. These again withdrew
To dances, and attraction of the song.
And while their pleasures did the time prolong,
The sable Even descended; and did steep
The lids of all men in desire of sleep.
Telemachus, into a room built hie,
Of his illustrous Court; and to the eye
Of circular prospect; to his bed ascended;
And in his mind, much weighty thought contended.
Before him, Euryclaea (that well knew
All the observance of a handmaids due,
Daughter to Opis Pysenorides)
Bore two bright torches. Who did so much please
Laertes in her prime; that for the price
Of twenty Oxen, he made merchandise
Of her rare beauties; and Loves equal flame
To her he felt, as to his nuptial Dame.
Yet never durst he mix with her in bed;
So much the anger of his wife he fled.
She, now grown old, to young Telemach^s
Two torches bore; and was obsequious,
Past all his other maids; and did apply
Her service to him, from his infancy.
His wel-built chamber, reached; she op't the door;
He, on his bed sat. The soft weeds he wore,
Put off; and to the diligent old maid
Gave all; who fitly all in thick folds laid,
And hung them on a beame-pin near the bed;
That round about was rich embrodered.
Then made she haste forth from him; and did bring
The door together with a silver ring;
And by a string, a bar to it did pull.
He, laid, and couerd well with cu^led wool,
Wouen in silk quilts: all night emploid his mind
About the task that Pallas had designed.
Finis libri primi Him. Odyss.
THE SECOND BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
TElemachus to Court does call*
The wooers; and commands them all
To leave his house* and, taking then
From wise Minerua, ship and men;
And all things fit for him beside,
That Euryclaea could provide
For sea-rites, till he found his Sire;
He hoists sail, when heaven stoopes his fire.
Another.
(...).
The old Maids store
The voyage cheres;
The ship leaves shore,
Minerua steres.

NOw when with rosy fingers, the early borne,
And, thrown through all the air, appeared the mo^e;
Ulysses loved son from his bed appeard;
His weeds put on; and did about him gird
His sword, that thwart his shoulders hung; and tied
To his fair feet, fair shoes; and all parts plied
For speedy readiness; who when he trod
The open earth, to men, showed like a God.
The Heralds then, he strait charged to consort
The curld-head Greeks, with loud calls to a Court.
They summoned; The Greeks called to council by Telemach^^.
the other came, in utmost haste;
Who, all assembld, and in one heap placed;
He likewse came to council; and did bear
In his fai^e hand, his iron-headed spear:
Nor came alone; nor with men troops prepared;
But two fleet dogs, made, both his train, and Guard.
Pallas supplied with her high wisdoms grace,
(That all men's wants supplies) States painted face.
His entering presence, all men did admire;
Who took seat in the high throne of his Sire;
To which the grave Peers gave him reverend way.
Amongst whom, an Egyptian Hero,
(Crooked with age, and full of skill) begun
The speech to all. Who had a loved son,
That with divine Ulysses did ascend
His hollow fleet to Troy: to serve which end,
He kept fair horse, and was a man at Arms;
And in the cruel Cyclops stern alarmes,
His life lost by him, in his hollow cave;
Whose entrails opened his abhorred grave;
And made of him (of all Ulysses train)
His latest supper, being latest slain.
His name was Antip^us. And this old man,
This crooked grown; this wise Egyptian,
Had three sons more; of which, one riotous,
A wooer was, and called (...);
The other two, took both, his own wished course.
Yet, both the best fates, weighd not down the worse;
But left the old man mindful still of moan;
Who, weeping, thus bespake the Session:
Hear, Ithacensia^s, all I fitly say;
Since our divine Ulysses parting day
Never was council called, nor session;
And now, by whom is this thus undergone?
Whom did Necessity so much compel,
Of young or old? Has any one heard tell
Of any coming army; that he thus now
May openly take boldness to a^ow?
First having heard it. Or will any here
Some motion for the public good prefer?
Some worth of note there is in this command;
And, me thinks, it must be some good man's hand
That Is put to it: that either has direct
Means to assist; or, for his good affect,
Hopes to be happy in the proof he makes;
And that, Jove grant, what ere he undertakes.
Telemachus (rejoicing much to hear
The good hope, and opinion men did bear
Of his young actions) no longer ^at;
But longd t'approue, what this man pointed at;
And make his first proof, in a cause so good:
And in the Councels chief place, Telemachus proposes his estate to the
Greeks.
up he stood;
When strait, Pysenor (Herald to his Sire,
And learnd in counsels) felt his heart on fire,
To hear him speak; and put into his hand
The Scepter that his Father did command;
Then (to the old Egyptian turned) he spoke:
Father, not far he is, that undertook
To call this council; whom you soon shall know.
My self, whose wrongs, my griefs will ma^e me show,
Am he that author'd this assembly here;
Nor have I heard of any army near;
Of which, being first told, I might iterate;
Nor for the public good, can aught, rela^^*
Only mine own affairs all this procure,
That in my house a double ill endure;
One, having lost a Father so renownd,
Whose kind rule once, with your command was crowned:
The other is, what much more does augment
His weighty loss, the ruin imminent
Of all, my house by it, my goods all spent.
And of all this, the wooers, that are sons
To our chief Peers, are the Confusions:
Importuning my Mothers marriage
Against her will; nor dares their bloods bold rage
Go to Icarius, her fathers Court,
That, his will asked, in kind and comely sort,
He may endow his daughter with a dowre;
And, she consenting, at his pleasures power,
Dispose her to a man, that (thus behau'd)
May have fit grace; and see her honor saved;
But these, in none but my house, all their lives
Resolve to spend; slaughtring my sheep and beeues;
And with my fattest goats, lay feast on feast;
My generous wine, consuming as they list.
A world of things they spoil; here wanting one,
That like Ulysses, quickly, could set gone
These peace-plagues from his house, that spoil like war.
Whom my powers are unfit, to urge so far,
My self immartiall. But had I the power,
My will should serve me, to exempt this hour
From out my life time. For past patience,
Base deeds are done here, that exceed defense
Of any honor. Falling is my house,
Which you should shame to see so ruinous.
Reverence the censures, that all good men give,
That dwell about you; and for fear to live
Exposde to heavens wrath (that does ever pay
Pains, for joys forfait) even by Jove I pray
Or Themis; both which, powers have to restrain
Or gather Councels; that ye will abstain
From further spoil; and let me only waste
In that most wretched grief I have embraced
For my lost Father. And though I am free
From meriting your outrage; yet, if he
(Good man) has ever, with a hostile heart
Done ill to any Greek; on me convert
Your like hostility; and vengeance take
Of his ill, on my life; and all these, make
Join in that justice; but to see abusde
Those goods that do none ill, but being ill used,
Exceeds all right. Yet better it is for me,
My whole possessions, and my rents to see
Consumed by you; then lose my life and all;
For on your rapine a revenge may fall,
While I live; and so long I may complain
About the City; till my goods again
(Often asked) may be with all amends repaid.
But in the mean space, your mis-rule has laid
Griefs on my bosom, that can only speak,
And are denied the instant power of wreake.
This said; his Scepter against the ground he threw,
And tears stilled from him; which moved all the crew:
The Court struck silent; not a man did dare
To give a word, that might offend his ^are.
Antinous only, in this sort replied:
High-spoken, Antinous to Telemachus.
and of spirit vnpacified;
How have you shamed us, in this speech of yours?
Will you brand us, for an offense not ours?
Your mother (first in craft) is first in cause.
Three years are past, and near, the fourth now draws,
Since first she mocked the Peers Achaian.
All, she made hope, and promised every man:
Sent for us ever; left loves show in naught;
But in her heart, conceald another thought.
Besides, (as curious in her craft) her loo^e
She with a web charged, hard to overcome;
And thus bespake us: The wile of Penelope to her wooers.
Youths that seek my bed;
Since my divine Spouse rests among the dead,
Hold on your suites, but till I end, at most
This funeral weed; lest what is done, be lost.
Besides, I purpose, that when th'austere fate
Of bitter death, shall take into his state,
Lae^tes the Hero; it shall deck
His royal corse; since I should suffer check
In ill report, of every common dame,
If one so rich, should show in death his shame.
This speech she used; and this did soon persuade
Our gentle minds. But this, a work she made
So hugely long; Telam Penelopes retexere, Prouerbium.
undoing still in night
(By torches) all, she did by days broad light;
That three years her deceit, diu'd past our view;
And made us think, that all she faind, was true.
But when the fourth year came; and those ^lie hours,
That still surprise at length, Dames craftiest powers;
One of her women, that knew all, disclosde
The secret to us; that she still vnlosde
Her whole days fair affair, in depth of night.
And then, no further she could force her slight,
But, of necessity, her work gave end.
And thus, by me, does every other friend,
Professing love to her, reply to thee;
That even thy self, and all Greeks else may see,
That we offend not in our stay, but she.
To free thy house then, send her to her Sire;
Commanding that her choice be left entire
To his election, and one settled will.
Nor let her vex with her illusions still,
Her friends that woo her; standing on her wit;
Because wise Pallas has given wiles to it,
So full of Art; and made her understand
All works, in fair skill of a Ladies hand.
But (for her working mind) we read of none
Of all the old world; in which Greece has shown
Her rarest pieces, that could equal her:
Tyro, Alcmena, and Mycena were
To hold comparison in no degree
(For solid brain) with wise Penelope.
And yet in her delays of us, she shows
No profits skill, with all the wit she owes;
For all this time, thy goods and victuals go
To utter ruin; and shall ever so
While thus the Gods, her glorious mind dispose.
Glory, her self may gain; but thou shall lose
Thy longings even for necessary food;
For we will never go, where lies our good;
Nor any other where; till this delay
She puts on all, she quits with th'endlesse stay
Of some one of us; that to all the rest
May give free farewell with his nuptial feast.
The wise young Prince replide: Antinous! Telemachus to Antinous.

I may by no means turn out of my house,
Her that has brought me forth, and nourisht me.
Besides: if quick or dead my Father be
In any region, yet abides in doubt.
And twill go hard, (my means being so run out)
To tender to Icarius again
(If he again, my mother must maintain
In her retreat) the dowre she brought with her.
And then, a double ill it will confer,
Both from my Father, and from God, on me;
When (thrust out of her house) on her bent knee,
My Mother shall the horrid Furies raise
With imprecations: and all men dispraise
My part in her exposure. Never then
Will I perform this counsel. If your spleen
Swell at my courses; once more I command
Your absence from my house. Some others hand
Charge with your banquets. On your own goods ^ate;
And either other mutually entreat,
At either of your houses, with your feast.
But if ye still esteem more sweet and best,
Another spoil; The word is (...) signifying, insatiabili quadam edacitate
vo^o.
so you still wreaklesse live:
Gnaw (vermine-like) things ^acred: no laws give
To your devouring; it remains that I
Inuoke each everliving Deity;
And vow if Jove shall daigne in any date,
Power of like pains, for pleasures so past rate;
From thenceforth look, where ye have reueld so,
Vnwreakt, your ruins, all shall undergo.
Thus spoke Telemachus, Augurium.
t'assure whose threat,
Farre-seeing Jove, upon their pinions set
Two Eagles from the high brows of a hill;
That, mounted on the winds, together still
Their strokes extended. But arriving now
Amidst the Council; over every brow,
Shook their thick wings; and (threatening deaths cold fears)
Their necks and cheeks tore with their eager Seres.
Then, on the Courts right hand away they flew,
Above both Court and City: with whose view
And study what events they might fore^ell,
The Council into admiration fell.
The old Her^e, Halitherses Halitherses an Augur.
then,
The son of Nestor; that of all old men
(His Peers in that Court) only could foresee
By flight of fowls, man's fixed destiny;
Twixt them and their amaze, this interposde:
Hear ( Ithacensians) all your doubts disclosde;
The wooers most are touched in this ostent,
To whom are dangers great and imminent.
For now, not long more shall Ulysses bear
Lack of his most loved; but fills some place near,
Addressing to these wooers, Fa^e and Death.
And many more, this mischief menaceth
Of us inhabiting this famous I Will.
Let us consult yet, in this long forewhile,
How to our selves we may prevent this ill.
Let these men rest secure, and revel still:
Though they might find it safer, if with us
They would in time prevent what threats them thus:
Since not without sure trial, I foretell
These coming storms; but know their issue well.
For to Ulysses, all things have event,
As I foretold him; when for Ili^n went
The whole Greek fleet together; and with them,
Th'abundant in all counsels, took the stream.
I told him, that when much ill he had past,
And all his men were lost; he should at last,
The twentieth year turn home; to all unknown;
All which effects are to perfection grown.
Eurymachus, the son of Polybus,
Opposde this man's presage, and answered thus:
Hence, Eurymachus excepts against the prophecy.
Great in years; go, prophecy at home;
Thy children teach to shun their ils to come.
In these, superior far to thee, am I.
A world of fowls beneath the Sunne-beames fly,
That are not fit t'enforme a prophecy.
Besides, Ulysses perished long ago,
And would thy fates to thee had destined so;
Since so, thy so much prophecy had spared
Thy wronging of our rights; which for reward
Expected, home with thee, has summoned us
Within the anger of Telemachus.
But this will I presage, which shall be true,
If any spark of anger, chance t'ensue
Thy much old art, in these deep Auguries,
In this young man incensed by thy lies;
Even to himself, his anger shall confer
The greater anguish; and thine own ends err
From all their objects: and besides, thine age
Shall feel a pain, to make thee curse presage,
With worthy cause, for it shall touch thee near.
But I will soon give end to all our fear,
Preventing whatsoever chance can fall,
In my suite to the young Prince, for us all
To send his mother to her fathers house,
That he may sort her out a worthy spouse;
And such a dowre bestow, as may befit
One loved, to leave her friends, and follow it.
Before which course be, I believe that none
Of all the Greeks will cease the ambition
Of such a match. For, chance what can to us,
We, no man fear; no not Telemachus,
Though never so greatly spoken. Nor care we
For any threats of austere prophecy
Which thou (old dotard) vantst of so in vain.
And thus shall thou in much more hate remain;
For still the Gods shall bear their ill expense;
Nor ever be disposde by competence,
Till with her nuptials, she dismiss our suites.
Our whole lives days shall sow hopes for such fruits.
Her virtues we contend to; nor will go
To any other, be she never so
Worthy of us, and all the worth we owe.
He answered him: Eurymach^s! and all
Ye generous wooers, Telemachus to the w^oers.
now, in general;
I see your brave resolves; and will no more
Make speech of these points; and much less, implore.
It is enough, that all the Grecians here,
And all the Gods besides, just witness bear,
What friendly premonitions have been spent
On your forbearance; and their vain event.
Yet with my other friends, let love prevail
To fit me with a vessel, free of sail;
And twenty men; that may divide to me
My ready passage through the yielding sea.
For Sparta, and Amathoon Pylos shore
I now am bound; in purpose to explore
My long lackt Father; and to try if Fame
(Or Jove, most author of man's honored name)
With his return and life, may glad mine ear;
Though toild in that proof, I sustain a year.
If dead, I hear him, nor of more state; here
(Retired to my loved count^ie) I will rere
A Sepulcher to him, and celebrate
Such royal parent-rites, as fits his state.
And then, my mother to a Spouse dispose.
This said, he sat; and to the rest, arose
Mentor, Mentor for Telemachus.
that was Ulysses chosen friend;
To whom, when he set forth, he did commend
His complete family; and whom he willd
To see the mind of his old Sire fulfild;
All things conseruing safe, till his retreat;
Who (tender of his charge; and seeing so set
In slight care of their King, his subjects there;
Suffering his son, so much contempt to bear)
Thus gravely, and with zeal to him began:
No more, let any Scepter-bea^ing man,
Beneuolent, or mild, or humane be;
Nor in his mind, form acts of piety,
But ever feed on blood; and facts unjust
Commit, even to the full swinge of his lust;
Since of divine Ulysses, no man now
Of all his subjects, any thought does show.
All whom, he gouernd; and became to them
(Rather then one that wore a diadem)
A most indulgent father. But (for all
That can touch me) within no envy fall
These insolent wooers; that in violent kind,
Commit things foul, by the will wit of the mind;
And with the hazard of their heads, devour
Ulysses house; since his returning hour,
They hold past hope. But it affects me much,
(Ye dull plebeians) that all this does touch
Your free States nothing; who (struck dumb) afford
These wooers, not so much wreake as a word;
Though few, and you, with only number might
Extinguish to them, the profaned light.
Euenors son ( Liocritus) replide; Li^critus to Mentor.

Mentor! the railer, made a fool with pride;
What language give thou? that would quiet us,
With putting us in storm? exciting thus
The rout against us? who, though more then we,
Should find it is no easy victory
To drive men, habited in feast, from feasts;
No not if Ithacus himself, such guests
Should come and find so furnishing his Court,
And hope to force them from so sweet a fort.
His wife should little joy in his arrive,
Though much she wants him: for, where she, alive
Would hers enjoy; there Death should claim his rights:
He must be conquered, that with many fights.
Tho^ speakst unfit things. To their labors then
Disperse these people; and let these two men
( Mentor and Halitherses) that so boast,
From the beginning to have gouernd most
In friendship of the Father; to the son
Confirm the course, he now affects to run.
But my mind says, that if he would but use
A little patience; he should here hear news
Of all things that his wish would understand;
But no good hope for, of the course in hand.
This said; the Council rose; when every Peer
And all the people, in dispersion were
To houses of their own; the wooers yet
Made to Ulysses house their old retreat.
Telemachus, apart from all the prease,
Prepared to shore; and (in the aged seas,
His fair hands washed) did thus to Pallas pray: Telemachus prays to Pallas.

Hear me (O Goddess) that but yesterday
Did daigne access to me at home; and lay
Grave charge on me, to take ship, and enquire
Along the dark seas for mine absent Sire;
Which all the Greeks oppose; amongst whom, most
Those that are proud still at another cost,
Past measure, and the civil rights of men,
(My mothers wooers) my repulse maintain.
Thus spoke he praying; when close to him came
Pallas, resembling Mentor, both in frame
Of voice and person; and aduisde him thus:
Those wooers well might know; Minerua in the person of Mentor* exh^rts to the
voyage.
Telemachus*
Thou will not ever weak and childish be;
If to thee be instilld the faculty
Of mind and body, that thy Father graced.
And if (like him) there be in thee enchac't
Virtue to give words works, and works their end;
This voyage, that to them thou did commend
Shall not so quickly, as they idly ween,
Be vain, or given up, for their opposite spleen.
But if Ulysses, nor Penelope
Were thy true parents; I then hope in thee
Of no more urging thy attempt in hand;
For few, that rightly bred on both sides stand,
Are like their parents; many that are worse;
And most-few, better. Those then that the nurse,
Or mother call true borne; yet are not so;
Like worthy Sires, much less are like to grow.
But thou shewst now, that in thee fades not quite
Thy Fathers wisdom; and that future light
Shall therefore show thee far from being unwise,
Or touched with stain of bastard cowardice.
Hope therefore says, that thou will to the end
Pursue the brave act, thou did erst intend.
But for the foolish wooers, they bewray
They neither counsel have, nor so^le; since they
Are neither wise nor just; and so must needs
Rest ignorant, how black above their heads
Fate houers, holding Death; that one sole day
Will make enough to make them all away.
For thee; the way thou wishest, shall no more
Fly thee a step; I that have been before
Thy Fathers friend; thine likewise now will be;
Provide thy ship my self, and follow thee.
Go thou then home, and sooth each woo^rs vain;
But under hand, fit all things for the Maine;
Wine, in as strong and sweet casks as you can;
And meal, the very marrow of a man;
Which put in good sure lether sacks; and see
That with sweet food, sweet vessels still agree.
I, from the people, strait will press for you
Free voluntaries; and (for ships) ^now
Sea-circl'd Ithaca contains, both new
And old built; all which, I Will exactly view,
And choose what one soever most does please;
Which riggd, we will strait lanch, and assay the seas.
This spoke I^^es daughter, Pallas; whose voice heard;
No more Telemachus her charge deferd;
But hasted home; and, sad at heart, did see
Amidst his Hall, the insulting wooers flea
Goats, and roast swine. Mo^gst whom, Antinous
Careless, (discovering in Telemachus
His grudge to see them) laughed; met; took his hand,
And said; Antinous to Telemachus.
High spoken! with the mind so mannd;
Come, do as we do; put not up your spirits
With these low trifles; nor our loving merits,
In gall of any hateful purpose, sleep;
But eat egregiously, and drink as deep.
The things thou think on, all, at full shall be
By the Achiues thought on, and performd to thee:
Ship, and choice Oars, that in a trice will land
Thy hasty Fleet, on heavenly Pylos sand;
And at the fame of thy illustrous Sire.
He answered: Telemachus answers.
Men whom Pride does so inspire,
Are no fit consorts for an humble guest;
Nor are constraind men, merry at their fea^t.
Is It not enough, that all this time ye have
Op't in your entrails, my chief goods a grave?
And while I was a child, made me partake?
My now more growth, more grown my mind does make:
And (hearing speak, more judging men then you)
Perceive how much I was misgouernd now.
I now will try, if I can bring ye home
An ill Fate to consort you; if it come
From Pylos, or amongst the people, here.
But thither I resolve; and know that there
I shall not touch in vain. Nor will I stay,
Though in a merchants ship I ^tere my way:
Which shows in your sights best* since me ye know
Incapable of ship, or men to row.
This said; his hand he coily snatched away
From forth Antinous hand. The rest, the day
Spent through the house with banquets; ^ome with jests,
And some with railings, dignifying the^^ feasts.
To whom, a iest-proud youth, the wit began:
Telemachus will kill us every man.
From Sparta, or the very Pyltan sand,
He will raise aides to his impetuous hand. The wi^ of the wooers upon the
purpose of Telemachus to seek his Father.

O he affects it strangely! Or he means
To search Ephyras fat shores; and from thence
Bring deathfull poisons; which amongst our bow'ls
Will make a general shipwreck of our souls.
Another said: Alas who knows, but he
Once gone; and erring like his Sire at sea,
May perish like him, far from aid of friends?
And so he makes us work; for all the ends
Left of his goods here, we shall share; the house
Left to his mother, and her chosen (...).
Thus they. While he a room ascended, hie
And large, built by his Father; where did lie
Gold and brass heapt up; and in coffers were
Rich robes; great store of (...); and there
Stood Tuns of sweet old wines, along the wall;
Neat and divine drink, kept ^o cheer withal
Ulysses old heart, if he turned again
From labors fatal to him to sustain.
The doors of Planke were; their close exquisite,
Kept with a double key; and day and night
A woman locked within; and that was she,
Who all trust had for her sufficiency.
Old Euryclea, (one of Opis ^ace,
Son to Pise^^r, and in passing grace
With gray Miner^^:) Telemachus to Euryciea.
her, the Prince did call;
And said, Nurse! draw me the most sweet of all
The wine thou keepst; next that, which for my Sire,
Thy care reserues, in hope he shall retire.
Twelve vessels fill me forth, and stop them well.
Then into well-sewd sacks, of fine ground meal,
Power twenty measures. No^ to any one
But thou thy self, let this desig^e be known.
All this see got together; I, it all
In night will fetch off, when my mother shall
Ascend her high room, and for ^^eepe prepare.
Sparta and Pylos, I must see, in care
To find my Father. Out Euryclea cried,
And asked with tears: Eurycleas answer.
Why is your mind applied
(Dear son) to this course? whither will you go?
So far off leave us? and beloved so?
So only? and the sole hope of your race?
Royal Ulysses, far from the embrace
Of his kind country; in a land unknown
Is dead; and you (from your loved country go^e)
The wooers will with some deceit assay
To your destruction; making then their prey
Of all your goods. Where, in your own y'^re strong,
Make sure abode. It fits (...) you so young,
To suffer so much by the aged feas,
And err in such a waylesse wilderness.
Be cheered (loved nurse, Telemachus comforts Euryclea.
said he) for not witho^t
The will of God, go my attempts about.
Swear therefore, not to wound my mothers ears
With word of this; before from heaven appears
Th'ele^enth or twelfth light; or her self shall please
To ask of me; or hears me put to seas;
Lest her fair body, with her woe ^e wore.
To this, the great oath of the Gods, she swore;
Which, having sworn; and of it, every due
Performd to full: to vessels, wine she drew;
And into well-sewd sacks powered foodie meal;
In mean time he (with cunning to conceal
All thought of this from others) himself bore
In broad house, with the wooers, as before.
Then grey-eyd Pallas, The care of Minerua for Telemachus.
other thoughts did own;
And (like Telemachus) trod through the Town;
Commanding all his men, in th'euen to be
Aboard his ship. Again then questioned she
Normon (famed for aged Phronius son)
About his ship; who, all things to be done,
Assured her freely should. The Sun then set,
And sable shadows slid through every street,
When forth they lancht; and soon aboard did bring
All Arms, and choice of every needful thing,
That fits a well-riggd ship. The Goddess then
Stood in the Ports extreme part; where, her men
(Nobly appointed) thick about her came,
Whose every breast, she did with spirit inflame.
Yet still fresh proiects, laid the grey-eyd Dame.
Strait, to the house she hasted; and sweet sleep
Powered on each wooer; which so laid in steep
Their drowsy temples, that each brow did nod,
As all were drinking; and each hand his lode
(The cup) let fall. All start up, and to bed;
Nor more would watch, when sleep so surfeted
Their leaden ey-lids. Then did Pallas call
Telemachus, (in body, voice, and all
Resembling Mentor) from his native nest:
And said, that all his armed men were addressed
To use their Oars; and all expected now
He should the spirit of a soldier show.
Come then (said she) no more let us defer
Our honored action. Then she took on her
A ravished spirit, and led as she did leap;
And he her most haste, took out, step by step.
Arrived at sea, and ship; they found ashore
The soldiers, that their fashiond long hair wore;
To whom, Telemachus to his soldiers.
the Prince said: Come, my friends; let us bring
Our voyages provision: every thing
Is heapt together in our Court; and none
(No not my mother, nor her maids) but one
Knows our intention. This expressed; he led;
The soldiers close together followed;
And all together brought aboard their store.
Aboard the Prince went; Pallas still before
Sat at the Stern: he close to her; the men
Up, hasted after. He, and Pallas then,
Put from the shore. His soldiers then he ^ad
See all their Arms fit; which they heard; and had.
A beechen Mast then, Nauigatur.
in the hollow base
They put, and hoisted; fixed it in his place
With cables; and with well-wreath'd halsers hoise
Their white sails; which gray Pallas now employes
With full and fore-gales, through the dark deep maine.
The purple waves (so swift cut) roared again
Against the ship sides, (...).
that now ran, and plowd
The rugged seas up. Then the men bestowd
Their Arms about the ship; and sacrifice
With crowned wine cups, to th'endlesse Deities,
They offered up* Of all yet throned above,
They most observed the grey-eyd seed of Jove:
Who from the evening, till the morning rose,
And all day long, their voyage did dispose.
Finis libri secundi Ho^. Odyss.
THE THIRD BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
TElemachus, and heavens Pallas.
wise Dame,
That never husband had, now came
To Nestor; who, his either guest
Received at the religious feast
He made to Neptune, on his shore.
And there told, what was done before
The Trojan turrets; and the state
Of all the Greeks, since Ilions fate.
This book, these Vid. Minerua, Nestor, and Telemachus.
three of greatest place,
Does serve with many a varied grace.
(Which past); Minerua takes her leave.
Whose state, when Nestor does perceive;
With sacrifice he makes it known,
Where many a pleasing rite is shown.
Which done, Telemachus had gaind
A chariot of him; who ordaind
Pisistratus, his son, his guide
To Sparta; and when starrie eyd
The ample heaven began to be;
All house-rites to afford them free
(In Pheris) Diocles did please;
His surname Ortilochides.
Another.
(...).
Ulysses son
With Nestor lies;
To Sparta gone,
Thence Pallas flies.

THe Sun now left the great and goodly Lake,
And to the firm heaven, bright ascent did make,
To shine as well upon the mortal birth,
Inhabiting the plowd life-giuing earth,
As on the ever tredders upon Death.
And now to Pylos, that so garnisheth
Her self with buildings; old Neleus town,
The Prince and Goddess come; had strange sights shown;
For on the Marine shore, the people there
To Neptune, that the Azure ^ockes does wear;
Be^ues that were wholly black, gave holy flame.
Nine seats of State they made to his high name;
And every Seat set with five hundred men;
And each five hundred, was to furnish then
With nine black Oxen, every sacred Seat.
These, of the entrails only, pleased to eat;
And to the God enflamed the fleshie thies.
By this time Pallas, with the sparkling eyes,
And he she led, within the ha^en bore:
Struck sail, Minerua to Tele^^ac^us.
cast anchor, and trod both the shore.
She first; he after. Then said Pallas: Now
No more befits thee the least bashful brow;
Tembolde^ which, this act is put on thee
To seek thy Father, both at shore, and sea:
And learn in what Clime, he abides so close;
Or in the power of what Fate does repose.
Come then; go right to Nest^r; let us see,
If in his bosom any counsel be,
That may inform us. Pray him not to trace
The common courtship; and to speak in grace
Of the Demander; but to tell the truth:
Which will delight him; and commend thy youth
For such prevention; for he loves no lies;
Nor will report them, being truly wise.
He answered: Telemachus to Minerua.
Me^t^r! how alas shall I
Present my self? how greet his gravity?
My youth by no means that ripe form affords,
That can digest my minds instinct, in words
Wise, and beseeming the ears of one so sage.
Youth of most hope, blush to use words with Age.
She said: Thy mind will some conceit impresse,
And something God will prompt thy towardness.
For I suppose, thy birth and breeding too,
Were not in spite of what the Gods could do.
This said, she swiftly went before, and he
Her steps made guides, and followd instantly.
When soon they reached the Pyli^^ throngs and seats,
Where Nestor with his sons sat; and the meats
That for the feast served; round about them were
Adherents dressing all their sacred cheer,
Being roast and boyld meats. When the Pylia^s saw
These strangers come: in thrust did all men draw
About their entry. They are rec^iued as guests.
Took their hands, and praid
They both would sit. Their entry first assaid
By Nestors son, Pisistratus. In grace
Of whose repair, he gave them honored place
Betwixt his Si^e, and brother Thrasi^^d,
Who sat at feast, on soft Fels that were spread
Along the sea sands. Keru'd, and reached to them
Parts of the inwards; and did make a stream
Of spritely wine, into a golden boule;
Which to Minerua, with a gentle soul
He gave, and thus spoke: Ere you eat, fair guest,
Inuoke the Seas King; The (...) of Pis^strat^^ to strangers.
of whose sacred feast,
Your travel hither, makes ye partners now:
When (sacrificing, ^s becomes) bestow
This boule of sweet wine on your friend, that he
May likewise use these rites of piety:
For I suppose, his youth does prayers use,
Since all men need the Gods. But you I choose
First in this cups disposure; since his years
Seem short of yours; who more like me appears.
Thus gave he her the cup of pleasant wine;
And since a wise and just man did design
The golden boule first to her free receipt;
Even to the Goddess it did add delight.
Who thus inuokt: Hear thou whose vast embrace
Enspheres the whole earth; nor disdain thy grace Minerua^ grace.

To us that ask it, in performing this:
To Nestor first, and these fair sons of his,
Vo^chsafe all honor: and next them, bestow
On all these Pylia^s, that have offered now
This most renowned Hecatomb to thee,
Remuneration fit for them, and free;
And lastly daigne Telemachus, and me,
(The work performd, for whose effect we came)
Our safe return, both with our ship and fame.
Thus praid she; and her self, her self obaid;
In the end performing all for which she praid.
And now to pray, and do as she had done;
She gave the fair round boule to Ulysses son.
The meat then dressed, and drawn, and served t'each guest;
They celebrated a most sumptuous feast.
When (appetite to wine and food allaid)
Horse-taming Nestor Nestor to the strangers.
then began, and said:
Now life's desire is served, as far as fare;
Time fits me to enquire, what guests these are.
Fair guests, what are ye? and for what Coast tries
Your ship the moist deepes? For fit merchandise,
Or rudely coast ye, like our men of prize?
The rough seas tempting; desperately erring
The ill of others, in their good conferring?
The wise Prince, now his boldness did begin;
For Pallas self had hardened him within;
By this device of travel to explore
His absent Father; which two Girlonds wore;
His good, by manage of his spirits; and then
To gain him high grace, in th'accounts of men.
O Nestor! Telemachus answers.
still in whom (...) lives!
And all the glory of the Greeks ^uruiues;
You ask, from whence we are; and I relate:
From Ithaca (whose seat is sit^ate
Where Neius the renowned Mountain reares
His haughty forehead; and the honor bears
To be our Sea-marke) wea^^aid the waves;
The business I must tell; our own good (...),
And not the public. I am come t'enquire,
If in the fame that best men does inspire,
Of my most-suffering Father, I may hear
Some truth of his estate (...)
The name (being joined in fight with you alone)
To even with earth the height of (...)*
Of all men else, that any name did ^eare,
And fought for Troy, the several ends we hear;
But his death, Jove keeps from the world unknown;
The certain fame thereof, being told by none.
If on the Continent, by enemies slain;
Or with the waves eat, of the ravenous Maine.
For his love it is, that to your knees I sue;
That you would please, out of your own clear view,
T'assure his sad end; or say, if your ear
Has heard of the unhappy wanderer,
To too much sorrow, whom his mother bore.
You then, by all your bounties I implore,
(If ever to you, deed or word has stood,
By my good Father promised, renderd good
Amongst the Trojans; where ye both have tried
The Grecian sufferance) that, in naught applied
To my respect or pity, you will gloss,
But vnclothd Truth, to my desi^es disclose.
O my much loved, Nestor to Telemachus.
(said he) since you renew
Remembrance of the miseries that grew
Upon our still-in-strength-opposing Gr^ece,
Amongst Troys people; I must touch a p^^ce
Of all our woes there; either in the m^n
Achilles brought by sea, and led to gain
About the Country; or in us that fought
About the City, where to death were b^ought
All our chief men, as many as were th^^e.
There Mars-like Ajax lies; Achilles there;
There the-in-counsell-like-the Gods; his Patroclus.
^riend;
There my dear son Antilochus (...);
Past measure swift of foot, and staid in fight.
A number more, that ils felt infinite:
Of which to reckon all, what mortal man
(If five or six years you should stay here) can
Serve such inquiry? You would back again,
Affected with insufferable pain,
Before you heard it. Nine years siegd we them,
With all the depth and sleight of stratagem
That could be thought. Ill knit to ill, past end:
Yet still they toild us: nor would yet Jove send
Rest to our labors: nor will scarcely yet.
But no man lived, that would in public set
His wisdom, by Ulysses policy,
(As thought his equal) so excessiuely
He stood superior all ways. If you be
His son indeed; mine eyes even ravish me
To admiration. And in all consent,
Your speech puts on his speeches ornament.
Nor would one say, that one so young could use
(Unless his son) a Rhetorique so profuse.
And while we lived together; he and I
Never in speech maintaind diversity:
Nor set in counsel: but (by one soul led)
With spirit and prudent counsel furnished
The Greeks at all hours: that with fairest course,
What best became them, they might put in force.
But when Troys high Towers, we had leueld thus;
We put to sea; and God divided us.
And then did Jove, our sad retreat devise;
For all the Greeks were neither just nor wise;
And therefore many felt so sharp a-fate;
Sent from Mineruas most pernicious hate;
Whose mighty Father can do fearful things.
By whose help she, betwixt the brother Kings
Let fall Contention: De Graecorum dissidio.
who in council met
In vain, and timelesse; when the Sun was set;
And all the Greeks called; that came chargd with wine.
Yet then the Kings would utter their design;
And why they summond. Menelaus, he
Put all in mind of home; and cried, To sea.
But Agam^mnon stood on contraries;
Whose will was, they should stay and sacrifise
Whole Hecatombs to Pallas; to forgo
Her high wrath to them. Fool, that did not know
She would not so be won: for not with ease
The Eternal Gods are turned from what they please.
So they (divided) on foul language stood.
The Greeks, in huge rout rose: their wine-heate blood,
Two ways affecting. And that nights sleep too,
We turned to studying either others woe.
When Jove besides, made ready woes enough.
Moan came, we lancht; and in our ships did stow
Our goods, Discors nauigatio Graecorum.
and faire-girt women. Half our men
The peoples guide ( Atrides) did contain;
And half (being now aboard) put forth to ^ea.
A most free gale gave all ships prosperous way.
God settld then the huge whale-bearing lake;
And Tenedos we reached; where, for times sake,
We did divine rites to the Gods: but I^ue
(Inexorable still) bore yet no ^oue
To our return; but did again excite
A second sad Contention, that turned quite
A great part of us back to sea again;
Which were, th'abundant in all counsels men,
(Your matchless Father) who, (to gratify
The great Atrides) back to him did fly.
But I fled all, with all that followd me;
Because I knew, God studied misery,
To hurl amongst us. With me likewise fled
Martial Tidides. I, the men he led,
Gat to go with him. Winds our fleet did bring
To Lesbos, where the yellow-headed King
(Though late, yet) found us: as we put to choice
A tedious voyage; if we sail should hoise^
Above rough Chi^s (left on our left hand)
To th'Ile of Psiria; or that rugged land
Sail under; and for windy (...) stere.
We asked of God, that some oftent might clear
Our cloudie business: who gave us ^igne,
And charge, that all should (in a middle line)
The sea cut, for Eub^ea; that with speed,
Our long-sustaind infortune might be freed.
Then did a whistling wind begin to rise,
And swiftly flew we through the fishie skies,
Till to Ger^^stus we, in night were brought;
Where (through the broad sea, since we safe had wrought)
At Neptunes altars, many solid Thies
Of slaughterd bulls, we burnd for sacrifise.
The fourth day came, when Tyd^^^ son did greet
The haven of Arg^s, with his complete Fleet.
But I, for Pyl^s strait ster'd on my course,
Nor ever left the wind his fore right force,
Since God fore-sent it first. And thus I came
(Dear son) to Pyols, vninformd by fame;
Nor know one saved by Fate, or overcome.
Whom I have heard of since (set here (...) home)
As fits, thou shall be taught, naught left vnshowne.
The expert speare-men; every My^midon,
(Led by the brave heir of the mighty sold
Vnpeerd Achilles) safe of home got hold.
Safe Philoctetes, Paeans famous seed:
And safe Idomen^eus; his men led
To his home, ( Crete;) who fled the armed field;
Of whom, yet none, the sea from him withheld.
Atrides (you have both heard, though ye be
His far off dwellers) what an end had he,
Done by Aegisthus, to a bitter death;
Who miserably paid for forced breath;
Atrides leaving a good son, that did
In blood of that deceitful parricide
His wreakfull sword. And thou my friend (as he
For this has his fame) the like spirit in thee
Assume at all parts. Fair, and great I see
Thou art, in all hope; make it good to the end;
That aftertimes, as much may thee commend.
He answered: Telemachus Nestori.
O thou greate^t grace of Greece;
Orestes made that wreake, his master piece;
And him the Greeks will give, a master praise;
Ve^se finding him, to last all after days.
And would to God, the Gods would favor me
With his performance; that my injury,
Done by my mothers wooers, (being so foul)
I might revenge upon their every soul.
Who (pressing me with contumelies) dare
Such things as past the power of vtt^rance are.
But heavens great Powers, have grac'^ my destiny
With no such honor. Both my Sire and I,
Are borne to suffer everlastingly.
Because you name those wooers (Friend, said he) Nestor Telemacho.

Report says, many such, in spite of thee,
(Wooing thy mother) in thy house commit
The ils thou nam'st. But say; proceeds it
From will in thee, to bear so foul a foil;
Or from thy subjects hate, that wish thy spoil?
And will not aid thee, since their spirits rely
(Against thy rule) on some grave Augurie?
What know they, but at length thy Father may
Come; and with violence, their violence pay?
Or he alone; or all the Greeks with him?
But if Minerua now did so esteem
Thee, as thy Father, in times past; whom, past
All measure, she, with glorious favors graced
Amongst the Troi^ns, where we suffered so;
(O! I did never see, in such clear show,
The Gods so grace a man, as she to him,
To all our eyes, appeard in all her t^im)
If so, I say, she would be pleased to love,
And that her minds care, thou so much could mo^e,
As did thy Father; every man of these,
Would lose in death their seeking marriages.
O Father, Telemachus.
(answered he) you make amaze
Seize me throughout. Beyond the height of phrase
You raise expression; but twill never be*
That I shall move, in any Deity,
So blessed an honor. Not by any means,
If Hope should prompt me, o^ blind Confidence,
(The God of Fools), or every Deity
Should will it; for, it is past my destiny.
The burning-eyd Dame answered: Minerua.
What a speech
Has past the teeth-guard, Nature gave to teach
Fit question of thy words before they fly?
God easily can (when to a mortal eye
He Is furthest off) a mortal satisfy: Volente Deo, nihil est difficile

And does, the more still. For thy cared for Sire;
I rather wish, that I might home retire,
After my sufferance of a world of woes;
Far off; and then my glad eyes might disclose
The day of my return; then strait retire,
And perish standing by my household fire.
As Agamemnon did; that lost his life,
By false Aegisthus, and his falser wife.
For Death to come at length, it is due to all;
Nor can the Gods themselves, when Fate shall call
Their most loved man, extend his vital breath
Beyond the fixed bounds of abhorred Death.
Mentor! Telemachus.
(said he) let us dwell no more on this,
Although in us, the sorrow pious is.
No such return, as we wish, Fates bequeath
My erring Father; whom a present death,
The deathlesse have decreed. I Will now use speech
That tends to other purpose; and beseech
Instruction of grave Nestor; since he flows
Past shore, in all experience; and knows
The sleights and wisdoms; to whose heights aspire
Others, as well as my commended Sire;
Whom Fame reports to have commanded three
Ages of men: and does in sight to me
Show like The Immortals. Nestor! the renown
Of old Neleius; make the clear truth known,
How the most great in Empire, Atreus son,
Sustaind the act of his destruction.
Where then was Menelaus? how was it,
That false Aegisthus, being so far unfit
A match for him, could his death so enforce?
Was he not then in Argos? or his course
With men so left, to let a coward breathe
Spirit enough, to dare his brothers death?
I Will tell thee truth in all (fair son) said he:
Right well was this event conceived by thee.
If Menelaus in his brothers house, Nestor Telemacho de Aegi^thi adult^rio.

Had found the idle liver with his spouse,
(Arrived from Troy) he had not lived; nor dead
Had the diggd heap powrd on his lustful head:
But fowls and dogs had torn him in the fields,
Far off of Argos. Not a Dame it yields;
Had given him any tear; so foul his fact
Showed even to women. Us Troys wars had rackt
To every sinews sufferance; while Aegisth^^.
he
In Argos vplands lived; from those works free.
And Agamemnons wife, with force of word
Flatterd and softn'd; who, at first abhord
A fact so infamous. The heavenly Dame,
A good mind had; but was in blood too blame.
There was a (...).
Poet, to whose care, the King
His Queen committed; and in every thing
(When he for Troy went) charged him to apply
Himself in all guard to her dignity.
But when strong Fate, so wrapt-in her affects,
That she resolved to leave her fit respects;
Into a desert I Will, her Guardian led,
(There left) the rapine of the Vultures fed.
Then brought he willing home his wills won prize;
On sacred Altars offered many Thies*
Hung in the Gods Phanes many ornaments;
Garments and gold; that he the vast events
Of such a labor, to his wish had brought,
As neither fell into his hope, nor thought.
At last, from Troy saild Spartas king and I,
Both, holding her untouched. And (that his eye
Might see no worse of her) when both were blown
To sacred Sunius (of Mineruas town
The goodly Promontorie) with his shafts severe
Augur Apollo slew him that did stere
Atrides ship, as he the stern did guide,
And she the full speed of her sail applide.
He was a man, that nations of men
Excelled in safe guide of a vessel; when
A tempest rusht in on the ruffld seas:
His name was Phrontis Onetorides.
And thus was Menelaus held from home,
Whose way he thirsted so to overcome;
To give his friend the earth, being his pursuit,
And all his exequies to execute.
But sailing still the (...) cuius facies vin^i representa^
wind-hewd seas, to reach
Some shore for fit perform^^ce; he did fetch
The steep Mount of the Mali^^s; and there
With open voice, offended I^piter,
Proclaimd the voyage, his repugnant mind;
And powered the puffes out of a shreeking wind,
That nourisht billows, heightened like to hills.
And with the Fleets division, fulfils
His hate proclaimd; upon a part of Cr^^te
Casting the Navy; where the ^ea-wa^^es meet
Rough I^rdanus; and where the Cyd^^s live.
There is a Rock, on which the Sea does drive;
Bare, and all broken; on the confines set
Of ^ortys; that the dark seas likewise fret;
And hither sent the South, a horrid drift
Of wanes against the top, that was the left
Of that torn cliffe; as far as Phast^^ Sttand.
A little stone, the great ^eas rage did stand.
The men here driven, escaped hard the ships so^e shocks;
The ships themselves being wrackt against the rocks;
Save only five, that blue fore-castles bo^e,
Which wind and water cast on Aegyp^s shore.
When he (there victling well, and store of gold
Aboard his ships brought) his wild way did ^old,
And the other languag'd men, was forced to rome.
Mean space Aegisthus made sad work at home;
And slew his brother; forcing to his sway,
Atrides subjects; Ag^mem^onis inte^tus.
and did seven years lay
His yoke upon the rich Myce^^^^ State.
But in the eight, (to his affrighting fat^)
Divine Orest^s home from Athe^s came; Orestes patrem v^ci^citur.

And what his royal Father felt, the same
He made the false Aegisthus groan beneath:
Death evermore is the reward of Death.
Thus having slain him; a sepulchrall feast
He made the Argiues, for his lustful guest,
And for his mother, whom he did de^est.
The selfsame day, upon him stole the King,
(Good at a martial shout) and goods did bring*
As many as his freighted Fleet could bear.
But thou (my son) too long, by no means err,
Thy goods left free for many a spoilfull guest;
Lest they consume some, and divide the rest;
And thou (perhaps besides) thy voyage lose.
To Menelaus yet thy course dispose,
I wish and charge thee; who but late arrived,
From such a shore, and men; as to have lived
In a return from them; he never thought;
And whom, black whirlwinds violently brought
Within a sea so vast, that in a year
Not any foul could pass it any where,
So huge and horrid was it. But go thou
With ship and men (or if thou please now
To pass by land, there shall be brought for thee
Both horse and chariot; and thy guides shall be
My sons themselves) to Sparta, the divine,
And to the King, whose locks like* Ambe^ shine.
Entreat the truth of him; nor loves he lies;
Wisdom in truth is; and he is passing wise.
This said, the Sun went down, and up rose Night,
When Pallas spoke; Pallas Nestori.
O Father, all good right
Bear thy directions. But divide we now
The sacrifises tongues; mix wine; and vow
To Neptune, and the other ever blessed;
That having sacrifisd, we may to rest.
The fit hour runs now; light dives ou^ of date;
At sacred feasts, we must not sit too late.
She said: They heard; the Herald water gave;
The youths crowned cups with wine; and let all have
Their equal shares; beginning from the cup,
Their parting banquet. All the Tongues cut up;
The fire they gave them; sacrifisde, and rose;
Wine, and divine rites, used to each dispose;
Minerua and Telemachus desirde
They might to ship be, with his leave, retirde.
He (moved with that) prouokt thus their abodes:
Now Jove forbid, and all the long-liu'd Gods,
Your leaving me, to sleep aboard a ship:
As I had drunk of poor Penias whip,
Even to my nakedness; and had nor sheet,
Nor covering in my house; that warm nor swe^^e.
A guest, nor I my self, had means to sleep;
Where I, both weeds and wealthy couerings keep
For all my guests: nor shall Fame ever say,
The dear son of the man Ulysses, lay
All night a ship board here; while my days shine;
Or in my Court, whiles any son of mine
Enioyes suruiuall: who shall guests receive,
Whom ever, my house has a nooke to leave.
My much loved Father, (said Minerua) well
All this becomes thee. But persuade to dwell
This night with thee thy son Telemachus;
For more convenient is the course for us,
That he may follow to thy house, and rest.
And I may board our black sail; that addressed
At all parts I may make our men; and cheer
All with my presence; since of all men there
I boast my self the senior; th'o^hers are
Youths, that attend in free and friendly care,
Great-sould Telem^chus; and are his peers,
In fresh similitude of form and years.
For their confirmance, I will therefore now
Sleep in our black Bark. But when Light shall show
Her silver forehead; I intend my way
Amongst the Cauco^s; men that are to pay*
A debt to me, nor small, nor new. For this,
Take you him home; whom in the morn dismiss,
With chariot and your sons; and give him horse
Ablest in strength, and of the speediest course.
This said; Disparet Minerua.
away she flew; formd like the foul
Men call the Os^ifrage; when every soul
Amaze invaded: Nestor Telemacho.
even the old man admired;
The youths hand took, and said: O most desired;
My hope says, thy proof will no coward show,
Nor one vnskild in war; when Deities now
So young attend thee, and become thy guides:
Nor any of the heauen-housde States besides;
But Tritogenias self; the seed of Jove;
The great in prey; that did in honor move*
So much about thy Father; amongst all
The Grecian army. Fairest Queen, let fall
On me like favors: give me good renown;
Which, as on me; on my loved wife, let down,
And all my children. I will burn to thee
An Ox right bred, broad headed, and yoke-free,
To no man's hand yet humbled. Him will I
(His horns in gold hid) give thy Deity.
Thus praid he; and she heard; and home he led
His sons, and all his heap^s of kindered;
Who entering his Court royal; every one
He marshald in his several seat and throne.
And every one, so kindly come, he gave
His sweet-wine cup; which none was let to have
Before this leuenth year, landed him from Troy;
Which now the Butleresse had leave t'employ.
Who therefore pierst it, and did give it vent.
Of this, the old Duke did a cup present
To every guest: made his maid many a praire
That wears the Shield fringed with his nurses hair;
And gave her sacrifise. With this rich wine
And food suffisde, Sleep, all eyes did decline.
And all for home went: but his Court alone,
Telemachus, divine Ulysses son,
Must make his lodging, or not please his heart.
A bed, all chequerd with elaborate Art,
Within a Portico, that rung like brass,
He brought his guest to; and his bedfere was
Pisistratus, the martial guide of men,
That lived, of all his sons, vnwed till then.
Himself lay in a by-roome, far above,
His bed made by his barren wife, his love.
The rosie-fingerd morn, no sooner shone,
But up he rose, took air, and sat upon
A seat of white, and goodly polisht stone,
That such a gloss as richest ointments wore
Before his high gates; where the Counselor
That matched the Gods (his Father) used to sit:
Who now (by Fate forced) stoopt as low as it.
And here sat Nestor, holding in his hand
A Scepter; and about him round did stand
(As early up) his sons troop; Perseus,
The God-like Thrasimed, and (...),
Ec^ephron, Stratius; the sixth and last
Pisistratus; and by him (half emb^ac't
Still as they came) divine Telemachus;
To these spoke Nestor, old Gerenius:
Haste (loved sons) and do me a desire, Nestoris filij patris iussu Mineruae
sacrum apparent.

That (first of all the Gods) I may aspire
To Pallas favor; who vouchsaft to me,
At Neptunes feast, her sight so openly.
Let one to field go; and an Ox with speed
Cause hither brought; which, let the Heardsman lead;
Another to my dear guests vessel go,
And all his soldiers bring, save only two.
A third, the Smith that works in gold, command
(Laertius) to attend; and lend his hand,
To plate the both horns round about with gold*
The rest remain here close. But first, see told
The maids within, that they prepare a feast;
Set ^eates through all the Court: see strait addressed
The purest water; and get fuel feld.
This said; not one, but in the service held
Officious hand. The Ox came led from field;
The Soldiers troopt from ship; The form of the Sacrifice.
the Smith he came,
And those tools brought, that served the actual frame,
His Art conceived; brought Anvile, hammers brought,
Fair tongs, and all, with which the gold was wrought.
Minerua likewise came, to set the Crown
On that kind sacrifice, and mak't her own.
Then the old Knight Nestor gave the Smith the gold,
With which he strait did both the horns infold;
And trimmed the Offering so, the Goddess ioyd.
About which, thus were Nestors sons employed:
Divine Echephron, and fair Stratius,
Held both the horns: the water odorous,
In which they washed, what to the rites was vowed,
Aretus (in a caldron, all bestrowd
With herbs and flowers) served in from the holy room
Where all were dressed; and whence the rites must come.
And after him, a hallowd virgin came,
That brought the barley cake, and blew the flame.
The axe, with which the Ox should both be feld
And cut forth, Thrasimed stood by* and held.
Perseus the ves^ell held, that should retain
The purple licour of the offering slain.
Then washed, the pious Father: then the Cake
(Of barley, salt, and oil made) took, and brake.
Asked many a boon of Pallas; and the state
Of all the offering, did initiate.
In three parts cutting off the hair, and cast
Amidst the flame. All th'inuocation past,
And all the Cake broke; manly Thr^simed
Stood near, and sure; and such a blow he laid
Aloft the offering; that to earth he sunk,
His neck-nerues sunderd, and his spirits shrunk.
Ou^ ^^^iekt the daughters, daughter in laws, and wife
Of three-ag'd Nestor, (who had eldest life
Of Clymens daughters) chaste Eurydice.
The Ox on broad earth, then laid laterally,
They held, while Duke Pisi^tr^tus, the throat
Dissolved and set, the sable blood afflo^e;
And then the life the bones left. Instantly
They cut him up; apart flew either Thie;
That with the fat they dubd, with art alone;
The throte-briske, and the sweetbread pricking on.
Then Nestor broild them on the cole-turnd wood,
Powered black wine on; and by him young men stood,
That spits fine-pointed held, on which (when burnd
The solid Thies were) they transfixt, and turned
The inwards, cut in cantles: which (the meat
Vowed to the Gods, consumed) they roast and eat.
In mean space, Polycaste (called the fair,
Nestors yongst daughter) bathed Ulysses heir;
Whom, having cleansd, and with rich balmes bespred;
She cast a white shirt quickly over his head,
And then his weeds put on; when, forth he went,
And did the person of a God present.
Came, and by Nestor took his honored seat,
This pastor of the people. Then, the meat
Of all the spare parts roasted; off they drew;
Sat, and fell to. But soon the temperate few,
Rose, and in golden bolles, filld others wine.
Till, when the rest felt thirst of feast decline;
Nestor his sons bad, fetch his high-man'd horse,
And them in chariot join, to run the course
The Prince resolved. Obaid, as soon as heard
Was Nestor by his sons; who strait prepared
Both horse and chariot. She that kept the store,
Both bread and wine, and all such viands more,
As should the feast of Ioue-fed Kings compose;
Pouruaid the voyage. To the rich Coach, rose
Ulysses son; Telemachus profici^citur ad Menclaum.
and close to him ascended
The Duke Pisistratus; the reins intended,
And scourged, to force to field, who freely flew;
And left the Town, that far her splendour threw.
Both holding yoke, and shook it all the day;
But now the Sun set, darkning every way,
When they to Pheris came; and in the house
Of Diocles (the son to Ortiloc^us,
Whom flood Alpheus got) slept all that night:
Who gave them each due hospitable rite.
But when the rosie-fingerd morn arose,
They went to Coach, and did their horse enclose;
Drove forth the fore-court, and the porch that yields
Each breath a sound; and to the fruitful fields
Rode scourging still their willing flying Steeds;
Who strenuously performd their wonted speeds.
Their journey ending just when Sun went down;
And shadows all ways through the earth were thrown.
Finis libri tertij Hom. Odyss.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Received now, in the Spart^^ Court
Telemachus, preferres report
To Menelaus, Menelaus.
of the throng
Of wo^ers with (...), and their wrong.
Atrides tells the Greeks retre^te,
And does a Prophecy repeat,
That Protens ^ade; by which he knew
His brothers death; and then does show
How wish Calypso li^'d the fire
Of his young guest. The woo'rs c^^spire
Their Princes death: whose treachery known,
Penelope in tears does dr^wne.
Whom Pallas by a (...),
And in (...) appear
Of fair Iphthima, (...) to be
The sister of Penelope.
Another.
(...).
Here, of the Sire
The (...) does hear:
The woo'rs conspire;
The mothers fear.

IN Laced^^^ now, (...) which is expounded Spar tam amplam, or (...) magnam:
where (...). signifies properly plurima cete nutrientem.
the nurse of Whales,
These two arrived, and found at festiuals
(With mighty concourse) the renowned King,
His son and daughter, jointly marrying.
Alectors daughter, he did give his son
Strong (...); who his life begun
By Menelaus bo^dmaid; whom he knew
In years. When Hellen could no more renew
In issue like divine (...);
Who held in all fair form, as high degree
As golden Venus. Her he married now
To great Achilles son; who was by vow
Betrothd to her at Tr^y. And thus the Gods
To constant loves, give nuptial periods.
Whose state here past, the Myrmid^ns rich town
(Of which she shared in the Imperial Crown)
With horse and chariots he resigned her to.
Mean space, the high huge house, with feast did flow
Of friends and neighbors, ioying with the King.
Amongst whom, did a heavenly Poet sing,
And touch his Harp. Amongst whom likewise danced
Two; who in that dumb motion advanced,
Would prompt (...) Cantum auspicantes: of which place, the Critiks affirm,
that saltatores morn suo indicant cantori, quo genere cantus ^altaturi forent.
The rapture of Eteoneus at sight of Telemachus and Pisistratus.
the Singer, what to sing and play.
All this time, in the utter Court did stay,
With horse and chariot, Telemachus,
And Nestors noble son, Pisistratus.
Whom Eteoneus coming forth, descried,
And, being a servant to the King, most tried
In care, and his respect; he ran and cried:
Guests! Ioue-kept Menelaus! two such men,
As are for form, of high Saturnius strain.
Inform your pleasure, if we shall unclose
Their horse from coach; or say, they must dispose
Their way to some such house, as may embrace
Their known arrival, with more welcome grace?
He (angry) answered, Thou did never show
Thy self a fool (Beotides) till now; Menelaus rebukes his (...) for his
doubt to entertain gnests worthy.

But now (as if turned child) a childish speech
Vents thy vain spirits. We our selves now reach
Our home, by much spent hospitality
Of other men; nor know, if Jove will try,
With other after wants, our state again:
And therefore, from our feast, no more detain
Those welcome guests; but take their Steeds from Coach,
And with attendance guide in their approach.
This said, he rusht abroad, and called some more
Tried in such service; that together bore
Up to the guests: and took their Steeds that swet
Beneath their yokes, from Coach. At mangers set,
Wheat and white barley gave them mixed; and placed
Their Chariot by a wall so clear, it cast
A light quite thorough it. And then they led
Their guests to the divine house; which so fed
Their eyes at all parts with illustrous sights,
That Admiration seisd them. Like the lights
The Sun and Moon gave; all the Palace threw
A luster through it. Satiate with whose view,
Down to the Kings most bright-kept Baths, they went;
Where handmaids did their services present:
Bathed, balmd them; shirts, and well-napt weeds put on,
And by Atrides side, set each his throne.
Then did the handmaid royal, water bring,
And to a Lauer, rich and glittering,
Of massy gold, powered: which she placed upon
A silver Caldron; into which, might run
The water as they washed. Then set she near
A polisht table; on which, all the cheer
The present could afford; a reverend Dame
That kept the Larder, set. A Cook then came,
And diverse dishes, borne thence, served again;
Furnished the board with bolles of gold; and then
(His right hand given the guests) Atrides said,
Eat, and be cheerful; appetite allaid,
I long to ask, of what stock ye descend;
For not from parents, whose race namelesse end,
We must derive your offspring. Men obscure,
Could get none such as you. The pourtraiture
Of Ioue-sustaind, and Scepter-bearing Kings,
Your either person, in his presence brings.
An Oxes fat chine, then they up did lift,
And set before the guests; which was a gift,
Sent as an honor, to the Kings own taste.
They saw yet, it was but to be eaten placed,
And fell to it. But food and wines care past,
Telemachus thus prompted Nestors son;
(His ear close laying, to be heard of none)
Consider (thou whom most my mind esteems)
The brasse-worke here, Telemachus to Pisistratus, in observation of the house,
not so much that he heartily admired it, as to please Menelaus, who he knew
heard, though he seemd desirous he should not hear.
how rich it is in beams;
And how besides, it makes the whole house sound?
What gold, and amber, silver, ivorie, round
Is wrought about it. Our of doubt, the Hall
Of Jupiter Olympius, has of all
This state, the like. How many infinites,
Take up to admiration, all men's sights?
Atrides ouer-heard; and said; Loved son,
No mortal must affect contention
With Jove, Menelaus relates his travels to his guests.
whose dwellings are of endless date.
Perhaps (of men) some one may emulate,
(Or none) my house, or me. For I am one,
That many a grave extreme have undergone.
Much error felt by sea; and till the eight year,
Had never stay; but wanderd far and near,
Cyprus, Phoenicia, and Syd^nia;
And fetched the far off Aethiopia:
Reached the Erembi of Arabia;
And Lybia, where, with horns, Ewes yeane their Lambs:
Where every full year, Ewes are three times dams.
Where neither King, nor shepherd; want comes near
Of cheese, or flesh, or sweet milk. All the year
They ever milk their Ewes. And here while I
Errd, gathering means to live: one, murtherously,
Unawares, unseen, bereft my brothers life;
Chiefly betrayed by his abhorred wife.
So, hold I, (not enjoying) what you see.
And of your Fathers (if they living be)
You must have heard this: since my sufferings were
So great and famous. From this Palace here,
(So rarely-well-built; furnished so well;
And substanced with such a precio^s deal
Of well-got treasure) banished by the doom
Of Fate; and erring as I had no home.
And now I have, and use it; not to take
Th'entire delight it offers; but to make
Continual wishes, that a triple part
Of all it holds, were wanting; so my heart
Were easde of sorrows (taken for their deaths
That fell at Troy) by their revived breaths.
And thus sit I here, weeping, mourning still
Each least man lost; and sometimes make mine ill
(In paying just tears for their loss) my joy.
Sometimes I breathe my woes; for in annoy*
The pleasure soon admits satietie.
But all these men's wants, wet not so mine eye,
(Though much they move me) as one sole man's miss;
For which, my sleep and meat even loathsome is,
In his renewd thought; since no Greek has won
Grace, for such labors, as Intending Ulysses.
La^rtes son
Has wrought and sufferd: to himself, naught else
But future sorrows forging: to me, hels
For his long absence; since I cannot know
If life or death detain him: since such woe
For his love, old Laertes, his wise wife,
And poor young son sustaines; whom new with life,
He left as sirelesse. This speech; grief to tears
(Powrd from the sons lids on the earth) his ears
(Told of the Father) did excite; who kept
His cheeks dry with his red weed, as he wept:
His both hands used therein. Atrides then
Began to know him; and did (...) retain,
If he should let, himself confess his Sire,
Or with all fitting circumstance, enquire.
While this, his thoughts disputed; forth did shine,
(Like to the golden Diana. Hellens reparance and ornament.
distaffe-deckt divine)
From her beds high and odoriferous room,
Hellen. To whom (of an elaborate loome)
Adresta set a chair: Alcyppe brought
A piece of Tapestrie, of fine wool wrought.
Philo, a silver Cabinet conferd:
(Given by Alcandra, Nuptially endeard
To Lord Polybius; whose abode in Thebes,
Th'Aegyptian city was;) where wealth in heaps,
His famous house held: out of which did go
In gift to Atrides, silver bath-tubs two;
Two Tripods; and of fine gold, talents ten.
His wife did likewise send to Hellen then,
Fair gifts; a Distaffe that of gold was wrought;
And that rich Cabinet that Phyl^ brought;
Round, and with gold ribd; now of fine thread, full:
On which extended (crowned with finest wool,
Of violet gloss) the golden Distaffe lay.
She took her State-chaire; and a foot-stoo^^s stay
Had for her feet: and of her husband, thus
Asked to know all things: Is it known to us,
(King Menelaus) Hellen to Menelaus concerning the guests.
whom these men commend
Themselves for; that our Court, now takes to friend?
I must affirm, (be I deceived or no)
I never yet saw man nor woman so
Like one another, as this man is like
Ulysses son. With admiration str^ke
His looks, my thoughts; that they should carry now
Power to persuade me thus; who did but know,
When newly he was borne, the form they bore.
But it is his Fathers grace; whom more and more
His grace resembles; that makes meretaine
Thought, that he now, is like Telemachus then:
Left by his Sire, when Greece did undertake
Troys bold war, for my impudencies sake.
He answered: Now wife, what you think, I know,
The true cast of his Fathers eye, does show
In his eyes order. Both his head and hair,
His hands and feet, his very fathers are.
Of whom (so well rememberd) I should now
Acknowledge for me, his continual flow
Of cares and perils: yet still patient.
But I should too much move him, that does vent
Such bitter tears for that which has been spoke;
Which (shunning soft show) see how he would cloak;
And with his purple weed, his weepings hide.
Then Nestors son, Pisistratus replide:
Great Pastor of the people, kept of God!
He is Ulysses son; Pisistrat^^ tells who they are.
but his abode
Not made before here; and he modest too;
He holds it an indignity to do
A deed so vain, to use the boast of words,
Where your words are on wing; whose voice affords
Delight to us, as if a God did break
The air amongst us, and vouchsafe to speak.
But me, my father (old Duke Nestor) sent
To be his consort hither; his content,
Not to be height^^d so, as with your sight.
In hope that therewith words and actions might
Inform his comforts from you; since he is
Extrernely grieved and iniu^'d, by the miss
Of his great Father; suffering even at home.
And few friends found, to help him overcome
His too weak sufferance, now his Sire is gone.
Amongst the people, not affoorded one
To check the miseries, that mate him thus;
And this the state is of Telemachus. Menelaus joy for Telemachus, and moan for
Ulysses absence.

O Gods (said he) how certain, now, I see
My house enioyes that friends son, that for me
Has undergone so many willing fights?
Whom I resolved, past all the Grecian Knights,
To hold in love; if our return by seas,
The farre-off Thunderer did ever please
To grant our wishes. And to his respect,
A Palace and a City to erect,
My vow had bound me. Whither bringing then
His riches, and his son, and all his men
From barren Ithaca, (some one sole Town
Inhabited about him, batterd down)
All should in Argos live. And there would I
Ease him of rule; and take the Emperie
Of all on me. And often here would we
(Delighting, loving eithers company)
Meet and converse; whom nothing should divide,
Till deaths black veil did each all over hide.
But this perhaps had ben^ a mean to take
Even God himself with envy; who did make
Ulysses therefore only the unblessed,
That should not reach his loved countries rest.
These woes made every one with woe in love;
Even Argiue Hellen wept, (the seed of Jove)
Ulysses son wept; Atreus Menelaus.
son did weep;
And Nestors son, his eyes in tears did steep.
But his tears fell not from the present cloud,
That from Ulysses was exhaled; but flowd
From brave Antilochus rememberd due,
Whom the renowmd Pisistratus weeps with remembrance of his brother Antilochus.
Vid. Memnon.
Son of the Morning slew.
Which yet he thus excusde: O Atreus son!
Old Nestor says, There lives not such a one
Amongst all mortals, as Atrides is,
For deathlesse wisdom. It Is a praise of his,
Still given in your remembrance; when at home
Our speech concerns you. Since then overcome
You please to be, with sorrow even to tears,
That are in wisdom so exempt from peers;
Vouchsafe the like effect in me excuse,
(If it be lawful) I affect no use
Of tears thus, after meals; at least, at night:
But when the morn brings forth, with tears, her light,
It shall not then empaire me to bestow
My tears on any worthies overthrow.
It is the only right, that wretched men
Can do dead friends; to cut hair, and complain.
But Death my brother took; whom none could call
The Grecian coward; you best knew of all.
I was not there, nor saw; but men report,
Antilochus excelled the common sort,
For footmanship, or for the Chariot race;
Or in the fight, for hardy hold of place.
O friend (said he) since thou have spoken so,
At all parts, as one wise should say and do;
And like one, far beyond thy self in years;
Thy words shall bounds be, to our former tears.
O he is questionless a right borne son,
That of his Father has not only won
The person, but the wisdom; and that Sire;
(Complete himself) that has a son entire,
Jove did not only his full Fate adorn,
When he was wedded; but when he was borne.
As now Saturnius, through his life's whole date,
Has Nestors bliss raisd to as steep a state:
Both in his age to keep in peace his house;
And to have children wise and valorous.
But let us not forget our rere Feast thus;
Let some give water here. Telemachus!
The morning shall yield time to you and me,
To do what fits; and reason mutually.
This said; the careful servant of the King;
( Asphalion) powered on, the issue of the Spring;
And all to ready feast, set ready hand.
But Hellen now, Hellens potion against Cares.
on new device did stand;
Infusing strait a medcine to their wine,
That (drowning Cares and Angers) did decline
All thought of ill. Who drunk her cup, could shed
All that day, not a tear; no not if dead
That day his father or his mother were;
Not if his brother, child, or chiefest dear,
He should see murtherd then before his face.
Such useful medcines (only borne in grace,
Of what was good) would Hellen ever have.
And this Juice to her, Polydamma gave
The wife of Thoon; an Egyptian borne;
Whose rich earth, herbs of medicine do adorn
In great abundance. Many healthful are,
And many banefull. Every man is there
A good Physician, out of natures grace;
For all the nation sprung of Paeons race.
When Hellen Hellen of Ulysses and the sack of Troy.
then her medicine had infusde,
She bad power wine to it, and this speech used:
Atrides, and these good men's sons; great Jove
Makes good and ill, one after other move
In all things earthly: for he can do all.
The woes past therefore, he so late let fall;
The comforts he affoords us, let us take;
Feast, and with fit discourses, merry make.
Nor will I other use. As then our blood
Grieved for Ulysses, since he was so good;
Since he was good, let us delight to hear
How good he was, and what his sufferings were.
Though every fight, and every suffering deed,
Patient Ulysses underwent; exceed
My woman's power to number, or to name.
But what he did, and sufferd, when he came
Amongst the Trojans, (where ye Grecians all
Took part with sufferance) I in part can call
To your kind memories. How with ghastly wounds
Himself he mangled; and the Trojan bounds
(Thrust thick with enemies) adventured on:
His royal shoulders, having cast upon
Base abject weeds, and enterd like a slave.
Then (begger-like) he did of all men crave;
And such a wretch was, as the whole Greek fleet
Brought not besides. And thus through every street
He crept discovering: of no one man known.
And yet through all this difference, I alone
Smok't his true person. Talked with him. But he
Fled me with wiles still. Nor could we agree,
Till I disclaimd him quite. And so (as moved
With womanly remorse, of one that proved
So wretched an estate, what ere he were)
Won him to take my house. And yet even there;
Till freely I (to make him doubtless) swore
A powrefull oath, to let him reach the shore
Of ships and tents, before Troy understood;
I could not force on him his proper good.
But then I bathed and soothed him, and he then
Confessed, and told me all. And (having slain
A number of the Trojan guards) retirde,
And reached the Fleet; for slight and force admirde.
Their husbands deaths by him, the Trojan wives
Shrickt for; but I made triumphs for their lives.
For then my heart conceived, that once again
I should reach home; and yet did still retain
Woe for the slaughters, Venus made for me:
When both my husband, my Hermio^e,
And bridal room, she robbed of so much right;
And drew me from my country, with her slight.
Though nothing under heaven, I here did need,
That could my Fancy, or my Beauty feed.
Her husband said: Menelaus to Hellen and his guests.
Wife! what you please to tell,
Is true at all parts, and becomes you well.
And I my self, that now may say, have seen
The minds and manners of a world of men:
And great Heroes, measuring many a ground,
Have never (by these eyes that light me) found
One, with a bosom, so to be beloved,
As that in which, th'accomplisht spirit, moved
Of patient Ulysses. What (brave man)
He both did act, and suffer, when we wan
The town of Ilion, in the braue-built horse,
When all we chief States of the Grecian force,
Were housde together; bringing Death and Fate
Amongst the Trojans; you (wife) may relate.
For you, at last, came to us; God that would
The Trojans glory give; gave charge you should
Approach the engine; and Deipho^us
(The god-like) followd. Thrice ye cir^'d us,
With full suruay of it; and often tried
The hollow crafts, that in it were implied.
When all the voices of their wives in it
You took on you; Hellen counterfetted the wives voices of those Kings of
Greece, that were in the wooden horse, and calls their husband.
with voice so like, and fit;
And every man by name, so visited;
That I, Ulysses, and King Diomed,
(Set in the midst, and hearing how you called)
Tydides, and my self, (as half appalld
With your remorcefull plaints) would, passing feign
Have broke our silence; rather then again
Endure, respectlesse, their so moving cries.
But, Ithacus, our strongest fantasies
Containd within us, from the slendrest noise,
And every man there, sat without a voice.
Anticlus only, would have answered thee:
But, his speech, Ithacus incessantly
With strong hand held in: till ( Mineruas call,
Charging thee off) Ulysses saved us all.
Telemachus replide: Telemachus to Menelaus.
Much greater is
My grief, for hearing this high praise of his.
For all this does not his sad death divert;
Nor can, though in him swelld an iron heart.
Prepare, and lead then (if you please) to rest:
Sleep (that we hear not) will content us best.
Then Argiue Hellen made he handmaid go,
And put fair bedding in the Portico;
Lay purple blankets on, Itur ad lecturn.
Rugs warm and soft;
And cast and Arras couerlet aloft.
They torches took; made haste, and made the bed,
When both the guests were to their lodgings led,
Within a Portico, without the house.
Atrides, and his large-traine-wearing Spouse,
(The excellent of women) for the way,
In a retired receipt, together lay.
The morn arose; the King rose, and put on
His royal weeds; his sharp sword hung upon
His ample shoulders; forth his chamber went,
And did the person of a God present.
Telemachus accosts him; who begun
Speech of his iourneys proposition.
And what (my young Vlyssean Hero)
Prouokt thee on the broad back of the sea, Menelaus enquires the cause of his
^oyage.

To visit Lacedaemon the Divine?
Speak truth; Some publicke^ or only thine?
I come (said he) to hear, if any fame
Breathed of my Father; to thy notice came.
My house is sacked; my fat works of the field,
Are all destroid: my house does nothing yield
But enemies; that kill my harmless sheep,
And sinewie Oxen: nor will ever keep
Their steeles without them. And these men are they,
That woo my Mother; most inhumanely
Committing injury on injury.
To thy knees therefore I am come, to attend
Relation of the sad and wretched end,
My erring Father felt: if witnest by
Your own eyes; or the certain news that fly
From others knowledges. For, more then is
The usual heap of humane miseries,
His Mother bore him to. Vouchsafe me then
(Without all ruth of what I can sustain)
The plain and simple truth of all you know.
Let me beseech so much. If ever vow
Was made, and put in good effect to you
At Troy (where suffrance bred you so much smart)
Upon my Father, good Ulysses part;
And quit it now to me (himself in youth)
Unfolding only the unclosed truth.
He (deeply sighing) answered him: O shame
That such poor vassals should affect the fame,
To share the joys of such a Worthies Bed!
As when a Hind (her calves late farrowed
To give suck) enters the bold lions den:
He, roots of hills, and herbie valleys then
For food (there feeding) hunting: but at length
Returning to his Cauerne; gives his strength
The lives of both the mother and her brood,
In deaths indecent; so the (...)
Must pay Ulysses powers, as sharp an end.
O would to Jove, Apollo, and thy friend,
(The wise Minerua) that thy Father were
As once he was, when he his spirits did rere
Against Philomelides, in a fight
Performd in well built Lesbos; where, downright
He struck the earth with him; and gat a shout
Of all the Grecians. O, if now, full out
He were as then; and with the wooers cop't,
Short-liu'd they all were; and their nuptials, hoped
Would prove as desperate. But for thy demand,
Enforced with prayrs; I Will let thee understand
The truth directly; nor decline a thought;
Much less deceive, or sooth thy search in ought.
But what the old, and still-true-spoken God,
That from the sea breathes oracles (...),
Disclosde to me; to thee I Will all impart,
Nor hide one word from thy sollicitous heart.
I was in Egypt; Menelai nauigatio.
where a mighty time,
The Gods detaind me: though my natural clime,
I never so desired; because their homes
I did not greet, with perfect Hecatomes.
For they will put men evermore in mind,
How much their masterly commandments bind.
There is (besides) a certain Island, called
Ph^ros, that with the high-wau'd sea is walld;
Just against Egypt; and so much remote,
As in a whole day, with a fore-gale (...),
A hollow ship can sail. And this I Will bears
A Port, most portly; where sea-passengers
Put in still for fresh water, and away
To sea again. Yet here the Gods did stay
My Fleet, full twenty days: the winds (that are
Masters at sea) no prosperous puff would spare,
To put us off: and all my victles here.
Had quite corrupted; as my men's minds were;
Had not a certain Goddess given regard,
And pittide me in an estate so hard:
And it was Edothea, honored Proteus seed,
That old sea-farer. Her mind I made bleed
With my compassion, when (walked all alone,
From all my soldiers, that were ever gone
About the I Will on fishing, with hooks bent;
Hunger, their bellies, on her errand sent)
She came close to me; spoke; and thus began:
Of all men, thou art the most foolish man,
Or slack in business; or stayst here of choice;
And do in all thy suffrances rejoice;
That thus long live detaind here; and no end
Can give thy tarriance. Thou do much offend
The minds of all thy fellows. I replied:
Who ever thouart of the Deified,
I must affirm, that no way with my will,
I make abode here: but, it seems, some ill
The Gods, inhabiting broad heaven, sustain
Against my getting off. Inform me then,
(For Godheads all things know) what God is he
That stays my passage, from the fishie sea?
Stranger (said she) I Will tell thee true: there lives
An old Sea-farer in these seas, Idothea to Menelaus.
that gives
A true solution of all secrets here.
Who, deathlesse Proteus is, th'Aegyptian Peer:
Who can the deepes of all the seas exquire;
Who Neptunes Priest is; and (they say) the Sire
That did beger me. Him, if any way
Thou could inveagle, he would clear display
Thy course from hence; and how far off does lie
Thy voyages whole scope through Neptunes sky.
Informing thee (O Godpreseru'd) beside
(If thy desires would so be satisfide)
What ever good or ill has got event,
In all the time, thy long and hard course spent,
Since thy departure from thy house. This said;
Again I answered: Make the sleights displaid,
Thy Father uses; lest his foresight see,
Or his foreknowledge taking note of me,
He flies the ^ixt place of his used abode;
It Is hard for man to countermine with God.
She strait replide: I Will utter truth in all;
When heavens supremest height, Idotheas couns^^^ to take her father Proteus.
the Sun does skall;
The old Sea-tell-truth leaves the deepes, and hides
Amidst a black storm, when the West wind chides;
In caves still sleeping. Round about him sleep
(With short feet swimming forth the fomie deep)
The Sea-calues (lovely Halosydnes called)
From whom a noisome odor is exhalld,
Got from the whirle-pooles, on whose earth they lie.
Here, when the morn illustrates all the sky,
I Will guide, and seat thee, in the fittest place,
For the performance thou have now in chase.
In mean time, reach thy Fleet; and choose out three
Of best exploit, to go as aides to thee.
But now I Will show thee all the old Gods sleights; The sleights of Proteus.

He first will number, and take all the sights
Of those, his guard, that on the shore arriues.
When having viewd, and told them forth by fiues;
He takes place in their midst, and there does sleep,
Like to a shepherd midst his flock of sheep.
In his first sleep, call up your hardiest cheer,
Vigor and violence, and hold him there,
In spite of all his striuings to be gone.
He then will turn himself to every one
Of all things that in earth creep and respire,
In water swim, or shine in heavenly fire.
Yet still hold you him firm; and much the more
Press him from passing. But when, as before
(When sleep first bound his powers) his form ye see,
Then cease your force, and the old Hero free;
And then demand, which heauen-borne it may be
That so afflicts you, hindering your retreat,
And free sea-passage to your native seat.
This said, she diu'd into the wauie seas;
And I my course did to my ships address,
That on the sands stuck; where arrived, we made
Our supper ready. Then th'Ambrosian shade
Of night fell on us; and to sleep we fell.
Rosy Aurora rose; we rose as well;
And three of them, on whom I most relied,
For firm at every force; I chusde, and hied
Strait to the many-riuer-serued seas.
And all assistance, asked the Deities.
Mean time Ed^thea, the seas broad breast
Embraced; and brought for me, and all my rest,
Four of the sea-calues skins, but newly flead,
To work a wile, which she had fashioned
Upon her Father. Then (within the sand
A covert digging) when these Calves should land,
She sat expecting. We came close to her:
She placed us orderly; and made us wear
Each one his Calves skin. But we then must pass
A huge exploit. The sea-calues savor was
So passing sour (they still being bred at seas)
It much afflicted us: for who can please
To lie by one of these same sea-bred whales? Ironice.

But she preserues us; and to memory calls
A rare commodity: she fetched to us
Ambrosia, that an air most odorous
Bears still about it; which she nointed round
Our either nosthrils; and in it quite drowned
The nastie whale-smell. Then the great event,
The whole mornes date, with spirits patient
We lay expecting. When bright Noone did flame
Forth from the sea, in Sholes the sea-calues came,
And orderly, at last, lay down and slept
Along the sands. And then the old sea-god crept
From forth the deepes; and found his sat calves there:
Suruaid, and numberd; and came never near
The craft we used; but told us five for calves.
His temples then diseasd, with sleep he salues;
And in rusht we, with an abhorred cry:
Cast all our hands about him manfully,
And then the old Forger, all his forms began:
First was a Lion, with a mighty mane;
Then next a Dragon; a pide Panther then;
A vast Boar next; and suddenly did strain
All into water. Last, he was a tree,
Curld all at top, and shot up to the sky.
We, with resolved hearts, held him firmly still,
When the old one (held to straight for all his skill, Proteus taken by Men^la^^.

To extricate) gave words, and questiond me:
Which of the Gods, O Atreus son, (said he)
Aduisde and taught thy fortitude this slight,
To take and hold me thus, in my despite?
What asks thy wish now? I replide: Thou know:
Why do thou ask? What wiles are these thou showst
I have within this I Will, been held for wind
A wondrous time; and ca^ by no means find
An end to my retention. It has spent
The very heart in me. Give thou then vent
To doubts thus bound in me, (ye Gods know all)
Which of the Godheads, does so fowly fall
On my addression home, to stay me here?
Auert me from my way? The fishie clear,
Barred to my passage? He replide: Of force
(If to thy home, thou wishest free recourse)
To Jove, and all the other Deities,
Thou must exhibit solemn sacrifice;
And then the black sea for thee shall be clear,
Till thy loved countries settled reach. But where
Ask these rites thy performance? ^Tis a fate
To thee and thy affairs appropriate,
That thou shall never see thy friends, nor tred
Thy Countries earth; nor see inhabited
Thy so magnificent house; till thou make good
Thy voyage back to the Egyptian flood,
Whose waters fell from I^^e: and there have gi^en
To Jove, and all Gods, housd in ample heaven,
Devoted Hecatombs; and then free ways
Shall open to thee; cleard of all delays.
This told he; and me thought, he b^^ke my heart,
In such a long and hard course to divert
My hope for home; and charge my back retreat,
As far as Egypt. I made answer yet:
Father, thy charge I Will perfect; but before,
Resolve me truly, if their natural ^hore,
All those Greeks, and their ships, do safe enjoy,
That Nestor and my self left, when from Troy
We first raisde sail? Or whether any died
At sea a death vnwisht? Or (satisfied)
When war was past, by friends embraced, in peace
Resigned their spirits? He made answer: Cease
To ask so far; it fits thee not to be
So cunning in thine own calamity.
Nor seek to learn; what learnd, thou should forget;
Men's knowledges have proper limits set,
And should not prease into the mind of God.
But twill not long be (as my thoughts abode)
Before thou buy this curious skill with tea^es.
Many of those, whose states so tempt thine ears,
Are stoopt by Death; and many left alive:
One chief of which, in strong hold does surui^e,
Amidst the broad sea. Two, in their retreat,
Are done to death. I list not to repeat,
Who fell at Troy; thy self was there in fight.
But in return, swift Ajax lost the light,
In his long-oard ship. Neptune yet a while,
Saft him vnwrackt: The wrack of Ajax Oileus.
to the Gyr^an I Will,
A mighty Rock ^emo^ing from his way.
And surely he had escaped the fatal day,
In spite of Pallas, if to that foul deed,
He in her Phane did, Cassandra.
(when he raui^hed
The Trojan Prophetess) he had not here
Adioynd an impious boast: that he would bear
(Despite the Gods) his ship safe through the waves
Then raisde against him. These his impious b^aues,
When Neptune heard; in his strong hand he took
His massy Trident; and so soundly struck
The rock Gyraean, that in two it cleft:
Of which, one fragment on the land he left;
The other fell into the troubld seas;
At which, first rusht Ajax Oileades,
And split his ship: and then himself aflote
Swum on the rough waves of the worlds va^t mo^e;
Till having drunk a salt cup for his sin,
There perished he. Thy brother yet did win
The wreath from Death, while in the waves they strove,
Afflicted by the reverend wife of Jove.
But when the steep Mount of the Malean shore,
He seemd to reach; a most tempestuous blore,
Far to the fishie world, that sighs so sore,
Strait ravished him again; as far away,
As to th'extreme bounds where the Agrians stay;
Where first Thiestes dwelt: but then his son
Aegisthus Thiestiades lived. This done,
When his return untouched appeard again;
Back turned the Gods the wind; and set him then
Hard by his house. Then, full of joy, he left
His ship; and close to his country earth he cleft;
Kissed it, and wept for joy: powrd tear on tear,
To set so wishedly his footing there.
But see: a Sentinel that all the year,
Crafty Aegisthus, in a watchtowre set
To spy his landing; for reward as great
As two gold talents; all his powers did call
To strict remembrance of his charge; and all
Discharged at first sight; which at first he cast
On Agamemnon; and with all his have,
Informd Aeg^sthus. He, an instant train
Laid for his slaughter: Twenty chosen men
Of his Plebeians, he in ambush laid.
His other men, he charged to see puruaid
A Feast: and forth, with horse and chariots graced,
He rode t'inui^e him: but in heart embraced
Horrible welcomes: and to death did bring,
With treacherous slaughter, the unwary King.
Received him at a Feast; and (like an Ox
Slain at his manger) gave him bits and knocks. Agamemnons slaughter by
Aegisthu^ treachery.

No one left of Atrides train; nor one
Saved to Aegisthus; but himself alone:
All strowd together there, the bloody Court.
This said: my soul he sunk with his report:
Flat on the sands I fell: tears spent their store;
I, light abhord: my heart would live no more.
When dry of tears; and tired with tumbling there;
The Old Tel-truth thus my danted spirits did cheer:
No more spend tears nor time, o Atreus son;
With ceaseless weeping, never wish was won.
Use uttermost assay to reach thy home,
And all unawares upon the murderer come,
(For torture) taking him thy self, alive;
Orw let Orestes, that should far out-striue
Thee in fit vengeance, quickly quit the light
Of such a dark soul: and do thou the right
Of burial to him, with a Funeral feast.
With these last words, I fortifide my breast;
In which again, a generous spring began,
Of fitting comfort, as I was a man;
But, as a brother, I must ever mourn.
Yet forth I went; and told him the return
Of these I knew: but he had named a third,
Held on the broad sea; still with life inspired;
Whom I besought to know, though likewise dead,
And I must mourn alike. He answered:
He is Laertes son; whom I beheld
In Nymph Calypsos Palace; who compeld
His stay with her: and since he could not see
His country earth, he mournd incessantly.
For he had neither ship, instruct with oars,
Nor men to fetch him from those stranger shores.
Where, leave we him; and to thy self descend;
Whom, not in Argos, Fate nor Death shall end;
But the immortal ends of all the earth,
So ruled by them, that order death by birth,
(The fields Elisian) Fate to thee will give: Elisium described.

Where Rhadamanthus rules; and where men live
A neuer-troubld life: where snow, nor showers,
Nor irksome Winter spends his fruitless powers;
But from the Ocean, Zephyre still resumes
A constant breath, that all the fields perfumes.
Which, since thou marriedst Hellen, are thy hire;
And Jove himself, is by her side thy Sire.
This said; he diu'd the d^epsome watrie heaps; Proteus leaves M^nelau^.

I, and my tried men, took us to our ships;
And worlds of thoughts, I varied with my steps.
Arrived and shipped, the silent solemn Night,
And Sleep bereft us of our visuall light.
At morn, masts, sails reard, we sat; left the shores,
And beat the fomie Ocean with our oars.
Again then we, the Ioue-falne flood did fetch,
As far as Egypt: where we did beseech
The Gods with Hecatombs; whose angers ceast;
I toomb'd my brother, that I might be blessed.
All rites performd; all haste I made for home;
And all the prosperous winds about were come;
I had the Pasport now of every God,
And here closde all these labors period.
Here stay then, till th'eleuenth or twelfth days light;
And I Will dismiss thee well; gifts exquisite
Preparing for thee: Chariot, horses three;
A Cup of curious frame to serve for thee,
To serve the immortal Gods with sacrifice;
Mindful of me, while all Suns light thy skies.
He answe^d: Telemach^st^ Menela^s.
Stay me not too long time here;
Though I could sit, attending all the year:
Nor should my house, nor parents, with desire,
Take my affections from you; so on fire
With love to hear you, are my thoughts: but so;
My Pylian friends, I shall afflict with woe,
Who mourn even this stay. Whatsoever be
The gifts your Grace is to bestow on me;
Vouchsafe them such, as I may bear and save,
For your sake ever. Horse, I list not have,
To keep in Ithaca: but leave them here,
To your soiles dainties; where the broad fields bear
Sweet Cypers grass; where men-fed Lote does flow;
Where wheate-like Spelt; and wheat it self does grow;
Where Barley, Ithaca described by Telemachus.
white, and spreading like a tree:
But Ithaca, has neither ground to be
(For any length it comprehends) a race
To try a horses speed: nor any place
To make him fat in: fitter far to feed
A Cliffe-bred Goat, then raise* or please a Steed.
Of all Isles, Ithaca does least provide,
Or meades to feed a horse, or ways ^o ride.
He, smiling said: Of good blood art thou (son):
What speech, so^yong? what observation
Have thou made of the world? I well am pleased
To change my gifts to thee; as being confessd
Unfit indeed: my store is such, I may.
Of all my house-gifts then, that up I lay
For treasure there, I will bestow on thee
The fairest, and of greatest price to me.
I will bestow on thee a rich carved Cup
Of silver all: but all the brims wrought up
With finest gold: it was the only thing
That the Heroical Sydonian King
Presented to me, when we were to part
At his receipt of me; and it was the Art
Of that great Artist, that of heaven is free;
And yet even this, will I bestow on thee.
This speech thus ended; guests came, and did bring
Muttons (for Presents) to the God-like King:
And spirit-prompting wine, that strenuous makes.
Their Riband-wreathed wives, brought fruit and cakes.
Thus, in this house, did these their Feast apply:
And in Ulysses house, The wooers conspiracy against Telemachus.
Actiuitie
The wooers practisde: Tossing of the Spear;
The Stone, and hurling: thus delighted, where
They exercisde such insolence before:
Even in the Court, that wealthy (...) wo^e.
Antinous did still their strifes decide;
And he that was in person dei^ide
Eury^ach^^; both ring leaders of all;
For in their virtues they were principal.
These, by Noem^n (son to (...))
Were sided now; who made the question thus:
Antinous! does any friend here know,
When this Telemachus returns? or no,
From sandy Pylos? He made bold to take
My ship with him: of which, I now should make
Fit use my self; and sail in her as fa^e
As spacious Elis; where, of mine, there are
Twelve delicate Mares; and under their sides, go
Laborious Mules, that yet did never know
The yoke, nor labor: some of which should bear
The taming now, if I could fetch them there.
This speech, the rest admired; nor dreamd that he
Neleian Pyles, ever thought to see;
But was at field about his flocks suruay:
Or thought, his heardsmen ^eld him so away.
Enpitheus son, Antino^s, then replied:
When went he? or with what Train dignified
Of his selected Ithacensi^^ youth?
Pressed men, or Bond men were they? Tell the truth.
Could he effect this? let me truly know:
To gain thy vessel, did he violence show,
And used her against thy will? or had her free,
When fitting question, he had made with thee?
Noemon answered: I did freely give
My vessel to him; who deserves to live,
That would do other? when such men as he,
Did in distress ask? he should churlish be,
That would deny him: Of our youth, the best
Amongst the people; to the interest
His charge did challenge in them; giving way,
With all the tribute, all their powers could pay.
Their Captain (as he took the ship) I knew;
Who Mentor was, or God. A deities show,
Maskt in his likeness. But to think it was he,
I much admire; for I did clearly see,
But yester morning, God like Mentor here;
Yet, the other evening, he took shipping there,
And went for Pylos. Thus went he for home,
And left the rest, with envy overcome:
Who sat; and pastime left. Enpitheus son
(Sad, and with rage, his entrails ouerrunne)
His eyes like flames; thus interposde his speech.
Strange thing; an action of how proud a reach, Antinous anger for the escape of
Telemachus.

Is here committed by Telemachus?
A boy, a child; and we, a sort of us,
Vowed against his voyage; yet admit it thus,
With ship, and choice youth of our people too?
But let him on; and all his mischief do;
Jove shall convert upon himself his powers,
Before their ill presumed, he brings on ours.
Provide me then a ship, and twenty men
To give her manage; that against again
He turns for home; on the Ithacensian seas,
Or Cliffie Samian; I may interprease;
Way-lay, and take him; and make all his craft,
Sail with his ruin, for his Father saf't.
This, all applauded; and gave charge to do;
Rose, and to greet Ulysses house, did go.
But long time past not, ere Penelope
Had notice of their far-fetcht treachery.
Medon the Herald told her; who had heard
Without the Hall, how they within conferd:
And hasted strait, to tell it to the Queen:
Who from the entry, having Medon seen
Preuents him thus: Now Herald; what affair
Intend the famous woo'rs, Penelope to Medon.
in your repair?
To tell Ulysses maids, that they must cease
From doing our work, and their banquets dress?
I would to heaven, that (leaving wooing me,
Nor ever troubling other company)
Here might the last Feast be, and most extreme,
That ever any shall address for them.
They never meet, but to consent in spoil,
And reap the free fruits of another toil.
O did they never, when they children were,
What to their Fathers, was Ulysses, hear?
Who never did against any one proceed,
With unjust usage, or in word or deed?
It Is yet with other Kings, another right,
One to pursue with love, another spite;
He still yet just; nor would, though might devour;
Nor to the worst, did ever taste of power.
But their vnruld acts, show their minds estate:
Good turns received once, thanks grow our of date.
Medon, the learned in wisdom, answered her: M^don to Penelo^e relates ^he
voyage of (...).

I wish (O Queen) that their ingratitudes were
Their worst ill toward you: but worse by far,
And much more deadly their endeavors are;
Which love will fail them in. (...)
Their purpose is (as he returns to us)
To give their sharp steeles in a cruel death:
Who now is gone to learn, if Fame can breathe
News of his Sire; and will the ^ylian shore,
And sacred Sparta, in his search explore.
This news dissolved to her both knees and heart,
Long silence held her, ere one word would part:
Her eyes stood full of tears; her small soft voice,
All late use lost; that yet at last had choice
Of won^ed words; which briefly thus she used:
Why left my son his mother? why refusde
His wit the solid shore, to try the seas,
And put in ships the trust of his distress?
That are at sea to men vnbridld horse,
And tun, past rule, their farre-engaged course,
Amidst a moisture, past all mean unstaid?
No need compeld this: did he it, afraid
To live and leave posterity his name?
I know not (he replide) if th'humor came
From current of his own instinct, or flowd
From others instigations; but he vowed
Attempt to Pylos; or to see descried
His Sires return, or know what death he died.
This said; he took him to Vlysse^ house
After the wooers; the Vlyssean Spouse
(Run through with woes) let Tort^^e seize her mind,
Nor, in her choice of state-chaires, stood inclined
To take her seat; but th'abiect threshold chose
Of her fair chamber, for her loathed repose;
And mournd most wretch-like. Round about her fell
Her handmaids, joined in a continuate yell.
From every corner of the Palace, all
Of all degrees, tuned to her comforts fall
Their own deiections: to whom, her complaint
She thus enforced: The Gods beyond constraint
Of any measure, urge these tears on me;
Nor was there ever Dame of my degree,
So past degree grieved. First, a Lord, so good,
That had such hardy spirits in his blood.
That all the virtues was adornd withal;
That all the Greeks did their Superior call,
To part with thus, and lose. And now a son
So worthily beloved, a course to run
Beyond my knowledge; whom rude tempests have
Made far from home, Penelope re^uk^th ^er Ladies for not telling her of
Telemachus.
his most inglorious grave.
Unhappy wenches, that no one of all,
(Though in the reach of every one, must fall
His taking ship) sustaind the careful mind,
To call me from my bed; who, this designd,
And most vowed course in him, had either staid,
(How much soever hasted) or dead laid
He should have left me. Many a man I have,
That would have called old Dolius my slave,
(That keeps my Orchard, whom my Father gave
At my departure) to have run, and told
Laertes this; to try if he could hold
From running through the people; and from tears,
In telling them of these vowed murderers;
That both divine Ulysses hope, and his,
Resolve to end in their conspiracies.
His Nurse then, Euryclaea made reply:
Dear Sovereign, E^ryel^as pio^^ comfort of Pe^elope.
let me with your own hands die;
Or cast me off here; I Will not keep from thee*
One word of what I know: He trusted me
With all his purpose; and I gave him all
The bread and wine, for which he pleased to call.
But then a mighty oath he made me swear,
Not to report it to your ^oyall ear,
Before the twelfth day either should appear,
Or you should ask me, when you heard him gone.
Empaire not then your beauties with your moan,
But wash, and put vnteare-staind garments on:
Ascend your chamber, with your Ladies here;
And pray the seed of Goat-nurst Jupiter,
(Divine Athenia) to preserve your son;
And she will save him from confusion.
The Old King, to whom your hopes stand so inclined,
For his grave counsels, you perhaps may find
Unfit affected, for his ages sake.
But heauen-kings wax not old; and therefore make
Fit prayers to them; for my thoughts never will
Believe the heavenly powers conceit so ill,
The seed of righteous Arcesiades,
To end it utterly; Laertes son to Arcesius the son of Jupiter.
but still will please
In some place evermore, some one of them
To save; and deck him with a Diadem:
Give him possession of erected Towers,
And farre-stretcht fields, crowned all of fruits and flowers.
This easd her heart, and dride her humorous ^ies,
When having washed, and weeds of sacrifise
(Pure, and unstained with her distrustful tears)
Put on; (with all her women-ministers)
Up to a chamber of most height, she rose;
And cakes of salt and barley did impose
Within a wicker basket; all which broke
In decent order; thus she did inuoke: Penelope to Pall^s.

Great Virgin of the Goat-preserued God;
If ever the inhabited abode
Of wise Ulysses, held the ^atted Thi^s
Of sheep and Oxen, made thy sacrifice
By his devotion; hear me; nor (...)
His pious services; but ^a^e ^ee ^e^
His dear son, on these shores; and (...)
These wooers, past all mean in insolence.
This said, she shriekt; and (...) her (...).
The wooers broke with tumult all (...)
About the shadie house; and one of them,
Whose pride, his youth had made the more (...),
Said; Now the many-wooer-(...) Queen,
Will surely fatiate her (...) (...)
And one of us, in instant (...).
Poor Dame, she dreams not, what design we make,
Upon the life and slaughter of her son.
So said he; but so said, was not so done;
Whose arrogant spirit, Antinous to the rest.
in a (...) so vain,
Antinous chid; and said; For shame (...)
These brauing speeches; who (...)
Are we not now in reach of (...)
If our intentions please us, let us call
Our spirits up to them, and let (...).
By watchful Danger, men must (...):
What we resolve on, let us not say, but do.
This said; he chusde out twenty men, that bore
Best reckning with him; and to ship and shore,
All ^asted; reached the ship, lanchit, raisd the ma^t;
Put sails in; and with leather loopes made ^a^t
The oars; Sails hoisted; Arms their men did bring;
All giving speed, and form to every thing.
Then to the high-deepes, their riggd vessel dri^en,
They supt; expecting the approaching Even.
Mean space, Penelope her chamber kept,
And bed, and neither eat, nor drank, nor slept;
Her strong thoughts wrought so on her blameless son;
Still in contention, if he should be done
To death; or escape the impious wooers design.
Look how a Lion, whom then ^^roopes combine
To hunt, and close him in a crafty (...);
Much varied thought conceiues; and fear does sting
For urgent danger: So fared she (...) sleep,
All iuncture of her joints, and nerves did s^eepe
In his dissoluing humor. When (at rest)
Pallas her favors varied; and addressed
An Idol, that Iphthima did present
In (...) membrorum struct^^^.
structure of her every lineament;
Great-sould Icarius daughter: whom, for Spouse
Eum^lus took, that kept in Pheris house.
This, to divine Ulysses house she sent,
To try her best mean, how she might content
Mournful Penelope; and make Relent
The strict addiction in her to deplore.
This Idol (like a (...), affectus curculionis significat quod Iongior and
gracilior cualerit.
worm, that less or more,
Contracts or strains her) did it self convey,
Beyond the wards, or windings of the key,
Into the chamber; and above her head,
Her seat assuming, thus she comforted
Distressed Penelope. Does sleep thus sease
Thy powers, Minerua sub Iphthimae persona, solatur Penelopen in somnis.
affected with so much disease?
The Gods, that nothing troubles, will not see
Thy tears nor griefs, in any least degree,
Sustaind with cause; for they will guard thy son,
Safe to his wished, and native mansion;
Since he is no offender of their States;
And they to such, are firmer then their Fates. Penelope to the Dream.
.
The wise Penelope received her thus;
(Bound with a slumber most delicious,
And in the Port of dreams) O sister, why
Repair you hither? since so far off lie
Your house and household? You were never here
Before this hour; and would you now give cheer
To my so many woes and miseries?
Affecting fitly all the faculties
My soul and mind hold: having lost before
A husband, that of all the virtues bore
The Palm amongst the Greeks; and whose renown
So ample was, that Fame the sound has blown
Through Greece and Argos, to her very heart.
And now again; a son that did convert
My whole powers to his love, by ship is gone.
A tender Plant, that yet was never grown
To labors taste, nor the commerce of men;
For whom, more then my husband I complain*
And lest he should at any sufferance touch
(Or in the sea, or by the men so much
Estranged to him, that must his consorts be)
Fear and chill tremblings, shake each joint of me.
Besides: his danger sets on, foes professed
To way-lay his return; that have addressed
Plots for his death. The scarce-discerned Dream,
Said: Be of comfort; nor fears so extreme,
Let thus dismay thee; thou have such a mate
Attending thee, as some at any rate
Would wish to purchase; for her power is great;
Mineru^ pities thy delights defeat:
Whose Grace has sent me to foretell thee these.
If thou (said she) be of the Goddesses, Penelope to the Idol.

And heardst her tell thee these; thou may as well
From her, tell all things else; daigne then to tell,
If yet the man, to all misfortunes borne,
(My husband) lives; and sees the Sun adorn
The darksome earth; or hides his wretched head
In Plutos house, and lives amongst the dead?
I will not (she replide) my breath exhale,
In one continude, and perpetual tale;
Lives he, or dies he. It Is a filthy use,
To be in vain and idle speech profuse.
This said; she through the keyhole of the door
Vanished again into the open blore.
Icarius daughter started from her sleep,
And Joys fresh humor, her loved breast did s^eepe:
When now so clear, in that first watch of night,
She saw the seen dream vanish from her sight.
The wooers (shipped) the seas moist waves did plie;
And thought the Prince, a haughty death should die.
There lies a certain Island in the sea,
Twixt rockie Samos and rough Ithaca,
That cliffie is it self, and nothing great;
Yet holds convenient havens, that two ways let
Ships in and out; called Asteris: and there
The wooers hoped to make their massakere.
Finis libri quarti Hom. Odyss.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Second Court, on Jove attends;
Who, Hermes to Calypso sends;
Commanding her to clear the ways
Ulysses sought; and she obayes.
When Neptune saw Vlysles free,
And, so in safety, plow the sea;
Enraged, he ruffles up the waves,
And splits his ship. Leucothea saues
His person yet; as being a Dame,
Whose Godhead gouernd in the frame
Of those seas tempers. But the mean
By which she curbs dread Neptunes spleen.
Is made a Jewel; which she takes
From off her head; and that she makes
Ulysses on his bosom wear,
About his neck, she ties it there:
And when he is with waves beset,
Bids wear it as an Amulet;
Commanding him, that not before
He touched upon Phaeacias shore,
He should not part with it; but then
Return it to the sea agein,
And ca^t it from him. He performs;
Yet after this, bides bitter storms;
And in the rocks, sees Death engrau'd;
But on Phaeacias shore is saved.
Another.
(...).
Ulysses builds
A ship; and gains
The Gassie fields;
Pays Neptune pains.

AVrora rose from high-borne Tithons Bed,
That men and Gods might be illustrated:
And then the Deities sat. Imperial Jove,
That makes the horrid murmr beat above,
Took place past all; whose height for ever springs;
And from whom flows the eternal power of things.
Then Pallas (mindful of Ulysses) told
The many Cares, that in Calypsos hold,
He still sustaind; when he had felt before,
So much affliction, and such dangers more.
O Father, Pallas to the Gods.
(said she) and ye ever blessed;
Give never King hereafter, interest
In any aid of yours, by serving you;
By being gentle, humane, just; but grow
Rude, and for ever scornful of your rights;
All justice ordring by their appetites.
Since he that ruled, as it in right behou'd,
That all his subjects, as his children loved,
Finds you so thoughtlesse of him, and his birth.
Thus men begin to say, ye rule in earth;
And grudge at what ye let him undergo;
Who yet the least part of his sufferance know:
Thralld in an Island; shipwrackt in his tears;
And in the fancies that Calypso bears,
Bound from his birthright; all his shipping gone;
And of his soldiers, not retaining one.
And now his most-lou'd Sons life does inflame
Their slaughterous enuies; since his Fathers fame
He puts in pursuit; and is gone as far
As sacred Pylos; and the singular
Dame breeding Sparta. This, with this reply,
The Cloud-assembler answered: Jove to Pallas.
What words fly
Thine own remembrance (daughter?) have not thou
The counsel given thy self, that told thee how
Ulysses shall with his return address
His wooers wrongs? And, for the safe access,
His Son shall make to his innatiue Port,
Do thou direct it, in as curious sort,
As thy wit serves thee: it obeys thy powers;
And in their ship return the speedlesse wowers.
Then turned he to his issue Mercury,
And said: Jove to Mercury
Thou have made good our Ambassie
To the other Statists; To the Nymph then now,
On whose fair head a t^ft of gold does grow;
Bear our true-spoken counsel; for retreat
Of patient Ulysses; who shall get
No aid from us, nor any mortal man;
But in a (...). in rate multis vinculis ligatus.
patcht-vp skiffe, (built as he can,
And suffering woes enough) the twentieth day
At fruitful Scheria, let him breathe his way,
With the Phaeacians, that half Deities live;
Who like a God will honor him; and give
His wisdom clothes, and ship, and brass, and gold,
More then for gain of Troy he ever told;
Where, at the whole division of the prey,
If he a sauer were, or got away
Without a wound (if he should grudge) it was well;
But the end shall crown all; therefore Fate will deal
So well with him; to let him land, and see
His native earth, friends, house and family.
Thus charged he; nor Argicides denied;
But to his feet, Mercurij descriptio.
his fair wingd shoes he tied;
Ambrosian, golden; that in his command,
Put either sea, or the vnmeasur'd land,
With pace as speedy as a puffed of wind.
Then up his Rod went; with which he declined
The eyes of any waker, when he pleased,
And any sleeper, when he wished, diseasd.
This took; he stoopt Pierea; and thence
Glid through the air; and Neptunes Confluence
Kissed as he flew; and checked the waves as light
As any Sea-mew, in her fishing flight,
Her thick wings soucing in the sauorie seas.
Like her, he past a world of wilderness;
But when the far-off I Will, he touched; he went
Up from the blue sea, to the Continent,
And reached the ample Cauerne of the Queen;
Whom he within found; without, seldom seen.
A Sun-like fire upon the harth did flame; Descriptio sp^t cus Calypsus.

The matter precious, and divine the frame;
Of Cedar cleft, and Incense was the Pile,
That breathed an odor round about the I Will.
Her self was seated in an inner room,
Whom sweetly sing he heard; and at her loome,
About a curious web; whose yarne she threw
In, with a golden shittle. A Grove grew
In endless spring about her Cauerne round;
With odorous Cypress, Pines, and Poplars crowned,
Where Haulks, Sea-owles, and long-tongu'd Bittours bred;
And other birds their shadie pinions spread.
All Fowls maritimall; none roosted there,
But those whose labors in the waters were.
A Vine did all the hollow Cave embrace;
Still green, yet still ripe bunches gave it grace.
Four Fountains, one against another powrd
Their silver streams; and meadows all enflowrd
With sweet Balme-gentle, and blue Violets hid,
That decked the soft breasts of each fragrant Mead.
Should any one (though he immortal were)
Arrive and see the sacred objects there;
He would admire them, and be ouer-ioyd;
And so stood Hermes ravished powers employed.
But having all admired, he enterd on
The ample Cave; not could be seen unknown
Of great Calypso, (for all Deities are
Prompt in each others knowledge; though so far
Seuerd in dwellings) but he could not see
Ulysses there within. Without was he
Set sad ashore; where it was his use to view
Th'vnquiet sea; sighed, wept, and empty drew
His heart of comfort. Placed here in her throne
(That beams cast up, to Admiration)
Divine Calypso, questioned Hermes thus:
For what cause (dear, Calypso to Mer^curie.
and much-esteem'd by us,
Thou golden-rod-adorned Mercury)
Arriu'st thou here? thou have not used t'apply
Thy passage this way. Say, what ever be
Thy hearts desire, my mind commands it thee,
If in my means it lie, or power of fact.
But first, what hospitable rights exact,
Come yet more near, and take. This said, she set
A Table forth, and furnished it with meat,
Such as the Gods taste; and served in with it,
Vermilion Nectar. When with banquet, fit
He had confirmd his spirits; he thus expressed
His cause of coming: Mercury to Calypso.
Thou have made request
(Goddess of Goddesses) to understand
My cause of touch here: which thou shall command,
And know with truth: Jove causd my course to thee,
Against my will; for who would willingly
Lackey along so vast a lake of Brine?
Near to no City; that the powers divine
Receives with solemn rites and Hecatombs?
But Jove's will ever, all law ouercomes;
No other God can cross or make it void.
And he affirms, that one, the most annoid
With woes and toiles, of all those men that fought
For Priams City; and to end has brought
Nine years in the contention; is with thee.
For in the tenth year, when roy Victory
Was won, to give the Greeks the spoil of Troy;
Return they did profess, but not enjoy,
Since Pallas they incenst; and she, the waves
By all the winds power, that blew open their graves.
And there they rested. Only this poor one,
This Coast, both winds and waves have cast upon:
Whom now forthwith he wills thee to dismiss;
Affirming that th'vnalterd destinies,
Not only have decreed, he shall not die
Apart his friends; but of Necessity
Enjoy their sights before those fatal hours,
His country earth reach, and erected Towers.
This struck, a loue-checkt horror through her powers;
When (naming him) she this reply did give:
Insatiate are ye Gods, Calypsos displeased reply to Mercury.
past all that live,
In all things you affect; which still conuerts
Your powers to Enuies. It afflicts your hearts,
That any Goddess should (as you obtain
The use of earthly Dames) enjoy the men:
And most in open marriage. So ye fared,
When the delicious-fingerd Morning shared
Orions bed: you easie-liuing States,
Could never satisfy your emulous hates;
Till in Ortygia, the precise-liu'd Dame
(Gold-thron'd Diana) on him rudely came,
And with her swift shafts slew him. And such pains,
(When rich-haird Ceres pleased to give the raines
To her affections; and the grace did yield
Of love and bed amidst a three-cropt field,
To her Iasion) he paid angry Jove;
Who lost, no long time, notice of their love;
But with a glowing lightning, was his death.
And now your enuies labor underneath
A mortals choice of mine; whose life, I took
To liberal safety; when his ship, Jove struck
With red-hote flashes, peece-meale in the seas,
And all his friends and soldiers, succourlesse
Perished but he. Him, cast upon this coast
With blasts and billows; I (in life given lost)
Preserved alone; loved, nourisht, and did vow
To make him deathlesse; and yet never grow
Crooked, or worn with age, his whole life long.
But since no reason may be made so strong,
To strive with Jove's will, or to make it vain;
No not if all the other Gods should strain
Their powers against it; let his will be law;
So he afford him fit means to withdraw,
(As he commands him) to the raging Maine:
But means from me, he never shall obtain,
For my means yield, nor men, nor ship, nor oars,
To set him off, from my so envied shores.
But if my counsel and goodwill can aid
His safe pass home, my best shall be assaid.
Vouchsafe it so, (said heavens Ambassador)
And daigne it quickly. By all means abhor
T'incense Jove's wrath against thee; that with grace
He may hereafter, all thy wish embrace.
Thus took the Argus-killing God, Mercury leaves Calypso.
his wings.
And since the reverend Nymph, these awful things
Received from Jove; she to Ulysses went:
Whom she ashore found, drowned in discontent;
His eyes kept never dry, he did so mourn,
And waste his dear age, for his wished return.
Which still without the Cave he used to do,
Because he could not please the Goddess so.
At night yet (forced) together took their rest,
The willing Goddess, and th'vnwilling Guest.
But he, all day in rocks, and on the shore
The vexed sea viewd; and did his Fate deplore.
Him, now, the Goddess (coming near) bespake:
Unhappy man; Calypso to Ulysses
no more discomfort take,
For my constraint of thee; nor waste thine age;
I now will passing freely disengage
Thy irksome stay here. Come then, fell thee wood,
And build a ship, to save thee from the flood.
I Will furnish thee with fresh wave; bread and wine,
Ruddie and sweet, that will the Hunger.
Piner pine;
Put garments on thee; give thee winds foreright;
That every way thy home-bent appetite
May safe attain to it; if so it please
At all parts, all the heauen-housd Deities!
That more in power are, more in skill then I;
And more can judge, what fits humanity.
He stood amazed, Ulysses to Calypso
at this strange change in her;
And said: O Goddess! thy intents prefer
Some other project, then my parting hence;
Commanding things of too high consequence
For my performance. That my self should build
A ship of power, my home assaies to shield
Against the great Sea, of such dread to pass;
Which not the best-built ship that ever was,
Will pass exulting; when such winds as Jove
Can thunder up, their trims and tacklings prove.
But could I build one, I would never aboard,
(Thy will opposde) nor (won) without thy word,
Given in the great oath of the Gods to me,
Not to beguile me in the least degree.
The Goddess smilde; held hard his hand, and said:
O you are a shrewdw one; and so habited
In taking heed; thou know not what it is
To be unwary; nor use words amiss.
How have thou charmd me, were I never so sly?
Let earth know then; Calypsos oath.
and heaven, so broad, so hie;
And th'vnder-sunke waves of the infernal stream;
(Which is an oath, as terribly supreme,
As any God swears) that I had no thought,
But stood with what I spoke; nor would have wrought,
Nor counseld any act, against thy good;
But ever diligently weighd, and stood
On those points in persuading thee; that I
Would use my self in such extremity.
For my mind simple is, and innocent;
Not given by cruel sleights to circumuent;
Nor bear I in my breast a heart of steel,
But with the Sufferer, willing sufferance feel.
This said; the Grace of Goddesses led home;
He tract her steps; and (to the Cauerne come)
In that rich Throne, whence Mercury arose,
He sat. The Nymph her self did then appose
For food and beuridge to him; all best meat
And drink, that mortals use to taste and eat.
Then sat she opposite; and for her Feast,
Was Nectar and Ambrosia addressed
By handmaids to her. Both, what was prepared,
Did freely fall to. Having fitly fared,
The Nymph Calypso this discourse began:
Ioue-bred Ulysses! many-witted man!
Still is thy home so wished? so soon, away?
Be still of cheer, for all the worst I say;
But if thy soul knew what a sum of woes
For thee to cast up, thy stern Fates impose,
Ere to thy country earth thy hopes attain;
Undoubtedly thy choice would here remain;
Keep house with me, Calypsos promise of immortality to Ulysses.
and be a liver ever.
Which (me thinks) should thy house and thee disseuer;
Though for thy wife there, thou art set on fire;
And all thy days are spent in her desire;
And though it be no boast in me to say,
In form and mind, I match her every way.
Nor can it fit a mortal Dames compare,
T'affect those terms with us, that deathlesse are.
The great in counsels, made her this reply:
Renowm'd, and to be reuerenc'd Deity!
Let it not move thee, that so much I vow
My comforts to my wife; though well I know
All cause my self, why wise Penelope
In wit is far inferior to thee;
In feature, stature, all the parts of show;
She being a mortal; an Immortal thou;
Old ever growing, and yet never old.
Yet her desire, shall all my days see told;
Adding the sight of my returning day,
And natural home. If any God shall lay
His hand upon me, as I pass the seas;
I Will bear the worst of what his hand shall please;
As having given me such a mind, as shall
The more still rise, the more his hand lets fall.
In wars and waves, my sufferings were not small.
I now have sufferd much; as much before;
Hereafter let as much result, and more.
This said; the Sun set; and earth shadows gave;
When these two (in an in-roome of the Cave,
Left to themselves) left Love no rites undone.
The early Morn up; up he rose; put on
His in and our-weed. She, her self inchaces
Amidst a white robe, full of all the Graces;
Ample, and plea^ed, thick, like fishie skales.
A golden girdle then, her waste empales;
Her head, a veil decks; and abroad they come;
And now began Ulysses to go home.
A great Axe, first she gave, that two ways cut;
In which a fair wel-polisht helm was put,
That from an Olive bough received his frame:
A plainer then. Then led she till they came
To lofty woods, that did the I Will confine.
The Fi^^e tree, Poplar, and heauen-scaling Pine,
Had there their offspring. Of which, those that were
Of driest matter, and grew longest there,
He chusde for lighter sail. This place, thus shown,
The Nymph turned home. He fell to felling down;
And twenty trees he stoopt, in little space;
Plaind, used his Plumb; did all with artfull grace.
In mean time did Calypso wimbles bring.
He bored, closde, naild, and orderd every thing;
And took how much a ship-wright will allow
A ship of burden; (one that best does know
What fits his Art) so large a Keele he cast.
Wrought up her decks, and hatches, side-boords, mast;
With willow watlings armd her, to resist
The billows outrage; added all she mist;
Sail-yards, and stern for guide. The Nymph then brought
Linen for sails; which, with dispatch, he wrought.
Gables, and halsters, tacklings. All the Frame
In four days space, This four days work (you will say) is too much for
one man: and Pliny affirms, that Hiero (a king of Sicilie) in five and forty
days built two hundred and twenty ships, r^gged them, and p^t to sea with
them.
to full perfection came.
The fifth day, they dismissed him from the shore;
Weeds, neat, and odorous gave him; victles store;
Wine, and strong waters, and a prosperous wind.
To which, Ulysses (fit to be diuin'd)
His sails exposd, and hoised. Off he gat;
And cheerful was he. At the Stern he sat,
And ster'd right artfully. No sleep could seize
His ey-lids: he beh^ld the Ple^ades;
The Bear, surnamed the Waine, that round does move
About Orion; and keeps still above
The billowie Oc^an. The slow-setting star,
Boots called, by some, the Waggonar.
Calypso warnd him, he his course should stere
Still to his left hand. Seventeen days did clear
The cloudie Nights command, in his moist way;
And by the eighteenth light, he might display
The shadie hills of the Phaeacian shore;
For which, as to his next abode, he bore.
The country did a pretty figure yield,
And looked from off the dark seas, like a shield.
Imperious Neptune (making his retreat
From the Ethiopian earth; and taking seat
Upon the mountains of the Solymi;
From thence, far off discovering) did descrie
Ulysses, his fields plowing. All on fire
The sight strait set his heart; and made desire
Of wreake run over, it did boil so hie.
When (his head nodding) O impiety
(He cried out) now, the Gods inconstancy
Is most apparent; altring their designs
Since I the Aethiops saw: and here confines
To this Ulysses fate, his misery.
The great mark, on which all his hopes rely,
Lies in Phaeacia. But I hope he shall
Feel woe at height, ere that dead calm befall.
This said; (...) Mendicando colligo.
he (begging) gatherd clouds from land;
Frighted the seas up; snatched into his hand,
His horrid Trident; and aloft did toss
(Of all the winds) all storms he could engrosse.
All earth took into sea with clouds; grim Night
Fell tumbling headlong from the cope of Light.
The East and Southwinds iustld in the air;
The violent Zephire, and North-making fair,
Rould up the waves before them: and then, bent
Ulysses knees; then all his spirit was spent.
In which despair, he thus spoke: Woe is me!
What was I borne to? man of misery?
Fear tells me now, that all the Goddess said,
Truths self will author; that Fate would be paid
Griefs whole sum due from me, at sea, before
I reached the dear touch of my countries shore.
With what clouds Jove, heavens heightened forehead binds?
How tyrannize the wraths of all the winds?
How all the tops, he bottomes with the deepes?
And in the bottomes, all the tops he steepes?
Thus dreadful is the presence of our death.
Thrice four times blessed were they that sunk beneath
Their Fates at Troy; and did to naught contend,
But to renown Atrides with their end?
I would to God, my hour of death, and Fate,
That day had held the power to terminate;
When showers of darts, my life bore vndeprest,
About divine Aeacides deceast.
Then had I been allotted to have died,
By all the Greeks, with funerals glorified;
(Whence Death, encouraging good life, had grown)
Where now I die, by^^o man mournd, nor known.
This spoke; a huge wave took him by the head,
And hurld him o're-boord: ship and all it laid
Inuerted quite amidst the waves; but he
Far off from her sprawld, strowd about the sea:
His Stern still holding, broken off; his Mast
Burst in the midst: so horrible a blast
Of mixed winds struck it. Sails and saile-yards fell
Amongst the billows; and himself did dwell
A long time under water: nor could get
In haste his head out: wave with wave so met
In his depression; and his garments too,
(Given by Calypso) gave him much to do,
Hindering his swimming; yet he left not so
His drenched vessel, for the overthrow
Of her nor him; but gat at length again
(Wrestling with Neptune) hold of her; and then
Sat in her Bulk, insulting over Death;
Which (with the salt stream, pressed to stop his breath)
He escaped, and gave the sea again; to give
To other men. His ship so strived to live,
Floting at randon, cufft from wave to wave;
As you have seen the Northwind when he drove
In Autumn, heaps of thorne-fed Grasshoppers*
Hither and thither; one heap this way bears,
Another that; and makes them often meet
In his confusde gales; so Vlyss^s fleet,
The winds hurled up and down: now Boreas
Tossed it to Notus, Notus gave it pass
To Eurus; Eurus, Zephire made it pursue
The horrid Tennis. This sport called the view
Of Cadmus daughter, with the narrow heel;
(Ino Leucothea) that first did feel
A mortal Dames desires; and had a tongue.
But now had th'honor to be named among
The marine Godheads. She, with pity saw
Ulysses iustl'd thus, from flaw to flaw;
And (like a Cormorand, in form and flight)
Rose from a whirl-poole: on the ship did light,
And thus bespeake him: Leucothea to Ulysses.
Why is Neptune thus
In thy pursuit extremely furious,
Oppressing thee with such a world of ill,
Even to thy death? He must not serve his will,
Though it is his study. Let me then advise,
As my thoughts serve; thou shall not be unwise
To leave thy weeds and ship, to the commands
Of these rude winds; and work out with thy hands,
Pass to Phaeacia; where thy austere Fate,
Is to pursue thee with no more such hate.
Take here this Tablet, with this riband strung,
And see it still about thy bosom hung;
By whose eternal virtue, never fear
To suffer thus again, nor perish here.
But when thou touchest with thy hand the shore,
Then take it from thy neck, nor wear it more;
But cast it far off from the Continent,
And then thy person far ashore present.
Thus gave she him the Tablet; and again
(Turned to a Cormorand) diu'd past sight the Maine.
Patient Ulysses sighd at this; and stuck
In the conceit of such faire-spoken Luck:
And said; Ulysses still suspicious of fair fortunes.
Alas, I must suspect even this;
Lest any other of the Deities
Add slight to Neptunes force; to counsel me
To l^aue my vessel, and so far off see
The shore I aim at. Not with thoughts too clear
Will I obey her: but to me appear
These counsels best; as long as I perceive
My ship not quite dissolved, I will not leave
The help she may afford me; but abide,
And suffer all woes, till the worst be tried.
When she is split, I Will swim: no miracle can
Past near and clear means, move a knowing man.
While this discourse emploid him, Neptune raisd
A huge, a high, and horrid sea, that seisd
Him and his ship, Neptuni (...) Vlystem inclementia.
and tossed them through the Lake;
As when the violent winds together take
Heaps of dry chafe, and hurl them every way;
So his long woodstacke, Neptune struck astray.
Then did Ulysses mount on rib, perforce,
Like to a rider of a running horse,
To stay himself a time, while he might shift
His drenched weeds, that were Calypsos gift.
When putting strait, Leucotheas Amulet
About his neck; he all his forces set
To swim; and cast him prostrate to the seas.
When powrefull Neptune saw the ruthlesse prease
Of perils siege him thus; he moved his head,
And this betwixt him and his heart, he said:
So, now feel ils enough, and struggle so,
Till to your Ioue-lou'd Ilanders you row.
But my mind says, you will not so avoid
This last task too, but be with sufferance cloid.
This said; his rich-man'd horse he moved; and reached
His house at Aegas. But Minerua fetched
The winds from sea; and all their ways but one
Barrd to their passage; the bleake North alone
She set to blow; the rest, she charged to keep
Their rages in; an bind themselves in sleep.
But Boreas still flew high, to break the seas,
Till Ioue-bred Ithacus, the more with ease,
The nauigation-skild Phaeacian States
Might make his refuge; Death, and angry Fates,
At length escaping. Two nights yet, and days,
He spent in wrestling with the sable seas;
In which space, often did his heart propose
Death to his eyes. But when Aurora rose,
And threw the third light from her orient hair;
The winds grew calm, and clear was all the air;
Not one breath stirring. Then he might descrie
(Raisd by the high seas) clear, the land was nie.
And then, Simile.
look how to good sons that esteem
Their fathers life dear, (after pains extreme,
Felt in some sickness, that has held him long
Down to his bed; and with affections strong,
Wasted his body; made his life his lode;
As being inflicted by some angry God)
When on their praires, they see descend at length
Health from the heavens, clad all in spirit and strength;
The sight is precious: so, since here should end
Ulysses toiles; which therein should extend
Health to his country, (held to him, his Sire)
And on which, long for him, Disease did tire.
And then besides, for his own sake to see
The shores, the woods so near; such joy had he,
As those good sons for their recouerd Sire.
Then labourd feet and all parts, to aspire
To that wished Continent; which, when as near
He came, as Clamor might inform an ear;
He heard a sound beat from the sea-bred rocks,
Against which gave a huge sea horrid shocks,
That belcht upon the firm land, weeds and foam;
With which were all things hid there; where no room
Of fit capacity was for any port;
Nor (from the sea) for any man's resort;
The shores, the rocks, and cliffes so prominent were.
O (said Ulysses then) now Jupiter
Has given me sight of an vnhop't for shore,
(Though I have wrought these seas so long, so sore)
Of rest yet, no place shows the slendrest prints;
The rugged shore so bristl'd is with flints:
Against which, every way the waves so flock;
And all the shore shows as one eminent rock.
So near which, it is so deep, that not a sand
Is there, for any tired foot to stand:
Nor fly his death-fast following miseries,
Lest if he land, upon him fore-right flies
A churlish wave, to crush him against a Cliffe;
Worse then vain rendering, all his landing strife.
And should I swim to seek a haven elsewhere,
Or land, less way-beate; I may justly fear
I shall be taken with a gale again,
And cast a huge way off into the Maine.
And there, the great Earth-shaker (having seen
My so near landing; and again, his spleen
Forcing me to him) will some Whale send out,
(Of which a horrid number here about,
His Amphitrite breeds) to swallow me.
I well have proved, with what malignitie
He treds my steps. While this discourse he held;
A cursed Surge, against a cutting rock impeld
His naked body, which it gasht and tore;
And had his bones broke, if but one sea more
Had cast him on it. But Palla^.
she prompted him,
That never faild; and bad him no more swim
Still off and on; but boldly force the shore,
And hug the rock, that him so rudely tore.
Which he, with both hands, sighed and claspt; till past
The billows rage was; which escaped; back, so fast
The rock repulst it, that it reft his hold,
Sucking him from it, and far back he rould.
And as the Polypus, that (forced from home
Amidst the soft sea; and near rough land come
For shelter against the storms that beat on her
At open sea, as she abroad does er^e)
A deal of grauill, and sharp little stones,
Needfully gathers in her hollow bones:
So he forced hither, Per asperiora vitare laeuia.
(by the sharper ill,
Shunning the smoother) where he best hoped, still
The worst succeeded: for the cruel friend,
To which he clingd for succor, off did rend
From his broad hands, the soken flesh so sore,
That off he fell, and could sustain no more.
Quite under water fell he; and, past Fate,
Hapless Ulysses, there had lost the state
He held in life; if (still the grey-eye Maid,
His wisdom prompting) he had not assaid
Another course; and ceast t'attempt that shore;
Swimming, and casting round his eye, t'explore
Some other shelter. Then, the mouth he found
Of fair Callicoes flood; whose shores were crowned
With most apt succors: Rocks so smooth, they seemd
Polisht of purpose: land that quite redeemd
With breathless couerts, the others blasted shores.
The flood he knew; and thus in heart implores:
King of this River! hear; what ever name
Makes thee inuokt: to thee I humbly frame
My flight from Neptunes furies; Reverend is
To all the everliving Deities,
What erring man soever seeks their aid.
To thy both flood and knees, a man dismayed
With varied sufferance sues. Yield then some rest
To him that is thy suppliant professed.
This (though but spoke in thought) the Godhead heard;
Her Current strait staid; and her thick waves cleard
Before him, smoothed her waters; and just where
He praid, half drowned; entirely saved him there.
Then forth he came, his both knees faltring; both
His strong hands hanging down; and all with froth
His cheeks and nosthrils flowing. Voice and breath
Spent to all use; and down he sunk to Death.
The sea had soakt his heart through: all his veins,
His toiles had rackt, t'a laboring (...): a partu doleo.
woman's pains.
Dead weary was he. But when breath did find
A pass reciprocal; and in his mind,
His spirit was recollected: up he rose,
And from his neck did th'Amulet unloose,
That Ino gave him; which he hurld from him
To sea. It sounding fell; and back did swim
With th'ebbing waters; till it strait arrived,
Where Inos fair hand, it again received.
Then kissed he the humble earth; and on he goes,
Till bulrushes showed place for his repose;
Where laid, he sighed, and thus said to his soul:
O me, what strange perplexities control
The whole skill of thy powers, in this event?
What feel I? if till Care-nurse Night be spent,
I watch amidst the flood; the seas chill breath,
And vegetant dewes, I fear will be my death:
So low brought with my labors. Toward day,
A passing sharp air ever breathes at sea.
If I the pitch of this next mountain scale,
And shadie wood; and in some thicket fall
Into the hands of Sleep: though there the cold
May well be checked; and healthful slumbers hold
Her sweet hand on my powers; all care allaid,
Yet there will beasts devour me. Best appaid
Does that course make me yet; for there, some strife,
Strength, and my spirit, may make me make for life.
Which, though empaird, may yet be fresh applied,
Where peril, possible of escape is tried.
But he that fights with heaven, or with the sea,
To Indiscretion, adds Impiety.
Thus to the woods he hasted; which he found
Not far from sea; but on farre-seeing ground;
Where two twin underwoods, he enterd on;
With Olive trees, and oile-trees ouergrowne:
Through which, the moist force of the loud-voic't wind,
Did never beat; nor ever Phoebus shined;
Nor shower beat through; they grew so one in one;
And had, by turns, their power t'exclude the Sun.
Here enterd our Ulysses; and a bed
Of leaves huge, and of huge abundance spread
With all his speed. Large he made it; for there,
For two or three men, ample Couerings were;
Such as might shield them from the Winters worst;
Though A met aphoricall Hyperbole, expressing the Winters extremity of
sharpness.
steel it breathed; and blew as it would burst.
Patient Ulysses ioyd, that ever day
Showed such a shelter. In the midst he lay,
Store of leaves heaping high on every side.
And as in some out-field, a man does hide
A kindld brand, to keep the seed of fire; Simile.

No neighbor dwelling near; and his desire
Served with self store; he else would ask of none;
But of his fore-spent sparks, rakes th'ashes on:
So this out-place, Ulysses thus receives;
And thus nak't virtues seed, lies hid in leaves.
Yet Pallas made him sleep, as soon as men
Whom Delicacies, all their flatteries daine.
And all that all his labors could comprise,
Quickly concluded, in his closed eyes.
Finis libri quinti Hom. Odyss.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
MInerua in a vision stands
Before Nausica^; and commands
She to the flood her weeds should bear,
For now her Nuptial day was near.
Nausicaa her charge ^b^yes;
And then with other virgins plays.
Their sports make ^ak't Ulysses rise;
Walk to them, and beseech supplies
Of food and clothes. His naked sight
Puts the other Maids, afraid to flight.
Nausicaa only boldly stays,
And gladly his desire obayes.
He (furnis^ with her f^^ours shown)
Attends her, and the re^t, to Town.
Another.
(...).
Here Olive leaves
T'hide shame, began.
The Maid receives
The naked man.

THe much-sustaining, patient, heavenly Man,
Whom Toil and (...). Somno and labor afflictus. Sleep ((...)) for the want
of sleep.
Sleep had worn so weak and wan;
Thus won his rest. In mean space Pallas went
To the Phaeacian city; and descent
That first did broad Hyperias lands divide,
Near the vast Cyclops, men of monstrous pride.
That preyd on those Hyperians, since they were
Of greater power; and therefore longer there
Divine Nausithous dwelt not; but arose,
And did for Scheria, all his powers dispose:
Far from ingenious Art-inuenting men.
But there did he erect a City then.
First, drew a wall round; then he houses builds;
And then a Temple to the Gods; the fields
Lastly dividing. But he (stoopt by Fate)
Diu'd to th'infernals: and Alcinous sat
In his command: a man, the Gods did teach,
Commanding counsels. His house held the reach
Of gray Miner^as project; to provide,
That great-sould Ithacus might be supplide
With all things fitting his return. She went
Up to the chamber, where the fair Nausicaa.
descent
Of great Alcinous slept. A maid, whose parts
In wit and beauty, wore divine deserts.
Well decked her chamber was: of which, the door
Did seem to lighten; such a gloss it bore
Betwixt the posts: and now flew open, to find
The Goddess entire. Like a puffed of wind
She reached the Virgin bed. Near which, there lay
Two maids; to whom, the Graces did convey,
Figure, and manners. But above the head
Of bright Nausicaa, did Pallas tred
The subtle air; and put the person on
Of Dymas daughter; from comparison
Exempt in business Nauall. Like his seed,
Minerua looked now; Intending Dymas daughter.
whom one year did breed,
With bright Nausicaa; and who had gaind
Grace in her love; yet on her thus complaind:
Nausicaa! why bred thy mother one
So negligent, in rites so stood upon
By other virgins? Thy faite garments lie
Neglected by thee; yet thy Nuptials nie.
When, rich in all attire, both thou should be,
And garments give to others honoring thee,
That lead thee to the Temple. Thy good name
Grows amongst men for these things; they inflame
Father, and reverend Mother with delight.
Come; when the Day takes any wink from Night,
Let Us to the river, and repurifie
Thy wedding garments: my society
Shall freely serve thee, for thy speedier aid,
Because thou shall no more stand on the Maid.
The best of all Phaeacia woo thy Grace,
Where thou were bred, and ow'st thy self a race.
Up, and stir up to thee thy honored Sire,
To give thee Mules and Coach; thee and thy tire;
Veiles, girdles, mantles, early to the flood,
To bear in state. It suites thy high-borne blood;
And far more fits thee, then to foot so far;
For far from town thou know the Bath-founts are.
This said; away blue-eyd Minerua went
Up to Olympus: the firm Continent, Olympus described.

That bears in endless being, the deified kind;
That Is neither souc't with showers, nor shook with wind;
Nor chilld with snow; but where Serenitie flies,
Exempt from clouds; and euer-beamie skies
Circle the glittering hill. And all their days,
Give the delights of blessed Deity praise.
And hither Pallas flew; and left the Maid,
When she had all that might excite her, said.
Strait rose the lovely Morn, that up did raise
Faire-veild Nausicaa; whose dream, her praise
To Admiration took. Who no time spent
To give the rapture of her vision vent,
To her loved parents: whom she found within.
Her mother set at fire, who had to spin
A Rock, whose tincture with sea-purple shined;
Her maids about her. But she chanced to find
Her Father going abroad: to Counsel called
By his grave Senate. And to him, exhald
Her smotherd bosom was. This familiar and near wanton carriage of Nausicaa to
her father, joined with that virgin modesty expressed in her after, is much
prais^d by the grauest of Homers exposit^rs; with her fathers loving allowance
of it; know^ng her shamefastnes and judgment, would not let her exceed at any
part. Which note ^here inserted, not as if this were more worthy the
observation then other every where strewed flowers of pr^cept; but because this
more generally pleasing su^^ect may p^rhaps find more fitness for the stay of
most Readers.
Loved Sire (said she)
Will you not now command a Coach for me?
Stately and complete? fit for me to bear
To wash at flood, the weeds I cannot wear
Before repurified? Your self it fits
To wear fair weeds; as every man that sits
In place of counsel. And five sons you have;
Two wed; three Bachelors; that must be brave
In every days shift, that they may go dance;
For these three last, with these things must advance
Their states in marriage: and who else but I
Their sister, should their dancing rites supply?
This general cause she showed; and would not name
Her mind of Nuptials to her Sire, for shame.
He understood her yet; and thus replide:
Daughter! nor these, nor any grace beside,
I either will deny thee, or defer,
Mules, nor a Coach, of state and circular,
Fitting at all parts. Go; my servants shall
Serve thy desires, and thy command in all.
The servants then (commanded) soon obaid;
Fetched Coach, and Mules joined in it. Then the Maid
Brought from the chamber her rich weeds, and laid
All up in Coach: in which, her mother placed
A maund of victles, varied well in taste,
And other iunkets. Wine she likewise filld
Within a goat-skin bottle, and distilld
Sweet and moist oil into a golden Cruse,
Both for her daughters, and her handmaids use;
To soften their bright bodies, when they rose
Clensd from their cold baths. Up to Coach then goes
T^'obserued Maid: takes both the scourge and raines;
And to her side, her handmaid strait attaines.
Nor these alone, but other virgins graced
The Nuptial Chariot. The whole Beuie placed;
Nausicaa scourgd to make the Coach Mules run;
That neigh'd, and paced their usual speed; and soon,
Both maids and weeds, brought to the river side;
Where Baths for all the year, their use supplide.
Whose waters were so pure, they would not stain;
But still ran fair forth; and did more remain
Apt to purge stains; for that purged stain within,
Which, by the waters pure store, was not seen.
These (here arrived,) the Mules vncoacht, and drove
Up to the gulphie rivers shore, that gave
Sweet grass to them. The maids from Coach then took
Their clothes, and steept them in the sable brook.
Then put them into springs, and trod them clean,
With cleanly feet; aduentring wagers then,
Who should have soonest, and most cleanly done.
When having thoroughly cleansd, they spread them on
The floods shore, all in order. And then, where
The waves the pibbles washed, and ground was clear,
They bathed themselves; and all with glittring oil,
Smoothed their white skins: refreshing then their toil
With pleasant dinner, by the rivers side.
Yet still watched when the Sun, their clothes had dride.
Till which time (having dined) Nausicae
With other virgins, did at stool-ball play;
Their shoulder-reaching head-tires laying by.
Nausicae (with the wrists of Ivory)
The liking stroke struck; singing first a song;
(As custom orderd) and amidst the throng,
Made such a show; and so past all was seen;
As when the Chast-borne, Arrow-louing Queen, Simile.

Along the mountains gliding; either over
Spartan Taygetus, whose tops far discover;
Or Eurymanthus; in the wild Bores chase;
Or swift-hou'd Heart; and with her, Jove's fair race
(The field Nymphs) sporting. Amongst whom, to see
How far Diana had prioritie
(Though all were fair) for fairness; yet of all,
(As both by head and forhead being more tall)
Latona triumphed; since the dullest sight,
Might easly judge, whom her pains brought to light;
Nausicaa so (whom never husband tamed)*
Above them all, in all the beauties flamed.
But when they now made homewards, and araid;
Ordring their weeds, disorderd as they played;
Mules and Coach ready; then Minerua thought,
What means to wake Ulysses, might be wrought,
That he might see this lovely sighted maid,
Whom she intended, should become his aid:
Bring him to Town; and his return advance.
Her mean was The piety and wisdom of the Po^t was such, that (agreeing
with the sacred letter) not the least of things he makes come to pass, sine
Numinis prouidentia. As Spond well notes of him
this, (though thought a stool-ball chance)
The Queen now (for the vpstroke) struck the ball
Quite wide off the other maids; and made it fall
Amidst the whirlpooles. At which, out shriekt all;
And with the shrieke, did wise Ulysses wake:
Who, sitting up, was doubtful who should make
That sudden outcrie; and in mind, thus strived:
On what a people am I now arrived?
At civil hospitable men, that fear
The Gods? or dwell injurious mortals here?
Unjust, and churlish? like the female cry
Of youth it sounds. What are they? Nymphs bred hie,
On tops of hills? or in the founts of floods?
In herbie marshes? or in leauy woods?
Or are they high-spoke men, I now am near?
I Will prove, and see. With this, the wary Peer
Crept forth the thicket; and an Olive bough
Broke with his broad hand; which he did bestow
In covert of his nakedness; and then,
Put ha^tie head out: Look how from his den,
A mountain Lion looks, Simile.
that, all embrewd
With drops of trees; and weather-beaten hewd;
(Bold of his strength) goes on; and in his eye,
A burning furnace glowes; all bent to prey
On sheep, or oxen; or the vpland Heart;
His belly charging him; and he must part
Stakes with the Heards-man, in his beasts attempt,
Even where from rape, their strengths are most exempt:
So wet, so weather-beate, so stung with Need,
Even to the home-fields of the countries breed,
Ulysses was to force forth his access,
Though merely naked; and his sight did press
The eyes of soft-haird virgins. Horrid was
His rough appearance to them: the hard pass
He had at sea, stuck by him. All in flight
The Virgins scatterd, frighted with this sight,
About the prominent windings of the flood.
All but Nausicaa fled; but she fast stood:
Pall^s had put a boldness in her breast;
And in her fair lims, tender Fear comprest.
And still she stood him, as resolved to know
What man he was; or out of what should grow
His strange repair to them. And here was he
Put to his wisdom; if her virgin knee,
He should be bold, but kneeling, to embrace;
Or keep aloof, and t^ie with words of grace,
In humblest suppliance, if he might obtain
Some cover for his nakedness; and gain
Her grace to show and guide him to the Town.
The last, he best thought, to be worth his own,
In weighing both well: to keep still aloof,
And give with soft words, his desires their proof;
Lest pressing so near, as to touch her knee,
He might incense her maiden modesty.
This fair and filled speech then, showed this was he.
Let me beseech (O Queen) this truth of thee;
Are you of mortal, or the deified race? Ulysses to Na^sicaa.

If of the Gods, that th'ample heavens embrace;
I can resemble you to none above,
So near as to the chast-borne birth of Jove,
The beamie Cynthia. Her you full present,
In grace of every God-like lineament;
Her goodly magnitude; and all th'addresse
You promise of her very perfectness.
If sprung of humanes, that inhabit earth;
Thrice blessed are both the authors of your birth;
Thrice blessed your brothers, that in your deserts,
Must, even to rapture, bear delighted hearts;
To see so like the first trim of a tree,
Your form adorn a dance. But most ble^t, he
Of all that breathe, that has the gift t'engage
Your bright neck in the yoke of marriage;
And deck his house with your commanding merit.
I have not seen a man of so much spirit.
Nor man, nor woman, I did ever see,
At all parts equal to the parts in thee.
T'enioy your sight, does Admiration seize
My eyes, and apprehensiue faculties.
Lately in Delos (with a charge of men
Arrived, that renderd me most wretched then,
Now making me thus naked) I beheld
The burden of a Palm, whose issue sweld
About Apollos Phane; and that put on
A grace like thee; for Earth had never none
Of all her Syluane issue so adorned:
Into amaze my very soul was turned,
To give it observation; as now thee
To view (O Virgin) a stupiditie
Past admiration strikes me; joined with fear
To do a suppliants due, and prease so near,
As to embrace thy knees. Nor is it strange;
For one of fresh and firmest spirit, would change
To Embrace so bright an object. But, for me,
A cruel habit of calamity,
Prepared the strong impression thou have made:
For this last Day did fly Nights twentieth shade
Since I, at length, escapt the sable seas;
When in the mean time, th'vnrelenting prease
Of waves and stern storms, tossed me up and down,
From th'Ile Ogygia: and now God has thrown
My wrack on this shore; that perhaps I may
My miseries vary here: for yet their stay,
I fear, heaven has not orderd: though before
These late afflictions, it has lent me store.
O Queen, daine pity then, since first to you
My Fate importunes my distress to vow.
No other Dame, nor man, that this Earth own,
And neighbor City, I have seen or known.
The Town then show me; give my nakedness
Some shroud to shelter it, if to these seas,
Linen or woollen, you have brought to cleanse.
God give you, in requital, all th'amends
Your heart can wish: a husband, family,
And good agreement: Naught beneath the sky,
More sweet, more worthy is, then firm consent
Of man and wife, in household government.
It joys their wishers well; their enemies wounds;
But to themselves, the special good redounds.
She answered: Nausica^ to Ulysses.
Stranger! I discern in thee,
Nor Sloth, nor Folly reigns; and yet I see,
Thou Art poor and wretched. In which I conclude,
That Industry nor wisdom make endude
Men with those gifts, that make them best to th'eie;
Jove only orders man's felicity.
To good and bad, his pleasure fashions still,
The whole proportion of their good and ill.
And he perhaps has formd this plight in thee,
Of which, thou must be patient, as he, free.
But after all thy wanderings, since thy way,
Both to our Earth, and near our City, lay,
As being exposde to our cares to relieve;
Weeds, and what else, a humane hand should give,
To one so suppliant, and tamed with woe;
Thou shall not want. Our City, I will show;
And tell our peoples name: This neighbor Town,
And all this kingdom, the Phaeacians own.
And (since thou seemdst so feign, to know my birth;
And made a question, if of heaven or earth)
This Earth has bred me; and my Fathers name
Alcinous is; that in the power and frame
Of this Isles rule, is supereminent.
Thus (passing him) she to the Virgins went.
And said: Give stay, both to your feet and fright;
Why thus disperse ye, for a man's mere sight?
Esteem you him a Cyclop, that long since
Made use to prey upon our Citizens? (...). Cui vitalis vel sensualis humiditas
inest. (...); vt dicatur quasi (...), quod nihil sit magis fluxum quam homo.

This man, no moist man is; (nor watrish thing,
That Is ever flitting; ever rauishing
All it can compass; and, like it, does range
In rape of women; never staid in change)
This man is truly (...). virili animo praeditus, fortis, magnanimus. Nor are
those affirmed to be men; qui servile quidpiam and abiectum faciunt; vel,
^acere ^ustinent: according to this of Herod^tus in Poly: (...). Many, men's
forms sustain, but few are men.
manly, wise, and staid;
In soul more rich; the more to sense decaid.
Who, nor will do, nor suffer to be done,
Acts lewd and abject; nor can such a one
Greet the Phaeacians, with a mind envious;
Dear to the Gods they are; and he is pious.
Besides, divided from the world we are;
The outpart of it; billows circulare
The sea reuoluing, round about our shore;
Nor is there any man, that enters more
Then our own countrymen, with what is brought
From other countries. This man, minding naught
But his relief: a poor unhappy wretch,
Wrackt here; and has no other land to fetch.
Him now we must provide for; from Jove* come
All strangers, According to an other translator: Ab love nam supplex pauper,
procedit and holpes: Res breuis, at chara est, Magni quoque mune^is i^star.
Which I cite to show his good when he keeps him to the Original; and near in
any degree expounds it.
and the needy of a home.
Who any gift, though never so small it be,
Esteem as great, and take it gratefully.
And therefore Virgins, give the stranger food,
And wine; and see ye bath him in the flood;
Near to some shore, to shelter most inclined;
To cold Bath-bathers, hurtful is the wind.
Not only rugged making the outward skin,
But by his thin powers, pierces parts within.
This said; their flight in a return they set;
And did Ulysses with all grace entreat:
Showed him a shore, wind^ proof, and full of shade:
By him a shirt, and utter mantle laid.
A golden Judge of liquid oil did add;
Bad wash; and all things as Nausicaa bad.
Divine Ulysses would not use their aid;
But thus bespake them: Ulysses modesty to the Virgins.
Every lovely maid,
Let me entreat to stand a little by;
That I alone the fresh flood may apply, He taught their youths modesty, by
his aged judgment. As receiving the custom of maids then ^sed to that
entertainment of men: notwithstanding the modesty of that age, could not be
corrupted inwardly, for those outward kind observations of guests and
strangers, and was therefore privileged. It is easy to a^oide show: and those
that most curiously avoid the outward construction, are ever most tainted with
the inward corruption.

To cleanse my bosom of the sea-wrought brine.
And then use oil; which long time did not shine
On my poor shoulders. I Will not wash in sight
Of faire-haird maidens. I should blush outright,
To bathe all bare by such a virgin light.
They moved, and musde, a man had so much grace;
And told their Mistress, what a man he was.
He clensd his broad-soild-shoulders; back and head
Yet never tamed. But now, had foam and weed,
Knit in the fair curles. Which dissolved; and he
Slickt all with sweet oil: the sweet charity,
The untouched virgin showed in his attire,
He clothed him with. Then Pallas put a fire,
More then before, into his sparkling eyes;
His late soil set off, with his soon fresh guise.
His locks (clensd) curld the more; and matched (in power
To please an eye) the Hyacinthian flower.
And as a workman, that can well combine
Silver and gold; and make both strive to shine;
As being by Vulcan, and Minerua too,
Taught how far either may be urged to go, Simile.

In strife of eminence; when work sets forth
A worthy soul, to bodies of such worth;
No thought reproving the act, in any place;
Nor Art no debt to Natures liueliest grace:
So Pallas wrought in him, a grace as great,
From head to shoulders; and ashore did seat
His goodly presence. To which, such a guise
He showed in going, that it ravished eyes.
All which (continude) as he sat apart;
Nausicaas eye struck wonder through her heart; Nausicaas admiration of
Ulysses.

Who thus bespake her consorts: Hear me, you
Faire-wristed Virgins; this rare man (I know)
Treds not our country earth, against the will
Of some God, throned on the Olympian hill.
He showed to me, till now, not worth the note;
But now he looks, as he had Godhead got.
I would to heaven, my husband were no worse;
And would be called no better; but the course
Of other husbands pleased to dwell out here:
Observe and serve him, with our utmost cheer.
She said; they heard, and did. He drunk and eat
Like to a Harpy; having touched no meat
A long before time. But Nausicaa now
Thought of the more grace, she did lately vow:
Had horse to Chariot joined; and up she rose:
Up cheered her guest, and said: Guest, now dispose
Your self for Town; that I may let you see
My Fathers Court; where all the Peers will be
Of our Phaeacian State. At all parts then,
Observe to whom, and what place you are t'attain;
Though I need usher you with no advice,
Since I suppose you absolutely wise.
While we the fields pass, and men's labors there;
So long (in these maids guides) directly bear
Upon my Chariot (I must go before,
For cause that after comes: to which, this more
Be my induction) you shall then soon end
Your way to Town; whose Towers you see ascend
To such a steepness. On whose either side,
A fair Port stands; to which is nothing wide
An enterers passage: on whose both hands ride
Ships in fair harbors; The Cities description so far forth as may in part,
induce her promised reason, why she took no^ Ulysses to coach with her.
which, once past, you win
The goodly market place, (that circles in
A Phane to Neptune, built of curious stone,
And passing ample) where munition,
Gables, and masts men make, and polisht oars;
For the Phaeacians are not conquerors
By bows nor quiuers; Oars, masts, ships they are,
With which they plow the sea, and wage their war.
And now the cause comes, why I lead the way,
Not taking you to Coach. The men that sway
In work of those tools, that so fit our State,
Are rude Mechanicals; that rare and late
Work in the market place; and those are they
Whose bitter tongues I shun; who strait would say,
(For these vile vulgars are extremely proud,
And foully languag'd) What, is he allowd
To coach it with Nausicaa? so large set,
And fairly fashiond? where were these two met?
He shall be sure her husband. She has been
Gadding in some place; and (of foreign men,
Fitting her fancy) kindly brought him home
In her own ship. He must, of force, be come
From some far region; we have no such man.
It may be (praying hard, when her heart ran
On some wished husband) out of heaven, some God
Dropped in her lap; and there lies she at rode,
Her complete life time. But, in sooth, if she
Ranging abroad, a husband such as he,
Whom now we saw, laid hand on; she was wise,
For none of all our Nobles, are of prise
Enough for her: he must beyond sea come,
That wins her high mind, and will have her home.
Of our Peers, many have importuned her,
Yet she will none. Thus these folks will confer
Behind my back; or (meeting) to my face,
The foule-mouth rout dare put home this disgrace.
And this would be reproaches to my fame;
For even my self, just anger would inflame,
If any other virgin I should see
(Her parents living) keep the company
Of any man; to any end of love,
Till open Nuptials should her act approve.
And therefore hear me guest; and take such way,
That you your self may compass, in your stay,
Your quick deduction, by my Fathers grace;
And means to reach the root of all your race.
We shall, not far out of our way to Town,
A neuer-felld Grove find, that Poplars crown;
To Pallas sacred, where a fountain flows;
And round about the Grove, a Meadow grows;
In which, my Father holds a Manor house;
Decked all with Orchards, green, and odorous;
As far from Town, as one may hear a shout.
There stay, and rest your foot pains; till full out
We reach the City. Where, when you may guess
We are arrived, and enter our access
Within my Fathers Court: then put you on
For our Ph^^cian State; where, to be shown
My Fathers house, desire. Each infant there
Can bring you to it; and your self will clear
Distinguish it from others: for no shows,
The City buildings make; compared with those
That King Alcinous seat does celebrate.
In whose roofes, and the Court, (where men of state,
And suitors sit and stay) when you shall hide:
Strait pass it, entering further: where abide
My Mother, with her withdrawn houswiferies;
Who still sits in the fire ^shine, and applies
Her Rock, all purple, and of pompous show:
Her Chair placed against a Pillar: all arow
Her maids behind her set; and ^o her here,
My Fathers dining Throne looks. Seated where
He powers his choice of wine in, like a God.
This view once past; for the end of your abode,
Address suite to my Mother; that her mean,
May make the day of your redition scene.
And you may frolic strait, though far away
You are in distance from your wished stay.
For if she once be won to wish you well,
Your Hope may instantly your Pasport seal;
And thenceforth sure abide to see your friends,
Fair house, and all, to which your heart contends.
This said; she used her shining scourge, and lasht
Her Mules, that soon the shore left, where she washed;
And (knowing well the way) their pace was fleet,
And thick they gatherd up their nimble feet.
Which yet Not without some little note of our omnisufficient Homers general
touch of the least fitness lying in his way, may this courtly discretion he
describes in Nausicaa, be obs^rud, if you please.
she temperd so; and used her scourge
With so much skill; as not to ouer-v^ge
The foot behind; and make them straggle so,
From close society. Firm together go
Ulysses and her maids. And now the Sun
Sunk to the waters; when they all had won
The neuer-feld, and sound-exciting wood,
Sacred to Pallas: where the God-like good
Ulysses rested; and to Pallas praid:
Hear me, of Goate-kept Jove, th'vnconquerd Maid;
Now thoroughly hear me; More of our Poets curious and sweat pi^ti^.
since in all the time
Of all my wrack, my prayers could never clime
Thy far-off ears; when noisefull Neptune tossed
Upon his watery brissels, my imbost
And rock^ torn body: hear yet now, and daine
I may of the Phaeacian State obtain
Pity, and grace. Thus praid he; and she heard:
By no means yet (exposde to sight) appeared,
For fear to offend her Uncle; the supreme
Of all the Neptun^.
Sea-Gods; whose wrath still extreme
Stood to Ulysses; and would never cease,
Till with his Country shore, he crowned his peace.
Finis libri sexti Hom. Odyss.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
NAusicaa arriues at Town;
And then Ulysses. He makes known
His suite to Arete: who, view
Takes of his vesture; which she knew;
And asks him, from whose hands it came.
He tells, with all the hapless frame
Of his affairs, in all the while,
Since he forsook Calypsos I Will.
Another.
(...).
The honored minds,
And welcome things,
Ulysses finds,
In Scherias Kings.

THus praid the wise, and God-obseruing Man.
The Maid, by free force of her Palfreys, wan
Access to Town; and the renowned Court,
Reached of her Father; where, within the Port,
She staid her Coach; and round about her came
Her Brothers, (made as of immortal frame.)
Who yet disdaind not, for her love, mean deeds;
But took from Haec fuit illi^^ saeculi simplicita^: nam vel fratern^^ quoque
Amor, tantus fuit, vt libenter ^anc redeunti charissimae sorori, operam
praestiter^nt.
Spond.
Coach her Mules, brought in her weeds.
And she ascends her chamber; where puruaid
A quick fire was, by her old chambermaid
Eurymedusa, the Aper^^n borne;
And brought by sea, from Apera, t'adorne
The Court of great Alcinous; because
He gave to all, the blessed Phaeacians laws;
And, like a heauen-borne Power in speech, acquired
The peoples ears. To one then so admired,
Eurymedusa was esteemd no worse,
Then worth the gift: yet now grown old, was Nurse
To Ivory-armd Nausicaa; gave heat
To all her fires, and dressed her privy meat.
Then rose Ulysses, and made way to Town;
Which ere he reached, a mighty mist was thrown
By Pallas round about him; in her Care,
Lest in the sway of enuies popular,
Some proud Phaeacian might foul language pass,
Iustle him up, and ask him what he was.
Entering the lovely Town yet: Vlys^es, a Minerua in aedes ^lcinoi perducitur,
septus nebula.
through the cloud
Pallas appeard; and like a young wench showd
Bea^^ng a pitcher; Stood before him so,
As if objected purposely to know
What there he needed; whom he questiond thus:
Know you not (daughter) where Alcino^s,
That rules this Town, dwells? I, a poor distressed
Mere stranger here; know none I may request,
To make this Court known to me. She wordreplied:
Strange Father; I will see you satisfied
In that request: my Father dwells, just by
The house you seek for; but go silently;
Nor ask, nor speak to any other; I
Shall be enough to show your way: the men
That here inhabit, do not entertain
With ready kindness, strangers; of what worth
Or state soever: nor have taken forth
Lessons of civil usage, or respect
To men beyond them. They (upon their powers
Of swift ships building) top the watery towers:
And Jove ^ath given them ships, (...)* naues veloces veluti penna, atque
cogitatio.
for sail so wrought,
They cut a fether, and command a thought.
This said; she vsherd him; and after, he
Trod in the swift steps of the Deity.
The free-saild seamen could not get a sight
Of our Ulysses, yet: though he foreright,
Both by their houses and their persons past:
Pallas about him, such a darkness cast,
By her divine power, and her reverend care,
She would not give the Towne-borne, cause to stare.
He wonderd, as he past, to see the Ports;
The shipping in them; and for all resorts,
The goodly market steds; and Isles beside
For the Heroes; walls so large and wide;
Rampires so high, and of such strength withal;
It would with wonder, any eye appall.
At last they reached the Court; and Pallas said:
Now, honored stranger; I will see obaid
Your will, to show our Rulers house; it is here;
Where you shall find, Kings celebrating cheer;
Enter amongst them; nor admit a fear;
More bold a man is, he preuailes the more;
Though man nor place, he ever saw before.
You first shall find the Queen in Court, whose name
Is Arete: Arete the wife of Alcinous.
of parents borne, the same
That was the King her Spouse: their Pedigree
I can report: the great Earth-shaker, he
Of Periboea, (that her sex out-shone,
And youngest daughter was, to Eurymedon;
Who of th'vnmeasur'd-minded Giants, swaid
The Imperial Scepter; and the pride allaid
Of men so impious, For the more perspicuitie of this pedigree, I have here set
down the Diagra^, as Spon danus has it. Neptune begat Nausithous of Periboea.
By Nausithous, Rhexenor, Alcinous, were begot. By Rhexenor, Ar^te, the wife of
her uncle Alcinous.
with cold death; and died
Himself soon after) got the magnified
In mind, Nausithous; who the kingdoms state
First held in supreme rule. Nausithous gat
Rhexenor, and Aicinous, now King:
Rhexenor (whose seed did no male fruit spring;
And whom the siluer-bow-glac't Phoebus slew
Young in the Court) his shed blood did renew
In only Arete; who now is Spouse
To him that rules the kingdom, in this house,
And is her Uncle; King Alcinous.
Who honors her, past equal. She may boast
More honor of him, The honor of Arete (or virtue) alleg.
then the honored most
Of any wife in earth, can of her Lord;
How many more soever, Realms afford,
That keep house under husbands. Yet no more
Her husband honors her, then her blessed store
Of gracious children. All the City cast
Eyes on her, as a Goddess; and give taste
Of their affections to her, in their praires,
Still as she decks the streets. For all affairs,
Wrapped in contention, she dissolues to men.
Whom she affects, she wants no mind to deigne
Goodness enough. If her heart stand inclined
To your dispatch; hope all you wish to find;
Your friends, your longing family, and all,
That can within your most affections fall.
This said; away the grey-eyd Goddess flew
Along th'vntamed sea. Left the lovely hew,
Scheria presented. Out flew Marathon,
And ample-streeted Athens lighted on.
Where, to the house th^^ casts so (...), spissus:
thick a shade,
Of Erectheus; she ingression made.
Ulysses, The Court of Alcinous.
to the loftie-builded Court
Of King Alcinous, made bold resort;
Yet in his heart cast many a thought, before
The brazen pauement of the rich Court, bore
His enterd person. Like heavens two maine Lights,
The rooms illustrated, both days and nights.
On every side stood firm a wall of brass,
Even from the threshold to the inmost pass;
Which bore a roof up, that all Sapphire was;
The brazen thresholds both sides, did enfold
Silver Pilasters, hung with ga^es of gold;
Whose Portall was of silue^; over which
A golden Cornish did the front enrich.
On each side, Dogs of gold and silver framed,
The houses Guard stood; which the Deity ( Vulcan*
lamed)
With knowing inwards had inspired; and made,
That Death nor Age, should their estates invade.
Along the wall, stood every way a throne;
From th'entry to the Lobbie: every one,
Cast over with a rich-wrought cloth of state.
Beneath which, the Phaeacian Princes sat
At wine and food; and feasted all the year.
Youths forged of gold, at every table there,
Stood bolding flaming torches; that, in night
Gave through the house, each honored Guest, his light.
And (to encounter feast with houswifry)
In one room fifty women did apply
Their several tasks. Some, apple-colourd corn
Ground in fair Quernes; and some did spindles turn.
Some work in loomes: no hand, least rest receives;
But all had motion, apt, as Aspen leaves.
And from the weeds they woue, (so fast they laid,
And so thick thrust together, thread by thread)
That th'oile (of which the wool had drunk his fill)
Did with his moisture, in light dewes distill.
As much as the Phaeacian men excelled
All other countrymen, in Art to build
A swift-saild ship: so much the women there,
For work of webs, past other women were.
Past mean, by Pallas means, they understood
The grace of good works; and had wits as good.
Without the Hall, and close upon the Gate,
A goodly Orchard ground was situate,
Of near ten Acres; about which, was led
A lofty Quickset. In it flourished
High and broad fruit trees, that Pomegranats bore;
Sweet Figs, Hortus Alcinoi memorabilis.
Pears, Olives, and a number more
Most useful Plants, did there produce their store.
Whose fruits, the hardest Winter could not kill;
Nor hotest Summer wither. There was still
Fruit in his proper season, all the year.
Sweet Zephire breathed upon them, blasts that were
Of varied tempers: these, he made to bear
Ripe fruits: these blossoms: Pear grew after Pear;
Apple succeeded apple; Grape, the Grape;
Fig after Fig came; Time made never rape,
Of any dainty there. A spritely vine
Spread here his root; whose fruit, a hot sunshine
Made ripe betimes. Here grew another, green.
Here, some were gathering; here, some pressing seen.
A large-allotted several, each fruit had;
And all th'adornd grounds, their appearance made,
In flower and fruit, at which the King did aim,
To the precisest order he could claim.
Two Fountains graced the garden; of which, one
Powrd out a winding stream, that overrun
The grounds for their use chiefly: the other went
Close by the lofty Palace gate; and lent
The City his sweet benefit: and thus
The Gods the Court decked of Alcinous.
Patient Ulysses stood a while at gaze;
But (having all observed) made instant pace
Into the Court; where all the Peers he found,
And Captains of Phaeacia; with Cups crowned,
Offering to sharp-eyd Mercury.
Hermes: to whom, last
They used to sacrifise; when Sleep had cast
His inclination through their thoughts. But these,
Ulysses past; and forth went; nor their eyes
Took note of him: for Pallas stopped the light
With mists about him; that, unstaid, he might
First to Alcinous, and Arete,
Present his person; and, of both them, she
(By Pallas counsel) was to have the grace
Of foremost greeting. Therefore his embrace,
He cast about her knee. And then off flew
The heavenly air that hid him. When his view,
With silence and with Admiration struck
The Court quite through: but thus he silence broake:
Divine Rhexenors of spring, Areten, Ulysses supplex orat.
Arete;
To thy most honored husband, and to thee,
A man whom many labors have distressed,
Is come for comfort; and to every guest:
To all whom, heaven vouchsafe delightsome lives;
And after, to your issue that suruiues,
A good resignement of the Goods ye leave;
With all the honor that your selves receive
Amongst your people. Only this of me,
Is the Ambition; that I may but see
(By your vouchsaft means; and betimes vouchsaft)
My country earth; since I have long bin left
To labors, and to errors, barrd from end;
And far from benefit of any friend.
He said no more; but left them dumb with that;
Went to the harth, and in the ashes sat,
Aside the fire. At last their silence brake;
And Echinaeus, the old Hero spoke.
A man that all Phaeacians past in years,
And in perswasiue eloquence, all the Peers;
Knew much, and used it well; and thus spoke he:
Alcinous! Echin^us to Alcinous.
it shows not decently;
Nor does your honor, what you see, admit;
That this your guest, should thus abiectly sit:
His chair the earth; the harth his cushion;
Ashes, as if apposde for food: a Throne
Adornd with duerites, stands you more in hand
To see his person placed in; and command
That instantly your Heralds fill in wine;
That to the God that does in lightnings shine,
We may do sacrifice: for he is there,
Where these his reverend suppliants appear.
Let what you have within, be brought abroad,
To sup the stranger. All these would have showd
This fit respect to him; but that they stay
For your precedence, that should grace the way.
When this had wordadded to the well-inclin'd,
And sacred order of Alcinous mind;
Then, of the great in wit, the hand he seisd;
And from the ashes, his fair person raisd;
Ad^a^^'t him to a well-adorned Throne;
And from his seat raisd his most loved son,
( Laodamas, that next himself was set)
To give him place* The handmaid then did get
An Ewre of gold, with water filled; which placed
Upon a Caldron, all with silver graced)
She powrd out on their hands. And then was spread
A Table, which the Butler set with bread;
As others served with other food, the board;
In all the choice, the present could afford.
Ulysses, meat and wine took; and then thus;
The King the Herald called: Pontonous!
Serve wine through all the house; that all may pay
Rites to the Lightner, who is still in way
With humble suppliants; and them pursues,
With all benign, and hospitable dues.
Pontonous, gave act to all he willd,
And honey sweetnesse-giuing-minds- The word that bears this long Epith^^^, is
translated only dolce: which signifies more. (...) Vinum quod mellea dulce.
dine, animum perfundit, and oblectat.
wine filld;
Disposing it in cups for all to drink.
All having drunk, what eithers heart could think
Fit for due sacrifice; Alcinous said:
Hear me, ye Dukes, that the Phaeacians lead;
And you our Counselors; that I may now
Discharge the charge, my mind suggests to you,
For this our guest: Feast past, and this nights sleep;
Next morn (our Senate summond) we will keep
Iusts, sacred to the Gods; and this our Guest
Receive in solemn Court, with fitting Feast:
Then think of his return; that under hand
Of our deduction; his natural land
(Without more toil or care; and with delight;
And that soon given him; how far hence dissite
Soever it can be) he may a^cend;
And in the mean time, Ascent to his Countries shore.
without wrong attend,
Or other want; fit means to that ascent.
What, after, austere Fates, shall make the event
Of his life's thread (now spinning, and began
When his paind mother, freed his root of man)
He must endure in all kinds. Eustathius will have this comparison of the
Phaeacians with the Giants and Cyclops, to proceed out of the inueterate
virulency of Anti^ous to the Cyclops, who were cause (as is before said) of
their remove from their country; and with great endeavor labors the approbation
of it: but (under his peace) from the purpose: for the sense of the Poet is
clear, that the Cyclops and Giants being in part the issue of the Gods, and yet
afterward their defiers, (as Polyp, hereafter dares profess) Antinous (out of
bold and manly reason, even to the face of one that might have bin a God, for
the past manly appeara^ce he made there) would tell him, and the rest in him,
that if they graced those Cyclops with their open appearance, that though
d^scended from them, durst yet deny them; they might much more do them the
honor of their open presence that adored them.
If some God,
Perhaps abides with us, in his abode;
And other things will think upon then we;
The Gods wills stand: who ever yet were free
Of their appearance to us; when to them
We offered Hecatombs, of fit esteem.
And would at feast sit with us; even where we
Orderd our Session. They would likewise be
Encountrers of us, when in way, alone
About his fit affairs, went any one.
Not let them cloak themselves in any care,
To do us comfort; we as near them are,
As are the Cyclops; or the impious race,
Of earthy Giants, that would heaven outface.
Ulysses answered; Let some other doubt
Employ your thoughts, then what your words give out;
Which intimate a kind of doubt, that I
Should shadow in this shape, a Deity.
I bear no such least semblance; or in wit,
Virtue, or person. What may well befit
One of those mortals, whom you chiefly know,
Bears up and down, the burden of the woe
Appropriate to poor man; give that to me;
Of whose mones I sit, in the most degree;
And might say more; sustaining griefs that all
The Gods consent to: no one twixt their fall
And my unpitied shoulders, letting down
The least diuersion. Be the grace then shown,
To let me taste your free-giuen food, in peace:
Through greatest grief, the belly must have ease.
Worse then an envious belly, nothing is.
It will command his strict Necessities,
Of men most grieved in body or in mind,
That are in health, and will not give their kind,
A desperate wound. When most with cause I grieve,
It bids me still, Eat man, and drink, and live;
And this makes all forgot. What ever ill
I ever bear; it ever bids me fill.
But this ease is but ^orc't, and will not last,
Till what the mindlikes, be as well embraced;
And therefore let me wish you would partake
In your late purpose; when the Morn shall make
Her next appearance; daigne me but the grace,
(Unhappy man) that I may once embrace
My country earth: though I be still thrust at,
By ancient ils; yet make me but ^ee that;
And then let life go. When (withal) I see
My high-rooft large house, lands and family.
This, all approved; and each, willd every one;
Since he has said so fairly; set him gone.
Feast past, and sacrifice; to sleep, all vow
Their eyes at eithers house. Ulysses now,
Was left here with Alcinous, and his Queen,
The all-lou'd Arete. The handmaids then
The vessel of the Banquet, took away.
When Arete set eye on his array;
Knew both his out, and vnderweed, which she
Made with her maids; and musde by what means he
Obtaind their wearing: which she made request
To know; and wings gave to these speeches: Guest!
First let me ask, Arete to Ulysses.
what, and from whence you are?
And then, who graced you with the weeds you wear?
Said you not lately, you had erred at seas?
And thence arrived here? Laertides
To this, Ulysses to Arete.
thus answered: It Is a pain (O Queen)
Still to be opening wounds wrought deep and green;
Of which, the Gods have opened store in me;
Yet your will must be served: Far hence, at sea,
There lies an I Will, that bears Ogygias name;
Where Atlas daughter, the ingenious Dame,
Faire-haird Calypso lives: a Goddess grave,
And with whom, men, nor Gods, society have.
Yet I (past man unhappy) lived alone,
By heavens wrath forced) her house companion.
For Jove had with a fervent lightning cleft
My ship in twain; and far at black sea left
Me and my soldiers; all whose lives I lost.
I, in mine arms the keele took, and was tossed
Nine days together up from wave to wave.
The tenth grim Night, the angry Deities drove
Me and my wrack, on th'Ile, in which does dwell
Dreadful Calypso; who exactly well
Received and nourisht me; and promise made,
To make me deathlesse: nor should Age invade
My powers with his deserts, through all my days.
All moved not me; and therefore, on her stays,
Seven years she made me lie: and there spent I
The long time; steeping in the misery
Of ceaseless tears, the Garments I did wear
From her fair hand. The eight reuolued year,
(Or by her changed mind; or by charge of Jove)
She gave prouokt way to my wished remove;
And in a many-ioynted ship, with wine,
(Dainty in savor) bread, and weeds divine;
Signed with a harmless and sweet wind, my pass.
Then, seventeen days at sea, I homeward was;
And by the eighteenth, the dark hills appeard,
That your Earth thrusts up. Much my heart was cheard;
(Unhappy man) for that was but a beam;
To show I yet, had agonies extreme,
To put in sufferance: which th'Earth-shaker sent;
Crossing my way, with tempests violent;
Vnmeasur'd seas vp-lifting: nor would give
The billows leave, to let my vessel live
The least time quiet: that even sighed to bear
Their bitter outrage: which, at last, did tear
Her sides in pieces, set on by the winds.
I yet, through-swomme the waves, that your shore binds,
Till wind and water threw me up to it;
When, coming forth, a ruthlesse billow smit
Against huge rocks, and an acceslesse shore
My mangled body. Back again I bore,
And swom till I was fallen upon a flood,
Whose shores, me thought, on good advantage stood,
For my receipt: rock-free, and fenc't from wind.
And this I put for, gathering up my mind.
Then the divine Night came; and tredding Earth,
Close by the flood, that had from Jove her birth.
Within a thicket I reposde; when round
I ruffld up fallen leaves in heap; and found
(Let fall from heaven) a sleep interminate.
And here, my heart (long time excruciate)
Amongst the leaves I rested all that night;
Even till the morning and meridian light.
The Sun declining then; delightsome sleep,
No longer laid my temples in his steep;
But forth I went, and on the shore might see
Your daughters maids play. Like a Deity
She shined above them; and I praid to her:
And she, in disposition did prefer
Noblesse, and wisdom, no more low then might
Become the goodness of a Goddess height.
Nor would you therefore hope (supposde distressed
As I was then, and old) to find the least
Of any Grace from her; being younger far.
With young folks, Wisdom makes her commerce rare.
Yet she in all abundance did bestow,
Both wine (that makes the (...), Vinum calefaciendi vim habens.
blood in humanes grow)
And food; and bathed me in the flood; and gave
The weeds to me, which now ye see me have.
This, through my griefs I tell you; and it is true.
Alcinous answered: Guest! my daughter knew
Least of what most you give her; nor became
The course she took, to let, with every Dame,
Your person lackey; nor has with them brought
Your self home to; which first you had besought.
O blame her not (said he) Heroical Lord;
Nor let me hear, against her worth, a word.
She faultlesse is; and wished I would have gone
With all her women home: but I alone
Would venture my receipt here; having fear
And reverend aw of accidents that were
Of likely issue: both your wrath to move,
And to inflame the common peoples love,
Of speaking ill: to which they soon give place;
We men are all a most suspicious race.
My guest (said he) I use not to be stird
To wrath too rashly; and where are preferred
To men's conceits, things that may both ways fail;
The noblest ever should the most prevail.
Would Jove our Father, Pallas, and the Sun,
That (were you still as now, and could but run
One Fate with me) you would my daughter wed,
And be my son-in-law; still vowed to lead
Your rest of life here. I, a house would give,
And household goods; so freely you would live,
Confined with us: but against you will, shall none
Contain you here; since that were violence done
To Jove our Father. For your passage home,
That you may well know, we can overcome
So great a voyage; thus it shall succeed:
To morrow shall our men take all their heed
(While you securely sleep) to see the seas
In calmest temper; and (if that will please)
Show you your Country and your house ere night;
Though far beyond Euboea be that sight.
And this Euboea (as our subjects say,
That have bin there, and seen) is far away
Farthest from us, of all the parts they know.
And made the trial, when they helped to row
The gold-lockt Rhadamanth; to give him view
Of Earth-borne Tityus: whom their speeds did show
(In that far-off Euboea) the same day
They set from hence; and home made good their way,
With ease again, and him they did convey.
Which, I report to you, to let you see
How swift my ships are; and how matchlesly
My young Phaecians, with their oars prevail,
To beat the sea through, and assist a sail.
This cheard Ulysses; who in private praid:
I would to Jove our Father, what he said,
He could perform at all parts; he should then
Be glorified for ever; and I gain
My natural Country. This discourse they had;
When faire-armd Arete, her handmaids bad
A bed make in the Portico; and plie
With clothes; the Covering Tapestrie;
The Blankets purple. Wel^napt Wastcoates too,
To wear for more warmth. What these had to do,
They torches took, and did. The Bed puruaid;
They moved Ulysses for his rest; and said:
Come Guest, your Bed is fit; now frame to rest.
Motion of sleep, was gracious to their Guest;
Which now he took profoundly; being laid
Within a loop-hole Tower, where was conuaid
The sounding Portico. The King took rest
In a retired part of the house; where dressed
The Queen her self, a Bed, and Trundlebed;
And by her Lord, reposde her reverend head.
Finis libri septimi Hom. Odyss.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Peers of the Phaeacian State,
A Council call, to consolate
Ulysses, with all means for Home.
The Council to a Banquet come.
Innited by the king: which done;
Assaies for hurling of the stone,
The Youths make with the stranger king.
Demodecus, at feast, does sing
The Adultery of the God of Arms
With her that rules, in Amorous charms.
And after, sings the intercourse
Of Acts about the Epaean Horse.
Another.
(...).
The Councels frame,
At fleet applied;
In strifes of Game,
Ulysses tried.

NOw when the Rosie-fingerd morn arose;
The sacred power Alcinous did dispose
Did likewise rise; and like him, left his Ease,
The Cittie-racer Laertiades.
The Council at the Navy was designed;
To which Alcinous, with the sacred mind,
Came first of all. On polisht stones they sat
Near to the Navy. To increase the state,
Minerua took the heralds form on her
That served Alcinous; studious to prefer
Ulysses Suite for home. About the town
She made quick way; Pallas like the Herald.
and filled with the renown
Of that design, the ears of every man:
Proclaiming thus; Peers Phaeacensian!
And men of Council: all haste to the Court;
To hear the stranger that made late resort
To king Alcinous: long time lost at Sea;
And is in person, like a Deity.
This, all their powers set up; and spirit instild;
And straight the Court and seats, with men were filled.
The whole State wonderd at Laertes Son
When they beheld him. Pallas put him on
A supernatural, and heavenly dress;
Enlarged him with a height, and goodlinesse
In breast, and shoulders; that he might appear
Gracious, and grave, and reverend; and bear
A perfect hand on his performance there,
In all the trials they resolved t'impose.
All met; and gatherd in attention close;
Alcinous thus bespake them: Alcinous exhorts the Phaeacians to the belief of
Ulysses.
Dukes, and Lords;
Hear me digest, my hearty thoughts in words:
This Stranger here whose travels found my Court;
I know not; nor can tell if his resort
From East or West comes: But his suite is this;
That to his Country earth we would dismis
His hither-forced person; and does bear
The mind to pass it under every Peer:
Whom I prepare, and stir up; making known
My free desire of his deduction.
Nor shall there ever, any other man
That tries the goodness Phaeacensian,
In me, and my Courts entertainment; stay
Mourning for passage, under least delay.
Come then; A ship into the sacred seas,
New-built, now lanch we; and from out our prease;
Choose two and fifty Youths; of all, the best
To use an oar. All which, see straight impressed;
And in their Oare-bound seats. Let others hie
Home to our Court; commanding instantly
The solemn preparation of a feast;
In which, provision may for any guest
Be made at my charge. Charge of these low things,
I give our Youth. You Scepter-bearing kings,
Consort me home; and help with grace to use
This guest of ours: no one man shall refuse.
Some other of you, haste, and call to us
The sacred singer, grave Demodocus;
To whom has God given, song that can excite
The heart of whom he lists with delight.
This said, he led. The Scepter-bearers lent
Their free attendance; and with all speed, went
The herald for the sacred man in song.
Youths two and fifty; chosen from the throng
Went, as was willd, to the untamed seas shore;
Where come; they lancht the ship: the Mast it bore
Advanced, sails hoised; every seat, his Ore
Gave with a lether thong: the deep moist then
They further reached. The dry streets flowd with men;
That troup't up to the kings capacious Court.
Whose Porticos, were chok't with the resort:
Whose walls were hung with men: young, old, thrust there,
In mighty concourse; for whose promised cheer
Alcinous slew twelve Sheep; eight white-toothd Swine:
Two crook-hancht Beeues; which flead, and dressed, divine
The show was of so many a iocund Guest
All set together, at so set a feast.
To whose accomplished state, the Herald then
The lovely Singer led; Demodocus Poeta.
Who past all mean
The Muse affected; gave him good, and ill;
His eyes put out; but put in soul at will.
His place was given him, in a chair, all graced
With silver studs, and against a Pillar placed;
Where, as the Center to the State, he rests;
And round about, the circle of the Guests.
The Herald, on a Pin, above his head
His soundfull harp hung: to whose height, he led
His hand for taking of it down at will.
A Board set by, with food; and forth did fill
A Bowl of wine, to drink at his desire.
The rest then, fell to feast; and when the fire
Of appetite was quenched: the Muse inflamed
The sacred Singer. Of men highliest famed,
He sung the glories; and a Poem pend,
That in applause, The contention of Achilles and Ulysses.
did ample heaven ascend.
Whose subject was, the stern contention
Betwixt Ulysses, and Great Thetis Son;
As, at a banquet, sacred to the Gods
In dreadful language, they expressed their ods.
When Agamemnon, sat reioyc't in soul
To hear the Greek Peers jar, in terms so foul;
For Augur Phoebus, in presage had told
The king of men, (desirous to unfold
The wars perplexed end; and being therefore gone
In heavenly Pythia, to the Porch of stone,)
That then the end, of all griefs should begin,
Twixt Greece, and Troy; when Greece (with strife to win
That wished conclusion) in her kings should jar;
And plead, if force, or wit must end the war.
This brave contention did the Poet sing;
Expressing so the spleen of either king;
That his large purple weed, Vlys^i mouetur fletus.
Ulysses held
Before his face, and eyes; since thence distilld
Tears vncontaind; which he obscured, in fear
To let th'obseruing Presence, note a tear.
But when his sacred song the mere Divine
Had given an end; a Goblet crowned with wine
Ulysses (drying his wet eyes) did seize;
And sacrifisde to those Gods that would please
T'inspire the Poet with a song so fit
To do him honor, The continued pie^ie of Ulysses through all places, times,
and occasions.
and renown his wit.
His tears then staid. But when again began
(By all the kings desires) the moving man;
Again Ulysses, could not choose but yield
To that soft passion: which again, withheld,
He kept so cunningly from sight; that none
(Except Alcinous himself, alone)
Discerned him moved so much. But he sat next;
And heard him deeply sigh. Which, his pretext
Could not keep hid from him. Yet he concealed
His utterance of it; and would have it held
From all the rest. Brake off the song, and this
Said to those Ore-affecting Peers of his:
Princes, and Peers! we now are satiate
With sacred song, that fits a feast of state:
With wine, and food. Now then, to field, and try;
In all kinds our approved actiuity;
That this our Guest, may give his friends to know
In his return: that we, as little owe
To fights, and wrestlings, leaping, speed of race,
As these our Court-rites; and commend our grace
In all, to all superior. Forth he led
The Peers and people, troup't up to their head:
Nor must Demodocus be left within;
Whose harp, the Herald hung upon the pin;
His hand, in his took; and abroad he brought
The heavenly Poet: out, the same way wrought
That did the Princes: and what they would see
With admiration, with his company
They wished to honor. To the place of Game
These thronged; and after, routs of other came,
Of all sort, infinite. Of Youths that strove,
Many, Since the Phaeacians were not only dwellers by sea, bu^ studious also of
sea qua^lities: their names se^me to usurp their faculties therein.
and strong, rose to their trials love.
Up rose Acroneus, and Ocyalus;
Elatreus, Prymneus, and Anchyalus;
Nauteus, Eretmeus, Thoo^, Proreus;
Pontaeus, and the strong Amphialus,
Son to Tectonides, Polinius.
Up rose to these, All consisting of seafaring signification, except Laodamas.
the great Euryalus;
In action like the homicide of war.
Naubolides, that was for person far
Past all the rest: As Acroneus, su^ma seu extrema Nauis pars. Ocyalus velox in
mari^ Elatreus, or (...), Remex. etc.
but one he could not pass;
Nor any thought improve; Laodamas.
Up Anabesinzus then arose;
And three sons of the Scepter state, and those;
Were Halius, and fore-praisde Laodamas;
And Clytonaeus, like a God in grace.
These first the foote-game tried; and from the lists
Took start together. Up the dust, in mists
They hurld about; as in their speed, they flew;
But Clytonaeus, first, of all the crew
A Stiches length in any fallow field
Made good his pace; when where the Judges yield
The prise, and praise, his glorious speed arrived.
Next, for the boistrous wrestling Game they strived;
At which, Euryalus, the rest outshone.
At leap, Amphialus. At the hollow stone
Elatreus excelled. At buffets, last,
Laodamas, the kings fair son surpast.
When all had strived in these assaies their fill;
Laodamas said; Come friends; let us prove what skill
This Stranger has attaind to, in our sport;
Me thinks, he must be of the active sort.
His calves, thighs, hands, and well-knit shoulders show,
That Nature disposition did bestow
To fit with fact their form. Nor wants he prime.
But sour Affliction, made a mate with Time,
Makes Time the more seen. Nor imagine I,
A worse thing to enforce debilitie,
Then is the Sea: though nature never so strong
Knits one together. Nor conceive you wrong,
(Replied Eu^yalus) but prove his blood
With that you question. In the midst then stood
Renowm'd Laodamas, and proved him thus;
Come (stranger Father) and assaie with us
Your powrs in these contentions: Laodamas urges Ulysses to their sports.
If your show
Be answered with your worth, it is fit that you
Should know these conflicts: nor does glory stand
On any worth more, in a man's command,
Then to be strenuous, both of foot and hand:
Come then, make proof with us; discharge your mind
Of discontentments: The word is (...) signif^ing: deductio: qua transue^endum
curamus ^um q^i nobiscum aliquandiu est versatus.
for not far behind
Comes your deduction. Ship is ready now;
And men, and all things. Why (said he) do thou
Mock me Laodamas! and these strifes bind
My powrs to answer? I am more inclind
To cares, then conflict. Much sustaind I have;
And still am suffering. I come here to crave
In your assemblies, means to be dismissed,
And pray, both Kings, and subjects to assist.
Euryalus, an open brawle began;
And said: I take you Sir, Euryalu^ vpbraids Ulysses,
for no such man
As fits these honored strifes. A number more
Strange men there are, that I would choose before.
To one that loves to lie a ship-boord much;
Or is the Prince of sailours; or to such
As traffic far and near, and nothing mind
But freight, and passage, and a foreright wind;
Or to a victler of a ship: or men
That set up all their powrs for rampant Gain, (...).

I can compare, or hold you like to be:
But, for a wrestler, or of quality
Fit for contentions noble; you abhor
From worth of any such competitor.
Ulysses (frowning) answered; Ulysses angry.
Stranger! far
Thy words are from the fashions regular
Of kind, or honor. Thou art in thy guise
Like to a man, that authors injuries.
I see, (...) Damnorum magnorum auctor.
the Gods to all men, give not all
Manly addiction; wisdom; words that fall
(Like dice) upon the square still. Some man takes
Ill form from parents; but God often makes
That fault of form up, with observed repair
Of pleasing speech: that makes him held for fair;
That makes him speak securely: makes him shine
In an assembly, with a grace di^ine.
Men take delight, to see how euenly lie
His words asteepe, in honey modesty.
Another then, has fashion like a God;
But in his language, he is foul, and broad:
And such art thou. A person fair is given;
But nothing else is in thee, sent from heaven.
For in thee lurkes, a base, and earthy soul
And t'hast compelld me, with a speech most foul
To be thus bitter. I am not unseen
In these fair strifes, as thy words ouerweene:
But in the first rank of the best I stand.
At least, I did, when youth and strength of hand
Made me thus confident: but now am worn
With woes, and labors; as a humane borne
To bear all anguish. Sufferd much I have.
The war of men, and the inhumane wave
Have I driven through at all parts: but with all
My waste in sufferance: what yet may fall
In my performance, at these strifes I Will try;
Thy speech has moved, and made my wrath run hie.
This said; with robe, and all, he graspt a stone,
A little grauer then was ever thrown
By these Phaeacians, in their wrestling rout;
More firm, more massy; which (turned round about)
He hurried from him, with a hand so strong
It sung, and flew: and over all the throng
(That at the others marks stood) quite it went:
Yet down fell all beneath it; fearing spent
The force that drove it flying from his hand,
As it a dart were, or a walking wand.
And, far past all the marks of all the rest
His wing stole way. When Pallas straight impressed
A mark at fall of it; resembling then
One of the nauy-giuen Phaeacian men;
And thus advanced Ulysses: One, (though blind)
(O stranger!) groping, may thy stones fall find;
For not amidst the rout of marks it fell,
But far before all. Of thy worth, think well;
And stand in all strifes: no Phaeacian here,
This bound, can either better or come nere.
Ulysses ioyd, to hear that one man yet
V^de him benignly; and would Truth abet
In those contentions. And then, thus smooth
He took his speech down: Reach me that now Youth,
You shall (and straight I think) have one such more;
And one beyond it too. And now, whose Core
Stands sound, and great within him (since ye have
Thus put my spleen up) come again and brave
The Guest ye tempted, with such gross disgrace:
At wrestling, buffets, whirlbat, speed of race.
At all, or either, I except at none,
But urge the whole State of you; only one
I will not challenge, in my forced boast,
And that is Laodamas; for he is mine Host. He names Laodamas only for all the
other brothers; since in his exception, the others enuies were curbd: for
brother^ either are or should be of one acceptance in all fit things.

And who will fight, or wrangle with his friend?
Unwise he is, and base, that will contend
With him that feeds him, in a foreign place;
And takes all edge off, from his own sought grace.
None else except I here; nor none despise;
But wish to know, and prove his faculties,
That dares appear now. No strife ye can name
Am I vnskilld in; And Laodamas, he calls his host, being eldest son to
Alcinous: the heir being ever the young master; nor might he conveniently
prefer Alcinous in his exception, since he stood not in competition at these
contentions.
(reckon any game
Of all that are, as many as there are
In use with men) for Archerie I dare
Affirm my self not mean. Of all a troop
I Will make the first foe with mine arrow stoop;
Though, with me never so many fellows bend
Their bows at marked men, and affect their end;
Only was Philocte^es with his bow
Still my superior; when we Greeks would show
Our Archerie against our foes of Troy:
But all that now by bread, frail life enjoy,
I far hold my inferiors. Men of old
None now alive, shall witness me so bold
To vant equality with such men as these;
O^chalian, Euritus, Hercules;
Who with their bows, durst with the Gods contend.
And therefore caught Eurytus soon his end.
Nor did at home, Apollo.
in age, a reverend man;
But by the Great incensed Delphian
Was shot to death, for daring competence
With him, in all an Archers excellence.
A Spear I Will hurl as far, as any man
Shall shoot a shaft. How at a race I can
Bestirre my feet; I only yield to Fear,
And doubt to meet with my superior here.
So many seas, so too much have misusde
My lims for race; and therefore have diffusde
A dissolution through my loved knees.
This said, The ingen^ous and ro^all speech of Alcinous to Ulysses.
he stilld all talking properties;
Alcinous only answered: O my Guest
In good part take we, what you have been pressed
With speech to answer. You would make appear
Your virtues therefore, that will still shine where
Your only look is. Yet must this man give
Your worth ill language; when, he does not live
In sort of mortals (whence so ere he springs
That judgment has to speak becoming things)
That will deprave your virtues. Note then now
My speech, and what, my love presents to you;
That you may tell Heroes, when you come
To banquet with your Wife, and Birth at home,
(Mindful of our worth) what deseruings Jove
Has put on our parts likewise; in remove
From Sire to Son, as an inherent grace
Kind, and perpetual. We must needs give place
To other Countrymen; and freely yield
We are not blameless, in our fights of field;
Buff^ts, nor wrestlings: but in speed of feet;
And all the Equipage that fits a fleet,
We boast us best. For table ever spread
With neighbor feasts, for garments varied;
For Poesy, Music, Dancing, Baths, and Beds.
And now, Phaeacians, you that bear your heads
And feet with best grace, in enamouring dance;
Inflame our guest here; that he may advance
Our worth past all the worlds, to his home friends;
As well for the unmatched grace, that commends
Your skills in footing of a dance; as theirs
That fly a race best. And so, all affairs,
At which we boast us best; he best may try;
As Sea-race, Land-race, Dance, and Poesy.
Some one, with instant speed to Court retire,
And fetch Demodocus, his soundfull lyre.
This said, the God-grac't king, and quick resort
Pontonous made, for that fair harp, to Court.
Nine of the lot-chusde public Rulers rose,
That all in those contentions did dispose;
Commanding a most smooth ground, and a wide,
And all the people, in fair game, aside.
Then with the rich harp, came Pontonous;
And in the midst, took place Demodocus.
About him then stood forth, the choice young men, (...) signifies splendour
vibran^; a twinckd splendour: (...) Vibrare vel^ti radios solares.

That on man's first youth, made fresh entry then:
Had Art to make their natural motion sweet
And shook a most divine dance from their feet;
That twinckld Star-like; moved as swift, and fine,
And beat the air so thin, they made it shine.
Ulysses wonderd at it; but amazd
He stood in mind, Air rar^fied turns first.
to hear the dance so phras'd.
For, as they danced; Demodocus did sing,
The bright-crownd Venus love, with Battles king;
As first they closely mixed, in t'house of fire.
What worlds of gifts, won her to his desire;
Who then, the night-and-day-bed did defile
Of good king Vulcan. But in little while
The Sun their mixture saw; and came, and told.
The bitter news, did by his ^ares take hold
Of Vulcans heart. Then to his Forge he went;
And in his shrewd mind, deep stuff did invent.
His mighty Anuile, in the stock he put;
And forged a net, that none could loose, or cut;
That when it had them, it might hold them fast.
Which, having finished, he made utmost haste
Up to the dear room, where his wife he wowd:
And (madly wrath with Mars) he all bestrowd
The bed, and bed posts: all the beam above
That crossed the chamber; The matter whereof none can see.
and a circle strove,
Of his device, to wrap in all the room.
And it was as pure, as of a Spiders Ioome,
The woofe before it is wouen. No man nor God
Could set his eye on it: a slight so odd,
His Art showed in it. All his craft bespent
About the bed: (...)
. he faind, as if he went
To well built Lemnos; his most loved town,
Of all towns earthly. Nor left this unknown
To golden-bridle-vsing Mars; who kept
No blind watch over him: but, seeing stepped
His rival so aside, he hasted home
With faire-wreath'd Venus love stung; who was come
New from the Court of her most mighty Sire.
Mars enterd; wrung her hand; and the retire
Her husband made to Lemnos told; and said;
Now (Love) is Vulcan gone; let us to bed,
He Is for the barbarous Sintians. Well appaid
Was Venus with it; and afresh assaid
Their old encounter. Down they went; and straight
About them clingd, the artificial sleight Of most wise Vulcan; and were so ensnared,
That neither they could stir their course prepared,
In any lim about them; nor arise.
And then they knew, they could no more disguise
Their close conueiance; but lay, forced, stone still.
Back rusht the Both foot cook't; but straight in skill,
From his near skout-hole turned; nor ever w^nt
To any Lemnos; but the sure event
Left Phoebus to discover, who told all.
Then, home hopt Vulcan, full of grief, and gall;
Stood in the Portall, and cried out so hie;
That all the Gods heard. Father of the sky
And every other deathlesse God (said he)
Come all, Vulcans complaint.
and a ridiculous object see;
And yet not sufferable neither; Come,
And witness, how when still I step from home,
(Lame that I am) Jove's daughter does profess
To do me all the shameful offices;
Indignities, despites, that can be thought;
And loves this all-things-making-come to naught
Since he is fair forsooth; foote-sound, and I
Took in my brain a little; legged awrie;
And no fault mine; but all my parents fault,
Who should not get, if mock me, with my halt.
But see how fast they sleep, while I, in moan,
Am only made, an idle looker on.
One bed their turn serves; and it must be mine;
I think yet, I have made their selfe-loues shine.
They shall no more wrong me, and none perceive:
Nor will they sleep together, I believe
With too hot haste again. Thus both shall lie
In craft, and force; till the extremity
Of all the dowre, I gave her Sire (to gain
A dogged set-fac't Girl, that will not stain
Her face with blushing, though she shame her head)
He paies me back: She Is fair, but was no maid.
While this long speech was making, all were come
To Vulcans wholie-brazen-founded home.
Earth-shaking Neptune; useful Mercury,
And far-shot Phoebus. No She Deity
For shame, would show there: all the giue-good Gods
stood in the Portall; and past periods
Gave length to laughters; all reioyc't to see
That which they said; that no impiety
Finds good success at the end. And now (said one)
The slow outgoes the swift. Lame Vulcan, known
To be the slowest of the Gods; outgoes
Mars the most swift; And this is that, which grows
To greatest justice; that Adulteries sport
Obtained by craft, by craft of other sort,
(And lame craft too) is plagued, which grieves the more,
That sound lims turning lame; the lame, Intending the^ sound of foot; when
they outgoe the soundest.
restore.
This speech amongst themselves they entertaind
When Phoebus, thus asked Hermes: Thus enchaind
Would thou be Hermes, to be thus disclosde?
Though, with thee, golden Venus were repos'de?
He soon gave that an answer: O (said he
Thou king of Archers) would twere thus with me.
Though thrice so much shame; nay, though infinite
Were powrd about me; and that every light
In great heaven shining, witnest all my harms,
So golden Venus slumberd in mine Arms.
The Gods again laughed; even the watery state
Wrung out a laughter: But propitiate
Was still for Mars, and praid the God of fire
He would dissolve him; offering the desire
He made to Jove, to pay himself; and said,
All due debts, should be, by the Gods repaid.
Pay me, no words (said he) where deeds lend pain;
Wretched the words are, given for wretched men.
How shall I bind you in The Immortals sight
If Mars be once loosed; nor will pay his right?
Vulcan (said he) if Mars should fly, This is (...). etc. Parua mag^e dicere*
grave sentence out of lightest vapor.
nor see
Thy right repaid, it should be paid by me:
Your word, so given, I must accept (said he)
Which said; he loosd them: Mars then rusht from sky
And stoop't cold Thrace. The laughing Deity
For Cyprus was, and took her Paphian state
Where, She a Grove, never cut, has consecrate:
All with Arabian odors fumed; and has
An Altar there, at which the Graces bathe,
And with immortal Balms besmooth her skin;
Fit for the bliss, Immortals solace in;
Decked her in to-be-studied attire,
And apt to set beholders hearts on fire.
This sung the sacred Muse, whose notes and words
The dancers feet kept; as his hands his cords.
Ulysses, much was pleased, and all the crew:
This would the king have varied with a new
And pleasing measure; and performed by
Two, with whom none would strive in dancerie.
And those, his sons were; that must therefore dance
Alone; and only to the harp advance,
Without the words; And this sweet couple, was
Young Halius, and divine Laodamas:
Who danced a Ball dance. Then the rich-wrought Ball,
(That Polybus had made, of purple all)
They took to hand: one threw it to the sky,
And then danced back; the other (capring hie)
Would surely catch it, ere his foot touched ground;
And up again advanced it; and so found
The other, cause of dance; and then did he
Dance lofty tricks; till next it came to be
His turn to catch; and serve the other still.
When they had kept it up to eithers will;
They then danced ground tricks; often mixed hand in hand;
And did so gracefully their change command;
That all the other Youth that stood at pause,
With deafning shouts, gave them the great applause.
Then said Ulysses; O past all men here
Clear, Ulysses to Alcinous.
not in power, but in desert as clear,
You said your dancers, did the world surpass;
And they perform it, clear, and to amaze.
This won Alcinous heart; and equal prise
He gave Ulysses; saying; Matchless wise
(Princes, and Rulers) I perceive our guest;
And therefore let our hospitable best
In fitting gifts be given him: twelve chief kings
There are that order all the glorious things
Of this our kingdom; and the thirteenth, I
Exist, as Crown to all: let instantly
Be thirteen garments given him: and, of gold
Precious, and fine, a Talent. While we hold
This our assembly; be all fetched, and given;
That to our feast prepared, as to his heaven
One guest may enter. And that nothing be
Left vnperformd, that fits his dignity;
Euryalus shall here conciliate
Himself, with words and gifts; since past our rate
He gave bad language. This did all commend
And give in charge; and every king did send
His Herald for his gift. Euryalus*
(Answering for his part) said; Alcinous!
Our chief of all; since you command, I will
To this our guest, by all means reconcile;
And give him this entirely mettald sword:
The handle massy silver; and the board
That gives it cover, all of Ivorie,
New, and in all kinds, worth his quality.
This put he strait into his hand, and said:
Frolick^, O Guest and Father; if words, fled,
Have been offensive; let swift whirlwinds take,
And ravish them from thought. May all Gods make
Thy wifes sight good to thee; in quick retreat
To all thy f^iends, and best-lou'd breeding seat;
Their long miss quitting with the greater joy;
In whose sweet, vanish all thy worst annoy.
And frolic thou, to all height, Friend (said he)
Which heaven confirm, with wished felicity.
Nor ever give again desire to thee,
Of this swords use, which with affects so free,
In my reclaim, thou have bestowd on me.
This said; athwart his shoulders he put on
The right fair sword; and then did set the Sun.
When all the gifts were brought; which back again
(With King Alcinous, in all the train)
Were by the honored Heralds borne to Court;
Which his fair sons took; and from the resort
Laid by their reverend Mother. Each his throne
Of all the Peers (which yet were ouershone
In King Alcinous command) ascended:
Whom he, to pass as much in gifts contended;
And to his Queen, said: Wife! see brought me here
The fairest Cabinet I have; and there
Impose a well-cleansd, in, and utter weed;
A Caldron heat with water, that with speed
Our Guest well bathed, and all his gifts made sure,
It may a joyful appetite procure
To his succeeding Feast; and make him hear
The Poets Hymn, with the securer ear.
To all which, I will add my boll of gold,
In all frame curious, to make him hold
My memory always dear; and sacrifise
With it at home, to all the Deities.
Then Arete, her maids charged to set on
A well-siz'd Caldron quickly. Which was done;
Clear water powered in, flame made so entire,
It gilt the brass, and made the water fire.
In mean space, from her chamber brought the Queen
A wealthy Cabinet, where (pure and clean)
She put the garments, and the gold bestowd
By that free State: and then, the other vowed
By her Alcinous, and said: Now Guest*
Make close and fast your gifts, lest when you rest
A ship-boord sweetly, in your way you meet
Some loss, that less may make your next sleep sweet.
This when Ulysses heard; all sure he made;
Enclosde and bound safe; for the saving trade,
The Reverend for her wisdom (Circe) had
In foreyeares taught him. Then the handmaid bad
His worth to bathing; which reioyc't his heart.
For since he did with his Calypso part,
He had no ^ote baths. None had favored him;
Nor bin so tender of his kingly lim.
But all the time he spent in her abode,
He lived respected, as he were a God.
Cleansd then and balmd; fair shirt, and robe put on;
Fresh come from bath, and to the Feasters gone;
Nausicaa, that from the Gods hands took
The sovereign beauty of her blessed look,
Stood by a well-caru'd Column of the room,
And through her eye, her heart was overcome
With admiration of the Port impressed
In his aspect; Nausicaa enflamed with Ulysses
and said: God save you Guest!
Be cheerful, as in all the future state,
Your home will show you, in your better Fate.
But yet, even then, let this rememberd be,
Your life's price, I lent, and you owe it me.
The varied in all counsels gave reply:
Nausicaa! flower of all this Empery!
So Iunos husband, that the strife for noise
Makes in the clouds, bless me with strife of Joys,
In the desired day, that my house shall show,
As I, as I to a Goddess, there shall vow,
To thy fair hand, that did my Being give;
Which I Will acknowledge ^uery hour I live.
This said; Alcinous placed him by his side;
Then took they feast, and did in parts divide
The several dishes; filld out wine, and then
The striu'd-for, (...)* Poetam cuius hominibus digna est societas.
for his worth, of worthy men,
And reuerenc't of the State; Demodocus
Was brought in by the good Pontonous.
In midst of all the guests, they gave him place,
Against a lofty Pillar; when, this grace
The graced with wisdom did him. From the Chine
That stood before him of a white-tooth'd Swine,
(Being far the daintiest joint) mixed through with fat,
He carved to him, and sent it where he sat,
By his old friend, the Herald; willing thus:
Herald! reach this to grave Demodocus;
Say, I salute him; and his worth embrace.
Poets deserve past all the humane race,
Reverend respect and honor; since the Queen
Of knowledge, and the supreme worth in men
(The Muse) informs them; and loves all their race.
This, reached the Herald to him; who, the grace
Received encouraged: which, when feast was spent,
Ulysses amplified to this ascent:
Demodocus! I must prefer you far,
Past all your sort; if, or the Muse of war,
Jove's daughter prompts you; (that the Greeks respects)
Or if the Sun, that those of Troy affects.
For I have heard you, since my coming, sing
The Fate of Greece, to an admired string.
How much ou^ sufferance was; how much we wrought;
How much the actions rose to, when we fought.
So lively forming, as you had bin there;
Or to some free relator, lent your ^are.
Forth then, and sing the wooden horses frame,
Built by Epeus; by the martial Dame,
Taught the whole Fabric; which, by force of slight,
Ulysses brought into the Cities height;
When he had stuffed it with as many men,
As leueld lofty Ilion with the Plain.
With all which, if you can as well enchant,
A^ with expression quick and elegant,
You sung the rest; I will pronounce you clear,
Inspired by God, past all that ever were.
This said; even stird by God up, he began;
And to his Song fell, past the form of man;
Beginning where, the Greeks a ship-boord went,
And every Chief, had set on fire his Tent.
When the other Kings, in great Ulysses guide,
In Troys vast market place, the horse did hide:
From whence, the Trojans, up to Ilion drew
The dreadful Engine. Where (sat all arew)
Their Kings about it: many counsels given,
How to dispose it. In three ways were driven
Their whole distractions: first, if they should feel
The hollow woods heart, (searched with piercing steel)
Or from the battlements (drawn higher yet)
Deiect it headlong; or, that counterfeit,
So vast and novel, set on sacred fire;
Vowed to appease each angerd Godheads ire.
On which opinion, they, thereafter, saw,
They then should have resolved: th'vnalterd law
Of Fate presaging; that Troy then should end,
When th'hostile horse, she should receive to friend;
For therein should the Grecian Kings lie hid,
To bring the Fate and death, they after did.
He sung besides, the Greeks eruption
From those their hollow crafts; and horse forgone;
And how they made Depopulation tred
Beneath her feet, so high a Cities head.
In which affair, he sung in other place,
That of that ambush, some man else did race
The Ilion Towers, then Ulysses.
Laertiades;
But here he As by the divine fury directly inspired so, for Ulysses glory.
sung, that he alone did seize
(With Menelaus) the ascended roof
Of Prince Deiphobus; and Mars- like proof
Made of his valor: a most dreadful fight,
Daring against him. And there vanquished quite,
In little time (by great Mineruas aid)
All Ilions remnant, and Troy level laid.
This the divine Expressor, did so give
Both act and passion, that he made it live;
And to Ulysses facts did breathe a fire,
So In that the slaughters he made were expressed so lively.
deadly quickening, that it did inspire
Old death with life; and renderd life so sweet,
And passionate, that all there felt it fleet;
Which made him pity his own cruelty,
And put into that ruth, so pure an ^ie
Of humane frailty; that to see a man
Could so revive from Death; yet no way can
Defend from death; his own quick powers it made
Feel there deaths horrors: and he felt life fade
In (...), Metaph. signifying, consumo, tabes^o.
tears, his feeling brain swet: for in things
That move past vtte^ance, tears open all their springs.
Nor are there in the Powers, that all life bears,
More true interpreters of all, then tears.
And as a Lady mournes her sole-lou'd Lord, Simile.

That fallen before his City, by the sword,
Fighting to rescue from a cruel Fate,
His town and children; and, in dead estate
Yet panting, seeing him; wraps him in her arms,
Weeps, shriekes, and powers her health into his arms;
Lies on him, striving to become his shield
From foes that still as^aile him; spears impeld
Through back and shoulders; by whose points embrude,
They raise and lead him into servitude,
Labor and languor: for all which, the Dame
Eats down her cheeks with tears, and feeds life's flame
With miserable sufferanc: So this King,
Of teare-swet anguish, op't a boundless spring:
Nor yet was seen to any one man there,
But King Alcinous, who sat so near,
He could not escape him: sighs (so chok't) so brake
From all his tempers, which the King d^d take
Both note, and grave resp^ct of, and thus spoke:
Hear me, Phaeacian Counselors and Peers;
And cease, Demodocus; perhaps all ears
Are not delighted with his song; for, ever
Since the divine Muse sung, our Guest has never
Containd from secret mournings. It may fall,
That something sung, he has bin grieved withal,
As touching his particular. Forbear;
That Feast may jointly comfort all hearts here;
And we may cheer our Guest up; it is our best,
In all due honor. For our reverend Guest,
Is all our celebration, gifts, and all,
His love has added to our Festival.
A Guest, and suppliant too; we should esteem
Dear as our brother; one that does but dream
He has a soul; or touch but at a mind
Deathlesse and manly; should stand so inclined.
Nor cloak you, longer, with your curious wit,
(Loved Guest) what ever we shall ask of it.
It now stands on your honest state to tell;
And therefore give your name; nor more conceal,
What of your parents, and the Town that bears
Name of your native; or of forreiners
That near us border, you are called in fame.
There Is no man living, walks without a name;
Noble nor base; but had one from his birth;
Imposde as fit, as to be borne. What earth,
People, and city, own you? Give to know:
Tell but our ships all, that your way must show;
For our This (...) or affirmation of miracles, how impossible soever in these
times assured, yet in those ages they were neither absurd nor strange. Those
inanimate things having (it seemd^ certain (...), in whose powers, they
supposed, their ships faculties. As others have affirmed Oaks to have sense of
hearing: and so the ship of Argos was said to have a Mast made of D^don^an Oak,
that was vocal, and co^l^ speak*
ships know th'expressed minds of men;
And will so most intentiuely retain
Their scopes appointed, that they never err^;
And yet use never any man to stere:
Nor any Rudders have, as others need.
They know men's thoughts; and whither tends their speed.
And there will set them. For you cannot name
A City to them; nor fat Soil, that Fame
Has any notice given; but well they know,
And will fly to them, though they ebb and flow,
In blackest clouds and nights; and never bear
Of any wrack or rock, the slendrest fear.
But this I heard my Sire Nausithous say
Long since, that Neptune seeing us convey
So safely passengers of all degrees,
Was angry with us; and upon our seas,
A well built ship we had (near habor come,
From safe deduction of some stranger home)
Made in his flitting billows, stick stone still;
And dimmed our City, like a mighty hill,
With shade cast round about it. This report,
The old Intending his father Nausithous.
King made; in which miraculous sort,
If God had done such things, or left undone;
At his good pleasure be it. But now, on,
And truth relate us; both whence you errd;
And to what Clime of men would be transferrd;
With all their fair Towns; be they, as they are;
If rude, unjust, and all irregular;
Or hospitable, bearing minds that please
The mighty D^itie. Which one of these
You would be set at, say; and you are there;
And therefore what afflicts you? why, to hear
The Fate of Greece and Ilion, mourn you so?
The Gods have done it; as to all, they do
Destine destruction; that from thence may rise
A Poem to instruct posterities.
Fell any kinsman before Ilion?
Some worthy Sire-in-law, or like-neare son?
Whom next our own blood, and selfe-race we love?
Or any friend perhaps, in whom did move
A knowing soul, and no unpleasing thing?
Since such a good one, is no underling
To any brother: for, what fits true friends,
True wisedom^ is, True wisdom fits true friends.
that blood and birth transcends.
Finis libri octaui Hom. Odyss.
THE NINTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE A^GVMENT.
Ulysses here, is first made known;
Who tells the stern contention,
His powers did against the Cicons try;
And thence to the Lotophagie
Extends his conquest: and from them,
Assayes the Cyclop Polypheme;
And by the crafts, his wits apply,
He puts him out his only eye.
Another.
(...).
The strangely fed
Lotophagie.
The Cicons fled.
The Cyclops eye.

Ulysses thus resolved the Kings demands.
Alcinous! (in whom this Empire stands)
You should not of so natural right disherit
Your princely feast, as take from it the spirit.
To hear a Poet, that in accent brings
The Gods breasts down; He begins where Alcinous commanded Demo^ocus to end.
and breathes them as he (...)
Is sweet, and sacred; nor can I conceive,
In any common weal, what more does give
Note of the just and blessed Empery,
Then to see Comfort universally
Cheer up the people. When in every roof,
She gives obseruers a most humane proof
Of men's contents. To see a neighbors Feast
Adorn it through; and thereat, hear the breast
Of the divine Muse; men in order set;
A (...).
wine-page waiting. Tables crowned with meat;
Set close to guests, that are to use it skilld;
The Cup-boords furnished; and the cups still filld.
This shows (to my mind) most humanely fair.
Nor should you, for me, still the heavenly air,
That stirrd my soul so; for I love such tears,
As fall from fit notes; beaten through mine ears,
With repetitions of what heaven has done;
And break from hearty apprehension
Of God and goodness, though they show my ill.
And therefore does my mind excite me still,
To tell my bleeding moan; but much more now,
To serve your pleasure; that, to ouer-flow
My tears with such cause, may by sighs be driven;
Though never so much plagued, I may seem by heaven.
And now my name; which, way shall lead to all
My miseries after: that their sounds may fall
Through your ears also; and show (having fled
So much affliction) first, who rests his head
In your embraces; when (so far from home)
I knew not where t'obtaine it resting room.
I am Ulysses Laertiades;
The fear of all the world for policies;
For which, my facts as high as heaven resound.
I dwell in Ithaca, Earths most renownd:
All ouer-shadow'd with the (...). quatientem seu agitantem frondes.
Shake-leafe hill
Tree-fam'd Neritus; whose near confines fill
Islands a number, well inhabited,
That under my observance taste their bread.
Dulichius, Samos, and the-full-of- quaedam quibus corp^s ali^ur and vita
sustentatur (...) appellantur.
food
Zacynthus, likewise graced with store of wood.
But Ithaca, (though in the seas it lie)
Yet lies she so aloft, she casts her eye
Quite over all the neighbor Continent.
Far* Norward situate; and (being lent
But little favor of the Morn, and Sun)
With barren rocks and cliffes is overrun.
And yet of hardy youths, a Nurse of Name.
(...) could I see a Soil, where ere I came,
More sweet and wishfull. Yet, from hence was I
Withheld with horror, by the Deity
Divine Calypso, in her cauie house;
Enflamed to make me her sole Lord and Spouse.
Circe Aeaea too, (that knowing Dame,
Whose veins, the like affections did inflame)
Detaind me likewise. But to neithers love,
Could I be tempted; which does well approve;
Nothing so sweet is as our countries earth, Amor patriae.

And joy of those, from whom we claim our birth.
Though roofes far richer, we far off possess,
Yet (from our native) all our more, is less.
To which, as I contended, I will tell
The much-distrest-conferring-facts, that fell
By Io^es divine prevention; since I set,
From ruined Troy, my first foot in retreat.
From Ilion, ill winds cast me on the Coast
The Cicons hold; where I emploid mine host
For Ismarus, a City, built just by
My place of landing; of which, Victory
Made me expugner. I depeopl'd it,
Slew all the men, and did their wives remit,
With much spoil taken; which we did divide,
That none might need his part. I then applide
All sp^ed for flight: but my command therein,
(Fools that they were) could no observance win
Of many soldiers, who with spoil fed hie,
Would yet fill higher; and excessiuely
Fell to their wine; gave slaughter on the shore,
Clouen-footed beeues and sheep, in mighty store.
In mean space, Cicons did to Cicons cry;
When, of their nearest dwellers, instantly
Many and better soldiers made strong head,
That held the Continent, and managed
Their horse with high skill: on which they would fight,
When fittest cause served; and again alight,
(With soon seen vantage) and on foot contend.
Their concourse swift was, and had never end;
As thick and sudden it was, as flowers and leaves
Dark Spring discouers, when she After Night, in the first of the Morning.
Light receaues.
And then began the bitter Fate of Jove
To alter us unhappy; which, even strove
To give us suffrance. At our Fleet we made
Enforced stand; and there did they invade
Our thrust-vp Forces: darts encountered darts,
With blows on both sides: either making parts
Good upon either, while the Morning shone,
And sacred Day her bright increase held on;
Though much out-matcht in number. But as soon
As Phoebus Westward fell, the Cicons won
Much hand of us; six proved soldiers fell
(Of every ship) the rest they did compel
To seek of Flight escape from Death and Fate.
Thence (sad in heart) we saild: and yet our State
Was something cheered; that (being ouer-matcht so much
In violent number) our retreat was such,
As saved so many* Our dear loss the less,
That they suruiu'd; so like for like success.
Yet left we not the Coast, before we called
Home to our country earth, the souls exhald,
Of all the friends, the Cicons overcame.
Thrice called we on them, The ancient custom of calling ^ome the dead.
by their several name,
And then took leave. Then from the angry North,
Cloud-gathering Jove, a dreadful storm called forth
Against our Navy; couerd shore and all,
With gloomie vapors. Night did headlong fall
From frowning Heaven. And then hurld here and there
Was all our Navy; the rude winds did tear,
In three, in four parts, all their sails; and down
Driven under hatches were we, pressed to drown.
Up rusht we yet again; and with tough hand
(Two days, two nights entoild) we gat nere land;
Labors and sorrows, eating up our minds.
The third clear day yet, to more friendly winds
We masts advanced, we white sails spread, and sat.
Forewinds, and guides, again did iterate,
Our ease and home-hopes; which we clear had reached;
Had not, by chance, a sudden North Wind fetched,
With an extreme sea, quite about again,
Our whole endeavors; and our course constrain
To giddie round; and with our bowd sails greet
Dreadful Maleia; calling back our fleet^,
As far forth as Cythaera. Nine days more,
Adverse winds tossed me; and the tenth, the shore,
Where dwell the blossome-fed Lotophagie,
I fetched* fresh water took in; instantly
Fell to our food aship-boord; and then sent
Two of my choice men to the Continent,
(Adding a third, a Herald) to discover,
What sort of people were the Rulers over
The land next to us. Where, The Lotophagie.
the first they met,
Were the Lotophagie* that made them eat
Their Country diet; and no ill intent,
Hid in their hearts to them: and yet the event,
To ill converted it; for, having eat
Their dainty viands; they did quite forget
(As all men else, that did but taste their feast)
Both countrymen and country; nor addressed
Any return, t'informe what sort of men
Made fixed abode there; but would needs maintain,
Abode themselves there; and eat that food ever.
I made out after; and was feign to sever
Th'enchanted knot; by forcing their retreat;
That strived, and wept, and would not leave their meat
For heaven it self. But, dragging them to fleet;
I wrapped in sure bands, both their hands and feet,
And cast them under hatches; and away
Commanded all the rest, without least stay;
Lest they should taste the Lote too; and forget
With such strange raptures, their despisde retreat.
All then aboard, we beat the sea with Ores;
And still with sad hearts saild by out-way shores;
Till th'out-lawd Cyclops land we fetched; a race
Of proud-liu'd loiterers, The idle Cyclops.
that never sow,
Nor put a plant in earth, nor use a Plow;
But trust in God for all things; and their earth,
(Unsown, vnplowd) gives every offspring birth,
That other lands have. Wheat, and Ba^ley; Vines
That bear in goodly Grapes, delicious wines;
And Jove sends showers for all: no counsels there,
Nor counselors, nor laws; but all men bear
Their heads aloft on mountains, and those steep,
And on their tops too: and there, houses keep
In vaultie Caves; their households gouernd all
By each man's law, imposde in several;
Nor wife, nor child awd; but as he thinks good.
None for another caring. But there stood
Another little I Will, well stored with wood,
Betwixt this and the entry; neither nie
The Cyclops I Will, nor yet far off does lie.
Men's want it sufferd; but the men's supplies,
The Goats made with their inarticulate cries.
Goats beyond number, this small Island breeds,
So ^ame, that no access disturbs their feeds.
No hunters (that the tops of mountains scale,
And rub through woods with toil) seek them at all.
Nor is the soil with flocks fed down, nor plowd;
Nor ever in it any seed was sowd.
Nor place the neighbor Cyclops their delights,
In brave Vermilion prow-deckt ships; nor wrights
Useful and skillful, in such works, as need
Perfection to those trafficks, that exceed
Their natural confines: to fly out and see
Cities of men; and take in, mutually
The prease of others; To themselves they live,
And to their Island, that enough would give
A good inhabitant; and time of year
Observe to all things Art could order there.
There, close upon the sea, sweet meadows spring,
That yet of fresh streams want no watering
To their soft burdens: but of special yield,
Your vines would be there; and your common field,
But gentle work make for your plow; yet bear
A lofty harvest when you came to sheare.
For passing fat the ^oile is* In it lies
A harbor so opportune, that no ties,
Halsers, or gables need; nor anchors cast.
Whom storms The descriptions of all these countries, have admirable
alleg^ries, besides their artly and pleasing relation.
put in there, are with stay embraced;
Or to their full wills safe; or winds aspire
To Pilots uses their more quick desire.
At entry of the haven, a silver foord
Is from a rock-impressing fountain powered,
All set with sable Poplars; and this Port
Were we arrived at, by the sweet resort
Of some God guiding us: for it was a night
So ghastly dark, all Port was past our sight,
Clouds ^id our ships, and would not let the Moon
Afford a beam to us; the whole I Will won,
By not an eye of ours. None thought the Blore
That then was up, should waves against the shore,
That then to an vnmeasur'd height put on.
We still at sea esteemd us, till alone
Our fleet put in it self. And then were struck
Our gatherd sails: our rest ashore we took,
And day expected. When the Morn gave fire,
We rose, and walked, and did the I Will admire.
The Nymphs, Jove's daughters, putting up a heard
Of mountain Goats to us, to render cheard
My fellow soldiers. To our Fleet we flew;
Our crooked bows took, long-pil'd darts, and drew
Our selves in three parts out; when, by the grace
That God vouch-saft, we made a gainful chase.
Twelve ships we had, and every ship had nine
Fat Goats allotted; ten only mine.
Thus all that day, even till the Sun was set,
We sat and feasted; pleasant wine and meat,
Plenteously taking; for we had not spent
Our ruddie wine aship-boord: supplement
Of large sort, each man to his vessel drew,
When we the sacred City overthrew,
That held the Cicons. Now then saw we near,
The Cyclops late-praisd Island; and might hear
The murmr of their sheep and goats; and see
Their smokes ascend. The Sun then set, and we
(When Night succeeded) took our rest ashore.
And when the world the Mornings favor wore,
I called my friends to council; charging them
To make stay there, while I took ship and stream,
With some associates; and explored what men
The neighbor I Will held: if of rude disdain,
Churlish and tyrannous, or minds bewraid
Pious and hospitable. Thus much said,
I boorded, and commanded to ascend
My friends and soldiers, to put off, and lend
Way to our ship. They boorded, sat, and beat
The old sea forth, till we might see the seat,
The greatest Cyclop held for his abode;
Which was a deep Cave, near the common rode
Of ships that touched there; thick with Laurels spread,
Where many sheep and goats lay shadowed:
And near to this, a Hall of torne-vp stone,
High built with Pines, that heaven and earth atone;
And loftie-fronted Oaks: in which kept house,
A man in shape, immane, and monsterous,
Fed all his flocks alone; nor would afford
Commerce with men; but had a wit abhord;
His mind, his body answering. Nor was he
Like any man, that food could possibly
Enhance so hugely; but (beheld alone)
Showed like a steep hills top, all ouergrowne
With trees and brambles; little thought had I
Of such vast objects. When, arrived so nie;
Some of my loved friends, I made stay aboard,
To guard my ship; and twelve* with me I shor'd,
The choice of all. I took besides along,
A Goat-skin flagon of wine, black and strong,
That Maro did present; Euantheus son,
And Priest to Phoebus; who had mansion
In Thracian Ismarus (the Town I took)
He gave it me; since I (with reverence struck,
Of his grave place, his wife and childrens good)
Freed all of violence. Amidst a wood
Sacred to Phoebus, stood his house; from whence
He fetched me gifts of varied excellence;
Seven talents of fine gold; a boll all framed
Of massy silver. But his gift, most famed,
Was twelve great vessels, filld with such rich wine,
As was incorruptible, and divine.
He kept it as his jewel, which none knew
But he himself, ^is wife, and he that drew.
It was so strong, that never any filld
A cup, where that was but by drops instilld,
And drunk it off; but it was before allaid
With twenty parts in water; yet so swaid
The spirit of that little, that the whole,
A sacred odor breathed about the boll.
Had you the odor smelt, Vi^um Maroneum memorabile.
and sent it cast,
It would have vexed you to forbear the taste.
But then (the taste gaind too) the spirit it wrought,
To dare things high, set up an end my thought.
Of this, a huge great flagon full I bore,
And in a good large knapsacke, victles store;
And longd to see this heap of fortitude,
That so illiterate was, and vpland rude,
That laws divine nor humane he had learnd.
With speed we reached the Cauerne, nor discernd
His presence there. His flocks he fed at field.
Entering his den; each thing beheld, did yield
Our admiration: shelues with cheeses heapt;
Sheds stuffed with Lambs and Goats, distinctly kept;
Distinct the biggest; the more mean distinct;
Distinct the youngest. And in their precinct
(Proper and placefull) stood the troughs and pailes,
In which he milkt; and what was given a^ meals,
Set up a creaming: in the Evening still,
All scouring bright, as deaw upon the hill.
Then were my fellows instant to convey
Kids, cheeses, lambs, aship^boord; and away
Sail the salt billow. I thought best, not so,
But better otherwise; and first would know,
What guest-gifts he would spare me. Little knew
My friends, on whom they would have preyd: his view
Proved after, that his inwards were too rough
For such bold usage: we were bold enough,
In what I sufferd; which was there to stay;
Make fire and feed there, though bear none away.
There sat we, till we saw him feeding come,
And on his neck a burden lugging home,
Most highly huge of Sere-wood; which the pile
That fed his fire, supplide all supper while.
Down by his den he threw it; and up rose
A tumult with the fall. Afraid, we close
Withdrew our selves, while he into a Cave
Of huge receipt, his high-fed cattle drove,
All that he milkt; the males he left without
His lofty roofes, that all bestrowd about
With Rams and buck-goates were. And then a rock
He lift aloft, that damd up to his flock,
The door they enterd: it was so hard to wield,
That two and twenty Wagons, all foure-wheeld,
(Could they be loaded, and have teames that were
Proportioned to them) could not stir it there.
Thus, making sure, he kneeld and milkt his Ewes,
And braying Goats, with all a milkers dues.
Then let in all their young: then, quick did dress,
His half milk up for cheese, and in a press
Of wicker pressed it; put in bolls the rest,
To drink, and eat, and serve his supping feast.
All works dispatched thus; he began his fire;
Which blown, he saw us; and did thus enquire:
Ho! Guests! what are ye? whence sail ye these seas?
Traffic, or roue ye? and like thieves oppress
Poor strange adventurers; exposing so
Your souls to danger, and your lives to woe?
This vtt^rd he; when Fear from our hearts took
The very life; to be so thunder-strooke
With such a voice, and such a monster see.
But thus I answered: Er^ing Grecians we,
From Troy were turning homewards; This his relation of Agamemnon, and his
glory and theirs for Troyes sack, with the piety of suppliants receipt, to him
that was so barbarous and impious, must be intended spoken by Ulysses, with
supposition that his hearers would note, still as he spoke; how vain they would
show to the Cyclops: who respected little Agamemnon, or their valiant exploit
against Troy, or the Gods themselves. For oth^rwise, the serious observation of
the words (though good and grave, if spoken to another) want their intentional
sharpness and life.
but by force
Of adverse winds, in far-diuerted course,
Such unknown ways took, and on rude seas tossed,
(As Jove decreed) are cast upon this Coast.
Of Agamemnon (famous Atreus son)
We boast our selves the soldiers; who has won
Renown that reaches heaven; to overthrow
So great a City, and to ruin so,
So many nations. Yet at thy knees lie
Our prostrate bosoms; forced with praires to try,
If any hospitable right, or Boon
Of other nature, (such as have bin won
By laws of other houses) thou will give.
Reverence the Gods, thou greatst of all that live.
We suppliants are; and hospitable Jove
Poures wreake on all, whom praires want power to move:
And with their plagues, together will provide,
That humble Guests shall have their wants supplide.
He cruelly answered: O thou fool (said he)
To come so far, and to importune me
With any Gods fear, or observed love;
We Cyclops care not for your Goat-fed Jove;
Nor other Blessed ones; we are better far.
To Jove himself, dare I bid open war;
To thee, and all thy fellows, if I please.
But tell me: where is the ship, that by the seas
Has brought thee hither? If far off, or near;
Inform me quickly. These his temptings were.
But I, too much knew, not to know his mind;
And craft, with craft paid; telling him the wind
(Thrust up from Sea, by him that shakes the Shore)
Had dashed our ships against his rocks, and tore
Her ribs in pieces, close upon his Coast;
And we from high wrack saved; the rest were lost.
He answered nothing; but rusht in, and took
Two of my fellows up from earth, and struck
Their brains against it. Like two whelps they flew
About his shoulders; and did all embrew
The blushing earth. No mountain Lion tore
Two Lambs so sternly; lept up all their gore,
Gusht from their torne-vp bodies; lim by lim,
(Trembling with life yet) ravished into him.
Both flesh and marrow-stuffed bones he eat,
And even th'vncleansed entrails made his meat.
We weeping, cast our hands to heaven, to view,
A sight so horrid. Desperation flew
With all our after lives, to instant death,
In our believed destruction. But when breath,
The fury of his appetite had got,
Because the gulf his belly, reached his throat;
Man's flesh, and Goats milk, laying laire on laire,
Till near chokt up, was all the pass for air.
Along his den, amongst his cattle, down
He rusht, and streakt him. When my mind was grown
Desperate, to step in; draw my sword, and part
His bosom, where the strings about the heart
Circle the Liver, and add strength of hand.
But that rash thought, More staid, did countermand;
For there we all had perished, since it past
Our powers to lift aside a log so vast,
As barrd all outscape; and so sighed away
The thought all Night, expecting active Day.
Which come, he first of all, his fire enflames,
Then milks his Goats and Ewes; then to their dams
Lets in their young; and wondrous orderly,
With manly haste, dispatched his houswifery.
Then to his Breakfast, to which, other two
Of my poor friends went: which eat; out then go
His herds and fat flocks; lightly putting by
The churlish bar, and closde it instantly;
For both those works, with ease, as much he did,
As you would open and shut your Quiver lid.
With storms of whistlings then, his flocks he drove
Up to the mountains; and occasion gave
For me to use my wits; which to their height,
I strived to skrew up; that a vengeance might
By some means fall from thence; and Pallas now
Afford a full ear to my neediest vow.
This then, my thoughts preferred: a huge club lay
Close by his milk-house, which was now in way
To dry, and season; being an Olive tree
Which late he feld; and being green, must be
Made lighter for his manage. It Was so vast,
That we resembl'd it to some fit Mast,
To serve a ship of burden, that was driven
With twenty Ores; and had a bigness given,
To bear a huge sea. Full so thick, so tall
We judged this club; which I, in part, hewd small,
And cut a fathom off. The piece I gave
Amongst my soldiers, to take down, and shave;
Which done, I sharpn'd it at top, and then
(Hardn'd in fire) I hid it in the den,
Within a nastie dunghill reeking there,
Thick, and so moist, it issude every where.
Then made I lots cast, by my friends to try,
Whose fortune served to dare the bored out eye
Of that man-eater: and the lot did fall
On four I wished to make my aid, of all;
And I, the fifth made, chosen like the rest.
Then came the Even; and he came from the feast
Of his fat cattle; drove in all; nor kept
One male abroad: if, or his memory slept
By Gods direct will; or of purpose was
His driving in of all then, does surpass
My comprehension. But he closde again
The mighty bar; milkt, and did still maintain
All other observation, as before.
His wo^ke, all done; two of my soldiers more,
At once he snatched up; and to supper went.
Then dared I words to him, and did present
A boll of wine, with these words: Cyclop! take
A boll of wine from my hand, that may make
Way for the man's flesh thou have eat; and show
What drink our ship held; which in sacred vow,
I offer to thee; to take ruth on me
In my dismission home. Thy rages be
Now no more sufferable. How shall men
(Mad and inhumane that thou art) again
Greet thy abode, and get thy actions grace,
If thus thou ragest, and eatst up their race.
He took, and drunk; and vehemently ioyd
To taste the sweet cup; and again employed
My flagons power; entreating more, and said:
Good Guest, again afford my taste thy aid;
And let me know thy name; and quickly now;
That in thy recompense I may bestow
A hospitable gift on thy desert;
And such a one as shall rejoice thy heart;
For to the Cylops too, the gentle Earth
Bears generous wine; and Jove augments her birth,
In store of such, with showers. But this rich wine,
Fell from the river that is mere divine,
Of Nectar and Ambrosia. This again
I gave him; and again; nor could the fool abstain,
But drunk as often. When the noble Juice
Had wrought upon his spirit; I then gave use
To fairer language; saying: Cylop! now
As thou demandst, I Will tell thee my name; do thou
Make good thy hospitable gift to me;
My name is No-Man; No-Man, each degree
Of friends, as well as parents, call my name.
He answered, as his cruel soul became:
No-Man! I Will eat thee last of all thy friends;
And this is that, in which so much amends
I vowed to thy deseruings; thus shall be
My hospitable gift, made good to thee.
This said; he upwards fell; but then bent round
His fleshie neck; and Sleep (with all crowns, crowned)
Subdude the Savage. From his throat brake out
My wine, with man's flesh gobbets, like a spout;
When loded with his cups, he lay and snor'd.
And then took I the clubs end up, and gored
The burning cole-heape, that the point might heat.
Confirmd my fellows minds, lest Fear should let
Their vowed assay, and make them fly my aid.
Strait was the Olive Lever, I had laid
Amidst the huge fire, to get hardening, hot;
And glowd extremely, though it was green; (which got
From forth the cinders) close about me stood
My hardy friends: but that which did the good,
Was Gods good inspiration, that gave
A spirit beyond the spirit they used to have:
Who took the Olive sparre, made keen before,
And plunged it in his eye: and up I bore,
Bent to the top close; and helped pour it in,
With all my forces: Simile.
And as you have seen
A ship-wright bore a nauall beam; he often
Thrusts at the Augurs Froofe; works still aloft;
And at the shanke, help others; with a cord
Wound round about, to make it sooner bored;
All plying the round still: So into his eye,
The fiery stake, we labourd to imply.
Out gusht the blood that scalded; his eye-ball
Thrust out a flaming vapor, that scorcht all
His brows and eyelids; his eye-strings did crack,
As in, the sharp and burning rafter brake.
And as a Smith to harden any tool, Simile.

(Broad Axe, or Mattocke) in his Trough does cool
The red-hote substance, that so fervent is,
It makes the cold wave strait to seethe and hiss:
So sod, and hizd his eye about the stake.
He roared withal; and all his Cauerne brake
In claps like thunder. We, did frighted fly,
Dispersed in corners. He from forth his eye,
The fixed stake plucked: after which, the blood
Flowd freshly forth; and, mad, he hurled the wood
About his houill. Out he then did cry
For other Cyclops, that in Cauernes by,
Upon a windy Promontorie dwelld;
Who hearing how impetuously he yelld,
Rusht every way about him; and inquired,
What ill afflicted him, that he expired
Such horrid clamors; and in sacred Night,
To break their sleeps so? Asked him, if his fright
Came from some mortal, that his flocks had driven?
Or if by craft, or might, his death were given?
He answered from his den; By craft, nor might,
No man has given me death. They then said right;
If no man hurt thee, and thy self alone;
That which is done to thee, by Jove is done.
And what great Jove inflicts, no man can fly;
Pray to thy Father yet, Neptune.
a Deity;
And prove, from him, if thou can help acquire.
Thus spoke they, leaving him. When all on fire,
My heart with joy was; that so well my wit,
And name deceived him; whom now pain did split;
And groaning up and down, he groping tried,
To find the stone, which found, he put aside;
But in the door sat, feeling if he could
(As his sheep issude) on some man lay hold;
Esteeming me a fool, that could devise
No stratageme to escape his gross surprise.
But I, contending what I could invent,
My friends and me, from death so imminent,
To get deliuerd: all my wiles I woue,
(Life being the subject) and did this approve;
Fat fleecie Rams, most fair, and great, lay there,
That did a Wool of a violet color.
burden like a Violet bear.
These (while this learned in villainy did sleep)
I yokt with Osiers cut there, sheep to sheep;
Three in a rank; and still the mid sheep bore
A man about his belly: the two more,
Marched on his each side for defense. I then,
Choosing my self the fairest of the den,
His fleecie belly vnder-crept; embraced
His back, and in his rich wool wrapped me fast
With both my hands, armed with as fast a mind.
And thus each man hung, till the Morning shined;
Which come, he knew the hour, and let abroad
His male-flocks first: the females, vnmilkt stood
Bleating and braying; their full bags so sore,
With being vnemptied; but their shepherd more,
With being vnsighted; which was cause, his mind
Went not a milking. He (to wreake inclined)
The backs felt as they past, of those male dams:
(Gross fool) believing, we would ride his Rams.
Nor ever knew, that any of them bore
Upon his belly, any man before.
The last Ram came to pass him, with his wool,
And me together, loded to the full:
For there did I hang: and that Ram he staid;
And me withal had in his hands; my head
Troubled the while, not causlesly, nor least.
This Ram he grop't, and talked to: Lazy beast!
Why last art thou now? thou have never used
To lag thus hindmost: but still first have brusde
The tender blossom of a flower; and held
State in thy steps, both to the flood and field:
First still at Fold, at Even; now last remain?
Do thou not wish I had mine eye again,
Which that abhord man No-Man did put out,
Assisted by his execrable rout,
When he had wrought me down with wine? but he
Must not escape my wreake so cunningly.
I would to heaven thou knewst, and could but speak,
To tell me where he lurks now; I would break
His brain about my Cave, strewed here and there,
To ease my heart of those foul ils, that were
Th'inflictions of a man, I prisde at naught.
Thus let he him abroad; when I (once brought
A little from his hold) my self first losde,
And next, my friends. Then drove we, and disposde,
His strait-leggd fat fleece-bearers over land,
Even till they all were in my ships command;
And to our loved friends, showed our praid-for sight,
Escaped from death. But for our loss, outright
They brake in tears; which with a look I staid,
And bad them take our Boot in. They obaid;
And up we all went; sat, and used our Ores,
But having left as far the savage shores,
As one might hear a voice; we then might see
The Cyclop at the haven; when instantly
I staid our Ores, and this insultance used:
Cyclop! Ulysses insults ^uer the Cyclop.
thou should not have so much abusde
Thy monstrous forces, to oppose their least,
Against a man immartiall, and a guest;
And eat his fellows: thou might know there were
Some ils behind (rude swain) for thee to bear;
That feared not to devour thy guests, and break
All laws of humanes: Jove sends therefore wreake,
And all the Gods, by me. This blew the more
His burning fury; when the top he tore
From off a huge Rock; and so right a throw
Made at our ship, that just before the Prow,
It ouerflew and fell: mist Mast and all
Exceeding little; but about the fall,
So fierce a wave it raisd, that back it bore
Our ship so far, it almost touched the shore.
A bead-hooke then (a far-extended one)
I snatched up, thrust hard, and so set us gone
Some little way; and strait commanded all
To help me with their Ores; on pain to fall
Again on our confusion. But a sign,
I with my head made; and their Ores were mine,
In all performance. When we off were set,
(Then first, twice further) my heart was so great,
It would again provoke him: but my men
On all sides rusht about me, to contain;
And said: Unhappy! why will you provoke
A man so rude; that with so dead a stroke,
Given with his Rock-dart, made the sea thrust back
Our ship so far; and near hand forced our wrack?
Should he again, but hear your voice resound,
And any word reach; thereby would be found
His Darts direction; which would, in his fall,
Crush peece-meale us, quite split our ship and all;
So much dart weilds the monster. Thus urged they
Impossible things, in fear; but I gave way
To that wrath, which so long I held deprest,
(By great Necessity conquered) in my breast.
Cyclop! Ulysses continued insole^ce, no more to repeat what he said to the
Cyclop, then to let his hearers know Epithetes, and estimation in the world.
if any ask thee, who imposde
Th'vnsightly blemish that thine eye enclosde;
Say that Ulysses (old Laertes son,
Whose seat is Ithaca; and who has won
Surname of Citie-racer) bored it out.
At this, he braid so loud, that round about
He drove affrighted Echoes through the Air;
And said: O beast! I was premonisht fair,
By aged Prophecy, in one that was
A great, and good man; this should come to pass;
And how it is proved now? Augur Telemus,
Surnamed Eurymedes (that spent with us
His age in Augurie; and did exceed
In all presage of Truth) said all this deed,
Should this event take; author'd by the hand
Of one Ulysses; who I thought was mand
With great and goodly personage; and bore
A virtue answerable: and this shore
Should shake with weight of such a conqueror,
When now a weakling came, a dwarfie thing,
A thing of nothing; who yet wit did bring,
That brought supply to all; and with his wine,
Put out the flame, where all my light did shine.
Come, land again, Ulysses! that my hand,
May Guest-rites give thee; and the great command,
That Neptune has at sea, I may convert
To the deduction, where abides thy heart,
With my sollicitings; whose Son I am;
And whose fame boasts to bear my Fathers^ame.
Nor think my hurt offends me; for my S^^e
Can soon repose in it the visuall fire,
At his free pleasure; which no power beside
Can boast: of men, or of the Deifide.
I answered: Would to God I could compel
Both life and soul from thee; and send to hell
Those spoils of nature. Hardly Nept^ne then
Could cure thy hurt, and give th^e all again.
Then flew fierce vows to Nept^ne; Polyphems imprecation against Ulysses.
both his hands
To starre-borne heaven cast: O tho^ that all lands
Girdst in thy ambient Cir^le; and in air
Shak'st the curld Tresses of thy Sapphire hair;
If I be thine, or thou may justly vant,
Thou art my Father: hear me now, and grant
That this Ulysses (old Laertes son,
That dwells in Ithaca; and name has won
Of Citie-ruiner) may never reach
His natural region. Or if to fetch,
That, and the sight of his fair roo^es and friends,
Be fatal to him; let him that Amends
For all his miseries, long time and ill,
Smart for, and fail of: nor that Fate fulfill,
Till all his soldiers quite are cast away
In others ships. And when, at last, the day
Of his sole-landing, shall his dwelling show,
Let Detriment prepare him wrongs enough.
Thus praid he Neptune; who, his Sire appeard;
And all his praire, to every syllable heard.
But then a Rock, in size more amplified
Then first, he ravished to him; and implied
A dismal strength in it; when (wheeld about)
He sent it after us; nor flew it out
From any blind aim; for a little pass
Beyond our Fore-decke, from the fall there was:
With which the sea, our ship gave back upon,
And shrunk up into billows from the stone;
Our ship again repelling, near as near
The shore as first. But then our Rowers were
(Being warnd, more armd) and stronglier stemd the flood
That bore back on us, till our ship made good
The other Island, where our whole Fleet lay;
In which our friends lay mourning for our stay;
And every minute looked when we should land.
Where (now arrived) we drew up to the sand;
The Cyclops sheep dividing, that none there
(Of all our priuates) might be wrung, and bear
Too much on power. The Ram yet was alone,
By all my friends, made all my portion,
Above all others; and I made him then,
A No occasion let pass to Ulysses piety, in our Poets singular wit and
wisedom^.
sacrifice for me, and all my men,
To cloud-compelling Jove, that all commands.
To whom I burnd the Thighs: but my sad hands,
Received no grace from him; who studied how
To offer, men and fleet to Overthrow.
All day, till Sunset yet, we sat and eat;
And liberal store took in, of wine and meat.
The Sun then down, and place resigned to shade,
We slept; Morn came, my men I raisd, and made
All go aboard; weigh Anchor, and away.
They boorded, sat and beat the aged sea;
And forth we made sail; sad for loss before,
And yet had comfort, since we lost no more.
Finis libri noni Hom. Odyss.
THE TENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses now relates to us,
The grace he had with Aeolus,
Great Guardian of the hollow winds:
Which in a leather bag he binds,
And gives Ulysses; all but one,
Which Zephyre was; who filld alone
Ulysses sails. The Bag once seen
(While he slept) by Ulysses men;
They thinking, it did gold enclose;
To find it* all the winds did lose.
Who back flew to their guard again.
Forth saild he; and did next attain
To where the Laestrigonians dwell.
Where he eleven ships lost; and fell
On the Aeaean coast; whose shore
He sends Eurylochus t'explore,
Dividing with him half his men:
Who go, and turn no more again;
(All save Eurylochus, to swine
By Circe turned.) Their stays incline
Ulysses to their search; who got
Of Mercury an Antidote,
(Which Moly was) against Ci^ces charms,
And so auoids his soldiers harms.
A year with Circe all remain,
And then their native forms regaine.
On utter shores, a time they dwell,
While Ithacus descends to hell.
Another.
(...).
Great Aeolus
And Circe, friends,
Finds Ithacus;
And Hell descends.

TO the Aeolian Island we attaind,
That swumme about still on the sea; where reigned
The God-lou'd Aeolus Hippotydes.
A wall of steel it had; and in the seas,
A waue-beat-smooth-rocke, moved about the wall.
Twelve children, in his house imperial,
Were borne to him: of which, six daughters were,
And six were sons, that youths sweet flower did bear.
His daughters, to his sons he gave, as wives;
Who spent in feastfull comforts* all their lives;
Close seated by their Sire, and his grave Spouse.
Past number were the dishes, that the house
Made ever savor; and still full the Hall;
As long as day shined; in the nightime, all
Slept with their chaste wives. Each his fair carved bed
Most richly furnished; and this life they led.
We reached the City, and fair roofes of these;
Where, a whole months time; all things that might please
The King vouchsaf't us. Of great Troy inquired,
The Grecian fleet, and how the Greeks retired:
To all which, I gave answer, as behou'd.
The fit time come; when I dismission moved;
He nothing would deny me, but addressed
My pass with such a bounty, as might best
Teach me contentment. For he did enfold
Within an Ox hide, flead at nine years old,
All th'airie blasts, that were of stormy kinds.
Saturnius made him Steward of his winds; I^piter.

And gave him power, to raise and to assuage;
And these he gave me, curbd thus of their rage.
Which in a glittering silver band I bound
And hung up in my ship: enclosd so round,
That no egression, any breath could find.
Only he left abroad the Western wind;
To speed our ships and us, with blasts secure.
But our securities, made all unsure:
Nor could he consummate our course alone,
When all the rest had got egression.
Which thus succeeded. Nine whole days and nights
We saild in safety; and the tenth, the lights
Borne on our Country earth, we might descrie:
So near we drew, and yet even then fell I
(Being ouerwatcht) into a fatal sleep:
For I would suffer no man else to keep
The foot that ruled my vessels course; (...) He calls the Stern, the foot
of the ship.
to lead
The faster home. My friends then Envy fed,
About the bag I hung up; and supposde,
That gold, and silver, I had there enclosde,
As gift from Aeolus. And said, O heaven!
What grace, and grave price, is by all men given
To our Commander? Whatsoever coast
Or town, he comes to, how much he engrost
Of fair and precious prey, and brought from Troy?
We the same voyage went; and yet enjoy
In our return, these empty hands for all.
This bag now, Aeolus was so liberal
To make a Guest-gift to him. Let us try
Of what consists, the faire-bound Treasury;
And how much gold, and silver it contains.
Ill counsel, present approbation gains.
They op't the bag, and out the vapors brake;
When instant tempest did our vessel take,
That bore us back to Sea; to mourn anew
Our absent Country. Up amazd I flew,
And desperate things discourst; if I should cast
My self to ruin in the seas; or taste
Amongst the living more moan, and sustain?
Silent, I did so; and lay hid again
Beneath the hatches: while an ill wind took
My ships, back to Aeolia: my men struck
With woe enough. We pumpt and landed then;
Took food, for all this; and (of all my men,)
I took a Herald to me, and away
Went to the Court of Aeolus; Where they
Were feasting still: he, wife and children set
Together close. We would not (at their meat)
Thrust in; but humbly on the threshold sat.
He then, amazd, my presence wonderd at;
And called to me: Ulysses! how, thus back
Art thou arrived here? what foul spirit brake
Into thy bosom to retire thee thus?
We thought we had deduction, curious
Given thee before; to reach thy shore and home:
Did it not like thee? I (even overcome
With worthy sorrow) answered: My ill men
Have done me mischief; and to them has been
My sleep th'vnhappie motive. But do you
(Dearest of friends) daigne succor to my vow:
Your powers command it. Thus endeuord I
With soft speech to repair my misery.
The rest, with ruth, sat dumb: but thus spoke he;
Auant; and quickly quit my land of thee,
Thou worst of all that breathe; it fits not me
To conuoy, and take in, whom heavens expose.
Away, and with thee go, the worst of woes,
That seek'st my friendship, and the Gods thy foes.
Thus he dismissed me, sighing; forth we saild,
At heart afflicted: and now wholly faild
The minds my men sustaind* so spent they were
With toiling at their oars; and worse did bear
Their growing labors; that they causd their grought,
By selfe-willd follies; nor now, ever thought
To see their Country more. Six nights and days
We saild; the seventh, we saw fair Lamos raise
Her lofty Towers (The Laestrigonian State)
That bears her Ports, so far disterminate.
Where This place suffers different construction, in all the Commentors, (in
which all err from the mind of the Poet: as in a hundred other places (which
yet I want time to approve) especially about (...)* etc. Prope enim noctis and
diei ^unt viae; (or similiter which (...) signifies) which they will have to be
understood, that the days in that region are long and the nights short; where
Hom. intends, that the Equinoctial is there: (for how else is the course of
day and night near or equal?) But therefore the nights-man bath his double
hire, being as long about his charge as the ^^her: and the night being more
dangerous, etc. And if the day were so long* why should the nightsman, be
preferred in wages?
Shepherd, Shepherd calls out; he a home
Is called out by the other that does come
From charge abroad; and then goes he to sleep,
The other issuing. He whose turn does keep
The Night observance, has his double hire;
Since Day and Night, in equal length expire,
About that Region; and the Nights watch weighed
At twice the Days ward; since the charge that's laid
Upon the Nights-man (besides breach of sleep)
Exceeds the Daies-mans: for one, oxen keep,
The other sheep. But when the haven we found,
(Exceeding famous; and enuirond round
With one continuate rock: which, so much bent,
That both ends almost met; so prominent
They were; and made, the havens mouth passing straight)
Our whole fleet, in we got; in whole receipt
Our Ships lay anchord close: nor needed we
Fear harm on any For being cast on the stays, as ships are by weather.
Stays; Tranquillity
So purely sat there: that waves great, nor small
Did ever rise to any height at all.
And yet would I, no entry make; but staid
Alone without the haven; and thence suruaid
From out a lofty watch-towre raised there,
The Country round about: nor any where
The work of man or beast, appeard to me;
Only a smoke from earth break, I might see.
I then made choice of two; and added more,
A Herald for associate, to explore
What sort of men lived there. They went, and saw
A beaten way, through which, carts used to draw
Wood from the high hills, to the Town; and met
A maid without the Port; about to get
Some near spring water. She, the daughter was
Of mighty Laestrigonian, Antiphas:
And to the clear spring, called Artacia, went;
To which the whole Town, for their water sent.
To her they came, and asked who gouernd there?
And what the people, whom he orderd were?
She answered not, but led them through the Port,
As making haste, to show her fathers Court.
Where, enterd; they beheld (to their affright)
A woman like a mountain top, in height.
Who rusht abroad; and from the Counsel place
Called home her horrid husband Antiphas. Ant^ph^^ (...) king there.

Who (deadly minded) straight he snatched up one,
And fell to supper. Both the rest were gone;
And to the fleet came. Antiphas, a cry
Drove through the City; (which heard,) instantly
This way, and that, innumerable sorts,
Not men, but Giants, issued through the Ports;
And mighty flints from rocks tore; which they threw
Amongst our ships; through which, an ill noise flew,
Of shiuerd ships, and life-expiring men,
That were, like fishes, by the monsters slain,
And borne to sad feast. While they slaughterd these,
That were engaged in all th'aduantages,
The close-mouth'd, and most dead-calme haven could give;
I (that without lay) made some means to live;
My sword drew; cut my gables; and to oars
Set all my men; and, from the plagues, those shores
Let fly amongst us, we made haste to fly;
My men, close working, as men loath to die.
My ship flew freely off; but theirs that lay
On heaps in harbors, could enforce no way
Through these stern fates, that had engaged them there.
Forth our sad remnant saild; yet still retaind,
The joys of men, that our poor few remaind,
Then to the I Will Aeae^ we attaind;
Where faire-haird, dreadful, eloquent Circe raignd;
Aeaetas sister, both by Dame and Sire;
Both daughters to heavens man-enlightning fire;
And Perse, whom Oceanus begat.
The ship-fit Port here, soon we landed at:
Some God directing us. Two days; two nights,
We lay here pining in the fatal spights
Of toil and sorrow. But the next third day
When fair Aurora had informd; quick way
I made out of my ship; my sword and lance
Took for my surer guide; and made advance
Up to a prospect, I assay to see
The works of men; or hear mortality
Expire a voice. When I had climbed a height
Rough and right hardly accessible; I might
Behold from Circes house (that in a grove
Set thick with trees, stood; a bright vapor move.
I then grew (...) Curiose cogito.
curious in my thought to try
Some fit inquiry; (...) signifiyng rutilus: by reason of the fire mixed with
it. Fumus qui fit dum aliquid accendi^ur.
when so spritely fly
I saw the yeallow smoke. But my discourse,
A first retiring to my ship gave force
To give my men their dinner, and to send,
(Before th'aduenture of my self) some friend.
Being near my ship; of one so desolate
Some God had pity, and would recreate
My woes a little, putting up to me
A great and high-palmd Heart; that (fatallie,
Just in my way it self, to taste a flood)
Was then descending: the Sun heat had sure
Importuned him, besides the temperature
His natural heat gave. Howsoever, I
Made up to him, and let my Iauelin fly,
That struck him through the mid-part of his chine;
And made him (braying) in the dust confine
His flying forces. Forth his spirit flew;
When I stepped in, and from the deaths wound drew
My shrewdly-bitten lance; there let him lie
Till I, of cut-vp Osiers, did imply,
A With; a fathom long, with which, his feet
I made together, in a sure league meet;
Stoop't under him, and to my neck, I heau'd
The mighty burden; of which, I received
A good part on my lance: for else I could
By no means, with one hand alone, vphould
(Joined with one shoulder) such a deathfull lode.
And so, to both my shoulders, both hands stood
Needful assistents: for it was a Dear
Goodly-wel-growne: when (coming something near
Where rode my ships) I cast it down, and rer'd
My friends with kind words; whom, by name I cheered,
In note particular, and said; See friends,
We will not yet to Plutos house, our ends
Shall not be hastend, though we be declind
In cause of comfort; till the day designed
By Fates fixed finger. Come, as long as food
Or wine lasts in our ship; lets spirit our blood
And quit our care and hunger, both in one.
This said; they frolikt, came, and looked upon
With admiration, the huge bodied beast;
And when their first-seru'd eyes, had done their feast;
They washed, and made a to-be-striu'd-for meal,
In (...). The whole end of this counsel was to persuade his soldiers to
explore those parts: which he kn^w would prove a most unpleasing motion to
them: for their fellows terrible entertainment with Antiphas, and Polyph* and
therefore he prepares the little he has to say, with this long circumstance:
implying a necessity of that service, and necessary resolution to add the
trial of the event, to their other adventures,
point of honor. On which all did dwell
The whole day long. And, to our venzons store,
We added wine till we could wish no more.
Sun set, and darkness up; we slept, till light
Put darkness down: and then did I excite
My friends to * counsel, uttering this: Now, friends,
Afford unpassionate ear; though ill Fate lends,
So good cause to your passion; no man knows
The reason whence, and how, the darkness grows;
The reason, how the Morn is thus begun:
The reason, how the Man-enlightning Sun
Dives under earth: the reason how again
He reres his golden head. Those counsels then
That pass our comprehension, we must leave
To him that knows their causes; and receive
Direction from him, in our acts, as far
As he shall please to make them regular;
And stoop them to our reason. In our state,
What then behoues us? Can we estimate
With all our counsels, where we are? or know
(Without instruction, past our own skils) how
(Put off from hence) to stere our course the more?
I think we can not. We must then explore
These parts for information; in which way
We thus far are: last Morn I might display
(From off a high-raisd cliffe) an Island lie
Girt with th'vnmeasur'd Sea; and is so nie
That in the midst I saw the smoke arise
Through tufts of trees. This rests then to advise,
Who shall explore this. This struck dead their hearts,
Remembering the most execrable parts
That Laestrigonian Antiphas had played:
And that foul Cyclop, that their fellows braid
Betwixt his jaws; which moved them so; they cried.
But idle tears, had never wants supplied.
I, in two parts divided all; and gave
To either part his Captain: I must have
The charge of one; and one of God-like look,
Eurylochus, the other. Lots we shook,
(Put in a caske together,) which of us
Should lead the attempt; and it was Eurylochus.
He freely went; with two and twenty more:
All which, took leave with tears; and our eyes wore
The same wet badge, of weak humanity.
These, in a dale, did Circes house Circes house.
descrie;
Of bright stone built, in a conspicuous way:
Before her gates; hill-wolues, and Lions lay;
Which with her virtuous drugs, so tame she made;
That Wolf, nor Lion, would one man invade
With any violence; but all arose;
Their huge long tails wagd; and in fawnes would close,
As loving dogs, Simile.
when masters bring them home
Relics of feast; in all observance, come
And sooth their entries, with their fawnes and bounds;
All guests, still bringing, some scraps for their hounds:
So, on these men, the Wolves, and Lions rampt;
Their horrid paws set up. Their spirits were dampt
To see such monstrous kindness; staid at gate,
And heard within, the Goddess eleuate
A voice divine, as at her web, she wrought,
Subtle, and glorious, and past earthly thought;
As all the houswiferies of Deities are.
To hear a voice, so rauishingly rare;
Polites (one exceeding dear to me,
A Prince of men; and of no mean degree
In knowing virtue; in all Acts, (...) C^ius animus curas prudentes versat.
(...) whose mind
Discreet cares all ways, used to turn, and wind)
Was yet surprisd with it; and said; O friends,
Some one abides within here, that commends
The place to us; and breathes a voice divine;
As she some web wrought; or her spindles twine
She cherisht with her song: the pauement rings*
With imitation of the tunes she sings;
Some woman, or some Goddess it is; Assay
To see with knocking. Thus said he; and they
Both knocked, and called; and straight her shining gates
She opened, issuing: bade them in, to cates.
Led, and (unwise) they followed; all, but one
Which was Eurylochus; who stood alone
Without the gates; suspicious of a slight;
They enterd, she made sit; and her deceit
She cloakt with Thrones; and goodly chaires of State;
Set hearby honey, and the delicate
Wine brought from Smyrna, to them; meal and cheese;
But harmefull venoms, she commixt with these;
That made their Country vanish from their thought.
Which, eat; she touched them, with a rod that wrought
Their transformation, far past humane wunts;
Swines snowts, swines bodies, took they, bristles, grunts;
But still retaind the ^oules they had before;
Which made them mourn their bodies change the more.
She shut them straight in sties; and gave them meat
Oke-mast, and beech, and Cornell fruit, they eat,
Groueling like swine on earth, in fowlest sort.
Eurylochus, straight hasted the report
Of this his fellows most remorcefull fate.
Came to the ships; but so excruciate
Was with his woe; he could not speak a word:
His eyes stood full of tears; which showed how stored,
His mind with moan remaind. We all admired;
Asked what had chanced him, earnestly desired
He would resolve us. At the last, our eyes,
Enflamed in him, his fellows memories:
And out his grief burst thus; Seeing them, he thought of his fellows.
You willd; we went
Through those thick woods you saw; when, a descent
Showed us a fair house, in a lightsome ground,
Where (at some work) we heard a heavenly sound
Breathed from a Goddess, or a woman's breast:
They knocked, she op't her bright gates; each, her guest
Her fair inuitement made: nor would they stay,
(Fools that they were) when she once led the way.
I enterd not, suspecting some deceit.
When all together vanished; nor the sight
Of any one, (though long I looked) mine eye
Could any way discover. Instantly,
(My sword, Viysses mo^'d for his soldiers. Euryloch^^.
and bow reached) I bad show the place,
When, down he fell; did both my knees embrace,
And praid with tears thus; O thou kept of God,
Do not thy self lose; nor to that abode
Lead others rashly; both the self, and all
Thou ventur'st thither, I know well, must fall
In one sure ruin: with these few then fly;
We yet may shun the others destiny.
I answered him: Euryloch^s! stay thou
And keep the ship then; eat and drink: I now
Will undertake th'aduenture; there is cause
In great Necessities vnalterd laws.
This said, I left both ship and seas; and on
Along the sacred valleys all alone
Went in discovery: till at last I came
Where, of the maine^ medcine-making D^me
I saw the great house: where, encounterd me,
The golden-rod-sustaining Merc^rie; Ulysses encounters Mercury.

Even entering Circes doors. He met me in
A young man's likeness, of the first-flowr'd chin,
Whose form has all the grace, of one so young:
He first called to me: then my hand, he wrung,
And said; Thouno-place-finding-for repose;
Whither, alone, by these hill-confines, goes
Thy erring foot? Thou Art entering Circes house,
Where, (by her medcines, black, and sorcerous)
Thy soldiers all are shut, in well-armd sties,
And turned to swine. Art thou arrived with prise
Fit for their ransomes? Thou come out no more
If once thou enterst. Like thy men before
Made to remain here; But I Will guard ^hee free;
And save thee in her spite: receive of me
This fair and good receipt; with which, once armed;
Enter her roofes; for thou art to all proof charmed
Against the ill day: I will tell thee all
Her banefull counsel. With a festival
She Will first receive thee; but will spice thy bread
With flowrie poisons: yet unaltered
Shall thy firm form be; for this remedy
Stands most approved, against all her Sorcery.
Which, thus particularly shun: When she
Shall with her long rod strike thee; instantly
Draw from thy thigh thy sword; and fly on her
As to her slaughter. She, (surprisde with fear
And love) at first, will bid thee to her bed;
Nor say the Goddess nay; that welcomed
Thou may with all respect be; and procure
Thy fellows freedoms. But before, make sure
Her favors to thee; and the great oath take
With which the blessed Gods, assurance make
Of all they promise: that no prejudice
(By stripping thee of form, and faculties)
She may so much as once attempt on thee.
This said, he gave his Antidote to me;
Which from the earth he plucked; and told me all
The virtue of it: The herb Moly which with Ulysses whole Narration, ha^h in
chi^^e^an Allegorical exposition. Notwithstanding I say* with our Spondanus,
Credo in hoc vasto mundi ambitu extare res innumerasmirandae facultatis* adeo,
vt ne quide^ ista quae ad tran^formanda co^pora pe^tine^* iure e mundo eximi
possit, etc
With what Deities call
The name it bears. And Moly they impose
For name to it. The root is hard to loose
From hold of earth, by mortals: but Gods power
Can all things do. It Is black, but bears a f^owre
As white as milk. And thus flew Mercury
Up to immense Olympus, gliding by
The syl^an Island. I, made back my way
To Circes house: my mind, of my assay
Much thought reuoluing. At her gates I staid
And called: she heard, and her bright doors displaid;
Invited, led; I followed in: but tract
With some distraction. In a Throne she placed
My welcome person. Of a curious frame
It Was, and so bright; I sat as in a flame.
A foote-stoole added. In a golden boule
She then subornd a potion: in her soul,
Deformd things thinking; for amidst the wine
She mixed her man-transforming medicine:
Which when she saw I had deuourd; she then,
No more observed me with her soothing vain;
But struck me with her rod, and, To her Sty,
Bad; out, away, and with thy fellows lie.
I drew my sword, and charged her, as I meant
To take her life. When out she cried, and bent
Beneath my sword, her knees; embracing (...);
And (full of tears) said, Who? of what high line
Art thou the issue? whence? what shores sustain
Thy native City? I amazed remain
That drinking these my venomes, thou art not turned.
Never drunk any this cup; but he mournd
In other likeness; if it once had past
The iuorie bounders of his tongue, and taste.
All but thy self, are brutishly declind:
Thy breast holds firm yet, and unchanged thy mind:
Thou can be therefore, none else but the man
Of many virtues: Ith^censi^^,
Deepe-soul'd Ulysses: who, I often was told,
By that sly God, that bears the rod of gold,
Was to arrive here, in retreat from Tr^y.
Sheath then thy sword, and let my bed enjoy
So much a man; that when the bed we prove,
We may believe in one another love.
I then: O Circe, why entreat'st thou me
To mix in any humane league with thee;
When thou, my friends have beasts turned? and thy bed
Tenderst to me; that I might likewise lead
A beasts life with thee; softn'd, naked stripped;
That in my blood, thy banes, may more be steept.
I never will ascend thy bed, before
I may affirm; that in heavens sight you swore
The great oath of the Gods; that all attempt
To do me ill, is from your thoughts exempt.
I said; she swore: when, all the oath-rites said,
I then ascended her adorned bed;
But thus prepared: four handmaids served her there;
That daughters to her silver fountains were,
To her bright-sea-obseruing sacred floods;
And to her uncut consecrated woods.
One decked the Throne-tops, with rich clothes of state;
And did, with silks, the foote-pace, consecrate.
Another, silver tables set before
The pompous Throne; and golden dishes store
Served in with several feast. A third filled wine;
The fourth brought water, and made fuel shine
In ruddy fires; beneath a womb of brass.
Which heat, I bathed; and odorous water was
Disperpled lightly, on my head, and neck;
That might my late, he^^t-hurting sorrows check
With the refreshing sweetness; and, for that*
Men sometimes, may be something delicate.
Bathed, and adorned; she led me to a Throne
Of massy silver; and of fashion
Exceeding curious. A fair foote-stoole set;
Water apposde, and every sort of meat
Set on th'elaborately polisht board.
She wished my taste emploid; but not a word
Would my ears taste, of taste: my mind had food
That must digest; eye meat would do me good.
Circe (observing, that I put no hand
To any banquet; having countermand
From weightier cares; the light cates could excuse)
Bowing her near me; these winged words did use:
Why sits Ulysses, like one dumb? his mind
Lessening with languors? Nor to food enclind;
Nor wine? Whence comes it? out of any fear
Of more illusion? You must need forbear
That wrongful doubt, since you have heard me swear.
O Circe! (I replied) what man is he,
Awd with the rights of true humanity,
That dares taste food or wine; before he sees
His friends redeemed from their deformities?
If you be gentle, and indeed incline
To let me taste the comfort of your wine;
Dissolve the charms, that their forced forms encheine
And show me here, my honored friends, like men.
This said, she left her Throne, and took her rod;
Went to her Stie, and let my men abroad,
Like swine of nine years old. They opposite stood;
Observed their brutish form; and looked for food;
When, with another medicine, (every one
All over smeer'd) their bristles all were gone,
Produced by malice of the other bane;
And every one, afresh, looked up a man.
Both younger then they were; of stature more;
And all their forms, much goodlier then before.
All knew me; clingd about me, and a cry
Of pleasing mourning, flew about so hie,
The horrid roof resounded; and the Queen
Her self, was moved, to see our kind so keen.
Who bad me now; bring ship and men ashore;
Our arms, and goods, in caves hid; and restore
My self to her, with all my other men.
I granted, went, and op't the weeping vein
In all my men; whose violent joy to see
My safe return, was passing kindly free
Of friendly tears, and miserably wept.
You have not seen youg Heiffers (highly kept;
Filld full of daisies at the field, and driven
Home to their houels; all so spritely given
That no room can contain them; but about,
Bace by the Dams, and let their spirits out
In ceasselesse bleating) of more iocund plight
Then my kind friends, even crying out with sight
Of my return so doubted. Circl'd me
With all their welcomes, and as cheerfully
Disposde their rapt minds, as if there they saw
Their natural Country, cliffie Itbaca;
And even the roofes where they were bred and borne.
And vowed as much, with tears: O your return
As much delights us; as in you had come
Our Country to us, and our natural home.
But what unhappy fate has re^t our friends?
I gave unlooked for answer; That amends
Made for their mourning, bad them first of all,
Our ship ashore draw; then in Cauerns stall
Our foodie cattle, hide our mutual prise;
And then (said I) attend me, that your eyes,
In Circes sacred house, may see each friend,
Eating and drinking, banquets out of end.
They soon obeid; all but Euryl^chus;
Who needs would stay them all; and counselld thus;
O wretches! whither will ye? why are you
Fond of your mischiefs? and such gladness show
For Circes house; that will transform ye all
To Swine, or Wolves, or Lions? Never shall
Our heads get out; if once within we be,
But stay compelld by strong Necessity.
So wrought the Cycl^p, when to his cave, our friends
This bold on, led one, and brought all their ends
By his one indiscretion. I, for this
Thought with my sword (that desperate head of his
Hewne from his neck) to gash upon the ground
His mangld body, though my blood was bound
In near alliance to him. But the rest
With humble suite containd me, and request,
That I would leave him, with my ship alone;
And to the sacred Palace lead them on.
I led them; nor Eurylochus would stay,
From their attendance on me: Our late fray
Struck to his heart so. But mean time, my men,
In Circes house, were all* in several baine
Studiously sweetn'd, smugd with oil* and decked
With, in, and outweeds: and a feast secret
Served in before them: at which, close we found
They all were set, cheered, and caro^sing round.
When (mutual sight had, and all thought on) then
Feast was forgotten; (...).
and the moon again
About the house flew, Commemorabantque omnia. Intending all their miseries,
escapes, and meetings*
driven with wings of joy.
But then spoke Circe; Now, no more annoy:
I know my self, what woes by sea, and shore,
And men unjust, have plagued enough before
Your injured virtues: here then, feast as long;
And be as cheerful, till ye grow as strong,
As when ye first forsook your Country earth.
Ye now fare all, like exiles; not a mirth
Flasht in amongst ye, but is quenched again
With still-renewd tears: though the beaten vain
Of your distresses, should (me think) be now
Benumb with sufferance. We did well allow
Her kind persuasions; and the whole year staid
In varied feast with her. When, now arraid
The world was with the Spring; and orbie hours
Had gone the round again, through herbs and flowers,
The months absolu'd in order; till the days
Had run their full race, in Apollos rays;
My friends rememberd me of home; and said,
If ever Fate would sign my pass; delaid
It should be now no more. I heard them well;
Yet that day, spent in feast, till darkness fell;
And sleep, his virtues, through our vapors shed.
When I ascended, sacred Circes bed;
Implored my pass; and her performed vow
Which now, my soul urged; and my soldiers now
Afflicted me with tears to get them gone.
All these I told her; and she answered these;
Much skilld Ulysses Laertiades!
Remain no more, against your wills with me:
But take your free way: only this must be
Performed before you stere your course for home;
You must the way to Pluto overcome;
And stern Persephone, to form your pass,
By th'aged Theban Soul Tiresias;
The dark-browd Prophet: whose soul yet can see
Clearly, and firmly: grave Persephone,
(Even dead) gave him a mind; that he alone
Might sing Truths solid wisdom, and not one
Prove more then shade, in his comparison.
This broke my heart; I sunk into my bed;
Mourned, and would never more be comforted
With light, nor life. But having now expressed
My pains enough to her, in my unrest,
That so I might prepare her ruth; and get
All I held fit, for an affair so great;
I said; O Circe, who shall stere my course
To Plutos kingdom? Never ship had force
To make that voyage. The divine in voice,
Said, Seek no guide, raise you your Mast, and hoice
Your ships white sails; and then, sit you at peace;
The fresh North spirit, shall want ye through the seas.
But, having past the Ocean, you shall see;
A little shore, that to Persephone
Puts up a consecrated wood; where grows,
Tall Firres, and Sallowes, that their fruits soon loose:
Cast anchor in the gulphes: and go, alone
To Plutos dark house, where, to Acheron
Cocytus runs, and Pyriphlegiton:
Cocytus borne of Styx, and where a Rock
Of both the met floods, bears the roaring shocke,
The dark Hero, (great Tiresias)
Now coming near, (to gain propitious pass)
Dig (of a cubit every way) a pit;
And power (to all that are deceast) in it
A solemn sacrifice. For which; first take
Honey and wine, and their commixtion make:
Then sweet wine, neat; and thirdly; water power;
And lastly, add to these, the whitest flower*
Then vow to all the weak necks of the dead,
Offerings a number: and when thou shall tread
The Ithacensian shore; to sacrifice
A Heifer never tamed, and most of prise;
A pyle of all thy most-esteemed goods
Enflaming to the dear streams of their bloods:
And, in secret Rites, to Tiresias vow
A Ram cole black, at all parts, that does flow
With fat, and fleece; and all thy flocks does lead:
When the all-calling nation of the dead
Thou thus have praid to; (...) Which is expounded Inclyta examina mortuorum.
But (...), is the Epithete of Pluto; and by Analogy belongs to the dead, quod
ad se omnes aduocet.
offer on the place,
A Ram and Ewe all black: being turned in face
To dreadful Erebus; thy self aside
The floods shore walking. And then, gratified
With flocks of Souls, of Men, and Dames deceast,
Shall all thy pious Rites be. Straight, addressed
See then the offering that thy fellows slew;
Flayd, and imposde in fire; and all thy Crew,
Pray to the state of either Deity,
Grave Pluto, and severe Persephone.
Then draw thy sword, stand firm; nor suffer one
Of all the faint shades, of the dead and gone,
T'approch the blood, till thou have heard their king,
The wise Tiresias: who, thy offering
Will instantly do honor: thy home ways,
And all the measure of them, by the seas
Amply unfolding. This the Goddess told;
And then, the morning in her Throne of gold,
Suruaid the vast world; by whose orient light,
The Nymph adorned me with attires as bright;
Her own hands putting on, both shirt and weed,
Robes fine, and curious; and upon my head,
An ornament that glitterd like a flame:
Girt me in gold; and forth betimes I came
Amongst my soldiers; rousd them all from sleep;
And bad them now; no more observance keep
Of ease, and feast; but straight, a shipboard fall,
For now the Goddess had informed me all:
Their noble spirits agreed; nor yet so clear
Could I bring all off; but Elpenor there
His heedlesse life left: he was youngest man
Of all my company, and one that wanne
Least fa^e for arms; as little for his brain;
Who (too much steept in wine, and so made feign;
To get refreshing by the cool of sleep;
Apart his fellows; plunged in vapors deep;
And they as high in tumult of their way)
Suddenly wak't, and (quite out of the stay
A sober mind had given him) would descend
A huge long Ladder, forward; and an end
Fell from the very roof; full pitching on
The dearest joint, his head was placed upon;
Which (quite dissolved,) let loose his soul to hell.
I, to the rest; and Circes means did tell
Of our return (as crossing clean the hope
I gave them first) and said; You think the scope
Of our endeavors now, is straight for home,
No: Circe otherwise designed; whose doom
Enioynd us first, to greet the dreadful house
Of Austere Pluto, and his glorious spouse;
To take the counsel of Tiresias
(The reverend Theban) to direct our pass.
This brake their hearts, and grief made tear their hair
But grief was never good, at great affair.
It would have way yet. We went woeful on
To ship and shore, where, was arrived as soon
Circe unseen; a black Ewe, and a Ram,
Binding for sacrifice; and as she came
Vanished again, vnwitnest by our eyes;
Which grieved not us, nor checked our sacrifice;
For who would see God, loath to let us see?
This way, or that bent; still his ways are free.
Finis decimi libri Hom. Odyss.
THE XI. BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses way to Hell appears;
Where he, the gr^^e Tiresias ^eares;
Enquires his own, and others fates.
His mother sees, and th'after flates*
In which, were held, by sad Decease
Heroes, and Herocsses;
A number, ^ that at Troy ^ag'dwarre;
As Ajax that was still as jar
With Ithacus, for the arms he lost;
And with the great Achilles Ghost.
Another.
(...).
Ulysses here
Inuokes the dead;
The lives appear,
Hereafter led.

Arrived now at our ship; we lancht, and set
Our Mast up, put forth sail; and in did get
Our late got Cattle. Up our sails, we went;
My wayward fellows mourning now the event.
A good companion yet* They mournd the ^^ent before they knew it.
a foreright wind;
Circe, (the excellent vtterer of her mind)
Supplied our murmuring consorts with, that was
Both speed, and guide to our aduenturous pass.
All day our sails stood to the winds; and made
Our voyage prosperous. Sun then set, and shade
All ways obscuring: on the bounds we fell
Of deep Oceanus; where people dwell
Whom a perpetual cloud obscures outright:
To whom the cheerful Sun lends never light;
Nor when he mounts the star-sustaining heaven;
Nor when he stoopes earth, and sets up the Even:
But Night holds fixed wings, fetherd all with Banes,
Above those most unblessed Cimmeri^nes.
Here drew we up our ship: our sheep wit-drew;
And walked the shore till we attaind the view
Of that sad region Circe had foreshow'd;
And then the sacred offerings, to be vowed,
Eurylochus, and Persimedes bore.
When I, my sword drew, and earths womb did gore
Till I, a pit dug of a cubite round;
Which with the liquid sacrifice, we crowned
First, honey mixed with wine; then, sweet wine neat;
Then water powered in; last the flower of wheat.
Much I importuned then, the weake-neckt dead,
And vowed, when I the barren soil should tread
Of cliffie Ithaca; amidst my hall
To kill a Heifer, my clear best of all,
And give in offering: on a Pile composd
Of all the choice goods, my whole house enclosd.
And to Tiresias, himself, alone
A sheep cole-blacke, and the selectest one
Of all my flocks. When to the powers beneath,
The sacred nation, that survive with Death,
My prayrs, and vows, had done devotions fit;
I took the offerings, and upon the pit
Bereft their lives. Out gusht the sable blood;
And round about me, fled out of the flood,
The Souls of the deceast. There clustered then,
Youths, and their wives, much suffering aged men,
Soft tender virgins, that but new came there,
By timelesse death, and green their sorrows were.
There, men at Arms, with armors all embrew'd,
Wounded with lances, and with faulchions hewed:
In numbers, up and down the ditch, did stalk;
And threw vnmeasur'd cries, about their walk;
So horrid that a bloodlesse fear surprisde,
My daunted spirits. Straight then, I aduisde
My friends to flay the slaughtered sacrifice;
Put them in fire, and to the Deities;
Stern Pluto, and Persephone, apply
Excitefull prayrs. Then drew I from my Thy,
My well-edg'd sword; stepped in, and firmly stood
Betwixt the prease of shadows, and the blood;
And would not suffer any one to dip
Within our offering, his vnsolide lip;
Before Tiresias, that did all control.
The first that preast in, was Elpenors soul;
His body, in the broad-waid earth, as yet
Vnmournd, unburied by us; since we swet
With other urgent labors. Yet his smart,
I wept to see; and ru'd it from my heart;
Enquiring how, he could before me be,
That came by ship? He mourning, answered me:
In Circes house; the spite some Spirit did bear;
And the unspeakable good licour there
Has been my bane. For being to descend
A ladder much in height; I did not tend
My way well down; but forwards made a proof
To tread the rounds; and from the very roof
Fell on my neck, and brake it. And this made
My soul thus visit this infernal shade.
And here, by them that next thy self are dear,
Thy Wife, and Father, that a little one
Gave food to thee; and by thy only Son
At home behind thee left, ( Telemachus)
Do not depart by stealth, and leave me thus,
Vnmourn'd, unburied: left neglected I*
Bring on thy self, the incensed Deity.
I know, that saild from hence, thy ship must touch
On th'Ile Ae^^; where vouchsafe thus much
(Good king) that, landed, thou will instantly,
Bestow on me, thy royal memory;
To this grace; that my body; arms and all,
May rest consumed in fiery funeral.
And on the fomie shore, a Sepulcher
Erect to me; that after times may hear
Of one so hapless. Let me these implore;
And fix upon my Sepulcher, Misenus apud Virgilium, ingenti mole, etc*
the Ore
With which alive, I shoooke the aged seas;
And had, of friends, the dear societies.
I told the wretched Soul, I would fulfill
And execute to the utmost point, his will;
And, all the time, we sadly talk^; I still
My sword above the blood held; when aside
The Idol of my friend, still amplified
His plaint, as up and down, the shades he erred.
Then, my deceased mothers Soul appeard;
Fair daughter of Antolicus, the Great;
Grave Anticlae^, Whom, when forth I set
For sacred Ilion, I had left alive.
Her sight, much moved me; and to tears did drive
My note of her deceasse: and yet, not she
(Though in my ruth, she held the highest degree)
Would I admit to touch the sacred blood;
Till from Tiresias, I had understood
What Circes told me. At the length did land,
Theban Tiresias soul; and in his hand
Sustaind a golden Scepter, Tiresi^^ to Vlyss^^.
knew me well;
And said; O man unhappy, why to hell
Admitst thou dark arrival; and the light
The Sun gives, leau'st; to have the horrid sight
Of this black region, and the shadows here?
Now sheath thy sharp sword; and the pit forbear.
That I the blood may taste; and then relate
The truth of those acts, that affect thy Fate.
I sheathed my sword; and left the pit, till he
The black blood tasting, thus instructed me;
Renoum'd Ulysses! all vnaskt, I know
That all the cause of thy arrival now,
Is to enquire thy wished retreat, for home:
Which hardly God will let thee ou^rcome;
Since Neptune still will his opposure try,
With all his laid-vp anger, for the eye
His loved Son lost to thee. And yet through all
Thy suffering course, (which must be capital)
If both thine own affections, and thy friends
Thou will contain; when thy access ascends
The three-forckt Island, having escaped the seas;
(Where ye shall find fed, on the flowrie leas,
Fat flocks, and Oxen; which the Sun does own;
To whom are all things, as well heard as shown:
And never dare, one head of those to slay;
But hold, vnharmefull on, your wished way)
Though through enough affliction; yet secure
Your Fates shall land ye. But Presage says sure,
If once ye spoil them; spoil to all thy friends;
Spoil to thy Fleet; and if the justice ends
Short of thy self; it shall be long before,
And that length, forced out, with inflictions store:
When, losing all thy fellows, in a sail
Of foreign built (when most thy Fates prevail
In thy deliverance) thus the event shall sort;
Thou shall find shipwreck, raging in thy Port:
Proud men, thy goods consuming; and thy Wife
Urging with gifts; give charge upon thy life.
But all these wrongs, Revenge shall end to thee;
And force, or cunning, set with slaughter, free
Thy house of all thy spoilers. Yet again,
Thou shall a voyage make; and come to men
That know no Sea; nor ships, nor oars, that are
Wings to a ship; nor mix with any fare, Men that never eat salt with their
food.

Salts sauorie vapor. Where thou first shall land,
This cleare-giuen sign, shall let thee understand,
That there those men remain: assume ashore,
Up to thy royal shoulder, a ship oar;
With which, when thou shall meet one on the way,
That will, in Countey admiration, say
What do thou with that wanne, upon thy neck?
There, fix (that wanne) thy oar; and that shore deck
With sacred Rites to Neptune: slaughter there
A Ram, a Bull, and, (who for strength does bear
The name of husband to a herd) a Bore.
And, coming home, upon thy natural shore,
Give pious Hecatombs, to all the Gods
(Degrees observed). And then the Periods
Of all thy labors, in the peace shall end
Of easy death; which shall the less extend
His passion to thee; that thy foe, the Sea
Shall not enforce it, but Deaths victory,
Shall chance in onely-earnest-pray-vow'd age: (...). Which all translate
senectute sub molli. The Epeth^te (...), not of (...), viz. pinguis; or (...),
pinguiter. But (...) signifying flagitanter orando. To which, pious age is ever
altogether addicted.

Obtaind at home, quite emptied of his rage;
Thy subjects round about thee, rich and blessed:
And here has Truth summed up, thy vital rest.
I answered him; We will suppose all these
Decreed in Deity; let it likewise please
Tiresias to resolve me, why so near
The blood and me, my mothers Soul does bear;
And yet, nor word, not look, vouchsafe her Son?
Does she not know me? No (said he) nor none
Of all these spirits, but my self alone;
Knows any thing, till he shall taste the blood;
But whomsoever, you shall do that good,
He will the truth, of all you wish, unfold;
Who, you envy it to, will all withhold.
Thus said the kingly soul, and made retreat,
Amidst the inner parts of Plutos Sea^e,
When he had spoke thus, by divine instinct:
Still I stood firm, till to the bloods precinct
My mother came, and drunk; and then she knew,
I was her Son; had passion to renew
Her natural plaints; which thus she did pursew:
How is it, (O my Son) that you alive,
This deadly-darksome region vnderdiue?
Twixt which, and earth, so many mighty seas,
And horrid currents, interpose their prea^e?
Oceanus, in chief; which none (unless
More helped then you) on foot now can transgress.
A well built ship he needs, that ventures there:
Come thou from Troy but now? enforced to err
All this time with thy soldiers? Nor have seen,
Ere this long day, thy Country, and thy Queen?
I answered; That a necessary end
To this infernal state, made me contend;
That from the wise Tiresias Theb^^ Soul,
I might, an Oracle, inuolu'd, vnrowle:
For I came nothing near Achaia yet;
Nor on our loved earth, happy foot had set;
But (mishaps suffering) erred from Coast to Coast;
Ever since first, the mighty Grecian host
Divine Atrides, led to Ilion;
And I, his follower, to set war upon
The rapefull Troyans: and so praid she would
The Fate of that ungentle death unfold,
That forced her thither: if some long disease;
Or that the Spleen, of her that arrows please,
(Diana, envious of most eminent Dames)
Had made her th'obiect of her deadly aims?
My Fathers state, and sons, I sought; if they
Kept still my goods? or they became the prey
Of any other, holding me no more
In power of safe return, or if my store
My wife had kept together, with her Son?
If she, her first mind held; or had been won
By some chief Grecian, from my love, and bed?
All this she answered; that Affliction fed
On her blood still at home; and that to grief,
She all the days, and darkness, of her life,
In tears, had consecrate. That none possessed
My famous kingdoms Throne; but th'interest
My son had in it; still he held in peace.
A Court kept, like a Prince; and his increase
Spent in his subjects good; administering laws
With justice, and the general applause
A king should merit; and all called him king.
My Father, kept the vpland, laboring;
And shunned the City: used no sumptuous beds;
Wonderd at furnitures; nor wealthy weeds;
But, in the Winter, strewn about the fire
Lay with his slaves in ashes; his attire
Like to a beggars. When the Summer came;
And Autumn all fruits ripend with his flame;
Where Grape-charg'd vines, made shadows most abound,
His couch with fallen leaves, made upon the ground:
And here lay he; his Sorrows fruitful state,
Increasing, as he faded, for my Fate.
And now, the part of age, that irksome is
Lay sadly on him. And that life of his,
She led, and perished in; not slaughterd by
The Dame, that dartslou'd, and her archerie;
Nor, by disease invaded, vast, and foul
That wastes the body, and sends out the soul
With shame and horror: only in her moan,
For me, and my life; she consumed her own.
She thus; when I, had great desire to prove
My arms, the circle, where her soul did move;
Thrice proved I, thrice she vanished, like a sleep;
Or fleeting shadow, which struck much more deep
The wounds, my woes made; and made, ask her why
She would my Love to her embraces fly;
And not vouchsafe, that even in hell we might,
Pay pious Nature, her vnalterd right,
And give Vexation here, her cruel fill?
Should not the Queen here, Proserpina or Persephon^.
to augment the ill
Of every sufferance (which her office is)
Enforce thy idol, to afford me this?
O Son (she answered) of the race of men
The most unhappy; our most equal Queen,
Will mock no solid arms, with empty shade;
Nor suffer empty shades, again t'inuade
Flesh, bones, and nerves: nor will defraud the fire
Of his last dues; that, soon as spirits expire,
And leave the white bone, are his native right;
When, like a dream, the soul assumes her flight.
The light then, of the living, with most haste
(O Son) contend to: this thy little taste
Of this state is enough; and all this life,
Will make a tale, fit, to be told thy wife.
This speech we had; The old Her^^sses appear to Ulysses.
when now repaired to me
More female spirits; by Persep^^^^,
Driven on before her. All t'heroes wives
And daughters, that, led there their second lives,
About the black blood throngd. Of whom, yet more
My mind impelled me to enquire, before
I let them altogether taste the gore;
For then would all have been dispersed, and gone,
Thick as they came. I therefore, one by one
Let taste the pit: my sword drawn from my Thy
And stand betwixt them made; when, severally
All told their stocks. The first that quenched her fire,
Was Tyro, Tyr^*
issued of a noble Sire.
She said she sprung from pure, (...) bed;
And Crethe^s, Son of Ae^lus did wed.
Yet the divine flood E^ipeus, loved,
Who much the most fair stream, of all floods moved.
Near whose streams, Tyr^ walking: Neptune came,
Like Enipeus, and enjoyed the Dame:
Like to a hill; the blew, and Snakie flood
Above the immortal, and the mortal stood;
And hid them both; as both together lay,
Just where his current, falls into the Sea.
Her virgin wast, dissolved, she slumberd then;
But when the God had done the work of men,
Her fair hand gently wringing; thus he said;
Woman! Rejoice in our combined bed;
For when the year has run his circle, round
(Because the Gods loves, must in fruit abound)
My love shall make (to cheer thy teeming mones)
Thy one dear burden, bear two famous Sons;
Love well, and bring them up: go home, and see
That, though of more joy yet* I shall be free;
Thou do not tell, to glorify thy birth:
Thy Love is Neptune shaker of the earth.
This said; he plunged into the sea, and she
(Begot with child by him) the light let see
Great Pelias, and Neleus; that became
In Jove's great ministry, of mighty fame.
Pelias, in broad Iolcus held his Throne,
Wealthy in cattle; the other royal Son
Ruled sandy Pylos. To these, issue more
This Queen of women to her husband bore*
Aeson, and Pheres, and Amythaon,
That for his fight on horseback, stoopt to none.
Next her, I saw admired Antiope
Asopus Antiope like Tyro.
daughter; who (as much as she
Boasted attraction, of great Neptunes love)
Boasted to slumber in the arms of Jove:
And two Sons likewise, at one burden bore,
To that, her all-controlling Paramore:
Amphion, and fair Z^thus; that first laid
Great Thebes foundations; and strong walls conuaid
About her turrets, that seven Ports enclosde.
For though the Theb^ns, much in strength reposde,
Yet had not they, the strength to hold their own,
Without the added aides, of wood, and stone.
Alcmena, Al^m^na.
next I saw; that famous wife
Was to Amphytri^; and honored life
Gave to the Lyon-hearted Hercule^,
That was, of Jove's embrace, the great increase.
I saw besides, proud Craeons daughter there,
Bright Megara; Megara.
that nuptial yoke did wear
With Jove's great Son; who never field did try,
But bore to him, the flower of victory.
The mother then, of Oedipus, I saw,
Fair Epicasta; Epicasta the mother of Oedipu^.
that beyond all law,
Her own Son married, ignorant of kind;
And, he (as darkly taken, in his mind)
His mother wedded, and his father slew;
Whose blind act, heaven exposde at length to view.
And he, in all-lou'd Thebes, the supreme state
With much moan managed; for the heavy Fate
The Gods laid on him. She made violent flight
To Plutos dark house, from the lothed light;
Beneath a steep beam, strangled with a cord;
And left her Son, in life, pains as abhord,
As all the furies powered on her in hell.
Then saw I Chloris, Chl^ris.
that did so excel
In answering beauties, that each part had all;
Great Neleus married her, when gifts not small,
Had won her favor; termed by name of dowre.
She was of all Amphions seed, the flower:
( Amphion, called l^sides, that then
Ruld strongly, Myni^an (...))
And now his daughter ruled the Pylean Throne;
Because her beauties Empire ouershone.
She brought her wise-awd husband, Neleus,
Nest^r, much honored; Peryclimenus,
And Chromius; Sons, with sovereign virtues grac'^;
But after, brought a daughter that surpast;
Rare-beautied Per^, so for form exact;
That Nature, to a miracle, was rackt,
In her perfections, blazed with the eyes of men.
That made of all the Countries hearts, a chain,
And drew them suitors to her. Which her Sire
Took vantage of; and (since he did aspire
To nothing more, then to the broad-browd herd
Of Oxen, which the common fame so rer'd,
Owned by Iphiclus) not a man should be
His Peros husband, that from Phylace,
Those neuer-yet-driuen Oxen, could not drive:
Yet these; a strong hope held him to atchieue;
Because a Prophet that had never erred,
Had said, that only he should be preferred
To their possession. But the equal Fate
Of God, withstood his stealth: inextricate
Imprisoning Bands; and sturdy churlish Swains
That were the Heardsmen; who withheld with chains
The stealth attempter: which was only he
That durst abet the Act with Prophecy;
None else would undertake it; and he must:
The king would needs, a Prophet should be just;
But when some days and months, expired were,
And all the Hours had brought about the year;
The Prophet, did so satisfy the king
( Iphiclus; all his cunning questioning)
That he enfranchisde him; and ((...) worst done)
Jove's counsel made, th'all-safe conclusion.
The saw I Laeda; Leada,
(linkt in nuptial chain
With Tynd^rus) to whom, she did sustain
Sons much renowm'd for wisdom; C^st^^ one,
That past, for use of horse, comparison;
And Poll^x, that excelled, in whirlbat fight;
Both these, the fruitful Earth bore; while the light
Of life inspired them; After which, they found
Such grace with Jove, that both lived under ground,
By change of days: life still did one sustain,
While th'^ther died; the dead then, lived again,
The living dying; both, of one self date,
Their lives and deaths made, by the Gods and Fate.
Iphemedia, Iph^medi^.
after Laeda came,
That did de^iue from Neptune too, the name
Of Father to two admirable Sons:
Life yet made short their admirations;
Who God-opposed Otus had to name,
And Ephialtes, far in sound of Fame.
The prodigal Earth so fed them, that they grew
To most huge stature; and had fairest hew
Of all men, but Orion, under heaven;
At nine years old, nine cubits they were driven
Abroad in breadth, and sprung nine fathomes hie.
They threatened to give battle to the sky,
And all The Immortals. They were setting on
Ossa upon Olympus; and upon
Steep Ossa, leauie Pelius, that even
They might a highway make, with lofty heaven.
And had perhaps performed it, had they lived
Till they were Striplings. But Jove's Son deprived
Their lims of life; before the age that begins
The flower of youth; and should adorn their chins.
Phaedra and Procris, Phaedra and Pr^cris.
with wise Minos flam^,
(Bright Ariadne) to the offering came.
Whom whilom Theseus made his prise from Crete;
That Athens sacred soil, might kiss her feet.
But never could obtain her virgin Flower;
Till, in the Sea-girt Dia, Dians power
Detained his homeward haste; where (in her Phane,
By Bacchus witnest) was the fatal wane
Of her prime Glory. Maera, Clymene, Maera and Clymene.

I witn^st there; and loathed Eryphile;
That honou^'d Amphiaraus was ^^r husband: who^ she betrayed to his ruin at
Thebes, for gold taken of Adrastus her brother.
gold more, then she loved her Spouse.
But all the He^oesses in Plutos house,
That then encounterd me, exceeds my might
To name or number; and Ambrosian Night
Would quite be spent; when now the formal hours,
Present to Sleep, our all-disposed powers.
If at my ship, or here, my home-made vow,
I leave for fit grace, to the Gods and you.
This said; the silence his discourse had made,
With pleasure held still, through the houses shade.
When, white-arm'd Arete this speech began:
Phaeacians! how appears to you this man?
So goodly person'd, and so matched with mind?
My guest he is; but all you stand combined,
In the renown he does us. Do not then
With careless haste dismiss him: nor the maine
Of his dispa^ch, to one so needy, maime;
The Gods free bounty, gives us all just claim
To goods enough. This speech, the oldest man
Of any other Phaeacensian,
The grave Hero, Echineus gave
All approbation; saying: Friends! ye have
The motion of the wise Queen; in such words,
As have not mist the ma^ke; with which, accords
My clear opinion. But Alcinous,
In word and work, must be our rule. He thus;
And then Alcinous said: This then must stand,
If while I live, I rule in the command
Of this well-skild-in-Nauigation State.
Endure then (Guest) though most importunate
Be your affects for home. A little stay
If your expectance bear; perhaps it may
Our gifts make more complete. The cares of all,
Your due deduction asks; but Principal
I am therein, the ruler* He replied:
Alcinous! the most duly glorifi^d,
With rule of all; of all men; if you lay
Commandment on me, of a whole years stay;
So all the while, your preparations rise,
As well in gifts, as Venuste and sal^e dictum.
time: ye can devise
No better wish for me; for I shall come
Much fuller handed, and more honored home;
And dearer to my people: in who^e loves,
The richer evermore the better proves.
He answered: There is argude in your sight,
A worth that works not men for benefit,
Like P^ollers or Impostors; of which crew,
The gentle black Earth feeds not up a few;
Here and there wanderers, blanching tales and lies,
Of neither praise, nor use: you move our eyes
With form; our minds with matter, and our ^ares
With elegant oration; such as bears,
A music in the orderd history
It lays before us. Not Demodocus,
With swee^er strains has used to sing to us,
All the Greek sorrows, wept out in your own.
But say; of all your worthy friends, were none
Objected to your eyes; that Consorts were
To ^lion with you? and served destiny there?
This Night is passing long, vnmeasur'd: none
Of all my household would to bed yet: On,
Relate these wondrous things. Were I with you;
If you would tell me but your woes, as now,
Till the divine Aurora showed her head,
I should in no night relish thought of bed.
Most emin^nt King, (said he) Times, all must keep;
There Is time to speak much, time as much to sleep.
But would you hear still, I will tell you still,
And utter more, more miserable ill,
Of Friends then yet, that escaped the dismal wars,
And perished homewards, and in household iarres.
Waged by a wicked woman. The chaste Here he begins his other relation.
Proserpin^.
Queen,
No sooner made these Ladie-ghosts unseen,
(Here and there flitting) but mine eie-sight won
The Soul of Agamemnon, (Atreus son)
Sad; and about him, all his train of friends,
That in Aegysthus house, endured their ends,
With his stern Fortune. Having dr^nke the blood,
He knew me instantly; and forth a flood
Of springing tears gusht. Out he thrust his hands,
With will to embrace me; but their old commands,
Flowd not about him; nor their weakest part.
I wept to see; and mon'd him from my heart.
And asked* O Agamemnon! King of men!
What sort of cruel death, has renderd slain
Thy royal person? Neptune, in thy Fleet?
Heaven, and his hellish billows making meet,
Rowsing the winds? Or have thy men by land
Done thee this ill; for using thy command,
Past their consents, in diminution
Of those full sha^es, their worths by lot had won,
Of sheep or oxen? or of any town?
In covetous strife, to make their rights, thine own,
In men or women prisoners? He replied:
By none of these* in any right, I died;
But by Aegysthus, and my murtherous wife,
(Bid to a banquet at his house) my life
Has thus been reft me: to my slaughter led,
Like to an Ox, pretended to be fed.
So miserably fell I; and with me,
My friends lay massacred: As when you see
At any rich man's nuptials, shot, or feast,
About his kitchen, white-tooth'd swine lie dressed.
The slaughters of a world of men, thine eyes,
Both private, and in prease of enemies,
Have personally witnest; but this one,
Would all thy parts have broken into moan:
To see how strewed about our Cups and Cates,
As Tables set with Feast, so we with Fates,
All gasht and slain, lay; all the floor embrude
With blood and brain. But that which most I ru'd,
Flew from the heavy voice, that Priams seed,
Cassandra breathed; whom, she that wit does feed
With banefull crafts, false Clytemnestra slew,
Close sitting by me; up my hand^ I threw
From earth to heaven; and tumbling on my sword,
Gave wretched life up. When the most abhord,
By all her sexes shame, forsook the room;
Nor daind (though then so near this heavy home)
To shut my lips, or close my broken eyes.
Nothing so heapt is with impieties,
As such a woman, that would kill her Spouse,
That married her a maid. When to my house
I brought her, hoping of her love in heart,
To children* maids, and slaves. But she (in Thou Art
Of only mischief hearty) not alone
Cast on her self, this foul aspersion;
But loving Dames, hereafter, to their Lords
Will bear, for good deeds, her bad thoughts and words.
Alas (said I) that Jove should hate the lives
Of Atreus seed, so highly for their wives.
For Menelaus wife, a number fell;
For dangerous absence, thine sent thee to hell.
For this, (he answered) Be not thou more kind
Then wise to thy wife; never, all thy mind
Let words express to her. Of all she knows,
Curbs for the worst still, in thy self repose.
But thou by thy wifes wiles, shall lose no blood;
Exceeding wise she is, and wise in good.
Icarius daughter, chaste Penelope,
We left a young Bride; when for batte^l, we
Forsook the Nuptial peace; and at her breast,
Her first child sucking. Who, by this hour, blessed,
Sits in the number of suruiuing men.
And his bliss, she has, that she can contain;
And her blifse, thou have, that she is so wise;
For, by her wisdom, thy returned eyes
Shall see thy son; and he shall greet his Sire,
With fitting welcom^s. When in my retire,
My wife denies mine eyes, my sons dear sight;
And, as from me, will take from him the light;
Before she adds one just delight to life;
Or her false wit, one truth that sits a wife.
For her sake therefore, let my harms advise;
That though thy wife be ne'^e so chaste and wise,
Yet come not home to her in This advice ^e foll^^^d at his coming home.
open view,
With any ship, or any personal show.
But take close shore disguisde: nor let her know;
For it is no world, to trust a ^oman now.
But what says Fame? Does my Son yet survive,
In Orch^men, or Pylos? or does live
In Sparta, with his Uncle? yet I see
D^uine Orestes is not here with me.
I answered, asking: Why does A^reus son*
Enquire of me? who yet arrived where none
Could give to these news any cer^aine wings?
And it is absurd, to tell uncertain things.
Such sad speech past us; and as thus we stood,
With kind tears rendering unkind fortunes good;
Achilles and Patroclus Soul appeared;
And his Soul, of whom never ill was heard,
The good Antilochus: and the Soul of him,
That all the Greeks past, both for force and lim,
Excepting the unmatched Aeacides,
Illustrous Ajax. But the first of these,
That saw, acknowledged, and saluted me,
Was Achill^s.
Thetis co^quering Son, who (heavily
His state here taking) said: Unworthy breat^*
What act, yet mightier, imagines
Thy ventrous spirit? How do thou descend
These under regions: where the dead man's end,
Is to be looked on? and his foolish shade?
I answered him: I was induced t'inuade
These under parts, (most excellent of Greece)
To visit wise Tir^sias, for ad^^ce
Of virtue to direct my voyage home
To rugged Ithaca; since I could come
To note in no place, where Achaia stood;
And so lived ever, tortured with the blood
In man's vain veins. Thou therefore ( Thetis son)
Have equald all, that ever yet have won
The bliss the earth yields; or hereafter shall.
In life, thy eminence was adored of all,
Even with the Gods. And now, even dead, I see
Thy virtues propagate thy Emperie,
To a renewd life of command beneath;
So great Achilles Achilles of the next life.
triumphs over death.
This comfort of him, this encounter found;
Urge not my death to me, nor rub that wound;
I rather wish, to live in earth a Swain,
Or serve a Swain for hire, that scarce can gain
Bread to sustain him; then (that life once gone)
Of all the dead, sway the Imperial the one.
But say; and of my Son, some comfort yield;
If he goes on, in first fights of the field;
Or lurks for safety in the obscure Rere?
Or of my Father, if thy royal ear
Has been aduertisde, that the Phthian Throne,
He still commands, as greatest Myrmidon?
Or that the Phthian and Thessalian rage,
(Now feet and hands are in the hold of Age)
Despise his Empire? Under those bright rays,
In which, heavens fervor hurles about the days;
Must I no more shine his revenger now;
Such as of old, the Ilion overthrow
Witnest my anger: th'vniuersall host,
Sending before me, to this shadie Coast,
In fight for Grecia. Could I now resort,
(But for some small time) to my Fathers Court;
In spirit and power, as then: those men should find
My hands inaccessible; and of fire, my mind,
That durst, with all the numbers they are strong,
Vnseate his honor, and suborne his wrong.
This pitch still flew his spirit, though so low;
And this, I answered thus: I do not know,
Of blameless Peleus, any ^^ast r^port;
But of your son, in all the utmost sort,
I can inform your care wi^h truth; and thus:
From Scyros, Ulysses report of Neoptolemus the son of ^e^^lles.
princely Neoptol^^us,
By Fleet, I conuaid to the Greeks; where he
Was Chief, at both parts: when our gr^uitie
Retired to council; and our youth to fight.
In council still (so fiery was Conceit,
In his quick apprehension of a cause)
That first he ever spoke; nor past the laws
Of any grave stay, in his greatest have.
None would contend with him, that counseld last;
Unless illustrous Nestor, he and I
Would sometimes put a friendly contrary,
On his opinion. In our fights, the prease
Of great or common, he would never sease;
But far before fight ever. No man there,
For force, he forced. He was slaughterer
Of many a brave man, in most dreadful fight.
But one and other, whom he reft of light,
(In Grecian succor) I can neither name,
Nor give in number. The particular fame,
Of one man's slaughter yet, I must not pass;
Eurypilus Telephides he was,
That fell beneath him; and with him, the falls
Of such huge men went, that they showed like This place (and a number more) is
most miserably mistaken by all translators and commentors.
whales*
Ra^pi^'d abou^him. Neoptolemus
Set him so sharply, for the sumptuous
Favors of Mistresses, he saw him wear;
For past all doubt, his beauties had no peer,
Of all that mine eyes noted; next to one,
And that was Memnon, Tithons Sun-like son.
Thus far, for fight i^^publicke, may a taste
Give of his eminence. How far surpast
His spirit in private; where he was not seen;
Nor glory could be said, to prais^ his spleen;
This close note, I exce^pted. When we sat
Hid in Epaeus horse; no Optimate
Of all the Greeks there, had the charge to open
And shut the The (...) said*
Stratageme, but I. My scope
To note then, each man's spirit, in a straight
Of so much danger; much the better might
Be hit by me, then others: as, prouokt*
I shifted place still; when, in some I smokt
Both privy tremblings, and close vent of tears.
In him yet, not a soft conceit of theirs,
Could all my search see, either his wet eyes
Plied still with wiping^; or the goodly guise,
His person all ways put forth; in least part,
By any tremblings, showed his toucht-at heart.
But ever he was urging me to make
Way to their sally; by his sign to shake
His sword hid in his scabberd; or his Lance
Loded with iron, at me. No good chance,
His thoughts to Troy intended. In the event,
(High Troy depopulate) he made ascent
To his fair ship, with prise and treasure store:
Safe, and no touch, away with him he bore,
Of farre-off hurled Lance, or of close-fought sword,
Whose wounds, for favors* War does often afford;
Which he (though sought) mist, in wars closest wage;
In close fights, Mars does never fight, but rage.
This made the soul of swift Achilles tred
A March of glory, through the herbie meade;
For joy to hear me so renown his Son;
And vanished stalking. But with passion
Stood the other Souls struck: and each told his bane.
Only the spirit Ai^x the sonn^ of Telamo^*
Telamonian
Kept far off; angry for the victory
I won from him at Fleet; though Arbit^ie
Of all a Court of war, pronounced it mine,
And Pallas self. Our prise were the arms divine,
Of great Achill^s.
Aeacides; propo^de to our fames
By his bright The^is.
Mother, at his funeral Games.
I wish to heaven, I ough^ not to have won;
Since for those Arms, so high a he^d, so soon
The base earth couerd. Ajax, that of all
The host of Greece, had person capital,
And acts as eminent; excepting his,
Whose arms those were; in whom was naught amiss.
I tried the great Soul with soft words, and said:
Ajax! great son of Telamon; arraid
In all our glories! what? not dead resign
Thy wrath for those cursed Arms? The Powers divine,
In them forged a^^ our banes; in thine own One;
In thy grave fall, our Tower was overthrown.
We mourn (for ever maimd) for thee as much,
As for Achilles: nor thy wrong does touch,
In sentence, Jupiter.
any, but Saturnius doom;
In whose hate, was the host of Greece become
A very horror. Who expressed it well,
In signing thy Fate, with this timelesse Hell.
Approach then (King of all the Grecian merit)
Repress thy great mind, and thy flamie spirit;
And give the words I give thee, worthy ear.
All this, no word drew from him; but less near
The stern Soul kept. To other Souls he fled;
And glid along the River of the dead.
Though Anger moved him; yet he might have spoke;
Since I to him. But my desires were struck
With sight of other Souls. And then I saw
Minos, (...).
that ministered to Death a law;
And Jove's bright son was. He was set, and swaid
A golden Scepter; and to him did plead
A sort of others, set about his Throne,
In Plutos wide-door'd house; when strait came on,
Mighty Orion, Orion.
who was hunting there,
The herds of those beasts he had slaughterd here,
In desert hills on earth. A Club he bore,
Entirely steel, whos^ virtues never wore.
^ Tityus Tityus.
I saw: to whom the glorious Earth
Opened her womb, and gave unhappy birth;
Upwards, and flat upon the Pauement lay
His ample lims; that spread in their display,
Nine Acres compass. On his bosom sat
Two Vultures, digging through his caul of fat,
Into his Liver, with their crooked Beakes;
And each by turns, the concrete entraile breaks,
(As Smiths their steel beat) set on either side.
Nor does he ever labor to divide
His Liver and their Beakes; nor with his hand,
Offer them off: but suffers by command,
Of th'angrie Thunderer; off^ing to en^orce,
His love Latona in the close recou^s^,
She used to Pytho, through the dancing land,
Smooth Panopaeus. I saw likewise stand,
Up to the chin, amidst a liquid lake,
Tormented Tantalus; yet could not slake
His burning thirst. Often as his scornful cup,
The Old man would taste; so often it was swallowd up;
And all the black earth to his feet descried;
Divine power (plaguing him) the lake still dried.
About his head, on high trees, clustering, hung
Pears, Apples, Granets, Olives, ever young;
Delicious ^igs, and many fruit trees more,
Of other burden; whose alluring store,
When the old Soul strived to pluck, the winds from sight,
In gloomie vapors, made them vanish quite.
There saw I Sisyphus, Sisyphu^.
in infinite moan,
With both hands heauing up a massy stone;
And on his tip-toes, racking all his height,
To wrest up to a mountain top, his freight;
When pressed to rest it there (his nerves quite spent)
Down rusht the deadly Quarrie: the event
Of all his torture, new to raise again;
To which, strait set his never rested pain.
The sweat came gushing out from every Pore;
And on his head a standing mist he wore;
Reeking from thence, as if a cloud of dust
Were raisd about i^. Down with th^se was thrust,
The Idol of the force of Hercules. H^^c^les.

But his firm self, did no such Fate oppress;
He feasting lives amongst the immortal States;
White-ankled Hebe, and himself, made mates,
In heavenly Nuptials. Hebe, Jove's dear race,
And Iunos; whom the golden Sandals grace.
About him flew the clamors of the dead,
Like Fowle^; and still stoopt cuffing at his head.
He, with his Bow, like Night, stalkt up and down;
His shaft still nockt; and hurling round his frown,
At thos^ v^xt houerers, aiming at them still;
And still, as shooting out, desire to still.
A horrid Bawdricke, wore he thwart his breast;
The Thong all gold, in which were forms impressed,
Where Art and Miracle, drew equal breaths,
In Bears, Bores, Lions, Battles, Combats, Deaths.
Who wrought that work, did never such before;
Nor so divinely will do ever more.
Soon as he saw, he ^new me; and gave speech:
Son of Laertes; high in wisdoms reach;
And yet unhappy wretch; for in this heart,
Of all exploits atchieu'd by thy desert,
Thy worth but works out some sinister Fate.
As I in earth did. I was generate
By Jove himself; and yet past mean, oppressed
By one my far inferior; whose proud hest,
Imposde abhorred labors, on my hand.
Of all which, one was, to descend this Strand,
And hale the dog from thence. He could not think
An act that Danger could make deeper sink;
And yet this depth I drew; and fetched as hie,
As this was low, the dog* The Deity,
Of slight and wisdom, as of downright power,
Both stoopt, and raisd, and made me Conqueror.
This said; he made descent again as low
As Plutos Court; when I stood firm; for show
Of more Her^es, of the times before;
And might perhaps have seen my wish of more;
(As Theseus and Pirithous, derived
From roots of Deity) but before th'atchieu'd
Rare sight of these; the rank-soul'd multitude
In infinite flocks rose; venting sounds so rude,
That pale Fear took me, lest the Gorgons head
Rusht in amongst them; thrust up* in my dread,
By grim Persephone. I therefore sent
My men before to ship; and after went.
Where, boorded, set, and lancht; The Ocean wave,
Our Ores and forewinds, speedy passag^ gave.
Finis libri vndecimi Hom. Odyss.
THE XII. BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
HE shows from Hell his safe retreat,
To the I Will A^^aea, Circes seat.
And how he escaped the Sirens calls.
With th'erring Rock^s, and waters falls,
That Scylla and Chary^dis break.
The Suns st^lne Herds; and his sad wreake*
Both of Ulysses ship and men,
His own head scaping sc^rce the pain.
Another.
(...).
The Rocks that errd;
The Sirens call;
The Suns stolen Herd;
The soldiers fall.

Our Ship now past the streights of The Ocean flood;
She plowd the broad seas billows; and made good,
The I Will Aeaea, where the Palace stands
Of the early Riser, with the rosy hands,
Active Aurora; where she loves to dance;
And where the Sun does his prime beams advance.
When here arrived; we drew her up to land,
And trod our selves the resaluted sand:
Found on the shore, fit resting for the Night;
Slept, and expected the celestial light.
Soon as the white-and-red-mixt-fingerd Dame, Reditur ab inferis ad Circen.

Had guilt the mountains with her Saffron flame;
I sent my men to Circes house before,
To fetch dece^st Elpenor to the shore.
Strait swelld the high banks with feld heaps of trees;
And (full of tears) we did due Exequies
To our dead friend. Elpenor tum^latur.
(Whose Corse consumed with fire,
And honored Arms* whose Sepulcher entire;
And ou^r that, a Column raisd) his Ore,
Curi^usly car^'d (to his desire before)
Upon the top of all his Tomb, we fixed.
Of all Rites fit, his Funeral Pile was mixed.
Nor was our s^fe ascent from hell, conceald
From Circes knowledge; nor so soon reueald,
But she was wi^h v^, with her bread and food,
And ruddie wine, brought by her sacred brood
Of woods and Fountains. In the midst she^ stood,
And thus saluted us: Unhappy men,
That have (informed with all your senses) been
In Plutos dismal mansion. You shall die
Twice now; where others that Mortality,
In her fair arms* holds; shall but once decease.
But eat and drink out all conceit of these;
And this day dedicate to food and wine;
The following Night to Sleep. When next shall shine
The cheerful Morning; you shall prove the seas.
Your way, and every act ye must address,
My knowledge of their order shall design:
Lest with your own bad counsels, ye incline
Events as bad against ye; and sustain
By sea and shore, the woeful ends that reign
In wilful act^ons. Thus did she adui^e;
And, for the time, our Fortunes were so wise,
To follow wise directions. All that day
We sat and feasted. When his lower way,
The Sun had enterd; and the Even, the hi^:
My friends slept on their Gables; she and I,
(Led by her fair hand, to a place apart,
By her well sorted) did to sleep convert
Our timed powers. When, all things Fate let fall
In our affair, she asked; I told her all.
To which she answered: These things thus took end:
And now to those that I inform, attend:
Which (you remembering) God himself shall be,
The blessed author of your memory.
First, Circe praesagit futura pet^cula.
to the Sirens ye shall come, that taint
The minds of all men, whom they can acquaint
With their attractions. Whosoever shall
(For want of knowledge moved) Si^ena^um des^riptio.
but hear the call
Of any Siren: he will so despise
Both wife and children, for their sorceries,
That never home turns his affections stream;
Nor they take joy in him, nor he in them.
The Sirens will so soften with their song,
(Shrill, and in sen^uall appetite so strong)
His loose affections, that he gives them head.
And then observe: They sit amidst a meade;
And round about it ^unnes a h^dge or wall
Of dead men's bones: their witherd skins and all,
Hung all along upon it; and these men
Were such as they had fawnd into their Fen,
And then their skins hung on their hedge of bones.
Sail by them therefore; thy companions
Before hand causing to stop every ^are
With sweet soft wax so close* that none may hear
A note of all their charmings. Yet may you
(If you affect it) open ear allow
To try their motion: but presume not so
To trust your judgment; when your senses go
So loose about you; but give straight command
To all your men, to bind you foot and hand*
Sure to the Mast; that you may safe approve
How strong in instigation to their love
Their rapting tunes are. If so much they move,
That, spite of all your reason, your will stands
To be enfranchisde, both of feet and hands;
Charge all your men before, to slight your charge,
And rest so far, from fearing to enlarge,
That much more sure they bind you. When your friends
Have outsaild these: the danger that tra^scends
Rests not in any counsel to prevent;
Unless your own mind, finds the tract and bent
Of that way, that auoids it. I can say
That in your course, there lies a twofold way;
The right of which, your own, taught, present wit
And grace divine, must prompt. In general yet
Let this inform you: Near these Sirens shore
Move two steep Rocks; at whose feet, lie and rore
The black seas cruel billows: the blessed Gods
Call them the Rouers. Their abhord abods
No bird can pass: no not the * (...). Columbae t^midae. What these D^ues
were, and the whole mind^ of this place: the Great Macedo^ ^sking Ch^ron
Am^hip^lites, he ^nswered, They were the Pl^iad^s or seven Stares. One of which
(besides his proper imperfection, of being (...). i. adeo exilis, vel
subobscurus, ^t vi^ appare^t) is utterly obscured or let b^ these Rocks. Why
then, or how, Jove still supplied the lost one, that the ^u^ber might be full:
Athen^^^ falls to it, and helps the other out: Interpreting it to be affirmed
of their perpetu^ll septenary number* though there appeared but six. But how
lame and loathsome these prozers show in their affected expositions of the
P^eticall Mind, this and an hundred others* spent in mere p^esumptu^^s guess
at this inaccessible Po^t; I hope will mak^ plain^ enough to the most envious
of any thing done, besides their ^wne set censur^s, and most arrogan^ over
weenings. In the 23. of the Iliads, (being t) at the Games celebrated ^ at
Patrocl^s fnerals, they tied t^ the top of a Mast, (...), ^imidam Columbam, to
sh^^^^ at for a ga^^: so that (by these great men's abouesaid expositions.) they
sh^^ at the Plei^^es.
Doves, whose fear
Sire Jove so loves, that they are said to bear
Ambrosia to him; can their rauine escape;
But one of them, falls ever to the rape
Of those sly rocks. Yet ^oue, another still
Adds to the rest; that so may ever fill
The sacred number. Never ship could shun
The nimble peril winged there; but did run
With all her bulk, and bodies of her men
To utter ruin. For the seas retain
Not only their outrageous aesture there;
But fierce assistents, of particular fear,
And supernatural mischief, they expire;
And those are whirlewinds of devouring fire
Whisking about still. The Argiue ship, alone
(Which bore the (...), etc. Naui^ omnibus Curae: the ship that ^^ld the c^re
of all men, or of ^ll things: which our Critickes will needs restrain, omnibus
heroibus Po^tisom^ibus, vel Historicis, when the care of all men's preser^atio^
is affirmed to be the freight of it: (...) if Po^ts and Historians comprehended
all things, when I scarce know any that makes them any part of their care. But
this likewise is garbige good enough for the monster. Nor will I tempt ^ur
spic't consciences with expressing the diuin^ mind it i^cl^des. Being ^fra^d to
affirm any good of poor Po^s^e, since n^ man gets any goods by it* And
notwithstanding many of our bird-^^d starters (...) profanation are for
nothing s^ afraid of it; as that lest their galled consciences (scarce
believing the most real truth, in approbation of their lives) should be r^bbed
with the confirmation of it, even in these contemned vaniti^s (as their
^^pieties please to call them,) which by much more lear^ed and pio^s the^
th^^selues, have ever been called the raptures of di^ine inspiration By which*
Homo supra humanam n^turam erigitur, and in D^um transit* Plat.
care of all men) got her gone,
Come from Aret^. Yet perhaps even she
Had wrackt at those Rocks; if the Deity
That lies by Jove's side, had not lent her hand
To their transmission; since the man that manned
In chief that voyage, she, in chief did love.
Of these two spiteful Rocks, the one does shoue
Against the height of heaven, her pointed brow.
A black cloud binds it round, and never show
Lends to the sharp point: not the clear blew sky
Lets ever view it. Not the Somners eye;
Not fervent Aut^mnes. None, that Death could end
Could ever skale it; or if up, descend.
Though twenty hands and feet he had for hold:
A polisht ice-like glibnesse does enfold
The rock so round, whose midst, a gloomie cell
Shrowds, so far Westward, that it sees to hell.
From this, keep you as far, as from his bow
An able young man can his shaft bestow.
For here, the (...), etc. Grauiter vociferans; as all, most ^^truly tr^nslat^
i^. As they (...) in the next ve^se, these words (...) Catuli Leonis. No Lion
being here dreamed of, n^r any vocifcr^tio^* (...)* signifying indignam,
dissim^lem, or horribilem vocem edens: But in what kind horribilem? Not for the
gra^itie or greatness of her voice, b^t for the rnworthy or disproportionable
small* wh^ling of it: she being in the vast fr^^e of her body, as the eery
words (...) signify, monst^um ingens: whose dispr^portion and defor^itie, is
too Poeticaley (and therei^ (...)) ordered, f^r fat and fla^ Prozers to
compreh^nd. N^r could they make the P^ets w^rds s^rue their comprehension; and
therefore they add of their own, (...)* from whence (...) is deri^ed*
signifying crepo, or stridule clamo. And (...), is to be expoanded, c^tuli
^uper or recen^ ^^ti, not Leonis. But thus they botch and ab^se the
incompar^ble expressor: Because they knew ^ot how otherwise to be (...) enough
the^sel^es, to help out the Monster. Imagining so huge a great body* must
needs have a voice as huge: and the^ would not our Homer have like^ed it t^ a
Lions whelps voice, but to the Lions ^wne: and all had been much too little, to
make ^ voice answerable to her h^genesse. And therefore found our inimitable
master, a ^ew way to express her monstrous disproportio^: performing it so, as
there can be ^i^il supra. And I would feign lear^e of ^y learn^d De^r^ctor,
that will needs have m^ only tr^nslate out of the Lati^e, what Latin
translation tells me this? or what Grecia^ has ever found this and a hundred
other such* Which may be some poor instance, or proof of my Greci^n fac^lt^,
as far as ^ld H^m^r goes in his two simple Poems, but not a sill^ble further
will my silli^ spirit presume.
whuling Scylla, shrowds her face:
That breaths a voice, at all parts, no more base
Then are a newly-kitn'd kitlings cries;
Her self a monster yet, of boundless sise;
Whose sight would nothing please a mortals eyes;
No nor the eyes of any God, if he
(Whom naught should fright) fell foul on her; and she
Her full shape showed. Twelve foul feet bear about
Her ougly bulk. Six huge long necks looked out
Of her rank shoulders: every neck, does let
A ghastly head out: every head; three set
Thick thrust together, of abhorred teeth;
And every tooth stuck with a sable death.
She lurkes in midst of all her den; and streakes
From out a ghastly whirle-poole, all her necks;
Where, (gloting round her rock) to fish she falls;
And up rush Dolphins, Dogfish; somewhiles, Whale^,
If got within her, when her rapine feeds;
For euer-groning Amphitrite breeds
About her whirlepoole, an vnmeasur'd store*
No Seaman ever boasted touch of shore
That there touched with his ship; but still she fed
Of him, and his. A man for every head
Spoiling his ship of. You shall then descrie
The other humbler Rock, that moves so nie,
Your dart may mete the distance. It receaues
A huge wild Fig Tree, curled with ample leaves;
Beneath whose shades, divine C^arybdis sits
Supping the black deepes. Thrice a day her pi^s
She drinking all dry; and thrice a day again,
All, up she belches; banefull to sustain.
When she is drinking, dare not near her draught,
For not the force of Neptune, (if once caught)
Can force your freedom. Therefore in your strife
To escape Charybdis, labor all, for life
To row near Scylla; for she will but have
For her six heads, sixemen; and better save
The rest, then all, make offerings to the wave.
This Need she told me of my loss^, when I
Desired to know, if that Necessity
(When I had escaped Ch^r^bdis outrages)
My powers might not revenge; though not redress?
She answered: O unhappy! a^t thou yet
Enflamed with war? and thirst to drink thy swet?
Not to the Gods give up, both Arms, and will?
She, deathlesse is, and that immortal ill
Grave, harsh, outrageous, not to be subdued,
That men must suffer till they be renewed*
Nor lives there any virtue that can fly
The vicious outrage of their cruelty.
Should thou put Arms on, and approach ^he Rock^*
I fear, six more must expiate the shocke.
Six heads, six men ask still. Hoise ^aile, and fly;
And in thy flight, aloud, on Cratis cry
(Great Scyllas Mother, who, exposde to light
That bane of men;) and she will do such right
To thy observance, that she, down will tread
Her daughters rage; nor let her show a head.
From thenceforth then, for ever past her care;
Thou shall ascend, the I^e Triangular^;
Where many Oxen of the Sun are fed;
And fatted flocks. Of Oxen, fifty head
In every herd feed; and their herds are seven;
And of his fat flocks is their number, Even.
Increase they yield not, for they never die;
There every shepherdess, a Deity.
Fair Phaethusa, and Le^petie,
The lovely Ny^phs are, that their Guardians be.
Who, to the daylights lofty-going flame
Had gracious birthright, from the heavenly Dame
Still young Neaera; who (brought forth and bred)
Far off dismissed them; to see duly fed
Their Fathers herds and flocks in Sicilie.
These herds, and flocks, if to the Deity
Ye leave, as sacred things, untouched; and on
Go with all fit care of your home, alone,
(Though through some sufferance) you yet sase shall land
In wished Ithac^. But if impious hand
You lay on those herds to their hurts: I then
Presage sure ruin, to thy ^hip and men.
If thou escap'st thy self, extending home
Thy longed for landing; thou shall loded come
With store of losses, most exceeding late,
And not consorted with a saved mate.
This said; the golden-thron'd Aurora rose;
She, her way went, and I did mine dispose
Up to my ship; weighed Anchor, and away.
When reverend Circe; helped us to conuaie
Our vessel safe, by making well inclind
A Sea man's true companion, a forewind;
With which she filld our sails, when, fitting all
Our Arms close by us; I did sadly fall
To grave relation, what conce^nd in Fate
My friends to know, and told them that the state
Of our affairs success, which Circe had
Presaged to me alone, must yet be made
To one, nor only two known; but to all:
That since their lives and deaths were left to fall
In their elections; the^ ^ight life elect,
And give what would preserve it, fit effect.
I first informed them, that we were to fly
The heauenly-singing Sire^s harmony,
And flowre-adorned Meadow* And that I
Had charge to hear their song; but f^tte^d ^^st
In bands, vnfauor'd, to th'erected Mast;
From whence, if I should pray; or use command
To be enlarged; they should with much more ^and
Contain my struglings. This I simply told
To each particular; nor would withold
What most enioyn'd mine own affections stay,
That theirs the rather might be taught t'obay.
In mean time, flew our ships; and straight we fetched
The Sirens I Will; a spleenelesse wind, so stretched
Her wings to waft us, and so urged our keele.
But having reached this I Will, we could not ^eele
The least gasp of it: it was stricken dead,
And all the Sea, in prostrate slumber spread:
The Sirens devil charmed all. Up then flew
My friends to work; struck sail, together drew,
And under hatches stowd them: sat, and plied
Their polisht oars; and did in curls divide
The white-head waters. My part then came on;
A mighty waxen Cake, I set upon;
Chopped it in fragments, with my sword; and wrought
With strong hand, every piece, till all were soft.
The great power of the Sun, in such a beam
As then flew burning from his Diadem,
To liquefaction helped us. Orderly,
I stopped their ears; and they, as fair did ply
My feet, and hands with cords; and to the Mast
With other halsers, made me soundly fast.
Then took they seat; and forth our passage struck;
The fomie Sea, beneath their labor shook.
Rowd on, in reach of an erected voice;
The Sirens soon took note, without our noice;
Tuned those sweet accents, that made charms so strong;
And these learned numbers, made the Sirens song:
Come here, thou, worthy of a world of praise;
That do so high, the Grecian glory raise;
Ulysses! stay thy ship; and that song hear
That none past ^uer, but it bent his ear:
But left him r^uish, and instructed more
By us, then any, ever heard before.
For we know all things whatsoever were
In wide Troy labored* whatsoever there
The Grecians and the Trojans both sustained;
By those high issues that the Gods ordained.
And whatsoever, all the earth can show
T'informe a knowledge of desert, we know.
This they gave accent in the sweetest strain
That ever opened an enamored vain.
When, my constrained heart, needs would have mine ear
Yet more delighted; force way forth, and hear.
To which end I commanded, with all sign
Stern looks could make (for not a joint of mine
Had power to stir) my friends to rise, and give
My limbs free way. They freely strived to drive
Their ship still on. When (far from will to lose)
Eurylochus, and Perimedes rose
To wrap me surer; and oppressed me more
With many a halser, then had use before.
When, rowing on, without the reach of sound;
My friends vnstopt their ears; and me, unbound;
And, that I Will quite we quitted. But again
Fresh fears emploid us. I beheld a maine
Of mighty billows, and a smoke ascend:
A horrid murmr hearing. Every friend
Astonished sat: from every hand, his oar
Fell quite forsaken: with the dismal Rore
Where all things there made Echoes, stone still stood
Our ship it self: because the ghastly flood
Took all men's motions from her, in their own:
I, through the ship went, laboring up and down
My friends recouerd spirits. One by one
I gave good words, and said: That well were known
These ills to them before: I told them all;
And that those could not prove, more capital
Then those the Cyclop blockt us up in; yet
My virtue, wit, and heauen-helpt Counsels, set
Their freedoms open. I could not believe
But they rememberd it, and wished them give
My equal care, and means, now equal trust:
The strength they had, for stirring up, they must
Rouse, and extend, to try if Jove had laid
His powers in theirs up, and would add his aid
To escape even that death. In particular then
I told our Pylot, that past other men
He, most must bear firm spirits; since he swaid
The Continent, that all our spirits conuaid
In his whole guide of her. He saw there boil
The fiery whirlpooles; that to all our spoil
Inclosde a Rock: without which, he must stere,
Or all our ruins stood concluded there.
All heard me, and obaid; and little knew
That, shunning that Rock, six of them should rue
The wrack* another hid. For I concealed
The heavy wounds that never would be healed,
To be by Scylla opened; for their fear
Would then have robbed all, of all care to stere;
Or stir an oar, and made them hide beneath:
When they, and all* had died an idle death.
But then, even I forgot to shun the harm
Circe forewarnd: who willd I should not arm,
Nor show my self to S^ylla, lest in vain
I ventured life. Yet could not I contain
But armed at all parts; and two lances took:
Up to the foredecke went, and thence did look
That Rockie Scylla would have first appeared,
And taken my life, with the friends I feared.
From thence yet, no place could afford her sight;
Though through the dark rock, mine eye threw her light,
And ransackt all ways. I then took a straight
That gave my self, and some few more receipt
Twixt Scylla, and Charybdis; whence we saw
How horridly Charybdis throat did draw
The brackish sea up, which, when all abroad
She spit again out: never Caldron sod
With so much feruor, fed with all the store
That could enrage it. All the Rock did rore
With troubled waters: round about the tops
Of all the steep crags, flew the fomy drops.
But, when her draught, the sea and earth dissunderd,
The troubled bottoms turned up, and she thunderd;
Far under shore, the swart sands naked lay.
Whose whole stern sight, the startled blood did fray
From all our faces. And while we on her
Our eyes bestowd thus, to our ruins fear;
Six friends had Scylla snatched out of our keele,
In whom, most loss, did force and virtue feel.
When looking to my ship, and lending eye
To see my friends estates, their heels turned hie,
And hands cast up, I might discern; and hear
Their calls to me for help, when now they were
To try me in their last extremities.
And as an Angler, medcine for surprise
Of little fish, sits pouring from the rocks,
From out the crookt horn, of a fold-bred Ox;
And then with his long Angle, hoists them hie
Up to the Air; then slightly hurles them by,
When, helpless sprauling on the land they lie:
So easily Scylla to her Rock had rapt
My woeful friends; and so vnhelpt, entrapt
Struggling they lay beneath her violent rape;
Who in their tortures, desperate of escape;
Shriekt as she tore; and up, their hands to me
Still threw for swee^e life. I did never see
In all my sufferance ransacking the seas,
A spectacle so full of miseries.
Thus having fled these rocks (these cruel dames
Scylla, Charybdis.) where the king of flames
Has offerings burnd to him; our ship put in
The Island, that from all the earth does win
The Epithete, F^ultlesse: where the broad of head
And famous Oxen, for the Sun are fed,
With many fat flocks of that high-gone God.
Set in my ship, mine ear reached, where we rod
The bellowing of Oxen, and the bleate
Of fleecie sheep; that in my memories seat
Put up the forms, that late had been impressed
By dread Aeaean Circe; and the best
Of Souls, and Prophets, the blind Theb^^ Seer;
The wise Tiresias, who was grave decreer
Of my returns whole means. Of which, this one
In chief he urged; that I should always shun
The Island of the Man-delighting Sun.
When, (sad at heart for our late loss) I praid
My friends to hear fit counsel, (though dismayed
With all ill fortunes) which was given to me
By Circes, and Tiresias Prophecy;
That I should fly the I Will, where was adored
The Comfort of the world: for ills, abhorred
Were ambusht for us there; and therefore, willd
They should put off, and leave the I Will. This killed
Their tender spirits; when Eurylochu^
A speech that vexed me vtter'd; answering thus:
Cruel Ulysses! Since thy nerves abound
In strength, the more spent; and no toils confound
Thy able lims, as all beat out of steel;
Thou ablest us to, as unapt to feel
The teeth of Labor, and the spoil of Sleep,
And therefore still, wet wast us in the deep;
Nor let us land to eat; but madly, now;
In Night, put forth, and leave firm land to strew
The Sea with errors. All the rabide flight
Of winds that ruin ships, are bred in Night.
Who is it, that can keep off cruel Death,
If suddenly should rush out the angry breath
Of Notus, or the eager-spirited West?
That cuffe ships, dead; and do the Gods their best!
Serve black Night still, with shore, meat, sleep, and ease;
And offer to the Morning for the seas.
This all the rest approved; and then knew I
That past all doubt, the devil did apply
His slaughterous works. Nor would they be withheld;
I was but one; nor yielded, but compelled.
But all that might contain them, I assaid:
A sacred oath, on all their powers I laid;
That if with herds, or any richest flocks
We chanced t'encounter; neither sheep, nor Ox
We once should touch; nor (for that constant ill
That follows folly) scorn advice, and kill:
But quiet sit us down, and take such food
As the immortal Circe had bestowd.
They swore all this, in all seuerst sort;
And then we ancord, in the winding Port;
Near a fresh River, where the longd^ for shore
They all flew out to; took in victles store;
And, being full, thought of their friends, and wept
Their loss by Scylla; weeping till they slept.
In Nights third part; when stars began to stoop;
The Cloud-assembler, put a Tempst up.
A boistrous spirit he gave it; drove out all
His flocks of clouds; and let such darkness fall,
That Earth, and Seas for fear, to hide were driven;
For, with his clouds, he thrust out Night from heaven.
At Morn, we drew our ships into a cave;
In which the Ny^phs, that Phoebus cattaile drove;
Fair, dancing Rooms had, and their seats of State.
I urged my friends then, that to shun their Fate,
They would observe their oath; and take the food
Our ship afforded; nor attempt the blood
Of those fair Herds and Flocks; because they were,
That dreadful Gods, that all could see, and hear.
They stood obseruant, and in that good mind
Had we been gone: but so adverse the wind
Stood to our passage, that we could not go.
For o^e whole month, perpetually did blow
Impetuous Notus; not a breaths repair
But his, and Eurus, ruled in all the Air.
As long yet, as their ruddy wine, and bread
Stood out amongst them; so long, not a head
Of all those Oxen, fell in any strife
Amongst those students for the gut, and life.
But when their victles faild, they fell to prey:
Necessity compelled them then, to stray
In rape of fish, and foul: what ever came
In reach of hand or (...)* the bellies flame
Afflicted to it. I then, fell to praire;
And (making to a close Retreat, repair
Free from, both friends, and winds) I washed my hands,
And all the Gods besought, that held commands
In liberal heaven; to yield some mean to stay
Their desperate hunger; and set up the way
Of our return restraind. The Gods, in steed
Of giving what I prayed for, power of deed;
A deedlesse sleep, did on my lids distill,
For mean to work upon, my friends their fill.
For, whiles I slept, there wak't no mean to curb
Their headstrong wants; which he that did disturb
My rule, in chief, at all times; and was chief
To all the rest in counsel to their grief;
Knew well, and of, my present absence took
His fit ad^antage; and their iron struck
At highest heat. For (feeling their desire
In his own Entrails, to allay the fire
That Famine blew in them) he thus gave way
To that affection: Hear what I shall say,
(Though words will stanch no hunger) every death
To us poor wretches, that draw temporal b^eath,
You know, is hateful; but all know, to die
The Death of Famine, is a misery
Past all Death loathsome. Let us therefore take
The chief of this fair herd; and offerings make
To all the Deathlesse that in broad heaven live;
And, in particular, vow, if we arrive
In natural Ithaca, to strait erect
A Temple to the haughty in aspect;
Rich, and magnificent, and all within
Deck it with Relics many, and divine.
If yet, he stands incenst, since we have slain
His high-browd herd; and therefore will sustain
Desire to wrack our ship: he is but one;
And all the other Gods, that we atone
With our divine Rites, will their suff^age give
To our designed return, and let us live.
If not; and all take part, I rather crave
To serve with one sole Death, the yawning wave;
Then, in a desert Island, lie and sterue;
And, with one pined life, many deaths observe.
All cried, He counsels nobly; and all speed
Made to their resolute driving. For the feed
Of those coleblacke, fair, broad-browd, Sun-lou'd Beeues:
Had place, close by our ships. They took the lives
Of sense, most eminent. About their fall
Stood round, and to the States celestial
Made solemn vows: But, other Rites, their ship
Could not afford them; they did therefore strip
The curld-head Oak, of fresh young leaves, to make
Supply of service for their Barley cake.
And, on the sacredly enflamed, for wine
Powrd purest water; all the parts divine
Spitting, and rosting: all the Rites beside
Orderly using. Then did light divide
My low, and upper lids; when, my repair
Made near my ship; I met the delicate air
Their roast exhaled. Out instantly I cried;
And said, O Jove, and all ye Deified,
Ye have oppressed me with a cruel sleep;
While ye conferd on me, a loss as deep
As Death descends to. To themselves, alone
My rude men, left vngouernd; they have done
A deed so impious, (I stand well assured)
That you will not forgive, though ye procured.
Then flew Lempetie, with the ample Robe,
Up to her Father, with the golden Globe;
Ambassadresse, t'informe him, that my men
Had slain his Oxen. Heart-incensed then;
He cried; Revenge me (Father, and the rest
Both ever living, and for ever blessed.)
Ulysses impious men, have drawn the blood
Of those my Oxen, that it did me good
To look on, walking, all my starrie round;
And when I trod earth, all with meadows crowned
Without your full amends, I Will leave heaven quite;
Dis, and the Dead, adorning with my light.
The Cloud-herd answered; Son! thou shall be ours,
And light those mortals, in that Mine of flowers;
My red hot flash, shall grase but on their ship,
And eat it, burning, in the boiling deep.
This by Calypso, I was told, and she
Informed it, from the verger Mercury.
Come to our ship; I chid, and told by name
Each man, how impiously he was to blame.
But chiding got no peace; the Beeues were slain:
When straight the Gods, fore-went their following pain
With dire Ostents. The hides, the flesh had lost,
Crept, all before them. As the flesh did roast
It bellowd like the Ox it self, alive.
And yet my soldiers, did their dead Beeues drive
Through all these Prodigies, in daily feasts.
Six days they banqueted, and slew fresh beasts,
And when the seventh day, Jove reduced the wind
That all the monethrag'd; and so in did bind
Our ship, and us; was turned, and calmed; and we
Lancht, put up Masts; Sails hoised, and to Sea.
The Island left so far; that land no where;
But only sea, and sky, had power t'appeare;
Jove fixed a cloud above our ship; so black
That all the sea it darkened. Yet from wrack
She ran a good free time: t^ll from the West
Came Zephyre ruffling forth; and put his breast
Out, in a singing tempest; so most vast,
It burst the Gables, that made sure our Mast;
Our Masts came tumbling down: our cattle down,
Rusht to the Pump: and by our Pylots crown
The maine Mast, past his fall; pasht all his Skull,
And all this wrack, but one flaw, made at full.
Off from the Stern, the Sternesman, diuing fell,
And from his sinews, flew his Soul to hell.
Together, all this time, Jove's Thunder chid;
And through, and through the ship, his lightning glid:
Till it embraced her round: her bulk was filld
With nasty sulphur; and her men were killd:
Tumbled to Sea, like Sea-mews swumme about,
And there the date of their return was out.
I tossed from side to side still, till all broke
Her Ribs were with the storm: and she did choke
With let-in Surges; for, the Mast torn down;
Tore her up pecemeale; and for me to drown
Left little vndissolu'd. But to the Mast
There was a lether Thong left; which I cast
About it, and the keele; and so sat tossed
With banefull weather, till the West had lost
His stormy tyranny. And then arose
The South, that bred me more abhorred woes;
For back again his blasts expelld me, quite
On ravenous Charybdis. All that Night
I tottered up and down, till Light, and I
At Scyllas Rock encounterd; and the nie
Dreadful Charybdis. As I drove on these,
I saw Charybdis, supping up the seas;
And had gone up together, if the tree
That bore the wild figs, had not rescued me;
To which I leapt, and left my keele; and hi^
Chambring upon it, did as close imply
My breast about it, as a Reremouse could:
Yet, might my feet, on no stub fasten hold
To ease my hands: the roots were crept so low
Beneath the earth; and so aloft did grow
The far-spred arms, that (though good height I gat)
I could not reach them. To the maine Bole, flat
I therefore still must cling; till up again
She belcht my Mast, and after that, amain
My keele came tumbling: so at length it chanced,
To me, as to a Judge; that long advanced
To judge a sort of hot young fellows iarres,
At length time frees him from their civil wars;
When, glad, he rises, and to dinner goes;
So time, at length, releast with joys my woes,
And from Charybdis mouth, appeared my keele.
To which (my hand, now loosd; and now, my heel)
I altogether, with a huge noise, dropped;
Just in her midst fell, where the Mast was propt;
And there rowd off, with owers of my hands.
God, and Man's Father, would not, from her sands
Let Scylla see me; for I then had died
That bitter death, that my poor friends supplied.
Nine Days at Sea, I houer'd: the tenth Night
In th'lle Ogygia, where about the bright
And right renoum'd Calypso, I was cast
By power of Deity; Where I lived embraced
With Love, and feasts. But why should I relate
Those kind occurrents? I should iterate
What I in part, to your chaste Queen and you
So late imparted. And for me to grow
A talker over of my tale again,
Were past my free contentment to sustain.
Finis duodecimi libri Hom. Odyss. Opus nouem dierum. (...).
THE THIRTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Another.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)

HE said; And silence all their Tongues contained
(In admiration) (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
To my high-rooft, and Brasse-foundation'd hou^^:
I hope, such speed, and pass (...)
Our Loves shall yield you, that you shall no more
Wander, nor suffer, homewards, as before.
You then, whoeuer, that are ever grac'^t
With all choice of authorized power, to taste
Such wine with me, (...). quod pro Honorario senibus datur And because the
word so Englisht, (...) no o ^her to exp^esse it, sounding well, and helping
our Language, it is her^ (...).
as warmes the sacred Rage;
And is an Honorarie given to Age.
With which, ye likewise, hear Divinely sing
(In Honors praise) the Poet of the King:
I move, by way of my command, to this;
That where, in an elaborate Chist, there lies
A Present for our Guest: Attires of price;
And Gold, engraven with in^inite device:
I wish that each of us should add beside
A Tripod, and a Caldron, amplified
With size, and Metal of most rate, and great.
For we (in counsel of taxation, met)
Will from our Subjects, gain their worth again;
Since it is unequal one man should sustain
A charge so weighty, being the grace of all;
Which, borne by many, is a weight but small.
Thus spoke Alcinous, and pleased the rest;
When each man closed, with home, and sleep, his feast.
But when the colour-giuing light arose;
All, to the Ship, did Intending in chief the Senators, with every m^ns
addition of gift.
all their speeds dispose;
And wealth (yt (...), Bene-honestos-faciensaes.
honest men makes) brought with them.
All which; even he, that wore the Diadem
Stowed in the Ship himself, beneath the seats
The Rowers sat in; stooping, le^t their le^s
In any of their labors, he might pro^e.
Then home he turned: and after him, did move
The whole assembly to expected (...).
Amongst whom, he a sacrifice (...).
And slew an Ox, to weather-wielding (...);
Beneath whose Empire, all things are, and move.
The thighs then rosting, they made glorious chere,
Delighted highly; and amongst them there,
The honored of the people used his v^ice,
Divine Demodocus. Yet through this choice
Of Cheer, and Music, had Vl^sses still
An Eye directed to the (...) hill,
To see Him rising, that illustrates all.
For now into his mind, a fire did fall
Of thirst for home* And as in hungry vow
To needful food, a man at fixed Plow;
(To whom, the black Ox all day long has turned
The stubborn fallowes up; his stomach burned
With empty heat, and appetite to food;
His knees afflicted with his spirit-spent blood)
At length the long-expected Sunset sees;
That the may sit to food, and rest his knees:
So, to Ulysses, set the friendly light
The Sun affoorded, with as wish'^a ^ight.
Who, straight bespake, that Ore-affecting State:
But did in chief, his speech appropriate
To him by Name, that with their Rule was crowned,
Alcinous? Of all men, most renowned, Ulysses to Alcinous.

Dismiss me, with as safe pass, as you vow;
(Your offering past) and may the Gods to you
In all contentment, use as full a hand:
For now, my landing here, and stay shall stand
In all perfection with my hearts desire;
Both my so safe deduction to aspire;
And loving gifts; which, may the Gods to me,
As blessed in use make, as your acts are free:
Even to the finding firm, in love, and life,
With all desired event, my friends, and wife.
When, as my self shall live delighted there;
May you, with yourwiues, rest as happy here:
Your Sons and Daughters (in particular State)
With every virtue rendered consummate:
And, in your general Empire, may ill never
Approach your Land; but good your good quit ever.
This, all applauded, and all jointly cried;
Dismiss the Stranger: he has dignified
With fit speech, his dismission. Then the King
Thus charged the Herrald: Alcinous to the Herrald.
Fill for offering
A bowl of wine: which through the whole large house
Dispose to all men; that propitious,
Our Father Jove made, with our prayers; we may
Give home our Guest, in full and wished way.
This said; Pontonous commixt a Bowl
Of such sweet wine, as did delight the soul:
Which making sacred to the blessed Gods,
That hold in broad heaven their supreme abodes;
God-like Ulysses, from his chair arose,
And in the hands of th'Empresse, did impose
The all-round Cup: Ulysses to Arete.
To whom (fair spoke) he said;
Rejoice, O Queen, and be your joys repaide
By heaven, for me, till age and death succeed;
Both which, inflict their most unwelcome need,
On Men and Dames, alike. And, first (for me)
I must from hence, to both: Live you here free;
And ever may, all living blessings spring;
Your joy in Children, Subjects, and your King.
This said, divine Ulysses took his way:
Before whom, the unalterable sway
Of King Alcinous virtue, did command
A Heralds fit attendance to the Strand
And Ship appointed. With him, likewise went
Handmaids, by Aretes iniunction sent.
One bore an Out and In-weede, fair and sweet;
The other an embroidered Cabinet:
The third, had Bread to bear, and ruddy wine;
All which, (at Sea, and Ship arrived) resign,
Their Freight conferred. With fair attendants then,
The sheets and bedding of the Man of men,
Within a Cabin of the hollow Keele,
Spread, and made soft; that sleep might sweetly seele
His restfull eyes; He entered, and his Bed,
In silence, took. The Rowers ordered
Themselves in several seats: and then set gone
The Ship; the Gable from the hollow stone
Dissolved, and weighed up: Altogether, close
Then beat the Sea. His lids, in swee^e repose
Sleep bound so fast, it scarce gave way to breath;
Inexcitable, The sound^st epc of V^ysses. Similitude.
most dear, next of all to death.
And as amids a fair field, four brave horse
Before a Chariot, stung into their course
With fervent lashes of the smarting Scourge;
That all their fire blows high; and makes them urge
To utmost speed, the measure of their ground:
So bore the Ship aloft, her fiery Bound;
About whom rusht the billows, black, and vast;
In which the Sea-roares burst. As firm as fast
She plied her Course yet: Nor her winged speed,
The Faulcou gentle, could for pace, exceed.
So cut she through* the waves, and bore a Man,
Even with the Gods, in counsels; that began
And spent his former life, in all misease:
Battles of men, and rude waves of the Seas;
Yet now, securely slept, forgetting all.
And when heavens brightest star, that first does call
The early morning out, advanced her head;
Then, near to Ithaca, the Billow-b^ed
Ph^^^cian Ship approch't. There is a Port,
That th'aged Sea-God Ph^rcys makes his Fo^^: The description of Phor^ys Haven.

Whose earth, the Ithace^si^^ people own.
In which, two Rocks inaccessible, are grown
Far forth into the Sea; whose each strength binds
The boistrous waves in, from the high-flowne winds
On both the out-parts so, that all within
The well built Ships, that once their harbor win
In his calm bosom; without Anchor, rest
Safe, and vnstir'd. From forth the havens high crest,
Branch the well-brawn'd arms of an Olive tree.
Beneath which, runs a Cave, from all Sun free;
Cool, and delightsome: Sacred to the access
Of Nymphs, whose sur-names are the (...):
In which, flew humming Bees; in which lay thrown
Stone cups, Stone vessels, Shittles, all of stone;
With which, the Nymphs their purple Mantles woue:
In whose contexture, Art and wonder strove.
In which, pure Springs perpetually ran;
To which, two entries were: the one for man,
(On which the North breathed:) the other, for the gods
(On which, the South:) and that, bore no abodes
For earthy men: But only deathlesse feet
Had there free way. This Port, these men thought meet
To Land Ulysses; being the first, they knew.
Drew then, their Ship in: but no further drew
Then half her bulk reach ^t: by such cunning hand
Her course was managed. Then her men took land;
And first, brought forth Ulysses: Bed, and all
That richly furnished it; he still in thrall
Of all-subduing sleep. Upon the sand
They set him softly down; and then, the Strand
They strewn with all the goods he had, bestowed
By the renowned Phaeacians; sinc^ he showed
So much Minerua. At the Olive root
They drew them then in heap, most far from foot
Of any Trauailer: least, ere his eyes
Resumed their charge, they might be others prize.
These, then turned home: nor was the seas supreme
Forgetful of his threats, for Polypheme
Bent at divine Ulysses: yet would prove
(Ere their performance) the decree of Jove*
Father! Neptune to Jupiter.
No more the Gods shall honor me,
Since men despise me; and those men that see
The The Phaeacians were descended Originally from Neptune.
Light, in Lineage of mine own loved race.
I vowed Ulysses, should before the grace
Of his return, encounter woes enough
To make that purchase dear: yet, did not vow
Simply against it, since thy Brow had bent
To his reduction; in the fore-consent
Thou had vouchsaf't it: yet before, my mind
Has full power on him; the Phaeacians find
Their own minds satisfaction, with his Pass:
So far from suffering, what my pleasure was;
That ease, and softness, now is habited
In his secure breast: and his careless head,
Returned in peace of sleep to Ithaca.
The Brass and Gold of rich Phaeacia
Rocking his Temples. Garments richly wouen;
And worlds of Prize more, then was ever strouen
From all the conflicts he sustained at Troy,
If safe, he should his full share there, enjoy.
The Showre-dissoluer answered: Jupiter to Neptun^.
What a speech
Has past thy Palate, O thou great in Reach
Of wrackfull Empire? Far the Gods remain
From scorn of thee: For, 'twere a work of pain
To prosecute, with ignonimies, One
That swaies our ablest, and most ancient Throne.
For men; If any so beneath in power,
Neglect thy high will: now, or any hour
That moves hereafter; take revenge to the^;
Soothe all thy will, and be thy pleasure free.
Why then (said he) thou blacker of the fumes
That dim the Sun; Neptune to Jupiter.
my licenst power resumes
Act from thy speech: but I observe so much,
And fear thy pleasure, that I dare not touch
At any inclination of mine own,
Till thy consenting influence be kno^ne.
But now; this curious-built Ph^aci^^ Ship,
Returning from her Conuoy, I will strip
Of all her fleeting matter; and to stone
Transform and fix it (just when she has gone
Her full time home; and iets before their (...)
In all her trim) amids the Sable Seas.
That they may cease to conuoy strangers still,
When they shall see, so like a mighty Hill
Their glory stick before their Cities grace,
And my (...). Superinijcio aliquid, tanquam tegmen seu operi^entum.
hands cast a mask before her face.
O friend, (said Jove) it shows to me the best
Of al earths objects; that their whole prease* dressed
In all their wonder; near their Town shall stand
And stare upon a Stone, so ne^re the Land,
So like a Ship, and dam up all their lights,
As if a Mountain interposde their sights.
When Neptune heard this, he for Scheri^ went,
Whence the Phaeacians took their first descent.
Which when he reached, and in her swiftest pride,
The water-treader, by the Cities side
Came cutting close; close he came swiftly on;
Took her in violent hand, and to a Stone
Turned all her syluane substance* All below,
Firmd her with Roots, and left her. This strange show
When the Phaeacians saw, they stupid stood,
And asked each other, who amids the flood
Could fix their Ship so, in her full speed home?
And quite transparant, make her bulk become?
Thus talked they; but were far from knowing how
These things had issue. Alcinous tells his people how the Ship became a Stone.
Which their King did show,
And said; O friends, the ancient Prophesies
My Father told to me, to all our eyes
Are now in proof: he said, the time would come,
When Neptune, for our safe conducting home
All sorts of Strangers (out of envy fired)
Would meet our fairest Ship as she retired;
And all the goodly Shape, and speed we bost,
Should like a Mountain stand before us lost,
Amids the moving waters; which we see
Performed in full end to our prophecy.
Hear then my counsel, and obey me then:
Renounce henceforth our conuoy home of men;
Who ever shall hereafter gree^e our Town.
And to the offended Deities Renown;
Twelve chosen Oxen let us sacred make,
That he may pity us: and from us take
This shady Mountain. They, in fear, obaide;
Slew all the Beeues, and to the Godhead praide:
The Dukes and Princes, all ensphearing round
The sacred Altar. While whose Tops were croun'd,
Divine Ulysses (on his Countries breast
Laid bound in sleep) now rose out of his rest:
Nor (being so long removed) the Region knew.
(Besides which absence ye^) (...) threw
A cloud about him; to make strange the more
His safe arrival: lest, upon his Shore
He should make known his face, and utter all
That might prevent, the event that was to fall.
Which she prepared so well, that not his wife
(Presented to him) should perceive his life:
No Citizen, no Friend; till righteous Fate
Upon the vvooers wrongs, (...).
Through which cloud, all things s^ow'd now to the King
Of foreign fashion. The (...) Spring*
Amongst the Trees there. The perpetual waves;
The Rocks, that did more high their foreheads raise
To his Rapt eye, then naturally they did:
And all the Haven, in which a man seemed hid
From wind, and weather, when storms loudest chid.
He therefore, being risen, stood and viewd
His country earth: which (not per^eiu'd) he rew'd:
And, striking with his hurld* down hands his Thyes,
He mourned, and said: O me! Again where lies
My desert way? To wrongful men, and rude?
And with no Laws of humane right indu'de?
Or are they humane, and of holy minds?
What fits my deed with these so many kinds
Of goods late given? What, with my self, will ^^oods
And Errors do? I would to God, these Goods
Had rested with their Owners: and that I
Had fallen on Kings of more Regality,
To grace out my return; that loved indeed,
And would have given me Consorts of fit speed
To my distresses ending! But, as now
All knowledge flies me, where I may bestow
My labored purchase. Here they shall not stay,
Lest what I cared for, others make their prey.
O Gods! I see, the great Phaeaci^^s then
Were not all just, and understanding men;
That land me elsewhere then their vants pretended:
Assuring me, my country should see ended
My miseries told them: yet now, eat their vants.
O Jove! great Guardian of poor Supplian^s,
That others sees, and notes too; shutting in
All in thy plagues, that most presume on Sin,
Revenge me on them. Let me number now
The goods they gave, to give my mind to know
If they have stolen none, in their close retreat.
The goodly Caldrons then, and Tripods (set
In several ranks from out the heap) he told.
His rich wrought garments too, and all his Gold:
And nothing lack't; and yet this Man did mourn,
The but supposd miss of his home return.
And, creeping to the shore, with much complaint;
Minerua, Minerua like a Shepherd (such as Kings sons used at those times to
be) appear^ to V^ysses.
(like a Shepherd, young, and quaint,
As King sons are: a double Mantle cast
A' thwart his Shoulders, his fair goers g^ac'st
With fitted shoes; and in his hand, a Dart)
Appeared to him, whose sight reioy^'^ his heart.
To whom he came, and said: O Friend? Since first
I meet your sight here: Be all good, the worst
That can join our encounter: Fare you Fair;
Nor with adverse mind, welcome my repair:
But guard these goods of mine, and succor me.
As to a God, I offer prayers to thee,
And low access make, to thy loved knee.
Say truth, that I may know, what country then?
What commune people live here? And what men?
Some famous Isle is this? Or gives it vent
(Being near the Sea) to some rich Continent?
She answered; Pallas to Ulysses.
Stranger, what so ere you are;
You Are either foolish, or come passing far,
That know not this Isle, and make that doubt, troble;
For it is not so exceedingly ignoble,
But passing many know it: and so many,
That, of all Nations, there abides not any,
From where the Morning rises, and the Sun;
To where the Even, and Night their courses run,
But know this country. Rocky it is, and rough;
And so, for use of horse unapt enough:
Yet, with (...), 1. Velut tri^tis, Ie^una^j, natura.
sad Barrenness not much infested,
Since clouds are here in frequent raines digested,
And flowery dewes. The compass is not great;
The little yet, well filled with wine, and wheat.
It feeds a Goat, and Ox well; being still
Watered with floods, that ever ouer-fill
With heavens continual showers: and woodded so,
It makes a Spring of all the kinds that grow.
And therefore, Stranger, the extended name
Of this Dominion, makes access by Fame,
From this extreme part of Achaia,
As far as Ilion; and it is Ithaca.
This joyed him much, that so unknown a Land,
Turned to his country. Yet so wise a hand
He carried, even of this joy, flowne so hye,
That other end he put to his reply,
Then straight to show that joy, and lay abroad
His life to Strangers. Therefore, he bestowd
A veil on Truth: For evermore did wind
About his bosom, a most crafty mind,
Which thus his words showed. Ulysses to Pall^s.
I have far at Sea,
In spacious Crete, heard speak of Ithaca;
Of which, my self (it seems) now reach the shore,
With these my Fortunes; whose whole value more
I left in Crete amongst my children there;
From whence I fly, for being the slaughter^^
Of royal Idomens most loved Son*
Swift-foote Orsilochus, that could outrun
Professed men for the race. Yet him I slew,
Because he would deprive me of my* due
In Trojan prize: for which, I suffered so
(The rude waves piercing) the redoubled woe
Of mind and body, in the wars of men:
Nor did I gratify his Father then
With any service; But, as well as he,
Swayed in command of other Soldiery.
So, with a friend withdrawn, we way-laide him,
When gloomy Night, the cope of heaven did dim,
And no man knew. But we (lodged close) he came,
And I put out, to him, his vital flame.
Whose slaughter, having author'd with my sword,
I instant flight made; and straight fell aboard
A Ship of the renowned Phoenician State;
When prayer, and pay, at a sufficient rate
Obtained my Pass, of men in her command:
Whom I inioyn'd to set me on the land
Of Pylos, or of Elis, the divine,
Where the Epeyans in great Empire shine.
But force of weather checked that course to them,
Though (loath to fail me) to their most extreme
They spent their willing powers. But, forced from thence,
We erred, and put in here, with much expense
Of Care and Labor: and in dead of Night,
When no man there, served any appetite,
So much as with the Memory of food,
Though our estates exceeding Needy stood.
But, going ashore, we lay; when gentle sleep
My weary powers invaded: and from Ship,
They fetching these my Riches, with just hand
About me laid them: while upon the sand
Sleep bound my senses; and for Sydon, they
(Put off from hence) made sail: while here I lay,
Left sad alone. The Goddess laughed, and took
His hand in hers; and with another look,
(Assuming then the likeness of a (...),
Lovely and goodly, expert in the frame
Of virtuous Huswiferies) she answered thus.
He should be passing sly, Pallas to Ulysses.
and covetous
(...) furandi auid^s.
Of stealth, in men's deceits, that coted thee,
In any craft; though any God should be
Ambitious to exceed in subtilty.
(...). varia and multiplicia habens consilia.
Thou still-wit-varying wretch! Insatiate
In ouer-reaches: Not secure thy state
Without these wiles? Though on thy Native shore
Thou setst safe footing? But upon thy store
Of false words, still spend? That even from thy birth
Have been thy best friends? Come: our either worth
Is known to either: Thou, of Men, art far
(For words and counsels) the most singular;
But I, above the Gods, in both, may bost
My still-tried Faculties. Yet thou have lost
The knowledge even of me: the seed of Io^e,
Pallas Athenia; that have still out-stroue
In all thy Labors, their extremes; and stood
Thy sure guard ever: making all thy good,
Known to the good phaeaci^^s, and received.
And now again, I gr^ete thee, to see weau'd
Fresh Counsels for thee: and will take on me
The close reserving of these goods for thee,
Which the renowned phaeacian States bestowed
At thy deduction homewards; Only moved
With my, both spirit and counsel. All which grace
I now will amplify, and tell what case
Thy household stands in; uttering all those pains,
That, of mere need, yet still must rack thy veins;
Do thou then freely bear; Nor one word give
To Man nor Dame, to show thou yet do live:
But silent, suffer over all again
Thy sorrows past; and bear the wrongs of Men.
Goddess (said he) unjust men, and unwise, (...)

That author injuries, and vanities;
By vanities and wrongs, should rather be
Bound to this ill-abearing destiny,
Then just, and wise men. What delight has heaven,
That lives unhurt it self, to suffer given
Up to all damage, those poor few that strive
To imitate it? and like the Deities live?
But where you wonder, that I know you not
Through all your changes; that skill is not got
By sleigh^ or Art: since thy most hard-hit face,
Is still distinguished by thy free-giuen grace.
And therefore truly to acknowledge thee
In thy encounters, is a maistery
In men most knowing. For to all men, thou
Take several likeness. All men think they know
Thee in their wits. But, since thy seeming view
Appears to all; and yet thy truth, to few:
Through all thy changes, to discern thee right,
Asks chief Love to thee; and inspired light.
But this, I surely know; that some years past,
I have been often with thy presence grac'st,
All time the sons of Greece waged war at Tr^y:
But when Fates full hour, let our swords enjoy
Our vows, in sack of (...) lo^ty Town:
Our Ships all boorded; and when God had blown
Our Fleet in sunder, I could never see
The seed of Io^e; Nor once distinguish thee
Boording my Ship, to take one woe from me.
But only in my proper spirit in^olu'd,
Erred, here and there quite slain; til heaven dissolved
Me, and my ill: which chanced not, ^ill thy grace
By open speech confirmed me; in a place
Fruitful of people: where, in person, thou
Did give me guide, and all their City show;
And that was the renowned (...) earth.
Now then; even by the author of thy Birth,
Vouchsafe my doubt the Truth (for far it flies
My thoughts; that thus should fall into mine eyes
Conspicuous Ithaca: but fear I touch
At some far Shore; and that thy wit is such,
Thou do delude me) Is it sure the same
Most honored earth, that bears my countries name?
I see (said she) thou will be ever thus,
In every worldly good, incredulous.
And therefore, have no more the power, to see
Frail life more plagued with infelicity;
In one so eloquent, ingenious wise.
Another man, that so long miseries
Had kept from his loved home; and thus returned
To see his house, wife, children; would have burned
In headlong lust to visit. Yet t'enquire,
What states they hold, affects not thy desire,
Till thou have tried: If in thy wife, there be
A Sorrow, wasting days, and nights for thee,
In Loving tears: That then the sight may prove
A full reward, for eithers mutual Love.
But I would never, credit in you both
Least cause of sorrow; but well knew, the troth
Of this thine own return: though all thy Friends,
I knew, as well, should make returnlesse ends.
Yet would not cross mine Uncle Neptune so
To stand their safeguard; since so high did go
His wrath, for thy extinction of the eye
Of his loved son. Come then, I Will show thee why
I call this Isle, thy Ithaca; To ground
Thy credit on my words: this haven is owned
By th'aged Sea god phor^ys: in whose Brow,
This is the Olive with the ample bow;
And here close by, the pleasant-shaded Cave,
That to the Fount-Nymphs, the (...) gave
As Sacred to their pleasures. Here does run
The large, and covered den, where thou have done
Hundreds of Offerings to the (...).
Here, Mount Nerytus shakes his cur^^d Tresse
Of shady woods. This said, she cleared the clowd
That first deceyu'd his eyes; and all things showed
His country to him. Glad he stood with sight
Of his loved Soil; and kissed it, with delight.
And instantly, to all the Nymphs he paid
(With hands held up to heaven) these vows* and said.
Ye Nymphs the Naiades, great seed of Jove:
I had conceit, that never more should move
Your sight, in these spheres of my erring eyes;
And therefore, in the fuller Sacrifice
Of my hearts gratitude; Rejoice, till more
I pay your Names, in Offerings, as before.
Which here I vow; if Io^es benign descent
(The mighty Pillager) with life convent
My person home; and to my saved decease,
Of my loved sons sight, add the sweet increase.
Be confident (said Pallas) nor oppress
Thy spirits with care of these performances;
But these thy fortunes, let us straight repose
In this divine Caves besome, that may close
Reserve their value; and we then may see
How best to order other acts to thee.
Thus entered she the light-excluding Cave;
And through it, sought some inmost nooke to save
The Gold, the great Brass, and robes richly wrought,
Given to Ulysses. All which, in he brought;
Laid down in heap; and she imposed a stone
Close to the cauernes mouth. Then sat they on
The sacred Olives root, consulting how
To act the insulting wooers overthrow.
When Pallas said; Examine now the means
That best may lay hand on the impudence
Of those proud wooers: that have now three years
Thy Roofes rule swai'd; and been bold Offerers
Of suite, and gifts, to thy renowned wife;
Who for thy absence, all her desolate life,
Dissolues in tears till thy desired return.
Yet all her wooers, while she thus does mourn
She holds in hope; and every one affords
(In fore-sent message) promise. But her words
Bear other utterance then her heart approues.
O Gods (said Ithacus) it now behoues
My Fate to end me, in the ill deceasse
That Agamemnon underwent, unless
You tell me, and in time, their close intents.
Advise then means, to the revenged events
We both resolve on. Be thy self so kind
To stand close to me; and but such a mind
Breath in my bosom, as when the Ilio^ Towers
We tore in Cinders. O if equal powers
Thou would inflame, amids my Nerves as then,
I could encounter with three hundred men:
Thy only self (great Goddess) had to friend,
In those brave ardors thou were wont t'extend.
I will be strongly with thee, (answered she)
Nor must thou fail, but do thy part with me.
When both whose powers co^bine, I hope the bloods
And brains of some of these that waste thy goods
Shall strew thy goodly Pauements. Join we then:
I first will render thee unknown to men.
And on thy solid Lineaments, make dry
Thy now smooth skin. Thy bright-brown curles imply
In hoary mattings: thy broad shoulders cloth
In such a cloak, as every eye shall loath.
Thy bright eyes, bleare and wrinkle: and so change
Thy form at all parts, that thou shall be strange
To all the VVooers; thy young son, and wife.
But, to thy Herdsman first present thy life;
That guards thy Swine, and wishes well to thee;
That loves thy son, and wife (...).
Thy search shall find him, set aside his Heard,
That are with tast-delighting Aco^nes reared:
And drink the darke-deepe water of the Spring
Bright Arethusa; the most nourishing
Raiser of Herds. There stay, and (taking seat
Aside thy Heardsman) of the whole State, treat
Of home occurrents; while I make access
To faire-dame-breeding Sparta: (...)
for regresse
Of loved Telemachus: who went in quest
Of thy loved fame; and l^u'd the welcome Guest
Of Menelaus. The much-knower said:
Why would not thou (in whose grave breast is bred
The Art to order all acts) tell in this
His error to him? Let those years of his
Amids the rude seas wander, and sustain
The woes there raging? while unworthy men
Devour his fortunes? Let not care extend
Thy heart for him (said she) my self did send
His person in thy search, to set his worth
(By good fame blown) to such a distance fo^th.
Nor suffers he, in any least degree
The grief you fear: but all variety
That Plenty can yield, in her quie^st fa^e,
In Menelaus Court, does sit and share.
In whose return from home, the VVoo^rs yet
Lay bloody ambush; and a Ship have set
To Sea, to intercept his life before
He touch again his births attempted shore.
All which, my thoughts say, they shall never do,
But rather, that the earth shall ouergo
Some one at least, of these Loue-making men;
By which thy goods, so much empaire sustain.
Thus using certain secret words to him,
She touched him with her rod; and every lim
Was hid all over with a withered skin:
His bright eyes, blear'd; his brow curles, white and thin;
And all things did an aged man present.
Then (for his own weeds) Shirt and coa^, all rent;
Tanned, and all sootied, with noisome smoke,
She put him on; and over all, a cloak
Made of a Stags huge hide: of which was worn
The hair quite off. A Scrip all patcht and torn,
Hung by a cord, often broke, and knit again,
And with a staff did his old limbs sustain.
Thus having both consulted of the event,
They parted both: and forth to Sparta went
The gray-ey'd Goddess, to see all things done
That appertained to wise Ulysses son.
The End of the Thirteenth Book of Homers Odysses.
THE FOVRTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses meets amids the Field
His Swain Eumaeus; who does yield
Kind Guest-rites to him; and relate
Occurrents of his wronged estate.
Another.
(...)
Ulysses faines,
for his true Good:
His pious Swains
faith understood.

But he, the rough way took from forth the Port,
Through woods, and hill tops, seeking the resort
Where Pallas said, divine Eumaeus lived:
Who, of the fortunes that were first atchieu'd
By God-like Ithac^^, in household rights,
Had more true care, then all his (...), materiae adhaerens: Item, qui rebus
Mundani^ deditus est.
Prosylites.
He found him sitting in his Cottage door;
Where he had raised to every ayry Blore,
A Front of great height; and in such a place,
That round ye might behold: of circular grace
A walk so wound about it: which the Swain
(In absence of his farre-gone Sovereign)
Had built himself, without his Queens supply,
Or old Laertes; to see safely lie
His housed herd. The inner part, he wrought
Of stones, that thither his own labors brought;
Which with an hedge of Thorn he fenc't about,
And compast all the hedge, with pales cleft out
Of sable Oak; that here and there he fixed
Frequent and thick. Within his yard, he mixed
Twelve Sties to lodge his Heard; and every Sty
Had room and use, for fifty Swine to lie.
But those were females all. The male Swine slept
Without doors ever. Nor was their Herd kept
Fair like the Females, since they suffered still
Great diminution: he being forced to kill
And send the fattest to the dainty Feasts,
Affected by th'vngodly wooing guests.
Their number therefore, but three hundred were,
And sixty: By them, Mastiues as austere
As savage beasts, lay ever. Their fierce strain
Bred by the Herdsman; a mere Prince of Men:
Their number, four. Himself was then appli'de
In cutting forth a fair hewed Oxes hide,
To fit his feet with shoes. His servants held
Guard of his Swine. Three, here and there, at field;
The fourth, he sent to City with a Sow,
Which must of force be offered to the Vow,
The VVoowers made to all saciety:
To serve which, still they did those Offerings ply. (...) Ad latrandu^ fato
quodam Na^us.

The Fate-borne-Dogs-to-Barke, took sudden view
Of Odyss^eus; and upon him flew
With open mouth. He (cunning, to appall
A fierce Dogs fury) from his hand let fall
His staff to earth; and sat him careless down.
And yet to him had one foul wrong been shown
Where most his Right lay; had not instantly
The Herdsman let his hide fall; and his cry
(With frequent stones, flung at the dogs) repeld
This way, and that, their eager course they held:
When through the entry past, he thus did mourn.
O Father! Howsoone, Eumaeus to Ulysses.
had you near been torn
By these rude Dogs? whose hurt had branded me
With much neglect of you? But Deity
Has given so many other sighs, and cares
To my attendant state: that well unawares
You might be hurt for me: for here I lie
Grieuing and mourning for the Majesty
That God-like wonted to be ruling here;
Since now, I fat his Swine, for others cheer:
Where he, perhaps, err's hungry up and down,
In Countries, Nations, Cities, all unknown.
If any where he lives yet; and does see
The Suns sweet beams. But (Father) follow me,
That (cheered with wine and food) you may disclose
From whence you truly are; and all the woes
Your age is subject to. This said, he led
Into his Cottage; and of Osiers, spread
A thickened hurdle; on whose top, he strow'd
A wild Goats shaggy skin; and then bestowed
His own Couch on it, that was soft and great.
Ulysses joyed, to see him so entreat
His uncouth Presence; saying, Io^e requite,
And all the immortal Gods, with that delight
Thou most defir'st, thy kind receite of me;
O Friend, to humane Hospitality.
Eum^eus answered: Guest? If one much wurse
Arrived here then thy self; it were a curse
To my poor means, to let a Stranger taste
Contempt, for fit food. Poor men, and vnplac'st
In free seats of their own; are all from Jove
Commended to our entertaining Love.
But poor is th'entertainment I can give;
Yet free, and loving. Of such men as live
The lives of servants, and are still in fear
Where young Lords govern; this is all the cheer
They can afford a Stranger. There was One
That used to manage, this now desert Throne:
To whom the Gods deny return; that showed
His curious favor to me, and bestowed
Possessions on me: A most wished wife,
A house, and portion; and a Servants life,
^it for the gift a gracious King should give:
Who still took pains himself; and God made thrive
His personal endeavor: and to me,
His work the more increast; in which you see
I now am conversant. And therefore much
His hand had helped me, had heavens will been such,
He might have here grown old. But he is gone,
And would to God the whole succession
Of Hellen might go with him; since for her
So many men di^de: whose Fate did confer
My Liege to Troy, in Ag^mem^o^s grace;
To spoil her People, and her Turrets race.
This said, his coat to him, he straight did gird;
And to his Sties went, that contained his Herd.
From whence, he took out two, slew both, and ^ut
Both fairly up. A fire enflamed, and put
To spit the joints; which roasted well, he set
With spit and all to him, that he might eat
From thence his food, in all the sindging heat.
Yet dreg'd it first with Flower: Then filled his Cup
With good sweet wine; Sat then, and cheard him up.
Eat now (my guest) such lean Swine, as are meat
For us poor Swains: The fat, the wooers eat.
In whose minds, no shame, no remorse does move:
Though well they know, the blessed Gods do not love
Ungodly actions; but respect the right,
And in the works of pious men, delight.
But these are worse then impious; for those
That vow t'iniustice, and profess them foes
To other Nations, enter on their Land;
And Jupiter (to show his punishing hand
Upon th'inuaded, for their penance then)
Gives favor to their foes (though wicked men)
To make their prey on them; who, having freight
Their ships with spoil enough, weigh ancor straight;
And each man to his house; (and yet even these,
Does powrefull fear, of Gods just vengeance seize
Even for that prize, in which they so rejoice)
But these men, knowing (having heard the voice
Of God, by some means) that sad Death has reft
The Ruler here; will never suffer left
Their unjust wooing of his wife, not take
Her often answer: and their own Roofes make
Their fit retreats: But (since vncheck't, they may)
They therefore will, make still his goods their pray,
Without all spare, or end. There is no day,
Nor night sent out from God, that ever they
Profane with one beasts blood, or only two,
But more make spoil of: and the wrongs they do
In meats excess; to Wine as well extend;
Which as excessiuely, their ryots spend:
Yet still leave store. For sure his means were great;
And no Hero, that has choicest seat
Upon the fruitful neighbor Continent;
Or in this Isle it self, so opulent
Was, as Ulysses: No, nor twenty such
Put altogether, did possess so much.
Whose Herds and Flocks I Will tell to every Head: Ulysses Wealth.

Upon the Continent, he daily fed
Twelve Herds of O^en; No less, Flocks of Sheep;
As many Herds of Swine. Stals, large and steep,
And equal sort of Goats: which Tenants there,
And his own Sheepherds kept. Then fed he here,
Eleven fair stalles of Goats; whose food has yeilde
In the extreme part of a neighbor Field.
Each Stall, his Herdsman has: An honest Swain,
Yet every one, must every day sustain
The load of one Beast, (the most fat, and best
Of all the Stall-fed) to the VVoers Feast.
And I (for my part) of the Swine I keep
(With four more Herdsmen) every day, help steep
The VVooers appetites, in blood of one,
The most select, our choice can fall upon.
To this; Ulysses gave good ear, Ulysses incen^t against the wooers, with
news of their spoil.
and fed;
And drunk his wine; and vexed; and ravished
His food for mere vexation. Seeds of ill
His Stomach sowed, to hear his goods go still
To glut of wooers. But his dinner done,
And Stomach fed to satisfaction:
He drunk a full Bowl, all of only wine,
And gave it to the Guardian of his Swine:
Who took it, and reioyc't. To whom he said;
O Friend, who is it that (so rich) has paid
Price for thy service? Whose commended power,
Thou say (to grace the Grecian Conqueror)
At Ilion perished? Tell me; it may fall
I knew some such. The great God knows, and all
The other deathlesse Godheads: if I can
(Far having trauail'd) tell of such a man.
Eumaeus answered: Father, never one
Of all the Strangers that have touched upon
This Coast with his life's News, could ever yet
Of Queen, or loved son, any credit get.
These Trauailers for clothes, or for a meal;
At all adventures, any lie will tell.
Nor do they trade for truth: not any man
That saw the people I^hacensian,
Of all their sort; and had the Queens supplies,
Did ever tell her any news, but lies.
She graciously receives them yet; enquires
Of all she can: and all, in tears expires.
It is th'accustom'd Law, that women keep,
Their husbands, elsewhere dead, at home to weep.
But do thou, quickly Father, forge a Tale;
Some Coat, or cloak, to keep thee warm withal,
Perhaps some one may yield thee: But for him,
Vultures and Dogs, have torn from every lim
His porous skin; and forth his soul is fled:
His coarse at Sea, to Fishes forfeited:
Or on the Shore, lies hid in heaps of sand;
And there has he his ebb: his Native Strand
With friends tears flowing. But to me, past all
Were tears created: For I never shall
Find so humane a royal Master more;
What ever Sea, I seek; what ever Shore.
Nay, to my Father, or my Mothers love
Should I return; by whom, I breath and move,
Could I so much joy offer; nor these eyes
(Though my desires sustain extremities
For their sad absence) would so feign be blessed
With sight of their lives, in my native Nest,
As with Ulysses dead: in whose last rest,
(O friend) my soul shall love him. He Is not here,
Nor do I name him like a Flatterer.
But as one thankful for his Love and care
To me a poor man; in the rich so rare.
And be he past all shores, where Sun can shine,
I will inuoke him as a soul divine.
O Friend (said he) to say, and to believe
He cannot live, does too much license give
To incredulity. For (not to speak
At needy randon; but my breath to break
In sacred Oath) Ulysses shall return.
And when his sight recomforts those that mourn,
In his own roofes; then give me cloak, and cote,
And garments worthy of a man of note.
Before which, though need urged me never so,
I Will not receive a thread, but naked go.
No less I hate him then the gates of hell,
That poorness can force, an untruth to tell.
Let Jove then (heavens chief God) just witness bear,
And this thy hospitable Table here;
Together with vnblam'd Ulysses house,
In which I find receipt so gracious;
What I affirmed of him shall all be true.
This instant year, thine eyes even here shall view
Thy Lord Ulysses. Nay, ere this months end
(Returned full home) he shall revenge extend
To every one, whose ever deed has done
VVrong to his wife, and his illustrous Son.
O Father (he replied) i will neither give
Thy news reward; nor does Ulysses live.
But come; enough of this; let us drink and eat,
And never more his memory repeat.
It greeues my heart to be remembered thus
By any one, of one so glorious.
But stand your oath, in your assertion strong,
And let Ulysses come, for whom I long:
For whom his wife; for whom his aged Sire;
For whom his Son, consumes his God-like fire;
Whose chance I now must mourn, and ever shall.
Whom when the Gods had brought to be as tall
As any upright plant: and I had said,
He would amongst a Court of men have swaide
In counsels; and for form, have been admired
Even with his Father: some God misinspir'd,
Or man took from him, his own equal mind;
And past him for the Pylia^ Shore, to find
His long-lost Father. In return from whence,
The Wooers pride, way-layes his innocence;
That, of divine Arcesius, all the race
May fade to Ithaca, and not the grace
Of any Name, left to it. But leave we
His state, howeuer: if surpised he be,
Or if he escape. And may Saturnius hand
Protect him safely to his native Land.
Do you then (Father) show your griefs, and cause
Of your arrival here; nor break the Laws
That Truth prescribes you: but relate your name,
And of what race you are: your Fathers ^ame,
And native Cities: Ship and men unfold,
That to this Isle conuaid you: since I hold
Your here arrival, was not all by shore;
Nor that your feet, your aged person bore.
He answered him; I Will tell all strictly true,
I^ time, and food, and wine enough acrue
Within your roose to us: that freely we
May sit and banquet: Let your business be
Discharged by others. For, when all is done,
I can not easly, while the year does run
His circle round, run over all the woes,
Beneath which (by the course the Gods dispose)
My sad age labors. First, I Will tell you then;
From ample Crete I fetch my Native strain;
My Father wealthy: whose house, many a life
Brought forth and bred besides, by his true wife.
But me; a Bond-maid bore; his Concubine:
Yet tendered was I, as his lawful line
By him; of whose race, I my life profes.
Castor, his name; surnamed Hyl^cides.
A man, in fore-times, by the Cre^an State,
For goods, good children, and his fortunate
Success in all acts; of no mean esteem.
But death-conferring Fates, have banished him
To Pluto's kingdom. After whom, his sons
By Lots divided his possessions;
And gave me passing little; yet bestowed
A house on me: to which, my virtues wooed
A wife from rich men's roofes; nor was borne low,
Nor last in fight, though all Ne^ues fail me now.
But I suppose, that you by thus much seen,
Know by the stubble, what the Corn has been.
For, past all doubt; affliction past all mean
Has brought my age on: but, in seasons past,
Both Mars and Pallas, have with boldness grac'st;
And Fortitude my fortunes; when I chus'd
Choice men for ambush, pressed to have produced
Ill to mine enemies; my too ventrous spirit,
Set never death before mine eyes, for merit.
But (far the first advanced still) still I stroo^^
Dead with my Lance, whoeuer ouertooke
My speed of foot. Such was I then for war.
But rusticke actions, ever fled me far,
And household thrift, which breeds a famous race.
In Ore-driuen Ships, did I my pleasures place:
In Battles, light Darts, Arrows. Sad things all,
And into others thoughts, with horror fall.
But what God put into my mind: to me
I still esteemed as my felicity.
As men, of several Metals are addressed;
So, several forms are in their souls impressed.
Before the sons of Greece, set foot in Troy,
Nine times, in Chief, I did Command enjoy
Of Men and Ships, against our foreign foe;
And all I fitly wished, succeeded so.
Yet, after this, I much exploit atchieu'd;
When straight, my house in all possessions thriu'd.
Yet after that, I great, and Reverend grew
Amongst the Cretans: till the Thunderer drew
Our Forces out, in his foe- Tray decrees.
A hateful service, that dissolved the knees
Of many a Soldier. And to this was I
And famous Idomene, enioyn'd t'apply
Our ships and powrs. Nor was there to be heard
One reason for denial; so preferred
Was the unreasonable peoples rumor.
Nine years we therefore fed the martial humor;
And in the tenth (de-peopling (...) Town)
We sailed for home. But God had quickly blown
Our Fleet in pieces; and to w^^tched me,
The Counsailor Io^e, did much mishap decree.
For, only one month, I had leave t'enioy
My wife, and children; and my goods t'employ.
But, after this, my mind for (...) stood;
When nine fair ships, I rig'd forth for the flood:
Manned them with noble ^ouldiers: all things fit
For such a voyage, soon were won to it.
Yet six days after, staid my friends in feast;
While I, in banquets to the Gods, addressed
Much sacred matter for their sacrifice.
The seventh, we boorded; and the Northern skies
Lent us a frank, and passing prosperous gale,
Fore which, we bore as free and easy ^aile,
As we had backed a full and frolic tide;
Nor felt one Ship misfortune for her pride;
But safe we sat, our Sailors and the wind
Consenting in our conuoy. When heaven shin'de
In sacred radiance of the fifth fair day:
To sweetly-water'd Egypt reached our way,
And there we anchored: where I charged my men
To stay aboard, and watch. Dismissing then
Some scouts, to get the hill-tops, and discover,
They (to their own intemperance given over)
Straight fell to forage the rich fields; and thence
Enforce both wives and infants, with the expense
Of both their bloods. When straight the rumor flew
Up to the City: (which heard) up they drew
By days first break; and all the field was filled
With foot and horse; whose Arms did all things gild.
And then the Lightning-louing Deity, cast
A foul flight on my soldiers: nor stood fast
One man* of all. About whom Mischief stood,
And with his stern steel, drew in streams the blood,
The greater part ^ed in their dissolute veins:
The rest were saved, and made enthralled Swains,
To all the basest vsages there bred.
And then, even Io^e himself supplied my head*
With saving counsel; (though I wished to dye,
And there in Egypt, with their slaughters lie,
So much grief seized me) but I^^e made me yield;
Dishelme my head, take from my neck, my shield:
Hurl from my hand my Lance, and to the troop
Of horse, the King led, instantly made up;
Embrac^ and kiss his knees; whom pity wun
To give me safety, and (to make me shun
The peoples outrage, that made in amain,
All jointly fired, with thirst to see me slain)
He took me to his Chariot, weeping home;
Himself with fear of Io^es wrath overcome,
Who yielding souls receives; and takes most ill
All such as well may save, yet love to kill.
Seven years I soiourn'd here, and treasure gat
In good abundance of The Egyptian state:
For all would give. But when the eighth year began:
A knowing Fellow (that would gnaw a man
Like to a Vermin, (...).
with his hellish brain,
And many an honest soul, even quick had slain;
Whose name was Phoenix) close accosted me:
And with insinuations, such as he
Practiced on others, my consent he gained
To go into Phoenicia; where remained
His house, and living. And with him I lived*
A complete year. But, when were all arrived
The months and days: and that the year again
Was turning round; and every seasons reign
Renewed upon us; we for Lybia went:
When (still inuenting crafts to circumuent)
He made pretext, that I should only go
And help convey his freight; but thought not so:
For his intent was, to have sold me there,
And made good gain, for finding me a year.
Yet him I followed, though suspecting this:
For, being aboard his Ship, I must be his
Of strong Necessity. She ran the flood
(Driven with a Northern gale, right free, and good)
Amids the full stream, full on Crete. But then,
Jove plotted death to him, and all his men.
For (put off quite from Crete, and so far gone
That Shore was lost; and we set eye on none:
But all showed heaven and sea) above our Keele
Jove pointed right, a cloud as black as hell:
Beneath which, all the sea hid; and from whence
Jove thundered, as his hand would never thence.
And thick into our Ship, he threw his flash:
That'gainst a Rock, (...), qui terr^m rapido motu concu^it.
or Flat, her Keele did dash
With headlong Rapture. Of the sulphur all
Her bulk did savor; and her men let fall
Amids the Surges: on which, all lay tossed
Like Sea-guls, round about her sides, and lost.
And So, God took, all home-returne from them.
But Jove himself (though plunged in that extreme)
Recouer'd me, by thrusting on my hand
The Ships long Mast. And (that my life might stand
A little more up) I embraced it round;
And on the rude winds, that did ruins sound,
Nine days we houer'd. In the tenth black night
A huge Sea cast me on Thesprotia's height:
Where the Hero Phidon, that was chief
Of all the Thesprotes; gave my wrack relief,
Without the price of that redemption
That Phoenix fish't for. (...), sine emption^^seu redemp^^onis precio
Where the Kings loved son
Came to me; took me by the hand, and led
Into his Court; my poor life surffetted
With cold and labor: and because my wrack
Chanced on his Fathers Shore: he let not lack
My plight; or coat, or cloak, or any thing
Might cherish heat in me. And here the King,
Said, he received Ulysses as his Guest;
Observed him Friend-like; and his course addressed
Home to his country: showing there to me
Ulysses goods. A very Treasury
Of Brass, and Gold, and Steel of curious frame.
And to the tenth succession of his name
He laid up wealth enough, to serve beside
In that Kings house; so hugely amplified
His treasure was. But from his Court, the King
Affirmed him ship't, for the Dodonean Spring:
To hear, from out the high-hair'd Oak of Jove,
Counsel from him: for means to his remove
To his loved country, whence so many a year
He had been absent; If he should appear
Disguisd, or manifest: and further swore
In his mid Court, at Sacrifice, before
These very eyes; that he had ready there
Both Ship and Soldiers, to attend and bear
Him to his country. But before; it chanced
That a Thesprotean Ship, was to be lanch't
For the much-corne-renown'd Dulichian Land:
In which, the King gave to his men command
To take, and bring me under tender hand
To King Acastus. But, in ill design
Of my poor life, did their desires combine;
So far forth, as might ever keep me under
In fortunes hands, and tear my state in sunder.
And when the water-treader, far away
Had left the Land: then plotted they the day
Of my long ^eruitude; and took from me
Both coat and cloak, and all things that might be
Grace in my habit; and in place, put on
These tattered rags, which now you see upon
My wretched bosom. When heavens light took A^ Sunneset.
sea*
They fetched the Field-workes of fair Ith^ca;
And in the armed Ship, with a wel-wreath'd cord
They straightly bound me, and did all disbord
To shore to supper, in contentious ^out.
Yet straight, the Gods themselves, took from about
My pressed limbs the bands, with equal ease;
And I (my head in rags wrapped) took the Seas,
Descending by the smooth stern; using then
My hands for Oars; and made from these bad men
Long way, in little time. At last, I fetched
A goodly Grove of Oaks; whose Shore I recht,
And cast me prostrate on it. When they knew
My thus-made-scape, about the Shores they flew:
But (soon not finding) held it not their best
To seek me further; but returned to rest
Aboard their Vessel. Me, the Gods lodged close,
Conducting me into the safe repose
A good man's stable yielded. And thus, Fate
This poor hour added, to my living date.
O wretch of Guests (said he) thy Tale has stirred
My mind to much ruth: both how thou have erred
And suffered hearing, in such good parts shown:
But what thy changed relation would make known
About Ulysses; I hold neither true,
Nor will believe: and what need'st thou pursue
A Lie so rashly? Since he sure is so
As I conceive; for which, my skill shall go.
The safe return my King lackes, cannot be;
He is so envied of each Deity,
So clear, so cruelly. For not in Troy
They gave him end; nor let his Corpse enjoy
The hands of Friends (wc well they might have done*
He managed arms to such perfection;
And should have had his Sepulcher, and all;
And all the Greeks to grace his Funeral:
And this had given a glory to his Son
Through all times future.) But his head is run
Unseen, vnhonor'd, into Harpies mawes.
For my part, I Will not meddle with the cause:
I live a separate life, amongst my Swine;
Come at no Town for any need of mine;
Unless the (...)
circularly witted Queen
(When any farre-come guest, is to be seen
That brings her news) commands me bring a Brawn;
About which (all things being in question drawn,
That touch the King) they sit; and some are sad
For his long absence. Some again, are glad
To waste his goods vnwreak't; all talking still.
But, as for me, I nourish't little will
T'enquire or question of him: since the man
That faign'd himself, the fled Etolian,
For slaughtering one, (through many Regions straid)
In my Stall (as his diuersory) staide.
Where well entreating him; he told me then,
Amongst the Cretans, with King Idomen,
He saw Ulysses; at his Ships repair,
That had been brush't with the enraged air:
And that, in Summer, or in Autumn, sure
With all his brave friends, and rich furniture,
He would be here: and nothing so, nor so.
But thou, an old man, taught with so much woe
As thou have suffered, to be seasoned true,
And brought by his ^ate; do not here pursue
His gratulations, with thy cunning Lies.
Thou can not soake so through my Faculties.
For I did never, either honor thee
Or give thee love, to bring these tales to me.
But in my fear of Hospitable Jove
Thou did to this pass, my affections move.
You stand exceeding much incredulous,
(Replied Ulysses) to have witnest thus
My word, and Oath; yet yield no trust at all.
But make we now a covenant here, and call
The dreadful Gods to witness, that take seat
In large Olympus: if your Kings retreat
Prove made, even hither; you shall furnish me
With cloak, and coat, and make my passage free
For loved D^lichius. If (as fits my vow)
Your King return not; let your servants throw
My old limbs headlong, from some rock most hye,
That other poor men may take fear to lie.
The Herdsman, that had gifts in him divine,
Replied; O Guest, how shall this Fame of mine
And honest virtue, amongst men, remain
Now, and hereafter, without worthy stain;
If I, that led thee to my Houe^ here,
And made thee fitting hospitable cheer,
Should after kill thee; and thy lo^ed mind
Force from thy bones? Or how should stand inclined
With any Faith, my will t'importune (...)
In any prayer hereafter, for his love?
Come, now it is supper's hour; and instant have
My men will make home: when our sweet repast
We Will taste together. This discourse they held
In mutual kind; when from a neighbor field,
His Swine and Swine-herds came* who in their coats
Inclosd their Herds for sleep: which, mighty throats
Laid out in entering. Then, the God-like Swain
His men enioyn'd thus: Bring me to be slain
A chief Swine female, for my stranger Guest:
When, altogether we will take our Fe^^t,
Refreshing now our spirits, that all day take
Pains in our Swines good: who may therefore make
For our pains with them all, amends with one;
Since others eat our Labors, and take none?
This said; his sharp steel hewed down wood, and they
A passing fat Swine haled out of the Sty,
Of five years old, which to the fire they put.
When first, E^m^eus from the Front did cut
The sacred hair, and cast it in the fire;
Then, prayed to heaven: for still, before desire
Was served with food, in their so rude abods,
Not the poor Swine-herd would forget the Gods.
Good souls they bore, how bad soever were
The habits, that their bodies parts did bear.
When all, the deathlesse Deities besought*
That wise Ulysses might be safely brought
Home, to his house; then with a logge of Oak
Left lying by (highlifting it) a stroke
He gave so deadly, it made life expire.
Then cut the rest, her throat; and all in fire
They hid and sindg'd her: cut her up, and then,
The Master took the office from the men,
Who on the Altar did the parts impose
That served for sacrifice: beginning close
About the belly; thorough which he went,
And (all the chief fat gathering) gave it vent
(Part dreg'd with Flower) into the sacred flame;
Then cut they up the joints, and roasted them:
Drew all from spit, and served in dishes all.
Then rose E^maeus, (who was General
In skill to guide each act, his fit event)
And (all, in seven parts cut) the first part went
To service of the Nymphs, and Mercury;
To whose names, he did Rites of piety
In vows particular; and all the rest
He shared to every one: but his loved Guest
He graced with all the Chine; and of that King
To have his heart cheered, set up every string.
Which he observing said; I would to Jove
( Eumaeus) thou liu'dst in his worthy love
As great as mine; that give to such a guest
As my poor self, of all thy goods the best.
Eumaeus answered; (...).
Eat, unhappy wretch,
And to what here is, at thy pleasure reach.
This I have; this thou want: thus God will give,
Thus take away; (...).
in us, and all that live.
To his wil's equal center, all things fall;
His mind he must have, for he can do all.
Thus having eat, and to his wine descended;
Before he served his own thirst, he commended
The first use of it, in fit sacrifice
(As of his meat) to all the Deities.
And to the City-racers hand, applide
The second cup; Ulysses.
whose place was next his side:
Mesaul^us did distribute the meat,
(To which charge, was Eumaeus solely set
In absence of Ulysses; by the Queen
And old Laertes) and this man had been
Bought by Eumaeus, with his faculties,
Employed then in the Taphian Merchandise.
But now; to food apposde, and ordered thus,
All fell. Desire sufficed, Mesaulius
Did take away. For bed then next they were,
All thoroughly satisfied with complete cheer.
The night then came; (...).
ill, and no Taper shind:
Jove rained her whole date. Th'euer wa^ry wind
Zephyre blew loud; and Laertiades
(Approving kind Eum^^us carefulnes
For his whole good) made far about assay,
To get some cast-off Cassocke (least he lay
That rough night cold) of him, or any one
Of those his servants: when he thus begun.
Hear me E^m^us, and my other friends;
I Will use a speech that to my glory tends:
Since I have drunk wine past my usual guise;
Strong Wine commands the Fool, and mo^es the wise;
Moves and impels him too, to sing and dance,
And break in pleasant laughters; and (perchance)
Prefer a speech too, that were better in.
But when my spirits, once to speak begin,
I shall not then dissemble. Would to heaven,
I were as young, and had my forces driven
As close together, as when once our powers
We led to ambush, under the Ilio^ Towers:
Where Ithacus, and Me^el^^^ were
The two Commanders; when it pleased them there
To take my self for third; when to the Town
And lofty walls we led, we couch't close down
All armed, amids the Osiers, and the Reeds,
Which oftentimes th'ore-flowing River feeds.
The cold night came; and th'l^y Northern gale
Blew bleake upon us: after which, did fall
A snow so cold, it cut, as in it bea^e
A frozen water; which was all concrete
About our Shields like Cristall. All made ^aine
(Above our arms) to cloathe, and cloathe again.
And so we made good shift (our shields beside
Clapped close upon our clothes) to rest and hide
From all discovery. But I (poor fool)
Left my weeds with my men, because so cool
I thought it could not prove: which thought, my pride
A little strengthened; being loath to hide
A goodly glittering garment I had on.
And so I followed with my shield alone,
And that brave weed. But when the night nere ended
Her course on earth, and that the stars descended,
I^iog'd Ulysses (who lay passing near)
And spoke to him, that had a nimble ear;
Assuring him, that long I could not lie
Amongst the living; for the feruencie
Of that sharp night would kill me; since as then,
My evil Angel, made me with my men
Leave all weeds, but a fine one. But I know
It Is vain to talk; here wants all remedy now.
This said; he bore that understanding part
In his prompt spirit, that still showed his Art
In Fight and counsel; saying (in a word,
And that low whispered) Peace, least you afford
Some Greek, note of your softnes. No word more,
But made as if his stern austerity, bore
My plight no pity. Yet (as still he lay
His head reposi^g on his hand) gave way
To this invention; Hear me friends, a Dream
(That was of some celestial light a beam)
Stood in my sleep before me: prompting me
With this fit notice: we are far (said he)
From out our Fleet. Let one go then, and try
If Agamemnon will afford supply
To what we now are strong. This stirred a speed
In Thoas to th'affaire. Whose purple weed
He left for have. Which then I took, and lay
In quiet after, til the dawne of day.
This shift Ulysses made for one in need;
And would to heaven, that youth such spirit did feed
Now in my Nerves; and that my joints were knit,
With such a strength, as made me then held fit
To lead men with Ulysses. I should then
Seem worth a weed, that fit's a herdsmans men:
For two respects, to gain a thankful friend;
And to a good man's need, a good extend.
O Father (said Eumaeus) thou have shown
Good cause for us, to give thee good (...)
Not using any word, that was not freed
From all least ill. Thou therefore, shall not need
Or coat, or other thing, that aptly may
Beseem a wretched suppliant, for (...)
Of this nights need. But when her golden ^hrone
The Morn ascends, you must resum^ your (...)
For, here you must not dream of many (...),
Or any change at all. We serve our needs,
As you do yours: One back, one coat. But when
Ulysses loved son returns, he then
Shall give you coat and cassocke; and bestow
Your person where, your heart and soul is now.
This said, he rose; made near the fire his bed,
Which all with Goats and Sheepskins, he bespred.
All which, Ulysses with himself d^d line.
With whom, besides, he changed a gabberdine*
Thick lined, and soft; which still he made his shift,
When he would dress him against the horrid drift
Of Tempest; when deep winters season blows.
Nor pleased it him to lie there with his Sowes,
But while Ulysses slept there: and close by
The other yonkers, he abroad would^ly,
And therefore armed him. Which set cheerful fare
Before Ulysses heart; to see such care
Of his goods taken; how far off soever
His fate, his person, and his wealth should sever.
First then; a sharp edged sword, he girt about
His well-spred shoulders; and (to shelter out
The sharp West wind that blew) he put him on
A thick-lin'd Iacket; and yet cast upon
All that, the large hide of a Goat, well fed.
A Lance then took he, with a keen steel head,
To be his keepe-off, both against Men and Dogs:
And thus went he to rest with his male Hogs,
That still abroad lay, underneath a Rock:
Shield to the North-winds ever eager shocke.
The End of the Fourteenth Book of Homers Odysses.
THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
MInerua, to his Native seat
Exhorts Ulysses sons retreat,
In ^ed, and waking. He receives
Gifts of Atrides; and so leaves
The Spartan Court. And, going ab^ord
Does favorable way affo^rd
To Theoclymenus; that was
The Argiue A^gure, and sought pass;
Fled for a slaughter he had done.
Eumaeus tells Laertes son,
How he became his Fathers Man;
Being sold by the Phoenician
For some agreed on Faculties;
From forth the Syrian Isle, made prise.
Telemachus arrived at home,
Does to Eumaeus Cottage come.
Another.
(...)
From Sparta's strand
makes safe ac^esse
To his own^ Land
Vlyssides.

IN Laced^mon, (...) In qua ampli vt pulchri chori duci possu^t, vel ducuntur:
which the vulgar translation turn therefore, latam, seu amplam.
large, and apt for dances;
Athenian Pallas, her access aduances
Up to the great in soul, Ulysses seed,
Suggesting his return, now fit for deed.
She found both him, and Nestors noble son
In bed; in front of that fair Mans^on:
Nestorides surpised with pleasing sleep.
But, on the watch Ulysses son did keep,
Sleep could not enter: cares did so excite
His soul, through all the solitary night,
For his loved Father. To him (near) she said:
Telemachus! It Is time that now were staid
Thy foreign travails; since thy goods are free
For those proud men, that all will eat from thee:
Divide thy whole possessions, and leave
Thy too-late presence nothing to receive.
Incite the shrill-voic't Me^elaus then,
To send thee to thy Native seat again;
While thou may yet find in her honor strong
Thy blameless Mother, against thy Father's wrong.
For both the Father, and the Brothers to
Of thy loved Mother, will not suffer so
Extended any more, her widows bed;
But make her now, her richest wooer wed,
Eurymachus: who chiefly may augment
Her gifts, and make her ioynture eminent.
And therefore have thee; least in thy despite,
Thy house stand empty of thy Native right.
For well thou know what mind a woman bears,
The house of him, who ever she endeares
Her self in Nuptials to: she sees encreast,
The issue of her first loved Lord deceast,
Forgotten quite, and never thought on more.
In thy return then, the re-counted store
Thou find'st reserved; to thy most trusted Maid
Commit in guard, till heavens powers have puruaid
A wife in virtue, and in beauties grace
Of fit sort for thee, to supply her place.
And this note more I Will give thee; which repose
In sure remembrance: The best sort of those,
That woo thy Mother, watchful scouts address,
Both in the streights of the Ithacensian Seas,
And dusty Samos; with intent t'inuade
And take thy life, ere thy return be made.
Which yet, I think will fail: and some of them
That waste thy fortunes, taste of that extreme
They plot for thee. But keep off far from shore,
And day and night sail: for, a fore-right blore
Who ever of The Immortals, that vow guard
And escape to thy return, will see prepared.
As soon as thou arriu'st, dismiss to Town
Thy Ship and Men: and first of all, make down
To him that keeps thy Swine, and does conceive
A tender care to see thee well survive.
There sleep; and send him to the Town, to tell
The chaste Penelope, that safe and well
Thou live in his charge; and that Pyl^s sands
The place contained, from whence thy person Lands.
Thus she, to large Olympus, made ascent.
When, with his heel, a little touch he lent
To Nestors son; whose sleeps sweet chain's he losde;
Bad rise, and see in Chariot inclosde
Their one-hoou'd horse; yt they might strait be gone.
No such haste (he replied) night holds her throne,
And dims all way, to course of Chariot.
The Morn will soon get up. Nor see forgot
The gifts with have, that will, I know, be rich;
And put into our Coach with gracious speech,
By Lance-fam'd Menelaus. Not a Guest
Shall touch at his house, but shall store his breast
With fit mind of an hospitable man,
To last as long as any daylight can
His eyes re-comfort; in such gifts as he
Will proofs make of his hearty royalty.
He had no sooner said; but up arose
Aurora, that the Golden hills repose.
And Menelaus (good at martial cries)
From Hellens bed raisde, to his Guest applies
His first appearance. Whose repair made known
TO Ulysses loved son: On, his robe was thrown
About his gracious body: his cloak cast
Athwart his ample shoulders; and in have
Abroad he went; and did the King accost.
Atrides, Telemachus to M^nelaus.
guarded with heavens deified host;
Grant now remission to my Native right:
My mind now urging mine own houses sight. Menel. answer

Nor will I stay (said he) thy person long,
Since thy desires to go, are grown so strong.
I should my self be angry to sustein
The like detention, urged by other men.
Who loves a guest past Mean, past Mean will hate;
The Mean in all acts, bears the best estate.
A like ill it is, to thrust out such a guest,
As would not go; as to detain the rest.
We should a guest love, while he love's to stay,
And when he like's not, give him loving way.
Yet suffer so, that we may gifts impose
In Coach to thee. Which ere our hands enclose,
Thine eyes shall see; lest else, our loves may gloss.
Besides, I Will cause our women to prepare
What our house yields; and merely so much fare
As may suffice for health. Both, well will do;
Both for our honor, and our profit to.
And serving strength with food, you after may
As much earth measure, as will match the day.
If you will turn your course from sea, and go
Through Greece and Argos: (that my self may so
Keep kind way with thee) I Will join horse, and guide
To Our humane Cities. Nor vngratifide
Will any one remit us: some one thing
Will each present us, that along may bring
Our pass with love; and prove our virtues blazed:
A Caldron or a Tripod, richly braz'd.
Two Mules; a bowl of Gold, that has his price
Heightn'd with Emblemes of some rare device.
The wise Prince answered: (...), poculum emblematis, and caelaturis ornatum.
I would gladly go
Home, to mine own; and see that governed so
That I may keep, what I for certain hold.
Not hazard that, for only hoped for Gold:
I left behind me, none, so all ways fit
To give it guard; as mine own trust with it.
Besides, in this broad course which you propose;
My Father seeking; I my self may lose.
When this, the shrill-voic't Menelaus heard;
He charged his Queen and Maids, to see prepared
Breakfast, of what the whole house held for best.
To him, rose Et^^^eus from his rest;
Whose dwelling was not far off from the Court;
And his attendance, his command did sort,
With kindling fires, and furth'ring all the roast,
In act of whose charge heard, no time he lost.
Himself then, to an odorous room descended,
Whom Megapenthe, and his Queen attended.
Come to his treasury; a two-ear'd cup
He chusde of all, and made his Son bear up
A Silver bowl. The Queen then taking stand
Aside her Chist; where (by her own fair hand
Lay Vests, of all hues wrought) She took out one
Most large, most Artfull: chiefly fair; and shone
Like to a Star; and lay of al, the last.
Then through the house, with eithers gift they past;
When to Ulysses son, Atrides said:
Telemachus: Menelaus to Tel^machus*
since so entirely swaid
Thy thoghts are, with thy vowed return, now tendered;
May Juno's thundering husband, see it rendered
Perfect at all parts; action answering thought.
Of all the rich gifts, in my treasure, sought
I give thee here, the most in grace, and best.
A Bowl, but Silver; yet the brims comprest
With Gold; whose fabric his desert does bring
From Vulcans hand. Presented by the King
And great Hero of Sydonia's State;
When at our parting he did consummate
His whole house keeping. This do thou command.
This said; he put the round Bowl in his hand;
And then, his strong son Meg^penthe placed
The Silver cup before him; amply graced
With work, and luster. Hellen (standing by;
And in her hand, the Robe, her huswifery)
His name remembering, said: And I present
(Loved son) this gift to thee; the Monument
Of the so-many-loued Hellens hands:
Which, at the knitting of thy Nuptial bands
Present thy wife. In mean space, may it ly
By thy loved Mother; but to me apply
Thy pleasure in it. And thus, take thy way
To thy fair house, and Countries wished stay.
Thus gave she to his hands, the veil; and he,
The acceptance author'd joyfully.
Which in the Chariots Chist, Pisi^ratus
Placed with the rest, and held miraculous.
The yellow-headed King then, led them all,
To seats and Thrones placed, in his spacious Hall.
The Handmaid, water brought, and gave it stream
From out a fair and golden Ewre to them.
From whose hands, to a silver Caldron, fled
The troubled wave. A bright board then she spread:
On which, another reverend Dame set bread:
To which, more servants, store of victuals served*
Et^onaeus was the man that keru'd;
And Megapenthe filled them all their wine.
All fed, and drank; till all felt care decline
For those refreshings. Both the Guests did go
To horse, and coach; and forth the Portico
A little issued: When the yellow King
Brought wine himself: that, with an Offering
To all the Gods, they might their journey take.
He stood before the Gods; and thus he spoke.
Farewell young Princes: to grave Nestors ear
This salutation from my gratitude, bear:
That I profess in all our Ilion wars
He stood, a careful Father to my cares.
To him the wise Vlyssides, replied:
With all our utmost shall be signified
( Ioue-kept Atrides) your right royal will:
And would to God, I could as well fulfill
Mine own minds gratitude, for your free grace;
In telling to Ulysses, in the place
Of my return; in what accomplished kind
I have obtained the office of a friend
At your deseruings: whose fair end you crown
With gifts so many; and of such renown.
His wish, that he might find in his retreat
His Father safe returned (to so repeat
The Kings love to him) was saluted thus;
An Eagle rose; and in her Seres did trusse
A Goose, all white, and huge: A household one,
Which, men and women (crying out upon)
Pursued: but she (being near the guests) her flight
Made on their righthand; and kept still fore-right
Before their horses: which observed by them,
The spirits in all their minds took joys extreme;
Which Nestors son thus questioned: Nestors son^e to M^nelaus His Ironi^^ll
question continuing stil^ Homer^ Ch^racter of M^n^laus.
Ioue-kept King,
Yield your grave thoughts, if this ostentfull thing
(This Eagle, and this Goose) touch us, or you?
He put to study, and not knowing how
To give fit answer; Hellen took on her
Th'ostents solution, and did this prefer.
Hear me, Hellen dissol^es the O^^ent.
and I will play the Prophets part,
As the immortals cast it in my heart;
And (as I think) will make the true sense known:
As this Jove's Bird, from out the Mountains flowne
(Where was her Arie; and whence rose her race)
Trust up this Goose, that from the house did grase;
So shall Ulysses (coming from the wild
Of Seas and sufferings) reach, vnreconcil'd
His Native home: where even this hour he is:
And on those house-fed woo'rs, those wrongs of his,
Will shortly wreake, with all their miseries.
O (said Telemachus) if Saturnian Jove, Telem. to He^len

To my desires, thy dear presage approve;
When I arrive, I will perform to thee
My daily vows, as to a Deity.
This said; he used his scourge upon the horse,
That through the City freely made their course
To Field; and all day, made that first speed, good.
But when the Sunset, and Obscur^^^^ stood
In each man's way; they ended their access
At Pheras, in the house of Diocles,
Son to Orsilochus, Alpheus seed;
Who gave them guest-rites: and sleeps natural need
They that night served there. When (...) rose,
They joined their horse: took coach, and did dispose
Their course for Py^os; whose high City, soon
They reached. Nor would Telemachus be won
To Nestors house: and therefore ordered thus
His speech to Nestors son, Pisistratus;
How shall I win thy promise to a grace
That I must ask of thee? Telem. to Pisist.
we both embrace
The names of Bed-fellowes; and in that name
Will glory as an Adiunct of our fame:
Our Fathers friendship: our own equal age;
And our joint travail, may the more engage
Our mutual concord. Do not then assay
(My God-lou'd friend) to lead me from my way*
To my near Ship; but take a course direct
And leave me there; least thy old Sires respect
(In his (...). Cupiens diligere.
desire to love me) hinder so
My way for home, that have such need to go.
This said; Nestorides held all discourse
In his kind soul, how best he might enforce
Both promise and performance; which, at last
He vowed to venture; and directly cast
His horse about, to fetch the Ship and Shore.
Where, come: His friends most lovely gifts, he bore
Aboard the Ship; and in her hin-deck placed
The veil that Hellens curious hand had graced;
And Menelaus Gold: and said, Away;
Nor let thy men, in any least date, stay:
But quite put off, ere I get home, and tell
The old Duke, you are past: for passing well
I know his mind, to so exceed all force
Of any prayer; That he will stay your course:
Himself make hither, All your course call back;
And when he has you, have no thought to rack
Him from his bounty; and to let you part
Without a Present: but be vexed at heart
With both our pleadings; if we once but move
The least repression of his fiery love.
Thus took he coach: his faire-man'd steeds scourged on
Along the Pylian City: and anon
His Fathers Court reached. While Ulysses Son
Bad board, and arm; which with a thought was done*
His Rowers set, and he rich Odors firing
In his hin-decke; for his secure retiring
To great Pallas.
Athenia: To his Ship came flying
A Stranger, and a Prophet; as relying
On wished passage: having newly slain
A man at Argos: yet his Races vain
^ow'd from Melampus; who in former date
In ^ylos lived, and had a huge estate.
But fled his country; and the punishing hand
Of great-soul'd Neleus, in a foreign Land
From that most famous Mortal; having held
A world of riches: nor could be compeld
To render restitution in a year.
In mean space, living as close prisoner
In Court of Phylacus: and for the sake
Of Neleus daughter, mighty cares did take;
Together with a grievous Languor sent
From grave One of the F^ries of ^ell.
Erynnis, that did much torment
His vexed conscience; yet his life's expense
He escaped, and drove the loud-voic't Oxen thence,
To breed-sheepe Pylos; bringing vengeance thus
Her foul demerit, to great Neleus;
And to his Brothers house reduced his wife:
Who yet from Pylos, did remove his life
For feed-horse Argos; where his Fate set down
A dwelling for him: and in much renown
Made govern many Argiues: where, a Spouse
He took to him, and built a famous house.
There had he borne to him Antiphates,
And forcefull Mantius. To the first of these
Was great Oiclaeus borne: Oiclaeus gate
Amph^araus, that the popular State
Had all their health in: whom, even from his heart
Jove loved; and Phoebus in the whole desert
Of friendship hel'd him. Yet not blessed so much
That Ages threshold, he did ever touch:
But lost his life, by His wife betrayed him for money.
Female bribery.
Yet two sons author'd his posterity;
Alcinaon, and renowned Amphilochus.
Mantius had issue; Polyphidius,
And Clytus: But Aurora rauish't him,
For excellence of his admired lim;
And interested him amongst the Gods.
His Brother knew, men's good and bad abods
The best of all men; after the decease
Of him that perish't in unnatural peace
At spacious Thebes. Apollo did inspire
His knowing soul with a Propheticke fire.
Who (angry with his Father) took his way
To Hyperesia; where (making stay)
He prophesied to all men; and had there
A Son called Theoclymenus; Theoclymenus to Telemachus.
who here
Came to Telemachus; and found abord
Himself at Sacrifice; whom in a word
He thus saluted: O Friend, since I find
Even here at Ship, a sacrificing mind
Inform your actions: By your sacrifice;
And by that worthy choice of Deities,
To whom you offer: by your self, and all,
These men that serve your course maritimall;
Tell one that asks, the truth: Nor give it gloss,
Both who, and whence you are? From what seed rose
Your royal person? And what Cities Towers
Hold habitation, to your parents powers?
He answered: Stranger! The sure truth is this;
I am of Ithaca; Telemachus to Theoclymenus*
my Father is
(Or was) Ulysses: but austere death, now
Takes his state from him; whose event to know,
(Himself being long away) I set forth thus
With ship and soldiers: Th^oclymenus,
As freely said; And I to thee am fled
From forth my country; for a man struck dead
By my unhappy hand: who was with me
Of one selfe-Tribe; and of his pedigree
Are many Friends and Brothers: and the sway
Of Achiue Kindred, reaches far away.
From whom (because I fear their spleenes suborne
Blood, and black fate against me (being borne
To be a wandrer among foreign men)
Make thy fair ship, my rescue; and sustein
My life from slaughter. Thy deseruings may
Perform that m^r^y: and to them I pray.
Nor will I bar (said he) Telem. Reply.
thy will to make
My means and equal ship, thy aid: but take
(With what we have here, in all friendly use)
Thy life from any violence that pursues.
Thus took he in, his Lance; and it extended
Aloft the hatches; which himself ascended.
The Prince took seat at Stern: on his right hand,
Set Theoclymenus; and gave command
To all his men, to arm; and see made fast
Amidst the hollow Keele, the Beechen Mast
With able hal^ers; hoise sail, lanch: which soon
He saw obay'd. And then his Ship did run
A merry course: Blew-ey'd Minerua sent
A fore-right gale; tumultuous, vehement,
Along the air; that her ways utmost yield
The ship might make, and plough the brackish field.
Then set the Sun, and Night black't all the ways.
The ship (with Jove's wind winged) where the Epian swaies
Fetched ^heras first: then Elis, the divine;
And then for those Isles made, that Sea-ward shine,
For form and sharpness, like a Lances head.
About which, lay the wooers ambushed.
On which he rush't, to try if he could escape
His plotted death; or serve Her treacherous Rape.
And now return we to Eumaeus Shed;
Where (at their food with others marshalled) The stories ^ turn to (...)

Ulysses, and his noble Herdsman sat;
To try if whose loves curious estate
Stood firm to his abode, or felt it fade;
And so would take each best cause to persuade
His Guest to Town; Ulysses thus contends:
Hear me, Eumaeus, and ye other Friends.
Next Morn, to Town I covet to be gone,
To beg some others alms; not still charge one.
Advise me well then; and as well provide
I may be fitted with an honest guide.
For through the streets (since Need will have it so)
I Will tread, to try if any will bestow
A dish of drink on me, or bit of bread,
Till to Ulysses house I may be led*
And there I Will tell all-wise Penelope, news:
Mix with the wooers pride; and (since they use
To fare above the full) their hands excite
To some small Feast, from out their infinite:
For which, I Will wait, and play the Seruingman,
Fairly enough; command the most they can.
For I will tell thee; note me well, and hear,
That if the will be of heavens Messenger,
(Who to the works of men, of any sort
Can grace infuse, and glory) nothing short
Am I of him, that does to most aspire
In any service: as to build a Fire,
To cleave sere wood: to roast, or boil their meat;
To wait at board, mix wine, or know the Neat;
Or any work, in which the poore-cal'd worst,
To serve the rich-cal'd best, in Fate are forced.
He, angry with him, Eum^^us to Ulysses.
said; Alas poor Guest,
Why did this counsel ever touch thy breast?
Thou seek'st thy utter spoil beyond all doubt,
If thou give venture on the Wooers rout:
Whose wrong the force, affects the Iron heaven.
Their light delights, are far from being given
To such grave Seruitors. Youths richly trick't
In coats or Cassocks; Locks divinely slickt,
And looks most rapting; ever have the gift
To taste their crowned cups, ^and full Trenchers shift.
Their Tables ever like their Glasses shine;
Loaded with bread, with varied flesh, and wine.
And thou? go thither? Stay: for here do none
Grudge at thy presence: nor my self, nor one
Of all I feed. But when Ulysses son
Again shall greet us, he shall put thee on
Both coat and cassocke; and thy quick retreat
Set, where thy heart and soul desire thy seat.
Industrious Ulysses, gave reply:
I still much wish, Ulysses answer to Eumaeus.
that heavens chief Deity
Loved thee, as I do; that have easde my mind
Of woes and wanderings, never yet confin'de.
Naught is more wretched in a (...),
Then Countries want, and shift from place to place.
But for the banefull belly, men take care
Beyond good counsel: whosoever are
In compass of the wants it undergoes,
By wanderings losses, or dependant woes.
Excuse me therefore, if I erred at home:
Which since thou will make here (as overcome
With thy command for stay) I Will take on me
Cares appertaining to this place, like thee.
Does then Ulysses Sire, and Mother breath?
Both whom he left, in the age next door to death?
Or are they breathless, and descended where
The dark house is, that never day does clear?
Laertes lives (said he) but every hour
Beseeches Jove to take from him the power
That ioynes his life and limbs: Eumaeus answer to Ulysses.
for with a moan
That breeds a marvel, he laments his son
Deprived by death. And adds to that, another
Of no less depth; for that dead sons dead Mother:
Whom he a Virgin wedded: which the more
Makes him lament her loss; and does deplore
Yet more her miss, because her womb the truer
Was to his brave son; and his slaughter slew her.
Which last love to her, does his li^e engage,
And makes him live an undigested age.
O! such a death she died, as never may
Seize any one, that here beholds the day;
That either is to any man, a friend,
Or can a woman kill in such a kind.
As long as she had Being, I would be
A still Inquirer (since it was dear to me,
Though death to her, to hear his name) when she
Heard of Ulysses: for I might be bold;
She brought me up, and in her love did hold
My life, compared with long-vail'd (...),
Her youngest issue (in some small degree
Her daughter yet preferred) a brave young Dame.
But when of youth the dearly loved (...), Peroptabilem pubem.
Flame
Was lighted in us; marriage did prefer
The maid to Samos; whence was sent for her
Infinite riches: when, the Queen bestowed
A fair new suite, new shoes, and all; and vowed
Me to the field. But passing loath to part,
As loving me, more then she loved her heart.
And these I want now; but their business grows
Upon me daily. Which the Gods impose,
To whom I hold all; give account to them,
For I see none, left to the Diadem,
That may dispose all better. So, I drink
And eat of what is here; and whom I think
Worthy or reverend, I have given to still
These kinds of Guest-ri^es: for the household ill
(Which where the Queen is, ryots) takes her still
From thought of these things. Nor is it delight
To hear from her plight; of or work, or word;
The woo^rs spoil all. But yet my men, will board
Her sorrows often, with discourse of all:
Eating and drinking of the Festival
That there is kept; and after bring to field
Such things as servants make their pleasures yield.
O me ( Eumaeus) said Laertes son,
Have thou then erred so, of a little one? Ulysses answer to Eumaeus.

(Like me?) From friends, and country? pray thee say,
(And say a Truth) does vast Destruction lay
Her hand upon the wide-way'd Supposing him to dwell in a City.
Seat of men?
Where dwelt thy Sire, and reverend Mother then?
That thou art spared there? Or else, set alone
In guard of Beeues, or Sheep: Set the enemy on;
Surprisde, and Shipped? transferred, and sold thee here?
He that bought thee, paid well; yet bought not dear.
Since thou inquire of that, Eumaeus relates his birth, etc.
my guest (said he)
Hear and be silent: and mean space, sit free
In use of these cups, to thy most delights;
(...).
Unspeakable, in length now, are the Nights.
Those that affect sleep yet; to sleep have leave;
Those that affect to hear, their hearers give.
But sleep not ere your hour; Much sleep does grieve.
Who ever lists to sleep; Away to bed:
Together with the morning raise his head:
Together with his fellows, break his fast;
And then, his Lords Herd, drive to their repast.
We two, still in our Tabernacle here,
Drinking and eating; will our bosoms cheer
With memories, and tales of our annoyes.
Betwixt his sorrows, every Humane joys.
He most, who most has felt; and furthest erred:
And now thy will; to act, shall be preferred.
There is an Isle above Ortygi^
(If thou have heard) Eumaeu^ tells Ulysses how he was bought and sold.
they call it Syria;
Where, once a day, the Sun moves backwards still.
It Is not so great as good; for it does fill
The fields with Oxen; fills them still with Sheep;
Fills roofes with wine, and makes al Come there cheap:
No Dearth comes ever there; nor no Disease,
That does, with hate, us wretched mortals sease.
But when men's varied Nations, dwelling there
In any City, enter th'aged year:
The Siluer-bow-bearer (the Sun) and she,
That bears as much renown for Archery;
Stoop with their painles shafts, and strike them dead,
As one would sleep, and never keep the bed.
In this Isle stand two Cities: betwixt whom
All things, that of the soiles fertility come,
In two parts are divided. And both these,
My Father ruld; ( Ctesius Ormenides)
A man, like the immortals. With these States,
The crosse-biting Phaenissians, traffick't rates
Of infinite Merchandise, in ships brought there;
In which, they then, were held exempt from pere.
There dwelt within my Fathers house, a Dame
Borne a Phaenissian; skillful in the frame
Of Noble Huswiferies; right tall, and fair.
Her, (...). 1. admodu^ vafer. Der. ex (...). 1. pertraho in retia and (...).
1. puella.
the Phaenissian great-wen^h-net-lai're,
With sweet words circumuented, as she was
Washing her Linen. To his amorous pass
He brought her first, shor'd from his Sh^p to her;
To whom he did his whole life's love prefer;
Which, of these brest-exposing Dames, the hearts
Deceiues; though fashioned of right honest parts.
He asked her after, What she was? and whence?
She passing presently, the excellence
Told of her Fathers Turrets; and that she
Might boast her self, sprung from the Progeny
Of the rich Sydons: and the daughter was
Of the much-yeare-reuennew'd Arybas.
But, that the Taphian Pirates, made her prize,
As she returned from her field-huswiferies:
Transferred her hither; and at that man's house
Where now she lived; for value precious
Sold her to th'Owner. He that stole her love,
Bad her again, to her births seat remove,
To see the fair roofes of her friends again;
Who still held state* and did the port maintain,
Her self reported. She said, Be it so;
So you, and all that in your ship shall roe,
Swear to return me, in all safety hence.
All swore; th'Oath past, with every consequence:
She bad, Be silent now; and not a word
Do you, or any of your friends afford,
Meeting me afterward in any way;
Or at the washing Fount; lest some display
Be made, and told the old man: and he then
Keep me straight bound: To you, and to your men
The utter ruin, plotting of your lives.
Keep in firm thought then, every word that strives
For dangerous utterance: Haste your ships full freight
Of what you Traffic for; and let me straight
Know by some sent friend: Intending the Ship.
She has all in hold,
And (with my self) I Will bring thence all the gold
I can by all means finger: and beside,
I Will do my best, to see your freight supplide
With some wel-weighing burden of mine own.
For I bring up, in house, a great man's son,
As crafty as my self; who will with me
Run every way along; and I will be
His Leader, till your Ship has made him sure.
He will an infinite great price procure
Transfer him to what languag'd men ye may.
This said; She gat her home, and there made stay
A whole year with us; Goods of great avail
Their Ship enriching. Which now, fit for sail:
They sent a Messenger t'informe the Dame.
And, to my fathers house a fellow came,
Full of Phaenissian craft: that, to be sold
A Tablet bought; the body all of Gold,
The Verge, all Amber. This had ocular view,
Both by my honored Mother, and the crew
Of her house-handmaids, handled; and ^he price
Beat; asked, and promised. And while this device
Lay thus upon the Forge: this Ieweller
Made privy signs (by winkes and wiles) to her
That was his object; which she took, and he
(His sign seeing noted) ^ied to Ship. When she
(My hand still taking, as she used to do
To walk abroad with her) conuai'd me so
Abroad with her; and in the Portic^
Found cups, with tasted Viands; which the guests
That used to flock about my Fathers feasts
Had left. They gone (some to the Counsel Court;
Some to hear news amongst the talking sort)
Her Theft, three bowls into her lap conuaid;
And forth she went. Nor was my wit so staid
To stay her, or my self. The Sun went down,
And shadows round about the world were flowne,
When we came to the haven; in which did ride
The swift Phaenissian Ship; whose fair broad side
They boorded straight: Took us up; And all went
Along the moist waves. VVinde, Saturnius sent.
Six days, we day and night sayl^d: But when Jove
Put up the seventh day; She, that shafts Diana*
does love,
Shot dead the woman; who into the pumpe
Like to a Dop-chicke, diu'd; and gave a thumpe
In her sad settling. Forth they cast her then
To serve the Fish, and Sea-calues: no more Men.
But I was left there, with a heavy heart.
When, wind and water drove them quite apart
Their own course, and on Ithaca they fell;
And there, poor me, did to Laertes sell:
And thus these eyes, the sight of this Isle proved.
Eumaeus (he replied) Thou much have moved
The mind in me, with all things thou have said,
And all the sufferance on thy bosom laid:
Bur (truly) to thy ill, has Jove joined good,
That one whose veins are served with humane blood
Has bought thy service; that gives competence
Of food, wine; cloth to thee. And sure the expense
Of thy life's date here, is of good desert.
Whose labors, not to thee alone, impart
Sufficient food and housing; but to me.
Where I, through many a heap't humanity
Have hither erred; where, though (like thee) not sold,
Not staid, like thee yet; nor naught needful hold.
This mutual speech they vsd; nor had they slept
Much time before; the much-nere-morning lept
To her fair throne. And now struck sail, the men
That served Telemachus; arrived just then
Nere his loved shore: where now they stoopt the Mast,
Made to the Port with Oars, and Anchor cast;
Made fast the Ship, and then ashore they went:
Dressed supper, filled wine; when (their appetites spent)
Telemachus commanded, they should yield
The Ship to the owner; while himself, at field
Would see his shepherds: when light drew to end
He would his gifts see, and to Town descend.
And in the morning, at a Feast bestow
Rewards for all their pains. And whither, now
(Said Theoclymenus) my loved Son
Shall I address my self? who^e mansion,
Of all men, in this rough-hewne Isle, shall I
Direct my way to? Or go readily
To thy house, and thy Mother? He replied;
Another time, I Will see you satisfied
With my house entertainment: but as now,
You should encounter none that could bestow
Your fit entreaty; and (which less grace were)
You could not see my Mother, I not there.
For she is no frequent object; but apart
Keeps from her wooers; wooed with her desert,
Up, in her chamber, at her Huswifery.
But I Will name one, to whom you shall apply
Direct repair; and that's Eurymachus,
Renowned descent, to wise Polybius:
A man whom the Ithacensians look on now,
As on a God: since he, of all that wow
Is far superior man; and likest far
To wed my mother: and as circular
Be in that honor, as Ulysses was.
But heauen-housd Jove knows, the yet hidden pass
Of her disposure; and on them he may
A blacker sight bring, then her Nuptial day.
As this he vtter'd; on his right hand flew
A Saker; sacred to the God of view:
That, in his Tallons trust, and plumed a Dove;
The Feathers round about the Ship did roue,
And on Telemachus fell; whom th'Augure then
Took fast by the hand; withdrew him from his men,
And said; Th^oclymenus to Telemachus.
Telemachus; This Hawke is sent
From God; I knew it for a sure Ostent
When first I saw it. Be you well assured,
There will no wooer be by heaven endured
To rule in Ithaca, above your Race:
But your powers ever fill the Regal place.
I wish to heaven (said he) thy word might stand; Telemachus to Theo^^ymenus.

Thou then should soon acknowledge from my hand
Such gifts and friendship, as would make thee (Guest)
M^t, and saluted, as no less then ble^t.
This said; Tele. to Pyraeus
he called Pyraeus (Clytus son)
His true associate; saying, Thou have done
(Of all my Followers, to the Pylian shore)
My will, in chief, in other things; Once more,
Be chiefly good to me: take to thy house
This loved stranger; and be studious
To Embrace and greet him, with thy greatest fare,
Till I my self come, and take off thy care.
The famous for his Lance said; Pyraeus reply.
if your stay,
Take time for life here; this man's care, I Will lay
On my performance; nor what fits a Guest,
Shall any penury withold his Feast.
Thus took he ship; bad them board, and away.
They boorded; sat: but did their labor stay
Till he had decked his feet, and reached his Lance.
They to the City: he did straight advance
Up to his Sties; where Swine lay for him, store;
By whose sides did his honest Swine-herd snore:
Till his short ^ares, his longest Nights had ended:
And nothing worse, to both his Lords intended.
The End of the Fifteenth Book of Homers Odysses.
THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Princ^ at F^^ld; ^e sends to Town
Eumaeus, to make truly known
His safe return. By Pallas will,
Telemachus is given the skill
To know his Father. Those that lay
In Ambush, to prevent the way
Of young Vlyssides, for home;
Retire, with anger overcome.
Another.
(...)
To his most dear,
Ulysses ^^owes;
The wise Son here
his Father knows.

Ulysses, and divine Eumaeus rose
Soon as the morning could her eyes unclose:
Made fire; brake fast; And to their Pasture send
The gathered Herds: on whom, their Swains attend.
The selfe-tyre barking Dogs, all fawned upon;
Nor bark't, at first sight of Ulysses son.
The whinings of their fawnings yet did greet
Ulysses ears; and sounds of certain feet;
Who thus bespake Eumaeus: Sure some friend,
Or one well known comes, that the Mastiues spend
Their mouths no louder. Only some one near
They whine, and leap about; whose feet I hear.
Each word of this speech was not spent, Eumaeus amaze and kind welcome of
Telemachus.
before
His Son stood in the entry of the door.
Out-rusht amazed Eumaeus: and let go
The cup to earth, that he had labored so,
Cleans'd for the neat wine: Did the Prince surprise,
Kissed his fair forehead: Both his lovely eyes,
Both his white hands; And tender tears distilled.
There breathed no kind-soul'd Father, that was filled
Less with his sons embraces, that had lived
Ten years in farre-off earth; now new retriu'd,
His only child too, gotten in his age:
And for whose absence he had felt the rage
Of griefs upon him; then for this diuin'd
So much for form, was this divine for mind:
Who kissed him through: who grew about him kissing,
As fresh from death escaped. Who^ (so long time missing)
He wept for joy, and said; Thou yet art come,
(Sweet light, sweet Sunrise) to thy cloudy home.
O (never I looked) when once shipped away
For Pylos shores, to see thy turning day.
Come; enter loved Son; Let me feast my heart
With thy sweet sight; new come, so far apart.
Nor when you lived at home, would you walk down
Often enough here, but staide still at Town:
It pleased you then, to cast such forehand view
About your house, on that most (...), of (...), Orcus, and signi^ies pr^perly,
tenebricosus, or infernalis* so that, perni^iosus (which is the Latin
translation) is not so ^itte as d^m^d for that crew of dissolute Wooers. The
phrase being now used to all so licentious.
damned crew.
It shall be so then, Friend (said he) but now
I come to glad mine eyes with thee, and know
If still my Mother, in her house remain:
Or if some wooer has aspired to gain
Of her in Nuptials: for Ulysses bed,
By this, lies all with Spiders cobwebs spread,
In penury of him that should supply it.
She still (said he) holds her most constant quiet,
Aloft thine own house, for the beds respect:
But for her Lords sad loss; sad nights and days
Obscure her beauties, and corrupt their rays.
This said; Eumaeus, took his brazen Spear;
And in he went: when, being entered near
Within the stony threshold; From his seat,
His Father rose to him: who would not let
The Old man remove; but drew him back and pre^t
With earnest terms his sitting; Saying, Guest;
Take here your seat again; we soon shall get
Within our own house here, some other ^ea^:
Here Is one will fetch it. This said; down again
His Father sat: and to his son, his Swain
Strewn fair green Osiers; and imposed thereon
A good soft Sheepeskin, which made him a Throne.
Then he appos'd to them, his last-left Roste;
And in a wicker basket, bread engro^te:
Filled luscious wine; and then took opposite seat
To the divine Ulysses. When the meat
Set there before them; all fell to, and (...).
When they had fed; the Prince said, pray thee say,
Whence coms this guest? what seaman gave him way
To this our Isle? I hope these feet of his
Could walk no water; who boasts he, he is?
I Will tell all truly Son: From ample Crete
He bosts himself; and says, his erring feet
Have many Cities trod: And God was he
Whose finger wrought in his infirmity.
But, to my Cottage, the last escape of his,
Was from a Thespro^s Ship. What ere he is,
I Will give him you: do what you please; His vant
Is, that he is (at most) a suppliant.
Eumaeus, (said the Prince) To tell me this,
You have afflicted my weak Faculties:
For how shall I receive him to my house
With any safety; that suspicious
Of my young forces (should I be assaide
With any sudden violence) may want aid
To shield my self? Besides, if I go home,
My mother is with ^wo doubts overcome:
If she shall stay with me, and take fit care
For all such guests, as there seek guestiue fare;
Her husbands bed respecting, and her same
Amongst the people: Or her blood may frame
A liking to some wooer, such as best
May bed her in his house; not giving lest.
And thus am I unsure, of all means free
To use a Guest there, fit for his degree.
But, being thy Guest; I Will be his supply,
For all weeds, such as mere necessity
Shall more then furnish: Fit him with a sword,
And set him where his heart would have been shor'd.
Or (if so pleased) receive him in thy Shed:
I Will send thee clothes, I vow; and all the bread
His wish would eat: that to thy men and thee
He be no burden. But that I should be
His mean to my house; where a company
Of wrong-professing wooers, wildly live;
I will in no sort author; lest they give
Foul use to him; and me, as gravely grieve.
For what great act can any one atchieue
Against a multitude? Although his mind
Retain a courage of the greatest kind?
For all minds have not force in one degree.
Ulysses answered; O Friend, since it is free
For any man, Ulysses to Tel^.
to change fit words with thee;
I Will freely speak. Me thinks, a woluish power
My heart puts on, to tear and to devour;
To hear your affirmation; that (in spite
Of what may fall on you, made opposite;
Being one of your proportion, birth, and age,
These wooers should in such injustice rage.
What should the cause be? Do you wilfully
Endure their spoil? Or has your Empery
Been such amongst your people; that, all gather
In troop, and one voice; (wc even God does father)
And vow your hate so, that they suffer them?
Or blame your Kinsfolks faiths, before th'extream
Of your first stroke has tried them? Whom a man
When strifes, to blows rise, trusts: though battle ran
In huge and high waves? would to heaven my spirit
Such youth breathed, as the man that must inherit,
Yet never touched Ulysses: or that he
(But wandering this way) would but come, and see
What my age could atchieue (and there is Fate
For Hope yet left; that he may recreate
His eyes with such an object.) This my head
Should any stranger strike off, if stark dead
I struck not all: the house in open force
Entering with challenge. If their great concourse
Did ouer-lay me, being a man alone;
(Which you urge for your self) be you that one.
I rather in mine own house wish to dye
One death for all; then so indecently
See evermore, deeds worse than death applied;
Guests, wro^g'd with vile words, and blow-giuing pride:
The women-seruants dragged in filthy kind
About the fair house; and in corners blind
Made serve the rapes of Ruffins: Food d^uour'd
Idely and rudely; wine exhaust, and poured
Through throats profane; and all about a deed,
That Is ever wooing, and will never speed.
I Will tell you (Guest) most truly, said his Son;
I do not think, Telemachus (...).
that all my people ron
One hateful course against me; Nor accuse
Kinsfolks that I, in strifes of weight, might use*
But Jove will have it so: our Race alone,
(As if made singular) to one, and one
His hand confining. Only to the King
( Ioue-bred Arcesius) did La^rtes spring;
Only to old La^rtes did descend
Ulysses; only to Ulysses end
Am I the Adiunct; whom he left so young,
That from me, to him, never comfort sprung.
And to all these now (for their (...)) arise
Up in their house, a brood of enemies.
As many as in these Isles bow men's k^^^s;
Samos, Dulychius, and the rich in Tr^^s
Zacynthus: Or in this rough Isles command,
So many suitors for the Nuptials stand,
That ask my Mother; and mean space, prefer
Their lusts to all spoil, that dishonor her.
Nor does she (though she loathes) deny their suites;
Nor they denials take, though taste their fruits.
But all this time, the sta^e of all things there
Their throats devour; and I must shortly bear
A part in all; and yet the periods
Of these designs, lie in the knees of Gods.
Of all Loves then, Eumaeus; make quick way
To wise Penelope; and to her, say
My safe return from Pylos; and alone
Return thou hither, having made it known.
Nor let (besides my Mother) any ear
Partake thy Message; since a number bear
My safe return displeasure. He replied;
I know, and comprehend you; you divide,
Your mind with one that understands you well. E^m. to Telem.

But, all in one yet; may I not reveal
To the old hard-fated Laertes.
Arcesiades
Your safe return? who through his whole distres
Felt for Ulysses, did not yet so grieve,
But with his household, he had will to live;
And served his appetite, with wine, and food;
Surueigh'd his husbandry, and did his blood
Some comforts fitting life: But since you took
Your ship for Pylos, he would never brook,
Or wine, or food, they say; nor cast an eye
On any labor: but sits weeping by;
And sighing out his sorrows, ceasselesse mones
Wasting his body, turned all skin and bones.
More sad news still (said he) yet; mourn he still:
For if the rule of all men's works be will, Telem. to Eum.

And his will, his way goes: mine stands inclined
To Attend the home-turne of my Intending his Father: whose ret^^ne, though he
were far fr^ knowing, or fully expecting: yet he desired to order all things as
he were present.
nearer kind.
Do then, what I inioyne, which given effect;
Err not to field to him, but turn direct.
Entreating first my Mother, with most speed;
And all the secrecy that now serves Need,
To send this way their storehouse Guardian,
And she shall tell all to the aged Intending to La^rtes, all that Eumaeus
would have ^old.
Man.
He took his shoes up; put them on, and went.
Nor was his absence, hid from Jove's descent,
Divine Minerua: who took straight, to view,
A goodly woman's shape, that all works knew:
And, standing in the entry, did prefer
Her sight to Ulysses. But (though meeting her)
His son Telemachus, nor saw, nor knew:
The Gods clear presences, are known to few.
Yet (with Ulysses) even the Dogs did see,
And would not bark; but, whining lovingly,
Fled to the Stals far side. P^llas appears to Ulysses.
Where She, her eine
Moved to Ulysses. He knew her design,
And left the house, past the great Sheep-cotes wall,
And stood before her. She bad, Utter all
Now to his son; nor keep the least vnlosde:
That all the wooers deaths being now disposde,
They might approach the Town; Affirming, she
Not long would fail, t'assist to victory.
This said; Pallas restores Ulysses youth for ^he ^ime.
She laid her golden Rod on him;
And with his late-worne weeds graced every lim.
His body straitn'd, and his youth instilled;
His fresh blood called up: every wrinkle filled
About his broken eyes; and on his chin
The brown hair spread. When his whole trim wrought in;
She yssu'd; and he entered to his son:
Who stood amazed; and thought some God had done
His house that honor: turned away his eyes,
And said; Tel^mac^us to his Father.
Now Guest, you grace another guise
Then suites your late show; Other weeds you wear,
And other person. Of the starry sphere
You certainly present some deathlesse God.
Be pleased, that to your here vouchsaf't abod
We may give sacred rites, and offer Gold
To do us favor. Ulysses to Tele^.
He replied: I hold
No deified state. Why put you thus on me
A Gods resemblance? I am only he
That bears thy Fathers name: for whose loved sake,
Thy youth so grieves: whose absence makes thee take,
Such wrong^ of men. Thus kissed he him; nor could
Forbear those tears, that in such mighty hold
He held before: still held, still yssuing ever.
And now (the shores once broke) the springtide never
Forbore earth from the cheeks he kissed. His son,
(By all these violent arguments; not won
To credit him his Father) did deny
His kind assumpt: and said, Some Deity
Feigned that joys cause, Tell. to Ulysses.
to make him grieve the more:
Affirming, that no man, whoeuer wore
The garment of mortality, could take
(By any utmost power, his soul could make
Such change into it: since at so much will,
Not Jove himself, could both remove, and fill
Old age, with youth; and youth, with age so spoil
In such an instant. You wore all the soil
Of age but now, and were old: And but now
You bear that young grace that the Gods indow
Their heauen-borne forms withal. His father said: Vlys. (...) his son

Telemachus? Admire, nor stand dismaide:
But know thy solid Father; since within,
He answers all parts, that adorn his skin.
There shall no more Vlyss^sses come here.
I am the man, that now this twentieth year
(Still under sufferance of a world of ill)
My count^ey earth, recover: It Is the will
The Prey-professor Pallas puts in act;
Who put me thus together; thus distract,
In aged pieces, as even now you saw,
This youth now rendering. It Is within the law
Of her free power. Sometimes to show me pore;
Sometimes again, thus amply to restore
My youth, and Ornaments; She still would please.
The God^ can raise, and throw men down, with ease.
This said; he sat: when his Telemachus poured
Himself about him: Tears on tears, he shour'd:
And to desire of moan, increast the cloud:
Both wept and howled, and laid out shrieks more loud;
Then or the Bird-bone-breaking Eagle reres;
Or Brood-kind Vulture with the crooked Seres,
When rusticke hands, their tender Aries draw,
Before they give their wings their full-plum'd Law.
But miserably poured they from beneath
Their lids, their tears: while both their breasts did breath
As frequent cries: and to their fervent moan,
The light had left the skies; if first the son
Their dumb mones had not vented, with demand
What Ship it was, that gave the natural land
To his blessed feet? He then, did likewise lay
Hand on his passion; and gave these words way.
I Will tell thee truth, my son; The men that bear
Much fame for shipping, Ulysses tells his son what ship ^e arri^'d in.
my Reducers were
To long-wisht Ithaca; who each men else,
That greets their shore, give pass to where he dwells.
The Phaeacensian Peers, in one nights date,
(While I fast slept) fetched the Ithacensian state:
Graced me with wealthy gifts: Brass, store of Gold,
And Robes fair wrought: All which have secret hold
In Caves, that by the Gods advice, I chusde.
And now, Minerua's admonitions used
For this retreat; that we might here dispose
In close Discourse, the slaughters of our foes.
Recount the number of the wooers then;
And let me know what name they hold with men:
That my mind, may cast over their estates
A curious measure; and confer the rates
Of our two powers, and theirs: to try, if we
Alone, may propagate to victory
Our bold encounters of them all, or prove
The kind assistance of some others love.
O Father (he replied) I Telem. to Vlys.
often have heard
Your counsels, and your force of hand preferred
To mighty glory: But your speeches now,
Your ventrous mind, exceeding mighty show.
Even to amaze they move me: for in right
Of no fit counsel, should be brought to fight,
Two men, against th'able faction of a throng.
No one two, o one ten; No twice ten strong
These wooers are: but more by much. For know,
That from Dulychius there are fifty two;
All choice young men: and every one of these
Six men attend. From Samos crossed the Seas
Twice twelve young Gallants. From Zacynthus came
Twice ten. Of Ithaca, the best of name
Twice six. Of all which, all the State they take,
A sacred Poet, and a Herald make.
Their delicacies, two (of special sort
In skill of banquets) serve. And all this port
If we shall dare t'encounter; all thrust up
In one strong roose: have great care lest the cup
Your great mind thirsts, exceeding bitter taste;
And your retreat, commend not to your haste
Your great attempt; but make you say, you buy
Their prides reuenges, at a price too hy.
And therefore (if you could) it were well you thought
Of some assistent. Be your spirit wrought
In such a man's election, as may lend
His succors freely, and express a Friend
His Father answered: Let me ask of thee; Vlys. to Telem.

Hear me, consider; and then answer me.
Think thou if Pallas, and the King of skies
We had to Friend; would their sufficiencies
Make strong our part? Or that some other yet
My thoughts must work for? These (said he) are set
Aloft the clouds; Telema^hu.
and are sound aids indeed:
As powers not only, that these men exceed;
But bear of all men else the high command;
And hold, of Gods, an ouer-ruling hand.
Well then (said he) not these shall sever long
Their force and ours, Ulysses.
in fights assured, and strong.
And then, twixt us, and them, shall Mars prefer
His strength; to stand our great distinguisher;
When, in mine own Roofes, I am forced to blows.
But when the day, shall first her fires disclose;
Go thou for home, and troop up with the woo'rs;
Thy will with theirs ioind; power with their rude powrs
And after, shall the Herdsman guide to Town
My steps; my person wholly ouer-growne
With all appearance of a poor old Swain,
Heavy, and wretched. If their high disdain
Of my vile presence; make them, my desert
Affect with contumelies; let thy loved heart
Beat in fixed confines of thy bosom still,
And see me suffer, patient of their ill.
I, though they drag me by the heels, about
Mine own free earth, and after hurl me out;
Do thou still suffer. Nay, though with their Darts
They beat, and bruise me; bear. But these foul parts
Persuade them to forbear; and by their names
Call all with kind words: bidding, for their shames
Their pleasures cease. If yet they yield not way;
There breaks the first light of their fatal day.
In mean space, mark this: When the chiefly wise
Minerua prompts me; I Will inform thine eyes
With some given sign; and then, all the arms that are
Aloft thy Roof, in some near room prepare
For speediest use. If those brave men enquire
Thy end in all; still rake up all thy fire
In fair cool words: and say; I bring them down
To scour the smoke off; being so ouer-growne
That one would think, all fumes that ever were.
Breathed since Ulysses loss, reflected here.
These are not like the arms, he left behind
In way for Troy. Besides, Jove prompts my mind
In their remove apart thus, with this thought:
That, if in height of wine, there should be wrought
Some harsh contention twixt you; this apt mean
To mutual bloodshed, may be taken clean
From out your reach; and all the spoil prevented
Of present Feast: perhaps, even then presented
My Mothers Nuptials, to your long kind vows.
Steel it self, ready; draws a man to blows.
Thus make their thoughts secure; to us alone
Two Swords, two Darts; two shields left; wc see done
Within our readiest reach; that at our will
We may resume, and charge; And all their skill,
Pallas and Jove, that all just counsels breath;
May darken, with securenesse, to their death.
And let me charge thee now, as thou art mine;
And as thy veins mine own true blood combine:
Let (after this) none know Ulysses nere.
Not any one of all the household there;
Not here, the Herdsman: Not Laertes be
Made privy: nor her self, Penelope.
But only let thy self, and me work out
The women's thoughts, of all things borne about
The wooers hearts: and then thy men approve,
To know who honors, who with reverence love
Our well-weigh'd Memories; and who is won
To fail thy fit right, though my only Son.
You teach (said he) so punctually now, Tel^machus to his Father.

As I knew nothing; nor were sprung from you.
I hope, hereafter, you shall better know
What soul I bear; and that it does not let
The least loose motion, pass his natural seat.
But this course you propose, will prove, I fear,
Small profit to us; and could wish your care
Would weigh it better, as too far about.
For Time will ask much, to the sifting out
Of each man's disposition, by his deeds.
And, in the mean time, every wooer feeds
Beyond saciety; nor knows how to spare.
The women yet, since they more easy are
For our enquiry; I would wish you try
Who right your state, who do it injury.
The men I would omit: and these things make
Your labor, after. But to undertake
The wooers war; I wish your utmost speed,
Especially, if you could cheer the deed,
With some Oftent from Jove. Thus (as the Sire
Consented to the Son) did here expire
Their mutual speech. And now the Ship was come
That brought the young Prince, and his soldiers home.
The deep Haven (reached) they drew the Ship ashore;
Took all their Arms out, and the rich Gifts bore
To Clitius house. But to Ulysses Court
They sent a Herald first, to make report
To wise Penelope, that safe at field
Her Son was left: yet since the Ship would yield
Most have to her; he sent that first; and them
To comfort with his utmost, the extreme
He knew she suffered. At the Court, now met
The Herald, and the Herdsman; to repeat
One message to the Queen. Both whom (arrived
Within the gates:) Both to be foremost strived
In that good News. The Herald, he for have
Amongst the Maids bestowed it; thinking plac'st
The Queen amongst them. Now (said he) O Queen,
Your loved Son is arrived. And then was seen
The Queen her self: To whom the herdsman ^ould
All that Telemachus inioyn'd he should.
All which discharged; his steps, he back bestows,
And left, both Court and City, for his Sowes.
The wooers then grew sad; soule-vext, and all
Made forth the Court. When, by the mighty wall,
They took their several seat, before the gates;
To whom Eurymachus, initiates
Their vtter'd greeuance. O (said he) my Friends; (...).

A work right great begun, as proudly ends*
We said, Telemachus should never make
His voyage good; nor this shore ever take
For his returns receipt: and yet we fail,
And he performs it. Come, let us man a Sail
The best in our election; and bestow
Such soldiers in her, as can swiftest row:
To tell our friends, that way-lay his retreat
It Is safe performed: and make them quickly get
Their ship for Ithaca. This was not said,
Before Amphinomus in Port displaid
The ship arrived: her sails then under stroke,
And Oars resumed. When laughing, thus he spoke:
Move for no messenger: these men are come; (...)

Some God has either told his turning home,
Or they themselves have seen his ship gone by:
Had her in chase, and lost her. Instantly
They rose, and went to Port: found drawn to Land
The Ship; the soldiers taking Arms in hand.
The woo'rs themselves, to counsel went, in throng:
And not a man besides, or old, or young,
Let sit amongst them. Then Eupitheus Son
(Antinous) said: See what the Gods have done:
They only, have delivered from our ill
The men we waylaid; (...)
every windy hill
Has bin their watch-tow'r; where by turns they stood
Continual Sentinel. And we made good
Our work as well: For (Sun, once set) we never
Slept wink ashore, all night; But made sail ever
This way, and that; even till the morning kept
Her sacred Station; so to intercept
And take his life, for whom our ambush lay;
And yet has God, to his return given way.
But let us prosecute with counsels, here
His necessary death: nor any where
Let rest his safety; for if he survive,
Our sails will never, in wished Havens arrive.
Since he is wise, has soul, and counsel to
To work the people, who will never do
Our faction favor. What we then intend
Against his person, give we present end
Before he call a counsel; which, believe
His spirit will have, and point where it does grieve*
Stand up amongst them all, and urge his death
Decreed amongst us. Which complaint, will breath
A fire about their spleenes; and blow no praise
On our ill labors. Lest they therefore raise
Power to exile us from our Native earth,
And force our lives societies to the birth
Of foreign countries: let our speeds prevent
His coming home, to this austere complaint;
(At field and far from Town, or in some way
Of narrow passage:) with his latest day
Shown to his forward youth: his goods and lands,
Left to the free division of our hands:
The Moouables made al, his Mothers dowre,
And his who-euer, Fate affoords the power
To celebrate with her, sweet Hyme^s rites.
Or if this please not; but your appetites
Stand to his safety, and to give him ^eate
In his whole birthright; let us look to eat
At his cost never more: but every man
Haste to his home: and wed with whom he can
At home; and there, lay first about for dowre,
And then the woman give his second power
Of Nuptial liking: And, for last, apply
His purpose, with most gifts, and destiny.
This, silence caused; whose breach, at last, begone
Amphinomus, the much renowned Son
Of Nisus, surnamed Aretiades;
Who from Dulychius (full of flowery Leas)
Led all the wooers; and in chief did please
The Queen with his discourse; because it grew
From roots of those good minds that did indue
His goodly person: (...). Bonis mentibus the plural number used ever by Homer.
who (exceeding wi^e)
Used this speech: Friends, I never will adui^e
The Princes death: for it is a damned thing
To put to death the issue of a King.
First therefore, let us examine, what applause
The Gods will give it. If the equal Laws
Of Jove approve it, I my self will be
The man shall kill him; and this company
Exhort to that mind: If the Gods remain
Adverse, and hate it; I advise, refrain.
This said Amphinomus, and pleased them all:
When all arose, and in Ulysses Hall
Took seat again. Then, to the Queen was come
The wooers plot, to kill her son at home:
Since their abroad design had mist success.
The Herald Medon (who the whole address
Knew of their counsels) making the report.
The Goddess of her sex, with her fair sort
Of lovely women; at the large Hals door
(Her bright cheeks clouded, with a veil she wore)
Stood, and directed to Antinous
Her sharp reproof; which she digested thus:
Antinous? Penel: to Antin*
composde of injury,
Plotter of mischief? Though reports that fly
Amongst our Ithacensian people; say
That thou, of all that glory in their sway,
Art best in words and counsels; Thou Art not so.
Fond, busy fellow, why plott'st thou the woe
And slaughter of my Son? and do not fear
The Presidents of suppliants? when the ear
Of Jove stoopes to them? It Is unjust to do
Slaughter for slaughter; or pay woe, for woe:
Mischief for kindness; Death for life sought then,
Is an injustice to be loathed of men.
Serves not thy knowledge, to remember when
Thy Father fled to us; who (moved to wrath
Against the Taphian thieves) pursued with scath
The guiltless Thesprots; in whose peoples fear,
Pursuing him for wreake, he landed here.
They after him, professing both their prize
Of all his chiefly valew'd Faculties,
And more priz^d life. Of all whose bloodiest ends
Ulysses curbed them, though they were his friends.
Yet thou, like one that no Law will allow
The least true honor, eat'st his house up now
That fed thy Father: woo'st for love, his wife,
Whom thus thou grieu'st; and seek'st her sole sons life.
Cease, I command thee; and command the rest,
To see all thought of these foul fashions eeast.
Eurymachus replied; Be confident, Eurym: to Pene^

Thou all of wit made; the most famed descent
Of King Icarius: Free thy spirits of fear:
There lives not any one; nor shall live here
Now, nor hereafter; while my life gives heat
And light to me on earth* that dares entreat
With any ill touch, thy well-loued Son;
But here I vow, and here will see it done,
His life shall stain my Lance. If on his knees
The City-racer, Ulysses.
Laert^ades,
Has made me sit; put in my hand his food,
And held his red wine to me: shall the blood
Of his Telemachus, on my hand lay
The least pollution, that my life can stay?
No: I have ever charged him not to fear
Deaths threat from any; And for that most dear
Love of his Father, he shall ever be
Much the most lou^d, of all that live to me.
Who kills a guiltless man, from Man may fly;
From God his searches, all escapes deny.
Thus cheered his words; but his affections still
Feared not to cherish foul intent to kill,
Even him, whose life to all lives he preferred.
^he Queen went up; and to her love appeared
Her Lord so freshly; that she wept, till sleep
(By Pallas forced on her) her eyes did steep
In his sweet humor. When the Even was come,
The God-like Herdsman reached the whole way home.
Ulysses and his Son, for supper dressed
A yeare-old Swine; and ere their Host and Guest
Had got their presence; Pallas had put by
With her fair rod, Ulysses royalty;
And rendered him, an aged man again,
With all his vile Integuments; lest his Swain
Should know him in his trim, and tell his Queen,
In these deep secrets, being not deeply seen.
He seen; Telem. to Eum.
to him, the Prince these words did use:
VVelcome divine Eumaeus; Now what news
Imployes the City? Are the wooers come
Back from their Scout dismayed? Or here at home
Will they again attempt me? ^um to Telem.
He replied,
These touch not my care; I was satisfied
To do, with most speed, what I went to do;
My message done, return. And yet, not so
Came my news first; a Herald (met with there)
Fore-stal'd my Tale, and told how safe you were.
Besides which merely necessary thing;
What in my way chanced, I may ouer-bring,
Being what I know, and witnest with mine eyes.
Where the Hermaean Sepulcher does rise
Above the City: I beheld take Port
A Ship; and in her, many a man of sort:
Her freight was shields and Lances; and, me thought
They were the wooers: but of knowledge, naught
Can therein tell you. The Prince smiled, and knew
They were the^wooers; casting secret view
Upon his Father. But what they intended
Fled far the Herdsman: whose Swains labors ended,
They dressed the Supper; which, past want, was eat.
When all desire sufficed, of wine, and meat;
Of other humane wants, they took supplies
At Sleeps soft hand; who sweetly closed their eyes.
The End of the xvi. Book.
THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
TElemachus returned to Town,
Makes to his curious mother known
In part, his Travails. After whom
Ulysses to the Court does come,
In good Eumaeus guide; and preast
To witness of the Wooers Feast*
Whom (though twice ten years did bestow
In far off parts) his Dog does know.
Another.
(...)
Ulysses shows
through all disguise:
Whom his dog knows;
who knowing dies.

But when aires rosy birth (the Morn) arose,
Telemachus did for the Town dispose
His early steps; and took to his command
His fair long Lance, well sorting with his hand.
Thus, parting with Eumaeus: Now my friend, Telem. to Eum.

I must to Town; lest too far I extend
My Mothers moan for me: who till her eyes
Mine own eyes witness; varies tears and cries
Through all extremes. Do then this charge of mine,
And guide to Town this hapless guest of thine;
To beg elsewhere his further Festival:
Give, they that please, I cannot give to all:
Mine own wants take up for my self my pain.
If it incense him, he the worst shall gain;
The lovely truth I love, and must be plain.
Alas Friend (said his Father) nor do I
Desire at all your further charity.
It Is better beg in Cities, Vlys* to his Son.
then in Fields,
And take the worst a beggars fortune yields.
Nor am I apt to stay in Swine-sties more
How ever: ever the great Chief before
The poor Ranks must, to every step obey.
But go; your man, in my command shall sway:
Anon yet to, by favor; when your fires
Have comforted the cold heat, age expires;
And when the Suns flame, has besides corrected
The early air abroad; not being protected
By these my bare weeds, from the mornings frost;
Which (since so much ground is to be engrost
By my poor feet as you report) may give
Too violent charge, to th'heat by which I live.
This said; his Son went on, with spritely pace,
And to the wooers, studied little grace.
Arrived at home; he gave his Iaueline stay
Against a lofty Pillar; and bold way
Made further in. When, having so far gone
That he transcended, the fair Porch of Stone;
The first by far, that gave his entry, eye
Was Nurse Euryclea; who th'embrodery
Of Stools there set; was giving Cushions fair:
Who ran upon him, and her rapt repair
Shed tears for joy. About him gathered round
The other Maids; his head, and shoulders, croun'd
With kisses and embraces. From above
The Queen her self came, like the Queen of Love;
Or bright Diana: Cast about her Son
Her kind embraces: with effusion
Of loving tears; kissed both his lovely eyes,
His cheeks, and forehead; and gave all supplies
With this entreaty: Welcome sweetest light;
I never had conceit, Penel. to Telem.
to set quick sight
On thee thus soon; when thy loved fathers fame
As far as Pylos, did thy spirit inflame:
In that search ventured all unknown to me.
O say, By what power came thou now to be
Mine eyes dear object? He returned reply,
Move me not now: Telem to his Mother.
when you my escape descry
From iminent death; to think me fresh entrapt;
The feared wound rubbing, felt before I escaped.
Double not needless passion, on a heart
Whose joy so green is, and so apt t'inuert:
But pure weeds putting on, ascend and take
Your women with you: that ye all may make
Vows of full Hecatombs, in sacred fire
To all the God-heads; If their only Sire
Vouchsafe revenge of guest-rites wronged, which he
Is to protect, as being their Deity.
My way shall be directed to the hall
Of common Concourse, that I thence may call
A stranger; who from off the Pylian shore
Came friendly with me; whom I sent before
With all my soldiers; but in chief did charge
Pyraeus with him, wishing him t'enlarge
His love to him, at home, in best affair,
And utmost honors, till mine own repair.
Her Son, thus spoken; his words could not bear
The wings too eas^ly through her either ear:
But putting pure weeds on; made vows entire
Of perfect Hecatombes, in sacred fire
To all the Deities; if their only Sire
Vouchsaft revenge of guest-rites, wronged; which he
Was to protect, as being their Deity.
Her Son left house: In his fair hand, his Lance;
His dogs attending, and on every glance
His looks cast from them; Pallas put a grace
That made him seem of the celestial race.
Whom (come to concourse) every man admired:
About him thronged the wooers, and desired
All good to him in tongue^; but in their hearts
Most deep ils threatened, to his most deserts.
Of whose huge rout, once free; he cast glad eye
On some, that long before his infancy,
Were with his Father, great, and gracious:
Grave Halytherses, Mentor, Antiphus;
To whom he went: took seat by them. And they
Inquired of all things, since his parting day.
To them Pyraeus came, and brought his Guest
Along the City thither; whom not left
The Prince respected; nor was long before
He rose and met him: The first word yet; Pyrae. to Tel^m.
bore
Pyraeus from them both: whose haste, besought
The Prince to send his women, to see brought
The Gifts from his house, that Atrides gave,
Which, his own roofes, he thought, would better save.
The wise Prince answered, I can scarce conceive
The way to these works. If the wooers reaue
By privy Stratagem, my life at home:
I rather wish, Pyraeus may become
The Master of them, then the best of these.
But, if I sow in their fields of excess,
Slaughter, and ruin; then thy trust employ,
And to me ioying, bring thou those with joy.
This said; he brought home his grief-practisd Guest;
Where both put off, both oiled, and did inuest
Themselves in rich Robes; washed, and sat, and eat.
His Mother, in a fair chair, taking seat
Directly opposite: her Loome applied;
Who (when her Son and Guest, had satisfied
Their appetites with feast) said; (...)
O my Son,
You know, that eue^ since your Sire was won
To go in Agamemnons guide to Troy;
Attempting sleep, I never did enjoy
One nights good rest; but made my quiet bed
A Sea blown up with sighs; with tears still shed
Embrew'd and troubled: yet, though all your miss
In your late voyage, has been made for this,
That you might know th'abode your Father made.
You shun to tell me what success you had.
Now then, before the insolent access
The wooers straight will force on us; express
What you have heard. I will (said he) and true.
We came to Py^os, (...).
where the studious due
That any Father could afford his Son;
(But new arrived* from some course he had ron
To an extreme length, in some voyage vowed)
Nestor, the Pastor of the people, showed
To me arrived, in turrets thrust up hye;
Where not his brave Sons, were more loved then I.
Yet of th'vnconquer'd euer-Sufferer
Ulysses; never he could set his ear
Alive, or dead, from any earthy man.
But to the great Lacedemonian
( Atri^es, famous for his Lance) he sent
With horse and Chariots; Me, to learn the event
From his Relation; where I had the view
Of Argine Hel^en, whose strong beauties drew
(By wills of Gods) so many Grecia^ States*
And Trojans, under such laborious fates.
Where Menelaus ask't me, what affai^e
To Lacedemon, rendered my repair.
I told him all the truth: (...). to Telem.
who made reply*
O deed of most abhorred indecency!
A sort of Impotents attempt his bed,
Whose strength of mind, has Cities leuelled?
As to a Lions den, when any Hind
Has brought her young Calves, to their rest inclinde;
When he is ranging hills, and hearby dal^s,
To make, of Feeders there, his Festiuals:
But turning to his luster; Calves, and Dam,
He shows abhorred death, in his angers flame:
So (should Ulysses find this rabble, housd
In his free Turrets, courting his espousd)
F^ule death would fall them. O, I would to Jove,
Phoebus, and Pallas, that (when he shall prove
The broad report of his exhausted store,
True with his eyes) his Nerves and Sinews wore
That vigor then, that in the Lesbian Towers
(Prouok't to wrestle with the iron powrs
Philomelides vanted) he approved;
When, down he hurled his Challenger, and moved
Huge shouts from all the Achiues then in view.
If, once come home, he all those forces drew
About him there to work: they all were dead,
And should find bitter his attempted bed.
But, what you ask and sue for, I (as far,
As I have heard, the true-spoke Marinar)
Will tell directly; nor delude your ear.
He told me, that an Island did enspheare
(In much discomfort) great Laertes son;
And that the Nymph Calypso (ouer-ronne
With his affection) kept him in her Caves,
Where men, nor Ship, of power to brook the waves,
Were near his conuoy to his countries Shore*
And where her self, importuned evermore
His quiet stay; which not obtained, by force,
She kept his person from all else recourse.
This told Atrides; which was all he knew;
Nor staid I more: but from the Gods there blew
A prosperous wind, that set me quickly here.
This put his Mother, quite from all her cheer: Theoclymenus to Penelope.

When Theoclymenus the Augu^e, said:
O woman, honored with Ulysses bed:
Your Son, no doubt, knows clearly nothing more*
Hear me yet speak, that can the truth uncore;
Nor will be curious. Jove then, witness bear,
And this thy Hospitable Table (...),
With this whole household of (...)
That, at this hour, his royal (...)
On his loved country earth; (...)
Coming, or creeping, (...)
These wooers make; and in his (...)
Seeds, that shall thrive to (...)
This, set a ship-boord, (...)
And cried it out, to your (...)
Penelope replied; Would (...)
You well should witness a most (...)
And gifts such of me, as (...)
Should greet you with, a blessed (...)
This mutual speech, past: all the (...)
Hurling the stone, and (...)
Before the Palace, in the (...)
Where other-whil^^, their (...)
Sat plotting injuries. But when (...)
Of Supper entered; and the (...)
Brought sheep from field, that filled up every way
With those that used to furnish that puruay;
Medon, (...)
the Herald (who of all the rest
Pleased most the wooers and at every Feast
Was ever near) said; You whose kind consort
Make the fair branches of the Tree, our Court;
Grace it within now, and your Suppers take.
You that for health, and fair contentions sake
Will please your minds; know, bodies must have meat;
Play's worse then idleness, in times to eat.
This said; all left; came in; cast by, on Thrones
And Chaires, their garments. Their provisions
Were Sheep, Swine, Goats; the chiefly great and fat.
Besides an Ox, that from the Herd they gat.
And now, the King and Herdsman, from the field,
In good way were to Town: Twixt whom was held
Some walking conference; which thus begun
The good Eumaeus: Eumae to Vlyss.
Guest, your will was wun,
(Because the Prince commanded) to make way
Up to the City; though I wished your stay,
And to have made you Gaurdian of my stall:
But I, in care and fear, of what might fall,
In after anger of the Prince; forbore.
The checkes (...) Princes, touch their subjects sore.
But make we have, the day is nearly ended;
And cold airs still, are in the Even extended.
I know it (said he) consider all; Vlyss. to Eum^.
your charge
Is given to one that understands at large.
Haste then: hereafter, you shall lead the way;
Afford your Staff to, if it fit your stay,
That I may use it; since you say, our pass
Is less friend to a weak foot, then it was.
Thus cast he on his ne^^e, his nasty (...),
All patcht and torn: A cord that would not slip
For knots, and bracks, about the mouth of it,
Made serve the turn: and then his Swain did (...)
His forced state with a staff. Then (...) they hard
Their way to town: Their Cottage (...)
To Swains and Dogs. And now, (...)
The King along: his garments to a thread
All bare, and burned; and he (...)
Upon his staff* at all parts (...)
And sad old beggar. But when now they got
The rough highway; their voyage (...)
Much, (...)
of the City: where a Fount they reached,
From whence the Town their choicest water fetched,
That ever ouer-flow'd; and curious Art
Was shown about it: In which, (...) part;
Whose names, Neritus and Polyctor were,
And famous Ithacus. It had a Sphere
Of poplar, that ran round about the wall;
And into it, a lofty Rock let fall,
Continual supply of cool clear stream:
On whose top, to the Nymphs that were supreme
In those parts loves; a stately Altar rose;
Where every Trauailer, did still impose
Devoted sacrifice. At this fount, found
These silly Trauailers, a man renowned
For guard of Goats, which now he had in guide;
Whose huge^ stored Herd, two herdsment kept beside:
For all Herds it excelled; and bred a feed
For wooers only. He was Dolius seed,
And called Melanthius. Who casting eye
One these two there, he chid them terribly:
And so past mean, that even the wrethed fate,
Now on Ulysses, he did irritate.
His fume Melan^^ius to Eumaeu^ and Ulysses.
to this effect, he did pursue:
Why so; it is now at all parts passing true,
That ill leads ill: good evermore does train
With like, his like: Why thou vnenuied Swain,
VVhither do thou lead this same victles Leager?
This bane of banquets; this most nasty beggar?
Whose sight does make one sad, it so abhorres;
Who with his standing in so many doors,
Has broke his back; and all his beggary tends
To beg base crusts, but to no manly ends;
As asking swords, or with actiuity
To get a Caldron Would thou give him me,
To farm my Stable, or to sweep my yard,
And bring brouse to my kids; and that preferred,
He should be at my keeping for his pains,
To drink as much ^hey, as his thirsty veins
Would still be swilling (whey made all his fees)
His monstrous belly, would oppress his knees.
But he has learned to lead ba^e life about;
And will not work, but crouch among the rout;
For broken meat, to cram his bursten gut.
Yet this I Will say; and he will find it put
In sure effect; that if he enters where
Ulysses roofes cast shade; the stools will there
About his ears fly; all the house will throw;
And rub his ragged sides, with cuffes enough.
Past these reuiles; his manlesse rudeness spurned
Divine Ulysses; who, at no part turned
His face from him, but had his spirit fed
With these two thoghts; If he should strike him dead
With his bestowed staff: or at his feet
Make his direct head, and the pauement meet.
But he bore all, and entertained a breast,
That in the strife of all extremes did rest.
Eumaeus, Eumoeuscu^seth Melm. for his rude usage of Ulysses.
frowning on him; chid him yet*
And lifting up his hands to heaven, he set
This bitter curse at him: O you that bear
Fair name to be the race of Jupiter,
Nymphs of these Fountains! If Ulysses ever
Burned thighs to you; that hid in fat, did never
Fail your acceptance, of or Lamb, or Kid;
Grant this grace to me; let the man thus hid
Shine through his dark fate: make some God his guide;
That, to thee (Goat-herd) this same Pallats Intending his (...) Herd, k^pt
only for the wooers dain^ie Pa^la^s.
pride,
Thou driu'st before thee; he may come and make
The scatterings of the earth; and ouer-take
Thy wrongs, with forcing thee to ever err
About the City, hunted by his fear.
And in the mean space, may some slothful Swains,
Let lousy sickness gnaw thy Cattels Veins.
O Gods! Mel^m: answer to Eumaeus.
(replied Melanthius) what a curse
Has this dog barkt out; and can yet, do wurse?
This man, shall I have given into my hands,
When, in a well built Ship, to farre-off Lands
I shall transport him: That (should I want (...))
My sale of him, may find me victels there.
And (for Ulysses) would to heaven, his joy
The Siluer-bearing^ bow-God, would destroy,
This day, within his house; as sure as he
The day of his return shall never see.
This said, he left them, going silent on;
But he out-went them, and took straight upon
The Palace royal, which he entered straight;
Sat with tho wooers, and his Trenchers freight
The Keruers gave him, of the flesh there v^nted:
But bread, the reverend Buttleresse presented.
He took, against Eurymachus, his place;
Who most of all the wooers, gave him grace.
And now, Ulysses and his Swain got nere:
When, round about them, visited their ear
The hollow Harpes delicious-stricken string;
To which, did Phaemius (near the wooers) sing.
Then, by the hand, Ulysses took his Swain,
And said, Eumaeus? One may here see plain
(In many a grace) that (...).
Laertiades
Built here these Turrets; and (among others these)
His whole Court armed, with such a goodly wall:
The Cornish, and the Cope, Maiesticall:
His double gates, and Turrets, built too strong
For force, or virtue, ever to expugne.
I know, the Feasters in it, now abound,
Their Cates cast such a savor; and the sound
The Harp gives, argues, an accomplished Feast;
The Gods made Music, Banquets dearest Guest.
These things (said he) your skill may tell with ease,
Since you are graced with greater knowledges.
But now, consult we, how these works shall sort,
If you will first approach this praised Court,
And see these wooers (I remaining here)
Or I shall enter, and your self forbear.
But be not you, too tedious in your stay
Lest thrust ye be, and buffeted away.
Brain has no fence for blows; look to it I pray.
You speak to one that comprehends (said he)
Go you before; and here, adventure me.
I have of old, been used to cuffes and blows;
My mind is hardn'd; having borne the throws
Of many a sour event, in waves, and wars;
Where knockes and buffets are no Forreinats.
And this same harmefull belly, by no mean,
The greatest Abstinent, can ever weane.
Men suffer much Bane, by the Bellies rage;
For whose sake, Ships in all their equipage
Are armed, and set out to th'vntamed Seas;
Their bulkes full fraught with ils to enemies.
Such speech they changed: when in the yeard there lay
A dog, called Argus; which, before his way
Assumed for Ilion; Ulysses dog, ^^^^led Argus.
Ulysses bred;
Yet stood his pleasure then, in little sted;
(As being too young) but growing to his grace,
Young men made choice of him for every Chase;
Or of their wild Goats, of their Hares, or Hearts.
But, his King gone; and he, now past his parts;
Lay all abiectly on the Stables store,
Before the Oxe-stall, and Mules stable door,
To keep the clothes, cast from the Pessants hands,
While they laid compass on Ulysses Lands:
The Dog, with Tickes (unlooked to) ouer-growne.
But, by this Dog* no sooner seen, but known
Was wise Ulysses, who (new entered there)
Up went his Dogs laid ears; and (coming nere)
Up, he himself rose, The Dog dye^ as soon as he had se^n Ulysses
fawned, and waged his Stern;
Coucht close his ears, and lay so: Nor descerne
Could evermore his deere-lou'd Lord again.
Ulysses saw it; nor had power t'abstaine
From shedding tears: which (far-off seeing his Swain)
He dried from his sight clean; to whom, he thus
His grief dissembled: It Is miraculous,
That such a Dog as this, should have his laire
On such a dunghill; for his form is fair.
And yet, I know not, if there were in him
Good pace, or parts, for all his goodly lim.
Or he lived empty of those inward things,
As are those trencher-Beagles, tending Kings;
Whom for their pleasures, or their glories ^ake,
Or fashion; they into their favors take.
This Dog (said he) Euma^us Des^riptions of Ulysses Dog.
was servant to one dead
A huge time since. But if he bore his head
(For form and quality) of such a hight,
As when Ulysses (bound for the Ilion fight,
Or quickly after) left him: your rapt eyes
Would then admire, to see him use his Thyes,
In strength, and swiftnes. He would nothing fly,
Nor any thing let escape. If once his eye
Seized any wild beast, he knew straight his scent:
Go where he would, away with him he went.
Nor was there ever any Savage stood
Amongst the thickets of the deepest wood
Long time before him, but he pulled him down;
As well by that true hunting to be shown
In such vaste couerts; as for speed of pace
In any open Lawne; For in deep chase,
He was a passing wise, and well-nos'd Hound.
And yet is all this good in him vncroun'd
With any grace here now. Nor he more fed
Then any errant Curre. His King is dead,
Far from his country; and his servants are
So negligent, they lend his Hound, no care.
Where Masters rule not, but let Men (...);
You never there, see honest service done.
That Man's half virtue, Jove takes quite away,
That once is Sun-burn'd with the servile day.
This said; he entered the well-builded Towers,
Up bearing right upon the glorious wooers;
And left poor Argus dead. His Lords first sight,
Since that time twenty years, bere^t his light.
Telemachus, did far the first behold
Eumaeus enter; and made signs he should
Come up to him. He (noting) came, and took
On earth, his seat. And then, the Master Cook
Served in more banquet: Of which; part he set
Before the wooers; part the Prince did get:
Who sat alone; his Table placed aside;
To which, the Herald did the bread divide.
After Eumaeus, Ulysses ruthful fashion of (...)
entered straight the King,
Like to a poor, and heavy aged thing:
Bore hard upon his staff; and was so clad,
As would have made his mere beholder sad.
Upon the Ashen floor, his limbs he spread;
And against a Cypress threshold staid his head;
The tree wrought smooth, and in a line direct,
Tried by the Plumbe, and by the Architect.
The Prince then bad the Herdsman give him bread,
The finest there: and see, that prostrated
At-all-parts-plight of his, given all the cheer
His hands, could turn to: Take (said he) and bear
These cates to him; and bid him beg of all
These wooers here; and to their feastiuall
Bear up with all the impudence he can;
Bashful behavior, fits no needy Man.
He heard, and did his will: Hold Guest (said he)
Telemachus commends these cates to thee:
Bids thee bear up, and all these woo'rs implore;
Wit must make Impudent, whom Fate makes pore.
O Jove (said he) do my poor prayers the grace,
To make him blessed'st of the mortal race:
And every thought now, in his generous heart,
To deeds that further my desires convert.
Thus took he in, with hoth his hands his store;
And in the uncouth Scrip that lay before
His ill-shod feet, reposed it: whence he fed
All time the Music to the Feasters played.
Both jointly ending. Then began the woo'rs
To put in old act, their tumultuous powers.
When Pallas standing close, did prompt her friend,
To prove how far the bounties would extend
Of those proud wooers; so, to let him try,
Who most, who least, had learned humanity.
Howeuer, no thought touched Mineruaes mind,
That any one should escape his wreake designed.
He handsomely became all; crept about
To every wooer; held a forced hand out:
And all his work, did in so like a way,
As he had practiced begging many a day*
And though they knew, all beggars could do this,
Yet they admired it, as no deed of his;
Though far from thought of other: used expense
And pity to him: who he was, and whence,
Enquiring mutually. Melanthius then:
Hear me, ye wooers of the farre-fam'd Queen,
About this beggar: I have seen before
This face of his; and know for certain more:
That this Swain brought him hither. What he is,
Or whence he came, flies me. Reply to this
Antinous made; and mocked Eumaeus thus.
O thou renowned Herdsman, why to us
Brought thou this beggar? Serves it not Our hands,
That other Land-leapers, and Cormorands
(Profane poor knaves) lie on us, vnconducted,
But you must bring them? So amiss instructed
Art thou in course of thrift, as not to know
Thy Lords goods wrackt, in this their ouer-flow?
Which, think thou nothing, that thou calst in these?
Eumaeus answered; Though you may be wise,
You speak not wisely: Who calls in a Guest
That is a guest himself? None call to Feast
Other then men that are of public use:
Prophets, or Poets, whom the Gods produce;
Physicians for men's ils; or Architects.
Such men, the boundless earth affoords respects
Bounded in honor; and may call them well:
But poor men, who calls? Who does so excel
In others good, to do himself an ill?
But all Ulysses servants have been still
Eye-sores in your way, more then all that woo;
And chiefly I. But what care I, for you?
As long as these roofes, hold as thrals to none,
The wi^e Penelope, and her God-like Son.
Forbear (said he) and leave this tongues bold ill;
Antinous uses to be crossing still,
And give sharp words: his blood that humor bears,
To set men still together by the ears.
But (turning then to Antinous) O (said he)
You entertain a Fathers care of me;
To turn these eating guests out: It Is advise
Of needful use for my poor faculties.
But God does not allow this: There must be
Some care of poor men, in humanity.
What you your selves take; give; I not envy,
But give command that hospitality
Be given al strangers: Nor shall my powers fear,
If this mood in me, reach my Mothers ear;
Much less the servants, that are here to see
Ulysses house kept, in his old degree.
But you bear no such mind; your wits more cast
To fill your self, then let another taste.
Antinous answered him; Brave spoken man!
Whose minds free fire, see checked, no virtue can;
If all we wooers here, would give as much
As my mind serves; his (...)
Larges should be such
As would for three months serve his far off way
From troubling your house, with more cause of stay.
This said; he took a stool up, that did rest
Beneath the board, his spangled feet at feast:
And offered at him: But the rest, gave all,
And filled his fulsome Scrip with Festival.
And so Ulysses for the present, was,
And for the future furnished; and his pass
Bent to the door, to eat. Yet could not leave
Antinous so: Ulysses to A^tin.
but said; Do you to give
(Loved Lord) your presence, makes a show to me,
As you not worst were of the company,
But best? and so much, that you seem the King:
And therefore, you should give some better thing,
Then bread, like others. I will spread your praise
Through all the wide world; that have in my days
Kept house my self; and trod the wealthy ways
Of other men, even to the Title, Blessed;
And often have I given an erring Guest
(How mean soever) to the utmost gain
Of what he wanted: kept whole troops of men;
And had all other commings in; with which
Men live so well, and gain the fame of Rich.
Yet Jove consumed all: he would have it so:
To which, his mean was this; he made me go
Far off, for Egypt, in the rude consort
Of all-waies-wandring Pirates; where, in Port
I bad my loved men, draw their Ships ashore,
And dwell amongst them* Sent out some t'explore
Up to the Mountains; who (intemperate,
And their inflamed bloods, bent to satiate)
Forrag'd the rich fields; haled the women thence,
And vnwean'd children, with the foul expense
Both of their fames, and bloods. The cry then flew
Straight to the City; and the great fields grew
With horse, and foot; and flamed with iron arms;
When Jove (that breaks the Thunder in Alarmes)
An ill flight cast amongst my men: Not one
Inspired with spirit, to stand, and turn upon
The fierce pursuing foe: and therefore stood
Their ill fate thick about them: some in blood,
And some in bondage: Toiles led by constraint
Fasting upon them. Me, along they sent
To Cyprus, with a stranger Prince they met,
Dmetor Iasides; who The Imperial seat
Of that sweet Island, swaid in strong command;
And thus feel I here, Needs contemned hand.
And what God sent (said he) this suffering bane
To vex our banquet? Stand off; nor profane
My board so boldly, lest I show thee here,
Cyprus and Egypt, made more sour then there.
You are a saucy set faced Vagabond.
About with all you go; and they, beyond
Discretion give thee, since they find not here
The least proportion set down to their cheer.
But every Fountain has his under floods;
It is no Bounty, to give others goods.
O Gods (replied Ulysses) I see now,
You bear no soul, in this your goodly show;
Beggars at your board, I perceive, should get
Scarce salt from your hands, if the^ selves brought meat:
Since, sitting where another board is spread,
That flows with feast; not to the broken bread
Will your allowance reach. Nay then (said he,
And looked austerely) I^ so saucy be
Your suffered language, I suppose, that clear
You shall not escape without some broken cheer.
Thus rapt he up a stool, with which he smit
The Kings right shoulder, 'twixt his neck, and it.
He stood him like a rock: Antinous dart
Not stirred Ulysses: who, in his great heart
Deep ils proiected; which, for time yet, close
He bound in silence; shook his head, and went
Out to the Entry, where he then gave vent
To his ^ull scrip; sat on the earth, and eat,
And talked still to the wooers: hear me yet
Ye wooers of the Queen. It never greeues
A man to take blows, where for Sheep, or Beeues,
Or other maine possessions, a man fights:
But for his harmefull belly, this man smites,
Whose love to many a man, breeds many a woe.
And if the poor have Gods, and Furies to;
Before Antinous wear his Nuptial wreath,
He shall be worn upon the dart of death.
Harsh Guest (said he) sit silent at your meat,
Or seek your desperate plight some safer seat;
Lest by the hands, or heels, youths drag your years,
And rend your rotten rags about your ears.
This made the rest, as highly hate his folly,
As he had violated something holy.
When one (even of the proudest) thus began:
Thou do not nobly, thus to play the man
On such an errant wretch: O ill disposed!
Perhaps some sacred Godhead goes enclosed
Even in his abject outside: For the Gods
Have often visited these rich abods
Like such poor stranger Pilgrims; since their powers
(Being always shapefull) glide through Towns and Towers;
Observing as they pass still, who they be
That piety love, and who impiety.
This, all men said; But he held sayings cheap:
And all this time Telemachus did heap
Sorrow on sorrow, on his beating heart
To see his Father stricken; yet let part
No tear to earth, but shook his head, and thought
As deep as those ils, that were after wrought.
The Queen now hearing of her poor guests stroke;
Said to her Maid, (as to her wooer she spoke)
I wish the famous for his Bow, the Sun
Would strike thy heart so. Her wish (thus begun)
Her Lady, fair Eurynome pursude
Her execration; and did thus conclude:
So may our vows call down from heaven, his end;
And let no one life of the rest, extend
His life till morning. O Eurynome
(Replied the Queen) may all Gods speak in thee:
For all the wooers, we should rate as foes;
Since all their weals, they place in others woes.
But this Antinous, we past all, should hate,
As one resembling black and cruel Fate.
A poor strange wretch; begged here, compelled by need:
Asked all, and every one gave in his deed;
Filled his sad Scrip, and eased his heavy wants:
Only this man, bestowed unmanly tants;
And with a cruel blow (his force let fly)
'Twixt neck and shoulders, showed his charity.
These minds (above) she and her Maids did show;
While, at his scrip, Ulysses sat below.
In which time, she Eumaeus called, and said:
Go, good Eumaeus, and see soon conuaid
The stranger to me: Bid him come and take
My salutations for his welcomes sake;
And my desire serve, if he has not heard
Or seen distressed Ulysses? who has erred
Like such a man; and therefore chance may fall,
He has, by him been met, and spoke withal.
O Queen (said he) I wish to heaven, your ear
Were quit of this irreverent noise you hear
From these rude wooers; when I bring the guest:
Such words, your ear, would let into your breast
As would delight it, to your very heart.
Three nights and days, I did my Roof impart
To his fruition; (for he came to me
The first of all men, since he fled the Sea)
And yet he had not given a perfect end
To his relation, of what woes did spend
The spite of Fate on him: Simil: In which Ulysses is compared with a Po^t,
for the swee^nesse of his speech.
But as you see
A Singer, breathing out of Deity
Loue-kindling lines; when all men seated nere,
Are rapt with endless thirst, to ever hear:
So swee^n'd he, my bosom, at my meat;
Affirming that Ulysses was in Crete,
Where first the memories of Minos were,
A Guest to him, there dwelling, then as dear
As his true Father: and from thence, came he
Tired on with sorrows; tossed from sea to sea;
To cast himself in dust, and tumble here
At wooers feet, for blows, and broken cheer.
But, of Ulysses (where the Thesprots dwell,
A wealthy people) Fame, he says, did tell
The still suruiuall: who his Native light
Was bound for now; with treasure infinite.
Call him (said she) that he himself may say
This, over to me. We shall soon have way
Given by the wooers: They, as well at Gate,
As set within doors, use to recreate
Their high-fed spirits. As their humors lead,
They follow; and may well; for still they tread
Vncharg'd ways here; their own wealth lying unwasted
In poore-kept houses: only something tasted
Their bread and wine is, by their household Swains:
But they themselves, let loose continual Reins
To our expenses; making slaughter still
Of Sheep, Goats, Oxen; feeding past their fill;
And vainly lauishing our richest wine.
All these extending past the sacred line.
For here lives no man, like Ulysses now
To curb these ruins: But should he once show
His country light, his presence; He and his
Would soon revenge these wooers injuries.
This said; about the house, in echoes, round,
Her Sons strange Neesings made a horrid ^ound; Neezing a good Omen.

At which, the Queen yet laughed, and said; Go^ call
The stranger to me: Heardst thou not to all
My words last vtter'd, what a Neesing brake
From my Telemachus? From whence I make
This sure conclusion; That the death, and fate
Of every wooer here, is near his date.
Call then the Guest; and if he tell as true
What I shall ask him; Cote, cloak, all things new
These hands shall yield him. This said; down he went
And told Ulysses, that the Queen had sent
To call him to her; that she might enquire
About her husband, what her sad desire
Urged her to ask: and if she found him true,
Both cote, and cassocke (which he needed) new
Her hands would put on him; And that the Bread
Which now he begged amongst the commune tread;
Should freely feed his hunger now from her;
Who, all he wished, would to his wants prefer.
His answer was; I will with fit speed, tell
The whole truth to the Queen; For, passing well
I know her Lord; since he and I have shared
In equal sorrows. But I much am scared
With this rude multitude of wooers here;
The rage of whose pride, smites h^auens braze^ sphere:
Of whose rout, when one struck me for no fault;
Telemachus, nor none else, turned the assault
From my poor shoulders. Therefore though she have;
Bese^ch the Queen, her patience, will see past
The days broad light; and then, may she enquire.
It Is but my closer preasing to the fire
In th^Euenings cold; because, my weeds, you know
Are passing thin: For I made bold to show
Their brackes to you, and prayed your kind supply.
He heard, and hasted; and met instantly
The Queen upon the pauement in his way:
Who asked; what? bringst thou not (...)
Find his austere supposes? Takes (...)
Of th'vniust wooers? Or thus hard (...)
On any other doubt the house obiect^?
He does me wrong; and gives (...)
To his feared safety. He does right (said (...))
And what he fears, should move the policy
Of any wise one; taking care to shun
The violent wooers; He bids bide, til Sun
Has hid his broad light: and, believe it, Queen,
It Will make your best course: since you two, unseen
May pass the encounter: you to speak more free;
And he, your ear gain, less distractedly.
The Guest is wise (said she) and well does give
The right thought use. Of all the men that live,
Life serves none such, as these proud wooers are,
To give a good man, cause to use his care.
Thus (all agreed) amongst the wooers goes
Eumaeus to the Prince; and (whispering close)
Said; Now, my Love, my charge shall take up me,
(Your goods, and mine) What here is, you must see
I^ fit protection. But, in chief, regard
Your own dear safeguard; whose state, study hard,
Lest sufferance seize you. Many a wicked thought
Conceal these wooers; whom just Jove see brought
To utter ruin, ere it touch at us.
So chance it, Friend (replied Telemachus)
Your Beuer taken, go: in first of day
Come, and bring sacrifice, the best you may.
To me, and to the immortals, be the care
Of whatsoever here, the safeties are.
This said; he sat in his elaborate Throne.
Eumaeus (fed to satisfaction)
Went to his charge; left both the Court and walls,
Full of secure, and fatal Festiuals.
In which, the wooers pleasures still would sway:
And now begun, the Euens nere-endin^ day.
The End of the Seauententh Book of Homers Odysses.
THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses, and Rogue Irus fight.
Penelope, vouchsafes her sight
To all her Wooers: who present
Gifts to her; ravished with content.
A certain Parle then we sing,
Betwixt a Wooer, and the King.
Another.
(...)
The Beggars gle^,
the Kings high fame;
Gifts given to see
a virtuous Dame.

THere came a commune Beggar to the Court;
Who, in the City, begged of all resort:
Excelled in madness of the gut; drunk, eat
Past intermission: was most hugely great;
Yet had no fiuers in him, nor no force:
In sight, a Man; In mind, a living Corse.
His true name, was Arnaeus: for his mother
Imposed it from his birth. And yet another
The City youth would give him (from the course
He after took; derived out of the force
That Need held on him: which was up, and down
To run on all men's errands through the Town)
Which sounded, Irus. When whose gut was come,
He needs would bar Ulysses his own home,
And fell to chiding him: Old man (said he)
Your way out of the Entry, quickly see
Be with fair Language taken; lest your stay
But little longer, see you dragged away.
See Sir: Observe you not, how all these make
Direct signs at me? Charging me to take
Your heels, and drag you out? But I take shame.
Rise yet, you are best; lest we two play a game
At cuffes together. He bent brows, and said:
Wretch! I do thee no ill; nor once vpbraide
Thy presence with a word; nor what mine eye
By all hands sees thee given, one thought envy:
Nor should thou envy others. Thou may see
The place will hold us both; and seem to me
A Beggar like my sels: which who can mend?
The Gods give most, to whom they least are Friend:
The chief goods Gods give, is in good to end.
But to the hands strife, of which you are so free,
Provoke me not, for fear you anger me;
And lest the old man, on whose scorn you stood,
Your lips and bosom, make shake hands in blood.
I love my quiet well, and more will love
To morrow then to day. But if you move
My peace beyond my right; the war you make,
Will never after give you will to take
Ulysses house into your begging walk.
O Gods (said he) how volubly does talk
This eating gulf? And how his fume breaks out,
As from an old cracked Oven? whom I will clout
So bitterly; and so with both hands mall
His chaps together; that his teeth shall fall,
As plain seen on the earth, as any Sowes
That ruts the Corne-fields, or deuoures the Mowes.
Come; close we now, that all may see, what wrong
An old man tempts, that takes at cuffes, a young.
Thus in the entry of those lofty Towers,
These two, with all spleen, spent their iarring powers:
Antinous took it; laughed, and said; O Friends
We never had such sport: This Guest contends
With this vaste Beggar, at the Buffets fight;
Come, join we hands, and screw up all their spite.
All rose in Laughters; and about them, bore
All the ragg'd rout of beggars at the door.
Then moved Antinous the victors hire
To all the woo'rs thus: There are now at fire
Two breasts of Goat: both which, let Law set down
Before the man, that wins the days renown,
With all their fat and greauie: And of both
The glorious Victor, shall prefer his tooth,
To which he makes his choice of, from us all;
And ever after, banquet in our Hall,
With what our boords yield: Not a Beggar more
Allowed to share; but all keep out at door.
This he proposd; and this they all approved;
To which Ulysses answered: O most loved,
By no means should an old man; and one old
In chief with sorrows, be so ouer-bold
To combat with his younger: But alas,
Mans-owne-ill-working belly, needs will pass
This work upon me; and enforce me too
To beat this fellow. But then, you must do
My age no wrong, to take my yongers part,
And play me foul play; making your strokes smart
Help his to conquer: for you easly may
With your strengths crush me. Do then right, and lay
Your Honors on it, in your oaths, to yield
His part no aid; but equal leave the field.
All swore his will. But then Telemachus,
His Fathers scoffs, with comforts serious,
Could not but answer, and made this reply.
Guest! If thine own powers cheer thy victory,
Fear no man's else, that will not pass it free:
He fights with many, that shall touch but thee.
I Will see thy guest^ right paid: Thou here art come
In my protection: and to this, the sum
Of all these wooers (which Antinous are
And King Eurymachus) conioyne their care.
Both vowed it. When Ulysses, laying by
His upper weed, his inner beggary
Nere showed his shame: which he, with rags prevented
Plucked from about his Thighs; and so presented
Their goodly sight, which were so white, and great,
And his large shoulders, were to view, so set
By his bare rags; his arms, his breast and all,
So broad, and brawny (their grace natural
Being helped by Pallas, ever standing nere)
That all the wooers, his admirers were
Beyond all measure: mutual whispers, driven
Through all their cluster, saying; Sure as heaven,
Poor Irus pulled upon him, bitter blows.
Through his thin Garment, what a Thigh he shows?
They said; But Irus felt. His Cow-herd mind
Was moved at root. But now, he needs must find
Facts to his brags; and forth at all parts ^it
The servants brought him; all his artires smit
With fears, and tremblings. Which Antinous saw,
And said; Nay, now too late comes fear; No Law,
Thou should at first have given thy braggart vain,
Nor should it so have swelled, if terrors strain
Thy spirits to this pass; for a man so old,
And worn with penuries, that still lay hold
On his ragg'd person. Howsoever, take
This vow from me, for firm; That if he make
Thy forces stoop; and prove his own supreme;
I Will put thee in a Ship, and down the stream
Send thee ashore, where King Echetus reigns,
(The roughest tyrant, that the world contains)
And he will slit thy Nostrils, crop each ear;
Thy shame cut off, and give it dogs to tear.
This shook his Nerves the more. The buffet ^ight betwixt Ulysses and Irus:
But both were now
Brought to the Lists; and up did either throw
His heavy fists. Ulysses, in suspense
To strike so home, that he should fright from thence
His Cow-herd soul (his trunk laid prostrate there:)
Or let him take more leisure to his fear,
And stoop him by degrees. The last, showed best,
To strike him slightly; out of fear the rest
Would else discover him. But (peace now broke)
On his right shoulder, Irus laid his stroke.
Ulysses struck him, just beneath the ear,
His iaw-bone broke, and made the blood appear.
When straight, he strewn the dust, and made his cry
Stand for himself; with whom, his teeth did lie,
Spit with his blood out: and against the ground
His heels lay sprawling. Up the hands went round
Of all the wooers; all at point to dye
With violent laughters. Then the King did ply
The Beggars feet, and dragged him forth the Hall
Along the Entry, to the gates, and wall:
Where leaving him, he put into his hand
A Staff, and bad him there use his command
On Swine, and Dogs; and not presume to be
Lord of the guests, or of the Beggary:
Since he, of all men, was the scum and curse:
And so, bad please with that, or fare yet wurse.
Then cast he on his scrip, all patcht, and rent,
Hung by a rotten cord; and back he went
To greet the Entries threshold with his seat.
The wooers thronged to him, and did entreat
With gentle words his conquest; laughing still:
Prayed Jove, and all the Gods, to give his will
What most it wished him; and would joy him most,
Since he so happily had cleared their cost
Of that unsavory morsel; whom they vowed
To see with all their utmost haste bestowed
Aboard a ship; and for Epirus sent
To King Echetus: on whose Throne was spent
The worst man's seat yt breathed. And thus was graced
Divine Ulysses: who with joy embraced
Even that poor conquest. Then was set to him
The goodly Goats breast promised (that did swim
In fat and greauy) by Antinous.
And from a Basket (by Amphinomus)
Was two Breads given him; who (besides) renowned
His banquet, with a golden Goblet cround,
And this high salutation: Frolic, Guest;
And be those riches that you first possessed
Restored again, with full as many joys,
As in your poor state, I see now annoyes.
Amphinomus (said he) you seem to me
Exceeding wise, as being the progeny
Of such a Father, as autentique Fame
Has told me was so: One of honored name,
And great reuennues in Dulychius;
His fair name, Nisus. He is blazoned thus;
And you to be his Son; his wisdom ^eyring,
As well as wealth: his state, in naught empairing.
To prove which, all ways; let me tell you this
(As warning you to shun the miseries
That follow full states, if they be not held
With wisdom still at full; and so compeld
To courses, that abode not in their brows,
By too much swindge, their sudden overthrows)
Of all things breathing, or that creep on earth;
Naught is more wretched then a human^ Birth.
Blessed men, think never, they can cursed be,
While any power lasts, to move a knee.
But when the blessed Gods, make them feel that smart,
That fled their Faith so; as they had no ^art,
They bear their sufferings; and, what well they might
Have clearly shunned, they then meet in despite.
The Mind of Man flies still out ^f his way,
Unless God guide, and prompt it, every day.
I thought me once, a blessed man with men;
And fashioned me, to all so counted then:
Did all injustice like them; what for Lust,
Or any pleasure, never so unjust
I could by power, or violence, obtain;
And gave them both in all their powers the reign:
Bold of my Fathers, and my Brothers still;
While which held good, my Arts seemed never ill.
And thus is none, held simply, good or bad;
But as his will is either mist, or had.
Al goods, Gods gifts man calls, how ere he gets them:
And so takes all, what price so ere, God sets them.
Says naught, how ill they come; nor will control
That Rauine in him, though it cost his soul.
And these parts here, I see these wooers play,
Take all that falls; and all dishonors lay
On that man's Queen, that (tell your friends) does bear
No long times absence, but is passing near.
Let God then, guide thee home; lest he may mee^^
In his return, thy vndeparted feet.
For when he enters, and sees men so rude,
The quarrel cannot but in blood conclude.
This said; he sacrificed; then drunk, and then
Referred the given Boule, to the guide of men;
Who walked away, afflicted at his heart;
Shook head, and feared, that these facts would convert
To ill in the end. Yet had not grace to fly:
Minerua staid him, being ordained to die
Upon the Lance of young Vlyssi^es.
So, down he sat; and then did Pallas please
T'incline the Queens affections, to appear
To all the wooers; to extend their cheer
To the utmost lightning, that still vshers death:
And made her put on all the painted sheath,
That might both set her wooers fancies hye;
And get her greater honor in the eye
Even of her Son and Sovereign, then before.
Who laughing yet (to show her humor bore
No serious appetite to that light show)
She told Eurynome, that not till now
She ever knew her entertain desire
To please her wooers eyes; but often on fire
She set their hate, in keeping from them still;
Yet now she pleased t'appeare: though from no will
To do them honor; vowing she would tell
Her son that of them, that should fit him well
To make use of: which was, not to converse
Too freely with their pride; nor to disperse
His thoughts amongst them, since they used to give
Good words; but through them, ill intents did drive.
Eurynome replied: With good advise
You vow his counsel, and your open guise.
Go then, advise your Son; nor keep more close
Your cheeks, still drowned in your eyes ouerflowes.
But bathe your body, and with Balmes make clear
Your thickn'd countenance; Vncomposed cheer,
And ever mourning, will the Marrow wear.
Nor have you cause to mourn; your Son has now
Put on that virtue, which (in chief) your vow
Wished (as your blessing) at his birth, might deck
His blood and person. But forbear to speak
Of Baths, or Balmings, or of beauty, now
(The Queen replied) lest (urging comforts) you
Discomfort much: because the Gods have won
The spoil of my looks, since my Lord was gone.
But these must serve. Call hither then, to me
Hippodamia, and Antono^;
That those our train additions may supply
Our own deserts. And yet besides, Not I
(With all my age) have learned the boldness yet
T'expose my self to men, unless I get
Some other Gracers. Eurynome.
This said; forth she went
To call the Ladies; and much spirit spent
To make their utmost speed: for now, their Queen
Would both her self show, and make them be seen.
But now Minerua other proiects laid;
And through Icarius Pen^l^p^.
daughters Veins conuaid
Sweet sleeps desire. In whose soft fumes, inuolu'd
She was as soon as laid; and quite dissolved
Were all her Lineaments. The Goddess then
Bestowed immortal gifts on her, that men
Might wonder at her beauties; and the beams
That glister in the deified supreames,
She cleared her mourning countenance up withal.
Even such a radiance, as does round empall
Crowned Venus.
Cytherea, when her ordered places,
Conduct the Beuy of the dancing Graces,
She added to her own: more plumpe, more hie,
And fairer than the polisht Iuory,
Rendering her parts, and presence. This grace done,
Away the Deity flew; and up did run
Her louely-wristed Ladies, with a noise
That blew the soft chains from her sleeping joys.
When she, her fair eyes wiped; and (gasping) said:
O me unblessed! How deep a sweet sleep spread
His shades about me? Would Diana pleased
To shoot me with a death no more diseased,
As soon as might be: that no more my moan
Might waste my blood, in weepings never done;
For want of that accomplished virtue spher'd
In my loved Lord, to all the Greeks preferred.
Then she descended with her Maids, and took
Place in the Portall; whence her beamy look
Reached every wooers heart. Yet cast she on
So thin a veyle, that through it quite there shone
A grace so stolen, it pleased above the clear,
And sunk the knees of every wooer there.
Their minds so melted, in loves vehement fires,
That to her bed she heightn'd all desires.
The Prince then coming near, she said; O Son,
Thy thoughts and judgments have not yet put on
That constancy, in what becomes their good
Which all expect in thee: thy younger blood
Did sparkle choicer spirits. But, arrived
At this full growth, wherein their Form has thriu'd
Beyond the bounds of childhood, (and when now)
Beholders should affirm, This man does grow
Like the rare son of his matchles Sire,
(His goodlinesse, his beauty, and his fire
Of soul aspired to) thou make nothing good
Thy Fate, nor fortune; nor thy height of blood,
In manage of thy actions. What a deed
Of foul desert, has thy gross sufferance freed
Beneath thine own Roof? A poor stranger here
Used most unmanly! How will this appear
To all the world; when Fame shall trumpet out,
That thus, and thus, are our guests beat about
Our Court vnrighted? It Is a blaze will show
Extremely shameful, to your name, and you.
I blame you not, O Mother (he replide)
That this clear wrong sustained by me, you chide:
Yet know I, both the good and bad of all;
Being past the years, in which young errors fall.
But (all this known) skill is not so exact
To give (when once it knows) things fit their fact.
I well may doubt the prease of strangers here;
Who, bent to ill, and only my Nerves nere,
May do it in despite. And yet the jar
Betwixt our guest and Irus, was no war
Wrought by the wooers; nor our guest sustained
VVrong in that action; but the conquest gained.
And would to Jove, Minerua, and the Sun,
That all your woo'rs, might serve Contention
For such a purchase as the Beggar made;
And wore such weak heads: Some should death invade
Strewn in the Entry; some imbrew the hall,
Till every man had vengeance capital;
Sattl'd like Irus at the Gates; his head
Every way nodding; like one forfeited
To reeling Bacchus; Knees, nor feet, his own,
To bear him where he is better loved or known.
Their speeches given this end, Eurymachus
Began his Court-ship, Eur^m. ^our^ship of the su^posed Widow Qu ^ ene.
and expressed it thus.
Most wise Icarius daughter; If all those
That did for Colchos ventrous sail dispose,
For that rich purchase; had before but seen
Earths richer prize, in the Ithacensian Queen,
They had not made that voyage; but to you,
Would all their virtues, and their Beings vow.
Should all the world know what a worth you store,
To morrow then to day; and next light, more
Your Court should banquet; since to all Dames, you
Are far preferred; both for the grace of show,
In Stature, Beauty; Form in every kind
Of all parts outward; and for faultlesse mind.
Alas (said she) my Virtue, Penel answer.
Body, Form,
The Gods have blasted, with that only storm
That ravished Greece to I^ion; since my Lord
(For that war ship't) bore all my goods abord:
If he (returned) should come, and govern here
My life's whole state; the grace of all things there
His guide would heighten, as the spirit it bore:
Which dead in me, lives; given him long before.
A sad course I live now; heavens stern decree
With many an ill, has numbed and deaded me.
He took life with him, when he took my hand,
In parting from me to the Trojan strand:
These words my witness; Ulysses words to his wife at parting.
Woman! I conceive
That not all the Achiues bound for Troy, shall leave
Their Native earth, their safe returned bones;
Fame saying, that Troy trains up approved sons
In deeds of Arms: Brave putters off of shafts:
For winging Lances, Masters of their crafts;
Unmatched Riders; swift of foot; and straight
Can arbitrate a war of deadliest weight:
Hope then, can scarce fill all with life's supply;
And of all, any failing; why not I?
Nor do I know, if God has marshalled me
Amongst the safe-return'd: Or his decree
Has left me to the thraldom, ordered there.
Howeuer, all cares be thy burdens here:
My Sire and Mother, tend as much as now,
I, further off; more near in cares be you.
Your Son, to man's state grown, wed whom you will:
And (you gone) his care, let his household fill.
Thus made my Lord his will; wc heaven sees proved
Almost at all parts; for the Sun removed
Down to his set; ere long, will lead the night
Of those abhorred Nuptials, that should fright
Each worthy woman; which her second are
With any man that breaths; her first Lords care
Dead, because he to flesh and blood is dead;
Which, I fear, I shall yield to, and so wed
A second husband; and my reason is,
Since Jove has taken from me all his bliss.
Whom God gives over, they themselves forsake;
Their greefes, their joys; their God, their devil make.
And it is a great grief; nor was seen till now,
In any fashion of such men as woo
A good and wealthy woman; and contend
Who shall obtain her, that those men should spend
Her Beeues and best Sheep, as their cheifest ends;
But rather, that herself, and all her friends
They should with Banquets, and rich gifts entreat;
Their life is death, that live with others meat.
Divine Ulysses, much reioyc't to hear
His Queen thus fish for gifts; and keep in cheer
Their hearts with hope, that she would wed again;
Her mind yet still, her first intent retain.
Antinous saw, the wooers won to give;
And said; wise Queen, by all your means receive
What ever bounty, any woo'r shall use;
Gifts freely given, it is folly to refuse.
For know, that we resolve not to be gone
To keep our own roofes; till of all, some One
Whom best you like, your long-woo'd love shall win
This pleased the rest; and every one sent in
His present by the Herald; First had place
Antinous gift: The Wooers Gift^.
a robe of special grace,
Exceeding full and fair; and twenty hewes
Changed luster to it. To which, choice of shows:
Twelve massy plated Buttons, all of Gold,
Enricht the substance, made to fairly hold
The Robe together; all laced down before,
Where Keeps and Catches, both sides of it wore.
Eurymachus, a golden Tablet gave;
In which did Art, her choicest works engraue;
And round about, an Amber verge did run,
That cast a radiance from it, like the Sun.
Eurydamas, two servants had, that bore
Two goodly Earings; whose rich hollowes wore
Three Pearls in either, like so many eyes,
Reflecting glances, radiant as the skies.
The King Pysander, great Polyctors heir,
A Casket gave, exceeding rich and fair.
The other, other wealthy gifts commended
To her fair hand; which took, and straight ascended
This Goddess of her sex, her upper State.
Her Ladies, all her gifts elaborate,
Up bearing after. All to dancing then
The wooers went, and songs delightful strain;
In which they frolickt, till the Evening came:
And then raised sable Hesperus his flame.
When, for their Lights within; they set up there
3. Lamps, whose weeks were wood exceeding sere,
And passing porous; which they causd to burn,
Their matter ever minister'd by turn
Of several Handmaids. Whom Ulysses (seeing
Too conversant with wooers; ill agreeing
With guise of maids) advised in this fair sort:
Maids of your long-lackt King; Ulysses ^o his Wiu^s women.
keep you the port
Your Queens chaste presence bears? Go, up to her,
Employ your Loomes, or Rocks, and keep ye there:
I Will serve to feed these lamps; should these Lords dances
Last til Aurora cheered us with her glances.
They cannot weary me, for I am one
Borne to endure, when all men else have done.
They wantonly brake out in Laughters all;
Looked on each other: and to terms did fall
Cheek-proud Melantho, who was Dolius seed,
Kept by the Queen, that gave her dainty breed
Fit for her daughter: and yet won not so
Her heart to her, to share in any woe
She suffered for her Lord: But she was great
With great Eurymachus; and her loves heat
In his bed quenched. And this choleric thing,
Bestowed this railing Language on the King.
Base Stranger; you are taken in your brain,
You talk so wildely: Never you, again
Can get where you were borne; Me^antho to Vysses.
and seek your bed
In some Smithes Houill, or the Market sted;
But here you must take confidence to prate
Before all these; for fear can get no state
In your wine-hardy stomach. Or, it is like
To prove your native ga^be: your tongue will strike
On this side of your mouth still, being at best.
Is the man idle-brain'd for want of rest?
Or proud, because he beat the roguish beggar?
Take heed Sir, lest some better man beleager
Your ears with his fists; and set headlong hence
Your bold abode here, with your bloods expense.
He looking sternly on her; answered her:
Dog! What broad Language give thou? I Will prefer
Your usage to the Prince; that he may fall
Foul on your fair limbs, til he tell them all.
This fray'd the wenches; and al straight got gone
In ^eare, about their business: Every one
Confessing he said well. But he stood now
Close by the Cressets; and did looks bestow
On all men there: his Brain employed about
Some sharper business, then to dance it out;
Which had not long to go. Nor therefore would
Minerua let the wooers spleenes grow cold,
With too good usage of him; that his heart
Might fret enough, and make his choler smart.
Eurymachus, prouok't him first, and made
His fellow laugh, with a conceit he had
Fetch far; from what was spoken long before;
That his poor form, perhaps some Deity bore.
It well may chance (said he) some God does bear
This man's resemblance: For, thus standing nere
The glistering Torches; his slick't head does throw
Beams round about it, as those Cressets do.
For not a hair he has to give it shade.
Say, will thy heart serve t'vndertake a Trade
For fitting wages? Should I take thee hence
To walk my grounds, and look to every Fence:
Or plant high trees: thy hire should raise thy forces;
Food store, and clothes. But these same idle courses
Thou a^t so prompt in, that thou will not work,
But forage up and down, and beg, and lurk
In every house, whose Roofes hold any will
To feed such fellows. That thy gut may fill,
Gives end to all thy Being. He replied;
I wish, at any work, we two were tried;
In hight of Spring time, when heavens lights are long;
I, a good crook'd Sith, that were sharp, and strong:
You, such another, where the grass grew deep;
Up by day break, and both our labors keep
Up, til slow darkness eased the laboring light;
Fasting all day, and not a crum til night:
We then should prove our either workmanship.
Or if (again) Beeues, that the goad, or whip
Were apt to obey, before a tearing Plow:
Big, lusty beasts: Alike in bulk and brow;
Alike in Labor, and alike in strength;
Our task four Acres, to be Tilled in length
Of one sole day: Again then you should try
If the dull glebe, before the Plough should fly;
Or I, a long Stitch could bear clean, and even.
Or lastly; if the guide of earth and heaven
Should stir stern war up, either here or there;
And that, at this day, I had double Spear,
And Shield, and steel Caske, fitting for my brows;
At this work likewise, midst the foremost blows
Your eyes should note me; and get little cause
To twit me with my bellies sole applause.
But you affect, t'affect with injury,
Your mind ungentle; seem in valor hie,
Because against few; and those, not of the best
Your conversation has been still professed.
But if Ulysses (landed on his earth,
And entered on the true right of his birth)
Should come and front ye; straight, his ample Gates
Your feet would hold, too narrow for your Fates.
He frowned, raged, called him wretch; and vowed
To be his death, since he durst prove so proud
Amongst so many: to tell him so home
What he affected. Asked, if overcome
With wine he were; or (as his Minion said)
Talked still so idly; and were palsied
In his minds instruments: or was proud, because
He gat from Irus off, with such applause?
With all which, snatching up a stool, he threw:
When old Ulysses, to the knees withdrew,
Of the Dulychian Lord Amphinomus,
As if he feared him. His dart missing thus
His aged object: and his Pages hand,
(A Boy, that waited on his cups command,
Now holding of an Ewre to him) he smit.
Down fell the sounding Ewre; and after it,
The guiltless Page, lay sprawling in the dust,
And crying out. When all the wooers thrust
A tumult up amongst them; wishing all,
The rogue had perished in some Hospital,
Before his life there, stirred such vpro^^ (...)*
And with rude speeches, spice their pleasures cup.
And all this for a Beggar, to fulfill
A filthy Proverb: Good still yields (...).
The Prince cried out on them, to let ^he bad
Obscure the good so; Told them they were mad;
Abusd their banquet; Telem mockes the wooers, yet wins their praise.
and affirmed some God.
Tried maisteries with them: Bad them take their lo^d
Of food and wine: Sit up, or fall to bed
At their free pleasures; and since he gave head
To all their freedoms; why should they mistake
Their own rich humors for a Beggars sake?
All bit their lips to be so taken down;
And taught the course that should have bin their own;
Admired the Prince; and said, he bravely spoke.
But Nisus Son then, struck the equal stroke,
And said, O Friends, let no man here disdain
To put up equal speeches; nor maintain
With serious words, an humor; Nor with stroke,
A Stranger in another house provoke,
Nor touch the meanest servant; but confine
All these dissentions in a bolle of wine:
Which fill us Cup Bearer; that having done
Our nightly sacrifice, we may atone
Our powers with sleep; resigning first the guest
Up to the Prince, that holds all interest
In his disposure here: the House being his
In just descent, and all the faculties.
Th^s all approved; when Noble Mulius
(Herald in chief, to Lord (...)
The Wine distributed with reverend grace
To every wooer: when the Gods given place
With service fit, they served themselves, and took
Their parting Cups: till (when they all had shook
The angry humor off) they bent to rest;
And every VVooer to several Roofes addressed.
The End of the Eighteenth Book of Homers Odysses.
THE NINETEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses and his Son, eschew
Offending of the Wooers view
With any Armor. His Birth's seat,
Ulysses tells his Queen, is Crete.
Euryclea the truth yet found,
Discovered by a scar-heal'd wound,
Which in Parnassus tops, a Bore
(Struck by him in his Chase) did gore.
Another.
(...).
The King still hid
by what he said.
By what he did,
informs his maid.

YEt did Divine Ulysses keep his Roof;
And with Minerua plotted still the proof
Of all the wooers deaths. When thus, his Son
He taught with these fore-counsailes: we must ron
A close course with these Arms, and lay them by.
And to the wooers make so fair a sky,
As it would never thunder. Let me then
(That you may well retain) repeat again
What in Eumaeus Cottage, Vlysse^ former counsel to his Son, for disposing
^he Arms repeated.
I advised.
If when they see your leisure exercised
In fetching down your Arms: and ask what use
Your mind will give them: Say, it is their abuse
With smoke and rust, that makes you take them down;
This not being like the Armory well known
To be the leauings of Laertes Son,
Consorting the design for Ilion.
Your eyes may see how much they are infected,
As all fires vapors, ever since, reflected
On those sole Arms. Besides, a grauer thought,
Jove graves within you, lest (their spirits wrought
Above their pitch with wine) they might contend
At some high banquet, and to wounds transcend;
Their Feast inuerting; which, perhaps may be
Their Nuptial feast, with wise Penelope.
The ready weapon when the blood is up,
Doubles the uproar, height^ed by the Cup.
Wrath's means for Act; cur^e all the ways ye can;
As Loadstones draw the steel, so steel draw's Man.
Retain these words; nor what is good, think thus
Received at second hand, superfluous.
The Son obeying, did Euryclea call,
And bad her shut (in the utter Porches) all
The other women; till himself brought down
His Fathers Arms, which all were ouer-growne
By his neglect, with rust: his Father gone,
And he too childish, to spend thoughts upon
Those manly Implements; but he would now
Reform those young neglects; and the arms bestow
Past reach of smoke. The loving Nurse replide;
I wish (O Son) your powers would once provide
For wisdoms habit; See your household were
In thrifty manage, and tend all things there.
But if these arms must down; and every Maid
Be shut in utter rooms; who else should aid
Your work with light? He answered; This my guest:
There shall not one in my house, taste my Feast,
(Or join in my (...), They will needs turn this; Quadram (for Modium) guste^.
Though the words bear no such signification: But give a Proverb then in use,
Repetition: which was, He shall not ioyn or make a spoke in the Naue of my
chariot, or Chariot wheel, (...) signifying Modiolus Rot^, and (...) Necto.
Naue) that shall ydlely live,
How ever far hence, he his home derive.
He said, and his words stood; The doors she shut
Of that so wel-f^ll'd house; and the other put
Their thoghts in act; Best Shields, Helmes, sharpened Lances
Brought down; and Pallas before both, aduances
A golden Cresset, that did cast a Light,
As if the Day sat, in the Throne of Night.
When (half amazed) the Prince said, O my Father,
Mine eyes, my souls powers all in wonder gather:
For though the walls, and goodly wind-beames here,
All all these Pillars, that their heads, so rere,
And all of Fur; they seem yet, all of fire.
Some God is surely with us. His wise Sire,
Bad peace, and keep the counsels of the Gods;
Nor ask a word: These Powers that use abods
Above the stars, have power from thence to shine
Through night, and all shades, to earths in most Mine.
Go thou for sleep; and leave me here to wake
The women and the Queen; whose heart does ache
To make enquiry for my self, of me.
He went to sleep, where lights did endlesly
Burn in his Night-roomes: where he feasted Rest,
Til days fair weed, did all the world inuest.
Thus was divine Ulysses left alone
With Pallas, plotting foul confusion
To all the wooers. Forth then came the Queen;
Phoebe, with golden Cytherea seen,
Her Port presented. Whom they set a Chair
Aside the fire: The fashion circulare;
The substance Silver, and rich Elephant;
Whose Fabric, did the cunning finger vant
Of great Icmalius: who besides, had done
A footstool for her, that did suit her Throne:
On which, they cast an ample skin, to be
The Cushion, for her other Royalty.
And there she sat; about whom, came her Maids,
Who brought upon a Table store of Breads,
And Bolles, that with the wooers wine were cround.
The Embers then they cast upon the ground
From out the Lamps, and other Fuel added;
That still, with cheereful flame, the sad house gladded.
Melantho, seeing still Ulysses there;
Thus she held out her spleen: Still stranger, here?
Thus late in night? To see what Ladies do?
Auant you wretch: hence; Go, without doors, go:
And quickly too, lest ye be sindg'd away
With burning firebrarnds. He (thus seeing their fray
Continued by her with such spleen) replide;
Minion! What makes your angry blood thus chide
My presence still? Is it, because you see
I shine not in your wanton bravery?
But wear these rags? It fits the needy Fate
That makes me beg thus, of the commune state.
Such poor souls, and such beggars, yet are men;
And even my mean means, means had to maintain
A wealthy house; and kept a manly prease;
Was counted blessed; and the poor access
O^ any Beggar, did not scorn, but feed
With often hand: and any man of need
Releeu'd as fitted: kept my servants to,
Not few; but did with those additions go,
That call choice men, The Honest; who are stild
The rich, the great. But what such great ones build
Jove often pulls down, as thus he ruined me;
His will was such, which is his equity.
And therefore (woman) bear you fitting hand
On your behavior, lest your spirit thus manned,
And cherisht with your beauties (when they wane)
Comes down: Your pride now, being then your bane.
And in the mean space, shun the present danger;
Lest your bold fashion, breed your Soueraigns anger.
Or lest Ulysses come: of whom, even yet
Hope finds some life in fate. Or, be his seat
Amongst the merely ruined; yet his Son
(Whose life's heat, Phoebus saues) is such a one,
As can discover, who does well deserve
Of any woman here; His years, now serve.
The Queen gave ear, and thus suppressed the flame:
Thou quite without a brow; past female shame;
I hear thy monstrous boldness, which thy head
Shall pay me pains for. Thou have heard it said,
And from my self too; and at every part
Thy knowledge serves thee; that (to ease my heart
So punished in thy witness) my desire
Dwelt on this Stranger; that I might enquire
My lost friends Being. But it is ever tried,
Both Man and God, are still forgot with Pride.
Eurynome! Bring here this Guest a seat,
And Cushion on it; that we two, may treat
Of the affair in question. Set it near,
That I may softly speak, yet he well hear.
She did this little freely; and he sat
Close by the Queen; who asked him, Whence, and what
He was himself? And what th'inhabited place?
Where lived his parents? whence he fetched his race?
O woman (he replied) with whom, Ulysses to his Queen.
no man
That moves in earths unbounded circle, can
Maintain contention, for true honor given;
Whose fame, has reached the (...)
fairly flowing heaven.
Who, like a neuer-ill-deseruing King,
That is well spoke of; First, for worshipping,
And striving to resemble God, in Empire;
Whose equal hand, impartially does temper,
Greatness, and Goodness: To whom therefore, bears
The black earth, store of all grain; Trees conferres,
Cracking with burden, Long-liu'd Herds creates;
All which, the Sea, with her sorts, emulates;
And all this feeds, beneath his powrefull hand,
Men, valiant, many, making strong his Land
With happy lives led; Nothing else, the cause
Of all these blessings, but well ordered Laws;
Like such a King, are you; in Love, in Fame,
And all the bliss that deifies a Dame.
And therefore, do not mix this with a moan
So wretched, as is now in question.
Ask not my Race, nor Country; lest you fill
My heart yet fuller, with repeated ill:
For I must follow it, with many tears;
Though it is not seemly, to sit wounding ears
In public Roofes, with our particular life;
Times worst expense, is still-repeated Grief.
I should be irksome to your Ladies here:
And you your self would say, you urged your ear
To what offends it: My still-broken eine,
Supposing wounded with your too much wine.
Stranger (said she) you fear your own excess,
With giving me too great a nobleness.
The Gods, my person, Beauty, Virtue to,
Long since subverted; when the Ilion woe
The Greek design attempted. In which, went
My praise, and honor. In his government
Had I deserved your utmost grace; But now
Sinister Deity, makes dishonor woo
(In show of grace) my ruin. All the Peers,
Syluane Zacynthus, and Dulychius Spheres,
Samos and Ithaca, strange strifes have shown,
To win me; spending on me* all mine own.
Will wed me, in my spite: And these are those,
That take from me, all virtue to dispose
Or Guest, or Suppliant: or take any course
Amongst my Heralds (that should all disburse)
To order any thing: Though I need none
To give me grief at home; Abroad erres one
That my veins shrink for; who^, these (holding gone)
Their Nuptials hasten, and find me as slow.
Good spirits prompted me, to make a show
Of undertaking a most curious task,
That an vnmeasur'd space of time would ask;
Which, they enduring long, would often say,
When ends thy work? I soon had my delay;
And prayed their stay: For though my Lord were dead,
His Fathers life yet, matter ministered
That must employ me: which, (to tell them true)
Was that great work I named. For now, nere drew
Laertes death; and on my hand did lie
His funeral Robe: whose end (being now so nigh)
I must not leave, and lose so much begun:
The rather, lest the Greek Dames might be wun
To tax mine honor; if a man so great
Should greet his grave, without his winding sheet.
Pride made them credulous; and I went on:
When, whatsoever all the day had done,
I made the night help, to undo again;
Though oil, and watch it cost, and equal pain.
Three years my wit secured me vndiscern'd:
Yet, when the fourth came, by my Maids discerned
(False careless wenches) now they were deluded:
When (by my light descern'd) they all intruded;
V^'d threatening words, and made me give it end.
And then could I, to no more length extend
My lingered Nuptials: Not a counsel more
Was to be stood upon; my Parents bore
Continual hand on me, to make me wed:
My Son grew angry, that so ruined
His goods were by them. He is now a man*
Wise in a great degree; and one that can
Himself, give order to his household fare:
And Jove, give equal glory, to his care.
But thus you must not pass me: I must know,
(It may be, for more end) from whence does grow
Your race, and you; For I suppose you, none
Sprung of old Oak, or iustl'd out of stone.
He answered; O Ulysses reverend wife!
Yet hold you purpose to enquire my life?
I Will tell you, though it much afflict me more
Then all the sorrows I have felt before.
As worthily it may: since so long time,
As I have wandered from my Native Clime,
Through humane Cities: and in sufferance still:
To rip all wounds up (though, of all their ill
I touch but part) must actuate all their pain.
But, ask you still; I Will tell, though still sustain.
In middle of the sable Sea, Vlys: sain'd relation of himself to his wife.
there lies
An Isle, called Crete; a rauisher of eyes:
Fruitful, and manned with many an infinite store:
Where ninety Cities crown the famous shore;
Mixed with all Languag'd men: There Greeks survive;
There the great-minded Eteocretans live:
There the Dorensians, never out of war:
The Cydons there; and there the singular
Pelasgian people: There does G^ossus stand,
That mighty City; where had most command
Great Jove's Disciple ( Minos) who nine years
Conferred with Jove: Both great familiares
In mutual counsels. And this Mi^os Son,
(The mighty-minded King Deucali^^)
Was Sire to me, and royal Idomen,
Who with Atrides, went to Ilion then,
My elder Brother, and the better man;
My name Aethon. At that time began
My knowledge of Ulysses; whom my home
Received with guest-rites. He was thither come
By force of weather, from the Malean coast
But new got off; where he the Navy lost,
Then under sail for Troy; and wind-bound lay
Long in Amnisus; hardly got away
From horrid storms, that made him anchor there,
In Havens that sacred to Lucina were;
Dreadful and dangerous. In whose bosom crept
Lucina's Cauerne. But in my roof slept
Ulysses, shor'd in Crete: who first inquired
For royal Idomen; and much desired
To taste his guest-rites; since to him had been
A welcome Guest my Brother Idomene.
The tenth, or, leuenth light, on Ulysses shin'de
In stay at Crete; attending then the wind
For threatened I^ion. All which time, my house
With love and entertainments curious
Embraced his person: though a number more
My hospitable roofes received before.
His men I likewise called; and from the store
Allowed them meal, and heat exciting wine;
And Oxen for their slaughter; to confine
In my free hand the utmost of their need.
Twelve days the Greeks staid, ere they got them freed;
A gale so bitter blew out of the North,
That none could stand on earth, being tumbled forth
By some stern God. But on the thirteenth day
The tempest ceast, and then went Greeks their way.
Thus, many tales Ulysses told his wife,
At most, but painting; yet most like the life:
Of which, her heart, such sense took through her ears,
It made her weep, as she would turn to tears.
And as from off the Mountains melts the snow,
Which Zephyres breath conceald; but was made flow
By hollow Eurus, which so fast poures down,
That with their Torrent, floods have ouer-flowne:
So down her fair cheeks, her kind tears did glide;
Her mist Lord mourning, set so near her side.
Ulysses much was moved to see her mourn,
Whose eyes yet stood as dry, as Iron, or Horn,
In his vntroubl'd lids; which, in his craft
Of bridling passion, he from issue saf't.
When she had given her moan so many tears,
That now 'twas satiate: her yet loving fears
Asked thus much further: You have thus far tried
My loves credulity: But if gratified
With so long stay he was with you, you can
Describe what weed he wore; what kind of man
Both he himself was, and what Followers
Observed him there. Alas (said he) the years
Have grown so many since (this making now
Their twentieth revolution) that my show
Of these slight notes, will set my memory sore;
But (to my now remembrance) this he wore:
A double purple Robe, Ulysses d^scription of his apparel going for Troy.
drawn close before
With golden Buttons; pleated thick, and bore
A facing, where a hundred colors shinde:
About the skirts, a Hound; A freckl'd Hind
In full course hunted. On the fore-skirts yet,
He pincht, and pulled her down: when with her feet,
And all her force, she struggled hard for flight.
Which had such life in Gold, that to the sight
It seemed the Hind it self for every hiew;
The Hound and al, so answering the view,
That all admired all. I observed beside
His inner weed, so rarely beautifide,
That dumb amaze it bred; and was as thin,
As any dry and tender Onion skin:
As soft 'twas too, and glister'd like the Sun.
The women were to loving wonder wun
By him and by his weeds. But (by the way)
You must excuse me, that I cannot say
He brought this suite from home; or had it there
Sent for some Present; or perhaps elsewhere
Received it for his guest-gift: For your Lord
Had Friends not few: The Fleet did not afford
Many, that had not fewer. I bestowed
A well-edg'd sword on him; a Robe that flowed
In foulds, and fullness, and did reach his feet,
Of richest purple: Brought him to his Fleet,
With all my honor: And besides (to add
To all this sifted circumstance) he had
A Herald there; in height, a little more
Put from the earth: that thicker shoulders wore;
A swarth complexion, and a curled head;
His name Eurybates; and much in stead,
He stood your King, employed in most command,
Since most of all, his mind could understand.
When all these signs she knew, for chiefly true;
Desire of moan upon her beauties grew:
And yet (even that desire sufficed) she said.
Till this (my Guest) a wretched state arraid
Your ill-vsd person: but from this hour forth,
You shall be honored, and find all the worth
That fits a friend. Those weeds these hands bestowed
From out my wardrobe: those gold buttons sowed
Before for closure, and for Ornament.
But never more, must his return present
The person that gave those adornments State.
And therefore, under an abhorred Fate
Was he induc't to feed the commune fame,
To visit vile Troy; I, too vile to name.
No more yet mourn (said he) nor thus see pinde
Your lovely person: Weeping, wast's the Mind.
And yet I blame you not; for any Dame
That weds one young, and brings to him, his name;
(What ever man he is) will mourn his loss:
Much more respectfull then, must show your woes,
That weep thus for Ulysses; who (Fame says)
Was equal with the Gods, in all his ways.
But where no cause is, there must be no moan:
And therefore hear me; my Relation
Shall lay the clear truth naked to your view;
I heard amongst the Thesprots, for most true,
That Lord Ulysses lived, and stood just now
On his return for home: That wealth did flow
In his possession; which, he made not known,
But begged amongst the people; since alone
He quite was left: for all his men were lost
In getting off, from the Trinacrian Coast;
Jove and the Sun, was wroth with them, for rape
Made of his Oxen; and no man let escape
The rugged deepes of Neptune: Only he
The Ships Keele only keeping, was by Sea
Cast on the fair Phaeacian Continent;
Where men survive, that are the Gods descent;
And like a God received him; gave him heaps
Of wealthy gifts, and would conduct his steps
Themselves safe home: which, he might long ago
His pleasure make: but profit would not so.
He gathered going, and had mighty store
Of Gold in safeguard: so beyond the Shore
That commune sails kept, his high flood of wit
Bore glorious top; and all the world, for it
Has far exceeded. All this Phaedon told,
That does the Scepter of Thesprotia hold:
Who swore to me, in household sacrifice,
The Ship was lancht, and men to man the prise;
That soon should set him on his country earth:
Showed me the goods, enough to serve the birth,
That in the tenth age of his seed, should spring;
Yet in his Court contained. But then the King
(Your husband) for Dodona was in way;
That from th'oraculous Oak, he might display
Jove's will; what course for home would best prevail:
To come in pomp; or bear a secret sail.
But me, the King dispatched in course before;
A Ship then bound for the Dulychian shore.
So thus you see his safety, whom you mourn,
Who now is passing near; and his return
No more will punish with delays, but see
His friends, and country: All which truth to thee
I Will seal with sacred Oath. Be witness Jove,
Thou first, and best, of all the Throned above;
And thou house of the great Laertes heir,
To whose high roofes, I tender my repair;
That what I tell the Queen, event shall crown:
This year, Ulysses shall possess his own:
Nay, ere the next month ends, shall here arrive;
Nay ere it enters, here abide alive.
O may this prove (said she;) gifts, friendship, then
Should make your name the most renowned of men.
But it is of me received; and must so sort,
That nor my Lord shall ever see his Court,
Nor you gain your deduction thence; for now
The altered house does no such man allow
As was Ulysses (if he ever were)
To entertain a reverend Passenger,
And give him fair dismission. But (Maids) see
Ye bathe his feet; and then with Tapistry,
Best sheets, and blanquets, make his bed, and lay
Soft wascotes by him; that (lodged warm) he may
Even till the golden-seated mornings ray,
Enjoy good ^est; and then, with her first light,
Bathe, and give alms; that cherisht appetite
He may apply within our Hall, and sit
Safe by Telemachus. Or if th'vnfit
And harmfull mind of any be so base
To greoue his age again; let none give grace
Of doing any deed, he shall command
(How wroth so ever) to his barbarous hand.
For how shall you (guest) know me for a Dame
That pass so far, nay, turn and wind the Fame
Of other Dames for wisdom, and the frame
Of household usage; if your poor thin weeds
I let draw on you, want, and worser deeds;
That may, perhaps, cause here your latest day?
The life of Man is short, and flies away.
And if the Rulers self of households, be
Ungentle, studying inhumanity,
The rest prove worse. But he bears all the blame:
All men will, living, vow against his name,
Mischiefs, and miseries; And (dead) supply
With bitter Epitaphes, his memory.
But if himself be noble, (noble things
Doing, and knowing) all his Underlings
Will imitate his Noblesse; and all guests
Give it, in many; many interests.
But (worthiest Queen, said he) where you command
Baths and rich beds for me, I scorn to stand
On such state now; nor ever thought it yet,
Since first I left the snowy hills of Crete.
When once I fell a ship-boord, those thoughts fled;
I love to take now (as long since) my bed:
Though I began the use, with sleeplesse nights;
I, many a darkness, with right homely rites
Have spent ere this hour; and desired the Morn
Would come; and make sleep to the world a scorn.
Nor run these dainty Bathes in my rude head;
Nor any handmaid (to your service bred)
Shall touch my ill-kept feet, unless there live
Some poor old drudge here, that has learnd to give
Old men good usage; and no work will fly:
As having suffered ill, as much as I.
But if there live, one such, in your command;
I will not shame to give my foot, her hand.
She gave this answer: O my loved Guest,
There never entered these kind Roofes, for rest,
Stranger or Friend, that so much wisdom laid
In gage for Guest-rites, as your lips have paid.
There lives and old maid in my charge, that knows
The good you speak of, by her many woes;
That nourisht and brought up, with curious care,
The Unhappy man, your old familiar:
Even since his Mother let him view the light,
And often has felt in her weak arms, his weight.
And she (though now much weaker) shall apply
Her Maiden service, to your modesty.
Euryclea, rise; and wash the feet of one,
That is of one age with your Sovereign gone.
Such hands, such feet has, though of altered grace:
Much grief in men, will bring on change apace.
She (from her aged slumber wak't) did clear
Her heavy eyes; and instantly (to hear
Her Sovereigns name) had work enough to dry
Her cheeks from tears: and to his memory
These Mones did offer: O my Son (said she)
I never can take grief enough for thee;
Whom Goodness hurts; and who^, even Jove's high spleen
(Since thou art Ioue-like) hates the most of men.
For none has offered him so many Thyes;
Nor such whole Hecatombes of sacrifice,
Fat, and selected, as thy zeal has done;
For all, but praying that thy noble Son,
Thy happy age, might see at state of man.
And yet has Jove with Mists Cimmerean
Put out the light of his returning day.
And as your self (O Father) in your way
Took these fair roofes for hospitable rights,
Yet find (for them) our dogged women's spights:
So he (in like course) being driven to proof
(Long time ere this) what such a royal Roof
Would yield his miseries; sound such usage there.
And you (now flying the foul Language here,
And many a filthy fact of our fair Dames)
^ly me, like them; and put on causlesse shames
To let me cleanse your feet. For not the cause
The Queens command yields, is the power yt draws
My will to wash your feet. But what I do,
Proceeds from her charge, and your reverence to.
Since I, in soul, am stricken with a ruth
Of your distresses, and past Intending with (...) it self: not his show only.
show of truth.
Your strangeness claiming little interest
In my affections: and yet many a Guest
Of poor condition, has been harbored here:
But never any, did so right appear
Like King Ulysses, as your self; For state,
Both of your stature, voice, and very gate.
So all have said (said he) that ever yet
Had the proportions of our figures met,
In their obseruances; so right, your eye,
Proves in your soul, your judging faculty.
Thus took she up a Caldron, brightly scoured,
To cleanse his feet in: and into it, poured
Store of cold wave* which on the fire she set;
And therein bathed (being temperatly heat)
Her Soueraigns feet. Who turned him from the light;
Since suddenly, he doubted her conceit
(So rightly touching at his state before)
A scar now seeing on his foot, that bore
An old note to discern him; might descry
The absolute truth; which (witnest by her eye)
Was strait approved. He first received this sore,
As in Parnassus tops, a white toothed Bore
He stood in chase withal; who struck him there,
At such time, as he lived a soiourner
With his grand Sire, Autolyc^: who, Thou Art
Of Theft and swearing (not out of the heart,
But by equivocation) first adorned
Your witty man withal; and was suborned
By Jove's descent (ingenious Mer^urie)
Who did bestow it; since so many a Thie
Of Lambs, and Kids, he had on him bestowed
In sacred flames; who therefore, when he vowed
Was ever with him. And this man imposed
Ulysses name; the light being first disclosed
To his first sight then; when his grand Sire came
To see the then preferrer of his fame,
His loved daughter. The first supper done,
Euryclea, put in his lap, her Son,
And prayed him to bethink, and give his name;
Since that desire, did all desires inflame. Autolycus gives his Grand child
Ulysses his name: from whence the Odysses is deriud (...), derived of (...), ex
(...) factum: (signifying dolorem proprie corporis) nam ira ex dolor oritur.

Daughter, and Son-in-Law (said he) let then
The name that I shall give him, stand with men;
Since I arrived here, at the hour of pain,
In which, mine own kind entrails did sustain
Moan for my daughters, yet vnended throes:
And when so many men's and women's woes,
In joint compassion met, of humane birth,
Brought forth to attend the many feeding earth;
Let Odysseus be his name, as one
Exposd to just constraint of all men's moan.
When here at home, he is arrived at state*
Of man's first youth; he shall initiate
His practisd feet, in travail made abroad;
And to Pernassus, where mine own abode
And chief means lie; address his way, where I
Will give him from my opened treasury,
What shall return him well; and fit the Fame
Of one that had the honor of his name.
For these fair gifts he went, and found all grace
Of hands, and words, in him and all his race.
Amphithea (his Mothers mother) to
Applied her to his love; withal, to do
In Grandames welcomes: both his fair eyes kissed,
And brows; and then, commanded to assist
Were all her sons, by their respected Sire,
In furnishing a Feast; whose ears did fire
Their minds with his command: who home strait led
A fiue-yeares-old-male Ox; feld, slew, and flead:
Gathered about him; cut him up with Art;
Spitted, and roasted; and his every part
Divided orderly. So all the day
They spent in feast: No one man went his way
Without his fit fill. When the Sun was set,
And darkness rose, they slept; till days fire het
Th'enlightned earth: and then, on hunting went
Both Hounds, and all Autolycus descent.
In whose guide, did divine Ulysses go;
Climbed steep Parnassus, on whose forehead grow
All syluan offsprings round. And soon they rech't
The Concaues, whence ayrs sounding vapors fetched
Their loud descent. As soon as any Sun
Had from the Ocean (where his waters run
In silent deepnesse) raised his golden head:
The early Huntsmen, all the hill had spread;
Their Hounds before them, on the searching Traile:
They near, and ever eager to assail.
Ulysses, brandishing a lengthfull Lance,
Of whose first flight, he longed to prove the chance.
Then found they lodged a Bore, of bulk extreme,
In such a Queach, as never any beam
The Sun shot, pierc'st: Nor any pass, let find
The moist impressions of the fiercest wind:
Nor any storm the sternest winter drives;
Such proof it was: yet all within, lay leaves
In mighty thickness; and through all this, flew
The hounds loud mouths. The sounds, the tumult threw;
And all together roused the Bore, that rusht
Amongst their thickest: All his brissels, pusht
From forth his rough neck; and with flaming eyes
Stood close, and dared all. On which horrid prise
Ulysses first charged; whom, above the knee
The savage struck, and rac't it crookedly
Along the skin, yet never reached the bone.
Ulysses Lance yet, through him, quite was thrown;
At his right shoulder entering: at his left,
The bright head passage to his keenness cleft,
And showed his point gilt, with the gushing gore.
Down in the dust fell the extended Bore,
And forth his life flew. To Ulysses, round
His Uncle drew; who (woeful for his wound)
With all Art bound it up; and with a charm
Staid straight the blood: went home, and when the harm
Received full cure; with gifts, and all event
Of joy, and love; to his loved home, they sent
Their honored Nephew: whose return, his Sire,
And reverend Mother, took with joys entire:
Inquired all passages; all which, he gave
In good relation: Nor of all, would save
His wound from utterance: By whose scar he came
To be discovered by this aged Dame.
Which, when she clensing felt, and noted well:
Down from her Lap, into the Caldron, fell
His weighty foot, that made the Brass resound:
Turned all aside, and on th'embrewed ground
Spilt all the water. Joy and grief together
Her breast invaded: and of weeping weather
Her eyes stood full: Her small voice, stuck within
Her part expressiue; till at length, his chin
She took, and spoke to him: O Son (said she)
Thou art Ulysses; nor can other be:
Nor could I know thee yet, till all my King
I had gone over, with the warmed Spring.
Then looked she for the Queen, to tell her all;
And yet, knew nothing sure: though naught could fall
In compass of all thoughts, to make her doubt.
Minerua, that distraction struck throughout
Her minds rapt sorces; that she might not tell.
Ulysses, noting yet her aptness well;
With one hand took her chin; and made all show
Of favor to her: with the other, drew
Her offered parting closer: Asked her why,
She, whose kind breast had nursed so tenderly
His infant life; would now, his age destroy?
Though twenty years had held him from the joy
Of his loved country. But, since only she,
(God putting her in mind) now knew, 'twas he,
He charged her silence; and to let no ear
In all the Court more, know his being there:
Lest, if God gave into his wreakfull hand
The Insulting wooers lives: he did not stand
On any partial respect with her,
Because his Nurse; and to the rest prefer
Her safety therefore; But when they should feel
His punishing finger, give her equal steel.
What words (said she) fly your retentiue powers?
You know, you lock your counsels in your Towers
In my firm bosom: and, that I am far
From those loose frailties. Like an Iron bar
Or bolt of solidst stone, I will contain:
And tell you this besides; That if you gain
By Gods good aid, the wooers lives in yours;
What Dames are here their shameless Paramours,
And have done most dishonor to your worth,
My information, well shall paint you forth.
It shall not need (said he) my self will soon
(While thus I mask here) set on every one
My sure observance of the worst, and best:
Be thou then silent, and leave God the rest.
This said, the old Dame, for more water went;
The rest was all upon the Pauement spent,
By known Ulysses foot. More brought (and he
Supplied besides with sweetest Ointments) she
His seat drew near the fire, to keep him warm:
And, with his peec't rags, hiding close his harm:
The Queen came near, and said: Yet (guest) afford
Your further patience; till, but in a word
I Will tell my woes to you: For well I know,
That Rests sweet Hour, her soft foot orders now:
When all poor men, how much soever grieved,
Would gladly get their wo-watcht powers relieved.
But God has given my grief a heart so great,
It will not down with rest. And so I set
My judgment up, to make it my delight.
All day I mourn; yet nothing let the right
I owe my charge, both in my work and Maids;
And when the night brings rest to others aides,
I toss my bed; Distress with twenty points,
Slaught'ring the powers that to my turning joints
Convey the vital heat. And as all night,
Pandareus daughter (poor Edone) sings,
Clad in the verdure of the yearly Springs;
When she for Itylus, her loved Son
(By Zetus issue; in his madness, done
To cruel death) poures out her hourly moan,
And draws the ears to her of every one;
So flows my moan, that cuts in two my mind,
And here and there, gives my discourse the wind;
Uncertain whether I shall with my Son*
Abide still here, the safe possession
And guard of all goods: Reverence to the bed
Of my loved Lord; and to my far-off spread
Fame with the people; putting still in use;
Or follow any best Greek I can choose
To his fit house, with treasure infinite
VVon to his Nuptials. While the infant plight
And want of judgment kept my Son in guide;
He was not willing with my being a Bride,
Nor with my parting from his Court: But now
(Arrived at man's state) he would have me vow
My love to some one of my wooers here,
And leave his Court; offended that their cheer
Should so consume his free possessions.
To settle then a choice in these my mones,
Hear and expound a dream, that did engraue
My sleeping fancy. Twenty Geese, I have;
All which, me thought, mine eye saw tasting wheat
In water steep't, and joyed to see them eat.
When straight, a crooke-beak't Eagle, from a hill,
Stoop't, and trust all their necks, and all did kill;
When (all left scattered on the Pauement there)
She took her wing up, to the Gods fair sphere:
I, even amid my Dream, did weep and mourn,
To see the Eagle, with so shrewd a turn,
Stoop my sad turrets; when, me thought there came
About my mournings, many a Grecian Dame
To cheer my sorrows; in whose most extreme
The Hawke came back, and on the prominent beam
That crossed my Chamber, fell; and used to me
A humane voice, that sounded horribly;
And said; Be confident, Icarius seed;
This is no dream, but what shall chance indeed.
The Geese, the wooers are: the Eagle, I,
Was heretofore a Foul: but now imply
Thy husbands Being; and am come to give
The wooers death, that on my Treasure, live.
With this, Sleep left me; and my waking way
I took to try, if any violent prey
Were made of those my Fowls; which, well eno^^^^
I (as before) found feeding at their Trough,
Their yoted wheat. O woman (he replide)
Thy dream can no interpretation bide,
But what the Eagle made, who was your Lord;
And said, himself would sure effect afford
To what he told you; that confusion
To all the wooers should appear; and none
Escape the Fate, and death, he had decreed.
She answered him: O Guest, these dreams exceed
The Art of man t'interpret; The two parts of Dreams.
and appear
Without all choice, or form; nor ever were
Performed to all at all parts. But there are
To these light Dreams, that like thin vapors fare,
Two two-leau'd gates; the one of Iuory;
The other, Horn. Those dreams that Fantasy
Takes from the polisht Iuory Port, delude
The Dreamer ever, and no truth include:
Those that the glittering Horn-gate, lets abroad,
Do evermore, some certain truth abode.
But this my dream, I hold of no such sort
To fly from thence; yet, which soever Port
It had access from, it did highly please
My Son, and me. And this, my thoughts profess;
That Day that lights me from Ulysses Court,
Shall both my infamy, and curse consort.
I therefore purpose to propose them now
In strong Contention, Ulysses Bow;
Which he that easly draws; and from his draft,
Shoots through twelve Axes (as he did his shaft, The pro^osition of Ulysses
Bow to the Wooers, determined by Penelope.

All set up in a row; And from them all,
His stand-farre-off kept firm) my fortunes shall
Dispose; and take me to his house from hence,
Where I was wed, a Maid; in confluence
Of feast and riches: such a Court he^re then,
As I shall ever in my dreams retain.
Do not (said he) defer the gamefull prise,
But set to task their importunities
With something else, then Nuptials: For your Lord
Will to his Court and Kingdom be restored,
Before they thread those steeles, or draw his Bow.
O Guest (repli'de Penelope) would you
Thus sit, and please me with your speech; mine ears
Would never let mine eyelids close their Spheres;
But none can live without the death of sleep;
The Immortals, in our mortal memories keep
Our ends, and deaths by sleep; dividing so,
(As by the Fate and portion of our woe)
Our times spent here; to let us nightly try,
That while we live; as much as live, we dye.
In which use, I will to my bed ascend,
Which I bedeaw with tears, and sigh past end,
Through all my hours spent; since I lost my joy,
For vile, lewd, neuer-to-be-named Troy.
Yet there, I Will prove for sleep, which take you here;
Or on the earth, if that your custom were;
Or have a bed, disposed for warmer rest.
Thus left she with her Ladies, her old Guest:
Ascended her fair chamber, and her bed:
Whose sight did ever duly make her shed
Tears for her Lord; which still her eyes did steep,
Till Pallas shut them with delightsome sleep.
The End of the Nineteenth Book of Homers Odysses.
THE TWENTIETH BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses* in the Wooers Beds,
Resolving first to kill the Maids;
That sentence giving off; His care
For other Objects dot^ prepare.
Another.
(...).
Jove's thunder chides; but cheers the king;
The Wooers prides disco^mfiting.

Ulysses in the Entry, land his head,
And v^der him, an Oxe-hide newly flead;
Above him Sheep fels stor^; and o^^r those
Eurynome cast Mantles. His repose
Would bring ^o sleep yet; studying the ill
He wished the wooers; who came by him still
With all their wenc^es; laughing, wantoning
In mutual lightness, which his heart did sting;
Contending two ways; if (all patience fled)
He should rush up, and strike those Strumpets dead;
Or let that night be last, and take th'extreme
Of those proud wooers, that were so supreme
In pleasure of their high fed fantasies.
His heart did bark within him, to surprise
Their spo^ts with spoils: No fell she Mastiue can
Amongst her whelps, fly eagrer on a man
She does not know; yet sents him something near,
And feign would come to please her tooth and tear;
Then his disdain, to see his Roof so fil'de
With those foul fashions: Grew within him wild
To be in blood of them. But finding best
In his free judgment, to let passion rest;
He chid his angry spirit, and beat his breast:
And said; Forbear (my mind) and think on this:
There has been time, when bitter agonies
Have tried thy patience: Call to mind the day,
In which the Cyclop, which past manly sway
Of violent strength, devoured thy friends; thou then
Stoodst firmly bold, till from that hellish den
Thy wisdom brought thee off; when naught but death
Thy thoughts resolved on. This discourse did breath
The fiery boundings of his heart, that still
Lay in that aesture; without end, his ill
Yet manly suffering. But from side to side
It made him toss apace: you have not tried
A fellow roasting of a Pig before
A hasty fire, (his belly yielding store
Of fat, and blood) turn faster: labor more
To have it roast, and would not have it burn;
Then this, and that way, his unrest made turn
His thoughts, and body; would not quench the fire,
And yet, not have it heighten his desire
Past his discretion; and the fit enough
Of have, and speed; that went to all the proof
His well-laid plots, and his exploits required;
Since he, but one, to all their deaths aspired.
In this contention, Pallas Pallas appears to Ulysses.
stoop't from heaven;
Stood over him, and had her presence given
A woman's form; who sternly thus began:
Why thou most sour, and wretched-fated man
Of all that breath! yet lie thou thus awake?
The house, in which thy cares so toss and take
Thy quiet up, is thine: thy wife is there;
And such a Son, as if thy wishes were
To be sufficed with one; they could not mend.
Goddess (said he) it is true; But I contend
To right their wrongs: and (though I be but one)
To lay vnhelpt, and wreakfull hand upon
This whole resort of impudents, that here
Their rude assemblies never will forbear.
And yet a greater doubt imployes my care;
That if their slaughters, in my reaches are,
And I perform them; ( Jove and you not pleased)
How shall I fly their friends? and would stand seas'd
Of counsel, to resolve this care in me.
Wretch (she replied) a friend of worse degree,
Might win thy credence: that a mortal were,
And used to second thee; though nothing nere
So powerful in performance, nor in care:
Yet I, a Goddess, that have still had share
In thy atchieuements, and thy persons guard,
Must still be doubted by thy Brain, so hard
To credit any thing above thy power,
And that must come from heaven; if every hour
There be not personal appearance made,
And aid direct given, that may sense invade.
I Will tell thee therefore clearly: If there were
Of diverse languag'd men, an Army here
Of fifty Companies; all driving hence
Thy Sheep and Oxen, and with violence
Offered to charge us, and besiedge us round;
Thou should their prey reprize, and them confound.
Let sleep then seize thee: To keep watch all Night,
Consumes the spirits, and makes dull the sight.
Thus poured the Goddess sleep into his eyes,
And re-ascended the Olympian skies.
When care-and-lineament-resoluing sleep,
Had laid his temples in his golden steep;
His, wise-in-chast-wit-worthy-wife, did rise:
(First sitting up in her soft bed) her eyes
Opened with tears, in care of her estate,
Which now, her friends resolved to terminate
To more delays; and make her marry one.
Her silent tears (then ceast) her Orizon
This Queen of women to Diana made.
Reverend Diana; let thy Darts invade
My woeful bosom, and my life deprive,
Now at this instant; or soon after drive
My soul with Tempests forth, and give it way
To those farre-off dark Vaults, where never day
Has power to shine; and let them cast it down
Where refluent Oceanus does crown
His curled head; where Pluto's Orchard is,
And entrance to our after miseries.
As such stern whirlewinds, ravished to that stream,
Pandareus daughters, when the Gods to them
Had reft their parents; and them left alone
(Poor orphan children) in their Mansion.
Whose desolate life, did loves sweet Queen incline
To nurse with pressed Milk, and sweetest wine;
Whom Juno decked, beyond all other Dames
With wisdoms light, and beauties moving flames:
Whom Phoebe, goodlinesse of stature rendered,
And to whose fair hands, wise Minerua tendered,
The Loome and Needle, in their utmost skill.
And while Loves Empress skal'd the Olympian hill,
To beg of Lightning-louing Jove (since he
The means to all things knows; and does decree
Fortunes, infortunes, to the mortal Race)
For those poor virgins, the accomplished grace
Of sweetest Nuptials: The fierce Harpyes preyed
On every good, and miserable Maid;
And to the hateful Furies, gave them all
In horrid service. Yet, may such Fate fall
From steep Olympus, on my loathed head;
Or faire^^hair'd ^hoebe, strike me instant dead:
That I may undergo the gloomy Shore,
To visit great Ulysses soul; before
I sooth my idle blood, and wed a wurse.
And yet, beneath how desperate a curse
Do I li^e now? It is an ill, that may
Be well endured, to mourn the whole long day;
So nights sweet sleeps (that make a man forget
Both bad, and good) in some degree would let
My thoughts leave greeuing. But, both day and night,
Some cruel God, gives my sad memory sight.
This night (me thought) Ulysses graced my bed
In all the goodly state, with which he led
The Grecian Army: which gave joys extreme
To my distress, esteeming it no dream,
But true indeed: and that conceit I had,
That when I saw it false, I might be mad.
Such cruel Fates, command in my life's guide.
By this, the mornings Orient, dewes had di'de
The earth in all her colors; when the King
In his sweet sleep, supposed the sorrowing
That she vi'd waking in her plaintiff bed
To be her mourning, standing by his head,
As having known him there. Who straight arose,
And did again within the Hall dispose
The Carpets and the Cushions, where before
They served the seats. The Hide, without the door
He carried back; and then, with held up hands,
He prayed to him, that heaven and earth commands;
O Father Jove; If through the moist and dry
You (willing) brought me home; when misery
Had punished me enough, by your free doomes;
Let some of these within those inner rooms,
(Startled with horror of some strange Ostent)
Come here, and tell me, that great Jove has bent
Threatenings without, at some lewd men within.
To this his prayer, Jove shook his sable chin,
And thundered from those pure clouds that (above
The breathing air) in bright Olympus move.
Divine Ulysses joyed, to hear it rore.
Report of which, a woman Miller bore
Straight to his ears; For near to him, there ground
Milles for his Corn, that twice six women found
Continual motion, grinding Barley meal,
And wheat (man's Marrow.) Sleep the eyes did seal
Of all the other women: having done
Their usual task; which yet, this Dame alone
Had scarce given end to; being of all the rest,
Least fit for labor. But when these sounds, pressed
Her ears, above the rumbling of her Mill:
She let that stand, looked out; and heavens steep hill
Saw clear, and temperate; which made her (unware
Of giving any comfort to his care,
In that strange sign he prayed for) thus inuoke.
O King of men, and Gods; a mighty stroke The Mill^r-woman^ prayer to Jove, in
satisfaction of Ulysses prayer.

Thy thundering hand laid, on the cope of stars;
No cloud in all the air; and therefore wars
Thou bidst to some men, in thy sure Ostent:
Perform to me (poor wretch) the maine event,
And make this day, the last, and most extreme,
In which the wooers pride shall solace them
With whoorish Banquets in Ulysses Roof:
That, with sad toil, to grind them meal enough,
Have quite dissolved my knees: vouchsafe then, now
Thy thunders may their latest Feast foreshow.
This was the * (...)
Boon, Ulysses begged of Jove;
Which (with his Thunder) through his bosom drove
A joy, that this vant breathed: Why now these men
(Despite their pride) will Jove make, pay me pain.
By this, had other Maids then those that lay,
Mixed with the wooers; made a fire like day,
Amidst the harth of the illustrious Hall:
And then the Prince, like a Celestial
Rose from his bed; to his embalmed feet, tied
Fair shoes: his sword about his bre^st applied;
Took to his hand his sharp-pil'd Lance, and met
Amidst the Entry, his old Nurse, that set
His have, at sudden stand; To whom he said:
O (my loved Nurse) with what grace have you laid
And fed my guest here? Could you so neglect
His age, to lodge him thus? Though all respect
I give my Mothers wisdom, I must yet
Affirm, it failed in this: For she has set
At much more price, a man of much less worth,
Without his persons note; and yet casts forth
With ignominious hands (for his Form sake)
A man much better. Do not faulty make
(Good Son) the faultlesse. He was given his seat
Close to her side; and food, till he would eat.
Wine til his wish was served: For she required
His wants, and willed him all things he desired.
Commanded her chief Maids to make his bed;
But he (as one whom sorrow only fed
And all infortune) would not take his rest
In bed, and couerings, fit for any Guest;
But in the Entry, on an Oxes hide,
Never at Tanners; his old Limbs implide
In warm Sheep-fels; yet over all, we cast
A mantle, fitting, for a man more grac'st.
He took her answer: Left the house, and went
(Attended with his dogs) to sift the event
Of private Plots, betwixt him and his Sire
In commune counsel. Then the crew entire
Of all the household Maids, ( Eury^lea) bad
Bestir them through the house; and see it clad
In all best Form: gave all their parts; and one
She set to furnish every seat and Throne
With Needle-workes, and purple clothes of State;
Another set to scour and cleanse the Plate:
Another, all the Tables to make proud
With porous Sponges: Others, she bestowed
In all speed to the Spring, to fetch from thence
Fit store of water; all, at all expense
Of pains, she willed to be: For this, to all
Should be a day of commune Festival;
And not a wooer now should seek his home,
Else where then there; But all were bid to come
Exceeding early; and be raised to heaven,
With all the entertainment could be given.
They heard with greedy ears; and every thing
Put straight in practice: Twenty to the Spring
Made speed for water; Many in the house
Took pains; and all, were both laborious
And skilled in labor. Many fell to Fell
And cleave their wood: and all did more then well.
Then troop't the lusty wooers in; and then
Came all from Spring. At their heels; loaded men
With slaughtered Brawnes: of all the Herd, the prize,
That had been long fed up in several Sties.
Eumaeus, and his men, conuei'd them there.
He (seeing now the King) began to chere,
And thus saluted him: How now, my Guest?
Have yet your virtues found more interest
In these great wooers good respects? Or still
Pursue they you, with all their wonted ill?
I would to heaven, Eumaeus (he replide)
The Deities once would take in hand their pride;
That such unseemly fashions put in frame
In others Roofes, as show no spark of shame,
Thus these; and to these came Melanthius,
Great guardian of the most egregious
Rich wooers Herds, consisting all of Goats:
Which he, with two more drove, and made their coats
The sounding Forticos of that fair Court.
Melanthius (seeing the King) this former sort
Of vpland Language gave: What? still stay here?
And dull these wooers with thy wretched cheer?
Not gone for ever, yet? why now I see
This strife of cuffes betwixt the beggary,
(That yesterday assaid, to get thee gone)
And thy more roguery, needs will fall upon
My hands to arbitrate. Thou will not hence
Till I set on thee: thy ragg'd impudence
Is so fast footed. Are there not beside
Other great Banquetants, but you must ride
At anchor still with us? He nothing said,
But thought of ill enough, and shook his head.
Then came Philaetius (a chief of men)
That to the wooers all-deuouring den
A barren Stere drove, and fat Goats; for they
In custom were, with Traffiquers by sea,
That who they would sent; and had utterance there.
And for these likewise, the fair Porches were
Hurdles, and Sheep-pens, as in any Fair.
Philaetius took note in his repair,
Of seen Ulysses; being a man as well
Given to his minds use as to buy and sell;
Or do the drudgery that the blood desired;
And (standing near Eumaeus) this inquired.
What Guest is this, that makes our house of late
His entertainer? whence claims he the state
His birth in this life holds? what Nation?
What race? what country stands his speech upon?
Ore hardly portion'd, by the terrible Fates.
The structure of his Lineaments relates
A Kings resemblance in his pomp of reign
Even thus, in these rags. But poor erring men
That have no firm homes, but range here and there
As Need compels, God keeps in this earths sphere,
As under water: and this tune he sings,
When he is spinning even the cares of Kings.
Thus coming to him; with a kind of fear
He took his hand; and (touched exceeding near
With mere imagination of his worth)
This salutation he sent lowdly forth.
Health! Father stranger; in another world
Be rich and happy: though thou here art hurld
At feet of never such insulting Need.
O Jove, there lives no one God of thy seed
More ill to man, then thou. Thou take no ruth
(When thou thy self have got him, in most truth:)
To wrap him in the straites of most distress,
And in the curse of others wickedness.
My brows have swet to see it; and mine eyes
Broke all in tears; when this being still the guise
Of worthiest men, I have but only thought,
That down to these ils, was Ulysses wrought;
And that (thus clad) even he is error driven,
If yet he lives, and sees the light of heaven.
But, if now dead, and in the house of hell,
O me! O good Ulysses! That my weal
Did ever wish: and when, but half a man
Amongst the people Cephalenian;
His bounty, to his Oxens charge preferred
One in that youth: which now, is grown a Herd
Unspeakable for number; and feed there
With their broad heads, as thick, as of his ear
A Field of Corn is to a man: yet these,
Some men advise me, that this noted prease
Of wooers may devour; and wish me drive
Up to their Feasts with them; that neither give
His Son respect, though in his own free roof;
Nor have the wit to fear th'infallible proof
Of heavenly vengeance: but make offer now
The long-lack't Kings possessions to bestow
In their self shares. Me thinks, the mind in me
Does turn as fast; as (in a flood, or Sea)
A raging whirlepit does; to gather in
To fishy death, those swimmers in their sin.
Or feeds a motion as circulare
To drive my Herds away. But while the Son
Bears up with life, it were heinous wrong to ron
To other people with them; and to trust
Men of another earth: and yet more just
It were to venture their Laws; an maine right
Made still their Masters; then at home lose quite
Their right, and them; and sit and grieve to see
The wrong authorized by their gluttony.
And I had long since fled, and tried the event
With other proud Kings (since, more insolent
These are, then can be borne,) But that, even still
I had a hope, that this (though borne to ill)
Would one day come from some coast, and their last
In his roofes strew, with ruins red, and vast.
Herdsman (said he) because thou art in show,
Nor lewd, nor indiscreete; and that I know
There rules in thee an understanding soul,
I Will take an oath, that in thee shall control
All doubt of what I swear: be witness, Jove,
That swai'st the first Seat, of the throned above;
This hospitable Table; and this house;
That still holds title for the strenuous
Son of Laertes; that (if so you please)
Your eyes shall witness, Laertiades
Arrived at home; and all these men that reign
In such excesses here; shall here lie slain.
He answered: Stranger! would inst Jove would sign
What you have sworn: in your eyes beams should shine
What powers I manage; and how these my hands,
Would rise and follow, where he first commands.
So said Eumaeus: praying all the Sky
That wise Ulysses might arrive and try.
Thus while they vowed: the wooers sat as hard
On his Sons death: but had their co^nsels skar'd;
For on their left hand, did an Eagle ^ore;
And in her seres, a fearful Pigeon bore;
Which seen; Amphinomus presa'gd: O friends,
Our Counsels never will receive their ends
In this man's slaughter: let us therefore plie,
Our bloody feast, and make his Oxen die.
Thus came they in; cast off on seats, their cloakes;
And fell to giving sacrificing strokes
Of Sheep and Goats; the cheefely fat, and great;
Slew fed up Swine, and from the Heard, a Neat.
The inwards (roasted,) they disposd'e betwixt
Their then obseruers; wine in Flaggons mixed.
The bolles Eumaeus brought; P^ilaetius, bread;
Melanthus filled the wine. Thus drank and fed
The feastfull wooers. Then the Prince (in grace
Of his close project) did his Father place
Amids the paued Entry; in a Seat
Seemelesse, and abject: a small board and meat
Of the only inwards. In a cup of gold
Yet sent him wine; and bad him now drink bold;
All his approches, he himself would free
Against all the wooers: since he would not see
His Court made populare: but that his Sire
Built it to his use. Therefore all the fire
Blown in the wooers spleenes, he bad suppress;
And that in hands, nor words they should digress
From that set peace, his speech did then proclaim.
They bit their lips, and wondered at his aim
I^ that brave Language: when Antinons said;
Though this speech (Grecians) be a mere vpbraide;
Yet this time give it pass: The will of Io^e
Forbids the violence of our hands, to move;
But of our tongues, we keep the motion free:
And therefore, if his further iollity
Tempt our encounter with his Braues, let us check
His growing insolence: though pride to speak,
Fly passing high with him. The wise Prince made
No more spring of his speech, The Feast that Eur^^ eas^oke o^ before, ret^rn^d
unto
but let it fade.
And now the Heralds bore about the Town
The sacred Hecatombe: to whose renown
The faire-haird Greeks assembled; and beneath
Apollo's shady wood; the holy death
They put to fire; which (made enough) they drew;
Divided all, that did in the end accrue
To glorious satisfaction. Those that were
Disposers of the Feast, did equal cheer
Bestow on wretched Laertiades,
With all the wooers souls: It so did please
Telemachus to charge them: And, for these
Minerua would not see the malices
The wooers bore; too much contained, that so
Ulysses moved heart, yet might higher flow
In wreakfull anguish. There was wooing there
(Amongst the rest) a Gallant, that did ^eare
The name of one well learned, in jests profane;
His name Ctesippus, borne a Samiane:
Who proud, because his Father was so rich,
Had so much confidence, as did bewitch
His heart with hope, to wed Ulysses wife:
And this man said* Hear me, my Lords, in strife
For this great widow: This her guest did share
Even feast with us, with very comely care
Of him that ordered it: For it is not good
Nor equal, to deprive Guests of their food;
And specially, what ever guest makes way
To that house where Telemachus does sway.
And therefore, I will add to his receipt,
A gift of very hospitable weight,
Which he may give again, to any Maid
That bath's his grave feet; and her pains see paid;
Or any servant else, that the divine
Ulysses lofty Battlements confine.
Thus snatched he with a valiant hand, from o^^
The poor folks commune basket, a Neat, foot,
And threw it at Ulysses: who, his head
Shrunk quietly aside; and let it shed
His malice on the wall. The suffering man
A laughter raising, most Sardinian
With scorn, and wrath mixed, at the Samian.
Whom thus the Prince reprou'd; Your valor wan
Much grace Ctesippus; and has eased your mind
With mighty profit: yet you see it find
No mark it aimed at; the poor strangers part
Himself made good enough, to escape your Dart.
But should I serve thee worthily, my Lance
Should strike thy heart through, and (in place t'aduance
Thy self in Nuptials with his wealth) thy Sire
Should make thy toomb here; that the foolish fire
Of all such valors, may not dare to show
These foul indecencies to me. I now
Have years to understand my strength, and know
The good and bad of things; and am no more
At your large sufferance, to behold my store
Consumed with patience: See my Cattle slain,
My wine exhausted; and my Bread, in vain
Spent on your license: For, to one then young,
So many enemies were match too strong.
But let me never more, be witness to
Your hostile minds; Nor those base deeds ye do:
For, should ye kill me, in my offered wreake,
I wish it rather; and my death would speak
Much more good of me, then to live and ^ee,
Indignity, upon indignity:
My Guests prouok't with bitter words and blows;
My women servants, dragged about my house
To lust, and rapture. This made silence seize
The house throughout: till Damastorides
At length the calm brake: and said; Friend, forbear
To give a just speech a disdainful ear:
The Guest no more touch, nor no servant here.
My self, will to the Prince and Queen commend
A motion grateful, if they please to lend
Grateful receite: as long as any hope
Left wise Ulysses any passage open
To his return in our conceits; so long
The Queens delays to our demands stood strong
In cause, and reason; and our quarrels thus
With guests; the Queen, or her Telemachus,
Set never foot amongst our liberal Feast;
For should the King return, though thought deceast,
It had been gain to us, in finding him,
To lose his wife: But now, since nothing dim
The days breaks out, that shows he never more
Shall reach the dear touch of his country shore,
Sit by your Mother, in persuasion,
That now it stands her honor much upon
To choose the best of us; and who gives most,
To go with him home. For so, all things lost
In sticking on our haunt so; you shall clear
Recover, in our no more concourse here:
Possess your birthright wholly; eat and drink;
And never more on our disgraces think.
By Jove, no Agelaus: For I swear
By all my Fathers sorrows; who does err
Far off from Ithaca; or rests in death:
I am so far from spending but my breath,
To make my Mother any more defer
Her wished Nuptials; That I Will counsel her
To make her fre^ choice: And besides, will give
Large gifts to move her. But I fear to drive,
Or charge her hence: For God will not give way
To any such course, if I should assay.
At this, Minerua made for foolish joy
The wooers mad; and roused their late annoy
To such a laughter, as would never down.
They laughed with others cheeks; eat meat oreflowne
With their own bloods: their eyes stood full of tears
For violent joys: Their souls yet thought of fears:
Which Theoclymenus expressed, and said:
O wretches! Why? Sustain ye (well apaid)
Your imminent ill? A night, with which Death sees;
Your heads, and faces, hides beneath your knees.
Shriekes burn about you: your eyes, thrust out tears:
These fixed walls, and that maine Beam that bears
The whole house up, in bloody torrents fall:
The Entry full of ghosts stands: Full the Hall
Of passengers to hell: And, under all
The dismal shades; The Sun sinkes from the Poles;
And troubled air, poures bane about your souls.
They sweetly laughed at this: E^rymachus
To mocks disposed, and said; This new come-t'vs
Is surely mad, conduct him forth to light
In the open Market place: he thinks it is night
Within the house. Eurymachus (said he)
I will not ask for any guide of thee:
I both my feet enjoy; have ears, and eyes,
And no mad soul within me: and with these
Will I go forth the doors: because I know,
That imminent mischief must abide with you;
Which, not a man of all the wooers here
Shall fly, or escape. ^e all too highly bear
Your vncurb'd heads: Impieties ye commit,
And every man affect, with forms unfit.
This said; he left the house, and took his way
Home to Pyraeus; who, as free as day,
Was of his welcome. When the wooers eyes
Changed looks with one another, and (their guise
Of laughters, still held on) still eased their breasts,
Of will to set the Prince against his guests:
Affirming, that of all the men alive
He worst luck had; and proved it worst to give
Guests entertainment: For he had one there
A wandering Hunter out of prouendere,
An errant Beggar every way; yet thought
(He was so hungry) that he needed naught
But wine and Victuals: nor knew how to do;
Nor had a spirit to put a knowledge to;
But lived an idle burden to the earth.
Another then stepped up; and would lay forth
His lips in ph^ophesie, thus: But (would he hear
His friends persuasions) he should find it were
More profit for him, to put both abord
For the Sici^ian people, that afford
These (...) feet of men, good price: and this would bring
Good means for better guests* These words made wing
To his ears idly: who h^d still his eye
Upon his Father, looking fervently
When he would lay his long-withholding hand
On those proud wooers. And, within command
Of all this speech that past, Icarius heir
(The wise Penelope) her royal chair
Had placed of purpose. Their high dinner then
With all pleased palates, these ridiculous men
Fell sweetly to: as ioying they had slain
Such store of banquet. But there did not reign
A bitterer banquet Planet in all heaven,
Then that which Pallas, had to that day driven;
And, with her able friend now, meant t'appose;
Since they, till then, were in deserts so gross.
The End of the Twentieth Book of Homers Odysses.
THE XXI. BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
PEnelope proposes now,
To him that draws Ulysses Bow
Her instant Nuptials. Ithacus,
Eumaeus, and Philaetius,
Gives charge for guarding of the Gates;
And he, his s^aft shoots through the plates.
Another.
(...).
The Nuptial vow,
and Game reherst:
Drawn is the Bow,
the steeles are pierst.

PAllas (the Goddess with the sparkling eyes)
Excites Penelope, t'obiect the prise
(The Bow and bright steeles) to the wooers strength
And here began the strife and blood at length.
She first aseended by a lofty staire,
Her utmost chamber; of whose door, her fair
And half transparant hand received the Key;
Bright, brazen; bitted passing curiously,
And as it hung a knob of Iuory.
And this did lead her, where was strongly kept
The treasure Royal; in whose store lay heap't,
Gold, Brass, and Steel, engraven with infinite Art;
The crooked Bow, and Arrowy quiver, part
Of that rich Magazin. In the Quiver, were
Arrows a number; sharp, and sighing gere.
The Bow was given by kind Eurythides
( ^phitus, fashioned like the Deities)
To young Ulysses; when within the Roof
Of wise Ort^locus, their pass had proof
Of mutual meeting in M^ssena; where
Ulysses claimed a debt: To whose pay, were
The whole Messen^an people bound; since they
From Ithaca, had forced a wealthy prey
Of Sheep, and She^pherds. In their ships they thrust
^hree hundred Sheep together: for whose just
And instat rendry* old L^ertes sent
Ulysses his Ambassador, that went
A long way in the Ambassy; yet then
Bore but the foremost prime of youngest men.
His Father, sending first to that affair
His gra^est Counselors, and then his heir.
Iphitus made his way there having lost
Twelve female horse; and Mules commended most
For use of burden; which were after cause
Of death and fate to him. For (past all Laws
Of hospitality) Jove's mighty son
(Skilled in great acts) was his confusion
Close by his house, though at that time his guest:
Respecting neither the apposed Feast
And hospitable Table, in that love
He set before him; nor the voice of Jove:
But* seizing first his Mares, he after slew
His host himself. From those Mares search now grew
Ulysses known t'Iphitus; who that Bow
At their encounter, did in love bestow,
Which great Eurytus hand had bo^ne before
(Iphitus Father) who (at deaths sad door)
In his steep Turret^, left it to his Son.
Ulysses gave him a keen Faulchion
And mighty Lance; and thus began they there
Their fatal Loves; for after, never were
Their mut^all Tables to each other known;
Because Iou^s son th'vnworthy part had shown^
O^ slaughtering this God-like loving man,
Eurytus son; who with that Bow began
And ended love t'Vlysses: who so dear
A gift esteemed it, that he would not bear
In his black fleet that guest-rite to the war;
But, in fit memory of one so far
In his affection, brought it home, and kept
His treasure with it, where till now it slept.
And now the Queen of women had intent
To give it use; and therefore made ascent
Up all the stairs height to the chamber door:
Whose shining leaves two bright Pilasters bore
To such a close, when both together went;
It would resist the air in their consent.
The Ring she took then, and did draw aside
A bar that ran within, and then implide
The Key into the Lock; which gave a sound
(The Bolt then shooting) as ^ pasture ground
A Bull does Low, and make the valleys ring:
So loud the Lock humm'd, when it loosd his spring,
And open the doors flew. In she went along
The lofty chamber, that was boorded strong
With heart of Oak; which many years ago
The Architect did smooth and polish so,
That now as then, he made it freshly shine;
And tried the evenness of it with a Line.
There stood in this room, Presses that enclosed
Robes odorferous; by which reposed
The Bow was upon pins: Nor from it far
Hung the round Quiver, glittering like a Star;
Both which, her white extended hand took down:
Then sat she low, and made her lap a Crown
Of both those Relics; which she wept to see,
And cried quite out with loving memory
Of her dear Lord: To whose worth, paying then
Kind debts enough: She left; and to the men
Vowed to her wooing, brought the crooked Bow,
And shaft-receiuing Quiver, that did flow
With arrows, beating sighs up where they fell.
Then, with another Chist, repleate as well
With Games won by the King, of Steel and Brass,
Her Maids attended. Past whom, making pass
To where her wooers were; She made her stay
Amids the fair Hall door, and kept the ray
Of her bright countenance hid with veyles so thin,
That though they seemed t'expose, they let love in;
Her Maids on both sides stood; and thus she spoke.
Hear me, ye wooers, that a pleasure take
To do me sorrow, and my house invade
To eat and drink; as if 'twere only made
To serve your Rapines: My Lord long away;
And you allowed no color for your stay
But his still absence; striving who shall frame
Me for his wife; and (since it is made a game)
I here propose divine Ulysses Bow
For that great Maister-peece, to which ye vow.
He that can draw it, with least show to strive,
And through these twelve Ax-heads, an arrow drive;
Him will I follow, and this house forgo,
That nourisht me a Maid: now furnished so
With all things fit; and which I so esteem
That I shall still live in it in my dream.
This said, she made Eumaeus give it them.
He took, and laid it by; and wept for woe,
And like him, wept Philaetius; when the Bow
Of which his King was bearer, he beheld.
Their tears, Antinous manhood much refeld;
And said, Ye rustic fools! that still each day
Your minds give over to this vain dismay,
Why weep ye (wretches?) and the widows eyes
Tempt with renewed thought; that would otherwise
Depose her sorrows, since her Lord is dead,
And tears are idle? Sit, and eat your bread,
Nor whisper more a word; or get ye gone,
And weep without doors: Let this Bow alone
To our ou-matcht contention: For I fear,
The Bow will scarce yield draught to any here.
Here no such man lives, as Laertes Son
Amongst us all: I knew him; Thought puts on
His looks sight now, me thinks, though then a child.
Thus showed his words doubt, yet his hopes enstild
His strength, the stretcher of Ulysses string.
And his steeles piercer: But his shaft must sing
Through his piercst Pallat first; whom so he wrong'^
In his free roof; and made the rest ill tongued
Against his virtues. Then the sacred heat
That spirited his Son, did further set
Their confidence on fire; and said: O Friends,
Jove has bereft my wits: The Queen intends
(Though I must grant her wise) ere long to leave
Ulysses Court; and to her bed receive
Some other Lord: yet notwithstanding, I
Am forced to laugh, and set my pleasures hye
Like one mad sick. But wooers, since ye have
An object for your trials now so brave,
As all the broad Achaian earth exceeds:
As sacred Pylos; as the Argiue breeds;
As black Epyrus, as Mycena's birth;
And as the more-fam'd Ithacensian earth;
All which, your selves well know, and o^t have said;
(For what need has my Mother of my aid
In her advancement?) Tender no excuse,
For least delay; nor too much time profuse
In stay to draw this Bow; but draw it straight;
Shoot, and the steeles pierce: make all see how slight
You make these poor bars, to so rich a prise.
No eagrer yet? Come on: My faculties
Shall try the Bows strength, and the pierced steel:
I will not for my reverend Mother feel
The sorrows that I know will seize my heart,
To see her follow any, and depart
From her so long-held home: But first extend
The Bow and Arrow to their tendered end.
For I am only to succeed my Sire
In guard of his games; and let none aspire
To their besides possession. This said;
His purple Robe he cast off. By he laid
His well-edg'd sword; and first, a several pit
He dug for every Axe, and strengthened it
With earth, close ramm'd about it: On a rue
Set them of one height, by a Line he drew
Along the whole twelve; and so orderly
Did every deed belonging (yet his eye
Never before beholding how 'twas done)
That in amaze rose all his lookers on.
Then stood he near the door, and proved to draw
The stubborn Bow: Thrice tried, and thrice gave Law
To his vncrown'd attempts: the fourth assay
With all force offering, which a sign gave stay
Given by his Father; though he showed a mind
As if he stood right heartily inclinde
To perfect the exploite: when, all was done
In only drift to set the wooers on.
His weakness yet confessed; he said, O shame
I either shall be ever of no name,
But prove a wretch: Or else I am too young,
And must not now prefume on powers so strong
As sinews yet more growing, may ingraft,
To turn a man quite over with a shaft.
Besides, to men whose Nerves are best prepared;
All great Adventures, at first proof, are hard.
But come, you stronger men, attempt this Bow,
And let us end our labor. Thus, below
A well-ioyn'd board he laid it; and close by,
The brightly-headed shaft: then throned his Thie
Amidst his late-left seat. Antinous then
Bad all arise: but first, who did sustain
The cups state ever; and did sacrifice
Before they eat still: and that man, bad rise,
Since on the others right hand he was placed;
Because he held the right hands rising, graced
With best success still. This direction wun
Supreme applause; and first, rose Oe^ops Son
Liodes, that was Priest to all the rest,
Sat lowest with the Cup still, and their jest
Could never like; but ever was the man
That checked their follies: and he now began
To taste the Bow: the sharp shaft took, tug'd hard,
And held aloft: and till he quite had marred
His delicate tender fingers, could not stir
The churlish string* who therefore did refer
The game to others; saying, that same Bow
(In his presage) would prove the overthrow
Of many a chief man there: nor thought the Fate
Was any whit austere; since Death^ short da^e
Were much the better taken; then long life
Without the ohiect of their amorous strife;
For whom they had burned out so many days
To find still other, nothing but delays
Obtaining in them: and affirmed that now
Some hoped to have her: but when that tough Bow
They all had tried, and seen the utmost done,
They must rest pleased to cease; and now some one
Of all their other fair veyl'd Grecian Dames
With gifts, and dower, and Hymeneal Flames;
Let her love light to him, that most will give,
And whom the Nuptial destiny did drive.
Thus laid he on the well-ioyn'd pol^sht Board
The Bow, and bright-pil't shaft; and then restored
His seat his right. To him, Antinous
Gave bitter language, and reprou'd him thus.
What words ( Liodes) pass thy speeches guard?
That it is a work to bear? And set so hard,
They set up my disdain: This Bow must end
The best of us? since thy arms cannot lend
The string least motion? Thy Mothers throws
Brought never forth thy arms, to draught of Bows,
Or knitting shafts off. Though thou can not draw
The sturdy Plant, thou art to us no law.
Melanthius? Light a fire, and set thereat
A chair and cushions; and that mass of fat
That lies within, bring out; that we may set
Our Pages to this Bow, to see it heat
And suppl'd with the sue^; and then we
May give it draught, and pay this great decree
Utmost performance. He a mighty fire
Gave instant flame, put into act th'entire
Command laid on him: Chair and cushions set;
Laid on the Bow, which straight the Pages het,
Chaft, suppl'd with the Suet to their most;
And sti^l was all their Unctuous labor lost:
All wooers strengths, too indigent and pore
To draw that Bow: Antinous arms, it tore;
An^ great Eurymachus (the both clear best)
Yet both it tired, and made them glad to rest.
Forth then went both the Swains; and after them
Divine Ulysses, when being past th'extreme
Of all the Gates; with winning words he tried
Their loves, and this asked: Shall my counsels hide
Their depths from you? My mind would gladly know
If suddenly Ulysses had his Vow
Made good for home; and had some God to guide
His steps and strokes to, to wreak these wooers pride;
Would your aids join on his part, or with theirs?
How stand your hearts affected? They made prayr's,
That some God would please, to return their Lord;
He then should see, how far they would afford
Their lives for his. (He seeing their (...)) replied;
I am your Lord; through (...) any a sufferance ^^ied,
Arrived now here; whom twenty years have held
From forth my Country; yet are not concealed
From my sure knowledge; your desires to see
My safe return. Of all the company
Now serving here besides; not one but you
Mine ear has witnest willing to bestow
Their wishes of my life, so long held dead.
I therefore vow, (which shall be perfected)
That if God please, beneath my hand to leave
These wooers liuelesse; ye shall both receive
Wives from that hand, and means; and near to me
Have houses built to you: and both shall be
As friends, and brothers to my only Son.
And that ye well may know me; and ^e ^onne
To that assurance: the infallible Sign
The white-tooth'd Bore g^^e, this marked knee of mine
When in Parnassus, he was held in chase
By me, and by my famous Grand^ires race;
I Will let you see. Thus seuer'd he his weed
From that his wound; and every word had deed
In their sure knowledges; Which made them cast
Their arms about him; his broad breast embraced,
His neck and shoulders kissed. And him, as well
Did those true powers of humane love compel
To kiss their heads and hands; and to their moan
Had sent the free light of the cheerful Sun,
Had not Ulysses broke the ^uth, and said;
Cease tears, and sorrows, le^t we prove displaide,
By some that issue from the house; and they
Relate to those within. Take each his way,
Not altogether in; but one by one:
First I, then you; and then see this be done:
The envious wooers will by no means give
The offer of the Bow, and Arrow leave
To come at me; spite then their pride, do thou
(My good Eumaeus) bring both shaft and Bow,
To my hands proof; and charge the maids before;
That instantly, they shut in every door;
That they themselves, (if any tumult rise
Beneath my Roofes; by any that enuies,
My will to undertake the Game) may gain
No passage forth, but close at work contain
With all free quiet; or at least, constrained.
And therefore (my Philaetius) see maintained
(When close the gates are shut) their closure fa^t;
To which end, be it thy sole work to cast
Their chains before them. This said, in he led;
Took first his feate, and then they seconded
His entry with their own. Then took in hand
Eurymachus the Bow, made close his stand
Aside the fire; at whose heat, here and there
He warmed and suppl'd it, yet could not stere
To any draught, the string, with all his Art;
And therefore, sweld in him his glorious heart;
Affirming; that himself, and all his friends
Had cause to grieve: Not only that their ends
They mist in marriage (since enough besides
Kind Grecian Dames, there lived to be their Brides
In Ithaca, and other bordering Towns)
But that to all times future, their renownes
Would stand disparaged, if Ulysses Bow
They could not draw, and yet his wife would woo.
Antinous answered; That there could ensue
No shame at all to them: For well he knew,
That this day was kept holy to the S^nne
By all the City: and there should be done
No such profane act; therefore bad, lay by
The Bow for that day: but the maistery
^f Axes that were set up, still might stand;
Since that no labor was, nor any hand
Would offer to invade Ulysses house,
To take, or touch with surreptitious
Or violent hand, what there was left for use.
He therefore bad the Cup-(...) infuse
Wine to the Bolles; that so, with ^acrifice
They might let rest the shooting exercise;
And in the morning make (...) bring
The chief Goats of his Herd, that to the King
Of Bows and Archers, they might burn the Thyes
For good success; and then, attempt the prize.
The rest sat pleased with this: the Heralds strait
Poured water on their hands: each Page did wait
With his crowned cup of wine: seru^d (...) man
Till all were satisfied: and then began
Vlyss^s plot of his close purpose* (...):
Hear me, ye much renowned Eurymachus,
And King Antinous, in chief; who well,
And with decorum sacred, does compel
This days observance; and to let lay down
The Bow, all this light; giving Gods their own.
The mornings labor, God the more will bless,
And strength bestow, where he himself shall please.
Against which time, let me presume to pray
Your favors, with the rest; that this assay,
May my old arms prove; trying if there lie
In my poor powers the same actiuity
That long since crowned them: Or if needy fare
And desolate wandering, have the web worn bar^
Of my life's thread at all parts; that no more
Can furnish these affairs as heretofore.
This heat their spleens past measure; blown with fear,
Lest his loathed temples, would the garland wear
Of that Bows draught: Antinous using speech
To this sour purpose: Thou most arrant wretch
Of all guests breathing; in no least degree
Graced with a humane soul: It serves not thee
To feast in peace with us; take equal share
Of what we reach to; sit, and all things hear
That we speak freely (which no begging guest
Did ever yet) but thou must make request
To mix with us in merit of the Queen.
But wine enflames thee; that has ever been
The bane of men: whoeuer yet would take
The Excess it offers; and the mean forsake.
Wine spoilde the Centaure great E^ryti^^,
In guest-rites, with the mighty-minded Son
Of bold Ixion; in his way to war,
Against the Lapithes; who driven as far
As madness, with the bold effects of wine;
Did outrage to his kind host; and decline
Other Heroes from him, feasted there;
With so much anger, that they left their cheer,
And dragged him forth the fore-court; slit his nose,
Cropped both his ears; and in the ill dispose
His mind then sufferd; drew the fatal day
On his head, with his host. For thence the fray
Betwixt the Centaures, and the (...)
Had mortal act: but he for his (...)
In spoil of wine, fared worth himself; As thou
For thy large cups, if thy arms draw the Bow,
My mind foretells shall fear: for not a man
Of all our Consort, that in wisdom can
Boast any fit share, will take prayers then;
But to Echetus, the most stern of men
A black Sail freight with thee; whose worst of ill,
Be sure is past all ransom. Sit then still;
Drink temperately; and never more contend
With men your yongers. This, the Queen did end
With her defense of him; and told his Foe
It was not fair, nor equal t'ouercrow
The poorest Guest her son pleased t'entertaine
In his free Turrets; with so proud a strain
Of threats, and brauings; asking if he thought
That if the stranger to his arms had brought
The stubborn Bow down; he should marry her
And bear her home? And said, himself should err
In no such hope; nor of them all the best
That grieved at any good, she did her guest,
Should banquet there; since it in no sort showed
Noblesse in them, nor paid her, what she owed
Her own free rule there. This Eurymachus
Confirmed and said; nor feeds it hope in us
( Icarius daughter) to solemnize Rites
Of Nuptials with thee; Nor in noblest sights
It can show comely; but to our respects
The rumor, both of sexes, and of Sects
Amongst the people, would breed shame, and fear,
Lest any worst Greek said; See, m^n that were
Of mean deseruings, will presume t'aspire
To his wives bed, whom all men did admire
For fame and merit; could not draw his Bow,
And yet his wife, had foolish pride to woo:
When straight an errant Beggar comes and draws
The Bow with ease, performing all the Laws
The game beside contained; and this would thus,
Prove both indignity and shame to us.
The Queen replied; The fame of men I see
Bears much price, in your great supposed degree;
Yet who can prove (amongst the people great)
That of one so esteemed of them, the seat
Does so defame and ruin? And beside,
With what right is this guest thus vilefied
In your high censures? when the man, in blood
Is well (...), Been compactus and coag^entatis.
composd, and great; his parents good.
And therefore give the Bow to him, to try
His Birth and breeding by his Cheualry.
If his arms draw it; and that Phoebus stands
So great a glory to his strength, my hands
Shall add this guerdon: Every sort of weed,
A two-edged Sword and Lance, to keep him freed
From Dogs and Men hereafter; and dismis
His worth to what place tends that heart of his.
Her son gave answer; That it was a wrong
To his free sway, in all things that belong
To guard of that house, to demand the Bow
Of any wooer, and the use bestow
Upon the stranger: For the Bow was his,
To give or to withold: No maisteries
Of her proposing, giving any power
T'empaire his right in things, for any wower;
Or any that rough Ithaca affords;
Any that Elis; of which, no man's words
Nor powers should curb him (stood he so inclined)
To see the Bow in absolute gift resigned
To that his guest, to bear and use at will:
And therefore bad his Mother keep ^er still
Amongst her women, at her Rock and Loome;
Bows were for men: and this Bow did become
Past al men's, his disposure; since his Sire
Left it to him, and all the house e^tire.
She stood dismayed at this; and in her mind
His wise words laid up; standing so inclinde
As he had willed; with all her women, going
Up to her chamber: there, her tears bestowing
(As every night she did) on her loved Lord,
Til sleep and Pallas, her fit rest restored.
The Bow, Eumaeus took, and bore away;
Which up in tumult, and almost in fray
Put all the wooers: One enquiring thus.
Whether? Rogue? abject? will thou bear from us
That Bow proposd? Lay down, or I protest
Thy dogs shall eat thee, that thou nourishest
To guard thy Swine: amongst whom (left of all)
Thy life shall leave thee; if the Festival
We now observe to Phoebus; ^ay our zeales
Grace with his aid, and all the Deities else.
This threat made good (...) yield the Bow
To his late place, not knowing what might grow
From such a multitude. And then fell on
Telemachus with threats; and said, Set gone
That Bow yet further: it is no servants part
To serve too many Masters: raise your heart
And bear it off, lest (though your younger) yet
With stones I pelt you to the field with it.
If you and I close, I shall prove to^ ^^rong:
I wish, as much too hard for all this (...)
The Gods would make me; I should quickly send
Some after, with just sorrow to their end:
They waste my victles so, and ply my cup,
And do me such shrewd turns still. This put up
The wooers all in Laugh^^rs; and put down
Their angers to him; that so late were grown
So grave and bloody, which resolved that fear
Of good Eumaeus; who did take and bear
The King the Bow; called Nurse, and bad her make
The doors all sure; that if men's tumults take
The ears of some within; they may not fly,
But keep at work still, close and silently.
These words put wings to her; and close she put
The chamber door: The Court gates then were shut
By kind Philaetius; who straight did go
From out the Hall; and in the Portico
Found laid, a Gable of a Ship, composed
Of spongy Bulrushes; with which he closed
(In winding round about them) the Court gates:
Then took his place again, to view the Fates
That quickly followed. When he came, he saw
Ulysses viewing, ere he tried to draw
The famous Bow; which every way he moved;
Up, and down turning it: in which he proved
The plight it was in: fearing chiefly, lest
The horns were eat with worms, in so long rest.
But what his thoughts intended, turning so;
And keeping such a search about the Bow:
The wooers little knowing, fell to jest,
And said; Past doubt, he is a man professed
In Bowyers craft, and sees quite through the wood:
Or something (certain) to be understood
There is, in this his turning of it still:
A cunning Rogue he is, at any ill.
Then spoke another proud one; Would to heaven
I might (at will) get Gold, till he has given
That Bow his draught: with these sharp jests, did these
Delightsome woo^rs, their fatal humors please.
But when the wise Ulysses once had laid
His fingers on it; and to proof suruaide
The still sound plight it held: As one of skill
In song, and of the Harp; does at his will
In tuning of his Instrument; extend
A string out with his pin; touch all, and lend
To every wel-wreath'd string, his perfect sound,
Struck all together: with such ease, drew round
The King, the Bow. Then twang'd he up the string,
That, as a Swallow, in the air does sing
With no continued tune; but (pausing still)
Twinkes out her scattered voice in accents shrill;
So sharp the string sung, when he gave it touch,
Once having bent and drawn it. Which so much
Amazed the wooers, that their colors went
And came, most grievously. And then, Jove rent
The air with thunder; which at heart did chere
The now-enough-sustaining Traveler.
Tha Jove, again, would his attempt enable.
Then took he into hand, from off the Table
The first drawn arrow; and a number more
Spent shortly on the wooers. But this One,
He measured by his arm (as if not known
The leng^h were to him) nockt it then; and drew:
And through the Axes, at the first hole, flew
The steele-chardg'd arrow; which when he had done,
He thus bespake the Prince: You have not won
Disgrace yet by your Guest; for I have struck
The mark I shot at; and no such toil took
In wearying the Bow, with fat and fire,
As did the wooers; yet reserved entire
(Thank heaven) my strength is; and my self am tried,
No man to be so basely vilified
As these men pleased to think me. But, free way
Take that, and all their pleasures: and while Day
Holds her Torch to you; and the hour of feast
Has now full date; give banquet; and the rest
(Poem and Harp) that grace a wel-fill'd boorde.
This said: he beckn'd to his Son; whose sword
He straight girt to him: took to hand his Lance,
And, complete armed, did to his Sire advance.
The End of the XXI. Book of Homers Odysses.
THE XXII. BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Wooers in Mineruaes sight
Slain by Ulysses; All the light
And lustful H^swiues, by his Son
And servants, are to slaughter done.
Another.
(...).
The end of Pride,
and lawless Lust;
Is wretched tried,
with slaughters just

THe upper rags, that wise Ulysses wore,
Cast off; he ^usheth to the great Hall door
With Bow and Quiver full of shafts; wc down
He poured before his feet; and thus made known
His true state to the wooers: This strife, thus
Has harmless been decided: Now for us
There rests another mark, more hard to hit,
And such as never man before has smit;
Whose full point likewise, my hands shall assay,
And try if Phoebus will give me his day.
He said; and off his bitter Arrow thrust
Right, at Antinous; that struck him just
As he was lifting up the Bolle; to show,
That 'twixt the cup, and lip, much ill may grow.
Death touched not at his thoughts, at Feast: for who
Would think, that he alone could perish ^o
Amongst so many? And he, best of all?
The Arrow in his throat took full his fall;
And thrust his head far through the other side:
Down fell his cup; down he; down all his pride.
Straight from his Nostrils gusht the humane gore:
And as he fell, his feet far ouerbore
The feastfull Table; all the Roast, and Bread
About the house strewn. When his highborn head
The rest beheld so low, up rusht they all,
And ransack't every Corner of the Hall
For Shields and Darts: but all fled far their reach;
Then fell they foul on him with terrible speech,
And told him, it should prove the dearest shaft
That ever past him; and that now was saf't
No shift for him, but sure and sudden death:
For he had slain a man, whose like did breath
In no part of the Kingdom: and that now
He should no more for Game^, strive with his Bow,
But Vultures eat him there. These threats they spent;
^et every man believed, that stern event
Chanced against the authors will: O Fools, to think
That all their rest, had any cup to drink,
But what their great Antinous began.
He (frowning) said; Dogs, see in me the man
Ye all held dead at Troy: My house it is
That thus ye spoil; that thus your Luxuries
File with my women's rapes: in which, ye woo
The wife of one that lives; and no thought ^^ow
Of man's fit fear, or Gods: your present Fame,
Or any fair sense of your future name.
And therefore, present and eternal death
Shall end your base life. This made fresh fears breath
Their former boldness: every man had eye
On all the means, and studied ways to fly
So deep deaths imminent. But, seeing none,
E^rymachus began with suppliant moan
To move his pity, saying; If you be
This Isles Ulysses, we must all agree
In grant of your reproves integrity.
The Greeks have done you many a wrong at home;
At field as many: But of all, the sum
Lies here contract in death: For only he
Imposd the whole ill Offices that we
Are now made guilty of: and not so much
Sought his endeavors; or in thought did touch
At any Nuptials; but a greater thing
Employed his forces: For, to be our King
Was his chief object: his sole plot it was
To kill your Son: which Jove's hand would not pass,
But set it to his own most merited end.
In which, end your just anger; nor extend
Your stern wreake further: Spend your royal powers
In mild ruth of your people; we are yours.
And whatsoever waste of wine; or food,
Our Liberties have made; we will make all good
In restitutions: call a Court, and pass
A fine of twenty Oxen, Gold, and Brass,
On every Head; and raise your most rates still,
Till you are pleased with your confessed fill:
Which if we fail to tender: all your wrath,
It shall be justice in our bloods to bathe.
Eurymachus (said he) if you would give
All that your Fathers hoord, to make ye live;
And all that ever you your selves possess,
Or shall by any industry increase:
I would not cease from slaughter, till your bloods
Had bought out your intemperance in my Goods.
It rests now for you, that you either fight
That will escape death, or make your way by flight:
In whose best choice, my thoughts conceive, not one
Shall shun the death, your first has undergone.
This quite dissolved their knees: E^rymachus
Enforcing all their fears, yet counsail'd thus:
O Friends This man, now he has got the Bow
And Quiver by him, ever will bestow
His most inaccessible hands at us
And never leave, if we avoid him thus,
Til he has strewn the pauement with us all:
And therefore, join we swords, and on him fall
With Tables forced up; and borne in opposd
Against his sharp shafts; when being round enclosd
By all our on-sets, we shall either take
His horrid person, or for safety make
His rage retire from out the Hall and Gates:
And then, if he escape, we will make our states
Known to the City, by our general ^ry:
And thus this man shall let his last shaft fly,
That ever his hand vanted. Thus he drew
His sharp edged sword; and with a table, flew
In, on Ulysses with a terrible throat,
His fierce charge urging. But Ulysses ^mote
The board, and cleft it through, from end to end
Borne at his breast, and made his shaft extend
His sharp head to his Liver: his broad breast
Pierced at his Nipple: when, his hand releast
Forthwith his sword, that fell and kissed the ground:
With cups and victles, lying scattered round
About the pauement: amongst which, his brow
Knocked the embrued earth; while in pains did slow
His vital spirits, til his heels shook out
His feastful life; and hurled a Throne about,
That way-laide deaths convulsions in his feet;
When from his tender eyes, the light did flee^.
Then charged Amphi^omus with his drawn blade
The glorious King, in purpose to have made
His feet forsake the house: But his assay
The Prince prevented; and his Lance gave way
Quite through his shoulder, at his back: his breast
The fierce pile letting forth. His ruin, pressed
Groans from the pauement; which his forhead struck.
Telemachus his long Lance then forsook
(Left in Amphinomus) and to his Sire
Made fiery pass; not staying to acquire
His Lance again; in doubt that while he drew
The fixed pile, some other might renew
Fierce charge upon him; and his unarmed head
Cleave with his back-drawne sword: for which he fled
Close to his Father; bad him arm, and he
Would bring him Shield and Iauelins instantly;
His own head arming; more arms laying by
To serve the Swine-herd, and the Oxen-herd.
Valor well armed, is ever most preferred.
Run then (said he) and come, before the last
Of these auxilliary shafts are past:
For fear, lest (left alone) they force my stand
From forth the Ports. He flew, and brought to hand
Eight Darts, four Shields, 4. Helmes. His own parts then
First put in arms, he furnished both his men,
That to their King stood close. But he, as long
As he had shafts to friend, enough was strong
For all the wooers: and some one man still
He made make even with earth. Till all, a hill
Had raisd in th'euen floor'd Hall. His last shaft spent,
He set his Bow against a beam, and went
To arm at all parts, while the other three
Kept off the wooers: who, unarmed, could be
No great assailants. In the well built wall
A window was thrust out, at end of all
The houses Entry: on whose utter side
There lay a way to Town; and in it, wide
And two leau'd folds were forged, that gave fit mean
For flyers out; and therefore, at it then
Ulysses placed Eumaeus in close guard:
One only pass open to it: which (prepared
In this sort by Ulysses, against all pass)
By Agelaus tardy memory, was
In question called: who bad, some one ascend
At such a window; and bring straight to friend
The City with his clamor; that this man
Might quickly shoot his last. This, no one can
Make safe access to (said Melanthi^s)
For it is too near the Hals fair doors: whence thus
The man afflicts ye: For from thence, there lies
But one straight passage to it; that denies
Access to all; if any one man stand
(Being one of courage) and will countermand
O^r offer to it. But I know a way
To bring you arms, from where the King does lay
His whole munition: and, believe there is
No other place, to all the Armories
Both of himself and Son. This said: a pair
Of lofty Stairs he climbed; and to th'affaire,
Twelve Shields, twelve Lances brought; as many casks,
With horse-haire Plumes; and set to bitter tasks
Both Son and Sire. Then shrunk Ulysses knees,
And his loved heart; when thus in arms he sees
So many wooers; and their shaken darts:
For then the work showed, as it asked more parts
To safe performance: and he told his Son,
That or Melanthius, or his maids had done
A deed, that foul war, to their hands conferd.
O Father (he replied) it is I have erred
In this caused labor: I, and none, but I;
That left the door open, of your Armory.
But some (it seems) has set a sharper eye
On that important place: Eumaeus! have
And shut the door; observing who has part
To this false action: any maid; or One
That I suspect more; which is Dolius Son.
While these spoke thus; Melanthius went again
For more fair arms; whom the renowned Swain
Eumaeus saw: and told Ulysses straight,
It was the hateful man, that his conceit
Before suspected; who had done that ill:
And (being again there) asked if he should kill
(If his power served) or he should bring the Swain
To him; t'inflict on him a several pain
For every forfeite, he had made his house.
He answered: I and my Telemachus
Will here contain these proud ones, in despite,
How much soever, these stolen arms excite
Their guilty courages; while you two take
Possession of the Chamber: the doors make
Sure at your back: and then (surprising him)
His feet and hands bind; wrapping every lim
In pliant chains; and with a halter (cast
Above the winde-beame (at himself made fast)
Aloft the Column draw him: where alive
He long may hang; and pains enough, deprive
His vexed life, before his death succeed.
This charge (soon heard) as soon they put to deed;
Stole on his stealth; and at the further end
Of all the chamber, saw him busily bend
His hands to more arms: when they (still at door)
Watched his return. At last, he came, and bore
In one hand, a fair Helm: in the other held
A broad, and ancient rusty-rested Shield,
That old Laertes in his youth had worn;
Of which, the cheeke-bands had with age bin torn.
They rusht upon him, caught him by the hair,
And dragged him in again: whom (crying out)
They cast upon the pauement: wrapped about
With sure and pinching cords, both foot and hand;
And then (in full act of their Kings command)
A pliant chain bestowed on him; and haled
His body up the column, till he scaled
The highest wind-beame. Where, made firmly fast,
Eumaeus on his just infliction, past
This pleasurable cavil: Now you may,
All night keep watch here, and the earliest day
Discern (being hung so high) to rouse from rest
Your dainty Cattle, to the wooers Feast.
There (as befits a man of means so fair)
Soft may you sleep, naught under you but air;
And so, long hang you. Thus they left him there,
Made fast the door; and with Ulysses, were
All armed in the instant. Then they all stood close;
Their minds fire breathed in flaures against their foes.
Four in th 'Entry fighting all alone;
When from the Hall charged many a mighty one:
But to them then, Jove's seed ( Min^urua) came,
Resembling Mentor, both in voice and frame
Of manly person. Passing well apaide
Ulysses was; and said, Now Ment^r, aid^
Against these odd mischiefs: call to memory now
My often good to thee; and that, we two
Of one years life are. Thus he said; but thought
It was Minerua, that had ever brought
To her side, safety. On the other part,
The wooers threatened: but the chief in heart
Was Agelaus; who, to Mentor spoke.
Mentor: Let no words of Ulysses make
Thy hand a fighter on his feeble side,
Against al us wooers: for we firm abide
In this persuasion; That when Sire and Son
Our swords have slain, thy life is sure to ron
One fortune with them: what strange acts have thou
Conceit to form here* Thy head must below
The wreake of theirs, on us: And when thy powrs
Are taken down by these fierce steeles of ours;
All thy possessions, in doors, and without
Must raise on heap with his; and all thy rout
Of sons and daughters, in thy Turrets bleed
Wreake offerings to us; and our Town stand freed
Of all charge with thy wife. Mineruaes heart
Was fired with these Braues: the approved desert
Of her Ulysses, chiding: saying, No more
Thy force nor fortitude, as heretofore
Will gain thee glory. When nine years at Troy,
VVhite-wristed Hellens rescue, did employ
Thy arms and wisdom; still, and ever used
The bloods of thousands, through the field diffusde
By thy vaste valor; Priams broad-waide Town
By thy grave parts, was sacked, and overthrown:
And now, amongst thy people, and thy goods,
Against the wooers base and petulant bloods,
Stint'st thou thy valor? Rather mourning here,
Then manly fighting? Come Friend, Stand we nere,
And note my labor, that thou may discern
Amongst thy foes, how Mentors Nerves will erne
All thy old Bounties. This she spoke, but staide
Her hand from giving each-way-often-swaide
Uncertain conquest, to his certain use;
But still would try, what selfe-pow'rs would produce
Both in the Father* and the glorious Son.
Then, on the wind-beame, that along did ron
The smoaky roof; transformed Minerua sat
Like to a Swallow; sometimes cuffing at
The swords and Lances, rushing from her seat;
And up and down the troubled house, did beat
Her wing at every motion. And as she
Had roused Ulysses; so, the enemy
Damastors son excited; Polybus,
Amphinomus, and Demoptolemus,
Eurynomus, and Polyctorides;
For these were men, that of the wooing prea^e
Were most egregious, and the clearly best
In strength of hand, of all the desperate rest
That yet suruiu'd, and now fought for their souls;
Which straight, swift arrows sent among the Fouls.
But first, Damastors son had more spare breath
To spend on their excitements, ere his death;
And said, That now Ulysses would forbear
His dismal hand, since Mentors spirit was there,
And blew vain vants about Ulysses ears;
In whose trust, he would cease his Massacres,
Rest him, and put his friends huge boasts in proof:
And so was he beneath the Entries roof
Left with Telemachus, and the other two:
At whom (said he) discharge no Darts: but through
All at Ulysses, rousing his faint rest;
Whom if we slaughter, by our interest
In Jove's assistance, all the rest may yield
Our powers no care, when he strowes once the field.
As he then willed: they all at randon threw,
Where they supposd he rested; and then flew
Minerua after every Dart, and made
Some strike the threshold; some the walls invade:
Some beat the doors; and all acts rendered vain
Their grave steel offered: which escaped, Again
Came on Ulysses, saying; O that we,
The wooers troop, with our joint Archerie
Might so assail; that where their spirits dream.
On our deaths first, we first may slaughter them.
Thus the much sufferer said; and all let fly,
When every man struck dead his enemy:
Ulysses slaughtred Demoptolemus:
Euryades by young Telemachus
His death encountered. Good E^maus slew
Elatus; And Philaetius overthrew
Pysander: all which, tore the paued floor
Up with their teeth: The rest retired before
Their second charge, to inner rooms; and then
Ulysses followed: from the slaughtered men
Their darts first drawing. While wc work was done,
The wooers threw, with huge contention
To kill them all; when with her Swallow wing,
Minerua cufft; and made their Iauelins ring
Against the doors, and thresholds, as before^:
Some yet did graze upon their marks. One tore
The Princes wrist, which was Amphimed^^;
The Extreme part of the skin, but touched upon.
Ctesippus, over good Eumaeus Shield
His shoulders top did taint; which yet did yield
The Lance free pass, and gave his hurt the ground.
Again then charged the wooers, and girt round
Ulysses with their Lances; who turned head,
And with his Iauelin struck Euryda^^s dead.
Telemachus, disliu'd Amphimed^n;
Eumaeus, Polybu^; Philaetius won
Ctesippus bosom with his dart, and said;
(In quittance of the Iesters part he played,
The Neats-foot hurling at Ulysses) Now
Great Son of Polytherses; you that vow
Your wit to bitter taunts; and love to wound
The (...) (...)
heart of any with a jest; so crowned
Your wit be with a laughter; never yiedling
To fools in folly; but your glory building
On putting down in fooling, spitting forth
Puffed words at all sorts: Cease to scoff at worth,
And leave revenge of vile words to the Gods,
Since theit wits bear the sharper edge by ods:
And in the mean time, take the Dart I drove,
For that right hospitable foot you gave
Divine Ulysses, begging but his own.
Thus spoke the black-Ox-herdsman; and straight down
Ulysses struck another with his Dart,
( Damastors son.) Telemachus did part
Just in the midst, the belly of the fair
Euenors son; his fierce Pile taking air
Out at his back. Flat fell he on his face;
His whole brows knocking, and did mark the place.
And now, man-slaughtering Pallas took in hand
Her Snake-frindg'd shield, and on that beam took stand
In her true form, where Swallow-like she sat.
And then, in this way of the house, and that:
The wooers (wounded at the heart with fear)
Fled the encounter: As in Pastures, where
Fat Herds of Oxen feed, about the field
(As if wild madness their instincts impeld)
The high-fed Bullockes fly: whom in the Spring
(When days are long) Gadbees, or Breezes sting.
Ulysses and his son, the Flyers chac'st;
As when with crooked Beakes and Seres, a cast
Of hill-bred Eagles, cast off at some game,
That yet their strengths keep; But (put up) in flame
The Eagles stoopes; From which, along the field
The poor Fowls make wing: this and that way yield
Their hard-flowne Pinions: ^hen, the clouds assay
For escape or shelter; their forlorn dismay
All spirit exhaling, all wings strength to carry
Their bodies forth; and (trust up) to the Quarry
Their Faulconers ride in, and rejoice to see
Their Hawks perform a flight so fervently;
So (in their flight) Ulysses with his Heir,
Did stoop and cuffe the wooers, that the air
Broke in vaste sighs: whose heads, they shot and cleft;
The Pauement boiling with the souls they reft:
Liodes (running to Ulysses) took
His knees; and thus did on his name inuoke:
Ulysses: Let me pray thee, to my place
Afford the reverence; and to me the grace:
That never did, or said, to any Dame
Thy Court contained, or deed, or word to blame.
But others so affected, I have made
Lay down their insolence; and if the trade
They kept with wickedness, have made them still
Despise my speech, and use their wonted ill;
They have their penance by the stroke of death;
Which their des^rt, divinely warranteth:
But I am Priest amongst them; and shall I,
That naught have done worth death, amongst the^ die?
From thee, this Proverb then will men derive;
Good turns do never their mere deeds survive.
He (bending his displeased forehead) said;
If you be Priest amongst them, as you plead,
Yet you would marry; and with my wife too;
And have descent by her: For all that woo
Wish to obtain, which they should never do
Dames husbands living. You must therefore pray
Of force, and often in Court here; that the day
Of my return for home might never shine;
The death to me wished, therefore shall be thine.
This said; he took a sword up that was cast
From Agelaus, having struck his last;
And on the Priests mid neck, he laid a stroke
That struck his head off; tumbling as he spoke.
Then did the Poet Phoemiu^ (whose sur-name
Was called Terpiades; who thither came
Forced by the woo'rs) fly death; but being nere
The Courts great gate, he stood, and parted there
In two his counsels; either to remove
And take the Altar of Here^ian Jove;
(Made sacred to him; with a world of Art
Engraven about it; where were wont t'impart
Laertes, and Ulysses, many a Thye
Of broad-brow'd Oxen to the Deity)
Or venture to Ulysses: cla^pe his knee,
And pray his ruth. The last was the decree
His choice resolved on. Twixt the royal Throne,
And that fair Table that the Bolle stood on
With which they sacrificed; his Harp he laid
Along the earth; the Kings knees hugged, and said:
Ulysses! Let my prayers obtain of thee
My sacred skils respect, and ruth to me.
It will hereafter grieve thee to have slain
A Poet, that does sing to Gods and men.
I, of my self am taught: for God alone,
All sorts of song has in my bosom sown:
And I, as to a God, will sing to thee;
Then do not thou deal like the Priest, with me*
Thine own loved son Telemachus will say,
That not to beg here; nor with willing way
Was my access to thy high Court addressed,
To give the wooers my song after Feast;
But being many, and so much more strong;
They forced me hither, and compelled my Song.
This did the Princes sacred virtue hear;
And to the King his Father, said: Forbear
To mix the guiltless, with the guilties blood.
And with him likewise, let our mercies save
Medon the Herald; that did still behave
Himself with care of my good, from a child;
If by Eumaeus yet he be not killed;
Or by Philaetius; nor your fury met,
While all this blood about the house it swet.
This Medon heard, as lying hid beneath
A Throne set near; half dead with fear of death;
A new-flead Oxe-hide (as but there thrown by)
His serious shroud made, he lying there, to fly.
But hearing this, he quickly left the Throne;
His Oxe-hide cast as quickly, and as soon
The Princes knees seized: saying, O my love,
I am not slain; but here alive, and move.
Abstain your self; and do not see your Sire
Quench with my cold blood, the vnmeasur'd fire
That flames in his strength, making spoil of me,
His wraths right, for the wooers injury.
Ulysses smiled, and said; Be confident
This man has saved, and made thee different;
To let thee know, and say, and others see,
Good life, is much more safe then villainy.
Go then, sit free without, from death within:
This much renowned Singer, from the sin
Of these men likewise quit. Both rest you there,
While I my house purge, as it fits me here.
This said, they went and took their seat without
At Jove's high Altar, looking round about,
Expecting still their slaughter: When the King
Searched round the Hall, to try life's hidden wing
Made from more death. But all, laid prostrate there
In blood and gore he saw: whole sholes they were;
And lay as thick, as in a hollow creake
VVithou^ the white Sea, when the Fishers break
Their many-meshed Draught-net up, there lie
Fish frisking on the Sands; and feign the dry
Would for the wet change. But th'al-seeing beam
The Sun exhales, has sucked their lives from them;
So, one by other, spraul'd the wooers there.
Ulysses, and his Son then, bid appear
The Nurse Euryclea, to let her hear
His mind in something, fit for her affair.
He op't the door, and called; and said, Repair
Grave Matron, long since borne; that art our Spy
To all this houses servile huswifery:
My Father calls thee, to impart some thought
That asks thy action. His word, found in naught
Her slack observance, who straight op't the door
And entered to him; when himself before
Had left the Hall. But there, the King she viewed
Amongst the slain, with blood and gore embrew'd:
And as a Lion sculking all in Night,
Far off in Pastures; and come home, all dight
In jaws and brest-lockes, with an Oxes blood,
New feasted on him, his looks full of mood?
So looked Ulysses; all his hands and feet
Freckl'd with purple. When which sight did greet
The poor old woman (such works being for eyes
Of no soft temper) out she brake in cries;
Whose vent, though thoroughly opened; he yet closd,
Called her more near, and thus her plaints composd;
Forbear; nor shrieke thus: But vent joys as loud?
It is no piety to bemone the proud:
Though ends befall them, moving near so much,
These are the portions of the Gods to such.
Men's own impieties, in their instant act,
Sustain their plagues; which are with stay but rackt.
But these men, Gods nor men had in esteem:
Nor good, nor bad, had any sense in them.
Their lives directly ill, were therefore cause
That Death in these stern forms, so deeply draws.
Recount then to me, those licentious Dames,
That lost my honor, and their sexes shames.
I Will tell you truly (she replied,) There are
Twice five and twenty women here, that share
All work amongst them; whom I taught to Spin,
And bear the just bands that they suffered in:
Of all which, only there were twelve, that gave
Themselves to impudence, and light behave;
Nor me respecting, nor herself (the Queen.)
And for your Son, he has but lately been
Of years to rule: Nor would his Mother bear
His Empire, where her women's labors were.
But let me go, and give her notice now
Of your arrival. Sure some God does show
His hand upon her, in this rest she takes,
That all these vpro^es bears, and never wakes.
Nor wake her yet (said he) but cause to come
Those twelve light women, to this utter room.
She made all utmost haste, to come and go,
And bring the women he had summoned so.
Then, both his Swains and Son, he bad, go call
The women to their aid, and clear the Hall
Of those dead bodies: Cleanse each board, and Throne
With wetted Sponges: which, with fitness, done,
He bad take all the Strumpets, 'twixt the wall
Of his first Court; and that room next the Hall;
In which, the vessel of the house were scoured;
And in their bosoms sheath their every sword,
Till all their souls were fled; and they had then,
Felt 'twas but pain to sport with lawless men.
This said; the women came, all drowned in moan,
And weeping bitterly. But first, was done
The bearing thence the dead: all which, beneath
The Portico they stowed, where death on death
They heap't together. Then took all, the pains
Ulysses willed. His Son yet, and the Swains
With paring-shouels wrought: The women bore
Their parings forth; and all the clotter'd gore.
The house then clensd, they brought the women out,
And put them in a room, so walled about,
That no means served their sad estates to fly.
Then said Telemachus, These shall not dye
A death that lets out any wanton blood,
And vents the poison that gave Lust her food,
The body clensing; but a death that chokes
The breath, and all together, that prouokes
And seems as Bellows, to abhorred Lust;
That both on my head, poured depraues unjust,
And on my Mothers; scandaling the Court,
With men debaucht, in so abhorred a sort.
This said; a Halser of a ship they cast
About a cross beam of the roof; which fast
They made about their necks, in twelve parts cut;
And haled them up so high, they could not put
Their feet to any stay. As which was done,
Look how a Mauis, or a Pygeon
In any Grove, caught with a Sprindge, or Net;
With struggling Pinions against the ground does beat
Her tender body; and that then-streight bed
Is sour to that swindge, in which she was bred;
So strived these taken Birds, till every one
Her pliant halter, had enforced upon
Her stubborn neck; and then aloft was haul'd
To wretched death. A little space they sprauld
Their feet fast moving; but were quickly still.
Then fetched they down Melanthius, to fulfill
The equal execution; which was done
In Portall of the Hall; and thus begun:
They first slit both his Nose thrils, cropped each ear;
His Members tugged off, which the dogs did tear,
And chop up bleeding sweet; and while red hot
The vice-abhorring blood was; off they smote
His hands and feet, and there that work had end:
Then washed they hands and feet, that blood had steind;
And took the house again. And then the King
( Euryclea calling) bad her quickly bring
All ill-expelling Brimstone, and some fire,
That with perfumes cast, he might make entire
The houses first integrity in all.
And then his timely will was, she should call
Her Queen and Ladies; still yet charging her,
That all the Handmaids she should first confer.
She said, he spoke as fitted; But before*
She held it fit to change the weeds he wore,
And she would others bring him: that not so
His fair broad shoulders might rest clad; and show
His person to his servants, was too blame.
First bring me Fire, said he. She went, and came
With fire, and sulphur straight; with which the hall,
And ^f the huge house, all rooms capital
He thoroughly sweetened. Then went Nurse to call
The Handmaid servants down; and up she went
To tell the news, and willed them to present
Their service to their Sovereign Down they came,
Sustaining Torches all, and poured a flame
Of Love, about their Lord: with welcomes home,
With huggings of his hands, with laborsome
Both heads and foreheads, kisses, and embraces;
And plied him so, with all their loving graces,
That tears and sighs, took up his whole desire;
For now he knew their hearts to him entire.
The End of the XXII. Book of Homers Odysses.
THE XXIII. BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses to his wife is known:
A brief sum of his Travails shown^.
Himself, his Son, and Servants go
T'approue the Wooers ouer^hrow.
Another.
(...).
For all annoyes*
sustained before;
The true wiu^s joys,
now made the more.

THe servants thus informed; the Matron goes
Up, where the Queen was cast in such repose;
Affected with a fervent joy to tell
What all this time she did with pain conceal.
Her knees reuokt their first strength; and her feet
Were borne above the ground, with wings, to greet
The long-greeu'd Queen, with news her King was come;
And (near her) said: Wake, Leave this withdrawn room;
That now your eyes may see, at length, though late,
The man returned, which all the heavy date
Your woes have rackt out, you have longed to see:
Ulysses is come home, and has set free
His Court of all your wooers; slaughtering all,
For wasting so his goods with Fes^iuall:
His house so vexing; and for violence done,
So all ways varied to his only son.
She answered her; The Gods have made thee mad;
Of whose power now, thy powers such proof have had.
The Gods can blind with follies, wisest eyes,
And make men foolish, so to make them wise.
For they have hurt even thy grave brain, that bore
An understanding spirit heretofore,
Why have thou wak't me to more tears, when Mon^
Has turned my mind, with tears, into her own?
Thy madness much more blamefull, that with lies
Thy haste is laden: and both robs mine eyes
Of most delightsome sleep; and sleep of them,
That now had bound me in his sweet extreme,
To Embrace my lids, and close my usual Spheres.
I have not slept so much this twenty years;
Since first my dearest sleeping-Mate was gone
For that too-ill-to-speake of, Ilion.
Hence, take your mad steps back; if any Maid
Of all my train besides, a part had played
So bold to wake, and tell mine ears such lies;
I had returned her to her huswiferies
With good proof of my wrath to such rude Dames;
But go, your years have saved their younger blames.
She answered her: I nothing wrong your ear,
But tell the truth: your long-mist Lord is here;
And, with the wooers slaughter, his own hand
(In chief exploit) has to his own command
Reduced his house; and that poor Guest was he,
That all those wooers, wrought such injury.
Telemachus had knowledge long ago
That 'twas his Father; but his wisdom so
Observed his counsels; to give surer end
To that great work, to which they did contend.
This called her spirits to their conceiving places;
She sprung for joy, from blames into embraces
Of her grave Nurse: wiped every tear away
From her fair cheeks; and then began to say
What Nurse said, oner thus; O Nurse, can this
Be true thou say* How could that hand of his
Alone, destroy so many? They would still
Troop all together. How could he then kill
Such numbers, so united? How? (said she)
I have nor seen, nor heard; but certainly
The deed is done. We sat within, in fear;
The doors shut on us: and from thence might hear
The sighs, and groans of every man he slew;
But heard, nor saw more: till at length, there flew
Your sons voice to mine ear, that called to me,
And bad me then come forth: and then I see
Ulysses standing in the midst of all
Your slaughtred wooers, heap't up like a wall,
One on another, round about his side;
It would have done you good to have descride
Your conquering lord; al smeard with blood and gore
So like a Lion. Straight then, off they bore
The slaughtred carcasses; that now before
The fore-Court gates lie, one on other pilde.
And now your victor, all the Hall (defilde
With stinch of hot death) is perfuming round;
And with a mighty fire the harth has crowned.
Thus, all the death removed, and every room
Made sweet and sightly; that your self should come
His pleasure sent me. Come then, take you now
Your mutual fills of comfort: Grief, on you
Has long, and many sufferings laid; which length,
Which many sufferings, now your virtuous strength
Of uncorrupted chastnesse, has conferred
A happy end to. He that long has erred
Is safe arrived at home: his wife, his son
Found safe and good; all ill that has been done
On all the dooers heads (though long prolonged)
His right has wreak't, and in the place they wronged*
She answered: Do not you now laugh, and bost
As you had done some great act; seeing most
Into his Being: For, you know, he won
(Even through his poor, and vile condition)
A kind of prompted thought; that there was placed
Some virtue in him, fit to be embraced
By all the house; but, most of all, by me
And by my Son, that was the progeni^
Of both our loves. And yet it is not he,
For all the likely proofs ye plead to me:
Some God has slain the wooers, in disdain
Of the abhorred pride, he saw so reign
In those base works they did: No man alive,
Or good, or bad, whoeuer did arrive
At their abodes once, ever could obtain
Regard of them: and therefore their so vain
And vile deserts, have found as vile an end.
But (for Ulysses) never will extend
His wished return to Greece: Nor he yet lives.
How strange a Queen are you? (said she) that given
No truth your credit? That your husband, set
Close in his house at fire, can purchase yet
No faith of you; But that he still is far
From any home of his? your wit's at war
With all credulity ever; and yet now
I Will name a sign, shall force belief from you:
I bathed him lately; and beheld the scar
That still remains a mark too ocular
To leave your heart yet blinded; and I then
Had run and told you: but his hand was feine
To close my lips from th'acclamation
My heart was breathing: and his wisdom won
My still retention, till he gave me leave,
And charge to tell you this. Now then, receive
My life for gage of his return; which take
In any cruel fashion; if I make
All this not clear to you. Loved Nurse (said she)
Though many things thou know, yet these things be
Veiled in the counsels th'vncreated Gods
Have long time maskt in: whose dark periods
It Is hard for thee to see into; But come,
Lets see my son; the slain; and he by whom
They had their slaughter. This said; down they went;
When on the Queens part, diverse thoghts were spent;
If (all this given no faith) she still should stand
Aloof, and question more: Or his hugged hand,
And loved head, she should at first assay
With free-giuen kisses. When her doubtful way
Had past the stony pauement, she took seat
Against her husband, in the opposite heat
The fire then cast upon the other wall:
Himself, set by the Column of the Hall;
His looks cast downwards, and expected still,
When her incredulous, and curious will
To shun ridiculous error, and the shame
To kiss a Husband, that was not the same,
Would down, and win enough faith from his sight.
She silent sat, and her perplexed plight
Amaze encountered: Sometimes, she stood clear
He was her Husband: sometimes, the ill wear
His person had put on, transformed him so,
That yet his sta^pe would hardly current go.
Her son her strangeness seeing* blamed her thus:
Mother, ungentle Mother! tyrannous!
In this too curious modesty you show;
Why sit you from my Father? Nor bestow
A word on me, t'enquire and clear such doubt
As may perplexe you? Found man ever out
One other such a wife? That could forbear
Her loved Lords welcome home, when twenty year
In infinite sufferance, he had spent apart:
No Flint so hard is, as a woman's heart.
Son (she replied) Amaze contains my mind,
Nor can I speak, and use the commune kind
Of those enquiries; nor sustain to see
With opposite looks, his countenance. If this be
My true Ulysses now returned; there are
Tokens betwixt us of more fitness far
To give me argument, he is my Lord;
And my assurance of him, may afford
My proofs of joy for him, from all these eyes
With more decorum; then object their guise
To public notice. The much-Sufferer brake
In laughter out; and to his Son said; Take
Your Mother from the prease; that she may make
Her own proofs of me, which perhaps may give
More cause to the acknowledgements, that drive
Their show thus off. But now, because I go
So poorly clad, she takes disdain to know
So loathed a creature, for her loved Lord.
Let us consult then, how we may accord
The Town to our late action. Some one, slain,
Has made the all-left slaughterer of him, feign
To fly his friends and country. But our swords
Have slain a Cities most supportfull Lords;
The chief Peers of the kingdom: therefore see
You use wise means t'vphold your victory.
See you to that good Father (said the Son)
Whose counsels have the sovereign glory won
From all men living. None will strive with you;
But with vnquestion'd Girlands grace your brow:
To whom, our whole alacrities we vow
In free attendance. Nor shall our hands leave
Your onsets needy of supplies, to give
All the effects that in our powers can fall.
Then this (said he) to me seems capital
Of all choice courses: Bathe we first, and then
Attire we freshly: all our Maids and men
Enioyning likewise, to their best attire.
The sacred Singer then, let touch his Lire;
And go before us all in graceful dance,
That all without, to whose ears shall advance
Our cheerful accents, (or of Trauailers by,
Or firm inhabitants) solemnity
Of frolic Nuptials may imagine here.
And this, perform we; lest the massakere
Of all our wooers be divulged about
The ample City, ere our selves get out,
And greet my Father, in his Grove of Trees;
Where, after, we will prove what policies
Olympius shall suggest, to overcome
Our latest toiles, and crown our welcome home.
This all obeyed: Bathed, put on fresh attire,
Both men and women did; Then took his Lire
The holy singer, and set thirst on fire
With songs, and faultlesse dances: all the Court
Rung with the footings, that the numerous sport
From iocund men drew, and faire-girdl'd Dames;
Which, (heard abroad) thus flew the common fames:
This s^re the day is, when the much-woo'd Queen
Is richly wed; O wretch! That has not been
So constant, as to keep her ample house
Til the utmost hour, had brought her foremost spouse.
Thus some conceived, but little (...) the thing.
And now, Eurynome had bathed the King;
Smoothed him with Oils; and he, himself attired
In vestures royal. Her part then inspired
The Goddess Pallas; decked his head and face
With infinite beauties: gave a goodly grace
Of stature to him: a much plumper plight
Through all his body breathed; Curles soft, and bright
Adorned his head withal, and made it show,
As if the flowery Hyacinth did grow
In all his pride there: In the general trim
Of every lock, and every curious lim.
Look how a skillful Artizan, well (...)
In all Arts Metalline; as ha^ing been
Taught by Minerua, and the God of fire,
Does Gold, with Silver mix so; that entire
They keep their self distinction; and yet so,
That to the Silver, from the Gold, does flow
A much more artificial luster then his ^^ne;
And thereby to the Gold it self, is grown
A greater glory, then if wrought alone;
Both being stuck off, by eithers (...)*
So did Minerua, hers and his combine,
He more in Her, She more in Him did shine.
Like an Immortal from the Bath, (...):
And to his wife did all his grace dispose,
Encountering this her strangeness: Cruel Dame
Of all that breathe; the Gods, (...) and flame
Have made thee ruthlesse: Life retains nor one
Of all Dames else, that bears so ouer-growne
A mind with abstinence; as twenty (...)
To miss her husband, drowned in wo^^, and tears;
And at his coming, keep aloof; (...)
As of his so long absence, and his care,
No sense had seisd her. Go Nurse, make a bed,
That I alone may sleep; her heart is dead
To all reflection. To him, thus replied
The wise Penelope: Man, half deified;
It Is not my fashion to be taken straight
With brauest men: Nor poorest, use to st^ight.
Your mean appearance made not me retire;
Nor this your rich show, makes me now admire,
Nor moves at all: For what is all to me,
If not my husband? All his certainty
I knew at parting; but (so long apart)
The outward likeness, holds no full desert
For me to trust to. Go Nurse, see addressed
A soft bed for him; and the single rest
Himself affects so. Let it be the bed,
That stands within our Bridal Chamber-sted,
Which he himself made: Bring it forth from thence,
And see it furnished with magnificence.
This said she, to assay him; and did stir
Even his established patience; and to her.
Whom thus he answered: Woman! your words prove
My patience strangely: Who is it can move
My Bed out of his place? It shall oppress
Earths greatest vnder-stander; and unless*
Even God himself come, that can easily grace
Men in their most skils, it shall hold his place.
For Man: he lives not, that (as not most skilled,
So not most young) shall easily make it yield.
If (building on the strength in which he flows)
He adds both Leuers to, and Iron Crows.
For, in the fixure of the Bed, is shown
A Maister-peece; a wonder: and 'twas done
By me, and none but me: and thus was wrought;
There was an Olive tree, that had his grought
Amidst a hedge; and was of shadow, proud;
Fresh, and the prime age of his verdure showed.
His leaves and arms so thick, that to the eye
It showed a column for solidity.
To this, had I a comprehension
To build my Bridal Bower; which all of stone,
Thick as the Tree of leaves, I raisde, and cast
A Roof about it, nothing meanly grac'st;
Put glew'd doors to it, that op't Art enough.
Then, from the Olive, every broad-leau'd bough
I lopt away: then felled the Tree, and then
Went over it, both with ^y Axe, and Plain:
Both governed by my Line. And then, I hewed
My curious Bed-sted out; in which, I showed
Work of no commune hand. All this, begone,
I could not leave, till to perfection
My pains had brought it. Took my Wimble; bored
The holes, as fitted: and did last, afford
The varied Ornament; which showed no want
Of Silver, Gold, and polisht Elephant.
An Oxe-hide Did in purple, then I threw
Above the cords. And thus, to curious view
I hope I have objected honest sign,
To prove, I author naught that is not mine:
But, if my bed stand vnreinou'd, or no,
O woman, passes humane wit to know.
This sunk her knees and heart, to hear so true
The signs she urged; and first, did tears ensue
Her rapt assurance: Then she ran, and spread
Her arms about his neck; kissed often his head;
And thus the curious stay she made, excusde:
Ulysses! Be not angry, that I used
Such strange delays to this; since heretofore
Your suffering wisdom, has the Gyrland wore
From all that breath: and it is the Gods that thus
With mutual miss, so long afflicting us,
Have causd my coyness: To our youths, envied
That wished society, that should have tied
Our youths and years together: and since now
Judgment and Duty, should our age allow
As full joys therein, as in youth and blood:
See all young anger, and reproof withstood,
For not at first sight giving up my arms:
My heart still trembling, lest the false alarmes
That words often strike up, should ridiculize me.
Had Argiue Hellen known credulity
Would bring such plagues with it; and her, again
(As aucthresse of them all) with that foul stain
To her, and to her country; she had staid
Her love and mixture from a strangers bed.
But God impelled her to a shameless deed,
Because she had not in her self decreed
Before the attempt; That, such acts still were shent,
As simply in themselves, as in the event.
By which, not only she her self sustaines,
But we, for her fault, have paid mutual pains.
Yet now; since these signs of our certain bed
You have discovered, and distinguished
From all earths others: No one man but you,
Yet ever getting of it the only show;
Nor one, of all Dames, but my self, and she
My Father gave; old Actors progeny:
(Who ever guarded to our selves, the door
Of that thick-shaded chamber) I, no more
Will cross your clear persuasion: though, till now,
I stood too doubtful, and austere to you.
These words of hers, so justifying her stay,
Did more desire of joyful moan convey
To his glad mind; then if at instant sight,
She had allowed him, all his wishes right.
He wept for joy, to enjoy a wife so fit
For his grave mind, that knew his depth of wit;
And held chaste virtue at a price so high.
And as sad men at Sea, when shore is nigh,
Which long their hearts have wished (their ship quite lost
By Neptunes rigor; and they vexed, and tossed
Twixt winds and black waves, swimming for their lives;
A few escaped; and that few that suruiues
(All drencht in foam, and brine) craule up to Land,
With joy as much as they did worlds command;
So dear, to this wife, was her husbands sight;
Who still embraced his neck; and had, (til light
Displaid her silver Ensign) if the Dame
That bears the blew sky, ente^mixt with flame
In her fair eyes, had not infixt her thought
On other joys, for loves so hardly brought
To longed-for meeting: who th'extended night
VVith-held in long date; nor would let the light
Her wing-hoou'd horse join; ( Lampus, Phaeton)
Those ever Colts, that bring the morning on
To worldly men; But, in her golden chair,
Down to the Ocean, by her silver hair
Bound her aspirings. Then Ulysses said;
O wife: Nor yet are my contentions staid;
A most vnmeasur'd labor, long and hard
Asks more performance; to it, being prepared
By grave Tiresias, when down to hell
I made dark passage; that his skill might tell
My men's return, and mine. But come, and now
Enjoy the sweet rest that our Fates allow.
The place of rest is ready, (she replied)
Your will at full serve, since the deified
Have brought you, where your right is to command.
But since you know (God making understand
Your searching mind) inform me, what must be
Your last set labor; Since 'twill fall to me
(I hope) to hear it after; tell me now:
The greatest p^easure is before to know.
Unhappy? (said Ulysses) To what end
Importune you this labor? It will lend
Nor you, nor me, delight; but you shall know,
I was commanded, yet more to bestow
My years in travail; many Cities more
By Sea to visit: and when first, for shore
I left my shipping, I was willed to take
A nauall Oar in hand; and with it make
My passage forth, till such strange men I met,
A^ knew no Sea, nor ever salt did eat
With any victles: who the purple beakes
O^ Ships did never see: nor that which breaks
The waves in curles, which is a Fan-like Oar,
And serves as wings, with which a ship does soar.
To let me know then, when I was arrived
On that strange earth, where such a people lived.
He gave me this for an vnfaili^g sign:
When any one, that took that Oar of mine
Borne on my shoulder, for a Corne-clense Fan,
I met ashore; and showed to be a man
Of that Lands labor: There had I command
To fix mine Oar; and offer on that strand
T'imperiall Neptune (whom I must implore)
A Lamb, a Bull, and Sow-ascending Bore:
And then turn home; where all the other Gods
That in the broad heaven made secure abods,
I must solicit (all my curious heed
Given to the several rites they have decreed)
With holy Hecatombes: And then, at home
A gentle death should seize me, that would come
From out the Sea, and take me to his rest
In full ripe age; about me, living blessed,
My loving people: To which (he presaged)
The sequel of my fortunes were engaged.
If then (said she) the Gods will please t'impose
A happier Being to your fortunes close
Then went before; your hope gives comfort strength,
That life shall lend you better days at length.
While this discourse spent mutual speech, the bed
Eurynome and Nurse had made; and spread
With richest Furn ture; while Torches spent
Their parcel gilt thereon. To bed then went
The aged Nurse; and where their Sovereigns were,
Eurynome (the Chambermaid) did bear
A Torch, and went before them to their rest:
To which she left them; and for hers addressed.
The King and Queen then, now (as newly wed)
Resumed the old Laws of th'embracing bed.
Telemachus, and both his Herdsmen, then
Dissolved the dances, both to Maids and men;
Who in their shady roofes took timely sleep.
The Bride, and Bridegroom, having ceast to keep
Observed Loue-ioyes; from their fit delight,
They turned to talk. The Queen then did recite
What she had suffered by the hateful rout
Of harmfull wooers, who had eat her out
So many Oxen, and so many Sheep;
How many ^un of wine their drinking deep
Had quite exhausted. Great V^ysses then,
What ever slaughters he had made of men;
What ever sorrows he himself sustained,
Repeated amply; and her ears remained
With all delight, attentive to their end.
Nor would one wink sleep, till he told her all;
Beginning where he gave the Cacons fall.
From thence, his pass to the Lotophagie;
The Cyclops acts; the putting out his eye,
And wreake of all the Soldiers he had eat,
No least ruth shown, to all they could entreat.
His way to Aeolus; his prompt receipt,
And kind dismission: his enforced retreat
By sudden Tempest, to the fishy maine;
And quite distraction from his course again.
His landing at the Laestrigonian Port,
Where ships and men, in miserable sort,
Met all their spoils; his ship, and he, alone
Got off from the abhorred confusion.
His pass to Circe; her deceits, and Arts:
His thence descension to the infernal parts:
His life's course of the Thebane Prophet learned;
Where, all the slaughtered Grecians he descern'd,
And loved Mother. His astonished ear
With what the Sirens voices made him hear.
His escape from th'erring Rocks, which Scylla was,
And rough Charybdis; with the dangerous pass
Of all that touched there: His S^cilian
Offense given to the Sun: His every man
Destroyed by thunder, vollied out of heaven,
That split his Ship; his own endeavors driven
To shift for succors on the Ogygian shore,
Where Nymph Calypso, such affection bore
To him in his arrival: Tha^ with feast
She kept him in her Caves, and would have blessed
His welcome life, with an immortal state;
Would he have staid, and lived her Nuptial mate:
All which, she never could persuade him to.
His pass to the Phaeacians, spent in woe:
Their hearty welcome of him, as he were,
A God descended from the starry Sphere:
Their kind dismission of him home, with Gold,
Brass, Garmen^s; all things his occasions would.
This last word used; sleep seized his weary eye,
That salues all care, to all mortality.
In mean space, Pallas, entertained intent,
That when Ulysses, thought enough time spent
In loue-ioyes with his wife; to raise the Day,
And make his grave occasions, call, away.
The Morning rose, and he; when thus he said;
O Queen: Now satiate with afflictions, laid
On both our bosoms; (you oppressed here
With cares for my return; I, every where
By Jove, and all the other Deities, tossed
Even till all hope of my return was lost)
And both arrived at this sweet Haven, our Bed;
Be your care used, to see administ^ed
My house-possessions left. Those Sheep that were
Consumed in surfets by your wooers here;
I Will forage, to supply with some; and more,
The suffering Grecians shall be made restore,
Even till our stalles receive their wonted fill.
And now, to comfort my good Fathers ill
Long suffered for me: To the many-tree'd
And ample Vineyard grounds, it is decreed
In my next care, that I must haste, and see
His longed-for presence. In the mean time, be
Your wisdom used; that since (the Sun ascended)
The fame will soon be through the Town extended,
Of those I here have slain; your self (got close
Up to your chamber) see you there tepose,
Cheered with your women; and, nor look afford
Without your Court; nor any man, a word.
This said, he armed: To arms, both Son and Swain
His power commanding; who did entertain
His charge with spirit: Op't the gates, and out;
He leading all. And now was hurled about
Auroraes ruddie fire: through all whose light
Minerua led them, through the Town, from sight.
The End of the XXIII. Book of Homers Odysses.
THE XXIIII. BOOK OF HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ARGUMENT.
BY Mercury the Wo^ers souls
Are vsher'd to th'Infer^all Pooles.
Ulysses, with Laertes ^et;
The people, are in uproar set
Against them, for the wooers ends:
Whom Pallas stays, and renders Friends.
Another.
(...).
The vprores fire,
the Peoples fall:
The Grandfire, Sire,
and Son, to all.

CYllenian Hermes with his golden rod,
The wooers souls (that yet retained abod
Amids their bodies) called in dreadful rout
Forth to th'Infernals; who came murmuring out.
And as amids the desolate retreat
Of some vaste Cauerne (made the sacred seat
Of austere spirits) Bats, with Breasts, and wings
Claspe fast the walls; and each to other clings:
But, swept off from their couerts, up they rise
And fly with murmures, in amazefull guise
About the cauerne: So these (grumbling) rose
And flockt together. Down before them goes
None-hurting Mercury, to hels broad ways;
And straight to those streights, where the Ocean stays
His lofty current in calm deepes, they flew.
Then to the snowy rock, they next withdrew;
And to the close of Phoebus orient gates:
The Nation then of Dreams; and then the states
Of those souls Idols, that the weary dead
Gave up in earth: which, in a flowery Mead
Had habitable situation.
And there they saw the soul of Thetis son;
Of good Patroclus; brave Antilochus,
And Ajax; the supremely strenuo^s
Of all the Greek host, next Plebeian:
All which assembled about M^ias son.
And to them (after) came the mournful Ghost
Of Agamemn^n; with all those, he lost
In false Aegysthus Court. A^hilles then
Beholding there, that mighty King of men:
Deplored his plight, and said: O Atreus Son!
Of all Heroes; all Opinion
Gave thee, for Jove's most loved; since most command
Of all the Greeks, he gave thy eminent hand
At siedge of Ilion, where we suffered so:
And is the issue this? That first in woe,
Stern Fate did therefore set thy sequel down?
None borne past others Fates, can pass his own.
I wish to heaven, that in the height of all
Our pomp at Ilion, Fate had signed thy fall;
That all the Greeks might have advanced to thee,
A famous Sepulcher; and Fame might see
Thy Son given honor, in thy honored end;
But now, a wretched death did Fate extend
To thy confusion, and thy Issues shame.
O Thetis Son (said he) the vital flame
Extinct at Ilion, far from the Argiue fields;
The style of blessed, to thy virtue yields.
About thy fall, the best of Greece and Troy
Were sacrificed to slaughter: Thy just joy
Conceived in battle, with some worth forgot,
In such a death, as great Apollo shot
At thy encounters: Thy brave person lay
Hid in a dusty whirlewinde, that made way
With humane breaths, spent in thy ruins state;
Thou great, were greatly valew'd, in thy Fate.
All day we fought about thee; nor at all
Had ceast our conflict, had not Jove let fall
A storm, that forced off our unwilling feet.
But, having brought thee from the fight, to fleet
Thy glorious person (bathed and balm'd) we laid
Aloft a bed; and round about thee, paid
The Greeks warm tears, to thy deplored decease;
Quite danted, cutting all their curles increase.
Thy death dra^e a divine voice through the Seas,
That started up thy Mother from the waves;
And all the Marine Godheads, left their caves,
Consorting to our fleet, her rapt repair:
The Greeks stood frighted, to see Sea, and Air,
And Earth, combine so, in thy losses sense;
Had taken ship, and fled for ever thence,
If old-much-knowing- Nestor had not staide
Their rushing off: His counsels having swaide
In all times former, with such cause, their courses;
Who bad contain themselves, and trust their forces;
For all they saw, was Thetis come from Sea,
With others of the watery progeny,
To see and mourn for her deceased Son.
Which staid the fears, that all to flight had won;
And round about thee stood the old Sea-gods seeds,
VVretchedly mourning: their immortal weeds
Spreading upon thee: all the sacred Nine
Of deathlesse Muses, paid ^hee dues divine;
By varied turns their heavenly voices venting;
All in deep passion for thy death consenting.
And then, of all our Army, not an eye
You could have seen, vndrown'd in misery;
The moving Muse, so ruled in every mind.
Full seventeen days and nights, our tears confined
To celebration of thy mourned end;
Both men, and Gods, did in thy moan con^^nd.
The eighteenth day, we spent about thy heap
Of dying fire: Black Oxen, fattest Sheep
We slew, past number. Then the precious spoil
(Thy Corse) we took up, which with stoods of oil
And pleasant Honey we emblam'd; and then
VVrapt thee in those Robes, that the Gods did rain:
In which, we gave thee to the hallowed flame;
To which, a number of heroical name,
All armed, came rushing in, in desperate plight;
As pressed to sacrifice their vital right
To thy dead ruins, while so bright they burned:
Both foot and horse brake in; and fought, and mourned
In infinite tumult. But when all the night
The rich flame lasted; and that wasted quite
Thy body was with the enamored fire;
We came in early Morn, and an entire
Collection made, of every Iuorie bone;
Which washed in wine, and (...),
A two-ear'd Bolle of Gold, (...) Mother ga^e,
By Bacchus given her; and did form receive
From Vulcans famous hand; which (O renowned
Great Thetis Son) with thy fair bones, we crowned;
Mixed with the Bones of Patr^^lus
(...),
And brave Antilochus; (...), in decease
Of thy Patroclus, was thy favors Dear.
About thee then, a matchless Sepulch^re,
The sacred host of the Achai^^^ (...)
Upon the Hellespont; where most it seisd
(For height, and conspicuity) the eyes
Of living men, and their posterities.
Thy Mother then obtained the Gods consent
To institute an honored game, that spent
The best approuement of our Grecian Fames;
In whose praise, I must say, that many games
About Heroes Sepulchers, mine eyes
Have seen performed: But these, bore off the prize
With miracles to me, from all before.
In which, thy Siluer-footed Mother, bore
The Institutions name; but thy deserts
(Being great with heaven) caused all the eminent parts.
And thus, through all the worst effects of Fate,
Achilles Fame, even Death shall propagate:
While any one, shall lend the light an eye,
Divine Ae^cides shall never dye.
But wherein can these comforts be conceived
As rights to me? when having quite a^chieu'd
An end with safety, and with Conquest too
Of so unmatched a war; what none could do
Of all our enemies there, at home, a Friend,
And Wife, have given me inglorious end.
While these thus spoke, the Argus-killing spy
Brought near, Ulysses noble victory
To their renew^ d discourse; in all the ends
The wooers suffered, and showed those his Friends.
Whom now, amaze invaded with the view,
And made give back: yet (...) knew
Melanthius heir, much-fam'd Amphimed^^,
Who had in Ithaca, Guest-fauours shown
To great Atrides; who first spoke, and said:
Amphimedon: what sufferance has been laid
On your alive parts, that has made you ma^e
This land of darkness, the retreat you take?
So all together? All being like in years?
Nor would a man have choosd, of all the Peers
A City honors, men to make a part
More strong for any object? Has your smart
Been felt from Neptune, being at Sea? His wrath,
The winds, and waves, exciting to your scath?
Or have offensive men imposd this Fate?
Your Oxen driving; or your flocks estate?
Or for your City fighting, and your wives,
Have deaths untimely, seized your best-tim'd lives?
Inform me truly: I was once your Guest;
When I, and Menelaus had professed
First arms for Ilion; and were com^ ashore
On Ithaca, with purpose to implore
Ulysses aid; that City-racing man,
In wreake of the adulterous Phrygian.
Retain not you the time? A whole months date
We spent at Sea, in hope to instig^te
In our arrival, old Laertes Son;
Whom (hardly yet) to our design we won.
The Soul made answer: Worthiest King of men,
I well remember every passage then
You now reduce to thought; and will relate
The truth, in whole form, of our timelesse Fate.
We wooed the wife of that long absent King;
Who (though her second marriage, were a thing
Of most hate to her) she would yet deny
At no part our affections; nor comply
With any in performance: but decreed
In her delays, the cruel Fates, we feed.
Her craft was this: She undertook to weau^
A Funeral garment, destined to receive
The corse of old Laertes; being a task
Of infinite labor, and which Time would ask.
In midst of whose attempt, she causd our stay
With this attraction: Youths! that come in way
Of honored Nuptials to me: Though my Lord
Abide amongst the dead; yet cease to board
My choice for present Nuptials; and sustain
(Lest what is past me, of this web, be vain)
Till all receive perfection: It Is a weed
Disposed, to wrap in, at his Funeral need
The old La^rtes: who (possessing much)
Would (in his want of rites as fitting) touch
My honor highly, with each vulgar Dame.
Thus spoke she, and persuaded; and her Frame
All day she labored; her days work not small;
But every night time, she unwrought it all.
Three years continuing this imperfect task;
But when the fourth year came, her slights could mask
In no more covert; since her trusted Maid
Her whole deceit, to our true note betrayed.
With which, surpised, she could no more protract
Her works perfection: but gave end exact
To what remained: washed up, and set thereon
A gloss so bright, that like the Sun and Moon
The whole work showed together. And when now
Of mere necessity, her honored vow
She must make good to us: ill fortune brought
Ulysses home; who yet, gave none one thought
Of his arrival; but far-off at field
Lived with his Herdsman: Nor his trust would yield
Note of his person; but lived there, as Guest;
Ragg'd as a beggar, in that life professed.
At length, Telemachus left Pylos sank;
And with a Ship, fetched soon his native Land.
When yet, not home he went: but laid his way
Up to his Herdsman, where his Father lay;
And where, both laid our deaths. To town then bore
The Swine-herd, and his King; the Swain before.
Telemachus, in other ways, bestowed
His course home first, t'associate us that wooed.
The Swain, the King led after, who came on
Ragged and wretched, and still leaned upon
A borrowed staff. At length, he reached his home;
Where (on the sudden, and so wretched, come)
Nor we, nor much our elders, once did dream
Of his return there: but did wrongs extreme
Of words, and blows to him: all which, he bore
With that old patience he had learned before.
But when the mind of Jove had raised his own;
His son and he, fetched all their Armor down;
Fast locked the doors; and (to prepare their use)
He willed his wife (for first mean) to produce
His Bow to us, to draw; of which, no one
Could stir the string: Himself yet, set upon
The deadly strength it held; Drew all, with ea^e;
Shot through the steeles, and then began to sease
Our armelesse bosoms; striking first, the breast
Of King Antinous, and then the ^est
In heaps turned over: hopeful of his end,
Because some God (he knew) stood firm his friend.
Nor proved it worse with him; but all in flood,
The Pauement straight, blushed with our vital blood:
And thus our souls came here; our bodies laid
Neglected in his roofes: no word conuaid
To any friend, to take us home and give
Our wounds fit balming* not let such as live
Entombe our deaths: and for our fortunes, shed
Those tears and dead rites, that renown the dead.
Atrides Ghost gave answer; O blessed Son
Of old Laertes, thou at length, have won
With mighty virtue, thy unmatched wife.
How good a knowledge* how untouched a life
Has wise Penelope? How well she laid
Her husbands right up! whom she loved a Maid?
For which, her virtues shall extend applause
Beyond the circles frail mortality draws;
The deathlesse in this vale of death, comprising,
Her praise, in numbers, into infinites rising.
The daughter, Tyndarus begat, begot
No such chaste thoughts; but cut the virgin knot
That knit her spouse and her, with murtherous swords.
For which, posterities shall put hateful words
To notes of her: that all her Sex defamed,
And for her ill, shall even the good be blamed.
To this effect, these, these digressions made
In hell; Earths dark, and euer-hiding shade.
Ulysses, and his Son (now past the Town)
Soon reached the field, elaborately grown
By old Laertes labor: when, with cares
For his lost Son, he left, all Court affairs;
And took to this r^de vpland* which, with toil
He made a sweet and habitable soil:
Where stood a house to him; about which, ran
In turnings thick, and Labyrinthian,
Poor Houels, where his necessary men
That did those works (of pleasure to him then)
Might sit, and eat, and sleep. In his own house
An old Sicilian Dame lived; st^dious
To serve his sour age with her cheerful pains.
Then said Ulysses to his Son, and Swains;
Go you to Town, and for your dinner kill
The best Swine ye can choo^e; my self will still
Stay with my father, and assay his eye,
If my acknowledged truth, it can descry;
Or that my long times travail, does so change
My sight to him, that I appear as strange.
Thus gave he arms to them, and home he hied:
Ulysses to the fruitful field, applied
His present place: nor found he Dolius there,
His sons, or any servant, any where
In all that spacious ground; all gone from thence,
Were dragging bushes, to repair a Fence,
Old Dolius leading all. Ulysses found
His father far above, in that fair ground,
Employed in proyning of a Plant: his weeds
All torn and tattered; fit for homely deeds,
But not for him. Upon his legs he wore
Patcht boots, to guard him from the brambles gore:
His hands, had thorne-proofe hedging Mittens on;
His head a Goats-skin Caske: through all which shone
His heart given over, to abiectest moan.
Him, when Ulysses saw, consumed with age,
And all the Ensigns on him, that the rage
Of grief presented: he brake out in tears:
And (taking stand then, where a tree of Pears
Shot high his forehead over him) his mind
Had much contention. If to yield to kind,
Make straight way to his father; kiss, embrace,
T^ll his return, and put on all the face
And fashion of his, instant told return,
Or stay th'impulsion; and the long day burn
Of his quite loss given, in his Fathers fear,
A little longer: trying first his cheer
With some free dalliance; th'earnest being so near.
This course his choice preferred, and forth he went:
His Father then, his aged shoulders bent
Beneath what years had stoop't; about a Tree
Busily digging: O, old man (said he)
You want no skill, to dres^e and deck your ground,
For all your Plants does ordered distance bound:
No Apple, Pear, or Olive, Fig, or Vine;
Nor any plat, or quarter, you confine
To grass, or flowers, stands empty of your care,
Which shows exact in each peculiare:
And yet (which let not move you) you bestow
No care upon your self; though to this show
^f outward irksomeness, to what you are,
You labor with an inward froward care,
Which is your age; that should wear all without
More neat, and cherishing. I make no doubt
That any sloth you use, procures your Lord
To let an old man, go so much abhord
In all his weeds; nor shines there in your look
A fashion, and a goodlinesse, so took
With abject qualities, to merit this
Nasty entreaty: Your resemblance is
A very Kings, and shines through this retreat.
You look like one, that having washed, and eat,
Should sleep securely, lying sweet, and neat.
It is the ground of Age, when cares abuse it,
To know life's end; and as it is sweet, so use it.
But utter truth, and tell; what Lord is he,
That rates your labor, and your liberty?
Whose Orchard is it, that you husband thus?
Or quit me this doubt; For if Ithacus
This kingdom claims for his: the man I found
At first arrival here, is hardly sound
Of brain, or civil; not enduring stay,
To tell, nor hear me, my enquiry out
Of that my friend; if still he bore about
His life and Being; or were diu'd to Death,
And in the house of him that harbors
The souls of men. For once he lived my guest;
My Land and house retaining interest
In his abode there; where there soiourn'd none,
As guest, from any foreign Region
O^ more price with me. He derived his race
From Ithaca; and said, his Father was
Laertes, surnamed Arcesiades.
I had him home; and all the offices
Performed to him, that fitted any friend;
Whose proo^e I did to wealthy gifts extend:
Seven Talents, Gold; a Bolle all silver, set
With pots of flowers: twelve robes, that had no pleat:
Twelve cloakes (or mantles) of delicious dye:
Twelve inner weeds: Twelve suits of Tapistry
I gave him likewise: women skilled in use
Of Loome, and Needle; freeing him to choose
Four the most fair. His Father (weeping) said,
Stranger! The earth to which you are conuaide,
Is Ithaca; by such rude men poffest,
Unjust and insolent, as first addressed
To your encounter; but the gifts you gave
Were given (alas) to the ungrateful grave.
If with his people, where you now arrive,
Your Fate had been to find your friend alive,
You should have found like Guest-rites from his hand;
Like gifts, and kind pass to your wished land.
But how long since, received you as your guest
Your Friend, my Son? who was th'nhappiest
Of all men breathing, if he were at all?
O borne, when Fates, and ill Aspects let fall
A cruel influence for him; Far away
From Friends and Country; dest^n'd to alay
The Sea-bred appetites; or (left ashore)
To be by Fowls and vpland Monsters tore.
His life's kind authors; nor his wealthy wi^e,
Bemoning (as behoou'd) his parted life:
Nor closing (as in honors course it lies
To all men dead) in bed, his dying eyes.
But give me knowledge of your name, and race:
What City bred you? Where the anchoring place
Your ship now rides at lies, that shor'd you here?
And where you men? Or if a passenger
In others Keeles you came; who (giving Land
To your adventures here, some other Strand
To fetch in further course) have left to us
Your welcome presence? His reply was thus:
I am of Alybande, where I hold
My names chief house, to much renown extold.
My Father Aphidantes; famed to spring
From Polypemon; the Molossian King:
My name, Eperitus. My taking land
On this fair Isle, was ruled by the command
Of God, or Fortune: quite against consent
Of my free purpose; that, in course was bent
For th'Isle Sicania. My Ship is held
Far from the City, near an ample field.
And for ( Ulysses) since his pass from me
It Is now five years. Unblessed by Destiny,
That all this time, has had the Fate to err:
Though, at his parting, good Birds did augure
His putting off, and on his right hand flew;
Which, to his passage, my affection drew:
His spirit joyful, and my hope was now
To guest with him, and see his hand bestow
Rights of our friendship. This, a cloud of grief
Cast over all the forces of his life.
With both his hands, the burning dust he swept
Up from the earth, which on his head he heapt,
And fetched a sigh, as in it, life were broke:
Which grieved his Son, and gave so smart a stroke
Upon his nosethrils, with the inward stripe,
That up the Vein rose there; and weeping ripe
He was, to see his Sire feel such woe
For his dissembled joy; which now (let go)
He sprung from earth, embraced and kissed his Sire:
And said; O Father: he, of whom y'enquire
Am I my self, that (from you, twenty years)
Is now returned. But do not break in tears;
For now, we must not forms of kind maintain*
But haste and guard the substance. I have stain
All my wives wooers; so, revenging no^
Their wrong so long time suffered. Take not you
The comfort of my coming then, to heart
At this glad instant; but, in proved desert
Of your grave judgment; give mo^e, glad suspense,
And, on the sudden, put this consequence
In act as absolute, as all time went
To ripening of your resolute assent.
All this haste made no^ his staide faith, so free
To trust his words; who said, If you are he,
Approve it by some sign. This (...) then see
(Replied Ulysses) given me by the Bore
Slain in Parnassus; I being sent before
By yours, and by my honored Mothers will,
To see your Sire A^tolycus fulfill
The gifts he vowed, at gining of my Name.
I Will tell you too, the Trees (in goodly frame
Of this fair Orchard) that I asked of you
Being yet a child; and followed, for your show
And name of every Tree. You gave me then
Of Figge-trees, forty; Apple bearers, ten;
Peare-trees, thirteen; and fifty ranks of Vine;
Each one of which, a season did confine
For his best eating. Not a Grape did grow;
That grew not there, and had his heavy brow
When Jove's fair daughters (the all-ripening how'rs)
Gave timely date to it. This charged the pow is
Both of his knees and heart, with such impression
Of sudden comfort, that it g^ue possession
Of all, to Trance: The signs were all so true,
And did the love, that ga^e them; so renew.
His cast his arms about his son, and sunk;
The circle, slipping to his feet. So shrunk
Were all his ages forces, with the fire
Of his young love rekindl'd. The old Sire,
The Son took up, quite liuelesse: But his breath
Again respiring; and his soul from death
His bodies powers recovering: Out he cried,
And said; O Jupiter! I now have tried,
That still there live in heaven, remembering Gods,
Of men that serve them; though the periods
They set to their apparances, are long
In best men's sufferings; yet, as sure, as strong
They are in comforts: be their strange delays
Extended never so, from days to days.
Yet see the short joys, or the soone-mixt fears
Of helps withheld by them, so many years:
For, if the wooers now, have paid the pain
Due to their impious pleasures; Now, again
Extreme fear takes me, lest we straight shall see
The Ithacensians here, in mutiny;
Their Messengers dispatched, to win to friend
The Cephalenian Cities. Do not spend
Your thoughts on these cares (said his suffering son)
But be of comfort; and see that course ron
That best, may shun the worst: Our house is nere;
Telemachus, and both his Herdsmen, there
To dress our supper with their utmost have;
And thither haste we. This said; Forth they past;
Came home, and found Telemachus, at feast
With both his Swains: while who had done, all dressed
With Baths, and Balmes, and royally arraid
The old King was, by his Sicilian Maid.
By whose side, Pallas stood, his crookt-age streitning;
His flesh more plumping; and his looks enlightening:
Who yssuing then to view, his son admired
The Gods Aspects* into his form inspired:
And said; O Father: certainly some God
By your addression in this state, has stood;
More great, more reverend, rendering you by far,
At all your parts, then of your self, you are.
I would to Jove (said he) the Sun, and She
That bears Jove's shield, the state had stood with me,
That helped me take in the wel-builded Towers
Of strong Nericus (the Cephalian powers
To that fair City, leading) two days past,
While with the wooers, thy conflict did last;
And I had then been in the wooers wreake;
I should have helped thee so, to render weak
Their stubborn knees, that in thy joys desert,
Thy breast had been too little for thy heart.
This said; and supper ordered by their men,
They sat to it; old Dolius entering then;
And with him (tired with labor) his sons came,
Called by their Mother, the Sicilia^ dame
That brought them up, and dressed their Fathers fare.
As whose age grew; with it, encreast her care
To see him served as fitted. When (thus set)
These men b^held Ulysses there, at meat;
They knew him; and astonished in the place,
Stood at his presence: who, with words of grace
Called to old Dolius, saying; Come, and eat,
And banish all astonishment: your meat
Has long been ready* and our selves made stay,
Expecting ever, when your wished way
Would reach amongst us. This brought fiercely on
Old Dolius from his stand; who ran upon
(With both his arms abroad) the King, and kissed
Of both his rapt up hands, the either wrist;
Thus welcomming his presence: O my Love,
Your presence here (for which all wishes strove)
No one expected. Even the Gods have gone
In guide before you, to your mansion:
Welcome, and all joys, to your heart, contend.
Knows yet Penelope? Or shall we send.
Some one to tell her this? She knows (said he)
What need these troubles (Father) touch at thee?
Then came the Sons of D^lius; and again
Went over with their Fathers entertain;
VVelcom'd, shook hands; and then to feast sat down;
About which, while they sat; about the Town
Fame flew, and shriek't about, the cruel death
And Fate, the wooers had sustained beneath
Ulysses roofes. All heard; together all,
From hence, and thence met, in Ulysses Hall,
Short-breathed, and noisefull: Bore out all the dead
To instant burial: while their deaths were spread
To other Neighbor-Cities, where they lived:
From whence, in swiftest Fisher-boats, arrived
Men to transfer them home. In mean space, here
The heavy Nobles, all in counsail^ were;
Where (met in much heap) up to all arose
Extremely-greeu'd Eupitheus; so to lose
His Son Antinous; who* first of all
By great Ulysses hand, had slaughtrous fall.
Whose Father (weeping for him) said; O Friends,
This man has author'd works of dismal ends;
Long since, conueying in his g^ide to Troy,
Good men, and many, that did ships employ:
All which are lost, and all their Soldiers dead;
And now, the best men Cephalenia b^ed
His hand has slaughtered. Go we then (before
His escape to Pylos, or the Elean Shore
Where rule the Epeans) against his horrid hand:
For we shall grieve, and infamy will brand
Our Fames for ever; if we see our Sons
And Brothers end in these confusions,
Revenge left vninflicted. Nor will I
Enjoy one days life more; But grieve, and die
With instant onset. Nor should you survive
To keep a base, and beastly name alive.
Haste then, let flight prevent us. This with tears
His griefs aduisd, and made all sufferers
In his affliction. But by this, was come
Up to the Counsel, from Ulysses home
(When sleep had left the^, which the slaughters there
And their self dangers, from their eyes, in fear
Had two nights intercepted) those two men,
That just Ulysses saved out of the slain;
Which Medon, and the sacred Singer were.
These stood amidst the Counsel; and the fear
The slaughter had impressed, in eithers look
Stuck still so ghastly; that amaze it struck
Through every there beholder: To whose ears
One thus enforced, in his fright, cause of theirs:
Attend me Ithacensians; This stern fact
Done by Ulysses, was not put in act
Without the Gods assistance; These self eyes
Saw one of the immortal Deities
Close by Ulysses; Mentors form put on
At every part: and this sure Deity, shone
Now near Ulysses, setting on his bold
And slaughterous spirit: Now, the points controlled
Of all the wooers weapons; round about
The armed house whisking; in continu^ll rout
Their party putting, till in heaps they fell.
This news, new fears did through their spirits impel:
When Halitherses (honored Mastors son,
Who of them all, saw only what was done
Present, and future) the much-knowing man
And aged Hero, this plain course ran
Amongst their counsels: Give me likewise ear;
And let me tell ye, Friends; that these ils bear
On your malignant spleenes, their sad effects;
Who, not what I persuaded, gave respects:
Nor what the peoples Pastor ( (...)) said;
That you should see your issues follies staid
In those foul courses; by their petulant life
The goods devouring, scandaling the wife
Of no mean person; who (they still would say)
Could never more see his returning day:
Which yet, appearing now: now give it trust,
And yield to my free counsels: Do not thrust
Your own safe persons, on the acts, your Sons
So dearly bought, lest their confusions
On your loved heads, your like addictions draw.
This stood so far, from force of any Law
To curb their loose attempts, that much the more
They rusht to wreake, and made rude tumult rore.
The greater part of all the Court arose*
Good counsel could not ill designs dispose.
Eupitheus was perswader of the course;
Which (complete armed) they put in present force:
The rest, sat still in counsel. These men met
Before the broad Town, in a place they set
All girt in arms; Eupitheus choosing Chief
To all their follies, who put grief to grief;
And in his slaughtered sons revenge did burn.
But Fate gave never feet to his return;
Ordaining there his death. Then Pall^^ spoke
To Jove, her Father, with intent to make
His will, high Arbiter, of the act designed;
And asked of him, what his unsearched mind
Held vndiscour^d; If with Arms* and ill,
And grave encounter, he would first fulfill
His sacred purpose; or both parts combine
In peaceful friendship? He asked, why incline
These doubts, thy counsels? Have not thou decreed
That Ithacus should come, and give his deed
The glory of revenge, on these and theirs?
Perform thy will; the frame of these affairs
Have this fit issue. When Ulysses hand
Has reached full wreake; his then r^^^wn'd command
Shall reign for ever: Faithful Truces struck
'Twixt him, and all; For every man shall brook
His Sons and Brothers slaughters; by our mean
To send Oblivion in; exp^gning clean
The Character of enmity in all,
As in best Leagues before. Peace, Feastiuall,
And Riches in abundance, be the state,
That crowns the close of Wise Ulysses Fate.
This spurred the Free; who, from heavens Continent
To the Ithacensian Isle, made straight descent.
Where (dinner past) Ulysses said; Some one
Look out to see their neerenesse. Dolius son
Made present speed abroad, and saw them nie;
Ran back, and told; Bad Arm; and instantly
Were all in arms. Ulysses part, was four;
And six more sons of Dolius: All his power
Two only more, which were his aged Sire,
And like-year'd Dolius, whose lives slaked fire;
All white had left their heads: yet, driven by Need,
Made Soldiers both, of necessary deed.
And now, all girt in arms; the Po^ts, set wide,
They sallied forth, Vl^sses being their guide.
And to them* in the instant, Pallas came,
In form and voice, like Mentor; who, a flame
Inspired of comfort in Ulysses heart
With her seen presence. To his Son, apart
He thus then spoke; Now Son, your eyes shall see
(Exposed in slaughterous fight) the enemy;
Against whom, who shall best serve, will be seen:
Disgrace not then your race, that yet has been
For force, and fortitude, the foremost tried,
Of all earths offsprings. His true Son replied;
Your self shall see (loved Father) if you please,
That my deseruings shall in naught digress
From best fame of our Races foremost merit.
The old King sprung for joy, to hear his spirit:
And said; O loved Immortals, what a day
Do your clear bounties to my life display?
I joy, past measure, to behold my Son
And Nephew, close in such contention
Of virtues martial. Pallas (standing nee^e)
Said, O my Friend! Of all, supreamly dear
Seed of Arcesius; Pray to Jove, and her
That rules in Arms, (his daughter) and a da^^
(Spritefully brandisht) hurl at th'aduerse part.
This said, He prayed; and she, a mighty force
Inspired within him; who gave instant course
To his braue-brandisht Lance, which struck the brass
That cheek't Eupitheus Caske; and thrust his pass
Quite through his head; who fell, and sounded falling;
His Arms, the sound again, from earth recalling.
Ulysses, and his Son, rusht on before;
And with their both-way-headed Darts, did gore
Their enemies breasts so thick, that all had gone
The way of slaughter, had not Pallas thrown
Her voice betwixt them, charging all to stay
And spare expense of blood. Her voice did fray
The blood so from their faces, that it left
A greenish palenesse. All their hands it rest
Of all their weapons; falling thence, to earth:
And to the commune Mo^her of their Birth
(The City) all fled, in (...) to save
The lives yet left them. Then Ulysses gave
A horrid shout; and like Jove's Eagle flew.
In fiery pursuit, till Saturnius threw
His smoking lightning twixt them; that had fall
Before Minerua: who th^^, out did call
Thus to Ulysses: Borne of Jove! abstain
From further bloodshed* (...) hand in the slain^
Has equaled in their pains, their prides to thee;
Abstain then, lest you move the Deity.
Again then, twixt both parts, the seed of Jove
( Athenian Pallas) of all future love
A league composed; and for her fo^me, took choice
Of Mentors likeness; both in Limb, and Voice.
The End of the XXIIII. and last Book of Homers Odysses.
So wrought divine Ulysses through his (...):
So, croun'd the Light with him; His ^^^hers Throes*
As through his great Renowner, I have wrought
And my safe sail, to sacred Anchor br^^ght.
Nor did the Argiue ship, more burden feel,
That bore the Care of all men, in her Keel^;
Then my aduenturous Bark: The Colchean Fleece,
Not half so precious, as this roll of Greece.
In whose songs I have (...),
And Greek it se^fe veil, to our English voice.
Yet this inestimable Pearl, wit all
Our Dunghill Chantich^r^s, (...);
Each Modern scraper, this (...) scratching by;
His Oate preferring far. Let such, let ly:
So scorn the stars the clouds; as true-soul'd men
Despise Deceivers. For, as Clouds would feign
Obscure the Stars yet (Regions left below
With all their enuies) bar them but of show;
For they shine ever, and will shine, when they
Dissolve in sinckes, make Mire, and temper Clay:
So puffed Impostors (our Muse-vapours) strive,
With their selfe-blowne additions, to deprive
Men solid, of their full; though infinite short
They come in their compare; and false report
Of leuelling, or touching, at their light,
That still retain their radiance, and clear right;
And shall shine ever When, alas, one blast
Of least disgrace, tears down the Impostors Mast;
His Tops, and Tacklings; His whole Freight, and He
Confiscate to the Fishy Mona^chy;
His trash, by foolish Fame bought now, from hence,
Given to ser^e Mackarell forth, and Frankincence.
Such then, and any; too soft-ey'd to see
Through works so solid, any worth, so free
Of all the learned professions, as is fit
To praise at such price; let him think his wit
Too weak to rate it; rather then oppose
With his poor powers, Ages, and Hosts of Foes.
To the Ruins of Troy, and Greece.
TRoy rac't; Greece wrackt: who mou^nes? Ye both may bost;
Else the Ilyads, and Odysses, had been lost.
Ad Deum.
THe only true God, (betwixt whom and Me,
I only bound my comforts; and agree
With all my actions) only truly knows,
And can judge truly me, with all that goes
To all my Faculties. In whose free grace
And inspiration, I only place
All means to know (with my means; Study, praire,
In, and from his word taken) staire by staire,
In all continual contentation, rising
To knowledge of his Truth; and practicing
His will in it, with my sole Saviors aid,
^uide, and enlightening: Nothing done, nor said,
Nor thought that good is; but acknowledged by
His inclination, skill, and faculty.
By which, to find the way out to his (...)
Past all the worlds; the sphere is, where does mo^e
My studies, prai'rs, and powers: No pleasure taken
But signed by his: for which, my blood forsaken,
My so^le I clean to: and what (in his blood
That has redeemed, cleansd, taught her) fits her good.
Deo opt. Max. gloria.
FINIS.

