A SERMON PREACHED JN Paul's Church in London: AND PVBLISHED FOR THE
instruction and consolation of all that are heavy hearted, for the woeful time
of God his general visitation, both in the City and in the Country: and fit
for the comfort of Gods Children at all times.

Heb. 12. Verse. 11.12. No chastising for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: but afterward, it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, unto
them that are thereby exercised. Wherefore lift up your hands which hang
down, ^^d your weak knees.

Imprinted at London by E. Allde.

TO THE RJGHT Honorable, Sir Thomas Bennet Knight, Lord Mayor of the Honorable
City of London: a prosperous and peaceable Maioralty, with a plentiful
increase of all God his blessings and graces, for the effecting thereof, etc.
THe hope failing me of your honorable presence at the Cross (for I
understand since it is not the custom for the Lord elect to come thither) I
^ost humbly here offer to your ^ading (at your good leisure) that (...) then
you should have heard: which, if it answer not unto your expectation, impute
(I pray) the defect, partly to the want of the effect of the lively voice,
which being great in other things, as appears by the speech of Ctesiphon to
the Rhodians, wondering at the Oration of Demosthenes, which he read unto the^:
Quanto magis admiraremini si audissetis ipsum: By how much more would ye have
marueiled if you had heard himself, is in this of most importance, by the
ordinance and blessing of God, who has in his wisdom appointed faith to be
of hearing. And favorable pardon I beseech you all other the imperfections; I
intended to the utmost of my power, to minister a word as of instruction, so
especially of consolation, necessary for this woeful time; and it was accepted
of by your honorable Predecessor: And as I have been informed by the rest of
the audience then assembled, that which the weakness of my voice could not
then perform to all, if by your Honorable acceptance, by this means it may be
made the more general, and so the more acceptable: I shall be much bounden to
your Honor, as a chief furtherer of my good meaning; If I have not entered
deep into particulars, and searched sores so far as they needed, let it be
excused by the (...) of mine ignorance, unacquainted with public affairs, as
having always lived a private life: and the absence of them to whom such a
search especially belonged, whom bebinde the back I thought it no part of
discretion, to speak that which by a second report might be made more
offensive. For conclusion, let me beseech you, as I besought (in this sermon)
your Predecessor, to double the care, to double the courage, to double the
zeal and diligence of all your Predecessors, and that not for the first
quarter, or for a while, as it were, quinquennium Neronis, the first five
years of Nero, but during the time of your whole Maioraltie, even to the last
hour thereof: yea, during the whole time of your natural life, which long may
it be, wherein you are to live by this most honorable entrance, in a perpetual
magistracy: and he that is God among Gods, shall advance you from this
temporal Honor, to an everlasting Crown of glory, Amen. From my house in
Deptford this xxxi. of October.

Your Honorable Lordships in Christ Christopher Hook

A SERMON PREAched in Paul's Church in London.
Ioh. 3.1, 2, 3. Behold, what manner of love the Father has given unto us,
that we should be called the Sons of God: for this cause the world knows
not you, because it knows not him.

Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not appear
what we shall be: and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him: for we shall see him as he is.

And every man that has this hope in him, purges himself, even as he is pure.


COnsidering (right honorable and dearly beloved in our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ) the heavy hand of GOD, which for our sins has, and
yet does lie heavy upon us, both in City and in Country: whereby so many as
have either sense of their own sins in particular, or of the sins of other
ingenerall, or a feeling of their own afflictions, or a sympathy and fellow
touch of the common calamity, have their heads and their hearts cast down with
an extraordinary grief and sorrow. Being called to supply this place (being
the meanest and weakest of all others:) I have thought it not amiss for the
raising up (so far as in me lies) of distressed hearts and minds, to handle
in your honorable audience, this parcel of Scripture, which ministers unto us
plentiful matter of singular consolation and comfort: Herein imitating the
example of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by whose tender
compassion, to all them that are distressed, calling them unto him, Mat. 11.28.
and saying: Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you, was fulfilled as S. Matthew records, that prophecy of Esaias
concerning him: Mat. 12.20.
A bruised read shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench.
Having also for my warrant the commandment of almighty God, unto the Prophet
Esaias, who unto the rest of Gods Prophets, from the Lord speaks thus: Comfort
ye, comfort ye my people says your God: Esaias 41.42.
Speak comfortablie unto Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warefare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, and that she has received double
from the Lord, for all her sins. Besides, when the Lord chalengeth the
Shepherds of Israel by his Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 34.^.
for that they have not strengthened the weak, nor healed the sick, nor bound
up that which was broken: It appears that it is one especial part of our
duty, to bend our speech this way so often as occasion shall (as great
occasion at this time does) offer it self unto us. God therefore assisting me
by his heavenly grace and holy spirit, for he only it is that gives the
tongue of the learned, Esaias 50.4
to know to minister a word in due season, to him that is weary: and you
yielding me your wonted honorable patience and attention, I will endeavor (as
the time will permit) to propose the instructions and comforts of this
scripture, unto your godly consideratio^s.

To proceed therein orderly, I will divide the whole into two general parts,
even as it naturally deuideth it self. The first part concerns the high
prerogative and dignity whereunto we who believe in Christ, and of him are
called Christians, are advanced: namely to be called, or to be the Sons of
God, proposed first in the first verse, with a note of admiration: Behold what
love the Father has given unto us, that we should be called the sons of
God: And repeated again in the 2. verse, with an examplification of the time:
Dearly beloved, now are we the Sons of God, signifying by this particle, Now
the present interest that we have in this our high preferment, though the
manifestation thereof in perfection remains till the appearance of the Lord
Jesus, at whose appearance it shall be made most evident: for that then, We
shall be like him, and see him as he is, as he infers in the second part
of this latter verse.

And for the further confirmation of this point, that we are the sons of Gods
The Apostle shows, both the Fountain from whence this great mercy flows
unto us: to wit, from the love of God: Secondly, the means whereby this his
great love was procured unto us: which is his mere grace and free gift,
through Jesus Christ. For the Apostle says, he has given us, for so the word
signifies, and so it is to be read.

But because there is no truth so plain but that argumentation may be
maintained against it, and quarrels picked at it: our Apostle answers two
objections which might be objected against the truth of this comfortable
assertion: the one taken from the evil entreaty that we have in this world.
For a man would think since we are the sons of God, who made the world,
the heaven, the earth, and all the fullness thereof, that the world should know
us to be such, and for our fathers sake make much of us. But there is no such
matter: for the world, as our Savior has fore-tolde us, cares for it own:
and as for Gods children, because they are not of the world, it respects not
them. To this the Apostle answers in the latter end of the first verse, that
the cause of the want of better entertainment at the worlds hand, is, because
they know not the Father: as if he should say, let it never trouble you that
are Gods sons, that the world know you not, and make no account of you, for
it knows not the Father that made it, nor the natural son of the Father,
by whom he made it, as this our Apostle testifyeth: He was in the world, 1
John. 10.
and the world was made by him, but the world knew him not, therefore no
marvel though it knows not us that are but his adopted Sons.

The second objection is taken from a consideration of our present estate, in
regard of our selves, to whom no such outward royalty appears, as we think
appertains to the sons of so high a Majesty: whereunto the Apostle
answers, First by a concession in the second clause or comma of the second
verse granting it to be so, that indeed yet it appears not, what we shall
be: Secondly, by a certain declaration of the appointed time, when we shall
receive the perfection of this dignity, which is when he shall appear, that
is, when Jesus Christ in whom our life is hid, shall come to judge the quick
and the dead: the^ our excellency which lies now buried as it were with so
great ignominy, shall be manifested to our endless joy and comfort.

These objections thus answered, whereby the truth of this principle
remains invincible, that we are the sons of God: The Apostle proceeds to
the duty which we ought to perform in respect of so great a prerogative,
which is the second general part of my text, and contained in the third
verse, in these words: And every man that has this hope in him purges
himself, Psalm. 51.5
even as he is pure: Wherein first he shows, that we are unclean of our
selves, as being conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity, having added
thereunto infinite thousand transgressions of our own, both in thought, word
and deed, and therefore have need to be purged. Secondly, that this work of
clensing or purging, belongs generally to every one that has this hope
without exception: Thirdly, how far forth we ought to labor and to proceed
the rein: namely, not to give over, until we have obtained to be pure as he is
pure: which because we can never attain to in this corruptible life, wherein
sin hangs so fast on, and sticks so hard unto us, Heb. 12.1
he means that we should apply the whole course of our life, unto an earnest
study of sanctification and holiness.

So that the sum of the whole is, that God of his mere love to vs-warde in
Jesus Christ, has adopted us in and through him, to be his sons and
daughters: and that this is not a preferment of hereafter only to be, but a
present prerogative and dignity how-euer the world does not so acknowledge us,
nor the excellency thereof seems as yet so apparent to our selves: 2, Cor. 7.1
and therefore it is our parts and duties, as our Father is holy, so also to
be holy: and therefore to purge our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and of the Spirit, and to grow up into full holiness in the fear of God, as
the Apostle S. Paul exhorts. And to show forth as S. Peter also
admonishes, ^. Pet. 2.9.
the virtues of him, that is, of ou^ heavenly Father, which has called us out
of darkness into his marvelous light.

Now to handle every part and point in his own order, so far forth as the
time will permit: we have first to consider more at large of this our high
calling and prerogative, and therein to observe how by other places of
Scripture, both it is confirmed and also amplifyed. This our Evangelist
testifyeth: That so many as received Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1.12.
to them he gave this prerogative, to be the sons of God, even to them that
believe in his name. The Apostle S. Paul says, Ye are all the sons of God
by faith in Jesus Christ. And 2. Cor. 6. he alleges the testimony of God
himself out of the Prophet Esaias: Gal. 3.2^
I will be your God, and you shall be my Sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. Our blessed Lord and Savior when he teaches us in the 6. of
Matthew to pray thus: O our Father which art in Heaven, thereby plainly
signifies unto us, that we are Gods children, which thing also the holy spirit
of God testifyeth and witnesses unto our spirits, in emboldning us to cry
Abba Father: So that if we believe these Scriptures which are so plain and
pregnant in this behalf, we need make no doubt of this great mercy of God
unto us, in making us to be his sons.

But not only thus simply and positiuely the Scripture sets down, that we
are the Sons of God: but it amplifyeth the same by gradation unto the highest
degree. In the 4. Galatians, at the 7. verse, the Apostle amplifyeth it: First,
rejecting or renouncing utterly that servile estate wherein we once were:
saying, Wherefore thou art no more a servant: and then peremptorily setting it
down, but a son. There-upon he arises a step further, If thou be a
son, thou art also the heir of God through Christ: And most sweetly in the
8. to the Ron. 17. he reasons thus: If we be children, we are also heirs,
which is one step higher, heirs of God, a second step higher, and joint
heirs with Christ, which is the highest step in the ladder of Jacob. And
this high prerogative of being not only a son, but an heir of God, and a
heir annexed with Christ, is elsewhere often set forth: as where it is said,
We shall reign with Christ, as 2. Tim. 12. if we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him: And where it is said that we shall inherit the kingdom,
as Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give
you the kingdom. And Mat. 25. Come ye blessed of my father, possess the
kingdom prepared for you from before the foundations of the World: And to his
Disciples: Luc. 21.29. I appoint you a kingdom as my Father appointed me: and
more generally to all: Reave. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to
sit with me in my throne, even as I overcame and sit with my Father in his
Throne.

The Kingdom of Heaven is Gauell-kinde Land, where-in all the sons are
indifferently heirs: yea, where the daughters have like portion with the
Sons, which both magnifyeth highly the mercy of God, and ministers
consolation and comfort to him or her that is most base and despised in this
world, when they consider that the time will come, when with the best they
shall be fellow heirs, and be set on a Throne together with them.

And the more comfort it shall minister unto al, and make this our advancement
to be the Sons of God, beyond all measure glorious, if we consider what
manner of kingdom it is whereof we are made the undoubted heirs: It is the
kingdom of Heaven (beloved) whereof God makes all his sons and daughters
heirs. Luc. 12.32.
Our Savior Christ calls it that kingdom, by excellency, as a kingdom
that surpasses all kingdoms. S. Peter calls it an inheritance, immortal,
1. Pet. 1.4.
invisible, undefiled, never fading, reserved in heaven for us: The author of
the Epistle unto the Hebrews, calls it a kingdom which cannot be shaken:
Heb. 12.28. Reuol. 21.19 21
The beauty and glory of this kingdom is set forth in the Revelation, under
the name of the new City Jerusalem, where the foundations of the walls are
said, to be garnished with precious stones: The gates of the City to be of
Pearl, the streets of the City to be pure gold: expressing by these things
which are of the greatest price and excellency with us, the beauty and the
glory of that kingdom which cannot be expressed: The joys of this Kingdom
are such, as eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and which the heart of man
is not able to conceive, 1. Pet. 5.4.
for we shall there receive that crown of glory, which shall never fade: Yea,
as S. Paul calls it, a far most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory.
2. Cor. 4.17
But of all this glory, were it far more, if more could be, if one alone
should be partaker, even as the Philosophers puts the case: or if he should
have such partners and fellows (as this world for the most part in these days
affoordeth) as would be ready to deceive, and to dispossess him of all, or
continually by their naughtines vex him, 2. Pet. 2 6
as the Sodomites did the soul of righteous Lot and the daughters of Heth,
Esaus wifes, Genesis 27.40
were a grief of heart to Isaac and to Rebeccah. If I say, it should thus fall
out with us in the kingdom of heaven, the comfort thereof would be but little,
as mingled with so bitter a gall. But to increase our comfort in this respect,
the Scripture shows, that we shall not be there alone, or mixed with envious,
deceitful, or otherwise wicked wretches, but we shall have the company of
innumerable Angels, Ieb. 12.22.
and of the spirits of just and perfect men, and of Jesus the mediator of the
New Testament: And as for Enchanters, whoremongers, murderers, Idolaters,
liars, and generally, all Malcontents and evil disposed persons, they shall
be shut out: Reave. 21.27
For none unclean thing shall enter in at the gates of this city to deminish
the joys, or to pollute the glory thereof. The exercise of Gods children in
this City, shall not be Plough or Cart, or planting or grafting, or buying
and selling, and traffiquing by Sea or by Land: it shall not be Hauking or
Hunting, much less dicing and carding, or any such other like profane
recreations, but it shall be a continual singing of Allelu-iah, Reu. 19 4
Reave. 7.12.
praise and glory and wisdom, and thanks, and honor and power and might,
be unto our God for evermore. No diseases, either plague or pestilence shall
be in this kingdom: no infirmities either in body or in soul, shall eclipse
the joys and the glory thereof: For all tears shall there be wiped from all
faces, Revel. 21.4
there shall be neither hunger or thirst, or heat or cold, neither death any
more. And what more can be added to express the height of that glory, the
unspeakable joys of that heavenly kingdom, whereof we are heirs apparent,
that are the children of God? Non mihi si centum linguae sint oraque centum
ferrea vox, etc. Not if I had an hundredth tongues, and an hundredth mouths, and
a voice so strong as Iron, were I able to descipher in the perfection, the
least joy and glory of this celestial inheritance. Oh that as Moses
standing on mount Pisgah, and beholding the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy, 3.27
in the length and breadth thereof, or as the Apostles in mount Thabor, Matt.
17.2
seeing the brightness and splendure of the Lord Jesus, when he was
transfigured: or as S. Stephen, seeing the heavens open, Act. 7.56.
beheld the glory of God, and Jesus standing at his right hand: Or as S.
Paul, transported into the third heaven, 2. Cor. 12.4.
saw and heard things ineffable. So it would please God to open the eyes of our
understanding and minds, whereby we might have, if not a perfect sight, yet a
glimpse of this heavenly kingdom, that so we might be thoroughly ravished with
a love and a desire thereof.

If in our greatest heaviness, the news of some great inheritance, that is
befalne us, or of some smaller matter, lifts up our heads, and drives all
sorrows from our hearts: should not this news which is brought unto us of
such a glorious kingdom in the midst of all our extremities and distresses,
reliue our dead spirits, and raise up our heads that hang down? What should be
the cause that we should be so much addicted to the one, and so little affected
to the other? Is it because the kingdom we bring you tidings of, is an
heavenly, and not an earthly kingdom? Do we not in the Fable, justly
condemn Aesops Cock of mere folly, for preferring a Barlie corn to a
precious Pearl? And is not Esau justly called by the author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, Heb. 12.16
profane: for that he regarded a mess of Potage, more then the honor of his
birthright? And deserve we not a greater condemnation, if we prefer earth to
heaven, and a momentable pleasure, to an eternal and endless weight of glory?
Our kingdom, beloved, is not the less to be accepted, for that it is not
earthly, but ten thousand, thousand times the more to be esteemed: for were our
kingdom earthly, it should be also transitory: were our kingdom earthly, we
should have therein much sorrow, care and grief, mixed with small felicity:
were our kingdom earthly, we might soon be dispossessed thereof, either by
open wars, or by secret conspiracy. How suddenly was Zedechias dispossessed
of his kingdom, and carried captive into Babylon, his eyes thrust out, Iere.
52.11.
and him self thrust into perpetual prison? How lamentably does Moses (when
he was made governor of that people) complain, of the heavy burden thereof,
Number. 11.15
and in the bitterness of his soul, desires of the Lord that he would rather
kill him, then to lay so heavy a load upon him? And for the transitory
estate of kingdoms, as of al other earthly things, both small and great, who
sees not that they can endure no longer then the earth endures? ^. Pet. 3, 7
which, yet it belong, must by fire be consumed with all the works therein.
And yet who has a lease of his life, or an assurance to hold his good til
then? How many thousands of our brethren within some few weeks, by their
speedy death, has left unto us a president of this our fickle and uncertain
state? many of them leaving their substance not an inheritance for their babes,
but a pray and a spoil to strangers, to waste and to devour. 1. Pet. 1.3.4.5.
Blessed therefore be God the Father of our Lord Jesus, who according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us to a lively hope, by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, To an inheritance, not mortal, but immortal,
invisible, undefiled, never fading, reserved not on earth, but in heaven for
us, Which are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, which is
prepated to be showed in the last time.

Thus we have seen how every manner of way, this our heavenly enheritance
excels all earthly kingdoms, and thereby, to how great a dignity it is
that we are exalted unto, in that we are made the sons of God, and heirs of
that everlasting kingdom of glory.

And the consideration hereof ministers great comfort unto us, in regards of
our dear friends deceased: for that we know, that so many of them as dyed in
the faith of Christ, they have received the possession of this kingdom,
enfranchized with a more glorious freedom, then all the freedoms of the
world, and have gotten the victory of Satan, sin and Hell, 1. These. 4.16.
and death no longer to hold their bodies, the^ the trumpet shall sound: Arise
ye dead, and come into judgment. Why therefore should we bewail them who from
misery are gone unto glory, who from poverty are ascended up into a throne
of majesty: who from continual labor and toil, are removed into a place of
perpetual rest and quietnesse^ according unto that voice that said unto John:
Write, Revel. 14.13
blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors.

For ourselves, whom God in mercy has yet passed by, and granted to live to
see this day, we may hereby receive this comfort, that we being his children
this visitation, if it shall please him to lay it upon us, as he has done
upon many of our brethren better then we, shall not tend unto our
destruction, but to the giving of us season and liuerie as it were, and full
possession of this our heavenly inheritance.

But you will say unto me, Is there then no note of God his displeasure and
anger in this sickness? Is it not an heavy judgment of God, which our sins
have drawn down upon us? Yes verily, manifest notes of God his just
conceived wrath and fearful judgments appears in this visitation: and that
as to the bad, so to the good: as to them that are dead, so to us that remain
alive.

A fearful judgment it is to the wicked and reprobate, if there be any such
that have departed: who, as they lived not in the fear, so died, not in the
favor of God. For this sudden cutting them off, shows that their sins were
ripe and grown to a full height, and that they are now gathered as it were in
bundles to be thrown into hell fire.

A fearful judgment also it is, even to God his own children that are
departed: the guilt and eternal punishment of whose sins, though they be
forgiven in Christ, and they received to mercy through him: yet God by this
extraordinary and sharp, though temporal affliction, would show that he was
highly displeased, both with them and with us for our sins, and that
therefore he has taken them away, the most of them in the prime and midst of
their days, from further enjoying the blessing of long life, which also he
promises unto them that truly do love and honor him.

A fearful judgment it is upon us that are remaining: for what is this
dividing, in so uncomfortable a manner, of the husband from the wife, of the
wife from the husband, of parents from their children, and children from their
parents, of friend from friend, and acquaintance from acquaintance? but as it
were a torturing and dividing of the same body, into diverse pieces: when the
husband dies, the wife has lost her head, when the wife dies, the husband
has lost his right hand: When the parents die, the children have lost the eye,
to guide them: when the children die, the parents have lost the sight that
should comfort them: when a brother dies, the brother has lost part of his
own flesh and bones: when a friend dies, his friend has lost (as the
Philosopher calls him) alter idem, another himself: Besides, the calamities
which befall the common states as not only whole families to be desolated, but
Cities and Towns to be dispeopled: the number of poor Widows and Orphans to
be increased, trades and occupations to be ceased, yea, tillage it self to be
decayed, whereby sore famine is threatened. It passes my reach, beloved, to
sound the depth of God his fearful judgment in this behalf: for this
breach made upon so many thousands of the people, is as it were a breach made
in the wall of a city, whereby the enemy enters and possesses the same.

What then remains, but that we turn from our sins, that God may turn
from his wrathful indignation? A natural Father, though he love his son
well, will not leave chastising him till he has left offending: and if in the
time of his chastisement, he shows himself stubborn, and to have an
obstinate mind to continue in his naughtines, he will lay on more heavy
stripes, and his soul shall not spare for his murmuring: we have a most tender
and merciful Father, gracious and abounding in all compassion toward us, we
have offended him in most grievous and fearful manner. It grieueth my heart, O
London, to think upon, much more to rehearse the horrible sins committed in
thee: for, consider whether as against Jerusalem, God may not complain thus
against thee? In thee they have despised Father and Mother: Ezech. 22.7
In thee they have oppressed the stranger: In thee they have vexed the
fatherless and the Widow: Thou have despised mine holy things, and polluted
my Sabbath. In thee are men to carry tales to shead blood: In thee are they
that eat upon the Mountains, as Popish recusants: In the midst of thee they
commit abominations: as incest, and adultery: In thee are they that take
gifts to shed blood. Thou have taken the usury and the increase, and thou have
defrauded thy neighbor by extortion. And would to God that this bitter
complaint were all, and that it might be only against thee; But against thee O
England in general, does God thus complain, with a Bill containing the same,
and more and more grievous accusations both against Court and Country,
against Church and common weal: as of blasphemy, of drunkenness, of pride and
covetousness, of horrible Witchcraft and sorcery, of immeasurable briberie: of
buying and selling offices in the common weal: of buying and selling dignities
in the Church: of insatiable avarice and ambition in both: in the one, of
heaping offices to offices, in the other, of laying benefices to benefices, in
neither a care or conscience to perform the duty to the common good, but to
their own gain and commodities. And herein, God appealeth to the consciences
of you all, that he slandereth not the state: neither does this bill of
complaint tend to the disparagement of our late blessed Sovereign deceased, in
whose times these abominations spra^g and grew up, and increased to such an
height. For, be it far from me, that I should let a syllable fall to the
dishonor of her being dead whom (as duty bound with my soul) I honored
being alive. The like enormities to these, fell out in the reign of good and
virtuous kings: Yea, in their reign who were most renowned of all the rest: as
of Ezechiah and Josias, as appears by the complaint of the Prophets, who
prophesied in their days. It was in the days of Ezechiah, that Esaiah the
Prophet thus complayneth. Esa. 22.12.
In that day did the Lord God of Hosts, call unto weeping and mourning, and
to baldness, and to a girding of Sackecloth, and behold, joy and gladness,
killing of Sheep and slaying of Oxen, eating and drinking, to morrow we shall
die. It was in the time of Ezechiah, when Micah the Prophet thus co^plaineth.
cap. 7. ver. 2.4 The good man is perished out of the earth and there is none
righteous among men, the best of them is as a bryer, and the most righteous,
sharper then a thorn hedge. It was in the time of Josiah, Jere. cap, 3. verse.
6. and 10. That God commanded Jeremy thus to vp-braide Judah. The rebellious
Israel has justified her self more then the rebellious Judah, for they have
not returned unto me with all their heart, but fainedly says the Lord: and
therefore he bids him. Iere. 5.1.3.4.5 etc. To run to and fro in the
streets of Jerusalem, and to ask and to enquire if he could find a man that
executes justice and judgment, and seeks the truth, and he would spare it.
And he got him to the poor men, and alas they were then, as for the most part
they are now, Ignorant and foolish, they knew not the way of the Lord nor the
judgment of their God. He went to the great men, and they were such, as for
the most part they are now, they made great profession, but they also had
altogether broke the yoke, and burst the bands, that is, they would not be
ordered by the Law of God. It was in the time of Josiah, that Zephaniah the
Prophet complains thus, Zeph. 1.12
That there were men in Jerusalem frozen in their dregs, and say in their
hearts, the Lord will neither do good nor evil: nay thus more generally in the
2. cap. 1. 2, Woe be to the polluted, to the robbing City, she heard not the
voice, she received not correction, she trusted not in the Lord, she drew not
near to her God. And particularly, as it were by name, in the 3. verse. Her
Princes within her are as Lions, her Judges as Wolves in the Evening, which
leave not the bones to ye morning: her Prophets are light and wicked persons,
her Priests have polluted the Sanctuary; and wrested the Law. And yet all
these corruptions whereof they thus bitterly complain, and for which they were
not accused for slandring of the state, were no stayne to their memorial. For
that they labored and endeavored to their utmost, to have reformed them, as
their histories sufficiently do show, and therefore are Chronicled to have
done uprightly in the sight of the Lord. In like manner, who is ignorant of the
godly zeal of Queen Elizabeth, for the true worship and service of God for
suppressing of vice, both in Church and common weal, and maintenance of
virtue? so that her Throne she left and resigned to Noble King JAMES,
unstained of these abominations: the guilt thereof to cleave to them and their
posterity, who were the causers of them. But as Ioab and the sons of Zeruiah
were to hard for David: and Sebna was a Patron of ungodliness under Ezechias,
and the Princes, the Judges, the Prophets, the Priests corrupt under Josiah:
and yet none of these good Kings bore the blame of their evil counselors:
Sam. 3.39.
So it is nothing to the impeachme^t of the honor of Queen Elizabeth, but
rather renowneth her much, that she continued her course, and to the last year
increased her zeal, Esa. 22, 15
which could be quenched neither by any Ioab, nor by all the sons of Zeruiah,
nor by any Sebnah, nor by any ambitious Prince, or corrupt Judge, or flattering
Prophet or Prelate, nor by that maine sea of iniquity, which in her time so
outrageouslie burst forth: But it tends much to the condemnation of this
City and our Land, that having so godly a Gouernesse, we regarded not her
government, but neglected her Laws and lived after our own wills and pleasures,
in all the abominations before rehearsed.

And now, what could our gracious God and heavenly Father do less, then,
first taking her to his mercy (whom we were unworthy longer to have) to take
the rod into his own hand, to beat us for our sins, to correct us for our
iniquities, and to prove, if his own chastisement would effect our amendment?
Let us therefore every one of us, in the fear of God, who stand in awe of his
judgments, turn from his own evil ways, and from the wickedness that is in
his hands, as did the Ninevites. Iona, 3, 10.
Let every man cease to do evil, Esa, 1.16.
and learn to do well: Let every man plough up his fallow ground, and sow no
more among thorns. Ierem. 4, 4.
Let every man cast away the abominations of his eyes and of his heart: yea,
Eze, 20.7
let us all turn to the Lord with fasting, weeping and mourning, Joel. 2.13.
renting our hearts and not our garments.

Oh let it be far from us, that this complaint that the Prophet Jeremy takes
up against Jerusalem, should be taken up against us. O Lord, thou have stricken
them, but they have not sorrowed, thou have consumed them, but they have
refused correction, they have made their faces harder then a stone, and have
refused to return. For if notwithstanding these judgments of God, we continue
still in those sins which have thus sore kindled his wrath, if in this day of
our visitatio^, wherein the Lord calls to weeping and mourning, to sackcloth
and ashes, we fall to eating and drinking, that is, to our wonted gluttony and
drunkenness, and other abominations: Let us assure our selves that the wrath of
God will still burn, and his arm be stretched out still, until he has laid
our land waste, and this City without an inhabitant.

As therefore it stands every man upon to mend one, so to you right
honorable, and your worshipful assistants, it belongs to reform them that
will not reform themselves, and betimes to cut off all the workers of
iniquity from the City of the Lord. And for a more general redress of all
abuses and corruptions, both in our Church and common weal: we ought earnestly
and continually, to pray unto almighty God, to put into the heart of our most
Noble and blessed Sovereign, the kings Majesty, both constantly to withstand
all oppositions of men, of corrupt minds, and to hasten as he has most
zealouslie begun the full amendment of whatsoever is amiss: even to the making
of a covenant betwixt God and his people, that they shall seek the Lord, and
that whosoever will not seek the Lord God of Israel, that he be slain,
whether he be great or small, man or woman, as did Asa King of Judah. For God
will not be reconciled unto us, 2. Cro. 15.12
until we yield unto him: For he is our Father, and we are his Children,
for our sins therefore does he thus smite us: And as the Father cease not
his punishing hand so long as his Son continues obstinate: No more, now he
has begun, will he give over, until we humble our selves unfeignedly before
him: For since our sins have in this sort incensed his wrath as we must needs
confess, though his mercy unto us that are his children appears herein that
the final end of this visitation, tends to the perfecting through his mercy,
which triumphs over his justice of our eternal salvation, Iam. 2
yet his angry countenance shows it self no less unto us in the manner
thereof, then the anger of a displeased Father appears in his face, when he
chastizeth his disobedient child (whom he loves) for his good.

And thus have I showed unto you, right Honorable and beloved, how in this
visitation, we may receive both singular comfort over them that are departed,
and for our selves who yet remain to be disposed of by his good will and
pleasure, and also perceive God his just displeasure and anger against us for
our sins.

It remains, that we proceed in the pursuit of God his mercy to us, which
we have showed to have been exceeding great, in making us to be his Sons: and
shall now show to be exceeding greater, in considering of the original and
fountain from whence this so unspeakable a mercy flows unto us. For the
very original spring, is the love of God: for so our Apostle affirms: Behold
what love the Father has given unto us: Which also our Savior Christ
confirms, saying: So God loved the World, John. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. and that not an ordinary, but an
extraordinary love, for so the words imports, and which the word (...)
which our Apostle here uses also signifies. For this word signifies, what
manner: with an admiration: so that the text is to be read: thus, behold what
manner of love the Father has given us, For so is this word also used. Mar.
13.1. What manner of stones, and what manner of building, as if they should say
not ordinary, but extraordinary stones, not ordinary, but extraordinary
buildings are here. So in the 8. of Matt. 27. after our Savior had stilled the
raging of the Sea, the men marueiled saying: What manner of man is this: as if
they should say what rare and singular man? Such a love then is the love of
God, whereby he has chosen us to be his children, as is past understanding,
as is extraordinary, as is a wonder of wonders: and therefore here set forth
by two words of wonderment. Behold, what manner? And beloved, you shall the
better behold and consider how admirable and wonderful a love it is wherewith
God has loved us? If ye observe first on whom he hath-bestowed it: Secondly,
in what sort he has bestowed it: And thirdly, by what person he has effected
it. He has bestowed it upon us, and he has bestowed it gratis in manner of a
gift, and he has effected it, by his own only Son our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ whom he gave unto death for us.

For the first, it is said that he gath given his love to us: For our selves,
if we had been the friends of God, or had in any wise deserved any small
matter at his hand, the love had not been so great, as loving us that had loved
him, according to that our Savior says of our manner of love one toward
another. If ye love them that love you, Math. 5.46
what reward shall ye have? do not also the very Publicanes and most
notorious sinners thus? The Jews told our Savior, that the Centurion was
worthy for his deserts toward their Nation, that he should heal his
servant: which, had it ben true, the benefit bestowed upon him, Luke 7.4,
had not been so great: But the Centurion acknowledges himself unworthy, not
pleading any desert: for there is no such matter indeed of desert on our part
to God-warde: for we were the utter enemies of God, and this enmity was
wrought betwixt God and us, by reason of our sins. For as God by reason of our
sin, was at enmity with us, Ephe, 2.3.
in which respect, we are called the children of Gods wrath: so we were at
utter variance or defyance with him, Job. 2, 9.
cursing him to the face, as Job his wife did council him: which also the
Apostle, Romans 8.7, testifyeth, when as he says: The wisdom of the flesh is
an utter enemy to God, for it is not a subject, therefore a rebel to the Law
of God, neither otherwise can be.

In that therefore God through Jesus Christ, yielded on his part to love us, we
continuing our disobedience and hatred toward him: how great must that his
love be? For if the party wronged shall yield unto him that does the wrong,
and shall seek his good will, and his good, what rare love do we account it?
yea, so rare, as is seldom (the more is the pity) to be seen among us.

This love of God therefore in this point, is a rare love, and exceeding
admirable, in that he loved us, being his enemies, and sought after us, when
we sought not after him, according to that he says by the Prophet Esaias 65.1.
I have offered my self to be found of them that asked not: For so the verb
Passive there used, is to be translated. Like as the Apostle To. 10.20.
renders it. I have been made manifest: For otherwise the sense of the first
comma in that sweet sentence, cannot be perceived. I offered my self (says
God) to be found of the^ that asked not I was found of the^ that sought me
not. I said behold me, behold me, to a Nation that called not upon my name:
And as by the ministry of his Prophets in former time, so by our Ministry
now, does he still seek after us, that continue still our enmity to him: For
we are the ambassadors, says the Apostle. 2. Corinthians. 5.20. for Christ, as
though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ stead, that ye be
reconciled unto God: The greatness therefore of God his love toward us in this
behalf, does the Apostle S. Paul highly, as it deserves renown:
Doubtless, says he for a righteous man, one can scarcely be found that will
die: but for a good man it may be one dare die: but God magnifieth his mercy
unto us, Romans 5,
that when we were his enemies, Christ dyed for us. And again, when we were
enemies, we were reconciled unto him by the death of his Son. This he
prosecuteth in many words in the 2. Ephesians. but especially in the 4. verse in
these words. But God which is rich in mercy through his great love, wherewith
he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, that is, his mortal enemies, he
quickened us together in Christ. Thus we see, how in this respect this holy
Apostle magnifyeth the greatness of Gods love and grace, Ephe, 2, 7.
calling it the exceeding riches of his grace: for that he loved us, when we
were his enemies. And therefore do we not accounte them worthily enemies to
the grace of God, who do obscure or rather deny this his great grace,
operibus praeuisis, by works foreseen: and I know not what the Lord Jesus
himself saw no such works foreseen when he taught us to say: we are
unprofitable servants, we have done but that which was our duty to do. This
our Apostle saw no such foreseen works, and there fore he renowneth this
love of GOD, Romans 11.^.
because he loved us first, saying in the 4. chap. 10. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us first: and again, in the 19. verse:
We love him, for he loved us first. This doctrine then teaches us, that by
grace we are saved, and therefore not by works alone, nor by grace and works
together: for works and grace cannot go together in the work of
iustifycation, for so the Apostle reasons. If it be of grace, it is no more
of works, or else were grace no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no
more grace, or else were work no more work: Aug, de fide et oper. Cap. 14
Well therefore says S. Augustne, concerning good works: Sequutur
iustifica^u^ non praecaedunt iustificandum: they follow him that is justified,
they go not before him that is to be justified. For by the way, this is to be
noted, that though works save us not, yet we are the workmanship of God,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, for to glorify him that saved us,
according as Zacharias says in his song: We are delivered from the hands of
our enemies, that we might serve him without fear, all the days of our life
in holiness and righteousness before him. And the grace of God, says the
Apostle unto Titus, that brings salvation unto all men: has appeared and
teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: and that we
should live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present world. And our
Apostle makes this to be our duty, namely, to purge our selves, whereof, if
time would permit, to come to the handling of ye part, which is, the second
part of our text, we would by the grace of God more largely speak.

Secondly, this doctrine teaches us, to love one another: which lesson, this
our Apostle infers upon the love of God, 1. These. 4.9.
in the 11. verse of this Chapter: Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also
to love one another. 1. John. 3.18
So S. Paul says, We are taught of God, that is, by the example of God,
John. 2.16.
to love one another, and that not in word and in tongue, giving only fair
words: Go in peace, be filled, be warmed, and give naught, and think naught,
but in deed and in truth, that is, we ought to manifest our love unto all, by
dealing faithfully and truly with all men, and to them that are in want, by
ministering unto their necessity. For hereby is love proved, as by a
touchstone If any man has this worlds goods, 1. Ioh. 3.1
and sees his brother want, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? as if he should say, Such a man neither
loves God nor man: And beloved, now is the time if ever you will, that you
must manifest your love to God by tender compassion on them that are in need.
I need not to utter unto you the great misery, of the poor of this City, and
of the Suburbs thereof: the want of the Widow and of the fatherless, and of
the poor man of occupation, who in this time wants work, and therefore
wants food for him and his family. Their cry is come before you out of
this place, and you have most honorably and charitably considered of it. I
beseech you in the tender bowels of the Lord Jesus, consider of it still, for
the sickness thus still (though not in so great measure, the Lord be ever
praised for it) continuing, and the Winter so hard approaching, and none or
little work, as they say, stirring, the number of the poor, and their
necessity, do increase daily: your liberality therefore must also increase,
Rather then the poor should want, make a bank for the poor, it would be the
most honorable bank that ever was made, and most profitable for the
adventurers. Let him that has twenty thousand pound, cast in two thousand:
Let him that has ten thousand pound, cast in a thousand: Let him that has a
thousand, cast in a hundredth, let him that has an hundredth, cast in ten. I
know I shall be censured by many to speak like a fool, but I regard not their
censure. For this proportion is not like to his that said, let him that has
two coats, give one to him that has none, and let him that has meat do
likewise: nor like unto his that said, Half of my goods I give to the poor:
Luc. 3.11
Nor like unto his that said, Sell all that thou have and give to the poor:
Luc. 19.8 Mat. 19.21
Nor like to theirs that sold their houses and possessions, and brought the
price to be distributed to them that wanted: Act. 4.34 Luc. 21.2
Nor like hers, that having but two mites, cast them into this bank, being all
the living she had, being content to work for more. Yet as the meaning of
these sayings, and examples is not to set any just rate, but to show that
charity must ouer-flowe in time of common necessity: so my meaning is not, to
prescribe unto your wisdoms, either a just proportion, or a manner of taxing:
but to show how farreforth in liberality, every one without compulsion, of
his own willing and voluntary mind (for Hilarem da^orem diligit dominus: 2.
Cor 9.7
The Lord loves a cheereful giver) ought to exceed, to relieve the great
misery of them that are in want. And this to do in regard of that love
wherewith God have loved us: for he loved us before we loved him: he loved
us, when we were his enemies: and therefore his example not only teaches us
to love such as are our friends, which stand in need, or to love them, who,
as they have done us no good, so they have done us no hurt, but even them that
have wronged us, we ought to help. Far therefore ought these, (though usual,
yet unchristian speeches) be from us: shall I love him that hates me? shall I do
him good that has wronged me? Alas, beloved, God stood not upon these terms
with us: he loved us when we were his enemies, when we blaspheamed him, Math.
5.4^.
and shall not we by his example, who also does good to the just and the
unjust, causing his sun to shine, and his rain to fall on them
indifferently, shall not we (I say) by his example, learn to bless the^
that curse us, Mat. 5.44.
to pray for them that persecute us, to do good to them that wrong us?

Let us not deceive our selves in boasting that we are the children of God:
for unless this affection in some measure be in us, we are no sons of God,
nor God any Father of ours.

But to proceed in magnifying further this love of God: the Apostle affirms
that this love which is bestowed upon us, is in manner of a gift, gratis: For he
has given it us. Some men deserve love for some good turns or deserts that
they have done, and so make him to be a friend, which before was an enemy: as
Jacob won Esau: Gene. 32.20,
But who has given to the Lord first, and he shall be recompensed. Esa. 40.13.
Romans 11.35
So the Lord demands by his Prophet, and by his Apostle, and who ever have
stood forth, and a^swerd to the demand, I have given: Not Abraham, for he
acknowledges himself to be dust and ashes. Not David, for he prays: Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, Gene. 18 27. Psalm. 143. Job. 28, 20.
O Lord. Not Job, for he confesses: If he should justify himself, his own
mouth would condemn him. God has not set his love to sale unto us: for if he
had, whereby should or could we have procured it? should we have given him a
thousand Rams (to use the words of the Prophet Micah) or ten thousand rivers
of oil: Mic. 6.7.
should we have offered him the fruit of the body for the sins of our
soul? Psalm. 50.10.
none of all these earthly things are ours, they are all his: so he testifyeth.
All the beasts of the field are mine, Eze. 18.4.
and so are the cattle upon a thousand hills: And as the soul of the fathers
is mine, says the Lord, so is the soul of the sons. And more generally:
The earth is the Lords, and all the fullness thereof, the round world, and
all that dwell therein. Psalm. 24.1.
But were these earthly things all ours, yet were they all too base to buy the
least parcel of God his heavenly grace and love toward us. For what
comparison is there betwixt earthly things and heavenly things? betwixt things
temporal and transitory, and things spiritual, and eternal?

The string whereupon many, and especially the Church of Rome does harp in
this respect, is our righteousness: but what our righteousness is, Yea al our
righteousnesses are (the Prophet Esaias tells us, Esa. 64 6.
when he says they are) as a stained cloth, which lotheth the eyes of them
that behold, so that with displeasure and detestation they turn from it. Our
righteousness therefore in it self considered without the merit of Christ, by
whom they are accepted, as fruits of our faith, they are too much stained, and
therefore too base to procure the abundant riches of the love of God. And this
we must needs of our selves confess, if we be not carried away with too great
a self-love, and weening of our selves: for even our conscience which is a
thousand, witnesses, witnesses against us, the manifold corruptions which
cleave unto the best and most holy work that we do.

The truth therefore of this doctrine remains inuinsible, and needs no
further testimony of any man, that, that eternal love of God, wherewith he
has so loved us, as to make us his children and heirs, is, of his free gift
bestowed and given unto us, according as our Apostle here says, Behold what
love the father has given unto us, that we should be called the Sons of
God: and according to that the Apostle says. Gal. 3.22. The promise by the
faith of Christ Jesus, is given to them that believe: for this one word given,
so often repeated by the Apostle, if there were no further argument to prove
the freenes of God his love and grace toward us, is sufficient to stop all
mouths, that open themselves to the derogation thereof. But yet further to
remove all opinion and conceit of our own worthiness, and to set forth the
love of GOD, to be beyond all measure, GOD to answer the utmost tittle of
his justice, and to cancel all obligations and hand-writings against us for
our sins, finding nothing in us, whereby to save us, according as one well
confesses to him: Nihil inuenis vnde salues, and multum inuenis, vnde damnes:
August de verbis Apost ser. 16.
thou find nothing for which thou may save us, but thou find much, for
which thou may damn us. God I say, sent his only Son Christ Jesus, who
is with the Father, and the holy spirit, God blessed for ever, to take on him
our nature, Romans 9.5
and therein to satisfy the whole severity of his justice, and to pay the
utmost farthing of our debt. The greatness of the love of God in this behalf,
does our Savior himself express, as we have showed, in saying: Col. 2.14.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son unto death, that
whosoever should believe on him, should not perish, but have life everlasting.
This also does our Apostle renown, in the fourth Chapter verse 10. Herein is
love, John. 3.16.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his only begotten
son, to be a reconciliation for our sins: Where the love of God is set in
the first place, for the cause efficient and principal, his son sent for the
cause material, and to be a reconciliation for our sins: for a cause final,
nothing required of us, but that we believe in him, and love one another for
him, as he has loved us. If the consideration hereof were thoroughly laid to
heart, it would quickly remove all proud opinion of our own merit, which is
thus excluded by including the merit of Christ, as alone the sufficient
sacrifice propitiatory for our sins: and it would swallow us up with an
admiration of the exceeding love of God toward us: Epe, 318.
The height, the depth, the length, the breadth whereof is incomprehensible,
and make us ashamed of our own corruption: Gold and silver, and precious
stones being of no value: all the Sacrifices and ceremonies of the old Law,
being of no worth: his blessed and glorious Angels being insufficient to effect
our ransom, who^ he so loved: he spared not his own only son, who was in
his bosom more dear unto him, than the signet of his own right hand, who
willingly said also; Lo I come, and gave him to the death, by his death to
redeem, Psalm. 40.6, 7 Heb. 10, 5, ^^.
us according to that sweet saying of S. Peter, We were not redeemed by silver
or gold, 1. Pet. 1.18.19
or by any other corruptible things, but by the precious blood of Jesus Christ,
as of a Lamb immaculate, and without spot. And we, in the mean while
wretched men and women, strain at every courtesy, and think every thing too
much we do in love toward our brethren, whom we should not only love by
supplying their wants in the expe^ce of our goods, as before we have showed,
but also love, by laying down our lives for them, by the expense of our blood,
if need so require: as our Apostle by this example of our blessed Savior
teaches us, saying: here in is love, that he laid down his life for us: we
ought therefore to lay down our lives for the brethren. 1. Ioh. 3.16.

There remains in this clause, yet one word that further amplifyeth this
love of God in the greatness thereof unto us: For besides that, it has pleased
him to make us, even us that were his enemies to be his sons, to be his
heirs and joint heirs with his own natural son: of such an inheritance,
that is immortal, and that of his mere love by gift, not deserved by us, but
purchased for us, by the precious death and passion of our blessed Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, he vouchsafes for ye further assurance of our faith
herein, and comfort of our souls to call himself our father, for adopting us in
his well-beloved Son, Ephesians. 1.7
as his well-beloved Son by nature, is not ashamed (as the author of the Epistle
to ye Hebrews well observes to call us, even us, yt were adopted (from a thing
of naught) his brethren: saying, Hebr. 2, 16.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren: so God his Father, the Father by
excellency, disdaineth not to call himself our Father, saying: 2. Cor. 6.18
I will be your Father, and ye shall be my sons and daughters. The word
Father is a sweet word, and serves to be observed for many uses. First, it
confirms all the former doctrine of GOD his loving us freely: for as the
child receives nothing but from his Father, and his Father bestows all
things upon him freely, in regard only, that he is his Father, the child
deserving not the least iotte of his love: So God being our Father, it
follows that we receive all from him, our being, our living, our moving, Act,
17, 28
benefits Temporal, blessings Spiritual, and that of his own mere love,
because he is our Father without any desert or merit of ours.

Secondly it expresses more sensibly the tender mercy and compassion of our
good God unto us: for thereby we understand that he tendreth us as a Father
according to that of the Prophet: Like as a father pittieth his own children,
Psalm, 103, 13
even so the Lord has compassion on them that fear him. Fatherly and
Motherlie love, we know to be very great, and none know it, but they which
are very Patres, Fathers indeed, their bowels are moved with more than an
ordinary affection toward their children, as appears by the example of the
harlot, whose compassion was kindled toward her child, when she heard sentence
given, 1, King, 3.26
and the sword drawn to have it divided: God in like manner testifyeth. Hos.
8.11. that his heart is turned in him, and that his repentance is rouled
together, even as a fathers does: when he takes in hand to punish his child,
he will beat him, and he will not beat him, loath he is, and therefore though
he does it, he does it unwillingly, so does also our heavenly Father, he
does not punish us with his heart, says Jeremy in his Lamentations: Lamen.
3, 33
but besides this, his compassion far excels, in that not only it
reaches further than is possible for any natural affection to reach unto: but
also for that it is immutable, it never changes. A mother may forget the fruit
of her womb: A Father may turn away his face from his own son, and
renownce him for ever. But though a woman should forget the fruit of her
womb, yet would not forget thee, Esa, 49.15,
says the Lord, for I am the Lord and am not changed: Therefore the Apostle
says: Rom, 11.2
His gifts and callings are without repentance: And the Evangelist says, John
13.1. Whom he loves, he loves unto the end.

And right Honorable and beloved, there is not a greater comfort unto our
souls and consciences, in this our present heaviness and distress, than
this: to consider that he is our Father that does thus correct us, who though
he be justly displeased with us, and his wrath fore kindled against us for our
sins: yet herein he shows himself to be infinitely gracious and merciful
unto us, in that he has taken the rod into his own hand, and not delivered
it into their hands that hate us, to strike us therewith.

The Spaniards has often hoped to have got this rod into their hands, and have
as it were snatched, to have pulled it unto them, that they might have been
Gods executioners. A bloody day had that been (beloved) for the corpse, whom
you have seen, honorably and reverently in peace carried to their graves, you
should have seen them lying waltering in their blood: in the midst of the
streets, torn with their Wire whips, dis-membred with their long Knives:
thrust through with their sharp swords, and no man to have buried them.
Malcontents among our selves, as Papists and Athests had hoped to have got
this rod into their hands: and as by often Treasons, against our late blessed
Sovereign, so by strong conspiracies against our now most gracious and
undoubted King, whom God for ever keep, from out of their hands, they have
attempted it.

A day of horror and confusion, a black and dismal day beloved, would that
have been, for then, whereas now you keep your seats of honor (and for ever
may you keep them) and every man possesses his house and home in peace, and
each neighbor ready to comfort his neighbor, and all may come with safety to
this place, and to other places of Gods worship to make their supplications
before him: then, I say, ye should have seen that verefied which is in the
Prophecy of Esaias: Esaias 3.5
Nothing but oppression and violence: Children presuming against the ancient,
and the vile against the honorable: Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses
against Ephraim, Esaias 9.21
and both against Judah. The Papist against the Athest, and the Athest against
the Papist, and both against the true Professor. You should have seen then,
your houses ransacked, your wives and your daughters dishonored, your sweet
children and babes, horribly murdered, and every man's sword imbrued in the
blood of his neighbor. Bless we therefore God, and for ever bless we him,
who has not given us as a pray unto our enemies hands, but brought upon
their own pates, the destruction and mischief they devised for others.
Himself reserving the rod of our correction into his own hand. And besides,
which also magnifyeth his love exceedingly, taking ye rod to beat us with,
which is a more gentle and favorable rod, 2. Sa, 24, 14,
than the rest, as appears by the choice of King David, who chose rather to
fall into the hands of God, then of man, who chose rather the Pestilence, then
hunger. What woeful misery the sword of the enemy would have brought, you
have heard: And I pray God, by experience, we may never know. What calamity,
famine and hunger causes, you may easily consider, when as it forces to
sustain nature by unnatural food, and the mother to feed upon her young
babe. 1. King. 6.25.
Examples there are in this behalf most lamentable, which I omit: In this
disease wherewith the Lord has visited us, there is either a speedy death
and dissolution, or a speedy recovery (for the most part) without languishing
in long torment and pain, and much comfort seen in the quiet and mild
yielding up of their spirits to God, whom he marketh and takes to himself.

Again, the Lord like a pitiful Father (for how shall I make an end to
speak of his mercy that is endless) upon the only promise of amendment,
have slacked his hand, Exodus, 34, 6, 7
to show and to manifest unto us, that he is full of mercy and abundant in
compassion, and that if we will truly humble our selves, he has done, and his
wrath is past. As therefore ye have begone, so continue your holy exercises
of Preaching, of Prayer, and of Fasting: and that it may not be formal only
and hypocritical, which the Lord reprooueth so much in the Jews. Is this the
fast that I have chosen, Esa, 58.5, 6, 7
that a man afflict his soul for a day, and hang down his head like a
Bull-rush? Remember yt the substance of true fasting, is to loose the bands of
wickedness, to let the oppressed go free, to take off the heavy burden, and
to break every yoke, To deal the bread to the hungry, to bring the poor
that wandreth into thy house: to cover the naked: and to do such other works
of mercy. And that which shall best please the Lord (right honorable) is, if
by the sword of your authority, ye shall repress the insolency of them,
who not regarding the heavy hand of God, continue in their blasphemy in the
profanation of the Sabbath, in their drunkenness, and in such other detestable
sins, who say with the Epicure: Let us eat, let us drink, for to morrow we
shall die: who make a pray and a spoil to themselves in this heavy time of
sickness, by imbeazeling of the goods of the^ that be diseased and deceased, by
defrauding of ye widow, by defeating of the Orphans, by robbing of the
natural kindred of their right. If such complaints come before you (right
Honorable) as I fear me, many will: defer not to do justice: for if you do,
the Lord will see it, and revenge it: but if ye execute the judgment of the
Widow, and of the fatherless: If you defend him that is oppressed, from the
hand of him that oppresses him: If you maintain the right, and punish the
wrong: Then you shall see that God, who has thus graciously begun, will
every day more and more slack his hand, until he has removed this evil
disease from you: then you shall see that he who has wounded you will heal
you, then you shall see that he who has in his anger for a moment visited you,
will in everlasting compassion embrace you, that you may see this your City
again peopled, by the joyful return of your fellow citizens, that are here
and there dispersed: that you may see those seats, which are by you empty,
with the Honorable and grave Judges of the Land, and with your worshipful
brethren replenished: that you may see your trades and traffiquing which is now
dead, to be renewed: that you may see your Terms and Sessions of Law, no
more omitted: that to conclude, you may see health and prosperity again
within your walls, and that you may hear the voice of the bridegroom, and of
the bride, and the noise of mirth and rejoicing, more than in the days of good
Queen Elizabeth.

Now it remains, that having thus far forth discoursed of that high
dignity and preferment, whereunto we are advanced, in being made the Sons of
God, and heirs of God, and ioynt-heires with Jesus Christ, the only begotten
and natural Son of the Father of such a celestial and glorious kingdom,
and having considered the original from whence so great mercy flows unto us,
which our Apostle shows to be the mere love of God, which love appears to
be love out of measure, Because he has bestowed it upon us that were his
enemies, Because he has gratis and freely without our desert given it unto us,
Because he has given his only Son to death, to answer his justice for us,
Because he vouchsafes to be called our Father, and more then our Father
pittieth us, Correcting us with his more gentle, and not with his sharpest rod,
and repenting of the punishment before we repent us of our sins: It
remains, I say, that we proceed to the answer of the first objection,
which here ensues: For this cause the world knows you not, because it
knows not him. But for that the time is spent: I must leave the consideration
thereof, unto your godly and private Meditations, which I may the more safely
do, having in such sort conformed this holy and comfortable doctrine unto
you, as that all the objections of man or Devil, shall never be able to
prevail against it.

And now, thou O Lord our God, which have in this wise so exceedingly magnified
thy mercies unto us, in calling us to be thy children: and have not for all our
rebellions against thee, cast us off and utterly rejected us, but chastized us
in great mercy for our sins, and corrected us for our transgressions; we
beseech thee to sanctify this thy fatherly punishing hand unto us, that we
may make right use thereof in loving thee for thy mercy, and fearing thee for
thy justice: That for the time of our life that remains, we may more
religiously and more holily walk before thee in all godliness of life and
conversation. And to this end we pray thee to give a blessing to the
ministry, and Preaching of thy holy word at this time: that graciously
pardoning, and passing by whatsoever weakness and infirmities have been
committed in the speaking and hearing hereof, thou would please to make it
effectual unto us, for the glorifying of thy name, for the edifying of our
selves in faith, for the humbling of our souls by repentance, for the
reforming of our lives from all ungodliness, and so finally for the turning
away of this thy fearful Plague and punishment, and for the purchasing of thy
wonted favors, and blessings onto us, and that for Jesus Christ's sake our
only mediator and advocate. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost three
Persons one true everliving and everlasting God, be rendered all praise, power,
Dominion and thanksgiving both now and for ever, Amen.


