A LEARNED DISCOVERSE OF JUSTIFICATION, WORKS, and how the foundation of faith
is over thrown.

By RICHARD HOOKER, sometimes Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes,
dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1612.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
WHereas many, desirous of resolution in some points handled in this learned
Discourse, were earnest to have it copied out: to ease so many labors, it has
been thought most worthy and very necessary to be printed, that not only
they might be satisfied, but the whole Church also hereby edified. The rather
because it will free the Author from the suspicion of some errors, which he
has been thought to have favored. Who might well have answered with Cremutius
in Tacitus, Lib. 4. Ann*
Verbamea arguuntur, adeo factorum innocens sum. Certainly, the event of that
time, wherein he lived, showed that to be true, which the same Lib. 1. Hist.
Author spoke of a worse, Cui deerat inimicus, per amicos oppressus; and that
there is not In vita Agricolae.
minus periculum ex magna fama, quam ex mala. But he has so quit himself,
that all may see, how, as it was said of Agricola, Simul suis virtutibus, simul
vitijs aliorum in ipsam gloriam praeceps agebatur. Touching whom I will say no
more, but that which my Author said of the same man, Integritatem, etc. in
tanto viro refer, iniuria virtutum fuerit. But as of all other his writings,
so of this I will add that, which Lib. a.
Velleius spoke in commendation of Piso, Nemo fuit, qui magis, que agenda
erant, curaret, sine vlla ostentatione agendi. So not doubting, Good Christian
Reader, of thy assent herein, but wishing thy favorable acceptance of this
work, (which will be an inducement to set forth others of his learned labors)
I take my leave; from Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

Thine in Christ Jesus HENRY IACKSON.

Abak. 1. 4. The wicked does compass about the righteous; therefore perverse
judgment does proceed.
FOR the better manifestation of the Prophets meaning in this place, we are
first to consider the wicked, 1
of whom he says* That they compass about the righteous: secondy, 2
the righteous, that are compassed about by them: and thirdly, that which is
inferred; therefore perverse judgment proceeds. Touching the first, there
are two kinds of wicked men, of whom, in the fifth of the former to the
Corinthians, the blessed Apostle speaks thus: 1. Cor. 5. 12. 13.
Do ye not judge them that are within? But God judges them that are without.
There are wicked therefore whom the church may judge, and there are wicked whom
God only judges: wicked within, and wicked without the walls of the Church. If
within the church particular persons be apparently such, as cannot otherwise
be reformed; the rule of the Apostolical judgment, is this; Separate them
from among you: if whole assemblies, this; Separate your selves from among
them: for what society has 2. Cor. 6 v 7.
light with darkness. But the wicked, whom the Prophet means, were
Babilonians, and therefore without. For which cause we have heard at large
heretofore in what sort he urges God to judge them.

2 Now concerning the righteous, there neither is nor ever was any mere
natural man absolutely righteous in him self: that is to say, void of all
unrighteousness, of all sin. We dare not except no not the blessed Virgin her
self; of whom although we say with S. Augustine, for the honor sake which we
owe to our Lord and Savior Christ, we are not willing in this cause to move
any question of his mother: yet for as much as the schools of Rome have made it
a question; we may answer with Or whosoever it be that was the author of those
Homilies that go under his name.
Eusebius Emissenus: who speaks of her and to her in this effect; Thou
did, by special prerogative, nine months together intertaine within the
closet of thy flesh, the hope of all the ends of the earth; the honor of the
world, the common joy of men: he from whom all things had their beginning, had
his beginning from thee, of thy body he took the blood which was to be shed
for the life of the world, of thee he took that which even for thee he paid.
Apeccati enim veteris nexu, Knowing how the Schoolmen hold this question, some
critical wits may perhaps half suspect that these two words, Perse, are
inmates. But if the place which they have, be their own, their sense can be
none other then that which I have given them by a paraphta sticall
interpretation.
per se non est immunis, nec ipsa genetrix redemptoris: the mother of the
redeemer, her self, is not otherwise loosed from the bond of ancient sin,
then by redemption; if Christ have paid a ransom for all, even for her, it
follows that al with out exception were captives. If one have died for all,
then all were dead in sin: all sinful therefore: none absolutely righteous
in themselves; but we are absolutely righteous in Christ. The world then mus^
^^ew a righteous man, otherwise it is not able to show a man that is perfectly
righteous. Christ is made to us wisdom, justice, sanctification, and
redemption: wisdom, because he has revealed his fathers will; Justice,
because he has offered up him self a sacrifice for sin; sanctification,
because he has given us his spirit; redemption, because he has appointed a
day to vindicate his children out of the hands of corruption, into liberty,
which is glorious. How Christ is made wisdom, and how redemption, it may be
declared, when occasion serves. But how Christ is made the righteousness of
men, we are now to declare.

3 There is a glorifying righteousness of men in the world to come; as there is
a justifying and sanctifying righteousness here. The righteousness wherewith we
shall be clothed in the world to come, is both perfect and inherent. That
whereby here we are justified, is perfect, but not inherent. That whereby we
are sanctified, is inherent, but not perfect. This opens a way to the
understanding of that grand question, which hangs yet in controversy,
between us and the Church of Rome, about the matter of justifying righteousness.

4 First, although they imagine, that the mother They teach as we do, that God
does justify the soul of man alone without any coeffectiue cause of justice.
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, were for his honor, and by his special
protection, preserved clean from all sin: yet touching the rest they teach
as we do; that infants which never did actually offend, have their natures
defiled, destitute of justice, averted from God; that in making man righteous,
none do efficiently work with God, but God. They teach as we do, that Deus
sine medi^ coeffectiv^ animam iustificat. Casal. de quadr. part. just. lib. 1.
cap. 8.
unto justice no man ever attained, but by the merits of Jesus Christ. They
teach as we do, that although Christ as God, be the efficient; as man, the
meritorious cause of our justice: yet in us also there is something required.
Idem l. 3. c. 9.
God is the cause of our natural life, in him we life: but he quickneth not
the body without the soul in the body. Christ has merited to make us just:
but as a medicine which is made for health, does not heal by being made, but
by being applied: so by the merits of Christ there can be no justification,
without the application of his merits. Thus far we join hands with the Church
of Rome.

5 Wherein then do we disagree? We disagree about The difference betwixt the
Papists and us about justification.
the nature and essence of the medicine, whereby Christ cures our disease;
about the manner of applying it, about the number, and the power of means,
which God requires in us for the effectual applying thereof to our souls
comfort. When they are required to show what the righteousness is, whereby a
Christian man is justified: they Tho. Aquin. 1. 2. quaest. 100. Gratia gratum
faciens, id est, iustificans, est in anima quiddam reale and positivii qualitas
quaeda [artic. 2 concl] supernaturalis, non eadem cum virtute infusa, vt
Magister; sed aliquid [art 3.] praeter virtutes insusas, sidem, spem,
charitate^; habitudo quaeda [artic 3. ad 3.] quae praesupponitur in virtutibus
istis, sicut earum principiu^ and radix, essentiam anime tanquam subiectum
occupat non potentias; sed ab ipsa [artic. 4. ad 1.] effluunt virtutes in
potentias animae, per quas potentiae moventur ad actus. plura vid. quaest. 113.
de iustificatione.
answer that it is a divine spiritual quality, which quality received into
the soul, does first make it to be one of them who are borne of God, and
secondly indue it with power, to bring forth such works, as they do that are
borne of him; even as the soul of man being joined to his body, does first
make him to be of the number of reasonable creatures, and secondly enable him
to perform the natural functions which are proper to his kind: that it makes
the soul amiable and gracious in the sight of God, in regard whereof it is
termed grace; that it purges, purifyeth, and washes out all the stains, and
pollutions of sin; that by it through the merit, we are delivered as from
sin, so from eternal death and condemnation the reward of sin. This grace
they will have to be applied by infusion: to the end that as the body is warm
by the heat which is in the body; so the soul might be righteous by the
inherent grace: which grace they make capable of increase, as the body may be
more and more warm, so the soul more and more justified, according as grace
shall be augmented, the augmentation whereof is merited by good works, as good
works are made meritorious by it. Wherefore, the first receipt of grace in
their divinity, is the first justification; the increase thereof, the second
justification. As grace may be increased by the merit of good works: so it may
be diminished by the demerit of sins venial; it may be lost by mortal
sin. In as much therefore as it is needful in the one case to repair; in the
other: to recover the loss which is made: the infusion of grace has her
sundry after meals, for the which cause, they make many ways to apply the
infusion of grace. It is applied to infants through baptism, without either
faith, or works and in them really it takes away original sin, and the
punishment due unto it: it is applied to Infidels and wicked men in the first
justification, through baptism without works, yet not without faith; and it
takes away both sins actual and original together, withal whatsoever
punishment eternal or temporal thereby deserved. Unto such as have attained
the first justification, that is to say, the first receipt of grace, it is
applied farther by good works to the increase of former grace, which is the
second justification. If they work more and more; grace does more and more
increase and they are more and more justified. To such as diminished it by
venial sins, it is applied by holy water, Ave mary's, crossings, papal
salutations, and such like, which serve for reparations of grace decayed. To
such as have lost it through mortal sin, it is applied by the sacrament (as
they term it) of Penance: which sacrament has force to confer grace anew,
yet in such sort, that being so conferred it has not altogether so much power
as at the first. For it only cleanses out the stain or guilt of sin
committed; and changes the punishment eternal into a temporal satisfactory
punishment, here, if time do serve; if not, hereafter to be endured, except it
be lightened by masses, works of charity, pilgrimages, fasts, and such like;
or else shortened by pardon, for term, or by plenary pardon quite removed, and
taken away. This is the mystery of the man of sin. This maze the Church of
Rome does cause her followers to tread when they ask her the way to
justification. I cannot stand now to unrip this building, and to sift it piece
by piece; only I will pass by it in few words, that that may befall Babylon in
the presence of that which God has builded, as happened unto Dagon before the
arc.

6 Doubtless says the Apostle Phil. 3. v. 8.
I have counted all things loss, and judge them to be dounge, that I may win
Christ; and to be found in him not having my own righteousness, but that which
is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God through faith.
Whether they speak of the first, or second justification, they make it the
essence of a divine quality inherent, they make it righteousness which is in
us. If it be in us, then is it ours, as our souls are ours, though we have them
from God, and can hold them no longer then pleases him; for if he withdraw the
breath of our nostrils we fall to dust: but the righteousness wherein we must
be found if we will be justified, is not our own: therefore we cannot be
justified by any inherent quality. Christ has me rited righteousness for as
many as are found in him. In him God finds us, if we be faithful, for by
faith we are incorporated into Christ. Then although in our selves we be
altogether sinful, and unrighteous, yet even the man which is impious in him
self, full of iniquity, full of sin, him being found in Christ through faith,
and having his sin remitted through repentance: him God vpholdeth with a
gracious eye; puts away his sin by not imputing; takes quite away the
punishment due thereunto, by pardoning it; and accepts him in Jesus Christ,
as perfectly righteous, as if he had fulfilled all that was commanded him in
the law: shall I say more perfectly righteous, then if him self had fulfilled
the whole law? I must take heed what I say; 2. Cor. 5. 21.
but the Apostle says* God made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Such we are in the sight
of God the father, as is the very son of God him self. Let it be counted
folly, or frenzy, or fury whatsoever; it is our comfort, and our wisdom; we
care for no knowledge in the world but this: that man has sinned and God has
suffered; that God has made himself the son of man, and that men are made
the righteousness of God. You see therefore that the Church of Rome in
teaching justification by inherent grace, does pervert the truth of Christ, and
that by the hands of the Apostles we have received otherwise then she
teaches. Now concerning the righteousness of sanctification, we deny it not
to be inherent; we grant that unless we work, we have it not: only we
distinguish it a thing different in nature from the righteousness of
justification: we are righteous the one way by the faith of Abraham; the other
way, except we do the works of Abraham, we are not righteous. Of the one, S.
Paul; To him that works not but believes, faith is counted for Rom 4. 5.
righteousness. Of the other S. John. Quifacit iustitiam 1. Ioh. 3. 7.
iustus est: He is righteous which works righteousness. Of the one, S. Paul
does prove by Abraham's example, that we have it of faith without works. Of the
other, S. James, by Abraham's example, that by works we have it, and not only
by faith. S. Paul does plainly sever these two parts of Christian righteousness
one from the other. For in the 6. to the Romans thus he writes, Being freed
from sin, and made servants to God; ye have Romans 6.
your fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life. Ye are made free from
sin, and made servants unto God: this is the righteousness of justification:
ye have your fruit in holiness; this is the righteousness of
sanctification. By the one we are intressed in the right of inheriting; by the
other we are brought to the actual possession of eternal bliss, and so the
end of both is everlasting life.

7 The Prophet Abak. does here term the Jews righteous men, not only because
being justified by faith they were free from sin, but also because they had
their measure of fruits in holiness. According to whose example of charitable
judgment, which leaves it to God to discern what we are, and speaks of
them according to that which they do profess themselves to be, although they
be not holy men whom men do think, but whom God does know indeed to be such:
yet let every Christian man know, that in Christian equity, he stands bound
for to think and speak of his brethren, as of men that have measure in the
fruit of holiness, and a right unto the titles, wherewith God in token of
special favor and mercy, vouchsafes to honor his chosen servants. So we see
the Apostles of our Savior Christ, do evse every where the name of Saints; so
the Prophet, the name of righteous. But let us all be such as we desire to be
termed. Reatus impij est pium nomen, says Salvianus. Godly names, do not
justify godless men. We are but vpbraided when we are honored with names and
titles, whereunto our lives and manners are not suitable. If indeed we have our
fruit in holiness* notwithstanding we must note, that the more we abound
therein, the more need we have to crave that we may be strengthened and
supported. Our very virtues may be snares unto us. The enemy that waits for
all occasions to work our ruin, has found it harder, to overthrow an humble
sinner, then a proud Saint. There is no man's case so dangerous, as his whom
Satan has persuaded, that his own righteousness shall present him pure and
blameless in the sight of God. If we could say we were not guilty of any thing
at all in our consciences (we know our selves far from this innocence; we
cannot say we know nothing by our selves; but if we could,) should we
therefore plead not guilty before the prefence of our judge, that sees
further into our hearts, then we ourselves can do? If our hands did never
offer violence to our brethren, a bloody thought, does prove us murderers
before him; if we had never opened our mouth to utter any scandalous,
offensive, or hurtful word, the cry of our secret cogitations is heard in the
ears of God. If we do not commit the sins which daily and hourly, either
in deed, word, or thoughts, we do commit: yet in the good things which we do,
how many defects are there intermingled? God in that which is done, respects
the mind and intention of the doer. Cut of then all these things wherein we
have regarded our own glory, those things which men do to please men, and to
satisfy our own liking, those things which we do by any respect, not
sincerely, and purely for the love of God: and a small score will serve for the
number of our righteous deeds. Let the holiest and best thing we do, be
considered: we are never better affected unto God, then when we pray; yet when
we pray, how are our affections many times distracted? How little reverence do
we show unto the grand majesty of God unto whom we speak? How little remorse
of our own miseries? How little taste of the sweet influence of his tender
mercies do we feel? Are we not as unwilling many times to begin, and as glad
to make an end; as if in saying, call upon me, he had set us a very burdensome
task? It may seem somewhat extreme which I will speak: therefore let every
one judge of it, even as his own heart shall tell him, and no otherwise; I
will but only make a demand. If God should yield unto us, not as unto
Abraham; if fifty, forty, thirty, twenty, yea or if ten good persons could
be found in a city, for their sakes that city should not be destroyed: but
an if he should make us an offer thus large; Search all the generations of
men, sithence the fall of our father Adam, find one man that has done one
action which has past from him pure, without any stain or blemish at al; and
for that one man's one only action, nether man nor Angel, shall feel the
torments which are prepared for both: do you think that this ransom to
deliver men and Angels, could be found to be among the sons of men? The best
things which we do, have somewhat in them to be pardoned. How then can we do
any thing meritorious, or worthy to be rewarded? Indeed God does liberally
promise whatsoever appertained to a blessed life, to as many as sincerely keep
his law, though he be not exactly able to keep it. Wherefore we acknowledge a
dutiful necessity of doing well; but the meritorious dignity of doing well,
we utterly renounce. We see how far we are from the perfect righteousness of
the law; the little fruit which we have in holiness, it is, God knows,
corrupt and unsound: we put no confidence at all in it, we challenge nothing in
the world for it, we dare not call God to reckning, as if we had him in our
debt books: our continual suite to him, is and must be, to bear with our
infirmities, and pardon our offenses.

8 But the people of whom the prophet speaks were they all, or were the most
part of the^ such as had care to walk uprightly? Did they thirst after
righteousness? Did they wish, did they long with the righteous Prophet: O that
our ways were made so direct that we might keep thy statutes? Did they
lament with the righteous Apostle: O miserable men, the good which we wish,
Romans 7. 19.
and purpose, and strive to do, we cannot? No, the words of the other Prophet
concerning this people, do show the contrary. How grievously does Esaias mourn
over the^? Cap. 1. V. 4.
O sinful nation, laden with iniquity, wicked seed, corrupt children. All
which notwithstanding, so wide are the bowels of his compassion enlarged, that
he denies us not, no not when we were laden with iniquity, leave to commune
familiarly with him, liberty to crave and entreat, that what plagues soever we
have deserved, we may not be in worse case then unbelievers, that we may not
be hemmed in by Pagans, and infidels. Jerusalem is a sinful polluted City:
but Jerusalem compared with Babylon is righteous. And shall the righteous be
overborne, shall they be compast about by the wicked? But the Prophet does not
only complain; Lord how comes it to pass, that thou handlest us so hardly;
of whom thy name is called; and bear with the heathen nations that despise
thee? No he breaks out through extremity of grief, and infers violently;
This procesding is perverse: the righteous are thus handled; therefore perverse
judgment does proceed.

9 Which illation contains many things whereof it were better much both for
you to hear, and me to speak, if necessity did not draw me to an other task.
Paul and Barnabas being requested to preach the same things again which once
they had preached, thought it their duties to satisfy the godly desires of
men sincerely affected to the truth. Nor may it seem burdenous to me, or for
ye unprofitable, that I follow their example, for the like occasion unto
theirs being offered me. When we had last the Epistle of S. Paul to the
Hebrews in hand, and of that Epistle these words; In Hob. 1. V. 2.
these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son: After we had thence
collected the nature of the visible Church of Christ; and had defined it to be
a community of men a sanctified through the profession of the truth which By
sanctification I mean a separation from others, not prosessing as they do. For
true holiness consists not in professing, but in obeying the truth of Christ.
God has taught the world by his Son; and had declared, that the scope of
Christian doctrine is the comfort of them whose hearts are overcharged with the
burden of sin; and had proved that the doctrine professed in the Church of
Rome, does bereave men of comfort both in their lives and in their deaths: the
conclusion in the end, whereunto we came was this; the church of Rome being in
faith so corrupted as she is, and refusing to be reformed as she does, we are
to sever our selves from her. The example of our fathers may not retain us in
communion with that church; under hope, that we so continuing, may be saved as
well as they. God I doubt not, was merciful to save thousands of them, though
they lived in Popish superstitions, in as much as they sinned ignorantly. But
the truth is now laid before our eyes. The former part of this last sentence,
namely these words, I doubt not but God was merciful to save thousands of our
fathers living in popish superstitions, in as much as they sinned ignorantly:
this sentence I beseech you to mark, and to sift it with the severity of
austere judgment; that if it be found to be gold, it may be suitable to the
precious foundation, whereon it was then laid: for I protest, that, if it be
hay or stubble, my own hand shall set fire to it. Two questions have risen by
reason of this speech before alleged. The one, whether our fathers infected
with Popish errors and superstitions* may be saved. The other, whether their
ignorance be a reasonable inducement to make us think, they might. We are then
to examine: first, what possibility; then, what probability there is, that God
might be merciful unto so many of our fathers.

10 So many of our fathers living in popish superstitions, yet by the mercy of
God to be saved? No; this could not be: God has spoken by his angel from
heaven, unto his people concerning Babylon (by Babylon we understand the church
of Rome;) Go out of her my people, that you be not pertaker of her plagues. For
answer Apocal. 18. 4.
whereunto, first, I do not take the words to be meant only of temporal
plagues, of the corporal death, sorrow, famine, and fire, whereunto God in his
wrath has condemned Babylon; and that to save his chosen people from these
plagues, he says, Go out, with like intent, as in the Gospel, speaking of
Hierusalems desolations, he says, Let the^ that are in Iudaea fly unto the
mountains, Math. 24 16.
and them that are in the midst thereof depart out; or, as in the former times
to Lot, Arise take thy wife, and thy daughters Genesis 19. 15.
which are there, lest thou be destroyed in the punishment of the City: but
for as much as here it is said, Go out of Babylon; we doubt, their everlasting
destruction, which are partakers therein, is either principally meant, or
necessarily implied in this sentence. How then was it possible for so many of
our fathers to be saved: since they were so far from departing out of Babylon,
that they took her for their mother, and in her bosom yielded up the ghost?

11 First for the plagues being threatened unto the^ that are partakers in the
sins of Babylon, we can define nothing concerning our fathers, out of this
sentence: unless we show what the sins of Babylon be, and what they be
which are such partakers of them, that their everlasting plagues are
inevitable. The sins which may be common both to them of the Church of Rome,
and to others departed thence, must be severed from this question. He which
says, Depart out of Babylon, least you be partakers of her sins: shows
plainly, that he means such sins, as, except we separate our selves, we
have no power in the world to avoid, such impieties, as by the law they have
established, and whereunto all that are among them, either do indeed assent,
or else are by powerable means, forced, in show and appearance, to subject
themselves. As for example, in the Church of Rome it is maintained, that the
same credit and reverence that we give to the Scriptures of God, ought also to
be given to unwritten verities; that the Pope is supreme head ministerial
over the universal Church militant; that the bread in the Eucharist is
transubstantiated into Christ; that it is to be adored, and to be offered up
unto God as a sacrifice propitiatory for quick and dead; that Images are to
be worshipped; Saints to be called upon as intercessors, and such like. Now,
because some heresies do concern things only believed, as the
transubstantiation of the sacramental elements in the Eucharist: some concern
things which are practiced and put in ure, as the adoration of the elements
transubstantiated: we must note, that erroniously, the practice of that is
sometime received; whereof the doctrine that teaches it, is not heretically
maintained. They are all partakers in the maintenance of heresies, who by word
or deed allow them, knowing them, although not knowing them to be heresies; as
also they, and that most dangerously of all others, who knowing heresy to be
heresy, do notwithstanding in worldly respects, make semblance of allowing
that, which in heart and judgment they condemn: but heresy is heretically
maintained, by such as obstinately hold it, after wholesome admonition. Of the
last sort, as of the next before, I make no doubt, but that their condemnation,
without an actual repentance, is inevitable. Least any mantherefore should
think, that in speaking of our fathers, I should speak indifferently of them
all: let my words I beseech you be well marked; I doubt not but God was
merciful to save thousands of our fathers: which thing I will now by Gods
assistance set more plainly before your eyes.

12 Many are partakers of the error, which are not of the heresy of the Church
of Rome. The people following the conduct of their guides, and observing as
they did, exactly that which was prescribed, thought they did God good service,
when indeed they did dishonor him. This was their error: but the heresy of the
church of Rome, their dogmatical positions opposite unto Christian truth, what
one man amongst ten thousand, did ever understand? Of them which understand
Roman heresies, and allow them, all are not alike partakers in the action of
allowing. Some allow them as the first founders and establishers of them: which
crime touches none but their Popes, and Councels; the people are clear and
free from this. Of them which maintain popish heresies, not as authors, but
receivers of them from others, all mainetaine them not as masters. In this are
not the people partakers neither, but only the predicauts and schoolmen. Of
them which have been partakers in this sin of teaching Popish heresy, there
is also a difference; for they have not all Ver. 22.
been teachers of all Popish heresies. Put a difference, says S. Jude; have
compassion upon some. Shall we lay up all in one condition? Shall we cast them
all headlong? Shall we plunge them all into that infernal and everlasting
flaming lake? Them that have been partakers of the errors of Babylon, together
with them which are in the heresy? Them which have been the authors of
heresy, with them that by terror and violence have been forced to receive it?
Them who have taught it, with them whose simplicity has by sleights and
conveiances of false teachers, been seduced to believe it? Them which have
been partakers in one, with them which have bin partakers in many? Them which
in many, with them which in all?

13 Notwithstanding I grant, that, although the condemnation of them, be more
tolerable then of these: yet from the man that labors at the plough, to him
that sits in the Vatican; to all partakers in the sins of Babylon; to our
Fathers, though they did but erroneously practice that which the guides
heretically taught; to all, without exception, plagues were due. The pit is
ordinarily the end, as well of the guide, as of the guided in blindness. But woe
worth the hour wherein we were borne, except we might promise our selves
better things; things which accompany man's solvatio^, even where we know, that
worse, and such as accompany condemnation are due. Then must we show some way
how possibly they might escape. What way is there that sinners can find to
escape the judgment of God, but only by appealing to the seat of his saving
mercy? Which mercy, with Origin, we do not extend to devils and damned
spirits. God has mercy upon thousands, but there be thousands also which he
hardens. Christ has therefore set the bounds, he has fixed the limittes
of his saving mercy, within the compass of these terms: God sent not his
Ioh. 3. 17.
own son to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved. In the third of S. John's Gospel mercy is restrained to believers; He
that believes shall not be condemned; he that believes not, is condemned
already, because he heleeued not in the Son of God. In the 2. of the
Revelation, mercy is restrained to the penitent. For of Iesabell and her
sectaries, thus he speaks; I gave her space to repent and she repented not.
Behold I will cast her into Rev. 2. 22.
a bed, and them that commit fornication with her, into a great affliction,
except they repent them of their works, and I will kill her children with
death. Our hope therefore of the Fathers, is, if they were not altogether
faithless and impenitent.

14 They are not all faithless that are weak in assenting to the truth, or
stiff in maintaining things any way opposite to the truth of Christian
doctrine. But as many as hold the foundation which is precious, though they
hold it but weakly, and as it were with a slender thread, although they frame
many base and unsuitable things upon it, things that cannot abide the trial of
the fire, yet shall they pass the fiery trial and be saved, which indeed
have builded themselves upon the rock which is the foundation of the Church.
If then our Fathers did not hold the foundation of faith, there is no doubt but
they were faithless. If many of them held it, then is therein no impediment,
but many of the^ might be saved. Then let us see what the foundation of faith
is and whether we may think, that thousands of our fathers, being in Popish
superstitions, did notwithstanding hold the foundation.

15 If the foundation of faith do import the general ground, whereupon we
rest, when we do believe the writings of the Evangelists, and the Apostles
are the foundation of the Christian faith, Credimus quia legimus, says S.
Ierom: o that the Church of Rome did as They misinterpret, not only by making
false and corrupt glosses upon the scripture, but also by forcing the old
vulgar translation as the only authentical: howbeit they refuse no book which
is Canonical though they admit sundry which are not
soundly interpret these fundamental writings, whereupon we build our faith,
as she does willingly hold and embrace them.

16 But if the name of foundation do note the principal thing which is
believed: then is that the foundation of our faith, which S. Paul has to
Timothy; God minifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, etc. that of
Nathaniel, Thou art the son of the living God, thou art the king of Israel;
that of the inhabitants of Samaria; 1. Tim. 3. 16.
John 1. 49.
This is Christ the Savior of the world: he that directly denies Ioh 4. 42.
this, does utterly raze the very foundation of our faith. I have proved
heretofore, that although the Church of Rome has played the harlot worse then
ever did Israel, yet are they not as now the Synagogue of the Jews, which
plainly deny Christ Jesus, quite and clean excluded from the new covenant.
But as Samaria compared with Jerusalem is termed Aholath, a Church or
Tabernacle of her own; contrariwise, Jerusalem, Aholibath, the resting place
of the Lord: so whatsoever we term the Church of Rome, when we compare her
with reformed Churches, still we put a difference, as then between Babylon and
Samaria, so now between Rome and the heathenish assemblies. which opinion, I
must, and will recall. I must grant, and will that the Church of Rome,
together with all her children, is clean excluded. There is no difference in
the world between our fathers, and Saracens, Turks, and Paynims: if they did
directly deny Christ crucified for the salvation of the world.

17 But how many millions of them were known, so to have ended their mortal
lives, that the drawing of their breath has ceased with the uttering of this
faith, Christ my Savior, my redeemer Jesus. Answer is made that this they
might unfeignedly confess, and yet be far enough from salvation. For behold,
says the Apostle, I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Gal. 5. 2.
Christ shall profit you nothing. Christ in the work of man's salvation is
alone: the Galathians were cast away by ioining Circumcision, and the other
rites of the law, with Christ: the Church of Rome does teach her children to
join other things likewise with him; therefore their faith, their belief,
does not profitte them any thing at all. It is true that they do indeed,
join other things with Christ: but how? Not in the work of redemption it
self, which they grant that Christ alone has performed sufficiently for the
salvation of the whole world; but in the application of this inestimable
treasure, that it may be effectual to their salvation: how demurely so ever
they confess that they seek remission of sins, no other wise then by the
blood of Christ, using humbly the means appointed by him to apply the benefit
of holy blood; they teach, indeed, so many things pernicious in Christian
faith, in setting down the means, whereof they speak, that the very
foundation of faith which they hold, is thereby Plainly in all men's sight
whose eyes God has enlightened to behold his truth. For they which are in
error are in darkness and see not that which in light is plain. In that which
they teach co^ cerning the natures of Christ, they hold the same which
Nestorius fully, the same which Eutiches about the proprieties of his nature.
plainly overthrown, and the force of the blood of Jesus Christ extinguished.
We may therefore dispute with them, urge them even with as dangerous sequels
as the Apostle does the Galatians. But I demand, if some of those Galatians
heartily embracing the gospel of Christ, sincere and sound in faith (this one
only error excepted,) had ended their lives before they were ever taught how
perilous an opinion they held: shall we think that the damage of this error
did so overway the benefit of their faith, that the mercy of God might not save
them? I grant they overthrew the very foundation of faith by co^sequent: does
not that so likewise which the The opinion of the Lutherans though it be no
direct denial of the foundation, may notwithstanding be damnable unto some:
and I do not think but that in many respects it is less damnable, as at th^^
day some maintain it, then it was in them which held it at first, as Luther
and others, whom I had an eye unto in this speech. The question is not whether
our error with such and such circumstances: but simply, whether an error
overthrowing the foundation do exclude all possibility of salvation, if it be
recanted and expressly repented of.
Lutheran Churches do at this day so stiffly and so firmly mainetaine? For
mine own part I dare not here deny the possibility of their salvation, which
have been the chiefest instruments of ours: albeit they carried to their grave
a persuasion so greatly repugnant to the truth. Forasmuch therefore as it may
be said of the Church of Rome, she has yet a little strength, she does not
directly deny the foundation of Christianity: I may I trust without offense
persuade my self, that thousands of our fathers in former times living and
dying within her walls, have found mercy at the hands of God.

18 What although they repented not of their errors? God forbid that I should
open my mouth to gainsay that which Christ himself has spoken; Except ye
repent, ye shall all perish. And if they did not repent, they perished. But
withal note that we have the benefit of a double repentance, the least sin
which we commit in deed, thought, or word, is death, without repentance. Yet
how many things do escape us in every of these which we do not know? how
many, which we do not observe to be sins? And without the knowledge, without
the observation of sin, there is no actual repentance. It cannot then be
chosen but that for as many as hold the foundation: and have all holden sins
and errors in hatred: the blessing of repentance for unknown sins and errors,
is obtained at the hands of God through the gracious mediation of Jesus Christ
for such suitors as cry with the Prophet David; Purge me O Lord from my secret
sins.

19 But we wash a wall of lome; we labor in vain; all this is nothing; it does
not prove; it cannot justify, that which we go about to mainetaine. Infidels
and heathen men are not so godless, but that they may no doubt, cry God
mercy, and desire in general to have their sins forgiven them. To such as
deny the foundation of faith there can be no salvation (according to the
ordinary course which God does use in saving me^) without a particular
repentance of that error. The Galatians thinking that unless they were
circumcised, they could not be saved, overthrew the foundations of faith
directly: therefore if any of them did die so persuaded, whether before or
after they told of their error, their end is dreadful; there is no way with
them but one, death and condemnation. For the Apostle speaks nothing of men
departed, but says generally of all, If you be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing. You are abolished from Christ whosoever are justified by
the law; ye are fallen from grace, Gal. 5. Of them in the Church of Rome, the
reason is the same. For whom Antichrist has seduced, concerning them did not
S. Paul speak long before, that they received not the word of truth, they
might not be saved? therefore God would send them 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
strong delusions to believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. And S. John, All that dwell
upon the earth shall worship Apoc, 13. v. 8.
him, whose names are not written in the book of life. Apoc. 13. Indeed many
in former times, as their books and writings do yet show, held the foundation,
to weet salvation by Christ alone, and therefore might be saved. God has
always had a church amongst them* which firmly kept his saving truth. As for
such as hold with the church of Rome, that we cannot be saved by Christ alone
without works: they do not only by a circle of consequence, but directly
deny the foundation of faith; they hold it not, no not so much as by a thread.

20 This to my remembrance, being all that has been opposed with any
countenance or show of reason, I hope if this be answered, the cause in
question is at an end. Concerning general repentance therefore, what? a
murderer, a blasphemer, an unclean person, a Turk, a Jew, any sinner to
escape the wrath of God, by a general repentance; God forgive me? Truly it
never came within mine heart that a general repentance does serve for all
sins: it serves only for the common oversights of our sinful life, and for
the faults which either we do not mark, or do not know that they are faults.
Our fathers were actually penitent for sins, wherein they knew they displeased
God, or else they fall not within the compass of my first speech. Again, that
otherwise they could not be saved, then holding the foundation of Christian
faith, we have not only affirmed, but proved. Why is it not then confessed that
thousands of our fathers which lived in Popish superstitions, might yet by the
mercy of God be saved? First, if they had directly denied the very fou^dations
of christianity, without repenting them particularly of that sin: he which
says there could be no salvation for them according to the ordinary course
which God does use in saving men, grants plainly, or at the least closely
insinuates, that an extraordinary privilege of mercy might deliver their
souls from hell; which is more the^ I required. Secondly, if the foundation be
denied, it is denied for fear of some heresy, which the church of Rome
maintains. But how many were there amongst our fathers, who being seduced by
the common error of that Church, never knew the meaning of her heresies? So
that although all popish heretics did perish: thousands of them which lived
in popish superstitions, might be saved. Thirdly, seeing all that held popish 3
heresies, did not hold all the heresies of the Pope: why might not thousands,
which were infected with other leven, live and die vnsowred with this, and so
be * saved? Fourthly, if they all held this heresy, many there were 4
For this is the only thing alleged to prove the impossibility of their
salvation: The church of Rome joins works with Christ, which is a denial of
the foundation, and unless we hold the foundation we cannot be saved.
that held it, no doubt, but only in a general form of words, which a
favorable interpretation might expound in a sense differing far enough from
the poisoned conceit of heresy. As for example, did they hold that we
cannot be saved with Christ without good works? We our selves do I think al
say as much, with this construction, salvation being taken as in that sentence,
Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem, except infants, and
men cut off upon the point of their conversion: of the rest none shall see God,
but such as seek peace and holiness, though not a cause of their salvation, yet
as a way which they must walk, which will be saved. Did they that hold without
works that we are not justified, take justification so as it may also imply
sanctification? And S. James does say as much. For except there be an
ambiguitie in the same term, S. Paul and S. James do contradict each the
other, which can not be. Now there is no ambiguity in the name either of faith,
or of works, being meant by them both in one and the same sense. Finding
therefore that justification is spoken of by S. Paul without implying
sanctification, when he proves that a man is justified by faith without
works; finding likewise that justification does some time imply sanctification
also with it: I suppose nothing to be more sound, then so to interpret S.
James, speaking not in that sense, but in this.

21 We have already showed that there be two kinds of Christian
righteousness: the one without us, which we have by imputation; the other in us,
which consists of faith, hope, and charity, and other Christian virtues. And
S. James does prove that Abraham had not only the one, because the thing
believed was imputed unto him for righteousness: but also the other, because he
offered up his son. God gives us both the one justice and the other: the one,
by accepting us for righteous in Christ; the other, by working christian
righteousness in us. The proper and most immediate efficient cause in us of this
later, is the spirit of adoption we have received into our hearts. That whereof
it consists, where of it is really and formally made, are those infused
virtues proper and particular unto Saints, which the spirit in the very moment
when first it is given of of God, brings with it: the effects whereof are
such actions as the Apostle does call the fruits of works, the operations of
the spirit. The difference of the which operations from the root whereof they
spring, makes it needful to put two kinds likewise of sanctifying
righteousness; Habitual, and Actual. Habitual, that holiness wherewith our
souls are inwardly endued, the same instant, when first we begin to be the
temples of the Holy Ghost: Actual, that holiness which afterward beautifieth
all the parts and actions of our life; the holiness for the which Enoch, Job,
Zachary, Elizabeth, and other Saints are in the Scriptures so highly
commended. If here it be demanded which of these we do first receive; I answer
that the spirit, the virtues of the spirit, the habitual justice which is
ingrafted, the external justice of Jesus Christ, which is imputed: these we
receive all at one and the same time; whenever we have any of these, we have
all; they go together. Yet since no man is justified except he believe, and no
man believes except he have faith, and no man except he have received the
spirit of adoption, has faith, for as much as they do necessarily infer
justification, and justification does of necessity presuppose them: we must
needs hold that imputed righteousness, in dignity being the chiefest, is
notwithstanding in order the last of all these: but actual righteousness,
which is the righteousness of good works, succeeds all, follows after al,
both in order and time. Which being attentively marked, shows plainly how
the faith of true believers cannot be divorced from hope and love; how faith
is a part of sanctification, and yet unto justification necessary; how faith
is perfected by good works, and no work of ours without faith; finally, how
our fathers might hold that we are justified by faith alone, and yet hold
truly, that without works we are not justified. Did they think that men do
merit rewards in heaven, by the works they perform on earth? The ancient use
meriting for obtaining, and in that sense they of Wittenberg have it in their
confession; We teach that good works commanded of God, are necessarily to be
done, and by the free kindness of God they merit their certain rewards.
Therefore speaking as our fathers did, and we taking their speech in a sound
meaning as we may take our fathers, and might for as much as their meaning is
doubtful, and charity does always interpret doubtful things favorably:
what should iuduce us to think that rather the damage of the worst
construction did light upon them all, the^ that the blessing of the better was
granted unto thousands? Fifthly, if in the worst construction that may be made,
they had generally al embraced it living, might not many of them dying utterly
renounce it? Howsoever men when they sit at ease do vainly tickle their hearts
with the wanton conceit of I know not what proportionable correspondence
between their merits and their rewards, which in the trance of their high
speculations they dream that God has measured, weighed, and laid up, as it
were, in bundles for them: notwithstanding we see by daily experience, in a
number even of them, that when the hour of death approaches, when they
secretly hear themselves summoned forthwith to appear, and stand at the bar
of that Judge, whose brightness causes the eyes of the Angels themselves to
dazzle, all these idle imaginations do then begin to hide their faces, to name
merits is then to lay their souls upon the rack, the memory of their own
deeds is loathsome unto them, they forsake all things wherein they have put any
trust or confidence, no staff to lean upon, no ease, no rest, no comfort
then, but only in Jesus Christ.

22 Wherefore if this proposition were true; To hold in such wise, as the
Church of Rome does, that we cannot be saved by Christ alone without works, is
directly to deny the foundation of faith; I say that if this proposition were
true: They may cease to put any confidence in works, and yet never think,
living in Popish superstition, they did amiss, Pighius dyed popish, and yet
denied Popery in the article of justification by works long before his death.
nevertheles so many ways I have showed, where by we may hope that thousands
of our fathers which lived in popish superstition, might be saved. But what if
it be true? what if neither that of the Galatians concerning circumcision; nor
this of the church of Rome, by works, be any direct denial of the fou^datio^,
as it is affirmed that both are? I need not wade so far as to discuss this
controversy, the matter which first was brought into question being so clear
as I hope it is. Howbeit, because I desire that the truth even in that also
should receive light, I will do mine endeavor to set down somewhat more
plainly: first, the foundation of faith, what it is; secondly, what it is
directly to deny the foundation; thirdly, whether they whom God has chosen to
be heirs of life, may fall so far as directly to deny it; fourthly,
whether the Galatians did so by admitting the error about circumcision and the
law; last of all, whether the Church of Rome for this one opinion of works may
be thought to do the like, and thereupon to be no more a Christian church then
are the assemblies of Turks and Jews.

23 This word foundation being figuratively used What the fou^datio^ of faith
is.
has always reference to somewhat which resembles a material building, as
both that doctrine of laws and the community of Christians do. By the Masters
of civil Vocata ad concionem multitudine, quae coalescere in p^pis li vnius
corpus nulla re praeterquam legibus poterat, Live. de Romans lib. 1.
policy nothing is so much inculcated, as that commo^weales are founded upon
laws; for that a multitude cannot be compacted into one body otherwise then
by a common acception of laws, whereby they are to be kept in order. The
ground of all civil laws is this; No man ought to be hurt or injured by an
other. Take away the persuasion, and ye take away all the laws; take away
laws and what shall become of commonweales? So it is in our spiritual
christian community: I do not mean that body mystical, whereof Christ is only
Ephesians. 1. 23. and 4* 15.
the head; that building indiscernable by mortal eyes, wherein Christ is the
Ephesians. 2. 20.
chief corner stone: but I speak of the visible church, the foundation
whereof is the Ephesians. 2. 20.
doctrine which the Prophets and Apostles professed. The mark whereunto their
doctrine tends, is pointed at in these words of Peter unto Christ, Ioh. 6. 68.
Thou have the words of eternal life; in these words of Paul to Timothee, The
holy Scriptures 2. Tim. 3. 15.
are able to make thee wise unto salvation. It is the demand of nature her
self, what shall we do to have eternal life? The desire of immortality and of
the knowledge of that whereby it may be obtained, is so natural unto all men,
that even they who are not persuaded that they shall, do notwithstanding wish
that they might know away how to see no end of life. And, because natural
means are not able still to resist the force of death: there is no people in
the earth so savage which has not devised some supernatural help or other to
fly for aid and succor in extremities against the enemies of their laws. A
longing therefore to be saved, without understanding the true way how, has
been the cause of all the superstitions in the world. O that the miserable
state of others which wander in darkness, and wot not whither they go, could
give us understanding hearts, worthelie to esteem the riches of the mercy of
God toward us, before whose eyes the doors of the kingdom of heaven are set
wide open: should we offer violence unto it? it offers violence unto us, and
we gather strength to withstand it. But I am besides my purpose when I fall to
bewail the cold affection which we bear toward that whereby we should be
saved; my purpose being only to set down what the ground of salvation is. The
doctrine of the gospel proposes salvation as the end, and does it not teach
the way of attaining thereunto? Yet the damsel possessed with a spirit of
divinatio^, spoke the truth; Act. 16. 17.
These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation; Heb. 10. 20.
A new and living way which Christ has prepared for us, through the veil that
is his flesh; salvation purchased by the death of Christ. By this foundation
the children of God before the written law, were distinguished from the sons
of men; the reverend Patriarks both possessed it living, and spoke expressly of it
Genesis 49.
at the hour of their death. It Job. 19.
comforted Job in the midst of grief; it was afterward the anchor hold of all
the righteous in Israel, from the writing of the law, to the time of grace.
Every Prophet makes mention of it. It was famously spoken of about the time,
when the coming of Christ to accomplish the promises, which were made long
before it, drew near, that the sound thereof was heard even amongst the
Gentiles. When he was come, as many as were his, acknowledged that he was their
salvation; he, that long expected hope of Israel; he, that seed, in whom all
the nations of the earth shall be blessed. So that now he is a name of ruin, a
name of death and condemnation, unto such as dream of a new Messiah, to as
many as look for salvation by any other then by him. For Act. 4. 12.
amongst men there is given no other name under heaven whereby we must be
saved. Thus much S. Mark does intimate by that which he does put in the front
of his book, making his entrance with these words; The beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God. His doctrine he terms the Gospel,
because it teaches salvation; the Gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God,
because it teaches salvation by him. This is then the foundation whereupon the
frame of the Gospel is erected; that very Jesus whom the Virgin conceived of
the holy Ghost, whom Simeon embraced in his arms, whom Pilat condemned, whom
the Jews crucified, whom the Apostles preached, he Luke 2. 11.
is Christ, the Lord, the only Savior of the world: 1, Cor. 3.
Other foundation can no man lay. Thus I have briefly opened that principle in
Christianity, which we call the foundation of our faith. It follows now, that
I declare unto you what is directly to overthrow it. This will be better opened,
if we understand what it is to hold the foundation of faith.

24 There are which defend that many of the Gentiles who never heard the name of
Christ, held the foundation of Christianity, and why? they acknowledged many
of them, the providence of God; his infinite wisdom, strength, power; his
goodness, and his mercy toward the children of men; that God has judgment
in store for the wicked, but for the righteous which ferue him, rewards, etc.
In this which they confessed, that lies covered which we believe; in the
rudiments of their knowledge concerning God, the foundation of our faith
concerning Christ, lies secretly wrapped up, and is vertually contained:
therefore they held the foundation of faith, though they never had it. Might
we not with as good a color of reason defend, that every ploughman has all the sciences wherein Philosophers have excelled? For no man is ignorant of their
first principles, which do vertually contain whatsoever by natural means,
is or can be known. Yea, might we not with as great reason affirm, that a
man may put three mighty oaks wheresoever three akornes may be put? For
vertually an akorne is an oak. To avoid such paradoxes, we teach plainly that
to hold the foundation, is in express terms, to acknowledge it.

25 Now, because the foundation is an affirmative proposition: they all
overthrowe it who deny it; they directly overthrow it, who deny it directly;
and they overthrow it by consequent, or indirectly, which hold any one
assertion whatsoever, whereupon the direct denial thereof, may be necessarily
concluded. What is the question between the Gentiles and us, but this, whether
salvation be by Christ? What between the Jews and us, but this, Whether by
this Jesus, whom we call Christ, yea or no? This to be the maine point
whereupon Christianity stands, it is clear by that one sentence of Festus
concerning Paul's accusers, They brought no crime of such things as I supposed,
but had certain questions against him of their superstition, and of one Jesus
which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. Where we see that Jesus, dead
and raised for the salvation of the world, is by Jews denied, despised by a
Gentile, by a Christian Apostle maintained. The Fathers therefore in the
Primitive Church, when they wrote; Tertullian, the book which he calls
Apologeticus; Minucius Foelix, the book which he intitleth Octavius; Arnobius,
the seave^ books against the Gentiles; Chrysostom* his Orations against the
Jews; Eusebius, his ten books of Evangelicall demonstration: they stand in
defense of Christianity against them, by whom the foundation thereof was
directly denied. But the writings of the Fathers against Novatians, Pelagians,
and other heretics of the like note, refell positions, whereby the foundation
of Christian faith, was overthrown by consequent only. In the former sort of
writings, the foundation is proved; in the later, it is alleged as a proof,
which to men that had been known directly to deny, must needs have seemed a
very beggarly kind of disputing. All Infidels therefore deny the foundation of
faith directly; by consequent, many a Christian man, yea whole Christian
Churches have denied it, and do deny it at this present day. Christian
Churches, the foundation of Christianity? Not directly; for then they cease to
be Christian Churches: but by a consequent, in respect whereof we condemn them
as erroneous, although for holding the foundation, we do, and must hold them
Christian.

26 We see what it is to hold the foundation; what directly, and what by
consequent, to deny it. The next thing which follows, is, whether they whom
God has chosen to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, may, once
effectually called, and through faith justified truly, afterward fall so
far, as directly to deny the foundation, which their hearts have before
embraced with joy and comfort in the holy Ghost: for such is the faith which
indeed does justify. Devilles know the same things which we believe, and the
minds of the most ungodly may be fully persuaded of the truth: which
knowledge in the one and in the'other is sometimes termed faith, but
equivocally, being indeed no such faith as that whereby a Christian man is
justified. It is the spirit of adoption which works faith in us, in them not:
the things which we believe, are by us apprehended, not only as true, but also
as good, and that to us: as good, they are not by them apprehended; as true,
they are. Whereupon follows the third difference; the Christian man the more
he increases in faith, the more his joy, and comfort abounds: but they, the
more sure they are of the truth, the more they quake and tremble at it. This
begets an other effect, where the hearts of the one sort have a different
disposition from the other. Non ignoro plerosque conscientia meritorum, nihil
se esse per mortem magis optare, quam credere. Malunt enim extingui penitus
qua^ ad supplicia reparari. I am not ignorant, says Minutius, that there be
many, who being conscious what they are to look for, do rather wish that they
might, then think that they shall, cease, when they cease to live: because
they hold it better that death should consume them unto nothing, then God
receive them into punishment. So it is in other articles of faith, whereof
wicked men think, no doubt, many times they are too true: on the the contrary
side, to the other, there is no grief or torment greater, then to feel their
persuasion weak in things, whereof when they are persuaded, they reap such
comfort and joy of spirit: such is the faith whereby we are justified; such, I
mean, in respect of the quality. For touching the principal object of faith,
longer then it holds the foundation whereof we have spoken, it neither
justifies, nor is, but cease to be faith, when it cease to believe that
Jesus Christ is the only Savior of the world. The cause of life spiritual in
us is Christ, not carnally or corporally inhabiting, but dwelling in the soul
of man, as a thing which (when the mind apprehends it) is said to inhabit
or possess the mind. The mind conceives Christ by hearing the doctrine of
Christianity, as the light of nature does the mind to apprehend those truths
which are merely rational, so that saving truth which is far above the
reach of humane reason, cannot otherwise then by the spirit of the Almighty be
conceived. All these are employed wheresoever any of them is mentioned as the
cause of the spiritual life. Wherefore if we have read that Romans 8. 10.
The spirit is our life; or, Philip. 2. 15.
the word our life; or, Col. 3 4.
Christ our life: we are in every of these to understand, that our life is
Christ, by the hearing of the gospel apprehended as a Savior, and assented
unto through the power of the holy Ghost. The first intellectual conceit and
comprehension of Christ so embraced, S. Peter calls. 1 Pet 1.
the seed whereof we be newborn: our first embracing of Christ is our first
Ephesians 2. 5.
reviving from the state of death and condemnation. 1. Ioh. 5. 12.
He that has the son has life, says S. John, and he that has not the
son of God has not life. If therefore he which once has the son may cease
to have the son, though it be for a moment, he cease for that moment to
have life. But the life of them which have the son of God 1. Ioh. 5. 13.
is everlasting in the world to come. But because as Christ being raised from
Perpetuity of faith.
the dead, dies no more, death has no more power over him: so the justified
man Rom 6. 10.
being alied to God in Jesus Christ our Lord, does as necessarily from that
time forward always live, as Christ Ioh. 14 19.
by whom he has life, lives always. I might, if I had not other where
largely done it already, show by many and sundry manifest and clear proofs,
how the motions and operations of life, are sometimes so indiscernable and so
secret, that they seem stone dead, who notwithstanding are still alive unto
God in Christ. For as long as that abides in in us, which animateth,
quickneth, and gives life, so long we live, and we know that the cause of our
faith abides in us for ever. If Christ the fountain of life, may flit, and
leave the habitation where once he dwells: what shall become of his promise,
I am with you to the worlds end? If the seed of God which contains Christ,
may be first conceived and then cast out* how does S. Peter term it 1. Pet. 1.
immortal? How does S. John affirm, 1. Ioh. 3 9.
it abides? If the spirit which is given to cherish, and prescrue the seed of
life, may be given and taken away: how is it Ephesians. 1. 14.
the earnest of our inheritance until redemption; how does it continue with us
for ever? If therefore Ioh. 4. 16.
the man which is once just by faith, shall live by faith, and live for ever:
it follows, that he which once does believe the foundation, must needs
believe the foundation for ever. If he believe it for ever, how can he ever
directly deny it? Faith holds the direct affirmation; the direct negation, so
long as faith continues, Ob.
is excluded. But you will say, that as he that is to day holy, may to morrow
forsake his holiness, and become impure; as a friend may change his mind, and
be made an enemy; as hope may wither: so faith may die in the heart of man,
the spirit may be quenched, grace may be extinguished, they which believe may
be quite Sol.
turned away from the truth. The cause is clear, long experience has made
this manifest: it needs no proof. I grant we are apt, prone, and ready to
forsake God: but is God ready to forsake us? Our minds are changeable: is his
so likewise? Whom God has justified, has not Christ assured that it is his
Fathers will to give them a kingdom? Notwithstanding it shall not be
otherwise given them, then if they continue Col. 1. 23
grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moved away from the 1. Tim.
2. 15.
hope of the Gospel; if they abide in love and holiness. Our Savior
therefore, when he spoke of the sheep effectually called, and truly gathered
into his fold; Ioh 10.
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hands; in promising to save them, he promised, no doubt,
to preserve them in that without which there can be no salvation as also from
that whereby it is irrecoverably lost. Every error in things appertaining unto
God, is repugnant unto faith every fearful cogitation unto hope; unto love,
every straggling inordinate desire; unto holiness, every blemish, wherewith
either the inward thoughts of our minds, or the outward actions of our lives
are stained. But heresy, such as that of Ebion, Cerinthus, and others, against
whom the Apostles were forced to be^d the^selus both by word and also by
writing; that repining discouragement of heart, which tempts God, whereof we
have Israel in the desert for a pattern: coldness; such as that in the
Angels of Ephesus; foul sins, known to be expressly against the first, or
second Table of the Law, such as Noah, Manasses, David, Solomon, and Peter
committed; these are each in their kind so opposite to the former virtues, that
they leave no place for salvation without an actual repentance. But
infidelity, extreme despair, hatred of God and all goodness, obduration in
sin, cannot stand where there is but the least spark of faith, hope, love, and
sanctity: even as cold in the lowest degree, cannot be where heat in the
highest degree is found. Whereupon I conclude, that, although in the first
kind, no man lives which sins not; and, in the second, as perfect as any
do live; may sin: yet since the Man which is borne of God, has a promise that
in him 1. Ioh. 3 9.
the seed of God shall abide, which seed is a sure preservatiue against the
sins that are of the third sure: greater and clearer assurance we cannot
have of any thing, then of this, that from such sins God shall preserve the
righteous as the apple of his eye for ever. Directly to deny the foundation of
faith is plain infidelity; where faith is entered, there infidelity is for
ever excluded; therefore by him which has once sincerely believed in Christ,
the foundation of Christian faith can never be directly denied. Did not Peter?
did not Marcellinus? did not others both directly deny Christ after that they
had believed, and again believe after they had denied? No doubt, as they
confess in words, whose condemnation is nevertheless their not believing (for
example we have Judas:) so likewise they may believe in heart, whose
condemnation, with out repentance, is their not confessing. Although there fore
Peter and the rest, for whose faith Christ has prayed, that it might not
fail, did not by denial sin the sin of infidelity, which is an inward
abnegation of Christ (but if they had done this, their faith had clearly
failed:) yet because they sinned notoriously and grievously committing that
which they knew to be expressly forbidden by the law, which says, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; necessary it was that
he which purposed to save their souls, should, as he did, touch their hearts
with true unfeigned repeutance, that his mercy might restore them again to
life, whom sin had made the children of death and condemnation. Touching this
point therefore, I hope I may safely set down, that if the justified err, as
he may, and never come to understand his error, God does save him through
general repentance; but if he fall into heresy* he calls him at one time or
other by actual repentance: but from infidelity, which is an inward direct
denial of the foundation, he preserves him by special providence for ever.
Whereby we may easily know what to think of those Galatians, whose hearts
were so possessed with the love of the truth, that if it had bin possible, they
would have plucked out their eyes to bestow upon their teachers. It is true that
they were greatly Howsoever men be changed (for changed they may be, even the
best amongst men) if they that have received, as it seems some of the
Galatians which fell into error, had received, the gifts and graces of God which
are called (...) such as faith, hope, and charity are, which God does never
take away from him, to whom they are given, as if it repented him to have given
them; if such might be so far changed by error* as that the very root of
faith should be quite extinguished in them, and so their salvation utterly
lost* it would shake the hearts of the strongest and stoutest of us all See the
contrary in Beza his observations upon the harmony of Confessions.
changed both in persuasion and affection: so that the Galatians when S. Paul
wrote unto them; were not now the Galatians, which they had been in former
time, for that through error they wandered, although they were his sheep. I
do not deny, but that I should deny that they were his sheep, if I should
grant that through error they perished. It was a perilous opinion that they
held; perilous, even in them which held it only as an error, because it
overthrows the foundation by consequent. But in them which obstinately
maine- taine it, I cannot think it less then a damnable heresy* We must
therefore put a difference between them, which err of ignorance, retaining
nevertheless a mind desirous to be instructed in truth, and them, which, after
the truth is laid open, persist in the stubborn defense of their blindness,
heretical defenders, froward and stiffnecked teachers of circumcision the
blessed Apostle calls dogs: silly men, who were seduced to think they thought
the truth, he pitieth, he takes up in his arms* he lovingly imbraceth, he
kisseth, and with more then fatherly tenderness does so temper, qualify, and
correct the speech he uses toward them, that a man cannot easily discern
whether did most abound, the love which he bare to their godly affection, or
the grief which the danger of their opinion bred them. Their opinion was
dangerous: was not theirs also, who thought the kingdom of Christ should be
earthly? was not theirs which thought the Gospel only should be preached to
the Jews? What more opposite to prophetical doctrine concerning the coming
of Christ, then the one? Concerning the Catholic Church, then the other? Yet
they which had their fancies, even when they had them were not the worst men in
the world. The heresy of Free Will was a millstone about the Pelagians neck;
shall we there give sentence of death inevitable against all those Fathers in
the Greek Church, which being misperswaded, died in the error of free will?
Of these Galatians therefore which first were justified and then deceived, as I
can see no cause why as many as died before admonition might not by mercy be
received, even in error: so I make no doubt, but as many as lived till they
were admonished, found the mercy of God effectual in converting them from
their Error convicted, and afterward maintained, is more then error: for
although opinion be the sa^e it was, in which respect I still call it error,
yet they are not now the sa^e they were when they are taught what the truth
is, and plainly taught
error, least any one that is Christ's, should perish. Of this I take it, there
is no controversy; only against the salvation of them which died, though
before admonition, yet in error, it is objected that their opinion was a very
plain direct denial of the foundation. If Paul and Barnabas had bin
persuaded, they would happly have used the terms otherwise speaking of the
Masters the^ selves who did first set that error abroach, Act. 15, 5.
certain of the sects of the Pharisees which believed. What difference was
there between these Pharisees, and other Pharisees, from whom by a special
description they are distinguished, but this? These which came to Antioch,
teaching the necessity of circuncision were Christians; the other, enemies of
Christianity? Why then should these be termed so distinctly believers, if
they did directly deny the foundation of our belief, besides which there was
no other thing that made the rest to be no believers? We need go no father
then S. Paul's very reasoning against them, for proof of this matter: seeing
you know God, or rather are known of God, how turn you again to impotent
rudiments? Gal. 3. 24. 25
The law ingendreth servants, her children are in bondage; V 28.
they which are gotten by the Gospel are free. V. 31.
Brethren we are not children of the servant, but of the free V. 21.
woman, and will ye not be under the law? That they thought it unto salvation
necessary, for the Church of Christ, to observe days, and months, and times,
and years, to keep the ceremonies and sacraments of the law, this was their
error. Yet he which condemns their error, confesses, that notwithstanding,
they knew God, and were known of him; he takes not the honor from them to
be termed sons begotten of the immortal seed of the Gospel. Let the
heaviest words which he uses, be waighed; consider the drift of those
dreadful conclusions: If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing;
AS many as are justified by the law, are fallen from grace. It had been to no
purpose in the world, so to urge them: had not the Apostle been persuaded,
that at the hearing of such sequels, No benefit by Christ, A defection from
grace, their hearts would tremble and quake within them: and why? because that
they knew, that in Christ, and in grace, their salvation lay; which is a plain
direct acknowledgement of the foundation. Least I should herein seem to hold,
that which no one learned, or godly has done: let these words be considered,
which import as much as I affirm. Bucer. de unit. Eccles. s^^ vanda.
Surely those brethren, which in S. Paul's time, thought that God did lay a
necessity upon them to make choice of days, and meats; spoke as they
believed, and could not but in words condemn the liberty which they supposed
to be brought in against the authority of divine Scripture. Otherwise it had
been needless for S. Paul to admonish them not to condemn such as eat
without scrupulosity, whatsoever was set before them. This error if you weigh
what it is of it self, did at once overthrow all Scriptures, whereby we are
taught salvation by faith in Christ, all that ever the Prophets did foretell,
all that ever the Apostles did preach of Christ, it drew with it the denial
of Christ utterly: in so much that S Paul complains, that his labor was lost
upon the Galatians, unto whom this error was obtruded, affirming that Christ,
if so be they were circumcised, should not profit them any thing at all. Yet
so far was S. Paul from striking their names out of Christ's book, that he
commands others to entertain them, to accept them with singular humanity, to
use them like brethren; he knew man's imbecilitie; he had a feeling of our
blindness which are mortal men how great it is, and being sure that they are
the sons of God, whosoever be endued with his fear, would have them counted
enemies of that whereunto they could not as yet frame themselves to be friends,
but did ever upon a very religious affection to the truth, willingly reject the
truth. They acknowledged Christ to be their only, and perfect Savior, but saw
not how repugnant their believing the necessity of Mosaicall ceremonies was to
their faith in Jesus Christ. Hereunto a reply is made, that if they had not
directly denied the foundation, they might have been saved; but saved they
could not be, therefore their opinion was not only by consequent, but
directly a denial of the foundation. When the question was about the
possibility of their salvation, their denying of the foundation was brought to
prove that they could not be saved; now that the question is about their
denial of the foundation, the impossibility of their salvation, is alleged
to prove, they denied the foundation. Is there nothing which excludes men from
salvation, but only the foundation of faith denied? I should have thought, that
besides this, many other things are death unto as many as be given to
understand, that to cleave thereunto, was to fall from Christ, did
notwithstanding cleave unto it. But of this enough. Wherefore I come to the
last question, whether that the doctrine of the Church of Rome, concerning the
necessity of works unto salvation, be a direct denial of our faith.

27 I seek not to obtrude unto you any private opinion of mine own; the best
learned in our profession are of this judgment, that all the corruptions of
the Church of Rome, do not prove her to deny the foundation directly; if they
did, they should grant her simply to be no Christian Church. But I suppose,
says Calv. ep. 104.
one, that in the Papacy some Church remains, a Church crased, or, if you
will, broken quite in pieces, forlorn, misshapen, yet some Church: his reason
is this, Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God. Least any man should think
such sentences as these to be true, only in regard of the^, whom that Church
is supposed to have kept by the special providence of God, as it were in the
secret corners of his bosom, free from infection, and as sound in the faith,
as we trust, by his mercy, we our selves are: I permit it to your wise
considerations, whether it be more likely, that as frenzy, though it self
take away the use of reason, does notwithstanding prove them reasonable
creatures which have it, because none can be frantic but they: so
Antichristianitie being the baine, and plain overthrow of Christianity, may
nevertheless argue the Church wherein Antichrist sits, to be Christian.
Nether have I ever, hitherto heard or read any one word alleged of force to
warrant, that God does otherwise, then so as in the two next questions before
has been declared, bind himself to keep his elect from worshipping the
Beast, and from receiving his mark in their foreheads: but he has preserved
and will preserve them from receiving any deadly wound at the hands of the man
of sin, whose deceit has prevailed over none unto death, but only unto such
as never loved the truth, such as took a pleasure in unrighteousness: they in
all ages, whose hearts have delighted in the principal truth, and whose souls
have thirsted after righteousness, if they received the mark of error, the
mercy of God, even erring and dangerously erring, might save them; if they
received the mark of heresy, the same mercy did, I doubt not, convert them.
HOW far Romish heresies may prevail over Gods elect, how many God has kept
falling into them, how many have bin converted from them, is not the question
now in hand: for if heaven had not received any one of that coat for these
thousand years, it may still be true that the doctrine which this day they do
profess, does not directly deny the foundation, and so prove them simply to
be no Christian Church. One I have alleged, whose words, in my ears, sound
that way: shall I add Morn. de Eccles.
another, whose speech is plain? I deny her not the name of a Church, says
another, no more then to a man, the name of a man, as long as he lives, what
sickness soever he has. His reason is this; Salvation in Jesus Christ, which
is the mark which ioineth the head with the body, Jesus Christ with the
Church, is so cut off by many merits, by the merits of Saints, by the Popes
pardons, and such other wickedness, that the life of the Church holds by a
very thread, yet still the life of the Church holds. A Zanch praefat de relig.
third has these words, I acknowledge the Church of Rome, eve^ at this present
day for a Church of Christ, such a Church as Israel did Jeroboam, yet a Church.
His reason is this; Every man sees except he willingly hoodwinke himself,
that as always, so now, the Church of Rome holds firmly and steadfastly the
doctrine of truth concerning Christ, and baptizeth in the name of the father,
the son and the Holy Ghost, confesses and avowcheth Christ for the only
redeemer of the world, and the judge that shall sit upon quick and dead,
recieving true believers into endless joy, faithless and godless men being
cast with Satan and his angels into flames inquenchable.

28 I may and will reine the question shorter the^ they do. Let the Pope take
down his top, and captivate no more men's souls by his Papal jurisdiction;
let him no longer count himself Lord Paramount over the Princes of the world,
no longer hold kings as his servants paravaile; let his stately Senate submit
their necks to the yoke of Christ, and cease to dye their garment like Edom, in
blood; let them from the highest to the lowest, hate and forsake their
idolatry, abjure all their errors and heresies wherewith they have any way
perverted the truth; let them strippe their Churches till they leave no
polluted ragge, but only this one about her, By Christ alone without works we
cannot be saved: it is enough for me if I show, that the holding of this one
thing does not prove the foundation of faith directly denied in the Church of
Rome.

29 Works are an addition: be it so: what then? the foundation is not
subverted by every kind of addition. simply to add unto those fundamental
words, is not to mingle wine with water, heaven with earth, things polluted
with the sanctified blood of Christ: of which crime indict them which
attribute* those operations in whole or in part to any creature, which in the
w^^ of our salvation wholly are peculiar unto Christ, and (...) open my mouth to
speak in their defense, if I hold my peace and plead not against them as
long as breath is within my body, let me be guilty of all the dishonor that
ever has been done to the Son of God. But a dreadful thing it is to deny
salvation by Christ alone; the more slow and fearful I am, except it be too
manifest, to lay a thing so grievous to any ma^s charge. Let us beware, least
if we make too many ways of denying Christ, we scarce leave any way for our
selves truly and soundly to confess him. Salvation only by Christ is the
true foundation whereupon indeed Christianity stands. But what if I say you
cannot be saved only by Christ, without this addition, Christ believed in heart,
confessed with mouth, obeyed in life and conversation? Because I add, do I
therefore deny that which I did directly affirm? There may be an additament
of explication, which overthrows not, but proves and concludes the
proposition whereunto it is annexed. He which says, Peter was a chief
Apostle, does prove that Peter was an Apostle, he which says, Our salvation
is of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
through sanctification of the spirit and faith of the truth, proves that our
salvation is of the Lord. But if that which is added be such a privation as
takes away the very essence of that whereunto it is added, then by the
sequel it overthrows. He which says Judas is a dead man, though in word he
grants Judas to be a man, yet in effect he proves him by that very speech no
man; because death depriveth him of being. In like sort, he that should say,
our election is of grace for our works sake, should grant in sound of words,
but indeed by consequent deny that our election is of grace; for the Rom 11. ^.
grace which electeth us, is no grace, if it elect us for our sake.

30 Now whereas the Church of Rome adds works, we must note farther that the
adding of I deny not but that the Church of Rome requires some kinds of works
which she ought not to require at men's hands. But our question is general
about the adding of good works, not whether such or such works be good. In
this comparison it is enough to touch so much of the matter in question between
S. Paul and the Galatians, as infers those co^clusions, Ye are fallen from
grace; Christ ca^ profit you nothing* which conclusions will follow upon
circumcision and rites of the law ceremonial, if they be required as things
necessary to salvation. This only was alleged against me, and need I touch
more then was alleged?
works is not like the adding of circumcision unto Christ. Christ came not to
abrogat and put away good works: he did, to change circumcision; for we see
that in place thereof, he has substituted holy baptism. To say, ye cannot be
saved by Christ, except ye be circumcised, is to add a thing excluded, a
thing not only not necessary to be kept, but necessary not to be kept by the^
that will be saved. On the other side, to say, ye cannot be saved by Christ
without works, is to add things, not only not excluded, but commanded, as
being in their place and in their kind necessary, and therefore subordinated
unto Christ, by Christ himself, by whom the web of salvation is spun; a
except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. They were Luk 11. 39.
rigorous of things not utterly to be neglected, and left undone washings and
tithings, etc. As they were in these, so must we be in judgment, and the love
of God. Christ in works ceremonial, gives more liberty; in Matthew. 5. 21.
moral much less, then they did. Works of righteousness therefore are not
so repugnantlie added in the one pro position; as in the other, circumcision is.

31 But we say our salvation is by Christ alone, therefore howsoever, or
whatsoever we add unto Christ in the matter of salvation* we overthrow
Christ. Our case were very hard, if this argument so universally meant, as it
is proposed, were sound and good. We our selves do not teach Christ alone,
excluding our own faith, unto justification; Christ alone, excluding our own
works, unto sanctification; Christ alone, excluding the one or the other
unnecessary unto salvation. It is a childish cavil wherewith in the matter of
justification our adversaries do so greatly please themselves, exclaiming that
we tread all Christian virtues under our feet, and require nothing in
Christians but faith, because we teach that faith alone justifies: whereas by
this speech we never meant to exclude either hope, or charity from being
always joined as inseparable mates with faith in the man that is justified; or
works from being added as necessary duties required at the hands of every
justified man: but to show that faith is the only hand, which puts on Christ
unto justification; and Christ, the only garment, which being so put on,
covers the shame of our defiled natures, hides the imperfections of our
works, preserves us blameles in the sight of God, before whom otherwise, the
weakness of our faith were cause sufficient to make us culpable, yea to shut
us from the kingdom of heaven, where nothing that is not absolute, can enter.
That our dealing with them be not as childish as theirs with us, when we
hear of salvation by Christ alone, considering that [ alone] as an exclusive
particle, we are to note what it does exclude, and where. If I say, such a
judge only, ought to determine such a case, all things incident to the
determination thereof, besides the person of the Judge, as laws, dispositions,
evidences, etc. are not hereby excluded; persons are not excluded from
witnessing herein, or assisting, but only from determining and giving
sentence. How then is our salvation wrought by Christ alone? It is not our
meaning that nothing is requisite to man's salvation but Christ to save, and he
to be saved quietly without any more adooe. As we have received, so we teach,
that besides the bare and naked work, wherein Christ without any other
associate finished all the parts of our redemption, and purchased salvation
himself alone, for conveiance of this eminent blessing unto us, many things
are of necessity required: as to be known and chosen of God before the
foundation of the world; in the world to called, justified, sanctified; after
we have left the world, to be received unto glory; Christ in every of these
has somewhat which he works alone. Through him according to the eternal
purpose of God, before the foundation of the world, borne, crucified, buried
raised, etc. we were in a gracious acceptio^ known unto God, long before we
were seen of men: God Ephesians. 1. 6. 2. 7
knew us, loved us, was kind to us in Jesus Christ; in him we were elected to
be heirs of life. Thus far God through Christ has wrought in such sort
alone, that our selves are mere patients, working no more then dead and
senseless matter, wood, or stone, or iron, does in the artificers hands, no
more then the clay when the potter appoints it to be framed for an honorable
use: nay, not so much: for the matter whereupon the craftsman works, he
chooses being moved by the fitness which is in it to serve his turn; in us
no such thing. Touching the rest which is laid for the foundation of our faith,
imports farther; that Gal. 5. 8.
by him we are called; that 1. Pet 2. 9.
we have rede^ptio^, Ephesians 1. 7.
remission of sins through 1. Pet 5 3.
his blood, Esai 53. 11.
health by his stripes, Ierem. 23. 6
justice by him; that he Ephesians. 8. 26
does sanctify his Church, and make it glorious to himself; that h entrance
into joy shall be give^ us by him, yea Mat. 25 23.
all things by him alone. Howbeit not so by him alone, 2. These. 2. 14.
as if in us to i our vocation, the hearing of the Gospel; Gal. 2. 16.
Gal 5. 23.
to our justification, faith; to our sanctification, the 2. These. 2. 15.
fruits of the spirit; to our entrance into rest, perseverance in hope, in
faith, in holiness, were not necessary.

32 Then what is the fault of the Church of Rome? Not that she requires
works at their hands which will be saved: but that she attributes unto
works a power of satisfying God for sin; yea a virtue to merit both grace
here, and in heaven glory. That this overthrows the foundation of faith, I
grant willingly; that it is a direct denying thereof, I utterly deny: what it
is to hold, and what directly to deny the foundation of faith, I have already
opened. Apply it particularly to this cause, and there needs no more adooe. The
thing which is handled, if the form under which it is handled, be added
thereunto, it shows the foundation of any doctrine whatsoever. Christ is the
matter whereof the doctrine of the Gospel treats; and it treats of Christ,
as of a Savior. Salvation therefore by Christ is the foundation of
Christianity: as for works, they are a thing subordinate, no otherwise then
because our sanctification cannot be accomplished without them; the doctrine
concerning them, is a thing builded upon the foundation; therefore the doctrine
which adds unto them the power of satisfying or of meriting, adds unto a
thing subordinated, builded upon the foundation, not to the very foundation it
self: yet is the foundation by this addition consequently overthrown, for as
much as out out of this addion, it may be negatiuely concluded; He which makes
any work good, and acceptable in the sight of God, to proceed from the
natural freedom of our will; he which gives unto any good works of ours,
the force of satisfying the wrath of God for sin, the power of meriting either
earthly or heavenly rewards; he which holds works, going before our vocation,
in congruity to merit our vocation, works following our first, to merit our
second justification, and by condignitie our last reward in the kingdom of
heaven; pulls up the doctrine Haec ratio Eccle stastici sacrameti and
Catholicae fidei est, vt qui partem divini sacramenti negat, partem non valcat
confiteri Ita enim sibi connexa and con corporata sunt omnia vt aliud sine alio
stare non possit, and qui vnum ex omnibus denegaverit, alia ei omniacredidisse
non profit, Cassian lib. 6 de Incarn Dom. If he obstinately stand in denial p.
193.
of faith by the roots; for out of every of these the plain direct denial
thereof may be necessarily concluded. Not this only, but what other heresy
is there, that does not raze the very* foundation of faith by consequent? How
be it, we make a difference of heresies accou^ting in the next degree to
infidelity which directly deny any one thing to be, which is expreslie
acknoweledged in the articles of our belief; for out of any one article so
denied, the denial of the very foundation it self is streightway inferd. As
for example; if a man should say, There is no Catholic Church, it follows
immediately thereupon that this Jesus, whom we call the Savior, is not the
Savior of the world; because all the Prophets bear witness, that the true
Messiah should Act. 26. 23.
show light unto the Gentiles, that is to say, gather such a Church as is
Catholic, not restrained any longer unto one circumcised nation. In the
second rank we place them, out of whose positions the denial of any the
foresaid articles may be with like facility concluded: such as are they, which
have denied either the Divinity of Christ with Hebion, or with Martion his
Humanity; an example whereof may be that of Cassianus defending the
incarnation of the son of God, against Nestorius Bishop of Antioch; which
held that the Virgin when she brought forth Christ, did not bring forth the
son of God, but sole and a mere man: out of which heresy the denial of the
articles of the Christian faith he deduceth thus: If thou do deny our Lord
Jesus Lib. 6. de Ircar.
Dom. cap. 16.
Christ; in denying the son thou* can not choose but deny the father: for
according to the voice of the father himself, He that has not the son, has
not the father. Wherefore denying him which is begotten, thou deniest him which
does beget. Again denying the son of God to have been borne in the flesh,
how can thou believe him to have suffered? believing not his passion, what
remains but that thou deny his resurrection? For we believe him not raised,
except we first believe him dead: neither can the reason of his rising from
the dead stand without the faith of his death going being before. The denial
of his death and passion infers the denial of his rising from the depth.
Whereupon it follows that thou also deny his ascension into heaven. The
Apostle affirms that he which ascended, did first descend, so that as much as
lies in thee, our Lord Jesus Christ has neither risen from the depth, nor is
ascended into heaven, nor sits at the right hand God the father, neither
shall he come at the day of final account which is looked for, nor shall judge
the quick and dead. And dare thou yet set foot in the church? Can thou
think they self a Bishop when thou have denied all those things whereby thou
do obtain a Bishoply calling? Nestorius confessed all the articles of the
Creed; but his opinion did imply the denial of every part of his confession.
Heresies there are of the third sort; such as the Church of Rome maintains;
which be removed by a greater distance from the foundation, although indeed
they over throw it. Yet because of that weakness, which the Philosopher notes
in men's capacities, when he says, that the common sort cannot see things which
follow in reason, when they follow as it were a far of by many deductions;
therefore the repugnancie of such heresy and the foundation, is not so quickly
or so easily found, but that an heretic of this, sooner then of the former
kind, may directly grant and consequently nevertheless, deny the foundation
of faith.

33 If reason be suspected, trial will show that the Church of Rome does no
otherwise by teaching the doctrine she does teach concerning good works, offer
them the very fundamental words: and what man is there, that will refuse to
subscribe unto them? Can they directly grant, and directly deny one and the
very selfsame thing? Our own proceedings in disputing against their works
satisfactorie, and meritorious, do show not only that they hold, but that we
acknowledge them to hold the foundation, notwithstanding their opinion. For are
not these our arguments against them? Christ alone has satisfied and appeased
his fathers wrath: Christ has merited salvation alone. We should do fondly to
use such disputes, neither could we think to prevail by them, if that
whereupon we ground, were a thing which we know they do not hold, which we
are assured they will not grant. Their very answers to all such reasons as are
in this controversy brought against the^, will not permit us to doubt, whether
they hold the foundation, or no. Can any man that has read their books
concerning this matter, be ignorant how they draw all their answers unto these
heads? That the remission of all our sins, the pardon of all whatsoever
punishments thereby deserved, the rewards which God has laid up in heaven, are
by the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ purchased, and obtained sufficiently for
all men: but for no man effectually, for his benefit in particular, except the
blood of Christ be applied particularly unto him, by such means as God has
appointed that to work by. That those means of themselves, being but dead
things; only the blood of Christ is that which puts life, force, and
ifficacie in them to work, and to be availeable, each in his kind, to our
salvation. Finally, that grace being purchased for us by the blood of Christ,
and freely without any merit or desert at the first bestowed upon us, the good
things which we do, after grace received, be thereby made satisfactorie, and
meritorious. Some of their sentences, to this effect, I must allege for mine
own war rant. If we desire to hear foreign judgments, we find in one, this
confession; He that could reckon how many the virtues and merits of our Savior
Christ have been, might Lews of Grana Meditat. c. last 3.
likewise understand how many the benefits have been, that are to come to us
by him; for so much as men are made partakers of them all by means of his
passion: by him is given unto us remission of our sins, grace, glory,
liberty, praise, salvation, redemption, justification, justice, satisfaction,
sacraments, merits, and all other things which we had, and were behouefull for
our salvation. In another we have these oppositions, and answers made unto
them; All grace Panigarola letti. 11.
is given by Christ Jesus; True, but not except Christ Jesus be applied. He is
the propitiation for our sins; by his stripes we are healed; he has offered
himself up for us: all this is true; but apply it: we put all satisfaction in
the blood of Jesus Christ; but we hold that the means which Christ has
appointed for us in this case to apply it, are our penal works. Our
Countrymen in Rhemes, make the like answer, that Annot in. 1. Ioh. 1.
they seek salvation no other way, then by the blood of Christ; and that
humbly they do use prayers, fastings, alms, faith, charity, sacrifice,
sacraments, priests, only as the means appointed by Christ, to apply the
benefit of his holy blood unto them: touching our good works, that in their
own natures they are not meritorious, nor answerable to the joys of heaven;
it comes by the grace of Christ, and not of the work it self, that we have
by well doing a right to heaven, and deserve it worthily. If any man think
that I seek to varnish their opinions, to set the better foot of a lame cause
foremost: let him know, that since I began thoroughly to understand their
meaning, I have found their halting greater, then perhaps it seems to them
which know not the deepnesse of Satan, as the blessed divine speaks. For
although this be proof sufficient, that they do not directly deny the
foundation of faith: yet if there were no other leaven in the whole lump of
their doctrine but this; this were sufficient to prove, that their doctrine is
not agreeable unto the foundatiof Christian faith. The Pelagians being over
great friends unto nature, made themselves enemies unto grace, for all their
confessing, that men have their souls, and all the faculties thereof, their
wills, and all the ability of their wills from God. And is not the Church of
Rome still an adversary unto Christ's merits, because of her acknowledging that
we have received the power of meriting by the blood of Christ? St Thomas More,
sets In his book of consolation
down the odds between us and he Church of Rome in the matter of works thus;
Like as we grant them that no good work of man is rewardable in heaven of
his own nature, but through the mere goodness of God, that list to set so
high a price upon so poor a thing; and that this price God sets through
Christ's passion, and for that also they be his own works with us; for good
works to Godward works no man, without God work in him; and as we grant
the^ also, that no man may be proud of his works, for his imperfect working,
and for that in all that man may do, he can do God no good, but is a servant
improfitable and does but his bare duty; as we, I say, grant unto them these
things: so this one thing, or twain, do they grant us again, that men are
bound to work good works, if they have time and power, and that who so
works in true faith mo^st, shall be most rewarded; but then set they thereto,
that all his rewards shall be given him for his faith alone, and nothing for
his works at all, because his faith is the thing, they say, that forces him
to work well. I see by this of St Thomas More, how easy it is for men of the
greatest capacity, to mistake things written or spoken as well on the one side
as on the other. Their doctrine, as he thought, makes the work of man
rewardable in the world to come, through the goodness of God, whom it pleases
to set so high a price upon so poor a thing; and ours, that a man does receive
that eternal and high reward, not for his works, but for his faiths sake, by
which he works: whereas in truth our doctrine is no other then that we have
learned at the feet of Christ, namely, that God does justify the believing
man, yet not for the worthiness of his belief, but for the worthiness of him
which is believed; God rewards abundantly every one which works, yet not
for any meritorious dignity, which is, or can be in the work, but through his
mere mercy, by whose commandment he works. Contrariwise their doctrine is,
that as pure water of it self has no savor, but if it pass throug a sweet
pipe, it takes a pleasant smell of the pipe through which it passes: so,
although before grace received, our works do neither satisfy, nor merit; yet
after, they do both the one and the other. Every virtuous action has then
power in such to satisfy, that if we our selves commit no mortal sin, no
heinous crime whereupon to spend this treasure of satisfaction in our own
behalf, Works of supererogatio^.
it turns to the benefit of other men's release, on who^ it shall please the
steward of the house of God to bestow it, so that we may satisfy for ourselves
and others, but merit only for our selves. In meriting, our actions do work
with two hands; with one they get their morning stipend, the increase of grace;
with the other, their evening hire, the everlasting crown of glory. Indeed
they teach that our good works do not these things, as they come from us, but
as they come from grace in us: which grace in us is another thing in their
divinity, then is the mere goodness of Gods mercy toward us in Christ Jesus.

34 I fit were not a strong deluding spirit which has possession of their
hearts: were it possible but that they should see how plainly they do herein
gaine-saie the very ground of Apostolic faith? Is this that salvation by
grace, whereof so plentiful mention is made in the scriptures of God? Was this
their meaning which first taught the world to look for salvation only by
Christ? By grace, the Apostle says, and by grace in such sort as a gift, a
thing that comes not of our selves, not of our works, lest any man should
boast, and say, I have wrought out my own salvation. By grace they confess;
but by grace in such sort, that as many as wear the diadem of bliss, they
wear nothing but what they have won. The Apostle, as if he had foreseen, how
the church of Rome would abuse the world in time by ambiguous terms, to
declare in what sense the name of grace must be taken when we make it the cause
of our salvation, says, He saved us according to his mercy: which mercy
although it exclude not the washing of our new birth, the renewing of our hearts
by the holy Ghost, the means, the virtues, the duties which God requires of
their hands which shall be saved, yet is it so repugnant unto merits, that to
say we are saved for the worthiness of any thing which is ours, is to deny
we are saved by grace. Grace bestows freely: and therefore justly requires
the glory of that which is bestowed. We deny the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ; we abuse, disanull, and annihilate the benefit of his bitter passion:
if we rest in these proud imaginations that life is deservedly ours, that we
merit it, and that we are worthy of it.

35 How be it considering how many virtuous and just men, how many Saints, how
many Martyrs, how many of the ancient fathers of the church, have had their
sundry perilous opinions, and amongst sundry of their opinions, this, that
they hoped to make good some part of amends for their sins, by the voluntary
punishments which they laid upon themselves, because by a consequent it may
follow hereupon, that they were injurious unto Christ: shall we therefore make
such dead lie epitaphes and set them upon their graves; They denied the
foundation of faith directly; they are damned; there is no salvation for them?
S. Austin says of himself, Errare possum, haereticus essemolo. And except we
put a difference between them that err, and them that obstinatlie perfist in
error: how is it possible, that ever any man should hope to be saved? Surely in
this case, I have no respect of any person alive or dead. Give me a man of what
state or condition soever, yea a Cardinal, or a Pope whom in the extreme
point of his life affliction has made to know himself, whose heart God has
touched with true sorrow for all his sins, and filled with love toward the
Gospel of Christ, whose eyes are opened to see the truth, and his mouth to
renounce all heresy and error any wise opposite thereunto (this one opinion of
merits excepted) he thinks God will require at his hands, and because he
wants, therefore trembles and is discouraged; It may be, I am forgetful,
and unskillful, not furnished with things new and old as a wise learned
scribe should be, nor able to allege that, whereunto, if it were alleged,
he does bear a mind most willing to yield, and so to be recalled as well
from this, as from other errors. And shall I think because of this only error,
that such a man touches not so much as the hemme of Christ's garment? If he
do, wherefore should not I have hope that virtue may proceed from Christ to
save him? Because his error does by consequent overthrow his faith? Shall I
therefore cast him off as one that has utterly cast of Christ? one that
holds not so much as by a slender thread? No, I will not be afraid to say
unto a Pope or Cardinal in this plight, be of good comfort, we have to do
with a merciful God; rather to make the best of a little which we hold well,
and not with a captious sophister, which gathers the worst out of every
thing, wherein we err. Is there any reason that I should be suspected, or you
offended for this speech? Let all affection be laid aside; let the matter
indifferently be considered.
Is it a dangerous thing to imagine, that such men may find mercy? The house
may come when we shall think it a blessed thing to hear, that if our sins
were the sins of the Popes and Cardinals, the bowels of the mercy of God are
larger. I do not propose unto you a Pope with the neck of an Emperor under his
feet; a Cardinal riding his horse to the bridle in the blood of Saints: but a
Pope or Cardinal, sorrowful, penitent, disrobed, stripped not only of usurped
power, but also delivered and recald from error; Antichrist converted and
lying prostrate at the foot of Christ: and shall I think that Christ will
spurn at him? And shall I cross and gainesaie the merciful promises of God
generally made unto penitent sinners by opposing the name of a Pope, of a
Cardinal? What difference is there in the world between a Pope and a
Cardinal, and John Style in this case? If we think it impossible for them,
after they be once come within that rank, to be afterward touched with any
such remorse, let that be granted. The Apostle says, If I or an Angel from
heaven preach unto, etc. Let it be as likely that Saint Paul or an Angel from
heaven should preach heresy, as that a Pope or a Cardinal should be brought
so far forth to acknowledge the truth: yet if a Pope or a Cardinal should,
what find we in their persons, why they might not be saved? It is not the
persons, you will say, but the error, wherein I suppose them to die, which
excludes them from the hope of mercy; the opinion of merits does take away
all possibitie of salvation from them. What, if they hold it only as an error?
although they hold the truth truly and sincerely in all other parts of
Christian faith? although they have in some measure all the virtues and graces
of the spirit, all other tokens of Gods elect children in them? although they
be far from having any proud presumptuous opinion, that they shall be saved
by the worthynesse of their deeds? although the only thing which troubles
and molesteth them, be but a little too much deiection, somewhat too great a
fear, rising from an erroneous conceit, that God will require a worthynesse
in them, which they are grieved to find wanting in themselves? although they
be not obstinate in this persuasion? although they be willing and would be
glad to forsake it, if any one reason were brought sufficient to disprove it?
although the only let why they do not forsake it ere they die, be the
ignorance of the means, by which it might be disproued? although the cause why
the ignorance in this point is not removed, be the want of knowledge in such
as should be able, and are not, to remove it? Let me die, if ever it be proved,
that simply an error does exclude a Pope or a Cardinal in such a case utterly
from hope of life. Surely, I must confess unto you, if it be an error, that
God may be merciful to save men, even when they err: my greatest comfort is
my error; were it not for the love I bear unto this error, I would never
wish to speak nor to live.

36 Wherefore, to resume that mother sentence, whereof I little thought that so
much trouble would have grown; I doubt not but that God was merciful to save
thousands of our fathers living in Popish superstitions, in as much as they
sinned ignorantly: alas what bloody matter is there contained in this
sentence, that it should be an occasion of so many hard censures? Did I say
that thousands of our fathers might be saved? I have showed which way it cannot
be denied. Did I say, I doubted not but they were saved? I see no impiety in
this persuasion, though I had no reason for it. Did I say, their ignorance does
make me hope they did find mercy, and so were saved? What hinders salvation
but sin? Sins are not equal: and ignorance, though it does not make to be
no sin; yet seeing it did make their sin the less, why should it not make
our hope concerning their life, the greater? We pity the most, and doubt not,
but God has most compassion over them that sin for want of understanding. As
much is confessed by sundry others, almost in the self same words which I have
used. It is but only my evil hap, that the same sentences which savor verity
in other men's books, should seem to bolster heresy when they are once by me
recited. If I be deceived in this point, not they, but the blessed Apostle
has deceived me. What I said of others, the same he said of himself, I
obtain mercy for I did it ignorantly. Conster his words, and you cannot
misconster mine. I speak no otherwise. I meant no otherwise then he did.

37 Thus have I brought the question concerning our Fathers, at the length unto
an end. Of whose estate upon so fit an occasion* as was offered me, handling the
weighty causes of separation between the Church of Rome and us, and the weak
motives which are commonly brought to retain men in that society; amongst
which motives, the examples of our Fathers deceased is one, although I saw it
convenient to utter that sentence, which I did to the end, that all men might
there by understand, how untruly we are said to condemn as many as have been
before us otherwise persuaded then we our selves are; yet more then that one
sentence I did not think it expedient to utter, judging it a great deal
meeter for us to have regard to our own estate, then to sift over curiously,
what is become of other men* And fearing least that such questions as these, if
voluntarily they should be to far waded in, might seem worthy of that
rebuke, which our Savior thought needful in a case not unlike; What is this
unto thee? when I was forced much beside mine expectation, to render a reason
of my speech, I could not but yield at the call of others, and proceed so far
as duty bound me, for the fuller satisfying of minds. Wherein I have walked
as with reverence, so with fear: with reverence, in regard of our Fathers,
which lived in former times; not without fear, considering them that are alive.

38 I am not ignorant, how ready men are to feed and sooth up themselves in
evil. Shall I, will the man say that loves the present world more then he
loves Christ, shall I incur the high displeasure of the mightiest upon
earth? shall I hazard my goods? endanger my estate? put my self in ieopardie,
rather then yield to that which so many of my fathers embraced, and yet found
favor in the sight of God? Curse Meroz, says Judge. 5. 23.
the Lord, curse her inhabitants, because they helped not the Lord, they helped
him not against the mighty. If I should not only not help the Lord against
the mighty, but help to strengthen them that are mighty, against the Lord:
worthily might I fall under the burden of that curse, worthy I were to bear
my own judgment. But if the doctrine which I teach, be a flower gathered in
the garden of the Lord; a part of the saving truth of the Gospel; from whence
notwithstanding poisoned creatures do suck venime: I can but wish it were
otherwise, and content my self with the lotte that has befallen me, the
rather because it has not befallen me alone. Saint Paul teached a truth, and
a comfortable truth, when he taught, that the greater our misery is, in respect
of our iniquities, the readier is the mercy of God for our release. If we
seek unto him, the more we have sinned, the more praise, and glory, and honor
unto him that pardons our sin. But mark what lewd collections were made
hereupon by some. Why then am I condemned for a sinner? and the Apostle (as we
are blamed, and as some affirm that we say; Why do we not evil that good
may come of it?) he was accused to teach that which ill disposed men did
gather by his teaching, though it were clean not only besides, but against his
meaning. The Apostle adds, Their condemnation (which thus do) is just. I am
not hasty to apply sentences of condemnation. I wish from mine heart their
conversion, whosoever are thus perversely affected. For I must needs say, their
case is fearful, their estate dangerous, which harden themselves, presuming
on the mercy of God toward others. It is true that God is merciful; but
let us beware of presumptuous sins: God delivered Jonah from the bottom of
the sea; will you therefore cast your selves headlong from the tops of
rocks, and say in your hearts, God shall deliver us? He pittieth the blind
that would gladly see; but will he pity them that may see, and hardens
himself in blindness? No. Christ has spoken too much unto you, to claim the
privilege of your fathers.

39 As for us that have handled this cause concerning the condition of our
Fathers, whether it be this thing, or any other, which we bring unto you, the
counsel is good which the wise man gives, Stand thou fast in thy sure
understanding, in the way and knowledge of the Lord, and have but one manner of
word, and follow the word of peace and righteousness. As a loose tooth is a
grief to him that eats: so does a wavering and unstable word in speech, that
tends to instruction, offend Shall a wise man speak words of the wind,
says Eliphas, light, unconstant, unstable words? Surely the wisest may speak
words of the wind, such is the untoward constitution of our nature, that we
do neither so perfectly understand the way and knowledge of the Lord, nor so
steadfastly embrace it, when it is understood nor so graciously utter it when it
is embraced; nor so peaceably maintain it, when it is uttered; but that the
best of us are overtaken sometime through blindness, sometime through
hastiness, sometime through impatience, sometime through other passions of the
mind, whereunto (God does know) we are too subject. We must therefore be
contented, both to pardon others, and to crave that others must pardon us for
such things. Let no man that speaks as a man, think himself, whiles he
lives, always freed from scapes and oversights in his speech. The things
themselves which I have spoken unto you are sound, howsoever they have seemed
otherwise unto some: at whose hands I have in that respect received injury. I
willingly forget it, although indeed considering the benefitte which I have
reaped by this necessary speech of truth, I rather incline to that of the
Apostle, They have not injured me at all. I have cause to wish them as many
blessings in the kingdom of heaven, as they have forced me to utter words and
syllables in this cause; wherein I could not be more sparing of speech then I
have been. It becomes no man, says St. Jerome, to be patient in the crime
of heresy. Patie^t, as I take it, we should be always, though the crime of
heresy were intended; but silent in a thing of so great consequence I could
not, beloved I durst not be: especially the love that I bear to the truth of
Christ Jesus, being hereby somewhat called in question. Whereof I beseech them
in the meekness of Christ, that have been the first original cause, to
consider that a watchman may cry ( an enemy) when indeed a friend comes. In
which cause as I deem such a watchman more worthy to be loved for this cause,
then misliked for his error: so I have judged it my own part in this, as much
as in me lies, to take away all suspicion of any unfriendly intent or meaning
against the truth, from which, God does know, my heart is free.

40 Now to you, beloved, which have heard these things, I will use no other
words of admonition, then those which are offered me by St James, My brethren
have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus in respect of persons. Ye are
not now to learn, that as of it self it is not hurtful, so neither should it
be to any scandalous and offensive in doubtful cases, to hear the different
judgments of men. Be it that Cephas has one interpretation, and Apollos has
another; that Paul is of this mind, that Barnabas of that; if this offend you,
the fault is yours. Carry peaceable minds, and you may have comfort by this
variety. Now the God of peace give you peaceable minds, and turn it to your
everlasting comfort.

FINIS.

