A REMEDY AGAINST SORROW AND FEAR, delivered in a funeral Sermon,

BY RICHARD HOOKER, SOMEtimes fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

AC: OX
printer's or publisher's device

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes
dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1612.

JOHN. 14. 27. Let not your hearts be troubled, nor fear.
THE holy Apostles having gathered themselves together by the special
appointment of Christ, and being in expectation to receive from him such
instructions as they had been accustomed with, were told that which they least
looked for, namely, that the time of his departure out of the world was now
come. Whereupon they fell into consideration first of the manifold benefits
which his absence should bereave them of, and secondly of the sundry evils
which themselves should be subject unto being once bereaved of so gracious a
master and patron. The one consideration overwhelmed their souls with
heaviness, the other with fear. Their Lord and Savior whose words had cast
down their hearts raises them presently again with chosen sentences of sweet
encouragement. My dear, it is for your own sakes that I leave the world. I
know the affections of your hearts are tender, but if your love were directed
with that advised and staide judgment which should be in you, my speech of
leaving the world and going unto my father would not a little augment your
joy. Desolate and comfortless I will not leave you, in spirit I am with you
to the worlds end, whether I be present or absent nothing shall ever take you
out of these hands, my going is to take possession of that in your names which
is not only for me but also for you prepared, where I am, you shall be. In the
mean while My peace I give, not as the world gives, give I unto you, Let not
your hearts be troubled, nor fear. The former part of which sentence having
otherwhere already been spoken of, this unacceptable occasion to open the
latter part thereof here I did not look for. But so God disposes the ways of
men. Him I heartily beseech that the thing which he has thus ordered by his
providence, may through his gracious goodness turn unto your comfort.

Our nature coveteth preservation from things hurtful. Hurtful things being
present do breed heavines, being future do cause fear. Our Savior to abate
the one speaks thus unto his disciples, Let not your hearts be troubled, and
to moderate the other, adds sear not. Grief and heaviness in the presents
of sensible evils cannot but trouble the minds of men. It may therefore seem
that Christ required a thing impossible. Be not troubled? Why, how could they
choose? But we must note this being natural and therefore simply not
reprouable, is in us good or bad according to the causes for which we are
grieved, or the measure of our grief. It is not my meaning to speak so
largely of this affection as to go over all particulers whereby men do one way
or other offend in it, but to teach it so far only as it may cause the very
Apostles equals to swarne. Our grief and heavines therefore is reproueable
sometime in respect of the cause from whence, sometime in regard of the measure
whereunto it grows.

When Christ the life of the world was led unto cruel death, there followed a
number of people and women, which women bewailed much his heavy case. It was
natural compassion which caused them, where they saw undeserved miseries,
there to pour forth unrestrained tears. Nor was this reproved. But in such
readiness to lament where they less needed, their blindness in not discerning
that for which they ought much rather to have mourned, this our Savior a little
touches putting them in mind that the tears which were wasted for him might
better have been spent upon themselves. Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for
me, weep for your selves and for your children. It is not as the Stoickes have
imagined, a thing unseemly for a wise man to be touched with grief of mind,
but to be sorrowful when we least should, and where we should lament there to
laugh, this argues our small wisdom. Again, when the Prophet David
confesses thus of him self, I grieved to see the great prosperity of
godless men how they flourish and go untouched. Psalm. 73. Himself hereby
opens both our common and his peculiar imperfection, whom this cause should
not have made so pensive. To grieve at this is to grieve where we should not,
because this grief does rise from error. We err when we grieve at wicked
men's impunitie and prosperity, because their estate being rightly discerned
they neither prosper nor go unpunished. It may seem a paradox, it is a truth,
that no wicked man's estate is prosperous, fortunate, or happy. For what
though they bless themselves and think their happiness great? Have not
frantic persons many times a great opinion of their own wisdom? It may be
that such as they think themselves, others also do account them. But what
others? Surely such as themselves are. Truth and reason discerns far
otherwise of them. Unto whom the Jews wish all prosperity, unto them the
phrase of their speech is to wish peace. Seeing then the name of peace
contains in it al parts of true happiness, when the Prophet says plainly
that the wicked have no peace, how can we think them to have any part of
other then vainly imagined felicity? What wise man did ever account fools
happy? If wicked men were wise they would cease to be wicked. Their iniquity
therefore proving their folly, how can we stand in doubt of their misery?
They abound in those things which all men desire. A poor happiness to have
good things in possession, A man to who^ God has given riches and treasures
and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all that it desires,
but yet God gives him not the power to eat thereof: such a felicity Solomon
esteems but as a vanity, a thing of nothing. Eccl. 6. ver. 2.
If such things add nothing to men's happiness where they are not used, surely
wicked men that use the^ ill the more they have, the more wretched. Of their
prosperity therefore we see what we are to think. Touching their impunitie
the same is likewise but supposed. They are oftener plagued then we are aware
of. The panges they feel are not always written in their foreheads. Though
wickedness be sugar in their mouths, and wantonness as oil to make them
look with cheerful countenance, nevertheles if their hearts were disclosed,
perhaps their glittering estate would not greatly be envied. The voices that
have broken out from some of the^, O that God had given me a heart senseles like
the flint in the rocks of stone, which as it can taste no pleasure so it
feels no woe, these and the like speeches are surely tokens of the curse
which Zophar in the book of Job powers upon the head of the impious man, He
shall suck the gale of Asps, and the Vipers tongue shall sley him. If this
seem light because it is secret, shall we think they go unpunished because no
apparent plague is presently seen upon them? The judgments of God do not
always follow crimes as Thunder does Lightning, but sometimes the space of
many ages coming between. When the sun has shined fair the space of six
days upon their Tabernacle, we know not what clouds the seventh may bring.
And when their punishment does come let them make their account in the
greatness of their sufferings to pay the interest of that respect which has
been given them. Or if they chance to escape clearly in this world which they
seldom do, in the day when the heavens shall shrivell as a scrole and the
mountains move as frighted men out of their places, what Cave shall receive
them? what mountain or rock shall they get by entreaty to fall upon them?
What court to hide them from that wrath which they shall be neither able to abide
nor to avoid? No man's misery therefore being greater then theirs whose impiety
is most fortunate; much more cause there is for them to bewail their own
infelicitie, then for others to be troubled with their prosperous and happy
estate, as if the hand of the Almighty did not or would not touch the^. For
these causes and the like unto these therefore be not troubled.

Now though the cause of our heaviness be just, yet may not our affections
herein be yielded unto with too much indulgencie and favor. The grief of
compassion whereby we are touched with the feeling of other men's woes is of all
other least dangerous. Yet this is a let unto sundry duties, by this we are to
spare sometimes where we ought to strike. The grief which our own sufferings
do bring, what temptations have not risen from it? What great advantage Satan
has taken even by the godly grief of hearty contrition for sins committed
against God the near approaching of so many afflicted souls whom the
conscience of sin has brought unto the very brink of extreme despair does
but too abundantly show. These things wheresoever they fall cannot but trouble
and molest the mind. Whether we be therefore moved vainly with that which
seems hurtful and is not: or have just cause of grief being pressed indeed
with those things which are grievous, our Saviors lesson is, touching the one,
be not troubled, nor overtroubled for the other. For though to have no feeling
of that which merely concerns us were stupiditie, nevertheless seeing that
as the Author of our Salvation was himself consecrated by affliction, so the
way which we are to follow him by, is not shrewed with rushes but set with
thorns, be it never so hard to learn, we must learn to suffer with patience
even that which seems almost impossible to be suffered, that in the hour
when God shall call us unto our trial and turn this honey of of peace and
pleasure wherewith we swell in that gall and bitterness which flesh does
shrink to taste of, nothing may cause us in the troubles of our souls to
storm and grudge and repine at God, but every heart be enabled with divinely
inspired courage to inculcate unto it self Be not troubled, and in those last
and greatest conflicts to remember it that nothing may be so sharp and bitter
to be suffered but that still we our selves may give our selves this
encouragement, Even learn also patience, o my soul.

Naming patience I name that virtue which only has power to stay our souls
from being over excessiuely troubled: a virtue wherein if ever any, surely that
soul had good experience which extremity of pains having chased out of the
Tabernacle of this flesh, Angels, I nothing doubt; have carried into the bosom
of her father Abraham. The death of the Saints of God is precious in his sight.
And shall it seem unto us superfluous at such times as these are to hear in
what manner they have ended their lives? The Lord himself has not disdained
so exactly to register in the book of life after what sort his servants have
closed up their days on earth, that he descends even to their very meanest
actions, what meat they have longed for in their sickness, what they have
spoken unto their children, kinsfolk, and friends, where they have willed
their dead Carkases to be laid, how they have framed their wills and
testaments, yea the very turning of their faces to this side or that, the
setting of their eyes, the degrees whereby their natural heat has departed
from them, their cries, their groans, their pantings, breathings, and last
gaspings, he has most solemnly commended unto the memory of all generations.
The care of the living both to live and to die well must needs be somewhat
increased when they know that their departure shall not be folded up in silence
but the ears of many be made acquainted with it. Again when they hear how
merciful God has dealt with others in the hour of their last need, besides
the praise which they give to God, and the joy which they have or should have
by reason of their fellowship and communion of Saints, is nor their hope also
much confirmed against the day of their own dissolution? Finally the sound of
these things does not so pass the ears of them that are most loose and
desolute of life, but it causes them sometime or other to wish in their
hearts, O that we might die the death of the righteous and that our end might
be like his. Howbeit because to spend herein many words would be to strike
even as many wounds into their minds whom I rather wish to comfort, therefore
concerning this virtuous Gentlewoman, only this little I speak, and that of
knowledge, She lived a Dove, and died a Lamb. And if amongst so many virtues,
hearty devotion toward God, toward poverty tender compassion, motherly
affection toward servants, toward friends even serviceable kindness, mild
behavior, and harmless meaning toward all; if where so many virtues were
eminent, any be worthy of special mention, I wish her dearest friends of that
sex to be her nearest followers in two things. Silence, saving only where
duty did exact speech, and Patience even then when extremity of pains did
enforce grief. Blessed are they which die in the Lord. And concerning the dead
which are blessed let not the hearts of any living be overcharged, with grief
overtroubled.

Touching the latter affection of fear which respects evils to come, as the
other which we have spoken of does present evils; first in the nature thereof
it is plain that we are not of every future evil afraid. Perceive we not how
they whose tenderness shrinketh at the least raze of a needles point, do kiss
the sword that pearceth their souls quite through? If every evil did cause
fear, sin, because it is sin, would be feared; whereas properly sin is
not feared as sin, but only as having some kind of harm annexed. To teach men
to avoid sin it had been sufficient for the Apostle to say, fly it. But to
make them afraid of committing sin, because the naming of sin sufficed not,
therefore he adds further that it is as a Serpent which stingeth the soul.
Again, be it that some nociue or hurtful thing be toward us* must fear of
necessity follow hereupon? Not except that hurtful things do threaten us
either with destruction or vexation, and that such as we have neither a
conceit of ability to resist, nor of utter impossibility to avoid. That which
which we know our selves able to withstand we fear not, add that which we know
we are unable to defer or deminish, or any way avoid we cease to fear, we
give our selves over to bear and sustain it. The evil therefore which is
feared must be in our persuasion unable to be resisted when it comes, yet
not utterly impossible for a time in whole or in part to be shunned. Neither
do we much fear such evils, except they be imminent and nere at hand, nor if
they be near, except we have an opinion that they be so. When we have once
conceived an opinion, or apprehended an imagination of such evils pressed and
ready to invade us, because they are hurtful unto our nature, we feel in our
selves a kind of abhorring; because they are though near yet not present our
nature seeks forthwith how to shift and provide for it self; because they
are evils which cannot be resisted, therefore she does not provide to
withstand but to shun and avoid. Hence it is that in extreme fear the mother
of life co^tracting her self avoiding as much as may be the reach of evil, and
drawing the heat together with the spirits of the body to her, leaves the
outward parts cold, pale weak, feeble, unapt to perform the functions of
life, as we see in the fear of Balthazar king of Babell. By this it appears
that fear is nothing else but a perturbation of the mind through an opinion of
some imminent evil threatening the destruction or great annoyance of our
nature, which to shun it does contract and deiect it self.

Now because not in this place only but otherwhere often we hear it repeated
Fear not, it is by some made a long question, whether a man may fear
destruction or vexation without sinning. First, the reproof wherewith Christ
checketh his Disciples more then once, O men of little faith wherefore are ye
afraid? Secondly the punishment threatened in the 21. of Revelations, to wit,
the lake, and fire, and brimstone, not only to murderers, unclean persons,
sorcerers, Idolators, liars, but also to the fearful and faintharted, this
seemeih to argue that fearfulness cannot but be sin. On the contrary side we
see that he which never felt motion unto sin had of this affection more then a
slight feeling. How clear is the evidence of the spirit that in the days of
his flesh he offered up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears
unto him that was able to save him from death, and was also heard in that
which he feared? Heb. 5. 7. Whereupon it follows that fear in it self is a
thing not sinful. For is not fear a thing natural and for men's preservation
necessary, implanted in us by the provident and most gracious giver of all
good things, to the end that we might not run headlong upon those mischiefs
wherewith we are not able to encounter, but use the remedy of shunning those
evils which we have not ability to withstand? Let that people therefore which
receive a benefit by the length of their princes days, that Father or Mother
that reioiceth to see the offspring of their flesh grow like green and
pleasant plants, let those children that would have their parents, those men
that would gladly have their friends and bretherens days Prolonged on earth,
(as there is no natural hearted man but gladly would,) let them bless the
Father of lights, as in other things, so even in this that he has given man a
fearful heart and settled naturally that affection in him which is a
preservation against so many ways of death. Fear then in it self being mere
nature cannot in it self be sin, which sin is not nature, but thereof an
accessory deprivation.

But in the matter of fear we may sin, and do, two ways. If any man's danger
be great, theirs greatest that have put the fear of danger fartherst from
them. Is there any estate more fearful then that Babilonians Strumpets, that
sits upon the tops of the seven hills glorying and vaunting, I am a Queen,
etc. Revel. 18. 7. How much bettter and happier they whose estate has been
always as his who speaks after this sort of himself, Lord from my youth
have I borne thy yoke. They which sit at continual ease, and are settled in the
leeze of their security, look upon them, view their countenance, their
speech, their gesture, their deeds; Put them in fear, O God, says the
Prophet, that so they may know the^selus to be but men, worms of the earth,
dust and ashes, frail corruptible, feeble things. To shake of security
therefore and to breed fear in the hearts of mortal men, so many admonitions
are used concerning the power of evils which beset them, so many threatenings of
calamities, so many discriptions of things threatened, and those so lively, to
the end they may leave behind the a deep impression of such as has force to
keep the heart continually waking. All which do show that we are, to stand in
fear of nothing more, then the extremity of not fearing.

When fear has delivered us from that pit wherein they are sunk that have
put far from them the evil day; that have made a league with death and have
said, Tush we shall feel no harm; it stands us upon to take heed it cast
us not into that wherein souls destitute of all hope are plunged. For our
direction, to avoid as much as may be both extremities, that we may know as a
ship master by his card, how far we are wide, either on the oneside or on the
other; we must note that in a Christian man there is first nature, secondly
corruption, perverting nature; thirdly grace correcting, and amending
corruption. In fear al these have their several operations. Nature teaches
simply, to wish preservation and avoidance of things dreadful, for which
cause our Savior himself prays, and that often; Father if it be possible.
In which cases corrupt natures suggestions are for the safety of temporal life
not to stick at things excluding from eternal: wherein how far even the
best may be led the chiefest Apostles frailty teaches. Were it not therefore
for such cogitations as on the contrary side grace and faith ministers, such
as that of Job, Though God kill me, that of Paul, Scio, cui credidi, I know
him on whom I do rely small evils would soon be able, to overwhelme even the
best of us. A wise man, says Solomon, does see a plague coming and hides
himself. It is nature which teaches a wise man, in fear to hide himself,
but grace and faith does teach him where. Fools care not, where they hide their
heads. But where shall a wise man hide himself when he fears a plague
coming. Where should the frighted child hide his head, but in the bosom of
his loving father? Where a Christian, but under the shadow of the wings of
Christ his Savior. Come my people, says God, in the Prophet Enter into thy
Chamber, hide thy self, etc. Esaias. 26. But because we are in danger like
chased birds, like Doves that seek and cannot see the resting holes, that are
right before them, therefore our Savior gives his Disciples these
encouragements before hand, that fear might never so amaze them, but that
always they might remember, that whatsoever evils at any time, did beset them,
to him they should still repair, for comfort, council, and succor. For their
assurance where of his Peace he gave them, his peace he left unto them, not
such peace as the world offers, by whom his name is never so much pretended
as when deepest treachery is meant, but Peace which passes all understanding,
peace that brings with it all happiness, peace that continues for ever and
ever with them that have it. This Peace God the Father grant, for his sons
sake, unto whom with the holy Ghost, three persons, one eternal, and
everliving God be all honor, glory, and praise, now, and for ever; Amen.

FINIS.

