ACHILLES SHIELD. Translated as the other seven Books of Homer, out of his
eighteenth book of Iliades.

By George Chapman Gent.

LONDON Imprinted by John Windet, and are to be sold at Paul's Wharfe, at the
sign of the Cross Keys. 1598.

To the most honored Earl, Earl Marshall.
SPondanus, one of the most desertfull Commentars of Homer, calls all sorts of
all men learned to be judicial beholders of this more then Artificial and no
less then Divine Rapture; then which nothing can be imagined more full of
soul and human extraction: for what is here prefigurde by our miraculous
Artist, but the universal world, which being so spacious and almost
unmeasurable, one circlet of a Shield representes and imbraceth? In it heaven
turns, the stars shine, the earth is enflowred, the sea swelles and rages,
Cities are built: one in the happiness and sweetness of peace, the other in
open war and the terrors of ambush etc. And all these so lively proposde, as
not without reason many in times past have believed, that all these things
have in them a kind of voluntary motion: even as those Tripods of Vulcan, and
that Dedalian Venus (...); nor can I be resolved that their opinions be
sufficiently refuted by Aristonicus, for so are all things here described, by
our diuinest Poet, as if they consisted not of hard and solid metals, but of a
truly, living, and moving soul: The ground of his invention he shows out of
Eustathius: intending by the Orbiguitie of the Shield, the roundnesse of the
world: by the four mettalles, the four elements: viz. by gold fire: by
brass earth for the hardness: by Tin water, for the softnes, and inclination
to fluxure: by silver, Air, for the grosnes and obscurity of the metal
before it be refind. That which he calls (...), he understands the Zodiac,
which is said to be triple for the latitude it co^tains, and shining by reason
of the perpetual course of the Sun made in that circle, by (...) the Axletree,
about which heaven has his motion etc. Nor do I deny (says Spondanus) Eneas
arms to be forged, with an exceeding height of wit by Virgil, but comparde with
these of Homer, they are nothing. And this is it (most honorde) that makes me
thus suddenly translate this Shield of Achilles, for since my publication of
the other seven books, comparison has been made between Virgill and Homer:
who can be comparde in nothing with more decysall and cutting of all argument,
then in these two Shieldes; and whosoever shall read Homer thoroughly and
worthily, will know the question comes from a superficial and too unripe a
reader: for Homers Poems were writ from a free fury, an absolute and full
soul: Virgils out of a courtly, laborious, and altogether imitatorie spirit:
not a Simile he has but is Homers: not an invention, person, or disposition,
but is wholly or originally built upon Homericall foundations, and in many
places has the very words Homer uses: besides, where Virgill has had no
more plentiful and liberal a wit, then to frame twelve imperfect books of
the troubles and travails of Aeneas: Homer has of as little subject finished
eight and forty perfect: and that the triuiall objection may be answered, that
not the number of books, but the nature and excellence of the work commends
it: All Homers books are such as have been presidents ever since of all
sorts of Poems: imitating none, nor ever worthily imitated of any: yet would I
not be thought so ill created as to be a malicious detracter of so admired a
Poet as Virgill, but a true iustifier of Homer, who must not be read for a few
lines with leaves turned over caprichiously in dismembered fractions, but
throughout; the whole drift, weight and height of his works set before the
apprehsiue eyes of his judge. The majesty he enthrones and the spirit he
infuseth into the scope of his work so far outshining Virgill, that his
skirmishes are but mere scramblings of boys to Homers; the silken body of
Virgils muse curiously arest in guilt and embrodered silver, but Homers in
plain massy and unvalued gold: not only all learning, government, and
wisdom being deduc't as from a bottomless fountain from him; but all wit,
elegancie, disposition and judgment. (...) etc. Homer (says Plato) was the
Prince and master of all praises and virtues: the Emperor of wise men: an
host of men against any deprauer in any principle he held. All the ancient and
lately learned have had him in equal estimation. And for any to be now
contrarily affected, it must needs proceed from a mere want onnesse of
wit: an Idle unthrifty spirit: wilful because they may choose whether they
will think otherwise or not, and have power and fortune enough to live like
true men without truth, or else they must presume of puritanicall inspiration,
to have that with delicacie and squemishnes, which others with as good means,
ten times more time, and ten thousand times more labor could never conceive.
But some will convey their imperfections under his Greek Shield, and from
thence bestow bitter arrows against the traduction, affirming their want of
admiration grows from defect of our language, not able to express the coppie
and elegancie of the original: but this easy and traditionall pretext hides
them not enough: for how full of height and roundnesse soever Greek be above
English, yet is there no depth of conconceipt triumphing in it, but as in a
mere admirer it may be imagined; so in a sufficient translator it may be
expressed. And Homer that has his chief holiness of estimation, for matter and
instruction, would scorn to have his supreme worthiness glosing in his
courtshippe and privilege of tongue. And if Italian, French and Spanish, have
not made it dainty, nor thought it any presumption to turn him into their
languages, but a fit and honorable labor and (in respect of their countries
profit and their poesies credit) ^^^ost necessary, what curious, proud, and
poor shamefastness should let an English muse to traduce him, when the
language she works withal is more conformable, fluent, and expressiue; which
I would your Lordship would command me to prove against all our whippers of
their own complement in their countries dialect.

O what peevish ingratitude and most unreasonable scorn of our selves we
commit, to be so extrauagant and forreignely witted, to honor and imitate
that in a strange tongue, which we condemn and contemn in our native? for if
the substance of the Poets will be expressed and his sentence and sense rendered
with truth and elocution, he that takes judicial pleasure in him in Greek,
cannot bear so rough a browe to him in English, to entombe his acceptance in
austeritie.

But thou soule-blind Scalliger, that never had any thing but place, time and
terms, to paint thy proficiencie in learning, nor ever writest any thing of
thine own impotent brain, but thy only impalsied diminution of Homer (which
I may swear was the absolute inspiration of thine own ridiculous Genius)
never did thou more palpably damn thy drossy spirit in all thy all
countries-exploded filcheries, which are so grossly illiterate, that no man
will vouchsafe their refutation, then in thy senseless reprehensions of Homer;
whose spirit flew as much above thy groueling capacity, as heaven moves above
Barathrum: but as none will vouchsafe repetition nor answer of thy other
unmanly fooleries: no more will I of these, my Epistle being too tedious to
your Lo: besides, and no man's judgment serving better, (if your high affairs
could admit their diligent perusal) then your Lo: to refute and reject him.
But alas Homer is not now to be lift up by my weak arm, more then he is now
deprest by more feeble oppositions, if any feel not their conceiptes so
ravished with the eminent beauties of his ascentiall muse, as the greatest men
of all sorts and of all ages have been. Their most modest course is, (unless
they will be powerfully insolent) to ascribe the defect to their apprehension,
because they read him but slightly, not in his surmised frugalitie of object,
that really and most feastfully powers out himself in right divine occasion.
But the chief and unanswerable mean to his general and just acceptance, must
be your Lo. high and of all men expected president, without which he must like
a poor snayle, pull in his English horns, that out of all other languages (in
regard of the countries affection, and royalty of his Patrones) has appeard
like an Angel from a cloud, or the world out of Chaos. When no language can
make comparison of him with ours if he be worthily converted; wherein before he
should have been borne so lame and defective, as the French midwife has
brought him forth, he had never made question how your Lo. would accept him:
and yet have two of their Kings, embraced him, as a wealthy ornament to their
studies, and the main battle of their armies.

If then your bounty would do me but the grace to confer my unhappy labors
with theirs so successful and commended (your judgment serving you much
better then your leisure and yet your leisure in things honorable being to
be enforced by your judgment) no malicious and dishonorable whisperer, that
comes armed with an army of authority and state against harmeles and armeles
virtue, could wrest your wonted impression so much from it self, to reject
(with imitation of tiranous contempt any affection so zealous and able in this
kind to honor your estate as mine. Only kings and princes have been Homers
Patrones, amongst whom Ptolomie would say, he that had slight hands to
entertayne Homer, had as slight brains to rule his common wealth. And an
usual severity he used, but a most rational (how precise and ridiculous
soever it may seem to men made of ridiculous matter) that in reverence of the
piety and perfect humanity he taught; whosoever writ or committed any proud
detraction against Homer (as even so much a man wanted not his malicious
deprauers) he put him with torments to extremest death. O high and magically
raised prospect, from whence a true eye may see means to the absolute
redress, or much to be wished extenuation, of all the unmanly degeneracies now
tyranysing amongst us: for if that which teaches happiness and has
vnpainefull corosiues in it, (being entertained and observed) to eat out the
heart of that raging ulcer, which like a Lernean Fen of corruption furnaceth the
universal sighs and complaints, of this transposed world; were seriously,
and as with armed garrisons defended and hartned; that which engenders and
disperseth, that wilful pestilence, would be purged and extirpate: but that
which teaches, being ouerturned, that which is taught is consequently subject
to euersion: and if the honor, happiness and preservation of true humanity
consist in observing the laws fit for man's dignity; and that the elaborate
prescription of those laws must of necessity be authorized, favored and
defended before any observation can succeed: is it unreasonable, to punish the
contempt of that moving prescription with one man's death, when at the heels of
it follows common neglect of observation, and in the neck of it, an
universal ruin? This my Lord I enforce only to interrupt in others that may
read this unsavory stuff, the too open mouthd damnation of royal and
virtuous Ptolomies severity. For to digest, transform and sweat a man's soul
into rules and attractions to society; such as are fashiond and temperd with
her exact and long laborde contention of study; in which she tosseth with her
impertiall discourse before her, all cause of fantastical objections and
reproves; and without which she were as wise as the greatest number of
detractors that shall presume to censure her; and yet by their flash and
insolent castigations to be slighted and turnde over their miserably vain
tongues in an instant; is an injury worthy no less penalty then Ptolomie
inflicted. To take away the heels of which running profanation. I hope your
Lo. honorable countenance will be as the Unicorns horn, to lead the way to
English Homers yet poisoned fountain: for till that favor be vouchsafed, the
herd will never drink, since the venomous galls of some of their fellows
have infected it, whom alas I pity. Thus confidently affirming your name and
dignities shall never be more honored in a poor book then in English Homer,
I cease to afflict your Lordshippe with my tedious dedicatories, and to still
sacred Homers spirit through a language so fit and so fauourles; humbly
presenting your Achilleian virtues with Achilles Shield; wishing as it is much
more admirable and divine, so it were as many times more rich, then the Shield
the Cardinal pawnd at Anwerp.

By him that wishes all the degrees of judgment, and honor, to attend your
deserts to the highest, George Chapman.

To the understander.
YOu are not every body, to you (as to one of my very few friends) I may be
bold to utter my mind, nor is it more empaire to an honest and absolute man's
sufficiency to have few friends, then to an Homericall Poem to have few
commenders; for neither do common dispositions keep fit or plausible
consort with judicial and simple honesty, nor are idle capacities
comprehensible of an elaborate Poem. My Epistle dedicatorie before my seven
books, is accounted dark and too much labored: for the darkness there is
nothing good or bad, hard or soft, dark or perspicuous but in respect, and in
respect of men's light, slight, or envious perusalles (to whose loose
capacities any work worthily composde is knit with a riddle) and that the
style is material flowing, and not rank, it may perhaps seem dark, to rank
riders or readers, that have no more souls then burbolts: but to your
comprehension and in it self, I know it is not. For the affected labor
bestowed in it, I protest two morninges both ended it and the Readers Epistle:
but the truth is, my desire and strange disposition in all things I write, is
to set down uncommon, and most profitable coherents for the time: yet further
removed from abhorde affectation, then from the most popular and cold
disgestion. And I ever imagine that as Italian and French Poems to our studious
linguistes, win much of their discountryed affection, as well because the
understanding of foreign tongues is sweet to their apprehension, as that the
matter and invention is pleasing, so my far fetched, and as it were beyond sea
manner of writing, if they would take as much pains for their poor countrymen
as for a proud stranger when they once understand it, should be much more
gracious to their choice conceiptes, then a discourse that falls naked before
them, and has nothing but what mixeth it self with ordinary table talk. For
my variety of new words, I have none Inckepot I am sure you know, but such as
I give pasport with such authority, so significant and not ill sounding, that
if my country language were an usurer, or a man of this age speaking it, he
would thank me for enriching him: Why alas will my young master the reader
affect nothing common, and yet like nothing extraordinary? Swaggering is a new
word amongst them, and round headed custom gives it privilege with much
imitation, being created as it were by a natural Prosopopeia without
etimologie or deriuation; and why may not an elegancie authentically derived,
and as I may say of the upper house, be entertained as well in their lower
consultation with authority of Art, as their own forgeries lickt up by
nature? All tongues have inricht themselves from their original (only the
Hebrew and Greek which are not spoken amongst us) with good neighbourly
borrowing, and as with infusion of fresh air, and nourishment of new blood in
their still growing bodies, and why may not ours? Chaucer (by whom we will
needs authorize our true english) had more new words for his time then any
man needs to devise now. And therefore for current wits to cry from standing
brains, like a brood of Frogs from a ditch, to have the ceaselesse flowing
river of our tongue turnde into their Frogpoole, is a song far from their
arrogation of sweetness, and a sin would soon bring the plague of barbarism
amongst us; which in faith needs not be hastened with defenses of his ignorant
furtherers, since it comes with mealemouth'd toleration too sauagely upon us.
To be short; since I had the reward of my labors in their consummation, and
the chief pleasure of them in mine own profit, no young preiudicate or
castigatorie brain has reason to think I stand trembling under the ayry
stroke of his feuerie censure, or that I did ever expect any flowing applause
from his dry fingers; but the satisfaction and delight that might probably
redound to every true lover of virtue I set in the seat of mine own profit
and contentment; and if there be any one in whom this success is enflowred, a
few sprigges of it shall be my garland. Since then this never equald Poet is
to be understood, and so full of government and direction to all estates;
stern anger and the affrights of war, bearing the main face of his subject;
soldiers shall never spend their idle hours more profitablie, then with his
studious and industrious perusal; in whose honors his deserts are infinite:
Counselors have never better oracles then his lines: fathers have no morales
so profitable for their children, as his counsels: nor shall they ever give
them more honored injunctions, then to learn Homer without book, that being
continually conversant in him, his height may descend to their capacities, and
his substance prove their worthiest riches. Husbands, wives, lovers, friends,
and allies, having in him mirrors for all their duties; all sorts of which
concourse and society in other more happy ages, have in steed of sonnets and
lascivious ballades, sung his Iliades. Let the length of the verse never
discourage your endeavors: for talk our quidditicall Italianistes of what
proportion soever their strooting lips affect; unless it be in these
coopplets, into which I have hastily translated this Shield, they shall never
do Homer so much right, in any octaues, canzons, canzonets, or with whatsoever
fustian Epigraphes they shall entitle their measures. Only the extreme false
printing troubles my conscience, for fear of your deserved discouragement in
the empaire of our Poets sweetness; whose general divinity of spirit, clad in
my willing labors (envious of none nor detracting any) I commit to your good
nature and solid capacity.

ACHILLES SHJELD.
BRight footed Thetis did the Sphere aspire,
(Amongst the Immortals) of the God of fire,
Starrie, incorruptible, and had frame
Of ruddie brass, right shaped by the lame.
She found him at his swelling bellows sweating
And twenty Tripods seriously beating,
To stand and beautify his royal hall,
For chaires of honor, round about the wall,
And to the feet he fixed of every one
Wheels of man-making gold to run alone
To the Gods Temples; to the which they were
Religious ornaments, when standing there
Till sacrifice were done, they would retire
To Vulcans house, which all eyes did admire:
Yet the Dedalean handles to hold by
Were vnimposde, which strait he did apply.
These while he fashiond with miraculous Art,
The fair white-footed dame appearde apart
To Charis with the rich-attyred head,
Whose heavenly beauties strowd the nuptial bed
Of that illustrate Smith: she took her hand
And entertained her with this kind demand,
What makes the Goddess with the ample train,
(Reverend and friendly Thetis) entertain
Conceit to honor us with her repair,
That never yet was kind in that affair?
But enter further, that so wished a guest
May be received with hospitable feast.
Thus led she Thetis to a chair of state,
Rich and exceedingly elaborate,
And set a footstool at her silver feet;
Then called her famous Smith; Vulcan my sweet,
Thetis in some use needs thy fiery hand:
He answered, Thetis has a strong command
Of all my powers; who gave my life defense,
Cast by my mothers wilful impudence
Out of Olimpus; who would have obscured
My native lamenes; then had I endurde
Vnhelped griefs, if on her shining breast,
Hospitious Thetis had not let me rest,
And bright Eurinome, my Guardian,
Fair daughter of the laboring Ocean,
With whom nine years I wrought up diverse things
Buttons and bracelets, whistles, chains, and rings,
In concluse of a Cave; and over us,
The swelling waves of old Oceanus,
With fomie murmr flowd, and not a God,
Nor any mortal knew my close abode,
But Thetis and divine Eurinome,
Who succord me; and now from gulphy sea
To our steep house has Thetis made ascent,
To whom requital more then competent,
It fits me much my safety should repay;
Charis do thou some sumptuous feast puruay,
Whiles I my ayrie bellows may lay by,
And all my tools of heavenly ferrarie.
Thus from his anuile the huge monster rose,
And with distorted knees he limping goes
To a bright chest, of silver Ore composde,
Where all his wonder-working tools were closde,
And took his sighing bellows from the fire;
Then with a sponge, his breast with hayres like wire,
His brawned neck, his hard hands and his face
He clensde; put on his robe, assumde his mace,
And halted forth, and on his steps attended
Handmaides of gold that with strong paces wended,
Like dames in flower of life; in whom were minds
Furnished with wisdom, knowing all the kinds
Of the Gods powers; from whom did voices fly,
In whom were strengthes, and motions voluntary.
These at his elbow ever ministered:
And these (drawing after him his legs) he led
To Thetis seated in a shining throne,
Whose hand he shook and asked this question.
What wished occasion brings the seas bright Queen
To Vulcans house, that ever yet has been
So great a stranger? show thy reverend will,
Which mine of choice commands me to fulfill,
If in the reach of all mine Art it lie,
Or it be possible to satisfy?
Thetis powrd out this sadreply in tears:
O Vulcan is there any Goddess bears
(Of all the deities that deck the sky)
So much of mortal wretchedness as I,
Whom Jove past all depriues of heavenly peace?
My self of all the blew Nereides,
He has subjected to a mortals bed,
Which I against my will have suffered
To Peleus surnamed Aeacides,
Who in his court lies slain with the disease
Of woeful age; and now with new infortunes
He all my joys to discontents importunes
In giving me a son, chief in renown
Of all Heroes; who has palme-like grown,
Set in a fruitful soil; and when my care
Had nursed him to a form so singular,
I sent him in the Grecians crooke-sternd fleet
To Ilion, with the swiftnes of his feet,
And dreadful strength, that his choice lims indude
To fight against the Trojan fortitude:
And him I never shall receive retirde,
To Peleus court; but while he lives inspirde
With human breath, and sees the Suns clear light.
He must live sad and moodie as the night.
Nor can I cheer him, since his valures price
Resignde by all the Grecians comprimise,
Atrides forced into his fortunes part
For which, Consumption tires upon his heart:
Yet since the Trojans, all the Greeks conclude
Within their forte, the Peers of Greece have sude
With worthynes of gifts and humble prayers,
To win his hand to harten their affairs
Which he denyde: but to appease their harms,
He decked his dear Patroclus in his arms
And sent him with his bands to those debates:
All day they fought before the Scaean gates
And well might have expugnde, by that black light,
The Ilian City, if Appollos spite,
Thirsting the blood of good Menetius sons
Had not in face of all the fight foredone
His faultlesse life; and authord the renown
On Hectors prowess, making the act his own:
Since therefore, to revenge the timelesse death
Of his true friend, my son determines
T'embrue the field; for want whereof he lies
Buried in dust, and drownde in miseries:
Hereat thy knees I sue, that the short date
Prefixed his life by power of envious fate
Thou will with heavenly arms grace and maintain
Since his are lost with his Patroclus slain.
He answered, be assurde, nor let the care
Of these desires thy firmest hopes empaire:
Would God as far from lamentable death,
When heavy fates shall see it with his breath,
I could reserve him, as vnequald arms,
Shall be found near t'auert all instant harms,
Such arms as all worlds shall for art admire,
That by their eyes their excellence aspire.
This said, the smith did to his bellows go,
Set them to fire, and made his Cyclops blow:
Full twenty pair breathd through his furnace holes
All sorts of blastes t'enflame his temperd coals,
Now blusterd hard, and now did contrarise,
As Vulcan would, and as his exercise
Might with perfection serve the dames desire.
Hard brass and tin he cast into the fire,
High-prised gold and silver, and did set
Within the stock, an anuile bright and great:
His massy hammer then his right hand held,
His other hand his gaspingtongues compeld.
And first he forgde a huge and solid Shield,
(...) may (...) var^ant artship yield,
(...) three ambitious circles cast,
(...) and refulgent; and without he placed
A silver handle; fiuefold proof it was,
And in it many things with special grace,
And passing arteficiall pomp were graven;
In it was earthes green globe, the sea and heaven,
Th'vnwearied Sun; the Moon exactly round,
And all the stars with which the sky is crowned,
The Pleyades, the Hyads, and the force
Of great Orion; and the Bear, whose course
Turns her about his Sphere observing him
Surnam'de the Chariot, and does never swim
Upon the vnmeasur'de Oceans marble face,
Of all the flames that heavens blew veil enchace.
In it two beauteous Cities he did build
Of diverse languag'd men; the one was filled
With sacred nuptialles and with solemn feasts,
And through the streets the fair officious guests,
Lead from their brydall chambers their fair brides
With golden torches burning by their sides.
Hymen's sweet triumphs were abundant there,
Of youths and damzels dancing in a Sphere;
Amongst whom masking flutes and harps were heard,
And all the matrones in their doors appearde,
Admiring their enamored braueries;
Amongst the rest busy contention flies
About a slaughter; and to solemn Court
The Citizens were drawn in thick resort,
Where two contended for a penalty:
The one due satisfaction did deny,
At the others hands for slaughter of his friend,
The other did the contrary defend:
At last by arbitration both desirde,
To have their long and costly suit expirde,
The friends cast sounds confusde on either side,
Whose tumult straight the Herraldes pacifide.
In holy circle and on polisht stones,
The reverend Judges made their sessions,
The voycefull Herralds awful scepters holding,
And their grave doomes on either side unfolding.
In midst two golden talents were proposde
For his rich see by whom should be disclosde
The most applausiue sentence: the other town
Two host besiegde, to have it ouerthrown,
Or in two parts to share the wealthy spoil,
And this must all the Citizens assoyle.
They yield to neither but with close alarm,
To sallies and to ambuscados arm,
Their wives and children on their walls did stand,
With whom and with the old men they were mand.
The other issude; Mars and Pallas went,
Propitious Captaaines to their brave intent.
Both golden did in golden garments shine
Ample and fair, and seemde indeed divine.
The soldiers were in humbler habites decked.
When they had found a valley most select,
To couch their ambush, (at a rivers brinke
Where all their herds had usual place to drink)
There (clad in shining steel) they close did lie,
And set far off two sentinels to spy,
When all their flocks and crooke-hancht herds came near
Which soon succeeded and they followed were
By two poor heardsmen that on bagpipes played,
Doubtless of any ambuscados laid:
The sentinels gave word, and in they flew,
Took herds and flocks, and both their keepers slew.
The enemy hearing such a strange uproar
About their cattle; being set before
In solemn counsel, instantly took horse,
Pursude and at the flood, with mutual force,
The conflict joined; betwixt them flew debate,
Disorderd Tumult, and exitial Fate;
Here was one taken with wounds bleeding green,
And here one pale, and yielding, no wound seen:
Another slain; drawn by the strengthles heels
From the red slaughter of the ruthles steeles,
And he that slew him on his shoulders wearing
His bloodieweedes as trophies of his daring.
Like men alive they did converse in fight,
And tyrde on death with mutual appetite.
He carude besides a soft and fruitful field,
Broad and thrice new tild in that heavenly shield,
Where many plowmen turned up here and there
The earth in furrows, and their sovereign near
They strived to work; and every furrow ended
A bowl of sweetest wine he still extended
To him that first had done; then turnde they hand,
Desirous to dispatch that piece of land,
Deep and new earde; black grew the plow with mould
Which looked like blackish earth though forgd of gold.
And this he did with miracle adorn.
Then made he grow a field of high-sprung corn,
In which did reapers sharpened sickles plie:
Others, their handfulles fallen confusedly
Laid on the ridge together; others bound
Their gatherd handfulles to sheaues hard and round
Three binders were appointed for the place,
And at their heels did children gleane apace,
Whole armefulles to the binders ministering.
Amongst all these all silent stood their king,
Upon a balke, his Scepter in his hand,
Glad at his heart to see his yeeldie land.
The herraldes then the harvest feast prepare,
Beneath an Oak far off, and for their fare,
A mighty Ox was slain, and women dressed
Store of white cakes, and mixed the laborers feast.
In it besides a vine ye might behold
Loded with grapes, the leaves were all of gold,
The bunches black and thick did through it grow,
And silver props sustainde them from below:
About the vine an azure dike was wrought,
And about it a hedge of tin he brought.
One path went through it, through the which did pass
The vintagers, when ripe their vintage was.
The virgins then and youths (childishly wise)
For the sweet fruit did painted cups devise,
And in a circle bore them dancing round,
In midst whereof a boy did sweetly sound
His silver harp, and with a piercing voice,
Sung a sweet song; when each youth with his choice
Triumphing over earth, quick daunces treades.
A heard of Oxen thrusting out their heads
And bellowing, from their stalles rushing to feed
Near a swift flood, raging and crowned with reed,
In gold and tin he carved next the vine,
Four golden heardsemen following; heard-dogsni.
Waiting on them; in head of all the heard,
To my admired and soule-loued friend Master of all essential and true
knowledge, M. Harriots.
TO you whose depth of soul measures the height,
And all dimensions of all works of weight,
Reason being ground, structure and ornament,
To all inventions, grave and permanent,
And your clear eyes the Spheres where Reason moves;
This Artizan, this God of rational loves
Blind Homer; in this shield, and in the rest
Of his seven books, which my hard hand has dressed,
In rough integuments I send for censure,
That my long time and labors deep extensure
Spent to conduct him to our envious light,
In your allowance may receive some right
To their endeavors; and take virtuous heart
From your applause, crowned with their own desert.
Such crowns suffice the free and royal mind,
But these subjected hangbyes of our kind,
These children that will never stand alone,
But must be nourisht with corruption,
Which are our bodies; that are traitors borne,
To their own crowns their souls: betrayed to scorn,
To gaudie insolence and ignorance:
By their base fleshes frailties, that must dance,
Profane attendance at their states and birth,
That are mere servants to this servile earth,
These must have other crowns for meedes then merits,
Or sterue themselves, and quench their fiery spirits.
Thus as the soul upon the flesh depends,
Virtue must wait on wealth; we must make friends,
Of the unrighteous Mammon, and our sleights,
Must bear the forms of fools or Parasites.
Rich mine of knowledge, o that my strange muse
Without this bodies nourishment could use,
Her zealous faculties, only t'aspire,
Instructiue light from your whole Sphere of fire:
But woe is me, what zeal or power soever
My free soul has, my body will be never
Able to attend: never shall I enjoy,
The End of my happles birth: never employ
That smotherd fervor that in lothed embers,
Lies swept from light, and no clear hour remembers.
O had your perfect eye Organs to pierce
Into that Chaos whence this stiffled verse
By violence breaks: where Gloweworme like does shine
In nights of sorrow, this hid soul of mine:
And how her genuine forms struggle for birth,
Under the claws of this foul Panther earth.
Then under all those forms you should discern
My love to you, in my desire to learn
Skill and the love of skill do ever kiss.
No band of love so strong as knowledge is:
Which who is he that may not learn of you,
Whom learning does with his lights throne endow?
What learned fields pay not their flowers t'adorne
Your odorous wreathe? compact, put on and worn,
By apt and Adamantine industry,
Proposing still demonstrate verity,
For your great object, far from plodding gain,
Or thirst of glory; when absurd and vain,
Most students in their whole instruction are,
But in traditions mere particular:
Leaning like rotten howses, on out beams,
And with true light fade in themselves like dreams.
True learning has a body absolute,
That in apparent sense it self can suite,
Not hid in ayrie terms as if it were
Like spirits fantastike that put men in fear,
And are but bugs formed in their foul conceits,
Nor made forsale glas'd with sophistique sleights;
But wrought for all times proof, strong to bide prease,
And shiuer ignorants like Hercules,
On their own dunghils; but our formal Clearkes
Blown for profession, spend their souls in sparks,
Fram'de of dismembered parts that make most show,
And like to broken limbs of knowledge go.
When thy true wisdom by thy learning won
Shall honor learning while there shines a Sun;
And thine own name in merit; far above,
Their Timpanies of state that arms of love,
Fortune or blood shall lift to dignity;
Whom though you reverence and your emperie,
Of spirit and soul, be servitude they think
And but a beam of light broke through a chink
To all their watrish splendour: and much more
To the great Sun, and all things they adore,
In staring ignorance: yet your self shall shine
Above all this in knowledge most divine,
And all shall homage to your true-worth owe,
You comprehending all, that all, not you
And when thy writings that now errors Night
Chokes earth with mistes, break forth like eastern light,
Showing to every comprehensiue eye,
High sectious brawles becalmde by unity,
Nature made all transparent, and her heart
Gripte in thy hand, crushing digested Art
In flames vnmeasurde, measurde out of it,
On whose head for her crown thy soul shall sit.
Crowned with Heavens inward brightness showing clear,
What true man is, and how like gnats appear.
O fortune-glossed Pompists, and proud Misers,
That are of Arts such impudent despisers;
Then past anticipating doomes and skornes,
Which for self grace each ignorant subornes,
Their glowing and amazed eyes shall see
How short of thy souls strength my weak words be,
And that I do not like our Poets prefer
For profit, praise and keep a squeaking stir
With called on muses to vnchilde their brains
Of wind and vapor: lying still in pains,
Of worthy issue; but as one professed
In naught but truths dear love the souls true rest.
Continue then your sweet judicial kindness,
To your true friend, that though this lump of blindness,
This skornefull, this despisde, inuerted world,
Whose head is furie-like with Adders curlde,
And all her bulk a poisoned Porcupine,
Her stings and quilles darting at worthes divine,
Keep under my estate with all contempt,
And make me live even from my self exempt,
Yet if you see some gleames of wrestling fire,
Break from my spirits oppression, showing desire
To become worthy to partake your skill,
(Since virtues first and chief step is to will)
Comfort me with it and prove you affect me,
Though all the rotten spawne of earth reject me.
For though I now consume in poesy,
Yet Homer being my root I can not die.
But lest to use all Poesy in the sight,
Of grave philosophy show brains too light
To comprehend her depth of mystery,
I vow it is only strong necessity
Gouernes my pains herein, which yet may use
A man's whole life without the least abuse.
And though to rhyme and give a verse smooth feet,
Uttering to vulgar pallattes passions sweet
Chance often in such weak capriccious spirits,
As in naught else have tolerable merits,
Yet where high Poesies native habit shines,
From whose reflections flow eternal lines:
Philosophy retirde to darkest caves
She can discover: and the proud worlds braues
Answer in any thing but impudence.
With circle of her general excellence
For ample instance Homer more then serves,
And what his grave and learned Muse deserves,
Since it is made a Courtly question now,
His competent and partles judge be you;
If these vain lines and his deserts arise
To the high serches of your serious eyes
As he is English: and I could not choose
But to your Name this short inscription use,
As well assurde you would approve my pain
In my traduction; and besides this vain
Excuse my thoughts as bent to others ames
Might my will rule me, and when any flames
Of my pressed soul break forth to their own show
Think they must hold engraven regard of you.
Of you in whom the worth of all the Graces,
Due to the minds gifts, might embrew the faces
Of such as skorne them, and with tiranous eye
Contemn the sweat of virtuous industry.
But as ill lines new filled with incke vndryed,
An empty Pen with their own stuff applied
Can blot them out: so shall their wealth-burst wombes
Be made with empty Pen their honors tombs.
FINIS.

