USURY IS INJURY.

Cleared in an examination of its best Apology, alleged by a country
Minister, out of Doctor Ames, in his Cases of Conscience, as a party and Patron
of that Apology.

Both answered here, By NATH: HOLMES, Dr. in Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop, for Jasper Emery, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Eagle and Child in S. Paul's Churchyard next Watlin
street. 1640.

USURY IS INJURY.
BRother, our Conference F^ c. 28. An Dom. 6^^.
falling upon Usury, and that drawing in your mention of Doctor Ames, as if
some Patron of it, or of some kind of it, viz. 8 l' per centum, 8 l' in the
hundred; upon my reading of the Doctor, at my retiring home, I could not but
repeat him, and report my opinion of his passages A week (...).
: So that my intent is not now to load this paper with an heap of weighty
matter, that I could urge against Usury, out of Scripture, and most sorts of
learned Authors, Heathens, Poets, Philosophers, Politicians, Moralists, Jews,
Rabbis, Targum, Talmud, Christians, Schoolmen, Lutherans, Calvinists, etc. but
only to walk over and view the limits of the question, so far as we have
you and Doctor Ames in our company; whom^ sometimes I oppose; yet not I, but
Scripture and reason; pardon me till you weigh my reasons. He had not been a
man, if he could not have erred. ^ando^ue and dormitat Homerus. Bernard^ non
vi^et omne. Seraphicall Bonaventure erred soulely in his Psalter: Angelical
Aqui^^s, by a mistake, sacrificed his wit in Purgatory: Alexander of H^l^s,
though styled Irrefragable, is sometime not so tolera^le in his defense of
Transubstantation: Aristotle, P^^lo who am maxim^, the Maxim of the Schools,
when at a loss in humane learning was forced many times (as learned (...)
describes) to speak so equivocally and amphibologically, as that he may
indifferently be understood in utramque partem. Nor are the learned Fathers
without their n^vi, as the learned Io^an^ has showed in a brief Synopsis: No;
nor are our soundest modern writers always in the way. It is our misery (and
therefore I^ a^cum jam causa jubet renovare dolo^) that the greatest Linguists
have stammered with their tongues. The Septuagint 70 times. The ^yriack often in
words. The Chaldee often losing the self. Ari^s, and Buxto^us, and other notable
H^ir^^^s, inconsider^^^ in most and best copi^s usually to be had, do read,
Psalm. 22. (...) for (...). We know (with all reverence be it spok^ (...)
Scrip^ari^^^ Canone) that the Apostles could ^erre in action, (...)
as Peter swerved some w^ ^^uching ceremonies of the Jews, that (...) might
ha^t betw^^^ the Jewish and Christian with a kind of dissimulation, as Saint
Paul calls it. Doctor Ames goes farther in his Bellarmino enervato, Tom. 1. p.
61. De sufficientia Scripturae. Neque enim (says he) omnia que P^ophetae aut
Apostoli scripserunt, sunt statim Canonica, sed quae Deus in illum finem
sanctificavit. No wonder therefore if Doctor Ames or you, sometimes miss your
way. Therefore in all, le^ us all, seeing we are but men, divinam consulamus
^ati^nem, follow one another as we follow Christ. Now to the question.

Vsura est lucrum ex mutuo quaesitum, D. Am^^
vi ipsius mutui. Usury is a gain sought by lending, by force of that lending.

Quest. An Vsura hujusmodi sit licita? Of this kind of Usury, the question is,
whether it be lawful.

Therefore for any learned man, Replicatio
whose parts I otherwise admire, to distinguish of Vsura licita and illicita,
it is a mere (...) A begging of h^ question
. He makes one member of the distinction to determine a lawful Usury, when the
question is of Usury in general, whether it be lawful. Pace tanti viri, that
in and upon the question shall so distinguish, he commits a soloecisme in
disputation, too great to be seem so great a scholar. For evidently that
Questionist of the lawfulness^ of Usury is beaten with his own distinction.
For if he distinguish that there is Vsura licita, why makes he the question, An
Vsura sit li^ita, indefinitely. Therefore learned Ames never so distinguishes,
but first defines, then questioneth, thirdly, stateth the question.

D. Ames.
Vsura talis, qualis a danistis ac foeneratoribus vul. go exercetur, ab omnibus
merito improbatur. Such Usury as is commonly used by the lenders on interest,
and Usurers, is justly disallowed of all men.

Replicatio.
Therefore you did ill to spend your breath in behalf of Usury, for their sakes
who are da^istae ac foeneratores, guilty talis Vsurae quae vulgo exercetur:
Except in this, that its evident their Usury is worse than the commonest sort;
insomuch that a Counselor was confident that it was extortion. If this
exception were not, seeing our common Usury is 8 l' per Cent. strictly required
by the Usurer, whether his Centum win or lose, it fully comes within the
compass of Doctor Ames his utter disallowance, and his sentence that it should
be disallowed of all So far therefore is Doctor Ames from allowing 8 l' per
Cent a^ it ^as affirmed in our di^course, ^ at in this ^o^^tion, the said no
more, l^e ^ follows out right in the ^^^^red.
. And if the Usurer alleges that he puts not the Use in the Bond; yet he does
in his bowellesse heart and bowels: that if it be not fully paid, he will
suddenly take in his Principal, the Client being so unprovided, that Usury in
the beginning, ends in unmercifull ex^orting cruelty. Summum jus summa injuria.
so hang a malefactor condemned to die, without sufficient allowance of time for
preparation, may be the murdering of his soul. And this sudden calling in of
money, as in the cause, scil. mental Usury, is naught, so in the effect worse,
viz. to make men mo^gage, or ruin their estate, to satisfy these (...) these
Donivoros, these Anthropophagos, these man-eating Usurers. Therefore this
learned Doctor Ames bids us observe his definition, of Usury; it is Lucrum ex
mutuo qu esitum, non conventum; quia non tantum Vsura realis in qua pactum
intercedit, sed and mentalis, quae versatur in intention, lucrum ut debitum ex
mutuo acquirendi, ista descriptione contineatur. i. Usury is a gain sought by
lending, not covenanted, because not only real Usury, which is by compact,
but also mental Usury, which lies in the intention of getting gain as a due
by lending, is contained in that description.

Generaliter tamen, D. Ames
and absolute illicitam esse quamlibet Vsuram, nulla ratione naturali solid
potest probari. But that generally all Usury is absolutely unlawful, it cannot
be proved by any natural reason, solidly.

We must remember how this learned Doctor lived where the people are
intolerable Usurers: Replicatio
It had been in vain therefore in such a place, e Cathedra, to have condemned
all Usury, and to have hoped to have sitten fast. And if the Doctor mean by
natural reason, reason from nature: 1. We have reason from nature, and
delivered by nature, I mean, (...) mere animals, that have nothing but
nature, mere heathens: whereby my conscience is persuaded, that it is a
dictate of nature in some sort, at least an experiment observed by nature, that
Vsura est illicita O^ the (...) mind is M^ster Cap^ o^ Usury, at the end of
(...) of temptations, viz. The heathens have condemned this sin by the light
of nature p 44^
. Aristotle in his Politics, lib. 1. cap. 7. says plainly, (...), which
Petrus Ramus renders so home, as that it is evident he was of Aristotle's mind;
thus, Quapropter ejusmodi nummorum foene^i^ (of money bringing forth money)
naturae maxim, contraria atque inimica judicanda est. Therefore that kind of
Usury of money producing money, is to be judged as most contrary, and an enemy
to nature. And 4. lib. Ethic. cap. 3. (...) That I may not seem to wrest the
words in translating Lambinus as an indifferent man shall render the Greek for
us; ^
Alii (says he) ^u^sus in accipiendo sant ^imit, quia undique, and puia^^le
acc^p^unt, ^^ales sunt it ^ui il i^e^ales o^e^as praestant, sordida ^ue arts
exe^cent, and lenones, and omnes hujus notae homines, and ^oe^e^at^res^ and ii
quibus exiguum lucrum magna mercede constat. Hi omnes a quibus non de^ent, and
quantum non delent, auferunt. The Philosopher concludes, (...) Communis autem
eorum videtur esse lucri tu^pitudo. O her; exceed in taking, viz any thing from
any, viz. men of illiberall and sordid arts, Bawds, etc. Usurers, etc. all
which receive of whom and how much they ought not, and sordid gain is common
to them all. The Poet Horace, lib. 1. Sermon. Satyr. 2. condemns Usury of 5 l'
per cent. his words are, Dives agris, dives positis in foenore nummis. ^inas
hic capiti mercedes e^secat, i. e. five upon the principle: so learned
Commentators: and a little before, Omnia conductis co^mens obsonia nummis. i.
Says the Commentator, Nummis foenori acceptis, pro quibus merces solvitur.
Cicero a Heathen, condemns Usury, Primum improbantur hi^ qu s^us qui in odia
hominum incurrunt, ut po^ti^orum and oe^era^orum. Cato a Heathen, condemns
Usury, saying it is idem a^ occide^e. 2. I might thus in the second place prove
Usury to be condemned by the Dictates of Nature, because condemned of all
mankind, all peoples, Nations and Countries, more or less. Of Heathens we
have heard. Of Jews after. For the laws of Nations, such as are the civil
laws, received in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, where men are not savage,
first they deny a known Usurer power to make a Will. Secondly, deny him right
to be buried in Church or Churchyard. Thirdly, in Court they allow not Use for
money detained when recovered. Again, for Canon Laws received of Christians,
Papists and Protestants, in some sort: I mean Latin Canons, they enjoin
tithes to Ministers to be paid of all profits, and so Usurers to pay the tenth
of their Use; but Ministers may not receive it, because the gain is all
unlawful and wicked and so the tithe. The Canonists and Canon Law do condemn
all Usury and interest whatsoever. So ^illet on Exodus 22. Our S^^ute Laws
expre^ly disallow the Usury of 8 l' per Cent. i^ point of Religion, and
Conscience. And in the judgment of Counselors his au^^lus la^t the ^atute do
^not allow and approve of taking any Use, but only provides a man shall not be
punished by the Common Law if he take but ^ l per Centum. The parent may omit
correction of a younger child for that vice which the parent does not allow.
Again they say, the maine intent of the Statute is to hinder above 8. not to
encourage to take 8 l' per Centum. Our English Canon, viz. Can. 109. is
express that it is a great sin, S. August^ne conde^n Vt^r Q^^dicam de ^ri,
q^s et a^pse Le^es and I dic^s ^edd^ ^ht^t August. Epist. 54. ^e^ret. cau. 13.
^ 4 c. 1
and presentable. And our Episc. Trienn. visit last held, expressed in articles
that it was presentable ^. 2. If D. Ames means by natural reason, proper, and
pertinent, and evident reason; sure that reason that does convince, is such.
And whether our reasons will convince, we will leave to the Reader to judge in
the premises and that which is to follow.

D. Ames.
Non probatur ratione eorum qui dicunt mutuum ex natura su^ debere esse
gratuitum. Neque enim probari hoc potest, omne mutuum, quibuscunque
circumstantiis vestiatur, debere esse gratuitum. i. e. It is not proved (that
is Usury to be unlawful) by their reason that say Borrow of its own nature
ought to be gratis.

Replicatie.
Omne mere purum putum mutuum, and of that is the question (whether
consideration be to be given for bare lending) is easily and evidently proved
it ought to be gratis. Luke 6.34, 35. If ye ^ad to them of whom ye hope to
receive, what thank have ye, for sinners do so. But lead, hoping for nothing
again Ma^t^r Capel times this a from place against Usury (...), Nor or can
(...) Law against V^ b^a the. I^ have of Moses; for such laws as such, are
(...) by so^ intell^ge^ ^ro^^ Moses: but Heathens of all sorts, and that by
^oug^ nature, have (...) ^nnel (...) sin, having never heard of Moses, and
theref^^^ (...) ^apol treall la^ of Moses. Besides we have it forbidden in the
New ^es^ at the ^^a^i^ials ^ere ^at of d^. Luke 6.35.
We explain this in our proper idiome of our tongue and common speech, calling
that which is free in this kind, borrowing and lending: that which is not, we
call by other names of contract, as letting and hiring. But the text is clear
enough, which forbids mental expectation of gain; calling lending for gain to
be a doing as sinners do. Upon these words Beza having fetched a circuit,
concludes point blanck, thus; Illud tamen certum est, si juvandus est proximus,
etiam nulla recipiendae sortis habita ratione (but this I should count rather
giving than lending) multo magis (says Beza) prohiberi foeneratorias
pactiones. Gregory Nisen on these words says, Malignam foe^orum
excogitationem si quis appelles furtum, and homicidium, non peccabit. Nam quid
refert suffosso pariete quenquam erepta possidere acf^norum necessitate
possidere illicita. Basil speaks to the same effect as Aristotle does in his
Politics, that it is unnatural and unreasonable that it should be expected
that money should bring forth money. The Papists in their Rhemes Test. shame us
Protestants: The words are, It may be taken for a pretext (as well as counsel)
wherein Usury, i. e. the expectation not of the money lent, but of vantage for
lone, is forbidden, as by other places of Scripture it is condemned. And it is
a thing against the law of Nature and Nations. And great shame and pity it is,
that it should be so much used and suffered among Christians, or so covered and
cloked under the habit of other contracts as it is. In a word, S. Matthew will
clear it, that giving is not here spoken of; who Mat. 5.42. repeats our text of
lending, and speaks of giving beside, as a distinct way of helping a neighbor.
It were strange therefore that S. Luke, that is the most eloquent writer of all
the four Evangelists, should confound giving and lending to be all one;
especially against the nature of the Greek (...), signifying always to lend,
May S. L^c ch^p 6. ver^. to had spoken of g^g, and (...) to speak of lendi^g.
never to give; commonly to lend on Usury, seldom signifying to lend
otherwise; whence (...) an Usurer, (...) Usury. So (...) in Syriack signifying
always to lend, never to give; and (...) signifying an Usurer.

D. Amet.
Et si concedatur hoc (omne mutuum debet esse gratuitum) nihil aliud inde
sequeretur, quam mutuum si gratis non fiat, transire in alium contractum, vel
nominatu^, vel innominatum, vel simplicem, vel mixtum. i.e. And if it be
granted that all lending should be gratis, nothing would follow thence, but
that then lending (if it be not gratis) would pass into another kind of
contract, named or unnamed, simple or mixed.

Replicatio.
But this, Nihil aliud, is magnum aliquod quod inde sequeretur. For by the same
reason that the Doctor distinguishes that mutuum si gratis non fiat, transire
in alium contractum, vel nominatum, vel innominatum, vel simplicem, vel mixtum;
we may go on, distinguishing, licitum vel illicitum, conductitium vel
foeneratorium: For this will of necessity follow, that if a man lend wearable
goods, that return not in the same perfection every way as they were when
lent, in consideration whereof the lender takes reward: now lending does
transire into hire. If he lends money, that by number, weight and quality,
returns as good as it went out, yet for the bare loan requires reward, here
lending does transire into Usury. And so the Doctor innominat, does simpliciter
grant the question.

Non probatur (viz. omnem Vsuram esse illicitam) ratione eorum qui allegant, D.
Ames.
in rebus illis quae usu consumuntur dominium non distingui ab usu, atque adeo
pro usu nihil posse accipi ultra valorem ipsius dominii; responnetur, enim
lucrum accipi non simpliciter pro usu rei mutuatae quoad substantiam, sed quoad
valorem aut proventum qui manet post substantiam consumptam, and subsistit
saepe in rebus quae usu non consumuntur and pro officio, vel actu mutuandi unde
commodum percipit mutuarius. All Usury to be unlawful, is not proved by their
argument that allege that in those things which wear with the Use, the rule
or Mastership of them is not distinguishable from the using of them, and
therefore nothing above the value of that Mastership can be taken for the Use:
For it is answered, that gain is not taken simply forth Use of the thing
borrowed, considered according to the substance, but considered according to
the value or In-come which redounds after the substance is wasted, which
oft-times consists in things which are not impaired by their use. Again, it is
taken for the office and act of lending, from which the borrower receives
profit.

Of things wastable by Use, Replicatio.
there is not only an impairing, but an hazard, and an event oft-times of
utter ruin. The hired horse dies; And then he must pass only for the hire (as
the Scripture speaks) without farther satisfaction The hired house not only is
worse in the parts, every thing older and more rotted, but the principles and
whole edifice falls, the tenant not bound, nor able to re-build. So that in
taking hire there is not only just satisfaction for wrong to the creature; But
lawful merchandise for hazard of the whole. But the Usurer takes generally for
the bare Use; For, for hazard he will run none. He usually requires intolerable
assurance, morgage, etc. His money wears not. And for that same valor aut
proventus qui manet post substantiam, and subsistit saepe in rebus quae usu non
consumuntur, of which the Doctor speaks observe I pray you well: That, take
away the consideration of the substance of money (which the Usurer has in
specie and numero again) and the act of lending, (which is satisfied by just
repaying) and there is nothing to come into consideration, no proventus the
Usurer is hindered of, which otherwise the Usurer would or could make of his
money, in consideration whereof he should demand Use. For the Usurer lends,
having now no penurious need of Use to maintain himself by: Being usually
rich, and always richer than the just borrower; or however, he has, or will
have nothing else to do with his money: But (as I know upon my own
experience) makes o^ lands, stock, etc, to provide an Usury banck. He is a
lazy Caterpiller, and will not work, and therefore turns Usurer. He is
upheld by learned men that there is a lawful Usury (though nor he, nor they,
can rehearse any marks the Scripture has set down to distinguish them) and
therefore he will not run the hazard to be a partner with any body. He will
not lend to be lent to again, for he needs not borrowing. If any man will
borrow and does not express or intimate he will pay for the act of lending, he
will keep his money a companion for canker and rust, rather than lend. If a
man would bring home his money a month or two before the time, he is utterly
unwilling, unless the whole time be paid for. He will have it go on, and take
for time, that was never his to sell: yet he will have Use for all his money,
for all the time he prayed, heard Sermons, received the Communion: For the time
of eating sleeping, etc. when, nor he nor his client could or ought to be
otherwise busied. Let not the Reader now unjustly untwist this answer, but take
all together, and let him speak whether the Usurer himself can allege that he
receives his Use for any thing but lending. 2 If it were so as the Doctor
speaks, that post substantiam remanet valor and proventus (which cannot be
found immediately in money) yet seeing God has allowed recompense for using
impairable goods, forbidden recompense for lending things that come in the
same, quod and quantum, the case is altered.

Non probatur (usuram esse illicitam) ratione eorum qui objiciunt pecuniam sua
natura esse sterilem: D. Ames.
i.e. Usury is not proved unlawful by the allegation of those that say, that
money in its own nature is barren.

Replicatio
The father of the Philosophers, Aristotle, as you heard before, thought this a
good reason, not only to condemn Usury, but to pronounce it contrary to
nature. The fathers of Christians, think the same. So Basil on Luke 6. as you
heard before. It is strange that we having the eyes of the fathers to see with
beside our own, should not be able to ken as far into the nature of vitium,
as a mere heathen. Consilio Lateranensi, Usury is thus defined; Quando ex usu
rei quae non germinat, nullo labor, nullo sumptu, nullo periculo lucrum
conquiri studetur. To which Willet assents, and Englisheth it in this manner;
Usury is when by the Use of a thing which increases not, gain is sought
without any labor, cost, or hazard. You heard before also that the Rhemish
Testament says, It is against the law of nature. Finally, many learned men
from this seeking money to be borne as it were of money, have conceived the
word Usury to be derived. Vsura, q.d. Vsus aeris. Not only Divines touch this
s. Tench, but Lawyers. I have read it in the Lord Cooks Reports in French.
Hence also the Greek word (...), which first signifies partus, then Usury. So
Latin, Foenus, q.d. Foetus, the Etymology rising from a wonder.

D. Ames.
Quamvis enim pecunia sua natura and per se sit sterilis, facile tamen
commutari potest in merces, quae fructum edunt, and accedeate industria utentis
vim suam confert ad fructum pariendum. For though money in its own nature is
barren, yet it may easily be changed into commodities which fructify, and by
the industry of him that uses it, brings forth fruit.

1 This answer is not sufficient, Replicatio.
unless it be a true universal proposition, that for whatsoever worldly
benefit that is barren in it self, yet easily commutable into profit,
recompense may be given, s. for the forbearance of it. For if the proposition
be but particular or singular; then we want other proofs to clear why it
should be true of money, more than other things. But the proposition is not
universally true. For then, because time, unprofitable in it self, being not
res, but mensura rerum, is profitable by industry, Accedente industria utentis,
therefore it may be sold. As indeed usurious and injurious merchants sell their
commodity, not according to the rate, but according to the value of time,
condemned by the learned, that condemn Usury. Then the Elements, Fire and
Water, bona communia, and therefore gratis to be communicated to one another
(says Cicero) might be let out or sold for money, because mediately they are
very useful. One neighbor might sell them to another wanting them: or the
Magistrate lay a tax upon men for the use of them. 2 Money brings not forth
profit, by all industry of all men, but by singular industry of some, and with
some hazard. Most men are not rich, most men not gaining by money, but many,
many times loosing. And therefore one argument of Politicians against Usury is,
it is unlawful, and against nature, because the Usurer by Bonds, Bills, Suits,
etc. requires of his Client quod non est in rerum natura; profit of money where
none was, but loss No man extols Midas ever the more, that his fingers could
turn bread into gold, as long as he lost in bread what he ^^t in gold. Nor is
the Usurers money to be admired, if it could be turned into ^read: seeing what
is ^on in bread, is lost in comfort of soul. F^r without in ^t^ not conve^ted
to bread, etc. 1. M^das bread was not turned into gold without a most foolish
wish.
. 3 The Maxim applied to particulars, pincheth; whether Usury money, i. e.
money lent on Usury be fruitful mediately, and per accidens. The Text, Prove
28.8. may justly make us doubt. If God curse not, cross not borrower or lender
(for it is seldom seen but the borrower is swallowed whole at last) yet if
the borrower upon Use, sels unconscionably dear, that he may make his customers
to pay for the commodity, pay his Use, and find him present maintenance, and
an estate for time to come, what boast can there be made of the fruitfulness
of this money to the Commonwealth? The Country is sacrificed on cruel dealing
to save one man. The Commonwealth must perish for the wealth of such Commons.
4 The rule of the husbandman in buying of Cattle and other commodities, or
Leases, is, that he will pay for what the thing is in statu praesenti: but to
pay for what it is improveable to, he has no reason. If money be fruifull that
is borrowed of the Usurer, yet seldom so fruitful as honestly to pay the Vser
for his great pains, and the Usurer his Use too.

D. Ames.
Non probatur (illicitam esse usuram) ratione eorum qui dicunt in genere nihil
esse in mutuo, pro quo lucrum possit accipi. Est enim proventus fructus qui ex
pecunia mutuo data potest expectari: est and onus annexum privationi pecuniae
qua fit ut omnis occasio eandem cum fructu alias collocandi omittatur. Vacatio
enim a pecunia utenda eorum jure aestimari posse videtur, quo and vacatio a
laboribus aestimatur. Exodus 21.19. i.e. Usury is not proved unlawful by their
reason, who say, that in general there is nothing in lending for which gain
may be taken. For there is both a fruitful in come to be expected of lent
money; as also there is a burdensome inconvenience annexed to the want of that
lent money, whereby all opportunity of disposing that money otherwise, is taken
away: For nonimployment of money that may be used, seems valuable, with the
same equity valuable, as nonimployment of labor, Exodus 21.19.

I have sufficiently answered all these already, Replicatio.
only to the last reason or clause [Vacatio etenim, etc.] I will speak a word.
As now it is the question whether Usury be lawful (as out of doubt labor in
our Callings is) and consequently, whether Gods blessing may be expected on
such money-mungring. So (which is the maine of our answer) the husbandman is
sure (under Gods ordinary providence) what he can get by his daily labor, day
by day: but at abundance of hazards that he does not lose by his laying out of
his money (especially his Vsury-borrowed money) as much in one day as he can
get in many weeks. Therefore there is not par ratio, that forbearance of money
should be recompensed (especially when men desired to lend their money for so
long time, six months, etc. as confident it would be no hinderance to them) as
bodily labor.

D. Ame^.
Ratione evidenti confirmatur, aliquam usuram esse licitam; quia nulla realis
differentia potest ostendi, inter quandam Vsuram, and alios contractus ab
omnibus probatos. e. g. Est aliquis pecunia instructus ad praedium emendum,
unde possit percipere annuos fructus centum imperialium. Idem praedium cupit
alter habere, sed non est pecunia instructus. Si prior ille emat praedium, and
elocet alteri pro centum imperialibus, quin justum and aequum fecerit, nemo
negabit. Si vero alteri det pecuniam ad idem praestandum, sc. ad idem praedium
sibi emendum, and candem summam ab eo accipiat, eidem periculo sese subjiciens,
cui in exemptione sua fuisset obnoxious, eadem prorsus est justitia. Et
praeterea nonnihil accedit alteri illi qui selvit usuras ratione dominii in
praedium illud quod emptione su acquisivit: i.e. It is ratified by evident
reason, that some Usury is lawful, because there cannot be showed any real
difference between a certain kind of Usury, and other contracts approved of
all. For instance, there is a man furnished with money to buy such a Farm of
an hundred pounds per annum: Another man, though wanting money, desired to buy
the same Farm: If the first of these buy the Farm, no doubt but he may
lawfully let it out to another for an hundred pounds by the year. Now if this
man now the owner, should not have bought it, but have lent his money to the
other, that wanting money desired to buy it, wherewith he now buys the Farm,
taking of this purchaser the same sum of rent for his money, which he should
have had of the Farm, putting himself upon the same hazard for his money to
which he should have been liable in the purchase of the Farm, there is the
self same equity in both.

Upon this argument and case I suppose was the speech at our conference
grounded (for I find none so like as this) that D. Ames allowed 8 l'. in the
hundred. Repicatio
But there was an utter mistake in this, as will appear easily to him that
reads the bare words. It will further appear by our answer.

1 Here the Doctor plainly allows a man to take so much in the hundred for his
money, which he lends to a purchaser of Free-land, or Farm, as the purchase
bought brings in of yearly rent, if it were let. Which is in England (and I
believe it to be so in other Countries; for Usury, too too common in all lands
in the practice, prescribes that proportion of purchasing) I say is in England
but 5 l' in the hundred, which is far from 8 l' in the hundred. 2 The phrase
eidem periculo sese su^jiciens, carries very much with it. Which the learned
Doctor not so versed in purchasing, as he was in perusing of books, might not
so well consider. For first if by it he means simply, that a man in lending out
his money to buy Centum imperialia per annum, does run himself into the same
hazard in lending his money, as he should have done in purchasing, if he
himself had laid out the money on the purchase: And that therefore he ought to
have as much for the lone of the money, as he should have had of rent, if the
purchase had been his, which rent his client or borrower now takes up of the
Farm as rent, and pays it him as Use: the worthy Doctor is much mistaken. 1
What great hazard there is in purchasing (over there is in lending money, for
which men are feign to give double, treble, quadruble bond, with morgages,
statutes, pawnes, etc. for security, even what the Usurer will require) I say
hazard in purchasing, in regard of conveyance, lest some morgages or statutes
secretly lie on the land, or some former estate be let, or the new lease be not
well made, some the for a, or and for but, marring all: Or some Entailes, or
Thirds, etc. worst the bargain, with hundreds more difficulties, I leave to
the Lawyer to declare. 2 What great charges for fines, recoveries, conveyances,
with many journies to settle a purchase, over there is to lend money to Use,
which costs the Vsury-taker nothing, I leave the purchaser to discourse. 3 How
uncertain the rates of commodities be, how wearable the ground is, how
alterable by seasons of excess of wet or drought the crops are, and
consequently how prices of land fall, especially in any trouble of
commonwealths, of wars, etc. whiles money is still of the same value, let the
husbandman speak. 4 How much labor and cost a man is at to make the Farm
yield his rent, let the occupier or imployer of that Farm speak, whiles the
Usurer is at none for the money he lends: and therefore it is a hard pennyworth
for the borrower, if he employ his Farm, to pay the Usurer, and be paid his
labor and his charges too, so as to have a maintenance. Seeing therefore in no
degree does this lender run hazard and charges as the purchaser, he is in no
wise to have the same profit of his money as the purchaser of his lands.

2 If we may so take the Doctor, as that he means the lender of his money
should altogether subjicere sese eidem periculo cui in exemptione sua fuisset
obnoxious; then it is as plain as if written with a Sun-beame, as evident as
evident may be, that now this is not Usury, but partnership, copurchasing,
coheirship, or joint-taking. And so all that this position has set down,
gives no allowance to Usury.

Scriptura non tollit omnem omnino Vsur^. i. e. D. Ames.
The Scripture does not altogether take away all Usury.

1 Answ. Most learned men (and some of them most pious) drawing out of the
Scripture the self same definition of Usury in effect, Replicatio.
which Doctor Ames sets down, under that their definition condemns all Usury,
coming within the compass thereof -- Vrsinus, Vsura est lucrum quod accipitur
solius mutuationis causa -- Calv. Quicquid lucri praeter sortem dabatur, est
usura, unde Haebraice dicta Tarbit: i. e Increase of the multiplying -- August.
Aug. in Psalm. 36.
Si plus quam dedisti expectas accipere, C. 14. q. 3. c. ^ Se^. 10.
foenerator es -- Cajetan a Papist, Plus ex mutuo velle quam mutuatum sit,
iniquum est -- Council. Carthag. 3. Nullus Clericorum amplius accipiat quam
cuiquam accommodavit -- 2 The Scripture takes away all Usury, and it will be
made to appear even out of those arguments that the worthy Doctor alleges to
the contrary, which are four. viz.

D. Ames.
Sed illam quae exigitur ab egeno, qui ob instantem, necessitatem and
sustentationem suam aliquid mutuo petit: ita ut prohibitio fundetur in
condition personae. Exodus 22.25. Levit. 25.35, 36. Pro. 28.8. Ezech. 18.17. e.
i. But only that which is exacted of the needy, who for his present urgent
necessity, and the sustentation of himself, borrows somewhat: so that the
prohibition is grounded upon the condition of the person.

Replicatio
We thus retort the argument. That sin which is forbidden to all that are
incident and subject to commit that sin, is altogether forbidden, that it be
not committed. But Usury is forbidden to all that are incident and subject to
commit Usury; Ergo. The Minor proposition is evident thus; The takers of Usury
are the richer: The borrowers are the poorer. And therefore the Lord forbids
all rich men to take Use of their Clients, because they are poor in comparison
of the lender; and so have more need to have the Use money given them, than the
rich borrower to receive it. That the Usurer is the ^c^ man; and others in
opposition to him are termed the poo^: we have an infallible place of
Scripture, Pro. 22 2. The rich and the poor meet together. See poor put in
opposition to this rich man ^e the only rich man. Who is he? The Usurer. See
Prove, 29 13. comp. the margent.
For though a man of an 100 l' per annum, borrow of a man that has but 50 l'
per annum; yet he that has the more lands and less money, and more in debt,
perhaps as much as half, or all his lands are worth, must needs be the poorer
man. If any rich man borrow for wantonness, and superfluous and unnecessary
uses; that is the special sin of borrowing and borrowers: forbidden under
another head, sc. covetousness: And by other kind of places of Scripture: Owe
nothing to any one but love. So a man may abuse a godly duty, viz. pr. to seek
things to get them, to consume them on lusts, etc. Iam 4 3.
Therefore in these places of Usury, the holy Ghost is altogether intent
against the sin of lenders. And that is Usury: whose aggravation is this in
the Texts above named (as in other Texts other aggravations of that sin are
touched) that it takes gain for lending, of them that are poorer than the
lenders. Unless this answer be admitted as sound, it would follow by the same
argument that the learned Doctor makes; That oppression is not uviversally
forbidden, because the mighty and potent ones usually are forbidden that sin,
toward the weak innocent neighbor, which always is weaker than the
oppressor, else he would not be oppressed. No more would the poor borrower
borrow if he were rich, but rather would be ready to lend, freely, or for
Usury. To the same M. Elton answers. If this consequence were good, then
because it is said, Pro. 22.22. Rob not the poor, because he is poor.
Therefore a man may rob the rich, because he is rich. And Deuteronomy. 23.19. No
mention is made of the poor, but Usury is forbidden toward a brother, whether
poor or rich.
Finally, that I may not seem to go an uncouth and untroden path, let the
Reader look on my company. 1 Master Capel in his Tract of Temptations, has
upon this objection of the Doctors, these words in the forenamed book, in his
dispute of restitution, at the end of the said book. Read, and read his answer:
The Law (says the objection) does urge most, that Usury be not done to the
poor: Was it not (says Master Capel) because the Jews were then too noble
and generous to go a borrowing, except it were the poorer sort? What should the
Law then forbid that to be done by rich men, which most rich men never did? But
after we have probitions plenty that are indefinite: we are forbidden we must
not rob the poor, because he is poor. Good sport for thieves, if therefore it
may be thought to follow, that it is a lawful matter to rob the rich The
Scripture forbids taking Use of a poor brother a Jew, this is no toleration of
Usury to be done to any Jew, for (says Master Capel) there is no one place
gives leave to hire his money out to a rich Jewish f^e.
. Neither can the law against Usury be thought to be a judicious law of Moses;
for such laws as such, are known only by some intelligence from the books of
Moses. But heathens of all sorts, who never once heard of Moses writings, have
with one voice cried sin upon Usury, and shame upon Usurers; Poets, Orators,
Historians, Philosophers, all. Thus far Master Capel, yet alive to maintain
his words against any. We will show you but one or two more of our company, and
leave the Reader to search the multitude of ordinary authors.

2 Next follows Master Ainsworth, on that place Exodus 22.^5. quoted by Doctor
Ames. Ainsworths words are, Usury consumes a man and his substance; and is
therefore here, and elsewhere absolutely (mark it well, absolutely) forbidden,
viz. Deuteronomy. 23.19. Levit. 25.35, 36. Prove. 28.8. Ezech. 18.8. Observe, Master
Ainsworth quotes the same places for absolute forbidding Usury, which Doctor
Ames notes for forbidding only to the poor. And he quotes beside Deuteronomy. 23.19.
where Usury is forbidden to be exercised toward any Jew whatsoever. Master
Ainsworth goes on, and learnedly produces the streams of Jewish Doctors and
Rabbis to be against all Usury, Usury of any increase, Usury of victuals,
cloths, labor: Usury of words and salutations: Usury of teaching one to read,
for lending money. All Sureties, Scribes, Witnesses, are forbidden to have to
do in Usury. The Usurer, say the Rabbis, offends against six prohibitions,
viz. Exodus 22.25. Levit. 25.37. of money. And again, Levit. 23.37. of
victual. Again, Levit. 25.36. of increase. Again, Exodus 22.25. shall not lay
upon him Usury. Deuteronomy. 23.19. and Levit. 19.14. For the Rabbis say, it is a
laying a stumbling block before the blind, to take Use. It is unlawful to
take Usury before or after, viz. to send a gift before to him of whom one
intends to borrow. Thus far M. Ainsworth and his Rabbis, with much more; to
make Christians blush at once moving a tongue for Usury.

3 Vatablus on this Exodus 22.25. has these words, Pauperi per expositionem
positum. Exponit enim quem vocet populum suum, nempe pauperes: Thus Vatablus.
And let me here put in mine oar, thus; That if this were a limitation of
Usury, to take only Usury of the poor Jew, then it would follow one might
take it of a rich Jew, which is no where allowed: And crosses another
limitation alleged by D. Ames, out of the text of Scripture, that allows
Usury to be done to none but to the stranger the Canaanite. And so these
limitations fight one against another: But being made aggravations, they agree.

4 Upon this, Exodus 22.25. Doctor Willet (having before named seven kinds of
Usury) has this assertion, That Usury is simply unlawful. He has this
explanation. But all these kinds of Usury and interest, with the like, were
utterly unlawful, and not to be practiced among Christians. He has finally
this probation. The said assertions and explanation shall appear by these
reasons (whereof I will defer some of them till after, for a fitter place.) 1
Usury (says he) was detestable among the Heathen; much more odious ought it to
be among Christians. As Cato being asked what it was to play the Usurer,
answered Idem quod occidere. And further he said, that in former time they used
to punish a thief but in twofold, an Usurer in fourefold Willet alleges for
this his argument Calvin. 2 Usury is against the first institution of money.
Pecunia inventa est, that thereby things necessary for the maintenance of this
life might be provided. But now it is prevented and abused to covetousness,
that money may increase money. Master Willet alleges this his argument out of
one Borrh. 3 The Scripture absolutely condemns Usury, as Psalm. 15.5. Ezech.
18.17. Doctor Willet may well say absolutely, for here are no limitations
mentioned, which Doctor Ames sets down. Well, Doctor Willet goes on. The word
(...) (says he) signifies increase. By which, says he, all increase by Usury
is forbidden. Let me give you to understand here, whence this word Tarbith
comes, viz. Arabi^e (...) m^ltipl^catus est, up ^n which word Tarinth,
Schindler, one of the greatest lingu^sts in fi^e of the Eastern tongues, Hebr.
Cha'd S^r. Ra^in-^almudie. and Arab. says that Pro 28.8. (...) ^m fo^^e and
^usura (...) multilica (...), viz. substant am saam, est ^tymologia e^pressa,
viz. usura.

Yet this is one of the places Doctor Ames urged, that Usury is here forbidden
with a limitation, sc. to the poor. When Schindler shows that hence is
fetched the etymology of Usury, what it is, sc. all increase for bare lending.
And as our learned English Translators have rendered Tharbith, the case goes
far worse against the Usurer; for they rende Tarbith, unjust gain. So that
if one asks what is (...) Usury. It is says Schindler, Tarbit^: what is
Tarbit^? It is unjust gain, say our English new Translators; Therefore I
conclude Usury is unjust gain.


. 4 His next reason is taken out of Chrysostom. Chrysostom says (quoth
Willet) Vsurarius super omnes mercatores maledictus. Cursed above all merchants
and tradesmen: So Willet translates. And Chrysostom (says Willet) further
uses this comparison; Like as when one fifteth any grain, all the grain by
little and little slippeth through, and so solum stercus remanet in cribro;
only the soil and dirt remains in the sieve: So of all the substance and
ill gotten goods of Usurers, Nihil remanet nisi peccatum. So far Willet. Thus
you see the prohibition of Usury in the above alleged places by Doctor Ames,
Non fundetur in condition personae, not only in my judgment and my reasons
(which notwithstanding are unanswerable) but in the judgment of other learned
men, with their invincible reasons.

Scriptura non tollit omnem omnino usuram, D. Ames.
fed illam quae mordet aut rodit, i.e. quando debitu^ exigitur cum rigore, and
proximi damno. i.e. The Scripture takes not away all Usury utterly, but the
biting and gnawing; i.e. when the debt is exacted with rigor, and damnifying
our neighbor.

Replicatio.
To the first clause. 1 Thus as our English Translators, O. or N. take no notice
of the distinction: Nor French, Iun. Lat. High Dutch; so here is not a
limitation of Usury, as if Neshech, biting Usury were unlawful only. As if
there were another Usury, which our old Usurers call toothlesse Usury. For
there is no Usury so old, as that the mark is out of its mouth, but still it
may be known to be a sin. Still its teeth may be seen, and so called biting
Usury. This word is often used as an epithet of aggravation, to deter men from
any Usury. Because any Usury at the best is (...) Neshech, A biting Usury. For
if we look after the other names of Usury, they have a worse signification
than this. 1 For (...) Neshech, it is agreed that is condemned. Chrysostom
calls it on Matthew. 5. Morsum aspidis venenatum. And that you may know what is
(...) Neshech, your friend (as the Usurers report, if any will believe them)
Master Zanch. will show. Neshech, Morsus est, quo scilcet mordetur, id est,
damno afficitur ille, qui mutuam accepit pecuniam, dum sc. v. g. pro centum
cogitur reddere centum, and prater hos aliquid amplius, sive parum, sive
multum. By which description of Neshech, all our Usurers hundreds for one are
cast, and condemned guilty of biting Usury. For they will have somewhat more
than the principle, let the borrower get nothing at all, but lose. The Usurer
must have a plus ultra, on his five in the hundred. Another his six in the
hundred. Another his seven in the hundred. Another his eight in the hundred.
Another his five shillings a month, or fifteen pence a week for two years,
for five pounds; which in the pecunia numerata, by Lunary months, twelve in a
year, comes to 20 l' per Centum: By Solary months, as the Sun measures seven
days to a week, four weeks to a month, and so makes thirteen months in a
year, it comes to thirty in the hundred. And in modo numerandi, the manner of
paying, that as soon as the stock is out, to have some coming in within a
week or a month, and so weekly or monthly, comes to above 30 l' in the
hundred. For the 30 l' per Centum, you may reckon it thus; five shillings a
month, for a year, for 5 l', comes to make the sum of 3 l', supposing but
the Almanac Lunary months, 12 in the year. For 12 crowns are 3 l'. of which
3 l', 10 s is the Use. For the sum was 5 l' for two years. Now half is come in
at 12 Almanacke months. Now multiply; ten a year for 50 s, is twenty shillings
for 5 l'. Then four twenties, sc. 4 l' for four 5 l, i e. for 20 l': that is
five 4 l' (which is 20 l') for five 20 l', which is an 100 l'. So you see then
that ten shillings a year for 50 s, is 20 l' for an hundred. Lets go on then;
if ten shillings a year, for 50 s, comes to 20 l' per Centum, then add half
ten shillings, sc. five, for the odd Solary month, the thirteenth month in
the year, and that will come to half as much more, i. e. 30 l' pro Centum.
These things I have reckoned if I forget not my self, before exact
Shopkeepers, Civil Lawyers, Common Lawyers, and Divines, and they have
assented to the reckoning to be right. And the Lawyer has pronounced directly
this to be indirect Usury (though a man pretend to sell his money) and so lies
liable to the penalty of the Statute. But then how much more than 30 in the 100
it comes to, to take in some of the Principal and Use together, the first
week, or first month, and so weekly or monthly, for two years, till all in, I
must confess I cannot tell; I nevet yet tried to reckon: and it seems
somewhat intricate: we had need have the help of the Almanack-maker. Others,
may be, sail lower, and take but 20 s in the hundred; yet if the borrower has
not gained thus much, this is Neshech with Master Zanchie. Nay, if a man does
not leave the borrower some gain, if he gat but one shilling, so that Creditor
fit tamen particeps benignitatis, of the gain. that is Neshech. We add the
judgment and reasons of other learned men, that are contrary to D. Ames; that
Neshech does not intend only to forbid one kind of Usury, but is a common name
to disgrace, and forbids all Usury, as all Usury being Neshech, biting. It is
Willets argument, and he has it out of learned Cajetan, Vsura est ex suo
genere nociva, because it is called Neshech. And the law of nature, says
Willet, teaches we should not do as we would not be done by. It is Ainsworths
position, Evod. 22.25. That Usury is called biting, because indefinitely all
Usury is biting, and therefore here says he, absolutely forbidden. He has
this position as out of many Scriptures there quoted, of which before: So out of
the Heb. Rab. viz. Maimonid. Usury indefinitely called Neshech or Noshech, it
nippeth and eats his neighbors flesh. -- Iun. out of Bernard, Vsura is
called Neshech, lucrum rodens, seu exedens; for it is, says Bernard, Venenum
patrimonii. -- Willet out of R. Sol. and Lyran. Usury is Neshech, q. mordet ut
serpens; parum percipitur in principio, tandem devorat totam hominis
substantiam. Out of Galass. q. tanquam hirudo, omnem succum and sanguinem
exsugit, as an horsleech, says Willet. -- Out of Simler, q. ut morsus
serpentis non sinit dormire. -- Out of Calvin, Neshech quia foenerator tanquam
canis famelicus, alios mordendo seipsum pascit. -- Finally, q. lethaliter
mordet eos, qui ea gravantur. ex Anonymo. Elton is of the same mind. All Usury
is Neshech. You see then how bad Usury is at best. How Neshech is enough to
condemn all Usury almost. The next words are worse. For Tharebith, in the
words and judgment of Master Zanchie, is of Rabbah. Quod est crescore, i.e.
augere. Vocem hanc habemus, Levit. 25. Significatur autem hac voce, usura sese
multiplicans, (for indeed it is a Nowne from the Conjugation Hithpael.) Cum
scilicet Vsura, (nempe iniqua) non persoluta, novam parit Vsuram. Quam certe
damnat Lex Dei, Levit. 25.36. Vbi utramque vocem conjungit Neshech and
Tharebith, and utramque damnat, cavetque ne fiat. Quare neque haec vox in
sacris literis in bonam partem accipi potest. Atque illam primam Vsuram, quae
Neshech dicitur, vocant Iurisperiti nostri Vsuram simplicem; alteram, usuram
usurarum; cumsc. Vsura non exacta, parit novam Vsuram; and Graeci vocant (...),
quasi dicat repetitam Vsuram. So then this Tharebith is not the toothlesse or
tolerable Usury, but worse than Neshech, and therefore condemned by Scripture
with Neshech, in the same text. Yea, condemned by Zanchie, yea, as he explains
it, by humane laws as most odious. Pray mark now, that this piece of Levit.
25.35, 36. is one of those places which Doctor Ames produces that Vsur^ is
forbidden, with this limitation, viz. to the poor. When a^ you hear that the
two words there to express Usury, signifying such a Usury as for the nature is
unlawful to be done to any man whatsoever, poor or rich. And it is not my
judgment only, but Zanchies, that seems to be a favourer to Usurers. And
Neshech there used, is condemned by Doctor Ames himself, and therefore he
somewhat smites himself to say Usury is forbidden, Levit. 25.36. to poor,
because poor. When it is rather forbidden, because Neshech: and soon makes
any Client so poor new as to borrow, a non to be very poor.
Me thinks, Zanchie or Ames, or any man that would intimate a tolerable Usury,
should have done so much as told us by what name that tolerable lawful Usury
is called in old Testament, where they pretend it is allowed. But they leave us
to our selves. Well therefore I go on. The third word for Usury is (...) which
signifies Frauds, Doli, Vsurae: It signifies cheating and cozening as well as
Usury, intimating that Usury is of an odious abominable nature, to be shunned
as a dangerous thing to entrap ones estate and livelihood. You shall not take
my word for this, or learned Shindlers; but I will produce our English Bibles,
and the best and last translation. Prove. 29.13. it is said, The poor and the
deceitful man meet together. The Hebrew word for deceitful man is Ish
Terakim, the word before named. The man of cunning deceits; which because it
signifies the Usurer, therefore in the margent it is rendered Usurer. Beside
these three words for Usury, I can find not one Hebrew word more, upon diverse
diligent searchings. Nor did others handling Usury, ever name so many as I
have, that I could find, or hear of. As for N. T. it is expressly named there,
but implicitly forbidden under the precept of free lending. And under all
these names Usury is made odious; therefore where is the name of that Usury
that Doctor Ames, or any, would intimate to be lawful? 2 Reply to the clause
is this: All Usury in Scripture is either Neshech, or Tharbith, or Terakim: But
all these are vilified and disgraced in Scripture as odious, therefore all
Usury in Scripture is forbidden, or disgraced as unlawful. The two first
expressly forbidden. The last word is, you see, not used in any precept or
position about Usury, but only as a name of the wicked rich man, and you see
what an odious signification it has; insomuch that the Usurers conscience
shall judge whether Terakim is not spoken against in Scripture, when called
cozening or deceitful dealing Usury. For the Usurer will not have his Usury
called cozening, or fraud, or deceit. Nay, if they would but see how they are
hated and cursed for taking Use, they would disallow their Usury. So Cic.
Attic. 85.6. Primum improbantur hi quaestus, qui in odia hominum incurrunt, ut
portitorum (toll or tax takers) and foeneratorum. But alas Usury in this is
worse than the worst sins. Those deny the fact, but excuse not the sin: These
confess the fact but deny the sin. 2 Our reply to the last clause, that
Usury is taken away, quando debitum exigitur cum rigore, etc. is briefly this.
The breach of the Law, consistit in indivisibili. (...), be it never so small,
is sin. 1 Ioh. 3.8, 9. David smote him for cutting of Saul's garment. It is
laid to the charge of the old world, Genesis 6.5. that they brake the Law in the
thoughts of their imaginations, and therefore God would bring upon them the
flood. And, Cursed is he that continues not in all the Law, etc. Gal. 3.10.
But the Law takes hold of thoughts, Thou shall not covet, etc. in the tenth
Commandment. See how Paul applies it, Romans 7. Therefore if all gain forbear
lending, for a bare principle, fully repayed, or to be repayed, be taken, be it
more or less, cum rigore, or absque rigore, it is all the same. For how is it
conceiveable that such gain should be taken, sine damno proximi, when the most
Divines that press restitution, do it on this ground, Usury ought to be
restored, because it has bin a damma^e to the so borrower. But says Master
Capel, The other part of the Schools, with whom, says he, I join, hold
restitution, because by Usury there is no true title jure divino, no not in
justice, to that which comes in that way. He quotes in the margent, Greg. de
Valent. Tom. 3. dis. 5. q. 21. pu. 3.

D. Ames.
Scriptura tollit illam usuram quae charitati repugnat, Luc. 6.35. i.e. The
^cripture takes away the Usury that is repugnant and opposite to charity.

Replicatio.
Therefore the Scripture takes away all Usury. 1 Because all is opposite to
charity. No man but would borrow freely if he could, therefore you ought so to
lend. 2 Because opposite to the Law of God as we hear, Ezech. 18. Psalm. 15.
Nehem. 5. restore the hundredth part, without mention of brother that is poor,
or biting, etc. But the sum of the Law is charity. As Christ approves the
answer of the Lawyer. Ergo. 3 Because opposite to that place, Luke 6.35.
alleged by Doct. Ames, Lend freely, looking for nothing. Finally take notice,
that whereas before the learned Doctor averred, that borrowing ought to be free
could not be proved; yet here he alleges this of Luke 6.35. Lend freely,
which not to observe, is against the law of charity, says the Doctor. Usury,
says Master Smith, is against charity.

Forsan and illam omnem Vsuram tollit, D. Ames.
quae ex lege politica Iudaeis inter se exercere non licebat. Deuteronomy. 33.19, 20.
Perhaps also it takes away all that Usury which was not lawful for the Jews,
by the political Law, to exercise one toward another. Unto a stranger thou
may lend upon Usury, but unto thy brother thou shall not lend upon Usury;
that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all thou set thy hand unto, etc.
Vnae Scriptura indicare videtur aliquam Vsuram esse per se licitam: Dum
aequali, non egeno extraneo accipere Vsuras Iudaeis permittebat.

Great glory is made of this Text, Replicat^o. in gener.
to prove Usury not simply unlawful. But as permission by law to execute death
upon malefactors, does not prove murder not simply unlawful: So toleration of
Usury here toward them whose lives the Jews might take away, does not prove
but that Usury is nevertheless simply unlawful. For al^ that ever gave a
reason why Usury toward the Canaanites (for the seven kingdoms of the
Canaanites are the only strangers here meant, by the confession of the
learned, and no other strangers) was permitted, was because their lives were
given to the Jews, and consequently their estates too. Therefore to object a
private Jew might not take away a Canaanites life, is only to argue, that a
private Jew might not take Usury of a Canaanite. For the Canaanites goods is
not his, except the life. Therefore this objection (that is grounded on that
which does not appear in the Text, that a private Jew might not kill a
Canaanite) does infer theft to be lawful, to prove Usury not unlawful. For
if a private Jew has no power over the Canaanites life, then not over his
estate; for what other rule is there? and so taking that he has nothing to do
with, he robs. If he, a private Jew, takes use of him, surely if he does it by
virtue of the public political Law, dirived to him particularly; sure then
the reason or ground of that law being public that Jews are to have power
over the Canaanites lives, comes down to him in particular: Or else his
particular and private Usury is without reason. 2 God tolerated the Jews
robbing the Egyptians: yet it does not follow thence, that theft is not simply
unlawful Therefore Master Pe^^ins m^^es this a r^^e of understanding the Law.
That the Law is still peremptory, and still the same in nature. The Lawmakers
dispensation being but for a special and particular time or occasion. And his
act transcendent.
.

Replicatio in partic. 1.
Suppose this were a toleration of Usury for the Jew upon the Canaanite,
without consideration of power over the Canaanites lives; yet what were this to
uphold any kind of Usury to be used of and toward Christians? when as two
learned men, Calvin and Willet, do not doubt from this place (which seems a
toleration) to conclude Usury to be utterly unlawful among Christians. Their
argument is this. The Hebrews were forbidden to take any Usury at all of their
brethren; of the Gentiles they might; but now diruta est maceries, the wall of
partition is taken away, there is neither Jew nor Gentile, but all are one in
Christ: therefore Christians may not take use of Christians. Before this
argument Master Willet puts this position [Vsury is simply unlawful:] He makes
the said argument his first argument, and at the end of it he subscribes
Calvin. The second particular Reply, From the manner of the Holy Ghosts setting
down this rule touching Usury, and men's urging, sc. as a toleration. Upon
which, Master Capels position is this: I know, says he, the Law permitted
Usury to the Jews to the stranger. What of that? It follows the rather, that
it is of it self a sin; because permission is of sins, not of duties. So
Master Capel. Meditate well on this answer. Perhaps at the first sight you will
wonder, and object, Does God then tolerate sin? Before he tolerated it is
simply sin, and so it is when his toleration cease. But God being above the
Commandment, his Will being the everlasting platform of the Commandment, he
may dispense; and when and how far he makes it no Law, there is no
transgression. The moral Law was written, say the general consent of Divines,
in Adams heart, and so was from the beginning, and yet still is in force. Yet
at first it was no adultery for the brother to marry the sister: I mean no
breach of the Commandment of Adultery: God showing by necessity, his Will for
that generation, to dispense. So, Thou shall not steal, is a Negative
Commandment, and so binds semper, and ad semper. But when God bids the
Israelites borrow of, and not pay the Egyptians, this is no theft: God having a
reason, that the breach of this Commandment then was greater justice than to
keep it. The same may be said for Usury. If Kings and Emperors must be obeyed
in their wholesome laws, under penalty of sin: But it is no sin to do contrary
to any law they make, when first they have for that time repealed them. Then
God has much more that power. The third particular reply is, That in the
judgment of most learned men, the reason of this dispensation, viz. the leave
the Jews had to slay the Canaanites, does the more show the vileness and
cruelty of Usury. First, let us hear Master Capel, that we may knit this to
that which was but quoted of him, that he may the better clear himself. The
thing is (says Master Capel) There was a Law to kill the Canaanite, and yet I
hope that killing was not murder: No more was that Usury a sin to them.
Next, let us hear Master Willet, backing himself with the judgments and
reasons of the Fathers. if it be objected (says Master Willet) that God
permitted the Hebrews to take Usury of the Gentiles, therefore it was not
simply unlawful. To this (says he) it may be answered, that they were those
seven Nations of the Canaanites, of whom they might take Usury: which Nations
they were commanded to destroy, and so by this means they might weaken their
estate, and impoverish them. Whereupon (says Master Willet) Ambrose infers,
Ab hoc Vsuram exige, quem non sit crimen occidere And, cui jure inferuntur
arma, huic legitima indicuntur Vsura.
. And so (says he) Augustine also concludes, Non minus crudelis qui pauperem
trucidat f^nore, quam qui eripit diviti. Add to these Simler; Vbi jus belli,
ibi jus Vsurae.

Si enim omnis Vsura esset intrinsece ac sua natura mala, D. Ames.
tum non potuere Iudaei a gentibus accipere Vsuras sine scandalo gravi, quo
gentes averterentur a religione ac lege Iudaeorum, quae admitteret rem
illicitam tanquam licitam. i.e. For if all Usury intrinsecally, and in its own
nature were evil, then the Jews could not have taken Usury of the Gentiles,
without great scandal, to the averting of the Gentiles from the religion and
law of the Jews tolerating a thing unlawful.

By the same reason we may say, Replicatio.
If theft had been intrinsecally, and in its own nature unlawful, then the
Jews could not have borrowed of the Egyptians jewels, not repaying them,
without great scandal, whereby the Egyptians might be turned away from the
religion and Law of the Jews, which did admit of a thing, unlawful in the
opinion of the Egyptians, to be as lawful. But we know that theft was simply,
and in its own nature unlawful, notwithstanding this dispensation. So was
Usury, notwithstanding that permission. For (...) this borrowing of jewels, as
that lending upon Usury, was an act of distributive justice, to justly punish
male factors, as enemies of the common state of the Church, not belonging to
commutative justice of trading and trafficking, borrowing, lending, etc. 2 We
are not to examine Gods Laws by the uncertain rule of scandal taken by
graceless men For the Gospel, and the liberty thereof was a scandal to the
Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 1.
, but rather by the holiness and uprightness of Gods will, which we know to
be so perfect, that the laws and dispensations it dictates, cannot be
condemned of scandall-giving. 3 We know murder was simply unlawful. And no
doubt but the Canaanites would take great offense at Jew and Jewish religion,
if the Jews invading their Kingdoms, would kill any of the Canaanites; yet
neither of these reasons made it unlawful or inconvenient (God giving them
this liberty) to kill and destroy all Jericho and Ay, etc So, nor the law
against theft, nor offense that might be taken by the Gentile, made it
unlawful or inconvenient for the Jew to pick the Cannaanites pocket by Usury,
seeing they might do more (by divine dispensation) viz. cut their throats, as
an act of just war. The Kings law is still current, that murder and robbing is
felony and death; though he sends his officer to take away the life and goods
of one that is not to be owned for a free Denison, but rather standing under a
foreign power, denying the Kings Supremacy, as Jesuits, etc. So the
Canaanites denied the Israelites to have any right to Canaan, or authority over
them; and therefore the Jews took their lives, or goods, or both, as
forfeited, without prejudice to the simple unlawfulness of murder, theft,
Usury, etc. 4 This toleration, in stead of taking offense, might probably bring
in the Canaanites to turn to the Jewish Religion. For when they saw no Jews
life or goods in jeopardy by war and Usury, but the Cananites, they might
reason within themselves who would be a Canaanite, and not a Jew? Seeing that
which is simply illicitum, unlawful among the Jews and their confederates, is
counted as a lawful act and execution of common justice upon a Canaanite, to
take away his goods by Usury, nay, Neshech, biting Usury, and his life by
war. For so in Deuteronomy. 23.19. Of thy brother thou shall not take (...) Neshech,
but verse. 20. extraneo, (...) Tashich, foenerabis; which Tashich is of the root
(...) which signifies to take Neshech, biting Usury: which Doctor Ames
condemned as simply unlawful.

Huc etiam referri potest, D. Ames.
quod maxim probabile sit ex parabola illa de Talentis. Matthew. 25.27. Non
tantum in vulgari usu fuisse apud Iudaeos mensariorum aliquod foenus, sed etiam
a Domino non fuisse improbatum, quia sub illa similitudine exigit officium
spirituale sine ulla infinuatione alicujus improbationis, qualem in aliis
parabolis, quae ab usu improbato officium illustrabant, solebat adhibere. Luc.
16.8. i. e. Thither may be referred that likely conjecture out of the Parable,
Matthew. 25.27. viz. that not only there was a certain Usury among the Jews,
commonly used by the money changers, but also that it was not disallowed of the
Lord; because under that similitude he requires a spiritual duty, without any
intimation of disallowing it; which he was wont to express in other parables,
illustrating a duty from or by some disallowable act. Luke 16.8.

Replicatio.
As for the Parable of the Talents, I never heard any learned Divine, or any
other Christian urge it, but those that are Usurers, in the behalf of Usury.
For if the Text be well weighed, the comparison smites Usury: For this
comparison was not used, but upon a special occasion of retortion. The man of
one Talent alleges for his idleness, the unreasonablenesse of the Master,
that he reaped where he sowed not. Why then says the Master, if thou had
thought so indeed, or if I had been so indeed, thou should and would have
run upon unreasonable wages of bringing in advantage to me, even to have put
my money to Use, to give me content: but because thou did not do so, it is
evident that thou did not take me for a cruel Master, but rather presumedst
on my clemency, and so did not by honest gain peruse my Talent, as all the
rest have done, and brought in advantage, without Usury. For had our Savior in
the least measure connived at Usury, he would as well have aggravated the
sluggishnesse of this owner of one Talent, from the manner how they got their
increase (if they had meddled with Usury) as from the matter they had gained.
To this effect Pareus Comments on the place; Abscondisti talentum, quia sciebas
me metere quod non seminavi. Imo, si sciebas me talemesse; si vera esset tua
criminatio, abscondere non debuisti, sed elocare talentum, ut reciperem cum
lucro. Sic falsam criminationem ipsius facto convincit, and vanum ignavia
praetextum refellit. So that to me it seems evidently, that the Lord intimates
that to be such a one as to reap where another sowes, is just to be as a
Usurer; and that there is no satisfying such a Master, but by paying Use-money.
Were this a good Commentary upon the comparison, Matthew. 24.43, 44. 1 Thessalonians.
5.2. 2 Pet. 3.10. De Domino, dieque illo Domini, ut fure noctu veniente, ita
venturo, quod maxim probabile sit, non tantum in vulgari usu fuisse apud
Iudaeos furtum, sed etiam a Domino non fuisse improbatum; quia sub illa
similitudine exigit officium spirituale (nempe vigilias spirituales) sine ulla
insinuatione alicujus improbationis, qualem in aliis parabolis quae ab usu
improbato officiu^ illustrabant, solebat adhibere. Luc. 16.8? No, I should be
cried out against for such a Gloss. Then may I dislike the like Gloss upon
the Parable of the Talents, like word for word. Others answer this place to the
same effect, viz. This place (say they) will no more warrant lending on Usury,
than Christ his comparing his coming to judgment to the sudden coming of a
thief, Mat. 24.43, 44. will warrant their suddenly breaking into men's houses.

D. Ames.
Aequitas lucri demonstrari potest, ex aequitate manifesta, de qua nemo potest
dubitare, si quis nulum certum reditum vel summam sibi praecise pendi
stipuletur, sed ita pecuniam suam apud probum virum collocet ut in illius fide
acquiescat. De hujusmodi pecuniae collocatione nulla potest esse quaestio, si
periculum capitalis maneat commune. Nihil enim est aliud quam contractus
societatis in lucro and damno. i. e. The equity of gaining, can be demonstrated
by a manifest equity doubted of by none; viz. If any one shall not bargain for
any certain return, or sum of gain to be precisely paid unto him, but so
puts out his money to an honest man, that he rests in his faithfulness. Of
this way of putting out of money there can be no question, if the hazard of the
Principle be common to them both; for its nothing but partnership in gain and
loss.

Replicatio.
Does the Usurer thus put out his money? No in no case: His conscience and his
security will witness the same. What is all this then to prove the lawfulness
of putting to Use? No more than he that to prove a thing to be chalk, uses
this argument, because it is cheese.

D. Ames.
Nihil contra aequitatem committitur si lucrum incertum, quod probabiliter
sequetur, vendatur pro certo moderato. i. e. There is nothing committed
contrary to equity, if a gain uncertain, but probably following, be sold for
a moderate gain certain.

But what proof is there of this? Not a word. Replicatio.
We therefore that are nullius addicti jurare in verba magistri, may just so
answer the argument as it is proposed, saying, it is contra aequitatem. And
what is now won or lost? But we will give a reason of what we say. If false
balances be abominable, to fell less for money than one ought; If going
beyond ones brother, and circumventing him, to sell naughty commodity for
good, is unlawful; then sure it is unlawful to sell nothing for money; which
a man does often, when a man sels lucrum incertum. So the Doctor confesses. He
says, quod probabiliter sequetur. We say that also, probabiliter non sequetur.
For so we see by experience in trading. So we find by Scripture upon all men.
All things come alike to all. Pe^s 9.^
Of riches in particular: They have wings. And of dealing so as to break the
Commandments, it brings a curse on all we put our hands to. Deuteronomy. 28. And of
this sort is Usury, sc. unjust gain. Prove. 28.8. And it brings a curse on all
we put our hands to, Deuteronomy. 23.19, 20. Whiles therefore the Usurer will sell,
and the borrower will buy Gods providence over his head, you see more likely in
Usury Gods curse, and losses are bought and sold over men's heads.

Neque iniquitatis quicquid est in eo, D. Ames.
si contractus fiat legibus aequis, ut totum periculum capitalis pertineat ad
eum qui exercet pecuniam. Nihil enim aliud est quam contractus assecurationis
quo alienae rei periculum pretio aestimabile suscipitur pro pretio. i. e.
Neither is there any injustice in it, if the contract be made with equal
conditions, that the whole hazard of the principle lie upon him which uses the
money, being nothing else but a contract of insurance, whereby the hazard of
another goods valuable at a price, is undertaken for a price.

D. Ames.
Did not the Doctor but now say, De pecuniae collocatione nulla potest esse
quaestio, si periculum capitalis maneat commune? Therefore it follows, si non
sit commune, est quaestio -- 2 How there may be contractus legibus aequis
factus de re injusta facienda, is beyond any man of sound reason to conceive. 3
If it be rei alienae periculum, why should it not so abide? why should any man
lend for care? why should he lay another man's sacks upon his shoulders? seeing
every day (...): especially seeing there is danger of sin to be laid on the
borrowers shoulders, as well as care, to help the Usurer to sin and live
unprofitably, which could not be without the borrower. If it be rei alienae
periculum, how shall it be on both sides, that neither has wrong, sc. pretio
aestimabile? It is all in Gods hands how great the periculum may be. One wedge
may fire all the stuff of Achan. By occasion of this Vsury-money, the borrower
may fall into dealing that may inwrap all his estate, and all may be lost.

Non necessario requiritur, D. Ames.
ut istiusmodi contractus distinct aut express fiant, sed satis est si fiant
implicit ex intention sincera, and secundu^ aestimationem proborum. i.e. It
is not necessary that such like contracts be made distinctly and expressly, it
being sufficient if they be made implicitly, out of a sincere intention ratably
by honest men.

Its no need indeed that the contract be express for the committing of the
sin of Usury. Replicatio.
For the Doctor said before, Vsura est lucrum ex mutuo quaesitum, non
conventum; quia est Vsura tam mentalis, quam realis -- 2 To seek intentionem
sinceram in an Usurer, is to look a rose among nettles, figs on thorns, and
grapes of thistles. 3 For the aestimatio proborum, be bold of it, they will be
judges of no such matters, unless they may judge the loss upon the idle
unprofitable Usurer, and the gain to the laboring borrower.

Si isti omnes contractus separatim sint liciti, D. Ames.
contractus ex iis compositus sit licitus. i.e. If all these contracts be
separately and singly lawful, then one compounded of them is lawful.

To these severally we have answered, Replicatio.
with several reasons and allegations: And therefore I wonder the worthy
Doctor would once speak such a word [ut omnes concedunt.] Therefore of these
lucra, single or mixed, we conclude with the old verse, Et quae non prosint
singula, mixta mala.
Or with this, Singula si noceant, eadem quoque juncta nocebunt.


Quaestio quarta est, quaenam observanda sunt ad peccatum vitandum in pecunia
exponenda? D. Ames.
i.e. The fourth question is, what rules are to be observed, whereby to avoid
sin in putting out money?

Replicatio.
It should seem there is a common fault and sin in putting out of money, by
the Doctors confession.

D. Ames.
But he thinks it avoidable by these cautions: 1 Ne quid ultra sortem exigatur
ab egenis. 2 Ne lucri aviditas impediat foeneratorem quo minus pauperes
simpliciter donando juvet. 3 Non totum illud exigere, quod legibus and usu
recepto licet. i.e. 1 That nothing above the principle be exacted of the poor.
2 That greediness of gain hinder not the Usurer from lending to the poor. 3
That he exact not all that law and custom tolerates.

Replicatio.
1 Let the Usurers conscience, and vox populi witness, whether these cautions
be observed. 2 If these be observed; yet God witnesses against the Usurer. Non
vitatur peccatum in pecunia exponenda, as I have already cleared it out of Gods
Word, canvased and argued with the allegations and reasons of godly and learned
authors. 3 To make the question, An Vsura sit licita; and to put down, dictate
and suggest cautions, without proof, as sufficient to take away the nature of
Usury, is petitio principii, a begging of the question.

Spectanda semper, and observanda regula aquitatis, D. Ames.
and charitatis; ut illud tantum accipiatur, quod quisque bona fide vellet a se
accipi in simili necessitate deprehenso. i.e. Always the rule of equity and
charity is to be observed. viz. That so much only be taken, which every one in
very deed, would have to be taken of him, were he in the same condition.

We have already showed, Replicatio.
that in committing this sin of Usury more or less, there can be no equity
or charity found: For if there could, the question were yielded, Usury were not
sin. 2 For doing as one would be done by, i.e. say the Schoolmen, secundum
rectam rationem. Saul would have his armor-bearer run him through; therefore
might Saul run his armor-bearer through? The lender upon Usury thinks it no
sin so to lend; therefore if he were in the borrowers case, he would not
doubt but lawfully so to borrow. But if the Usurer and the Borrower were well
informed, secundum rectam rationem, they would know (as very learned men hold)
it is unlawful to borrow or lend upon Use, and so would neither do, nor be
done to upon Usury.

The Caution. D. Ames.
Offensiones and calumniae (quibus obnoxium est hoc genus co^ractuum. Jer.
15.10.) declinari semper dabeat, quantum fieri potest. i. e. The last Caution
is, that offenses and calumnies (to which this kind of contract is liable.
Ier. 15.10.) ought to be avoided as much as may be.

Replicatio.
This dasheth near all the Doctor has laid down before in favor of Usury. 1
He confesses Usury to be a thing of evil report, out of Ier. 15.10. 2 That
offenses must be avoided, etc. we infer therefore Usury must be left. 1 By
the rule of this; Woe unto the world because of offenses. Better a millstone,
etc. But so do Usurers offend many of their clients, to cursing. So do they
offend their Minister, to heartbreaking sorrow, especially at times of
Communion. 2 By the Apostles rule, Philip. 4. Whatsoever is of good report,
etc. If there be any praise, think of these things.

Thus Ames urged at our Conference. There was another author named, (sed
excidit memoria) whereby to countenance Usury, as if the urging of men's
authority without their reasons, were of any validity.

1 We viz. 6 learned pious Bishops; 10 learned pious Doctors; 22 learned pious
Divines; with an addition of the witty reasons of three famous English Poets. 2
If we run upon men's authorities, we shall be robbed of all the Commandments,
or the maine branches of them. The learned Atheist will take away the first
Commandment. I have seen in Cardinal B^^onius his Talmud the second Com.
bl^tted out with his own pen, And left out in Romans Catech. Council. Viennens.
Council. Ta rocon^ens. c. 3. Council. Laterancos. par. 16. c. 1. See also Willet
on Exodus 22. qu. 46.
The Papist the second. The Anabaptist the third. The Jew the fourth. The Popes
dispensations the fifth, sixth, and seventh. The Usurer the eighth. The
equivocating Jesuit the ninth. The Papist the tenth, that Concupiscence is no
sin. 3 The Canonists and Canon Law have this remarkable decree; SI QUIS
AFFIRMARE PRAESUMAT, EXERCERE USURAS NON ESSE PECCATUM, etc. If any presume to
affirm that it is no sin to practice Usury, we decree him worthy to be
punished as an Heretic. Finally, we have not only learned pious men's
arguments in abundance to prove Usury unlawful, but that it is so unlawful,
as that restitution must be made; Usurers being bound to it by the Law of God.
See Capel of Temptations; That it is utterly unlawful to borrow upon Use. So
the learned Jews and Rabbines. See Ainsworth on Exodus 22.25. They prove it out
of Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not cause to bite; Thou shall not cause to lend upon
biting Usury. By traditon we have been taught, that this is an admonition to
the borrower. Three times more in the said place they say it is unlawful to
borrow upon Use. I add, If Usury be simply a sin, as the learned prove, and
you have heard them alleged: Then how can a man be accessory to it, and not be
guilty?

Finally,

Sol.
But if God (on pain of excluding heaven) forbids Usury, Psalm. 15. Ezech. 18.
sure no case can make it necessary. Capel to this alleges Tullie, That no
necessity can license a man to take that which is not ones own. And Erasmus,
that these in case of necessity, is still sin. Nor may we, nor can we upon any
pretense conceive, that God will so prevent man's good, that he will make it
condemnation to do that, which our Cases (we make) say we must needs do.

FINIS.

