A LEARNED AND COMFORTABLE SERMON OF THE certainty and perpetuity of faith in
the Elect; especially of the Prophet Habakkuks faith. BY RICHARD HOOKER,
SOMEtimes fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes
dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1612.

ABAC. 1.4. Whether the Prophet Abacuck by admitting this cogitation into his
mind, The Law does fail, did thereby show himself an unbeliever.
WE have seen in the opening of this clause which concerns the weakness
of the Prophets faith, first what things they are whereunto the faith of sound
believers does assent: secondly wherefore al men assent not thereunto: and
thirdly why they that do, do it many times with small assurance. Now because
nothing can be so truly spoken but through misvndersta^ding it may be depraved;
therefore to prevent if it be possible, all misconstruction in this cause,
where a small error cannot rise but with great danger, it is perhaps needful
ere we come to the fourth point, that something be added to that which has
been already spoken concerning the third.

That mere natural men do neither know nor acknowledge the things of God
we do not marvel, because they are spiritually to be discerned: but they in
whose hearts the light of grace does shine, they that are taught of God, why are
they so weak in faith? Why is their assenting to the law so scrupulous, so
much mingled with fear and wavering? It seems strange that ever they should
imagine the law to fail. It cannot seem strange if we weigh the reason. If
the things which we believe be considered in themselves, it may truly be
said that faith is more certain then any Science. That which we know either
by sense, or by infallible demonstration, is not so certain as the principles,
articles, and conclusions of Christian faith. Concerning which we must note,
that there is a certainty of evidence, and a certainety of adherence.
Certainty of evidence we call that, when the mind does assent unto this or
that, not because it is true in it self, but because the truth is clear,
because it is manifest to us. Of things in themselves most certain, except
they be also most evident, our persuasion is not so assured, as it is of
things more evident although in themselves they be less certain. It is as
sure, if not surer, that there be spirits, as that there be men: but we be
more assured of these then of them, because these are more evident. The truth
of some things is so evident that no man which hears them can doubt of them:
as when we hear that a part of any thing is less then the whole, the mind
is constrained to say this is true. If it were so in matters of faith, the^ as
all men have equal certainety of this, so no believer should be more
scrupulous and doubtful then an other. But we find the contrary. The Angels
and spirits of the righteous in heaven have certainety most evident of things
spiritual: but this they have by the light of glory. That which we see by the
light of grace, though it be indeed more certain, yet is it not to us so
evidently certain, as that which sense or the light of nature will not suffer
a man to doubt of. Proofs are vain and frivolous except they be more
certain then is the thing proved: and do we not see how the spirit every
where in the scripture proves matters of faith, labors to confirm us in
the thing which we believe, by things whereof we have sensible knowledge? I
conclude therefore that we have less certainety of evidence concerning things
believed, then concerning sensible or naturally perceived. Of these who does
doubt at any time? Of them at sometime who doubts not? I will not here allege
the sundry co^fessions of the perfectest that have lived upon earth concerning
their great imperfections this way; which if I did, I should dwell too long
upon a matter sufficiently known by every faithful man that does know
himself.

The other which we call the certainty of adherence, is when the heart does
cleave and stick unto that which it does believe. This certainty is greater
in us then the other. The reason is this. The faith of a Christian does
apprehend the words of the Law, the promises of God, not only as true, but also
as good: and therefore even then when the evidence which he has of the truth
is so small that it grieveth him to feel his weakness in assenting thereto;
yet is there in him such a sure adherence unto that which he does but faintly
and fearefullie believe, that his spirit having once truly tasted the heavenly
sweetness thereof, all the world is not able quite and clean to remove him
from it: but he striveth with himself to hope against all reason of believing,
being settled with Job upon this immovable resolution, Though God kill me I
will not give over trusting in him. For why? This lesson remains for ever
imprinted in him, It is good for me to cleave unto God. Psalm. 73.

Now the minds of all men being so darkened as they are with the foggie dampe
of original corruption, it cannot be that any man's heart living should be
either so enlightened in the knowledge, or so established in the love of that
wherein his salvation stands, as to be perfect, neither doubting nor
shrinking at all. If any such were, what does let why that man should not be
justified by his own inherent righteousness? For righteousness inherent being
perfect will justify. And perfect faith is a part of perfect righteousness
inherent; yea a principal part* the root and the mother of all the rest: so
that if the fruit of every tree be such as the root is, faith being perfect, as
it is if it be not at all mingled with distrust and fear, what is there to
exclude other Christian virtues from the like perfections? And then what need
we the righteousness of Christ? His garment is superfluous; we may be honorably
clothed with our own Robes, if it be thus. But let them beware who challenge
to themselves a strength which they have not, least they loose the comfortable
support of that weakness which indeed they have.

Some show although no soundnes of ground there is which may be alleged for
defense of this supposed perfection in certainety touching matters of our
faith: as first that Abraham did believe and doubted not; secondly, that the
spirit which God has given us to no other end but only to assure us that we
are the sons of God, to embolden us to call upon him as our father, to open
our eyes and to make the truth of things believed evident unto our minds, is
much mightier in operation then the common light of nature, whereby we discern
sensible things: wherefore we must needs be more sure of that we believe, then
of that we see; we must needs be more certain of the mercies of God in Christ
Jesus, then we are of the light of the sun when it shines upon our faces. To
that of Abraham, He did not doubt, I answer, that this negation does not
exclude all fear, all doubting; but only that which cannot stand with true
faith. It freeth Abraham from doubting through infidelity, not from doubting
through infirmity; from the doubting of unbelievers, not of weak believers;
from such a doubting as that whereof the Prince of Samaria is attainted, who
hearing the promise of sudden plenty in the midst of extreme dearth
answered, a Though the Lord would make windows in heaven, were it possible so
to come to pass? But that Abraham was not void of al doubting, what need we
any other proof then the plain evide^ce of his own words, Genesis 17. v. 17. The
reason which is taken from the power of the spirit were effectual, if God did
work like a natural agent, as the fire does inflame, and the sun inlighten,
according to the uttermost ability which they have to bring forth their
effects. But the incomprehensible wisdom of God does limit the effects of his
power to such a measure as seems best unto him self. Wherefore he works
that certainty in all, which suffices abundantly to their salvation in the
life to come; but in none so great as attaineth in this life unto perfection.
Even so, o Lord, it has pleased thee, even so it is best and fittest for us,
that feeling still our own infirmities, we may no longer breath then pray,
Adiuva Domine. Help Lord our incredulity. Of the third question this I hope
will suffice being added unto that which has bin thereof already spoken. The
fourth question rests and so an end of this point.

That which comes last of all in this first branch to be considered
concerning the weakness of the Prophets faith: whether he did by this very
thought The Law does fail quench the spirit, fall from faith, and show
himself an unbeliever or no. The question is of moment, the repose and
tranquillity of infinite souls does depend upon it. The Prophets case is the
case of many; which way soever we cast for him, the same way it passes for all
others. If in him this cogitation did extinguish grace, why the like thoughts
in us should not take the like effect, there is no cause. Forasmuch therefore
as the matter is weighty, dear and precious which we have in hand, it
behooves us with so much the greater charines to wade through it, taking
special heed both what we build, and whereon we build: that if our building
be pearl, our foundation be not stubble; if the doctrine we teach be full of
comfort and consolation, the ground whereupon we gather it be sure: otherwise
we shall not save but deceive both our selves and others. In this we know we
are not deceived, nether can we deceive you, when we teach that the faith
whereby ye are sanctified cannot fail; it did not in the Prophet, it shall
not in you. If it be so; let the difference be showed between the condition
of unbelievers and his, in this or in the like imbecillitie and weakness.
There was in Abakkuk, that which S* John does call the seed of God, meaning
thereby, the first grace which God powers into the hearts of them that are
incorporated into Christ; which having received, if because it is: an
adversary unto sin, we do therefore think we sirv not both otherwise, and
also by distrustful and doubtful apprehending of that, which we ought
steadfastly to believe, surely we do but deceive our selves. Yet they which are
of God do not sin either in this, or in any thing any such sin as does
quite extinguish grace, clean cut them of from Christ Jesus: because the seed
of God abides in them, and does shield them from receaving any irremediable
wound. Their faith when it is at strongest is but weak; yet even then when it
is at the weakest, so strong, that utterly it never fails, it never perishes
altogether, no not in them, who think it extinguished in themselves. There are
for whose sakes I dare not deal slightly in this cause, sparing that labor
which must be bestowed to make it plain. Men in like agonies unto this of the
Prophet Abakkuks are through extremity of grief many times in judgment so
confounded, that they find not themselves in themselves. For that which
dwells in their hearts they seek, they make diligent search and inquiry. It
abides, it works in them, yet still they ask where? Still they lament as
for a thing which is past finding: they mourn as Rachell, and refuse to be
comforted as if that were not, which indeed is; and as if that which is not
were; as if they did not believe when they do; and as if they did despair when
they do not. Which in some I grant is but a melancholy passion proceeding only
from that dejection of mind, the cause whereof is in the body, and by bodily
means can be taken away. But where there is no such bodily cause, the mind is
not lightly in this mood, but by some of these three occasions. One; that
judging by comparison either with other men or with themselves, at some other
time more strong, they think imperfection to be a plain deprivation, weakness
to be utter want of faith. An other cause is; they often mistake one thing for
an other. Saint Paul wishing well to the church of Rome prays for them after
this sort; The God of hope fill you with all joy of believing. Hence an error
grows when men in heavines of spirit suppose they lack faith, because they
find not the sugered joy and delight which indeed does accompany faith, but
so as a separable accident, as a thing that may be removed from it; yea there
is a cause why it should be removed. The light would never be so acceptable,
were it not for that usual intercourse of darkness. Too much honey does turn
to gall, and too much joy even spiritually would make us wantons. Happier a
great deal is that man's case whose soul by inward desolation is humbled then
he whose heart is through abundance of spiritual delight lifted up and exalted
above measure. Better it is sometimes to go down into the pit with him, who
beholding darkness, and bewailing the loss of inward joy and consolation,
cries from the bottom of the lowest hell, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? then continually to walk arm in arm with Angels, to sit as it
were in Abraham's bosom, and to have no thought, no cogitation, but, I thank my
God it is not with me as it is with other men. No; God will have them that
shall walk in light, to feel now and then what it is to sit in the shadow
of death. A grieved spirit therefore is no argument of a faithless mind. A
third occasion of men's misiudging themselves, as if they were faithless when
they are not, is; They fasten their cogitations upon the distrustful
suggestions of the flesh, whereof finding great abundance in themselves, they
gather thereby, surely unbelief has full dominion, it has taken plenarie
possession of me; if I were faithful it could not be thus. Not marking the
motions of the spirit and of faith, because they lie buried and overwhelmed
with the contrary: when notwithstanding as the blessed Apostle does
acknowledge, that the spirit groneth, and that God hears when we do not; so
there is no doubt, but that our faith may have and has her privy operations
secret to us, in whom, yet known to him by whom they are. Tell this to a man
that has a mind deceaved by too hard an opinion of himself, and it does but
augment his grief: he has his answer ready; will you make me think
otherwise then I find, the^ I feel in my self? I have thoroughly considered and
exquisitely sifted all the corners of my heart, and I see what there is: never
seek to persuade me against my knowledge, I do not, I know I do not believe.
Well, to favor them a little in their weakness: let that be granted which
they do imagine; be it that they are faithless and without belief. But are
they not grieved for their unbelief? They are. Do they not wish it might and
also strive that it may be otherwise? We know they do. Whence comes this but
from a secret love and liking which they have of those things that are
believed? No man can love things which in his own opinion are not. And if they
think those things to be, which they show that they love, when they desire to
believe them; then must it needs be that by desiring to believe, they prove
themselves true believers. For without faith, no man thinks that things
believed are. Which argument all the subtlety of infernal powers will never
be able to dissolve. The faith therefore of true believers, though it have many
and grievous downfalls, yet does it still continue invincible; it conquereth
and recovereth it self in the end. The dangerous conflicts whereunto it is
subject are not able to prevail against it. The Prophet Abacuck remained
faithful in weakness, though weak in faith. It is true, such is our weak
and wavering nature, that we have no sooner received grace, but we are ready
to fall from it: we have no sooner given our assent to the law that it cannot
fail, but the next conceit which we are ready to embrace, is, that it may,
and that it does fail. Though we find in our selves a most willing heart to
cleave unseparably unto God, even so far as to think unfeignedly with Peter,
Lord I am ready to go with thee into prison and to death: yet how soon and
how easily, upon how small occasions are we changed, if we be but a while let
alone and left unto our selves? The Galathians to day for their sakes which
teach them the truth in Christ, content if need were to pluck out their own
eyes, and the next day ready to pluck out theirs which taught them. The love of
the Angel to the Church of Ephesus, how greatly enflamed and how quickly
slacked? The higher we flow the nearer we are unto an ebb, if men be respected
as mere men according to the wonted course of their alterable inclination,
without the heave^ly support of the spirit. Again, the desire of our ghostly
enemy is so incredible, and his means so forcible to overthrowe our faith, that
whom the blessed Apostle knew betroathed and made handfast unto Christ, to
them he could not write but with great trembling: I am jealous over you with a
godly jealousy, for I have prepared you to one husband to present you a pure
virgin unto Christ: but I fear least as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtlety; so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which is in
Christ. The simplicity of faith which is in Christ takes the naked promise of
God, his bare word, and on that it rests. This simplicity the serpent
laboreth continually to pervert, corrupting the mind with many imaginations of
repugnancie and contrariety between the promise of God, and those things which
sense or experience or some other fore conceaved persuasion has imprinted. The
word of the promise of God unto his people is, I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee: upon this the simplicity of faith rests, and it is not afraid
of famine. But mark how the subtilty of Satan did corrupt the minds of that
rebellious generation, whose spirits were not faithful unto God. They beheld
the desolate state of the desert in which they were, and by the wisdom of
their sense, concluded the promise of God to be but folly: Ca^ God prepare a
table in the wilderness? The word of the promise to Sara was, Thou shall bear a
Son* Faith is simple and doubts not of it: but Satan to corrupt this
simplicity of faith, entangleth the mind of the woman with an argument drawn
from common experience to the contrary. A woman that is old; Sara now to be
acquainted again with forgotten passions of youth* The word of the promise of
God by Moses and the Prophets made the Savior of the world so apparent unto
Philip, that his simplicity could conceive no other Messiah, then Jesus of
Nazareth the son of Joseph. But to stay Nathaniel least being invited to come
and see, he should also believe and so be saved: the subtilty of Satan
casts a mist before his eyes, puts in his head against this, the common
conceaved persuasion of all men concerning Nazareth; Is it possible that a good
thing should come from thence? This stratagem he does use with so great
dexterity, the minds of all men are so strangely ensorceled with it, that it
bereaveth the^ for the time of all perceavance of that which should relieve
them and be their comfort, yea it takes all remembrance from them, even of
things wherewith they are most familiarly acquainted. The people of Israel
could not be ignorant that he which led them through the sea, was able to feed
them in the desert: but this was obliterated and put out by the sense of their
present want. Feeling the hand of God against them in their food, they
remembered not his hand in the day that he delivered them from the hand of the
oppressor. Sara was not then to learn that with God all things are possible.
Had Nathaniel never noted, how God does choose the base things of this world,
to disgrace them that are most honorably esteemed? The Prophet Abakuk knew
that the promises of grace, protection, and favor which God in the law does
make unto his people, do not grant them any such immunitie as can free and
exempt them from all chastisements: he knew that as God said, I will continue
my mercy for ever toward them; so he likewise said, their transgressions I
will punish with a rod: he knew that it cannot stand with any reason we should
set the measure of our own punishments, and prescribe unto God how great or
how long our sufferings shall be: he knew that we were blind and altogether
ignorant what is best for us; that we sue for many things very unwisely
against our selves, thinking we ask fish when indeed we crave a serpent: he
knew that when the thing we ask is good, and yet God seems slow to grant
it, he does not deny but defer our petitions, to the end we might learn to
desire great things greatly: all this he knew. But beholding the land which
God had severed for his own people; and seeing it abandoned unto heathen
nations; viewing how reproachfully they did tread it down, and wholly make
havoc of it at their pleasure; beholding the Lords own Royal Seat made an
heap of stones, his temple defiled, the carkases of his servants cast out for
the souls of the air to devour, and the flesh of his meek ones for the
beasts of the field to feed upon; being conscious to himself how long and how
earnestly he had cried, Succor us o God of our welfare for the glory of thine
own name; and feeling that their soar was still increased: the conceit of
repugnancie between this which was object to his eyes, and that which faith
upon promise of the law did look for, made so deep an impression and so
strong, that he disputes not the matter, but without any further enquiry or
search infers as we see, The Law does fail.

Of us who is here which cannot very soberly advise his brother; Sir you must
learn to strengthen your faith by that experience which heretofore you have
had of Gods great goodness toward you, per ea quae agnoscas praestita, discas
sperare promissa. By those things which you have known performed, learn to
hope for those things which are promised. Do you acknowledge to have received
much? Let that make you certain to receive more. Habenti dabitur. To him that
has more shall be given. When you doubt what you shall have, search what you
have had at Gods hands. Make this reckoning, that the benefits which he has
bestowed, are bills obligatorie and sufficient sureties that he will bestow
further. His present mercy is still a warrant of his future love, because whom
he loves he loves unto the end* Is it not thus? Yet if we could reckon up as
many evident, clear, undoubted signs of Gods reconciled love toward us as
there are years, yea days, yea hours past over our heads, all these set
together have not such force to confirm our faith, as the loss, and sometimes
the only fear of loosing a little transitory goods, credit, honor, or favor
of men, a small calamity, a matter of nothing to breed a conceit, and such a
conceit as is not easily again removed; that we are clean crossed out of Gods
book, that he regards us not, that he looks upon others, but passes by us
like a stranger, to whom we are not known. Then we think looking upon others
and comparing them with our selves; their tables are furnished day by day;
earth and ashes are our bread: they sing to the lute, and they see their
children dance before them; our hearts are heavy in our bodies as lead, our
sighs beat as thick as a swift pulse, our tears do wash the beds wherein we
lie: the sun shines fair upon their foreheads; we are hanged up like bottles
in the smoke, cast into corners like the sherds of a broken pot: tell not us
of the promises of Gods favor, tell such as do reap the fruit of them, they
belong not to us, they are made to others: the Lord be merciful to our
weakness; but thus it is. Well, let the frailty of our nature, the subtlety
of Satan, the force of our deceavable imaginations be, as we cannot deny but
they are, things that threaten every moment the utter subversion of our faith;
faith notwithstanding is not hazarded by these things. That which one sometimes
told the Senators of Rome, Ego sic existimabam, P.C. vti patrem saepe meum
praedicantem audiveram, qui vestram amicitiam diligenter colerent, eos multum
laborem suscipere, caeterum ex omnibus maxim tutos esse. As I have often heard
my father acknowledge so I my self did ever think, that the friends and
favorers of this state, charged themselves with great labor, but no man's
condition so safe as theirs: the same we may say a great deal more justly in
this case: our Fathers and Prophets, our Lord and master has full often
spoken, by long experience we have found it true; as many as have entered their
names in the mystical book of life, eos maximum laborem suscipere, they have
taken upon them a laboursome, a toilesome, a painful profession, sed omnium
maxim tutos esse, but no man's security like to theirs. Simon, Simon, Satan
has desired to winnow thee as wheat; Here is our toil: but I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not; this is our safety. No man's condition so sure as
ours: the prayer of Christ is more then sufficient both to strengthen us, be we
never so weak; and to overthrow all adversary power, be it never so strong
and potent. His prayer must not exclude our labor: their thoughts are vain
who think that their watching can preserve the city which God himself is not
willing to keep. And are not theirs as vain, who think that God will keep
the city, for which they themselves are not careful to watch? The husbandman
may not therefore burn his plough, nor the Merchant forsake his trade, because
God has promised, I will not forsake thee* And do the promises of God
concerning our stabilitie, think you, make it a matter indifferent for us to
use or not to use the means whereby, to attend or not to attend to reading, to
pray or not to pray that we fall not into temptation? Surely if we look to
stand in the faith of the sons of God, we must hourly, continually be
providing and setting our selves to strive. It was not the meaning of our Lord
and Savior in saying, Father keep them in thy name, that we should be
careless to keep our selves. To our own safety, our own sedulitie is
required. And then blessed for ever and ever be that mothers child whose
faith has made him the child of God. The earth may shake, the pillars of the
world may tremble under us; the countenance of the heaven may be apaled, the
Sun may loose his light, the Moon her beauty, the Stars their glory: but
concerning the man that trusts in God, if the fire have proclaimed it self
unable as much as to finge a heir of his head; if Lions, beasts ravenous by
nature and keen with hunger, being set to devour, have as it were religiously
adored the very flesh of the faithful man, what is there in the world that
shall change his heart, overthrow his faith, alter his affection toward God, or
the affection of God to him? If I be of this note, who shall make a separation
between me and my God? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No; I am persuaded that neither
tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor
peril, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall ever prevail so far over me. I know in whom I have
believed; I am not ignorant whose precious blood has been shed for me; I have
a shepherd full of kindness, full of care, and full of power: unto him I
commit my self; his own finger has engraven this sentence in the tables of
my heart; Satan has desired to winnow thee as wheat, but I have prayed that
thy faith fail not. Therefore the assurance of my hope I will labor to keep
as a jewel unto the end, and by labor, through the gracious mediation of his
prayer, I shall keep it.

FINIS.

