TWO SERMONS UPON PART OF S. JVDES EPISTLE, BY RICHARD HOOKER sometimes Fellow
of Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

AC: OX

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. Ann. Dom. 1614.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL Mr GEORGE SVMMASTER, Principal of Broad-Gates Hall in
Oxford, HENRY IACKSON wishes all happiness.
SIR,
YOur kind acceptance of a former testification of that respect I owe you, has
made me venture to show the world these godly Sermons under your name. In
which as every point is worth observation, so some especially are to be noted.
The first, that as the spirit of Prophecy is from God himself, who does
inwardly heat, and enlighten the hearts and minds of his holy Penmen, (which
if some would diligently consider, they would not puzzle themselves with the
contentions of Scot, and Thomas, Whether God only, or his ministering spirits
do infuse into men's minds prophetical revelations, per species
intelligibiles) so God framed their words also. Whence the holy Father Lib 4 ca
6. de doct. Chr.
S. Augustine religiously observes, that al those, which understand the sacred
writers, will also perceive, that they ought not to use other words, then they
did, in expressing those heavenly mysteries which their hearts conceaved, as
the Blessed Virgin did our Savior, By the holy Ghost. The greater is Castellio
his offense, who has labored to teach the Prophets to speak otherwise, then
they have already. Much like to that impious King of Spain, Alphonsus X, who
found fault with Gods works, Rob. Tolet. l. 4 cap 5.
Si, inquit, creationi affuissem, mundum melius ordinassem, if he had been
with God at the creation of the world, the world had gone better, then now it
does. As this man found fault with Gods works, so did the other with Gods
words. But because we have a 2 Pet. 1.
most (^ure word of the Prophets, to which we must take heed, I will let his
words pass with the wind, having P^aef in orat. D. Rainold.
elsewhere spoken to you more largely of his errors, whom notwithstanding, for
his other excellent parts, I much respect.

You shall moreover from hence understand, how Christianitic consists not in
formal, and seeming purity (under which who knows not notorious villainy to
mask?) but in the heart root. Whence the author truly teaches* that Mockers,
which use religion as a cloak to put off, and on, as the weather serves, are
worse then Pagans and Infidels. Where I cannot omit to show, how justly this
kind of men has been reproved by that renowned Martyr of Jesus Christ, B.
Latimer; both because it will be apposite to this purpose, and also free that
Christian worthy from the slanderous reproaches of Parsons in 3. Convers.
him, who was, if ever any, a Mocker of God, Religion, and all good men. But
first I must desire you, and in you all Readers, not to think lightly of that
excellent man for using of this, and the like witty similitudes in his
Sermons. For whosoever will call to mind, with what riff-raff Gods people were
fed in those days, when their Priests, Malac. 2 7.
whose lips should have preserved knowledge, preached nothing else but dreams,
and false miracles of counterfeit saints, enrolled in that Canus locor. lib.
11. c. 6 Vives lib. 2 de corrupt. art. Hard. lib 4. Detect.
sottish Legend, coined and amplified by a drowsy head between sleeping and
waking. He that will consider this, and also how the people were delighted with
such toies (God sending them strong delusions, that they should believe lies)
and how hard it would have been for any man wholly and upon the sudden to
draw their minds to another bent; will easily perceive, both how necessary it
was to use symbolicall discourse, and how wisely, and moderately it was applied
by that religious Father, to the end he might lead their understanding so
far, till it were so convinced, informed, and settled, that it might forget
the means and way, by which it was led, and think only of that it had
acquired. For in all such mystical speeches, who knows not that the end, for
which they are used, is only to be thought upon?

This then being first considered, let us hear the story, as it is related by
Mr Fox: Mr Latimer, Page 1903. edit. 1570.
says he, in his sermon gave the people certain cards out of the fifth, sixth,
and seventh Chap: of S. Matthew. For the chief Triumph in the cards, he
limited the Heart, as the principal thing that they should serve God withal,
whereby he quite overthrew all hypocritical and external ceremonies, not
tending to the necessary furtherance of Gods holy word and Sacraments. By this
he exhorted all men to serve the Lord with inward heart and true affection, and
not with outward ceremonies, adding moreover to the praise of that triu^ph,
that though it were never so small, yet it would take up the best coat card
beside in the bunch, yea though it were the king of Clubbes, etc. meaning
thereby how the Lord would be worshipped and served in simplicity of the
heart, and verity, wherein consists true Christian religion, etc. Thus Mr.
Fox. By which it appears, that the holy man's intention was to lift up the
peoples hearts to God, and not that he made a sermon of playing at cards, and
taught them how to play at Triumph, and played (himself) at cards in the
Pulpit, as that base companion In the third part of 3. conversions of England:
in the Examine of Foxes Saint, cap. 14.. 53. 54 p. 215
Parsons reports the matter in his wonted scurrilous vain of railing, whence
he calls it a* Sect 55
Christmasse Sermon. Now he that will think ill of such allusions, may out of
the abundance of his folly jest at Demosthenes for his story of the Plut in
Demosthen.
sheep, wolves, and dogs, and at Live. dec 1. lib. 2. an. V. C 60
Menenius for his fiction of the Belly. But, hinc illae lacrymae, The good
Bishop meant that the Romish Religion came not from the heart, but consisted in
outward ceremonies: which sorely greived Parsons who never had the least warmth
or spark of honesty. Whether B. Latimer compared the Bishops to the knaves of
Clubs, as the fellow interprets him, I know not: I am sure Parsons of all
others deserved those colors, and so I leave him.

We see then, what inward purity is required of all Christians, which if they
have, then in prayer, and all other Christian duties, they shall lift up pure
hands, as the 1. Tim. 2. 8.
Apostle speaks, not as Annal to 1 Ann. 57. n. 109 110 and.10. 2. An. 132.
number. 5
Baronius would have it, washed from sins with holy water, but pure, that is,
holy, free from the pollution of sin, as the greek word (...) does signify.

You may also see here refuted those calumnies of the Papists, that we abandon
al religious rites, and godsy duties, as also the confirmation of our doctrine
touching certainty of faith (and so of salvation) which is so strongly denied
by some of that faction, that they have told the world, S. Paulus de sua salute
incertus Richeom. Jesuit. lib. 2. c. 12. Idololat. Huguenot. pa. 119. in marg.
edit. lat. Mogunt. 1613. interpret Marcel. Bompar Iesuita.
S. Paul himself was uncertain of his own salvation. What then shall we
say, but pronounce a woe to the most strict observers of S. Francis rule, and
his canonical discipline (though they make him even Witness the verses of
Horatius of Jesuit, recited by Possevin. Biblioth. Select part. 2. lib. 17.
cap. 19. Exue Francis cum tunica, laceroque cucullo, Qui Fra^ciscus eratiam
tibi Christus erit, Fra^c^sci exuviis (si qua licet) indue Christum, Iam
Franciscus erit, qu imodo Christus erat The like has Bencius another Jesuit.
equal with Christ) and the most meritorious Monk that ever was registered in
their Calendar of Saints? But we for our comfort are otherwise taught out of
the holy Sbripture and therefore exhorted to build our selves in our most holy
faith, that so when our 2. Cor. 5. 1.
earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be destroyed, we may have a building
given of God, a house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. This is
that, which is most piously and feelingly taught in these few leaves, so that
you shall read nothing here, but what, I persuade my self, you have long
practiced in the constant course of your life. It remains only, that you
accept of these labors tendered to you by him who wishes you the long ioies of
this world, and the eternal of that which is to come. Oxon. from Corp. Christ.
College, this 13. of January, 1613.

THE FIRST SERMON.
EPIST. IVDE.
17 But ye, beloved, remember the words which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,

18 How that they told you, that there should be mockers in the last time,
which should walk after their own ungodly lusts.

19 These are makers of sects, fleshly, having not the spirit.

20 But ye, beloved, edify your selves in your most holy faith praying in
the holy Ghost.

21 And keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, unto eternal life.


THE occasion whereupon, together with the end wherefore, this Epistle was
written, is opned in the front and entry of the same. There were then, as
there are now, many evil and wickedly disposed persons, not of the mystical
body, yet within the visible bounds of the Church, men which were of old
ordained to condemnation, ungodly men which turned the grace of our God into
wantonness and denied the Lord Jesus. For this cause the spirit of the Lord is
in the hand of Jude, the servant of Jesus, and brother of James, to exhort them
that are called, and sanctified of God the father, that they would earnestly
contend to maintain the faith; which was once delivered unto the Saints. Which
faith because we cannot maintain except we know perfectly, first against
whom, secondly in what sort it must be maintained; therefore in the former
three verses of that parcel of Scripture which I have read, the enemies of the
cross of Christ are plainly described; and in the later two, they that love
the Lord Jesus have a sweet lesson given them how to strengthen and stablish
themselves in the faith. Let us first therefore examine the description of these
reprobates concerning faith; and afterward come to the words of the
exhortation; wherein Christians are taught how to rest their hearts on Gods
eternal and everlasting truth. The description of these godless persons is
two fold; General and Special. The general does point them out and show what
manner of men they should be. The particular points at them, and says
plainly these are they. In the general description we have to consider of
these things. First, when they were described, they were told of before.
Secondly, the men by whom they were described, They were spoken of by the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thirdly, the days when they should be
manifested unto the world, they told you they should be in the last time.
Fourthly, their disposition and whole demeanure, mockers and walkers after
their own ungodly lusts.

2 In the third to the Philippians, the Apostle describes certain. They are
men, says he of whom I have told you often, and now with tears I tell you of
them, their God is their belly, their glorying and rejoicing is in their own
shame, they mind earthly things.

These were enemies of the cross of Christ, enemies whom he saw, and his eyes
gusht out with tears to behold them. But we are taught in this place, how the
Apostles spoke also of enemies, whom as yet they had not seen, described a
family of me^ as yet unheard of, a generation reserved for the end of the
world, and for the last time, they had not only declared what they heard and
saw in the days wherein they lived, but they have prophecid also of me^ in
time to come. And you do well, says S. Peter, in that ye take heed, to the
words of prophecy, so that ye first know this, that no prophecy in the
Scripture comes of any man's own resolution. No prophecy in Scripture
comes of any man's own resolution. For all prophecy, which is in Scripture,
came by the secret inspiration of God. But there are prophecies which are no
scripture, yea there are prophecies against the Scripture: my brethren beware
of such prophecies, and take heed you heed them not. Remember the things that
were spoken of before; Of the spirit of prophecy received from God himself.
but spoken of before by the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Take heed to prophecies, but to prophecies which are in scripture. For both the
manner and the matter of those prophecies does show plainly that they are of
God.

3 Touching the manner, how men by the spirit of prophecy in holy Scripture
have spoken and written of things to come, we must understand that as the
knowledge of that they spoke, so likewise the utterance of that they knew came
not by these usual and ordinary means whereby we are brought to understand
the mysteries of our salvation, and are wont to instruct others in the same.
For whatsoever we know, we have it by the hands and ministry of men, which
lead us along like children from a letter to a syllable, from a syllable to a
word, from a word to a line, from a line to a sentence, from a sentence to a
side, and so turn over. But God himself was their instructour, he himself
taught the^ partly by dreams and visions in the night, partly by revelations
in the day, taking them aside from amongst their brethren; and talking with
them, as a man would talk with his neighbor in the way. Thus they became
acquainted even with the secret and hidden counsels of God. They saw things
which themselves were not able to utter, they beheld that whereat men and
Angels are astonished. They understood in the beginning, what should come to
pass in the last days.

4 God, which lightened thus the eyes of their understanding giving them
knowledge by unusual and extraordinary means, Of the Prophers manner of
speech.
did also miraculously himself frame and fashion their words and writings, in
so much that a greater difference there seems not to be between the manner
of their knowledge, then there is between the manner of their speed and ours.
When we have conceived a thing in our hearts and thoroughly understand it, as
we think within our selves, yet we can utter it in such sort that our
brethren may receive instruction or comfort at our mouths, how great, how long,
how earnest meditation are we forced to use? And after much travail, and much
pains, when we open our lips to speak of the wonderful works of God, our
tongues do faulter within our mouths, yea many times we disgrace the
dreadful mysteries of our faith, and grieve the spirit of our hearers by words
unsavory, Job. 15. 2. 3.
and unseemly speeches. Shall a wise man fill his belly with the eastern
vind, says Eliphaz, shall a wise man dispute with words not comely? or with
talk that is not profitable? Yet behold, even they that are wisest amongst us
living, compared with the Prophets, seem no otherwise to talk of God, then as
if the children which are carried in arms should speak of the greatest matters
of state. They whose words do most show forth their wise and standing, and
whose lips do utter the purest knowledge, so long as they understand and
speak as men, are they not feign sundry ways to excuse themselves. Sometimes
acknowledging with the wise man, hardly can we discern the things that are on
earth, Wisd. 9. 16.
and with great labor find we out the things that are before us, who can
then seek out the things that are in heaven? Sometimes confessing with Job the
righteous, entreating of things too wonderful for us* we have spoken we wist
not what. Sometimes ending their talk, as does the history of the Macchabees,
if we have done, well, and aa the cause required it is that we desire if we have
spok^ stenderly and havely we have done that we could. But God (...) Esai. 49.
2.
says, Esaias And we have received, says the Apostle, not the spirit of the
world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things, which
are given to us of God, which things also we speak, not in words, which man's
wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost does teach. This is that which the
Prophets mean by those books written full within, and without, which books were
so often delivered the^ to eat, not because God fed the^ with ink, and paper,
but to teach us, that so often as he employed them in this heavenly work, they
neither spoke, nor wrote any word of their own, but uttered syllable by
syllable as the spirit put it into their months, no otherwise then the Harp or
the Lute does give a sound according to the discretion of his hands that
holds and strikes it with skill. The difference is only this. An instrument
whether it be a pipe or harp makes a distinction in the times and sounds,
which distinction is well perceived of the hearer, the instrument it self
understanding not what is piped or harped. The Prophets and holy men of God not
so. I opened my mouth; Ezechiel. 3.
says Ezechiels and God reached me a scroule, saying son of man cause thy
belly to eat and fill thy bowels with this I give thee, I eat it, and it was
sweet in my mouth as honey, says the Prophet. Yea sweeter, I am persuaded, then
either honey or the honey comb. For herein they were not like Harps or Lutes,
but they felt, they felt the power and strength of their own words. When they
spoke of our peace, every corner of their hearts, was filled with joy. When
they prophesied of mournings, lamentations, and woes, to fall vpan us; they
wept in the bitterness and indignation of spirit; the arm of the Lord being
mighty and strong upon them.

5 On this manner were all the prophecies of holy scripture. Which prophecies,
although they contain nothing which is not profitable for our instruction, yet
as one star differs from another in glory, so every word of prophecy has a
treasure of matter in it, but all matters are not of like importance, as al
treasures are not of equal price. The chief and principal matter of prophecy
is the promise of righteousness, peace, holiness, glory, victory, immortality
unto every soul which believes, that Jesus is Christ, of the Jew first, and
of the Gentile. Now because the doctrine of salvation to be looked for by
faith in him, who was in outward appearance as it had been a man forsaken of
God, in him who was numbered, Judged, and condemned with the wicked, in him whom
men did see buffited on the face, scoft at by Soldiers, scourged by
tormentours, hanged on the cross, pierced to the heart, in him whom the eyes
of many witnesses did behold, when the anguish of his soul enforced him to
roar as if his heart had rent in sunder, O my God, my God why haste thou
forsaken me? I say, because the doctrine of salvation by him is a thing
improbable to a natural man, that whether we preach it to the Gentile, or to
the Jew, the one condemns our faith as madness, the other as blasphemy,
therefore to establish and confirm the certainety of this saving truth in the
hearts of men; the Lord together, with their preachings, whom he sent
immediately from himself, to reveal these things unto the world, mingled
prophecies of things both civil and Ecclesiastical, which were to come in
every age from time to time, till the very last of the latter days; that by
those things, wherein we see daily their words fulfilled and done, we might
have strong consolation in the hope of things which are not seen, because they
have revealed as well the one as the other. For when many things are spoken of
before in scripture, whereof we see first one thing accomplished, and then
another, and so a third, pereeiue we not plainly, that God does nothing else
but lead us along by the hand, til he have settled us upon the rock of an
assured hope, that no one jot or title of his word shall pass till all be
fulfilled? It is not therefore said in vain, that these godless wicked ones
were spoken of before.

6 But by whom? By them whose words, if men or Angels from heaven gainesaie,
they are accursed; by them, whom whosoever despises, despises not them, but
me, says Christ. If any man therefore does love the Lord Jesus (and woe worth
him that loves not the Lord Jesus!) hereby we may know that he loves him
indeed, if he despise not the things that are spoken of by his Apostles; A
natural man perceaveth not heavenly things.
whom many have despised even for the baseness and simpleness of their
persons. For it is the property of fleshly and carnal men, to honor and
dishonor, credit, and discredit the words and deeds of every man according to
that he wants or has without, If a man with gorgeous apparel come amongst
us, although he be a these or a murderer (for there are thieves and
murderers in gorgeous apparel) be his heart whatsoever, If his coat be of
purple, Iam. 2.
or velvet, or tissue, every one rises up, and all the reverent solemnities
we can use, are too little. But the man that serves God, is contemned and
despised amongst us for his poverty. Act. 12.
Herod speaks in judgment, and the people cry out, The voice of God, Act 1^.
and not of man. Paul preaches Christ, they term him a trifler. Harken
beloved: has not God chosen the poor of this world, that they should be rich
in faith? has he not chosen the refuse of the world to be heirs of his
kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? has he not chosen the
ofscowrings of men to be the lights of the world, and the Apostles of Jesus
Christ? Men unlearned, yet how fully replenished with understanding? few in
number, yet how great in power? contemptible in show, yet in spirit how strong?
how wonderful? I would feign learn the mystery of the eternal generation of
the son of God, says Hilary. Whom shall I seek? shall I get me to the
schools of the Grecians? why? I have read, vbi sapiens? vbi scriba? vbi
conquisitor huius seculi? These wise men in the world must needs be dumb in
this, because they have rejected the wisdom of God. Shall I beseech the
Scribes and Interpreters of the law, to become my teachers? how can they know
this, since they are offended at the cross of Christ? It is death for me to be
ignorant of the unsearchable mystery of the son of God; of which mystery
notwit standing I should have been ignorant, but that a poor fisherman,
unknown, unlearned, new come from his bote with his clothes wringing wet,
has opened his mouth and taught me, In the beginning was the word, and the
word was with God, and the word was God. These poor silly creatures have made
us rich in the knowledge of the mysteries of Christ.

7 Remember therefore that which is spoken of by the Apostles. Whose words if
the children of this world do not regard, is it any marvel? They are the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus; not of their Lord but of our. It is true which one
has said in a certain place, Apostolicam fidem seculi homo non capit, a man
sworn to the world, is not capable of that faith which the Apostles do teach.
What mean the children of this world then to tread in the courts of our God?
What should your bodies do at Bethel, whose hearts are at Bethaven? The God of
this world, whom ye serve, has provided Apostles and teachers for you,
Chaldeans, wisards, Southsayers, Astrologers, and such like: Hear them. Tell
not us that ye will sacrifice to the Lord our God if we will sacrifice to
Ashteroth or Melcom; We must not halt between 2. opinions.
that ye will read our Scriptures, if we will listen to your traditions; that
if ye may have a Mass by permission, we shall have a Communion with good
leave and liking; that ye will admit the things that are spoken of by the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus, if your Lord and Master may have his ordinances
observed, and his statutes kept. Solomon took it (as well he might) for an
evident proof, that she did not bear a motherly affection to her child, which
yielded to have it cut in diverse parts. He cannot love the Lord Jesus with his
heart, which lends one care to his Apostles, and another care to false
Apostles: which can brook to see a mingle mangle of religion and superstition,
Ministers and Massingpriests, light and darkness, truth and error, traditions
and Scriptures. No; we have no Lord but Jesus; no doctrine but the Gospel, no
teachers but his Apostles. Were it reason to require at the hands of an English
subject, obedience to the laws and edicts of the Spaniard? I do marvel that
any man bearing the name of a servant of the servants of Jesus Christ, will go
about to draw us from our allegiance. We are his sworn subjects; it is not
lawful for us to hear the things, that are not told us by his Apostles. They
have told us that in the last days there shall be mockers; therefore we
believe it: Credimus quia legimus, we are so persuaded because we read it must
be so. If we did not read it, we would not teach it: Nam quae libro legis non
continentur, eanec nosse debemus, says Hilary, those things that are not
written in the book of the law, we ought not so much as to be acquainted with
them. Remember the words which were spoken of before of the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

8 The third thing to be considered in the description of these men of whom we
speak is the time, wherein they should be manifested to the world. They told
you there should be mockers in the last time. Mockers in the last time.
Noah at the commandment of God built an Arc, and there were in it beasts of
all sorts, clean and unclean. A husbandman planteth a vineyard and looks
for grapes, but when they come to the gathering, behold together with grapes
there are found also wild grapes. A rich man prepares a great supper and
bids many, but when he sits him down he finds amongst his friends
here and there a man whom he knows not. This has been the state of the
Church sithe^ce the beginning. God always has mingled his Saints with
faithless and godless persons; as it were the clean with the unclean,
grapes with sour grapes, his friends and children with aliens and strangers.
Mervaile not the^, if in the last days also ye see the men, with whom you
live and walk arm in arm, laugh at your religion and blaspheme that glorious
name whereof you are called. Thus it was in the days of the patriarckes and
prophets; and are we better then our fathers? Albeit we suppose that the
blessed Apostles in foreshewing what manner of men were set out for the last
days, meant to note a calamity special and peculiar to the ages and
generations which were to come. As if he should have said; As God has
appointed a time of seed for the sower, and a time of harvest for him that
reapeth; as he has give^ unto every herb and every tree his own fruit, and
his own season, not the season nor the fruit of another, (for no man looks to
gather figs in the winter, because the Summer is the season for them, nor
grapes of thistles, because grapes are the fruit of the Vine,) so the same God
has appointed sund^ie for every generation of men, other men for other times,
and for the last times the worst men, as may appear by their properties, which
is the fourth point to be considered of in this description.

9 They told you that there should be Mockers. Mockers.
He means men that shall use religion as a cloak to put off, and on, as the
weather serves; such as shall with Herod hear the preaching of John Baptist
to day, and to morrow condescende to have him beheaded; or with the other Herod
say, they will worship Christ when they purpose a massacre in their hearts,
kiss Christ with Judas, and betray Christ with Judas. These are mockers. For
as ishmael the son of Hagar laughed at Isaak, which was heir of the promise;
so shall these men laugh at you as the maddest people under the sun, if ye
be like Moses, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. And why? God has not given
them eyes to see, nor hearts to conceive that exceeding recompense of your
reward. The promises of salvation made to you are matters, wherein they can
take no pleasure, even as Ishmael took no pleasure in that promise, wherein
God had said unto Abraham, In Isaac shall thy seed be called, because the
promise concerned not him but Isaac. They are termed for their impiety toward
God, mockers, and for the impurity of their life and conversation, walkers
after their own ungodly lusts. S. Peter in his second epistle and 3. chapter
sounds the very depth of their impiety: showing first, how they shall not
shame at the length to profess themselves profane, and irreligious, by flat
denying the gospel of Jesus Christ, and deriding the sweet and comfortable
promises of his appearing: secondly, that they shall not be only deriders of
all religion, but also disputers against God, using truth to subvert the truth;
yea scriptures themselves to disprove scriptures. Being in this sort mockers,
they must needs be also followers of their own ungodly lusts. Being Atheists
in persuasion, can they choose but be beasts in conversatio^? For why remove
they quite from them the fear God? Why take they such pains to abandon and
put out from their hearts all sense, all taste, all feeling of religion? but only
to this end and purpose, that they may without inward remorse and grudging of
conscience give over themselves to all uncleanness. Surely the state of these
me^ is more lamentable, then is the condition of Pagans and Turks. For at the
bare beholding of heaven and earth the infidels heart by and by does give him,
that there is an eternal, Mockers worse then Pagans, and Infidels.
infinite, immortal, and everliving God; whose hands have fashioned and framed
the world; he knows that every house is builded of some man, though he see
not the man which built the house, and he considers, that it must be God
which has built and created all things; although because the number of his
days be few he could not see when God disposed his works of old, when he
caused the light of his clouds first to shine, when he laid the corner stone of
the earth and swadled it with bands of water and darkness; when he caused the
morning star to know his place, and made bars and doors to shut up the sea
within his house, saying, hitherto shall thou come but no farther: he has no
eye sweetness of these things. Yet the light of natural reason has put this
wisdom in his reins, and has given his heart thus much understanding. Bring
a pagan to the schools of the prophets of God; prophecy to an infidel,
rebuke him, lay the judgments of God before him, make the secret sins of his
heart manifest, and he shall fall down and worship God. They that crucified
the Lord of glory were not so far past recovery, but that the preaching of the
Apostles was able to move their hearts and to bring them to this, Men and
brethren what shall we do? Agrippa, Act. 2. Act 26.
that sat in judgment against Paul for preaching, yielded notwithstanding
thus far unto him, almost thou perswadest me to become a Christian. Although
the Jews for want of knowledge have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God; yet I bear them record, Romans 10.
says the Apostle, that they have a zeal. The Athenians, a people having
neither zeal nor knowledge, yet of them also the same Apostle bears
witness, ye men of Athens I perceive ye are (...), some way religious But
mockers, walking after their own ungodly lusts they have smothered every
spark of that heavenly light, they have stiflled even their very natural
understanding. O Lord, thy mercy is over al thy works, thou savest man and
beast! yet a happy case it had been for these men if they had never been
borne: and so I leave them.

10 St Jude having his mind exercised in the doctrine of the Apostles of Jesus
Christ concerning things to come in the last time, Judas vir sapiens and certi
iudicii.
became a man of a wise and staid judgment. Grieved he was, to see the
departure of many, and their falling away from the faith, which before they did
profess: grieved, but not dismayed. With the simpler and weaker sort it was
otherwise: Their countenance began by and by to change, they were half in
doubt they had deceived themselves in giving credit to the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. St Jude to comfort and refresh these silly lambs takes them up in his
arms, and shows them the men at whom they were offended. Look upon them that
forsake this blessed profession wherein you stand: They are now before your
eyes; view them, mark them, are they not carnal? are they not like to noisome
carrion cast out upon the earth? is there that spirit in them, which cries
Abba father in your bosoms? Why should any man be discomforted? have you not
heard that there should be mockers in the last time? These verily are they,
that now do separate themselves.

11 For your better understanding, what this severing and separating of
themselves does mean, we must know, that the multitude of them which truly
believe (howsoever they be dispersed far and wide each from other) is all one
body, whereof the head is Christ, one building, whereof he is the corner stone,
in whom they as the members of the body being knit, and as the stones of the
building, being coupled, grow up to a man of perfect stature, and rise to an
holy temple in the Lord. That which linketh Christ to us is his mere mercy and
love toward us. That which tieth us to him is our faith in the promised
salvation revealed in the word of truth. That which unites and joins us
amongst our selves, in such sort that we are now as if we had but one heart
and one soul, is our love. Who be inwardly in heart the lively members of this
body, and the polished stones of this building, coupled and joined to Christ,
as flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones by the mutual bond of his
unspeakable love toward them, and their unfeigned faith in him, thus linked and
fastened each to other by a spiritual, sincere, and hearty affection of love
without any manner of simulation, who be Jews within, and what their names be,
none can tell, save he whose eyes do behold the secret disposition of all men's
hearts. We, whose eyes are too dim to behold the inward man, must leave the
secret judgment of every servant to his own Lord, accounting and using all
men as brethren both near and dear unto us, supposing Christ to love them
tenderly, so as they keep the profession of the Gospel and join in the
outward communion of Saints. Whereof the one does warrantize unto us their
faith, the other their love, till they fall away and forsake either the one, or
the other, or both; and then it is no injury to term them as they are. When
they separate themselves they, are (...), not judged by us, but by their own
doings. Men do separate themselves either by heresy, schism, or apostasy. If
they loose the bond of faith, Threefold (...)
which then they are justly supposed to do, when they frowardly oppugn any
principal point of Christian doctrine, 1 Heresy.
this is to separate themselves by Heresy. If they break the bond of unity,
whereby the body of the Church is coupled and knit in one, as they do, which
wilfully forsake al external communion with Saints in holy exercises purely
and orderly established in the Church, this is to separate themselves by
schism. ^. Schism.
If they willingly cast of and utterly forsake both profession of Christ, and
communion with Christians, taking their leave of all religion, this is to
separate themselves by plain Apostasy. 3. Apostasy.
And Saint Jude, to express the manner of their departure, which by Apostasy
fell away from the faith of Christ, says they separated themselves: noting
thereby, that it was not constraint of others, which forced them to depart, it
was not infirmity and weakness in themselves, it was not fear of persecution
to come upon them, whereat their hearts did fail; it was not grief of
torments, whereof they had tasted, and were not able any longer to endure them.
No, they voluntarily did separate themselves with a fully settled, and
altogether determined purpose never to name the Lord Jesus and more, nor to
have any fellowship with his Saints, but to bend all their counsel and all
their strength to raze out their memorial from amongst men.

12 Now because that by such examples, not only the hearts of Infidels were
hardened against the truth, but the minds of weak brethren also much troubled,
the holy Ghost has given sentence of these backsliders, that they were carnal
men, and had not the spirit of Christ Jesus, least any man having an
overweening of their persons should be overmuch amazed and offended at their
fall. For simple men not able to discern their spirits, were brought by their
apostasy thus to reason with themselves. If Christ be the son of the living
God, if he have the words of eternal life, if he be able to bring salvation
to all men that come unto him, what means this Apostasy and unconstrained
departure? Why do his servants so willingly forsake him? Babes be not
deceived, his servants forsake him not. They that separate themselves were
amongst his servants, but if they had been of his servants, they had not
separated themselves. They were amongst us, not of us, says Saint John: and
Saint Jude proves it, because they were carnal, and had not the spirit. Will
you judge of wheat by chafe which the wind has scattered from amongst it?
Have the children no bread because the dogs have not tasted it? Are Christians
deceived of that salvation they looked for, because they denied the ioies of
the life to come which were not Christians? What if they seemed to be pillars
and principal vpholders of our faith? What is that to us, which know that
Angels have fallen from heaven? Although if these men had been of us indeed,
(O the blessedness of a Christian man's estate!) they had stood surer then the
Angels, they had never departed from their place. Whereas now we mervaile not
at their departure at all, neither are we prejudiced by their falling away,
because they were not of us, since they are fleshly and have not the spirit.
Children abide in the house for ever; they are bondmen and bondwomen which are
cast out.

13 It behooves you therefore greatly every man to examine his own estate, and
to try whether you be bond or free, children or no children. I have told you
already, that we must beware we presume not to sit as Gods in judgment upon
others, and rashly, as our conceit and fancy does lead us, so to determine
of this man he is sincere, or of that man, he is an hypocrit, except by their
falling away they make it manifest and known what they are. For who art thou
that take upon thee to judge another before the time? Judge thy self. God
has left us infallible evidence, infallible evidence in the faithful that
they are Gods child^^^
whereby we may at any time give true and righteous sentence upon our selves.
We cannot examine the hearts of other men, we may our own. That we have passed
from death to life, we know it, says St John, because we love our brethren:
and know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates? I trust, beloved, wec know that we are not reprobates,
because our spirit does bear us record, that the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ
is in us.

14 It is as easy a matter for the spirit within you to tell whose ye are, as
for the eyes of your body to judge where you sit, or in what place you stand.
For what says the Scripture? Ye, which were in times past strangers and
enemies, because your minds were set on evil works, Christ has now
reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to make you holy, and
unblameable, and without fault in his sight: if you continue grounded and
established in the faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel,
Colos. 1. And in the third to the Coloss. ye know that of the Lord ye shall
receive the reward of that inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. If we
can make this account with our selves; I was in times past dead in trespasses
and sins, I walked after the prince that rules in the air, and after the
spirit that works in the children of disobedience; but God, who is rich in
mercy, through his great love, wherewith he loved me, eve^ when I was dead,
has quickened me in Christ. I was fierce, heady, proud, high minded; but God
has made me like the child that is newly wained: I loved pleasures more then
God; I followed greedily the ioies of this present world; I esteemed him, that
erected a stage or theater, more then Solomon which built a Temple to the Lord;
the Harp, Viole, Timbrell, and Pipe men singers and women singers were at my
feasts, it was my felicity to see my children dance before me, I said of every
kind of vanity, O how sweet art thou unto my soul! All which things now are
crucified to me, and J to them: now I hate the pride of life, and pomp of this
world; now I take as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, O Lord, as in
all riches, now I find more joy of heart in my Lord and Savior, then the
worldly minded man, when his wheat and oil do much abound: now I taste nothing
sweet, but the bread that came down from heaven, to give life unto the world:
now mine eyes see nothing, but Jesus rising from the dead: now my ear refuses
all kind of melody to hear the song of them that have gotten victory of the
beast, and of his image, and of his mark, and of the number of his name, that
stand on the sea of glass, having the harpes of God, and singing the song of
Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and
marvailous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just, and true are thy ways, O
king of Saints. Surely if the spirit have been thus effectual in the secret
work of our regeneration unto newness of life; if we endeavor thus to frame
our selves anew, then we may say boldly with the blessed Apostle in the 10. to
the Hebrews, we are not of them which withdraw our selves to perdition, but
which follow faith to the conservation of the soul. For they that fall away
from the grace of God, and separate themselves unto perdition, they are fleshly
and carnal, they have not Gods holy spirit. But unto you, because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, to the
end ye might know, that Christ has built you upon a rock immovable, that
he has registered your names in the book of life, that he has bound himself
in a sure and everlasting covenant to be your God, and the God of your children
after you, that he has suffered as much, groned as often, prayed as heartily
for you as for Peter, O father keep them in thy name! o righteous father the
world has not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that
thou have sent me, I have declared thy name unto them, and will declare it,
that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. The
Lord of his infinite mercy give us hearts plentifully fraught with the treasure
of this blessed assurance of faith unto the end.

14 Here I must advertise all men, that have the testimony of Gods holy fear
within their breasts, The Papists falsely accuse us of Heresy and Apostasy
to consider how unkindly, and injuriously our own countrymen and brethren
have dealt with us by the space of four and twenty years, from time to time,
as if we were the men of whom S. Jude here speaks; never ceasing to charge
us, some with schism, some with heresy, some with plain and manifest
apostasy, as if we had clean separated our selves from Christ, utterly
forsaken God, quite abiured heaven, and trampled all truth and all religion
under our feet. Against this third sort, God himself shall plead our cause,
in that day, when they shall answer us for these words, not we them. To others
by whom we are accused for schism and heresy, we have often made our
reasonable, and in the sight of God, I trust, allowable answers. Act. 25.
For in the way which they call heresy, we worship the God of our fathers,
believing all things which are written in the law and the Prophets. That which
they call schism, we know to be our reasonable service unto God, and
obedience to his voice, which cries shrill in our ears, Apoc. 18.
Go out of Babylon my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues. And therefore when they rise up against us,
having no quarrel but this, we need not to seek any farther for our Apology,
then the words of Abiah to Jeroboam and his army, 2. Chr. 13. O Jeroboam and
Israel, hear you me, ought you not to know, that the Lord God of Israel has
given the kingdom over Israel to David, for ever, even to him and to his
sons by a covenant of salt? that is to say, an everlasting covenant. Jesuits
and Papists, hear ye me, ought you not to know, that the Father has given
al power unto the some, and has made him the only head over his Church,
wherein he dwells as an husba^dman in the midst of his vineyard, manuring it
with the sweat of his own brows, not letting it forth to others? Cant. 8 11.
For as it is in the Canticle, Solomon had a vineyard in Baalhamon, he gave the
vineyard unto keepers every one bringing for the fruit thereof a thousand
pieces of silver; but my vineyard which is mine is before me, says Christ. It
is true this is meant of the mystical head set over the body which is not
seen. butas he has reserved the mystical administration of the church
invisible unto himself, so he has committed the mystical government of
co^gregations visible to the sons of David by the same covenant; whose sons
they are in the governing of the flock of Christ, who^soever the holy ghost
has set over the^ to go before them and to lead them in their several
pastures, one in this congregation, another in that: as it is written, Take
heed unto your selves, and to all the flock, Act. 20.
whereof the holy ghost has made you over seers, to feed the church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood. Neither will ever any Pope or
Papist under the cope of heaven be able to prove the Romish Bishops usurped
supremacy over all Churches, The Popes usurped supremacy.
by any one word of the covenant of salt, which is the Scripture. For the
children in our streets do now laugh them to scome, when they force, thou art
Peter, to this purpose. The Pope has no more reason to draw the charter of his
universal authority from hence, then the rethren had to gather by the words
of Christ in the last of S. John, that the Disciple, whom Jesus I ued, should
never die. If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? says
Christ; Straight ways a report was raised amongst the brethren, that this
disciple should not die, yet Jesus said not to him, He shall not die, but if I
will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Christ has said in the
16 of S. Matthewes Gospel to Simon the son of Jonas, I say to thee, thou art
Peter. Hence an opinion is held in the world that the Pope is universal head
of all Churches, yet Jesus said not the Pope is universal head of all
Churches, but, Tues Petrus, Thou art Peter. Howbeit, as Jeroboam the son of
Nebat the servant of Solomon, rose up and rebelled against his Lord, and there
were gathered unto him vain men and wicked, which made themselves strong
against Jeroboam the son of Solemon, because Roboam was but a child, and
tender hearted, and could not resist them: so the son of perdition and man of
sin, being not able to brook the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
which forbad his disciples to be leke princes of nations, They bear rule and
are called gracious, it shall not be so with you, has risen up and rebelled
against his Lord, and to strengthen his arm, he has crept into the houses
almost of all the noblest families round about him, and taken their children
from the cradle to be his Cardinals, he has fawned upon the kings and princes
of the earth, and by spiritual coufenage has made them sell their lawful
authority and jurisdiction for titles of Catholicus, Christianissimus,
Defensor fidei, and such like, he has proclaimed sale of pardons to inveigle
the ignorant, built seminaries to allure young men desirous of learning,
Consil. delector. Cardin. Laurent. Surius Commde reb. gest. a Pio 5 Franci^cus
Sansovin. de gubernat. regnoru^ and Rerumpub. lib 11 cap. de Iud Marescal and
Sultan.
erected Stews, to gather the dissolute unto him. This is the rock whereupon
his Church is built. Hereby the man is grown huge and strong, like the Cedars,
which are not shaken with the wind, because Princes have been as children,
over tender hearted, and could not resist.

Hereby it is come to pass, as you see this day, that the man of sin does
war against us, not by men of a language which we cannot understand, but he
comes as Jeroboam against Judah, and brings the fruit of our own bodies to
eat us up, that the bowels of the child may be made the mothers grave, that he
has caused no small number of our brethren to forsake their native country,
and with all disloialty to cast off the yoke of their allegiance to our dread
Sovereign, whom God in mercy has set over them, for whose sauegard, if they
carried not the hearts of Tigers in the bosoms of men, they would think the
dearest blood in their bodies well spent. But now, says Abiah to Jeroboam, ye
think ye be able to resist, the kingdom of the Lord, which is in the hands
of the sons of David. Ye be a great multitude, the golden calves are with
you, which Jeroboam made you for Gods, have ye not driven away the priests of
the Lord the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests like
the people of nations? whosoever comes with a young bullock and seven
rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no Gods. If I should follow
the comparison, and here uncover the cup of those deadly and ougly
abominations, where with this Jeroboam of whom we speak has made the earth so
drunk that it has reeled under us, I know your godly hearts would loath to
see them. For my own part I delight not to take in such filth, I had rather
take a garment upon my shoulders, and go with my face from them to cover them.
The Lord open their eyes, and cause them, if it be possible, at the length to
see, how they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked!
Put it O Lord in their hearts to seek white raiment, and to cover themselves,
that their filthy nakedness may no longer appear! For, beloved in Christ, we
bow our knees, and lift up our hands to heaven in our chambers secretly, and
openly in our churches we pray heartily, and howrely even for them also; though
the Pope have given out as a Judge in a solemn declaratory sentence of
excommunication against this land, that our gracious Lady has quite abolished
prayers within her realm, and his scholars, whom he has taken from the midst
of us, have in their published writings charged us not only not to have any
holy assemblies unto the Lord for prayer, but to hold a common school of
sin and flattery, to hold sacrilege to be Gods service, unfaithfulness and
breach of promise to God to give it to a strumpet to be a virtue; to abandon
fasting, to abhor confession, to mislike with penance, to like well of usury,
to charge none with restitution, to find no good before God in single life,
nor in no well working; that all men, as they fall to us, are much woorsed, and
more, then before, corrupted. I do not add one word or syllable unto that,
which Mr Bristow, a man both borne and sworn amongst us, has taught his hand
to deliver to the view of all. I appeal to the conscience of every soul, that
has been truly converted by us; whether his heart were never raised up to
God by our preaching; whether the words of our exhortation never wrong any
tear of a penitent heart from his eyes; whether his soul never reaped any
joy, any comfort, any consolation in Christ Jesus, by our sacraments, and
prayers, and Psalms, and thansgivings; whether he were never bettered, but
always worsed by us. Omerciful Godlif heaven and earth in this case do not
witness with us, and against them, let us be razed out from the land of the
living! let the earth, on which we stand, swallow us quick, as it has done
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram! But if we belong unto the Lord our God, and have not
forsaken him, if our priests the sons of Aaron minister unto the Lord, and
the Levites in their office, if we offer unto the Lord every morning and every
evening the burnt offerings, and sweet incense of prayers, land thanks givings,
if the bread be set in order upon the pure table, 2. Chr. c. 13.
and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof to burn every morning,
that is to say, if amongst us Gods blessed sacraments be duly administered, his
holy word sincerely and daily preached, if we keep the watch of the Lord our
God, and if ye have forsaken him; then doubt ye not this God is with us as a
captain, his priests with founding trumpets must cry alarm against you, Ver.
12.
O ye children of Israel fight not against the Lord God of your fathers, for
ye shall not prosper.

The second Sermon.
EPIST. IVDE.
17 But ye, beloved, remember the words, which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.

18 How that they told you that there should be mockers in the last time,
which should walk after their own ungodly lusts.

19 These are makers of Sects, fleshly, having not the spirit.

20 But ye, beloved, edify your selves in your most holy faith, praying in
the holy Ghost.

21 And keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.


HAving otherwhere spoken of the words of Saint Jude, going next before,
concerning Mockers, which should come in the last time, and backsliders, which
even then fell away from the faith of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; I am
now by the aid of almighty God, and through the assistance of his good spirit,
to lay before you the words of exhortation, which I have read.

2 Wherein first of all, whosoever has an eye to see, let him open it, and he
shall well perceive, how careful the Lord is for his children, how desirous to
see them profit and grow up to a manly stature in Christ, how loath to have
them any way mislead, either by examples of the wicked, or by enticements of
the world, and by provocation of the flesh, or by any other means forcible to
deceive them, and likely to estrange their heartt from God. For God is not at
that point with us, that he cares not whether we sink or swim. No, he
has written our names in the palm of his hand, in the signet upon his finger
are we graven, in sentences not only of mercy, but of judgment also we are
remembered. He never denou^ceth judgments against the wicked, but he makes
some Proviso for his children, as it were for some certain privileged
persons, Touch not mine anointed, do my Prophets no harm, hurt not the
earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of God in
their foreheads. He never speaks of godless men, but he adioineth words of
comfort, or admonition, or exhortation, whereby we are moved to rest and
settle our hearts on him. In the second to Tim. the 3. Chap. Evil men; says
the Apostle, and deceivers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived. But continue thou in the things, which thou have learned. And in the
first to Tim. the. 6. Chap. Some men lusting after money have erred from the
faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. But thou, o man of
God, fly these things, and follow after righteousness godliness, faith love,
patience, meekness. In the second to the Thessalonians, the second Chap. They
that have not received the love of the truth, that they might be saved, God
shall send them strong delusions, that they may believe lies. But we ought to
give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God
has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the
spirit, and faith in the truth. And in this Epistle of S. ^ude, There shall
come mockers in the last time, walking after their own ungodly lusts. But,
beloved, edify ye your selves in your most holy faith.

3 These sweet exhortations, which God puts every where in the mouths of
the Prophets and Apostles of Jesus Christ, are evident tokens, that God si^teth
not in heaven careless and unmindful of our estate. Can a mother forget her
child? Surely a mother will hardly forget her child. But if a mother be
happily found unnatural, and do forget the fruit of her own womb, yet Gods
judgments show plainly, that he cannot forget, the man whose heart he has
framed and fashioned a new in simplicity and truth to serve and fear him. For
when the wickedness of man was so great, and the earth so filled with
cruelty, that it could not stand with the righteousness of God any longer to
forbear, wrathful sentences brake out from him like wine from a vessel that
has no vent. My spirit, Gen 6 3 and 13
says he, can struggle and strive no longer, an end of all flesh is come
before me. Yet then did Noah find grace in the eyes of the Lord; Gen 6, 8 and
18
I will establish my covenant with thee, says God, thou shall go into the
arc, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons wives with thee.

4 Do we not see what shift God does make for Lot, and for his family in the
19. of Genesis, least the fiery destruction of the wicked should overtake him?
Overnight the Angels make enquiry, what sons or daughters, or sons in law,
what wealth and substance he had. They charge him to carry out al, whatsoever
thou have in the city, Gen 19. 12.
bring it out. God seems to stand in a kind of fear, least something or
other would be left behind. And his will was that nothing of that which he had,
not an hoof of any beast, not a thread of any garment should be singed with
that fire. In the morning the Angels fail not to call him up, Gen 19. 15.
and to hasten him forward, Arise, take thy wife, and thy daughters which are
here, that they be not destroyed in the punishment of the City. The Angels
having spoken again and again, Lot for all this, lingereth out the time
still, till at the length they were forced to take both him, Ver. 16.
and his wife, and his daughters by the arms (the Lord being merciful unto
him) and to carry them forth and set them without the city.

5 Was there ever any father thus careful to save his child from the flame? A
man would think, that now being spoken unto to escape for his life, and not to
look behind him, nor to tarry in the plain, but to hasten to the mountain
and there to save himself, he should do it gladly. Yet behold, now he is so
far off from a cheerful and willing heart to do whatsoever is commanded him
for his own weal, that he begins to reason the matter, as if God had
mistaken one place for another, sending him to the hill when salvation was in
the City. Not so, my Lord, I beseech thee. Ver. 18.
Behold, thy servant has found grace in thy sight, and thou have magnified thy
mercy which thou haste showed unto me in saving my life. I cannot escape in the
mountain, least some evil take me and I die. Here is a City hard by, a small
thing. O let me escape thither (is it not a small thing?) and my soul shall
live. Well, God is contented to yield to any conditions. Behold I have received
thy request concerning this thing also. I will spare this City, for which thou
have spoken; have thee; save thee there. For I can do nothing till thou come
thither.

6 He could do nothing! Not because of the weakness of his strength (for who
is like unto the Lord in power?) but because of the greatness of his mercy
which would not suffer him to lift up his arm against that City, nor to power
out his wrath upon that place, where his righteous servant had a fancy to
remain, and a desire to dwell. O the depth of the riches of the mercy and love
God! God is afraid to offend us which are not afraid to displease him! God can
do nothing till he have saved us, which can find in our hearts rather to do any
thing then to serve him. It contenteth him not to exempt us, when the pit is
dug for the wicked; to comfort us at every mention which is made of
reprobates and godless men; to save us as the apple of his own eye when fire
comes down from heaven to consume the inhabitants of the earth, except every
Prophet and every Apostle, and every servant, whom he sends forth, do come
laden with these and the like exhortations, O beloved, edify your selves in
your most holy faith. Give your selves to prayer in the spirit, keep your
selves in the love of God. Look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life.

7 Edify your selves. The speech is borrowed from material builders, and must
be spiritually understood. It appears in the 6. of S. John's gospel by the
Jews, that their mouths did water too much for bodily food, Our fathers, say
they, did eat Manna in the Desert, is it is written, He gave them bread from
heaven to eat; Lord, evermore give us of this bread! Our Savior, to turn
their appetite another way, makes the^ this answer, I am the bread of life,
he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me, shall
never thirst.

8 An usual practice it is of Satan to cast heaps of worldly baggage in our
way, that whilst we desire to heap up gold as dust, we may be brought at the
length to esteem vilely that spiritual bliss. Christ, in the 6. of Matthew,
to correct this evil affection, puts us in mind to lay up treasure for our
selves in heaven. The Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. chapt. misliking the vanity of those
women, which attired themselves more costly, then beseemed the heavenly calling
of such as professed the fear of God, wills them to cloth themselves with
shamefastnes and modesty, and to put on the apparel of good works. Taliter
pigmentatae Deum habebitis amatorem, says Tertullian. Put on righteousness as
a garment: in steed of Civit have Faith, which may cause a savor of life to
issue from you, and God shall be enamoured, he shall be ravished with your
beauty. These are the ornaments, and bracelets, and jewels, which inflame the
love of Christ, and set his heart on fire upon his spowse. We see, how he
breaks out in the Canticles at the beholding of this attire, How fair art
thou, and how pleasant art thou, O my love, in these pleasures!

9 And perhaps S. Jude exhorts us here not to build our houses but our
selves, forseeing by the spirit of the Almighty, which was with him, that there
should be men in the last days like to those in the first, which should
encourage and stir up each other to make brick and to burn it in the fire,
to build houses huge as cities, and towers as high as heaven, thereby to get
them a name upon earth; men that should turn out the poor, and the
fatherless, and the widow, to build places of rest for dogs and swine in
their rooms; men that should lay houses of prayer even with ground, and make
the^ stables where Gods people have worshipped before the Lord. Surely this is
a vanity of all vanities, and it is much amongst men, a special sickness of
this age. What it should mean, I know not, except God have set the^ on work
to provide fuel against that day, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire. What good comes unto the
owners of these things, says Solomon, Eccles. 5.
but only the beholding thereof with their eyes? Martha, Martha, thou busiest
thy self about many things, One thing is necessary. Ye are too busy, my
brethren, with timber, and brick; They have chosen the better part, they have
taken a better course, that build themselves. Ye are the Temples of the living
God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and will walk in them, and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God.

10 Which of you will gladly remain, or abide in a misshapen, a ruinous, or a
broken house? And shall we suffer sin, and vanity to drop in at our eyes, and
at our ears, at every corner of our bodies, and of our souls, knowing that we
are the Temples of the holy Ghost? Which of you receives a guest, whom he
honors, or whom he loves, and does not sweep his chamber against his
coming? And shall we suffer the chamber of our hearts and consciences to lie
full of vomiting, full of filth, full of garbidge knowing that Christ has said,
I, and my Father will come, and dwell with you? Is it meet for your Oxen to
lay in parlours, and your selves to lodge in cribs? Or is it seemly for your
selves to dwell in your settled houses, and the house of the Almighty to lie
wast, whose house ye are your selves? Do not our eyes behold, how God every
day overtaketh the wicked in their iourneies, how suddenly they pop down into
the pit? how Gods judgments for their times come so swiftly upon them, that
they have not the leisure to cry, Alas? how their life is cut off like a
thread in a moment? how they pass like a shadow? how they open their mouths
to speak, and God takes them even in the midst of a vain or an idle word?
And dare we for all this lay down, take our rest, eat our meat securely and
carelessly in the midst of so great and so many ruins? Blessed and praised for
ever and ever be his name, who perceiving of how senseless and heavy metal
we are made, The sacrament of the L. Supper.
has instituted in his Church a spiritual supper, and an holy communion, to
be celebrated often, that we might thereby be occasioned often to examine
these buildings of ours, in what case they stand. For since God does not dwell
in Temples which are unclean, since a shrine cannot be a sanctuary unto him;
and this supper is received as a seal unto us, that we are his house and his
sanctuary, that his Christ is as truly united to me, and I to him, as my arm
is united and knit unto my shoulder, that he dwells in me as verily as the
elements of bread and wine abide within me, which persuasion, by receiving
these dreadful mysteries, we profess our selves to have; a due comfort, if
truly, and if in hypocrisy, then woe worth us. Therefore ere we put forth our
hands to take this blessed Sacrament, we are charged to examine, and to try
our hearts whether God be in us of a truth or no: and if by faith and love
unfeigned we be found the temples of the holy Ghost, then to judge, whether we
have had such regard every one to our building, that the spirit which dwells
in us has no way been vexed, molested, and grieved. Or if it have, as no
doubt sometimes it has by incredulity, sometimes by breach of charity,
sometimes by want of zeal, sometimes by spots of life, even in the best and
most perfect amongst us, (for who can say, his heart is clean?) O then to fly
unto God by unfeigned repentance, to fall down before him in the humility of
our souls, begging of him whatsoever is needful to repair out decaies before
we fall into that desolation, whereof the Prophet speaks, saying, Thy breach
is great like the sea, Lam. 2. v. 13.
who can heal thee?

11 Receiving the sacrament of the Supper of the Lord, after this sort (you
that are spiritual, judge what I speak) is not all other wine like the water
of Marah, being compared to the cup, which we bless? Is not Manna like to
gall* and our bread like to Manna? Is there not a taste, a taste of Christ Jesus
in the heart of him that eats? Does not he which drinks, behold plainly in
this cup, that his soul is bathed in the blood of the lamb? O beloved in our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, if ye will taste how sweet the Lord is, if ye
will receive the king of glory, Build your selves.

12 Young men, I speak this to you, for ye are his house, because by faith,
ye are conquerers over Satan, and have overcome that evil. Fathers, I speak
it also to you, ye are his house, because ye have known him, which is from
the beginning. Sweet Babes, I speak it even to you also; ye are his house,
because your sins are forgiven you for his namesake. Matrons and Sisters, I
may not hold it from you, ye are also the Lords building, and, as S. Peter
speaks, heirs of the grace of life as well as we. Though it be forbidden you
to open your mouths in public assemblies, yet ye must be inquisitiue in
things concerning this building, which is of God, with your husbands and
friends at home, not as Dalila with Sampson, but as Sara with Abraham, whose
daughters ye are, whilst ye do well, and build your selves.

13 Having spoken thus far of the exhortation, as whereby we are called upon
to edify and build our selves. It remains now, that we consider the thing
prescribed, namely wherein we must be built. This prescription stands also
upon two points, the thing prescribed, and the adjuncts of the thing. And that
is our most pure, and holy faith.

14 The thing prescribed is Faith. For as in a chain, which is made of many
linkes, if you pull the first, you draw the rest; and as in a ladder of many
staves, if you take away the lowest, all hope of ascending to the highest will
be removed, So because all the precepts and promises in the law and in the
Gospel do hang upon this, Believe; and because the last of the graces of God
does so follow the first, that he glorifieth none, but whom he has justified,
nor justifies any, but whom he has called to a true, effectual, and lively
faith in Christ Jesus, therefore S Jude exhorting us to build our selves,
mentions here expressly only faith* as the thing wherein we must be edified,
for that faith is the ground and the glory of all the welfare of this building.

15 Ye are not strangers and forrainers, Ephesians:
but citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, says the Apostle,
and are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the building being coupled
together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom ye also are built
together to be the habitation of God by the spirit. And we are the habitation
of God by the spi^^t, if we believe. For it is written, whosoever confesses
that Jesus is the son of God, in him God dwells, and he in God. The
strength of this habitatio^ is great; it prevails against Satan; it
conquereth sin; it has death in derision; neither principalities, nor powers
can throw it down; it leads the world captive, and brings every enemy,
that rises up against it, to confusion and shame, and all by faith; for this
is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith. Who is it that
overco^meth the world, 1 Ioh 4 1. Ioh. 5.
but he which believes, that Jesus is the son of God?

16 The strength of every building, which is of God, stands not in any man's
arms or legs: it is only in our faith, as the valor of Sampson lay only in
his hair. This is the reason, why we are so earnestly called upon to edify
our selves in faith. Not as if this bare action of our minds, whereby we
believe the Gospel of Christ, were able in it self as of it self to make us
unconquerable and invincible, like stones, which abide in the building for ever
and fall not out. No, it is not the worthiness of our believing, it is the
virtue of him in whom we believe, by which we stand sure as houses that are
builded upon a rock. He is a wise man, Mat 7.
which has builded his house upon a rock; for he has chosen a good
foundation, and no doubt his house will stand. But how shall it stand? verily
by the strength of the rock which bears it, and by nothing else. Our
fathers, whom God delivered out of the land of Egypt, were a people that had no
peers amongst the nations of the earth, because they were built by faith upon
the rock, which rock is Christ. And the rock, says the Apostle in the first
to the Corinthians, the tenth Chapter, did follow him. Whereby we learn not
only this, that being built by faith on Christ as on a rock, Romans 11.
and grafted into him as into an Olive, we receive all our strength and
fatness from him, but also that this strength and fatness of ours ought to be
no cause why we should be high minded and not workeout our salvation with a
reverent, tre^bling, and holy fear. For if thou boastest thy self of thy
faith, know this that Christ chose his Apostles, his Apostles chose not him;
that Israel followed not the rock, but the rock followed Israel, and that
thou bear not the root, but the root thee. So that every heart must this
think, and every tongue must thus speak, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
nor unto any thing which is within us, but unto thy name only, only to thy
name belongs all the praise of all the treasures and riches of every Temple
which is of God. This excludes al boasting and vaunting of our faith.

17 But this must not make us careless to edify our selves in faith. It is
the Lord that delivers men's souls from death, but not except they put their
trust in his mercy. It is God that has given us eternal life, 1. Joh ^
but no otherwise then thus, If we believe in the name of the son of God;
for he that has not the son of God has not life. It was the spirit of the
Lord which came upon Sampson, and made him strong to tear a lion as a man
would rent a kid: but his strength forsook him, and he became like other men
when the razer had touched his head. It is the power of God whereby the
faithful have subdued kingdoms, wroug^t righteousness, obtained the
promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword: But take away their faith, and does not their strength
forsake them? are they not like unto other men?

18 If ye desire yet farther to know how necessary and ne^dfull it is, that
we edify and build up our selves in faith, mark the words of the blessed
Apostles, without faith it is impossible to please God. If I offer unto God all
the sheep and oxen, that are in the world, if all the Temples, that were
builded since the days of Adam till this hour, were of my foundation, if I
break my very heart with calling upon God, and wear out my tongue with
preaching, if J sacrifice my body and my soul unto him, and have no faith all
this avails nothing. No pleasing of God without faith.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. Our Lord and Savior therefore
being asked in the sixth of S. John's Gospel, What shall we do that we might
work the works of God, makes answer, This is the work of God, that ye
believe in him, whom he has sent.

19 That no work of ours, no building of our selves in any thing can be
available or profitable unto us, except we be edified and built in faith, what
need we to seek about for long proof? look upon Israel, once the very chosen
and peculiar of God, to whom the adoption of the faithful, and the glory of
Cherubins, and the covenants of mercy, and the law of Moses, and the service
of God, and the promises of Christ were made impropriate, who not only were
the offspring of Abraham, father unto all them which do believe, but Christ
their offspring, which is God to be blessed for evermore.

20 Consider this people and learn, what it is to build your selves in faith.
They were the Lords vine: he brought it out of Egypt, he threw out the heathen
from their places, that it might be planted, he made room for it, and caused
it to take root, till it had filled the earth, the mountains were covered
with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were as the goodly Cedars. She
stretched out her branches unto the sea and her boughs unto the river. But when
God having sent both his servants and his son to visit this vine, they
neither spared the one, nor received the other, but stoned the Prophets, and
crucified the Lord of glory which came unto them, then began the curse of God
to come upon them, even the curse whereof the Prophet David has spoken,
saying, Let their table be made a snare, Psalm 69.
and a net, and a stumbling block, even for a recompense unto them, Romans 11.
let their eyes be darkened, that they do not see, bow down their backs
forever, keep them down. And since the hour, that the measure of their
infidelity was first ma^e up they have been spoiled with wars, eaten up
with plagues s^ent with hunger and famine: they wander from place to place, and
are become the most base and contempt^ble people that are under the sun.
Ephraim, which before was a terror unto nations, and they trembled at his
voice, is now by infidelity so vile that he seems as a thing cast out to be
trampled under men's feet. In the midst of these desolations they cry. Return
we beseech thee, Psalm 18. v. 14.
o God of hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visit this vine: but their
very prayers are turned into sin, and their cries are no better then the
lowing of beasts before him. Rom 11. 20.
Well, says the Apostle, by their unbelief they are broken of, and thou do
stand by thy faith. Behold therefore the bountifulness, and severitie of God;
toward them severitie, because they have fallen, Ver. 22.
bountifulness toward thee, if thou continue in his bountifulness, or else
thou shall be cut off. If they forsake their unbelief, and be grafted in
again, and we at any time for the hardness of our hearts be broken off, it
will be such a judgment, as will amaze all the powers and principalities which
are above. Who has searched the counsel of God concerning this secret? and
who does not see that infidelity does threaten Lo-ammi unto the Gentiles, as
it has brought Lo-ruchama upon the Jews? Hos. 1. 9 not my people.
It may be that these words seem dark unto you. Ver 6. not obtaining mercy.
But the words of the Apostle in the eleventh to the Romans, are plain enough,
If God have not spared the natural branches, take heed, take heed, least he
spare not thee. Build thy self in faith. Thus much of the thing which is
prescribed, and wherein we are exhorted to edify our selves. Now consider the
conditions and properties, which are in this place annexed unto faith. The
former of them (for there are but two) is this, Edify your selves in your
faith.

21. A strange, and a strong delusion it is where with the man of sin has
bewitched the world; a forcible spirit of error it must needs be, which has
brought men to such a senseless and unreasonable persuasion as this is, not
only that men clothed with mortality and sin as we our selves are, can do
God so much service, as shall be able to make a full and a perfect
satisfaction before the Tribunal seat of God for their own sins, yea a
great deal more, then is sufficient for themselves; But also that a man at the
hands of a Bishop or a Pope, for such or such a price, may buie the overplus of
other men's merits, purchase the fruits of other men's labors, and build his
soul by another man's faith. Is not this man drowned in the gall of
bitterness? Is his heart right in the sight of God? Can he have any part or
fellowship with Peter, and with the successors of Peter, which thinks so
vilely of building the precious Temples of the holy Ghost? Let his money perish
with him, and he with it, because he judges, that the gift of God may be sold
for money.

22 But, Beloved in the Lord, deceive not your selves, neither suffer ye your
selves to be deceived: ye ca^receiue no more ease nor comfort for your souls
by an other man's faith, then warmth for your bodies by another man's clothes,
or sustenance by the bread which another does eat. The just shall live by his
own faith. Let a saint, yea a Martyr content himself, that he has cleansed
himself of his own sins, says Tertullian. No saint or martyr can cleanse
himself of his own sins. But if so be a saint, or a martyr can cleanse
himself of his own sins, it is sufficient that he can do it for himself.
Did ^uer any man by his death deliver another man from death, except only the
Son of God? he indeed was able to Safe Conduct a Thief from the Cross to
Paradise: for to this end he came, that being himself pure from sin, he
might obey for sinners. Thou which think to do the like, and supposest,
that thou can justify another by thy righteousness, if thou be without
sin, then lay down thy life for thy brother; die for me. But if thou be a
sinner, even as I am a sinner, how can the oil of thy lamp be sufficient both
for thee, and for me* Virgins, that are wise, get ye oil, while ye have day,
into your own lamps. For out of all peradventure, others, though they would,
can neither give nor sell. Edify your selves in your own most holy faith. And
let this be observed for the first property of that, wherein we ought to
edify our selves.

23 Our faith being such, is that indeed, which S. Jude does here term Faith,
namely a thing most holy. The reason is this. We are justified by Faith. For
Abraham believed, and this was imputed unto him for righteousness. Being
justified, all our iniquities are covered, God beholds us in the
righteousness which is imputed, and not in the sins which we have committed.

24 It is true, we are full of sin both original, and actual; whosoever
denies it is a double sinner, for he is both a sinner, and a liar. To deny
sin, is most plainly and clearly to prove it, because he that faith, he
has no sin, lies, and by lying proves that he has sin.

25. But imputation of righteousness has covered the sins of every soul
which believes; God by pardoning our sin has taken it away: so that now
although our transgressions be multiplied above the hairs of our head, yet
being justified we are as free, and as clear, as if there were no one spot,
or stain of any uncleanness in us. For it is God that justifies, and who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? says the Apostle in the 8.
chapter to the Romans.

26 Now sin being taken away, we are made the righteousness of God in
Christ. For David speaking of this righteousness, says, Blessed is the man
whole iniquities are forgiven. No man is blessed but in the righteousness of
God. Every man, whose sin is taken away is blessed. Therefore every man,
whose sin is covered, is made the righteousness of God in Christ. The
righteousness does m^ke us to appear most holy, most pure, most unblameable
before him.

27 This then is the sum of that which I say, faith does justify:
justification washes away sin: sin removed, we are clothed with the
righteousness which is of God: the righteousness of God makes us most holy.
Every of these I have proved by the testimony of Gods own mouth. Therefore I
conclude, that faith is that which makes vas most holy, in consideration
whereof it is called in this place, Our most holy faith.

28 To make a wicked and a sinful man most holy through his believing, is more
then to create a world of nothing. Our faith most holy? Surely Solomon could
not show the Queen of Saba so much treasure in all his kingdom, as is lapt up
in these words. O that our hearts were stretched out like tents, and that the
eyes of our understanding were as bright as the sun, that we might thoroughly
know the rich^s of the glorious inheritance of Saints, and what is the
exceeding greatness of his power toward us, whom he accepts for pure, and
most holy, through our believing. O that the spirit of the Lord would give this
doctrine entrance into the stony and brazen heart of the Jew, which follows
the law of righteousness but cannot attain unto the righteousness of the law.
Wherefore? says the Apostle. They seek righteousness, and not by faith.
Wherefore they stumble at Christ, they are bruised, shivered to pieces as a
ship that has run her self upon a rock. O that God would cast down the
eyes of the proud, and humble the souls of the high minded, that they might at
the length abhor the garments of their own flesh which cannot hide their
nakedness, and put on the faith of Christ Jesus, as he did put it on, which
has said; Doubtless I think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge
sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do
judge them to be dung, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him,
not having mine owner righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through
faith. O that God would open the Arc of mercy, wherein this doctrine lies,
and set it wide before the eyes of poor afflicted consciences, which fly up
and down upon the water of their afflictions, and can see nothing but only the
gulf and deluge of their sins, wherein there is no place for them to rest
their feet. The God of pity and compassion give you al strength and courage,
every day, and every hour, and every moment, to build, and edify your selves
in this most pure and holy faith. And thus much both of the thing prescribed in
this exhortation, and also of the properties of the thing. Build your selves in
your most holy faith. I would come to the next branch, which is of Prayer, but
I cannot lay this matter out of my hands, til I have added somewhat for the
applying of it both to other, and to our selves.

29 For your better understanding of matters contained in this exhortation,
Build your selves, you must note, that every Church and congregation does
consist of a multitude of believers, as every house is built of many stones.
And although the nature of the mystical body of the Church be such, that it
suffers no distinction in the invisible members, but whether it be Paul or
Apollos, Prince or Prophet, he that is taught, or he that teaches, all are
equally Christ's, and Christ is equally theirs: yet in the external
administration of the Church of God, because God is not the author of confusion
but of peace, it is necessary that in every Congregation there be a
distinction, if not of inward dignity, yet of outward degree: so that all are
Saints, or seem to be Saints, and should be as they seem. But are all
Apostles? If the whole body were an eye, where were then the hearing? God
therefore has given some to be Apostles, and some to be Pastors, etc. for the
edificatio^ of the body of Christ. In which work we are Gods laborers, says
the Apostle, and ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods building.

30 The Church respected with reference unto administration ecclesiastical,
does generally consist but of 2 sorts of men, the Laborers, and the Building;
they which are ministered unto and they to whom the work of the ministry is
committed; Pastors and the flock, over whom the holy Ghost has made them
overseers If the Guide of a Congregation, be his name or his degree whatsoever,
be diligent in his vocation, feed the flock of God which depends upon him,
caring for it not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind, not as though he would tyrannize over Gods heritage, but as a
pattern unto the flock, wisely guiding them: if the people in their degree
do yield themselves frameable to the truth, not like rough stone or flint
refusing to be smoothed and squared for the building: if the Magistrate do
carefully and diligently survey the whole order of the work, providing by
statutes and laws, and bodily punishments, if need require, that all things
may be done according to the rule which cannot deceive, even as Moses provided
that all things might be done according to the pattern which he saw in the
Mount; there the words of this exhortation are truly and effectually heard. Of
such a Congregation every man will say, Behold a people that are wise, a people
that walk in the statutes and ordinances of their God, a people full of
knowledge and understanding, a people that have skill in building themselves.
Where it is otherwise there, as by slothfulness the roof does decay, and as
by idleness of hinds the house droppeth thorough, as it is in the 10. of
Ecclesiastes, v. 18; so first one piece and then another of their building shall
fall away, till there be not a stone left upon a stone.

31 We see how fruitless this exhortation has been to such as bend all their
travail only to build manage a Papacy upon earth, without any care in the
world of building themselves in their most holy faith. Gods people have
enquired at their mouths, What shall with do to have eternal life? where-in
shall we build edify our selves? And they have departed ho^e from their
Prophets, and from their priests, laden with doctaines, which are precepts of
men; they have been taught to tire out themselves with bodily exercise; those
things are enjoined them which God did never require at their hands, and the
things he does require are kept from the^; their eyes are fed with pictures,
and their ears filled with melody, but their souls do wither, and starve,
and pine away; they cry for bread, and behold stones are offered them; they
ask for fish, and see they have scorpions in their hands; Thou see, O Lord,
that they build themselves, but not in faith; they feed their children but
not with food; Their rulers say with shame, Bring, and not build. But god is
righteous; their dru^kennesse stinketh, their abominations ate known, their
madness is manifest, the wind has bound them up in her wings, and they shall
be ashamed of their doings. Ephraim, says the Prophet, is joined to Idols,
let him alone, I will turn me therefore from the Priests which do minister unto
Idols, and apply this exhortation to the^ whom god has appointed to feed
his chosen in Israel.

32 If their be any feeling of Christ, and drop of heavenly dew any spark of
Gods good spirit within you, stir it up, be careful to build and edify first
your selves, and then your flocks in this most holy faith.

33 I say, first your selves; For he which will set the hearts of other men on
fire with the love of Christ, must himself burn with love. It is want of
faith inour selves, My Brethren, which makes us Careless.
retchlesse in building others. We forsake the Lords inheritance and seed it
not. What is the reason of this? Our own desires are settled where they should
not be. We our selves are like those women which have a longing to eat
coals, and lime, and filth; we are fed, some with honor, some with ease, some
with wealth; the Gospel waxes loathsome and unpleasant in our taste; how
should we then have a care to feed others with that which we cannot fancy our
selves? If faith wax cold, and slender in the heart of the Prophet, it will
soon perish from the ears of the people. The Prophet Amos speaks of a
famine, Amos 8. 11.
saying, I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst
of water, but of hearing the word of the Lord. Ver. 12.
Men shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north unto the east shall they
run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. 1. Pet.
4. 17.
Judgment must begin at the house of God, says Peter. Yea, I say, at the
sanctuary of God this judgment must begin. This famine must begin at the heart
of the Prophet. He must have darkness for a vision, he must stumble at noone
days, as at the twilight, and then truth shall fall in midst of the
streets, then shall the people wander from sea to sea, and from the North unto
the east shall they run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord.

34 In the second of Haggaie, speak now, says God to his prophet, Speak now
to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel Prince of Judah, and to Iehoshua the son of
Iehozadak the high priest, and to the residue of the people, saying, who is
left among you that saw this house in her first glory, and how do you see it
now? is not this house in your eyes, in comparison of it, as nothing? the
prophet would have all men's eyes turned to the veiw of themselves, every sort
brought to the consideration of their present state. This is no place to show
what duty Zerubbabel or Iehoshua does owe unto God in this respect. They have
I doubt not such as put them hereof in remembrance. I ask of you which are a
part of the residue of Gods elect and chosen people. Who is their amongst you
that has taken a survey of the house of God, as it was in the days of the
blessed Apostles of Jesus Christ? who is there amongst you that has seen and
co^sidred this holy temple in her first glory? and how do you see it now? Is it
not in comparison of the other almost as nothing when ye look upon the^ that
have vndertake^ the charge of your souls, and know how far these are for the
most part grown out of kind, how few there be that tread the steps of their
ancient predecessors, ye are easily filled with indignation, easily drawn
unto these complaints, wherein the difference of present from former times is
bewailed, easily persuaded to think of the^ that lived to enjoy the days which
now are gone. Surely they were happy in comparison of us that have succeeded
them: were not their Bishops me^ vnreprovable, wis^, righteous, holy, te^perat,
well reported of even of those which were without? were not their Pastors,
guids, and teachers, able and willing to exhort with wholso^e doctrine and to
improve which gainesaid the truth? had they priests made of the refuse of the
people? were men, like to the children which were in Niniveh, unable to
discern between the right hand and the left; presented to the charge of their
congregation? did their teachers leave their flocks over which the holy Ghost
had made them overseers? Did their Prophets enter upon holy things as spoils,
without a reverend calling? were their leaders so unkindly affected toward
the^ that they could find in their hearts of sell them as sheep or oxen, not
caring how they made them away? But beloved, deceive not your selves. Do the
faults of your guids and pastors offeud you? it is your fault if they be thus
faulty. Nullus qui malu^ rectore^ patitur, eu^ accuset, quia fuifuit meriti
perversi pastoris subiacere ditioni, says S. Gregory, whosoever thou art whom
the inco^venience of an evil governor does press, accuse thy self, and not
him. His being such is thy deserving O ye disobedient children; turn again,
says the Lord, and the will I give you pastors according to mine own heart,
ier. 3. v 14. 15.
which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. So that the only way to
repair all ruins, breaches, and offensive decaies in others, is to begin
reformation at your selves. Which that we may all sincerely, seriously, and
speedily do, God the Father grant for his son our Savior lesus sake, unto
whom with the holy Ghost, three persons, one Eternal and everlasting Gone, be
Honor, and Glory, and Praise forever. Amen.

FINIS.

