A BANQVET OF IEASTS. OR Change of Cheer. BEING A COLLECTION OF Modern Jests.
Witty Jeeres. Pleasant Taunts. Merry Tales. Never before Imprinted.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, and are to be sold at his shop in
Ivie-Lane next the Exchequer-Office. 1630.

TO THE READER, whom I desire to be as Courteous as Conceited.
TO you (of all sorts) that shall vouchsafe the perusal of these few sheets
stitcht up in a small fardell, I prepare you to expect no more in this
collection of Jests, then the Title page promises, wherein is nothing earnest,
saving a pledge of my good meaning toward you. If you look that I should
feast you senses, or banquet your particular Pallates, these Papers will much
deceive you: For in the stead of dainties you shall find Dicteria: for
Iunkets, Ioci: and for curious Sallets, Sales. Only they are passages of
mirth, fit to entertain time, and employ leasured hours, when they cannot be
more seriously and profitably employed. So mild and gentle they are in their
condition, that as they bark at none, so they bite not any: and therefore you
may sport with them freely, and safely. Now if some out of their curiosity
shall despise them for their commonnesse; I must then retire my self to the
refuge of that old Adage, Bona quo communia eo meliora: If they prove good,
they cannot be too common. Again, if any shall object and say, that I know
that, and this I have heard related; Those I thus answer. If many have heard
some of them, but few or none (I dare presume) all. Besides I do not challenge
them for mine own, but gathered from the mouths of others; and what is stale
to me, may be to thee new. Accept them then as courteously as they are
offered to thy perusal willingly, to make them familiar unto such to whom they
are merely foreign, and to recollect the memories of those to whom they have
been known, but since forgotten. I must ingenuously confess unto you, that
had not the License curbed my liberty, the leaves of this book had been more
in tale, and the Ieasts (for I know not how more properly to style them)
greater in number: But as they are (for otherwise now they cannot be) if they
be well accepted, I acknowledge the^ too few, but if not well received, by
many, too many.

Anonimos.

The Contents of the passages herein mentioned.
1. OF a Countryman and a Constable. 2. A casheird Captain. 3. Of a Justice
of Peace, and a Horsestealer. 4. The Principal of an House. 5. M Gentleman
arrested. 6. A Batchelours answer touching Marriage. 7. A Counselor, and his
client. 8. Of an Oatemeale man. 9. A Gentleman and a Barber. 10. A wager of
eating. 11. Two Welshmen in a robbery. 12. Geneva print. 13. A Papist and a
Puritan. 14. A young Heir. 15. Of a Gentleman coming to Court. 16. Of a
Freese Ierkin. 17. A Poor man arraigned. 18. Two old Captains. 19. A great
Eater. 20. A Gentlewoman and a Justice. 21. A Nobleman in his Gallery. 22. One
traveling to Rome. 23. A Scholar on horseback. 24. A Gentleman, and a
Citizen. 25. A Clarke of a Church. 26. A Cheese-monger. 27. Of a Doctors man.
28. A Boy that cried fire. 29. A Country fellows courtesy. 30. One with a
great Nose. 31. One that ate of a Bear. 32. An English man at a French
Ordinary. 33. Of a Seruingman. 34. Of a Justice and his man. 35. A Cheater and
a Tapster. 36. A man on the Gallows. 37. Two by the ears. 38. A drunkard and
his wife. 39. A These and a Gentleman. 40. A rich man's Hospital. 41. To choose
a wife. 42. Of a Horse, and a Pecke of Oysters. 43. A famous Thief. 44. A
young Master of Arts. 45. A simple Countryman. 46. A Courtier. 47. Two
Scholars. 48. Gentlemen at a Tavern. 49. A Chronologer. 50. The Marriage of
the Arts. 51. Of a Scholar married. 52. An Epitaph. 53. Of an extraordinary
nose. 54. Two Inkeepers. 55. Two old Widows. 56. A Horse-stealer. 57. A Baker.
58. A Coachman. 59. A Tailor. 60. A Cheater. 61. A handsome wench, and a
Justice. 62. A clearly lie. 63. Gentlemen at an Ordinary. 64. Of a deaf
Hostess. 65. Of a Prentice. 66. A Spaniard and a Dutchman. 67. A great Lords
entertainment. 68. An Empericke. 69. Of a Horse. 70. A young Citizen and his
Wife. 71. Of Rape seed. 72. Of a Thatcher. 73. Of another Thatcher. 74 Of an
Ox hide. 75 Three Surgeons. 76. Of Bucanon. 77. An Usurer dying. 78. A parish
Clarke. 79. Two sisters. 80. Wishers, and woulders. 81 Barbarous Latin. 82 A
Gentleman to a Lady. 83. Two hyring one horse. 84. A Gentleman and a
Horsecourser. 85. A man buying a Cow. 86. A Doctor and a Lady. 87. An Epitaph.
88. Pope Alexander VI. 89. Pictures hanged. 90. Coming of the Spaniards. 91. A
father and his daughter. 92. A letter writ out of the Country. 93. A lie
retorted. 94. A Scotchman and his Mistress. 95. Of a Gentleman that was the
first of his house. 96. An Empericke and his man. 97. Two Country Fellows. 98.
A Churchman in his Inn. 99. An English Gentleman in France. 100. A Gentlemen
and a Constable. 101. A rich man and a poor. 102. A sleepy drawer. 103. A
famous Painter. 104. Of giving away Dear. 105. The King a hunting. 106. Of
choughing in ones grave. 107. A Gentleman in disgrace. 108. A simple Constable.
109. The twelve signs of usury. 110. One preaching against usury. 111. Of a
tall Gentleman, and a little Tailor. 112. Two Gentlemen falling out. 113. A
Drunkard. 114. A Master of a ship. 115. A Gormandizer. 116. A Welsh Reader.
117. A Bishop and a Gentleman. 118. Trusting for a reckoning. 119. A Strange
beasts to be seen. 120. A Emperor of Rome. 121. A Scotch Witch. 122. A
braggard. 123. The reuersion of an house. 124. A Mayor in the North. 125. A man
lying sick. 126. Of one Foul a Gentleman. 127. A Gentleman in an Ordinary.
128. A Welchman and a Cutpurse. 129. A Gentleman and a Parson. 130. Of Grave
Maurice, and Marquess Spinola. 131. Of Bishop Gardener. 132. An unhappy
Vintners Boy. 133. Of a sign. 133. Playing with words. 134. Of a Landlord and
his Tenant. 135. Of an old Beggar. 136. A rich man and a Scholar. 137. A
Lawyer and a Divine. 138. Of Swimming. 139. Of a she-seruant that came to take
her oath. 140. Another Gentleman and a Parson. 141. A Lawyer at the Bar. 141.
A Mayor in the North. 142. The Tenant to an Archbishop. 143. Of a sign. 144.
Of a Translator. 145. A Mariner in a storm. 146. A desperate Saylor. 147. A
short Cloak. 148. Of Wine. 149. A Welchman arraigned. 150. Of Card-playing.
151. An Epitaph made upon an honest Cobbler. 152. Of a Gentleman visiting of his
friend. 153. Of a Captain that was to be arrested. 154. Of two knaves accusing
one another. 155. Of a Vintners boy. 156. Of Augustus Caesar. 157. Of Diogenes.
158. Of a Country fellow and a Peeretree. 159. Stratford upon Auon. 160. An old
Goose. 161. An honorable Thief. 162. Of S. P. Q. R. 163. An Oppressor. 164.
A wrie Nose. 165. Of usury. 166. A Scholar and a Townsman. 167. Of an ignorant
fellow. 168. An old horse. 169. Fire and Toe. 170. Borrowing of a Cloak. 171.
One begd for a fool. 172. A Traveler drowned. 173. A Knight of Italy. 174. A
Gentleman boasting of hic Wit. 175. A Justice and a Baud. 176. Of a Citizen,
and a Gardeners Boy. 177 Anold Vicar. 178. Two debawsht follewes. 179. A lame
Horse. 180. A Woman, and her Husband. 181. A Townsman and a Scholar. 182. Of
five Vintners. 183. Two striving for the Wall. 184. The answer of a Doctor.
185. A Horsecouser. 186. A Country fellow hunting with the King. 187. Women
Writers. 188. A Country fellow at a Gentleman's Table. 189. Of curtaling names.
190. A retort betwixt two Gentlemen. 190. A Knight and his man. 191. A Doctor
of Physic and a Serving man. 192. One that parted a Fray. 193. A bargain in
Smithfield. 194. An Usurer dying. 195. A Doctor and Scholar.
To the Book.
I Now expose thee little Book,
To all that daigne on thee to look,
And do not take me for a Cook,
because professing
You have an Ordinary here,
(For which you shall not pay too dear)
And yet be served with change of cheer,
and of my dressing.
Yet tell them they are invited guests,
And seldom meet they with such feasts,
Where nothing is disht in but jests,
and sauc'd with laughter.
They shall not meet I dare compare,
(Where Geese and Pigs are nothing rare)
The like in Bartholmews next Fayer,
nor the day after.
I wish it may not be your lots,
(Poor Pupes) to be rent by sots,
Or such as will stop Muster pots,
for that believe me,
Would like a Chandlers greasy fist,
Who raps his wares in what be list,
As well in things applaus'd as hist,
no little grieve me.
TO were better thou should Critticks meet,
Whose very looks will sower what is sweet.
Who though they carpe at every sheet,
nay page, or pagine.
In sooth I shall not much admire,
Though they with thee Tobacco fire,
For so perhaps some may desire,
as I imagine.
Much nobler it is to suffer so,
By such as something seem to know,
But wherefore in such rage to grow,
I Will not compel them.
So farewell Book, I make thee free,
To ieere at them that jest at thee,
Though thou be hurt it harms not me:
prithee so tell them.
Change of Cheer, OR A Banquet of Jests.
1. Of a Countryman and a Constable.
A Simple Countryman having term business in London, and being somewhat late
abroad in the night, was staid by a Constable, and somewhat harshly entreated,
the poor man observing how imperiously he commanded him, demanded of him what
he was: to whom he replied, I am the Constable, and this is my Watch. And I
pray you sir, for whom watch you? (says the man) marry answered the Constable,
I watch for the King; for the King replies he again simply? then I beseech you
Sr. that I may pass quietly and peaceably by you to my Lodging, for I can
bring you a certificate from some of my neighbors who are now in town, that I
am no such man.

2. A casheird Captain.
A Captain in the Low Countries being Casheird and his company conferred upon
another, he grew more private and Melancholy, and not long after being met by
the others Leiftenant, was kindly saluted, and after other complements,
demanded why he was of late so strange, to absent himself so long from his
Captain; who much desired to see him: who answered I pray you commend me to
your Captain, and tell him he had my pany too late.

3. Of a Justice of Peace, and a Horse-stealer.
A Horse-stealer was brought to be examined before a Justice, who finding the
felony to be most apparent, Well friend says he; if thou be not hanged for
this fact, I Will be hanged for thee. I humbly thank your Worship; replied the
thief, and when the time comes, I desire you, that you will not be out of the
way.

4 The Principal of an House.
A Pleasant fellow came unto the Principal of a house, and pretending that he
had received some injury by some of the Society, complained unto him in this
manner: Sir, said he, I have been abused by a company of Rascals, belonging
to this House, and knowing you to be Principal, I thought good to acquaint
you with the business, and so proceeded, etc.

5. A Gentleman arrested.
A Gentleman being arrested and brought before a Country Mayor, who was by
Profession a Tanner, being somewhat roughly hanled by the Sergeants, and
espying an Ox hide in the place where they stayed him till the Mayor was ready
to come forth, My friends, quoth he, what need you trouble your selves so
much about me, when me thinks you had more need, and it would better become
you, to brush your Masters Gown that lies on the ground.

6. A Batchelours answer touching Marriage.
A Lady observing a Gentleman that was a Batchelour, much given to Melancholy,
said unto him, truly Sir, I am of opinion, that you will never be truly merry
till you be married: to whom he answered: In troth Madam I am of opinion that
I shall never laugh till my heart ache, till then.

7. A Counselor, and his client.
ONe making a long and tedious speech to a grave Counseliour, in the conclusion
thereof made an Apology to excuse himself for being so troublesome, who gave
him this answer, I Will assure you sir, you have not been troublesome to me at
all, for all the time that you were speaking, my mind was of another matter.

8. Of an Oatemeale-man.
AN Oatemeale-man a rich fellow fell at some difference with a Comedian about
the town, and began to vpbraid him with his profession, and according to the
small talent of wit he had, came hotly upon him with the common objection, if,
says he, all men were of my mind, you should keep your doors shut, and find
your galleries empty, and then you would be more poor, and less proud. I
believe it, replied the other, so if every man would, as I could find in my
heart to do, that is, to forswear the eating of Puddings, and Pottage, who
would be more poor, and less proud then the Oatemeale man.

9. A Gentleman and a Barber.
A Barber coming finnically about a Gentleman, was (as the most of them are)
terribly full of talk, at length he found the leisure to ask how he would
be trimmed. Marry my friend replied the gentleman, if thou can possibly, do
it in silence.

10. A wager of eating.
TWo Captains, the one an English man, the other a Dutch man, having both good
stomachs, laid a wager which of them at one set dinner should eat most.
Earnest was given, and they drew lots which should bespeake their Prouant; it
fell to the Dutch man, who presently went down into the Kitching, and bespoke
of the Hostess of the ordinary a fat Capon and a dozen of Larkes, and so came
up again to his company: Presently the English Captain went down to enquire
what he had spoke for. The Hostess told him, A Capon and a dozen of Larkes.
How? says he. I say, hostess, send into the Market and buy for us a dozen of
Capons, and a Lark. Of which the Dutchman hearing, grew presently to
composition, and recanted the bargain.

11. Two Wolshmen in a robbery.
TWo Welshmen were in a Robbery, and both taken: the one being known to be an
old thief, had his judgment to be hanged, and was so. The other, because it
was his first fault, found the more favor, and had his sentence to be whipped
at a Carts-taile, and so let go. Who after, coming into his country and being
demanded what was become of his friend and Countryman, he told them for a
truth that he was married: but some not believing it, and further pressing him
to know when and to whom: he answered he could resolve them no further then
this, that he was certainly married; by the same token, before a great many
Spectators, he was forced to dance at his wedding

12. Geneva print.
A Collection being made for the distressed Ministers of Geneva a Gentleman,
which (it seems) was not much affected toward them, being pressed by the
Collector something hard for his charity, he absolutely told him he would
give him nothing. But the other, not so satisfied, would needs know his reason:
The Gentleman after some pause, answered him, If you will needs know my
reason, it is because I find nothing more prejudicial to my eyesight then
the reading of their Geneva print.

13. A Papist and a Puritan.
A Papist and a Puritan being next neighbors, and traveling by the highway
where stood a wooden Cross: the papist put off his hat, and so passed by: At
which his neighbor only smiled to himself and said nothing. But walking
further, and passing by a tree that stood in the way, and not seeing him move
to that, Neighbor (says he) I pray you in courtesy will you resolve me a
question. With all my heart replied the other, so that if occasion be offered,
you will do me the like: both are agreed, now then neighbor says the Puritan.
I would know why you did not the like reverence unto the tree: that you did
unto the Cross, being both one wood: the reason of this (says the other) you
shall soon know, but one thing first I must know of you: I called upon you in
the morning, and I observed you in taking leave of your wife, why did you kiss
her lips and not her tail seeing they are both made of one flesh.

14. A young Heir.
A Young heir not yet come to age, but desirous to be suited with other
gallants, and to be furnished with money and commodities to the purpose: the
creditor demanded his bond, he granted it conditionally, that his Father
should not know of it, therefore wished it to be done very privately. Upon this
promise all things were concluded: and the time came when he should seal it.
But when he began to read in the beginning of the bond, Nouerint vniuersi.
Be it known unto all men, he cast away the bond and absolutely refused to
seal it saying: If it be known unto all men, how can it possibly be but it
must come to my Fathers care.

15. Of a Gentleman coming to Court.
A Gentleman coming out of the Country, and having one Mr. Wiseman to his
Kinsman who lived in the Court, and belonged to the King, came bluntly to the
Guard-Chamber, and speaking to him that kept the door: I pray you sir tell me
(faith he) is not there one Wiseman among you? who answered, No indeed sir, you
had best inquire of the Queens side.

16. Of a Freese Ierkin.
AN honest good fellow having worn a thredbare Ierkin for the space of two
years and an half: as soon as he had compast another suite, for the good
service it had done him, made of it this Epitaph.

Here lie in peace thou patient ouercommer.
Of two cold winters, and one Scortching Summer.
17. A Poor man arraigned.
A Poor simple man arraigned at the Sessions for his life, and being
convicted, the Judges, much commiserating him in regard of his simplicity,
purposed to do him what favor they could, and offered him his book: which he
hearing, cast himself upon his knees beseeching them to do him any favor
else saving that, for he protested unto them, that he could read no more then
the Pope of Rome.

18. Two old Captains.
TWo ancient Captains looking upon the rich hangings of Eighty Eight,
observing in the border thereof, the faces of all the prime Commanders, and
Gentlemen of note that had been in the service, Well, says the one to the
other, if every one had his right, my face might have had the honor, to have
bin placed before some that I see: for I am sure I was engaged in the hottedst
encounter. To whom the other replied, content thy self Captain, it is well
known thou art an old soldier, and reserved for another hanging.

19. A great Eater.
A Gentleman riding down into the Low country, was asked by his friend, what
was the best news at London, who answered them he had by reason of sudden,
and unexpected coming down not listened after any: only wot you what (says
he) It is reported that such a man, naming the great Gormandizer, has lost his
stomach to whom the other replied: If a poor man have found it he is directly
undone.

20. A Gentlewoman and a Justice.
A Gentlewoman suspected to be a Romish-Catholike; being brought before a busy
Justice in the country, he would not accept of her oath, unless she would
publicly call the Pope knave: to whom she answered, Sr, if it please your
worship, it were great folly and indiscretion in me, to call any man knave whom
I never either saw, or knew, but I protest sir, (says she) If I had seen him
so often, or known him so well as I do your good worship, I think I might,
and with a safe conscience too, call him knave, and knave again, and with this
answer I pray you rest satisfied.

21. A Nobleman in his Gallery.
A Private Gentleman being admitted to walk with a nobleman in his gallery
being full of curious pictures, he commended them exceedingly, as some of
those pieces to be the best that he had seen: Say you so says the nobleman,
then out of all these, choose that which best pleases you, and it is your own:
the Gentleman espying a fair table in which the ten commandments were
curiously drawn in golden Letters: Please you my Lord, says he, of all that
I have viewed, this like I best; and challenge by your promise. To who^ the
Lord replies. That only I had forgot to except, choose else where you will, and
it is at your free dispose, but these I will never depart from. Why my Lord,
says the Gentleman, have you vowed these ten Commandments shall never go
from you. Indeed says he I have, and have vowed it by mine honor; Well replied
the Gentleman, your Lordship may speak your pleasure, but I will assure you
and take my word, with all the care you have, you shall never keep them.

22. One traveling to Rome.
A Gentleman of England traveling with his man to Rome desirous to see all
fashions, but especially such rarities as were there to be seen, was by the
mediation of some friends there resident, admitted into the Popes presence: to
whom his holiness offered his foot to kiss; which the Gentleman did with
great submission, and reverence: this his man seeing, and not before acquanted
with the like ceremony, presently makes what speed he can to get out of the
presence: which some of the wayters espying, and suspecting his have, stayed
him, and demanded the cause of his so sudden speed: but the more they
importune him, the more he pressed to be gone: but being further urged, he made
this short answer, truly says he, this is the cause of my fear, that if they
compel my master, being a Gentleman to kiss the Popes foot; I fear what
part they will make me kiss being but his serving man.

23. A Scholar on horseback.
A Scholar an unskillful rider being to pass through a river, offered to water
his horse before he rid him in so deep as to the foote-locke, his friend that
was with him, fearing he would founder him, called upon him to ride in depeer,
the other not well understanding his meaning, said to his friend, first stay
till he has drunk off all this, and then I will ride him in farther where
he may have his belly full.

24. A Gentleman, and a Citizen.
A Gentleman and a Citizen walking together, just before them went two
Aldermen, says the Gentleman to the other, there goes a Cuckold, at which the
Citizen his supposed friend takes exceptions, and tells the others what was
spoke, they make a complaint, and bearing him before the Mayor, the parties
appear, witness is called; the words justified, the Gentleman he pleades a
mistake, for says he, I said not by these two worthy Citizens there goes a
Cuckold: but the words that I spoke were, there goes a couple, I, was it so
says the Mayor, if it were no otherwise, the matter is answered, and I here
discharge you the Court.

25. A Clarke of a Church.
THe Clarke of the Church, having received some coffeehouse of his Parish,
grew sullen upon it, and when Sunday came, and that he was to give out a
Psalm: he sat still in his seat, and would not so much as open his lips, but
being often called upon, and seeing there was no remedy, looked somewhat
doggedly upon the matter: sing you may if you please the Psalm of Quicunque
Vult, whosoever will, and for his own part, as soon as he had given it out;
went out of the Church.

26. A Cheese-monger.
A Puritan coming to his neighbor, a Cheese-monger; to buy a Gossips or
groaning Cheese because his wife was ready to lie down, the master of the shop
offered him a taste of that which he seems best to like: who as he put it to
his mouth, so he put his hat to his eyes, and began a long grace, which the
Cheese-monger seeing, nay says he, since you mean in stead of a taste to make
a meal out of my cheese, I assure you, you shall buy none here; for I cannot
afford it after that weight and measure.

27. Of a Doctors man.
AN old Doctor lying on his deathbed, willing to leave something to a poor
simple servant who had served him long, to do him some good after his decease,
wild him to profess Physic and he would leave unto him certain
prescriptions, both to benefit his knowledge and estate, amongst others this
was the maine, that still when he came to visit any patient, he should look
curiously about the rooms, what bones he saw scattered either about the Table
or the beds side: if he found any of fish, then he should tell him he took a
surfeit of such a kind of fish, as he might guess it to be by the bones;
and so likewise of Beef, Veale, Mutton, Capon, and Rabbit, etc. and to judge
by the fragments, and reuersions which were more certain, then to presume upon
the disease by the sick man's water, in which he knew he was altogether
unpracticed, and unskillful: In process it so fell out, that being sent for to
one that was sick of an Impostume, and the room being so clean swept, that he
could find no apparent sign in the floor, by which he might conjecture of
any certain disease, prying at length very curiously, beneath his bed he spide
and found a Saddle lie: upon which, he came unto his sick Patient, and
seriously told him that he had now searched into the nature of his disease, for
by feeling of his pulse he might well perceive he had taken a great surfeit by
eating of a horse; at which the Patient fell into such an extreme laughter
that his Impostume broke, by which he was suddenly cured, and the fellow grew
thereby more famous.

28. A Boy that cried fire.
AN unhappy boy lying in the streets in a cold winter night, cryde fire, fire:
the people looked out of their Windows, and cryde where, where? marry quoth the
Boy I would I knew my self, for I would gladly warm me.

29. A Country fellows courtesy.
A Country fellow meeting with his friend told him he had been at London, and
seen my Lord Mayor; I but said his friend, did he take any notice of thee? no
faith, said he, no great notice, only I put off my hat to him, and he did his
duty to me.

30. One with a great Nose.
A Gentleman with an extraordinary great Nose, walking along Cheapside an
unhappy Prentise Boy meeting him makes a sudden stand, at which the Gentleman
musing, made a stand likewise, and asked him why he did not keep his way? to
whom the Lad answered, Sir I would gladly pass by you, but I cannot for your
Nose; the Gentleman loath to be too much observed, or to be the occasion of
any tumult in the street, with one of his fingers put his Nose on the one side,
and said; now youth you may freely pass, the way lies plain before you.

31. One that eat of a Bear.
A Woman having eaten of the right side of a Bear, which some say makes good
Venison, took a conceit, that she had an exceeding great rumbling and rolling
in her belly, and for remedy sends to ask advise of the Doctor, who persuaded
her to knock a Mastiffe Dog in the head, and eat so much of him, and so no
doubt but the flesh of him would worry the Bear in her belly.

32. An English man at a French Ordinary.
AN English man being in France, and at a French Ordinary, amongst other dishes
there were Woodcocks at the Table; the English gentleman somewhat before the
time took one of the Woodcocks heads, and picked it; which one of the Monsters
observing, and thinking with his wit to play upon him; I have (says he) ever
noted these English men, that wheresoever Woodcocks are served in, their
fingers will be ever first in the dish, the rest laughed at the jest, and he
for the present made no reply: but when the Table began to withdraw and every
man was silent, the Englishman fell into a great laughter, and being demanded
the reason of it: troth (said he) at a wondrous good jest was made this night
at Supper, which I protest has so taken me, that I shall never hereafter see a
Woodcock, but I shall either think of that Monsier, or some of his Countrymen.

33. Of a Seruingman.
A Seruingman bringing a brace of Greyhounds from his Master to a Knight a
friend of his, and a near neghbour; the Knight asked him whether they were
good Dogs or no? good Dogs (says the fellow) I will assure you for this,
pointing to the one of them, he is the best Dog that ever ran with four Legs
upon the earth, and see you this other, he is three times better then he.

34. Of a Justice and his man.
AN old Justice of Peace and his Seruingman riding with other company upon the
way, the day being something windy, a Crow sitting upon a weak and tender
bough, which at every small gust moved this way and that, and cried as they
rode by Ka, Ka, Ka: hark, says the Justice to his man, what the Crow says to
thee, she would (if she could) say Knave, Knave: nay, not to me says the
fellow sure she means to some man of worship in this company, you may well
perceive by her many low becks and congees.

35. A Cheater and a Tapster.
A Fellow that was exceeding dry, and had no money, came to a Taphouse, and
calls for a Can of Beer, and drinks it off; which done, he asked the Tapster if
he had any bread, yes sir, says he, you may have a whole dozen if you
please, no (says he) half a dozen will serve, and bring it in; the Tapster
did so, and set them before him: now (says he) because I will give thee a good
account, bring me another Can of Bear, which was no sooner done but he
drank it off, and withal gave him two penny Loaves, then called for the
third, then for the fourth, till he had made it up a full half dozen, and
still for every Can gives him a Loase; then asked him what was to pay. Six
pence says the Tapster. For what says the fellow? For Bear says the
Tapster. Why, had thou not bread for thy Bear, answered the other? Why then
for bread, says the Tapster. Had thou not thy bread again said the fellow?
how can that be? So whilst the Tapster was studying to reconcile this
intricate reckoning, he stepped out of doors, and paid nothing.

36. A man on the Gallows.
ONe passing by, and seeing a poor fellow in a very cold morning upon the
Gallows in his shire, and after a short confession ready to be turned off the
Ladder: Alas poor man (says he) I must pity him, he will stand so long
yonder in the cold, that I am afraid he will go near to catch his death.

37. Two by the ears.
A Man and a woman being together by the ears in the street, and a great
throng about them; a Citizens wife passing that way by chance, demands of a
Gentleman that came from the tumult, what the occasion of that vproare might
be? to whom he answered, you are a whore. How said she? thou art an arrant
Knave to call me whore, I am as honest as the skin betwixt thy brows: he
presently very courteously put off his Hat, and said, Truly fair Gentlewoman,
this was the occasion of their quarrel.

38. A drunkard and his wife.
A Woman had a husband that used to come home often disguised, and sometimes to
lie along in the floor, and still when she offered to raise him from the
ground, he would not be removed, but answered, the tenement is mine own, I pay
rent for it, and I may lie where I list: Some few nights after, coming home in
the like taking, he sat down in a Chair before the fire, and fell asleep:
the woman would have waked him, but could not, and therefore went up to bed; in
which she was scarce warm, but the maid cried out aloud, Mistress, Mistress, my
Master is fallen out of the Chair, and lies in midst of the fire: which she
hearing, lay still, and answered, Let him alone, for as long as he pays rent
for the house, he may lie where he will.

39. A Thief and a Gentleman.
A Thief in the night having purposed to rob a Gentleman's chamber which was
three Stories high, had conveyed a ladder up to his window, and being at the
top of it, and ready to make his entrance, it happened the Gentleman at the
same time was awake, and heard him, and just as he was about to open the
Casement, he met him at the window, and said, My friend, it is your best
course to stay till an hour or two hence, for I am not yet asleep; which the
Thief hearing, what with have, and fear, tumbled down from the top of the
Ladder, and without the help of a halter had almost broke his neck.

40. A rich man's Hospital.
A Gentleman coming by where a rich man was laying the foundation of an
hospital, whispered to his friend, and said, I much commend this man above
many others that I know, for he does well to provide for beggars now, knowing
he is so near his death, that by oppression has made so many in his life.

41. To choose a wife.
ONe being dissuaded from marrying a woman, because she was no wiser, made this
answer, I desire that the wise whom I am to marry should have no more wit then
to be able to distinguish her husbands bed from another man's.

42. Of a Horse, and a Pecke of Oysters.
A Gentleman having rid hard in a went morning, and coming into his Inn
dropping dry, and because his money fell short, loath to be at the charge of
faggots, giving his horse to the Ostler, he comes into the Hall where was a
great fire, but set so round, that he could not get so much as shoulder room,
for the weather being wet and cold no man would give him place: he having spyed
Oysters at the Inn gate, called in great have to the Ostler to give his horse
instantly a Pecke of Oysters, for his purpose is to ride away before dinner:
the Ostler was amazed, the rest wondered, but he would not rest till he saw
them measured, and cast before his horse into the Manger: strange it was to
them all to hear of a Horse that would eat Oysters, and to behold the nouelty
all of them presently left the fire, and ran instantly into the stable, and in
the interim he warmes, and dries himself thoroughly from top to Toe at his
pleasure, they gaping like fools till he had what he desired, came back
again, and told him his would not touch an Oyster: no, says he, will not the
sullen lade fall too, is not his stomach yet come to him? well Ostler take
away his Oysters, and give him so many Oats, and bring that he scorns to eat
hither to me, and see what I can do with them: which was done accordingly; by
that time the Horse had made an end of his Oats, he had done his Oysters, the
weather grew fair, and he well dried, rode on his journey.

43. A famous Thief.
A Famous Thief frequenting one of our Cities, where the Gates were
continually shut a nights, and not willing to lie in the Suburbs for fear of
search or suspicion, acquainted himself with one of the Porters of one of the
Gates, and fed him with money, that still when he had been abroad about any
exploit, that he should be ready to let him in at what hour soever, and this
he used a long time, till at length being taken, arraigned and convicted for
many robberies, and great evidences came against him: the next day he was
brought to the Gallows, where the Sheriffs persuading him still to confess
more, and more; at length he desired that they would send for this Porter,
which was done accordingly: The poor man came quaking, and trembling, and the
people were in great expectation of some strange thing to be revealed, all
thirsting after nouelty. By this time the Thief upon the ladder spies him, and
calls him to him; the poor Porter in a pitiful fear asks why he sent for him,
and what he had to say to him? To whom the Thief replied; Troth honest Porter
I only sent for thee to tell thee, that if I come not in by this and twelve a
Clock at night, do not tarry up for me, but go to bed a Gods name, and
saying no more, leapt off the Ladder, and with this jest in his mouth was
hanged in earnest.

44. A young Master of Arts.
A Young Master of Art the very next day after the Commencement, having his
course to common place in the Chapel, where were diverse that the day before
had took their degree, took his Text out of the eigth Chapter of Job; the
words were these, we are but of yesterday, and know nothing. This text, says
he, does fitly divide it self into two branches, our standing, and our
understanding, our standing in these words, we are but of yesterday, our
understanding, we know nothing.

45. A simple Countryman.
A Simple fellow at an Easter time, coming to receive the Communion, the
Preacher having demanded of him diverse easy questions, and finding him
ignorant in all, at length asked him how many Commandments there were: he
answered he could not tell. The Parson wondering at his sottish ignorance, asked
him how many he thought there were. Marry I think says he, there may be some
four or five. Yes says the Parson there are more. Why then replyde he there
may be seven or eight; but if you know better, then you had best tell me. Why
then quoth he, I will. There are just ten. At which he laughed, and said, Nay
I thought so and looked for no less, for sure I was, that you being the
Parson, would bring them to ten, because you would keep the tithe.

46. A Courtier.
ONe of our Scarlet Courtiers coming on a time prancing on a great horse, and
alighting at the Court gate, calls to one that stood by, and says to him, I
prithee honest fellow, whilst I walk into the Court, do so much as hold my
horse. The man seemed afraid of the beast, and asked him withal, if he was
not unruly, and that one man might hold him, he answered yes, very easily. Nay
then says he, if it be but one man's work, I would wish you to do it your
self, for I have more business in hand, then walking of horses.

47. Two Scholars.
TWo Scholars of one College in the University, the one called Pain, the
other Culpepper, were both in fault, but Pain in the less, the other in the
greater: but when the fault came to be censured, the fault was not less then
expelling the College: but Culpepper the greater delinquent yet finding more
friends, had his sentence took off, and liberty to remain still in the house,
but the other suffered for example: A Master of Art of another house coming to
visit a friend of his that was of the College where this was done, amongst
other discourse, asked what became of the business between the two Scholars,
he told him in brief, how Pain that was in the least fault was punished, and
Culpepper in the greater pardoned, who instantly replied, Nay then I think
Ovid did Prophecy of this when he said,

Paena perire potest, culpa perennis erit. 48. Gentlemen at a Tavern.
TWo or three Gentlemen meeting at a Tavern about some business, and walking
up into a room two pair of stayres high, called for a pint of Wine, which
being drunk off, and they often knocking and calling, but none either
answering, or coming up, one of the Gentlemen threw down the pint pot, when
instantly a drawer comes up with a quart, and so left them; they following
their discourse, and drinking to the good success of the bargain they were
then concluding of: the quart pot was likewise soon emptied, they knock
again, and call, none answering, down goes the quart pot, and in a trice
comes up a pottle, which after some respite being likewise dispatched, and they
ready to call for a reckoning, and so to be gone, as unwilling to enter into
further charges; they call aloud, but none would answer, then beat they the
pottle pot against the table but none yet answered, at length they thundered
with such violence, that up comes one of the drawers, whom a Gentleman being
angry at such slack attendance, meets him at the top of the stairs, and
casts him headlong down to the bottom. At which all the rest of his fellows,
with the Master of the house, began to muster up their selves, and coming up
into the Gentlemen's room, he demanding the reason of that violence done to his
servant, one of the Gentlemen answered thus, Mine Host, we have no way
willingly transgrest the customs of your house, for we observed that calling
for one pint of wine, and casting down the pot you brought up two; then
casting down the quart pot, you presented us with a pottle: now sitting here
alone, and no man regarding us to bring us up a reckoning, we flung one Drawer
down the stairs, to no other purpose, but in hope to have two at the least to
attend us.

49. A Chronologer.
ONe of our late Chronologers that succeeded old Mr John Stow, and others, in
his brief Chronicle speaking of George Duke of Clarence, says, he was drowned
in a Rundlet of Malmesey, and being taxt by a Gentleman that he had mainly
falsified the History, in regard that Hollingshed, Speed, and others have
delivered to the world that he was drowned in a whole Butt, to which he
answered, that he had no way erred from the truth, for if these that writ
great and large Histories, call it a Butt, he might (and no way improperly) in
his small Epitome of Chronicle, call it a Rundlet.

5 The Marriage of the Arts.
THe Play called The Marriage of the Arts being presented before King James at
Woodstocke, he in regard that it was somewhat tedious, and himself weary with
so long sitting, offered twice or thrice to go away, which being observed by
an ingenious Scholar of the other University, he writ these verses:

When Christ-Church showd their marriage to the King,
Lest that their match should want an offering,
The King himself did offer: what I pray?
He offered twice or thrice to go away.
51. Of a Scholar married.
A Scholar having married a young wife, and being still at his book,
preferring his serious study before dalliance with her, as she was one day
wantoning whilst he was reading: Sir says she, I could wish my self that I
had been made a book, for then you would be still peering upon me, and I
should never night nor day be out of your fingers: so would I sweet heart,
answered he, so I might choose what book, to whom she again answered, and what
book would you wish me to be, marry sweet wife says he, an Almanacke, for
so I might have every year a new one.

52. An Epitaph.
THe Lord chief Justice Femming that succeeded Judge Poppans in his place,
being both a learned and merciful Gentleman, being deceased, a pleasant fellow
writ of him this Epitaph:

Justice is dead, that was of Justice chief,
Who never yet hanged true man for a thief:
Nor ever was condemned for condemning,
Being borne in England, yet he did a Flemming.
53. Of an extraordinary nose.
A Pleasant fellow meeting a man in the street with an extraordinary red nose,
looks very earnestly in his face, as if he had espied something there which
he wondered at, the man asked what it was at which he so gazed, to which he
answered, friend, I have reuiewed you thus earnestly, and for ought I can
perceive, me thinks your eyes are not matches, no says he, I pray show a
reason why they are not, marry says he, because most certainly if they had
been matches, your nose by this time would have set them on fire.

54. Two Innekeepers.
AN Inkeeper of Saffron Walden using every Term co^sta^tly to one Inn in
London, the two Hosts grew into a great league of love and friendship together,
but ever and anon when he of London was about his business, or out of the
way, mine Host of Walden was importunate with his wife to make him a Cuckold:
which the modest woman at her best opportunity told to her husband what a false
friend he was to him, for which he vows revenge, and taking no notice at all
what was past: The time came that mine Host of Walden was for the Country;
great healths, and much protestation of love there was at their parting: But
this injury still sticks in mine host of Londons stomach. A toy takes him in
the head in the long vacation, he takes his horse, and rides purposely to see
his old friend of Walden; and coming near the Town, he spurs somewhat
hard, alights in the Inn yard, his horse being all of a sweat, he calls for an
Oftler to walk him up and down; he was no sooner dismounted but he was espied
by his old friend and familiar acquaintance, who runs to him, embraces him,
and calls out his wife to bid him welcome: the woman appears; This is mine host
(says he) of London, which uses me with kindness and respect, to whom I am
so much bound, and whose health I have drunk, and thou have pledged so often;
now I pray thee Ioane with a kiss bid him welcome into the Country. The woman
in great courtesy offers him her lips, whom he scornfully puts by: and I pray
you good woman are you wife to this man? yes, said she, for default of a
better: but I entreat you fool not me says he, I came to visit this my
friend in kindness, and not to be derided. Derided says she, why speak you
that, I am she that has laid by his side this twenty years: I that she has
I can assure you, quoth mine host of Walden: But will you tell me that, quoth
mine host of London, of certainty I know this not to be the woman you were
wont to bring to my house to lodge, and lay with her Term by Term, I hope I
know her if I see her again: nay mine host says he, if you be such a kind
of fellow, here is no staying for me; at which words while the other stood
half amazed, he leapes up into the saddle, and without mere pause spurs
back as fast as he can, to London. Mine host of Walden calls after him, but in
vain: the woman railes, he would excuse it, but cannot be heard: drunkard, and
whoremaster are the best she can afford him: the house is all in an vproare;
nor could the man and wife ever be reconciled, notwithstanding all his vows,
and oaths, with the mediation of neighbors and friends, till mine host of
London, thinking himself partly revenged, sent under his hand and seal, that
it was but a mere trick put upon him in requital of a former injury.

55. Two old Widows.
TWo old widows sitting over a Cup of Ale in a Winters night, entered into
discourse of their dead husbands, and after the ripping up of their good, and
bad qualities, says one of them to her maid, I prithee wench reach us another
light, for my husband, (God rest his soul) above all things loved to see good
lights about the house, God grant him light everlasting: and I pray you
neighbor (says the other) let the maid lay on some more Coals, or stir up
the fire, for my husband in his life time ever loved to see a good fire, God
grant him fire everlasting.

56. A Horse-stealer.
A Fellow for stealing of a horse was apprehended, arraigned, convicted, and
executed: the question being made, why this man was hanged, it was answered for
stealing a horse, Nay says the other, I will assure you no such matter, he
was hanged for being taken, for had he stolen an hundred and never been taken,
he might have been alive at this day.

57. A Baker.
ONe being called in question before a Justice for giving a Baker ill language:
now, says the Justice, my friend, what say you to this complaint? Truly sir
said he, the worst words that ever I gave him, was that I held him to be as
honest a man as ever lived by bread.

58. A Coachman.
A Mad fellow, a Coachman about the Town being drunk, fell from the seat where
he sare, and the wheels running over him, brake one of his legs, the anguish of
which drove him into a Fever: but being well recovered of them both, he had an
humor to go and prove all the prime Doctors of the Town, and try whether by
his water they could tell his profession, or his misfortune, or the disease
that before had troubled him: he being then in perfect health, his water was
carried to many, and all that saw it, concluded, that he that sent it was a
sound man, but could proceed no further; therefore his opinion was, that all
Physicians were fools, and not one learned man amongst them. This being told
an ancient grave Doctor that practiced about the City by one of the Coachmans
acquaintance, by whom he had understood every particular before related: he
wrought with him to persuade the Coachman to bring his water to him, which
took effect: But in their journey toward the Doctor, they drinking somewhat
hard, the Coachma^ carrying his vrinall empty, pist it full, which his friend
seeing, fie, says he, carry not all this water along for shame, pour out
half at least, otherwise he will perceive we have been drinking; the Coachman
was persuaded, and did so. On they went, and whilst the Coachman staid below,
his friend went up to see if the Doctor were at leisure, and told him all that
past by the way: This done, the Patient is called up, who presents his Vrinal
to the Doctor, with many a low congee outwardly, though scoffing inwardly. The
Doctor he turns, and tosses the glass, sometimes chafing it against the fire,
then again holds it up to the light: at last he breaks into these words, I
perceive by this water, that he that made it was a Carter, or Carman. Truly
(says he) if it please your Worship, you come the nearest of all the Doctors I
have tried yet, and yet you are wide from the mark. Will thou tell me that
says the Doctor, sure I am he is one that gets his living by the whip. Therein
you are right again answered the other: for to tell you true he was a Coachman.
Very good says the Doctor: now this Carter being drunk, fell from his Cart,
and the wheel ran over him and brake his leg. You are right in all things sir,
if you would change the Cart, and the Carter, into the Coach, and Coachma^.
Interrupt me not, says the Doctor; this Carter breaking his Leg, fell after
into a dangerous Fever of which he is since recovered. Good your worship. Good
your Worship, no more Carter, nor Cart, if you love me; for of my knowledge he
was a Coachman, and fell from his Coach. His Coach says the Doctor, still
looking upon the Vrin: I prithee truly resolve me, is here all the water that
was made? No indeed, says the fellow, I poured out half by the way. Nay, I
thought as much; then there went away the other two wheels, says the Doctor,
for there cannot be above two contained in this Vrinall. The Coachman admires
his cunning, departs satisfied with his skill, says, he shall have his
custom, with all his comrades; and vowed only for his sake, to speak well of
Doctors ever after.

59. A Tailor.
A Tailor bringing to a Gentleman a bill of extraordinary length, because it
included many reckonings, and altogether despairing of present payment, because
the party had a present purpose to travel; the Gentleman demands what he
would bate him of the maine bill, and he would pay him down the rest in ready
money, ready cash quoth the Tailor, being extaside with the very thought, I
will bate you says he a full yard City measure and that's a handful more, take
it off in the middle, the top, or the bottom, either of all these three, choose
you which.

60. A Cheater.
A Cheater having stolen a cup out of a Tavern, and being pursude and taken in
the streets, there grew on the sudden a great tumult of people, and a great
confluence was gathered together, a civil Gentleman passing, and seeing
another come from thence that had bin at the vproare, demanded of him what was
the reason of that throng, nothing says he, but that one has gotten a cup
too much, alas says the other, nothing else, that may be an honest man's
fault, and mine as soon as another.

61. A handsome wench, and a Justice.
A Handsome wench for some suspicious business being brought before a Justice
somewhat late in the evening, and he taking compassion of her because she was
fair and seeming modest, wished the man that brought her before him to take her
home, and lodge her that night, and he would hear the business more at large
in the morning; Marry with all my heart, says he, Master Justice, so you will
but commit my wife which is now at home to the Counter till the morning.

62. A cleanly lie.
WIll: Kempe by a mischance was with a sword run quite through the leg, a
Country Gentleman coming to visit him, asked him how he came by that
mischa^ce, he told him, and withal, troth says he, I received this hurt just
eight weeks since, and I have line of it this quarter of a year, and never
stirred out of my Chamber.

63. Gentlemen at an Ordinary.
Certain Gentlemen being in Game at an Ordinary, every one complained of a
filthy rank smell that was amongst them, which grew still hotter and hotter in
their Noses: At length says one of them iestingly, I pray you Gentlemen, which
of you amongst us here uses to wear Socks? A Country Gentleman one of the
company presently answered, not I, I protest I never knew what belongs to them.

64. Of a deaf Hostess.
A Young Gentleman having a deaf hostess, used to put many Jests upon her,
and one day having invited diverse of his friends to dinner, and thinking to
make them merry, takes a glass of wine, and makes signs to the good old
woman that he drank to her, and says, here Hostess, I will drink to you,
and to all your friends, namely the Baudes and Whores in Turnebull street, to
whom she innocently said, I thank you Sir, even with all my heart, I know you
remember your Mother, your Aunt, and those good Gentlewomen your sisters.

65. Of a Prentice.
A Young Boy coming out of the Country, and being new bound Prentice, seeing
my Lord Majors show, and wondering at the great pomp and state he rid in, I
marry says he, now I see what we must all come too.

66. A Spaniard and a Dutchman.
A Spaniard and a Dutchman meeting in an Inn, were appointed to be
bedfellowes, the Dutchman went first to bed, expecting the other, who before
he vncas'd himself, takes out of his mouth a set of teeth, and wiping them
laid them in a clean napkin. The Dutchman being still awake, began to wonder.
In the mean time he takes off his counterfeit hair, and shows a head quite
bald. The other still observes him. Then he takes out an artificial eye, wipes
it, and lays it by the rest. This began to startle the other, who by this time
had served off his silver Nose, and then makes toward the bed: which the
Dutchman seeing, leapes out of the bed, crying, the Devil, the Devil.

67. A great Lords entertainment.
THe Mayor of Exeter entertaining the Earl of Essex in his return from his
first Cales voyage; at dinner entreated my Lord to relate unto him all the
passage of the assaulting, and taking the Town: Which my Lord having done at
his entreaty: I marry says he, this were brave indeed, if it were true. My
Lord smiled at his ignorance, but said little, but drunk to him. The Mayor
pledged his Lordship, and withal asked him how he liked the Wine? Who answered,
it was very good. I but, says Master Mayor, I have a cup of Wine in my Celler,
etc. I marry says my Lord, I should have thought my self welcome, indeed, if
I might have tasted of that.

68. An Empericke.
AN Emperick that had but one cure for all diseases, which was certain Pills
which he used to give for all sorts of maladies, by reason that some of his
Patients were accidentally cured: grew famous in the place where he lived,
amongst the the simpler sort: In so much that some of them held him for a
learned Doctor: others for a cunning man. It happened that a poor Country man,
having his Cow strayed from him, and giving her out for lost, heard the fame of
this Artist; profers him money to help him to his Cow again. Who answered, if
he would have any Pills, he could help him to them. Yes, with all my heart
says the poor man, if I thought they would do me any good in this
business. The Artist sels him Pills, and teaches him how to take them; which
he presently did, and bids him farewell. The man going homeward the Physic
began to work with him: he retires himself for modesty sake from the highway
into a neigbouring thicket; where as he sat, casting his eye aside, he by
chance saw his Cow grazing amongst the bushes; at which he rejoiced. The next
day he returned to the City, to give thanks, by whose report he grew ten
times more famous then before among the vulgar.

69. Of a Horse.
QVeene Elizabeth in her progress to Couentry, was met a distance from the
Town by the Mayor and his Brethren, and so conducted to the City. There was a
Water in the way, and Master Majors horse would needs drink; but his rider
not suffering him, but curbing him in, the horse kept such a plunging in the
water, that he dashed the Queen; who called to him, and asked him why he did
not let his Horse drink? Who answered, if it please your Grace, I was not so
ill bred, as to suffer my Horse to drink before you Majesty's.

70. A young Citizen and his Wife.
A Young Citizen and his wife being at dinner together, he had earen Eggs, and
she was feeding upon Beef; and finding her self somewhat dry: Sweet husband
says she, I prithee drink to me, and I will pledge thee; thee after thine
Egg, and I after mine Ox.

71. Of Rape seed.
A Hansome young fellow having seen a Play at the Curtain, comes to William
Rowly after the Play was done, and entreated him if his leisure served, that
he might give him a Pottle of Wine, to be better acquainted with him. He
thankt him, and told him if he pleased to go as far as the Kings Head at
Spittlegate, he would as soon as he had made himself ready follow him, and
accept of his kindness. He did so, but the Wine seeming tedious betwixt two,
and the rather because the young fellow could entertain no discourse, Rowly
beckoned to an honest fellow over the way to come and keep them company; who
promised to be with them instantly. But not coming at the second or third
calling. At last he appears in the room, where William Rowly begins to chide
him because he had staid so long. He presently craved pardon, and begins to
excuse himself, that he had been abroad to buy Rape seed, and that he staid
to seed his birds. At the very word of Rape seed, the man rose from the Table,
with a changed countenance, being very much discontented, and said, Mr Rowly I
came in courtesy to desire your acquaintance, and to bestow the Wine upon you,
not thinking you would have called this fellow up to taunt me so bitterly,
(they wondering what he meant,) He proceeded. It Is true indeed, the last
Sessions I was arraigned at Newgate for a Rape: but I thank God, I came off
like an honest man, little thinking to be twitted of it here. Both began to
excuse themselves, as not knowing any such thing, as well as they might. But he
that gave the offense, thinking the better to express his innocence; young
Gentleman, says he, to express how far I was from wronging of you, lock
you here, as I have Rape seed in one Pocket for one Bird, so here is Hemp seed
on this side for another. At which word, Hemp seed, says the young man, Why
Villain, do thou think I have deserved hanging? and took up the Pot to
fling at his head, but his hand was stayed: and as error and mistake began the
quarrel, so Wine ended it.

72. Of a Thatcher.
A Thatcher being on the top of an house, one of the maids speaks to him
somewhat hastily, and bids him come down to breakfast, The fellow whether
ouer-ioyed with the news, or what the matrer was I know not, but his hands
left their hold, and his feet slipped, and down he came sliding; which the wench
seeing, calls aloud to him, and says, Gaffer, Gaffer, you need not make such
have, for breakfast is not ready.

73. Of another Thatcher.
ANother of the same trade, being at work on the ridge of an high Barn, and
all the Thatch loose beneath him, his feet slipped from him, and still as he
felt himself falling, catching uncertain hold, as the Thatch faild him, he
cryde, Lord help me, Lord bless me, Lord preserve me: but coming to the
Eues, and beholding what a great distance it was betwixt him and the ground;
raps out a great oath, and says, what a huge fall am I like to have.

74. Of an Ox hide.
A Scholar of the University being abroad late in the Town, coming by a
Tanners house, happened to stumble upon a raw Ox hyde that lay before his door:
and groping with his hand to know what it was, first hits upon the hyde, and
after upon the horns, upon which he had this conceit: Te toga dat nostrum, te
dant tua cornua Ciuem.
In English thus; Thou should be Scholar by thy Gown,
But by thy Horns one of the Town.


75. Three Surgeons.
THree Surgeons in their own Countries were equally famous, and all at one
time: the one in England, another in Ireland, a third in Wales. Now as all men
naturally enquire after such as are eminent in their own quality: so each of
these by rumor having heard much of the others excellency: They had great
desire to see one another, and were all in the same thought. The Irishman comes
over to enquire after both, or either just at the same time when the Englishman
was iourneying toward Wales, and the Welchman toward England. These three by
accident met in one Inn, all strangers one to another. Motion was made by the
Hostess, in regard they were single men, that they might Sup together: It was
accepted of. After supper they grew in discourse of their own Art. The
Irishman extols one famous in England, another in Wales: The Welchman is as
liberal in the praise of an Englishman, and an Irishman: The Englishman is as
free in commending the other. After some circumstance, they find themselves to
be the same. Many enterchanging of courtesy passed between them: and the Table
being drawn, they concluded all to lie in one Chamber. A great fire being
made, and some healths passing round: at length says the Englishman, we are
all famous for our Art practiced upon others; being so fortunately met, it were
not much amiss if we practiced something upon our selves. The others as
ambitious to make trial of their skill, gave consent to the motion. The
Englishman presently calls for a clean wooden dish; and having commanded the
hostess to leave the Chamber, takes his incision Knife, and opens himself
before the fire, rips up his belly, takes out his stomach or Paunch, and casts
it into the wooden dish: then binds up his body, as his Art taught him,
without any trouble of color or countenance. Which they seeing,
notwithstanding cheered him up, and asked him how he did. He answered, (I
thank God) never better, only for the present he wanted a stomach. They
applaud his cunning. Then the Irishman loath to be exceeded in his Art, with
his knife takes out one of his eyes, with the strings, and without show of
fear or sign of pain, closes up the place with a plaster, and lays it to
the Englishmans Paunch in the wooden Platter. Which the Welchman observing, and
scorning to be undervalued in his Art, leapes to his sword, and takes it in
the lest hand, and cuts off the right, stancheth the blood, binds up the
wound, and casts it to the rest, as little moved as the other. This done, they
deliver up the paunch, the eye, and the hand to be kept safe, and delivered
back to them in the morning. And then to bed they go. The Hostess lays
these things in the wet Larder: but her daughter forgetting to lock the door;
about break of day in comes a Cow, and eats up all in the Tray. The hostess
rising betimes in the morning, going to see her charge, finds all devoured, and
no sign of any thing remaining, she grows into a great perplexity for her
guests, grieuing that she should be the cause of their deaths: Which her
daughter ouer-hearing, comforts her mother thus. To satisfy your guests in
show, and to avoid the law, we have incurd by our negligence. First for the
Englishman, they say the paunch of an Hog, or a Sow is just like the stomach of
a man, or woman: Our Sow is fat, and to be killed shortly, cut her throat now,
her flesh will be never a whit the worse, and lay her Paunch in the place of
the other, this was no sooner advised then put in practice. But now says the
hostess, how shall we do for the Irishmans eye? Oh mother says the Girl,
look but upon our gray eyed Cat, and she has has such eyes as he has for
all the world. The mother apprehends, the Cat is taken, and suffers, and her
eye cast into the tray in stead of the Irishmans. That done, what shift (says
mine hostess) shall we make for the Welchmans hand? Oh Mother says the Girl,
but yesterday a thief suffered, and hangs still upon the Gallows: send
quickly to the place, and cut off his hand, and lay it in the place of the
Welchmans. Al is done, the Surgeons call, the Tray is carried up, and (as they
think) every thing accommodated in his own place. The Englishman closes up
his stomach: the Irishman puts in his eye: the Welchman fastens on his hand,
and every of them in outward appearance seems whole, and sound. And being
ready to take horse, and part, says one of them; these cures seem current for
the present, but whether they be settled, or permanent, may be a question:
Therefore I hold it fit that every one of us travel about our most necessary
affairs, and meet here again in the same place this day month, to give
account of our cures. It is concluded: the day comes: the Artists appear
according to promise. They first ask the Englishman concerning the state of
his body? Who anwered, he was never in better health, nor ever had so great a
stomach; for now no meat can come amiss to him, raw, or roasted: besides, he
had much ado to keep his Nose out of every swilling Tub: Nay, he cannot see
a young Child turn his backside to the wall, but he had a great mind to be
doing with it. They question next the Irishman of his health: who answers, that
he feels himself well, saving that he feels some defect in that one eye,
for when the one is shut, and asleep, the other is open and awake. Besides, if
at midnight he hear a Rat or a Mouse stirring, he could not contain himself
from stepping out of bed, breaking his Shins so often, that they were never
without plasters. They question the Welchman last, he protests that he is
well, and in health, and that in his own nature he is both of good condition,
and conversation, but ever since the reioyning of that hand, he has much ado
from stealing whatsoever stands in his way, and from keeping it out of the next
man's Pocket.

76. Of Bucanon.
THe famous Poet Bucanon in his travels was taken hold of by some of the Popes
Inquisitors, who by his free writing, suspected his religion, but he to acquit
himself, wrote unto his holiness this Dysticon: Laus tua non tua fraus,
virtus non copia rerum,
Scandere te fecit hoc decus eximium.
Which thus I paraphrase. Thy praise not fraud, thy virtue, not thy store,
Made thee to climb that height which we adore.


For which Encomium he was set at liberty, and being got out of the Popes
jurisdiction, he sent to his Holiness, and desired according to his own true
meaning, to read the selfsame verses backward which were these: Eximium decus
hoc fecit te scandere rerum
Copia, non virtus, fraus tua, non tua laus.
Thus Englished: The height which we adore, what made thee climb?
Not virtue, nor thy worth, rather thy crime.


77. An Usurer dying.
A Great Usurer having purchased a mighty estate, as all men are mortal, so
the time came when he must leave the world: and lying upon his deathbed, the
Doctors, and Physicians having given him over, a Reverend Divine was sent to
comfort him; who telling him of many comforts for his souls health, amongst
other things, said, he had been a great purchaser upon earth, but now he must
study for another purchase, which was the Kingdom of heaven. He turning upon
the other side, at the hearing of the word purchase, answered, I will not give
more then according to fifteen years for the purchase, and so died. This
Gentleman preaching at his funeral, in the conclusion of his Sermon, said
only thus, Brethren, and dearly beloved, it is now expected, that should
speak something concerning our brother here deceased: I will end it in few
words, namely these: How he lived you know, how he dyed I know, and where his
soul is now, God Almighty knows.

78. A parish Clarke.
AN honest man, a Parish Clarke, and a freeman of London, by trade a Skinner,
being by the Preacher, before he went into the Pulpit, (because he found
himself at the present not very well) entreated to sing a Psalm of some
length: I will said he, and said aloud thus: I entreat you good people sing
Lamentation of a Skinner.

79. Two sisters.
TWo sisters, the one being exceeding fair, the other extreme black: It so
fortuned, the one had Suitors, the other had none. The fair one meeting with a
Sweetheart of hers in a Garden, to which her chamber window was a prospect, they
grew so wantonly familiar, that it was most indecent, and unseemly; the black
sister finding the others chamber open, and espying all which had past; with
her diamond writes, Te tam formosam non decet esse leuem, and having done this,
conueyes her self out of the room. Their dalliance being ended, the fair
sister returning to her Chamber, and finding no body there, espies what was
writ in the window, and finding it to be her sisters ohatacter, thus
subscribes, Te non formosam non valet esse leuem, which I thus interpret, the
first:

So fair and light do not agree. The answer:

Were you as fair such would you be. 80. Wishers, and woulders.
ONe desiring a Scholar to turn the old ancient English proverb into Latin,
Wishers and Woulders were never good householders. That I will presently, says
the Scholar thus, Oh si, oh si, otiosi.

81. Barbarous Latin.
ONe thinking with barbarous latin to put down a Scholar, came and saluted
him in these words, Ars tufons, art thou well? To whom he presently answered in
the others garb, Asinus fons, Asinus tu; that is, As well as thou.

81. A Gentleman to a Lady.
A Witty conceited Gentleman, that when he came among Ladies, would often bolt
out a phrese of Latin; one of them, that thought her self the most witty
amongst the rest, said unto him, Sir you are ever and anon out with your
Latin, which we Gentlewomen understand not, therefore are afraid lest you
should play upon us: But for mine one part, I persuade my self that if you
speak but two words, if one of them be good, the other is naught. I, says
he, Madam; what say you then of these two words, bona mulier, good woman? Well
says she, bona may be good, but if mulier be not naught, then never trust me.

83. Two hyring one horse.
TWo fellows purposing a journey hired a horse betwixt them to ride by turns:
The one laid down half the hire, and calls to his partner for the other half,
which he willingly disburst. Which done, says he, mark the conditions betwixt
us, which are these: when I ride, then you shall go a foore, and when you go
on foot the^ I shall ride. This is the bargain, will you stand to it? Yes, with
all my heart says the other. So the first got up, rod the whole journey, and
left the other to come on foot after him.

84. A Gentleman and a Horsecourser.
A Gentleman hired a Horse in Smithfield to ride a journey twenty miles beyond
York, and having paid the Horsecourser his money he desired to know of him
whether the horse would serve him his journey, or no? to whom the fellow
answered, that without doubt he would, if he would but observe three things,
the Gentleman asking what they were, The first is says he, you must meat him
well. Fear not says the other, for I look to my horse, as to my self. The
second is, you must not ride him up hill nor down hill. Well says he, I must
spare him to ease my self. Now what is the third, marry says he, drive him
before you in all the even way you come in, and if he serve not your iourny as
well as any horse in England, trust me no more. Thus was the poor Gentleman not
only iaded, but mocked for his money.

85. A man buying a Cow.
A Certain man came into the Market, to buy a Cow, and bought one: when he had
paid for her he desired to know what faults she had. Now the Cow could not
endure any to stand just before her: so the seller spoke to the buyer to stand
just before her, and he should see all her faults at once: which he did: but no
sooner was he just before her, thinking to see some egregious fault in her,
and alas he felt it, for she ran at him, and threw him along in the dirt.

86. A Doctor and a Lady.
DOctor Butler being very angry with a Lady, called her whore: she makes a
grievous complaint upon him; in so much, that partly by compulsion, partly by
entreaty, he was forced to recant his words before a competent company, such
as for her best satisfaction she would make choice of. The time appointed
came, wherein he recanted in these words:

Madam I called you whore, it is true. and to speak otherwise, I should lie.
I come to give you satisfaction, I am sorry.
Upon these terms grew a perfect reconcilement between them.

87. An Epitaph.
A Gentleman having lost a dear friend of his, and willing to bestow some
monument upon him after his death, comes to a Scholar, desiring him to make
him a Epitaph for that purpose, he told him withal his hear, then he
demanded, what special virtues his friend had when he lived, that in his death
he might commend them to posterity, who answered he never took notice of
any particular virtues; he asked him then what noted vices he was guilty of, he
told him again not any that he knew, but that he was a good honest moral man,
and more he could not speak for him: the third question was, he demanded how
old he was, when he departed his life, he answered he was just sixty years of
age, upon which he writ this Epitaph:

Here lies a man was borne and cride,
Told threescore years, fell sick, and did.
88. Pope Alexander VI.
POpe Alexander the sixth, intruding into the Papacy rather by force then the
consort of a free election, one coming to read his title, which was Alexander
Papa VI. Pope Alexander the sixth, read Alexander Papa vi. Alexander Pope by
force.

89. Pictures hanged.
A Fantastic Gentleman having bespoken diverse Pictures to furnish a Gallery,
the picturer bringing them home, he was disposing them in their several
places, here says he, hang this, there that, and there that, but here will be
hanged my self.

90. Coming of the Spaniards.
ONe coming fearfully into a company of Gentlemen, told them he could tell
them most fearful news, they asked him what it was, Marry says he, it is
publicly rumored that the Spaniards will be here before Easter, Tush let not
that trouble you says one of the Company, I will never believe it, for the
Spaniards kill no flesh in Lent.

91. A father and his daughter.
A Father being suspicious of his daughter, and of a young man that was a surer
to her, whom he did no way affect, took his daughter to schooling, and made
her vow unto him never more to come into his company without asking leave, upon
a time her father sitting by the fire, and she having notice given her that her
friend was at the door to speak with her, she made an exuse to reach
something behind her father, and as she stooped, said father, by your leave:
marry good leave have you daughter says he, which was no sooner spoke, but out
she went to her sweet heart, and saw her father no more till she came home a
married wife.

92. A letter writ out of the Country.
A Countryman writ a Letter to a friend of his at London after this manner:
After my hearty commendations, hoping in God that you are in good health, as I
am at the making hereof, etc. these are to let you understand that at this
present I am extremly sick, and much troubled with a quartaine ague, in so
much that there is small hopes ever to be mine own man again: And for such a
man that has done me most violent and dangerous wrongs I do forgive him with
all my heart and soul: but if it shall please God I may recover this
sickness, I will be revenged of him to the utmost of my power, though it cost
me all that ever I am or shall be worth, thus being loath to trouble you any
further, I remain, and cease ever to be your loving friend,

I. F.

93. A lie retorted.
ONe hearing another in the company tell a lie, at least an extreme
impossibility, all condemned it for a thing that had no appearance of truth: no
says one, I can tell you as strange a wonder as that, walking the other day
over the fields, and plowed lands, it was my fortune to cast mine eye upon a
Hare that was sitting, having nothing at that time in mine hand, and being
desirous to kill her sitting, still fixing my eyes upon her, I stooped to take
up a clod or stone to fling at her, and beat out her brains, and in that
thought stooping to catch up something, I fastened upon another hare that sat
there formed, cast her from me, and hit the other as she was rising, and brake
both their necks, and carried them home to supper.

94. A Scotchman and his Mistress.
A Scotchman in the beginning of the spring, when scarce one flower was seen
to bud out of the earth, by chance walking to take the air, cast his eye upon
a Primrose fairly blown, and being about to pluck it, he began to consider
with himself, how much more acceptable would this be to my Lady, and
Mistress, if for the rareness thereof she gathered it with her own fair
hand, and in this thought he purposed to call her from her Chamber, and bring
her to the place, but fearing lest any one in his absence should find it out,
he thought it the safest way to cover it with his hat, so he did, and goes
withal speed to his Ladies Chamber, in this interim one coming by that way,
(whether he before observed him or no, I know not) but removing the hatt to see
what was under it, espies the flower, and crops it, and in the same place he
left a Rose of a worse smell behind him, couers it with the hat, and conueighes
himself quite out of sight, presently after comes the Scotchman leading his
Lady by the arm, tells her after many complements the rareness of the flower,
and of his great fortune to find it, and how much more precious she should
make it by plucking it in her own person. Why where is this dainty flower
says she you so much praise and speak of. Why here sweet Lady says he
covered with this my Beauer, and with curiosity remooving it, discouers the
thing I spoke of, still smelling, and therefore more offensive to the smell,
the Scotchman blushes, the Lady railes, what he then thought, or how her dainty
nose took it, I leave it to the Readers considerations:

So dainty was her nose? and she not smell
That sent before she came so near? and tell
The Scotchman that for recreation
She walked with him, so far it is Ladies fashion,
But flowers she'de have none, so soon this year,
So might she have ie'rde him, and not he her.
95. Of a Gentleman that was the first of his house.
ONe Gentleman obiecting to another, that he was the first of his house, the
other answered that is my honor that thou vpbraidest me with, but be it thy
dishonor that thou art likely to be the last of thine.

96. An Empericke and his man.
A Physician and his man riding a long, they perceived a distance off, a great
confluence of people assembled: the master desirous to know the reason thereof,
sends his servant to know the cause, and to give him notice, which the fellow
did, and gallopping back with all the speed he could, desires his master if
he loved his life, to put spurs to his horse, and to provide for his present
safety otherwise he was but a lost man: at which the Physician amazed, desired
likewise to know the reason of that, his man replied, Sir, the reason of this
meeting is to behold the execution of one that has killed a man, now if he
were condemned for killing of one, what danger are you in, that to my knowledge
have been the death of half a hundred at the least.

97. Two Country Fellows.
Two Country fellows meeting at an Assizes in the Country, one asked the other
what news, and how many were condemned to suffer, the other answered, This
has been the strangest Sessions that ever was in my time, I have not known
the like, for there is no execution at all, and is it not worthy observation,
that so many Justices should sit on the Bench, and not one thought worthy to be
hanged?

98. A Churchman in his Inn.
A Churchman being in his Inn, and arguing with an high voice, fie quoth his
curious hostess, Sir, why do you talk so loud? marry sweet Hostess says
he, because I am alowd to talk, and so are not you without the consent of your
husband.

99. An English Gentleman in France.
AN English Gentleman being in France, and having exercised himself in a
dancing school, had put off his pumps, and wiping himself with a dry towell,
was ready to depart, at which time enters a French Mounsier, and entreated him
to put on his pumps again that he might see him practice, the other excused it
by reason of his wearines, and that by too much heating his body, he might
endanger a surfeit, but the Mounsier from entreaty grew to importunity, from
importunacy to threats, and withal seeing his sword lie a distance from him
draws it, and swears that if he will not presently satisfy him in his
request, he will run him through: the English Gentleman seeing at what
advantage he had him, yields to the present necessity, dances out his Galliard,
and gives him as much content as he can desire, but having ended, made himself
ready, and recovered his sword, coming close to the Mounsier, he tells him,
that if he be a gentleman, he must satisfy him for this affront, and either
acknowledge that he had done him a manifest wrong, or decide the difference by
the sword: the other seeing how near it touched his reputation, told him he
would give him meeting to his desire: the place, and hour was appointed, their
weapons agreed upon, and their length taken: The morning came, and singly
without Seconds they met and drew, the Englishman presently draws a case of
Pistols, and bids the Mounsier dance, I and to what tune he would either sing
or whistle: the other taxes him of dishonorable advantage, but he is obstinate,
and swears he will shoot him if he will not dance: then the French man lays
down his arms, and footes it with all the curiosity he could, hihich done,
the English man tells tem now they are upon equal wrmes, gives him leave to
rest and breathe, and having made himself sport sufficiently, fought with him,
and had the better of the Duel.

100. A Gentlemen and a Constable.
A Gentleman coming late before the Constable, thinking to have past the
watch, he was called before the lantern, and very strictly demanded who he
was, and whom he served, he answered, he was as they saw a man, and that he
served God. I, say you so, says the Constable, then carry him to the Compter,
if you serve no body else: yes Sir replied the Gentleman, I serve my Lord
Chamberlain. Say you so says the Constable, why did you not tell me so
before? Marry says the Gentleman, because I had thought you had loved God
better then my Lord Chamberlain.

101. A rich man and a poor.
ONe ask this question, What was that, that the poor man throws away, and
the rich man puts up in his pocket? It was answered, when the rich man blows
his nose in a hankercher.

102. A sleepy drawer.
A Drawer sleeping under the Pulpit, the Preacher beat his deske so hard, that
he being suddenly awaked, start up, and cried openly in the Church, Anon, Anon
Sir.

103. A famous Painter.
ANgelo a most famous painter in Rome, wrought all those famous pieces, or the
most part of the^ that are now to be seen in S. Peter's Church, and working
privately with a curtain before him, as not willing his tables should be
seen till his nouissima manus had been upon them, and that they were complete
and perfect, being at that time about the resurrection and last judgment, where
the Elect were of one side, and the reprobate of the other, he had observed a
Priest who would be still prying into his work, therefore to be revenged on
him, he thought no more fit occasion or opportunity then to draw his face to
the life amongst the damned, which he did with such art and curiosity, that
when his work came to be seen, and made public, not any that knew the
Priest, but could easily perceive, it personated him; for which he grew to be
a derision or byword among the people, insomuch that they would say to his
face, that he was in Angeloes hell already: for which he made a great
complaint to the Clergy, at length petitioned to the Pope himself that his
face might be taken from thence, and some put into the place: to who^ the Pope
gave answer, that he must necessarily excuse him in that business, for true
it was, that if Angelo had put him into purgatory, he then had power in
himself, to have released him thence, but seeing it was into hell, it was
beyond his jurisdiction, for ex inferis nulla redemptio, out of hell there is
no redemption.

104. Of giving away Dear.
A Private Gentleman of this Kingdom having a walk in the Forest, was
complained on to King James, that he had in one year given away above 60
heads of Dear, at the least, at which his Majesty being grievously incensed,
called him before him, and asked him whether that were true that was reported of
him, and told him of the complaint which was made against him: to whom he
answered that it was most true, that within such a time he had given away as
many: at which the King being enraged he swore he would have him hanged for
it: but he beseecht his Majesty to hear him fully: True it is says he, that
I have given away so many to such friends of mine that were suitors to me for
Venison; but if it come to be proved that I have delivered any one of them, I
shall then submit my self to undergo your highnesses most heavy displeasure,
with which answer the King was appeased, and he acquitted.

105. The King a hunting.
THe King being one day a hunting, and pleasing to retire himself to repast,
leaned, or rather sat upon the same Gentleman, being fat and corpulent,
somewhat to his disease, who boldly spoke to the King in these words; I do
beseech your Majesty, lean not too hard upon your cushion, least you make the
feathers tofly out.

106. Of choughing in ones grave.
A Master of Art in one of the Universities, having acted in a Tragedy, and his
body lying seeming dead on the Stage, for the time was not yet come that he
should be taken away, a passion took him that he was forced to cough so loud
that it was perceived by the general auditory, at which many of them falling
into a laughter, he rising up excused it thus: you may see Gentlemen what it
is to drink in ones porridge, for they shall cough in their grave.

107. A Gentleman in disgrace.
A Worthy Gentleman, and a good Scholar had been long in disgrace with Queen
Elizabeth, the reason I know not, nor am willing to examine, but he made means
to one that was then in great favor at Court, to bring him into favor with her
Majesty, which he had promised him, and persuaded the Queen to give
admittance of him into her presence. The time was come, and the other brought
him, where and when she expected him: who having done his duty with all the
submission that a subject might; The Queen says, I understand you are a great
scholar, shall I ask you one question? Any thing Madam says he that lies
within the compass of mine understanding to resolve you; then I pray you says
she, how many vowells be there? Madam says he, it is a question that every
school boy can resolve you, but since you would be answered from me, there be
five: five says she? but I pray you of these five, which may we best spare?
Not any of them Madam says he, without corrupting of our natural dialect. Yes
replied she, I can tell you, for of them all we can (for our own part) best
spare u or you.

108. A simple Constable.
A Gentleman walking late, knowing there to be a simple Constable that had the
watch that night, giving him some peremptory terms, there was no way with him
but to prison he must, at length the Gentleman came up close to him, and bid
him commit him if he durst. Why says he, what may I call your name, that I
who present the Kings person may not commit? Says the Gentleman, my name is
Adultery, and neither by Gods Laws nor man's ought you to commit me: which
one of the wisest of the company hearing, let him go Master Constable says
he, let him go, for if your wife should hear that you had committed Adultery
in your watch it might be an everlasting breach of love betwixt you. Upon this
the constable was appeased, and the Gentleman went quietly to his lodging.

109. The twelve signs of usury.
ONe being desirous to know what twelve several Nations nearest resembled the
12. months, having their several influences from them, was by one that stood
by in Disticks thus answered.

Aquarius bids the Russian at home tarry,
And use baths, furs, and fires in January.
Pisces in February bids keep warm,
Lest hail, rain, snow, may do the Lopland harm.
March of Mars savors, Aries the Commander,
To him belongs the warlike. Netherlander.
April has correspondence to the French,
And Tau rus tells us that he loves a wench.
In Gemini the Italian loves to play,
And therefore he is like the Month of May.
The Month of June is governed by the Crab,
The Spaniards hot, and he must have a drab.
In July the bright Sun in Virgo swayes,
The parched Moors are tanned by his rays.
Leo in August reins, the Indian then,
Though naked may be counted amongst men.
The English the Goat inuites as I remember,
To challenge to himself the Month September.
The Scorpion ripens harvest in October,
The Germane claims that month, though seldom sober.
The Austrian who his shape does never vary,
November claims, swayd by the Sagittary.
Upon the Hungarian Aquarius powers
Many full pots, filt by December showers.
110. One preaching against usury.
ONe preaching violently against usury, was by one that was known to be a
great money master, the same day invited to dinner, but because he had so
netled him and all of his profession in his sermon, he was at the first motion
(fearing some violence to be offered to to his person) resolved not to go,
but upon consideration, trusting to the privilege of his Cote, he boldly went,
and was exceeding welcome, the Table being taken away the guests either
dispersed, or in discourse, the usurer takes the Preacher aside, puts ten
pieces in his hand and thanks him kindly for his sermon: the other wondering at
his bounty, demanded of him the reason thereof, for said he, I was afraid I had
much offended in being so bitter against those two damnable crimes of
oppression and usury. The other answered, I protest you were so far from
offense to me ward, that you gave me much content, and I would entreat you to
amplify that Text, and in all your sermons to inueigh against it still. The
Preacher asking his reason, I hope it may so edify, and prevail with some
that they will quite give it over, and so by that means, I and some others of
my own resolution, may put out our money to our profit.

111. Of a tall Gentleman, and a little Tailor.
A Little low Tailor working to a tall Fantastic Gentleman, had pleased him
in all things, saving that he never made his collar high enough, and bespeaking
a new suite, charged him to button him up before two or three buttons more then
ordinary. The Tailor willing to give him all content, did accordingly: brought
it home, and see it put on; and having buttond him to the height, it made him
hold up his chin, so that he could scarce see any thing save the Element.
Says the Tailor, have I pleased your worship now? Oh very well says the
Gentleman, this is as I would have it. Reach me up thy bill, and put thy hand
into my other hose, there is my purse, and tell out thy money. The Tailor did
so, and told him he was satisfied. I am glad of it, says the Gentleman, and
not able to hold down his head, Reach me thine hand honest friend, says he,
and now farewell, for I fear I shall never see thee again.

112. Two Gentlemen falling out.
TWo young gentlemen falling out in a Tavern over night, promised to meet in
the field the next morning, and did so; but upon cold blood distrusting their
valors, they began to parle: at length it was concluded betwixt them, that in
regard their going out was taken notice of by other gentlemen, and if no blood
were drawn betwixt them, it might redound to both their disparagement, to give
one another some slight hurt, or scratch such a place, where they could best
endure it: and so drew cuts who should give the first wound, and the other to
appoint the place. Says he who was the first patient, give me a little prick
in the Arm: I will says the other, and ran his Arm quite through. The other
making sour faces, at the smart thereof. Now says he, stand me, and show me
where I shall hit you? But he that was untouched, perceiving whom he had before
wounded, to be scarce able to hold his sword, stands upon his guard, and tells
him he lay fair and open to him, bids him hit him where he could, and so came
off boasting and bragging to his friends, how he had got the better of the day.

113. A Drunkard.
A Drunkard lying in the street, and not able to help himself: a gentleman
walking late without a light, stumbled at him, but by good fortune recovered
himself, and perceiving what had line in the way, I have stumbled at a straw,
says he, and leaped over a block.

114. A Master of a ship.
THere was one whose name was Man, and he was Master of a ship, which was
called the Moon: who was at Sea, and had been in great familiarity with a
Sailers wife in Ratcliffe. In his absence her husband finding her to be a
light huswife: but not knowing of the former, charged her with a young
Seafaring man, with whom she had been often at private meeting in company,
and that very suspiciously, in so much that he urged her to tell him upon her
salvation, what in that kind had passed betwixt them. The woman to give his
jealousy satisfaction, fell down upon her knees, and wished some heavy fate
might fall upon her, if she knew more by that party, then by the man in the
Moon, at which protestation the husband was satisfied, and as it is said never
jealous of her after.

115. A Gormandizer.
A Gorma^dizing fellow protesting to a friend of his that he loved him as well
as he loved his soul. I thank you sir (said he) with all my heart; but I had
rather you loved me as well as you love your body.

A Welsh Reader.
A Welchman reading the chapter of the Genealogy, where Abraham begat Isaac,
and Isaac begat Jacob, ere he came to the midst he found the names so
difficult, that he broke off in these words, and so they begat one another till
they came to the end of the Chapter.

117. A Bishop and a Gentleman.
THis is an old one, but a good one, and therefore not altogether amiste to be
here inserted; which though it be known to some, is questionless not to all.
A Gentleman of the University, being great acquaintance with a Doctor,
insomuch that they were very intimate, and indeared friends. It happened that the
Gentleman traveled for the space of seven years: In which interim this Doctor
was made an Archbishop. The Gentleman at his return being glad to hear of his
friends preferment, took time to visit him, and came just when they were
preparing for dinner. The Archbishop more strange in his salutation then
before; after short greeting asked him where he purposed to dine? He answered,
My Lord, where my horse stands, which is both an Inn, and an Ordinary. Well
says my Lord, it may be before dinner be done you shall hear from me, and
so parted, without any further complements. The gentleman went to his Inn, and
sat down among the rest of the strangers. The Archbishop remembering his
promise, calls one of his gentlemen, and spying a Mullet (which is a Sea fish)
on the Table; Take this dish says he, and inquire for such a Gentleman at his
Inn, and tell him I have sent him this, as a Token of my love, to mend his
Ordinary. The Gentleman did. And finding him set amongst other strangers, told
him that his Grace had sent him that token of his love, to mend his commons, he
kindly seemed to accept it, and humbly thanked his Grace, and the Gentleman
that brought it: who being about to take his leave, the Gentleman called him
back, and desired to hear of him, whether his Lordship had not withal sent
him either bread to his fish, or Bear, or Wine? Who answered him, not any of
those. Then I pray you says he, remember my service to your Lord, in a sheet
suddenly; and calling for Pen, Ink, and Paper, writ this disticke,

Mittitur in disco
Mihipiscis ab Archiepisco.
Po non ponetur,
Quia potus non mihi detur.
The messenger bearing the Note to his Lord, he called him back again, told
him it might be his Grace that could forget his friends, might perhaps not
well remember his Latin, therefore entreated that he would stay to take the
same lines interpreted into English, which were thus:

There was a fish, sent me in a dish, by an Archbis
Hop shall not be there, because he sent me no Beer.
118 Trusting for a reckoning.
ONe came into a Tavern, Drawer says he, will thou trust me for a Pottle of
Wine till the next time I come? Sir says he, I must answer you in the same
words, I will trust you for a Pettle of Wine, till I come again: so brought
it, and made him pay for it.

119. Strange beasts to be seen.
TWo pleasant fellows coming by a Bartholmew Fayer, where amongst other
shows, diverse beasts were to be seen: as a Leopard, a Cat a Mountain, and
the like: either having no money at all, or that little they had being
unwilling to spend; one asked the other how they might see these sights, and
cost them nothing? The other answered, follow me, do as I do, say nothing
and fear nothing. So coming to him that kept the door, by your leave Sir
says the first, and the other rushed in after him: so taking view of that was
to be seen; says one of them, where are these monsters which your painted
cloth speaks of? here says the Keeper. Where says the other? why here says
he. They having seen what they came for, a good jest (says the first)
indeed, come a way, do not use thus to make fools of Gentlemen, and so went
out of the Room. Says the Keeper looking after them, I perceive these two be
of that kind of people that can see, and will not.

120. A Emperor of Rome.
A Emperor of Rome passing by the high way in great pomp, with his Nobility,
and Gentry about him, two beggars sitting together, says one of them, Oh how
happy were that man (says the one of them) whom the Emperor would be pleased
to make rich. Nay, answered the other, happy were that man whom God Almighty
would be pleased to make rich. This Caesar ouer-hearing, gave charge to a
Gentleman that was next him, that these two Beggars should attend him the next
monow at Court. At these summons the poor men were in a most pitiful case,
fearing they had spoke some treason to bring their lives in danger: but the
next day appearing in Court, they were by the Emperors appointment brought
into the great Chamber, where a Table being covered, two rich chaires were
placed, and the two beggars in them, and before them two Pyes, made in all
respects alike, the one full of Gold, the other having a baked Feasant, or some
other foul to serve for one meal: then were they bid to cast lots: the Pie
with the Feasant fell fell to him that said, Oh how happy was he whom the
Emperor would please to make rich, and the Pie of Gold to the other.

121. A Scotch Witch.
A Witch in Scotland, arraigned, convicted, and condemned to be burnt, being
brought to the place of execution, and tied to the Stake, and the Executioner
ready to give her fire, she casting her eye on the one side spide her own, and
only son, a chubbed young fellow, and like the child to such a mother: She
calls to him, and very earnestly with some acclamation, desires him to bring her
any quantity of water, or any other liquor, were it never so small, to comfort
her before her death, for she was extremely a thirst. At which he only
shook his head. She still the more earnestly importunes him, saying, Why
dear child, help me to some drink, be it never so little, so it be any, I
care not what it be, for I am fearful dry. To whom the young man answered,
by no means dear Mother will I do you that injury, for the drier you are, the
better you will burn.

122. A braggard.
A Terrible braggard boasted how it was his chance to meet with two of his arch
enemies at once, the one says he, I tossed so high in the air, that had he had
at his back a Bakers basket full of bread, though he had eaten all the way, he
would have been starued in his fall, ere he would have reached the ground: and
the other he struck so deep into the earth, that he left him no more to be
seen above ground, but his head and one of his Arms, and these to no other
end, then to put off his Hat to him, as he had occasion to pass that way.

123. The reuersion of an house.
ONe came bragging from the Court of Aldermen, ouerioyed with the obtaining of
a suite, for says he, they have promised me the lease of the next house that
falls. To whom one standing by replied, but had it been my case I should have
petitioned for a house that stood.

A Mayor in the North
A Mayor of a corporation in the North, just upon the death of Queen
Elizabeth, to an occasion to assemble his Brethren, and to make an Oration,
what a good Queen they had lost: but wished them to take comfort, for Pompey,
was dead, and Alexander was dead, and all the nine worldlings were dead, but
none of all these was so good a Queen as she. And moreover says he, in this
-- as Master Schoolmasters calls it, where there are no Justices of peace, and
that no Officers have any power, but Majors, Coroners, and Constables, by
reason of which many Seabaleroes take their opportunity to commit diverse
outrages, and mutinies, hoping to escape unpunished, but says he, if all other
Magistrates will take that strict order, that I purpose to do, there shall
none of them all have the least hope of a resurrection.

125. A man lying sick.
A Man lying very sick, having his wife dead not long before, one came to him
and counseled him to leave off the cares of this world, and to think of a
better place, whither says he do you think my wife is gone? no doubt said
the other by the grace of God but she is in heaven, O says he then I care not
whither I go, so I come not where she is.

126. Of one Foul a Gentleman.
ONe Foul by name came unto a great man in this Kingdom, with a petition, and
having been a long suitor was so importunate, that he stirred his patience so
far, that in a great rage he bad him get him gone for a Woodcocke as he was:
at which the petitioner smiling, humbly thanks his Lordship, for doing him
that present courtesy, the Lord turned back, and thinking he had mocked, asked
him what courtesy? to which he answered his Lordship, truly my Lord, I have
known my self for a Foul these fifty years, and upwards, but never knew what
foul, till now that your Lordshippe resolved me: his answer pleased the Lord,
and his suit was dispatched instantly.

127. A Gentleman in an Ordinary.
A Young Gentleman late come out of the Country, and not being well acquainted
with London, being at an Ordinary, amongst many other Gallants, to whom he was
a mere stranger, Gentlemen says he, I must entreat you to take notice of an
humor that I have; the truth is, if any man offer to touch the bread that I
cut, and lay by my trencher, I presently stabb: some smiled, others looked a
little strangely upon the business, till at length one Gentleman that sat
next him, began thus; I entreat you all likewise to take notice of another
humor which I have; and it is this, I protest when I perceive any man begin to
stab, I stab again, and looking him in the face, snacht his bread, and eat it.

128. A Welchman and a Cutpurse.
A Gentleman that had a Welchman waiting on him came to see a Play, and drawing
his purse at the door which was well furnished with Crowns, was watched by a
Cutpurse, who dogd him, and took his seat close by him, the Welchman sitting
behind his Master, observed that whilst he was seriously minding the sport,
the Cheater had cunningly conuayed his purse out of his pocket, and was about
to rise, when presently the Welshman without more words draws out his knife,
and with one slash cut off the Cheaters ear, who startling at the suddenness
of the act, and troubled with the smart, looked behind him, and asked him what
he meant by it? The Welchman having his ear in his hand answered no harm
done good friend, no harm done, give hur Master hur purse, and I will give
hur, hur care.

129. A Gentleman and a Parson.
A Pleasant conceited Gentleman riding by the high way, in the company of some
friends, spyed a Parson of the Country before him, said, Gentlemen yonder is a
Scholar, let us mend our pace, and you shall hear me pose him with a
question, and after a slight salutation, Master Parson says he, I pray you
can you resolve me what part of speech is Qui mihi discipulus, yes Sir, I can,
says the parson, puer es cupis atque deceri, the words are so familiar that I
hope they need no Interpreter.

130. Of Grave Maurice, and Marquess Spinola.
IT is reported that when Marquess Spinola came first with an Army into the
Low-Countryes, that he sent word to Grave Maurice he was now come somewhat
nearer him, and purposed to sit as close unto him as his Cassocke to his back;
to whom he returned this answer, that he had often known when a soldier
has took a Merchants Cloak from his shoulders, but that a Merchant should
pluck off a soldiers Cassock, he had seldom heard or never.

131. Of Bishop Gardener.
I Have read that Bishop Gardener being deposed in King Edwards days, and sent
to the Tower, a fellow meeting him in the way, in great derision saluted him
with a low Congee, and bade him good morrow Bishop Olim, whose salutation he
returned in these few words, Gramercy knave semper.

132. An unhappy Vintners Boy.
TWo Divines walking along the Town, the end of the Lane which they should
pass through was choked with Carts, and the corner thereof being a Tavern,
and having one door into the Lane, and another into the street, they made use
of the present, and as they past through, the boy at the bar seeing they
called for no wine, Gentlemen says he, is it your custom to go through a
Church, and not to say your prayers.

133. Playing with words.
A Divine willing to play more with words, then to be serious in the expounding
of his text, spoke thus in some part of his sermon; this Dyall shows we must
dye all, yet notwithstanding, all houses are turned into Alehouses: our cares
converted into cures: our Paradise into a pair of Dice: our marriage to a merry
age: our Matrimony to a matter of money: our Divines into dry Vines: It was not
so in the days of Noah, Ah no, etc.

134. Of a Landlord and his Tenant.
A Tenant had a horse, which many times looked into his Landlords grounds, for
no hedge nor ditch could stop him, but he would still feed where he saw the
best grass, at length the Landlord sent word unto his Tenant, that
peremptorily if ever he took his horse in his ground again, he would cut off
his tail. This word being brought unto the Tenant, he gave the messenger this
short answer; My Landlord says he, may do his pleasure, but tell him again
from me, if he cut off his tail, I Will cut off his ears. The Landlord upon this
menace sueth him, and binds him to the peace and good behavior, but when the
cause came to be decided, the Tenant pleaded that his Landlord had much
mistaken him, for his answer reached no further then thus: That if his Landlord
did cut off his horses tail, he purposed to cut off his horses ears, and to
make him crop-ear'd, as the other had made him cur-taild.

135. Of an old Beggar.
AN old Beggar in Cornwall lived till he was above seven score years, whose
name was Ball: And being asked by many, what course he took to continue his
life to that length of years: He would still make answer, he loved a cup of
good Ale, and that he used to drink continually, but of other Physic he
never tasted any. The Beggar dying a witty gentleman of the Country made of him
this Epitaph:

Here Ball the quondam Beggar lies,
who counted by his Tale,
Some seven score Winters and above,
such virtue is in Ale.
Ale was his meat, ale was his drink
Ale did his life deceive,
Ver could he still have drunk his ale,
he yet had been alive.
136. A rich man and a Scholar.
A Rich Citizen, whose house was often frequented by Scholars, demanded of one
of them what was the reason why Aldermens and great Merchants threesholds were
so often trod upon by scholars; and on the contrary part, why scholars
Chambers were so seldom frequented by wealthy Citizens. He made him this
answer: Because scholars know what they want, but rich men do not. Another
being asked how the learned differ from the unlearned, replied, In the same
sort that horses which never felt the curb or bridle differ from those that
have been carefully brought up and managed. Another demanded whether a beggar
or a man illiterate or unlearned wanted most; It was answered, An ignorant man,
because a beggar only wants money, but the other lacks all things to a man
belonging.

137. A Lawyer and a Divine.
A Grave Divine having a suit in Law, feed his Counselor, who pleaded very
eloquently in his behalf, and carried the cause clearly from the adversary: The
Churchman coming after to give him thanks: The Lawyer somewhat proud of his
success, spoke to him in this manner: Now Sir, what profit had you reaped by
your Divinity, if my Rhetoric had not helped you out of the Briars, to whom
he replied and said, This profit I have gotten by it, that I have brought
before you an honest cause; And all the evidences alleged in my behalf, are
most just and true.

138. Of Swimming.
AMongst other communication at the Table, there was discourse held concerning
swimming, in which many excellent in that art were remembered: One of the
company listening to their talk, Well my Masters says he, you talk of
swimmers, but for mine own part I can swim no more then a Goose.

139. Of a she-seruant that came to take her oath.
A Waiting Gentlewoman being summoned into a Court to take an Oath (for she was
served in with a sub paena) The Examiner asked how he should write her down:
A Maid, a Wife, or a Widow? she told him that he should write her down a
Maid, for she never had had any husband. He finding her a pretty handsome
smugge wench, asked her how old she was; she told him about the age of six and
twenty: six and twenty (says he willing to sport with her:) then take heed
says he, what you swear, for you are now upon your oath, and therefore, may I
securely set you down Maid, being of those years? The wench made a pause, and
considering a while with her self: I pray you Sir says she, stay your hand a
little, and write me down young woman.

140. Another Gentleman and a Parson.
A Country man ouer-taking a Parson, saluteth him with a how now black Coat?
Why black coat says the Parson? I use to call all parsons so says the other
O Master Saunders, how do you sir, says the Parson? Why Saunders, says the
other? I use to call all Iacks so, says the Parson.

141. A Lawyer at the Bar.
A Lawyer pleading earnestly in behalf of his client at the Bar, this case
says he is plain, and has been warranted already by two great, and
sufficient Lawyers; the one of them is (as we make no doubt) in heaven, the
other (meaning one that was then made a Judge) is at this time in an higher
place.

142. The Tenant to an Archbishop.
A Simple man that was Tenant to an Archbishop, came to the Palace, to tender
his rent, and by the Porter was directed to the Steward: to whom he came, and
told him that he had brought his Lordships worship some money for a certain
Cottage in which he then dwelt. The Steward received it, but withal told him,
that he must leave out Worship, and put in Grace. But before the small sum
was told, the Archbishop came through the great Hall, and demanded of the
Steward what the Poor man's business was? The Tenant prevented his answer,
made two or three low legs, and began again with, if it please his Worship:
but the Steward prompting him, told him he must say Grace. Must I, said the
fellow, why then I will, and holding up his hands began, The eyes of all
things, etc.

133. Of a sign.
A Gentleman passing through a fair Town, and spying at an Inn gate the
sign of a blew Bore, but miserably, and most unskillfully drawn; rides into
the middle of the yard, and calls aloud for some one to take money, down comes
the Chamberlain, and asked his Worship what he had had? Had (says he)
nothing: but still importuned him to take money, for he is desirous to take
view of the Monster to be seen. The fellow asked him what Monster? Marry, that
strange Monster says he, whose picture you have hung out to be seen. Why sir
says he, you mistake your self, that is our Sign. Your Sign says the
Gentleman? then I prithee let it hang there still for a sign that the Painter
was an ass, and thy Master a Coxcombe who bought it.

144. Of a Translator.
ONe that had translated many books and Volumes, at length publishing the
history of Suetonius Tranquillus in English, a pleasant Gentleman writ this
distick:

Philemon with Translations does so fill us,
He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus.
145. A Mariner in a storm.
A Young Mariner being in a great storm at Sea, and in the night when every
one had left their labors, and were at prayers, this fellow had nothing in his
mouth, but oh that I could see but two Stars, or but one of the two: and of
these words he made so often repetition, that disturbing the meditation of the
rest; at length one asked him what two Stars, or what one he meant? To whom
he replied, Oh that I could but see the Star in Cheapside, or the Star in
Coleman street I care not whether.

146. A desperate Saylor.
ANother desperate Saylor being in a ship that was accidently set on fire, and
burning under them, when there was no hope of the life of any man of them, but
to perish betwixt the two Elements of fire, and water, he standing upon the
hatches, and is it so, says he? Nay then some roasted, and some sod, and so
desperately leapt into the sea.

147. A short Cloak.
A Gentleman spying one walk in a must pitiful short Cloak, says to a
friend that was then walking with him, Did you ever see a poor man wear his
Cloak so short? Oh there is help for that replied the other, for I see by his
countenance that he can find a way to wear it longer.

148. Of Wine.
ONe presented a Drunkard for his Newyeares gift, with these few lines:

Whilst in my Pot or Glass I keep my Wine,
I boldly dare presume that they are mine:
But when the Pot I by the Glass devour,
Being drunk, the Master in the servants power.
I have not it, it has me, all I have
Is to be made a prisoner to my slave.
What was my Vassaile, now I Idol call,
For I before it must both kneel and fall.
149. A Welchman arraigned.
A Welchman arraigned, and convicted, by the favor of the Bench, having his
book granted him, when he was burnt in the hand, they bid him say God save
the King. Nay says he, God bless my father and my mother, for had not they
brought me up to write and read, I might have been hanged for all the King.

150. Of Card-playing.
A Parson in the Country living among his Parishoners and neighbors well, would
sometimes at his retired hours for his recreatio^, play at Cards amongst them,
for which he was much envied of a Puritan Justice, and the Official of the
Diocese. These meeting on a market day amongst the chief men of the Country
where the Parson was there present, his two adversaries began in the Ordinary
openly to reprove him at the Table for profane Card-playing, not sitting his
Calling. Who hearing them with some impatience, and the rest attending how he
could acquit himself, he thus began: Right Worshipful, and the rest of my
friend, I am here charged by Master Justice, and Master Official to be a
common Cardplayer: to which I answer, If all men would make that use of it
that I do, it would seem as pardonable as I shall make it appear excusable in
me: for mine own part, I never see an Ace, but I apprehend that unity which
ought to be betwixt man and wife. If a Duce, the love which should be betwixt
Neighbors. If a Tra, if two of my Parishioners be at ods, how needful a
thing it is for a third person to reconcile them, and make them friend; and so
of the rest. Nor do I look upon a king, but presently I apprehend the
allegiance due to my Prince, and Sovereign. Nor on a queen, but I remember
her sacred Majesty, and the reverence belonging to her estate. Nor do I cast
mine eye upon a Knave, but he puts me in mind either of you Master Justice, or
you Master Official, or of some other of my good friends. The Justice and
Official were answered; and the plain honest Parson for his jest sake, both
applauded and excused.

151. An Epitaph made upon an honest Cobbler.
Here lies a Cobbler that dwelt in the Strand,
Who though he was still on the mending hand:
Yet by the force of wind and weather,
His sole was rent from his upper leather.
152. Of a Gentleman visiting of his friend.
A Gentleman coming to give his sick friend a courteous visitation, found him
extremly fainthearted and wondrous timorous of death, insomuch that he grew
much ashamed at his too much pusillanimity, especially in regard of the
standers by: for he had nothing in his mouth but ah, woe is me, (...) no
friend near which will (...) rid me from this pain and anguish which I now
suffer? These words were iterated so often that the Gentleman drawing his sword
with a menacing look said, yes sir, you have one friend yet left that for your
sake will do it, and withal aimed the point directly against his breast. At
which proffer the sick Gentlemen raising himself out of his bed, entreated
him to stay his hand, for his desire was to be rid out of his pain, but not
out of his life.

153. Of a Captain that was to be arrested.
ONe Captain Leonard Sampson well known about this town, being indebted was
way-layed by his Creditour, who had feed Sergeants to arrest him. These spying
him in Cheapside, were stealing behind him thinking to clap him on the
shoulders unawares, which a Gentleman a friend of his espying, cried out alowd
unto him and said, The Philistines be upon thee Sampson, at which words he
suddenly lookign back, and espying the Catchpoles, drew his sword, and by that
means escaped from the Arrest.

154. Of two knaves accusing one another.
TWo fellows of notorious and bad lives, came to complain at a public
Assizes one of the other, and ripped up so many cheats, vile pranks and
mischievous disorders, that both seemed exceeding bad, and hardly it was to be
distinguished which was worse, upon whom the Judge gave sentence, that the one
should instantly depart the Realm, and that the other should as suddenly
follow him, and see his sentence to be strictly executed.

155. Of a Vintners boy.
TWo Divines passing through a Tavern and calling for no wine, the Vintners
boy seeing them, what says he, two Preachers go through the Church and not
offer to say their prayers.

156. Of Augustus Caesar.
IT is reported of Augustus Caesar demanded a reward of him alleging that by
reason of his virtue and desert it was noised in the City he had received
great gifts of him already: but he knowing him to be a man of words, without
merit, returned him only this answer, Well friend says he, whatsoever the
city reports, I would wish thee not to believe it. A second, who had bin a
Captain of the Horse, and being casheired from his Command petitioned unto the
Emperor, that in regard he had left his place, yet it would please him to
allow him an annual pension: which he did not desire for any profit or gain,
but says he, to salve my reputation, that the world may not report that I
forfeited my place by any insufficiency or negligence: but rather out of my
freewill made thereof a voluntary resignation. To whom the Emperor made this
answer: well honest soldier, do not then spare to make report to thee a
yearly pension, and if any one shall chance hereafter to question me about it,
I will not deny but that thou have one. A third (being a young Nobleman and
called Herennius) having through his misgouernment and disorder been commanded
to avoid the Camp, he earnestly besought the Emperor that he would not do
unto him public disgrace. For Sir (says he) if I be turned off with such
disgraces I shall never dare to show my face; either unto my Father, or any of
my Noble kinsmen in Rome: For what shall I say unto them? why says Augustus
Caesar, say unto them only this: that thou and I were at some difference, and
in the deciding thereof, I lost thy countenance, and favor. A fourth in a
skirmish being struck with a stone and wounded in the face, so that he was
much disfigured, yet because he bore that visible mark in his forehead, he
thereupon grew insolent, boasting of what great acts of Chivalry he had
performed in the wars; which he not sparing to do in the sight of the
Emperor, He thus derided his arrogance in these few words: Well Sir, (says
he) Take heed how you look back again the next time that you find an
opportunity to run away from the battle. Another time, a Knight of Rome
deceasing, who had the opinion to be a rich man, when the Executors came to
examine his estate, it was found that he dyed, to the value of two hundred
Crowns worse then nothing: and yet all his life time carried himself bravely
and nobly: when this was reported to the Emperor, he sent to buy his quilt and
mattrice, which used to lie upon his bed (for all his goods were sold at an
outcry) one of his Noblemen demanding the reason thereof, He answered, only
for this cause, to sleep quietly in the night. For no question there was some
great virtue in these couerings, otherwise he could never have rested to
securely being indebted so much money. This was that Augustus who said, I found
Rome made of Beech, but I hope to leave it built of Marble, etc.

157. Of Diogenes.
DIogenes being taken Prisoner was brought into the Market place to be sold
for a slave, who still as the Crier made proclamation, who will by a slave. He
seconded him with a loud clamor, and asked what was he that would buy a
Master. A rich Cheffe made up only out of money bags had built a wondrous
beautiful house, with this Inscription upon the great Gate (which was the
common entrance) Let no evil thing enter here. Diogenes coming by and reading
what was there inscribed, and knowing the man withal that built it, made
inquiry of the neighbors, which ways the man went into his house. A man of
evil condition, asking him whether he thought there were any gods or no? he
answered, I must needs believe there are gods, because I confidently believe
that thou art hated of them. Of a Prodigal whose estate he knew could not last
long, he begged an an Alms, and asked no less then according to account
comes to five pounds: The young Heir demanded of him what his reason was to
crave so great a sum of money from him, when others had desired at once but
an half penny: The reason is (answered he) because of others that spend
sparingly, I am in hope to receive again, but of thee that art an unthrift, I
am afraid I shall never beg hereafter. To a fellow that had before been foiled
in wrestling and other exercises, and finding him now to practice Physic; He
thus said, my friend, I do much commend thy policy, for taking a safe course,
to destroy these by Physic, who have disgraced thee by wrestling. To one that
asked him what he would have to take a sound blow on the pate; he answered,
an Iron Head Piece. To a wanton woman fitting in a stately Horslitter, he
said, truly another Cage would better become that load. And to another who
demanded in what state it were best to marry a wife, he answered, that for a
young man it was too soon, and for an old man too late, etc.

145. Of a Country fellow and a Peeretree.
A Country-fellow at Bartholomew Fair, coming through the Charterhouse in the
Evening, chanced to find a mellow peer, which some had scattered out of their
pocket, and tasting it, looked up unto the great Elmes growing there, imagining
it had fallen from thence. So well he liked the taste of it, that he laid by
his Cloak, and with a Crabtree Cudgel which he had then about him, he did so
belabour the trees, that those which passed by wondered what he meant, and
asking him the reason, he told them, he purposed only to fill his belly from
these Peer trees, for he did not think there were the like in all his
Country: They suffered him with some laughing till he had sufficiently tired
himself, and then bid him get (like a fool as he was) to his own lodging.

259. Stratford upon Auon.
ONe traveling through Stratford upon Auon, a Town most remarkable for the
birth of famous William Shakespeare, and walking in the Church to do his
devotion, espied a thing there worthy observation, which was a tombestone laid
more then three hundred years ago, on which was engraven an Epitaph to this
purpose, I Thomas such a one, and Elizabeth my wife here under lie buried, and
know Reader I. R. C. and I. Chrystoph. Q. are alive at this hour to witness
it.

160. An old Goose.
HENRY the fourth King of France of late famous memory, being upon a long
march where victuals at that time were very scarce, and he extremely a
hungered, at length an honest Gentleman brought a leg of a Brood goose
carbonadoed: at which the King long tugging, and not able to pull it asunder.
Mort die (says he) this is sure a limb of that Goose, that in Cumellus his
time by her gabling saved the Roman Capitol.

161. An honorable Thief.
AN Earl in times past in this kingdom, having made some prosperous voyages
abroad, and returned with great prizes from the Spanyard: meeting with another
young Earl, who by his fathers death was newly come both to his Means, and
Title: after some Noble gratulation, they fell in discourse of diverse Sea
fights, and ships taken from the Enemy. At lengh, I wonder says the soldier
Earl, that your Lordship being of such remarke in the Court, and Kingdom,
does not for your greater honor undertake in your own person some Noble
enterprise at sea against the common enemy the Spanyard, as I, and others have
done. To whom he gave this modest answer; My worthy Lord, I thank God, my
Father was so careful, that he has husbanded so my present Means, and
fortunes, that I am able to live of mine own revenues at home, without any
need to go theeuing abroad. Why my Lord says he, do you hold me to be a
Thief? Oh yes, (with pardon my Lord) an honorable Thief.

162. Of S P. Q. R.
A Jest touching these letters, S. P. Q. R. Senatus, Populusque Romanus. It so
happened that a new Pope being elected merely for his devotion, and austerity of
life; as using an extraordinary spare diet, and selseldome seen so much as to
smile: Yet after his Inauguration coming to sit in Pontificalibus, he used to
feed high, to laugh heartily, and to countenance Iesters, and Buffoones to make
him merry at his Table, which being observed, one sets up these four words,
being correspondent to the four former letters: Sancte Pater quare rides? Holy
Father, why do you laugh? To which the next day was under written, Rideo quia
Papa sum, I laugh because I am Pope.

163. An Oppressor.
ONe told a great oppressor he might kill beggars by the law. The other asked
him the reason? He answered, because he was before hand in their number, for
he could not kill so many as he had made before.

144. A writ Nose.
THere was a man whose Nose leaned more toward one side then the other. One
disposed to play the wag with him, sir says he, I know what your nose is not
made of, and I know what it is made of, First, I will assure you it is not made
of wheat. What then says the other? I will be judge by all the company if it
be not made of Rye.

165. Of usury.
ONe bitterly railing against usury, and extortion, made the sin equal with
wilful murder: but after upon some urgent necessity, coming to borrow money
of one of his parishioners, desired to have it for three months gratis. Who
answered him, truly sir, if to lend money upon use be in your opinion as great
a sin as murder, to lend money gratis, in my conceit can be a sin no less
then manslaughter.

166. A Scholar and a Townsman.
ONe measuring a Scholar and a Townsman, the question was, which was the
higstest? The party having at that time in his hand a Pitchforke, thus
answered; When I had first set them back to back, and after well considered
them Brow to Brow, I found the Townsman to be higher then the Scholar by thus
much pointing to the tines.

167. Of an ignorant fellow.
ONe of the great stone letters fell from the top of Northampton house, and beat
out a scholars brains. It happened not long after that an honest good fellow
that could neither write nor read, (for such was the unhappiness of his
bringing up) being in the company of three or four very ingenious Gentlemen,
upon the sudden breaks out into a deep melancholy, and says, Well, I thank
God, I can neither write nor read. One of the rest smiling, replies, you
speak strangely, for I thank God, and so may the rest that are here, that we
can do both. All Is one for that says he, yet let my self, and many
Captains, and other brave fellows about the Town (naming a great many) be
still thankful that we can do neither. They asked his reason? He gave them
this satisfaction, because says he, we can walk the streets with that
secutie that you book men cannot. They desired him to express himself, says
he, if one letter falling from the top of a great house had the power to knock
out the brains of a scholar, what safety should we live in, to be troubled
with four and twenty letters? Now thanked be heaven, says he, for as we have
nothing to do with letters, so I see no reason why letters can have any thing
to do with us.

168. Anola horse.
A Horse being judged to be past his best days, one seeing what he was likely
to come to, replied, that then he was near his dog days. It being further
demanded how old he was? The answer was made, that for this years he might
very lawfully set his foot unto a bond.

169. Fire and Toe.
ONe seeing a fellow warming his feet by a hot seacole fire; my friend says
he, what do you mean to put fire and Toe together.

170. Borrowing of a Cloak.
A Poor decayed Gentleman, having pound or sold his Cloak; came to another,
to whom he was known, and desired, (knowing he was well furnished) to supply
him with one, for two or three days whilst his own came from dressing, and
then he would undoubtedly return it: the Gentleman answered him again: that
he had not any spare Cloak, but such as belonged to one suite or another and
to vnsuite his clothes he was loath: yet upon his importunity, he was
content, to lend him a thin stuff Cloak, that belonged to a Summer suit,
and that upon promise, within two or three days, to restore it: but days,
weeks, and months came, in which time he never heard of the Gentleman, but
some half a year after, it was his chance to meet him, in the midst of
December, in a cold misty morning, with the same cloak upon him, worn to the
very threeds, and scarce able to hang upon him; which the other seeing, stays
him, and challenges him, upon his breach of promise, and tells him withal,
that in regard of the private cheat, he will do him a public disgrace: and
take his own (howsoever worth nothing) wheresoever he finds it, and so
offers to pluck it from off his shoulders. The other desires him to forbear,
and tells him he may do more then he can answer. How says he, have I not to
do with mine own, what I please? In this case (answers he) you cannot. Give
me your reason, says the creditor. Then thus, says he, when, I borrowed this
cloak of you, I was a Protestant, but since am turned Roman Catholic, and
coming to my confessor amongst others. I told him how ungratefully I had used
you, concerning this poor garment, for which he enjoined me this penance,
Have thou said he, had the pleasure to wear this light Cloak all this warm
Summer? the^ I command thee as a punishment, not to leave it off for the space
of this cold, and frosty winter, and so slipped away from him.

171. One begd for a fool.
A Knight, held to be a very wiseman in his life, left behind him a son, and
heir that was none of the best witted, to inherit his Land: who was begd for a
fool, and summoned into the court of Wards for his answer: when question was
made unto him, what he could say for himself, why his lands should not be
taken from him, he said, It is reported, that my father was a wiseman, and
begott a fool to inherit his estate after his death, who can tell, him that I
a fool, may beget a wiseman to inherit after me his answer carried it, and he,
and his remain in possession of the same revenues unto this day.

172. A Traveler drowned.
A Traveler reported to be drowned, a friend of his being in company, when the
letters came, that brought the first news of his death: fetched a great sigh,
with these words, God rest his soul, for he is gone the way of all flesh. Nay
says another the^ standing by, if he be drowned he is rather gone he way of
all fish.

173. A Knight of Italy.
A Knight of Italy sitting down to a feast, and seeing two ancient neglected
gentlemen standing by, (who had been great soldiers) whilst the youngmen
disposed of themselves, at the table, he instantly rose from the table, and to
the rest of the guests said, Most justly ought we to afford these Gentlemen
places whereon to sit, for had they not been in such a great battle against
the Turk, we had not at this time, had any thing whereof to eat.

174. A Gentleman boasting of his wit.
A Young Gentleman, being at an ordinary was boasting exceedingly of his
trauells, adding withal that he spent three years abroad in foreign
Countries, and lived without any Exhibition from his parents, and friends; or
any supply from his Country: But merely by his own natural wit, to whom
another answered, truly sir, I think never any traveled at a more easy rate.

175. A Justice and a Baud.
A Notorious Baud being brought before a Justice of Peace, for many lewd
demenours, but especially for keeping a common brothell house, was examined of
diverse particulars, all which she obstinately denied, though there were
proofs sufficient, apparently to convict her, which the Justice hearing, Well,
huswife says he, you keep a common brothell house, and I will mainetaine it.
Marry I thank your good worship says she, for such a support I have great
need of.

176. Of a Citizen, and a Gardeners Boy.
A Rich tradesman in the City, took a Summer house in the country, with a
fair Garden land Orchard, amongst many other pla^ts, one was commended unto
him, which as yet had never borne any fruit, the Citizen gave the gardener a
great charge, that when the time of the year came, he should be careful to
save the Apples that came of it, in regard the graft was commended unto him by
so especial a friend, the gardener did so, and sent them to London by a young
lad his son, who presented the^ being 3 in number, to his Master and Mistress,
they seeing them look so lovely, presently fell to eating them, he one and she
another: the boy looking wishly upon them, and she observing it, I pray you
husband give the one Apple to the boy, for he may long: which he did, the boy
presently draws his knife to pare his Apple before he eats it, the
Gentlewoman noting it; asked him why he did not eat it as they did with the
skin on, marry quoth he, if please you, one of the three slipped out of my hand
by the way into the dirt, and this may be it for ought that I know.

177. An old Vicar.
AN old Vicar in Lancashire, that read prayers in a Chapel of ease, having
but one son, bred him in the university, whose name was John, who profited
well, proved a graduate: and was made minister: who coming home in a vacation
to see his father, was requested by the parishioners to bestow a Sunday Sermon
on them, who willingly assented, and coming into the pulpit, and reading his
text, I John saw the new Jerusalem, his father heareing him, presently starts
up, and said aloud, believe him not my good neighbors, for he is a young lying
knave, he was never in Jerusalem, no further then Cambridge in all his life,
but one iogging him on the elbow, said, peace Master Vicar for shame, will you
not give him leave to read his text? Oh was it his text says he, nay then let
him proceed a Gods name.

178. Two Debawsht fellows.
TWo debawsht Fellows, proposing diverse courses how to live; says one, my
purpose is to keep a Tobacco shop: How will thou come by Tobacco, and pipes,
says the other? why says he, I will go upon the ticket. But says he, how
will thou do for a shop? Marry says he, I have just so much money, as will
serve for earnest; and I will take one by the quarter. How will thou do says
his friend, to pay the rent? he beginning to answer, that when the quarter day
comes, the other preventing him, saying, then lay the Key under the door, no
answered he again, I have bethought me of a far better course, I will
according to the old Proverb, put my pipes in my bag and so get me away.

179. A lame Horse.
Upon a Friday in Smithfield one willing to put off a lame Horse, and therefore
not willing to have him rid; had tied him by the Bridle to the Railes, a
chapman liking the Nag came somewhat near his price, because the seller
warranted him sound of wind and limb, but before he would part with his
money, desirous to see what metal he had, he rid him upon the Stones, and
perceived the poor Jade to halt down right, at which the Chapman vexing,
asking the other if he was not ashamed, to put a lame unserviceable Jade upon
him, and warrant him sound. To whom the other answered, I assure you he is as
sound, as any Horse in England, but that it was your fortune to try him when
his foot was a sleep.

180. A Woman, and her Husband.
IN the time of auricular confession, a woman who not without cause, was
Jealous of her husband, came to the confessor to enquire of him, whether at any
time he had revealed any such thing in his confession: and prevailed so far
with him, by vow of concealment, that he told her, that if within some few
days, after his next coming to confession, he presented her with cloth to
make her a new gown, as in the way of recompense for some injury before done
her, she might apprehend some thing, but more then that she could not get from
him. The woman well conceiving as it was, found as he had told her, that her
good man presented her with a new gown, and after many fair, and flattering
words, Sweet wife says he, how do thou like the cloth? she conceiving how
the business went, marry so well my most dear and loving husband, that I vow
ere many days go over my head to provide you a cloak out of the same piece.

181. A Townesman and a Scholar.
A Townesman in one of the Universities with his companions on one side of the
way, a company of Scholars were on the other, both being within hearing at
such a time, as a drove of Oxen was to pass betwixt them, when one of the
Townsmen according to his wit thought to toss a jest among them, said, Those
that come yonder seem to be scholars by their long tails. To whom the
scholars replied, But they appear to be Townsmen by their high foreheads.

182. Of five Vintners.
Five Vintners riding into Kent, to be merry, upon horses hired or borrowed, in
their return coming through Greenwich, they alighted at the Tavern next to
the bridge, and there fell a healthing so long, till it grew toward night, one
tumbling on a bed, another sat drowsy in a chair, only one stood stiffely
to it, and told them plainly if they would not get up and take horse he would
leave them there, be instantly gone, and commend them to their wives at London:
but they all agreed to stay there that night, to set up their horses, and to
take the benefit of the morning. With this answer away goes he. It being now
grown dark, and he keeping the Londoners pace a tantiuie: it happened that
within a little of Debtford, a dead horse lay full in the way, just of the same
color of that on which he rid. His live horse stumbles at the dead, both are
overthrown, but the four legs being nimbler then the two, gets up first, and
away he plods onward his journey toward London. The Vintner much bruised with
the fall rises with difficulty, and curses his lade, and gropes in the dark
if it be possible to find him, and lights upon the dead one, kicks to rouse him
up, but all in vain, he will not stir. The poor man in this perplexity is
almost at his wits end: but spying a Candle some Bows shoot before him, he
makes toward it, and within a little space finds himself within Debtford,
there he enquires for a Farrier or a Smith, they direct him to his house. But
Vulcan had got a cup in his pate, and was gone to bed, he is earnest to have
him rise: but the Smith will not by any means, unless he will give him a
crown in hand, which is done. Up gets the Smith, calls his man to carry a
Candle, and Lantern, he tells him all his misfortune by the way, and directs
him to the place of his distaster, entreating him to use all the art he can in
the recovery of his horse, being but hired. By this time they come to the sad
spectacle, the smith lifts at his head, and his man at the tail; but finding
no motion, give him over as lost. The Vintner looking sadly upon the business,
fetches a great sigh, and says, whilst I have been knocking up the smith,
some body has stolen away my bridle and saddle. Back to the Town goes he
with the Farrier and his man, resolving to sit up that night, and to comfort
himself with a cup of good Ale, to which the Smith brings him, where I leave
them potting together, and from thence look back to Greenwich. The morning
comes, where my late drousie Vintners are fresh, and stirring, and gallopping
through Debtford, are spyde by their fifth companion, who calls after them, they
wonder to see him there, and asked if he had done their commendations to their
Wives, he entreats them to leave off their jesting, and tells them all the
former circumstances of his last nights misfortune: some laughed at him, others
lament with him, according their several humors, and with this discourse he
on foot, and they on horseback have left the Town a mile behind them, when
one of them casting his eye of the one side, spies a horse brideled and sadled,
browsing on the hedge, and says withal, is not that the beast you rid on? He
dares not acknowledge him. That is sure the same Saddle and Bridle says
another, or very like them, but he has scarce faith to believe it. At length
all of them agree, that both horse and furniture are the same, but he can
hardly be won, being sure to pay for one, to hazard the danger of stealing
another. But at length they prevail with him, up he mounts, the Stirrops fit
him and delivering him at the stable from whence he hired him, is by the owner
acknowledged for the same.

183. Two striving for the Wall.
TWo Gentlemen meeting, the one iustled the other from the wall, and had almost
made him to measure his length in the Kennell, who by much a do having
recovered himself, came up close to him, and asked him whether he were in jest,
or in earnest? He told him plainly, that what he did, was in earnest. And I am
very glad you have told me so, for I protest I love no such jesting says the
other. By which words he put off the quarrel.

184. The answer of a Doctor.
A Worthy Doctor of Cambridge amongst many other charitable deeds done in his
life time, at his own charge made a fair causey or high way some mile in
length, to the great benefit of the Country; and being one day there in person
to visit the laborers, and to see how the work went forward, it happened that a
Nobleman riding that way by chance, and knowing him, gave him a kind
salutation; but withal thinking to break a jest on him, Master Doctor says
he, for all your great charge and pains, yet I believe not says he that
this is the high way to Heaven. I am of your mind in that my Lord, replied the
Doctor, for if it were, I should have wondered to have met your Lordship here.

185. A Horsecourser.
ONe coming into Smithfield on a Friday market, called to a Horsecourser
aloud, and said, I prithee my friend, how go horses to day? To whom he
answered, marry as you see, some amble, some trot, and some gallop.

186. A Country fellow hunting with the King.
KIng James being a hunting and very earnest in his sport, a Country fellow
crossed it, in so much that the dogs were at a loss: At which the King being
extremely angry, drew his Skeine, and rides after the man, with all the speed
he possibly can. Who perceiving the King to pursue him in his anger, cried out
aloud, I beseech your Majesty to pardon me, for I have no desire to be knighted
yet: and this he spoke so often, that he turned the Kings rage into laughter,
who bid him to ride fast enough, and far enough and be hanged, for he better
deserved a halter, then to be knighted.

187. Women Writers.
ONe asking a question why women either all, or the most part, when they learn
to write, practice Roman hand, It was answered him again, that it stood with
great reason, for he had never heard of any woman, that made good Secretary.

188. A Country fellow at a Gentleman's Table.
A Country fellow being admitted to a Gentleman's table, fell upon the
Artichokes at lower end, and eating the burres was almost choakt, says one
that sat nere him, friend why are you busy with them so soon, being a dish
reserved for the last, to whom he answered as well as he could speak, Marry I
am of your mind, for I think they are the last dish that ever I shall taste
of.

189. Of curtaling names.
A Gallant about this Town, that was admitted into the company of the prime,
and choicest Gentlemen, used to curtall their names, and only to call them
Robin, Will, Jack, Dick, and Tom, and being asked why he was so familiar with
men of that rank and quality, to give them no better attributes and titles,
answered it is my humor, and I vow withal, that if the King should call me
Jack, I would call him Charles by the grace of God.

190. A retort betwixt two Gentlemen.
A Gentleman whose name was Apollo, being very low of stature, but richly
conceited, coming into another Chamber whose name was Master Towers, and
finding him absent, who because he was a big man, and looking upright used an
affected gate, finding paper, pen, and ink there, writ this hexameter,

Interris habitas sed non in turribus altis. The other coming in, and knowing
the hand, sent him the same line with another underwritten.

Die quibus in terris, and eris mihi magnus Apollo. 190. A Knight and his man.
A Gentleman having a Seruingman, who used still to ride with his head in his
bosom, for which he had often checked him, but never made him reform it, upon
a time riding to a Noblemans house not far of about some urgent business, whilst
the Master was busy with the Lord in his Chamber, the Gentlemen had got the
man into the Cellar where they had given him as much drink as his skin would
hold: in the Interim his Master having dispath this business, came suddenly
and called his man to get his horse ready, which he did, in the way home the
Master observing that contrary to his former custom he rid upright with his
chin almost level to his nose, asked him the reason why now more then at other
times he rid bolt upright; Marry Sir says he, if you will needs know, it is
to keep in my drink.

191. A Doctor of Physic, and a Serving man.
ONe thinking to put a trick upon an excellent D. of Physic, had mingled with
the water in his Vrinall the powder of a brick batt, which settled to the
bottom shows like red gravel, that comes from the kidneyes, he shows it to
the Doctor, and tells him that it was his Masters water, who lay in grievous
pain, desiring his Worships counsel, what would give him some ease, the Dr.
chafed it up and down, and tried it by the fire; In conclusion found out the
fellows knavery, and cunningly closing with him, my friend says he, would
thou have my counsel to prevent this terrible disease which is growing on thy
Mr? yes sir says he, that was the cause of my coming to your Worship. Then
tell him, replied the Doctor, all that I can prescribe him at this time, is
that he eat no more Artichokes, and at that word, broke the Vrinall upon his
pate, and so left him.

192. One that parted a Fray.
ONe parting a Fray was cut into the skull, and coming to be dressed, as he was
searching the wound, says he, here is a dangerous Orifice, your pery-cranium
is pierced, so that one may plainly see your brains beat, I do not believe
that says the patient, for had I had any brains at all, I should never have
been so mad, as to have come betwixt them to part the Fray.

193. A bargain in Smithfield.
A Pleasant fellow willing to put off a Lame Horse, rid him from the Sun
Tavern within Cripple-gate, to the Sun in Holburne, near to Fullers Rents,
and the next day offering him to sell him in Smithfield, the buyer asking him,
why he looked so lean. Marry no marvel answered he, for but yesterday, I rid
him from Sun to Sun, and never drew bridle.

194. An Usurer dying.
AN Usurer being dead, was opened, and found without a Heart, at which the
standers by as well as the Surgeon wondered, but none could give a reason of
the Prodegie, at length says one of the Executors, it may be his heart now
he is dead, is where it was when he was living, and looking in his Chest where
his money lay: they found it there.

195. A Doctor and a Scholar.
A Doctor of the University being of more standing then learning, being at
Dinner in the Hall, and hearing a fellow Commoner speak louder the^ the rest,
calls to a Junior Scholar that waited, and said go to that Gentleman from me,
and tell him Vir sapit, qui pauca loquitur, which being delivered him, commend
me says he, to M. Doctor, and tell him that I say Vir loquitur, qui pauca
sapit, which inversion lest it be justly asperst on me, here I set my period.

FINIS.

