THE ILIADS OF HOMER Prince of Poets. Never before in any languag truly
translated. With a Com^ent upon some of his chief places; Done according to
the Greek By Geo: Chapman

At London printed for Nathaniell Butter

William Hole sculp:

Qui Nil molitur Inepte TO THE HIGH BORNE PRINCE OF MEN, HENRY THRICE Royal
inheritor to the united kingdoms of Great BRITAIN, etc.
SInce perfect happiness, by Princes sought,
Is not with birth, borne, nor ^xchequers bought;
Nor follows in great Trains; nor is possessed
With any outward State; but makes him blessed
That gouernes inward; and beholds theare,
All his affections stand about him bare;
That by his power can send to Tower, and death,
All traitrous passions; marshalling beneath
His justice, his mere will; and in his mind
Holds such a scepter, as can keep confinde
His whole life's actions in the royal bounds
Of Virtue and Religion; and their grounds
Takes-in, to sow his honors, his delights,
And complete empire. You should learn these rights
(Great Prince of men) by Princely presidents;
Which here, in all kinds, my true zeal presents
To furnish your youths groundworke, and first State;
And let you see, one Godlike man create
All sorts of worthiest men; to be contrived
In your worth only; giving him revived,
For whose life, Alexander would have given
One of his kingdoms: who (as sent from heaven,
And thinking well, that so divine a creature
Would never more enrich the race of Nature)
Kept as his Crown his works; and thought them still
His Angels; in all power, to rule his will.
And would affirm that Homers poesy
Did more advance his Asian victory,
Then all his Armies. O! it is wondrous much
(Though nothing prisde) that the right virtuous touch
Of a well written foul, to virtue moves.
Nor have we souls to purpose, if their loves
Of fitting objects be not so inflamed.
How much then, were this kingdoms maine soul maimed,
To want this great inflamer of all powers
That move in humane souls? All Realms but yours,
Are honored with him; and hold blessed that State
That have his works to read and contemplate.
In which, Humanity to her height is raisde;
Which all the world (yet, none enough) has praisde.
Seas, earth, and heaven, he did in verse comprise;
Out-sung the Muses, and did equalize
Their king Apollo; being so far from cause
Of Princes light thoughts, that their grauest laws
May find stuff to be fashiond by his lines.
Through all the pomp of kingdoms still he shines,
And graceth all his gracers. Then let lie
Your Lutes, and Viols, and more loftily
Make the Heroiques of your Homer sung,
To Drums and Trumpets set his Angels tongue:
And with the Princely sport of Hawks you use,
Behold the kingly flight of his high Muse:
And see how like the Phoenix she renues
Her age, and starrie feathers in your sun;
Thousands of years attending; every one
Blowing the holy fire, and throwing in
Their seasons, kingdoms, nations that have bin
Subverted in them; laws, religions, all
Offered to Change, and greedy Funeral;
Yet still your Homer lasting, living, reigning;
And proves, how firm Truth builds in Poets faining.
A Princes statue, or in Marble carved,
Or steel, or gold, and shrin'd (to be pres^d)
Aloft on Pillars, or Pyramides;
Time into lowest ruins may depresse:
But, drawn with all his virtues in learned verse,
Fame shall resound them on Obliuions hearse,
Till graves gasp with her blasts, and dead men rise.
No gold can follow, where true Poesy flies.
Then let not this Divinity in earth
(Dear Prince) be slighted, as she were the birth
Of idle Fancy; since she works so hie:
Nor let her poor disposer (Learning) lie
Still bedridden. Both which, being in men defaced;
In men (with them) is Gods bright image rac't.
For, as the Sun, and Moon, are figures given
Of his refulgent Deity in Heaven:
So, Learning, and her Lightner, Poesy,
In earth present his fiery Majesty.
Nor are Kings like him, since their Diademes
Thunder, and lighten, and project brave beams;
But since they his clear virtues emulate;
In Truth and Justice, imaging his State;
In Bounty, and Humanity since they shine;
Then which, is nothing (like him) more divine:
Not Fire, not Light; the Suns admired course;
The Rise, nor Set of Stars; nor all their force
In us, and all this Cope beneath the Sky;
Nor great Existence, termed his Treasury.
Since not, for being greatest, he is blessed;
But being Just, and in all virtues best.
What sets his Justice, and his Truth, best forth,
(Best Prince) then use best; which is Poesies worth.
For, as great Princes, well informed and decked
With gracious virtue, give more sure effect
To her persuasions, pleasures, real worth,
Then all the inferior subjects she sets forth;
Since there, she shines at full; has birth, wealth, state,
Power, fortune, honor, fit to eleuate
Her heavenly merits; and so fit they are
Since she was made for them, and they for her:
So, Truth, with Poesy graced, is fairer far,
More proper, moving, chaste, and regular,
Then when she runs away with vntruss't Prose;
Proportion, that does orderly dispose
Her virtuous treasure, and is Queen of Graces;
In Poesy, decking her with choicest Phrases,
Figures and numbers: when loose Prose puts on
Plain letter-habits; makes her trot, upon
Dull earthly business (she being mere divine:)
Holds her to homely Cates, and harsh hedge-wine,
That should drink Poesies Nectar; every way
One made for other, as the Sun and Day,
Princes and virtues. And, as in a spring,
The plyant water, moved with any thing
Let fall into it, puts her motion out
In perfect circles, that move round about
The gentle fountain, one another, raising:
So Truth, and Poesy work; so Poesy blazing,
All subjects fallen in her exhaustlesse fount,
Works most exactly; makes a true account
Of all things to her high discharges given,
Till all be circular, and round as heaven.
And lastly, great Prince, mark and pardon me;
As in a flourishing, and ripe fruit Tree,
Nature has made the bark to save the Bole;
The Bole, the sap; the sap, to deck the whole
With leaves and branches; they, to bear and shield
The useful fruit; the fruit it self to yield
Guard to the kernel, and for that all those
(Since out of that again, the whole Tree grows:)
So, in our Tree of man, whose neruie Root
Springs in his top; from thence even to his foot,
There runs a mutual aid, through all his parts,
All joined in one to serve his Queen of Arts. The soul.

In which, does Poesy, like the kernel lie
Oscur'd; though her Promethean faculty
Can create men, and make even death to live;
For which she should live honored; Kings should give
Comfort and help to her, that she might still
Hold up their spirits in virtue; make the will,
That gouernes in them, to the power conformed;
The power to justice; that the scandals, stormed
Against the poor Dame, cleared by your fair Grace,
Your Grace may shine the clearer. Her low place,
Not showing her, the highest leaves obscure.
Who raise her, raise themselves: and he sits sure,
Whom her winged hand aduanceth; since on it
Eternity does (crowning Virtue) sit.
All whose poor seed, like violets in their beds,
Now grow with bosome-hung, and hidden heads.
For whom I must speak (though their Fate conuinces
Me, worst of Poets) to you, best of Princes.
By the most humble and faithful implorer for all the graces to your highness
eternised by your divine Homer. Geo. Chapman.

AN ANAGRAM OF THE NAME OF OUR DRAD PRINCE, MY MOST Gracious and sacred
Moecaenas; HENRYE PRINCE OF WALES OUR SVNN, HEYR, PEACE, LIFE.
BE to us as thy great Name does import,
(Prince of the people;) nor suppose it vain,
That in this secret, and prophetique sort,
Thy Name and Noblest Title does contain
So much right to us; and as great a good.
Nature does nothing vainly; much less Art
Perfecting Nature. No spirit in our blood,
But in our souls discourses bears a part.
What Nature gives at randon in the one,
In the other, orderd, our divine part serves.
Thou art not HEYR then, to our state alone;
But SVNN, PEACE, LIFE. And what thy power deserves
Of us, and our good, in thy utmost strife;
Shall make thee to thy self, HEYR, SVNN, PEACE, LIFE.
TO THE SACRED FOVNTAINE OF PRINCES; SOLE EMPRESS OF BEAVTIE AND VERTVE; ANNE,
Queen of England, etc.
WIth whatsoever Honor we adorn
Your Royal issue; we must gratulate you
Imperial Sovereign. Who of you is borne,
Is you; One Tree, make both the Bole, and Bow.
If it be honor then to join you both
To such a powerful work, as shall defend
Both from foul Death, and Ages ougly Moth;
This is an Honor, that shall never end.
They know not virtue then, that know not what
The virtue of defending virtue is:
It comprehends the guard of all your State,
And ioynes your Greatness to as great a Bliss.
Shield virtue, and advance her then, Great Queen;
And make this Book your Glass, to make it seen.
Your Majesty's in all subjection most humbly consecrate,

Geo. Chap^an.

TO THE READER.
LEst with foul hands you touch these holy Rites;
And with preiudicacies too profane,
Pass Homer, in your other Poets sleights;
Wash here. In this Porch to his numerous Phane,
Hear ancient Oracles speak, and tell you whom
You have to censure. First then Silius hear,
Who thrice was Consul in renowned Rome;
Whose verse (says Martial) nothing shall out-weare.
Silius Italicus. Lib. 13.

HE, in Elysium, having cast his eye
Upon the figure of a Youth, whose hair
With purple Ribands braided curiously,
Hung on his shoulders wondrous bright and fair;
Said, Virgin, What is he whose heavenly face
Shines past all others, as the Morn the Night;
Whom many maruelling souls, from place to place,
Pursue, and haunt, with sounds of such delight?
Whose countenance (were not in the Stygian shade)
Would make me, questionless, believe he were
A very God. The learned Virgin made
This answer: If thou should believe it here,
Thou should not err: he well deserved to be
Esteemed a God; nor held his so-much breast
A little presence of the Deity:
His verse comprisde earth, seas, stars, souls at rest:
In song, the Muses he did equalize;
In honor, Phoebus: he was only soul;
Saw all things spher'd in Nature, without eyes,
And raisde your Troy up to the starrie Pole.
Glad Scipio, viewing well this Prince of Ghosts,
Said, O if Fates would give this Poet leave,
To sing the acts done by the Roman Hoasts;
How much beyond, would future times receive
The same facts, made by any other known?
O blessed Aeacides! to have the grace
That out of such a mouth, thou should be shown
To wondering Nations, as enricht the race
Of all times future, with what he did know:
Thy virtue, with his verse, shall ever grow.
Now hear an Angel sing our Poets Fame;
Whom Fate, for his divine song, gave that name.
Angelus Politianus, in Nutricia. More living, then in old Demodocus,
Fame glories to wax young in Homers verse.
And as when bright Hyperion holds to us
His golden Torch; we see the stars disperse,
And every way fly heaven; the pallid Moon
Even almost vanishing before his sight:
So with the dazzling beams of Homers Sun,
All other ancient Poets lose their light.
Whom when Apollo heard, out of his star,
Singing the godlike Acts of honored men;
And equalling the actual rage of war,
With only the divine strains of his pen;
He stood amazed, and freely did confess
Himself was equaled in Maeonides.
Next, hear the grave and learned Pliny use
His censure of our sacred Poets Muse.
Plin. Not. hist. lib. 7. Cap 29. Turned into verse; that no Prose may come
near Homer. Whom shall we choose the glory of all wits,
Held through so many sorts of discipline,
And such variety of works, and spirits;
But Grecian Homer? like whom none did shine,
For form of work and matter. And because
Our proud doom of him may stand justified
By noblest judgments; and receive applause
In spite of envy, and illiterate pride;
Great Macedon, amongst his matchless spoils,
Took from rich Persia (on his Fortunes cast)
A Casket finding (full of precious oils)
Formed all of gold, with wealthy stones enchac't:
He took the oils out; and his nearest friends
Asked, in what better guard it might be used?
All giving their conceits, to several ends;
He answered; His affections rather chusde
An use quite opposite to all their kinds:
And Homers books should with that guard be served;
That the most precious work of all men's minds,
In the most precious place, might be preserved.
The Fount of wit was Homer; Learnings Sire, Idem. lib. 17. cap. 5. Idem. lib.
25. cap. 3.

And gave Antiquity, her living fire.
VOlumes of like praise, I could heap on this,
Of men more ancient, and more learned then these:
But since true Virtue, enough lovely is
With her own beauties; all the suffrages
Of others I omit; and would more feign
That Homer, for himself, should be beloved
Who every sort of loue-worth did contain.
Which how I have in my conversion proved,
I must confess, I hardly dare refer
To reading judgments; since, so generally,
Custom has made even th'ablest Agents err
In these translations; all so much apply Of Translation, and the natural
difference of Dialects, necessarily to be observed in it.

Their pains and cunnings, word for word to render
Their patient Authors; when they may as well,
Make fish with foul, Camels with Whales engender;
Or their tongues speech, in other mouths compel.
For, even as different a production
Ask Greek and English; since as they in sounds,
And letters, shun one form, and unison;
So have their sense, and elegancie bounds
In their distinguished natures, and require
Only a judgment to make both consent,
In sense and elocution; and aspire
As well to reach the spirit that was spent
In his exanple; as with art to pierce
His Grammar, and etymology of words. (...).

But, as great Clerks, can write no English verse;
Because (alas! great Clerks) English affords
(Say they) no height, nor copy; a rude tongue,
(Since it is their Native): but in Greek or Latin
Their writs are rare; for thence true Poesy sprung:
Though them (Truth knows) they have but skill to chat-in,
Compared with that they might say in their own;
Since thither the others full soul cannot make
The ample transmigration to be shown
In Nature-louing Poesy: So the brake
That those Translators stick in, that affect
Their word-for-word traductions (where they lose
The free grace of their natural Dialect
And shame their Authors, with a forced Gloss)
I laugh to see; and yet as much abhor The necessary nearen^e of translation
to the example.

More license from the words, then may express
Their full compression, and make clear the Author.
From whose truth, if you think my feet digress,
Because I use needful Periphrases;
Read Valla, Hessus, that in Latin Prose,
And Verse convert him; read the Messines,
That into Tuscan turns him; and the Gloss
Grave Salel makes in French, as he translates:
Which (for th'aforesaide reasons) all must do;
And see that my conversion much abates
The license they take, and more shows him too:
Whose right, not all those great learned men have done
(In some maine parts) that were his Commentars:
But (as the illustration of the Sun
Should be attempted by the erring stars)
They failed to search his deep, and treasurous heart.
The cause was, since they wanted the fit key
Of Nature, in their downright strength of Art; The power of nature, above Art
in Poesy.

With Poesy, to open Poesy.
Which in my Poem of the mysteries
Revealed in Homer, I will clearly prove.
Till whose near birth, suspend your Calumnies,
And farre-wide imputations of self love.
It Is further from me, then the worst that reads;
Professing me the worst of all that wright:
Yet what, in following one, that bravely leads,
The worst may show, let this proof hold the light.
But grant it clear: yet has detraction got
My blind side, in the form, my verse puts on;
Much like a dung hill Mastife, that dares not
Assault the man he barks at; but the stone
He throws at him, takes in his eager jaws,
And spoils his teeth because they cannot spoil.
The long verse has by proof received applause
Beyond each other number: and the foil,
That squint-eyed Envy takes, is censured plain.
For, this long Poem asks this length of verse,
Which I my self ingenuously maintain
Too long, our shorter Authors to rehearse.
And, for our tongue, that still is so empayr'd Our English language, above all
others, for Rhythm^call Poesi^.

By travailing linguists; I can prove it clear,
That no tongue has the Muses utterance heyr'd
For verse, and that sweet Music to the ear
Struck out of rhyme, so naturally as this;
Our Monosyllables, so kindly fall
And meet, opposde in rhyme, as they did kiss:
French and Italian, most immetricall;
Their many syllables, in harsh Collision,
Fall as they brake their necks; their bastard Rimes
Saluting as they iustl'd in transition,
And set out teeth on edge; nor tunes, nor times
Kept in their falls. And me thinks, their long words
Show in short verse, as in a narrow place,
Two opposites should meet, with two-hand swords
Vnweildily, without or use or grace.
Thus having rid the rubs, and strow'd these flowers
In our thrice sacred Homers English way;
What rests to make him, yet more worthy yours?
To cite more praise of him, were mere delay
To your glad searches, for what those men found,
That gave his praise, past all, so high a place:
Whose virtues were so many, and so cround,
By all consents, Divine; that not to grace,
Or add increase to them, the world does need
Another Homer; but even to rehearse
And number them: they did so much exceed;
Men thought him not a man; but that his verse
Some mere celestial nature did adorn.
And all may well conclude, it could not be,
That for the place where any man was borne,
So long, and mortally, could disagree
So many Nations, as for Homer strived,
Unless his spur in them, had been divine.
Then end their strife, and love him (thus revived)
As borne in England: see him ouer-shine
All other-Countrie Poets; and trust this,
That whose-soeuer Muse dares use her wing
When his Muse flies, she will be truss't by his;
And show as if a Bernacle should spring
Beneath an Eagle. In none since was seen
A soul so full of heaven as earth's in him.
O! if our modern Poesy had been
As lovely as the Lady he did lymne,
What barbarous wo^ldling, groueling after gain,
Could use her lovely parts, with such rude hate,
As now she suffers under every swain?
Since then it is naught but her abuse and Fate,
That thus empaires her; what is this to her
As she is real? or in natural right?
But since in true Religion men should err
As much as Poesy, should the abuse excite
The like contempt of her Divinity?
And that her truth, and right saint sacred Merits,
In most lives, breed but reverence formally;
What wonder is it if Poesy in herits
Much less observance; being but Agent for her,
And singer of her laws, that others say?
Forth then ye Mowles, sons of the earth abhor her;
Keep still on in the durty vulgar way,
Till dirt receive your souls, to which ye vow;
And with your poisoned spirits bewitch our thrifts.
Ye cannot so despise us as we you.
Not one of you, above his Mowlehill lifts
His earthy Mind; but, as a sort of beasts,
Kept by their Guardians, never care to hear
Their manly voices; but when, in their fists,
They breathe wild whistles; and the beasts rude ear
Hears their Curres barking; then by heaps they fly,
Headlong together: So men, beastly given,
The manly souls voice (sacred Poesy,
Whose Hymns the Angels ever sing in heaven)
Contemn, and hear not: but when brutish noises
(For Gain, Lust, Honor, in litigious Prose)
Are bellow'd-out, and cra^ke the barbarous voices
Of Turkish Stentors; O! ye lean to those,
Like itching Horse, to blocks, or high May-poles;
And break naught but the wind of wealth, wealth, All
In all your Documents; your Asinine souls
(Proud of their burdens) feel not how they gall.
But as an Ass, that in a fi^ld of weeds
Affects a thistle, and falls fiercely to it;
That pricks, and gals him; yet he feeds, and bleeds;
Forbeares a while, and licks; but cannot woo it
To leave the sharpnes; when (to wreake his smart)
He beats it with his foot; then backward kickes,
Because the Thistle gald his forward part;
Nor leaves till all be eat, for all the pricks;
Then falls to others with as hot a strife;
And in that honorable war does waste
The tall heat of his stomach, and his life:
So, in this world of weeds, you worldlings taste
Your most-lou'd dainties; with such war, buy peace;
Hunger for torment; virtue kick for vice;
Cares, for your states, do with your states increase:
And though ye dream ye feast in Paradise,
Yet Reasons Daylight, shows ye at your meat
Asses at Thistles, bleeding as ye eat.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
OF all books extant in all kinds, Homer is the first and best. No one All
books of humane wisdom.
before his ( Josephus affirms,) nor before him (says Velleius Paterculus)
was there any whom he imitated: nor after him, any that could imitate him. And
that Poesy may be no ca^se of detraction from all the eminence we give him;
Spondanus (preferring it to all Arts and sciences) unanswerably argues and
proves. For to the glory of God, and the singing of his glories, (no man dares
deny) man was chiefly made. And what art performs this chief end of man, with
so much excitation, and expression as Poesy? Moses, David, Solomon, Job, Esaias,
Jeremy, etc. chiefly using that to the end abouesaid. And since the excellence
of it cannot be obtained by the labor and art of man (as all easily confess
it,) it must needs be acknowledged, a divine infusion. To prove which in a
word, this distich, (in my estimation) serves something nearely:

Great Poesy, blind Homer, makes all see
Thee capable of all Arts, none of thee.
For out of him (according to our most grave and judicial Plutarch) are all
Arts deduced, confirmed, or illustrated. It is not therefore the worlds
vilifying of it, that can make it vile: for so we might argue, and blaspheme
the most incomparably sacred. It is not of the world indeed: but (like Truth)
hides it self fro^it. Nor is there any such reality of wisdoms truth in all
humane excellence, as in Poets fictions. That most vulgar and foolish receipt
of Poetical license, being of all knowing men to be exploded; (accepting it,
as if Poets had a tale-telling privilege above others,) no Artist being so
strictly, and inextricably confined to all the laws of learning, wisdom, and
truth, as a Poet. For were not his fictions composed of the sinews and souls
of all those; how could they differ far from, and be combined with eternity?
To all sciences therefore, I must still (with our learned and ingenious
Spondanus) prefer it; as having a perpetual commerce with the divine
Majesty; embracing and illustrating al his most holy precepts; and enjoying
continual discourse with his thrice perfect, and most comfortable spirit. And
as the contemplative life is most worthily and divinely preferred by Plato, to
the active; as much as the head to the foot; the eye to the hand; reason to
sense; the soul to the body: the end it self, to all things directed to the
end: quiet to motion; and Eternity to Time; so much prefer I divine Poesy
to all worldly wisdom. To the only shadow of whose worth yet, I entitle not
the bold rimes of every Apish and impudent Braggart, (though he dares assume
any thing) such I turn over to the weauing of Cobwebs; and shall but chatter
on molehels (far under the hill of the Muses) when their fortunat'st selfloue
and ambition has advanced them highest. Poesy is the flower of the Sun, and
disdains to open to the eye of a candle. So kings ^ide their treasures, and
counsels from the vulgar; ne euilescant (says our Spond.) we have example
sacred enough; that true Poesies humility, poverty and contempt, are badges of
divinity; not vanity. Bray then, and bark against it ye Wolf-fac't worldlings;
that nothing but honors, riches, and magistracy, nescio quos, turgide
spiratis (that I may use the words of our friend still,) Qui solas leges
Iustinianas crepatis; paragraphum vnum aut alterum, pluris quam vos ipsos
facitis, etc. I (for my part) shall ever esteem it much more manly and sacred,
in this harmless and pious stu^e, to sit till I sink into my grave, then
shine in your vainglorious bubbles, and impieties; al your poor policies,
wisdoms, and their trappings, at no more valuing then a musty Nut. And much
less I wey the frontlesse detractions of some stupide ignorants; that no more
knowing me, then their own beastly ends; and I, ever (to my knowledge) blessed
from their sight; whisper behind me vilifyings of my translation: out of the
French affirming them; when both in French, and all other languages but his
own, our withall-skill enriched Poet, is so poor and unpleasing, that no man
can discerue from whence flowed his so generally given eminence, and
admiration. And therefore (by any reasonable creatures conference, of my slight
comment, and conversion) it will easily appear how I shun them: and whether
the original be my rule or not. In which, he shall easily see, I understand
the understandings of all other interpreters, and commenters in places of his
most depth, importance, and rapture. In whose exposition and illustration, if I
abhor from the sense that others wrest, and rack out of him; let my best
detractor examine how the Greek word warrants me. For my other fresh fry, let
them fry in their foolish gals; nothing so much weighed as the barkings of
puppies, or foistinghounds; too vile to think of our sacred Homer, or set
their profane feet within their lives lengths of his thresholds. If I fail
in something, let my full performance in other some restore me; haste spurring
me on with other necessities. For as at my conclusion I protest, so here at my
entrance, less then fifteen weeks was the time, in which all the last twelve
books were entirely new translated. No conference had with any one living in all
the novelties I presume I have found. Only some one or two places I have showed
to my worthy and most learned friend, M. Harriots, for his censure how much
mine own weighed: whose judgment and knowledge in all kinds, I know to be
incomparable, and bottomless: yea, to be admired as much, as his most blameles
life, and the right sacred expense of his time, is to be honored and
reverenced. Which affirmation of his clear vnmatchednesse in all manner of
learning; I make in contempt of that nastie objection often thrust upon me;
that he that will judge, must know more then he of whom he judges; for so a
man should know neither God nor himself. Another right learned, honest, and
entirely loved friend of mine, M. Robert Hews, I must needs put into my confessed
conference touching Homer, though very little more then that I had with M.
Harriots. Which two, I protest, are all, and preferred to all. Nor charge I
their authorities with any allowance of my general labor; but only of those
one or two places, which for instances of my innovation, and ^ow it showed to
them, I imparted. If any tax me for too much periphrasis or circumlocution in
some places, let them read Laurentius Valla, and Eobanus Hessus, who either
use such shortness as comes nothing home to Homer; or where they shun that
fault, are ten parts more paraphrastical then I. As for example; one place I
will trouble you (if you please) to confer with the original, and one
interpreter for all. It is in the end of the third book; and is Hellens speech
to Venus, fetching her to Paris, from seeing his cowardly combat with Menelaus:
part of which speech I will here cite:

(...) (...) etc. For avoiding the common readers trouble here, I must refer
the more Greekish to the rest of the speech in Homer, whose translation ad
verbum by Spondanus, I will here cite; and then pray you to confer it with
that which follows of Valla.

Quoniam vero nunc Alexandrum, Menelaus
Postquam vicit; vult odiosam me domum abducere;
Propterea vero nunc dolum (ceu dolos) cogitans aduenisti?
Sede apud ipsum vadens, deorum abnega vias,
Neque vnquam tuis pedibus reuertaris in coelum,
Sed semper circa ^um aerumnas perfer, and ipsum serua
Donec te vel vxorem faciat, vel hic seruam, etc.
Valla thus:

Quoniam victo Paride, Menelaus, me miseram, est reportaturus ad lares, ideo
tu, ideo falsa sub imagine venisti, vt me deciperes ob tuam nimiam in Paridem
beneuolentia^: eo dum illi ades, dum illi studes, dum pro illo satagis, dum
illum obseruas atque custodis, deorum commercium reliquisti, nec ad eos
reuersura es amplius; adeo (quantum suspicor) aut vxor eius ^fficieris, aut
ancilla, etc.

Wherein note if there be any such thing as most of this in Homer; yet only to
express (as he th^nkes) Homers conceit, for the more pleasure of the reader,
he uses this overplus dum illi ades, dum illi studes, dum pro illo satagis,
dum illum obseruas, atque custodis, deorum commercium reliquisti. Which
(besides his superfluity) is utterly false. For where he says, reliquisti
deorum commercium, Hellen says, (...), deorum autem abnega, or abnue vias,
(...), ( vel (...) as it is used poetically) signifying denegare, or abnuere;
and Hellen (in contempt of her too much observing men) bids her renounce
heaven, and come live with Paris till he make her his wife or servant;
scoptically or scornefully speaking it: which both Valla, Eobanus, and all
other interpreters (but these ad verbum) have utterly mist. And this one
example I thought necessary to insert here, to show my detractors that they
have no reason to vilify my circumlocution sometimes, when their most approved
Grecians, Homers interpreters, generally hold him fit to be so converted. Yet
how much I differ, and with what authority, let my impartial, and judicial
reader judge. Always conceiving how pedanticall and absurd an affectation it
is, in the interpretation of any Author (much more of Homer) to turn him word
for word; when (according to Horace and other best lawgiuers to translators) it
is the part of every knowing and judicial interpreter, not to follow the
number and order of words, but the material things themselves, and sentences
to weigh diligently; and to clothe and adorn them with words, and such a style
and form of Oration, as are most apt for the language into which they are
converted. If I have not turned him in any place falsely (as all other his
interpreters have in many, and most of his chief places;) if I have not left
behind me any of his sentence, elegancie, height, intention, and invention: if
in some few places (especially in my first edition, being done so long since,
and following the common tract) I be something paraphrasticall and faulty; is it
justice in that poor fault (if they will needs have it so) to drown all the
rest of my labor? But there is a certain envious Windfucker, that houers up
and down, laboriously engrossing all the air with his luxurious ambition; and
buzzing into every ear my detraction; affirming I turn Homer out of the
Latin only, etc. that sets all his associates, and the whole rabble of my
maligners on their wings with him, to bear about my empaire, and poison my
reputation. One that, as he thinks, whatsoever he gives to others, he takes
from himself; so whatsoever he takes from others, he adds to himself. One
that in this kind of robbery, does like Mercury, that stole good, and
supplied it with counterfeit bad still. One like the two gluttons, Phyloxenus
and Gnatho, that would still empty their noses in the dishes they loved, that
no man might eat but themselves. For so this Castrill, with too hot a liver,
and lust after his own glory, and to de^oure all himself, discourageth all
appetites to the fame of another. I have stricken, single him as you can. Nor
note I this, to cast any rubbes, or plasters out of the particular way of mine
own estimation with the world; for I resolve this with the wilfully obscure:

Sine honor viuam, nulloque numero ero.
Without men's honors I will live, and make
No number, in the manlesse course they take.
But to discourage (if it might be) the general detraction of industrious, and
wellmeaning virtue. I know I cannot too much diminish, and deiect my self; yet
that passing little that I am, God only knows; to whose euer-implored
respect, and comfort, I only submit me. If any further edition of these my
silly endeavors shall chance, I will mend what is amiss (God assisting me) and
amplify my harsh Comment to Homers far more right, and mine own earnest,
and ingenious love of him. Notwithstanding, I know, the curious, and e^uious,
will never sit down satisfied. A man may go over and over, till he come over
and over; and his pains be only his recompense: every man is so loded with
his particular head; and nothing in all respects perfect, but what is perceived
by few. Homer himself has met with my fortune, in many maligners; and
therefore may my poore-selfe, put up with motion. And so little I will respect
malignitie; and so much encourage my self with mine own known strength, and
what I find within me, of comfort, and confirmance; (examining my self
throughout, with a far more jealous and severe eye, then my greatest enemy;
imitating this: Iudex ipse sui totum se explorat ad vnguem, etc.)That after
these Iliads, I will (God lending me life and any meanest means) with more
labor then I have lost here, and all unchecked alacrity, diue through his
Odysses. Nor can I forget here (but with all hearty gratitude remember) my
most ancient, learned, and right noble friend M. Richard Stapilton, first most
des^rtfull mouer in the frame of our Homer. For which (and much other most
ingen^ous and utterly undeserved desert) God make me amply his requiter; and be
his honorable families speedy and full restorer. In the mean space, I entreat
my impartial, and judicial Reader; that all things to the quick he will not
pare; but humanely and nobly pardon defects; and if he find any thing perfect,
receive it vnenuied.

Of Homer.
OF his country, and time, the difference is so infinite amongst all writers,
that there is no question (in my conjecture) of his antiquity beyond all. To
which opinion, the nearest I will cite; Adam Cedrenus places him under David's
and Solomon's rule; and the destruction of Troy under Saul's. And of one age with
Solomon, Michael Glycas Siculus affirms him. Aristotle (in tertio de Poetica)
affirms he was borne in the I Will of Io, begot of a Genius, one of them that
used to dance with the Muses, and a virgin of that I Will, comprest by that
Genius, who being quick with child (for shame of the deed) came into a place
called Aegina, and there was taken of thieves, and brought to Smyrna, to Moeon
king of the Lydians, who for her beauty married her. After which, she walking
near the flood Meletes; on that shore being overtaken with the throws of her
delivery, she brought forth Homer, and instantly died. The infant was
received by Moeon, and brought up as his own till his death; which was not
long after. And according to this, when the Lydians in Smyrna, were afflicted
by the Aeolians, and thought fit to leave the city, the Captains by a Herald
willing all to go out that would, and follow them; Homer (being a little child)
said he would also (...) (that is, sequi.) And of that, (for Melesigenes, which
was his first name) he was called Homer. These Plutarch.

The varieties of other reports touching this, I omit for length: and in place
thereof, think it not unfit to insert something of his praise, and honor
amongst the greatest of all Ages; not that our most absolute of himself, needs
it; but that such autenticall testimonies of his splendour and excellence, may
the better convince the malice of his maligners.

First, what kind of person Homer was, (says Spondanus) his statue teaches;
which Cedrenus describes. The whole place we will describe, that our relation
may hold the better coherence; as Nylander conuerts it. Then was the Octagonon
at Constantinople consumed with fire; and the Bath of Seuerus, that bore the
name of Ze^xippus: in which there was much variety of spectacle, and splendour
of Arts; the works of all Ages being conferred, and preserved there, of
Marble, Rocks, Stones, and Images of Brass; to which, this only wanted; that
the souls of the persons they presented, were not in them. Amongst these
master pieces, and all-witexceeding workmanships, stood Homer, as he was in ^is
age; thoughtfull, and musing: his hands folded beneath his bosom; his beard
untrimmed, and hanging down; the hair of his head in like sort thin on both
sides before; his face with age and cares of the world (as these imagine)
wrinkled and austere; his nose proportioned to his other parts; his eyes fixed
or turned up to his eye brows, like one blind (as it is reported he was) not
born blind (says Vell. Paterculus) which he that imagins (says he) is blind
of all senses. Upon his under coat he was attired with a loose robe; and at
the base beneath his feet, a brazen chain hung. This was the statue of Homer,
which in that conflagration perished. Another renowned statue of his (says
Lucian in his Encomion of Demosthenes) stood in the temple of Ptolomy, on the
upper hand of his own statue. Cedrenus likewise remembers a Library in the
Palace of the king, at Constantinople, that contained a thousand a hundred and
twenty books: amongst which there was the gut of a Dragon, of an hundred and
twenty foot long; in which, in letters of gold; the Iliads, and Odysses of
Homer were inscribed: which miracle (in Basiliscus the Emperors time) was
consumed with fire.

For his respect amongst the most learned; Plato in Ione calls him, (...),
Poetarum omnium, and praestantissimum, and diuinissimum. In Phaedone, (...),
diuinum Poetam, and in Theaetetus, Socrates citing diverse of the most wise and
learned for confirmation of his there held opinion, (as Protagoras, Heraclitus,
Empedocles, Epicharmus, and Homer) who (says Socrates) against such an army,
being all led by such a Captain as Homer, dares fight or resist, but he will
be held ridiculous? This for Scaliger, and all Homers envious and ignorant
detractors. Why therefore, Plato in another place banisheth him with all other
Poets out of his Commonwealth, dealing with them like a Politician indeed; use
men, and then cast them off, (though Homer he thinks fit to send out crowned
and anointed;) I see not, since he makes still such honorable mention of him;
and with his verses, (as with precious Iemmes*) every where enchaceth his
writings. So Aristotle, continually celebrateth him. Nay even amongst the
Barbarous, not only Homers name, but his Poems have been recorded and
reverenced. The Indians (says Aelianus var. hist. lib. 12. cap. 48.) in their
own tongue had Homers Poems translated and sung. Nor those Indians alone, but
the kings of Persia. And amongst the Indians (of all the Greek Poets, Homer
being ever first in estimation;) whenever they used any divine duties
according to the custom of their households and hospitaliies, they invited
ever, Apollo, and Homer. Lucian in his Encomion of Demosth. affirms all Poets
celebrated Homers birth day; and sacrificed to him the first fruits of their
verses. So Thersagoras answers Lucian, he used to do himself. Alex. Paphius
(says Eustathius) delivers Homer, as borne of Egyptian Parents; D^asagoras
being his father, and Aethra his mother; his nurse being a certain
Prophetess, and the daughter of Oris, Isis Priest; from whose breasts,
oftentimes, honey flowed in the mouth of the infant. After which, in the night,
he uttered nine several notes or voices of fowls, viz. of a Swallow, a
Peacocke, a Dove, a Crow, a Partrich, a red-Shank, a Stare, a Blackebird, and a
Nightingale: and being a little boy, was found playing in his bed with nine
Doves. Sibylla being at a feast of his Parents, was taken with sudden fury;
and sung verses, whose beginning was (...) polynice, signifying much victory;
in which song also she called him (...) great in glory; and (...), signifying
gyrlond-seller; and commanded him to build a temple to the Pegridarij, that is,
to the Muses. Herodotus affirms, that Phaemius (teaching a public school at
Smyrna) was his master; and Dionysius in in 56. oration says, Socrates was
Homers scholar. In short; what he was, his works show most truly; to which
(if you please) go on and examine him.

Faults escaped.
In the margin. page 176. for pastime, read past time. Page 177. for whom,
read who. Page 188 in the margin for (...), read (...). p. 195. for totas,
read totus. p. 197. for back, read backs: for possessions, read possession.
p. 200. for defiderat, read desideat. p. 202. for inconstant, read in
constant. in the same p. for through r. though. p. 205. in the margin, join
the disioyned note of Iup. Nept. Pluto. p. 213. for hill, r. wood. p. 214. for
against, r. against. p. 223. for a bowl of mighty wine, read a mighty bowl
of wine. p. 226. for heads, r. head. p. 141. for nere more, r. now no. p. 244.
in the margin, for imitable, r. inimitable. in the same p. for ofs, r. often. p.
248. at the end. for or, r. our. p. 250. for t'Aiaces this, r. th'Aiaces. p.
256. for friend, read fiend. p. 263. for the spritely, r. their spritely. in
the same p. for were, r. where. p. 264. for larg'd, r. lardge. p. 266. in the
Comment, for to which, r. which. in the same. for the ears, r. the ears. p.
284. for steeles, r. seeles. p. 290. for with blind, r. which blind. p. 293.
for hands, r. sands. p. 303, for all the feet, r. at the feet. p. 306. for
fetched, r. ^tch. p. 324. at the end, for Teucer, read Teucers.

THE FIRST BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
APollos Priest to the Argiue sleete does bring
Gifts for his daughter, prisoner to the King;
For which, her tenderd freedom, he entreats.
But, being dismissed, with contumelious threats,
At Phoebus hands, by vengefull prayer he seeks,
To have a plague inflicted on the Greeks.
Which had, Achilles does a Council cite,
Emboldning Chalchas, in the Kings despite,
To tell the truth, why they were punished so.
From hence their fierce and deadly strife did grow.
For wrong in which, Aeacides so raues, Aeacides, surname of Achilles being the
grand child of Aeacus.

That Goddess Thetis, from her throne of waves,
(Ascending heaven) of Jove assistance won,
To plague the Greeks, by absence of her Son:
And make the General himself repent,
To wrong so much his Armies Ornament.
This, found by Juno, she with Jove contends,
Till Vulcan, with heavens cup, the quarrel ends.
Another Argument.
Alpha, the prayer of Chryses, sings:
The Armies plague: the strife of Kings.
His proposition and invocation.
AChilles banefull wrath resound, O Goddess, that imposd,
Infinite sorrows on the Greeks; and many brave souls losd
From breasts Heroique: sent them far, to that a invisible cave
That no light comforts: and their lims, to dogs and vultures gave.
To b all which, Jove's will gave effect; c from whom, first strife begun,
Betwixt Atrides, Atrides surname of Agamemnon; being son to Atreus. Eris the
Gods of contention. Narration.
king of men; and Thetis godlike Son.
What God gave Eris their command, and op't that fighting vein?
Jove's, and Latonas Son; who fired, against the king of men,
For contumely, shown his Priest; infectious sickness sent,
To plague the army; and to death, by troops, the soldiers went.
Occasiond thus; Chryses the Priest, came to the fleetc, to buy
For presents of unvalued price, his daughters liberty.
The golden scepter, and the crown, of Phoebus, in his hands
Proposing; and made suite to all, but most to the Commands
Of both the Atrides, Agamemnon and Menelaus: called the Atrides being
brothers, and both sons to Atreus.
who most ruled. Great Atreus sons (said he)
And all ye wel-grieu'd Greeks; the Gods whose habitations be
In heavenly houses, grace your powers, with Priams razed town,
And grant ye happy conduct home: to win which wished renown
Of Jove, by honoring his son (farre-shooting Phoebus) daine
For these fit presents to dissolu^, the ransomeable chain Chryses, the Priest
of Apollo, to the Atrides, and other Greeks.

Of my loved daughters servitude. The Greeks entirely gave
Glad d acclamations, for sign, that their desires would have
The grave Priest reuerenc'd, and his gifts, of so much price embraced.
The General yet, bore no such mind, but viciously disgraced,
With violent terms, the Priest, and said: Doterd, avoid our fleet,
Where lingering be not found by me, nor thy returning feet Agamemnons (...)
repulse of Chryses.

Let ever visit us again, lest nor thy Godheads crown,
Nor scepter save thee. Her thou seekst, I still will hold mine own,
Till age defloure her. In our court, at Argos (far transferd
From her loved country) she shall plie, her web, and see See my bed made, it
may be englisht: the word is (...), which signifies co^tra stan tem; as
standing of one side, opposite to another on the other side which yet others
(...) capessentem, and adornantem; which, since it shows best to a reader, I
follow. The prayer of Chryses to Apollo.
prepared
(With all fit ornaments) my bed. Incense me then no more,
But, (if thou will be safe) be gone. This said, the sea-beate shore,
(Obeying his high will) the Priest, trod off with haste, and fear.
And walking silent, till he left, far off his enemies ear;
Phoebus (faire-haird Latonas son) he stird up, with a vow,
To this stern purpose: Hear, thou God, that bear the silver bow,
That Chrysa guard'st, rulest Tenedos, with strong hand, and the e round
Of Cilla most divine do walk: O Smintheus, if crowned
With thankful offerings thy rich Phane, I ever saw, or fired.
Fat thighs of oxen, and of goats, to thee: this grace desired
Vouchsafe to me: pains for my tears, let these rude Greeks repay,
Forced with thy arrows. Thus he praid, and Phoebus heard him pray;
And vexed at heart, down from the tops, of steep heaven stoopt; his bow
And quiver couerd round; his hands, did on his shoulders throw;
And, of the angry deity, the arrows as he moved
Ratl'd about him. Like the night, he ranged the host, and rou'd
(Apart the fleet set:) terribly, with his hard-loosing hand
His silver bow twang'd, and his shafts, did first, the Mules command,
And swift hounds: then the Greeks themselves, his deadly arrows shot. Apollo
sends the plague among the Greeks.

The fires of death went never out, nine days his shafts flew hot
About the army, and the tenth, Achilles called a court
Of all the Greeks: heavens Juno.
white-arm'd Queen, (who every where cut short
Beholding her loved Greeks by death) suggested it: and he
(All met in one) arose, and said: Atrides, Now I see Achilles to A^.

We must be wandering again, flight must be still our stay,
(If flight can save us now) at once, sickness and battle lay
Such strong hand on us. Let us ask, some Prophet, Priest, or prove
Some dream interpreter (for dreams, are often sent from Jove)
Why Phoebus is so much incenst? If unperformed vows
He blames in us; or Hecatombs; and if these knees he bows
To death, may yield his graves no more; but offering all supply
Of savors, burnt from lambs, and goats; auert his fervent eye,
And turn his temperate. Thus he sat; and then stood up to them
Chalcas, sirnam'd Thestorides, of Augures, the supreme: Calchas the Prophet.

He knew things present, past, to come; and ruled the Equinpage,
Of th'Argiue fleet to Ilion, for his Prophetique rage
Given by Apollo: who well seen, in the will they felt, proposd
This to Achilles: Jove's beloved? would thy charge see disclosd, Calchas to
Achilles.

The secret of Apollos wrath? then covenant, and take oath,
To my discovery; that with words, and powrefull actions both,
Thy strength will guard the truth, in me; because I well conceive
That he whose Empire gouerns all, whom all the Grecians give,
Confirmed obedience, will be moved; and then you know the state,
Of him that moves him. When a king, has once marked for his hate,
A man inferior; though that day, his wrath seems to digest
The Offense he takes; yet evermore, he rakes up in his breast,
Brands of quick anger; till revenge, has quenched to his desire,
The fire reserved. Tell me then, if, whatsoever, ire
Suggests, in hurt of me, to him; thy valor will prevent?
Achilles answered; All thou know, speak, and be confident: Achilles to
Chalchas.

For by Apollo, Jove's beloved (to whom, performing vows,
O Calchas, for the state of Greece; thy spirit Prophetique shows
Skils that direct us) not a man, of all these Grecians here,
(I living, and enjoying the light, shot through this flowrie sphere)
Shall touch thee, with offensive hands; though Agamemnon be
The man in question, that does boast, the mightiest Emperie,
Of all our army. Then took heart, the Prophet vnreprou'd,
And said: They are not unpaid vows; nor Hecatombs, that moved,
The God against us: his offense, is for his Priest, empaird, Calchas discouers
to the Greeks the cause of their plague.

By Agamemnon; that refusd, the present he preferred,
And kept his daughter. This is cause, why heavens farre-darter darts,
These plagues amongst us; and this still, will empty in our hearts
His deathfull quiver, vncontaind; till to her loved sire,
The blacke-eyd damsel be resigned; no redemptorie hire,
Took for her freedom; not a gift; but all the ransom quit;
And she conuaide, with sacrifice; till her enfranchisd feet,
Tread Chrysa under: then the God (so pleased) perhaps we may
Move to remission. Thus he sat; and up, the great in sway,
Heroique Agamemnon rose; eagerly bearing all:
His minds seat ouercast with fumes: an anger general,
Filled all his faculties; his eyes, sparckl'd like kindling fire;
Which, sternly cast upon the Priest, thus vented he, his ire;
Prophet of ill? For never good, came from thee toward me; Agamemnon incenst,
to Calchas

Not to a words worth: evermore, thou tookst delight to be
Offensive in thy Auguries; which thou continuest still;
Now casting thy prophetique gall, and vouching all our ill
(Shot from Apollo,) is imposd; since I refusd the prise
Of fair Chryseis liberty; which would in no worth rise,
To my rate of her self; which moves, my vows to have her home;
Past Clytemnestra loving her; that graced my nuptial room,
With her virginity, and flower. Nor ask her merits less,
For person, disposition, wit, and skill in housewiferies.
And yet, for all this, she shall go; if more conducible
That course be, then her holding here. I rather wish the weal
Of my loved army, then the death. Provide yet, instantly,
Supply for her, that I alone, of all our royalty,
Lose not my winnings: it is not fit, ye see all, I lose mine
Forced by another: see as well, some other may resign,
His Prise to me. To this, replied, the swift-foote God-like son Achilles to
Agamemnon.

Of Thetis, thus: King of us all, in all ambition;
Most couetouse of all that breath; why should the great-soul'd Greeks
Supply thy lost prise, out of theirs? nor what thy avarice seeks,
Our common treasury can find; so little it does guard
Of what our rac'd towns, yielded us; of all which, most is shared,
And given our soldiers; which again, to take into our hands
Were ignominious, and base. Now then, since God commands,
Part with thy most-lou'd prise to him: not any one of us,
Exacts it of thee: yet we all, all loss thou sufferst thus,
Will treble; quadruple in gain, when Jupiter bestows
The sack of well-wall'd Troy on us; which by his word, he owes.
Do not deceive your self with wit, (he answered) God-like man; (...) to
Ahilles.

Though your good name may color it; it is not your swift foot can
Out run me here; nor shall the gloss, set on it, with the God,
Persuade me to my wrong. Woulst thou, maintain in sure abode
Thine own pris^, and slight me of mine? Resolve this: if our friends
(As fits in equity, my worth) will right me with amends,
So rest it; otherwise my self, will enter personally
On thy prise; that of Ithacus, or Ajax, for supply;
Let him, on whom I enter, rage. But come we will order these,
Hereafter, and in other place. Now put to sacred seas
Our black sail; in it rowers put, in it fit sacrifise;
And to these, I will make ascend, my so much envied prise,
Bright-cheekt Chryseis. For conduct, of all which, we must choose
A chief out of our counselors; thy service we must use,
Idomeneus; Ajax, thine, or thine, wise Ithacus;
Or thine, thou terriblest of men, thou son of Peleus;
Which fittest were, that thou might see, these holy acts performd,
For which thy cunning zeal so pleades; and he whose bow thus stormd
For our offenses, may be calmd. Achilles, with a frown, Achilles to Agamemnon.

Thus answered: O thou impudent! of no good but thine own,
Ever respectfull; but of that, with all craft, covetous;
With what heart can a man attempt, a service dangerous,
Or at thy voice be spirited, to fly upon a foe,
Thy mind thus wretched? For my self, I was not injured so,
By any Trojan, that my powers, should bid them any blows;
In nothing bear they blame of me. Phthia, whose bosom flows
With corn and people, never felt, empaire of her increase,
By their invasion: hills enough, and farre-resounding seas,
Power out their shades, and deepes, between: but thee thou frontlesse man,
We follow, and thy triumphs make, *with bonfires of our bane:
Thine, and thy brothers vengeance sought (thou dogs eyes) of this Troy
By our exposd lives; whose deserts, thou neither do employ,
With honor, nor with care. And now, thou threatst to force from me,
The fruit of my sweat, which the Greeks, gave all; and though it be
(Compared with thy part, then snatched up) nothing: ^or ever is,
At any sackttowne: but of fight, (the fetcher in of this)
My hands have most share: in whose toils, when I have emptied me
Of all my forces; my amends, in liberality
(Though it be little) I accept, and turn pleased to my tent:
And yet that little, thou esteemst, too great a continent
In thy incontinent avarice. For Phthya therefore now
My course is; since it is better far, then here endure, that thou
Should^ still be rauishing my right, draw my whole treasure dry;
And add dishonor. He replied: If thy heart serve thee, fly: Agamemnon to
Ahilles.

Stay not for my cause; others here, will aid, and honor me;
If not, yet Jove I know, is sure; that counselor is he
That I depend on: as for thee, of all our Ioue-kept kings,
Thou still art most my enemy: strifes, battles, bloody things,
Make thy blood feasts still. But if strength, that these moods build upon,
Flow in thy nerves; God gave thee it; and so it is not thine own,
But in his hands still: what then lifts, thy pride in this, so hie?
Home with thy fleet, and Myrmidons; use there their Emperie,
Command not here: I weigh thee not, nor mean to magnify
Thy rough hewne rages; but in stead, I thus far threaten thee:
Since Phoebus needs will force from me, Chryseis; she shall go;
My ships, and friends, shall waft her home: but I will imitate so,
His pleasure; that mine own shall take, in person, from thy tent
Bright-cheekt Briseis; and so tell, thy strength how eminent
My power is, being compared with thine: all other, making fear
To vaunt equality with me; or in this proud kind bear
Their beards against me. Thetis son, at this stood vexed; his heart Achilles
angri^ with ^non.

Bristled his bosom, and two ways, drew his discursiue part;
If from his thigh, his sharp sword drawn, he should make room about
Atrides, person slaughtring him; or sit his anger out
And curb his spirit. While these thoughts, strived in his blood and mind,
And he his sword drew: down from heaven, Athenia (...).
stoopt, and shind
About his temples; being sent, by th'Iuorie-wristed queen
Saturnia; who, out of her heart, had ever loving been,
And careful for the good of both. She stood behind, and took
Achilles by the yellow curles; and only gave her look
To him appearance: not a man, of all the rest could see.
He, turning back his eye; amaze, struck every faculty;
Yet straight, he knew her, by her eyes; so terrible they were
Sparkling with ardor, and thus spoke: Thou seed of Jupiter, Achilles to (...).

Why come thou? to behold his pride, that bosts our Emperie?
Then witness, with it, my revenge; and see that insolence die,
That lives to wrong me. She replied, I come from heaven to see
Thy anger settled: if thy soul, will use her sovereignty, (...) to Achilles.

In fit reflection. I am sent, from Juno, whose affects,
Stand heartily inclind to both: Come, give us both respects,
And cease contention: draw no sword; use words, and such as may
Be bitter to his pride, but just; for trust in what I say,
A time shall come, when thrice the worth, of that he forces now,
He shall propose for recompense, of these wrongs: therefore throw
Reins on thy passions, and serve us. He answered: Though my heart
Burn in just anget; yet my soul, must conquer th'angrie part, Achilles
Palladi, hoc est, rationi obsequitur.

And yield you conquest. Who subdues, his earthly part for heaven,
Heaven to his prayres subdues his wish. This said, her charge was given,
Fit honor: in his silver hilt, he held his able hand,
And forced his broad sword up; and up, to heaven did reascend
Minerua, who in Jove's high roof, that bears the rough shield, took
Her place with other deities. She gone, again forsook,
Patience his passion; and no more, his silence could confine
His wrath, that this broad language gave: Thou ever steep't in wine, Achilles
again infurie.

Dogs-face? with heart, but of a Ha^t? that nor in the open eye
Of fight, dare thrust into a prease; nor with our noblest, lie
In secret ambush. These works seem, too full of death for thee;
It Is safer far, in the open host, to dare an injury,
To any crosser of thy lust. Thou subiect-eating king,
Base spirits thou gouernst; or this wrong, had been the last foul thing
Thou ever author'dst: yet I vow, and by a great oath swear,
Even by this scepter; that as this, never again shall bear
Green leaves, or branches, nor increase, with any growth, his sise; This
simile Virgil directly translates.

Nor did, since first it left the hills, and had his faculties
And ornaments bereft, with iron; which now to other end
Judges of Greece bear; and their laws, received from Jove, defend;
(For which, my oath to thee is great.) So whenever need
Shall burn with thirst of me, thy host, no prayres shall ever breed
Affection in me, to their aid; though well deserved woes
Afflict thee for them; when to death, man-slaughtring Hector throws
Whole troops of them; and thou torment'st, thy vexed mind with conceit
Of thy rude rage now: and his wrong, that most deserved the right
Of all thy army. Thus he threw, his scepter against the ground,
With golden studs stuck; and took seat. Atrides breast was drowned
In rising choler. Up to both, sweet-spoken Nestor stood,
The cunning Pylian Orator; whose tongue powrd forth a flood Nestors age and
eloqu^e.

Of more-then-hony sweet discourse: two ages were increast
Of diuerse-languag'd men; all borne, in his time, and deceast
In sacred Pylos, where he reignd, amongst the third-ag'd men:
He (well seen in the world) aduisd, and thus expressed it then.
O Gods, our Greek earth will be drowned, in just tears; rapefull Troy, Nes^or
to Achil les, and Agame^n.

Herking, and all his sons, will make, as just a mock, and joy
Of these disiunctions; if of you, that all our host excel,
In counsel, and in skill of fight, they hear this: Come, repel
These young men's passions: you are not both, (put both your years in one)
So old as I: I lived long since, and was companion
With men superior to you both: who yet would ever hear,
My counsels with respect. My eyes, yet never witness were, Decorum (...)
(...).

Nor ever will be, of such men, as then delighted them;
Perithous, Exadius, and god-like Polypheme;
Ceneus, and Dryas, prince of men; Aegean Theseus.
A man, like heavens immortals formd; all, all most vigorous,
Of all men, that even those days bred; most vigorous men, and fought
With beasts most vigorous; mountain beasts, (for me^ in strength were naught
Matched with their forces) fought with them; and bravely fought them down;
Yet even with these men, I conuerst, being called to the renown
Of their societies, by their suites, from Pylos far, to fight
In th'Asian kingdom; and I fought, to a degree of might
That helped even their mights; against such, as no man now would dare,
To meet in conflict; yet even these, my counsels still would hear,
And with obedience, crown my words. Give you such palm to them;
It Is better, then to wreath your wraths. Atrides? give not stream
To all thy power, nor force his prise; but yield her still his own,
As all men else do. Nor do thou, encounter with thy crown
(Great son of Peleus) since no king, that ever Jove allowd
Grace of a scepter, equals him. Suppose thy nerves endowd
With strength superior, and thy birth, a very Goddess gave;
Yet he of force, is mightier; since, what his own nerves have
Is amplified, with just command, of many other. King of men
Command thou then thy self; and I, with my prayres will obtain,
Grace of Achilles, to subdue, his fury; whose parts are
Worth our entreaty; being chief check, to all our ill in war.
All this, good father (said the king) is comely, and good right; Agamemnon to
Nestor.

But this man breaks all such bounds; he, affects past all men height.
All would in his power hold, all make, his subjects, give to all
His hot will for their temperate law: all which he never shall
Persuade at my hands. If the Gods, have given him the great style
Of ablest soldier; made they that, his license to revile
Men with vile language? Thetis soon, prevented him, and said:
Fearful and vile I might be thought, if the exactions laid Achilles to
Agamemnon.

By all means on me I should bear. Others command to this,
Thou shall, not me; or if thou do, far my free spirit is
From serving thy command. Beside, this I affirm (afford
Impression of it in thy soul) I will not use my sword
On thee, or any, for a wench: unjustly though thou take
The thing thou gave; but all things else, that in my ship thou make
Greedy survey of, do not touch, without my leave; or do
Add that acts wrong to this; that these, may see that outrage too;
And then comes my part: then be sure, thy blood upon my lance,
Shall flow in vengeance. These high terms, these two at variance
Vsd to each other; left their seats, and after them arose The Grecian
counc^ll dissolved.

The whole court. To his tents and ships, with friends and soldiers, goes
Angry Achilles. Atreus son, the swift ship lancht, and put
Within it twenty chosen row'rs: within it likewise shut
The Hecatomb, to appease the God. Then causd to come abord
Fair cheekt Chryseis. For the chief, he in whom Pallas pourd
Her store of counsels, ( Ithacus) aboard went last, and then Chriseis sent to
her father.

The moist ways of the sea they saild. And now the king of men
Bad all the host to sacrifice. They sacrificed and, cast
The offall of all to the deepes: the angry God they graced
With perfect Hecatombs; some bulls, some goats along the shore
Of the unfruitful sea, inflamed. To heaven the thick fumes bore
Enwrapped savors. Thus though all, the politic king made show
Respects to heaven; yet he himself, all that time did pursue
His own affections. The late jar, in which he thunderd threats
Against Achilles, still he fed, and his affections heats
Thus vented to Talthybius, and grave Eurybates
Heralds, and ministers of trust, to all his messages.
Haste to Achilles tent, where take, Briseis hand, and bring Agamemnon to
Talthybius and Eurybates his Heralds.

Her beauties to us; if he fail, to yield her; say your king
Will come himself with multitudes, that shall the horribler
Make both his presence and your charge, that so he dares defer.
This said, he sent them with a charge, of hard condition.
They went unwillingly, and trod, the fruitless seas shore: soon
They reached the navy and the tents, in which the quarter lay
Of all the Myrmidons, and found, the chief Chief in their sway,
Set at his black bark in his tent. Nor was Achilles glad
To see their presence; nor themselves, in any glory, had
Their message; but with reverence stood, and feared the offended king.
Asked not the dame; nor spoke a word. He yet, well knowing the thing
That causd their coming; graced them thus: Heralds, ye men that bear Achill^s
Princely receipt of the Heralds.

The messages of men and Gods; you are welcome, come ye near.
I nothing blame you, but your king; it is he, I know, does send
You for Briseis; she is his. Patroclus? honored friend,
Bring ^oorth the damsel; and these men, let lead her, to their Lord.
But, Heralds, be you witnesses, before the most adored;
Before us mortals, and before, your most ungentle king,
Of what I suffer: that if war, ever hereafter bring
My aid in question; to auert, any seuerest bane,
It brings on others; I am scusde, to keep my aid in wane,
Since they mine honor. But your king, in tempting mischief, raues;
Nor sees at once, by present things, the future; how like waves,
Ils follow ils; iniustices, being never so secure
In present times; but after plagues, even then, are seen as sure.
Which yet he sees not; and so sooths, his present lust; which checked,
Would check plagues future; and he might, in succouring right, protect
Such as fight for his right at fleet; they still in safety fight,
That fight still justly. This speech vsd, Patr^clus did the rite
His friend commanded; and brought forth, Briseis from her tent; Briseis led to
Agamemnon.

Gave her the heralds, and away, to th'Achiue ships they went:
She sad, and scarce for grief, could go; her love, all friends' forsook,
And wept for anger. To the shore, of the old sea, he betook
Himself alone; and casting forth, upon the purple sea,
His wet eyes, and his hands to heaven, advancing; this sad plea,
Made to his mother: Mother, since, you brought me forth to breath, Achilles to
Thetis.

So short a life: Olympius, had good right to bequeath
My short life, honor; yet that right, he does in no degree:
But lets Atrides do me shame, and force that prise from me
That all the Greeks gave: this with tears, he vtterd, and she heard;
Set with her old sire, in his deepes; and instantly appeard,
Up, from the gray sea, like a cloud: sat by his side, and said;
Why weeps my son? what grieves thee? speak; conceal not what has laid
Thetis to Achilles.

Such hard hand on thee: let both know. He (sighing like a storm)
Replied: Thou do know; why should I, things known; again inform? Achilles
to Thetis.

We marched to Thebs, the sacred town, of king Eetion,
Sacked it, and brought to fleet the spoil, which every valiant son
Of Greece, indifferently shared. Atrides had for share,
Faire-cheekt Chryseis; after which, his priest, that shoots so far,
Chryses, the fair Chryseis sire, arrived at th'Achiue fleet,
With infinite ransom; to redeem, the dear imprisoned feet,
Of his fair daughter. In his hands, he held Apollos crown,
And golden scepter; making suite, to every Grecian son,
But most, the sons of Atreus, (the others orderers)
Yet they least heard him; all the rest, received with reverend ears,
The motion: both the Priest, and gifts, gracing; and holding worth
His wished acceptance. Atreus son, yet (vexed) commanded forth
With rude terms, Phoebus reverend Priest: who, angry, made retreat,
And prayed to Phoebus; in whose grace, he standing passing great,
Got his petition. The God, an ill shaft sentabrode,
That tumbled down the Greeks in heaps. The host had no abode,
That was notvisited; we asked, a Prophet that well knew
The cause of all; and from his lips, Apollos prophecies flew;
Telling his anger. First my self, exhorted to appease
The angerd God; which Atreus son, did at the heart displease.
And up he stood, used threats, performd. The blacke-eyd Greeks sent home
Chryseis to her sire; and gave, his God a Hecatome;
Then, for Briseis to my tents, Atrides Heralds came,
And took her, that the Greeks gave, all. If then thy powers can frame
Wreake for thy son, afford it; scale, Olympus, and implore
Jove, (if by either word, or fact; thou ever did restore
Joy to his grieved heart) now to help. I often have heard thee vant
In court of Peleus; that alone, thy hand was conversant,
In rescue from a cruel spoil, the blacke-clowd-gathering Jove;
Whom other Godheads, would have bound. (The power whose pace does move
The round earth; heavens great Queen, and Pallas) to whose bands Neptune,
Juno, and (...), confederates in the binding of Iupi^.

Thou came with rescue; bringing up, him with the hundred hands,
To great Olympus; whom the Gods, call Briar^us; men
Aegaeon; who, his sire surpast, and was as strong again; The fiction of (...).

And in that grace, sat glad, by Jove; the immortals stood dismayed
At his ascension; and gave, free passage to his aid.
Of all this, tell Jove; kneel to him; embrace his knee, and pray
(If Trois aid he will ever deigne) that now their forces may
Beat home the Greeks to fleet, and sea; embruing their retreat
In slaughter: their pains paying the wreake, of their proud Soueraigns heart:
And that farre-ruling king may know, from his poor soldiers harms,
His own harm falls: his own, and all, in mine; his best in arms.
Her answer she powered out in tears: O me, my son (said she) Thetis to
Achilles.

Why brought I up, thy being at all; that brought thee forth to be
Sad subject of so hard a fate? O would to heaven, that since,
Thy fate is little, and not long; thou might without offense,
And tears perform it. But to live, thrall to so stern a fate
As grants thee least life; and that least, so most unfortunate,
Grieves me to have given thee any life. But what thou wishest now
(If Jove will grant) i will up, and ask. Olympus crowned with snow
I Will clime: but sit thou fast at fleet: renounce all war, and feed
Thy heart with wrath, and hope of wreake: till which come, thou shall need,
A little patience: Jupiter, went yesterday to feast Jupiters feast with the
Aethiops.

Amongst the blameless Aethiops, in The Oceans deepned breast;
All Gods attending him: the twelfth, high heaven again he sees,
And then his brasse-pau'd court I Will skale; cling to his powrefull knees,
And doubt not, but to win thy wish. Thus made she her remove,
And left wrath tyring on her son, for his enforced love.
Ulysses, with the Hecatomb, arrived at Chrysas shore: Navigations to Chrysa.

And when, amids the havens deep mouth, they came to use the oar,
They strait stroke sail, then rold them up, and on the hatches threw.
The top mast, to the kelsine then, with haleyards down they drew;
Then brought the ship to Port with oars, then forked anchor cast,
And against the violence of storms, for drifting made her fast.
All come ashore, they all exposd, the holy Hecatomb
To angry Phoebus; and with it, Chryseis welcomd home:
Whom, to her sire, wise Ithacus, that did at the altar stand,
For honor, led; and (spoken thus) resignd her to his hand:
Chryses, the mighty king of men (great Agamemnon) sends ^lysses to Chryses.

Thy loved seed, by my hands, to thine; and to thy God commends
A Hecatomb, which my charge is, to sacrifice, and seek
Our much-sigh-mixt-woe, his recure, inuokt by every Greek.
Thus he resignd her, and her sire, received her, highly ioyd.
About the well built altar then, they orderly emploide
The sacred offering. Washed their hands, took salt cakes, and the Priest
(With hands held up to heaven) thus praid: O thou that all things see,
Fautour of Chrysa, whose fair hand, does guardfully dispose Chryses prayer to
Apollo for appeasing the plague.

Celestial Cilla: governing, in all power, Tenedos:
O hear thy Priest, and as thy hand, in free grace to my prayers
Shot fervent plague-shafts through the Greeks: now hearten their affai^es,
With health renewd, and quite remove, the infection from their blood.
He praid; and to his prairs again, the God propitious stood.
All, after prayre, cast on salt cakes; drew back, killed, flaid the beeues,
Cut out, and dubd with fat their thighs, fair dressed with doubled leaves; The
sacrifice.

And on them, all the sweet-breads pricked. The Priest, with small sere wood
Did sacrifice; powered on red wine, by whom the young men stood,
And turned (in five ranks) spits; on which, (the legs enough) they eat The
banquet.

The inwards; then in giggots cut, the other fit for meat;
And put to fire; which (roasted well) they drew; the labor done,
They served the feast in; that fed all, to satisfaction.
Desire of meat, and wine, thus quenched, the youths crowned cups of wine
Drunk off, and filled again to all. That day was held divine;
And spent in Paeans to the Sun; who heard with pleased ear;
When whose bright chariot stoopt to sea, and twilight hid the clear; The
evening.

All, soundly on their cables slept, even till the night was worn:
And when the Lady of the light, the rosy fingerd morn The morning.

Rose from the hills: all fresh arose, and to the camp retired.
Apollo with a fore-right wind, their swelling bark inspired.
The topmast hoisted; milke-white sails, on his round breast they put;
The Misens strooted with the gale; the ship her course did cut,
So swiftly, that the parted waves, against her ribs did rore,
Which coming to the camp, they drew, aloft the sandy shore:
Where, laid on stocks, each soldier kept, his quarter, as before.
But Pelius son, swift-foote Achilles, at his swift ships sat,
Burning in wrath, nor ever came, to Councels of estate,
That make men honored: never trod, the fierce embattaild field,
But kept close, and his loved heart pined: what fight and cries could yield,
Thirsting, at all parts, to the host. And now since first he told
His wrongs to Thetis: twelve fair mornes, their ensigns did unfold.
And then the everliving Gods, mounted Olympus; Jove Jupiter and the other Gods
from the A^thiops.

First in ascension. Thetis then, remembered well to move
Achilles motion: rose from sea, and by the mornes first light,
The great heaven, and Olympus climbd; where, in supremest height
Of all that many-headed hill, she saw the farre-seene son Jupiter.

Of Saturn, set from all the rest, in his free seat alone:
Before whom (on her own knees fallen) the knees of Jupiter
Her left hand held, her right his chinne; and thus she did prefer
Her sons petition: Father Jove, if ever I have stood Thetis prayer to
Jupiter.

Aidfull to thee in word or work: with this implored good
Requite my aid: renown my son, since in so short a race,
(Past others) thou confin'st his life: an insolent disgrace
Is done him by the king of men: he forced from him, a prise
Won with his sword. But thou, O Jove, that art most strong, most wise,
Honor my son, for my sake; add, strength to the Trojans side
By his sides weakness, in his want: and see Troy amplifide
In conquest, so much, and so long, till Greece may give again
The glory reft him; and the more, illustrate the free reign
Of his wronged honor. Jove, at this, sat silent; not a word
In long space past him: Thetis still, hung on his knee; implored
The second time, his help, and said: Grant, or deny my suite,
Be free in what thou do; I know, thou can not sit thus mute,
For fear of any: speak, deny, that so I may be sure
Of all heavens Goddesses, it is I, that only must endure
Dishonor by thee. Jupiter, the great cloud-gatherer, grieved
With thought of what a world of griefs, this suite asked, being atchieu'd;
Sweld, sighed, and answered: Works of death, thou vrgest; O at this Jove to
Thetis.

Juno will storm, and all my powers, inflame with contumelies.
Ever she wrangles, charging me, in ear of all the Gods,
That I am partial still; that I, add the displeasing odds
Of my aid to the Ilians. Be gone then, lest she see:
Leave thy request to my care: yet, that trust may hearten thee
With thy desires grant, and my power, to give it act, approve
How vain her strife is: to thy praire, my eminent head shall move,
Which is the great sign of my will, with all the immortal states:
Irreuocable; never fails; never without the rates
Of all powers else: when my head bows, all heads bow with it still;
As their first mouer; and gives power, to any work I will.
He said; and his blacke-ey-brows bent; above his deathle^se head,
Th'Ambrosian curls flowed; great heaven shook, and both were severed,
Their counsels broken. To the depth, *of Neptunes kingdom, diu'd,
Thetis; from heavens height: Jove arose; and all the Gods received,
(All rising from their thrones) their sire; attending to his court;
None sat, when he rose; none delaid, the furnishing his port,
Till he came near: all met with him, and brought him to his throne.
Nor sat great Juno ignorant, when she beheld, alone,
Old Nereus siluer-footed seed, with Jove; that she had brought
Counsels to heaven; and straight her tongue, had teeth in it, that wrought
This sharp inuectiue: Who was that, (thou craftiest counselor Juno to (...).

Of all the Gods) that so apart, some secret did implore?
Ever apart from me, thou love, to counsel and decree,
Things of more close trust then thou think, are fit t'impart to me:
What ever thou determin'st, I, must ever be denied
The knowledge of it, by thy will. To her speech, thus replied; Jupiter to Juno.

The Father, both of men, and Gods: Have never hope to know,
My whole intentions; though my wife: it fits not, nor would show,
Well to thine own thoughts: but what fits, thy woman's ear to hear;
Woman, nor man, nor God, shall know, before it grace thine ear.
Yet, what apart from men and Gods, I please to know; forbear
T'examine, or enquire of that. She with the cowes fair eyes
(Respected Juno) this returned: Austere king of the skies, Iunos reply.

What have thou vtterd? when did I, before this time, enquire,
Or sift thy counsels? passing close, you are still; your desire,
Is served with such care, that I fear, you can scarce vouch the deed
That makes it public; being seduc't, by this old sea-Gods seed.
That could so early use her knees, embracing thine. I doubt,
The late act of thy bowed head, was for the working out,
Of some boon she asked; that her son, thy partial hand would please
With plaguing others. Wretch (said he) thy subtle ielousies, Jove incenst.

Are still exploring: my designs, can never escape thine eye;
Which yet thou never can prevent. Thy curiosity
Makes thee less cared for, at my hands; and horrible the end
Shall make thy humor. If it be, what thy suspects intend,
What then? it is my free will it should: to which, let way be given,
With silence; curb your tongue in time, lest all the Gods in heaven
Too few be, and too weak to help, thy punished insolence,
When my inaccessible hands, shall fall on thee. The sense
Of this high threatening, made her fear; and silent she sat down,
Humbling her great heart. All the Gods, in court of Jove, did frown
At this offense given: amongst whom, heavens famous Artizan,
Ephatstus, in his mothers care, this comely speech began: A name of Vulcan.

Believe it, these words will breed wounds, beyond our powers to bear,
If thus for mortals ye fall out. Ye make a tumult here
That spoils our banquet. Evermore, worst matters put down best.
But mother, though your self be wise, yet let your son request
His wisdom audience. Give good terms, to our loved father Jove,
For fear he take offense again; and our kind banquet prove
A wrathful battle. If he will, the heavenly lightner can
Take you, and toss you from your throne; his power Olympian
Is so surpassing. Soften then, with gentle speech his spleen,
And drink to him; I know his heart, will quickly down again.
This said, arising from his throne, in his loved mothers hand Vultan fills and
gives the cup to ^uno.

He put the double handeld cup, and said: Come, do not stand
On these cross humors: suffer, bear, though your great bosom grieve,
And lest blows force you: all my aid, not able to relieve
Your hard condition; though these eyes, behold it, and this heart
Sorrow to think it; it is a task, too dangerous to take part
Against Olympius. I my self, the proof of this still feel;
When other Gods would feign have helped, he took me by the heel The fall of
Vulcan.

And hurld me out of heaven: all day, I was in falling down,
At length in Lemnos I struck earth; the likewise falling Sun,
And I, together set: my life, almost set too; yet there
The Sintij cheard, and took me up. This did to laughter cheer
White-wristed Juno; who now took, the cup of him and smiled.
The sweete-peace-making-draught went round; and lame Ephaistus filled Vulcan
skinker to the Gods.

Nectar, to all the other Gods. A laughter never left,
Shook all the blessed d^ities, to see the lame so deft
At that cup service. All that day, even till the Sun went down,
They banqueted, and had such cheer, as did their wishes crown.
Nor had they music less divine, Apollo there did touch Apollo touches his
harp at the banquet, and the Musessing to it.

His most sweet harp; to which, with voice, the Muses pleased as much.
But when the Suns fair light was set, each Godhead to his house
Addressed for sleep, where every one, with art most curious
(By heavens great both-foote halting God) a several roof had built;
Even he to sleep went, by whose hand, heaven is with lightning guilt.
(High Jove) where he had vsd to rest, when sweet sleep seisd his eyes:
By him the golden-thron'd Queen slept: the Queen of deities.
COMMENTARIVS.
Since I dissent from all other Translators, and Interpreters, that ever assaid
exposition of this miraculous Poem, especially where the divine rapture is
most exempt from capacity, in Grammarians merely, and Grammatical Critics,
and where the inward sense or soul of the sacred Muse is only within eye-shot
of a Poetical spirits inspection; (lest I be prejudiced with opinion, to
dissent of ignorance, or singularity) I am bound by this brief Comment, to
show I understand how all other extants understand; my reasons why I reject
them; and how I receive my Author. In which labor, if where all others find
discords and dissonances, I prove him entirely harmonious and proportionate: if
where they often alter, and fly his original, I at all parts stand fast, and
observe it: if where they mix their most pitiful castigations with his
praises, I render him without touch, and beyond admiration: (though truth in
her very nakedness sits in so deep a pit, that from Gades to Aurora, and
Ganges, few eyes can sound her:) I hope yet, those few here, will so discover
and confirm her, that the date being out of her darkness in this morning of
our Homer; he shall now gird his Temples with the Sun, and be confessed
(against his good friend) Nunquam dormitare. But how all Translators, Censors,
or Interpretors, have slept, and been dead to his true understanding; I hope it
will neither cast shadow of arrogance in me to affirm, nor of difficulty in
you to believe: if you please to suspend censure, and diminution, till your
impartial conference of their pains and mine be admitted. For induction and
preparatiue to which patience, and persuasion, trouble your selves but to know
this: This neuer-enough-glorified Poet, (to vary and quicken his eternal Poem)
has inspired his chief persons with different spirits, most ingenious and
inimitable characters; which not understood, how are their speeches? being one
by another, as conveniently, and necessarily known, as the instrument by the
sound. If a Translator or Interpreter of a ridiculous and cowardly described
person (being deceived in his character) so violates, and vitiates the
original, to make his speech grave, and him valiant: can the negligence and
numbnesse of such an Interpreter or Translator, be less then the sleep, and
death, I am bold to sprinckle upon him? or could I do less then affirm and
enforce this, being so happily discovered? This therefore (in his due place)
approved and explaned, let me hope my other assumpts will prove as conspicuous.

This first and second book, I have wholly translated again; the seventh,
eighth, ninth, and tenth books, deferring still imperfect, being all Englished
so long since; and my late hand (overcome wih labor) not yet rested enough to
refine them. Nor are the wealthy veins of this holy ground, so amply
discovered in my first twelve labors, as my last; not having competent time,
nor my profit in his mysteries being so ample, as when driving through his
thirteenth and last books, I drew the main depth, and saw the round coming of
this silver bow of our Phoebus; the clear scope and co^texture of his work;
the full and most beautiful figures of his persons. To those last twelve then,
I must refer you, for all the chief worth of my clear discoueries. And in
the mean space, I entreat your acceptance of some few new touches in these
first. Not perplexing you in first or last, with anything handled in any other
Interpreter, further then I must conscionably make congression with such as
have diminisht, mangled, and maimed, my most worthily most tendered Author.

a (...) (being compounded ex a priuatiua: and (...), video) signifies, locus
tenebricosus, or (according to Virgil) sine luce domus; and therefore
(different from others) I so convert it.

b (...) etc.) is the vulgar reading, which I r^ade: (...) because (...) referd
to (...), etc. is redundant and idle; to the miseries of the Greeks by Jove's
counsel, grave, and sententious.

c (...), etc. ex quo quidem primum: (...), etc. ex quo. Here our common
readers would have tempore understood; because (...) (to which they think the
Poet must otherwise have reference) is the feminine gender. But Homer
understands Jove; as in (...), verse 273. he expounds himself in these words:
(...), etc. which Pindarus Thebanus in his Epitome of these Iliads, rightly
observes, in these verses:

Conficiebat enim summi sententia Regis,
Ex quo contulerant discordi pectore pugnas
Sceptriger Atrides, and bello clarus Achilles.
d (...), comprobarunt Graeci, all others turn it; but since, (...) signifies
properly, fausta acclamatione do significationem approbationis, I therefore
accordingly convert it, because the other intimates a comprobation of all the
Greeks by word; which was not so, but only by inarticulate acclamations, or
showtes.

e (...), signifies properly circumambulo, and only metaphorice, protego, or
tueor, as it is always in this place translated; which suffers alteration with
me, since our usual phrase of walking the round in towns of garrison, for the
defense of it, fits so well the property of the original.

f (...). Praemiserat enim Dea alba v^nis Juno? Why Juno should send Pallas, is
a thing not noted by any: I therefore answer; Because Juno is Goddess of
state. The allegory therefore in the Prosopopoeia both of Juno and Pallas, is,
that Achilles for respect to the state there present, the rather used that
discretion and restraint of his anger. So in diverse other places, when state is
represented, Juno procures it: as in the eighteenth book, for the state of
Patroclus his fetching off, Juno commands the Sun to go down before his
time, etc.

g (...): sic dixit lachrimans, etc. These tears are called by our Co^mentors,
unworthy, and fitter for children, or women, then such an Hero as Achilles:
and therefore Plato is cited in 3. de Repub. where he says, (...), etc. Merito
igitur, clarorum virorum ploratus e medio tolleremus, etc. To answer which, and
justify the fitness of tears generally (as they may be occasioned) in the
greatest, and most renowned men; (omitting examples of Virgils Aeneas,
Alexander the Great, etc.) I oppose against Plato, only one president of great
and most perfect humanity, (to whom infinitely above all other, we must
prostrate our imitations) that shed tears, viz. our All* perfect and Almighty
Savior, who wept for Lazarus. This then, leaving the fitness of great men's
tears generally, utterly unanswerable: these particular tears of vnuented
anger in Achilles, are in him most natural: tears being the highest effects
of greatest and most fiery spirits; either when their abilities cannot
perform to their wills, or that they are restrained of revenge, being injured,
out of other considerations: as now the consideration of the state, and
gravity of the counsel, and public good of the army curbd Achilles. Who can
deny, that there are tears of manliness, and magnanimity, as well as
womanish and pusillanimous? So Diomed, wept for cursed heart, when Apollo
struck his scourge from him, and hindered his horse race: having been warned
by Pallas before not to resist the Deities; and so his great spirits being
curbed of revenge, for the wrong he received then. So when not-enough. vented
anger, was not to be expressed enough by that teare-starting affection in
courageous and fierce men, our most accomplish^ expressor, helps the
illustration in a Simile of his fervor, in most feruent-spirited fowls,
resembling the wrathful fight of Sarpedon and Patroclus to two Vultures,
fighting, and crying on a rock; which thus I have afterward Englished, and
here for example inserted:

Down iumpt he from his chariot; down leapt his foe as light:
And as on some far-seeing rock, a cast of Vultures fight,
Fly on each other, strike, and trusse; part, meet, and then stick by;
Tugge both with crooked beakes, and seres; cry, fight, and fight, and cry.
So fiercely fought these angry kings, etc.
Wherein you see, that crying in these eagerly fought fowls (which is like
tears in angry men) is so far from softness or faintness, that to the
superlatiue of hardiness and courage, it expresses both. Nor must we be so
gross to imagine, that Homer made Achilles, or Diomed blubber, or sob, etc.
but in the very point and sting of their vnuented anger, shed a few violent
and seething-ouer tears. What Asse-like impudence is it then, for any merely
vaineglorious, and selfe-louing puff, that every where may read these
inimitable touches of our Homers maisterie, any where to oppose his arrogant
and ignorant castigations? when he should rather (with his much better
understander Spondanus) submit where he ouersees him faulty: and say thus: Quia
tu tamen hoc voluisti, sacrosanctae tuae authoritati, per me nihil detrahetur.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jove calls avision up, from Somnus den;
To bid Atrides, muster up his men.
The king (to Greeks dissembling his desire)
Persuades them to their country to r^tire.
By Pallas will, Ulysses stays their flight;
And wise old Nestor, heartens them to fight.
They take their meat: which done, to arms they go^:
And march in good array, against the foe.
So those of Troy, when Iris, from the sky,
Of Saturns son, performs the Ambassie.
Another Argument.
Beta, the dream and Synod cites,
And catalogues the nauall knights.
THe other Gods, and knights at arms, all night slept: only Jove, Jupiter
carefu^ in performing his vow to Thet^.

Sweet slumber seisd not; he discourst, how best he might approve
His vow made for Achilles grace, and make the Grecians find
His miss, in much death. Al ways cast; this counsel served his mind
With most allowance: to dispatch, a harmefull dream to greet
The king of men; and gave this charge: Go, to the Achiue fleet, Jupiter calls
up a vision.

(Pernicious dream) and being arrived, in Agamemnons tent,
Deliver truly all this charge; command him to convent
His whole host armed, before these towers; for now Troys broad-waid town
He shall take in: the heauen-housd Gods, are now indifferent grown,
Iunos request has won them: Troy, now under imminent ils,
At all parts labors. This charge heard, the vision straight fulfils;
The ships reached, and Atrides tent, in which he found him laid;
Divine sleep powrd about his powers. He stood above his head
Like Nestor (graced, of old men, most) and this did intimate:
Sleeps the wise Atreus-tame-horse son? a counselor of State, The vision
to Agamemnon.

Must not, the whole night, spend in sleep; to whom the people are,
For guard committed; and whose life, stands bound to so much care.
Now hear me then, ( Jove's messenger,) who, though far off from thee,
Is near thee yet; in ruth, and care: and gives command by me,
To arm thy whole host. Thy strong hand, the broad-waid town of Troy,
Shall now take in: no more the Gods, dissentiously employ
Their high-housd powers: Iunos suite, has won them all to her;
And ill fates ouer-hang these towers, addressed by Jupiter.
Fix in thy mind this; nor forget, to give it action, when
Sweet sleep shall leave thee. Thus he fled, and left the king of men
Repeating, in discourse, his dream; and dreaming still, awake, (...)
discourses of (...) (...).

Of power, not ready yet for act. O fool, he thought to take
In that next day, old Priams town; not knowing what affairs
(...) had in purpose; who prepared, (by strong fight) sighs and (...)
For Greeks, and Trojans. The dream gone, his voice still mur^ured
About the kings ears: who sat up, put on him, in his bed,
His silken inner weed; fair, new, and then in have arose;
Cast on his ample mantle, tied, to his soft feet fair shoes;
His siluer-hilted sword he hung, about his shoulders, took
His fathers scepter, never staind: which then abroad he shook,
And went to fleet. And now great heaven, Goddess Aurora, scall'd The morning.

To Jove, and all Gods, bringing light. When Agamemnon called
His heralds, charging them aloud, to call to instant Court
The thicke-haird Greeks. The heralds called, the Greeks made quickeresort:
The Council chiefly he composd, of old great minded men,
At Nestors ships, the Pylian king: all there assembled then,
Thus Atreus son begun the Court: Hear friends, a dream divine, (...).

Amids the calm night in my sleep, did through my shut eyes shine,
Within my fantasy: his form, did passing naturally
Resemble Nestor: such attire, a stature just as hie.
He stood above my head; and words, thus fashiond, did relate.
Sleeps the wise Atreus-tame-horse son? A counselor of state (...) (...)
(...) (...).

Must not, the whole night spend in sleep; to whom the people are
For guard committed; and whose life, stands bound to so much care.
Now hear me then, ( Jove's messenger,) who, though far off from thee,
Is near thee yet, in love, and care: and gives command by me,
To arm thy whole host. Thy strong hand, the broad-waid town of Troy,
Shall now take in: no more the Gods, dissentiously employ
Their high-housd powers: Saturnias suite, has won them all to her;
And ill fates ouer-hang these towers, addressed by Jupiter.
Fix in thy mind this. This expressed, he took wing and away;
And sweet sleep left me: let us then, by all our means assay,
To arm our army; I will first, (as far as fits our right)
Try their addictions, and command, with full-sail'd ships our flight:
Which if they yield to, oppose you. He sat; and up arose
N^stor, of sandy Pylos, king: who, (willing to dispose
Their counsel to the public good) proposd this to the State:
Princes, and Counselors of Greece? If any should relate Nestor to the Greeks.

This vision, but the king himself; it might be held a tale,
And move the rather our (...): but since our General
Affirms he saw it, hold it true; and all our best means make
To arm our army. This speech used, he first the Council brake;
The other scepter-bearing States, arose to, and obeyed
The peoples Rector. Being abroad, the earth was ouerlaid
With flockers to them, that came forth: as when, of frequen^ Bees
Swarms rise out of a hollow rock, repairing the degrees Simile.

Of their egression endlesly; with ever rising new,
From forth their sweet nest: as their store, still as it faded, grew,
And never would cease sending forth, her clusters to the spring
They still crowd out so; this flock here; that there, belabouring
The loaded flowers. So from the ships, and tents, the armies store,
Troopt to these Princes, and the Court; along th'vnmeasur'd shore:
Amongst whom, Jove's Ambassadresse, ( Fame) in her virtue shined, (...), (...)
(...) (...).

Exciting greediness to hear. The rabble thus inclined,
Hurried together; uproar seisd, the high Court; earth did groan
Beneath the settling multitude; tumult was there alone.
Thrice three voiciferous heralds rose, to check the rout, and get
Ear to their Ioue-kept Governors; and instantly was set
That huge confusion; every man, set fast, and clamor ceast:
Then stood divine Atrides up, and in his hand comprest
His scepter, th'elaborate work, of fiery Mulciber: The (...) of (...).

Who gave it to Saturnian Jove; Jove to his messenger;
His messenger ( Argicides,) to Pelops, skild in horse;
Pelops, to Atreus chief of men; he dying, gave it course
To Prince Thyestes, rich in herds; Thyestes to the hand
Of Agamemnon renderd it, and with it, the command
Of many Isles, and Argos, all. On this he leaning, said:
O friends, great sons of Danaus, servants of Mars; Jove laid Agamemnon to
the Greeks.

A heavy curse on me, to vow, and bind it with the bent
Of his high forehead; that (this Troy, of all her people spent)
I should return; yet now to mock, our hopes, built on his vow:
And charge ingloriously my flight; when such an overthrow
Of brave friends, I have authored. But to his mightiest will
We must submit us; that has raz't, and will be razing still,
Men's footsteps, from so many towns; because his power is most,
He will destroy most. But how vile, such, and so great an host,
Will show to future times? that matched, with lesser numbers far,
We fly, not putting on the crown, of our so long-held war?
Of which, there yet appears no end. Yet should our foes and we
Strike truce, and number both our powers; Troy taking all that be
Her armed inhabitants; and we, in tens should all sit down
At our truce banquet: every ten, allowed one of the town
To fill his feast-cup; many tens, would their attendant want:
So much I must affirm, our power, exceeds th'inhabitant.
But their auxiliarie bands; those brandishers of spears,
(From many cities drawn) are they, that are our hinderers;
Not suffering well-raisd Troy to fall. Nine years are ended now,
Since Jove our conquest vowed, and now, our vessels rotten grow,
Our tackling fails, our wives, young sons, sit in their doors, and long
For our arrival: yet the work, that should have wreakt our wrong,
And made us welcome, lies un wrought: Come then, as I bid, all
Obey, and fly to our loved home; for now, nor ever shall
Our utmost, take in broad-waid Troy. This said, the multitude
Was all for home, and all men else, that what this would conclude
Had not discouerd. All the crowd, was should about the shore;
In sway, like rude, and raging waves, rowsd with the fervent blore Simile.

Of The East, and South winds; when they break, from Jove's clouds, and are borne
On rough backs of the I carian seas: or like a field of corn
High grown, that Zephyrs vehement gusts, bring easily underneath,
And make the stiffe-vp-bristl'd ears, do homage to his breath:
For even so easily, with the breath, Atrides used, was swaid
The violent multitude. To fleet, with showts, and disaraid,
All rusht; and with a fogge of dust, their rude feet, dimd the day;
Each cried to other, cleanse our ships; come, lanch, aboard, away.
The clamor of the runners home, reached heaven; and then past fate,
The Greeks had left Troy, had not then, the Goddess of estate,
Thus spoke to Pallas: O foul shame, thou untamed seed of Jove, Juno to Pallas.

Shall thus the seas broad back be charged, with these our friends remove?
Thus leaving Argiue Hellen here? thus Priam graced? thus Troy?
In whose fields, far from their loved own, (for Hellens sake) the joy,
And life of so much Grecian birth, is vanished? take thy way
To Our brasse-arm'd people; speak them fair, let not a man obey
The charge now given, nor lanch one ship. She said, and Pallas did
As she commanded: from the tops, of heavens steep hill she slid;
And straight, the Greeks swist ships, she reached: Ulysses, (like to Jove
In gifts of counsel) she found out; who, to that base remove,
Stird not a foot, nor touched a ship; but grieved at heart to see
That fault in others. To him close, the blue-eyd deity
Made way, and said: Thou wisest Greek, divine Laertes son,
Thus fly ye homewards, to your ships, shall all thus headlong run?
Glory to Priam, thus ye leave; glory to all his friends,
If thus ye leave her here; for whom, so many violent ends
Have closd your Greek eyes? and so far, from their so loved home?
Go to these people, use no stay; with fair terms overcome
Their foul endeavor: not a man, a flying sail let hoice.
Thus spoke she, and Ulysses knew, it was Pallas by her voice:
Ran to the runners; cast from him, his mantle, which his man
And Herald, grave Eurybates, the Ithacensian
That followd him, took up. Himself, to Agamemnon went;
His incorrupted scepter took; his scepter of descent;
And with it, went about the fleet. What Prince, or man of name,
He found flight-giuen; he would restrain, with words of gentlest blame;
Good sir, it fits not you to fly, or fare as one afraid; ^lysses temper in
restraining the flight.

You should not only stay your self, but see the people staid.
You know not clearly (though you heard, the kings words) yet his mind,
He only tries men's spirits now; and whom his trials find
Apt to this course, he will chastise. Nor you, nor I, heard all
He spoke in council: nor durst preasse, too near our General,
Lest we incenst him to our hurt. The anger of a king
Is mighty; he is kept of Jove, and from Jove likewise spring
His honors; which, out of the love, of wise Jove, he enioyes.
Thus, he the best sort vsd; the worst, whose spirits brake out in noise,
He cudgeld with his scepter, chid, and said: Stay wretch, be still,
And hear thy betters; thou art base, and both in power and skill
Poor and unworthy; without name, in counsel, or in war.
We must not all be kings: the rule, is most irregularre,
Where many rule; one Lord, one king, propose to thee; and he
To whom wise Saturns son has given, both law, and Emperie,
To rule the public, is that king. Thus, ruling, he restrained
The host from flight: and then, again, the Council was maintained
With such a concourse, that the shore, rung with the tumult made;
As when the farre-resounding sea, does in his rage invade
His sandy confines; whose sides groan, with his inuolued wave,
And make his own breast echo sighs. All sat, and audience gave;
Thersites only would speak all. A most disorderd store
Of words, he foolishly powrd out; of which his mind held more
Then it could manage; any thing, with which he could procure
Laughter, he never could contain. He should have yet been sure
To touch no kings. To Oppose their states, becomes not iesters parts. Thersites
description.

But he, the filthiest fellow was, of all that had deserts
In Troyes brave siege: he was squint-eyd, and lame of either foot:
So crooke-backt, that he had no breast: sharp headed, where did shoot
(Here and there sperst) thin mossie hair. He most of all enuide Achilles.

Ulysses and Aeacides, whom still his spleen would chide;
Nor could the sacred king himself, avoid his saucie vain,
Against whom, since he knew the Greeks, did vehement hates sustain
(Being angry for Achilles wrong) he cride out; railing thus:
Atrides? why complainst thou now? what would thou more of us? Thersites to
Agamemnon.

Thy tents are full of brass, and dames; the choice of all are thine:
With whom, we must present thee first, when any towns resign
To our invasion. Wantst thou then (besides all this) more gold
From Troyes knights, to redeem their sons? whom, to be dearly sold,
I, or some other Greek, must take? or would thou yet again,
Force from some other Lord, his prise; to sooth the lusts that reign
In thy encroching appetite? it fits no Prince to be
A Prince of ill, and govern us; or lead our progeny
By rape to ruin. O base Greeks, deserving infamy,
And ils eternal: Greekish girls, not Greeks ye are: Come, fly
Home with our ships; leave this man here, to perish with his preys,
And try if we helped him, or not: he wronged a man that weys
Far more then he himself in worth: he forced from Thetis son,
And keeps his prise still: nor think I, that mighty man has won
The style of wrathful worthily; he is soft, he is too remiss,
Or else Atrides, his had been, thy last of injuries.
Thus he the peoples Pastor chid; but straight stood up to him Ulysses to
Thersites.

Divine Ulysses; who with looks, exceeding grave, and grim,
This bitter check gave: Cease, vain fool, to vent thy railing vain
On kings thus, though it serve thee well: nor think thou can restrain,
With that thy railing faculty, their wills in least degree,
For not a worse, of all this host, came with our king then thee,
To Troys great siege: then do not take, into that mouth of thine,
The names of kings; much less revile, the dignities that shine
In their supreme states; wresting thus, this motion for our home
To sooth thy cowardice; since our selves, yet know not what will come
Of these designments: if it be, our good, to stay, or go:
Nor is it that thou standst on; thou, reuil'st our General so,
Only, because he has so much, not given by such as thou,
But our Heroes. Therefore this, thy rude vein, makes me vow,
(Which shall be curiously observed) if ever I shall hear
This madness from thy mouth again, let not Ulysses bear
This head, nor be the father called, of young Telemachus;
If to thy nakedness, I take, and strip thee not, and thus
Whip thee to fleet from Council; send, with sharp stripes, weeping hence,
This glory thou affectst to rail. This said, his insolence
He settled with his scepter; struck, his back and shoulders so,
That bloody wales rose; he shrunk round; and from his eyes did flow
Moist tears, and looking filthily, he sat, feared, smarted; dried
His blubberd cheeks; and all the preasse, (though grieved to be denied,
Their wished retrait for home) yet laughed, delightsomely, and spoke
Either to other: O ye Gods, how infinitely take
Ulysses virtues in our good? author of Counsels, great
In ordering armies: how most well, this act became his heat
To beat from Council this rude fool? I think his saucy spirit
Hereafter will not let his tongue, abuse the sovereign merit,
Exempt from such base tongues as his. Thus spoke the people: then
The citie-razer, Ithacus, stood up to speak again,
Holding his Scepter. Close to him, gray-eyd Minerua stood;
And like a herald, silence causd, that all the Achiue brood
(From first to last) might hear and know, the counsel: when (inclind
To all their good) Ulysses said: Atrides, now I find, Ulysses to Agamem^n and
the people.

These men would render thee the shame, of all men; nor would pay,
Their own vows to thee, when they took, their free and honored way,
From Argos hither; that till Troy, were by their brave hands rac't,
They would not turn home; yet like babes, and widows, now they have
To that base refuge. It Is a spite, to see men melted so
In womanish changes. Though it is true, that if a man do go
Only a month to sea, and leave, his wife far off, and he
Tortured with winters storms, and tossed, with a tumultuous sea,
Grows heavy, and would home; us then, to whom the thrice three year
Has filled his reuoluble orb, since our arrival here,
I blame not, to wish home, much more: yet all this time to stay
(Out of our judgments) for our end; and now to take our way
Without it, were absurd and vile. Sustain then friends, abide,
The time set to our object: try, if Calchas prophesied
True of the time or not. We know, ye all can witness well
(Whom these late death-conferring-fates, have faild to send to hell)
That when in Aulis, all our fleet, assembled with a freight
Of ils to Ilion, and her friends: beneath the fair grown height
A Platane bore, about a fount, whence crystal water flowed,
And near our holy altar, we, upon the Gods bestowed
Accomplished Hecatombs; and there, appeared a huge portent,
A Dragon with a bloody skale, horride to sight, and sent
To light by great Olympius; which crawling from beneath
The Altar, to the Platane climbd; and ruthlesse crasht to death
A Sparrowes young, in number eight, that in a top-bow lay
Hid under leaves: the dam the ninth, that houerd every way,
Mourning her loved birth; till at length, the Serpent watching her,
Her wing caught, and deuourd her too. This dragon, Jupiter
(That brought him forth) turned to a stone; andb made a powrefull mean
To stir our zeales up, that admired, when of a fact so clean
Of all ill as our sacrifice, so fearful an ostent
Should be the issue. Calchas then, thus prophesied the event;
Why are ye dumb struck, faire-haird Greeks? wise Jove is he has shown
This strange ostent to us. It Was late, and passing lately done,
But that grace it foregoes to us, for suffering all the state
Of his appearance, (being so slow) nor time shall end, nor fate.
As these eight Sparrowes, and the dam, (that made the ninth) were eat
By this stern Serpent; so nine years, we are to endure the heat
Of ravenous war, and in the tenth, take in this broad-waid town.
Thus he interpreted this sign; and all things have their crown
As he interpreted, till now. The rest then, to succeed,
Believe as certain: stay we all, till that most glorious deed
Of taking this rich town, our hands, are honored with. This said,
The Greeks gave an vnmeasur'd shout; which back the ships repaid
With terrible echoes, in applause, of that persuasion
Divine Ulysses vsd; which yet, held no comparison
With Nestors next speech, which was this: O shameful thing! ye talk Nestor
to the Greeks.

Like children all, that know not war. In what aires region walk
Our oaths, and covenants? Now I see, the fit respects of men
Are vanished quite; our right hands given, our faiths, our counsels vain;
Our sacrifice with wine; all fled, in that profaned flame
We made to bind all: for thus still, we vain persuasions frame,
And strive to work our end with words; not joining stratagemes
And hands together; though thus long, the power of our extremes
Has urged us to them. Atreus son? firm as at first hour stand:
Make good thy purpose; talk no more, in counsels, but command
In active field. Let two or three, that by themselves advise,
Faint in their crowning; they are such, as are not truly wise.
They will for Argos, ere they know, if that which Jove has said
Be false or true. I tell them all, that high Jove bowd his head
As first we went aboard our fleet, for sign we should confer
These Trojans, their due fate and death; almighty Jupiter,
All that day darting forth his flames, in an vnmeasur'd light,
On our right hands; let therefore none, once dream of coward flight,
Till (for his own) some wife of Troy, he sleeps withal; the rape
Of Hellen wreaking; and our sighs, enforced for her escape.
If any yet dare dote on home, let his dishonored have
His black, and well built bark but touch, that (as he first disgraced
His countries spirit) fate, and death, may first his spirit let go.
But be thou wise (king) do not trust, thy self, but others. Know
I will not use an abject word: see all thy men arraid
In tribes and nations; that tribes, tribes; nations may nations aid:
Which doing, thou shall know, what chiefs, what soldiers play the men;
And what the cowards: for they all, will fight in several then,
(Easy for note.) And then shall thou, if thou destroist not Troy,
Know if the prophecies defect, or men thou do employ
In their approved arts, want in war: or lack of that brave heat
Fit for the ventrous spirits of Greece, was cause to thy defeat.
To this the king of men replied; O father, all the sons Agamemnon to Nestor.

Of Greece thou conquerst, in the strife, of consultations.
I would to Jove, Atheni^, and Phoebus, I could make
(Of all) but ten such Counselors; then instantly would shake
Kings Priams city; by our hands, laid hold on, and laid wast.
But Jove has orderd I should grieve, and to that end has cast
My life into debates, past end. My self, and Thetis son,
(Like girls) in words fought for a girl, and I the offense begun:
But if we ever talk as friends, Troys thus deferred fall
Shall never vex us more one hour. Come then, to victles all,
That strong Mars, all may bring to field; each man his lances steel
See sharpened well; his shield well lined, his horses meated well,
His chariot carefully made strong; that these affairs of death,
We all day may hold fiercely out: no man must rest, or breath.
The bosoms of our targatiers, must all be steept in sweat.
The lanciers arm, must fall dissolved; our chariot horse with heat*
Must seem to melt. But if I find, one soldier take the chase,
Or stir from fight, or fight not still, fixed in his enemies face;
Or hid a shipboord: all the world, for force, nor price, shall save
His hated life; but fowls, and dogs, be his abhorred grave.
He said, and such a murmr rose, as on a lofty shore Simile.

The waves make, when the Southwind comes, and tumbles them before
Against a rock, grown near the strand, which diversely beset
Is never free; but here and there, with varied vprores beat.
All rose then, rushing to the fleet, perfumed their tents, and eat:
Each offering to the immortal Gods, and praying to escape th'heate
Of wa^e and death. The king of men, an Ox of five years spring
T'almightie Jove slew: called the Peers, first Nestor, then the king
Idomenaeus: after them, the Aiaces, and the son
Of Tydeus; Ithacus the sixth, in counsel Paragon Diomed.

To Jove himself. All these he bad, but cat-a-martiall-crie.
Good Menelaus, since he saw, his brother busily
Employed at that time, would not stand, on inuitation,
dBut of himself came. All about, the offering overthrown
Stood round, took salt-cakes, and the king, himself thus praid for all:
O Jove, most great, most glorious, that in that starrie hall,
Sit'st drawing dark clouds up to air: let not the Sun go down,
Darkness supplying it; till my hands, the Palace, and the town
Of Priam overthrow, and burn; the arms on Hectors breast
Dividing; spoiling with my sword, thousands (in interest
Of his bad quarrel) laid by him, in dust, and eating earth.
He prayed, Jove heard him not, but made, more plentiful the birth
Of his sad toiles; yet took his gifts. Prayres past, cakes on they threw:
The Ox then (to the altar drawn,) they killed, and from him drew
His hide: then cut him up; his thighs (in two hewne) dubd with fat,
Pricked on the sweet-breads; and with wood, leauelesse, and kindled at
Apposed fire, they burn the thighs; which done, the inwards slit,
They broild on coals, and eat. The rest, in giggots cut, they spit,
Roast cunningly, draw, sit, and feast: naught lackt to leave alaid
Each temperate appetite; which served, Nestor began and said:
Atrides, most graced king of men, now no more words allow, Nestor to Agamemnon.

Nor more defer the deed Jove vows. Let heralds summon n^w
The brasen-coted Greeks; and us, range every where the host,
To stir a strong war quickly up. This speech no syllable lost;
The high-voic't heralds, instantly, he charged to call to arms
The curld-head Greeks; they called; the Greeks, straight answered their alarmes.
The Ioue-kept kings, about the king, all gatherd, with their aid
Ranged all in tribes and nations. With them the gray-eyd maid
Great Aegis (Jove's bright shield) sustained, that can be never old;
Never corrupted, fringed about, with serpents forged of gold,
As many as suffisde to make, an hundred fringes, worth
A hunderd oxen, every snake, all sprawling, all set forth
With wondrous spirit. Through the host, with this the Goddess ran
In fury, casting round her eyes; and furnished every man
With strength; exciting all to arms, and fight incessant. None
Now liked their loved homes like the wars. And as a fire upon
A huge wood, on the heights of hills, that far off hurles his light:
So the divine brass shined on these, thus thrusting on for fight;
Their splendour through the air reached heaven: and as about the flood
Caister, in an Asian meade, flocks of the airie brood,
(Cranes, Geese, or long-neckt Swans) here, there, proud of their pinions ffi^,
And in their falls lay out such throats, that with their spiritfull cry
The meddow shrikes again: so here, these many nation'd men,
Flowed over the Scamandrian field; from tents, and ships; the din
Was dreadful, that the feet of men, and horse, beat out of earth.
And in the flourishing meade they stood, thick as the odorous birth
Of flowers, or leaves bred in the spring; or thick as swarms of flies
Throng then to ship-coates; when each swarm, his erring wing applies
To milk deawd on the milk maids pailes: all eagerly disposd,
To give to ruin th'Ilians. And as in rude heaps closd
Though huge Goate-heards are at their food, the Goate-heards easly yet,
Sort into sundry herds; so here, the Chiefes in battle set,
Here tribes, here nations, ordring all. Amongst whom shined the king,
With eyes, like lightning-louing Jove; his forehead answering*
In breast like Neptune; Mars in waste: and as a goodly Bull
Most eminent of all a heard, most strong, most masterfull;
So Agamemnon, Jove that day, made ouerheighten clear,
That heauen-bright army; and preferred, to all th'Heroes there.
Now tell me Muses, you that dwell, in heavenly roofes (for you Invocation.

Are Goddesses; are present here, are wise, and all things know;
We only trust the voice of fame, know nothing:) who they were
That here were captains of the Greeks? Commanding Princes here,
The multitude exceed my song; though fitted to my choice
Ten tongues were, hardened pallats ten, a breast of brass, a voice
Infract, and trumplike: that great work, unless the seed of Jove
(The deathlesse Muses) undertake, maintains a pitch above
All mortal powers. The Princes then, and navy that did bring
Those so inenarrable troops; and all their soyles, I sing.
The Catalogue of the Grecian ships and Captains.
PEneleus, and Leitus, all that Boeotia bred, The Boeotian captains.

Arcesilaus, Clonius, and Prothoaenor, led;
The Inhabitants of Hyria, and stony Aulida;
Schaene, Schole, the hilly Eteon, and holy Thespia;
Of Graea, and great Mycalesse, that has the ample plain;
Of Harma, and Ilesius, and all that did remain, The places in Boeotia.

In Erith, and in Eleon; in Hylen, Peteona,
In fair Ocalea, and the town, well builded, Medeona;
Capas, Eutresis, Thisbe that, for Pigeons does surpass;
Of Coroneia, Harliart; that has such store of grass.
All those that in Platea dwelt, that Glissa did possess;
And Hypothebs, whose wel-built walls, are rare and fellowlesse;
In rich Onchestus famous wood, to watrie Neptune vowed;
And Arne, where the vine-trees are, with vigorous bunches bowed:
With them that dwelt in Mydea, and Nissa most divine.
All those whom utmost Anthedon, did wealthily confine.
From all these coasts in general, full fifty sail were sent, The navy of
the Boeotians fifty.

And sixscore strong, Boeotian youths, in every burden went.
But those who in Aspledon dwelt, and Mynian Orchomen;
God Mars his sons did lead ( Ascalaphus, and Ialmen.) Ascalaphus and
Ialmenus, sons of Mars.

Who in Azidon Astors house, did of Astioche come;
The bashful Maid, as she went up, into the higher room,
The warre-god secretly comprest: in safe conduct of these,
Did thirty hollow-bottom'd barks, divide the wauie seas. Their navy 30.

Brave Schedius and Epistrophus, the Phocean captains were, The Phocensian
captains Schedius and Epistrophus.

Naubolida, Iphitus sons, all-proofe against any fear;
With them the Cyparisians went, and bold Pythonians,
Men of religious Chrysas soil, and fat Daulidians:
Panopaeans, Anemores, and fierce Hyampolists:
And those that dwell where Cephisus, casts up his silken mists.
The men that fair (...) held, near the Cephisian spring*
All which did forty sable barks, to that designement bring. (...) 40.

About th'entoyld Phocensian fleet, had these their sail assignde:
And near to the sinister wing, the armed Boeotians shinde.
Ajax the less, Oileus son, the Locrians led to war, Ajax, Oielus,
captains of the (...).

Not like to Ajax Telamon, but lesser man by far.
Little he was, and ever wore, a breastplate made of linne;
But for the manage of his lance, he general praise did win.
The dwellers of Caliarus, of Bessa, Opoen; The towns of the (...).

The youths of Cynus, Scarphis, and, Augias, lovely men;
Of Tarphis, and of Thronius, near flood Boagrius fall;
Twice twenty martial barks of these, less Ajax saild withal. Their (...)
40.

Who near Euboeas blessed soil, their habitations had,
Strength-breathing Abants, who their seats, in sweet Euboea made: Euboeans and
their towns.

The Astiaeans rich in grapes, the men of Chalcida;
The Cerinths, bordring on the sea, of rich Eretria;
Of Dyons highly-seated town; Charistus, and of Styre;
All these the Duke Alphenor led, a flame of Mars his fire; Alphenor their
Commander.

Surnamed Chalcodontiades, the mighty Abants guide;
Swift men of foot, whose broad-set backs, their trailing hair did hide,
Well seen in fight, and soon could pierce, with far extended darts
The breast plates of their enemies, and reach their dearest hearts. Their
fleet 40.

Forty black men of war did sail, in this Alphenors charge.
The soldiers that in Athens dwelt, a city builded large, The Athenians.

The people of Eristhius, whom Ioue-sprung Pallas fed:
And plentious-feeding Tellus brought, out of her flowrie bed:
Him, Pallas placed in her rich Fane, and every ended year,
Of Bulls and Lambs, the Athenian youths, please him with offerings there.
Mighty Menestheus, Peteus son, had their divided care: Menesth^us their
Ch^ife.

For horsemen and for targatiers, none could with him compare:
Nor put them into better place, to hurt or to defend:
But Nestor (for he elder was) with him did sole contend:
With him came fifty sable sail. And out of Salamine (...) (...) 50.

Great Ajax brought twelve sail, that with, th'Athenians did combine.
Who did in fruitful Argos dwell; or strong Hyrintha keep: The Salamines
joined with the^. Their leader Ajax Telamonius. Ships 12.

Hermion, or in Asinen, whose bosom is so deep;
Traezena, Elion, Epida re, where Bacchus crowns his head;
Egina, and Mazetas soil, did follow Diomed. The (...) Diomed their captain
with (...) and Eurialus.

And Sthenelus, the dear loved son, of famous Capaneus:
Together with Eurialus, heir of Mecistaeus,
The king of Talaeonides; past whom, in deeds of war,
The famous soldier Diomed, of all was held by far;
Fourscore black ships did follow these. The men fair Mycene held: Their
fleet 80. sail.

The wealthy Corinth, Cleon that, for beauteous sight excelled: The (...)* Their
towns.*

A^aethiraeas lovely seat, and in Ornias plain,
And Sicyona, where at first, did king Adrastus reign:
High seated Gonoessas towers, and Hyperisius;
That dwelt in fruitful Pellenen, and in divine Aegius:
With all the seaside borderers, and wide Helices friends;
To Agamemnon every town, her native birth commends, Agamemnon captain.

In double fifty sable barks: with him a world of men Ships 100.

Most strong and full of valor went: and he in triumph then
Put on his most resplendent arms, since he did ouershine
The whole heroique host of Greece, in power of that design.
Who did in (...) rule, th'vnmeasur'd concaue hold: The Laced^monians and their
towns.

High Phares, Spartas, Messes towers, for doves so much extold;
Bryseias and Augias grounds; strong Laa, Oetylon;
Amyclas, Helos harbor-towne, that Neptune beats upon:
All these did Menelaus lead, (his brother that in cries Menelaus captain.

Of war was famous) sixty ships, conuaid these enemies, Ships 60.

To Troy in chief; because their king, was chiefly injured there,
In Hellens rape; and did his best, to make them buy it dear.
Who dwelt in Pylos sandy soil, and Arene the fair; The Pylians and their
towns.

In Thryon, near Alphaeus flood, and Aepy full of air:
In Cyparisseus, Amphygen, and little P^eleon;
The town where all the Iliots dwelt, and famous Doreon;
Where all the Muses (opposite, in strife of Poesy,
To ancient Thamyris of Thrace) did use him cruelly; Thamyris deprived of sight
and Poesy by the Muses.

He coming from Eurytus court, the wise Oechalian king:
Because he proudly durst affirm, he could more sweetly sing,
Then that Pyerean race of Jove; who (angry with his vant)
Bereft his eyesight, and his song, that did the ear enchant;
And of his skill to touch his Harp, disfurnished his hand:
All these in ninety hollow keeles, grave Nestor did command. Nestor captain.
Ships 90.

The richly blessed inhabitants of the Arcadian land The Arcadians and their
towns.

Below Cyllenes mount, that by, Epyrus tomb did stand;
Where dwell the bold neare-fighting men; who did in Phaeneus live:
And Orchomen, where flocks of sheep, the shepherds clustering drive:
In Ripe and in Stratie, the fair Mantinean town;
And strong Enispe, that for height, is ever weather-blowne;
Tegea, and in Stimphalus; Parrhasia strongly walled;
All these Alcaeus son, to field (king Agapenor) called; Agapenor their
leader.

In sixty barks he brought them on, and every bark well mand, Ships 60.

With fierce Arcadians, skild to use, the utmost of a band.
King Agamemnon on these men, did well built ships bestow,
To pass the gulfie purple sea, that did no sea rites know.
They who in Hermin, Buphrasis, and Elis did remain, The Epians and their
towns.

What Olens Cliffes, Alisius, and Myrsin did contain;
Were led to war by twice two Dukes, and each ten ships did bring, Sphips 40.

Which many venterous Epyans, did serve for burthening.
Beneath Alphimacus his charge, and valiant Talphius,
Son of Euritus Actor, one; the other Cteatus; Captains Alphimachus,
Talphius, Diores Polixenus.

Diores Amarincides, the other did employ;
The fourth divine Polixenus, Agasthenis his joy:
The king of fair Angeiades, who from Dulichius came, Dulichians.

And from Euchinaus sweet Isles, which hold their holy frame
By ample Elis region, Meges Phelides led: (...) (...).

Whom Duke Phyleus, Jove's beloved, begat, and whilome fled
To large Dulychius for the wrath, that fired his fathers breast.
Twice twenty ships with Ebon sails, were in his charge addressed. Ships 40.

The warlike men of Cephale, and those of Ithaca, The (...) and their towns.

Woody Nerytus, and the men, of wet Crocilia:
Sharp Aegilipha, Samos I Will, Zacynthus, sea-enclosd;
Epyrus, and the men that hold, the Continent opposd;
All these did wise Ulysses lead, in counsel Peer to Jove: Ulysses captain.
Ships. 12.

Twelve ships he brought, which in their course, vermilion sternes did move.
Thoas, Andremons wel-spoke son, did guide th'Etolians well; The Aetolians
their captains and towns.

Those that in Pleuron, Olenon, and strong Pylene dwell:
Great Calcis that by seaside stands, and stony Calydon;
For now no more of Oeneus sons, suruiu'd; they all were gone: Thoas captain.

No more his royal self did live, no more his noble son,
The golden Meleager; now, their glasses all were run.
All things were left to him in charge, the Aetolians Chief he was,
And forty ships to Trojan wars, the seas with him did pass. Ships. 40.

The royal soldier Idomen, did lead the Cretans stout: The Cretans* their
towns and Captains.

The men of Gnossus, and the town, Cortima, walled about.
Of Lictus and Myletus towers, of white Lycastus state,
Of Phestus and of Rhistias, the cities fortunate:
And all, the rest inhabiting, the hundred towns of Crete; Idomeneus.

Whom warre-like Idomen did lead, copartner in the fleet, A hundred cities in
Crete.

With kil-man Merion; eighty ships, with them did Troy invade. Ships 80.

Tlepolemus Heraclides, right strong and bigly made,
Brought nine tall ships of war from Rhodes, which hautie Rhodians mand,
Who dwelt in three disseuer'd parts, of that most pleasant land;
Which Lyndus and Ialissus were, and bright Camyrus, called:
Tlepolemus commanded these, in battle vnappald: Tlepolemus Co^mander of the
Rhodians.

Whom fair Astioche brought forth, by force of Hercules;
Led out of Ephyr with his hand, from river Sellees; Ships 9.

When many towns of princely youths, he leueld with the ground. Towns.

Tlepolem (in his fathers house, for building much renownd,
Brought up to headstrong state of youth) his mothers brother slew,
The flower of arms, Lycymnius, that somewhat aged grew:
Then straight he gathred him a fleet, assembling bands of men,
And fled by sea, to shun the threats, that were denounced then,
By other sons and nephews of, th'Alciden fortitude.
He in his exile came to Rhodes, driven in with tempests rude:
The Rhodians were distinct in tribes, and great with Jove did stand,
The king of men and Gods, who gave, much treasure to their land.
Nireus, out of Symas haven, three wel-built barks did bring; The Sym^ns.

Nireus fair Aglaias son, and Charopes the king: Nireus their Chief, (...)
of all the Greeks but (...). Ships 3.

Nireus was the fairest man, that to fair Ilion came,
Of all the Greeks, save Peleus son; who past for general frame.
But weak this was, not fit for war, and therefore few did guide.
Who did in Cassus, Nisyrus, and Crapathus abide,
In Co, Euripilus his town, and in Calydnas soyles, The (...) and other
Ilanders.

Phydippus and bold Antiphus, did guide to Trojan toils;
The sons of crowned Thessalus, derived from Hercules, Their Chief Phydippus
and Antiphus.

Who went with thirty hollow ships, well ordered to the seas.
Now will I sing the sackfull troops, Pelasgian Argos held, Ships 30.

That in deep Alus, Alope, and soft Trechina dweld; The Pelasgians Thessal.
Myrmidons.

In Pthya and in Hellade, where live the lovely dames,
The Myrmidons, Helenians, and Achiues, robbed of Fames:
All which the great Aeacides, in fifty ships did lead. Achilles their
Captain.

For, these forgot wars horride voice, because they lackt their head, Ships
50.

That would have brought them bravely forth; but now at fleet did lie,
That wind-like vser of his feet, fair Thetis progeny;
Wroth for bright-cheekt Bryseis loss; whom from Lyrnessus spoils,
(His own exploit) he brought away, as trophee of his toiles,
When that town^ was depopulate; he sunk the Theban towers;
Myneta, and Epistrophus, he sent to Plutoes bowres,
Who came of king Euenus race, great Helepiades:
Yet now heidely lives enraged, but soon must leave his ease.
Of those that dwelt in Phylace, and flowrie Pyrrason Philacei, and their
towns.

The wood of Ceres, and the soil, that sheep are fed upon,
Iten and Antron, built by sea, and (...) full of grass,
Protesilaus while he lived, the worthy captain was: Protesilaus captain.

Whom now the sable earth detaines: his teare-torne faced spouse
He woeful left in Philace, and his half finished house:
A fatal Dardane first his life, of all the Greeks, bereft,
As he was leaping from his ship; yet were his men vnleft
Without a Chief; for though they wished, to have no other man,
But good Protesilay their guide; Podarces yet began
To govern them, Iphitis son, the son of Philacus,
Most rich in sheep, and brother to, short-liu'd Protesilaus:
Of younger birth, less, and less strong; yet served he to direct
The companies, that still did more, their ancient Duke affect.
Twice twenty Iettie sails with him, the swelling stream did take. Ships. 40.

But those that did in Pheres dwell, at the Baebreian lake, The Phereians and
their towns.

In Baebe, and in Glaphir^, Iaolcus builded fair:
In thrice six ships to Pergamus: did through the seas repair,
With old Admetes tender son, Eumelus, whom he bred, Eumelus captain.

Of Alcest Pelius fairest child, of all his femall seed. Ships 11.

The soldiers that before the siege, Methones vales did hold: The Methonians
and their borderers.

Thaumaciae, flowrie Melibae, and Olison the cold,
Duke Philoctetes governed, in darts of finest slight: Their chief,
Philoctetes, left maimed at (...).

Seven vessels in his charge conuaid, their honorable freight;
By fifty rowers in a bark, most expext in the bow:
But he in sacred Lemnos lay, brought miserably low,
By torment of an ulcer grown, with Hydras poisoned blood:
Whose sting was such, Greece left him there, in most impatient mood: Medon
Oyleus base son, captain in Philoct. place.

Yet thought they on him at his ship, and chusde to lead his men,
Medon, Oyleus bastard son, brought forth to him by R^en.
From Thricce, bleake Ithomens cliffes, and hapless Oechaly: The Thriccians,
(...), and (...), whose captains were (...) and Machaon.

Eurites city ruled by him, in wilful tyranny,
In charge of Esculapius sons, physician highly praisd:
Machaon, Podalirius, were thirty vessels raisd:
Who near Hiperias fountain dwelt, and in Ormenius: Ships 30.

The snowy tops of Titannus, and in Asterius: The Ormenians, with their
borderers.

Euemons son Euripilus, did lead into the field:
Whose towns did forty blacke-saild ships, to that encounter yield. Their
captain Euripilus.

Who Gyrton, and Argissa held, Orthen and Elons seat, Ships 40.

And chalkie Oloossine, were led by Polypete; (...) with their borderers.

The issue of Perithous, the son of Jupiter. (...) their chief, and (...),
Ships 40.

Him the Athenian Theseus friend, Hypodamy did bear;
When he the bristled savages: did give Ramnusia,
And drove them out of Pelius, as far as Ethica.
He came not single, but with him, Leonteus, Corons son,
An arm of Mars; and Corons life, Ceneus seed begun.
Twice twenty ships, attended these. Cuneus next did bring, The Cyphians,
Enians, Perabians.

From Cyphus, twenty sail and two, the Enians following;
And fierce Peraebi, that about, Dodones frozen mold,
Did plant their houses, and the men, that did the meadows hold, Their chief
Guneus.

Which Titoresius deckes with flowers, and his sweet current leads, Ships 22.

Into the bright Peneius, that has the silver heads.
Yet with his admirable stream, does not his waves commixe;
But glides aloft on it like oil: fortis the flood of Stix,
By which the immortal Gods do swear. Teuthredons honored birth
Prothous led the Magnets forth, who near the shadie earth, The Magnets.
Prothous their chief.

Of Pelius, and Peneion, dwelt; forty reuengefull sail
Did follow him; these were the Dukes, and Princes of avail,
That came from Greece: but now the man, that ouershin'd them all; Ships 40.

Sing Muse: and their most famous Steeds, to my recital call,
That both the Atrides followed; fair Pheretiedes,
The brauest mares, did bring by much; Eumelius managed these: Eumelius had the
best mares of the army.

Swift of their feet as birds of wings; both of one hair did shine,
Both of an age, both of a height, as measured by a line:
Whom siluer-bow'd Apollo bred, in the Pierean meade;
Both slicke and dainty, yet were both, in war of wondrous dread.
Great Ajax Telamon for strength, past all the Peers of war, Ajax Telamonius
the strongest Greek next Achill^.

While vexed Achilles was away: but he surpast him far.
The horse that bore that faultlesse man, were likewise past compare:
Yet lay he at the crookt-stern'd ships, and fury was his fare, Achilles the
best horse.

For Atreus sons ungracious deed: his men yet pleased their hearts,
With throwing of the holed stone; with hurling of their darts,
And shooting fairly on the shore. Their horse at chariots fed,
On greatest parsley, and on sedge, that in the fens is bred.
His Princes tents their chariots held, that richly couerd were.
His Princes, amorous of their Chief, walked storming here and there,
About the host, and scorned to fight: their breaths, as they did pass,
Before them flew, as if a fire, fed on the trembling grass.
Earth vnder-gron'd their high raisd feet, as when offended Jove,
In Arime, Tiphocus, with rattling thunder drove,
Beneath the earth: in Arime, men say the grave is still,
Where thunder tomb'd Typhoeus, and is a monstrous hill.
And as that thunder made earth groan, so gron'd it as they past,
They trod with such hard-set-downe steps, and so exceeding fast.
To Troy the rainbow-girded dame, right heavy news relates, Iris to the
Trojans, from Jove.

From Jove (as all to Council drew, in Priams Palace gates)
Resembling Priams son in voice, Polytes swift of feet:
In trust whereof (as Sentinel, to see when from the fleet,
The Grecians sallied) he was set, upon the lofty brow
Of aged Esietes tomb, and this did Iris show;
O Priam thou art always pleased, with indiscreet advise: Iris to Priam.

And fram'st thy life to times of peace, when such a war does rise
As threats inevitable spoil; I never did behold
Such and so mighty troops of men, who trample on the mold,
In number like Autumnus leaves, or like the marine sand:
All ready round about the walls, to use a ruining hand.
Hector? I therefore charge thee most, this charge to undertake:
A multitude remain in Troy, will fight for Priams sake,
Of other lands and languages; let every leader then
Bring forth, well armed into the field, his several bands of men.
Strong Hector knew, a deity, gave charge to this assay:
Dismissed the Council straight; like waves, clusters to arms do sway:
The ports are all wide open set: out rusht the troops in swarms,
Both horse and foot, the city rung, with sudden cried alarmes.
A Column stands without the town, that high his head does raise, (...)
tumulus

A little distant, in a plain, trod down with diverse ways:
Which men do Batieia call, but the immortals name
Myrinnes famous sepulcher, the wondrous active dame.
Here were the Auxiliarie bands, that came in Troyes defense,
Distinguished under several guides, of special excellence.
The Duke of all the Trojan power, great helme-deckt Hector was: Hector
General of the Trojans.

Which stood of many mighty men, well skild in darts of brass:
Aeneas of commixed seed (a goddess with a man, The catalogue of other
captains.

Anchises, with the Queen of love:) the troops Dardanian, Dardans, and Aeneas
their captain^.

Led to the field; his lovely Sire, in Idas lower shade,
Begat him of sweet Cypridis; he solely was not made
Chief leader of the Dardan powers: Antenors valiant sons,
Archilochus, and Acamas, were joined companions. Archiloc^s. Acamas.

Who in Zelia dwelt, beneath, the sacred foot of I Would,
That drink of black Aesepus stream, and wealth made full of pride;
(The Aphnij) Lycaons son, whom Phoebus gave his bow, The Aphnij.
Pandarus their leader.

(Prince Pandarus) did lead to field. Who Adrestinus owe,
( Apesus city, Pitai, and mount Tereies)
Adrestus, and stout Amphius led; who did their Sire displease, Adrestians.
Their Chief Adrestus and Amphius.

( Merops Percosius) that excelled, all Troy in heavenly skill,
Of futures-searching prophecy: for much against his will,
His sons were agents in those arms: whom since they disobeyd;
The Fates, in letting slip their threads, their hasty valures staid.
Who in Percotes, Practius; Arisbe did abide, Percosians, S^stians, Abidens,
(...)* led by Asius.

Who Sestus and Abidus bred, Hyrtacides did guide:
Prince Asius Hyrtacides, that through great Selees force,
Brought from Arisba to that fight, the great and fiery horse.
Pyleus, and Hypothous, the stout Pelasgians led, The Pelasgians.
Their chief, (...)* and (...).

Of them Larissas fruitful soil, before had nourished:
These were Pelasgian Pithus sons, son of Teutamidas.
The Thracian guides were Pyrous, and valiant Acamas. The Thracians.


Of all that the impetuous flood, of Hellespont enclosd, Their chief Pyrous
and (...).

Euphemus, the Ciconian troops, in his command disposd; Euphemus Capt. of the
Ciconians.

Who from Trezenius Ceades, right nobly did descend.
Pyrechmes did the Peons rule, that crooked bows do bend. Pyrechm^s Commander
of the (...).

From Axius out of Amidon, he had them in command:
From Axius, whose most beauteous stream, still (...) the land.
Pylemen with the well armed heart, the Paphlagonians led, Pyleme^ captain of
the Paphlagonians.

From Enes, where the race of mules, fit for the plough is bred:
The men that broad Cytorus bounds, and Sesamus enfold*
About Parthenius lofty flood, in houses much extold;
From Cromna and Aegialus, the men that arms did bear,
And Eurithymus situate high, Pylemens soldiers were.
Epistrophus and Dius did, the Halizonians guide, (...), their captain
Epistrophus and Dius.

Far-fetcht from Alybe, where first, the silver mines were tried.
Chronius, and Augur Eunomus, the Mysians did command,
Who could not with his auguries, the strength of death withstand: The Mysians.
Eunomus and C^ronius.

But suffered it beneath the stroke, of great Aeacides,
In Xanthus; where he made more souls, diue to the Stygian seas.
Phorcys and fair Ascanius, the Phrygians brought to war; The (...). Their
Chiefes Phorcis and (...)*

Well trained for battle, and were come, out of Ascania far.
With Methles, and with Antiphus (Pylemens sons) did fight,
The men of Mezon, whom the fenne, Gygaea brought to light.
And those Maeonians that beneath, the mountain Tmolus sprung; The (...).
Antiphus and Methles captains.

The rude vnletterd Caribae, that barbarous were of tongue,
Did under Naustes colors march, and young Amphimachus,
( Nomyons famous sons) to whom, the mountain Phthirorus, The (...)* and
Milesians led by Amphimacus and Naustes.

That with the famous wood is crowned; Miletus, Micales,
That has so many lofty marks, for men that love the seas;
The crooked arms Meander bowed, with his so snakie flood,
Resigned for conduct the choice youth, of all their martial brood*
The fool Amphimachus, to field, brought gold to be his wrack;
Proude-gi^lelike that does ever bear, her dowre upon her back;
Which wise Achilles marked; slew him, and took his gold in strife,
At Xanthus flood; so little death, did fear his golden life. The Lycians
whose Commanders were Sarpe don and (...).

Sarpedon led the Lycians, and Glaucus vnreprou'd,
From Lycia and the gulfie flood, of Xanthus far removed.
COMMENT ARIVS.
a (...), etc. Sicut examina prodeunt apum frequentium, etc. In thu Simile,
Virgil (using the like in imitation) is preferred to Homer; with what reason I
pray you see. Their ends are different: Homer intending to express the
infinite multitude of soldiers every where dispersing; Virgil, the diligence
of builders. Virgils Simile is this. 1. Aeneid.

Qualis apes aestate noua, per florea rura
Exercet sub sole labor; cum gentis adultos
Educunt foetus; aut cum liquentia mella
Stipant; and dulci distendunt Nectare cellas;
Aut onera accipiunt venientum; aut agmine facto;
Ignauum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent:
Feruet opus; redolent thymo fragrantia mella.
Now compare this with Homers, but in my translation; and judge if to both
their ends, there be any such betternesse in Virgils: but that the reverence of
the scholar, due to the master (even in these his maligners) might well have
containd their lame censures of the Poetical fury; from these vnmannerlie and
hateful comparisons. Especially, since Virgil has nothing of his own, but
only elocution; his invention, matter, and form, being all Homers: which laid
by a man; that which he adds, is only the work of a woman, to netifie and
polish. Nor do I, alas, but the foremost rank of the most ancient and best
learned that ever were, come to the field for Homer; hiding all other Poets
under his ensign: hate not me then, but them; to whom, before my book I
refer you. But much the rather I insist on the sormer Simile; for the word
(...), cateruatim, or confertim, which is noted by Spondanus to contain all
the (...), reddition, or application of the comparison; and is nothing so. For
though it be all the reddition Homer expresses; yet he intends two special
parts in the application more; which he leaves to his judicial readers
understanding, as he does in all his other Similes: since a man may peruially
(or as he passes) discern all that is to be understood. And here, besides the
throngs of soldiers, expressed in the swarms of Bees; he intimates the infinite
number in those throngs or companies, issuing from fleet so ceaslesly, that
there appeared almost no end of their issue: and thirdly, the every where
dispersing themselves. But Spondanus would excuse Homer, for expressing no more
of his application; with affirming it impossible; that the thing compared, and
the comparison, should answer in all parts; and therefore alleges the vulgar
understanding of a Simile, which is as gross as it is vulgar; that a
similitude must vno pede semper claudicare. His reason for it as absurd as the
rest: which is this, si ea inter se omnino respo^derent, falleret illud axioma,
nullum simile est idem; as though the general application of the compared, and
the comparison, would make them any thing more the same, or all one; more then
the swarms of Bees, and the throng of soldiers are allone, or the same; for
answering most aptly. But that a Simile must needs halt of one foot still;
shows how lame vulgar tradition is, especially in her censure of Poesy. For
who at first sight, will not conceive it absurd to make a Simile; which ser^es
to the illustration and ornament of a Poem; lame of a foot, and idle? The
incredible violence suffered by Homer in all the rest of his most inimitable
Similes, being expressed in his place, will abundantly prove the stupiditie of
this tradition: and how injuriously short his interpreters must needs come of
him, in his straight and deep places; when in his open and fair passages,
they halt and hang back so.

b (...) etc. hunc quidem claru^ (or illustrem) fecit Deus; as it is by all
translated; wherein I note the strange abuse (as I apprehend it) of the word
(...) beginning here, and continuing wheresoever it is found in these Iliads.
It is by the transition of Z into (...) in deriuation, according to the
Doricke: for which cause our Interpreters will needs have Homer intend (...)
which is clarus or illustris, when he himself says, (...) which is a compound
of (...) which is valde, and (...) and signifies, quem valde aemulamur, or
valde aemulandus, according to Scap. But because (...) is most authentically
expounded, impetus mentis ad cultum diuinum, that exposition I follow in this
place, and expound (...) hunc quidem magnum impulsum ad cultum diuinum fecit
Deus; because he turned so suddenly and miraculously the Dragon to a stone. To
make it (...), and say, clarum, or illustrem fecit Deus; qui ostendit, or
ostenderat, (which follows in the verse) and says thus much in our tongue:
God that showed this, made it clear; is very little more, then God that
showed this, showed it. One way it observes the word (betwixt which, and the
other, you see what great difference) and is fair, ^ll, grave; the other
alters the original, and is ugly, empty, idle.

c (...), etc, Spontanens autem ei venit, voce bonus Menelaus; and some say
bello strenuus Menelaus: which is far estranged from the mind of our Homer,
(...) signifying vociferatio, or clamor, though some will have it pugna, ex
consequenti; because fights are often made with clamor. But in bello strenuus,
(unless it be ironically taken) is here straind beyond sufferance, and is to
be expounded vociferatione bonus Menelaus: which agrees with that part of his
character in the next book, that tells his manner of utterance or voice:
which is (...) valde stridule, or arguto cum stridore; (...) being commonly and
most properly taken in the worse part, and signifies shrillae, or
noisefullie, squeaking: howsoever in the vulgar conversion it is in that place
most grossly abused. To the consideration whereof, being of much importance,
I refer you in his place. And in the mean time show you, that in this first
and next verse, Homer (speaking scoptically) breaks open the fountain of his
ridiculous humor following: never by any interpreter understood, or touched
at, being yet the most ingenious conceited person that any man can show in any
heroical Poem, or in any Comicke Poet. And that you may something perceive
him before you read to him in his sever all places: I will, as I can, in
haste, give you him here together, as Homer at all parts presents him: viz.
simple, wel-meaning, standing still affectedlie on telling truth, small, and
shrill voiced (not sweet, or eloquent, as some most against the hair would
have him) short spoken, after his country the Laconicall manner: yet speaking
thick and fast, industrious in the field, and willing to be employed. And
(being mollis Bellator himself) set still to call to every hard service, the
hardiest. Even by the wit of Ajax, played upon, about whom he would still be
diligent: and what he wanted of the martial fury and faculty himself, that
he would be bold to supply out of Ajax: Ajax and he, to any for blows:
Antilochus and he for wit: ( Antilochus old Nestors (onne, a most ingenious,
valiant, and excellently formed person.)

Sometimes valiant, or daring, (as what coward is not) sometimes falling upon
sentence, and good matter in his speeches (as what meanest capacity does not?)
Nor uses our most inimitable Imitator of nature, this cross and deformed
mixture of his parts, more to color and avoid too broad a taxation of so
eminent a person; then to follow the true life of nature, being often, or
always, expressed so disparent in her creatures. And therefore the decorum that
some poor Critics have stood upon; to make fools always foolish, cowards at
all times cowardly, etc. is far from the variant order of nature, whose
principles being contrary, her productions must needs contain the like
opposition.

But now to the first; (...), etc. Spontaneus autem ei venit, etc. about which,
a passing great piece of work is picked out by our greatest Philosophers,
touching the unbidden coming of Menelaus to supper or Counsel, which some
commend; others condemn in him: but the reason why he staid not the
inuitement, rendered immediately by Homer, none of the^ will understand, viz.
(...), etc. sciebat enim in animo quantum frater laborabat: of which verse his
interpreters cry out for the expunction, only because it was never entered in
their apprehension; which I more then admire (for the easiness of it) so
freely offering it self to their entertainment; and yet using the hoof of
Pegasus, only with a touch breaking open (as abouesaid) the fountain of his
humor. For thus I expound it, (laying all again together, to make it plain
enough for you,) Agamemn^n inuiting all the chief Commanders to supper, left
out his brother; but he, seeing how much his brother was troubled about the
dream, and busied, would not stand upon inuitement, but came of himself. And
this being spoken Scoptice, or by way of irrision, argues what manner of man
he made of him. Ineptus enim (as it is affirmed in Plutarch, 1. Symp. and
second question) fuit Menelaus, and locum dedit prouerbio, qui ad consilium
dandum accessisset, non (...): And to this place he had reference, because a
Council of war was to be held at this supper. And here (I say) Homer opened
the vein of his simplicity, not so much in his going unbidden to supper, and
Counsel, as in the reason for it ironically rendered; that he knew his brother
was busy, etc. And yet that addition, without which the very sense of our Poet
is not safe, our interpreters would have raced.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
PAris (betwixt the Hoasts) to single fight
(Of all the Greeks) dares the most hardy knight:
King Menelaus, does accept his brave,
Conditioning that he again should have
Fair Helena, with all she brought to Troy,
If he subdued; else Paris should enjoy
Her, and her wealth, in peace. Conquest does grant
Her dear wreath to the Grecian combattant;
But Venus, to her champions life does yield
Safe rescue, and conueyes him from the field,
Into his chamber; and for Hellen sends;
Whom much, her lovers foul disgrace offends;
Yet Venus, for him still makes good her charms,
And ends the second combat in his arms.
Another Argument.
Gamma, the single fight does sing
Twixt Paris, and the Spartan king.
WHen every least Commanders will, best soldiers had obaide,
And both the hosts were ranged for fight, the Trojans would have fraid
The Greeks with noises; crying out, in coming rudely on:
At all parts like the Cranes that fill, with harsh confusion, The (...)
compared to Cranes.

Of brutish clanges, all the air: and in ridiculous war,
(Eschuing the vnsufferd storms, shot from the winters star)
Visit the Ocean; and confer, the Pygmei soldiers death. The silent assalt
of the Greeks.

The Greeks charged silent, and like men, bestowed their thriftie breath
In strength of far-resounding blows; still entertaining care
Of eithers rescue, when their strength, did their engagements dare.
And as upon a hills steep tops, the Southwind powers a cloud
To shepherds thanklesse; but by thieves, that love the night, allowd;
A darkness letting down, that blinds, a stones cast off men eyes:
Such darkness from the Greeks swift feet, (made all of dust) did rise.
But ere stern conflict mixed both strengths, fair Paris stepped before
The Trojan host; athwart his back, a Panthers hide he wore,
A crooked bow, and sword, and shook, two brazen-headed darts;
With which (well armed) his tongue prouok't, the best of Grecian hearts
To stand with him in single fight. Whom, when the man wronged most
Of all the Greeks, so gloriously, saw stalk before the host;
As when a Lion is reioyc't (with hunger half forlorn)
That finds some sweet prey; (as a Heart, whose grace lies in his horn,
Or Syluane Goat) which he deuours, though never so pursued
With dogs and men; so Spartas king, exulted, when he viewed
The faire-fac'd Paris so exposde, to his so thirsted wreake,
Whereof his good cause made him sure. The Grecian front did break,
And forth he rusht, at all parts armed: leapt from his chariot,
And royally prepared for charge. Which seen, cold terror shot
The heart of Paris, who retired, as headlong from the king, Paris flies at
sight of Menelaus.

As in him, he had shund his death: and as a hilly spring,
Presents a serpent to a man, full underneath his feet, Simile.

Her blew neck (swollen with poison) raisd, and her sting out, to greet
His heedlesse entry: suddenly, his walk he alters;
Starts back amazed, is shook with fear, and looks as pale as death:
So Menelaus, Paris scared: so that divine faced foe,
Shrunk in his beauties. Which beheld, by Hector, he let go
This bitter check at him. Accursed, made but in beauties skorne; Hector to
Paris.

Impostor, woman's man! O heaven, that thou had near been borne,
Or (being so manlesse) never lived, to bear man's noblest state,
The nuptial honor; which I wish, because it were a fate
Much better for thee, then this shame; this spectacle does make
A man a monster: Hark how loud, the Greeks laugh, who did take
Thy fair form, for a continent, of parts as fair; a rape
Thou made of Nature, like their Queen. No soul; an empty shape
Takes up thy being: yet, how spite, to every shade of good,
Fills it with ill? for as thou art, thou could collect a brood
Of others like thee: and far hence, fetch ill enough to us;
Even to thy father: all these friends; make those foes mock them thus,
In thee: for whose ridiculous sake, so seriously they lay,
All Greece, and Fate upon their necks: O wretch! not dare to stay
Weak Menelaus? But it was well: for in him, thou had tried
What strength, lost beauty can infuse; and with the more grief died,
To feel thou robdst a worthier man; to wrong a soldiers right.
Your Ha^ps sweettouch, curld locks, fine shape, and gifts so exquisite,
Given thee by Venus, would have done, your fine Dames little good,
When blood and dust had ruffled them; and had as little stood
Thy self in stead; but what thy care, of all these in thee flies,
We should inflict on thee our selves: infectious cowardice
(In thee) has terrified our host; for which, thou well deseru'st
A coat of Tombstone, not of steel: in which, for form thou seru'st.
To this thus Paris spoke, (for form, that might inhabit heaven) Paris to
Hector.

Hector? Because thy sharp reproof, is out of justice given,
I take it well: but though thy heart (inu^'d to these affrights
Cuts through them, as an axe through Oak; that, more vsd, more excites
The workmans faculty: whose art, can make the edge go far;
Yet I (less practisd, then thy self, in these extremes of war)
May well be pardond, though less bold; in these, your worth exceeds;
In others, mine: Nor is my mind, of less force to the deeds
Required in war; because my form, more flows in gifts of peace.
Reproach not therefore the kind gifts, of golden Cyprides;
All heavens gifts have their worthy price; as little to b^ scorned,
As to be won with strength, wealth, state; with which, to be ador^'d,
Some man would change, state, wealth, or strength. But if your ^artiall heart
Wish me to make my challenge good, and hold it such a part
Of shame to give it over thus; cause all ^he rest to rest;
And twixt both hosts, let Spartas king, and me perform our best,
For Hell^n, and the wealth she brought: and he that ouercomes,
Or proves superior any way, in all your equal doomes,
Let him enjoy her utmost wealth, keep her, or take her home;
The rest strike leagues of endless date, and hearty friends become;
You dwelling safe in gleby Troy, the Greeks retire their force,
T'Achaia, that breeds fairest Dames: and Argos, fairest horse.
He said, and his amendsfull words, did Hector highly please;
Who rusht betwixt the fighting hoasts, and made the Trojans cease,
By holding up, in midst, his lance: the Grecians noted not
The signal he for parle used, but at him fiercely shot;
Hurld stones, and still were leuelling darts. At last, the king of men
(Great Agamemnon) cried alowd: Argiues? for shame contain: Agamemn on
restraines the fight against Hector.

Youths of Achaia? shoot no more; the faire-helm'd- Hector shows
As he desired to treat with us. This said, all ceast from blows;
And Hector spoke to both the hosts: Trojans? and hardy Greeks? Hector to the
Greeks and Trojans.

Hear now, what he that stird these wars, for their cessation seeks:
He bids us all, and you disarme, that he alone may fight
With Menelaus, for us all; for Hellen and her right,
With all the dowre she brought to Troy; and he that wins the day,
Or is, in all the art of arms, superior any way;
The Queen, and all her sorts of wealth, let him at will enjoy;
The rest strike truce; and let love seal, firm leagues twixt Greece and Troy.
The Gre^ke host wondered at this Brave: silence flew every where;
At last, spoke Spartas warlike king: Now also give me ear, Menelaus ^o both
the armies.

Whom grief gives most cause of reply; I now have hope to free
The Greeks and Trojans of all ils, they have sustaind for me
And Alexander, that was cause, I stretched my sple^e so far.
Of both then, which is nearest fate, let his death end the war:
The rest immediately retire, and greet all homes in peace.
Go then (to bless your champion, and give his powers success)
Fetch for the Earth, and for the Sun, (the Gods on whom ye call)
Two lambs, a black one and a white: a femall, and a male;
And we, another for our selves, will fetch, and kill to Jove;
To sign which rites, bring (...) force; because we well approve,
His sons perfidious, envious, (and out of practisd bane
To faith, when she believes in them) Jove's high truce may profane,
All young men's hearts, are still unstaid: but in those wel-weigh'd deeds
An old man will consent to pass, things past, and what succeeds
He looks into; that he may know, ^ow best to make his way
Through both the fortunes of a fact: and will the worst obey.
(This granted,) A delightful hope, both Greeks and Trojans fed,
Of long'd*for rest, from those long toils, their tedious war had bred.
Their horses then in rank they set, drawn from their chariots round;
Descend themselves, took off their arms, and placed them on the ground,
Near one another; for the space, twixt both the hosts was small.
Hector two heralds sent to Troy, that they from thence might call Hector
sends for Priam.

King Priam; and to bring the lambs, to rate the truce they swore.
But Agamemnon to the fleet, Talthibius sent before,
To fetch their lamb; who nothing slackt, the royal charge was given.
a Iris the rainbow then came down, Ambassadres^e from heaven, Iris to
H^llen.

To white-arm'd Hellen; she assumed, at every part, the grace
Of Hellens last loves sisters shape; who had the highest place
In Hellens love; and had to name, Laodice; most fair
Of all the daughters Priam had: and made the nuptial pair,
With Helicaon; royal sproute, of old Antenors seed;
She found Queen Hellena at home, at work about a weed,
Wou'n for her self: it shined like fite; was rich, and full of sise;
The work of both sides being alike, in which she did comprise
The many labors, warlike Troy, and brasse-arm'd Greece endured*
For her fair sake, by cruel Mars, and his stern friends procured.
Iris came in in joyful haste, and said: O come with me,
(Loved Nymph) and an admired sight, o^ Greeks and Trojans see;
Who first on one another brought, a war so full of tears,
(Even thirsty of contentious war) now every man forbeares,
And friendly by each other sits, each leaning on his shield;
Their long and shining lances pitched, fast by them in the field.
Paris, and Spartas king alone, must take up all the strife;
And he that conquers, only call, fair Hellena his wife.
Thus spoke the thousand colored Dame: and to her mind commends
The joy to see her first espousd, her native towers, and friends; ^ellens
(...) to see her first husband and friends.

Which stirred a sweet desire in her, to serve the which, she hi'd:
Shadowed her graces with white veiles, and (though she took a pride
To set her thoughts at gaze, and see, in her clear beauties flood
What choice of glory swum to her, yet tender womanhood)
Seasoned with tears, her joys to see, more joys the more offense:
And that perfection could not flow, from earthly excellence.
Thus went she forth, and took with her, her women most of name,
Aethra, Pitth^us lovely birth: and Clymene, whom fame
Has, for her fair eyes, memorisd. They reached the Scaean towrs,
Where Priam sat to see the fight, with all his Counselors,
Panthous, Lampus, Cl^tius, and stout Hycetaon,
Thim^tes, wise Antenor, and profound Vealeg^n:
All grave old men, and soldiers, they had been, but for age
Now (...) the wars; yet Counselors, they were exceeding sage. Old men, and
their weak (...), most (...) compared to Grasshoppers and their (...).

And, as in well-growne woods, on trees, cold spinie Grasshoppers
Sit chirping, and send voices out, that scarce can pierce our ears,
b For softness, and their weak faint sounds: So (talking on the tower)
These Seniors of the people sat: who when they ^aw the power
Of beauty, in the Queen ascend; even those cold-spirited Peers;
Those wise, and almost witherd men, found this heat in their years; Hellens
beauty moves even ^he oldest.

That they were forced (though whispering*) to say; what man can blame
The Greeekes and Trojans to endure, for so admired a Dame,
So many miseries, and so long? In her sweet countenance shine
Looks like the Goddesses: and yet (though never so divine)
Before we boast, uniustly still, of her enforced prise,
And justly suffer for her sake, with all our progenies,
Labor and ruin, let her go: the profit of our land,
Must pass the beauty. Thus, though these could bear so fit a hand
On their affections; yet when all their gravest powers were usde,
They could not choose but welcome her, and rather they accusde
The gods then beauty; for thus spoke the most famed King of Troy; Priam calls
Hellen to inform him of the Greek Princes.

Come, loved daughter, sit by me, and take the worthy joy
Of thy first husbands sight; old friends, and Princes near allied:
And name me some of these brave Greeks, so manly beautified.
Come: do not think I lay the wars, endured by us, on thee,
The gods have sent them, and the tears, in which they swumme to me,
Sit then, and name this goodly Greek, so tall, and broadly spread,
Who then the rest, that stand by him, is higher by the head;
The bravest man I ever saw, and most maiesticall;
His only presence makes me think him King amongst them all.
The fairest of her sex replied; Most reverend fath'r in law: Hellen to Priam

Most loved, most feared; would some ill death had seisd me, when I saw
The first mean, why I wronged you thus* that I had never lost
The sight of these my ancient friends; of him that loved me most,
Of my sole daughter, brothers both; with all those kindly mates,
Of one soil, one age borne with me, though under different fates,
But these boones envious stars deny; the memory of these,
In sorrow pines those beauties now, that then did too much please;
Nor satisfy they your demand, to which I thus reply:
That Is Agamemnon, (Atreus son) the great in (...);
A King, whom double royalty does crown, being great and good;
And one that was my brother in law, when I contained my blood,
And was more worthy; if at all, I might be sa^d to be,
My Being, being lost so soon, in all that honored me?
The good old King admired, and said: O (...) blessed son! (...) (...) to
(...). (...).

Borne under joyful destinies, that have the Empire won
Of such a world of Grecian youths, as I discover here;
I once marched into Phrygia, that many vines does bear,
Where many Phrygians ^ beheld, well skild in use of horse,
That of the two men, like two gods, were the commanded force,
( Otroeus, and great Migdonus) who on Sangarius sands,
Set down their tents, with whom my self (for my (...) bands)
Was numbered as a man in chief* the cause of war (...) then,
The Amazon dames, that in their facts, affected to be men.
In all, there was a mighty power, which yet did never rise,
To equal these Achaian youths, that have the sable eyes,
Then (seeing Ulysses next) he said, Loved daughter, what is he,
That lower then great Atreus son, seems by the head to me?
Yet in his shoulders, and big breast, presents a broader show,
His armor lies upon the earth: he up and down does go,
To see his soulders keep their ranks, and ready have their arms,
If, in this truce, they should be tried by any false alarmes.
Much like a well grown Bel-weather, or feltred Ram he shows,
That walks before a wealthy flock of fair white* fleeced Ewes.
High Jove, and Ledas fairest seed, to Priam thus replies:
This is the old Laertes son, Ulysses called the wise; Ulysses d^scribed

Who, though unfruitful Ithaca, was made his nursing seat,
Yet knows he every sort of slight: and is in counsels great.
The wise Antenor answered her, it is true, renowned Dame; A^tenor to Hellen by
way of digression.

For, some times past, wise It^acus, to Troy a Legate came
With Menelaus, for your cause: to whom I gave receipt,
As guests, and welcomed to my house, with all the love I might.
I learned the wisdoms of their souls, and humors of their blood:
For when the Trojan Council met, and these together stood,
By height of his broad shoulders had Atrides eminence,
Yet set, Ulysses did exceed, and bred more reverence.
And when their counsels and their words, they wove in one, the speech
Of Atreus son was passing loud, small, fast, yet did not reach
To much; being naturally borne Laconicall: nor would
His humor lyc for any thing, or was (like the other) old.
But when the prudent Ithacus, did to his counsels rise,
He stood a little still, and fixed upon the earth his eyes;
His scepter moving neither way, but held it formally,
Like one that vainly does affect. Of wrathful quality,
And frantic (rashly judging him) you would have said he was,
But when out of his ample breast, he gave his great voice pass,
And words that flew about our ears, like drifts of winters snow; Ulysses
wisdom (...) illustrated by similitude.

None thenceforth might contend with him, though naught admird for show.
The third man, aged Priam marked, was Ajax Telam^:
Of whom he asked, What Lord is that so large of limme and bone,
So raisd in height, that to his breast, I see there reaches none?
To him the Goddess of her sex, the large veild Hellen said; Ai^x Telamon the
Grecian bulwark.

That Lord is Ajax Telamon, a Bulwark in their aid:
On the other side stands Idomen, in Crete of most command,
And round about his royal sides, his Cretane Captains stand. Id^menus (...)
of (...).

Often has the warlike Spartan King, given hospitable due
To him within our Lacene court, and all his retinue.
And now the other Achive Dukes, I generally discern,
All which I know, and all their names, could make thee quickly learn.
Two Princes of the people yet, I no where can behold;
Castor, the skillful Knight on horse, and Pollux uncontrold, Castor and Pollux
brothers to Hellen.

For all stand-fights, and force of hand; both at a burden bred,
My natural brothers: either here, they have not followed,
From lovely Sparta; or (arrived within the sea-borne fleet)
(In fear of infamy for me) in broad field shame to meet.
Nor so; for holy Tellus womb, inclosd those worthy men, The h^ralds propare
for the compact.

In Sparta, their beloved soil. The voicefull heralds then,
The firm agreement of the Gods, through all the city ring:
Two lambs, and spirit-refreshing wine (the fruit of earth) they bring,
Within a Goates-kin bottle closd; Ideus also brought
A massy glittering boll, and cups, that all of gold were wrought: Ideus to
Priamus.

Which bearing to the king they cride; Son of Laomedon?
Rise; for the wel-rode Peers of Troy, and brasse-arm'd Greeks in one,
Send to thee, to descend to field, that they firm vows may make;
For, Paris and the Spartan king, must fight for Hellens sake,
With long armed lances; and the man, that proves victorious,
The woman and the wealth she brought, shall follow to his house;
The rest knit friendship, and firm leagues; we safe in Troy shall dwell;
In Argos and Achaia they, that do in dames excel.
He said, and Priams aged ioints, with chilled fear did shake;
Yet instantly he bad his men, his chariot ready make.
Which soon they did, and he ascends: he takes the reins, and guide,
Antenor calls; who instantly, mounts to his royal side;
And through the Scaean ports, to field, the swift-foote horse they drive.
And when at them of Troy and Greece, the aged Lords arrive,
From horse, on Troyes well feeding soil, twixt both the hosts they go.
When straight up rose the king of men, up rose Ulysses to;
The heralds in their richest cotes, repeat (as was the guise)
The true vows of the Gods; termed theirs, since made before their eyes.
Then in a cup of gold they mix, the wine that each side brings;
And next, power water on the hands, of both the kings of kings.
Which done, Atrides drew his knife, that evermore he put
Within the large sheath of his sword: with which, away he cut
The wool from both fronts of the lambs, which (as a rite in use
Of execration to their heads, that brake the plighted truce)
The heralds of both hosts did give, the Peers of both. And then
With hands and voice advanced to heaven, thus prayed the ^ing of men:
O Jove, that Ida do protect, and have the titles won, Agamemnon himself
prays.

Most glorious, most invincible; And thou all-seeing Sun;
All-hearing, all-recomforting; floods? earth? and powers beneath?
That all the periuries of men, chastise even after death;
Be witness, and see performed, the hearty vows we make;
If Alexander shall the life, of Menelaus take,
He shall from henceforth Hellena, with all her wealth retain;
And we will to our household Gods, hoyse sail, and home again.
If by my honored brothers hand, be Alexander slain,
The Trojans then, shall his forced Queen, with all her wealth restore,
And pay convenient fine to us, and ours for evermore.
If Priam, and his sons deny, to pay this, thus agreed,
When Alexander shall be slain; for that perfidious deed,
And for the fine, will I fight here, till dea^ely they repay
By death and ruin, the amends, that falsehood keeps away.
This said, the throtes of both the lambs, cut with his royal knife; The
c^tract is (...).

He laid them panting on the earth, till (quite deprived of life)
The steel had robbed them of their strength. Then golden cups they cround,
With wine out of a cisterne drawn: which powered upon the ground,
They fell upon their humble knees, to all the deities,
And thus prayed one of both the hosts, that might do sacrifice;
O Jupiter, most high, most great, and all the deathlesse powers; Now one
prays whose office was to do sacrifice.

Who first shall dare to violate, the late sworn oaths of ours,
So let the bloods and brains of them, and all they shall produce,
Flow on the staind face of the earth; as now, this sacrediuice:
And let their wives with bastardi^e, brand all their future race.
Thus praid they: but with wished effects, their prayrs Jove did not grace.
When Priam said; Lords of both hoasts? I can no longer stay, Priam to both
hosts.

To see my loved son try his life; and so must take my way
To winde-exposed Ilion. Jove yet and heavens high States,
Know only, which of these must now, pay tribute to the Fates.
Thus putting in his coach the lambs, he mounts, and reins his horse; Pri^ and
Antenor return^ to Troy.

Antenor to him; and to Troy, both take their speedy course.
Then Hector (Priams Martial son) stepped forth, and met the ground,
(With wise Ulysses) where the blows, of combat must resound. He^or and
Ulysses measure the ground for the combat.

Which done, into a helm they put, two lots, to let them know,
Which of the combattants should first, his brasse-pil'd iaueline throw.
When, all the people standing by, with hands held up to heaven,
Prayed Jove, the conquest might not be, by force or fortune given;
But that the man, who was in right, the author of most wrong,
Might feel his justice; and no more, these tedious wars prolong;
But sinking to the house of death, leave them (as long before)
Linkt fast in leagues of amity, that might dissolve no more.
Then Hector shook the helm that held, the equal doomes of chance; Hector
shakes the hel^e, and Part draws the lot to (...) first.

Looked back, and drew; and Paris first, had lot to hu^le his lance.
The soldiers all sat down enrank't, each by his arms and horse,
That then lay down, and cooled their hoofes. And now th'allotted course
Bids faire-haird H^lens husband arm: who first makes fast his greaues, He
arms.

With silver buckles to his legs: then on his breast receives
The curets that Lycaon wore, (his brother) but made fit
For his fair body: next, his sword, he took, and fastened it
(All damaskt) underneath his arm: his shield then, grave and great,
His shoulders wore: and on his head, his glorious helm he set;
Topt with a plume of horses hair, that horribly did dance,
And seemed to threaten as he moved. At last he takes his lance,
Exceeding big, and full of weight; which he* with ease could use.
In like sort, Spartas warlike king, himself with arms indues. (...) arms

Thus armed at either army both, they both stood bravely in,
Possessing both hosts with amaze: they came so chin to chin;
And with such horrible aspects, each other did salute.
A fair large field was made for them: where wraths (for hugeness) mu^e
And mutual, made them mutually, at either shake their darts,
Before they threw: then Paris first, with his long iaueline parts; The co^at.

It smote Atrides orbie Targe: but ran not through the br^
For in it (arming well the shield) the head reflected (...).
Then did the second combattant, apply him to his spear:
Which ere he threw, he thus besought, almighty Jupiter: (...) prays to
(...).

O Jove! vouchsafe me now revenge, and that my enemy,
(For doing wrong so undeserved) may pay deservedly
The pains he forfeited; and let, these hands inflict those pains,
By conquering, I, by conquering dead, him on whom life complains:
That any now, or any one, of all the brood of men
To live hereafter, may with fear, from all offense abstain,
(Much more from all such foul offense) to him that was his host,
And entertained him, as the man, whom he affected most.
This said, he shook, and threw his lance; which struck through Paris shield
And with the strength he gave to it, it made the curets yield;
His coat of Maile, his breast and all: and drove his intrailes in,
In that low region, where the guts, in three small parts begin:
Yet he, in bowing of his breast, prevented sable death.
This taint he followed with his sword, drawn from a silver sheath:
Which (lifting high) he struck his helm, full where his plume did stand,
(...) sword breaks.

On which, it peece-meale brake, and fell, from his unhappy hand.
At which, he sighing stood, and star'd, upon the ample sky,
And said, O Jove, there is no God, given more illiberally Menelaus (...)
Jupiter.

To those that serve thee, then thy self; why have I prayed in vain?
I hoped my hand should have revenged, the wrongs I still sustain
On him that did them; and still dares, their foul defense pursue;
And now my lance has mist his end, my sword in shiuers flew,
And he scapes all. With this again, he rusht upon his guest,
And caught him by the horse-haire plume, that dangl'd on his crest;
With thought, to drag him to the Greeks; which he had surely done,
And so (besides the victory) had wondrous glory won;
(Because the needle-painted lace, with which his helm was tied
Beneath his chin, and so about, his dainty throat employed,
Had strangled him:) but that in time, the Cyprian seed of Jove,
Did break the string, with which was lined, that which the needle woue;
And was the tough thong of a Steer, and so the victors palm
Was (for so full a man at arms) only an empty helm.
That then he swong about his head, and cast among his friends;
Who scrambled, and took't up with shou^s. Again then he intends,
To force the life blood of his foe, and ran on him amain,
With shaken iaueline; when the Queen, that lovers loves, again Venus rapture
of Paris from Menelau^.

Attended; and now ravished him, from that encounter quite,
With ease, and wondrous suddenly; for she (a Goddess) might.
She hid him in a cloud of gold, and never made him known, This place Virgil
(...).

Till in his chamber, (fresh and sweet) she gently set him down;
And went for Hellen, whom she found, in Scaeas utmost height;
To which, whole swarms of city Dames, had climbed to see the sight.
To give her errand good success; she took on her the shape, (...) like (...)
to (...).

Ofbeldame Graea, who was brought, by Hellen in her rape,
From Lacedaemon, and had trust, in all her secrets still;
Being old, and had (of all her maids) the maine bent of her will;
And spun for her, her finest wool; like her, loves Empress came,
Pulled Hellen by the heavenly veil, and softly said: Madame?
My Lord calls for you, you must needs, make all your kind haste home;
He Is in your chamber, stays, and longs; sits by your bed; pray come,
It Is richly made, and sweet; but he, more sweet; and looks so clear,
So fresh, and mouingly attired: that (seeing) you would swear,
He came not from the dustie fight, but from a courtly dance,
Or would to dancing. This she made, a charm for dalliance;
Whose virtue Hellen felt, and knew (by her so radiant eyes,
White neck, and most enticing breasts) the deified disguise.
At which amazed, she answered her: unhappy Deity? Hellen chideth (...).

Why love thou still in these deceipts, to wrap my fantasy?
Or whether yet (of all the towns, given to their l^st beside,
In Phrygia, or Maeonia) come thou to be my guide?
If there (of diverse languag'd men) thou have (as here in* Troy)
Some other friend, to be my shame? since here thy latest joy,
By Menelaus now subdued; by him, shall I be borne
Home to his Court; and end my life, in triumphs of his scorn.
And to this end, would thy deceits, my wanton life allure.
Hence, go thy self to Priams son, and all the ways abjure
Of Gods, or Godlike minded Dames, nor ever turn again
Thy earth-affecting feet to heaven: but for his sake, sustain
Toiles here: guard, grace him endlesly: till he requite thy grace,
By giving thee my place with him: or take his servants place,
If all dishonorable ways, your favors seek to serve
His neuer-pleasd incontinence: I better will deserve,
Then serve his do^age now: what shame, were it for me to feed
This lust in him? all honored Dames, would hate me for the deed;
He leaves a woman's love so shamed, and shows so base a mind;
To feel, nor my shame, nor his own; griefs of a greater kind
Wound me, then such as can admit, such kind delights so soon.
The Goddess (angry, that past shame, her mere will was not done) Venus
terrifies Hellen.

Replied: Incense me not you wretch, lest (once incenst) I leave
Thy cursed life to as strange a hate, as yet it may receive
A love from me; and lest I spread, through both hosts such despite,
For those plagues they have felt for thee, that both abjure thee quite.
And (setting thee in midst of both) turn all their wraths on thee,
And dart thee dead: that such a death, may wreake thy wrong of me.
This struck the fair Dame with such fear, it took her speech away;
And (shadowed in her snowy veil) she durst not but obey:
And yet (to shun the shame she feared) she vanished vndescride
Of all the Trojan Ladies there; for Venus was her guide.
Ar^iu'd at home; her women both, fell to their work in have;
When she that was of all her sex, the most divinely graced, Hellen follows
Venus from the port.

Ascended to a higher room, though much against her will,
Where lovely Alexander was, being led by Venus still.
The laughter-louing Dame discerned, her moved mind, by her grace:
And (for her mirth sake) set a stool, full before Paris face; (...) (...)
with Hellen.

Where she would needs have Hellen sit: who (though she durst not choose
But sit, yet) looked away for all, the Goddess power could use;
And vsd her tongue too, and to chide, whom Venus soothed so much; (...) bitter
reproof of (...).

And chid too, in this bitter kind; And was thy cowardice such,
(So conquered) to be seen alive? O, would to God thy life
Had perished by his worthy hand, to whom I first was wife.
Before this, thou would glorify, thy valor, and thy lance;
And, past my first Loves, boast them far: Go once more, and advance
Thy braues against his single power: this foil might fall by chance.
Poor conquered man; it was such a chance, as I would not advise,
Thy valor should provoke again: shun him thou most unwise;
Lest next, thy spirit sent to hell, thy body be his prise.
He answered; Pray thee woman cease, to chide and grieve me thus: (...) to
(...).

Disgraces will not ever last; look on their end; on us
Will other Gods, at other times, let fall the victors wreath,
As on him Pallas put it now. Shall our love sink beneath
The hate of fortune? In loves fire, let all hates vanish: Come,
Love never so inflamed my heart; no not, when (bringing home
Thy beauties so delicious prise) on Cranaes blessed shore
I longed for, and enjoyed thee first. With this, he went before
She after, to the odorous bed. While these to pleasure yield, (...) ^keth for
Paris through the (...) (...)

Perplexed Atrides, sauage-like, ran up and down the field,
And every thickest troop of Troy, and of their farre-cald aid,
Searched for his foe; who could not be, by any eye betrayed;
Nor out of friendship (out of doubt) did they conceal his sight;
All hated him so like their deaths, and owed him such (...).
At last thus spoke the king of men: Hear me, ye men of Troy, (...) to both
the armi^s.

Ye Dardans and the rest, whose powers, you in their aides employ;
The conquest on my brothers part, ye all discern is clear:
Do you then Argiue Hellena, with all her treasure here
Restore to us, and pay the mulct, that by your vows is due,
Yield us an honored recompense: and all that should accrue,
To our posterities, confirm; that when you render it,
Our acts here may be memorisd. This all Greeks else thought fit.
COMMENTARIVS.
a (...) etc. Iris autem Helene, etc. Elegantly, and most aptly (says
Spondanus) is Hellen called by Homer, to the spectacle of this single fight: as
being the chief person in cause of all the action. The chief end of whose
coming yet, e^uiously and most vainly Scaligers Criticus taxes. Which was her
relation to Priam, of the persons he noted there: jesting (with his French wit)
at this Greek Father, and fount of all wit; for making Priam to seek now of
their names and knowledges, when nine years together they had lien there
before. A great piece of necessity to make him therefore know them before,
when there was no such urgent occasion before, to bring Priam to note them? nor
so calm a conuenience, in their ordered and quiet distinction? But let his
criticisme in this be weighed with his other faults found in our master: as,
for making lightning in winter before snow or rain; which the most ignorant
vpland peasant could teach him out of his observations. For which yet, bi^
Criticus has the project impudence to tax Homer. Most falsely repeating his
words too: saying, Vbi ningit, when he says, (...), etc. Parans, or struens,
vel multum imbrem, immensamue grandinem, vel niuem: preparing, or going about
those moist impressions in the air, not in present act with them. From this
immediately and most rabidly he ranges to Ulysses reprehension, for killing the
woers with his bow, in the Odysses. Then to his late vomit again in the
Iliads the very next word, and enuieth Achilles horse for speaking, (because
himself would have all the tongue) when, in sacred writ, Balaams Ass could have
taught him, the like has been heard of. Yet now to the Odysses again with a
breath, and challenges Ulysses ship for suffering Neptune to turn it to a
rock. Here is strange laying out, for a master so curiously methodicall. Not
with what Graces, with what Muses, we may ask he was inspired: but with what
Harpyes? what Furies? putting the putidum mendacium upon Homer. Putidus,
ineptus, frigidus, puerilis, (being terms fitter for a scold or a bawd, then a
man softened by learning) he belcheth against him, whom all the world has
reverenced, and admired, as the fountain of all wit, wisdom, and learning.
What touch is it to me then, to bear spots of deprauations, when my great
master is thus muddily daubed with it? But who ever saw true learning,
wisdom, or wit, vouchsafe mansion in any proud, vaineglorious, and braggartly
spirit, when their chief act and end is, to abandon and abhor it? Language,
reading, habit of speaking, or writing in other learning, I grant in this
reuiler great and abundant: but in this Poesy, redundant, I affirm him, and
rammish. To conclude, I will use the same words of him, that he of Erasmus (in
calce Epinomidos) which are these (as I convert it): Great was his name, but
had been futurely greater, would himself have been less: where now, bold with
the greatness of his wit, he has undertaken the more, with much less
exactness; and so his confidence set on by the renown of his name, has
driven him headlong, etc.

b (...) Vocem suauem emittunt; says the Interpreter (intending the
Grasshoppers, to whom he compares the old Counselors) but it is here to be
expounded, vocem teneram, not suauem: ((...) in this place signifying tener)
for Grasshoppers sing not sweetly, but harshly and faintly: wherein the weak
and tender voices of the old Counselors is to admiration expressed. The Simile
Spondanus highly commends, as most apt and expressiue: but his application in
one part does abuse it, in the other right it: and that is, to make the old men
resemble Grasshoppers for their cold, and bloodlesse spininesse, Tython being
for age turned to a Grasshopper. But where they were grave and wise Counselors,
to make them garrul^us, as Grasshoppers are stridulous; that application holds
not in these old men, though some old men are so. These being (...), boni, and
periti concionatores; the word (...) signifying frugi also, which is temperate
or full of almoderation, and so far from intimating any touch of garrulitie.
Nor was the conceit of our Poet by Spondanus or any other, understood in this
Simile.

c (...) succincte concionabatur Menelaus; he spoke succinctly, or
compendiously, say his interpreters; which is utterly otherwise, in the voice
(...), signifying velociter, properly, modo eorum qui currunt; he spoke fast,
or thick.

d (...), etc. few words yet, he used, (...), sed valde acute: they expound it;
when it is valde stridule, shrilly, smally, or alowd; (...) (as I have noted
before) being properly taken in the worse part: and accordingly exp^nded,
makes even with his simple character at all parts, his utterance being
noisefull, small, or squeaking: an excellent pipe for a fool. Nor is the voice
or manner of utterance in a man, the least key that discovers his wisdom or
folly. And therefore with the ^ting is that of Ulysses in the second book:
that he knew Pallas by her voice: (...), quoniam non garrulus, or loquax; being
borne naturally Laconical, which agrees not the less with his fast or thick
speaking: for a man may have that kind of utterance, and yet few words.

e (...): neque in verbis peccans, say the Commentors, as though a fool were
perfectly spoken: when the word here has another sense, and our Homer a far
other meaning, the words being thus to be expounded: neque mendax erat, he
would not lie by any means; for that affectedly he stands upon hereafter. But
to make a fool non peccans verbis, will make a man nothing wonder at any
peccancie or absurdity, in men of mere language.

You see then, to how extreme a difference and contrariety the word and sense
lie subject: and that without first finding the true figures of persons in this
kind presented, it is impossible for the best linguist living to express an
Author truly, especially any Greek author; the language being so differently
significant: which not iudicially fitted with the exposition, that the place
(and coherence with other places) requires, what a motley, and confused man a
translator may present? As now they do all, of Menelaus, who, wheresoever he is
called (...), is there untruly translated bellicosus; but cui Mars est charus,
because he might love the war, and yet be no good warrior: as many love many
exertises at which they will never be good: and Homer gave it to him for
another of his peculiar Epithets, as a vainglorious affectation in him, rather
then a solid affection.

And here haste makes me give end to these new Annotations, deferring the like
in the next nine books for more breath and encouragement. Since time (that
has ever oppressed me) will not otherwise let me come to the last twelve, in
which the first free light of my Author, entered and emboldened me. Where so
many rich disoueries importune my poor expression, that I fear rather to
betrai^ them to the world, the^ express them to their price. But how soever
envy and prejudice stand squirting their poison through the eyes of my Readers,
this shall appear to all competent apprehensions, I have followed the
Original with authentical expositions (according to the proper signification
of the word in his place, though I differ therein utterly from others:) I have
rendered all things of importance, with answerable life and height to my
Author, (though with some periprhrasis, without which no man can worthily
translate any worthy Poet.) And since the translation it self, and my notes,
(being impartially conferred) amply approve this, I will still be confident
in the worth of my pains, how idly and unworthily soever I be censured. And
thus, to the last twelve Books (leaving other horrible errors in his other
Interpreters unmoved) with those free feet that entered me, I ^aste, sure of
nothing but my labor.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Gods in Counsel, at the last decree,
That famous Ilion, shall expugned be.
And, that their own continued faults may prove,
The reasons that have so incensed Jove.
Minerua seeks with more offenses done,
Against the lately injured Atreus son,
(A ground that clearest would make seen their sin)
To have the Lycian Pandarus begin.
He (against the Truce with sacred covenants bound)
Gives Menelaus, a dishonored wound,
Machaon heales him. Agamemnon then,
To mortal war incenseth all his men:
The battles join, and in the heat of fight,
Cold death shuts many eyes in endless night.
Another Argument.
In Delta, is the Gods Assise,
The Truce is broke, wars freshly rise.
WIthin the faire-pau'd Court of Jove, he and the Gods conferd,
About the sad events of Troy; amongst whom ministerd, The Gods in Counsel at
Jove's Court.

Blessed Hebe, Nectar. As they sat, and did Troyes towers behold;
They drank, and pledged each other round, in full crowned cups of gold. Hebe
fills Nectar

The mirth, at whose feast, was begun, by great Saturnides,
In urging a begun dislike, amongst the Goddesses.
But chiefly, in his solemn Queen, whose spleen he was disposd
To tempt yet further; knowing well, what anger it inclosd.
And how wives angers should be vsd. On which, (thus pleased) he played:
Two Goddesses there are, that still, give Menelaus aid:
And one that Paris loves. The two, that sit from us so far, Jove's mirth with
his wife and daughter Pallas

(Which Argiue Juno is, and she, that rules in deeds of war
No doubt are pleased, to see how well, the late-seene-fight did frame.
And (yet upon the adverse part) the laughter-louing Dame,
Made her power good too, for her friend. For though he were so near,
The stroke of death, in the others hopes, she took him from them clear;
The conquest yet, is questionless, the martial Spartan kings;
We must consult then, what events, shall crown these future things.
If wars, and combats, we shall still, with even successes strike;
Or (as impartial) friendship plant, on both parts. If ye like
The last, and that it will as well, delight, as merely please
Your happy Deities: still let stand, old Priams town in peace;
And let the Lacedaemon king, again his Queen enjoy.
As Pallas and heavens Queen sat close, complotting ill to Troy;
With silent murmures they received, this ill-lik't choice from Jove;
Against whom was Pallas much incenst, because the Queen^ of Love,
Could not without his leave relieve, in that late point of death,
The son of Priam, whom she loathed; her wrath yet fought beneath
Her supreme wisdom, and was curbed: but Juno needs must ease
Her great heart, with her ready tongue, and said: What words are these Juno
angry with Jupiter.

(Austere, and too much Saturns son?) why would thou render still
My labors idle? and the sweat, of my industrious will,
Dishonor with so little power? My chariot horse are tired,
With posting to and fro, for Greece: and bringing banes desired,
To people-mustring Priamus, and his perfidious sons:
Yet thou protectst, and ioynst with them, whom each just Deity shuns.
Go on, but ever go resolved, all other Gods have vowed
To cross thy partial course for Troy, in all that makes it proud. Jupiter to
Juno.

At this, the cloud-compelling Jove, a far fetched sight let fly:
And said, Thou Fury, what offense, of such impiety,
Has Priam or his sons done thee? that with so high a hate
Thou should thus ceaslesly desire, to raze, and ruinate
So well a builded town as Troy? I think (had thou the power)
Thou would the ports and farre-stretcht walls, fly over, and devour
Old Priam, and his issue quick: and make all Troy thy feast;
And then at length I hope, thy wrath, and tired spleen would rest:
To which, run on thy chariot, that naught be found in me,
Of just cause to our future iarres. In this yet strengthen thee,
And fix it in thy memory fast; that, if I entertain
As peremptory a desire, to level with the plain,
A city, where thy loved live; stand not betwixt my ire,
And what it aims at; but give way, when thou have thy desire,
Which now I grant thee willingly, although against my will.
For not beneath the ample Sun, and heavens starre-bearing hill, Troy most
loved of Jupiter, of all other cities.

There is a town of earthly men, so honored in my mind,
As sacred Troy, nor of earths kings, as Priam and his kind,
Who never let my altars lack, rich feast of offerings slain,
And their sweet savors: for which grace, I honor them again.
Drad Juno, with the Cowes fair eyes, replied; Three towns there are Three
cities dear to Juno.

Of great and eminent respect, both in my love and care,
Mycena, with the broad high ways, and Argos rich in horse;
And Sparta: all which three destroy, when thou enui'st their force;
I will not aid them, nor malign, thy free and sovereign will:
For if I should be envious, and set against their ill,
I know my envy were in vain, since thou art mightier far:
But we must give each other leave, and wink at eithers war. Her deadly hate
to Troy.

I likewise, must have power to crown, my works with wished end;
Because I am a Deity, and did from thence descend,
Whence thou thy self, and the elder borne, wise Saturn was our Sire;
And thus there is a twofold cause, that pleads for my desire;
Being sister, and am called thy wife: And more, since thy command
Rules all Gods else; I claim therein, a like superior hand.
All wrath before then, now remit, and mutually combine
In eithers Empire; I, thy rule, and thou illustrate mine.
So will the other Gods agree: and we shall all be strong.
And first, (for this late plot) with speed, let Pallas go among
The Trojans; and some one of them, entice to break the truce,
By offering in some treacherous wound, the honored Greeks abuse.
The Father both of men and Gods, agreed, and Pallas sent,
With these winged words, to both the hosts; Make all haste, and invent Jupiter
to Pallas

Some mean, by which the men of Troy, against the truce agreed,
May stir the glorious Greeks to arms, with some inglorious deed.
Thus charged he her with haste, that did, before, in have abound;
Who cast her self from all the heights, with which steep heaven is crowned:
Pallas falls from heaven like a Comet.

And as Jove, brandishing a star (which men a Comet call)
Hurls out his curled hair abroad, that from his brand exhals
A thousand sparks; to fleets at sea, and every mighty host,
(Of all presages and ill haps, a sign mistrusted most:)
So Pallas fell twixt both the Camps, and suddenly was lost;
When through the breasts of all that saw, she struck a strong amaze,
With viewing, in her whole descent, her bright and ominous blaze.
When straight, one to another turned, and said; Now thundering (...)
(Great Arbiter of peace, and arms) will either stablish love
Amongst our nations: or renew, such war, as never was.
Thus either army did presage, when Pallas made her pass
Amongst the multitude of Troy; who now put on the grace
Of brave Laodocus; the flower, of old Antenors race;
And sought for Lycian Pandarus; a man, that being bred
Out of a faithless family, she thought, was fit to shed
The blood of any innocent, and break the covenant sworn.
He was Lycaons son, whom Jove, into a Wolf did turn
For sacrificing of a child; and yet in arms renownd,
As one that was inculpable: him Pallas, standing, found,
And round about him, his strong troops, that bore the shadie shields.
He brought them from Aesaepus flood, let through the Lycian fields:
Whom, standing near, she whispred thus: Lycaons warlike son? Pallas to
Pandarus, persuading him to breaks the (...)

Shall I despair at thy kind hands, to have a favor done?
Nor dare thou let an arrow fly, upon the Spartan king?
It would be such a grace to Troy, and such a glorious thing,
That every man would give his gift; but Alexanders hand
Would load thee with them, if he could, discover from his stand,
His foes pride struck down with thy shaft; and he himself ascend
The flaming heap of funeral: Come, shoot him (princely friend.)
But first inuoke the God of light, that in thy land was borne,
And is in archers art the best, that ever sheafe has worn;
To whom a hundred first ew'd lambs, vow thou in holy fire,
When safe to sacred Zelias towers, thy zealous steps retire.
With this, the mad-gift-greedie man, Minerua did persuade; The description of
(...) his bow.

Who instantly drew forth a bow, most admirably made
Of th'antler of a iumping Goat, bred in a steep up land;
Which Archerlike (as long before, he took his hidden stand;
The Euicke, skipping from a rock) into the breast he smote;
And headlong feld him from his cliffe. The forehead of the Got,
Held out a wondrous goodly palm, that sixteen branches brought:
Of all which, (joined) an useful bow, a skillful Bowyer wrought;
(Which picked and polisht,) both the ends, he hid with horns of gold.
And this bow (bent) he close laid down, and bad his soldiers hold
Their shields before him; lest the Greeks (discerning him) should rise
In tumults, ere the Spartan king, could be his arrows prise.
Mean space, with all his care he chusd, and from his quiver drew
An arrow, fetherd best for flight; and yet, that never flew;
Strong headed, and most apt to pierce; then took he up his bow,
And nockt his shaft; the ground whence all, their future grief did grow.
When (praying to his God the Sun, that was in Lycia bred,
And king of Archers; promising, that he the blood would shed
Of full an hundred first fallen lambs, all offered to his name,
When to Zelias sacred walls, from rescued Troy he came)
He took his arrow by the nocke, and to his bended breast, Virgil uses these
verses.

The Oxy sinew close he drew, even till the pile did rest,
Upon the bosom of the bow: and as that savage prise, Pandarus draught and
shoot.

His strength constraind into an Orb; (as if the wind did rise)
The coming of it made a noise; the sinew forged string
Did give a mighty twang; and forth, the eager shaft did sing,
(Affecting speediness of flight) amongst the Achiue throng:
Nor were the blessed heavenly powers, unmindful of thy wrong,
O Menelaus; but in chief, Jove's seed the Pillager, (...) hurt.

Stood close before, and slackt the force, the arrow did confer;
With as much care, and little hurt, As does a mother use, Simile.

And keep off from her babe, when sleep, does through his powers diffuse
His golden humor; and the assaults, of rude and busy flies
She still checks with her careful hand: for so the shaft she plies,
That on the buttons made of gold, which made his girdle fast,
And where his curets double were, the fall of it she placed.
And thus much proof she put it to: the buckle made of gold;
The belt it fastened, bravely wrought; his curets double fold;
And last, the charmed plate he wore, which helped him more then all;
And against all darts, and shafts bestowd, was to his life a wall.
So (through all these) the upper skin, the head did only race,
Yet forth the blood flowed, which did much, his royal person grace;
And showed upon his Iuorie skin, as does a purple dye,
Laid (by a Dame of Caira, or lovely Maeony)
On Iuorie; wrought in ornaments, to deck the cheeks of horse;
Which in her marriage room must lie; whose beauties have such force,
That they are wished of many knights; but are such precious things,
That they are kept for horse that draw, the chariots of kings;
Which horse (so decked) the chariotere, esteems a grace to him:
Like these (in grace) the blood upon, thy solid thighs did swim,
O Menelaus, down thy calves, and ankles to the ground;
For nothing decks a soldier so, as does an honored wound.
Yet (fearing he had fared much worse) the hair stood up on end
On Agame^non, when he saw, so much black blood descend.
And stifned with the like dismay, was Menelaus to:
But (seeing th'arrowes stale without,) and that the head did go
No further then it might be seen, he called his spirits again:
Which Agamemnon marking not, (but thinking he was slain)
He grip't his brother by the hand, and sigh't as he would break:
Which sigh the whole host took from him, who thus at last did speak:
O dearest brother, is it for this? That thy death must be wrought, Agamemnous
complaint and ^are of his brothers h^rt.

Wrought I this truce? For this have thou, the single combat fought
For all the army of the Greeks? For this, has Ilion sworn,
And trod all faith beneath their feet? Yet all this has not worn
The right we challenged, out of force; this cannot render vain
Our stricken right hands; sacred wine; nor all our offerings slain.
For though Olympius be not quick, in making good our ill,
He will be sure, as he is slow; and sharplier prove his will.
Their own hands shall be ministers, of those plagues they despise:
Which shall their wives and children reach, and all their progenies.
For both in mind, and soul, I know, that there shall come a day,
When Ilion, Priam, all his power, shall quite be worn away;
When heauen-inhabiting Jove shall shake, his fiery shield at all,
For this one mischief. This I know, the world cannot recall.
But, be all this; all my grief still, for thee will be the same,
(Dear brother:) if thy life must here, put out his royal flame;
I shall to sandy Argos turn, with infamy, my face;
And all the Greeks will call for home: old Priam and his race
Will flame in glory; Helena, untouched, be still their pray;
And thy bones in our enemies earth, our cursed fates shall lay;
Thy Sepulcher be trodden down; the pride of Troy desire,
(Insulting on it:) Thus, o thus, let Agamemno^s ire,
In all his acts, be expiate; as now he carries home
His idle army, empty ships; and leaves here overcome
Good Menelaus. When this Brave, breaks in their hated breath;
Then let the broad earth swallow me, and take me quick to death.
Nor shall this ever chance (said he,) and therefore be of cheer; Menelaus to
Agamemnon.

Lest all the army (led by you,) your passions put in fear.
The arrow fell in no such place, as death could enter at;
My girdle, curets doubled here, and my most trusted plate,
Objected all twixt me and death; the shaft scarce piercing one.
Good brother (said the king) I wish, it were no further gone; Agamemnon to
Men^laus.

For then our best in medicines skild, shall open and search the wound;
Applying balmes to ease thy pains, and soon restore thee sound.
This said, divine Talthybius, he called, and bad him haste
Machaon (Aesculapius son, who most of men was graced (...) (...) (...) for
(...)

With Physics sovereign remedies) to come and lend his hand
To Menelaus; shot by one, well skild in the command
Of bow and arrows; one of Troy, or of the Lycian aid;
Who much has glorified our foe, and us as much dismayed.
He heard, and hasted instantly; and cast his eyes about
The thickest squadrons of the Greeks, to find Machaon out.
He found him standing guarded well, with well-arm'd men of Thrace;
With whom he quickly joined, and said; Man of Apollos race? Tal^ybius to
Mach^on.

Haste; for the king of men commands, to see a wound impressed,
In Menelaus (great in arms) by one instructed best
In thou art of archerie; of Troy, or of the Lycian bands,
That them with much renown adornes; us with dishonor brands.
Machaon much was moved with this, who with the herald flew
From troop to troop, along the host; and soon they came in view
Of hurt Atrides; circled round, with all the Grecian kings;
Who all gave way; and straight he draws, the shaft: which forth he brings
Machaon draws the arro^.

Without the forkes; the girdle then, plate, curets, off he pluckes,
And viewes the wound; when first from it, the clotterd blood he sucks;
Then medicines wondrously composd, the skillful Leech applied,
Which loving Chyron taught his Sire; he from his Sire had tried.
While these were thus employed to ease, the Atrean martialist,
The Trojans armed, and charged the Greeks; the Greeks arm and resist. The
Trojans renew the figh^.

Then not asleep, nor mazed with fear, nor shifting off the blows,
You could behold the king of men; but in full speed he goes
To set a glorious fight on foot: and he examples this, Agamemnon marshals his
armi^.

With toyling (like the worst) on foot; who therefore did dismiss
His brasse-arm'd chariot, and his steeds, with Ptolomaus son,
(Son of Pyraides) their guide, the good Eu^ymidon;
Yet (said the king) attend with them, lest weariness should seize
My lims, surcharged with ordering troops, so thick and vast as these.
Eurymidon then rein'd his horse, that trotted neighing by;
The king a footman, and so scowres, the squadrons orderly.
Those of his swiftly-mounted Greeks, that in their arms were fit, Agamemnon
to the Greek^s.

Those he put on, with cheerful words, and bad them not remit
The least spark of their forward spirits, because the Trojans durst
Take these abhord advantages; but let them do their wurst*
For they might be assured that Jove, would patronise no lies;
And that, who with the breach of truce, would hurt their enemies,
With vultures should be torn themselves; that they should raze their town:
Their wives, and children at their breasts, led vassals to their own.
But such as he beheld hang off, from that increasing fight;
Such would he bitterly rebuke, and with disgrace excite;
Base Argiues, blush ye not to stand, as made for Buts to darts? Agamemnon to
the negligent soldiers.

Why are ye thus discomfited, like Hinds that have no hearts?
Who wearied with a long-run field, are instantly embost,
Stand still, and in their beastly breasts, is all their courage lost:
And so stand you struck with amaze, nor dare to strike a stroke.
Would ye the foe should nearer yet, your dastard splenes provoke?
Even where on Neptunes fomie shore, our nauies lie in sight?
To see if Jove will hold your hands, and teach ye how to fight?
Thus he (commanding) ranged the host; and (passing many a band)
He came to the Cretensian troops, where all did armed stand,
About the martial Idomen; who bravely stood before,
In vantguard of his troops, and matched, for strength a savage Bore.
Meriones (his chariotere) the Rereguard bringing on:
Which seen to Atreus son, to him, it was a sight alone;
And Idomens confirmed mind, with these kind words he seeks;
O Idomen! I ever loved, thy self past all the Greeks; Agamemnon to Idomen.

In war, or any work of peace; at table, every where;
For when the best of Greece besides, mix ever, at our cheer,
My good old ardent wine, with small; and our inferior mates
Drink even that mixed wine measured too; thou drinkst without those rates
Our old wine, neat; and evermore, thy boll stands full like mine;
To drink, still when, and what thou will. Then rowse that heart of thine;
And whatsoever heretofore, thou have assumed to be,
This day be greater. To the king, in this sort, answered he;
Atrides, what I ever seemed, the same, at every part, Idomen to Agamemnon.

This day shall show me at the full; and I will fit thy heart.
But thou should rather cheer the rest, and tell them they in right
Of all good war, must offer blows, and should begin the fight.
(Since Troy first brake the holy truce) and not endure these braues,
To take wrong first, and then be dared, to the revenge it craves.
Assuring them that Troy, in fate, must have the worse at last;
Since first, and against a truce, they hurt; where they should have embraced.
This comfort, and advice did fit, Atrides heart indeed,
Who still through new raisd swarms of men, held his laborious speed:
And came where both the Aiaces stood; whom like the last he found,
Armed, caskt, and ready for the fight. Behind them, hid the ground,
A cloud of foot, that seemed to smoke. And as a Gotehea^d spies,
On some hills top, out of the Sea, a rainie vapor rise, How the troops of
Ajax stood.

Driven by the breath of Zephyrus, which (though far off he rest)
Comes on as black as pitch, and brings, a tempest in his breast;
Whereat, he frighted, drives his herds, apace, into a den:
So (darkning earth, with darts and shields) showed these with all their men.
This sight, with like joy fired the king, who thus let forth the flame,
In crying out to both the Dukes: O you of equal name, Agamemnon to the Aiaces.

I must not cheer; nay, I disclaim, all my command of you,
Your selves command with such free minds, and make your soldiers show,
As you, nor I led, but themselves. O would our father Jove,
Minerua, and the God of light, would all our bodies mou^
With such brave spirits as breathe in you: then Priams lofti^ town
Should soon be taken by our hands, for ever overthrown.
Then held he on to other troops, and Nestor, next beheld,
(The subtle Pylian Orator) range up and down the field, Nestors art i^
ordering his soldiers.

Embattelling his men at arms, and stirring all to blows;
Points every legion out his Chief, and every Chief he shows
The forms, and discipline of war: yet his Commanders were
All expert, and renowned men: Great Pelagon was there;
Alastor: manly Chromius; and Hemon, worth a Throne;
And Byas, that could armies lead: with these he first put on,
His horse troops, with their chariots: his foot (of which he chusde
Many, the best and ablest men, and which he ever used,
As rampire to his general power) he in the Rere disposd.
The slothful, and the least of spirit, he in the midst inclosd;
That such as wanted noble wills, base need might force to stand.
His horse troops (that the Vantgard had) he strictly did command
To ride their horses temperatly; to keep their ranks, and shun
Confusion; lest their horsemanship, and courage made them run
(Too much presumed on) much too far: and (charging so alone)
Engage themselves, in the enemies strength; where many fight with one.
Who his own chariot leaves to range; let him not freely go,
But straight unhorse him with a lance: for it is much better so.
And with this discipline (said he) this form, these minds, this trust;
Our Ancestors have, walls, and towns, laid level with the dust.
Thus prompt, and long inured to arms, this old man did exhort;
And this Atrides likewise took, in wondrous cheerful sort:
And said, O Father! would to heaven, that as thy mind remains Agamemnon to
Nestor.

In wonted vigor; so thy knees, could undergo our pains.
But age, that all men ouercomes, has made his prise on thee;
Yet still I wish, that some young man, grown old in mind, might be
Put in proportion with thy years; and thy mind (young in age)
Be fitly answered with his youth; that still where conflicts rage,
And young men vsd to thrust for fame, thy brave exampling hand,
Might double our young Grecian spirits, and grace our whole Command.
The old knight answered: I my self, could wish (O Atreus son) Nestor to
Agamemnon.

I were as young, as when I slew, brave Ereu^halion;
But Gods, at all times, give not all, their gifts to mortal men.
If then I had the strength of youth, I mist the Counsels then,
That years now give me; and now years, want that maine strength of youth;
Yet still my mind retains her strength, (as you now said the sooth)
And would be, where that strength is vsd, affoording counsels sage,
To stir youths minds up; it is the grace, and office of our age;
Let younger sinews, Men sprung up, whole ages after me,
And such as have strength, use it; and, as strong in honor be.
The king (all this while comforted) arrived next, where he found,
Well-rode Menestheus (Peteus son) stand still, inuirond round,
With his well-train'd Athenian troops: and next to him he spide
The wise Ulysses, deedlesse too, and all his bands beside,
Of strong Cephalians; for as yet, th'alarme had not been heard
In all their quarters, Greece, and Troy, were then so newly stird,
And then first moved (as they conceived) and they so looked about
To see both hoasts give proof of that, they yet had cause to doubt.
Atrides (seeing them stand so still) and spend their eyes at gaze;
Began to chide; And why (said he) dissolved thus, in a maze,
Thou son of Peteus, Ioue-nurst king; and thou in wicked slight, Agamemnon
to Ulysses and Menestheu^.

A cunning soldier, stand ye off? Expect ye that the fight
Should be by other men begun? it is fit the foremost band
Should show you there; you first should front, who first lifts up his hand.
First you can hear, when I inuit, the Princes to a feast,
When first, most friendly, and at will, ye eat and drink the best;
Yet in the fight, most willingly, ten troops ye can behold
Take place before ye. Ithacus, at this his brows did fold,
And said, How has thy violent tongue, broke through thy set of teeth? Ulysses
to Aga^emnon.

To say that we are slack in fight? and to the field of death
Look others should enforce our way? when we were busied then,
(Even when thou spak'st) against the foe, to cheat and lead our men.
But thy eyes shall be witnesses (if it content thy will;
And that (as thou pretendst) these cares, do so affect thee still)
The father of Telemach^ (whom I esteem so dear,
And to whom, as a Legacy, I Will leave my deeds done here)
Even with the foremost band of Troy, has his encounter dared;
And therefore are thy speeches vain, and had been better spared.
He smiling, since he saw him moved, recald his words, and said; Agamemnon to
Ulysses.

Most generous L^ertes son, most wise of all our aid;
I neither do accuse thy worth, more then thy self may hold
Fit (that inferiors think not much (being slack) to be controld;)
Nor take I on me thy command: for well I know thy mind
Knows how sweet gentle counsels are; and that thou standst enclind
As I my self, for all our good. On then: if now we spoke
What has displeasd, another time, we full amends will make:
And Gods grant that thy virtue here, may prove so free, and brave,
That my reproves may still be vain, and thy deseruings grave.
Thus parted they, and forth he went, when he did leaning find
Against his chariot, near his horse, him with the mighty mind,
Great Diomedes (Tydeus son) and Sthenelus, the seed
Of Capaneius; whom the king, seeing likewise out of deed,
Thus cried he out on Diomed: O melin what a fear Agamemnon chideth Diomed.

The wise great warrior, Tydeus son, stands gazing every where,
For others to begin the fight? It was not Tydeus use
To be so danted; whom his spirit, would evermore produce,
Before the foremost of his friends, in these affairs of fright,
As they report that have beheld, him labor in a fight.
For me, I never knew the man, nor in his presence came:
But excellent above the rest, he was in general fame.
And one renowm'd exploit of his, I am assured is true, The history of Tydeus.

He came to the Mycenian Court, without arms, and did sue,
At Godlike Polinices hands, to have some worthy aid,
To their designs, that against the walls, of sacred Thebes were laid.
He was great Polinices guest, and nobly entertaind:
And of the kind Mycenian state, what he requested gaind,
In mere consent: but when they should, the same in act approve,
(By some sinister prodigies, held out to them by Io^e,)
They were discouraged; thence he went, and safely had his pass
Back to Aesopus flood, renowm'd, for Bulrushes and grass;
Yet, once more, their Ambassador, the Grecian Pe^res address,
Lord Tydeus to Eteocles: to whom being given access,
He found him feasting with a crew, of Cadmians in his hall;
Amongst whom, though an enemy, and only one to all;
To all yet, he his challenge made, at every Martial feate;
And easly foild all, since with him, Miner^a was so great.
The ranke-rode Cadmians (much incenst, with their so foul disgrace)
Lodged ambuscados for their foe, in some well chosen place,
By which he was to make return. Twice five and twenty men,
And two of them, great captains too, the ambush did contain.
The names of those two men of rule, were M^on, H^mons son,
And Lycophontes, Keepe-field called, the heir of Autophon,
By all men honored like the Gods: yet these and all their friends,
Were sent to hell by Tydeus hand, and had untimely ends.
He trusting to the aid of Gods, reueald by Augurie;
Obeying which, one Chief he saved, and did his life apply,
To be the heavy messenger, of all the others deaths;
And that sad message (with his life) to Maeon he bequeaths;
So brave a knight was Tydeus: of whom a son is sprung,
Inferior far, in martial deeds, though higher in his tongue.
All this, Tydides silent heard, awed by the reverend king;
Which stung hot Sthenelus with wrath, who thus put forth his sting:
Atrides? when thou know the truth, speak what thy knowledge is,
And do not lie so; for I know, and I will brag in this; Sthenelus rough
speech to Agamemnon.

That we are far more able men, then both our fathers were;
We took the seuen-fold ported Thebes, when yet we had not there
So great help as our fathers had; and fought beneath a wall,
Sacred to Mars, by help of Jove; and trusting to the fall
Of happy signs from other Gods, by whom we took the town
Untouched; our fathers perishing there, by sollies of their own:
And therefore never more compare, our fathers worth with ours.
Tydides frownd at this, and said; Suppress thine angers powers,
(Good friend) and hear why I refrained: thou see I am not moved Diomed
rebuk^s Sthene^s.

Against our General, since he did, but what his place behou'd,
Admonishing all Greeks to fight: for if Troy prove our prise,
The honor, and the joy is his. If here our ruin lies,
The shame and grief for that, as much, is his in greatest kinds.
As he then his charge, weigh we ours: which is our dantlesse minds.
Thus from his chariot (amply armed) he iumpt down to the ground:
The armor of the angry king, so horribly did sound,
It might have made his brauest foe, let fear, take down his braues.
And as when with the West-wind flawes, the sea thrusts up her waves, Simile.

One after other, thick, and high, upon the groaning shores;
First, in her self, loud (but opposd, with banks and Rocks) she ^ores,
And (all her back in bristles set) spits every way her some;
So (after Diomed) instantly, the field was overcome
With thick impressions of the Greeks; and all the noise that grew The
silence of the Greek fight.

(Ordring and chearing up their men) from only leaders flew.
The rest went silently away, you could not hear a voice,
Nor would have thought, in all their breasts, they had one in their choice;
Their silence uttering their awe, of them, that them contrould;
Which made each man keep bright his arms, march, fight still where he should.
The Trojans (like a sort of Ewes, pend in a rich man's fold, The Trojans
compared to Ew^s.

Close at his door, till all be milkt; and never baaing hold,
Hearing the bleating of their lambs) did all their wide host fill,
With showts and clamors; nor observed, one voice, one baaing still;
But showed mixed tongs from many a land; of men, called to their aid:
Rude Mars, had th'ordring of their spirits: of Greeks, the learned Maid. Mars
for the Trojans, Pallas for the Greeks.

But Terror followed both the hosts, and flight; and furious Strife,
The sister, and the mate of Mars, that spoil of humane life; Discord the
sist^r of Mar^.

And never is her rage at rest; at first she is but small,
Yet after, (but a little fed) she grows so vast, and tall, Virgil the same of
^ame.

That while her feet move here in earth, her forhead is in heaven.
And this was she, that made even then, both hosts so deadly given.
Through every troop she stalkt, and stird, rough sighs up as she went:
But when in one field, both the foes, her fury did content;
And both came under reach of darts, then darts, and shields opposd
To darts and shields, strength answered strength; then swords and targets closd
With swords and targets; both with pikes; and then did tumult rise
Up to her height; then conquerors boasts, mixed with the conquerds cries,
Earth flowed with blood. And as from hills, rain waters, headlong fall,
That all ways, eat huge Ruts, which, met, in one bed, fill a vall
With such a confluence of streams; that on the mountain grounds
Far off, in frighted shepherds ears, the bustling noise rebounds:
So grew their conflicts; and so showed, their scuffling to the ear;
With flight, and clamor, still commixt, and all effects of fear.
And first renowm'd Antilochus, slew (fighting in the face Antiloc^us slew
(...).

Of all Achaias foremost bands, with an undaunted grace)
Echepolus Thalysiades: he was an armed man;
Whom, on his haire-plum'd helmets crest, the dart first smote; then ran
Into his forehead, and there stuck; the steel pile making way
Quite through his skull; a hasty night, shut up his latest day.
His fall was like a fight-rac't tower; like which, lying their dispred,
King Elephenor, (who was son to Chalcodon, and led
The valiant Abants) covetous; that he might first possess
His arms, laid hands upon his feet; haled him from the preasse
Of darts, and Iauelins hurld at him. The action of the king Elephenor drawing
of the body of Echepolus is slain by Agenor.

When (great in heart) Agenor saw, he made his Iaueline sing
To the others labor; and along, as he the trunk did wrest,
His side (at which he bore his shield, in bowing of his breast)
Lay naked, and received the lance; that made him lose his hold,
And life together; which in hope, of that he lost, he sold.
But for his sake the fight grew fierce; the Trojans and their foe,
Like wolves, on one another rusht; and man for man it goes.
The next of name, that served his fate; great Ajax Telamo^, (...) slaies Si^.

Preferred so sadly; he was heir, to old Anthemion,
And decked with all the flower of youth: the fruit of which yet fled,
Before the honored nuptial torch, could light him to his bed;
His name was Symoisius; For, some few years before,
His mother walking down the hill, of Ida, by the shore
Of Silver Symois, to see, her parents ^locks; with them,
She (feeling suddenly the pains, of childbirth) by the stream
Of that bright river brought him forth; and so (of Symois)
They called him Symoisius. Sweet was that birth of his
To his kind parents; and his growth, did all their care employ;
And yet those rites of piety, that should have been his joy,
To pay their honored years again, in as affectionate sort,
He could not graciously perform, his sweet life was so short:
Cut off with mighty Ajax lance. For, as his spirit put on,
He struck him at his breasts right pappe, quite through his shoulder bone;
And in the dust of earth he fell, that was the fruitful soil
Of his friends hopes; but where he sowed, he buried all his toil.
And as a Poplar shot aloft, set by a river side, Simile.

In moist edge of a mightiefenne, his head in curls implide;
But all his body plain and smooth: to which a Wheel-wright puts
The sharp edge of his shining axe, and his soft timber cuts
From his innatiue root; in hope, to hew out of his bole
The Fell'ffs, or out-parts of a wheel, that compass in the whole;
To serve some goodly chariot; but (being big and sad,
And to be haled home through the bogs) the useful hope he had
Sticks there; and there the goodly plant, lies withring out his grace:
So lay, by Ioue-bred Ajax hand, Anthemions forward race.
Nor could through that vast fen of toiles, be drawn to serve the ends
Intended by his bodies powers, nor cheer his aged friends.
But now the gay-arm'd Antiphus (a son of Priam) threw Antiphus one of Priams
sons.

His lance at Ajax through the preasse, which went by him, and flew
On Leucus, wise Ulysses friend; his groine it smote, as feign
He would have drawn into his spoil, the ca^kasse of the slain;
By which he fell, and that by him; it vexed Ulysses heart;
Who thrust into the face of fight, well armed at every part,
Came close, and looked about to find, an object worth his lance;
Which when the Trojans saw him shake, and he so near advance,
All shrunk; he threw, and forth it shined: nor fell, but where it feld:
His friends grief gave it angry power, and deadly way it held D^mocoon
Pria^s base son ^lain by (...).

Upon Democoon, who was sprung, of Priams wanton force;
Came from Abydus, and was made, the master of his horse.
Through both his temples struck the dart, the wood of one side showed,
The pile out of the other looked, and so the earth he strewed,
With much sound of his weighty arms. Then back the foremost went,
Even Hector yielded; then the Greeks, gave worthy clamors vent,
Effecting then their first dumb powers; some drew the dead and spoild;
Some followed; that in open flight, Troy might confess it foild.
Apollo (angry at the sight) from top of Ilion cride, Apollo excites the
Trojans.

Turn head, ye well-rode Peers of Troy, feed not the Grecians pride;
They are not charmed against your points, of steel, nor Iron framed;
Nor fights the faire-haird Thetis son, but sits at fleet inflamed.
So spoke the dreadful God from Troy. The Greeks, Jove's noblest seed,
Encouraged to keep on the chase: and where fit spirit did need, Pall^
encourages the Greeks.

She gave it, marching in the midst; Then flew the fatal hour
Back on Diores, in return, of Ilions sun-burnd power;
Diores Amarincides, whose right legs ankle bone, Diores.

And both the sinews, with a sharp, and handful charging stone,
Pirus Imbrasides did break, that led the Thracian bands, Piros.

And came from Aenos; down he fell, and up he held his hands
To his loved friends; his spirit wingd, to fly out of his breast;
With which not satisfied, again, Imbrasides addressed
His Iaueline at him, and so ripped, his nauill, that the wound,
(As endlesly it shut his eyes) so (opend) on the ground,
It powered his entrails. As his foe, went then suffisd away,
Thoas Aetolius threw a dart, that did his pile convey
Above his nipple, through his lungs; when (quitting his stern part)
He closd with him; and from his breast, first drawing out his dart, Piros
^aine by Thoas.

His sword flew in, and by the midst, it wiped his belly out;
So took his life, but left his arms; his friends so flockt about,
And thrust forth lances of such length, before their slaughterd king,
Which though their foe were big and strong, and often brake the ring,
Forged of their lances; yet (enforced) he left th'affected prise;
The Thracian, and Epeian Dukes, laid close with closed eyes,
By either other, drowned in dust; and round about the plain
All hid with slaughterd carcasses; yet still did hotely reign
The martial planet; whose effects, had any eye beheld,
Free, and unwounded (and were led, by Pallas through the field
To keep of Iauelins, and suggest, the least fault could be found)
He could not reprehend the fight, so many strewn the ground.
The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
KIng Diomed (by Pallas spirit inspired,
With will and power) is for his acts admired:
Mere men, and men derived from Deities,
And Deities themselves, he terrifies;
Adds wounds to terrors: his inflamed lance
Draws blood from Mars, and Venus: In a trance
He casts Aeneas, with a weighty stone;
Apollo quickens him, and gets him gone:
Mars is recur'd by Paeon; but by Jove
Rebuk't, for authoring breach of humane love.
Another Argument.
In Epsilon, heavens blood is shed,
By sacred rage of Diomed.
THen Pallas breathed in Tydeus son: to render whom supreme Pallas inspires
and glorifies Diomed.

To all the Greeks, at all his parts, she cast a hoter beam,
On his high mind; his body filled, with much superior might,
And made his complete armor cast, a far more complete light.
From his bright helm and shield, did burn, a most unwearied fire: This
simile lik^wise Virgil Iearus of him.

Like rich Autumnus golden lamp, whose brightness men admire,
Past all the other host of stars, when with his cheerful face,
Fresh washed in lofty Ocean waves, he does the skies enchase.
To let whose glory lose no sight, still Pallas made him turn,
Where tumult most expressed his power, and where the fight did burn. Dares
Priest of Mulciber, or Vulcan.

An honest and a wealthy man, inhabited in Troy;
Dares the Priest of Mulciber, who two sons did enjoy,
Idaeus, and bold Phegeus, well seen in every fight:
These (singl'd from their troops, and horst) assaild Mineruas knight, Ideus
and Phegeus both against Diom^d.

Who ranged from fight to fight, on foot; all hasting mutual charge,
(And now drawn near) first Phegeus threw, a iaueline swift and large:
Whose head the kings left shoulder took, but did no harm at all:
Then rusht he out a lance at him, that had no idle fall;
But in his breast stuck twixt the paps, and struck him from his horse.
Phegeus slain, Ideus (...).

Which stern sight, when Idaeus saw (distrustful of his force
To save his slaughterd brothers spoil) it made him headlong leap
From his fair chariot, and leave all: yet had not escaped the heap
Of heavy funeral, if the God, great president of fire,
Had not (in sudden clouds of smoke, and pity of his Sire,
To leave him utterly vnheird) given safe pass to his feet.
He gone, Tydides sent the horse, and chariot to the fleet.
The Trojans seeing Dares sons, one slain, the other fled,
Were struck amazed; the blew-eyd maid (to grace her Diomed
In giving free way to his power) made this so ruthful sact,
A fit advantage to remove, the warre-God out of act,
Who raged so on the Ilion side; she grip't his hand and said,
Mars, Mars, thou ruinor of men, that in the dust have laid Pallas to Mars.

So many cities, and with blood, thy Godhead do disteine;
Now shall we cease to show our breasts, as passionate as men,
And leave the mixture of our hands? resigning Jove his right
(As rector of the Gods) to give, the glory of the fight,
Where he affects? lest he force, what we should freely yield?
He held it fit, and went with her, from the tumultuous field,
Who set him in an hearby seat, on broad Scamanders shore. Mars leaves the
field, and Troy flies.

He gone, all Troy was gone with him, the Greeks drove all before,
And every Leader slew a man; but first the king of men
Deserved the honor of his name, and led the slaughter then, Agamemnon (...)
Odius.

And slew a Leader; one more huge, then any man he led;
Great Odius, Duke of Halizons; quite from his chariots head
He struck him with a lance to earth, as first he flight addressed;
It took his forward-turned back, and looked out of his breast;
His huge trunk sounded, and his arms, did echo the resound.
Idomenaeus to the death, did noble Phaestus wound, Idomenaeus slaies Phaestus.

The son of Maeon Borus, that, from cloddie Terna came;
Who (taking chariot) took his wound, and tumbled with the same
From his attempted seat; the lance, through his right shoulder struck,
And horrid darkness struck through him: the spoil his soldiers took.
Atrides-Menelaus slew (as he before him fled) Menelaus slaies Scamandrius.

Scamandrius, son of Strophius, that was a huntsman bred;
A skillful huntsman, for his skill, Dianas self did teach;
And made him able with his dart, infallibly to reach
All sorts of subtlest savages, which many a wooddie hill
Bred for him; and he much preserved, and all to show his skill.
Yet, not the dart-delighting Queen, taught him to shun this dart;
Nor all his hitting so far off, (the mastrie of his art:)
His back received it, and he fell, upon his breast withal:
His bodies ruin, and his arms, so sounded in his fall,
That his affrighted horse flew off, and left him, like his life.
Meriones ^lue Phereclus, whom she that nere was wife, Meriones ^lue Phereclus
an excellent Architect.

Yet Goddess of good housewiues, held, in excellent respect,
For knowing all the witty things, that grace an Architect;
And having power to give it all, the cunning use of hand;
Harmonides his sire built ships, and made him understand,
(With all the practice it required) the frame of all that skill;
He built all Alexanders ships, that au^hord all the ill
Of all the Trojans and his own, because he did not know
The Oracles, aduising Troy (for fear of overthrow)
To meddle with no sea affair, but live by tilling land;
This man Meriones surprisd, and drove his deadly hand
Through his right hip; the lances head, ran through the region
About the bladder, underneath, th'in-muscles, and the bone;
He (sighing) bowed his knees to death, and sacrificed to earth.
Phylides staid Pedaeus flight; Antenors bastard birth: Pedaeus slain by
Phylides.

Whom virtuous Theano his wife (to please her husband) kept
As tenderly as those she loved. Phylides near him stepped,
And in the fountain of the nerves, did drench his fervent lance,
At his heads backe-part; and so far, the sharp head did advance,
It cleft the Organe of his speech; and th'Iron (cold as death)
He took betwixt his grinning teeth, and gave the air his breath. Eurypilus
slai^s Hypsenor.

Eurypilus the much renowm'd, and great Euemons son,
Divine Hypsenor slew, begot, by stout Dolopion,
And consecrate Scamanders Priest; he had a Gods regard,
Amongst the people: his hard flight, the Grecian followed hard;
Rusht in so close, that with his sword, he on his shoulder laid
A blow, that his arms brawne cut off; nor there his vigor staid,
But drove down, and from off his wrist, it hewd his holy hand,
That gusht out blood, and down it dropped, upon the blushing sand;
Death, with his purple finger shut, and violent fate, his eyes.
Thus fought these, but distinguished well; Tydides so implies
His fury, that you could not know, whose side had interest Diomed compared to
a torrent.

In his free labors, Greece or Troy. But as a flood increast
By violent and sudden showers, let down from hills, like hills
Melted in fury; swells, and fomes, and so he ouerfils
His natural channel; that besides, both hedge and bridge resignes
To his rough confluence, far spread: and lusty flourishing vines
Drowned in his outrage. Tydeus son, so ouer-ran the field,
Strewn such as flourisht in his way: and made whole squadrons yield.
When Pandarus, Lycaons son, beheld his ruining hand,
With such resistlesse insolence, make lanes through every band:
He bent his gold-tipt bow of horn, and shot him rushing in, Pandarus wounds
Diomed

At his right shoulder; where his arms, were hollow; forth did spin
The blood, and down his curets ran; then Pandarus cried out,
Rank riding Trojans, Now rush in: Now, now, I make no doubt,
Our brauest foe is marked for death, he cannot long sustain
My violent shaft, if Jove's fair Son, did worthily constrain
My foot from Lycia: thus he brau'd, and yet his violent sha^t
Struck short with all his violence, Tydides life was saft;
Who yet withdrew himself, behind, his chariot and steeds,
And called to Sthenelus; Come friend, my wounded shoulder needs
Thy hand to ease it of this shaft. He hasted from his seat
Before the coach, and drew the shaft: the purple wound did sweat,
And drown his shirt of male in blood, and as it bled he praid:
Hear me, of Jove Aegiochus, thou most vnconquerd maid, Diomeds prayer to
Pall^.

If ever in the cruel field, thou have assistfull stood,
Or to my father, or my self, now love, and do me good;
Give him into my lances reach, that thus has given a wound,
To him thou guardst; preventing me, and brags that never more,
I shall behold the cheerful Sun: thus did the king implore.
The Goddess heard, came near, and took, the weariness of fight
From all his nerves and lineaments, and made them fresh and light, Pallas
encour ageth Diomed.

And said; Be bold, o Diomed, in every combat shine,
The great shield-shaker Tydeus strength (that knight, that Sire of thine)
By my infusion breaths in thee. And from thy knowing mind,
I have removed those erring mists, that made it lately blind,
That thou may difference Gods from men: and therefore use thy skill,
Against the tempting Deities, if any have a will
To try if thou presum'st of that, as thine, that flows from them;
And so assum'st above thy right. Where thou discern'st a beam
Of any other heavenly power, then she that rules in love,
That calls thee to the change of blows; resist not, but remove;
But if that Goddess be so bold (since she first stird this war)
Assault and mark her from the rest, with some infamous scarre.
The blew-eyd Goddess vanished, and he was seen again
Amongst the foremost; who before, though he were prompt and feign
To fight against the Trojans powers; now, on his spirits were called,
With thrice the vigor, Lion-like, that has been lately gald, Diomed made
thrice so strong as before by Pall^.

By some bold sheapheard in a field, where his curld flocks were laid;
Who took him as he leapt the fold; not slain yet, but appaid,
With greater spirit; comes again, and then the shepherd hides,
(The rather for the desolate place) and in his Coat abides;
His flocks left guardlesse; which amazed, shake and shrink up in heaps;
He (ruthlesse) freely takes his prey; and out again he leapes:
So sprightly, fierce, victorious, the great Hero flew
Upon the Trojans; and at once, he two Commanders slew;
Hyppenor and Astynous, in one, his lance he fixed, Hyppenor and Astynous slain
by Diomed.

Full at the nipple of his breast: the other smote betwixt
The neck and shoulder with his sword; which was so well laid on,
It swept his arm and shoulder off. These left, he rusht upon
Abbas, and Polyeidus, of old Eurydamas
The hapless sons; who could by dreams, tell what would come to pass:
Yet, when his sons set forth to Troy, the old man could not read
By their dreams, what would chance to them, for both were stricken dead
By great Tydides: after these, he takes into his rage
Xanthus, and Thoon, Phenops sons, borne to him in his age;
The good old man, even pined with years, and had not one son more
To heir his goods: yet Diomed, took both, and left him store
Of tears and sorrows in their steeds; since he could never see
His sons leave those hot wars alive: so, this the end must be (...) (...).

Of all his labors; what he heapt, to make his issue great,
Authority heird, and with her seed, filled his forgotten seat.
Then snatched he up two Priamists, that in one chariot stood; Simile of a Lion
otherwise applied then before.

Echemon, and fair Chromius; as feeding in a wood
Oxen or steeres are; one of which, a Lion leapes upon,
Tears down, and wrings in two his neck: so sternely Tydeus son
Threw from their chariot both these hopes, of old Dardanides:
Then took their arms, and sent their horse, to those that ride the seas.
Aeneas (seeing the troops thus tossed) brake through the heat of ^ight,
And all the whizzing of the darts, to find the Lycian knight
Lycaons son: whom having found, he thus bespake the Peer:
O Pandarus, where is now thy bow? thy deathfull arrows where? (...) to
Pandarus.

In which no one in all our host, but gives the palm to thee;
Nor in the Sun-lou'd Lycian greenes, that breed our Archerie,
Lives any that exceeds thy self. Come lift thy hands to Jove,
And send an arrow at this man (if but a man he prove,
That winnes such God-like victories; and now affects our host
With so much sorrow: since so much, of our best blood is lost
By his high valor;) I have fear, some God in him does threat,
Incenst for want of sacrifice; the wrath of God is great.
Lycaons famous son replyde; Great Counselor of Troy, Pandarus i^ (...).

This man so excellent in arms, I think is Tydeus joy;
I know him by his fiery shield, by his bright three plumed caske,
And by his horse; nor can I say, if or some God does mask
In his appearance; or he be (whom I named) Tydeus son:
But without God, the things he does (for certain) are not done;
Some great Immortal, that conueyes, his shoulders in a clowd,
Goes by, and puts by every dart, at his bold breast bestowd;
Or lets it take with little hurt* for I my self let fly
A shaft that shot him through his arms, but had as good gone by:
Yet, which I gloriously affirmed, had driven him down to hell.
Some God is angry, and with me; for far hence, where I dwell,
My horse and Chariots idle stand; with which some other way
I might repair this shameful miss: eleven fair chariots stay
In old Lycaons Court; new made, new trimd, to have been gone;
Curtaind and Arrast underfoot, two horse to every one,
That eat white Barley and black Otes, and do no good at all:
And these Lycaon, (that well knew, how these affairs would fall)
Charged (when I set down this design) I should command with here;
And gave me many lessons more, all which much better were
Then any I took forth my self. The reason I laid down,
Was, but the sparing of my horse; since in a sieged town,
I thought our horse-meate would be scant; when they were vsd to have
Their mangers full; so I left them, and like a lackey slave
Am come to Ilion, confident, in nothing but my bow,
That nothing profits me; two shafts, I vainly did bestow
At two great Princes; but of both, my arrows neither slew;
Nor this, nor Atreus younger son: a little blood I drew,
That served but to incense them more. In an unhappy star,
I therefore from my Armorie, have drawn those tools of war:
That day, when for great Hectors sake, to amiable Troy
I came to lead the Trojan bands. But if I ever joy
(In safe return) my Countries sight; my wives, my lofty towers;
Let any stranger take this head, if to the fiery powers,
This bow, these shafts, in pieces burst (by these hands) be not thrown;
Idle companions that they are, to me and my renown.
Aeneas said, Use no such words; for, any other way Aeneas to Pandarus.

Then this, they shall not now be vsd: we first will both assay
This man with horse and chariot. Come then, ascend to me,
That thou may try our Trojan horse, how skild in field they be;
And in pursuing those that fly, or flying, being pursude,
How excellent they are of foot: and these (if Jove conclude)
The escape of Tydeus again, and grace him with our flight)
Shall serve to bring us safely off. Come, I Will be first shall fight:
Take thou these fair reins and this scourge; or (if thou will) fight thou,
And leave the horses care to me. He answered, I will now
Descend to fight; keep thou the reins, and guide thy self thy horse;
Who with their wonted manager, will better wield the force Pandarus fights and
Aeneas guides the chariot.

Of the impulsive chariot, if we be driven to fly,
Then with a stranger; under whom, they will be much more shye,
And (fearing my voice, wishing thine) grow restie, nor go on,
To bear us off; but leave engaged, for mighty Tydeus son,
Themselves and us; Then be thy part, thy one hou'd horses guide;
I Will make the fight: and with a dart, receive his utmost pride.
With this the gorgious chariot, both (thus prepared) ascend,
And make full way at Diomed; which noted by his friend;
Mine own most loved Mind (said he) two mighty men of war S^henelus to
Diomed.

I see come with a purposd charge; one's he that hits so far
With bow and shaft, Lycaons son: the other fames the brood
Of great Anchises, and the Queen, that rules in Amorous blood;
( Aeneas excellent in arms) come up and use your steeds,
And look not war so in the face, lest that desire that feeds
Thy great mind be the bane of it. This did with anger sting
The blood of Diomed, to see, his friend that chid the king
Before the fight, and then preferred, his ablesse, and his mind,
To all his ancestors in fight, now come so far behind: Diomed now finds time
to make Sthenelus see better his late rebuke of mem^on.

Whom thus he answered; Urge no flight, you cannot please me so;
Nor is it honest in my mind, to fear a coming foe;
Or make a flight good, though with fight; my powers are yet entire,
And scorn the help-tire of a horse; I will not blow the fire
Of their ho^e valors with my flight; but cast upon the blaze
This body borne upon my knees: I entertain amaze?
Minerua will not see that shame: and since they have begun,
They shall not both elect their ends; and he that scapes shall run;
Or stay and take the others fate: and this I leave for thee;
If amply wise Athenia, give both their lives to me,
Reine our horse to their chariot hard, and have a special heed
To seize upon Aeneas steeds; that we may change their breed,
And make a Grecian race of them, that have been long of Troy;
For, these are bred of those brave beasts, which for the lovely Boy,
That waits now on the cup of Jove, Jove, that farre-seeing God.
Gave Tros the king in recompense: the best that ever trod
The sounding Center, underneath, the Morning and the Sun.
Anchises stole the breed of them; for where their Sires did run,
He closely put his Mares to them, and never made it known
To him that heird them, who was then, the king Laomedon.
Six horses had he of that race, of which himself kept four,
And gave the other two his son; and these are they that scour
The field so bravely toward us, expert in charge and flight:
If these we have the power to take, our prize is exquisite,
And our renown will far exceed. While these were talking thus,
The fired horse brought the assailants near: and thus spoke Pandarus;
Pandarus to Diomed.

Most suffering-minded Tydeus son, that have of war the art:
My shaft that struck thee, slew thee not, I now will prove a dart:
This said, he shook, and then he threw, a lance, aloft and large,
That in Tydides curets stuck, quite driving through his targe;
Then braid he out so wild a voice, that all the field might hear;
Now have I reached thy root of life, and by thy death shall bear
Our praises chief prize from the field: Tydides, vndismaid,
Replide; Thou err'st, I am not touched: but more charge will be laid
To both your lives before you part: at least the life of one
Shall satiate the throat of Mars; this said, his lance was gone:
Minerua led it to his face, which at his eye ran in,
And as he stoopt, struck through his jaws, his tongs root, and his chinne.
Diomed slaies Pandarus.

Down from the chariot he fell, his gay arms shined and rung,
The swift horse trembled, and his soul, for ever charmed his tongue.
Aeneas with his shield and lance, leapt swiftly to his friend,
Afraid the Greeks would force his trunk; and that he did defend,
Bold as a Lion of his strength: he hid him with his shield,
Shook round his lance, and horribly, did threaten all the field
With death, if any durst make in; Tydides raisd a stone,
With his one hand, of wondrous weight, and powered it mainly on
The hip of Anchisiades, wherein the joint does move Aeneas being son to
Anchises.

The thigh, it is called the huckle bone, which all in sherds it drove;
Brake both the nerves, and with the edge, cut all the flesh away:
It staggerd him upon his knees, and made the Hero stay
His strooke-blind temples on his hand, his elbow on the earth;
And there this Prince of men had died, if she that gave him birth,
(Kissed by Anchises on the green, where his fair oxen fed,
Jove's loving daughter) instantly, had not about him spread
Her soft embraces, and conuaid, within her heavenly veil, Venus takes off
Aeneas being wounded.

(Vsd as a rampire against all darts, that did so hot assail)
Her deare-lou'd issue from the field: Then Sthenelus in have,
(Remembering what his friend aduisd) from forth the preasse made fast
His own horse to their chariot, and presently laid hand,
Upon the louely-coated horse, Aeneas did command; The horse of Aeneas made
prise.

Which bringing (to the wondering Greeks) he did their guard commend
To his beloved Deiphylus, who was his inward friend,
And (of his equals) one to whom, he had most honor shown*
That he might see them safe at fleet: then stepped he to his own,
With which he chearefully made in, to Tydeus mighty race;
He (mad with his great enemies rape) was hot in desperate chase
Of her that made it; with his lance (armed less with steel then spite)
Well knowing her no Deity, that had to do in fight;
Minerua his great patroness, nor she that raceth towns,
Bellona; but a Goddess weak, and foe to men's renownes;
Her (through a world of fight) pursude, at last he ouer-tooke,
And (thrusting up his ruthlesse lance) her heavenly veil he struck,
(That even the Graces wrought themselves, at her divine command) Diomed wounds
Venus.

Quite through, and hurt the tender back, of her delicious hand:
The rude point piercing through her palm; forth flowed the immortal blood,
(Blood, such as flows in blessed Gods, that eat no humane food,
Nor drink of our inflaming wine, and therefore bloodlesse are,
And called immortals:) out she cried, and could no longer bear
Her loved son, whom she cast from her; and in a sable clowd Venus for
anguish throws away Aeneas, whom Apollo receives.

Phoebus (receiving) hid him close, from all the Grecian crowd;
Lest some of them should find his death. Away flew Venus then,
And after her cried Diomed; Away thou spoil of men,
Though sprung from all-preseruing Jove; These hot encounters leave: Diomed to
Venus.

Is It not enough that silly Dames, thy sorceries should deceive,
Unless thou thrust into the war, and rob a soldiers right?
I think, a few of these assaults, will make thee fear the fight,
Where ever thou shall hear it named. She sighing, went her way
Extremely grieved, and with her griefs, her beauties did decay;
And black her Iuorie body grew. Then from a dewy mist, Iris rescues Venus.

Brake swift-foot Iris to her aid, from all the darts that hist,
At her quick rapture; and to Mars, they took their plaintiff course,
And found him on the fights left hand; by him his speedy horse,
And huge lance, lying in a fogge: the Queen of all things fair, Venus to
Mars.

Her loved brother on her knees, besought with instant prayre, (...).

His golden-ribband bound-man'd horse, to lend her up to heaven,
For she was much grieved with a wound, a mortal man had given;
Tydides: that against Jove himself, durst now advance his arm.
He granted, and his chariot (perplexed with her late harm) Mars lends his
horse to Venus.

She mounted, and her wagonnesse, was she that paints the air;
The horse she reind, and with a scourge, importuned their repair,
That of themselves out-flew the wind, and quickly they ascend
Olympus, high seat of the Gods; th'horse knew their iournies end,
Stood still, and from their chariot, the windy footed Dame
Dissolved, and gave them heavenly food; and to Dione came
Her wounded daughter; bent her knees; she kindly bad her stand;
With sweet embraces helped her up; strok't her with her soft hand;
Called kindly by her name; and asked, what God has been so rude, Dione mother
of Venus, to Venus.

(Sweet daughter) to chastise thee thus? as if thou were pursude,
Even to the act of some light sin, and deprehended so?
For otherwise, each close escape, is in the Great let go.
She answered; Haughty Tydeus son, has been so insolent; Ven^s to Dione.

Since he, whom most my heart esteems, of all my loved descent,
I rescued from his bloody hand: now battle is not given,
To any Trojans by the Greeks; but by the Greeks to heaven.
She answered, Daughter, think not much, though much it grieve the* (...) Dio^
to (...).

The patience, whereof many Gods, examples may produce,
In many bitter ils received; as well that men sustain
By their inflictions; as by men, repaid to them again^.
Mars sufferd much more then thy self, by Ephialtes power, Mars bound in
chains by O^us and Ephial^.

And Otus, Aloeus sons, who in a brazen tower,
(And in inextricable chains) cast that warre-greedie God;
Where twice six months and one he lived, and there the period
Of his sad life perhaps had closd, if his kind step-dames eye,
Fair Erebaea had not seen, who told it Mercury;
And he by stealth enfranchisd him, though he could scarce enjoy
The benefit of franchisment, the chains did so destroy
His vital forces with their weight. So Juno sufferd more,
When with a three-forkt arrows head, Ampbytrios son did gore
Her right breast, past all hope of cure. Pluto sustaind no less
By that self man; and by a shaft, of equal bitterness,
Shot through his shoulder at hell gates; and there (amongst the dead,
Were he not deathlesse) he had died: but up to heaven he fled
(Extremely tortured) for recure, which instantly he won
At Paeons hand, with sovereign Balm; and this did Jove's great son. Paeon
Phisit^ to the Gods.

Unblessed, great-high-deed-daring man, that cared not doing ill; (...)

That with his bow durst wound the Gods; but by Mineruas will,
Thy wound, the foolish Diomed, was so profane to give;
Not knowing he that fights with heaven, has never long to live;
And for this deed, he never shall, have child about his knee
To call him father, coming home. Besides, hear this from me,
(Strength-trusting man) though thou be strong, and art in strength a tower;
Take heed a stronger meet thee not, and that a woman's power
Contains not that superior strength; and lest that woman be
Adrastus daughter, and thy wife, the wise Aegiale,
When (from this hour not far) she wakes, even sighing with desire
To kindle our revenge on thee, with her enamouring fire,
In choosing her some fresh young friend, and so drown all thy fame,
Won here in war, in her Court-peace, and in an opener shame.
This said, with both her hands she cleansd, the tender back and palm
Of all the sacred blood they lost; and never using Balm,
The pain ceast, and the wound was cured, of this kind Queen of love.
Juno and Pallas seeing this, assaid to anger Jove,
And quit his late made-mirth with them, about the loving Dame,
With some sharpeiest, in like sort built, upon her present shame.
Grey-eyd Athenia began, and asked the Thunderer, Pallas to Iou^.

If (nothing moving him to wrath) she boldly might prefer
What she conceived, to his conceit: and (staying no reply)
She bade him view the Cyprian fruit, he loved so tenderly,
Whom she though hurt, and by this means, intending to suborne
Some other Lady of the Greeks (whom lovely veiles adorn)
To gratify some other friend, of her much-loued Troy,
As she embraced and stird her blood, to the Venerean joy, Scoptic^.

The golden claspe those Grecian Dames, upon their girdles wear,
Took hold of her delicious hand, and hurt it, she had fear.
The Thunderer smiled, and called to him, loves golden Arbitresse, (...) to Venus.

And told her, those rough works of war, were not for her access:
She should be making marriages, embracings, kisses, charms;
Stern Mars and Pallas had the charge, of those affairs in arms.
While these thus talked, Tydides rage, still thirsted to atchieue
His prise upon Anchises son; though well he did perceive
The Sun himself protected him: but his desires (inflamed
With that great Trojan Princes blood, and arms so highly famed)
Not that great God did reverence. Thrice rusht he rudely on;
And thrice betwixt his darts and death, the Suns bright target shone:
But when upon the fourth assault (much like a spirit) he flew,
The far-off-working Deity, exceeding wrathful grew,
And asked him: What? Not yield to Gods? thy equals learn to know: Apollo to
Diomed.

The race of Gods is far above, men creeping here below.
This drove him to some small retreite; he would not tempt more near
The wrath of him that struck so far; whose power had now set clear Apollo
bears Aeneas to Troy.

Aeneas from the stormy field, within the holy place
Of Pergamus; where, to the hope, of his so sovereign grace
A goodly Temple was advanced; in whose large inmost part
He left him, and to his supply, inclined his mothers heart
( Latona) and the dart-pleasd Queen, who cured, and made him strong.
The siluer-bow'd-faire God, then threw, in the tumultuous throng,
An Image, that in stature, look, and arms he did create The Image of Aeneas.

Like Venus son; for which the Greeks, and Trojans made debate,
Laid loud strokes on their Ox-hide shields, and bucklers easly borne:
Which error Phoebus pleased to urge, on Mars himself in scorn:
Mars, Mars, (said he) thou plague of men, smeard with the dust and blood
Apollo to Mars.

Of humanes, and their ruined walls; yet thinks thy Godhead good,
To fright this Fury from the field? who next will fight with Jove.
First, in a bold approach he hurt, the moist palm of thy Love:
And next (as if he did affect, to have a Deities power)
He held out his assault on me. This said, the lofty tower
Of Pergamus he made his seat, and Mars did now excite
The Trojan forces, in the form, of him that led to fight
The Thracian troops; swift Acamas. O Priams sons (said he)
How long, the slaughter of your men, can ye sustain to see? Mars like Acamas
to the sons of Priam.

Even till they brave ye at your gates? Ye suffer beaten down
Aeneas, great Anchises son; whose prowess we renown
As much as Hectors: fetch him off, from this contentious prease.
With this, the strength and spirits of all, his courage did increase;
And yet Sarpedon seconds him, with this particular taunt Sarpedon reproues
Hector.

Of noble Hector; Hector? where, is thy vnthanfull vaunt,
And that huge strength on which it built? that thou, and thy allies,
With all thy brothers (without aid of us or our supplies,
And troubling not a citizen) the City safe would hold:
In all which, friends, and brothers helps, I see not, nor am told
Of any one of their exploits; but (all held in dismay
Of Diomed; like a sort of dogs, that at a Lion bay,
And entertain no spirit to pinch;) we (your assistants here)
Fight for the town, as you helped us: and I (an aiding Peer,
No Citizen, even out of care, that does become a man,
For men and childrens liberties) add all the aid I can:
Not out of my particular cause; far hence my profit grows:
For far hence Asian Lycia lies, where gulfie Xanthus flows:
And where my loved wife, infant son, and treasure nothing scant,
I left behind me, which I see, those men would have, that want:
And therefore they that have, would keep; yet I (as I would lose
Their sure fruition) cheer my troops, and with their lives propose
Mine own life, both to general fight, and to particular cope,
With this great soldier: though (I say) I entertain no hope
To have such gettings as the Greeks, nor fear to lose like Troy:
Yet thou (even Hector) deedlesse standst, and car'st not to employ
Thy towne-borne friends; to bid them stand, to fight and save their wives:
Lest as a Fowler casts his nets, upon the silly lives
Of birds of all sorts; so the foe, your walls and houses hales,
(One with another) on all heads: or such as escape their falls,
Be made the prey and prize of them, (as willing overthrown)
That hope not for you, with their force: and so this braue-built town
Will prove a Chaos: that deserves, in thee so hot a care
As should consume thy days and nights, to hearten and prepare
Th'assistant Princes: pray their minds, to bear their far-brought toiles,
To give them worth, with worthy fight; in victories and foiles
Still to be equal; and thy self (exampling them in all)
Need no reproves nor spurs: all this, in thy free choice should fall.
This stung great Hectors heart: and yet, as every generous mind
Should silent bear a just reproof, and show what good they find
In worthy counsels, by their ends, put into present deeds:
Not stomach, nor be vainly shamed: so Hectors spirit proceeds:
And from his Chariot (wholly armed) he iumpt upon the sand:
On foot, so toiling through the host; a dart in either hand,
And all hands turned against the Greeks; the Greeks despisde their worst,
And (thickning their instructed powers) expected all they durst.
Then with the feet of horse and foot, the dust in clouds did rise.
And as in sacred floores of barnes, upon corne-winowers flies
The chafe, driven with an opposite wind, when yellow Ceres dites; Simile
(...) the husband man, expressing ^bly.

Which all the Diters feet, legs, arms, their heads and shoulders whites:
So looked the Grecians gray with dust, that struck the solid heaven,
Raisd from returning chariots, and troops together driven.
Each side stood to their labors firm: fierce Mars flew through the air,
And gatherd darkness from the fight: and with his best affair,
Obeyed the pleasure of the Sun, that wears the golden sword,
Who bad him raise the spirits of Troy, when Pallas ceast t'afford
Her helping office, to the Greeks; and then his own hands wrought; Apollo
brings Aeneas from his Temple to field cured.

Which (from his Phanes rich chancell, cured) the true Aeneas brought,
And placed him by his Peers in field; who did (with joy) admire,
To see him both alive and safe, and all his powers entire:
Yet stood not sifting, how it chanced: another sort of task,
Then stirring th'idle sieve of news, did all their forces ask:
Inflamed by Phoebus, harmfull Mars, and Eris, eagrer far:
The Greeks had none to hearten them; their hearts rose with the war;
But chiefly Diomed, Ithacus, and both the Aiaces used
Stirring examples, and good words: their own fames had infusde
Spirit enough into their bloods, to make them neither fear
The Trojans force, nor Fate it self; but still expecting were
When most was done, what would be more; their ground they still made good;
And (in their silence, and set powers) like fair still clouds they stood:
Simile.

With which, Jove crowns the tops of hills, in any quiet day,
When Boreas and the ruder winds (that use to drive away
Aires duskie vapors, being loose, in many a whistling gale)
Are pleasingly bound up and calm, and not a breath exhale;
So firmly stood the Greeks, nor fled, for all the Ilions aid.
Atrides yet coasts through the troops, confirming men so stayed:
O friends (said he) hold up your minds; strength is but strength of will;
Reverence each others good in fight, and shame at things done ill:
Where soldiers show an honest shame, and love of honor lives,
That ranks men with the first in fight; death fewer liueries gives
Then life; or then where Fames neglect, makes cow-herds fight at length:
Flight neither does the body grace, nor shows the mind has strength.
He said; and swiftly through the troops, a mortal Lance did send,
That reft a standard-bearers life, renownd Aeneas friend;
Deicoon Pergasides, whom all the Trojans loved, Pergasides slain by Agamemnon.

As he were one of Priams sons; his mind was so approved
In always fighting with the first: the Lance his target took,
Which could not interrupt the blow, that through it clearly struck,
And in his bellies rimme was sheathed, beneath his girdle-stead;
He sounded falling; and his arms, with him resounded, dead.
Then fell two Princes of the Greeks, by great Aeneas ire, Orsilochus and
Crethon slain by Aeneas.

Diocleus sons ( Orsilochus, and Crethon) whose kind Sire
In brauely-builded Phaera dwelt; rich, and of sacred blood;
He was descended lineally, from great Alphaus flood,
That broadly flows through Pylos fields: Alphaeus did beget The pedigree of
Orsilochus.

Orsilochus; who in the rule, of many men was set:
And that Orsilochus begat, the rich Diocleus:
Diocleus sire to Crethon was, and this Orsilochus:
Both these, arrived at man's estate, with both the Atrides went,
To honor them in the Ilton wars; and both were one way sent;
To death as well as Troy; for death, hid both in one black hour.
As two young Lions (with their dam, sustaind but to devour) Simile.

Bred on the tops of some steep hill, and in the gloomie deep
Of an inaccessible wood, rush out, and prey on sheep,
Steeres, Oxen; and destroy men's stals, so long that they come short,
And by the Owners steel are slain: in such unhappy sort,
Fell these beneath Aeneas power. When Menelaus viewed
(Like two tall fir-trees) these two fall; their timelesse falls he rew'd;
And to the first fight, where they lay, a vengefull force he took;
His arms beat back the Sun in flames; a dreadful Lance he shook:
Mars put the fury in his mind, that by Aeneas hands,
(Who was to make the slaughter good) he might have strewed the sands.
Antilochus voluntary care of Menelaus, and their charge of Aeneas.

Antilochus (old Nestors son) observing he was bent
To urge a combat of such ods; and knowing the event,
Being ill on his part, all their pains (alone sustaind for him)
Er'd from their end, made after hard, and took them in the trim
Of an encounter; both, their hands, and darts advanced, and shook,
And both pitched, in full stand of charge; when suddenly the look
Of Anchisiades took note, of Nestors valiant son,
In full charge too; which two to one, made Venus issue shun
The hot adventure, though he were, a soldier well approved.
Then drew they off their slaughterd friends; who given to their beloved,
They turned where fight showed deadliest hate; and there mixed with the dead
Pylemen, that the targatiers of Paphlagonia led,
A man like Mars; and with him fell, good Mydon that did guide
His chariot; Atymnus son. The Prince Pylemen died Menelaus slayes Pylemen.

By Menelaus; Nestors joy, slew Mydon; one before,
The other in the chariot: Atrides lance did gore
Pylemens shoulder, in the blade: Antilochus did force
A mighty stone up from the earth, and (as he turned his horse) Antilochus
slayes Myden.

Struck Mydons elbow in the midst: the reins of Iuorie
Fell from his hands into the dust: Antilochus let fly,
His sword withal, and (rushing in) a blow so deadly laid
Upon his temples, that he gron'd; tumbled to earth, and stayed
A mighty while preposterously (because the dust was deep)
Upon his neck and shoulders there, even till his foe took keep
Of his prisde horse, and made them stir; and then he prostrate fell:
His horse Antilochus took home. When Hector had heard tell, Hectors manner of
assault.

(Amongst the uproar) of their deaths, he laid out all his voice,
And ran upon the Greeks: behind, came many men of choice;
Before him marched great Mars himself, matched with his femall mate,
The drad Bellona: she brought on (to fight for mutual Fate)
A tumult that was wild, and mad: he shook a horrid Lance,
And, now led Hector, and anon, behind would make the chance.
This sight, when great Tydides saw, his hair stood up on end:
And him, whom all the skill and power, of arms did late attend,
Now like a man in counsel poor, that (traveling) goes amiss, Simile.

And (having past a boundless plain) not knowing where he is,
Comes on the sudden, where he sees, a river rough, and raues
With his own billows ravished, into the king of waves;
Murmurs with foam, and frights him back: so he, amazd, retirde,
And thus would make good his amaze; O friends, we all admirde
Great Hector, as one of himself, well-darting, bold in war;
When some God guards him still from death, and makes him dare so far;
Now Mars himself (formd like a man), is present in his rage:
And therefore, whatsoever cause, importunes you to wage
War with these Trojans; never strive, but gently take your rod;
Lest in your bosoms, for a man, ye ever find a God.
As Greece retirde, the power of Troy, did much more forward prease;
And Hector, two brave men of war, sent to the fields of peace; Hector
slaughters Menesthes and Anchialus. Ajax slayes Amphius Selag^.

Menesthes, and Anchialus; one chariot bare them both:
Their falls made Ajax Telamon, ruthful of heart, and wroth;
Who lightened out a lance, that smote, Amphius Selages,
That dwelt in Paedos; rich in lands, and did huge goods possess:
But Fate, to Priam and his sons, conducted his supply:
The Iauelin on his girdle struck, and pierced mortally
His bellies lower part; he fell; his arms had looks so trim,
That Ajax needs would prove their spoil; the Trojans powrd on him
Whole storms of Lances, large, and sharp: of which, a number stuck
In his rough shield; yet from the slain, he did his Iauelin pluck:
But could not from his shoulders force, the arms he did affect;
The Trojans, with such drifts of Darts, the body did protect:
And wisely Telamonius feared, their valorous defense;
So many, and so strong of hand, stood in, with such expense,
Of deadly prowess; who repeld (though big, strong, bold he were)
The famous Ajax; and their friend, did from his rapture bear.
Thus this place, filled with strength of fight, in th'armies other prease,
Tlepolemus, a tall big man, the son of Hercules,
A cruel destiny inspired, with strong desire to prove
Encounter with Sarpedons strength, the son of Cloudy Jove;
Who, coming on, to that stern end, had chosen him his foe:
Thus Jove's great Nephew, and his son, against one another go: Jove's son
Sarpedon, and Tlepodemus his nephew son to Hercules, draw to encounter.
Tlepodemus to Sarpedon.

Tlepolemus (to make his end, more worth the will of Fate)
Began, as if he had her power; and showed the mortal state
Of too much confidence in man, with this superfluous Brave;
Sarpedon, what necessity, or needless humor drove
Thy form, to these wars? which in heart, I know thou do adhorre;
A man not seen in deeds of arms, a Lycian counselor;
They lie that call thee son to Jove, since Jove bred none so late;
The men of elder times were they, that his high power begat,
Such men, as had Herculean force; my father Hercules
Was Jove's true issue; he was bold; his deeds did well express
They sprung out of a Lions heart: he whilome came to Troy,
(For horse that Jupiter gave Tros, for Ganimed his boy)
With six ships only and few men, and tore the City down,
Left all her broad ways desolate, and made the horse his own:
For thee, thy mind is ill disposde, thy bodies powers are poor,
And therefore are thy troops so weak: the soldier evermore
Follows the temper of his chief; and thou pull'st down a side.
But say, thou art the son of Jove; and have thy means supplide,
With forces fitting his descent: the powers, that I compel,
Shall throw thee hence; and make thy head, run open the ga^es of b^ll.
Jove's Lycian issue answered him, Tlepolemus, it is true; Sarpedon to (...).

Thy father, holy Ilion, in that sort overthrew;
Th'iniustice of the king was cause, that where thy father had
Used good deseruings to his state, he quitted him with bad.
Hesyone, the joy and grace, of king Laomedon,
Thy father rescude from a whale; and gave to Telamon
In honored Nuptials; Telamon, from whom your strongest Greek
Boasts to have issude; and this grace, might well expect the like:
Yet he gave taunts for thanks, and kept, against his oath, his horse;
And therefore both thy fathers strength, and justice might enforce
The wreake he took on Troy: but this, and thy cause differ far;
Sons seldom heir their fathers worths; thou can not make his war:
What thou assum'st from him, is mine, to be on thee imposde.
With this, he threw an ashen dart; and then Tlepolemus losde
Another from his glorious hand: Both at one instant flew;
Both struck, both wounded; from his neck, Sarpedons Iauelin drew Sarpedon
slaugh ters (...).

The life-bloud of Tlepolemus; full in the midst it fell:
And what he threatened, the other gave; that darkness, and that hell.
Sarpedons left thigh took the Lance; it pierced the solid bone; ^imselfe
sore hurt by T^epolemus.

And with his raging head, ran through; but Jove preserved his son.
The dart yet vexed him bitterly, which should have been pulled out;
But none considerd then so much; so thick came on the rout,
And filled each hand so full of cause, to plie his own defense;
It Was held enough (both fallen) that both, were nobly carried thence.
Ulysses knew the events of both, and took it much to heart,
That his friends enemy should escape; and in a twofold part
His thoughts contended; if he should, pursue Sarpedons life,
Or take his friends wreake on his men. Fate did conclude this strife;
By whom it was otherwise decreed, then that Ulysses steel Ulysses (...).

Should end Sarpedon. In this doubt, Minerua took the wheel
From fickle Chance; and made his mind, resolve to right his friend
With that blood he could surest draw. Then did Revenge extend
Her full power on the multitude; Then did he never miss;
Alastor, Halius, Chromius, Noemon, Pritanis,
Alcander, and a number more, he slew, and more had slain,
If Hector had not understood; whose power made in amain,
And struck fear through the Grecian troops; but to Sarpedon gave
Hope of full rescue; who thus cried, O Hector! help and save Sarpedon to
Hector.

My body from the spoil of Greece; that to your loved town,
My friends may see me borne; and then, let earth possess her own,
In this soil, for whose sake I left, my countries; for no day
Shall ever show me that again; nor to my wife display
(And young hope of my Name) the joy, of my much thirsted sight:
All which, I left for Troy; for them, let Troy then do this right.
To all this Hector gives no word: but greedily he strives,
With all speed to repel the Greeks, and shed in floods their lives,
And left Sarpedon: but what face, soever he put on
Of following the common cause; he left this Prince alone
For his particular grudge; because, so late, he was so plain
In his reproof before the host, and that did he retain;
How ever, for example sake, he would not show it then;
And for his shame to, since it was just. But good Sarpedons men
Venturd themselves, and forced him off, and set him underneath
The goodly Beech of Jupiter, where now they did vnsheath
The Ashen lance: strong Pelagon, his friend, most loved, most true,
Enforced it from his maimed thigh: with which his spirit flew, Sarpedon in a
trance.

And darkness ouer-flew his eyes, yet with a gentle gale
That round about the dying Prince, cool Boreas did exhale,
He was revived, recomforted; that else had grieved and dyed.
All this time, flight drove to the fleet, the Argiues, who applied
No weapon against the proud pursuit, nor ever turned a head;
They knew so well that Mars pursude, and dreadful Hector led.
Then who was first, who last, whose lives, the Iron Mars did seize,
And Priams Hector? Helenus, surnamed Oenopides,
Good (...), and Orestes, skild, in managing of horse;
Bold Oenomaus, and a man, renownd for martial force,
Trechus, the great Aetolian Chief; Oresbius, that did wear
The gaudy Myter; studied wealth, extremely, and dwelt near
The Athlantique lake Cephisides, in Hyla; by whose seat,
The good men of Boeotia dwelt. This slaughter grew so great,
It flew to heaven: Saturnia, discernd it, and cried out
To Pallas; O unworthy sight? to see a field so fought,
And break our words to Spartas king, that Ilion should be rac'^,
And he return revenged? when thus, we see his Greeks disgraced
And bear the harmfull rage of Mars? Come, let us use our care
That we dishonor not our powers. Minerua was as yare
As she, at the despite of Troy. Her golden-bridl'd steeds,
Then Saturns daughter brought abroad; and Hebe, she proceeds
T'addresse her chariot; instantly, she gives it either wheel,
Beamed with eight Spokes of sounding brass, the Axle-tree was steel; (...)
chariot.

The Felffes, incorruptible gold; their upper bands, of brass;
Their matter most vnuallued; their work of wondrous grace.
The Naues in which the Spokes were driven, were all with silver bound;
The chariots seat, two hoopes of gold, and silver, strengthened round;
Edged with a gold and silver fringe; the beam that looked before,
Was massy silver; on whose top, geres all of gold it wore,
And golden Poitrils. I^no mounts, and her ho^e horses rein'd,
That thirsted for contention, and still of peace complaind.
Minerua wrapped her in the robe, that curiously she woue
With glorious colors, as she sat, on th'Azure floor of Jove; Pallas armed.

And wore the arms that he puts on, bent to the tearefull field:
About her brode-spred shoulders hung, his huge and horrid shield, Aegis (Io^es
^ield) described

Fringed round with euer-fighting Snakes; through it, was drawn to life
The miseries, and deaths of fight; in it frownd bloody Strife;
In it shined sacred Fortitude; in it fell Pursuit flew;
In it the monster Gorgons head, in which (held out to view)
Were all the dire ostents of Jove; on her big head she placed
His foure-plum'd glittering caske of gold, so admirably vast,
It would a hundred garrisons, of soldiers comprehend.
Then to her shining chariot, her vigorous feet ascend:
And in her violent hand she takes, his grave, huge, solid lance,
With which the conquests of her wrath, she uses to advance,
And ouerturne whole fields of men; to show she was the seed
Of him that thunders. Then heavens Queen (to urge her horses speed) The thr^e
How^s Guardians of heaven gates.

Takes up the scourge, and forth they fly; the ample gates of heaven
Rung, and flew open of themselves; the charge whereof is given
(With all Olympus, and the sky) to the distinguished Hours,
That clear, or hide it all in clouds; or power it down in showers.
This way their scourge-obeying horse, made haste, and soon they won
The top of all the topfull heavens, where aged Saturns son
Sat seuerd from the other Gods; then staid the white-arm'd Queen
Her steeds; and asked of Jove, if Mars, did not incense his spleen
With his foul deeds; in ruining, so many, and so great
In the Command and grace of Greece, and in so rude a heat.
At which (she said) Apollo laughed, and Venus; who still sue
To that mad God for violence, that never justice knew;
For whose impiety she asked, if with his wished love
Her self might free the field of him? He bade her rather move
Athenia to the charge she sought, who vsd of old to be
The bane of Mars; and had as well, the gift of spoil as he.
This grace she slackt not, but her horse, scourged, that in nature flew
Betwixt the cope of stars and earth: And how far at a view
A man into the purple Sea, may from a hill descrie:
How far ^ heavenly (...) took at one reach or stroke in galloping or
running; wherein Homers ^ind is far from being expressed in his Inter pretors,
al taking it for how far Deities were borne from the earth: when insta^tly they
came down to earth: (...), etc. tantum vno saltu conficiunt, vel, tantu^
sub^ulum progrediuntur deorum altizoni e qui, etc. vno, be ing understood, and
the horses swiftnes highly expressed. The sense otherwise is senseless, and
contradictorie.
So far a high-neighing horse of heaven, at every iumpe would fly.
Arrived at Troy, where broke in cutls, the two-floods mix their force,
( Scamander, and bright Simois) Saturnia staid her horse;
Took them from chariot; and a clowd, of mighty depth diffusd
About them; and the verdant banks, of Symois produced
(In nature) what they (...) ilus is the original word, which Sea (...) (...),
(...) learnedly, asking how the horse came by it on those banks, when the text
tells him (...) produced it: being willing to express by (...) the (...) of
that (...). If not, I hope the D^ities (...) ever command it.
eat in heaven. Then both the Goddesses
Marched like a pair of timorous Doves, in hasting their access,
To the Argiue succor. Being arrived, where both the most, and best
Were heapt together, (showing all, like Lions at a feast
Of new slain carcasses; or Bores, beyond encounter strong.)
There found they Diomed; and there, midst all th'admiring throng,
Saturnia put on Stentors shape; that had a brazen voice,
And spoke as loud as fifty men; like whom she made a noise,
And chid the Argiues; O ye Greeks, in name, and outward rite,
But Princes only; not in act: what scandal? what despite
Use ye to honor? all the time, the great Aeacides
Was conversant in arms; your foes, durst not a foot addr^sse
Without their ports; so much they feared, his lance that all controld;
And now they out-ray to your fleet. This did with shame make bold
The general spirit and power of Greece; when (with particular note
Of their disgrace) Athenia, made Tydeus issue hot.
She found him at his chariot, refreshing of his wound
Inflicted by slain Pandarus; his sweat did so abound,
It much annoid him, underneath, the broad belt of his shield;
With which, and tired with his toil, his soul could hardly yield
His body motion. With his hand, he lifted up the belt,
And wiped away that clotterd blood, the fervent wound did melt.
Minerua leand against his horse, and near their withers laid
Her sacred hand; then spoke to him; Believe me Diomed, (...) to Di^med.

Tydeus exampl'd not himself, in thee his son; not Great,
But yet he was a soldier; a man of so much heat,
That in his Ambassie for Thebes, when I forbad his mind
To be too ventrous; and when Feasts, his heart might have declind
(With which they welcomed him) he made, a challenge to the best,
And foild the best; I gave him aid, because the rust of rest
(That would have seisd another mind) he sufferd not; but vsd
The trial I made like a man; and their soft feasts refusd:
Yet when I set thee on, thou faint'st; I guard thee, charge, exhort,
That (I abetting thee) thou should, be to the Greeks a Fort,
And a dismay to Ilion; yet thou obey'st in naught:
Afraid, or slothful, or else both: henceforth, renounce all thought Diomed
to Pal^.

That ever thou were Tydeus son. He answered her; I know
Thou art Jove's daughter, and for that, in all just duty owe
Thy speeches reverence: yet affirm, ingenuously, that fear
Does neither hold me spiritlesse, nor sloth. I only bear
Thy charge in zealous memory, that I should never war
With any blessed Deity, unless (exceeding far
The limits of her rule) the Queen, that gouerns Chamber sport
Should preasse to field; and her, thy will, enioynd my lance to hurt:
But he whose power has right in arms, I knew in person here
(Besides the Cyprian Deity) and therefore did forbear;
And here have gatherd in retreit, these other Greeks you see
With note and reverence of your charge. My dearest mind (said she) (...)
again.

What then was fit is changed: It Is true, Mars has just rule in war,
But just war; otherwise he raues, not fights; he is alterd far; What (...)
w^rre is.

He vowed to Juno and my self, that his aid should be vsd
Against the Trojans, whom it guards; and therein he abusd
His rule in arms, infringed his word, and made his war unjust:
He is inconstant, impious, mad: Resolve then; firmly trust
My aid of thee against his worst, or any Deity:
Add scourge to thy free horse, charge home: he fights perfidiously.
This said; as that brave king, her knight, with his horse-guiding friend,
Were set before the chariot, (for sign he should descend,
That she might serve for wagonnesse) she plucked the waggoner back,
And up into his seat she mounts: the Beechen tree did crack
Beneath the burden; and good cause, it bore so huge a thing:
A Goddess so repleate with power, and such a puissant king.
She snatched the scourge up and the reins, and shut her heavenly look
In hels vast helm, from Mars his eyes: and full careere she took
At him, who then had newly slain, the mighty Periphas,
Renowned son to Ochesius; and far the strongest was
Of all th'Aetolians; to whose spoil, the bloody God was run:
But when this man-plague saw th'approch, of God-like Tydeus son;
He let his mighty Periphas lie, and in full charge he ran The comb^ of Mars
and (...).

At Diomed; and he at him; both near; the God began,
And (thirsty of his blood) he throws, abrazen lance, that bears
Full on the breast of Diomed, above the reins and geres;
But Pallas took it on her hand, and struck the eager lance
Beneath the chariot: then the knight, of Pallas does advance,
And cast a Iaueline off, at Mars; Minerua sent it on; Mars (...) by (...).

That (where his arming girdle girt) his belly grazed upon,
Just at the rim, and rancht the flesh: the lance again he got,
But left the wound; that stung him so, he laid out such a throat,
As if nine or ten thousand men, had brayed out all their breaths
In one confusion; having felt, as many sudden deaths.
The rore made both the hosts amazed. Up flew the God to heaven;
And with him, was through all the air, as black a tincture driven
(To Diomeds eyes) as when the earth, half chok't with smoking heat
Of gloomie clouds, that stifle men; and pitchie tempests threat,
Vsherd with horrid gusts of wind: with such black vapors plumed,
Mars flew to Olympus, and broad heaven; and there his place resumed. (...)
(...) (...) (...).

Sadly he went and sat by Jove, showed his immortal blood,
That from a mortall-man-made-wound, powrd such an impious flood;
And (weeping) powered out these complaints: O Father, stormst thou not Mars to
Iupite^.

To see us take these wrongs from men? extreme griefs we have got
Even by our own deep counsels held, for gratifying them;
And thou (our Councels President) conclud'st in this extreme
Of fighting ever; being ruld, by one that thou have bred;
One never well, but doing ill; a girl so full of head,
That, though all other Gods obey, her mad moods must command
By thy indulgence; nor by word, nor any touch of hand
Correcting her; thy reason is, she is a spark of thee,
And therefore she may kindle rage, in men, against Gods; and she
May make men hurt Gods; and those Gods, that are (besides) thy seed.
First in the palms height Cyprides; then runs the impious deed
On my hurt person: and could life, give way to death in me;
Or had my feet not fetched me off; heaps of mortality
Had kept me consort. Jupiter, with a contracted brow,
Thus answered Mars: Thou many minds, inconstant changling thou; Jupiter to Mars

Sit not complaining thus by me; whom most of all the Gods
(Inhabiting the starrie hill) I hate: no periods
Being set to thy contentions, brawles, fights, and pitching fields;
Just of thy mother Iunos moods; stiffe-neckt, and never yields,
Though I correct her still, and chide; nor can forbear offense,
Though to her son; this wound I know, tastes of her insolence;
But I will prove more natural, thou shall be cured, because
Thou come of me: but had thou been, so cross to sacred laws,
Being borne to any other God; thou had been thrown from heaven
Long since, as low as Tartarus, beneath the Giants driven.
This said, he gave his wound in charge, to P^on, who applied
Such sovereign medicines, that as soon, the pain was qualified,
And he recur'd; as nourishing milk, when runnet is put in,
Runs all in heaps of tough thick curd, though in his nature thin:
Even so soon, his wounds parted sides, ran close in his recure;
For he (all deathlesse) could not long, the parts of death endure.
Then Hebe bathed, and put on him, fresh garments, and he sat Hebe attires
Mars.

Exulting by his Sire again, in top of all his state;
So (having from the spoils of men, made his desired remove)
Juno and Pallas reascend, the starrie Court of Jove.
The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Gods now leaving an indifferent field,
The Greeks prevail, the slaughterd Troi^ns yield;
Hector (by Hellenus advice) retires
In haste to Troy; and Hecuba, desires
To pray Minerua, to remove from fight
The son of Tydeus, her affected knight;
And vow to her (for favor of such price)
Twelve Oxen should be S^aine in sacrifice.
In mean space, Glaucus and Tydides (...);
And either other, with remembrance greet
Of old love twixt their fathers; which enclines
Their hearts to fri^ndship; who change arms for signs
Of a continued love for eithers life.
Hector, in his return, meets with his wife;
And taking, in his armed arms, his son,
He prophecies the fall of Ilion.
Another Argument.
In Zeta, Hector Prophecies;
Prays for his son: wills sacrifice.
THe stern fight freed of all the Gods; conquest, with doubtful wings
Flew on their lances; every way, the restless field she flings,
Betwixt the floods of Symois, and Xanthus, that confined
All their affairs at Ilion, and round about them shined.
The first that weighed down all the field, of one particular side,
Was Ajax, son of Telamon: who like a bulwark plide
The Greeks protection, and of Troy, the knottie orders brake:
Held out a light to all the rest, and showed them how to make
Way to their conquest: he did wound, the strongest man of Thrace,
The tallest, and the biggest set, ( Eussorian Acamas:)
His lance fell on his caskes plumed top, in stooping; the fell head
Drove through his forehead to his jaws; his eyes Night shadowed.
Tydides slew Teuthranides, Axilus, that did dwell
In fair Arisbas well built towers, he had of wealth a Well, Tydides, (...)
Diomed (being son to Tyd^.)

And yet was kind and bountiful: he would a traveler pray
To be his guest; his friendly house, stood in the broad high way;
In which, he all sorts nobly vsd: yet none of them would stand,
Twixt him and death; but both himself, and he that had command
Of his fair horse, Calisius, fell liuelesse on the ground.
Euryalus; Opheltius, and Dresus dead did wound;
Nor ended there his fiery course, which he again begins,
And ran to it succesfully, upon a pair of twins,
Aesepus, and bold Pedasus, whom good Bucolion,
(That first called father, though base borne, renowm'd Laomedon)
On Nais Abarbaraea got; a Nymph that (as she fed
Her curled flocks) Bucolion wooed, and mixed in love and bed.
Both these were spoild of arms, and life, by Mecistiades.
Then Polypaetes, for stern death, Astialus did seize:
Ulysses slew Percosius: Teucer, Aretaon:
Antilochus (old Nestors joy) Ablerus: the great son
Of Atreus, and king of men, Elatus; whose abode
He held at upper Pedasus, where Satnius river flowed.
The great Hero Leitus, staid Philacus in flight,
From further life: Eurypilus, Melanthius reft of light.
The brother to the king of men, Adrestus took alive;
Whose horse, (affrighted with the flight) their driuer now did drive,
Amongst the low-growne Tam^cke trees; and at an arm of one
The chariot in the draught-tree brake; the horse brake loose, and ron
The same way other flyers fled; contending all to town:
Himself close at the chariot wheel, upon his face was thrown,
And there lay flat, rolled up in dust: Atrides inwards drove;
And (holding at his breast his lance) Adrestus sought to save
His head, by losing of his feet, and trusting to his knees:
On which, the same parts of the king, he hugs, and offers fees
Of worthy value for his life; and thus pleades their receipt:
Take me alive, O Atreus son, and take a worthy weight
Of brass, elaborate iron, and gold: a heap of precious things This Virgils
imita^es.

Are in my fathers riches hid; which (when your servant brings
News of my safety to his ears) he largely will divide
With your rare bounties: Atreus son, thought this the better side,
And meant to take it; being about, to send him safe to fleet:
Which when (far off) his brother saw, he winged his royal feet,
And came in threatening, crying out; O soft heart? what is the cause Agamemno^ to
Men^laus.

Thou spar'st these men thus? have not they, observed these gentle laws
Of mild humanity to thee, with mighty argument,
Why thou should deal thus? In thy house? and with all president
Of honored guest rites entertaind? not one of them shall fly
A bitter end for it, from heaven; and much less (dotingly)
Escape our reuengefull fingers; all, even the infant in the womb
Shall taste of what they merited, and have no other tomb,
Then razed Ilion; nor their race, have more fruit, then the dust.
This just cause turned his brothers mind, who violently thrust
The prisoner from him; in whose guts, the king of men impressed
His ashen lance; which (pitching down, his foot upon the breast,
Of him that upwards fell) he drew; then Nestor spoke to all:
O friends and household men of Mars, let not your pursuit fall Kestor to the
Greeks.

With those ye fell, for present spoil; nor (like the king of men)
Let any escape vnfeld: but on, dispatch them all; and then
Ye shall have time enough to spoil. This made so strong their chase,
That all the Trojans had been housd, and never turned a face,
Had not the Priamist Helenus (an Augure most of name) Hellenus to Hector and
Aeneas

Willed Hector, and Aeneas thus: Hector? Anchises fame?
Since on your shoulders, with good cause, the weighty burden lies
Of Troy and Lycia, (being both, of noblest faculties,
For counsel, strength of hand, and apt, to take chance at her best,
In every turn she makes) stand fast, and suffer not the rest
(By any way searched out for escape) to come within the ports:
Lest (fled into their wives kind arms) they there be made the sports
Of the pursuing enemy: exhort and force your bands
To turn their faces: and while we, employ our ventured hands
(Though in a hard condition) to make the other stay:
Hector, go thou to Ilion, and our Queen mother pray,
To take the richest robe she has; the same that is chiefly dear
To her Court fancy: with which Iemme, (assembling more to her,
Of Troys chief Matrones) let all go, (for fear of all our fates)
To Pallas temple: take the key, unlock the leauie gates;
Enter, and reach the highest tower, where her Palladium stands,
And on it put the precious veil, with pure, and reverend hands:
And vow to her (besides the gift) a sacrificing stroke
Of twelve fat Heifers of a year, that never felt the yoke:
(Most answering to her maiden state) if she will pity us;
Our town, our wives, our youngest joys: and (him that plagues them thus)
Take from the conflict; Diomed, that Fury in a fight;
That true son of great Tydeus; that cunning Lord of Flight:
Whom I esteem the strongest Greek: for we have never fled
Achilles (that is Prince of men, and whom a Goddess bred)
Like him; his fury flies so high, and all men's wraths commands.
Hector intends his brothers will; but first through all his bands,
He made quick way, encouraging, and all (to fear) affraide:
All turned their heads and made Greece turn. Slaughter stood still dismayed,
On their parts; for they thought some God, fallen from the vault of stars,
Was rusht into the Ilions aid, they made such dreadful wars.
Thus Hector, toyling in the waves, and thrusting back the flood Hector to the
Trojans.

Of his ebbed forces: thus takes leave: So, so, now runs your blood
In his right current; Forwards now, Trojans? and far called friends?
Awhile hold out, till for success, to this your brave amends,
I haste to Ilion, and procure, our Counselors, and wives
To pray, and offer Hecatombs, for their states in our lives.
Then faire-helm'd Hector turned to Troy, and (as he trod the field) How Hector
left the field.

The black Bulls hide, that at his back, he wore about his shield,
(In the extreme circumference) was with his gate so rockt,
That (being large) it (both at once) his neck and ankles knocked.
And now betwixt the hosts were met, Hippolochus brave son The encounter of
Diomed and Glaucus.

Glaucus, who (in his very look) hope of some wonder won:
And little Tydeus mighty heir: who seeing such a man
Offer the field; (for usual blows) with wondrous words began.
What art thou (strongst of mortal men) that putst so far before? Diomed to
Glauc^.

Whom these fights never showed mine eyes? they have been evermore
Sons of unhappy parents borne, that came within the length
Of this Minerua-guided lance, and durst close with the strength
That she inspires in me. If heaven, be thy divine abode,
And thou a Deity; thus informed, no more, with any God
Will I change lances: the strong son, of Drias did not live
Long after such a conflict dared, who godlesly did drive
Nisaeus Nurses through the hill, made sacred to his name,
And called Niss^ius: with a goade, he puncht each furious dame,
And made them every one cast down, their green and leauie spears.
This, t'homicide Lycurgus did; and those ungodly fears,
He put the Froes in, seisd their God. Even Bacchus he did drive
From his Nisseius; who was feign (with huge exclaimes) to diue
Into the Ocean: Thetis there, in her bright bosom took
The flying Deity; who so feared, Lycurgus threats, he shook:
For which, the freely-liuing Gods, so highly were incenst,
That Saturns great son struck him blind, and with his life dispenc't
But small time after: all because, the immortals loved him not:
Nor loved him, since he strived with them: and his end has begot
Fear in my powers to fight with heaven: but if the fruits of earth
Nourish thy body, and thy life, be of our humane birth,
Come near, that thou may soon arrive, on that life-bounding shore,
To which I see thee hoise such sail. Why do thou so explore, Glaucu^ his
worcester thie answer to Diomed: and his ^edegree drawn even from Sysip^us.

(Said Glaucus) of what race I am? when like the race of leaves
The race of man is, that deserves, no question; nor receives
My being any other breath: The wind in Autumn strowes
The earth with old leaves; then the Spring, the woods with new endowes:
And so death scatters men on earth: so life puts out again
Man's leauie issue: but my race, if (like the course of men)
Thou seekst in more particular terms: it is this; (to many known)
In midst of Argos, nurse of horse, there stands a walled town
Ephyre, where the Mansion house, of Sysiphus did stand; The history of
Bellerophon.

Of Sysiphus Aeolides, most wise of all the land:
Glaucus was son to him, and he, begat Bellerophon,
Whose body heaven endued with strength, and put a beauty on,
Exceeding lovely: Pr^tus yet, his cause of love did hate,
And banished him the town: he might; he ruld the Argiue state:
The virtue of the one, Iou^ placed, beneath the others power.
His exile grew, since he denied, to be the Paramour
Of fair Ant^ta, Pr^tus wife; who felt a raging fire
Of secret love to him: but he, whom wisdom did inspire
As well as prudence (one of them, aduising him to shun
The danger of a Princess love: the other, not to run
Within the danger of the Gods: the act being simply ill)
Still entertaining thoughts divine, subdued the earthly still.
She (ruled by neither of his wits) preferred her lust to both;
And (false to Pr^tus) would seem true, with this abhorred untroth;
Praetus? or die thy self (said she) or let Bellerophon die; Bellereph^ntis
literae^. Ad. Eras. ^hu long speech many Critickes tax^ (...) vntim^ly, being
(as they take (...)) in the hea^ of fight. Hier Vidas (a late obseruer) be ing^
eagrest against Homer, whose ignorance in this, I cannot but note, and prove to
you: for (besides the authority and office of a Poet, to vary and quicken hi^
Poem with these episods, sometimes beyond the leisure of their actions) the
Critic notes not how far his forerunner preue^ts his worst as far: and sets
down his spe^ch, at the sudden and strange turning of the Trojan field, set on
a little before by Hector: and that so fiercely, it made an admi ring stand
among the Grecians, and therein gave fit time for these great captains to
utter their admirations: the whole field in that part being to stand like their
Commanders. And then how full of decorum this gallant show and speech was to
sound understandings, I leave only to such, and let our Critics go c^uill.

He urged dishonor to thy bed: which since I did deny,
He thought his violence should grant, and sought thy shame by force,
The king, incenst with her report, resolved upon her course;
But doubted, how it should be run: he shund his death direct;
(Holding a way so near, not safe) and plotted the effect,
By sending him with letters sealed (that, opened, touch his life)
To Rheuns king of Lycia, and father to his wife.
He went, and happily he went: the Gods walked all his way.
And being arrived in Lycia, where Xanthus does display
The silver ensigns of his waves: the king of that broad land
Received him, with a wondrous free, and honorable hand.
Nine days he feasted him, and killed, an Ox in every day,
In thankful sacrifice to heaven, for his fair guest; whose stay,
With rosy fingers, brought the world, the tenth wel-welcomd morn:
And then the king did move to see, the letters he had borne
From his loved son in law; which seen, he wrought thus their conten's.
Chym^ra the invincible, he sent him to convince:
Sprung from no man, but mere divine; a Lions shape before,
Behind, a dragons, in the midst, a Gotes shagg'd form she bore;
And flames of deadly feruencie, flew from her breath and eyes:
Yet her he slew, his confidence, in sacred prodigies
Renderd him victor. Then he gave, his second conquest way,
Against the famous Solymi, when (he himself would say
Reporting it) he enterd on, a passing vigorous fight.
His third huge labor he approved, against a woman's spite
That filled a field of Amazons: be overcame them all.
Then set they on him sly Deceit, when Force had such a fall;
An ambush of the strongest men, that spacious Lycia bred,
Was lodged for him; whom he lodged sure: they never raisd a head.
His deeds thus showing him derived, from some Celestial race,
The king detaind, and made amends, with doing him the grace
Of his fair daughters Princely gift; and with her (for a dowre)
Gave half his kingdom; and to this, the Lycians on did power
More then was given to any king: a goodly planted field,
In some parts, thick of groves, and woods: the rest, rich crops did yield.
This field, the Lycians futurely (of future wanderings there
And other errors of their Prince, in the unhappy Rere
Of his sad life) the Err^nt called: the Princess brought him forth
Three children (whose ends grieved him more, the more they were of worth)
Isander, and Hippolochus, and fair Laodomy:
With whom, even Jupiter himself, left heaven it self, to lie;
And had by her the man at arms, Sarpedon, called divine.
The Gods th^n left him (lest a man should in their glories shine) S^rpedons
birth

And set against him, for his son, Isandrus, (in a strife,
Against the valiant Solymi) Mars reft of light and life,
Laodamia (being envied, of all the Goddesses)
The golden-bridle-handling Queen, the maiden Patroness,
Slew with an arrow: and for this, he wandered evermore
Alone through his Aleian field; and fed upon the core
Of his sad bosom: flying all, the loathed consorts of men.
Yet had he one suruiu'd to him, of those three childeren;
Hippolochus, the root of me: who sent me here, with charge,
That I should always bear me well, and my deserts enlarge
Beyond the vulgar: lest I shamed, my race, that far excelled
All that Ephyras famous towers, or ample Lycia held.
This is my stock, and this am I. This cheard Tydides heart,
Who pitched his spear down; leand, and talked, in this affectionate part.
Certesse (in thy great Ancetor, and in mine own) thou art Diomed^ answer to
(...).

A guest of mine, right ancient; king Oeneus twenty days
Detaind, with feasts, Bellerophon, whom all the world did praise:
Betwixt whom, mutual gifts were given: my Grandsi^e gave to thine,
A girdle of Phoenician work, impurpl'd wondrous fine:
Thine gave a two-neckt Judge of gold, which though I use not here,
Yet still it is my gemme at home. But if our fathers were
Familiar; or each other knew, I know not: since my sire
Left me a child, at siege of Thebes: where he left his life's fire.
But let us prove our Grandsires sons, and be each others guests:
To Lycia when I come, do thou, receive thy friend with feasts:
Peloponnesus, with the like, shall thy wished presence greet;
Mean space, shun we each other here, though in the preasse we meet:
There are enough of Troy beside, and men enough renownd,
To right my powers, whom ever heaven, shall let my lance confound:
So are there of the Greeks for thee: kill who thou can: and now
For sign of amity twixt us, and that all these may know
We glory in th'hospitious rites, our Grandsires did commend,
Change we our arms before them all. From horse then Both descend,
Join hands, give faith, and take; and then, did Jupiter (...). ^entem ^demit
Iup. the text has it: which ^nely I alter of all ^o mers original, since
Plutarch against the Stoics, excuses this supposed f^lly in Gl^ucus. Spond.
likewise enc^uvaging my alterations, which I use for the lou^d and simple
Nobility of the free exchange in Glaucus, contrary to others that for the
supposed f^lly in Gl^us, turned his change into a Pro^erb. (...), golden o^
(...). Pri^ Court.
elate
The mind of Glaucus: who to show, his reverence to the state
Of virtue in his grandsires heart, and gratulate beside
The offer of so great a friend: exchanged (in that good pride)
Curets of gold for those of brass, that did on Diomed shine:
One of a hundred Oxens price, the other but of nine.
By this, had Hector reached the ports, of Scaea, and the towers:
About him flockt the wives of Troy, the children, paramours,
Enquiring how their husbands did, their fathers, brothers, loves.
He stood not then to answer them, but said; It now behoues
Ye should go all ^'implore the aid, of heaven, in a distress
Of great effect, and imminent. Then hasted he access,
To Priams goodly builded Court; which round about was run
With walking porches, galleries, to keep off rain and Sun;
Within, of one side, on a rue, of sundry colored stones,
Fifty fair lodgings were built out, for Priams fifty sons:
And for as fair sort of their wives; and in the opposite view
Twelve lodgings of like stone, like height, were likewise built arew;
Where, with their fair and virtuous wives, twelve Princes, sons in law,
To honorable Priam, lay: And here met Hecub^
(The loving mother) her great son, and with her, needs must be
The fairest of her femall race, the bright Laodice. (...) to Hector.

The Queen grip't hard her Hectors hand, and said; O worthiest son,
Why leau'st thou field? is it not because, the cursed nation
Afflict our countrymen and friends? they are their mones that move
Thy mind to come and lift thy hands (in his high tower) to Jove:
But stay a little, that my self, may fetch our sweetest wine,
To offer first to Jupiter: then that these joints of thine
May be refresht: for (woe is me) how thou art toyld and spent!
Thou for our cities general state: thou, for our friends far sent,
Must now the preasse of fight endure: now solitude to call
Upon the name of Jupiter: thou only for us all.
But wine will something comfort thee: for to a man dismayed,
With careful spirits; or too much, with labor ouerlaid,
Wine brings much rescue, strengthening much, the body and the mind.
The great Helme-mouer thus received, the authresse of his kind; Hector to
(...).

My royal mother, bring no wine, lest rather it impair,
Then help my strength; and make my mind, forgetful of th'affaire
Committed to it. And (to pour, it out in sacrifice)
I fear, with unwashed hands to serve, the pure-liu'd Deities;
Nor is it lawful, thus imbrew'd, with blood, and dust; to prove
The will of heaven: or offer vows, to clowd-compelling Jove.
I only come to use your pains (assembling other Dames,
Matrons, and women honored most, with high and virtuous names)
With wine and odors; and a robe, most ample, most of price;
And which is dearest in your love, to offer sacrifice,
In Pallas temple: and to put, the precious robe ye bear,
On her Palladium; vowing all, twelve Oxen of a year,
Whose necks were never wrung with yoke; shall pay her Grace their lives,
If she will pity our sieg'd town; pity our selves, our wives;
Pity our children; and remove, from sacred Ilion,
The dreadful soldier Diomed; and when your selves are gone
About this work, my self will go, to call into the field,
(If he will hear me) Hellens love; whom would the earth would yield,
And headlong take into her gulf, even quick before mine eye^*
For then my heart, I hope, would cast, her lode of miseries;
Borne for the plague he has been borne, and bred to the deface
(By great Olympius) of Troy, our Sire, and all our race.
This said, g^aue Hecuba went home, and sent her maids about,
To bid the Matrones: she her self, descended, and searched out
(Within a place that breathed perfumes) the richest robe she had:
Which lay with many rich ones more, most curiously made,
By women of Sydonia; which Paris brought from thence,
Sailing the broad Sea, when he made, that voyage of offense,
In which he brought home Hellena. That robe, transferd so far,
(That was the undermost) she took; it glitterd like a star;
And with it, went she to the Fane, with many Ladies more:
Amongst whom, fair cheekt Thean^, unlocked the folded door;
Chaste Theano, Antenors wife, and of Cisseus race,
Sister to Hecuba, both borne, to that great king of Thrace.
Her, th*Ilions made Mineruas Priest; and her they followed all,
Up to the Temples highest tower; where, on their knees they fall*
Lift up their hands, and fill the Fane, with Ladies pitious cries.
Then lovely Theano took the veil, and with it she implies Theano Mineruas
Priest, and Antenors wife, prays to Palla^

The great Palladium, praying thus; Goddess of most renown?
In all the heaven of Goddesses? great guardian of our town?
Reverend Miner^a? break the lance, of Diomed; cease his grace;
Give him to fall in shameful flight, headlong, and on his face,
Before our ports of Ilion; that instantly we may,
Twelve vnyok't Oxen of a year, in this thy Temple slay
To thy sole honor; take their bloods, and banish our offense;
Accept Troyes zeal; her wives, and save, our infants innocence.
She praid, but Pallas would not grant. Mean space was Hector come
Where Alexanders lodgings were; that many a goodly room
Had, built in them by Architects, of Troys most curious sort;
And were no lodgings, but a house; nor no house, but a Court;
Or had all these containd in them; and all within a tower,
Next Hectors lodgings and the kings. The loved of heavens chief power,
( Hector) here entered. In his hand, a goodly lance he bore,
Ten cubits long; the brazen head, went shining in before;
Helped with a burnisht ring of gold; he found his brother then
Amongst the women; yet prepared, to go amongst the men.
For in their chamber he was set, trimming his arms, his shield,
His curets, and was trying how, his crooked bow would yield
To his straight arms; amongst her maids, was set the Argiue Queen,
Commanding them in choicest works. When Hectors eye had seen
His brother thus accompanied; and that he could not bear
The very touching of his arms, but where the women were;
And when the time so needed men: right cunningly he chid,
That he might do it bitterly; his cowardice he hid
(That simply made him so retired) beneath an anger faind,
In him, by Hector; for the hate, the citizens sustaind Hector dissembles the
cowardice he finds in Part, t^rning it, as if he chid him for his anger at the
Tro^ns for hating him being conquered by Menelaus: when it is for his
effeminacie: which is all paraphr asticall in my translation.

Against him, for the foil he took, in their cause; and again,
For all their general foiles in his. So Hector seems to plain
Of his wrath to them, for their hate, and not his cowardice;
As that were it that shelterd him, in his effeminacies;
And kept him in that dangerous time, from their fit aid in fight:
For which he chid thus; Wretched man? so timelesse is thy spite,
That it is not honest; and their hate, is just, against which it bends:
War burns about the town for thee; for thee our flaughterd friends
Besiege Troy with their carcasses, on whose heaps our high walls
Are ouerlookt by enemies: the sad sounds of their falls
Without, are echoed with the cries, of wines, and babes within;
And all for thee: and yet for them, thy honor cannot win
Head of thine anger: thou should need, no spirit to stir up thine,
But thine should set the rest on fire; and with a rage divine
Chastise impartially the best, that impiously forbeares:
Come forth, lest thy fair towers and Troy, be burnd about thine ears.
Paris acknowledged (as before) all just that Hector spoke;
Allowing justice, though it were, for his injustice sake:
And wh ere his brother put a wrath, upon him, by his art;
He takes it (for his honors sake,) as sprung out of his heart:
And rather would have anger seem, his fault, then cowardice:
And thus he answered: Since with right, you joined check with advise, Paris
(...) H^ctor.

And I hear you; give equal ear; It is not any spleen
Against the Town (as you conceive) that makes me so unseen;
But sorrow for it: which to ease, and by discourse digest,
(Within my self) I live so close: and yet, since men might wrest
My sad retreat, like you; my wife, (with her advice) inclinde
This my addression to the field; which was mine own free mind,
As well as th'instance of her words: for though the foil were mine,
Conquest brings forth her wreaths by turns: stay then this have of thine,
But till I ar me; and I am made, a consort for thee straight;
Or go, I Will overtake thy haste. Hellen stood at receipt,
And took up all great Hectors powers, to attend her heavy words; Hellens
ruthful complaint to Hector.

By which had Paris no reply; this vent her grief affords:
Brother, (if I may call you so, that had been better borne
A dog, then such a horride Dame, as all men curse and scorn;
A mischief mak^r, a man-plague) O would to God the day
That first gave light to me, had been, a whirlwind in my way,
And borne me to some desert hill, or hid me in the rage
Of earths most far-resounding seas; ere I should thus engage
The dear lives of so many friends: yet since the Gods hau^ been
Helpless foreseers of my plagues, they might have likewise seen,
That he they put in yoke with me, to bear out their award,
Had been a man of much more spirit; and, or had noblier dared
To shield mine honor with his deed; or with his mind had known
Much better the vpbraids of men; that so he might have shown
(More like a man) some sense of grief, for both my shame and his:
But he is senseless, nor conceiues, what any manhood is;
Nor now, nor ever after will: and therefore hangs, I fear,
A plague above him. But come near; good brother, rest you here,
Who (of the world of men) stands charged, with most unrest for me,
(Vile wretch) and for my Lovers wrong; on whom a destiny
So bitter is imposde by Jove, that all succeeding times
Will put (to our vn-ended shames) in all men's mouths our crimes.
He answered: Hellen, do not seek, to make me sit with thee: Hector to Hellen.

I must not stay, though well I know, thy honored love of me:
My mind calls forth to aid our friends, in whom my absence breeds
Longings to see me: for whose sakes, importune thou, to deeds,
This man by all means, that your care, may make his own make have,
And meet me in the open town, that all may see at last,
He minds his lover: I my self, will now go home* and see
My household, my dear wife, and son, that little hope of me.
For (sister) it is without my skill, if I shall ever more
Return and see them; or to earth, her right in me restore:
The Gods may stoop me by the Greeks. This said, he went to see
The virtuous Princess, his true wife, white armed Andromache.
She (with her infant son, and maid) was climbed the tower, about
The sight of him that sought for her, weeping and crying out.
Hector, not finding her at home, was going forth; retired;
Stood in the gate: her woman called; and curiously inquired,
Where she was gone; bad tell him true, if she were gone to see
His sisters, or his brothers wives? or whether she should be
At Temple with the other Dames, t'implore Mineruas ruth.
Her woman answered; since he asked, and urged so much the truth;
The truth was, she was neither gone, to see his brothers wives,
His sisters, nor t'implore the ruth, of Pallas on their lives;
But (she aduertisde of the bane, Troy sufferd; and how vast
Conquest had made her self, for Greece) like one distraught, made have
To ample Ilion, with her son, and Nurse; and all the way
Mournd, and dissolved in tears for him. Then Hector made no stay;
But trod her path, and through the streets (magnificently built)
All the great City past, and came, where (seeing how blood was spilt)
Andromache might see him come; who made as he would pass
The ports without saluting her, not knowing where she was:
She, with his sight, made breathless have, to meet him: she, whose grace
Brought him, withal, so great a dowre; she that of all the race
Of king Action, only lived: Action, whose house stood
Beneath the mountain Placius, enuirond with the wood
Of Theban Hippoplace, being Court, to the Cilician land:
She ran to Hector, and with her (tender of heart and hand)
Her son, borne in his Nurses arms: when like a heavenly sign,
Compact of many golden stars, the princely child did shine;
Whom Hector called Scamandrius; but whom the town did name
Astianax; because his sire, did only prop the same.
Hector (though grief bereft his speech, yet) smiled upon his joy:
Andromache cride out, mixed hands, and to the strength of Troy,
Thus wept forth her affection: O noblest in desire; A^dromaches passion to
Hector

Thy mind, inflamed with others good, will set thy self on fire:
Nor pitiest thou thy son, nor wife, who must thy widow be,
If now thou issue: all the field, will only run on thee.
Better my shoulders underwent, the earth, then thy decease;
For then would earth bear joys no mo^e: then comes the black increase
Of griefs (like Greeks on Ilion): Alas, what one suruiues
To be my refuge? one black day, bereft seven brothers lives,
By stern Achilles; by his hand, my father breathed his last: Thebes a most
(...) (...) of Ci^.

His high-wald rich Cilician Thebes, sacked by him, and laid wast;
The royal body yet he left, vnspoild: Religion charmed
That act of spoil; and all in fire, he burnd him complete armed;
Built over him a royal tomb: and to the monument
He left of him; The Oreades (that are the high descent
Of Aegis-bearing Jupiter) another of their own
Did add to it, and set it round, with Elms; by which is shown
(In theirs) the barrenness of death: yet might it serve beside
To shelter the sad Monument, from all the ruffinous pride
Of storms and tempests, used to hurt, things of that noble kind:
The short life yet, my mother lived, he saved; and served his mind
With all the riches of the Realm; which not enough esteemd,
He kept her prisoner; whom small time, but much more wealth redeemd:
And she in syluane Hyppoplace, Cilicia ruled again;
But soon was ouer-rul'd by death: Dianas chaste disdain
Gave her a Lance, and took her life; yet all these gone from me,
Thou amply renderst all; thy life, makes still my father be;
My mother; brothers: and besides, thou art my husband too;
Most loved, most worthy. Pity then (dear love) and do not go;
For thou gone, all these go again: pity our common joy,
Lest (of a fathers patronage, the bulwark of all Troy)
Thou leau'st him a poor widows charge; stay, stay then, in this Tower,
And call up to the wild Fig Tree, all thy retired power:
For there the wall is easiest scaled, and fittest for surprise;
And there, the Aiaces, Idomen, the Atrides, Diomed, thrice
Have both suruaid, and made attempt; I know not, if induced
By some wise Augure; or the fact, was naturally infusd
Into their wits, or courages. To this, great Hector said; Hector to (...).

Be well assured wife, all these things, in my kind cares are waid:
But what a shame, and fear it is, to think how Troy would scorn
(Both in her husbands and her wives, whom long-traind gowns adorn)
That I should cowardly fly off? The spirit I first did breath,
Did never teach me that; much less, since the contempt of death
Was settled in me; and my mind, knew what a Worthy was;
Whose office is, to lead in fight, and give no danger pass
Without improuement. In this fire, must Hectors trial shine;
Here must his country, father, friends, be (in him) made divine.
And such a stormy day shall come, in mind and soul I know,
When sacred Troy shall shed her towers, for tears of overthrow;
When Priam, all his birth and power, shall in those tears be drowned.
But neither. Troyes posterity, so much my soul does wound:
Priam, nor Hecuba her self, nor all my brothers woes
(Who though so many, and so good, must all be food for foes)
As thy sad state; when some rude Greek, shall lead thee weeping hence;
These free days clouded; and a night, of captive violence
Loding thy temples: out of which, thine eyes must never see; The n^mes of two
fountains: of which, one in Thessaly, the other (...) Argos: or according to
(...), in (...) or (...).

But spin the Greek wives, webs of task; and their Fetch-water be,
To Argos, from Messeides, or clear Hyperias spring:
Which (howsoever thou abhorst) Fate's such a shrewish thing,
She will be mistress: whose cursed hands, when they shall crush out cries
From thy oppressions, (being beheld, by other enemies)
Thus they will nourish thy extremes: This dame was Hectors wife,
A man, that at the wars of Troy, did breath the worthiest life
Of all their army. This again, will rub thy fruitful wounds,
To miss the man, that to thy bands, could give such narrow bounds:
But that day shall not wound mine eyes; the solid heap of night
Shall interpose, and stop mine ears, against thy plaints, and plight.
This said, he reached to take his son: who (of his arms afraid;
And then the horse-haire plume, with which, he was so ouerlaid,
Nodded so horribly) he clingd, back to his nurse, and cride.
Laughter affected his great Sire; who doft, and laid aside
His fearful Helm; that on the earth, cast round about it, light;
Then took and kissed his loving son; and (ballancing his weight
In dancing him) these loving vows, to living Jove he used,
And all the other bench of Gods: O you that have infusde Hectors prayer for
his son.

Soul to this Infant; now set down, this blessing on his star:
Let his renown be clear as mine; equal his strength in war;
And make his reign so strong in Troy, that years to come may yield
His facts this fame; (when rich in spoils, he leaves the conquered field
Sown with his slaughters.) These high deeds, exceed his fathers worth:
And let this echoed praise supply, the comforts to come forth
Of his kind mother, with my life. This said; th'Heroicke Sire
Gave him his mother; whose fair eyes, fresh streams of loves salt fire,
Billow'd on her soft cheeks, to hear, the last of Hectors speech;
In which his vows comprisde the sum, of all he did beseech
In her wished comfort. So she took, into her odorous breast,
Her husbands gift; who (moved to see, her heart so much oppressed)
He dried her tears; and thus desired: Afflict me not (dear wife)
With these vain griefs; He does not live, that can disioyne my life
And this firm bosom; but my Fate; and Fate, whose wings can fly?
Noble, ignoble, Fate controuls: once borne, the best must die:
Go home, and set thy houswifrie, on these extremes of thought;
And drive war from them with thy maids; keep them from doing naught:
These will be nothing: leave the cares, of war, to men, and me;
In whom (of all the Ilion race) they take their highest degree.
On went his helm; his Princess home, half cold with kindly fears;
When every fear, turned back her looks; and every look shed tears.
Fo-slaughtering Hectors house, soon reached, her many women there
Wept all to see her: in his life, great Hectors funerals were;
Never looked any eye of theirs, to see their Lord safe home,
Escaped from the gripes and powers of Greece. And now was Paris come
From his high towers; who made no stay, when once he had put on Paris
ouertakes Hector.

His richest armor; but flew forth: the flints he trod upon His simile: high
and expressiue: which Virgil almost word for word has transla^ed, 12. Aen.

Sparkled with luster of his arms; his long-ebd spirits, now flowd
The higher, for their lower ebb. And as a fair Steed, proud
With ful-giuen mangers; long tied up, and now (his head-stall broke)
He breaks from stable, runs the field, and with an ample stroke
Measures the center; neighs, and lifts, aloft his wanton head:
About his shoulders, shakes his Crest; and where he has been fed,
Or in some calm flood washed; or (stung, with his high plight) he flies
Amongst his femals; strength put forth; his beauty beautifies.
And like Life's mirror, bears his gate: so Paris from the tower
Of lofty Pergamus came forth; he showed a Sun-like power
In carriage of his goodly parts, addressed now to the strife;
And found his noble brother near, the place he left his wife;
Him (thus respected) he salutes; Right worthy, I have fear Paris to Hector.

That your so serious haste to field, my stay has made forbear;
And that I come not, as you wish. He answered, Honored man, Hector to Paris.

Be confident; for not my self, nor any others can
Reprove in thee, the work of fight; at least, not any such,
As is an equal judge of things: for thou have strength as much
As serves to execute a mind, very important: But
Thy strength too readily flies off: enough will is not put
To thy ability. My heart, is in my minds strife, sad,
When Troy (out of her much distress, she and her friends have had
By thy procurement) does deprave, thy noblesse in mine ears:
But come, hereafter we shall calm, these hard conceits of theirs,
When (from their ports the foe expulst) high Jove to them has given
Wished peace; and us free sacrifice, to all the powers of heaven.
The end of the sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEctor, by Hellenus advice does seek
Aduenturous combat on the boldest Greek.
Nine Greeks stand up, Acceptants every one,
But lot selects strong Ajax Telamon.
Both, with high honor, stand the important fight,
Till Heralds part them by approached night.
Lastly, they grave the dead: the Greeks erect
A mighty wall, their Navy to protect;
Which angers Neptune. Jove, by hapless signs,
In depth of night, succeeding woes divines.
Another Argument.
In Eta, Priams strongest son
Combats with Ajax T^lamon.
THis said; brave Hector through the ports, with Troyes bane-bringing Knight,
Made issue to the insatiate field, resolved to fervent fight. These next four
book^s have not my last hand: (...) because the rest (for a time) will be
sufficient to em^oy your censures, suspend them of these: spare not the other.

And as the weather-wielder sends, to Seamen prosperous gales,
When with their sallow-polisht Oars, long lifted from their falls,
Their wearied arms, dissolved with ^yle, can scarce strike one stroke more;
Like those sweet winds appeared these Lords, to Trojans tired before.
Then fell they to the works of death: by Paris valor fell
King A^eithous hapless son, that did in Arna dwell,
( Menestbius) whose renowned Si^e, a Club did ever bear,
And of Philomedusa gat (that had her eyes so clear)
This slaughterd issue: Hectors dart, struck Eioneus dead;
Beneath his good steel caske, it pierced, above his gorget stead.
Glaucus (Hyppolochus his son) that led the Lycian crew,
Iphinous-Dexiades, with sudden Iauelin slew,
As he was mounting to his horse: his shoulders took the spear;
And ere he sat, in tumbling down, his powers dissolved were.
When gray-eyd Pallas had perceived, the Greeks so fall in fight; Pall^ to the
Grecian aid: Apollo to the Trojan.

From high Olympus top she stoopt, and did on Ilion light.
Apollo (to encounter her) to Pergamus did fly;
From whence he (looking to the field) wished Trojans victory. Apollo to Pall^

At Jove's broad Beech these godheads met; and first Jove's son objects;
Why, burning in contention thus, do thy extreme affects
Conduct thee from our peaceful hill? is it to ouersway
The doubtful victory of fight, and give the Greeks the day?
Thou never pitiest perishing Troy: yet now let me persuade,
That this day no more mortal wounds, may either side invade.
Hereafter, till the end of Troy, they shall apply the fight,
Since your immortal wills resolve, to ouerturne it quite.
Pallas replide, It likes me well; for this came I from heaven: Pallas to
Apollo.

But to make either army cease, what order shall be given?
He said, We will direct the spirit, that burns in Hectors breast, His reply.

To challenge any Greek to wounds, with single powers impressed;
Which Greeks (admiring) will accept; and make some one stand out,
So stout a challenge to receive, with a defense as stout:
It is confirmd; and Hellenus (King Priams loved seed) Hellen^ Priams son,
and a Prophet, to Hector.

By Augurie, discernd the event, that these two powers decreed.
And (greeting Hector) asked him this: Will thou be once aduisde?
I am thy brother, and thy life, with mine is euenly prisde;
Command the rest of Troy and Greece, to cease this public fight;
And what Greek bears the greatest mind, to single strokes excite:
I promise thee that yet thy soul, shall not descend to fates;
So heard I thy suruiuall cast, by the celestial States.
Hector, with glad allowance gave, his brothers counsel ear;
And (fronting both the hoasts) advanced, just in the midst, his spear.
The Trojans instantly surceasse; the Greeks Atrides staid:
The God that bears the silver Bow, and wars triumphant Maid, The combat
prepared.

On Jove's Beech, like two Vultures sat, pleased to behold both parts,
Flow in, to hear; so sternly armed, with huge shields, helmes and darts.
And such fresh horror as you see, driven through the wrinkled waves
B^ rising Zephyre, under whom, the sea grows black, and raues: Simile.

Such did the hasty gathering troops, of both hoasts make, to hear;
Whose tumult settled, twixt them both, thus spoke the challenger:
Hear Trojans, and ye well armed Greeks, what my strong mind (diffusde
T^rough all my spirits) commands me speak; Saturnius has not used
His promised favor for our truce, but (studying both our ils)
Will never cease till Mars, by you, his ravenous stomach fills,
With ruined Troy; or we consume, your mighty Sea-borne fleet.
Sin^e then, the General Peers of Greece, in reach of one voice meet;
Am^ngst you all, whose breast includes, the most impulsive mind, Hector to
both hoasts.

Let him stand forth as combatrant, by all the rest designde.
(...) whom thus I call high Jove, to witness of our strife;
I^ he, with home-thrust iron can reach, th'exposure of my life,
(Spoiling my arms) let him at will, convey them to his tent;
But let my body be returned; that Troys two-sext descent
May waste it in the funeral Pile: if I can slaughter him,
( Apollo honoring me so much) I Will spoil his conquered lim,
And bear his arms to Ilion, where in Apollos shrine
I Will hang them, as my trophies due: his body I Will resign
To be disposed by his friends, in flamie funerals,
And honored with erected tomb, where Hellespontus falls
Into Egaeum; and does reach, even to your nauall rode;
That when our beings, in the earth, shall hide their period;
Suruiuers, sailing the black sea, may thus his name renew:
This is his monument, whose blood, long since, did fates embrew; (...) per
(...).

Whom, passing far in fortitude, illustrate Hector slew.
This shall posterity report, and my fame never die.
This said, dumb silence seized them all; they shamed to deny,
And feared to undertake. At last, did Menelaus speak,
Checked their remissness, and so sighed, as if his heart would break; Menela^
(...)

Aye me, but only threatening Greeks, not worthy Grecian names:
This more and more, not to be borne, makes grow our huge defames, ^ ^ Phryges:
says (...) imitator.

If Hectors honorable proof, be entertaind by none;
But you are earth and water all, which (symboliz'd in one)
Have framed your faint vnfirie spirits: ye sit without your hearts,
Grossly inglorious: but my self, will use acceptiue darts,
And arm against him; though you think, I arm against too much ods:
But conquests garlands hang aloft, amongst the immortal gods.
He armed, and gladly would have fought: but ( Menelaus) then,
By Hectors far more strength, thy soul, had fled th'abodes of men;
Had not the kings of Greece stood up, and thy attempt restraind;
And even the king of men himself, that in such compass reigned;
Who took him by the bold right hand, and sternly plucked him back: Agamemnon
wiser then his brother.

Mad brother, it is no work for thee, thou seekst thy wilful wrack:
Contain though it despite thee much; nor for this strife engage
Thy person with a man more strong, and whom all fear t'enrage:
Yea whom Aeacides himself, in men-renowning war,
Makes doubt t'encounter: whose huge strength, surpasses thine by far;
Sit thou then by thy regiment; some other Greek will rise
(Though he be dreadlesse, and no war, will his desires suffice,
That makes this challenge to our strength) our valors to auow:
To whom, if he can escape with life, he will be glad to bow.
This drew his brother from his will, who yielded, knowing it true,
And his glad soldiers took his arms: when Nestor did pursue Nestor to the
Greeks.

The same reproof he set on foot; and thus supplide his turn:
What huge indignity is this! how will our country mourn!
Old Peleus that good king will weep: that worthy counselor,
That trumpet of the Myrmidons, who much did ask me for
All men of name that went to Troy: with joy he did enquire
Their valor and their towardness: and I made him admire.
But that ye all fear Hector now, if his grave ears shall hear,
How will he lift his hands to heaven, and pray that death may bear
His grieved soul into the deep! O would to heavens great King, O si (...)
(...) mihi Jupiter annos, Qualis eram, etc.

Minerua and the God of light, that now my youthful spring
Did flourish in my willing veins, as when at Phaeas towers,
About the streams of Iardanu^, my gathered Pylean powers,
And dart-employed Arcadians fought, near raging Celadon:
Amongst whom, first of all stood forth, great Ereuthalion,
Who the arms of Arcithous wore (brave Are^hous)
And (since he still fought with a club) sirnam'd Clauigerus;
All men, and faire-girt Ladies both, for honor called him so:
He fought not with a keepe-off spear, or with a far shot bow;
But with a massy club of iron, he brake through armed bands:
And yet Lycurgus was his death, but not with force of hands;
With slight (encountering in a lane, where his club wanted sway)
He thrust him through his spacious waste, who fell, and upwards lay;
In death not bowing his face to earth: his arms he did despoile;
Which iron, Mars bestowd on him: and those, in Mars his toil,
Lycurgus ever after wore; but when he aged grew,
Enforced to keep his peaceful house, their use he did renew,
On mighty Ereuthalions lims; his soldier, loved well;
And with these Arms he challenged all, that did in Arms excel:
All shook and stood dismayed, none durst, his adverse champion make;
Yet this same forward mind of mine, of choice, would undertake
To fight with all his confidence; though youngest enemy
Of all the army we conduct; yet I fought with him, I;
Minerua made me so renownd; and that most tall strong Peer
I slew; his big bulk lay on earth, extended here and there,
As it were covetous to spread, the center every where.
O that my youth were now as fresh, and all my powers as sound;
Soon should bold Hector be impugn'd: yet you that most are crowned
With fortitude, of all our host; even you, me thinks are slow,
Not free, and set on fire with lust, t'encounter such a foe.
With this, nine royal Princes rose; Atrides for the first; Nine Princ^ stand
up to answer Hector.

Then Diomed: the Aiaces then, that did the encounter thirst:
King Idomen and his consorts; Mars-like Meriones;
Euemons son, Euripilus; and Andremonides;
Whom all the Grecians Thoas called; sprung of Andremons blood;
And wise Ulysses; every one, proposd, for combat stood.
Again Gerenius Nestor spoke; Let lots be drawn by all,
His hand shall help the wel-armd Greeks, on whom the lot does fall; Lots
(...) by Nestor for the (...).

And to his wish shall he be helped, if he escape with life,
The harmfull danger-breathing fit, of this aduentrous strife.
Each marked his lot, and cast it in, to Agamemnons caske;
The soldiers praid, held up their hands, and this of Jove did ask,
(With eyes advanced to heaven): O Jove, so lead the Heralds hand,
That Ajax or great Tydeus son, may our wished champion stand:
Or else the King himself, that rules, the rich Mycenian land.
This said, old Nestor mixed the lots: the foremost lot suruaid,
With Ajax Telamon was signed; as all the soldiers praid;
One of the Heralds drew it forth, who brought and showed it round,
Beginning at the right hand first, to all the most renownd:
None knowing it; every man denide: but when he forth did pass,
To him which marked and cast it in, which famous Ajax was,
He stretched his hand, and into it, the Herald put the lot,
Who (viewing it) th'inscription knew; the Duke denied not,
But joyfully acknowledged it, and threw it at his feet;
And said, (O friends) the lot is mine, which to my soul is sweet; The (...)
(...) to Ai^.

For now I hope my fame shall rise, in noble Hectors fall.
But whilst I arm my self, do you, on great Saturnius call; He to the Greeks

But silently, or to your selves, that not a Trojan hear:
Or openly (if you think good) since none alive we fear;
None with a will, if I will not, can my bold powers affright,
At least for plain fierce swinge of strength, or want of skill in fight:
For I will well prove that my birth, and breed in Salamine,
Was not all consecrate to meat, or mere effects of wine.
This said, the wel-giuen soldiers prayed: up went to heaven their eyne;
O Jove, that Ida do protect, most happy, most divine;
Send victory to Ajax side; fame; grace, his goodly lim:
Or (if thy love, bless Hectors life, and thou have care of him)
Bestow on both, like power, like fame. This said, in bright arms shone
The good strong Ajax: who, when all, his war attire was on,
Marched like the hugely figured Mars, when angry Jupiter, Ajax armed, and his
dreadful manner of approach to the combat.

With strength, on people proud of strength, sends him forth to infer
Wreakfull contention; and comes on, with presence full of fear;
So th'Achiue rampire, Telamon, did twixt the hoasts appear*
Smiled; yet of terrible aspect; on earth with ample pace,
He boldly stalkt, and shook aloft, his dart, with deadly grace.
It did the Grecians good to see; but heart quakes shook the joints
Of all the Trojans; Hectors self, felt thoughts, with horrid points,
Tempt his bold bosom: but he now, must make no counterflight;
Nor (with his honor) now refuse, that had prouokt the fight. The shield of
Ajax, like a tower.

Ajax came near; and like a tower, his shield his bosom bard;
The right side brass, and seven Ox hides, within it quilted hard:
Old Tychius the best currier, that did in Hyla dwell, Tychius the currier.

Did frame it for exceeding proof, and wrought it wondrous well. Hinc illud:
Dominu^ clypei septemplicis Ajax.

With this stood he to Hector close, and with this Brave began:
Now Hector thou shall clearly know, thus meeting man to man,
What other leaders arm our host, besides great Thetis son:
Who, with his hardy Lions heart, has armies ouerrunne.
But he lies at our crookt-sternd fleet, a Rival with our King
In height of spirit; yet to Troy, he many knights did bring,
Coequall with Aeacides; all able to sustain
All thy bold challenge can import: begin then, words are vain.
The Helme-grac't Hector answered him; Renowned Telamon, Hector to Ajax,

Prince of the soldiers came from Greece; assay not me like one,
Young and immartiall, with great words, as to an Amazon dame;
I have the habit of all fights; and know the bloody frame
Of every slaughter: I well know, the ready right hand charge;
I know the left, and every sway, of my securefull targe;
I triumph in the cruelty, of fixed combat fight,
And manage horse to all designs; I think then with good right,
I may be confident as far, as this my challenge goes,
Without being taxed with a vaunt, borne out with empty shows.
But (being a soldier so renownd) I will not work on thee,
With least advantage of that skill, I know does strengthen me;
And so with priuitie of slight, win that for which I strive:
But at thy best (even open strength) if my endeavors thrive.
Thus sent he his long Iauelin forth; it struck his foes huge shield, The
combat.

Near to the upper skirt of brass, which was the eighth it held.
Six folds th'vntamed dart struck through, and in the seventh tough hide
The point was checked: then Ajax threw: his angry Lance did glide
Quite through his bright orbicular targe, his curace, shirt of maile;
And did his manly stomachs mouth, with dangerous taint assail:
But in the bowing of himself, black death too short did strike;
Then both to pluck their Iauelins forth, encountered Lion-like;
Whose bloody violence is increast, by that raw food they eat:
Or Bores, whose strength, wild nourishment, does make so wondrous great.
Again Priamides did wound, in midst, his shield of brass,
Yet pierced not through the upper plate, the head reflected was:
But Ajax (following his Lance) smote through his target quite,
And stayed bold Hector rushing in; the Lance held way outright,
And hurt his neck; out gusht the blood: yet Hector ceast not so,
But in his strong hand took a Flint (as he did backwards go) Saxis pugnant.

Black, sharp and big, laid in the field: the seuenfold targe it smit,
Full on the bosse; and round about, the brass did ring with it.
But Ajax a far greater stone, lift up, and (wreathing round,
With all his body laid to it) he sent it forth to wound,
And gave vnmeasur'd force to it; the round stone broke within Hector strooks
on his knees.

His rundled target: his loved knees, to languish did begin;
And he leand, stretched out on his shield; but Phoebus raisd him straight.
Then had they laid on wounds with swords, in use of closer fight;
Unless the Heralds (messengers, of Gods and godlike men)
The one of Troy, the other Greece; had held betwixt them then
Imperial scepters: when the one ( Idaeus, grave and wise)
Said to them; Now no more my sons: the Sovereign of the skies
Does love you both; both soldiers are, all witness with good right:
But now night lays her mace on earth; it is good to obey the night.
Idaeus? (Telamon replide,) To Hector speak, not me: Ajax to Id^.

He that called all our Achiue Peers, to station fight, it was he;
If he first cease, I gladly yield: great Hector then began:
Ajax, since Jove to thy big form, made thee so strong a man, Hector to Ajax.

And gave thee skill to use thy strength; so much, that for thy spear,
Thou art most excellent of Greece, now let us fight forbear:
Hereafter we shall war again, till Jove our Herald be,
And grace with conquest, which he will; heaven yields to night, and we.
Go thou and comfort all thy Fleet; all friends and men of thine,
As I in Troy my favorers; who in the Fane divine Hector gives Ajax a sword:
Ajax, Hector a girdle. Both which gifts were afterward cause of both their
deaths.

Have offered Orisons for me; and come, let us impart
Some ensigns of our strife, to show, each others suppled heart;
That men of Troy and Greece may say, Thus their high quarrel ends:
Those that encountering, were such foes, are now (being separate) friends.
He gave a sword, whose handle was, with silver studs through driven,
Scabard and all, with hangers rich: By Telamon was given
A fair well glossed purple waste. Thus Hector went to Troy,
And after him a multitude, filled with his safeties joy;
Despairing he could ever escape, the puissant fortitude
And vnimpeached Ajax hands. The Greeks like joy renude,
For their reputed victory, and brought him to the King;
Who to the great Saturnides, preferred an offering: Sacrifice for victory.
Virgil imit.

An Ox that fed on five fair springs; they fleyd and quartred him,
And then (in pieces cut) on spits, they roasted every lim:
Which neatly dressed, they drew it off: work done, they fell to feast:
Conuiuium a sacrificio.

All had enough; but Telamon, the King fed past the rest, Nector to the Greeks.

With good large pieces of the chine. Thus, thirst and hunger staid,
Nestor (whose counsels late were best) vows new, and first he said:
Atrides, and my other Lords, a sort of Greeks are dead,
Whose black blood near Scamanders stream, inhumane Mars has shed:
Their souls to hell descended are: it fits thee then our king,
To make our soldiers cease from war; and by the days first spring
Let us our selves, assembled all, the bodies bear to fire,
With Mules and Oxen near our fleet; that when we home retire,
Each man may carry, to the sons, of fathers slaughterd here,
Their honored bones: one tomb for all, forever let us rear;
Circling the pile without the field: at which we will erect
Walls, and a raueling, that may safe, our fleet and us protect.
And in them let us fashion gates, solid and bard about,
Through which our horse and chariots, may well get in and out.
Without all, let us dig a dike; so deep it may avail
Our forces against the charge of horse, and foot, that come t'assaile:
And thus th'attempts, that I see swell, in Troys proud heart, shall fail.
The Kings do his advice approve: so Troy does Court convent,
At Priams gate, in th'Ilion tower, fearful and turbulent. Antenors counsel
to the Tro* ians.

Amongst all, wise Antenor spoke: Trojans and Dardan friends,
And Peers assistants, give good ear, to what my care commends
To your consents, for all our good: resolve, let us restore
The Argiue Hellen, with her wealth, to him she had before:
We now defend but broken faiths. If therefore ye refuse,
No good event can I expect, of all the wars we use.
He ceast, and Alexander spoke, husband to th'Argiue Queen; Paris replies.

Antenor, to mine ears thy words, harsh and ungracious been:
Thou can use better if thou will: but if these truly fit
Thy serious thoughts; the Gods, with age, have reft thy grauer wit:
To warlike Trojans I will speak; I clearly do deny
To yield my wife: but all her wealth, I Will render willingly,
What ever I from Argos brought; and vow to make it more;
Which I have ready in my house, if peace I may r^store.
Priam, sirnam'd Dardanides (godlike in counsels grave) Priam to the Trojans.

In his sons favor well aduisde, this resolution gave;
My royal friends of every state, there is sufficient done,
For this late counsel we have called, in th'offer of my son;
Now then let all take needful food; then let the watch be set,
And every court of guard held strong: so when the morn does wet
The high raisd battlements of Troy, Idaeus shall be sent
To th'Argiue fleet, and Atreus sons, t'vnfold my sons intent,
From whose fact our contention springs: and (if they will) obtain
Respit from heat of fight, till fire, consume our soldiers slain:
And after, our most fatal war, let us importune still,
Till Jove the conquest have disposd, to his unconquered will.
All heard, and did obey the king, and (in their quarters all,
That were to set the watch that night) did to their suppers fall. Idaeus to
the Grecian flee^.

Idaeus in the morning went, and th'Achiue Peers did find
In counsel at Atrides ship: his audience was assignd:
And in the midst of all the kings, the vocal Herald said: Idaeus to the
Greeks.

Atrides? my renowned king, and other kings his aid,
Propose by me, in their commands, the offers Paris makes,
(From whose joy all our woes proceed) he Princely undertakes
That all the wealth he brought from Greece (would he had died before)
He will (with other added wealth) for your amends restore:
But famous Menelaus wife, he still means to enjoy,
Though he be urged the contrary, by all the Peers of Troy.
And this besides, I have in charge, that if it please you all;
They wish both sides may cease from war, that rites of funeral
May on their bodies be performd, that in the fields lie slain:
And after to the will of Fate, renew the fight again.
All silence held at first: at last, Tydides made reply; Diomed do Idaeus

Let no man take the wealth, or Dame; for now a child's weak eye
May see the imminent black end, of Priams Emperie.
This sentence quick, and briefly given, the Greeks did all admire:
Then said the King; Herald, thou hear'st, in him, the voice entire Agvmemnon
to Idaeus,

Of all our Peers, to answer thee, for that of Priams son:
But, for our burning of the dead, by all means I am won
To satisfy thy king therein, without the slendrest gain
Made of their spoiled carcasses; but freely (being slain)
They shall be all consumd with fire: to witness which, I cite
High thundering Jove, that is the king, of Iunos beds delight.
With this, he held his scepter up, to all the sky throned powers:
And grave Idaeus did return, to sacred Ilions towers,
Where Ilians, and Dardanians, did still their counsels plie,
Expecting his return: he came, and told his Legacy.
All, whirlewind like, assembled then: some, bodies to transport,
Some to hew trees: On the other part, the Argiues did exhort
Their soldiers to the same affairs: then did the new fired Sun
Smite the broad fields, ascending heaven, and The Ocean smooth did run:
When Greece and Troy mixed in such peace, you scarce could either know:
Then washed they off their blood and dust, and did warm tears bestow
Upon the slaughterd, and in Carres, conueid them from the field:
Priam commanded none should mourn, but in still silence yield
Their honored carcasses to fire, and only grieve in heart.
All burnd: to Troy, Troyes friends retire: to fleet, the Grecian part:
Yet doubtful night obscured the earth, the day did not appear:
When round about the funeral pile, the Grecians gatherd were;
The pile they circled with a tomb, and by it raisd a wall,
High towers to guard the fleet and them: and in the midst of all
They built strong gates, through which the horse, and chariots passage had:
Without the rampire a broad dike, long and profound they made,
On which they Pallesados pitched; and thus the Grecians wrought.
Their huge works in so little time, were to perfection brought,
That all Gods, by the Lightner set, the frame thereof admired;
Among whom, the earthquake-making God, this of their King inquired:
Father of Gods, will any man, of all earths grassie sphere, Neptune to I^iter.

Ask any of the Gods consents, to any actions there,
If thou will see the shag-haird Greeks, with headstrong labors frame
So huge a work, and not to us, due offerings first inflame?
As far as white Auroras dewes, are sprinkled through the air,
Fame will renown the hands of Greece, for this divine affair:
Men will forget the sacred work, the Sun and I did raise,
For king Laomedon (bright Troy) and this will bear the praise.
Jove was extremely moved with him, and said: What words are these, Jove to
Neptune.

Thou mighty shaker of the earth, thou Lord of all the seas?
Some other God, of far less power, might hold conceits dismayed,
With this rare Grecian stratageme, and thou rest well apaid; The fortification
that inthe twelft Book is razed.

For it will glorify thy name, as far as light extends:
Since, when these Greeks shall see again, their native soil and friends,
(The bulwark battred) thou may quite, devour it with thy waves,
And cover (with thy fruitless sands) this fatal shore of graves:
That what their fiery industries, have so divinely wrought,
In raising it: in razing it, thy power will prove it naught.
Thus spoke the Gods among themselves: set was the fervent Sun;
And now the great work of the Greeks, was absolutely done.
Then slew they Oxen in their tents, and strength with food revived;
When out of Lemnos a great fleet, of odorous wine arrived, A fleet of wine
of a thousand tun sent by Euneus king of Le^nos Iasons son.

Sent by Euneus, Iasons son, borne of Hypsiphile.
The fleet containd a thousand tun: which must transported be
To Atreus sons, as he gave charge; whose merchandise it was.
The Greeks bought wine for shining steel, and some for sounding brass;
Some for Ox hides; for Oxen some, and some for prisoners.
A sumptuous banquet was prepared, and all that night the Peers,
And faire-haird Greeks consumed in feast: so Trojans and their aid.
And all the night Jove thunderd loud: pale fear all thoughts dismaide.
While they were gluttonous in earth, Jove wrought their banes in heaven:
They pourd full cups upon the ground; and were to offerings driven,
In stead of quaffings: and to drink, none durst attempt, before
In solemn sacrifice they did, almighty Jove adore.
Then to their rests they all repaird: bold zeal their fear bereaved:
And sudden sleeps refreshing gift, securely they received.
The end of the seventh book.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
When Jove to all the Gods had given command,
That none, to either host, should helpful stand;
To Ida he descends: and sees from thence
Juno and Pallas haste the Greeks defense:
Whose purpose, his command by Iris given,
Does interuent; then came the silent Even;
When Hector chargde fires should consume the night.
Lest Greeks in darkness took suspected flight.
Another Argument.
In Theta gods a Counsel have,
Troyes conquest, glorious Hectors Brave.
THe cheerful Lady of the light, decked in her saffron robe, Periphrasis of
the Morning.

Dispersed her beams through every part, of this enflowred globe,
When thundering Jove a Court of Gods, assembled by his will,
In top of all the topfull heights, that crown th'Olympian hill.
He spoke, and all the Gods gave ear: Hear how I stand inclind: Jove to the
bench of Deities.

That God nor Goddess may attempt, t'infringe my sovereign mind:
But all give suffrage; that with speed, I may these discords end.
What God soever I shall find, endeavor to defend
Or Troy or Greece, with wounds to heaven, he (shamed) shall reascend;
Or (taking him with his offense) I Will cast him down as deep
As Tartarus (the brood of night) where Barathrum does steep Virgil makes
this likewise his place, adding, Bis patet in prae ceps, tantum tenditque sub
vmbras, etc. Homers golden chain.

Torment in his profoundest sinks; where is the floor of brass,
And gates of iron: the place, for depth, as far does hell surpass,
As heaven (for height) exceeds the earth; then shall he know from thence,
How much my power past all the Gods, has sovereign eminence.
Endanger it the whiles and see: let down our golden chain;
And, at it, let all Deities, their utmost strengths constrain,
To draw me to the earth from heaven: you never shall prevail,
Though with your most contention, ye dare my state assail:
But when my will shall be disposd, to draw you all to me;
Even with the earth it self, and seas, ye shall enforced be.
Then will I to Olympus top, our virtuous engine bind,
And by it every thing shall hang, by my command inclind:
So much I am supreme to Gods; to men supreme as much.
The Gods sat silent, and admired; his dreadful speech was such.
At last, his blue-eyd daughter spoke: O great Saturnides,
O Father, o heavens highest King; well know we the excess Pallas to Jove.

Of thy great power, compared with all: yet the bold Greeks estate
We needs must mourn, since they must fall, beneath fo hard a fate:
For if thy grave command enjoin, we will abstain from fight:
But to afford them such advice, as may relieve their plight,
We will (with thy consent) be bold; that all may not sustain
The fearful burden of thy wrath, and with their shames be slain.
He smiled, and said; Be confident, thou art beloved of me: (...) to Pallas.

I speak not this with serious thoughts, but will be kind to thee.
This said, his brass hou'd winged horse, he did to chariot bind, Jove's horse.

Whose crests were fringed with manes of gold, and golden garments shined
On his rich shoulders; in his hand, he took a golden scourge,
Divinely fashiond, and with blows, their willing speed did urge,
Mid way betwixt the earth and heaven; to Ida then he came, Jove descends to
Ida.

Abounding in delicious springs, and nurse of beasts vntame;
Where (on the mountain Gargarus) men did a Fane erect
To his high name, and altars sweet; and there his horse he checked;
Dissolved them from his chariot, and in a cloud of ieate
He couerd them, and on the top, took his triumphant seat;
Beholding Priams famous town, and all the Fleet of Greece, Jove's prospect.
Both hosts arm.

The Greeks took breakfast speedily, and armed at every piece:
So Trojans; who though fewer far, yet all to fight took arms:
Dire need enforced them, to auert, their wives and childrens harms.
All gates flew open, all the host, did issue, foot and horse,
In mighty tumult: strait one place, adioynd each adverse force: The fight.

Then shields with shields met, darts with darts, strength against strength
opposd:
The bosse-pik't targets were thrust on, and thunderd as they closd
In mighty tumult; groan for groan, and breath for breath did breath:
Of men then slain and to be slain; earth flowd with fruits of death.
While the fair mornings beauty held, and day increast in height;
Their Iauelins mutually made death, transport an equal freight:
But when the hot Meridian point, bright Phoebus did ascend, (...) victoria
The Meridian libra Iouis Aurea. Virg. tran^ulit Macrobius 5.

Then Jove his golden Balances, did equally extend:
And of long-rest-conferring death, put in two bitter fates
For Troy and Greece he held the midst: the day of final dates
Fell on the Greeks: the Greeks hard lots, sunk to the flowrie ground.
The Trojans leapt as high as heaven, then did the claps resound,
Of his fierce thunder; lightning leapt, amongst each Grecian troop: Jove's
thunder amongst the Grecians.

The sight amazed them; pallid fear, made boldest stomachs stoop.
Then Idomen durst not abide; Atrides went his way,
And both the Aiaces: Nestor yet, against his will did stay
(That grave Protector of the Greeks): for Paris with a dart
Enraged one of his chariot horse; he smote the upper part
Of all his skull, even where the hair, that made his foretop, sprung:
The hurt was deadly, and the pain, so sore the courser stung,
(Pierced to the brain) he stamped and plunged: one on another bears:
Entangled round about the beam; then Nestor cut the geres
With his new drawn authentic sword; mean while the fiery horse
Of Hector brake into the preasse, with their bold rulers force:
Then good old Nestor had been slain, had Diomed not espied; Dio^ed to ^ses.

Who to Ulysses, as he fled, importunately cried;
Thou, that in counsels do abound, O Laertiades,
Why flyest thou? why thus cowardlike, shunst thou the honored prease?
Take heed thy back take not a dart: stay, let us both intend
To drive this cruel enemy, from our dear aged friend.
He spoke: but wary Ithacus, would find no patient ear: Ulysses flies and
Diomed alon^ steps to the rescue of Nestor.

But fled forth right, even to the fleet: yet though he single were,
Brave Diomed mixed amongst the fight, and stood before the steeds
Of old Neleides, whose estate, thus kingly he areeds:
O father, with these youths in fight, thou art unequal placed,
Thy willing sinews are unknit, grave age pursues thee fast,
And thy unruly horse are slow; my chariot therefore use,
And try how ready Trojan horse, can fly him that pursues;
Pursue the flier, and every way, perform the varied fight:
I forced them from Anchises son, well skild in cause of flight.
Then let my Squire lead hence thy horse: mine thou shall guard, whilst I
(By thee advanced) assay the fight; that Hectors self may try
If my lance dote with the defects, that fail best minds in age,
Or find the palsy in my hands, that does thy life engage.
This, noble Nestor did accept; and Diomeds two friends,
Eurymedon, that valor loves; and Sthenelus, ascends,
Old Nestors coach: of Diomeds horse, Nestor the charge sustains
And Tydeus son took place of fight; Neleides held the rains,
And scourged the horse, who swiftly ran, direct in Hectors face, Diomed
charges Hector.

Whom fierce Tydides bravely charged: but, he turned from the chase,
His iaueline Eniopeus smit, mighty Thebaeus son,
And was great Hectors chariotere; it through his breast did run,
Near to his pappe; he fell to earth, back flew his frighted horse;
His strength and soul were both dissolved: Hector had deep remorse
Of his mishap: yet left he him, and for another sought;
Nor long his steeds did want a guide: for straight good fortune brought
Bold Archeptolemus, whose life, did from Iphytis spring;
He made him take the reins and mount: then souls were set on wing:
Then high exploits were undergone, then Trojans in their walls
Had been infolded like meek Lambs, had Jove winkt at their falls;
Who hurld his horrid thunder forth, and made pale lightnings fly
Into the earth, before the horse, that Nestor did apply.
A dreadful flash burnt through the air, that sauourd sulphure-like,
Which down before the chariot, the dazzled horse did strike:
The fair reins fell from Nestors hand; who did (in fear) entreat
Renownd Tydides, into flight, to turn his furies heat. Nestor to Diomed.

For know thou not, said he, our aid, is not supplide from Jove?
This day he will give fame to Troy, which when it fits his love
We shall enjoy; let no man tempt, his unresisted will,
Though he exceed in gifts of strength: for he exceeds him still.
Father (replied the king) it is true: but both my heart and soul Diomed to
Nestor.

Are most extremely grieved to think, how Hector will control
My valor with his vants in Troy: that I was terror-sicke
With his approach: which when he boasts, let earth devour me quick.
Ah warlike Tydeus son (said he,) what needless words are these? Nestor to
Diomed.

Though Hector should report thee faint, and amorous of thy ease,
The Trojans nor the Trojan wives, would never give him trust,
Whose youthful husbands thy free hand, has smotherd so in dust.
This said, he turned his one-hou'd horse, to flight, and troop did take;
When Hector and his men with showts, did greedy pursuit make,
And poured on darts, that made air sigh: then Hector did exclame;
O Tydeus son, the kings of Greece, do most renown thy name Hectors brave to
Diomed.

With highest place, feasts, and full cups; who now will do thee shame:
Thou shall be like a woman vsd, and they will say; Depart
Immartiall minion, since to stand, Hector, thou had no heart:
Nor can thou scale our turrets tops, nor lead the wives to fleet
Of valiant men; that wifelike fear, my adverse charge to meet.
This, two ways moved him; still to fly, or turn his horse and fight:
Thrice thrust he forward to assault; and every time the fright
Of Jove's fell thunder drove him back: which he proposd for sign
(To show the change of victory) Trojans should victors shine.
Then Hector comforted his men; All my aduentrous friends, Hector to his
friends.

Be men, and of your famous strength, think of the honored ends.
I know, beneuolent Jupiter, did by his beck profess
Conquest, and high renown to me; and to the Greeks distress.
O fools, to raise such silly forts, not worth the least account,
Nor able to resist our force; with ease our horse may mount,
Quite over all their hollow dike: but when their fleet I reach,
Let Memory to all the world, a famous bonfire teach:
For, I will all their ships inflame; with whose infestiue smoke
(Feare-shrunke and hidden near their keels) the conquered Greeks shall choke.
Then cherisht he his famous horse: O Xanthus, now, said he, The names of
Hectors horse.

And thou Podargus: Aethon to, and Lampus, dear to me;
Make me some worthy recompense, for so much choice of meat,
Given you by fair Andromache; bread of the purest wheat;
And with it (for your drink) mixed wine, to make ye wished cheer, Vinum equis.

Still serving you before my self (her husband young and dear:)
Pursue and use your swiftest speed, that we may take for prise
The shield of old Neleides, which Fame lifts to the skies; Nestors shield al
of gold.

Even to the handles, telling it, to be of massy gold:
And from the shoulders let us take, of Diomed the bold,
The royal curace Vulcan wrought, with art so exquisite.
These if we make our sacred spoil, I doubt not, but this Night,
Even to their navy to enforce, the Greeks unturned flight.
This Juno took in high disdain; and made Olympus shake,
As she but stird within her throne; and thus to Neptune spoke;
O Neptune, what a spite is this? thou God so huge in power, I^no to Neptune.

Afflicts it not thy honored heart, to see rude spoil devour
These Greeks that have in Helice, and Aege, offered thee
So many and such wealthy gifts, let them the victors be;
If we that are the aids of Greece, would beat home these of Troy,
And hinder brode-eyd Jove's proud will, it would abate his joy. Neptune to Juno

He (angry) told her, she was rash, and he would not be one,
Of all the rest, should strive with Jove, whose power was matched by none.
Whiles they conferd thus, all the space, the trench containd before,
(From that part of the fort that flankt, the nauie-anchoring shore)
Was filled with horse and targateirs, who there for refuge came,
By Mars-swift Hectors power engagde; Jove gave his strength the fame:
And he with spoilefull fire had burnt, the fleet: if Iunos grace
Had not inspirde the king himself, to run from place to place,
And stir up every soldiers power, to some illustrous deed; Agamemnons ^bor
in ranging his army.

First visiting their leaders tents, his ample purple weed
He wore, to show all who he was; and did his station take
At wise Ulysses sable barks, that did the battle make
Of all the fleet: from whence his speech, might with more ease be driven
To Ajax and Achilles ships; to whose chief charge were given
The Vantguard and the Rereguard both: both for their force of hand,
And trusty bosoms. There arrived, thus urged he to withstand Agamem nons
exprobration of the Greeks.

The Insulting Trojans: O what shame, ye empty hearted Lords,
Is this to your admired forms? where are your glorious words?
In Lemnos vaunting you the best, of all the Grecian host?
We are the strongest men (ye said) we will command the most:
Eating most flesh of high hornd beeues, and drinking cups full crowned:
And every man a hundred foes, two hundred will confound:
Now all our strength, dared to our worst, one Hector cannot tame,
Who presently with horrid fire, will all our fleet inflame. Apostrophe ad
Iouem.

O Father Jove, has ever yet, thy most vnsuffred hand
Afflicted, with such spoil of souls, the king of any land?
And taken so much fame from him? when I did never fail
(Since under most unhappy stars, this fleet was under sail)
Thy glorious altars, I protest; but above all the Gods,
Have burnt fat thighs of beeues to thee; and praid to race th'abodes
Of rape-defending Ilions: yet grant (almighty Jove)
One favor, that we may at least, with life from hence remove:
Not under such inglorious hands, the hands of death employ,
And where Troy should be stoopt by Greece, let Greece fall under Troy.
To this even weeping king, did Jove, remorsefull audience give,
And shook great heaven to him, for sign, his men and he should live:
Then quickly cast he off his hawke, the Eagle prince of air, Jove casts off
his Eagle on the Greeks right hand, that trust a ^inde cafe.

That perfects his unspotted vows; who seisd in her repair
A sucking hind calfe; which she trust, in her enforciue seeres,
And by Jove's altar let it fall, amongst the amazed peers,
Where the religious Achiue kings, with sacrifice did please
The author of all Oracles, divine Saturnides.
Now when they knew the bird of Jove, they turned courageous head:
When none (though many kings put on) could make his vaunt, he led
Tydides to renewd assault: or issued first the dike, Dio^d.

Or first did fight: but far the first, stone dead his lance did strike
Armed Agelaus; by descent, surnamed Phradmonides;
He turned his ready horse to flight; and Diomeds lance did seize
His back betwixt his shoulder blades, and looked out at his breast;
He fell, and his arms rang his fall. The Atrides next addressed
Themselves to fight; the Aiaces next, with vehement strength endude:
Idomeneus and his friend, stout Merion, next pursude:
And after these Euripilus, Euemons honored ^ace:
The ninth, with backward wreathed bow, had little Teucer place;
He still fought under Ajax shield; who sometimes held it by, Teucer serving
under Ajax (...).

And then he looked his object out, and let his arrow fly:
And whomsoever in the preasse, he wounded, him he slew;
Then under Ajax seuen-fold shield, he presently withdrew.
He fared like an unhappy child, that does to mother run
For succor, when he knows full well, he some shrewd turn has done.
What Trojans then were to their deaths, by Teucers shafts impressed?
Hapless Orsylochus was first; Ormenus, Ophelest,
Detor, and hardy Cronius, and Lycophon divine;
And Amopaon, that did spring, from Polyemons line,
And Menalippus: all on heaps, he tumbled to the ground.
The king reioyc't to see his shafts, the Phrygian ranks confound:
Who straight came near, and spoke to him; O Teucer lovely man, Agamemnon to
Teucer.

Strike still so sure, and be a grace, to every Grecian;
And to thy father Telamon, who took thee kindly home,
(Although not by his wife, his son) and gave thee foster room,
Even from thy childhood; then to him, though far from hence removed,
Make good fame reach; and to thy self, I vow what shall be proved:
If he that dreadful Egis bears, and Pallas grant to me
Th'expugnance of wel-builded Troy, I first will honor thee,
Next to my self with some rich gift, and put it in thy hand:
A three-foot vessel, that for grace, in sacred Fanes does stand:
Or two horse and a chariot, or else a lovely Dame,
That may ascend on bed with thee, and amplify thy name.
Teucer right nobly answered him: Why (most illustrate king) Teucer to Agamemnon.

I being thus forward of my self, do thou adioyne a sting?
Without which, all the power I have, I cease not to employ:
For, from the place where we repulst, the Trojans toward Troy,
I all the purple field have strewn, with one or other slain:
Eight shafts I shot, with long steel heads, of which not one in vain;
All were in youthful bodies fixed, well skild in wars constraint:
Yet this wild dog, with all my aim, I have no power to taint.
This said, another arrow forth, from his stiff string he sent,
At Hector, whom he longed to wound; but still amiss it went:
His shaft smit fair Gorgythion, of Priams princely race,
Who in Aepina was brought forth (a famous town in Thrace)
By Castianira; that, for form, was like celestial breed.
And as a crimson Poppie flower, surcharged with his seed,
And vernall humors falling thick, declines his heavy brow; (...) (...) (...)
est.

So, of one side, his helmets weight, his fainting head did bow:
Yet Teucer would another shaft, at Hectors life dispose;
So feign, he such a mark would hit: but still besides it goes;
Apollo did auert the shaft: but Hectors charioteere
Bold Archeptolemus he smit, as he was rushing near
To make the fight: to earth he fell, his swift horse back did fly,
And there, were both his strength and soul, exilde eternally.
Huge grief, for Hectors slaughterd friend, pincht-in his mighty mind:
Yet was he forced to leave him there, and his void place resignd
To his sad brother, that was by; Cebriones: whose ear
Receiving Hectors charge, he straight, the weighty reins did bear;
And Hector, from his shining coach (with horrid voice) leapt on, H^ctor with a
stone at Teucer.

To wreake his friend on Teucers hand; and up he took a stone,
With which he at the Archer ran; who, from his quiver, drew
A sharpe-pild shaft, and nockt it sure: but, in great Hector flew,
With such fell speed, that in his draught, he his right shoulder struck,
Where twixt his neck and breast, the joint, his native closure took:
The wound was wondrous full of death, his string in sunder flees;
His nummed hand fell strengthlesse down, and he upon his knees.
Ajax neglected not to aid, his brother thus deprest;
But came and saft him with his shield; and two more friends addressed
To be his aid, took him to fleet; Mecistius, Echius son,
And gay Alastor: Teucer sighed, for all his service done.
Then did Olympius, with fresh strength, the Trojan powers revive;
Who to their trenches once again, the troubled Greeks did drive.
Hector brought terror with his strength, and ever fought before:
As when some highly stomackt hound, that hunts a syluan Bore,
Or kingly Lion, loves the hanch, and pincheth often behind,
Bold of his feet, and still observes, the game, to turn inclind,
Not utterly dissolved in flight: so Hector did pursue;
And whosoever was the last, he ever did subdue.
They fled, but when they had their dike, and Pallesados past,
(A number of them put to sword) at ships they staid at last:
Then mutual exhortations flew, then all with hands and eyes,
Advanced to all the Gods, their plagues, wrung from them open cries.
Hector with his four rich-man'd horse, assaulting always rode; Hectors
terrible aspect.

The eyes of Gorgon burnt in him, and wars vermilion God.
The Goddess that all Goddesses (for snowie arms) out shined,
Thus spoke to Pallas; to the Greeks, with gracious ruth inclined.
O Pallas, what a grief is this? is all our succor past Juno to Pallas.

To these our perishing Grecian friends? at least withheld at last?
Eu^n now, when one man's violence, must make them perish all,
Insatisfaction of a Fate, so full of funeral?
Hector Priamides now raues, no more to be endured;
That has already on the Greeks, so many harms inured.
The Azure Goddess answered her; This man had surely found
His fortiude and life dissolved, even on his fathers ground,
By Grecian valor; if my Sire, infested with ill moods,
Did not so dote on these of Troy, too ielous of their bloods:
And ever, an unjust repulse, stands to my willing powers;
Little remembering what I did, in all the desperate hours
Of his affected Hercules: I ever rescued him,
In labors of Euristheus, untouched in life or lim:
When he (heaven knows) with drowned eyes, looked up for help to heaven:
Which ever at command of Jove, was by my supppliance given.
But had my wisdom reached so far, to know of this event,
When to the solid-ported depths, of hell his son was sent,
To hale out hateful Plutoes dog, from darksome Erebus,
He had not escaped the streams of Styx, so deep and dangerous:
Yet Jove hates me, and shows his love, in doing Thetis will,
That kissed his knees, and strok't his chin; praid, and importuned still,
That he would honor with his aid, her cittie-razing son,
Displeasd Achilles: and for him, our friends are thus undone.
But time shall come again, when he (to do his friends some aid)
Will call me his Glaucopides; his sweet and blew-eyd maid.
Then harness thou thy horse for me, that his bright Palace ga^es
I soon may enter, arming me, to order these debates:
And I will try if Priams son, will still maintain his cheer,
When in the crimson paths of war, I dreadfully appear;
For some proud Trojan shall be sure, to nourish dogs and souls,
And paue the shore with fat, and flesh, deprived of lives and souls.
Juno prepared her horse, whose manes, Ribands of gold enlac't:
Pallas her party colored robe; on her bright shoulders cast, Pallas arms.

Divinely wrought with her own hands, in th'entrie of her Sire:
Then put she, on her ample breast, her vnder-arming tire,
And on it her celestial arms: the chariot straight she takes,
With her huge heavy violent lance, with which she slaughter makes
Of armies, fatal to her wrath: Saturnia whipped her horse, Juno her waggonnesse.

And heaven gates, guarded by the Hours, op't by their proper force:
Through which they flew. Whom when Jove saw (set near th'Idalian spring)
Highly displeasd: he Iris called, that has the golden wings,
And said; Fly Iris, turn them back, let them not come at me: Jove to Iris.

Our meetings (severally disposd) will nothing gracious be.
Beneath their o'rethrowne chariot, I Will shiuer their proud steeds:
Hu^le down themselves, their wagon break, and for their stubborn deeds,
In ten whole years they shall not heal, the wounds I will impresse
With horrid thunder; that my maid, may know, when to address
Arms against her father. For my wife, she does not so offend,
It Is but her use to interrupt, what ever I intend.
Iris, with this, left Idas hills, and up t'Olympus flew, (...) is to heaven.

Met (near heaven gates) the Goddesses, and thus their haste withdrew.
What course intend you? why are you, wrapped with your fancies storm?
Jove likes not ye should aid the Greeks, but threats, and will perform,
To crush in pieces your swift horse, beneath their glorious yokes,
Hurl down your selves, your chariot break: and those impoysoned strokes
His wounding thunder shall imprint, in your celestial parts,
In ten full Springs ye shall not cure: that she that tames proud hearts
(Thy self, Minerua) may be taught, to know for what, and when,
Thou do against thy father fight; for sometimes childeren
May with discretion plant themselves, against their fathers wills;
But not where humors only rule, in works beyond their skils,
For, Juno, she offends him not, nor vexes him so much;
For, it is her use to cross his will, her impudence is such. ^ile facit quod
semper facit.

The habit of offense in this, she only does contract,
And so grieves or incenseth less, though nere the less her fact:
But thou most grieu'st him (dogged Dame) whom he rebukes in time,
Lest silence should pervert thy will, and pride too highly clime
In thy bold bosom (desperate girl) if seriously thou dare
Lift thy vnwieldie lance against Jove, as thy pretenses are.
She left them, and Saturnia said, Ay me thou seed of Jove, Juno to Pall^.

By my advice we will no more, unfit contention move
With Jupiter for mortal men; of whom, let this man die,
And that man live, who ever he, pursues with destiny:
And let him (plotting all events) dispose of either host,
As he thinks fittest for them both, and may become us most.
Thus turned she back, and to the Hours, her rich manned horse resigned
Who them t'immortall mangers bound; the chariot they inclined
Beneath the Crystal walls of heaven, and they in golden thrones
Consorted other Deities, repleate with passions.
Jove, in his bright-wheeld chariot, his fiery horse now beats,
Up to Olympus; and aspired, the Gods eternal seats.
Great Neptune loosd his horse; his Carre, upon the Altar placed,
And heauenly-linnen Couerings, did round about it cast.
The farre-seer vsd his throne of gold: the vast Olympus shook
Beneath his feet, his wife, and maid, apart their places took;
Nor any word afforded him: he knew their thoughts, and said; ^oue to Inn^ and
Pallas.

Why do you thus torment your selves? you need not sit dismayed
With the long labors you have vsd, in your victorious fight,
Destroying Trojans: against whose lives, you heap such high despite. Scoptice.

Ye should have held your glorious course; for be assured, as far
As all my powers (by all means urged) could have sustaind the war:
Not all the host of Deities, should have retired my hand,
From vowed inflictions on the Greeks: much less, you two withstand.
But you before you saw the fight, much less the slaughter there,
Had all your goodly lineaments, possessed with shaking fear;
And never had your chariot borne, their charge to heaven again:
But thunder should have smit you both, had you one Trojan slain.
Both Goddesses let fall their chins, upon their Iuorie breasts,
Set next to Jove; contriuing still, afflicted Troyes vnrests:
Pallas for anger could not speak, Saturnia, contrary,
Could not for anger hold her peace, but made this bold reply;
Not-to-be-suffred Jupiter, what needst thou still enforce (...) to Jupiter.

Thy matchless power? we know it well: But we must yield remorse
To them that yield us sacrifice: nor needst thou thus deride
Our kind obedience, nor our griefs, but bear our powers applide
To just protection of the Greeks; that anger tomb not all
In Troyes foul gulf of perjury, and let them stand, should fall.
Grieve not (said Jove) at all done yet: for if thy fair eyes please, I^piter
to I^no.

This next red morning they shall see, the great Saturnides
Bring more destruction to the Greeks: and Hector shall not cease,
Till he have rowsed from the Fleet, swift-foot Aeacides:
In that day, when before their ships, for his Patroclus slain,
The Greeks in great distress shall fight; for so the Fates ordain.
I weigh not thy displeased spleen; though to th'extremest bounds
Of earth and seas it carry thee; where endless night confounds
Iapet, and my dejected Sire; who sit so far beneath,
They never see the flying Sun, nor hear the winds that breath,
Near to profoundest Tartarus: nor thither if thou went,
Would I take pity of thy moods, since none more impudent.
To this, she nothing did reply: and now Sols glorious light
Fell to the sea, and to the land, drew up the drowsy night:
The Trojans grieved at Phoebus fall, which all the Greeks desired: The Night.

And sable night (so often wished) to earths firm throne aspired.
Hector (intending to consult) near to the gulfie flood
Far from the Fleet; led to a place, pure, and exempt from blood,
The Trojans forces: from their horse, all lighted, and did hear
Th'Oration Ioue-lou'd Hector made; who held a goodly spear,
Eleven full cubits long; the head, was brass, and did reflect
A wanton light before him still; it round about was decked
With strong hoops of new burnisht gold. On this he leand, and said:
Hear me, my worthy friends of Troy, and you our honored aid; (...) to his
friends.

A little since, I had conceit, we should have made retreat,
By light of the inflamed fleet, with all the Greeks escheate;
But darkness has prevented us; and safte, with special grace,
These Achiues, and their shore-hal'd fleet. Let us then render place,
To sacred Night; our suppers dress^; and from our chariot free
Our faire-man'd horse, and meat them well: then let there conuoid be,
From forth the city presently, Oxen, and well fed sheep;
Sweet wine, and bread; and fell much wood, that all night we may keep Vina
parant animos.

Plenty of fires, even till the light, bring forth the lovely morn;
And let their brightness glase the skies, that night may not suborne
The Greeks escape, if they, for flight, the seas broad back would take;
At least they may not part with ease; but as retreit they make,
Each man may bear a wound with him, to cure when he comes home,
Made with a shaft or sharpened spear; and others fear to come,
With charge of lamentable war, against soldiers bred in Troy.
Then let our Heralds, through the town, their offices employ,
To warn the youth, yet short of war; and time-white fathers, past;
That in our god-built towers they see, strong courts of guard be placed,
About the walls; and let our Dames, yet flourishing in years,
That (having beauties to keep pure) are most inclined to fears
(Since darkness in distressefull times, more dreadful is then light)
Make lofty fires in every house: and thus, the dangerous night,
Held with strong watch; if the enemy, have ambuscadoes laid
Near to our walls (and therefore seem, in flight the more dismayed,
Intending a surprise, while we, are all without the town)
They every way shall be impugn'd, to every man's renown.
Perform all this brave Trojan friends: what now I have to say,
Is all expressed; the cheerful morn, shall other things display;
It is my glory (putting trust, in Jove, and other Gods)
That I shall now expulse these dogs, fates sent to our abodes;
Who bring ostents of destiny, and black their threatening fleet.
But this night let us hold strong guards: to morrow we will meet,
(With fierce-made war) before their ships; and I Will make known to all,
If strong Tydides, from their ships, can drive me to their wall,
Or I can pierce him with my sword; and force his bloody spoil;
The wished morn shall show his power, if he can shun his foil,
I running on him with my Lance; I think when day ascends,
He shall lie wounded with the first, and by him many friends.
O that I were as sure to live, immortal, and sustain
No frailties, with increasing years, but evermore remain
Adored like Pallas, or the Sun; as all doubts die in me,
That heavens next light shall be the last, the Greeks shall ever see.
This speech all Trojans did applaud; who from their traces losde
Their sweating horse; which severally with headstals they reposde,
And fastened by their chariots; when others brought from town,
Fat sheep and oxen, instantly; bread, wine; and hewed down
Huge store of wood: the winds transferd, into the friendly sky,
Their suppers savor; to the which, they sat delightfully,
And spent all night in open field; fires round about them shinde;
As when about the silver Moon, when air is free from wind,
And stars shine clear; to whose sweet beams, high prospects, and the brows
Igne. Trolanoru^ (...) similes.

Of all steep hills and pinnacles, thrust up themselves for shows;
And even the lowly valleys joy, to glitter in their sight,
When the vnmeasur'd firmament, bursts to disclose her light,
And all the signs in heaven are seen, that glad the shepherds heart;
So many fires disclosde their beams, made by the Trojan part,
Before the face of Ilion; and her bright turrets showed.
A thousand courts of guard kept fires: and every guard allowed
Fifty stout men, by whom their horse, eat oats and hard white corn,
And all did wilfully expect, the siluer-throned morn.
The end of the eighth Book.
THE NINTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
TO Agamemnon (urging hopeless flight)
Stand Diomed, and Nestor opposite:
By Nestors counsel, Legates are dismissed,
To Thetis son, who still denies t'assist.
Another Argument.
Iota sings the Ambassie,
And great Achilles stern reply.
SO held the Trojans sleeplesse guard; the Greeks to flight were given:
The feeble consort of cold fear (strangely infusde from heaven)
Grief, not to be endured, did wound, all Greeks of greatest worth.
And as two laterall-sited winds (the West wind and the North)
Meet at the Thracian seas black breast; join in a sudden blore;
Tumble together the dark waves, and power upon the shore
A mighty deal of froth and weed, with which men manure ground:
So Jove and Troy did drive the Greeks, and all their minds confound:
But Agamemnon most of all, was tortured at his heart,
Who to the voicefull Heralds went, and bad them cite, apart,
Each Grecian leader severally, not openly proclaim;
In which he labourd with the first: and all together came.
They sadly sat; the king arose, and poured out tears as fast
As from a lofty rock, a spring, does his black waters cast.
And deeply ^ghing, thus bespake, the Achiues; O my friends, Agamemnon to the
Greeks.

Princes and leaders of the Greeks; heavens adverse king extends
His wrath, with too much detriment, to my so just design;
Since he has often promised me, and bound it with the sign
Of his bent forehead, that this Troy, our vengefull hands should race,
And safe return: yet now engaged, he plagues us with disgrace;
When all our trust to him has drawn, so much blood from our friends.
My glory, nor my brothers wreake, were the proposed ends,
For which he drew you to these toiles; but your whole countries shame,
Which had been huge, to bear the rape, of so divine a Dame,
Made in despite of our revenge: and yet not that had moved
Our powers to these designs, if Io^e, had not our drifts approved;
Which since we see he did for blood; it is desperate fight in us
To strive with him; then let us fly: it is flight he urges thus.
Long time still silence held them all; at last did Diomed rise:
Atrides, I am first must cross, thy indiscreet advise, Diomed to Agamemnon:
and takes fit time to answer his wrong done by Agamemnon in the fourth book.

As may become me, being a king, in this our martial court.
Be not displeasd then: for thy self, did broadly misreport
In open field my fortitude, and called me faint and weak;
Yet I was silent, knowing the time; loath any rites to break,
That appertaind thy public rule: yet all the Greeks knew well
(Of every age) thou did me wrong. As thou then did refell
My valor first of all the host, as of a man dismayed:
So now, with fit occasion given, I first blame thee afraid.
Inconstant Saturnes son has given, inconstant spirits to thee;
And with a scepter over all, an eminent degree:
But with a scepters sovereign grace, the chief power, Fortitude,
(To bridle thee) he thought not best, thy breast should be endude.
Unhappy king, think thou the Greeks, are such a silly sort,
And so excessive impotent, as thy weak words import?
If thy mind move thee to be gone; the way is open, go:
Mycenian ships enough ride near, that brought thee to this woe;
The rest of Greece will stay, nor stir, till Troy be overcome,
With full euersion; or if not, but (doters of their home)
Will put on wings to fly with thee; my self and Sthenelus
Will fight, till (trusting favoring Jove) we bring home Troy with us.
This, all applauded, and admired, the spirit of Diomed; Nestor approues
Diomeds counsel, and goes further.

When Nestor (rising from the rest) his speech thus seconded:
Tydides, thou art (questionless) our strongest Greek, in war,
And grauest in thy counsels too, of all that equal are
In place with thee, and stand on strength; Nor is there any one
Can blame, or contradict thy speech: And yet thou have not gone
So far, but we must further go; thou art young, and well might be
My youngest son, though still I yield, thy words had high degree
Of wisdom in them to our king; since well they did become
Their right in question, and refute, inglorious going home;
But I (well known thy senior far) will speak, and handle all
Yet to propose: which none shall check; no not our General.
A hater of society, unjust, and wild is he,
That loves intestine war; being stuffed, with manlesse cruelty:
And therefore in persuading peace, and home-flight, we the less
May blame our General; as one loathe, to wrap in more distress
His loved soldiers: but because, they bravely are resolved
To cast lives after toils, before, they part in shame inuolu'd;
Provide we for our honored stay; obey black night, and fall
Now to our suppers; then appoint, our guards without the wall,
And in the bottom of the dike; which guards I wish may stand
Of our brave youth. And ( Atreus son) since thou art in command
Before our other Kings; be first, in thy commands effect:
It well becomes thee; since it is both, what all thy Peers expect;
And in the royal right of things, is no impair to thee;
Nor shall it stand with less then right, that they invited be
To supper by thee; all thy tents, are amply stored with wine,
Brought daily in Greek ships from Thrace; and to this grace of thine Vinum
Thraciu^

All necessaries thou have fit, and store of men to wait;
And many meeting there; thou may, hear every man's conceit,
And take the best: it much concerns, all Greeks to use advise
Of grauest nature; since, so near, our ships, our enemies
Have lighted such a sort of fires: with which, what man is ioyd?
Look, how all bear themselves this night, so live, or be destroyed.
All heard, and followd his advice: there was appointed then
Seven Captains of the watch, who forth, did march with all their men. Se^en
Captains of the watch, and their names.

The first was famous Thrasymed, aduicefull Nestors son;
Ascalaphus and Ialmen, and mighty Merion;
Alphareus and Deipyrus, and lovely Lycomed;
Old Creons joy: These seven bold Lords, an hundred soldiers led
In every seuerd company; and every man his pike:
Some placed on the rampires top, and some amidst the dike:
All fires made, and their suppers took: Atrides to his tent
Invited all the Peers of Greece; and food sufficient
Apposde before them; and the Peers, apposde their hands to it.
Hunger and thirst being quickly quenched, to counsel still they sit.
And first spoke Nestor, who they thought, of late, aduisde so well,
A father grave, and rightly wise, who thus his tale did tell.
Most high Atrides, since in thee, I have intent to end, Nestor to (...).

From thee will I begin my speech, to whom Jove does commend
The Empire of so many men, and puts into thy hand
A Scepter, and established ^awes, that thou may well command
And counsel all men under thee. It therefore does behoue
Thy self to speak most, since of all, thy speeches most will move;
And yet to hear as well as speak: and then perform as well
A free just counsel; in thee still, must stick, what others tell.
For me; what in my judgment stands, the most convenient
I will advise; and am assured, advice more competent
Shall not be given: the general proof, that has before been made
Of what I speak, confirms me still; and now may well persuade,
Because I could not then, yet ought, when thou (most royal King)
Even from the tent, Achilles love, did violently bring,
Against my counsel, urging thee, by all means to relent:
But you (obeying your high mind) would venture the event,
Dishonoring our ablest Greek, a man the immortals grace:
Again, yet let us deliberate, to make him now embrace
Affection to our general good, and bring his force to field:
Both which, kind words and pleasing gifts, must make his virtues yield.
O father (answered the King) my wrongs thou tell me right; Agam^non to
Ne^or.

Mine own offense, mine own tongue grants; one man must stand in fight
For our whole army; him I wronged, him Jove loves from his heart:
He shows it in thus honoring him; who living thus apart,
Proves us but number: for his want, makes all our weakness seen:
Yet after my confessed offense, soothing my humorours spleen,
I Will sweeten his affects again, with presents infinite,
Which (to approve my firm intent) I Will openly recite; Gifts offered to
Achilles.

Seven sacred Tripods free from fire, ten talents of fine gold,
Twenty bright caldrons, twelve young horse, well shaped and well controld,
And victors too, for they have won, the price at many a race:
That man should not be poor, that had, but what their winged pace
Has added to my treasury; nor feel sweet golds defect.
Seven Lesbian Ladies he shall have, that were the most select,
And in their needles rarely skild: whom (when he took the town
Of famous Lesbos) I did choose; who won the chief renown,
For beauty from their whole fair sex; amongst whom I Will resign
Fair Brysis; and I deeply swear (for any fact of mine
That may discourage her receipt) she is untouched, and rests
As he resigned her. To these gifts (if Jove to our requests
Vouchsafe performance, and afford, the work for which we wait;
Of winning Troy) with brass and gold, he shall his navy freight;
And (entering when we be at spoil) that princely hand of his
Shall choose him twenty Trojan Dames, excepting Tyndaris,
The fairest Pergamus infolds: and if we make retreat
To Argos (called of all the world, the Nauill, or chief seat)
He shall become my son in law, and I will honor him
Even as Orestes, my sole son, that does in honors swim.
Three daughters in my wel-built court, unmarried are, and fair;
Laodice, Chrysothemis, that has the golden hair,
And Iphianassa: of all three, the worthiest let him take
All ioynturelesse, to Peleus Court: I will her ioyncture make;
And that so great, as never yet, did any maid prefer;
Seven cities right magnificent, I will bestow on her:
Enope, and Cardamile; Hyra for herbs renownd;
The fair Aepaea, Pedasus, that does with grapes abound:
Antaea, girded with green meades: Phera, surnamed Divine;
All whose bright turrets, on the seas, in sandy Pylos shine:
The Inhabitants in flocks and herds, are wondrous confluent;
Who like a God will honor him, and him with gifts present;
And to his throne will contribute, what tribute he will rate;
All this I gladly will perform, to pacify his hate:
Let him be mild and tractable: it is for the God of ghosts
To be vnrul'd, implacable, and seek the blood of hoasts;
Whom therefore men do much abhor: then let him yield to me;
I am his greater, being a King, and more in years then he.
Brave King (said Nestor) these rich gifts, must make him needs relent: Nestor
makes choice of Ambassadors to Achilles.

Choose then fit legates instantly, to greet him at his Tent;
But stay, admit my choice of them; and let them strait be gone:
Ioue-loued Phoenix shall be chief; then Ajax Telamon,
And Prince Ulysses; and on them, let these two heralds wait,
Grave Odius and Euribates. Come Lords, take water strait,
Make pure your hands; and with sweet words, appease Achilles mind;
Which we will pray, the king of Gods, may gently make inclined.
All liked his speech, and on their hands, the Heralds water shed:
The youths, crowned cups of sacred wine, to all distributed:
But, having sacrificed and drunk, to every man's content,
(With many notes by Nestor given) the Legates forwards went:
With courtship in fit gestures vsd, he did prepare them well,
But most Ulysses; for his grace, did not so much excel:
Such ^ites beseem Ambassadors: and Nestor urged these,
That their most honors might reflect, enraged Aeacides.
They went along the shore, and praid, the God that earth does bind
In brackish chains, they might not fail, but bow his mighty mind.
The quarter of the Myrmidons, they reached, and found him set
Delighted with his solemn harp, which curiously was fret Achilles at his
Ha^pe.

With works conceited, through the verge: the bawdricke that embraced
His lofty neck, was silver twist: this (when his hand laid waste
Actions city) he did choose, as his especial prise, A^illes love of Music.

And (loving sacred music well) made it his exercise:
To it he sung the glorious deeds, of great Heroes dead, Himself sings the
deeds of Heroes.

And his true mind, that practice faild, sweet contemplation fed.
With him alone, and opposite; all silent sat his friend,
Attentive, and beholding him, who now his song did end.
Th'Ambassadors did forwards preasse, renowned Ulysses led,
And stood in view: their sudden sight, his admiration bred;
Who with his harp and all arose: so did Menetius son
When he beheld them: their receipt, Achilles thus begun.
Health to my Lords: right welcome men, assure your selves you be; Achilles
gentle receipt of Ulysses, A^ax, etc.

Though some necessity I know, does make you visit me,
Incenst with just cause against the Greeks. This said, a several seat
With purple cushions he set forth, and did their ease entreat:
And said, Now friend, our greatest bolle, with wine unmixed, and neat,
Appose these Lords; and of the depth, let every man make proof:
These are my best-esteemed friends, and underneath my roof.
Patroclus did his dear friends will: and he that did desire Principes ips^
(...) munera obeunt, vt alibi.

To cheer the Lords (come faint from fight) set on a blasing fire
A great brass pot, and into it, a chine of mu^ton put,
And fat Goats flesh: Automedon, held, while he pieces cut
To roast and boil, right cunningly: then of a well fed swine,
A huge fat shoulder he cuts out, and spits it wondrous fine;
His good friend made a goodly fire: of which the force once past,
He laid the spit low, near the coals, to make it brown at last:
Then sprinkled it with sacred salt, and took it from the rackes:
This roasted and on dresser set, his friend Patroclus takes
Bread in fair baskets; which set on, Achilles brought the meat;
And to diuinest Ithacus, took his opposed seat
Upon the bench: then did he will, his friend to sacrifice; Sacrifice before
meat.

Who cast sweet incense in the fire, to all the Deities.
Thus fell they to their ready food: hunger and thirst allaid,
Ajax to Phoenix made a sign, as if too long they staid,
Before they told their Legacy. Ulysses saw him wink,
And (filling the great boule with wine) did to Achilles drink.
Health to Achilles; but our plights, stand not in need of meat, (...) (...).

Who late supt at Atrides tent, though for thy love we eat
Of many things, whereof a part, would make a complete feast:
Nor can we joy in these kind rites, that have our hearts oppressed
(O Prince) with fear of utter spoil: it is made a question now
If we can save our fleet or not, unless thy self endow
Thy powers with wonted fortitude: now Troy and her consorts,
Bold of thy want, have pitched their tents, close to our fleet and forts;
And made a firmament of fires; and now no more they say
Will they be imprisoned in their walls, but force their violent way
Even to our ships; and Io^e himself, has with his lightnings showd
Their bold adu^ntures happy signs; and Hector grows so proud
Of his huge strength, borne out by Jove, that fearfully he raues;
Presuming neither men nor Gods, can interrupt his braues.
Wild rage inuades him, and he prays, that soon the sacred morn
Would light his fury; boasting then, our streamers shall be torn,
And all our nauall ornaments, fall by his conquering stroke;
Our ships shall burn, and we our selves, lie stifled in the smoke.
And I am seriously afraid, heaven will perform his threats;
And that it is fatal to us all, far from our native seats
To perish in victorious Troy: but rise, though it be late,
D^liuer the afflicted Greeks, from Troyes tumultuous hate.
It will hereafter be thy grief, when no strength can suffice
To remedy th'effected threats, of our calamities;
Consider these affairs in time, while thou may use thy power,
And have the grace to turn, from Greece, fates vnrecouered hour.
O friend? thou know, thy royal Sire, forewarnd what should be done,
That day he sent thee from his Court, to honor Atreus son:
My son (said he) the victory, let Jove and Pallas use
At their high pleasures; but do thou, no honored means refuse
That may advance her; in fit bounds, contain thy mighty mind;
Nor let the knowledge of thy strength, be factiously inclind,
Contriuing mischiefs; be to fame, and general good professed;
The more will all sorts honor thee; Benignity is best.
Thus charged thy sire, which thou forgetst: yet now those thoughts appease
That torture thy great spirit with wrath: which if thou will surcease,
The King will merit it with gifts; (and if thou will give ear)
I Will tell how much he offers thee, yet thou sitst angry here.
Seven Tripods that no fire must touch; twice ten pans fit for flame:
Ten talents of fine gold; twelve horse, that ever overcame,
And brought huge prises from the field, with swiftnes of their feet:
That man should bear no poor account, nor want golds quickening sweet,
That had but what he won with them: seven worthiest Lesbian Dames,
Renowned for skill in houfwifrie, and bear the sovereign fames,
For beauty, from their general sex; which at thy overthrow
Of wel-built Lesbos he did choose; and these he will bestow;
And with these, her he took from thee, whom (by his state since then)
He swears he touched not, as fair Dames, use to be touched by men.
All these are ready for thee now: and if at length we take,
By helps of Gods, this wealthy town, thy ships shall burden make
Of gold and brass at thy desires, when we the spoil divide:
And twenty beauteous Trojan Dames, thou shall select beside,
(Next Hellen) the most beautiful; and (when returned we be
To Argos) be his son in law: for he will honor thee
Like his Oresles, his sole son, maintaind in height of bliss:
Three daughters beautify his Court, the fair Chrysothemis,
Laodice, and Iphianesse; of all, the fairest take
To Peleus thy grave fathers Court, and never ioynture make:
He will the iointure make himself, so great, as never Sire
Gave to his daughters nuptials: seven cities left entire;
Cardamile, and Enope, and Hyra full of flowers;
Anthaea, for sweet meadows praisd; and Phera, decked with towers;
The bright Epea; Pedassus, that does God Bacchus please,
All on the the Sandy Pylos soil, are seated near the seas:
The Inhabitants, in droues and flocks, exceeding wealthy be,
Who like a God with worthy gifts, will gladly honor thee;
And tribute of esp^iall rate, to thy high scepter pay:
All this he freely will perform, thy anger to allay.
But if thy hate to him be more, then his gifts may repress,
Yet pity all the other Greeks, in such extreme distress;
Who with religion honor thee: and to their desperate ill,
Thou shall triumphant glory bring; and Hector thou may kill,
When pride makes him encounter thee: filled with a banefull sprite,
Who vaunts, our whole-fleet brought not one, equal to him in fight.
Swift-foot Aeacides replide: Divine Laertes son, Achilles answers Ulysses
Oration.

It Is requisite I should be short, and show what place has won
Thy serious speech: affirming naught, but what you shall approve
Established in my settled heart; that in the rest I move
No murmr nor exception: for like hell mouth I loath,
Who holds not in his words and thoughts, one indistinguisht troth.
What fits the freeness of my mind, my speech shall make displaid;
Not Atreus son, nor all the Gr^eks, shall win me to their aid:
Their suite is wretchedly enforced, to free their own despaires;
And my life never shall be hired, with thanklesse desperate praires:
For never had I benefit, that ever foild the foe;
Even share has he that keeps his tent, and he to field does go;
With equal honor cowards die, and men most valiant:
The much performer, and the man, that can of nothing vant.
No overplus I ever found, when with my minds most strife,
To do them good, to dangerous fight, I have exposd my life.
But even as to vnfeatherd birds, the careful dam brings meat,
Which when she has bestowed, her selft, has nothing left to eat:
So when my broken sleeps have drawn, the nights t'extremest length;
And ended many bloody days, with still-employed strength,
To guard their weakness: and preserve, their wives contents infract;
I have been robbed before their eyes; twelve cities I have sacked,
Assaild by sea; eleven by land, while this siege held at Troy:
And of all these, what was most dear, and most might crown the joy
Of Agamemnon, he enjoyed; who here behind remaind:
Which when he took, a few he gave, and many things retaind:
Other, to Optimates and Kings, he gave, who hold them fast;
Yet mine he forces; only I, sit with my loss disgraced.
But so he gain a lovely Dame, to be his beds delight,
It is enough; for what cause else, do Greeks and Trojans fight?
Why brought he hither such an host? was it not for a Dame?
For faire-hair'd Hellen? and does love, alone the hearts inflame
Of the Atrides to their wives, of all the men that move?
Every discreet and honest mind, cares for his private love,
As much as they: as I my self, loved Brysis as my life,
Although my captive; and had will, to take her for my wife:
Whom, since he forced, preventing me; in vain he shall prolong
Hopes to appease me, that know well, the deepnesse of my wrong.
But good Ulysses, with thy self, and all you other Kings,
Let him take stomach to repel, Troyes fiery threatenings:
Much has he done without my help; built him a goodly fort,
Cut a dike by it, pitched with pales, broad, and of deep import:
And cannot all these helps repress, this kil-man Hectors fright?
When I was armed amongst the Greeks, he would not offer fight
Without the shadow of his walls; but to the Scaean ports,
Or to the holy Beech of Jove, come backed, with his consorts;
Where once he stood my charge alone, and hardly made retreat;
And to make new proof of our powers, the doubt is not so great.
To morrow then with sacrifice, performed t'imperiall Jove
And all the Gods, I Will lanch my fleet, and all my men remove;
Which (if thou will use so thy sight, or think it worth respect)
In forehead of the morn thine eyes, shall see with sails erect
Amidst the fishie Hellespont, helped with laborious oars:
And if the sea-god send free sail, the fruitful Pthian shores
Within three days we shall attain; where I have store of prise,
Left, when with prejudice I came, to these indignities;
There have I gold as well as here, and store of ruddie brass,
Dames slender, elegantly girt, and steel as bright as glass;
These will I take as I retire, as shares I firmly save;
Though Agamemnon be so base, to take the gifts he gave.
Tell him all this, and openly; I on your honors charge,
That others may take shame to hear, his lusts command so large:
And if there yet remain a man, he hops to deceive,
(Being did in endless impudence) that man may learn to leave
His trust and Empire: but alas, though like a wolf he be,
Shameless and rude; he durst not take, my prise, and look on me.
I never will partake his works, nor counsels, as before;
He once deceived, and injured me, and he shall never more
Tie my affections with his words; enough is the increase
Of one success in his deceits; which let him joy in peace,
And bear it to a wretched end; wise Io^e has reft his brain,
To bring him plagues; and these his gifts, I (as my foes) disdain:
Even in the numnesse of calm death, I will reuengefull be,
Though ten or twenty times so much, he would bestow on me:
All he has here, or any where; or Orchomen contains,
To which men bring their wealth for strength; or all the store remains
In circuit of Egyptian Thebes, where much hid treasure lies,
Whose walls contain an hundred ports, of so admired a size,
Two hundred soldiers may, afront, with horse and chariots pass.
No^, would ^e amplify all this, like sand, or dust, or grass;
Should he reclaim me, till his wreake, paid me for all the pains,
That with his contumely burnd, like poison in my veins. (...) (...) and (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)

Nor shall his daughter be my wife, although she might contend
With golden Ven^s for her form; or if she did transcend
Blew-eyd Min^a for her works: let him a Greek select
Fit for her, and a greater King. For if the Gods protect
My safety to my fathers court, he shall choose me a wife.
Many fair Achiue Princesses, of vnimpeached life,
In Hell and in Pthia live, whose Sires do cities hold,
Of whom I can have whom I will. And more, an hundred ^old,
My true mind in my country likes, to take a lawful wife,
Then in another nation; and there delight my life
With those goods that my father got, much rather then die here.
Not all the wealth of wel-built Troy, possessed when peace was there:
All that Apoll^s marble Fane, in stony Pythos holds,
I value equal with the life, that my free breast infolds.
Sheep, Oxen, Tripods, crest-deckt horse, though lost, may come again:
But when the white guard of our teeth, no longer can contain
Our humane soul, away it flies; and once gone, never more
To her frail mansion any man, can her lost powers restore.
And therefore since my mother-queene (famed for her silver feet)
Told me two fates about my death, in my direction meet:
The one, that if I here remain, t'assist our victory,
My safe return shall never live, my fame shall never die:
If my return obtain success, much of my fame decays,
But death shall linger his approach, and I live many days.
This being revealed, twere foolish pride, t'abridge my life for praise.
Then with my self, I will advise, others to hoise their sail;
For, against the height of Ilion, you never shall prevail:
Jove with his hand protecteth it, and makes the soldiers bold.
This tell the King in every part: for so grave Legates should;
That they may better counsels use, to save their fleet and friends
By their own valors; since this course, drowned in my anger ends.
Phoenix may in my tent repose; and, in the mo^e, stere course
For Pthia, if he think it good; if not, I Will use no force.
All wondered at his stern reply; and Ph^nix full of fears,
His words would be more weak then just, supplide their wants with tears.
If thy return incline thee thus, ( Peleus renowned joy)
And thou will let our ships be burnd, with harmfull fire of Troy, Phoenix
Oration to A^hilles.

Since thou art angry, O my son; how shall I after be
Alone in these extremes of death, relinquished by thee?
I, whom thy royal father sent, as orderer of thy force,
When to Atrides from his Court, he left thee, for this course;
Yet young, and when in skill of arms, thou did not so abound;
Nor had the habit of discourse, that makes men so renownd:
In all which, I was set by him, t'instruct thee as my son,
That thou might speak when speech was fit, and do, when deeds were done;
Not sit as dumb, for want of words; idle, for skill to move:
I would not then be left by thee; dear son, begot in love;
No not if God would promise me, to raze the prints of time
Carved in my bosom, and my brows; and grace me with the prime
Of manly youth, as when at first, I left sweet Helles shore
Decked with fair Dames, and fled the grudge, my angry father bore;
Who was the fair Amyntor called, surnamed Ormenides: Mor^m (...) obseruat, qu^
de prateritis libe^ter solent meminisse.

And for a faire-haird harlots sake, that his affects could please,
Contemnd my mother his true wife; who ceaseless urged me
To use his harlot Clytia, and still would claspe my knee
To do her will; that so my Site, might turn his love to hate
Of that lewd Dame; converting it, to comfort her esta^.
At last, I was content to prove, to do my mother good,
And reconcile my fathers love; who straight suspicious stood,
Pursuing me with many a curse, and to the Furies praide
No Dame might love, nor bring me seed: the Deities obayd
That govern hell: infernal Jove, and stern Persephone.
Then durst I in no longer date, with my stern fatherbe:
Yet did my friends, and near allies: enclose me with desires
Not to depart: killed sheep, bores, beeues; roast them at solemn fires:
And from my fathers tuns we drunk, exceeding store of wine.
Nine ni^hts they guarded me by turns; their fires did ceaseless shine,
One in the porch of his strong hall, and in the portall one,
Before my chamber: but when day, beneath the tenth night shone,
I brake my chambers thick-fram'd doors, and through the hals guard past,
Unseen of any man or maid. Through Greece, then rich, and vast,
I fled to Pthia, nurse of sheep: and came to Peleus Court,
Who entertaind me heartily, and in as gracious sort
As any Sire his only son; borne when his strength is spent,
And blessed with great possessions, to leave to his descent.
He made me rich, and to my charge, did much command commend:
I dwelt in th'vt most region, rich Pthia does extend;
And gouernd the Dolopians; and made thee what thou a^,
O thou that like the Gods art framed: since (dearest to my heart)
I used thee so, thou lou'dst none else; nor any where would eat,
Till I had crowned my knee with theee, and karu'd thee tenderst meat,
And given thee wine so much, for love, that in thy infancy
(Which still discretion must protect, and a continual eye)
My bosom lovingly sustained; the wine thine could not bear:
Then, now my strength needs thine as much, be mine to thee as dear;
Much have I sufferd for thy love, much labored, wished much;
Thinking since I must have no heir, (the Gods decrees are such)
I would adopt thy self my heir: to thee my heart did give
What any Sire could give his son; in thee I hoped to live:
O mitigate thy mighty spirits: it fits not one that moves
The hearts of all, to live unmoved, and succor hates, for loves:
The Gods themselves are flexible, whose virtues, honors, powers,
Are more then thine: yet they will bend, their breasts as we bend ours.
Perfumes, benign devotions, sauors of offerings burnd,
And holy rites, the engines are, with which their hearts are turned,
By men that pray to them; whose faith, their sins have falsified:
For, prayers are daughters of great Jove; lame, wrinkled, ruddie eyd, Prayers,
how necessary and helpful: if shund or neglected, how wreakefull.

And ever following injury; who (strong and sound of feet)
Flies through the world, afflicting men: believing prayers, yet
(To all that love that seed of Jove) the certain blessing get Jove's
daughters, and called Lit^.

To have Jove hear, and help them too: but if he shall refuse,
And stand inflexible to them, they fly to Jove, and use
Their powers against him; that the wrongs, he does to them, may fall
On his own head, and pay those pains, whose cure he fails to call.
Then great Achille^ honor thou, this sacred seed of Jove,
And yield to them; since other men, of greatest minds they move:
If Agamemnon would not give, the self same gifts he vows,
But offer other afterward; and in his stil-bent brows
Entombe his honor and his word; I would not thus exhort
(With wrath appeasde) thy aid to Greece, though plagued in heauiest sort:
But, much he presently will give; and after, yield the rest:
T'assure which, he has sent to thee, the men thou love best,
And most renownd of all the host, that they might soften thee:
Then let not both their pains and prayers, lost and despised be.
Before which, none could reprehend, the tumult of thy heart:
But now to rest inexpiate, were much too rude a part.
Of ancient worthies we have heard, when they were more displeasde,
(To their high fames) with gifts and prayers, they have been still appeasde.
For instance, I remember well, a fact performed of old,
Which to you all my friends I Will tell: The Curets wars did hold Another
narration, de bello Aetolico.

With the well-fought Etolians; where mutual lives had end
About the city Calidon; th'Etolians did defend
Their flourishing country; which to spoil, the Curets did contend.
Diana with the golden throne (with Oeneus much incenc't,
Since with his plenteous lands first fruits, she was not reuerenc't;
Yet other Gods, with Hecatombes, had feasts; and she alone,
(Great Jove's bright daughter) left vnseru'd; or by oblivion,
Or undue knowledge of her dues) much hurt in heart she swore:
And she enraged, excited much: she sent a syluan Bore
From their green groves, with wounding tuskes, who usually did spoil Aper
Calidonius

King Oeneus fields: his lofty woods, laid prostrate on the soil;
Rent by the roots, trees fresh, adornd, with fragrant apple flowers:
Which Meleager (Oeneus son) slew with assembled powers
Of hunters, and of fiercest hounds; from many cities brought:
For, such he was, that with few lives, his death could not be bought;
Heaps of dead humanes, by his rage, the funeral piles applide:
Yet (slain at last) the Goddess stird, about his head, and hide
A wondrous tumult; and a war, betwixt the Curets wrought
And brave Aetolians: all the while, fierce Meleager fought,
Ill fared the Curets: near the walls, none durst advance his crest
Though they were many: but when wrath, inflamed his hautie breast,
(Which often the firm mind of the wise, with passion does infest)
Since twixt his mother Queen and him, arose a deadly strife;
He left the Court, and privately, lived with his lawful wife:
Fair Cleopatra, femall birth, of bright Marpissas pain,
And of Idaeus; who, of all, terrestrial men, did reign
(At that time) king of fortitude; and, for Marpissas sake,
Against wanton Phoebus, king o^ flames, his bow in hand did take,
Since he had ravished her, his joy; whom her friends, after, gave
The surname of Alcyone; because they could not save
Their daughter from Alcyones Fate: in Cleopatr as arms
Lay Meleager, feeding on, his anger for the harms
His mother praid might fall on him; who, for her brother slain
By Meleager, grieved, and praid, the Gods to wreake her pain,
With all the horror could be poured, upon her furious birth:
Still knocked she, with her impious hands, the many-feeding earth,
To urge stern Pluto and his Queen, t'incline their vengefull ears;
Fell on her knees, and all her breast, dewd with her fiery tears
To make them massacre her son; whose wrath enraged her thus.
Erynnis (wandering through the air) heard, out of Erebus,
Prayers, fit for her vnpleased mind; yet Meleager lay,
Obscurd in fury; then the bruit, of the tumultuous ^ray,
Rung through the turrets as they scaled; then came the Aetolian Pee^es,
To Meleager with low suits, to rise and free their fears:
Then sent they the chief Priests of Gods, with offered gifts t'attone
His differing fu^ie; bad him ch^, in sweet-soild Calidon,
Of the most fat and yeeldie soil, what with an hundred steares,
Might in a hundred days be plowde; half, that rich vintage bears,
And half of naked earth to plow: yet yielded not his ire.
Then to his lofty chamber door, ascends his royal Sire
With ruthful plaints: shook the strong bars; then came his sisters cries,
His mother then, and all entreat: yet still more stiff he lies:
His friends, most reverend, most esteemed; yet none impression took,
Till the high turrets where he lay, and his strong chamber shook
With the inuading enemy: who now forced dreadful way
Along the city: then his wife (in pitiful dismay)
Besought him weeping: telling him, the miseries sustaind
By all the citizens, whose town, the enemy had gaind;
Men slaughterd, children bondslaues made; sweet Ladies forced with l^st:
Fires climing towers, and turning them, to heaps of fruitless dust.
These dangers softened his steel heart: up the stout Prince arose,
Indude his body with rich arms, and freed th'Aetolians woes:
His smotherd anger giving air, which gifts did not assuage,
But his own peril. And because, he did not dis-ingage
Their lives for gifts, their gifts he lost. But for my sake (dear friend)
Be not thou bent to see our plights, to these extremes descend,
Ere thou assist us; be not so, by thy ill angel, turned
From thine own honor: it were shame, to see our navy burnd,
And then come with thy timelesse aid. For offered presents come,
And all the Greeks will honor thee, as of celestial room.
But if without these gifts thou fight, forced by thy private woe,
Thou will be nothing so renowned, though thou repel the foe*
Achilles answered the last part, of this oration, thus: Achilles to Phoenix.

Phoenix, renowned and reverend; the honors vrgde on us
We need not; Jove does honor me, and to my safety sees,
And will whiles I retain a spirit, or can command my knees.
Then do not thou, with tears and woes, impassion my affects,
Becoming gracious to my foe: nor fits it the respects
Of thy vowed love, to honor him, that has dishonord me;
Lest such loose kindness lose his heart, that yet is firm to thee.
It were thy praise to hurt, with me, the hurter of my state;
Since half my honor and my Realm, thou may participate.
Let these Lords then return the event; and do thou here repose;
And when dark sleep breaks with the day; our counsels shall disclose
The course of our return or stay. This said, he with his eye
Made to his friend, a covert sign, to hasten instantly
A good soft bed, that the old Prince, soon as the Peers were gone,
Might take his rest; when souldier-like, brave Ajax Telamon
Spoke to Ulysses, as with thought; Achilles was not worth
The high direction of his speech; that stood so sternly forth,
Unmoved with th'Orators: and spoke, not to appease
Pelides wrath, but to depart: his arguments were these:
High-issued Laertiades? let us insist no more Ai^x souldierlike speech and
fashion.

On his persuasion; I perceive, the world wo^d end before
Our speeches end, in this affair: we must with utmost haste
Return his answer, though but bad: the Peers are elsewhere placed,
And will not rise till we return; great Thetis son has stored
Proud wrath within him, as his wealth, and will not be implored;
Rude that he is; nor his friends love, respects, do what they can:
Wherein past all, we honored him. O vnremorsefull man!
Another for his brother slain, another for his son,
Accepts of satisfaction: and he the deed has done
Lives in beloved society, long after his amends;
To which, his foes high heart for gifts, with patience condescends:
But thee a wild and cruel spirit, the Gods for plague have given,
And for one girl; of whose fai^e sex, we come to offer seven,
The most exempt for excellence, and many a better prise.
Then put a sweet mind in thy breast, respect thy own allies,
Though others make thee not remiss: a multitude we are,
Sprung of thy royal family, and our supremest ca^e
Is to be most familiar, and hold most lou^ with thee,
Of all the Greeks, how great an host, soever here there be.
He answered; Noble Telamon, Prince of our soldiers here: Achilles t^ (...)

Out of thy heart I know thou speakst, and as thou holdst me dear:
But still as often as I think, how rudely I was vsd,
And like a stranger for all rites, fit for our good, refusd:
My heart does swell against the man, that durst be so profane
To violate his sacred place: not for my private bane;
But since wrackt virtues general laws, he shameless did infringe:
For whose sake I will loose the reins, and give mine anger swinge,
Without my wisdoms least impeach. He is a fool, and base,
That pitties vice-plagu'd minds, when pain, not love of right gives place.
And therefore tell your king, my Lords, my just wrath will not care
For all his cares: before my tents, and navy charged are
By warlike Hector; making way, through flocks of Grecian lives,
Enlightened by their nauall fire: but when his rage arriues
About my tent, and sable bark, I doubt not but to shield
Them and my self: and make him fly, the there-strong bounded field.
This said, each one but kissed the cup, and to the ships retired,
Ulysses first. Patroclus then, the men and maids requi^'d
To make grave Phoenix bed with speed, and see he nothing lacks:
They strait obeyed, and thereon laid, the subtle fruit of flax,
And warm sheep-fels for covering: and there the old man slept,
Attending till the golden Morn, her usual station kept.
Achilles lay in the inner room, of his tent richly wrought;
And that fair Lady by his side, that he from Lesbos brought,
Bright Diomeda, Phorbas seed: Patroclus did embrace
The beauteous Iphis, given to him, when his bold friend did race
The lofty Syrus, that was kept, in Enyeius hold.
Now at the tent of Atreus son, each man with cups of gold Agamemnon to
Ulysses.

Received th'Ambassadors returned; all clusterd near to know
What news they brought: which first the king, would have Ulysses show.
Say most praise-worthie Ithacus; the Grecians great renown,
Will he defend us? or not yet, will his proud stomach down?
Ulysses made reply; Not yet, will he appeased be, Ulysses to Ag^memnon.

But grows more wrathful, prizing light, thy offered gifts and thee;
And wills thee to consult with us, and take some other course
To save our army and our fleet: and says, with all his force,
The morn shall light him on his way, to Pthias wished soil:
For never shall high-seated Troy, be sacked with all our toil:
love holds his hand twixt us and it: the soldiers gather heart.
Thus he replies: which Ajax here, can equally impart,
And both these Heralds: Phoenix stays, for so was his desire
To go with him, if he thought good; if not, he might retire.
All wondered he should be so stern: at last bold Diomed spoke:
Would God, Atrides, thy request, were yet to undertake; Diomed to Aga^non.

And all thy gifts vnofferd him, he is proud enough beside:
But this embassage thou have sent, will make him burst with pride.
But let us suffer him to stay, or go at his desire:
Fight when his stomach serves him best; or when Jove shall inspire:
Mean while our watch being strongly held, let us a little rest
After our food: strength lives by both; and virtue is their guest.
Then, when the rosie-fingerd Morn, holds out her silver light,
Bring forth thy host, encourage all; and be thou first in fight.
The kings admired the fortitude, that so divinely moved
The skillful horseman Diomed; and his advice approved:
Then with their nightly sacrifice, each toooke his several tent;
Where all received the sovereign gifts, soft Somnus did present.
The end of the ninth Book.
THE TENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
TH'Atrides watching, wake the other Peers:
And (in the Fort, consulting of their fears)
Two kings they send, most stout, and honored most,
For royal skowts, into the Trojan host:
Who meeting Dolon (Hectors bribed Spy)
Take him; and learn, how all the Quarters lie.
He told them, in the Thracian regiment
Of rich king Rhesus, and his royal Tent;
Striving for safety; but they end his strife,
And rid poor Dolon, of a dangerous life.
Then with digressiue wyles, they (...) their force
On Rhesus life, and take his sno^e horse.
Another Argument.
Kappa the Night exploits applies;
Rhesus and Dolons tragedies.
THe other Princes at their ships, soft fingerd sleep did bind,
But not the General; Somnus silks, bound not his laboring mind, Aga^nons
cares.

That turned, and returned, many thoughts. And as quick lightnings fly These
are the li^htnings before snow, etc. that Scalligers Criti^ (...) ^worthily
(...); citing the place falsely, as in the 3. books annotations, etc

From well-deckt- Iunos sovereign, out of the thickened sky,
Preparing some exceeding rain, or hail, the fruit of cold:
Or downe-like Snow, that suddenly, makes all the fields look old;
Or opes the gulfie mouth of war, with his ensulphur'd hand
In dazzling flashes, poured from clouds, on any punished land:
So from Atrides troubled heart, through his dark sorrows, flew
Redoubled sighs: his intrailes shook, as often as his view
Admired the multitude of fires, that gilt the Phrygian shade,
And heard the sounds of fifes, and shawmes, and tumults so^ldiers made.
But when he saw his fleet and host, kneel to his care and love,
He rent his hair up by the roots, as sacrifice to Jove:
Burnt in his fiery sighs, still breathed, out of his royal heart;
And first thought good, to Nestors care, his sorrows to impart:
To try if royal diligence, with his approved advise,
Might fashion counsels, to prevent, their threatened miseries.
So up he rose, attired himself, and to his strong feet tide Aga^nons habit
rising in the night.

Rich shoes, and cast upon his back, a ruddie Lions hide,
So ample, it his ankles reached: then took his royal spear. He wearing a
Lio^s hide.

Like him was Menelaus pierced, with an industrious fear,
Nor sat sweet slumber on his eyes; lest bitter Fates should quite
The Greeks high favors, that for him, resolved such endless fight. (...) a
^eopards.

And first a freckled Panthers hide, hid his broad back athwart:
His head, his brazen helm did arm; his able hand his dart;
Then made he all his haste to raise, his brothers head as rare,
That he who most excelled in rule, might help to effect his care.
He found him at his ships crookt-sterne, adorning him with arms;
Who ioyd to see his brothers spirits, awak't without alarmes:
Well weighing th'importance of the time. And first the younger spoke:
Why brother, are ye arming thus? is it to undertake Menelaus to Agamemnon.

The sending of some ventrous Greek, t'explore the foes intent?
Alas I greatly fear, not one, will give that work consent,
Exposd alone to all the fears, that flow in gloomie night:
He that does this, must know death well; in which ends every fright.
Brother (said he) in these affairs, we both must use advice; Agamemnon to
Menelaus.

Jove is against us, and accepts, great Hectors sacrifice;
For I have never seen, nor heard, in one day, and by one,
So many high attempts well urged, as Hectors power has done
Against the hapless sons of Greece: being chiefly dear to Jove;
And without cause; being neither fruit, of any Godesse love,
Nor helpful God: and yet I fear, the deepnesse of his hand
Ere it be rac't out of our thoughts, will many years withstand.
But brother, hie thee to thy ships, and Idomen disease
With warklike Ajax: I will haste, to grave Neleides;
Exhorting him to rise, and give, the sacred watch command;
For they will specially embrace, incitement at his hand;
And now his son, their captain is; and Idomens good friend
Bold Merion; to whose discharge, we did that charge commend.
Commandst thou then (his brother asked) that I shall tarry h^re
Attending thy resolved approach, or else the message bear
And quickly make return to thee? He answered: Rather stay, Directions for
commmand in wars extremity.

Lest otherwise we fail to meet: for many a different way
Lies through our labyrinthian host; speak ever as you go;
Command strong watch; from Sire to son, urge all t'obserue the foe;
Familiarly, and with their praise, exciting every eye;
Not with vnseason'd violence, of proud authority.
We must our patience exercise, and work, our selves with them,
Jove in our births combined such care, to eithers Diadem.
Thus he dismissed him, knowing well, his charge before he went,
Himself to Nestor, whom he found, in bed within his tent: N^tors arms, and
readiness to use them.

By him, his damask curets hung, his shield, a pair of darts;
His shining caske, his arming waste: in these he led the hearts
Of his apt soldiers to sharp war, not yielding to his years.
He quickly started from his bed, when to his watchful ears
Untimely feet told some approach: he took his lance in hand,
And spoke to him; Ho, what art thou? that walk'st at midnight? stand;
Is any wanting at the guards? or lack'st thou any Peer?
Speak, come not silent toward me: say what intendst thou hear?
He answered, O Neleides, grave honor of our host: (...) to Nestor.

It Is Agamemnon thou may know, whom Jove afflicts most
Of all the wretched men that live; and will, whilst any breath
Gives motion to my toiled lims, and bears me up from death.
I walk the round thus, since sweet sleep, cannot enclose mine eyes,
Nor shut those Organs care breaks open, for our calamities.
My fear is vehement for the Greeks: my heart (the fount of heat)
With his extreme affects, made cold; without my breast does beat;
And therefore are my sinews struck, with trembling: every part
Of what my friends may feel, has act, in my dispersed heart.
But if thou think of any course, may to our good redound,
(Since neither thou thy self can sleep) come, walk with me the round;
In way whereof we may confer, and look to every guard:
Lest watching long, and weariness, with laboring so hard,
D^owne their oppressed memories, of what they have in charge.
The liberty we give the foe, (alas) is over large;
Their camp is almost mixed with ours; and we have forth noispies,
To learn their drifts; who may perchance, this night intend surprise.
Grave Nestor answered: Worthy king, let good hearts bear our ill: Nestor to
Agamem^n.

Jove is not bound to perfect all, this busy Hectors will;
But I am confidently given, his thoughts are much dismayed
With fear, lest our distress incite, Achilles to our aid:
And therefore will not tempt his fate, nor ours with further pride.
But I will gladly follow thee, and stir up more beside:
Tydides, famous for his lance; Ulysses, Telamon,
And bold Phyleus valiant heir: or else if any one
Would haste to call king Idomen, and Ajax, since their sail
Lie so removed; with much good speed, it might our haste avail.
But (though he be our honored friend,) thy brother I will blame,
Not fearing if I anger thee: it is his utter shame
He should commit all pains to thee, that should himself employ,
Past all our Princes, in the care, and cure of our annoy;
And be so far from needing spurs, to these his due respects,
He should apply our spirits himself, with prayers, and urged affects.
Necessity (a law to laws, and not to be endured)
Makes proof of all his faculties; not sound, if not inured.
Good father (said the king) sometimes, you know I have desired Agamemnons
excuse of hi^ brother.

You would improve his negligence, too often to ease retired:
Nor is it for defect of spirit, or compass of his brain,
But with observing my estate, he thinks, he should abstain
Till I commanded, knowing my place: unwilling to assume,
For being my brother, any thing, might prove he did presume.
But now he rose before me far, and came, t'auoid delays:
And I have sent him for the man, your self desired to raise:
Come, we shall find them at the guards, we placed before the fort:
For thither my direction was, they should with speed resort.
Why now (said Nestor) none will grudge, nor his just rule withstand;
Examples make excitements strong, and sweeten a command.
Thus put he on his arming trusse, fair shoes upon his feet,
About him a mandilion, that did with buttons meet,
Of purple, large, and full of folds; curld with a warmefull nap;
A garment that against cold in nights, did soldiers use to wrap:
Then took he his strong lance in hand; made sharp with proved steel,
And went along the Grecian fleet. First at Ulysses keele,
He called; to break the silken fumes, that did his senses bind:
The voice through th'Organs of his ears, straight rung about his mind.
Forth came Ulysses, asking him; Why stir ye thus so late? Ulysses to
Agamemnon and Nestor.

Sustain we such enforciue cause? He answered, Our estate
Does force this perturbation; vouchsafe it worthy friend, N^or to Ulysses.

And come, let us excite one more, to counsel of some end
To our extremes, by fight, or flight. He, back, and took his shield,
And both took course to Diomed; they found him laid in field The manner of
Diomeds loggi^.

Far from his tent: his armor by; about him was dispread
A ring of soldiers; every man, his shield beneath his head:
His spear fixed by him as he slept, the great end in the ground:
The point, that brisled the dark earth, cast a reflection round,
Like pallid lightnings thrown from Jove; thus this Hero lay,
And under him a big Ox hide: his royal head had stay
On Arras hangings, rolled up: whereon he slept so fast,
That Nestor stird him with his foot, and chid to see him cast Nestor chideth
Diomed.

In such deep sleep, in such deep wo^s: and asked him why he spent
All night in sleep, or did not hear, the Tr^ans near his tent?
Their Camp drawn close upon their dike, small space twixt foes and foes?
He, starting up, said, Strange old man, that never take repos^; Diomed to
Nestor.

Thou art too patient of our toil; have we not men more young,
To be imploid from king to king? thine age has too much wrong.
Said like a king, replied the Sire: for I have sons renownd; Nestor to him.
Note the life of these representations.

And there are many other men, might go this toilesome round:
But you must see, imperious Need, has all at her command:
Now on the eager razors edge, for life or death we stand. (...)* T^ went into
a Proverb, used by T^critus, in Dioscaris D^caris of H^mer.

Then go (thou art the younger man,) and if thou love my ease,
Call swift*foot Ajax up thy self, and young Phyleides.
This said, he on his shoulders cast, a yellow Lions hide,
Big, and reached earth; then took his spear; and Nestors will applide:
Raisd the Heroes, brought them both. All met, the round they went,
And found not any captain there, asleep or negligent:
But waking, and in arms, gave ear, to every lowest sound.
And as keen dogs, keep sheep in Cotes, or folds, of Hurdles bound: Simile.

And grin at every breach of air, envious of all that moves:
Still listening when the ravenous beast, stalks through the hilly groves*
Then men and dogs stand on their guards, and mighty tumults make,
Sleep wanting weight to close one wink: so did the Captains wake,
That kept the watch the whole sad night: all with intentive ear
Converted to the enemies tents, that they might timely hear
If they were stirring to surprise: which Nestor ioyd to see.
Why so (dear sons) maintain your watch; sleep not a wink (said he)
Rather then make your fames, the scorn, of Trojan perjury. N^ ^o the ^ds.

This said, he foremost past the dike, the others seconded;
Even all the kings that had been called, to counsel, from the bed:
And with them went Meriones, and Nestors famous son:
For both were called by all the kings, to consultation.
Beyond the dike they chusde a place, near as they could from blood;
Where yet appeared the falls of some, and whence (the crimson flood
Of Grecian lives being poured on earth, by Hectors furious chase)
He made retreat, when night repour'd, grim darkness in his face.
There sat they down, and Nestor spoke: O friends remains not one, N^ ^o the
Gre^ Princes

That will rely on his bold mind, and view the camp alone,
Of the proud Trojans? to approve, if any straggling mate
He can surprise near the utmost tents; or learn the brief estate
Of their intentions for the time, and mix like one of them
With their outguards, expiscating, if the renowned extreme,
They force on us, will serve their turns; with glory to retire,
Or still encampe thus far from Troy? This may he well enquire*
And make a brave retreat untouched; and this would win him fame
Of all men canapied with heaven; and every man of name
In all this host shall honor him, with an enriching meed;
A black Ewe and her sucking Lamb, (rewards that now exceed
All other best possessions, in all men's choice requests)
And still be bidden by our kings, to kind and royal feasts.
All reuerenc't one another worth; and none would silence break,
Lest worst should take best place of speech: at last did Diomed speak: Dio^
^o N^stor.

Nestor, thou ask'st if no man here, have heart so well inclined
To work this stratageme on Troy: yes, I have such a mind:
Yet if some other Prince would join; more probable will be
The strengthened hope of our exploite* two may together see
(One going before another still) sly danger every way;
One spirit upon another works; and takes with firmer stay
The benefit of all his powers: for though one knew his course,
Yet might he well distrust himself; which the other might enforce.
This offer every man assumed, all would with Diomed go:
The two Aiaces, Merion, and Menelaus too:
But Nestors son enforced it much, and hardy Ithacus,
Who had to every ventrous deed, a mind as venturous.
Amongst all these, thus spoke the king; Tydides, most beloved* The gr^ ^unsell
of Agamem^on to Diomed.

Choose thy associate worthily; a man the most approved
For use and strength in these extremes. Many tho^ ^st stand forth:
But choose not thou by height of place, but by regard of worth*
Lest with thy nice respect of right, to any m^ns degr^*
Thou wrongst thy venture, choosing one, least fit to join with thee*
Although perhaps a greater king: this spoke he with suspect,
That Diomed (for honors sake) ^is brother would select.
Then said Tydides; Since thou give, my judgment leave to choose,
How can it so much truth forget, Ulysses to refuse? Di^ c^ of Ulysses.

That bears a mind so most exempt, and vigorous in the effect*
Of all high labors, and a man, Pallas does most respect?
We shall return through burning fire, if I with him combine:
He sets strength in so true a course, with counsels so divine.
Ulysses loath to be esteemd, a lover of his praise,
With such exceptions humbled him, as did him higher raise: Ulysses m^destie in
accepting.

And said; Tydides praise me not, more then free truth will bear,
Nor yet empaire me: they are Greeks, that give judicial ear.
But come, the morning hasts; the stars, are forward in their course,
Two parts of night are past; the third, is left t'imploy our force.
Now borrowed they, for haste, some arms: bold Thrasymedes lent The
expl^rators armed.

Aduentrous Diomed his sword, (his own was at his tent)
His shield, and helm, tough and well tanned, without or plume or crest,
And called a murrion; archers heads, it used to inuest.
Meriones lent Ithacus, his quiver and his bow;
His helmet fashiond of a hide: the workman did bestow
Much labor in it, quilting it, with bowstrings; and without,
With snowie tuskes of white-mouthd Bores, it was armed round about
Right cunningly: and in the midst, an arming cap was placed,
That with the fixed ends of the tuskes, his head might not be rac't.
This (long since) by Autolycus, was brought from Eleon,
When he laid waste Amyntors house, that was Ormenus son.
In Scandia, to Cytherius, surnamed Amphydamas,
Autolycus did give this helm: he, when he feasted was
By honored Molus, gave it him, as present of a guest:
Molus to his son Merion, did make it his bequest.
With this Ulysses armed his head; and thus they (both addressed) A^gurium ex
cant^ Arde^.

Took leave of all the other kings: to them a glad ostent,
(As they were entering on their way) Minerua did present,
A Hernshaw consecrate to her; which they could ill discern
Through sable night: but by her clange, they knew it was a Herne.
Ulysses joyed, and thus inuok't: Hear me great seed of Jove, Ulysses in^oketh
Palla^.

That ever do my labors grace, with presence of thy love:
And all my motions do attend; still love me (sacred Dame)
Especially in this exploit, and so protect our fame,
We both may safely make retreat, and thriftily employ
Out boldness in some great affair, banefull to them of Troy.
Then praid illustrate Diomed: Vouchsafe me likewise ear, Diomed to Pall^.

O thou vnconquerd Queen of arms: be with thy favors near,
As to my royal fathers steps, thou wentst a bountious guide,
When the Achiues, and the Peers of Thebes, he would have pacifide,
Sent as the Greeks Ambassador, and left them at the flood
Of great Aesopus; whose retreat, thou made to swim in blood
Of his enambusht enemies: and if thou so protect
My bold endeavors; to thy name, an Heiffer, most select,
That never yet was tamed with yoke, broad fronted, one year old,
I Will burn in zealous sacrifice, and set the horns in gold.
The Goddess heard, and both the kings, their dreadlesse passage bore,
Through slaughter, slaughterd carcasses; arms; and discolord gore.
Nor Hector let his Princes sleep, but all to counsel called:
And asked, What one is here will vow, and keep it vnap pald, H^tor to the
(...).

To have a gift fit for his deed; a chariot and two horse,
That pass for speed the rest of Greece? what one dares take take this course,
For his renown (besides his gifts) to mix amongst the foe,
And learn if still they hold their guards? or with this overthrow
Determine flight, as being too weak, to hold us longer war?
All silent stood, at last stood forth, one Dolon, that did dare Dol^ offers to
be explorat^r.

This dangerous work; Eumedes heir, a Herald much renownd:
This Dolon did in gold and brass, exceedingly abound;
But in his form was quite deformed; yet passing swift to run:
Amongst five sisters he was left, Eumedes only son;
And he told Hector, his free heart, would undertake t'explore
The Greeks intentions; but (said he) thou shall be sworn before,
By this thy scepter, that the horse, of great Aeacides
And his strong chariot, bound with brass, thou will (before all these)
Resign me as my valors prise: and so I rest unmoved
To be thy spy, and not return, before I have approved
(By venturing to Atrides ship, where their consults are held)
If they resolve still to resist; or fly, as quite expeld.
He put his scepter in his hand, and called the thunders God Hector swears to
D^lon.

( Saturnias husband to his oath, those horse should not bero de
By any other man then he; but he for ever joy
(To his renown) their services, for his good done to Troy.
Thus swore he, and forswore himself; yet made base Dolon bold: Dolon arms.

Who on his shoulders hung his bow, and did about him fold
A white wolves hide; and with a helm, of weasels skins did arm
His weasels head; then took his dart, and never tu^d to harm
The Greeks with their related drifts: but being past the troops
Of horse and foot, he promptly runs; and as he runs he stoopes
To undermine Achilles horse; Ulysses straight did see,
And said to Diomed; this man, makes footing toward thee,
Out of the tents; I know not well, if he be used as spy Ulysses to Di^med.

Bent to our fleet; or come to rob, the slaughterd enemy.
But let us suffer him to come, a little further on,
And then pursue him. If it chance, that we be ouergone
By his more swiftness; urge him still, to run upon our fleet,
And (left he escape us to the town) still let thy Iaueline meet
With all his offers of retreat. Thus stepped they from the plain
Amongst the slaughterd carcasses; Dolon came on amain,
Suspecting nothing; but once past, as far as Mules outdraw
Oxen at plough; being both put on, neither admitted law,
To plow a deep soild furrow forth; so far was Dolon past;
Then they pursude, which he perceived, and staid his speedlesse have;
Subtly supposing Hector sent, to countermand his spy:
But in a Iauelins throw or less, he knew them enemy.
Then laid he on his nimble knees; and they pursude like wind.
As when a brace of greyhounds are, laid in, with Hare or Hind; Simile.

Close-mouth'd, and skild to make the best, of their industrious course;
Serve eithers turn, and set on hard; lose neither ground nor force:
So constantly did Tydeus son, and his towne-razing Peer,
Pursue this spy; still turning him, as he was winding near
His covert: till he almost mixed, with their out-courts of guard.
Then Pallas prompted Diomed, lest his due worths reward Diomed to Dolon.

Should be empaird, if any man, did vant he first did sheath
His sword in him, and he be called, but second in his death:
Then spoke he (threatening with his lance,) or stay, or this comes on,
And long thou can not run, before, thou be by death out-gone.
This said, he threw his Iaueline forth: which mist, (as Diomed would)
Above his right arm making way; the pile stuck in the mould:
He staid and trembled, and his teeth, did chatter in his head.
They came in blowing, seisd him fast; he, weeping, offered D^lons surprise and
offer.

A wealthy ransom for his life, and told them he had brass,
Much gold, and iron, that fit for use, in many labors was;
From whose rich heaps his father would, a wondrous portion give,
If, at the great Achaian fleet, he heard his son did live.
Ulysses bad him cheer his heart. Think not of death, said he, Ulysses to
Dolon.

But tell us true, why runst thou forth, when others sleeping be?
Is it to spoil the carcasses? or art thou choicely sent,
T'explore our drifts? or of thy self, seek'st thou some wished event?
He trembling answered: Much reward, did Hectors oath propose, Dolons answer.

And urged me much against my will, t'indeuour to disclose,
If you determined still to stay, or bent your course for flight,
As all dismayed with your late foil, and wearied with the fight:
For which exploite, Pelides horse, and chariot, he did swear
I only ever should enjoy. Ulysses smiled to hear
So base a swain have any hope, so high a prise t'aspire; Ulysses to Dolon.

And said, his labors did affect, a great and precious hire:
And that the horse Pelides rein'd, no mortal hand could use
But he himself; whose matchless life, a Goddess did produce.
But tell us, and report but truth, where lef^st thou Hector now?
Where are his arms? his famous horse? on whom does he bestow
The watches charge? where sleep the Kings? intend they still to lie
Thus near encampt? or turn suffisd, with their late victory?
All this, said he, I Will tell most true. At Ilus monument Dolons relation.

Hector with all our Princes sits, t'aduise of this event;
Who choose that place removed, to shnn, the rude confused sounds
The common soldiers throw about: but, for our watch, and rounds,
Whereof (brave Lord) thou make demand; none orderly we keep:
The Trojans that have roofes to save, only abandon sleep,
And privately without command, each other they exhort
To make prevention of the worst; and in this slender sort
Is watch, and guard maintaind with us. Th'auxiliarie bands
Sleep soundly, and commit their cares, into the Trojans hands;
For they have neither wives with them, nor children to protect;
The less they need to care, the more, they succor dull neglect.
But tell me (said wise Ithacus,) are all these foreign powers Ithac^.

Appointed quarters by themselves, or else commixt with yours? Dol^.

And this (said Dolon) too (my Lords,) I Will seriously unfold:
The Paeons with the crooked bows, and Cares, quarters hold
Next to the sea; the Leieges, and Caucons joined with them,
And brave Pelasgians; Thimbers meade, removed more from the stream,
Is quarter to the Licians; the lofty Misian force;
The Phrygians and Meonians, that fight with armed horse.
But what need these particulars? if ye intend surprise
Of any in our Trojan camp; the Thracian quarter lies
Utmost of all, and vncommixt, with Trojan regiments,
That keep the voluntary watch: new pitched are all their tents.
King Rhesus, Eioneus son, commands them; who has steeds
More white then snow, huge, and well shaped; their fiery pace exceeds
Virgilianum.

The winds in swiftness: these I saw: his Chariot is with gold
And pallid silver richly framed, and wondrous to behold.
His great and golden armor is, not fit a man should wear;
But for immortal shoulders framed: come then, and quickly bear
Your happy prisoner to your fleet: or leave him here fast bound
Till your well urged and rich return, prove my relation sound.
Tydides dreadfully replide: Think not of passage thus, Diomeds stern^ r^ply
to Dolon.

Though of right acceptable news, thou have aduertisde us;
Our hands are holds more strict then so: and should we set thee free
For offered ransom; for this escape, thou still would scouting be
About our ships; or do us scathe, in plain opposed arms;
But if I take thy life, no way, can we repent thy harms.
With this, as Dolon reached his hand, to use a suppliants part, Dolons
slaughter by Diomed.

And stroke the beard of Diomed; he struck his neck athwart,
With his forced sword; and both the nerves, he did in sunder wound;
And suddenly his head, deceived, fell speaking on the ground:
His wesels helm they took, his bow, his wolves skin, and his lance;
Which to Minerua, Ithacus, did zealously advance
With lifted arm into the air; and to her thus he spoke;
Goddess, triumph in thine own spoils: to thee we first will make Ulysses
offers Dolons arms to Pallas.

Our inuocations, of all powers, throned on th'Olympian hill;
Now to the Thracians, and their horse, and beds, conduct us still.
With this, he hung them up aloft, upon a Tamricke bow,
As eyefull Trophies: and the sprigs, that did about it grow,
He proined from the leauie arms, to make it easier viewd,
When they should hastily retire, and be perhaps pursude.
Forth went they, through black blood and arms; and presently aspired
The guardlesse Thracian regiment, fast bound with sleep, and tired*
Their arms lay by, and triple ranks, they as they slept did keep,
As they should watch and guard their king; who, in a fatal sleep,
Lay in the midst; their chariot horse, as they coach fellows were,
Fed by them; and the famous steeds, that did their General bear,
Stood next him, to the hinder part, of his rich chariot tied. Ulysses to
Diomed.

Vyss^s saw them first, and said: Tydides, I have spied
The horse that Dolon (whom we slew) assured us we should see:
Now use thy strength; now idle arms, are most unfit for thee:
Prise thou the horse; or kill the guard; and leave the horse to me.
Miner^a with the Azure eyes, breathed strength into her King,
Who filled the tent with mixed death: the souls, he set on wing,
Issued in groans, and made air swell, into her stormy flood:
Horror, and slaughter had one power; the earth did blush with blood.
As when a hungry Lion flies, with purpose to devour
On flocks unkept, and on their lives, does freely use his power:
So Tydeus son assaild the foe; twelve souls before him flew;
Ulysses waited on his sword; and ever as he slew,
He drew them by their strengthlesse heels, out of the horses sight;
That when he was to lead them forth, they should not with affright
Bogle, nor snore, in treading on, the bloody carkases;
For being new come, they were vnusde, to such stern sights as these.
Through four ranks now did Diomed, the king himself attain; Diomed
slaughters Rhesu^ king of Thrace.

Who (snoring in his sweetest sleep) was like his soldiers slain.
An ill dream by Minerua sent, that night, stood by his head,
Which was Oenides royal son, unconquered Diomed.
Mean while Ulysses loosd his horse; took all their raines in hand,
And led them forth: but Tydeus son, did in contention stand
With his great mind, to do some deed, of more audacitie;
If he should take the chariot, where his rich arms did lie,
And draw it by the beam away, or bear it on his back;
Or if of more dull Thracian lives, he should their bosoms sack.
In this contention with himself, Minerua did suggest, Mineru^ to Diomed.

And bad him think of his retreat; lest from their tempted rest,
Some other God should stir the foe, and send him back dismayed.
He knew the voice; took horse, and fled; the Trojans heavenly aid
( Apollo with the silver bow) stood no blind sentinel
To their secure and drowsy host; but did discover well
Minerua following Diomed; and angry with his act,
The mighty host of Ilion, he entered; and awak't
The cosen germane of the king, a counselor of Thrace,
Hopocoon; who when he rose; and saw the desert place
Where Rhesus horse did use to stand, and the other dismal harms,
Men struggling with the pangs of death; he shriekt out thick alarmes; Al^rmes
amongst the Trojans.

Called Rhesus? Rhesus? but in vain: then still, arm, arm, he cride:
The noise and tumult was extreme, on every startled side
Of Troyes huge host; from whence in throngs, all gatherd and admired,
Who could perform such harmfull facts, and yet be safe retired.
Now, coming where they slew the scout, Ulysses stayed the steeds;
Tydides lighted, and the spoils (hung on the Tamricke reeds)
He took and gave to Ithacus; and up he got again;
Then flew they joyful to their fleet: Nestor did first attain
The sounds the horse hoofes struck through air, and said; My royal Peers?
Nestor to the Greeks.

Do I but dote? or say I true? me thinks about mine ears
The sounds of running horses beat. O would to God they were
Our friends thus soon returned with spoils: but I have hearty fear,
Lest this high tumult of the foe, does their distress intend.
He scarce had spoke, when they were come: Both did from horse descend,
All, with embraces and sweet words, to heaven their worth did raise.
Then Nestor spoke; Great Ithachus, even heapt with Grecian praise;
How have you made these horse your prise? pierced you the dangerous host,
Where such gemmes stand? or did some God, your high attempts accost,
And honored you with this reward? why, they be like the Rays
The Sun effuseth. I have mixed, with Trojans all my days;
And now, I hope you will not say, I always lie abord
Though an old soldier I confess: yet did all Troy afford
Never the like to any sense, that ever I possessed;
But some good God, no doubt, has met, and your high valors blessed:
For he that shadows heaven with clouds, loves both, as his delights:
And she that supples earth with blood, can not forbear your sights.
Ulysses answered, Honored Sire, the willing Gods can give Ulysses to Nestor.

Horse much more worth, then these men yield, since in more power they live:
These horse are of the Thracian breed; their king Tydides slew,
And twelve of his most trusted guard: and of that meaner crew
A skowt for thirteenth man we killed, whom Hector sent to spy
The whole estate of our designs, if bent to fight or fly.
Thus (followed with whole troops of friends,) they with applauses past
The spacious dike, and in the tent, of Diomed they placed
The horse without contention, as his deseruings meed:
Which (with his other horse set up) on yellow wheat did feed.
Poor Dolons spoils Ulysses had; who shrin'd them on his stern,
As trophies vowed to her that sent, the good aboding Herne.
Th^n entered they the mere maine sea, to cleanse their honored sweat
From off their feet, their thighs and necks: and when their vehement heat
Was calmed, and their swollen hearts refresht; more curious baths they vsd;
Where odorous and dissoluing Oils, they through their lims diffusde.
Then, taking breakfast, a big boule, filled with the purest wine,
They offered to the maiden Queen, that has the azure eyne.
The end of the tenth Book.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
ATrides and his other Peers of name,
Lead forth their men; whom Eris does inflame.
Hector (by Iris charge) takes deedlesse breath,
Whiles Agamemnon plies the work of death:
Who with the first bears his imperial head.
Himself, Ulysses, and King Diomed,
Euripylus, and Aesculapius son,
(Enforced with wounds) the furious skirmish shun.
Which martial sight, when great Achilles viewes,
A little his desire of fight renewes:
And forth he sends his friend, to bring him word
From old Neleides, what wounded Lord
He in his chariot from the skirmish brought:
Which was Machaon. Nestor then besought
He would persuade his friend to wreake their harms,
Or come himself, decked in his dreadful arms.
Another Argument.
Lambda presents the General,
In fight the worthiest man of all.
AVrora, out of restfull bed, did from bright Tython rise,
To bring each deathlesse essence light, and use, to mortal eyes;
When Jove sent Eris to the Greeks, sustaining in her hand
Stern signs of her designs for war: she took her horrid stand
Upon Ulysses huge black Bark, that did at anchor ride,
Amidst the fleet; from whence her sounds, might ring on every side;
Both to the tents of Telamon, and the authors of their smarts;
Who held, for fortitude and force, the nauies utmost parts.
The red-eyd Goddess seated there, thunderd th'Orthian song, Eris (contention)
sings and excites the Gr^cians.

High, and with horror, through the ears, of all the Grecian throng;
Her verse with spirits invincible, did all their breasts inspire;
Blew out all darkness from their lims, and set their hearts on fire;
And presently was bitter war, more sweet a thousand times
Then any choice in hollow keeles, to greet their natiu climes.
Atrides summoned all to arms; to arms himself disposde: Agamemnon arms for
the ^eld.

First on his legs he put bright Greaues, with silver buttons closde;
Then with rich Curace armed his breast, which Cyniras bestowed
To gratify his royal guest; for even to Cyprus flowed
Th'vnbounded fame of those designs, the Greeks proposde for Tr^y;
And therefore gave he him those arms, and wished his purpose joy.
Ten rows of azure mixed with black: twelve golden like the Sun:
Twice ten of tin, in beaten paths, did through this armor run.
Three serpents to the gorget crept, that like three rain-bowes shined,
Such as by Jove are fixed in clouds, when wonders are diuin'd.
About his shoulders hung his sword; whereof the hollow hilt
Was fashioned all with shining bars, exceeding richly gilt:
The scaberd was of silver plate, with golden hangers graced:
Then took he up his weigh^ie shield, that round about him cast
D^fensiue shadows: ten bright zones, of gold-affecting brass
Were driven about it; and of tin (as full of gloss as glass)
Sweld twenty bosses out of it: in center of them all,
One of black metal had engraven (full of extreme appall)
An ugly Gorgon, compassed, with Terror and with Fear:
At it, a silver Bawdricke hung, with which he used to bear
(Wound on his arm) his ample shield; and in it there was wouen
An azure Dragon, curled in folds; from whose one neck, was cloven
Three heads contorted in an orb: then placed he on his head
His foure-plum'd caske; and in his hands, two darts he managed,
Armed with bright steel, that blazed to heaven: then Juno and the maid
That conquers Empires; trumpets served, to summon out their aid,
In honor of the General: and on a sable cloud
(To bring them furious to the field) sat thundering out aloud.
Then all enioyn'd their charioteers, to rank their chariot horse
Close to the dike: forth marched the foot; whose front they did r'enforce
With some horse troops: the battle then, was all of Charioteers,
Lined with light horse: but Jupiter, disturbed this form with fears;
And from aires upper region, did bloody vapors rain;
For sad ostent, much noble life, should ere their times be slain.
The Trojan host, at Ilus tomb, was in Battalia led
By Hector and Polydamas, and old Anchises seed,
Who God-like was esteemed in Troy; by grave Antenors race,
Divine Agenor, Polybus, unmarried Acamas,
Proportioned like the states of heaven: in front of all the field,
Troyes great Priamides did bear, his al*wayes-equall shield,
Still plying th'ordering of his power. And as amids the sky Simile.

We sometimes see an ominous star, blaze clear and dreadfully,
Then run his golden head in clouds, and straight appear again:
So Hector otherwhiles did grace, the vaunt-guard, shining plain;
Then in the rere-guard hid himself, and labored every where,
To order and encourage all: his armor was so clear,
And he applide each place so fast; that like a lightning thrown
Out of the shield of Jupiter, in every eye he shone.
And as upon a rich man's crop, of barley or of wheat, Another c^parison.

(Opposde for swiftness at their work,) a sort of reapers sweat,
Bear down the furrows speedily, and thick their handfuls fall:
So at the joining of the hoasts, ran Slaughter through them all;
None stoopt to any fainting thought, of foul inglorious flight,
But equal bore they up their heads, and fared like wolves in fight:
Stern Eris, with such weeping sights, reioyc't to feed her eyes;
Who only showed her self in field, of all the Deities.
The other in Olympus tops, sat silent, and repined,
That Jove to do the Trojans grace, should bear so fixed a mind.
He cared not, but (enthroned apart) triumphant sat in sway
Of his free power; and from his seat, took pleasure to display Jones
prospect.

The city so adorned with towers, the sea with vessels filled;
The splendour of refulgent arms, the killer and the killed.
As long as bright Aurora ruled, and sacred day increast,
So long their darts made mutual wounds, and neither had the best:
But when in hill-enuiron'd vales, the timber-feller takes Periphrasis of Noone.

A sharp set stomach to his meat, and dinner ready makes,
His sinews fainting, and his spirits, become surcharged and dull;
Time of accustomed ease arrived; his hands with labor full:
Then by their valors Greeks brake through, the Trojan ranks, and cheered
Their general Squadrons through the host: then first of all appeared
The person of the King himself; and then the Trojans lost
Byanor, by his royal charge, a leader in the host: Agamemnons slaughters.

Who being slain, his chariotere ( Oileus) did alight,
And stood in skirmish with the king; the king did deadly smite
His forehead with his eager lance, and through his helm it ran,
Enforcing passage to his brain, quite through the hardened pan;
His brain mixed with his clotterd blood, his body strewed the ground.
There left he them; and presently he other objects found;
Isus and Antiphus, two sons, king Priam did beget,
One lawful, the other wantonly; both in one chariot met
Their royal foe; the baser borne, Isus was chariotere,
And famous Antiphus did fight: both which, king Peleus heir, Achilles.

(Whilome in Ida keeping flocks) did deprehend and bind
With pliant Osiers; and for prize, them to their Sire resigned.
Atrides with his well aimed lance, smote Isus on the breast
Above the nipple; and his sword, a mortal wound impressed
Beneath the ear of Antiphus: down from their horse they fell.
The king had seen the youths before, and now did know them well,
Remembering them the prisoners, of swift Aeacides,
Who brought them to the sable fleet, from Idas foodie leas.
And as a Lion having found, the furrow of a Hind, Simile.

Where she has calu'd two little twins; at will and ease does grind
Their joints snatched in his sollide jaws; and crusheth into mist
Their tender lives; their dam (though near) not able to resist;
But shook with vehement fear her self, flies through the Oaken chase
From that fell savage, drowned in sweat; and seeks some covert place:
So when with most unmatched strength, the Grecian General bent
Against these two Princes, none durst aid, their native kings descent;
But fled themselves before the Greeks: and where these two were slain,
Pysander and Hypolocbus, (not able to restrain
Their headstrong horse, the silken teines, being from their hands let fall)
Were brought by their vn^uly guides, before the General.
Antimachus begat them both; Antimachus that took
Rich gifts, and gold of Hellens love; and would by no means brook
Just restitution should be made, of Menelaus wealth,
Bereft him, with his ravished Queen, by Paris.
Alexanders stealth.
Atrides, Lion-like did charge, his sons; who on their knees
Fell from their chariot, and besought, regard to their degrees;
Who, being Antimachus his sons, their father would afford
A worthy ransom for their lives; who in his house did hoord
Much hidden treasure; brass, and gold, and steel, wrought wondrous choice.
Thus wept they, using smoothing terms; and heard this rugged voice Agamem^ to
Pysander and Hippolochus.

Breath' from the unrelenting king: If you be of the breed
Of stout Antimachus, that staid, the honorable deed
The other Peers of Ilion, in counsel had decreed,
To render Hellen, and her wealth; and would have basely slain
My brother and wise Ithacus, Ambassadors, t'attaine
The most due motion: now receive, wreake for his shameful part.
This said, in poor Pysanders breast, he fixed his wreakfull dart;
Who upward spread the oppressed earth: his brother croucht for dread,
And as he lay, the angry king, cut off his arms and head,
And let him like a football lie, for every man to spurn.
Then to th'extremest heat of fight, he did his valor turn,
And led a multitude of Greeks; where foot did foot subdue,
Horse slaughterd horse, Need featherd flight, the batterd center flew
In clouds of dust about their ears, raisd from the horses hooues,
That beat a thunder out of earth, as horrible as Jove's.
The king (persuading speedy chase) gave his persuasions way
With his own valor, slaughtring still: As in a stormy day,
In thicke-set woods a ravenous fire, wraps in his fierce repair
The shaken trees, and by the roots, does toss them into air:
Even so beneath Atrides sword, flew up Troyes flying heels:
Their horse drew empty chariots, and sought their thundering wheels
Some fresh directors through the field, where least the pursuit drives:
Thick fell the Trojans, much more sweet, to Vultures, then their wives.
Then Jove drew Hector from the darts, from dust, from death and blood,
And from the tumult: still the king, firm to the pursuit stood;
Till at old Ilus monument, in midst of all the field,
They reached the wild Figtree, and longed, to make their town their shield.
Yet there they rested not; the king, still cride; Pursue, pursue,
And all his unreproved hands, did blood and dust embrue.
But when they came to Sceas ports, and to the Beech of Jove,
There made they stand; there every eye, fixed on each other, strove
Who should outlooke his mate amazed: through all the field they fled.
And as a Lion, when the night, becomes most deaf and dead, (...).

Inuades Ox herds, affrighting all, that he of one may wreake
His dreadful hunger; and his neck^, he first of all does break;
Then laps his blood and e^iles up: so Agamemnon plide
The manage of the Trojan chase, and still the last man di'd;
The other fled; a number fell, by his imperial hand:
Some groueling downwards from their horse: some upwards strewn the sand.
High was the fury of his lance: but having beat them close
Beneath their walls, the both worlds Sire, did now again repose
On fountaine-flowing Idas tops, being newly slid from heaven,
And held a lightning in his hand: from thence this charge was given
To Iris with the golden wings: Thaumantia, fly (said he) Jove to the Rainbow.

And tell Troys Hector, that as long, as he enraged shall see
The souldier-louing Atreus son, amongst the foremost fight,
Depopulating troops of men: so long he must excite
Some other to resist the foe, and he no arms advance:
But when he wounded takes his horse, attained with shaft or lance:
Then will I fill his arm with death, even till he reach the Fleet,
And peaceful night treads busy day, beneath her sacred feet.
The wind-foot swift Thaumantia, obeyed, and vsd her wings
To famous Ilion, from the mount, enchaste with silver springs:
And found in his bright chariot, the hardy Trojan knight:
To whom she spoke the words of Jove, and vanished from his sight.
He leapt upon the sounding earth, and shook his lengthfull dart,
And every where he breathed exhorts, and stird up every heart:
A dreadful fight he set on foot, his soldiers straight turned head:
The Greeks stood firm, in both the hoasts, the field was perfected.
But Agamemnon foremost still, did all his side exceed:
And would not be the first in name, unless the first in deed.
Now sing fair Presidents of verse, that in the heavens embowre,
Who first encountered with the king, of all the adverse power:
Iphydamas, Antenors son, ample and bigly set,
Brought up in pasture-springing- Thrace, that does soft sheep beget:
In grave Cissaeus noble house, that was his mothers Sire;
(Fair Theano) and when his breast, was heightened with the fire
Of gaisome youth; his grand-Sire gave, his daughter to his love:
Who straight his bridal chamber left; Fame, with affection strove,
And made him furnish twelve fair ships, to lend fair Troy his hand.
His ships he in Percope left, and came to Troy by land:
And now he tried the fame of Greece, encountering with the king,
Who threw his royal lance and mist: Iphydamas did fling,
And struck him on the arming waste, beneath his coat of brass,
Which forced him stay upon his arm, so violent it was:
Yet pierced it not his wel-wrought zone; but when the lazy head
Tried hardness with his silver waste, it turned again like lead.
He followed, grasping the ground end: but with a Lions wile,
That wrests away a hunters staff; he caught it by the pile,
And plucked it from the casters hand; whom with his sword he struck Iphydamas
slain by Agamemnon

Beneath the ear, and with his wound, his timelesse death he took:
He fell and slept an iron sleep; wretched young man, he did
Far from his newly-married wife, in aid of foreign pride;
And saw no pleasure of his love; yet was her ioynture great:
An hundred Oxen gave he her, and vowed in his retreat
Two thousand head of sheep and Goats, of which he store did leave:
Much gave he of his loves first fruits, and nothing did receive.
When Coon (one that for his form, might feast an amorous eye,
And elder brother of the slain) beheld this tragedy:
Deep sorrow sat upon his eyes; and (standing laterally,
And to the General vndiscernd) his Iauelin he let fly:
That twixt his elbow and his wrist, transfixt his armelesse arm:
The bright head shined on the other side. The unexpected harm
Impressed some horror in the king: yet so he ceast not fight,
But rushton Coon with his lance, who made what haste he might
(Seizing his slaughterd brothers foot) to draw him from the field,
And called the ablest to his aid; when under his round shield
The kings brass Iauelin, as he drew, did strike him helpless dead:
Who made Iphydamas the block, and cut off Coons head.
Thus under great Atrides arm, Antenors issue thriu'd,
And to suffice precisest fate* to Plutos mansion diu'd.
He with his lance, sword, mighty stones, poured his Heroicke wreake
On other Squadrons of the foe, whiles yet warm blood did break
Through his cleft veins: but when the wound, was quite exhaust and crude;
The eager anguish did approve, his Princely fortitude.
As when most sharp and bitter pangs, distract a laboring Dame;
Which the divine Ilithiae, that rule the painful frame
Of humane chid-birth pour on her: the Ilithiae that are
The daughters of Saturnia: with whose extreme repair
The woman in her travel strives, to take the worst it gives:
With thought it must be, it is loves fruit, the end for which she lives;
The mean to make her self newborn: what comforts will redound:
So Agamemnon did sustain, the torment of his wound.
Then took he chariot, and to Fleet, bad haste his chariotere;
But first poured out his highest voice, to purchase every ear:
Princes and Leaders of the Greeks, brave friends, now from our fleet
Agamemnon to the Greek Princes.

Do you expel this bostrous sway: Jove will not let me meet
Illustrate Hector, nor give leave, that I shall end the day
In fight against the Ilian power: my wound is in my way.
This said, his ready chariotere, did scourge his spritefull horse,
That freely to the sable fleet, performd their fiery course:
To bear their wounded Sovereign, apart the Martial thrust,
Sprinkling their powerful breasts with foame, and snowing on the dust.
When Hector heard of his retreat, thus he for fame contends: Hector to the
Tr^ians.

Trojans, Dardanians, Lycians, all my close-fighting friends,
Think what it is to be renownd: be soldiers all of name:
Our strongest enemy is gone; love vows to do us fame:
Then in the Grecian faces drive, your one-hou'd violent steeds,
And fare above their best, be best, and glorify your deeds.
Thus as a dog-giuen Hunter sets, upon a brace of Bores,
His white-toothd hounds: pufs, showts, breaths terms, and on his emprese pores,
All his wild art to make them pinch: so Hector urged his host
To charge the Greeks, and he himself, most bold, and active most:
He brake into the heat of fight: as when a tempest raues,
Stoops from the clouds, and all on heaps, does cuffe the purple waves.
Who then was first, and last, he killed, when Jove did grace his deed?
Asseus, and Autonous; Opys, and Clytus seed: Whom Hector s^ue.

Prince Dolops, and the honored Sire, of sweet Euryalus:
( Opheltes) Agelaus next; and strong Hipponous:
Orus, Essymnus, all of name. The common soldiers fell,
As when the hollow flood of air, in Zephires cheeks does swell, Simile.

And sparseth all the gatherd clouds, white Notus power did draw;
VVraps waves in waves, hurls up the froath, beat with a vehement flaw:
So were the common soldiers wrackt, in troops, by Hectors hand.
Then ruin had enforced such works, as no Greeks could withstand:
Then in their fleet they had been housd, had not Laertes son
Stird up the spirit of Diomed, with this impression.
Tydides, what do we sustain, forgetting what we are? Ulysses to Diomed.

Stand by me (dearest in my ^oue:) twere horrible impair
For our two valors to endure, a customarie flight,
To leave our navy still engaged, and but by fits to fight.
He answered; I am bent to stay, and any thing sustain:
But our delight to prove us men, will prove but short and vain; Diomeds
answer to Ulysses.

For Jove makes Trojans instruments; and virtually then,
Wields arms himself: our cross affairs, are not twixt men and men.
This said, Thimbraeus with his ^ance, he tumbled from his horse;
Near his left nipple wounding him: Ulysses did enforce
Fair Molion, minion to this king, that Diomed subdude:
Both sent they thence, till they returned: who now the king pursude
And furrowed through the thickened troops. As when two chaced Bores
Turn head against kennels of bold hounds, and race way through their gor^:
So (turned from flight) the forward kings, showed Trojans backward death:
Nor fled the Greeks but by their wills, to get great Hector breath.
Then took they horse and chariot, from two bold city foes, Ulysses and
Diomeds s^aughters.

Merops Percosius mighty sons: their father could disclose,
Beyond all men, hid Auguries; and would not give consent
To their egression to these wars: yet wilfully they went;
For Fates, that order sable death, enforced their tragedies:
Tydides slew them with his lance, and made their arms his prise.
Hypporochus, and Hyppodus, Ulysses reft of light:
But Jove, that out of Ida looked, then equallisde the fight;
A Grecian for a Trojan then, paid tribute to the Fates:
Yet royal Diomed slew one, even in those even debates,
That was of name more then the rest; Paeons renowned son,
The Prince Agastrophus: his lance, into his hip did run:
His Squire detaind his horse apart, that hindered him to fly;
Which he repented at his heart: yet did his feet apply
His escape with all the speed they had, along the foremost bands;
And there his loved life dissolved. This, Hector understands,
And rusht with clamor on the king; right soundly seconded
With troops of Troia^s: which perceived, by famous Dio^d;
The deep conceit of Io^es high will, stifned his royal hair;
Who spoke to neare-fought Ithachus; The fate of this affair Di^d to Ulysses.

Is bent to us: come let us stand, and bound his violence.
Thus threw he his long Iauelin forth; which smote his heads defense
Full on the top, yet pierced no skin; brass, took repulse with brass;
His helm (with three folds made, and sharp,) the gift of Phoebus was.
The blow made Hector take the troop; sunk him upon his hand,
And struck him blind: the king pursude, before the foremost band,
His darts recovery: which he found, laid on the purple plain*
By which time, Hector was revived, and taking horse again,
Was far commixt within his strength, and fled his darksome grave.
He followd with his thirsty lance, and this elusiue Brave:
Once more be thankful to thy heels, (proud dog) for thy escape: Diom^d
insults on Hector.

Mischief sat near thy bosom now; and now another rape
Has thy Apollo made of thee, to whom thou well may pray,
When through the singing of our darts, thou findst such guarded way:
But I shall meet with thee at length, and bring thy latest hour,
If with like favor any God, be fautor of my power:
Mean while, some other shall repay, what I suspend in thee.
This said, he set the wretched soul, of P^ns issue free;
Whom his late wound, not fully slew: but Pri^ms amorous birth, Paris at Diomed.

Against Tydides bent his bow, hid with a hill of earth;
Part of the ruinated tomb, for honored Ilus built:
And as the Curace of the slain (engraven and richly gilt)
Tydides from his breast had spoild, and from his shoulders raft,
His target and his solid helm, he shot; and his keen shaft
(That never flew from him in vain) did nail unto the ground
The kings right foot: the spleenfull knight, laughed sweetly at the wound,
Crept from his covert, and triumphed: Now art thou maimd, said he, Paris
insults on Diomed.

And would to God my happy hand, had so much honored me,
To have infixt it in thy breast, as deep as in thy foot,
Even to th'expulsure of thy soul: then blessed had been my shoot
Of all the Trojans: who had then, breathed from their long vnrests,
Who fear thee as the braying Goats, abhor the king of beasts.
Undaunted Diomed replide: You Brauer, with your bow, Diomeds reply.

You slick-hair'd lover: you that hunt, and fleere at wenches so:
Durst thou but stand in arms with me, thy silly archerie
Would give thee little cause to vaunt: as little suffer I
In this same tall exploit of thine, performed when thou were hid:
As if a woman or a child, that knew not what it did,
Had touched my foot: a cowards steel, has never any edge:
But mine (t'assure it sharp) still lays, dead carcasses in pledge;
Touch it: it renders liuelesse straight: it strikes the fingers ends
Of hapless widows in their cheeks; and children blind of friends:
The subject of it makes earth red; and air with sighs inflames:
And leaves lims more embraced with birds, then with enamored Dames.
Lance-fam'd Ulysses now came in, and stepped before the king;
Kneeld opposite, and drew the shaft: the eager pain did sting
Through all his body; straight he took, his royal chariot there,
And with direction to the fleet, did charge his chariotere.
Now was Ulysses desolate, fear made no friend remain:
He thus spoke to his mighty mind: What does my s^ate sustain? Ulysses to
himself.

If I should fly this ods in fear, that thus comes clu^ing on,
Twere high dishonor: yet twere worse, to be surprisd alone:
It Is Jove that drives the rest to flight: but that's a faint excuse;
Why do I tempt my mind so much? pale cowards fight refuse.
He that affects renown in war, must like a rock be fixed;
Wound, or be wounded: valors truth, puts no respect betwixt.
In this contention with himself, in flew the shadie bands
Of targateres, who sieg'd him round, with mischiefe-filled hands.
As when a crew of gallants watch, the wild muse of a Bore;
Their dogs put after in full cry, he rusheth on before:
Whets, with his lather-making jaws, his crooked tuskes for blood:
And (holding firm his usual haunts) breaks through the deepned woo^:
They charging, though his hot approach, be never so abhord:
So, to assail the Ioue-lou'd Greek, the Il^ans did accord,
And he made through them: first he hurt, upon his shoulder blade,
Deiops a blameless man at arms: then sent to endless shade
Thoon and Eunomus: and struck, the strong Chersidamas, Socus wounds Ulysses.

As from his chariot he leapt down, beneath his targe of brass:
Who fell, and crawld upon the earth, with his sustaining palms,
And left the fight: nor yet his lance, left dealing Martial alms:
But Socus brother by both sid^s, young Carops did impresse:
Then Princely Socus to his aid, made brotherly access,
And (coming near) spoke in his charge; O great Laertes son,
Insatiate in sly stratagems, and labors never done:
This hour, or thou shall boast to kill, the two Hypasides,
And prize their arms, or fall thy self, in my resolved access.
This said, he threw qui^e through his shield, his fell and well-driuen lanc^:
Which held way through his curaces, and on his ribs did glance:
Plowing the flesh along his sides: but Pallas did repel
All inward passage to his life. Ulysses knowing well
The wound vndeadly; (setting back, his foot to form his stand)
Thus spoke to Socus: O thou wretch, thy death is in this hand:
That stay'st my victory on Troy: and where thy charge was made
In doubtful terms (or this or that) this shall thy life invade.
This frighted Socus to retreat; and in his faint reuerse,
The lance betwixt his shoulders fell, and through his breast did perse:
Down fell he sounding, and the king, thus played with his misease:
O Socus, you that make by birth, the two Hypasides: Ulysses insulta^ion.

Now may your house and you p^rceiue, death can outflie the flier:
Ah wretch, thou can not escape my vows: old Hypasus thy sire,
Nor thy well honored ^others hands; in both which lies thy worth,
Shall close thy wretched eyes in death; but Vultures dig them forth,
And hide them with their darksome wings: but when Ulysses dies,
Diuinest Greeks shall tomb my corse, with all their ob^equies.
Now from his body and his shield, the violent lance he drew,
That P^incely Socus had infixt: which drawn, a crimson dew
Fell from his bosom on the earth: the wound ^id dare him sore.
And when the furious Trojans saw, Ulysses forced gore:
(Encouraging themselves in gross) all his destruction vowed;
Then he retired, and summond aid: thrice showted he allowd,
(As did denote a man engaged:) thrice Menelaus ear
Ob^eru'd his aid-suggesting voice: and Ajax being near,
He told him of Ulysses show^s, as if he were enclosd
From all assistance: and aduisd, their aids might be disposd
Against the Ring that circled him: lest, charged with troops alone
(Though valiant) he might be oppressed, whom Greece so built upon.
He led, and Ajax seconded: they found their Io^e-lou'd king
Circled with foes. As when a den, of bloody Lucerns cling
About a goodly palmed Heart, hurt with a hunters bow,
Whose escape, his nimble feet enforce, whilst his warm blood does flow,
And his light knees have power to move: but (maistred of his wound,
Embost within a shadie hill) the Lucerns charge him round,
And tear his flesh; when instantly, fortune sends in the powers
Of some stern Lion, with whose sight, they fly, and he deuours:
So charged the Ilians Ithacus, many and mighty men:
But then made Menelaus in, and horrid Ajax then, Ajax and Menelaus to the
rescue of Ulysses.

Bearing a target like a tower: close was his violent stand,
And every way the foe dispersed; when, by the royal hand,
Kind Menelaus led away, the hurt Laertes son,
Till his fair squire had brought his horse: victorious Telamon
Still plied the foe, and put to sword, a young Priamides;
Doriclus, Priams bastard son: then did his lance impresse
Pando^us, and strong Pyrasus; Lysander and Palertes,
As when a torrent from the hills, swollen with Saturnian showers,
Falls on the fields; bears blasted Oaks, and witherd rosine flowers,
Loose weeds, and all dispersed filth, into the Oceans force:
So, matchless Ajax beat the field, and slaughterd men and horse.
Yet had not Hector heard of this, who fought on the left wing
Of all the host, near those sweet herbs, Scamanders flood does spring:
Where many foreheads trod the ground, and where the skirmish burnd
Near Nestor, and king Idomen; where Hector ouerturnd
The Grecian squadrons; authoring, high service with his lance,
And skillful manadge of his horse: nor yet the discrepance
He made in death betwixt the hosts, had made the Greeks retire,
If faire-haird Hellens second spouse, had not represt the fire
Of bold Machaons fortitude, who with a three-forkt head
In his right shoulder wounded him: then had the Grecians dread,
Lest in his strength declined, the foe, should slaughter their hurt f^iend:
Then Cretes king urged Neleides, his chariot to ascend,
And getting near him, take him in, and bear him to their tents;
A Surgeon is to be preferred, with physic ornaments,
Before a multitude: his life, gives hurt lives native bounds,
With sweet inspersion of fit balmes, and perfect search of wounds.
Thus spoke the royal Idomen: Neleides obeyed,
And to his chariot presently, the wounded Greek conuaid
The son of Esculapius, the great Physician:
To fleet they flew. Cebriones, perceived the slaughter done
By Ajax on the other troops, and spoke to Hector thus:
Whiles we encounter Grecians here, stern Telamonius
Is yonder raging, turning up, in heaps our horse and men:
I know him by his spacious shield: let us turn chariot then
Where both of horse and foot the fight, most hotely is proposde,
In mutual slaughters: hark, their throats, from cries are never closd.
This said, with his shrill scourge he struck, the horse that fast ensude,
Stung with his lashes, tossing shields, and carcasses imbrude:
The chariot tree was drowned in blood, and th'arches by the seat,
Disperpled from the horses houes, and from the wheelebands beat.
Great Hector longed to break the ranks, and startle their close fight:
Who horribly amazed the Greeks, and plied their sudden fright
With busy weapons, ever wingd: his lance, sword, weighty stones:
Yet charged he other Leaders bands, not dreadful Telamons,
With whom he wisely shund foul blows: but Jove (that weighs above
All humane powers) to Ajax breast, divine repressions drove,
And made him shun, who shund himself: he ceast from fight amazed:
Cast on his back his seauen-fold shield, and round about him gazed,
Like one turned wild; looked on himself, in his distract retreat:
Knee before knee did scarcely move: as when from herds of Neat
Whole threaues of Bores and mungrils chase, a Lion skulking near,
Loath he should taint the wel-prisd fat, of any stall-fed steer,
Consuming all the night in watch; he (greedy of his prey)
Often thrusting on, is often thrust off: fo thick the Iauelins play
On his bold charges, and so hot, the burning fire brands shine,
Which he (though horrible) abhors, about his glowing eyne;
And early his great heart retires: so Ajax from the foe,
For fear their fleet should be inflamed: against his swollen heart did go.
As when a dull mill Ass comes near, a goodly field of corn Another simile
expressing the manner of Ajax retreat.

Kept from the birds by childrens cries; the boys are ouerborne
By his insensible approach, and simply he will eat:
About whom many wands are broke, and still the children beat;
And still the selfe-prouiding Ass, does with their weakness bear,
Not stirring till his panch be full; and scarcely then will stere.
So the huge son of Telamon, amongst the Trojans fared;
Bore showers of darts upon his shield, yet scornd to fly, as skar'd;
And so kept softly on his way; nor would he mend his pace
For all their violent pursuits, that still did arm the chase
With singing lances: but at last, when their Cur-like presumes,
More urged, the more forborne; his spirits, did rarifie their fumes,
And he reuokt his active strength; turned head, and did repel
The horse troops that were new made in: twixt whom the fight grew fell;
And by degrees he stole retreat, yet with such puissant stay
That none could pass him to the fleet: in both the armies sway
He stood, and from strong hands received, sharp Iauelins on his shield;
Where many stuck, thrown on before; many fell short in field,
Ere the white body they could reach; and stuck, as telling how
They purposd to have pierced his flesh: his peril pierced now
The eyes of Prince Eurypilus, Euemons famous son;
Who came close on, and with his dart, struck Duke Apisaon,
Whose surname was Phausiades; even to the concrete blood
That makes the liver: on the earth, out gusht his vital blood.
Eurypilus made in, and easd, his shoulders of his arms:
Which Paris seeing, he drew his bow, and wreakt in part the harms
Of his good friend Phausiades: his arrow he let fly,
That smote Eurypilus, and brake, in his attainted thie:
Then took he troop, to shun black death, and to the flyers cride; Eurypilus
to the Greeks.

Princes, and Leaders of the Greeks, stand, and repulse the tide
Of this our honour-wracking chase; Ajax is drowned in darts,
I fear past escape: turn honored friends, help out his ventrous parts.
Thus spoke the wounded Greek; the sound, cast on their backs their shields,
And raisd their darts: to whose relief, Ajax his person wields:
Then stood he firmly with his friends, retiring their retire:
And thus both hosts indifferent joined, the fight grew hot a^ fire.
Now had Neleides sweating steeds, brought him and his hurt friend
Amongst their Fleet; Aeacides, that wishly did intend
(Standing asterne his tall neckt ship) how deep the skirmish drew
Amongst the Greeks; and with what ruth, the insecution grew:
Saw Nestor bring Machaon hurt, and from within did call
His friend Patroclus: who like Mars, in form celestial Achilles to trocl^.

Came forth with first sound of his voice (first spring of his decay)
And asked his Princely friends desire: Dear friend, said he, this day
I doubt not will enforce the Greeks, to swarm about my knees:
I see vnsufferd Need imployd, in their extremities.
Go sweet Patroclus and enquire, of old Neleides,
Whom he brought wounded from the fight: by his back parts, I guess
It is Machaon: but his face, I could not well descrie,
They past me in such earnest speed. Patroclus presently
Obeyed his friend, and ran to know. They now descended were,
And Nestors squire, Eurimidon, the horses did vngeare:
Themselves stood near th'extremest shore, to let the gentle air
Dry up their sweat; then to the tent; where Hecamed the fair
Set chaires, and for the wounded Prince, a potion did prepare.
This Hecamed, by wars hard fate, fell to old Nestors share,
When Thetis son sacked Tenedos. She was the Princely seed
Of worthy king Arsynous, and by the Greeks decreed
The prize of Nestor: since all men, in counsel he surpast.
First, a fair table she apposd, of which, the feet were graced
With bluish metal, mixed with black: and on the same she put
A brass fruit dish, in which she served, a wholesome Onion cur,
For pittance to the potion, and honey newly wrought;
And bread, the fruit of sacred meal: then to the board she brought
A right fair cup, with gold studs driven; which Nestor did transfer
From Pylos; on whose swelling sides, four handles fixed were;
And upon every handle sat, a pair of doves of gold;
Some billing, and some pecking meat. Two gilt feet did uphold
The antique body: and withal, so weighty was the cup,
That being proposd brim full of wine, one scarce could lift it up:
Yet Nestor drunk in it with ease, spite of his years respect.
In this the Goddesse-like fair Dame, a potion did confect
With good old wine of Pramnius; and scrap't into the wine
Cheese made of Goats milk; and on it, sperst flower exceeding fine:
In this sort for the wounded Lord, the potion she prepared,
And bad him drink: for company, with him old Nestor shared.
Thus physically quenched they thirst, and then their spirits revived
With pleasant conference. And now, Patroclus being arrived,
Made stay at th'entrie of the tent: old Nestor seeing it,
Rose, and received him by the hand, and feign would have him sit.
He set that courtesy aside; excusing it with have;
Since his much to be reuerenc't friend, sent him to know who past
(Wounded with him in chariot) so swiftly through the shore;
Whom now, said he, I see and know, and now can stay no more:
You know good father, our great friend, is apt to take offense:
Whose fiery temper will inflame, sometimes with innocence.
He answered, When will Peleus son, some royal pity show Nestor to Patroci^.

On his thus wounded countrymen? Ah, is he yet to know
How much affliction tires our host? how our especial aid
(Tainted with lances, at their tents) are miserably laid?
Ulysses, Diomed, our King, Euripylus, Machaon:
All hurt, and all our worthiest friends; yet no compassion
Can supple thy friends friendlesse breast. Does he reserve his eye
Till our fleet burn, and we our selves, one after other die?
Alas, my forces are not now, as in my younger life.
Oh would to God I had that strength, I used in the strife
Betwixt us and the Elians, for Oxen to be driven;
When Itumonius lo^tie soul, was by my valor given
As sacrifice to destiny; Hypporocus strong son,
That dwelt in Elis, and fought first, in our contention.
We forrag'd (as proclaimed foes) a wondrous wealthy boot;
And he, in rescue of his Herds, fell breathless at my foot.
All the Dorpe Bores with terror fled; our prey was rich and great,
Twice five and twenty flocks of sheep; as many herds of neat;
As many goats, and nastie swine; a hundred fifty mares
All sorrel, most with sucking foales; and these soone-monied wares,
We drove into Neileus town, fair Pylos; all by night.
My fathers heart was glad to see, so much good fortune quite
The forward mind of his young son, that used my youth in deeds*
And would not smother it in moods. Now drew the Suns bright steeds
Light from the hills; our heralds now, accited all that were
Endamag'd by the Elians; our Princes did appear;
Our boot was parted; many men, the Epeians much did owe,
That (being our neighbors) they did spoil; afflictions did so flow
On us poor Pyleans though but few. In brake great Hereules
To our sad confines of late years, and wholly did suppress
Our hapless Princes: twice six sons, renownd Neleius bred;
Only my self am left of all: the rest subdude and dead.
And this was it that made so proud, the base Epeian bands:
On their near neighbors, being oppressed, to lay injurious hands,
A heard of Oxen for himself: a mighty flock of sheep,
My Sire selected; and made choice, of shepherds for their keep:
And from the general spoil, he culd, three hundred of the best:
The Elians ought him infinite, most plagued of all the rest.
Four wager-winning horse he lost, and chariots interuented
Being led to an appointed race. The prize that was presented
Was a religious threefoote vrne: Augeas was the king,
That did detain them, and dismissed, their keeper sorrowing
For his loved charge, lost with foul words. Then both for words and deeds
My Sire being worthily incenst, thus justly he proceeds
To satisfaction, in first choice, of all our wealthy prize:
And as he shared much, much he left, his subjects to suffice;
That none might be oppressed with power, or want his portion due:
Thus for the public good we shared. Then we to temples drue
Our complete city: and to heaven, we thankful rights did burn
For our rich conquest. The third day, ensuing our return
The Elians flew on us in heaps: their general Leaders were
The two Moliones, two boys, untrained in the fear
Of horrid war, or use of strength. A certain city shines
Upon a lofty Prominent; and in th'extreme confines
Of sandy Pylos, seated where, Alpheus flood does run,
And called Thryessa: this they sieg'd, and gladly would have wun:
But (having past through all our fields) Minerua as our spy,
Fell from Olympus in the night, and armed us instantly:
Nor mustred she unwilling men, nor vnprepar'd for force.
My Sire yet, would not let me arm, but hid away my horse,
Esteeming me no soldier yet: yet shined I nothing less
Amongst our Gallants, though on foot; Minerua^ mightiness
Led me to fight, and made me bear, a soldiers worthy name.
There is a flood falls into sea, and his crookt course does frame
Close to Arena, and is called, bright Myniaeus stream:
There made we halt: and there the Sun, cast many a glorious beam
On our bright armours; horse and foot, insea'd together there:
Then marched we on: By fiery noone, we saw the sacred clear
Of great Alphaeus; where to Jove, we did fair sacrifice:
And to the azure God that rules, the vnder-liquid skies:
We offered up a solemn Bull; a bull to Alph^us name,
And to the blew eyd maid we burnd, a heifer never tame.
Now was it night, we supt, and slept, about the flood in arms;
The foe laid hard siege to our town, and shook it with ala^mes:
But for prevention of their splenes, a mighty work of war
Appeard behind them. For as soon, as Phoebus fiery Carre
Cast nights foul darkness from his wheels (inuoking reverend Jove,
And the vnconquerd maid (his birth) we did the event approve,
And gave them battle: first of all, I slew (the army saw)
The mighty soldier Mulius, Augeus son in law;
And spoyld him of his one-hou'd horse: his eldest daughter was
Bright Agamede, that for skill, in simples did surpass:
And knew as many kind of drugs, as earths broad center bred:
Him charged I with my brass armed lance, the dust received him dead.
I (leaping to his chariot) amongst the foremost pressed:
And the great hearted Elyans, fled frighted, seeing their best
And lofti'st soldier taken down, the General of their horse.
I followed like a black whi^lwind, and did for prize enforce
Full fifty chariots, every one, furnished with two armed men;
Who eat the earth, slain with my lance; and I had slaughterd then
The two young boys, Moliones, if their world circling Sire,
(Great Neptune) had not saft their lives; and covered their retire
With vnpierc't clouds: then Jove bestowed a haughty victory
Upon us Pyleans. For so long, we did the chase apply,
Slaughtring and making spoil of arms; till sweet Buprasius soil,
Alesius, and Olenia, were famed with our recoile.
For there Minerua turned our power: and there the last I slew;
As when our battle joined, the first: the Peleans then withdrew
To Pylos from Buprasius. Of all the Immortals then,
They most thankt Jove for victory; Nestor, the most of men.
Such was I ever, if I were, employed with other Peers,
And I had honor of my youth, which dies not in my years.
But Great Achilles only joys, ability of act
In his brave Prime, and does not daine, t'impart it where it is lackt.
No doubt he will extremely mourn, long after that black hour,
Wherein our ruin shall be wrought, and rue his ruthlesse power.
O friend, my memory reuiues, the charge Menetius gave
Thy towardness; when thou setst forth, to keep out of the grave
Our wounded honor; I my self, and wise Ulysses were
Within the room, where every word, then spoken we did hear:
For we were come to Peleus Court, as we did mustering pass
Through rich Achaia; where thy Sire, renownd Menetius was,
Thy self and great Aeacides; when Peleus the King
To thunder-louing Jove did burn, an Ox for offering,
In his Courtyard: a cup of gold, crowned with red wine he held
On the holy Incensorie poured. You, when the Ox was feld,
Were dressing his divided lims; we in the Portall stood.
Achilles seeing us come so near; his honorable blood,
Was struck with a respective shame, rose, took us by the hands,
Brought us both in, and made us sit, and used his kind commands,
For seemly hospitable rights; which quickly were apposd.
Then (after needfulnesse of food) I first of all disclosd
The royal cause of our repair; moved you and your great friend,
To consort our renowned designs: both straight did condescend;
Your fathers knew it, gave consent, and grave instruction
To both your valors. Peleus charged, his most vnequald son,
To govern his victorious strength, and shine past all the rest
In honor, as in mere maine force. Then were thy partings blessed
With dear aduices from thy Sire. My loved son, said he,
Achilles by his grace of birth, superior is to thee,
And for his force more excellent; yet thou more ripe in years:
Then with sound counsels (ages fruits) employ his honored years,
Command and ouerrule his moodes; his nature will obey
In any charge discreetly given, that does his good assay.
Thus charged thy Sire, which thou forgetst; yet now at last approve
(With forced reference of these) th'attraction of his love.
Who knows if sacred influence, may bless thy good intent,
And enter with thy gracious words, even to his full consent?
The admonition of a friend, is sweet and vehement.
If any Oracle he shun, or if his mother Queen
Has brought him some instinct from Jove, that fortifies his spleerie;
Let him resign command to thee, of all his Myrmidons,
And yield by that means some repulse, to our confusions;
Adorning thee in his bright arms, that his resembled form
May happily make thee thought himself, and calm his hostile storm:
That so a little we may ease, our ouercharged hands;
Draw some breath, not expire it all: the foe but faintly stands
Beneath his labors; and your charge, being fierce, and freshly given,
They easly from our tents and fleet, may to their walls be driven.
This moved the good Patroclus mind, who made his utmost haste,
T'informe his friend; and at the fleet, of Ithacus he past,
(At which there markets were disposd, counsels and martial courts,
And where to th'Altars of the Gods, they made diuineresorts)
He met renownd Eurypilus, Euemons noble son
Halting; his thigh hurt with a shaft: the liquid sweat did run
Down from his shoulders, and his brows: and from his raging wound
Forth flowed his melancholy blood, yet still his mind was sound.
His sight, in kind Patroclus breast, to sacred pity turned,
And (nothing more immartiall, for true ruth) thus he mournd;
Ah wretched progeny of Greece, Princes, dejected kings:
Was it your fates to nourish beasts, and serve the outcast wings
Of savage Vultures here in Troy? Tell me, Euemons fame,
Do yet the Greeks withstand his force, whom yet no force can tame?
Or are they hopeless thrown to death, by his resistlesse lance?
Divine Patroclus (he replide) no more can Greece advance
Defensive weapons; but to fleet, they headlong must retire:
For those that to this hour have held, our fleet from hostile fire,
And are the bulwarks of our host, lie wounded at their tents;
And Troys unvanquishable pow^e, still as it toiles augments.
But take me to thy black sternd ship, save me, and from my thie
Cut out this arrow; and the blood, that is ingor'd and dry,
Wash with warm water from the wound: then gentle salues apply,
Which thou know best; thy Princely friend, has taught thee surgerie;
Whom (of all Centaures the most just) Chyron did institute:
Thus to thy honorable hands, my ease I prosecute,
Since our Physicians cannot help: Machaon at his tent
Needs a Physician himself, being Leach and patient:
And Podalirius in the field, the sharp conflict sustaines.
Strong Menetiades replide; How shall I ease thy pains?
What shall we do Eurypilus? I am to use all haste,
To signify to Thetis son, occurrents that have past
At Nestors honorable suite: but be that work atchieu'd,
When this is done, I will not leave, thy torments vnrelieu'd.
This said, athwart his back he cast, beneath his breast, his arm,
And nobly helped him to his tent: his servants seeing his harm,
Dispread Ox-hides upon the earth, whereon Machaon lay:
Patroclus cut out the sharp shaft, and clearly washed away
With lukewarm water the black blood: then twixt his hands he brusde
A sharp and mitigatorie root: which when he had infusde
Into the green well-cleansed wound, the pains he felt before
Were well, and instantly allaid, the wound did bleed no more.
The end of the eleventh Boooke.
THE TWELFTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIA^S.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Trojans at the trench, their powers engage,
Though greeted by a bird, of bad presage.
In five parts they divide, their power, to skale,
And Prince Sarpedon forces down the pale;
Great Hector from the Ports, tears out a stone,
And with so dead a strength, he sets it gone
At those broad gates the Grecians made to g^ard
Their tents and ships: that, broken, and vnbard,
They yield way to his power; when all contend
To reach the ships: which all at last ascend.
Another Argument.
My, works the Trojans all the grace,
And does the Grecian Fort deface.
PAtroclus, thus emploid in cure, of hurt Eurypilus;
Both hosts are all for other wounds, doubly contentious;
One, all ways laboring to expel; the other to invade:
Nor could the broad dike of the Grecks, nor that strong wall they made
To guard their fleet, be long vnrac't; because it was not raisd,
By grave direction of the Gods; nor were their Deities praisd
(When they begun) with Hecatombes, that then they might be sure
(Their strength being seasoned well with heavens) it should have force to endure;
And so, the safeguard of their fleet, and all their treasure there
Infallibly had been confirmed; when now, their bulwarks were
Not only without power of check, to their assaulting foe
(Even now, as soon as they were built) but apt to overthrow:
Such, as in very little time, shall bury all their sight
And thought, that ever they were made: as long as the despite
Of great Aeacides held up, and Hector went not down:
And that by those two means stood safe, king Priams sacred town:
So long their rampire had some use, (though now it gave some way:)
But when Troyes best men sufferd Fate, and many Greeks did pay
Dear for their sufferance; then the rest, home to their country turned,
The tenth year of their wars at Troy, and Troy was sacked and burnd.
And then the Gods fell to their Fort: then they their powers employ
To ruin their work, and left less, of that then they, of Troy. Neptun^ and
Phoeb^ o^erturne the Grecian rampire.

Neptune and Phoebus tumbled down, from the Idalian hills,
An inundation of all floods, that thence the broad sea fills
On their huge rampire; in one glut, all these together rorde,
Rhesus, Heptaporus, Rhodius, Scamander, (the adorde) The names of the rivers
about Troy.

Caresus, Simois, Grenicus, Aesepus: of them all,
Apollo opened the rough mouths; and made their lusty fall
Ravish the dustie champian, where, many a helm and shield,
And halfe-god race of men were strewn: and that all these might yield
Full tribute to the heavenly work: Neptune and Phoebus wun
Jove to unburden the black wombes, of clouds (filled by the Sun)
And pour them into all their streams, that quickly they might send
The huge wall swimming to the Sea. Nine days their lights did spend
To nights, in tempests; and when all, their utmost depth had made,
Jove, Phoebus, Neptune, all came down, and all in state did wade
To ruin of that impious fort: Great Neptune went before,
Wrought with his trident, and the stones, trunkes, roots of trees he tore
Out of the rampire: tossed them all, into the Hellespont;
Even all the proud toil of the Greeks, with which they durst confront
The to-be-shunned Deities: and not a stone remaind,
Of all their huge foundations, all with the earth were plaind.
Which done; again the Gods turned back, the silver flowing floods,
By that vast channel, through whose vaults, they pourd abroad their broods,
And couerd all the ample shore, again with dustie sand:
And this the end was of that wall, where now so many a hand
Was emptied of stones and darts, contending to invade;
Where Clamor spent so high a throat; and where the fell blows made
The new-built wooden turrets groan. And here the Greeks were pent,
Tamed with the Iron whip of Jove: that terrors vehement
Shook over them by Hectors hand, who was (in every thought)
The terror-maister of the field, and like a whirlewind fought; Hector like a
whirlwind, and Lion.

As fresh, as in his morns first charge. And as a savage Bore
Or Lion, hunted long; at last, with hounds and hunters store,
Is compast round; they charge him close: and stand (as in a tower
They had inchac't him) pouring on, of darts an Iron shower:
His glorious heart yet, naught appald, and forcing forth his way:
Here overthrows a troop, and there; a running ring does stay
His utter passage: when again, that stay he overthrows,
And then the whole field frees his rage: so Hector wearies blows,
Runs out his charge upon the Fort: and all his force would force
To pass the dike. Which being so deep, they could not get their horse
To venture on: but trample, snore, and on the very brinke,
To neigh with spirit, yet still stand off: nor would a humane think
The passage safe; or if it were, it was less safe for retreat,
The dike being every where so deep; and (where it was least deep) set
With stakes exceeding thick, sharp, strong, that horse could never pass;
Much less their chariots, after them: yet for the foot there was
Some hopeful service, which they wished. Polydamas then spoke;
Hector, and all our friends of Troy, we indiscreetly make Polyd^ s^d c^nsell
to Hector.

Offer of passage with our horse: ye see the stakes, the wall,
Impossible for horse to take: nor can men fight at all,
The place being straight, and much more apt, to let us take our bane,
Then give the enemy: and yet, if Jove decree the wane
Of Grecian glory utterly: and so bereave their hearts,
That we may freely charge them thus, and then, will take our parts:
I would with all speed, wish the assault: that ugly shame might shed
(Thus far from home) these Grecians bloods. But if they once turn head,
And sallie on us from their fleet, when in so deep a dike
We shall lie struggling; not a man, of all our host is like
To live, and carry back the news: and therefore, be it thus:
Here leave we horse, kept by our men, and all on foot let us
Hold close together, and attend, the grace of Hectors guide;
And then they shall not bear our charge, our conquest shall be did*
In their lives purples. This advice, pleased Hector, for it was sound:
Who first obeyed it, and full armed, betook him to the ground:
And then all left their chariots, when he was seen to lead;
Rushing about him, and gave up, each chariot and steed
To their directors to be kept, in all procinct of war:
There, and on that side of the dike. And thus the rest prepare
Their onset: In five regiments, they all their power divide:
Each regiment allowed three Chiefes; of all which, even the pride,
Served in great Hectors Regiment: for all were set on fire
(Their passage beaten through the wall) with hazardous desire,
That they might once, but fight at fleet. With Hector, Captains were,
Polydamas, and Cebriones, who was his chariotere:
But Hector found that place a worse. Chiefes of the second band,
Were Paris, and Alcathous, Agenor. The command
The third strong Phalanx had, was given, to th'Augure Hellenus;
Deiphobus, that God-like man, and mighty Asius;
Even Asius Hyrtacides, that from Arisba rode
The huge bay horse, and had his house, where river Sellees flowde.
The fourth charge, good Aeneas led, and with him were combinde
Archelochus, and Acamas (Antenors dearest kind)
And excellent at every fight. The fifth brave company,
Sarpedon had to charge; who chusde, for his commands supply,
Asteropoeus great in arms, and Glaucus; for both these
Were best of all men, but himself: but he was fellowlesse.
Thus fitted with their well wrought shields, down the steep dike they go;
And (thirsty of the walls assault) believe in overthrow:
Not doubting but with headlong falls, to tumble down the Greeks,
From their black navy: in which trust, all on; and no man seeks
To cross Polydamas advice, with any other course,
But Asius Hyrtacides, who (proud of his bay horse)
Would not forsake them; nor his man, that was their manager,
(Fool that he was) but all to fleet: and little knew how near
An ill death sat him, and a sure; and that he never more
Must look on lofty Ilion: but looks, and all, before,
Put on th'all-couering mist of Fate; that then did hang upon
The lance of great Idomen^.
Deucalides: he fatally rusht on
The left hand way; by which the Greeks, with horse and chariot,
Came usually from field to fleet: close to the gates he got,
Which both vnbard and open he found; that so the easier might
An entry be for any friend, that was behind in flight;
Yet not much easier for a foe: because there was a guard
Maintaind upon it, past his thought; who still put for it hard,
Eagerly showting: and with him, were five more friends of name
That would not leave him, though none else, would hunt that way for fame
(In their free choice) but he himself. Orestes, Iamenus,
And Acamas, Asiades, Thoon, O^nomaus,
Were those that followed Asius: within the gates they found
Two eminently valorous, that from the race renownd
Of the right valiant Lapithes, derived their high descent.
Fierce Leonteus was the one, like Mars in detriment; Such makes Virgil
Pandarus and Bitias.

The other mighty Polepaet, the great Pirithous son.
These stood within the lofty gates, and nothing more did shun,
The charge of Asius and his friends, then two high hill-bred Oaks,
Well rooted in the binding earth, obey the airie strokes
Of wind and weather, standing firm, against every seasons spite:
Yet they pour on continued showts, and bear their shields upright:
When in the mean space Polypaet, and Leonteus cheard
Their soldiers to the fleets defense: but when the rest had heard
The Trojans in attempt to skale, Clamor and flight did flow
Amongst the Grecians: and then (the rest dismayed) these two
Met Asius entering; thrust him back, and fought before their doors:
Nor fared they then like Oaks, that stood, but as a brace of Bores
Coucht in their own bred hill, that hear, a sort of hunters showt
And hounds in hot traile coming on; then from their dens break out,
Trauerse their force, and suffer not, in wildness of their way,
About them any plant to stand: but thickets, offering stay,
Break through, and ^end up by the roots; whet gnashes into air,
Which Tumult fills, with showts, hounds, horns, and all the hot affair
Beats at their bosoms: so their arms, rung with assailing blows;
And so they stird them in repulse, right well assured that those
Who were within, and on the wall, would add their parts; who knew
They now fought for their tents, fleet, lives, and fame; and therefore threw
Stones from the walls and towers, as thick, as when a drift wind shakes
Blacke-clouds in pieces, and plucks snow, in great and plumie flakes
From their soft bosoms, till the ground, be wholly clothed in white;
So earth was hid with stones and darts: darts from the Trojan fight,
Stones from the Greeks, that on the helms, and bossie Trojan shields
Kept such a rapping, it amazed, great Asius, who now yields
Sighs, beats his thighs: and in a rage, his fault to Jove applies.
O Jove (said he) now clear thou show, thou art a friend to lies; Asi^
near his death blames (...) for it.

Pretending, in the flight of Greece, the making of it good,
To all their ruins: which I thought, could never be withstood,
Yet they, as yellow Waspes, or Bees (that having made their nest Apta ad rem
comparatio.

The gasping Cranny of a hill) when for a hunters feast,
Hunters come hot and hungry in; and dig for honny Comes:
They fly upon them, strike and sting: and from their hollow homes
Will not be beaten, but defend, their labors fruit, and brood:
No more will these be from their port, but either lose their blood
(Although but two, against all us) or be our prisoners made;
All this, to do his action grace, could not firm Jove persuade,
Who for the general counsel stood; and (against his singular brave)
Bestowed on Hector that days fame. Yet he, and these behave
Themselves thus nobly at this port: but how at other ports,
And all along the stony wall, sole force, against force and forts,
Raged in contention twixt both hoasts: it were no easy thing,
(Had I the bosom of a God) to tune to life, and sing.
The Trojans fought not of themselves, a fire from heaven was thrown
That ran amongst them, through the wall, mere added to their own.
The Greeks held not their own: weak grief, went with her witherd hand,
And dipped it deeply in their spirits; since they could not command
Their forces to abide the field, whom harsh Necessity
(^o save those ships should bring them home) and their good forts supply
Drove to th'expulsiue fight they made; and this might stoop them more
Then Need it self could eleuate: for even Gods did deplore
Their dire estates, and all the Gods, that were their aids in war:
Who (though they could not clear their plights) yet were their friends thus
far,
Still to uphold the better sort: for then did Polepaet pass
A lance at Damasus, whose helm, was made with cheeks of brass,
Yet had not proof enough; the pyle, drove through it, and his skull;
His brain in blood drowned; and the man, so late so spiritfull,
Fell now quite spirit-lesse to earth. So emptied he the veins
Of Pylon, and Ormenus lives: and then Leonteus gains
The life's end of Hippomachus, Antimachus-his son;
His lance fell at his girdle stead, and with his end, begun
Another end: Leonteus, left him, and through the prease
(His keen sword drawn) ran desperately, upon Antiphates;
And liuelesse tumbled him to earth. Nor could all these lives quench
His fiery spirit, that his flame, in Menons blood did drench,
And raged up, even to Iamens, and young Orestes life;
All heapt together, made their peace, in that red field of strife.
Whose fair arms while the victors ^poild; the youth of Ilion
(Of which thereseru'd the most and best) still boldly built upon
The wisdom of Polydamas, and Hectors matchless strength;
And followed, filled with wondrous spirit; with wish, and hope at length
(The Greeks wall wun) to fire their fleet. But (having past the dike,
And willing now, to pass the wall) this prodigy did strike
Their hearts with some deliberate stay: A high-flowne-Eagle sorde
On their troops left hand, and sustaind, a Dragon all engorde,
In her strong seres, of wondrous sise, and yet had no such check
In life and spirit, but still she fought; and turning back her neck
So stung the Eagles gorge, that down, she cast her fervent prey,
Amongst the multitude; and took, upon the winds, her way;
Crying with anguish. When they saw, a branded Serpent sprawle
So full amongst them; from above, and from Jove's foul let fall:
They took it an ostent from him; stood frighted; and their cause
Polydamas thought just, and spoke; Hector, you know, applause Polydamas to
Hector.

Of humor has been far from me; nor fits it, or in war,
Or in affairs of Court, a man, imploid in public care,
To blanch things further then their truth, or flatter any power:
And therefore, for that simple course, your strength has often been sour
To me in counsels: yet again, what shows in my thoughts best,
I must discover: let us cease, and make their flight our rest
For this days honor; and not now, attempt the Grecian fleet;
For this (I fear) will be the event; the prodigy does meet
So full with our affair in hand. As this high flying foul,
Upon the left wing of our host, (implying our controwle)
Houerd above us; and did trusse, within her golden seres
A Serpent so embrew'd, and big, which yet (in all her fears)
Kept life, and fervent spirit to fight, and wrought her own release;
Nor did the Eagles Airie, feed: So though we thus far prease
Upon the Grecians; and perhaps, may ouerrune their wall,
Our high minds aiming at their fleet; and that we much appall
Their trussed spirits; yet are they, so Serpent-like disposd
That they willl fight, though in our seres; and will at length be losd
With all our outcries; and the life, of many a Trojan breast,
Shall with the Eagle fly, before, we carry to our nest
Them, or their navy: thus expounds, the Augure this ostent;
Whose depth he knows; and these should fear. Hector, with countenance bent
Thus answered him: Polydamas, your depth in augurie Hector to Polydamas.

I like not; and know passing well, thou do not satisfy
Thy self in this opinion: or if thou think it true,
Thy thoughts, the Gods blind; to advise, and urge that as our due,
That breaks our duties; and to ^oue, whose vow and sign to me
Is past directly for our speed: yet light-wingd birds must be
(By thy advice) our Oracles, whose feathers little stay
My serious actions. What care I, if this, or the other way
Their wild wings sway them: if the right, on which the Sun does rise,
Or, to the left hand, where he sets? It Is Jove's high counsel flies
With those wings, that shall bear up us: Jove's, that both earth and heaven,
Both men and Gods sustaines and rules: One augurie is given
To order all men, best of all; fight for thy countries right.
But why fearst thou our further charge? for though the dangerous fight
Strew all men he^e about the fleet, yet thou needst never fear
To bear their Fates; thy wary heart, will never trust thee, where
An enemies look is; and yet fight: for, if thou dare abstain,
Or whisper into any ear, an abstinence so vain
As thou aduisest: never fear, that any foe shall take
Thy life from thee, for it is this lance. This said, all forwards make,
Himself the first: yet before him, exulting Clamor flew;
And thunder-louing- Jupiter, from lofty Ida blew
A storm that vsherd their assault, and made them charge like him:
It drove directly on the fleet, a dust so fierce and dim,
That it amazed the Grecians: but was a grace divine,
To Hector and his following troops, who wholly did incline
To him, being now in grace with Jove: and so put boldly on
To raze the rampire: in whose height, they fiercely set upon
The Parrapets, and pulled them down, rac't every foremost fight;
And all the Butteresses of stone, that held their towers upright;
They tore away, with Crows of Iron; and hoped to ruin all.
The Greeks yet stood, and still repaird, the forefights of their wall
With hides of Oxen, and from thence, they pourd down stones in showers
Upon the underminers heads. Within the foremost towers,
Both the Aiaces had command; who answered every part,
Th'assaulters, and their soldiers; represt, and put in heart:
Repairing valor as their wall: spoke some fair, some reprou'd,
Who ever made not good his place: and thus they all sorts moved;
O countrymen, now need in aid, would have excess be spent:
The excellent must be admired; the meanest excellent;
The worst, do well: in changing war, all should not be alike,
Nor any idle: which to know, fits all, lest Hector strike
Your minds with frights, as ears with threats; forward be all your hands,
Urge one another: this doubt down, that now betwixt us stands,
Jove will go with us to their walls. To this effect, alow'd
Spoke both the Princes: and as high (with this) th'expulsion flowed. Simile.

And as in winter time, when Jove, his cold-sharpe iauelines throws
Amongst us mortals; and is moved, to white earth with his snowes:
(The winds asleep) he freely poures, till highest Prominents,
Hill tops, low meddowes, and the fields, that crown with most contents
The toiles of men: sea ports, and shores, are hid, and every place,
But floods (that snowes fair tender flakes, as their own brood, embrace:)
So both fides couerd earth with stones, so both for life contend,
To show their sharpness: through the wall, uproar stood up an end.
Nor had great Hector and his friends, the rampire ouerrun,
If heavens great Counselor, high Jove, had not inflamed his son
Sarpedon (like the forests king, when he on Oxen flies)
Against the Grecians: his round targe, he to his arm applies
Brasse-leau'd without: and all within, thick Oxe-hides quilted hard:
The verge naild round with rods of gold, and with two darts prepared;
He leads his people: as ye see, a mountain Lion fare,
Long kept from prey: in forcing which, his high mind makes him dare,
Assault upon the whole full fold: though guarded never so
With well-arm'd men, and eager dogs; away he will not go,
But venture on, and either snatch, a prey, or be a prey:
So fared divine Sarpedons mind, resolved to force his way Sarpedons (...) to
Glaucus, never equalled by ^y (in this kind) of all (...) ^aue written.

Through all the fore-fights, and the wall: yet since he did not see
Others as great as he, in name, as great in mind as he:
He spoke to Glaucus: Glaucus, say, why are we honored more
Then other men of Lycia, in place? with greater store
Of meats and cups? with goodlier roofes? delightsome gardens? walks?
More lands, and better? so much wealth, that Court and country talks
Of us, and our possessions; and every way we go,
Gaze on us as we were their Gods? this where we dwell, is so:
The shores of Xanthus ring of this; and shall not we exceed,
As much in merit, as in noise? Come, be we great in deed
As well as look; shine not in gold, but in the flames of fight;
That so our neat-arm'd- Lycians, may say; See, these are right
Our kings, our Rulers; these deserve, to eat, and drink the best;
These govern not ingloriously: these, thus exceed the rest,
Do more then they command to do. O friend, if keeping back
Would keep back age from us, and death; and that we might not wrack
In this life's humane sea at all: but that deferring now
We shund death ever; nor would I, half this vain valor show,
Nor glorify a folly so, to wish thee to advance:
Bur since we must go, though not here; and that, besides the chance
Proposd now, there are infinite fates, of other sort in death,
Which (neither to be fled nor escaped) a man must sink beneath:
Come, try we, if this sort be ours: and either render thus,
Glory to others, or make them, resign the like to us.
This motion, Glaucus shifted not, but (without words) obeyed; Sarpedon and
Glaucus charge together.

Fore-right went both, a mighty troop, of Lycians followed.
Which, by Menestheus observed; his hair stood up on end,
For at the tower where he had charge, he saw Calamity bend
Her horrid brows in their approach. He threw his looks about
The whole fights near, to see what Chief, might help the misery out
Of his poor soldiers, and beheld, where both the Aiaces fought,
And Teucer, newly come from fleet: whom it would profit naught
To call, since Tumult on their helmes, shields, and upon the ports
L^id such loud claps; for every way, defenses of all sorts
Were adding, as Troy took away; and Clamor flew so high
Her wings struck heaven, and drowned all voice. The two Dukes yet so nigh
And at the offer of assault; he to the Aiaces sent
Thoos the herald, with this charge: Run to the regiment T^oos sent to the
A^aces for aid by Menestheus.

Of both the Aiaces, and call Both, for both were better here,
Since here will slaughter, instantly; be more enforced then there.
The Lycian Captains this way make, who in the fights of stand,
Have often showed much excellence: yet if laborious hand
Be there more needful then I hope, at least afford us some,
Let Ajax Telamonius, and th'Archer Teucer come.
The Herald hasted, and arrived; and both the Aiaces told,
That Peteus noble son desired, their little labor would
Employ it self in succouring him. Both their supplies were best,
Since death assaild his quarter most: for on it fiercely pressed
The well-prou'd mighty Lycian Chiefs. Yet if the service there
Allowd not both, he praid that one, part of his charge would bear,
And that was Ajax Telamon, with whom he wished would come,
The Archer Teucer. Telamon, left instantly his room
To strong Lycomedes, and willed, Ajax Oiliades
With him to make up his supply, and fill with courages
The Grecian hearts till his return, which should be instantly
When he had well relieved his friend. With this, the company
Of Teucer he took to his aid: Teucer, that did descend
(As Ajax did) from Telamon: with these two did attend
Pandion, that bo^e Teucers bow. When to Menestheus tower
They came, along the wall; they found, him, and his heartned power
Toyling in making strong their fort. The Lycian Princes set
Black whirlwind-like, with both their powers, upon the Parapet.
Ajax, and all, resisted them. Clamor amongst them rose:
The slaughter, Ajax led; who first, the last dear sight did close
Of strong Epicles, that was friend, to Jove's great Lycian son.
Amongst the high munition heap, a mighty marble stone
Lay highest, near the Pinnacle; a stone of such a paise,
That one of this times strongest men, with both hands, could not raise:
Yet this did Ajax rowse, and throw; and all in sherds did drive
Epicles foure-topt caske and skull; who (as ye see one diue
In some deep river) left his height; life left his bones withal.
Teucer shot Glaucus (rushing up, yet higher on the wall) Glaucus wounded by
Teucer.

Where naked he discernd his arm, and made him steal retreat
From that hot service; lest some Greek, with an insulting threat,
(Beholding it) might fright the rest. Sarpedon much was grieved,
At Glaucus parting, yet fought on; and his great heart relieved Sarpedon
reuengeth Glaucus.

A little with Alcmaons blood, surnamed Thestorides,
Whose life he hurld out with his lance; which following through the prease,
He drew from him. Down from the tower, Alcmaon dead it struck;
His fair arms ringing out his death. Then fierce Sarpedon took
In his strong hand the battlement, and down he tore it quite:
The wall stripped naked, and broad way, for entry and full fight,
He made the many. Against him, Ajax and Teucer made;
Teucer, the rich belt on his breast, did with a shaft invade:
But Jupiter auerted death; who would not see his son
Die at the tails of th'Achiue ships. Ajax did fetch his run,
And (with his lance) struck through the targe, of that brave Lycian king;
Yet kept he it from further pass; nor did it any thing
Dismay his mind, although his men, stood off from that high way,
His valor made them; which he kept, and hoped that stormy day
Should ever make his glory clear. His men's fault thus he blamed;
O Lycians, why are your hot spirits, so quickly disinflam'd? Sarpedon to hi^
soldiers.

Suppose me ablest of you all: it is hard for me alone,
To ruin such a wall as this; and make Confusion,
Way to their Nau^e; lend your hands. What many can dispatch
One cannot think: the noble work, of many, has no match. (...)

The wise kings just rebuke did strike, a reverence to his will
Through all his soldiers; all stood in; and against all th'Achiues still
Made strong their Squadrons; insomuch, that to the adverse side
The work showed mighty; and the wall, when it was within des^ride,
No easy service; yet the Greeks, could neither free their wall,
Of these brave Lycians, that held firm, the place they first did skale:
Nor could the Lycians from their fort, the sturdie Grecians drive,
Nor reach their fleet. But as two men, about the limits strive Admiranda and
pene inimitabilis comparatio (says Spond.) and yet in the explication of it,
he thinks all super^ but three words, (...), exiguo in loco: leaving out other
words more expressiue with his old rule, vno pede, etc.

Of land that touches in a field; their measures in their hands,
They mete their parts out curiously, and either stiffely stands,
That so far is his right in law; both hugely set on fire
About a passing little ground: so greedily aspire
Both these foes, to their several ends; and all exhaust their most
About the very battlements (for yet no more was lost.)
With sword, and fire they vexed for them, their targes hugely round,
With Oxehides lined; and bucklers light, and many a ghastly wound
The stern steel gave, for that one prise; whereof though some received
Their portions on their naked backs; yet others were bereaved
Of brave lives, face-turnd, through their shields: towers, bulwarks every where
Were freckled with the blood of men; nor yet the Greeks did bear A simile
su^ior to the other, in which, comparing mightiest things with mea ^est, and
the mea ^est illustrating the mightiest: both meeting in one end of this life's
preservation, and credit: our Hom. is beyond comparison and admiration. Hector
to the Tro^ans.

Base back-turnd faces; nor their foes, would therefore be outfac't.
But as a Spinster poor and just, ye sometimes see strait lac't
About the weighing of her web, who (careful) having charge,
For which, she would provide some means, is loath to be too large
In giving, or in taking weight; but ever with her hand,
Is doing with the weights and wool, till Both in just paise stand:
So euenly stood it with these foes, till Jove to Hector gave
The turning of the skoles; who first, against the rampire drove;
And spoke so loud that all might hear: O stand not at the pale
(Brave Trojan friends) but mend your hands: up, and break through the wall,
And make a bonfire of their fleet. All heard, and all in heaps
Got ^kaling ladders, and aloft. In mean space, Hector leapes
Upon the port, from whose out-part, he tore a massy stone
Thick downwards, upward edged; it was so huge an one
That two vast (...), duo v^ri (...).
yoemen of most strength (such as these times beget)
Could not from earth lift to a Cart: yet he did brandish it,
Alone ( Saturnius made it light:) and swinging it as naught,
He came before the plankie gates, that all for strength were wrought,
And kept the Port: two fold they were, and with two rafters bard;
High, and strong locked: he raisd the stone, bent to the hurl so hard,
And made it with so maine a strength, that all the gates did crack;
The rafters left them, and the folds one from another brake:
The hinges peece-meale flew, and through, the fervent little rock
Thundered a passage; with his weight, th'inwall his breast did knock:
And in rusht Hector, fierce and grimme, as any stormy night;
His brass arms, round about his breast, reflected terrible light.
Each arm held up, held each a dart: his presence called up all
The dreadful spirits his Being held, that to the threatened wall
None but the Gods might check his way: his eyes were furnaces;
And thus he looked back, called in all: all fired their courages,
And in they flowed: the Grecians fled, their fleet now, and their freight
Asked all their rescue: Greece went down, Tumult was at his height.
The end of the twelfth Book.
THE XIII. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
NEptune (in pity of the Greeks hard plight)
Like Calchas, both the Aiaces, does excite
And others; to repel, the charging foe.
Idomeneus, bravely does bestow
His kingly forces; and does sacrifice
Othryoneus to the Destinies;
With diverse other. Fair Deiphobus,
And his prophetique brother Hellenus
Are wounded. But the great Priamides,
(Gathering his forces) hartens their address
Against the enemy; and then, the field,
A mighty death, on either side does yield.
Another Argument.
The Greeks with Troyes bold power dismaide,
Are cheered by Neptunes secret aid.
Jove helping Hector, and his host; thus close to the Achiue flee^,
He let the^ then their own stre^gths try; and season there their sweet
With ceaseless toils, and grieuances. For now he turned his face,
Looked down, and viewd the far-off land, of welrode me^ in Thrace.
Of the renowned amilk-nourisht men, the Hippemolgians,
Long-liu'd; most just, and innocent. And close-fought Mysians:
Nor turned he any more to Troy, his euer-shining eyes:
Because he thought, not any one, of all the Deities;
(When his care left th'indifferent field) would aid on either side.
But this security in Jove, the great Sea-Rector spide,
Who sat aloft, on the utmost top, of shadie Samothrace,
And viewd the fight. His chosen seat, stood in so brave a place, Neptunes
prospect.

That Priams city, the Achiue ships, all Ida did appear,
To his full view; who from the sea, was therefore seated there.
He took much ruth, to see the Greeks, by Troy, sustain such ill,
And (mightily incenst with Jove) stoopt strait from that steep hill;
That shook as he flew off: so hard, his parting pressed the height.
The woods, and all the great hills near, trembled beneath the weight
Of his immortal moving feet: three steps he only took,
Before he far-off Aegas reached; but with the fourth, it shook
With his drad entry. In the depth, of those seas, he did hold
His bright and glorious palace built, of neuer-rusting gold;
And there arrived, he put in Coach, his brazen-footed steeds,
All golden manned, and pac't with wings; and all in golden weeds The horse of
Neptune.

He clothed himself. The golden scourge, (most elegantly done)
He took, and mounted to his seat: and then the God begun
To drive his chariot through the waves. From whirlepits every way
The whales exulted under him, and knew their king: the Sea
For joy did open; and his horse, so swift, and lightly flew:
The vnder-axeltree of Brass, no drop of water drew.
And thus, these deathlesse Coursers brought, their king to the Achiu^ ships.
Twixt the Imber Cliffs, and Tenedos, a certain Cauerne creepes
Into the deep seas gulphie breast, and there th'earth-shaker staid
Chorographia.

His forward steeds: took them from coach, and heavenly fodder laid
In reach before them. Their brass houes, he gi^ with gives of gold
Not to be broken, nor dissolved; to make them firmly hold
A fit attendance on their king. Who went to the Achiue host, Nept une goes to
the Greeks.

Which (like to tempests, or wild flames) the clustring Trojans tossed;
Insatiably valourous, in Hectors like command;
High founding, and resounding shouts: for Hope cheered every hand
To make the Greek fleet now their prise, and all the Greeks destroy.
But Neptune (circler of the earth) with fresh heart did employ
The Grecian hands. In strength of voice, and body, he did take
Calchas resemblance, and (of all) the Aiaces first bespake;
Who of themselves were free enough: Aiaces? you alone Neptun^ to the two
A^aces.

Sustain the common good of Greece, in ever putting on
The memory of Fortitude: and flying shameful Flight.
Elsewhere, the desperate hands of Troy, could give me no affright,
The brave Greeks have withstood their worst: but this our mighty wall
Being thus transcended by their power; grave Fear does much appall
My careful spirits, lest we feel, some fatal mischief here;
Where Hector raging like a flame, does in his charge appear,
And boasts himself the best Gods son. Be you conceited so,
And fire so, more then humane spirits; that God may seem to do
In your deeds: and with such thoughts cheered, others to such exhort,
And such resistance: these great minds, will in as great a sort,
Strengthen your bodies, and force check, to all great Hectors charge,
Though nereso spirit-like; and though Jove still, (past himself) enlarge
His sacred actions. Thus he touched, with his forckt scepters point
The breasts of both; filled both their spirits, and made up every joint
With power responsiue: when hawk-like, swift, and set sharp to fly, Simile.

That fiercely stooping from a rock, inaccessible, and hie,
Cuts through a field, and sets a foul, (not being of her kind)
Hard, and gets ground still: Neptune so, left these two; eithers mind
Beyond themselves raisd. Of both which, Oileus first discerned
The masking Deity: and said, Ajax? some God has warned Ajax Oileus to Ajax
Telamo^ius.

Our powers to fight, and save our fleet. He put on him the hew
Of th'Augure Calchas: by his pace (in leaving us) I knew
(Without all question) it was a God: the Gods are easly known:
And in my tender breast I feel, a greater spirit blown,
To execute affairs of fight: I find my hands so free
To all high motion; and my feet, seem featherd under me. The two (...) to
(...) (...).

This, Telamonius thus received: So, to my thoughts, my hands
Burn with desire to toss my lance; each foot beneath me stands
Bare on bright fire, to use his speed: my heart is raisd so hie,
That to encounter Hectors self, I long insatiately.
While these thus talked, as, ouer-ioyd, with study for the fight,
(Which God had stird up in their spirits) the same God did excite
The Greeks that were behind at fleet, refreshing their free hearts
And joints; being even dissolved with toil: and (seeing the desprate parts
Played by the Trojans, past their wall) Grief struck them; and their eyes
Sweat tears from under their sad lids: their instant destinies
Never supposing they could escape. But Neptune stepping in,
With ease stird up the able troops; and did at first begin
With Teucer, and Peneleus; th'Heroe Leitus;
Deipirus, Meriones, and young Antilochus;
All expert in the deeds of arms: O youths of Greece (said he) Nept^ to the
Greeks.

What change is this? In your brave fight, I only looked to see
Our fleets whole safety; and if you, neglect the harmefull field;
Now shines the day, when Greece to Troy, must all her honors yield.
O grief! so great a miracle, and horrible to sight,
As now I see; I never thought, could have profaned the light:
The Trojans brave us at our ships, that have been heretofore,
Like faint and fearful Dear in woods; distracted evermore
With every sound: and yet escape not, but prove the torne-vp fare
Of Lynces, Wolves, and Leopards; as never borne to war:
Nor durst these Trojans at first siege, in any least degree,
Expect your strength; or stand one shocke, of Grecian Chivalry.
Yet now, far from their walls they dare, fight at our fleet maintain;
All by our Generals cowardice, that does infect his men;
Who (still at ods with him) for that, will needs themselves neglect;
And suffer Slaughter in their ships. Suppose there was defect
(Beyond all question) in our king, to wrong Aeacides;
And he, for his particular wreake, from all assistance cease:
We must not cease t'assist our selves. Forgive our General then; Good minded
men apt to forgive.

And quickly too: apt to forgive, are all good minded men.
Yet you (quite void of their good minds) give good, in you quite lost,
For ill in others: though ye be, the worthiest of your host.
As old as I am, I would scorn, to fight with one that flies,
Or leaves the fight, as you do now. The General slothful lies,
And you (though sloughtfull to) maintain, with him, a fight of spleen.
Out, out, I hate ye from my heart; ye rotten minded men.
In this, ye add an ill that's worse, then all your sloths dislikes.
But as I know, to all your hearts, my reprehension strikes;
So thither let just shame strike to; for while you stand still here,
A mighty fight swarms at your fleet, great Hector rages there,
Has burst the long bar and the gates. Thus Neptune rowsd these men;
b And round about the Aiaces did, their Phalanxes maintain,
Their station firm; whom Mars himself, (had he amongst them gone)
Could not disparage; nor Jove's Maid, that sets men fiercer on:
For now the best were chosen out, and they received th'aduance
Of Hector and his men so full, that lance, was lined with lance;
Shields, thickened with opposed shields; targets to targets nailed:
Helmes stuck to helmes; and man to man, grew; they so close assailed:
Plumed caskes, were hanged in eithers plumes: all joined so close their stands;
Their lances stood, thrust out so thick, by such all-daring hands.
All bent their firm breasts to the point; and made sad fight their joy
Of both: Troy all in heaps struck first, and Hector first of Troy.
And as a round piece of a rock, which with a winters flood Simile.

Is from his top torn; when a shower, powered from a bursten cloud,
Has broke the natural bond it held, within the rough steep rock;
And iumping, it flies down the woods, resounding every shocke;
And on, unchecked, it headlong leapes, till in a plain it stay:
And then (though never so impeld) it stirs not any way.
So Hector, hereto throated threats, to go to sea in blood,
And reach the Grecian ships and tents; without being once withstood:
But when he fell into the strengths, the Grecians did maintain,
And that they fought upon the square, he stood as fetterd then.
And so, the adverse sons of Greece, laid on with swords and darts,
(Whose both ends hurt) that they repeld, his worst; and he conuerts
His threats, by all means, to retreats; yet, made as he retired
Only t'encourage those behind; and thus those men inspired:
Trojans? Dardanians? Lycians? all warlike friends, stand close; Hector to his
friends.

The Greeks can never bear me long, though towre-like they oppose;
This lance (be sure) will be their spoil: if, even the best of Gods,
(High-thundring Iunos husband) stirs, my spirit with true abodes.
With this, all strengths and minds he moved; but young Deiphobus,
(Old Priams son) amongst them all, was chiefly virtuous. D^obus his ^alor.

He bore before him his round shield; tript lightly through the prease,
At all parts couerd with his shield: And him Meriones
Charged with a glittring dart, that took, his bul-hide orbie shield,
Yet pierced it not, but in the top, it self did peecemeale yield.
Deiphobus thrust forth his targe, and feared the broken ends
Of strong Meriones his lance, who now turned to his friends;
The great Hero, scorning much, by such a chance to part
With lance and conquest: forth he went, to fetch another dart
Left at his tent. The rest fought on, the Clamor heightened there
Was most vnmeasur'd; Teucer first, did flesh the Massacre, Teu^ers ^alor.

And slew a goodly man at arms, the soldier Imbrius,
The son of Mentor, rich in horse; he dwelt at Pedasus
Before the sons of Greece sieg'd Troy; from whence he married
Medesicaste, one that sprung, of Priams bastard bed.
But when the Greek ships, (double oar'd) arrived at Ilion,
To Ilion he returned, and proved, beyond comparison
Amongst the Trojans; he was lodged, with Priam, who held dear
His natural sons no more then him; yet him, beneath the ear
The son of Telamon attained, and drew his lance. He fell
As when, an Ash on some hills top, (it self topt wondrous well) Simile.

The steel hewes down, and he presents, his young leaves to the soil:
So fell he, and his fair arms gron'd; which Teucer longed to spoil,
And in he ran; and Hector in, who sent a shining lance
At Teucer; who (beholding it) slipped by, and gave it chance
On Actors son Amphimachus, whose breast it struck; and in
Flew Hector, at his sounding fall, with full intent to win
The tempting helmet from his head; but Ajax with a dart,
Reached Hector at his rushing in, yet touched not any part
About his body; it was hid, quite through with horrid brass;
The bosse yet of his targe it took, whose firm stuff staid the pass,
And he turned safe from both the trunks: both which the Grecians bore
From off the field; Amphimachus, Menestheus did restore,
And Stichius, to the Achaian strength: the Aiaces (that were pleased
Still most, with most hot services) on Trojan Imbrius seasd:
And, as from sharply-bitten hounds, a brace of Lions force Simile*

A new slain Goat; and through the woods, bear in their jaws the corse
Aloft, lift up into the air: so, up, into the skies
Bore both the Aiaces, Imbrius; and made his arms their pri^e.
Yet (not content) Oileades, enraged, to see there dead
His much beloved Amphimachus; he hewd off Imbrius head,
Which (swinging round) bowl like he tossed, amongst the Trojan prease,
And full at Hectors feet it fell. Amphimachus decease
(Being nephew to the God of waves) much vexed the Deities mind;
And to the ships and tents he marched: yet more, to make inclinde
The Grecians, to the Trojan bane. In hasting to which end,
Idomen^us met with him, returning from a friend,
Whose hamme late hurt, his men brought off; and having given command
To his Physicians for his cure, (much fired to put his hand
To Troyes repulse) he left his tent. Him (like Andremons son,
Prince Thoas, that in Pleuron ruled, and lo^rie Calidon,
The Aetolian powers; and like a God, was of his subjects loved)
Neptune encountered: and but thus, his forward spirit moved.
Idomeneus, Prince of Crete? O whither now are fled Neptu^e to Ido^en

Those threats in thee, with which the rest, the Trojans menaced?
O Thoas (he replide) no on^, of all our host, stands now
In any question of reproof (as I am let to know)
And why is my intelligence false? We all know how to fight,
And ( Fear disanimating none) all do our knowledge right.
Nor can our harms accuse our sloth; not one from work we miss:
The great God only works our ill, whose pleasure now it is,
That far from home, in hostile fields, and with inglorious fate,
Some Greeks should perish. But do thou, O Thoas (that of late
Have proved a soldier, and was wont, where thou have Sloth beheld,
To chide it, and exhort to pains) now hate to be repeld,
And set on all men. He replied, I would to heaven, that he
Who ever this day does abstain, from battle willingly,
May never turn his face from Troy, but here become the prey
And skorne of dogs. Come then, take arms, and let our kind assay
Join both our forces: though but two, yet being both combinde,
The work of many single hands, we may perform; we find
That Virtue coaugmented thriues, in men of little mind:
But we, have singly, matched the great. This said, the God again
(With all his conflicts) visited, the ventrous fight of men.
The king turned to his tent; rich arms, put on his breast, and toooke
Two darts in hand, and forth he flew; his haste on made him look
Much like a fiery Meteor, with which, Jove's sulphrie hand
Opes heaven, and hurles about the air, bright flashes, showing aland
Abodes; that ever run before, tempest, and plagues to men:
So, in his swift pace, showed his arms: he was encountered then
By his good friend Meriones, yet near his tent; to whom
Thus spoke the power of Idomen: What reason makes thee come,
(Thou son of Molus, my most loved) thus leaving fight alone?
Is It for some wound? the Iauelins head, (still sticking in the bone)
Desir'st thou ease of? Bring'st thou news? or what is it that brings
Thy presence hither? Be assured, my spirit needs no stings
To this hot conflict. Of my self, thou see I come; and loath
For any tents love, to deserve, the hateful taint of Sloth.
He answered, Only for a dart, he that retreat did make,
(Were any left him at his tent:) for, that he had, he brake
On proud Deiphobus his shield. Is one dart all? (said he)
Take one and twenty, if thou like, for in my tent they be;
They stand there shining by the walls: I took them as my prise
From those false Trojans I have slain. And this is not the guise
Of one that loves his tent, or fights, afar off with his foe:
But since I love fight, therefore does, my martial star bestow
(Besides those darts) helmes, targets bost, and corslets, bright as day.
So I (said Merion) at my tent, and sable bark, may say,
I many Trojan spoils retain: but now, not near they be,
To serve me for my present use; and therefore ask I thee.
Not that I lack a fortitude, to store me with my own:
For ever in the foremost fights, that render men renown,
I fight, when any fight does stir: and this perhaps, may well
Be hid to others, but thou know, and I to thee appeal.
I know (replide the king) how much, thou weigh'st in every worth,
What needst thou therefore utter this? If we should now choose forth
The worthiest men for ambushes, in all our fleet and host:
(For ambushes are services, that try men's virtues most;
Since there, the fearful and the firm, will, as they are, appear:
The fearful altering still his hue, and rests not any where;
Nor is his spirit capable, of th'ambush constancy,
But rises, changes still his place, and croucheth curiously
On his bent hanches; half his height, scarce seen above the ground,
For fear to be seen, yet must see: his heart with many a bound,
Offering to leap out of his breast, and (ever fearing death)
The coldness of it makes him gnash, and half shakes out his teeth.
Where men of valor, neither fear, nor ever change their looks,
From lodging th'ambush till it rise: buut since there must be strokes,
Wish to be quickly in their midst:) thy strength and hand in these,
Who should reprove? For if, far off, or fighting in the prease,
Thou should be wounded, I am sure, the dart that gave the wound
Should not be drawn out of thy back, or make thy neck the ground;
But meet thy belly, or thy breast; in thrusting further yet
When thou art furthest, till the first, and before him thou get.
Buton; like children, let not us, stand bragging thus, but do;
Lest some hear, and past measure chide, that we stand still and woo.
Go, choose a better dart, and make, Mars yield a better chance.
This said, Mars-swift Meriones, with haste, a brazen lance
Took from his tent; and ouertooke (most careful of the wars)
Idomeneus. And such two, in field, as harmfull Mars,
And Terror, his beloved son, that without terror fights;
And is of such strength, that in war, the frighter he affrights;
When, out of Thrace, they both take arms, against the Ephyran bands;
Or against the great-soul'd Phlegians: nor favor their own hands,
But give the grace to others still. In such sort to the fight,
Marched these two managers of men; in armours full of light.
And first spoke Merion: On which part, (son of Deucalion)
Serves thy mind to invade the fight? is it best to set upon
The Trojans in our battles aid, the right or left hand wing,
For all parts I suppose employed. To this the Cretan king,
Thus answered: In our nauies midst, are others that assist,
The two Aiaces, Teucer too; with shafts, the expertest
Of all the Grecians, and though small, is great in fights of stand.
And these (though huge he be of strengh) will serve to fill the hand
Of Hectors self, that Priamist, that studier for blows:
It shall be called a deed of height, for him (even suffering throws
For knocks still) to out labor them: and (bettring their tough hands)
Inflame our fleet: if Jove himself, cast not his fier-brands
Amongst our navy; that affair, no man can bring to field:
Great Ajax Telamonius, to none alive will yield,
That yields to death; and whose life takes, Ceres nutritions
That can be cut with any iron, or pasht with mighty stones.
Not to Aeacides himself, he yields for combats set,
Though clear he must give place for pace, and free swinge of his feet.
Since then, the battle (being our place, of most care) is made good
By his high valor; let our aid, see all powers be withstood,
That charge the left wing: and to that, let us direct our course,
Where quickly, feel we this hot foe, or make him feel our force.
This orderd; swift- Meriones, went, and forewent his king;
Till both arrived, where one enioynd: when in the Greeks left wing,
The Trojans saw the Cretan king, like fire in fortitude;
And his attendant in bright arms, so gloriously indude,
Both chearing the sinister troops: all at the king addressed,
And so the skirmish at their sternes, on both parts were increast:
That, as from hollow bustling winds, engenderd storms arise, Simile.

When dust does chiefly clog the ways, which up into the skies
The wanton tempest rauisheth; begetting Night of Day;
So came together both the foes: both Iusted to assay,
And work with quick steel, eithers death. Man's fierce Corruptresse Fight
Set up her bristles in the field, with lances long and light,
Which thick, fell foul on eithers face: the splendour of the steel,
In new skowrd curets, radiant caskes, and burnisht shields, did seele
Th'assailers eyes up. He sustaind, a huge spirit that was glad
To see that labor, or in soul, that stood not stricken sad.
Thus these two disagreeing Gods, old Saturns mighty sons,
Afflicted these heroique men, with huge oppressions.
Jove honoring Aeacides, (to let the Greeks still try
Their want without him) would bestow, (yet still) the victory
On Hector, and the Trojan power; yet for Aeacides,
And honor of his mother Que^e, great Goddess of the seas,
He would not let proud Ilion see, the Grecians quite destroid:
And therefore, from the hoarie deep, he sufferd so imploid
Great Neptune in the Grecian aid; who grieved for them, and stormed
Extremely at his brother Jove. Yet both, one Goddess formed,
And one soil bred: but Jupiter, precedence took in birth,
And had more The Empire of Jove exceeded Neptunes (says Plut. upon this
place) because he was more anci^nt, and excellent in knowledge and wisedom^. And
upon this verse, viz. (...), etc. sets down this his most worthy to be noted
opinion: viz I think also that the blessedness of eternal life, which God
enioyes is this: that by any pastime he forgets not notions presently
apprebended; for other wise the knowledge and understanding of things taken
away; Immortality should not be lise, b^t Time, etc. Plutde I side and Osiride.
knowledge: for which cause, the other came not forth
Of his wet kingdom, but with care, of not being seen t'excite
The Grecian host, and like a man, appeard, and made the fight.
So these Gods made men's valors great; but equald them with war
As harmefull, as their hearts were good; and stretched those chains as far
On both sides as their lims could bear: in which they were inuolu'd
Past breach, or loosing; that their knees, might therefore be dissolved.
Then, though a halfe-gray man he were, Cretes sovereign did excite
The Greeks to blows; and flew upon, the Trojans, even to flight:
For he, in sight of all the host, Othryoneus slew,
That from Cabesus, with the fame, of those wa^es, thither drew
His new-come forces, and required, without respect of dowre,
Cassandra, fairest of Priams race; assuring with his power,
A mighty labor: to expel, in their despite from Troy
The sons of Greece. The king did vow, (that done) he should enjoy
His goodliest daughter. He, (in trust, of that fair purchase) fought,
And at him threw the Cretan king, a al^nce, that singl'd out
This great assumer; whom it struck, just in his nauils stead;
His brazen curets helping naught, resignd him to the dead.
Then did the conqueror exclaim, and thus insulted then:
Othryoneus, I will praise, beyond all mortal men,
Thy living virtues; if thou will, now perfect the brave vow
Thou made to Priam, for the wife, he promisd to bestow.
And where he should have kept his word, there we assure thee here,
To give thee for thy Princely wife, the fairest, and most dear, Idomens
insultation on Othry^ncus.

Of our great Generals femall race, which from his Argiue hall,
We all will wait upon to Troy; if with our aids, and all,
Thou will but race this well built town. Come therefore, follow me,
That in our ships, we may conclude, this royal match with thee:
I Will be no jot worse then my word. With that he took his feet,
And dragged him through the fervent fight; In which, did Asius meet
The victor, to inflict revenge. He came on foot before
His horse, that on his shoulders breathed; so closely evermore
His coachman led them to his Lord: who held a huge desire
To strike the King, but he struck first; and underneath his chin, Asius
slain.

At his throats height, through the other side, his cager lance drove in;
And down he busl'd, like an Oak, a Poplar, or a Pine,
Hewne down for shipwood, and so lay: his fall did so decline
The spirit of his chariotere; that lest he should incense
The victor to empaire his spoil, he durst not drive from thence
His horse and chariot: and so pleased, with that respective part Antilochus
slaughters the chariotere of Asius.

Antilochus, that for his fear, he reached him with a dart,
About his bellies midst; and down, his sad corse fell beneath
The richly-builded chariot, there laboring out his breath.
The horse Antilochus took off; when, (grieved for this event)
Deiphobus drew passing near, and at the victor sent Dei^hobus at Antilochus,
and kills Hyps^nor.

A shining Iauelin; which he saw, and shund; with gathring round
His body, in his all-round shield; at whose top, with a sound,
It ouerflew; yet seizing there, it did not idly fly
From him that winged it; his strong hand, still drove it mortally
On Prince * Hypsenor; it did pierce, his liver, underneath
The veins it passes: his shrunk knees, submitted him to death.
And then did loved- Deiphobus, miraculously vant:
Now Asius lies not unrevenged, nor does his spirit want Deiphobu^ hi^ Brave.

The joy I wish it; though it be, now entering the strong gate
Of mighty Pluto: since this hand, has sent him down a mate.
This glory in him grieved the Greeks, and chiefly the great mind
Of martial Antilochus; whom, (though to grief inclind)
He left not yet his friend, but ran, and hid him with his shield;
And to him came two lovely friends, that freed him from the field:
Mecisteus, son of Echius; and the right nobly borne
Alastor, bearing him to fle^t, and did extremely mourn.
Idomeneus suncke not yet, but held his nerves entire;
His mind much less deficient, being fed with firm desire
To hide more Trojans in dim night, or sink himself, in guard
Of his loved countrymen. And then, Alcathous prepared
Work for his valor; offering fate, his own destruction.
A great Hero, and had grace, to be the loved son
Of Aesietes, son in law, to Prince Aeneas Sire;
Hippodamia marrying: who most enflamed the fire
Of her dear parents love; and took, precedence in her birth,
Of all their daughters; and as much, exceeded in her worth
(For beauty answered with her mind; and both, with housewiferie)
All the fair beauty of young Dames, that used her company;
And therefore (being the worthiest Dame) the worthiest man did wed
Of ample Troy. Him Neptune stoopt, beneath the royal force
Of Idomen; his sparkling eyes, deluding; and the course
Of his illustrous lineaments, so, out of nature bound,
That back, nor forward, he could stir: but (as he grew to ground
Stood like a pillar, or high tree, and neither moved, nor feared:
When strait the royal Cretans dart, in his mid breast appeared;
It brake the curets that were proof, to every other dart,
Yet now they cleft and rung; the lance, stuck shaking in his heart:
His heart with panting made it shake. But Mars did now remit
The greatness of it, and the king, now quitting the brag fit
Of glory in Deiphobus, thus terribly exclam'd:
Deiphobus, now may we think, that we are euenly famed, Idomen^ to Deiphobus.

That three for one have sent to Dis. But come, change blows with me,
Thy vaunts for him thou slew'st were vain: Come wretch, that thou may see
What issue love has; Jove begot, Minos, the strength of Crete:
Minos begot Deucalion; Deucalion did beget
Me Idomen now Cretas king, that here my ships have brought,
To bringthy self, thy father, friends, all Ilions pomp to naught.
Deiphobus at two ways stood, in doubt to call some one
(With some retreat) to be his aid, or try the chance alone.
At last, the first seemed best to him; and back he went to call,
Anchises son to friend; who stood, in troop the last of all,
Where still he served: which made him still, incense against the king, Aeneas
angry being ever disgraced by Pria^.

That, being amongst his best, their Peer, he graced not any thing
His wronged deserts. Deiphobus, spoke to him, standing near:
Aeneas? Prince of Trojans? if any touch appear To him Deiphobus.

Of glory in thee: thou must now, assist thy sisters Lord,
And one, that to thy tendrest youth, did careful guard afford,
Alcathous, whom Cretas king, has chiefly slain to thee;
His right most challenging thy hand: come therefore follow me.
This much excited his good mind, and set his heart on fire,
Against the Cretan: who child-like, dissolved not in his ire, Simile.

But stood him firm: As when, in hills, a strength-relying Bore,
Alone, and hearing hunters come (whom Tumult flies before)
Up thrusts his bristles, whets his tusks, sets fire on his red eyes,
And in his braue-prepar'd repulse, does dogs and men despise.
So stood the famous for his lance; nor shund the coming charge
That resolute Aeneas brought; yet (since the ods was large)
He called, with good right, to his aid, war-skild Ascalaphus, Idomeneus calls
his friends to aid

Aphareus, Meriones, the strong Deipyrus,
And Nestors honorable son: Come near, my friends (said he)
And add your aids to me alone: Fear taints me worthily,
Though firm I stand, and show it not: Aeneas great in fight,
And one, that bears youth in his flower, (that bears the greatest might
Aeneas yet a youth as Virgil makes him.

Comes on, with aim, direct at me: had I his youthful lim
To bear my mind, he should yield Fame, or I would yield it him.
This said, all held, in many souls, one ready helpful mind,
Clapped shields and shoulders, and stood close. Aeneas (not inclind
With more presumption then the king) called aid as well as he:
Divine Agenor; Hellens love; who followd instantly,
And all their forces following them: as after Bellwethers
The whole flocks follow to their drink; which sight the shepherd cheres.
Nor was Aeneas joy less moved, to see such troops attend
His honored person; and all these, fought close about his friend.
But two of them, past all the rest, had strong desire to shed
The blood of either; Idomen, and Cythereas seed. Aene^ and Idomene^ in
conflict.

Aeneas first bestowd his lance, which the other seeing, shund;
And that (thrown from an idle hand) stuck trembling in the ground.
But Idomens (discharged at him) had no such vain success,
Which Oenomaus entrails found, in which it did impresse
His sharp pile to his fall: his palms, tore his returning earth.
Idomeneus strait steptin, and plucked his Iauelin forth,
But could not spoil his goodly arms, they pressed him so with darts.
And now the long toil of the fight, had spent his vigorous parts,
And made them less apt to avoid, the foe that should advance;
Or (when himself advanced again) to run and fetch his lance.
And therefore in stiff fights of stand, he spent the cruel day:
When (coming softly from the slain) Deiphobus gave way
To his brght Iauelin at the king, whom he could never brook;
But then he lost his envy too: his lance yet, deadly, took Ascalaphus the
son of Mars slai^e by (...)

Ascalaphus, the son of Mars; quite through his shoulder flew
The violent head, and down he fell. Nor yet by all means knew
Wide throated Mars, his son was fallen: but in Olympus top
Sad canapied with golden clouds. Jove's counsel had shut up
Both him, and all the other Gods, from that times equal task,
Which now about Ascalaphus, Strife set; his shining caske
Deiphobus had forced from him: but instantly leapt in
Mars-swift Meriones, and struck, with his long Iauelin, Deiphobus wounded by
Meridnes.

The right arm of Deiphobus, which made his hand let fall
The sharp-topt helmet; the pressed earth, resounding there withal.
When, Vulture-like, Meriones, rusht in again, and drew
(From out the low part of his arm) his Iauelin, and then flew
Back to his friends. Deiphobus (faint with the bloods excess
Fallen from his wound) was carefully, conuaid out of the preasse
By his kind brother, by both ^ides, ( Polites) till they gat
His horse and chariot, that were still, set fit for his retreat;
And bore him now to Ilion. The rest, fought fiercely on,
And set a mighty fight on foot. When next, Anchises son,
Aphareus Caletorides (that tan upon him) st^oke
Just in the throat with his keen lance, and strait his head forsook
His upright carriage; and his shield, his helm, and all with him,
Fell to the earth: where ruinous death, made prise of every lim.
Antilochus (discovering well, that Thoons heart took check)
Let fly, and cut the hollow vein, that runs up to his neck,
Along his back part, quite in twain: down in the dust he fell,
Upwards, and with extended hands, bad all the world farewell.
Antilochus rushtnimbly in; and (looking round) made prise
Of his fair arms; in which affair, his round set enemies
Let fly their lances; thundering, on his advanced targe,
But could not get his flesh: the God, that shakes the earth, took charge
Of Nestors son, and kept him safe: who never was away,
But still amongst the thickest foes, his busy lance did play;
Observing ever when he might, far-off, or near, offend;
And watching Asius son, in prease, he spide him, and did send
(Close coming on) a dart at him, that smote in midst his shield;
In which, the sharp head of the lance, the blew-hair'd God made yield,
Not pleased to yield his pupils life; in whose shield, half the dart
Stuck like a trunchion, burnd with fire; on earth lay the other part.
He seeing no better end of all, retired; in fear of worse;
But him, Meriones pursude; and his lance foundfull course
To the others life: it wounded him; betwixt the privy parts
And nauill; where (to wretched men, that wars most violent smarts
Must undergo) wounds chiefly vex. His dart, Meriones
Pursude, and Adamas so strived, with it, and his misease,
As does a Bullock puff and storm; whom, in disdained bands, Simile.

The vpland heardsmen strive to cast: so (fallen beneath the hands
Of his stern foe) Asiades, did struggle, pant, and rave,
But no long time; for when the lance, was plucked out, up he gave
His tortured soul. Then Troys turn came; when with a Thracian sword
The temples of Deipyrus, did Hellenus afford
So huge a blow; it struck all light, out of his cloudie eyes,
And cleft his helmet; which a Greek, (there fighting) made his prise,
(It fell so full beneath his feet.) Atrides grieved to see
That sight; and (threatening) shook a lance, at Hellenus; and he
A bow, half drew, at him; at once, out flew both shaft and lance:
The shaft, Atrides curets struck, and far away did glance:
Atrides dart, of Hellenus, the thrust out bow-hand struck, Hellenus wounded.

And through the hand, stuck in the bow; Agenors hand did pluck
From forth the nailed prisoner, the Iauelin quickly out;
And fairly with a little wool, enwrapping round about
The wounded hand; within c a scarffe, he bore it; which his Squire
Had ready for him: yet the wound, would needs he should retire.
Pysander to revenge his hurt, right on the King ran he;
A bloody fate suggested him, to let him run on thee
O Scoptice.
Menelaus, that he might, by thee, in dangerous war,
Be done to death. Both coming on, Atrides lance did err:
Pisander struck Atrides shield, that brake at point, the dart
Not running through; yet he reioyc't; as playing a victors part.
Atrides (drawing his fair sword) upon Pisander flew:
Pisander, from beneath his shield, his goodly weapon drew;
Two-edged, with right sharp steel, and long; the handle Olive tree,
Well polisht; and to blows they go; upon the top struck he
Atrides horse-hair'd-featherd helm; Atrides, on his brow
(Above th'extreme part of his nose) laid such a heavy blow,
That all the bones crasht under it, and out his eyes did drop
Before his feet, in bloody dust; he after, and shrunk up
His dying body: which the foot, of his triumphing foe
Opened; and stood upon his breast, and off his arms did go:
This insultation used the while: c At length forsake our fleet, (...) most
ridi^lous insultation.

(Thus ye false Trojans) to whom war, never enough is sweet:
Nor want ye more impieties; with which ye have abusde
Me, (^e bold dogs) that your chief friends, so honorably used:
Nor fear you hospitable, Jove, that lets such thunders go:
But build upon it, he will vnbuild, your towers, that clamber so;
For rauishing my goods, and wife, in flower of all her years,
And without cause; nay when that fair, and liberal hand of hers
Had used you so most lovingly; and now again ye would,
Cast fire into our fleet, and kill, our Princes if ye could.
Go too, one day you will be curbed (though never so ye thirst
Rude war) by war. O Father Jove, they say thou art the first
In wisdom, of all Gods and men; yet all this comes from thee;
And still thou gratifiest these men, how lewd so ere they be;
Though never they be cloid with sins: nor can be satiate
(As good men should) with this vile war. Satie^ie of state,
Satietie of sleep and love, Satietie of ease,
Of music, dancing, can find place; yet harsh war still must please
Past all these pleasures, even past these. They will be cloyd with these
Before their war joys: never war, gives (...) satieties.
This said, the bloody arms were off, and to his soldiers thrown,
He mixing in first fight again: and then Harpalion,
(Kind King Pylemens son) gave charge; who, to those wars of Troy,
His loved father followed; nor ever did enjoy
His countries sight again; he struck, the targe of A^reus son
Full in the midst, his iauelins steel; yet had no power to run
The target through: nor had himself, the heart to fetch his lance,
But took him to his strength, and cast, on every side a glance, (...) (...)
Harpalion.

Lest any his dear sides should dart: but Merion as he fled,
Sent after him a brazen lance, that ran his eager head,
Through his right hippe, and all along, the bladders region,
Beneath the bone; it settled him, and ^et his spirit gone,
Amongst the hands of his best friends; and like a worm he lay,
Stretched on the earth; which his black blood, embrewd and flowed away,
His corse the Paphlagonians, did sadly wait upon
(Repo^d in his rich chariot) to sacred Ilion.
The king his father following, dissolved in kindly tears,
And no wreake sought for his slain ^onne. But, at his slaughterers
Incensed Paris spent a lance (since he had been a guest,
To many Paphlagonians) and through the preasse it pressed.
There was a certain Augures son, that did for wealth excel,
And yet was honest; he was borne, and did at C^th dwell:
Who (though he knew his harmefull fate) would needs his ship ascend*
His father ( Polyidus) often, would tell him, that his end
Would either seize him at his house, upon a sharp disease;
Or else amongst the Grecian ships, by Trojans slain. Both these
Together he desired to shun; but the disease (at last,
And lingering death in it) he left, and wars quick stroke embraced:
The lance betwixt his ear and cheek, ran in; and dra^e the mind
Of both those bitter fortunes out: Night struck his whole powers blind.
Thus fought they like the spirit of fire, nor Ioue-lou'd Hector knew
How in the fleets left wing, the Greeks, his downe-put soldiers slew
Almost to victory: the God, that shakes the earth, so well
Helped with his own strength, and the Greeks, so fiercely did impell.
Yet Hector made the first place good, where both the ports and wall,
(The thick rank of the Greek shields broke) he enterd, and did skall,
Where on the gray seas shore, were drawn (the wall being there but slight,)
Protesilaus ships, and those, of Ai^x, where the fight
Of men and horse were sharpest set. There the Boeotian band,
Long-rob'd Iaones, Locrians, and (brave men of their hands) By I^ons (for
Io^ians) he intends the Athenians.

The Phthian, and Epeian troops, did spritefully assail,
The God-like Hector rushing in; and yet could not prevail
To his repulse, though choicest men, of Athens, there made head:
Amongst whom, was Menesthius Chief; whom Phid^as followed: The names of the
Captains at the fight at the wall, and their soldiers.

Stichius, and Bias, huge in strength. The Epeian troops were led
By Meges, and Philides cares, Amphion, Dracius.
Before the Ph^hians, Medon marched, and Meneptolemus;
And these (with the Boeotian powers) bore up the fleets defense.
Oileus, by his brothers side, stood close, and would not thence
For any moment of that time: but as through fallow fields, Simile, wherein the
two A^aces are compared to two draught ^xen.

Black Oxen draw a well-ioyn'd plough, and either, euenly yields
His thriftie labor; all heads coucht, so close to earth, they plow
The fallow with their horns, till out, the sweat begins to flow;
The stretched yokes crack, and yet at last, the furrow forth is driven:
So toughly stood these to their task, and made their work as even.
But Ajax Telamonius, had many helpful men,
That when sweat ran about his knees, and labor flowed, would then
Help bear his mighty seuen-fold shield: when swift Oileades
The Locrians left, and would not make, those murthrous fights of prease, The
Locrians which Oileus Ajax led, were all Archers.

Because they wore no bright steel caskes, nor bristl'd plumes for show,
Round shields, nor darts of solid Ash; but with the trusty bow,
And iackes, welld quilted with soft wool, they came to Troy, and were
(In their fit place) as confident, as those that fought so near;
And reached their foes so thick with shafts, that these were they that brake
The Trojan orders first; and then, the brave armed men did make
Good work with their close fights before. Behind whom, having sho^,
The Locrians hid still; and their foes, all thought of fight forgot;
With shows of those far striking shafts, their eyes were troubled so:
And then, assur'dly, from the ships, and tents, the insulting foe,
Had miserably fled to Troy, had not Polydamas
Thus spoke to Hector. Hector still, impossible it is to pass Polyd^ to (...).

Good counsel upon you: but say, some God prefers thy deeds:
In counsels would thou pass us too? In all things none exceeds. (...)
ad^ice to (...).

To some, God gives the power of war; to some the sl^ight to dance;
To some, the art of instruments; some does for voice advance:
And that far-seeing God grants some, the wisdom of the mind,
Which no man can keep to himself: that (though but few can ^inde)
Does profit many, that preserues, the public weal and sta^:
And that, who has, he best can prise: but, for me, I Will relate
Only my censure what is our best. The very crown of war
Does burn about thee; yet our men, when they have reach^ thus far,
Suppose their valors crowned, and cease. A few still stir their fe^,
And so a few with many fight; sperst thinly through the fleet*
Retire then, leave speech to the route, and all thy Princes call;
That, here, in counsels of most weight, we may resolve of all.
If having likelihood to believe, that God will conquest give,
We shall charge through; or with this grace, make our retreat, and live:
For (I must needs affirm) I fear, the debt of yesterday
(Since war is such a God of change) the Grecians now will pay.
And since the insatiate man of war, remains at fleet, if there
We tempt his safety: no hour more, ^is hot soul can forbear.
This sound stuff Hector liked, approved, iumpt from his chariot,
And said; Polydamas? make good, this place, and suffer not
One Prince to pass it; I myself, will there go, where you see
Those friends in skirmish; and return (when they have heard from me, Hector
for his goodly form compared to a hill of snow.

Command, that your advice obeys) with utmost speed: this said,
With day-bright arms, white plume, white skarffe, his goodly lims arraid,
He parted from them, like a hill, removing, all of snow:
And to the Trojan Peers and Chiefes, he flew; to let them know
The Counsel of Polydamas. All turned, and did rejoice;
To haste to Panthus gentle son, being called by Hectors voice.
Who (through the forefights making way) looked for Deiophobus;
King Hellenus, Asiades, Hyrtasian Asius:
Of whom, some were not to be found, unhurt, or vndeceast;
Some only hurt, and gone from field. As further he addressed,
He found within the fights left wing, the faire-hair'd Hellens love,
By all means moving men to blows; which could by no means move
Hectors forbeareance; his friends miss, so put his powers in storm: Hector
chide^ Paris.

But thus in wonted terms he chid: You, with the finest form,
Impostor, woman's man: Where are (in your care marked) all these?
Deiphobus, king Hellenus, Asius Hyrtacides?
Othryoneus, Acamas? now haughty Ilion
Shakes to his lowest groundworke: now, just ruin falls upon
Thy head, past rescue. He replied; Hector, why chid'st thou now
When I am guiltless? other times, there are for ease I know,
Then these; for she that brought thee forth, not utterly left me
Without some portion of thy spirit, to make me brother thee.
But since thou first brought in thy force, to this our nauall fight:
I, and my friends, have ceaseless fought, to do thy service right.
But all those friends thou seek'st are slain, exeepting Hellen^,
(Who parted wounded in his hand) and so Deiphobus;
Jove yet auerted death from them. And now lead thou as far
As thy great heart affects; all we, will second any war
That thou endurest: And I hope, my own strength is not lost,
Though least, I Will fight it to his best; nor further fights the most.
This calmed hot Hectors spleen; and both, turned where they saw the face
Of war most fierce: and that was, where, their friends made good the place
About renowm'd Polydamas, and God-like Polyphet,
Palmus, Ascanius; Morus, that, Hippotion did beget;
And from Ascanias wealthy fields, but even the day before
Arrived at Troy; that with their aid, they kindly might restore
Some kindness they received from thence: and in fierce fight with these,
Phalces and tall Orthaus stood, and bold Cebriones.
And then the doubt that in advice, Polydamas disclosd,
To fight or fly, Jove took away, and all to fight disposd.
And as the floods of troubled air, to pitchie storms increase Simile.

That after thunder sweepes the fields, and ravish up the seas,
Encountering with abhorred roares, when the engrossed waves
Boil into foame; and endlesly, one after other raues:
So rank't and guarded, the Ilians marched; some now, more now, and then The
Trojan host, and Hector glorified.

More upon more, in shining steel; now Captains, then their men.
And Hector, like man* killing Mars, advanced before them all,
His huge round target before him, through thickn'd, like a wall,
With hides well coucht, with store of brass; and on his temples shined
His bright helm, on which danced his plume: and in this horrid kind,
(All hid within his worldlike shield) he every troop assaid
For entry; that in his despite, stood firm, and vndismaid.
Which when he saw, and kept more off; Ajax came stalking then,
And thus prouokt him: O good man, why fright'st thou thus our men?
Come nearer; not Arts want in war, makes us thus nauie-bound, Ajax his
speech to Hector, Scopt^ce.

But Jove's direct scourge; his armed hand, makes our hands give you ground:
Yet thou hop'st (of thy self) our spoil: but we have likewise hands
To hold our own, as you to spoil: and ere thy countermands
Stand good against our ransackt fleet; your hugely-peopl'd town
Our hands shall take in; and her towers, from all their heights pull down.
And I must tell thee, time draws on, when, flying, thou shall cry
To Jove, and all the Gods, to make, thy faire-man'd horses fly
More swift then Falkons; that their hoofes, may rouse the dust, and bear
Thy body, hid, to Ilion. This said, his bold words were
Confirmed, as soon as spoke; Jove's bird, the high flowne Eagle took
The right hand of their host, whose wings, high acclamations struck,
From forth the glad breasts of the Greeks. Then Hector made reply:
Vaine-spoken man, and glorious; what have thou said? would I Hector to Ajax.

As surely were the son of Jove, and of great Juno borne;
Adorned like Pallas, and the God, that lifts to earth the Morn;
As this day shall bring harmefull light, to all your host; and thou,
(If thou dare stand this lance) the earth, before the ships shall strew,
Thy bosom torn up; and the dogs, with all the foul of Troy,
Be satiate with thy fat, and flesh* This said, with showting joy
His first troops followed; and the last, their showts with showts repeld:
Greece answered all, nor could her spirits, from all show rest conceald.
And to so infinite a height, all acclamations strove,
They reached the splendors, stuck about, the vnreacht throne of Jove.
COMMENTARIVS.
a (...), etc. illustrium Hippemolgorum: (...), Lacte Vescentium, etc.
Laurentius Valla, and Eobanus Hessus, (who I think translated Homer into
Hexameters out of Vallas prose) take (...), the Epithete to (...), for a nation
so called, and (...), translates, vt quae sine vllis diuitijs, equino victitat
lacte; intending gens Agauorum: which he takes for those just men of life
likewise, which Homer commends: utterly mistaking (...) signifying preclarus,
or illustris, whose genitive case plural is used here: and the word, Epithete
to (...); together signifying, Illustrium Hippemolgorum, and they being bred,
and continually fed with milk (which the next word (...) signifies) Homer calls
most just, long-liued and innocent, in the words (...), signifying longaeuus;
ab (...) epitatico, and (...) vita. But of some inops, being a compound ex
(...) private. and (...) victus: and from thence had Valla his interpretation:
vt quae sine vllis diuitijs, but where is equino lacte? But not to show their
errors, or that I understand how others take this place different from my
translation, I use this note, so much as to intimate what Homer would have
noted, and does teach; that men brought up with that gentle, and
soft-spirit-begettingmilk, are long lived, and in nature most just and
innocent. Which kind of food, the most ingenious and grave Plutarch, in his
oration, De esu carnium, seems to prefer before the food of flesh: where he
says, By this means also, Tyrants laid the foundations of their homicides:
for, (as amongst the Athenians) first, they put to death the most notorious or
vilest Sycophant Epitedeius; so the second and third: then being accustomed to
blood, they slew good, like bad: as Niceratus, the Emperor Theramenes,
Polemarchus the Philosopher, etc. So at the first, men killed some harmfull
beast or other, then some kind of foul, some fish; till taught by these, and
stirred up with the lust of their pallats, they proceeded to slaughter of the
laborious Ox, the man clothing, or adorning sheep, the house guarding cock,
etc. and by little and little cloyed with these: war, and the food of men,
men fell to, etc.

(...), etc. Circum autem Aiaces, etc. To judgment of this place Spondanus
calls all sound judgments, to condemnation of one Panaedes a Judge of games
on Olympus: whose brother Amphidamas being dead, Gamnictor his son celebrated
his funerals, calling all the most excellent to contention, not only for
strength and swif^nesse, but in learning likewise, and force of wisdom. To
this general contention came Homer, and Hesiodus: who casting down verses on
both parts, and of all measures, ( Homer by all consents questionless
obtaining the garland.) Panaedes bade both recite briefly their best: for which
Hesiodus cited these verses: which as well as I could, in haste, I have
translated out of the beginning of his second Book of works and days.

When Atlas birth, (the Pleiades) arise,
Harvest begin; plow, when they leave the skies.
Twice twenty nights, and days, these hide their heads:
The year then turning, leave again their beds,
And show when first to whet the harvest steel.
This likewise is the fields law, where men dwell
Near Neptunes Empire: and where far away,
The winding valleys, fly the flowing sea,
And men inhabit the fat region.
There, naked plow, sow naked, nak't cut down;
If Ceres labors thou will timely use,
That timely fruits, and timely revenues,
Serve thee at all parts, lest at any, Need
Send thee to others grudging doors to feed, etc.
These verses (howsoever Spondanus stands for Homers) in respect of the peace
and thrift they represent; are like enough to carry it for Hesiodus, even in
these times judgments. Homers verses are these.

-- Thus Neptune rowsd these men;
And round about the Aiaces did, their Phalanxes maintain,
Their station firm; whom Mars himself, (had he amongst them gone)
Could not disparage; nor Jove's Maid, that sets men fiercer on.
For now the best were chosen out, and they received th'aduance
Of Hector and his men so full, that lance, was lined with lance;
Shields, thickened with opposed shields; targets to targets nailed:
Helmes stuck to helmes; and man to man, grew; they so close assailed:
Plumed caskes, were hanged in eithers plumes: all joined so close their stands;
Their lances stood, thrust home so thick, by such all-daring hands.
All bent their firm breasts to the point; and made sad fight their joy
Of both: Troy all in heaps struck first, and Hector first of Troy.
And as a round piece of a rock, etc.
Which martial verses, though they are as high as may be for their place, and
end of our Homer: are yet infinitely short of his best in a thousand other
places. Nor think I the contention at any part true; Homer being affirmed by
good Authors, to be a hundred years before Hesiodus: and by all others much the
older, Hesiodus being near in blood to him. And this, for some variety in
your delight, I thought not amiss to insert here.

c (...), the Commentors translate in this place, funda, most untruly: there
being no slings spoken of in all these Iliads; nor any such service used in all
these wars, which in my last annotation in this book will appearemcre
apparent. But here, and in this place, to translate the word funda (though most
commonly it signifies so much) is most ridiculous. (...) likewise signifying,
ornamentum quoddam muliebre: which therefore I translate a skarffe: a fitter
thing to hang his arm in then a sling; and likely that his Squire carried
about him, either as a favor of his own mistress, or his masters, or for
eithers ornament: skarffs being no unusual wear for soldiers.

d (...), etc. Relinquetis demum sic, etc. At length for sake our fleet, etc.
Now come we to the continuance (with clear notes) of Menelaus ridic^lous
character. This very beginning of h^ insultation, (in the manner of it)
preparing it, and the simply uttered vpbraids of the Trojans following,
confirming it most ing^niously. First, that the Trojans ravished his wife in
the flower of her years, calling her (...), which Spondanus translateth
virgine^ vxorem, being here to be translated iuuenile^ vxorem: (...) signifying
iuuenilis: but they will have it virginem; because Homer must be taxed, with
ignorance of what the next age after Troys siege revealed of the age before; in
which Theseus is remembered first to have rauish^ Hellen; and that by Theseus,
Iphigenia was begotten of her: which being granted, makes much against Homer
(if you mark at) for making Menelaus think yet, he married her a virgin (if
Spondanus translation should pass.) First, no man being so simple to think,
that the Poet thinks always as he makes others speak: and next, it being
no very strange, or rare credulity, in men, to believe they marry maids when
they do not. Much more such a man made for the purpose as M^laus, whose good
husbandly imagination of his wives maidenhead at their marriage, I hope
answers at full the most foolish taxation of Homers ignorance: in which a man
^ay wonder at these learned Critics ouerlearnednesse: and what ropes of sand
they make with their kind of intelligencing knowledge. I mean, in such as
abuse the name of Critics, as many versers do, of Poets: the rest, for their
industries, I reverence. But all this time, I lose my collection of Menelaus
silly and ridiculous vpbraids here given to the Trojans. First, (as above
said) for rauishing his wife in the flower of her years: when should a man
play such a part but then? though in deed poor Menelaus had the more wrong or
loss in it, and yet Paris the more reason. He adds then, and without cause
or injury, a most sharp one in Homer, and in Menelaus as much ridiculous: as
though lovers looked for more cause in their loue-suits, then the beauties of
their beloved: or that men were made cuckolds only for spite, or revenge of
some wrong precedent. But indeed, Menelaus true simplicity in this, to think
harms should not be done without harms foregoing (no not in these vnsmarting
harms) makes hi^ well deserve his Epithete (...). Yet further see how his
pure imbecillitie prevails: and how by a thread Homer cutteth him out here,
(...), postquam amice tractati fuistis apud ipsam, after ye had been kindly
entertaind at her hands, I hope you will think nothing could encourage them
more then that. See how he speaks against her in taking her part: and how
ingeniously Homer gives him still some color of reason for his senslesnesse,
which color yet, is enough to deceive our Commentors: they find not yet the
tame figure of our horned. But, they and all Translators, still force his
speeches to the best part. Yet further then make we our dissection. And now
(says our Simplician) you would again show your iniquities, even to the
casting of pernicious fire into our fleet, and killing our Princes if you
could. Would any man think this in an Enemy? and such an Enemy as the
Trojans? Chide Enemies in arms, for offering to hurt their Enemies? Would you
have yet plainer this good Kings simplicity? But his slaughters sometimes, and
wise words, are those mists our Homer casts before the eyes of his Readers,
that hinders their prospects, to his more constant and predominant softness
and simplicity. Which he does, imagining his understanding Readers eyes more
sharp, then not to see peruially through them. And yet, would not have these
great ones themselves need so subtle flatteries: but that every shadow of
their worth might remove all the substance of their worthlesnesse. I am weary
with beating this thin thicket for a woodcocke, and yet, lest it prove still
too thick for our sanguine and gentle complexions to shine through, in the
next words of his lame reproof, he cries out against Jupiter, saying, (...).
Profecto, te aiunt sapientia (vel circa mentem) superare caeteros homines atque
Deos: wherein he affirms, that men say so, building (poor man) even that
unknown secret to himself, upon others, and now, I hope, shows himself
empty enough. But, lest you should say I strive to illustrate the Sun, and
make clear a thing plain, hear how dark, and perplexed a riddle it shows
yet to our good Spondanus, being an excellent scholar, and Homers Commentor.
Whose words upon this speech, are these: Facundiam Menelai cum acumine, antea
praedicauit Homerus (intending in Antenors speech, lib. 3. vnt^ which I pray
you turn) cuius hic luculentum exemplum habes. Vehemens autem est eius hoc
loco oration, vt qui iniuriarum sibi a Troianis in vxoris raptu illatarum
recordetur, qua praesens eorundem in Graecos impetus exacerbauit. Primum itaque
in Troianos inuehitur, and eorum furorem tandem aliquando cohibitum iri
comminatur. Deinde, per Apostrophem, ad Iouem conqueritur, de inexplebili
pugnandi ardore, quibus Troiani vehementer inflammantur. Would any man believe
this serious blindness in so great a scholar? Nor is he alone s^ taken in his
eyes, but all the rest, of our most profaned and holy Homers Traducers.

c (...), etc. Et been torta ouis lana (or rather, been torto ouis flore.)
Definitio fundae (says Spondanus) vel potius periphrastica descriptio. The
definition, or rather paraphrasticall description of a sling: a most
insufferable exposition: not a sling being to be heard of (as I before
affirmed) in all the services expressed in these Iliads. It is therefore the true
periphrasis of a light kind of armor called a jack, that all our archers used
to serve in of old: and were ever quilted with wool: and (because (...)
signifies as well qui facili motu versatur and circumagitur, as well as, been
vel pulchre tortus) for their lightness and aptness to be worn, partaketh
with the word in that signification. Besides, note the words that follow, which
are: (...), and Metri causa vsurpatur (...)
(...), etc. frequenter iacientes, and a tergo iacientes, shooting, striking,
or wounding so thick, and at the backs of the armed men; not hurling: here
being no talk of any stones, but only (...), conturbabant enim sagittae. And
when saw any man slings lined with w^ll? to keep their stones warm? or to
dull their delivery? and I am sure they hurled not shafts out of them? The
agreement of the Greeks with our English, as well in all other their greatest
virtues, as this skill with their bows: other places of these Annotations
shall clearly demonstrate; and give (in my conceit) no little honor to our
Country.

The end of the thirteenth Book.
THE XIIII. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
ATrides, to behold the skirmish, brings
Old Nestor* and the other ^ounded kings.
Juno (receiving of the Cyprian Dame
Her Ceston, whence her sweet enticements came)
Descends to Somnus, and gets him to bind
The powers of Jove with sleep, to free her mind.
Neptune assists the Greeks, and of the foe,
Slaughter inflicts a mighty over throw.
Ajax, so sore, strikes Hector with a stone,
It makes him spit blood, and his sense sets gone.
Another Argument.
In (...) with sleep, and bed, heavens Queen,
Even Jove himself, makes ouerseene.
NOt wine, nor feasts, could lay their soft chains on old Nestors ^are This
first verse (after the first four syllables) is to be read (...) one of our
Tens.

To this high Clamor; who required, Machaons thoughts to bear
His care in part, about the cause; for me think still (said he)
The cry increases. I must needs, the watch tower mount to see
Which way the flood of war does drive. Still drink thou wine, and eat
Till faire-hair'd Hecamed has given, a little water heat,
To cleanse the quitture from thy wound. This said, the goodly shield
Of warlike Thrasimed, his son, (who had his own in field)
He took; snatched up a mighty lance; and so stepped forth to view
Cause of that Clamor. Instantly, th'vnworthy cause he knew,
The Grecians wholly put in rout; the Trojans rowting still,
Close at the Greeks backs, their wall rac't: the old man mournd this ill;
And as when, with vnwieldie waves, the great Sea forefeeles winds, Simil^.

That both ways murmr, and no way, her certain current finds,
But pants and swells confusedly; here goes, and there will stay,
Till on it, ai^e casts one firm wind, and then it rolls away:
So stood old Nestor in debate, two thoughts at once on wing
In his discourse; if first to take, direct course to the King,
Or to the multitude in fight. At last, he did conclude
To visit Agamemnon first: mean time both hosts imbrewd
Their steel in one another blood, naught wrought their healths but harms:
Swords, huge stones, double-headed darts, still thumping on their arms.
And now the Ioue-kept Kings, whose wounds, were yet in cure, did meet
Old Nestor, Diomed, Ithacus, and Atreus son, from fleet,
Bent for the fight, which was far off, the ships being drawn to shore
Agamemnon, Ulysses, and Diomed wounded, go toward* the (...).

On heaps at first, till all their stems, a wall was raisd before;
Which (though not great) it yet suffisd, to hide them, though their men
Were something streighted; for whose scope, in form of battle then,
They drew them through the spacious shore, one by another still;
Till all the bosom of the Strand, their sable bulks did fill:
Even till they took up all the space, twixt both the Promontori^.
These kings (like Nestor) in desire, to know for what those cries
Became so violent; came along (all leaning on their da^ts)
To see, though not of power to fight; sad, and suspicious hearts Agamemnon to
Nestor.

Distempring them, and (meeting now, Nestor) the king in fear
Cried out, O Nestor our renown? why shows thy presence here?
The harmefull fight abandoned? now Hector will make good,
The threatening vow he made, (I fear) that till he had our blood,
And fired our fleet, he never more, would turn to Ilion.
Nor is it long, I see, before, his whole will, will be done.
O Gods, I now see all the Greeks, put on Achilles ire,
Against my honor; no mean left, to keep our fleet from fire.
He answered; It Is an evident truth, not Jove himself can now, Nestor to
Aga^emnon.

(With all the thunder in his hands) prevent our overthrow.
The wall we thought invincible, and trusted more then Jove;
Is scaled, rac't, enterd, and our powers, (driven up) past breathing, prove
A most inevitable fight: both slaughters so commixt,
That for your life, you cannot put, your diligent'st thought betwixt
The Greeks and Trojans; and as close, their throats cleave to the sky.
Consult we then (if that will serve;) for fight, advise not I;
It fits not wounded men to fight. Atrides answered him,
If such a wall, as cost the Greeks, so many a tired lim,
And such a dike be past, and rac't, that (as your self said well) Agamemnons
reply to Nestor, ^rging flight.

We all esteemd invincible, and would, past doubt repel
The world, from both our fleet and us: it does directly show,
That here Jove vows our shames, and deaths. I evermore did know
His hand from ours, when he helped us: and now I see as clear
That (like the blessed Gods) he holds, our hated enemies dear;
Supports their arms, and pinnions ours. Conclude then, it is in vain
To strive with him. Our ships drawn up, now let us lanch again,
And keep at anchor, till calm Night; that then (perhaps) our foes
May calm their storms, and in that time, our escape we may dispose:
It is not any shame to fly, from ill, although by night:
Known ill, he better does that flies, then he it takes in fight.
Ulysses frowned on him, and said; Accursed, why talk thou thus? Ulysses
bitter answer to Aga^mnon.

Would thou had led some babarous host, and not commanded us
Whom Jove made soldiers from our youth, that age might scorn to fly
From any charge it undertakes; and every dazeled eye
The honored hand of war might close. Thus would thou leave this town
For which our many miseries felt, entitle it our own?
Peace, lest some other Greek give ear, and hear a sentence such
As no man's palate should profane; at least, that knew how much
His own right weighed, and being a Prince, and such a Prince as bears
Rule of so many Greeks as thou. This counsel lothes mine ears;
Let others toil in fight and cries, and we so light of heels
Upon their very noise, and groans, to hoise away our keeeles.
Thus we should fit the wish of Troy, that being something near
The victory, we give it clear: and we were sure to bear
A slaughter to the utmost man: for no man will sustain
A stroke, the fleet gone; but at that, look still, and wish him slain:
And therefore (Prince ofa men) be sure, thy censure is unfit.
O Ithacus (replied the King) thy bitter terms have smit
My heart in sunder. At no hand, against any Princes will
Do I command this; would to God, that any man of skill, (...) to Ulysses.

To give a better counsel would; or old, or younger man:
My voice should gladly go with his. Then Diom^d began.
The man not far is, nor shall ask, much labor to bring in, Diomed to
Aga^non and the rest.

That willingly would speak his thoughts, if spoken, they might win
Fit ear; and suffer no empaire, that I discover them,
Being youngest of you: since, my Sire, that heir'd a Diadem,
May make my speech to Diadems, decent enough, though he
Lies in his sepulcher at Thebes. I bost this pedigree, b Diom^ds pod^gree.

Portheus, three famous sons begot, that in high Calidon,
And Pleuron kept, with state of kings, their habitation.
Agrius, Melas, and ^he third, the horseman Oeneus,
My fathers father, that excelled, in actions generous,
The other two: but these kept home, my father being driven
With wandering, and aduentrous spirits; for so the king of heaven,
And the other Gods, set down their wills: and he to Argos came,
Where he begun the world, and dwelt; there marying a dame,
One of Adrastus femall race. He kept a royal house,
For he had great demeanes, good land, and (being industrious)
He planted many orchard grounds, about his house; and bred
Great store of sheep. Besides all this, he was well qualited,
And past all Argiues for his spear: and these digressiue things
Are such as you may well endure; since (being derived from kings,
And kings not poor, nor vertulesse) you cannot hold me base,
Nor scorn my words: which often (though true) in mean men, meet disgrace.
How ever; they are these in short. Let us be seen at fight,
And yield to strong Necessity, though wounded; that our sight
May set those men on, that of late, have to Ac^illes spleen
Been too indulgent, and left blows: but be we only seen
Not come within the reach of darts; lest wound, on wound we lay:
(Which reverend Nestors speech implide) and so far him obey.
This counsel gladly all observed; went on, A^des led;
Nor Neptune this advantage lost, but closely followed;
And like an aged man appeared, to A^ides; whose right hand (...) appears lik^
an aged (...) to (...).

He seisd, and said; Atrides, this, does passing ^tly stand
With stern Achilles wreakfull spirit; that he can stand a stern
His ship; and both in fight and death, the Greci^ (...) discern:
Since, not in his breast glowes one spark, of any humane mind;
But, be that his own bane; let God, by that loss make him find Neptune to
Agam^non.

How vile a thing he is: for know, the blessed Gods have not given
Thee ever over; but perhaps, the Trojans may from heaven
Receive that justice. Nay it is sure, and thou shall see their falls:
Your fleet soon freed; and for fights here, they glad to take their walls.
This said, he made known who he was, and parted with a cry,
As if ten thousand men had joined, in battle then; so hie
His throat flew through the host: and so, this great earth-shaking God
Cheered up the Greek hearts, that they wished, their pains no period.
Saturnia from Olympus top, saw her great brother there,
And her great husbands brother too, exciting every where
The glorious spirits of the Greeks; which, as she joyed to see:
So (on the fountfull Idas top) Jove's sight did disagree
With her contentment; since she feared, that his hand would descend,
And check the sea-Gods practices. And this she did contend
How to prevent; which thus seemed best: To deck her curiously, Iu^o prepares
her self to deceive Jove.

And visit the Idalian hill, that so the Lightners eye
She might enamour with her looks, and his high temples steep
(Even to his wisdom) in the kind, and golden juice of sleep.
So took she chamber, which her son, the God of ferrary,
With firm doors made, being joined close, and with a privy key,
That no God could command but Jove; where (enterd) she made fast
The shining gates; and then upon, her lovely body cast
Ambrosia, that first made it clear; and after, laid on it
An odorous, rich, and sacred oil, that was so wondrous sweet, Te^hyomenon
^guentum.

That, ever, when it was but touched, it sweetn'd heaven and earth.
Her body being cleansd with this, her Tresses she let forth,
And combed, (her comb dipped in the oil) then wrapped them up in cutles:
And thus (het deathlesse head adornd) a heavenly veil she hurles
On her white shoulders; wrought by her, that rules in housewiferies,
Who woue it full of antique works, of most divine device.
And this, with goodly clasps of gold, she fastn'd to her breast:
Then with a girdle (whose rich sphere, a hunderd studs impressed)
She girt her small wast. In her ears (tenderly pierced) she wore
Pearls, great, and orient: on her head, a wreath not worn before
Cast beams out like the Sun. At last, she to her feet did tie
Fair shoes; and thus entire attired, she shined in open sky:
Called the fair Paphian Queen apart, from the other Gods, and said;
Loved daughter? should I ask a grace, should I, or be obeyed? I^o to Venus.

Or would thou cross me? being incenst, since I cross thee, and take
The Greeks part, thy hand helping Troy? She answered, That shall make V^us to
Iu^.

No difference in a different cause: ask (ancient Deity)
What most contents thee; my mind stands, inclined as liberally,
To grant it, as thine own to ask; provided that it be
A favor fit, and in my power. She (given deceiptfully)
Thus said; Then give me those two powers, with which both men and Gods
Thou vanquishest, Love, and Desire, For now, the periods
Of all the many-feeding earth, and the original
Of all the gods, Oceanus; and Thetis, whom we call
Our mother, I am going to greet: they nursed me in their court,
And brought me up; receiving me, in most respectfull sort
From Phaea; when Jove under earth, and the unfruitful seas
Cast Saturn. These I go to see, intending to appease
Iarres grown betwixt them, having long, abstaind from speech and bed;
Which iarres, could I so reconcile, that, in their angers stead
I could place love; and so renew, their first society;
I should their best loved be esteemed, and honored endlesly.
She answered, It Is not fit, nor just, thy will should be denied, Venus to Juno.

Whom Jove, in his embraces holds. This spoken, she untied,
And from her odorous bosom took, her Ceston; in whose sphere
Were all enticements to delight, all Loves; all Longings were,
Kind conference; Fair speech, whose power, the wisest does inflame:
This, she resigning to her hands, thus urged her by her name.
Receive this bridle, thus fair wrought; and put it twixt thy breasts:
Where all things, to be done, are done; and whatsoever rests
In thy desire, return with it. The great-eyd Juno smild,
And put it twixt her breasts. Loves Queen, thus cunningly beguild,
To Jove's court flew. Saturnia, (straight stooping from heavens height)
Pieria, and Emathia, (those countries of delight)
Soon reached, and to the snowy mounts, where Thracian soldiers dwell,
(Approaching) past their tops untouched. From Athos then she fell,
Past all the broad sea; and arrived, in Lemnos, at the towers,
Of god-like Thoas; where she met, the Prince of all men's powers,
Deaths brother, Sleep; whose hand she took, and said; Thou king of men, Juno
to Somn^.

Prince of the Gods too: if before, thou heardst my suites: again
Give helpefull ear, and through all times, I Will offer thanks to thee.
Lay slumber on Jove's fiery eyes: that I may comfort me
With his embraces. For which grace, I Will grace thee with a throne
Incorruptible, all of gold, and elegantly done
By Mulciber: to which, he forged, a footestoole for the ease
Of thy soft feet; when wine, and feasts, thy golden humors please.
Sweet Sleep replied; Saturnia, there lives not any god Somn^ to Juno.

(Besides Jove) but I would becalme: I, if it were the flood
That fathers all the Deities, the great Ocean^s.
But Jove we dare not come more near, then he commands us.
Now you command me, as you did, when Jove's great minded son,
Alcides (having sacked the town, of stubborn Ilion)
Took sail from thence; when by your charge; I poured about Jove's mind
A pleasing slumber; calming him, till thou drau'st up the wind,
In all his cruelties, to sea; that set his son ashore,
In Cous, far from all his friends; which (waking) vexed so sore
The supreme godhead, that he cast, the gods about the sky,
And me (above them all) he fought: whom he had utterly
Hurld from the sparkling firmament; if all-gods-^aming Night,
(Whom, flying, I besought for aid) had sufferd his despite,
And not preserved me: but his wrath, with my offense dispenc't,
For fear to offend her; and so ceast, though never so incenst:
And now another such escape, you wish I should prepare.
She answered; What has thy deep rest, to do with his deep care* Juno to Some.

As though Jove's love to Ilion, in all degrees were such,
As it was to Hercules, his son? and so would storm as much
For their displeasure, as for his? away, I will remove
Thy fear, with giving thee the dame, that thou did ever love;
One of the fair young Graces borne, divine Pasithae.
This started Somnus into joy; who answered, Swear to me,
By those inviolable springs, that feed the Stygian lake:
With one hand touch the nourishing earth; and in the other, take
The marble sea; that all the gods, of the infernal state,
Which circle Saturn, may to us, be witnesses; and rate
What thou have vowed: that with all truth, thou will bestow on me,
The dame (I grant) I ever loved, divine Pasithae.
She swore, as he enioyn'd in all, and strengthend all his joys, The oath of
Juno to Some.

By naming all the infernal gods, surnamed the Titanois.
The oath thus taken, both took way, and made their quick repair
To Ida, from the town, and I Will, all hid in liquid air.
At Lecton first, they left the sea; and there, the land they trod*
The fountfull nurse of savages, with all her woods did nod,
Beneath their feet: there Somnus staid, lest Jove's bright eye should see;
And yet (that he might see to Jove) he climbed the goodliest tree Somnus
climes a (...) tree.

That all the Idalian mountain bred, and crowned her progeny:
A fur it was, that shot past air, and kissed the burning sky.
There sat he hid in his dark arms, and in the shape, withal,
Of that continual prating bird, whom all the Deities call
Chalcis; but men Cymmindis name. Saturnia tript apace
Up to the top of Gargarus, and showed her heavenly face
To Jupiter; who saw, and loved; and with as hot a fire,
(Being curious in her tempting view) as when with first desire
(The pleasure of it being stolen) they mixed, in love and bed.
And (gazing on her still) he said: Saturnia, what has bred
This haste in thee, from our high court? and whither tends thy gate? (...) to
Juno:

That void of horse and chariot, fit for thy sovereign state,
Thou lackiest here? Her studied fraud, replied; My journey now (...) answer.

Leaves state, and labors to do good. And where, in right I owe
All kindness to the Sire of gods; and our good mother Queen,
That nursed, and kept me curiously, in court, (since both have been
Long time at discord) my desire, is to atone their hearts;
And therefore go I now to see, those earths extremest parts;
For whose farre-seate, I spared my horse, the skaking of this hill,
And left them at the foot of it: for they must taste their fill
Of travail with me; that must draw, my coach, through earth and seas;
Whose farre-intended reach, respect, and care not to displease
Thy graces: made me not attempt, without thy gracious leave.
The cloud-compelling god, her guile, in this sort did receive;
Juno, thou shall have after leave, but ere so far thou stray, (...) (...)
with his (...) to Juno.

Convert we our kind thoughts to love; that now, does every way
Circle, with victory, my powers: nor yet with any dame;
(Woman, or goddess) did his fires, my bosom so inflame
As now, with thee: not when it loved, the parts so generous
Ixions wife had, that brought forth, the wise Pyrithous;
Nor when the lovely dame, Acrisius daughter stird
My amorous powers, that Perseus bore, to all men else preferred;
Nor when the dame that Phoenix got, surprisd me with her sight;
Who, the diuine-soul'd Rhadamanth, and Minos brought to light;
Nor Semele, that bore to me, the joy of mortal men,
The sprightly Bacchus; Nor the dame, that Thebes renowned then,
Alcmena, that bore Hercules; Latona, so renownd;
Queen Ceres, with the golden hair; nor thy fair eyes did wound,
My entrails to such depth as now, with thirst of amorous ease.
The cunning dame seemed much incenst, and said, what words are these, Iunos
(...) (...) to Jove in satisfying his (...).

Insufferable Saturns son? What? here? in Idas height?
Desir'st thou this? how fits it us? or what if in the sight
Of any god, thy will were pleased? that he, the rest might bring
To witness thy incontinence; it were a dishonourd thing.
I would not show my face in heaven, and rise from such a bed.
But if love be so dear to thee, thou have a chamber sted,
Which Vulcan purposely contrived, with all fit secrecy:
There sleep at pleasure. He replied; I fear not if the eye (...) to (...).

Of either god, or man observe; so thick a cloud of gold
I Will cast about us, that the Sun, (who furthest can behold)
Shall never find us. This resolved, into his kind embrace,
He took his wife: beneath them both, fair Tellus strewed the place The bed of
(...) and Juno.

With fresh-sprung herbs, so soft, and thick, that up aloft it bore
Their heavenly bodies: with his leaves, did deawy Latus store
The Elysian mountain; Saffron flowers, and Hyacinths helped make
The sacred bed; and there they slept: when suddenly there brake,
A golden vapor out of air, whence shining dewes did fall;
In which they wrapped them close, and slept, till Jove was tamed withal.
Mean space flew Somnus to the ships, found Neptune out, and said, (...) to
(...).

Now, cheerfully assist the Greeks, and give them glorious head;
At least, a little, while Jove sleeps; of whom through every limme,
I poured dark sleep; Saturnias love, has so (...) him.
This news made Neptune more secure, in giving Grecians heart;
And through the first fights, thus he stird, the men of most desert.
Yet, Grecians: shall we put our ships, and conquest in the hands, (...) to the
(...).

Of Priams Hector, by our sloth? he thinks so, and commands,
With pride according; all because, Achilles keeps away.
Alas, as we were naught but him? we little need to stay*
On his assistance, if we would, our own strengths call to field,
And mutually maintain repulse. Come on then, all men yield
To what I order; we that bea^e, best arms in all our host;
Whose heads sustain the brightest helms; whose hands are bristl'd most
With longest lances, let us on: But stay, I Will lead you all;
No^ think I, but great Hectors spirits, will suffer some apall,
Though they be never so inspired: the ablest of us then,
That on our shoulders worst shields bear, exchange with worser men
That fight with better. This proposd, all heard it, and obeyed:
The kings (even those that sufferd wounds, Ulysses, Diomed,
And Agamemnon) heplt t'instruct, the complete army thus;
To good, gave good arms; worse, to worse; yet none were mutinous.
Thus (armed with order) forth they flew, the great Earth-shaker led; Neptune
leads the Greeks.

A long sword in his sinowy hand, which when he brandished,
It lightened still: there was no law, for him, and it; poor men
Must quake before them. These thus manned, illustrous Hector then
His host brought up. The blew-hair'd god, and he, stretched through the prease
A greiuous fight: when to the ships, and tents of Gre^ce, the seas
Brake loose, and raged. But when they joined, the dreadful Clamor rose
To such a height; as not the sea, when up, the North-spirit blows
Her raging billows; bellows so, against the beaten shore:
Nor such a rustling keeps a fire, driven with violent blore,
Through woods that grow against a hill: nor so the fervent strokes
Of almost-bursting winds resound, against a grove of Oaks;
As did the clamor of these hoasts, when both the battles closd.
Of all which, noble Hector first, at A^ax breast disposd H^tor at Ajax.

His iauelin, since so right on him, the great-soul'd soldier bore;
Nor mist it, but the bawdricks both, that his broad bosom wore,
To hang his shield and sword, it struck; both which, his flesh preserved:
Hector (disdaining that his lance, had thus, as good as sweru'd)
Trod to his strength; but going off, great Ajax with a stone, Ai^x at Hector.

(One, of the many props for ships, that there lay trampled on)
Struck his broad breast, above his shield, just underneath his throat;
And shook him peecemeale. When the stone, sprung back again and smo^e
(cEarth, like a whirlewind gathering dust, with whirring fiercely round,
For fervor of his unspent strength, in settling on the ground:
And, as when Jove's bolt, by the roots, rends from the earth an Oak; Simile.

His sulphur casting with the blow, a strong, unsavory smoke;
And on the fallen plant none dare look, but with amazed eyes,
( Jove's thunder being no laughing game) so bowd strong Hectors thyes; Hector
ouerthrown^.

And so, with tost-vp heels he fell: away, his lance he flung,
His round shield followd; then his helm, and out his armor rung.
^he Greeks then showted, and ran in, and hoped to hale him off;
And therefore powered on darts, in storms, to keep his aid aloof;
But none could hurt the peoples guide; no^ stir him from his ground:
Sarpedon, prince of Lycia; and Glaucus, so renownd, Hector rescued.

Divine Agenor, Venus son, and wise Polydamas
Rusht to his rescue, and the rest: no one, neglectiue was
Of Hectors safety; all their shields, they coucht about him close;
Raisd him from earth, and (giving him, in their kind armesrepose)
From off the labor, carried him, to his rich chariot,
And bore him mourning toward Troy: but when the flood they got
Of gulphy Xanthus, that was got, by deathlesse Jupiter;
There took they him from chariot, and all be sprinkled there
His temples with the stream; he breathed, looked up, assaid to rise,
And on his knees staid, spitting blood: again then, closd his eyes,
And back again his body fell; the maine blow had not done
Yet with his spirit. When the Greeks, saw worthy Hector gone;
Then thought they of their work; then charged, with much more chere the foe
And then (far first) Oileades, began the overthrow;
He darted Satnius, Enops son, whom famous Nais bo^e,
(As she was keeping Enops flocks) on Satnius rivers shore:
And struck him in his bellies rimme; who upwards fell, and raisd
A mighty skirmish with his fall: and then Panthaedes seisd
Prothenor Areilicides, with his reuend'gfull spear,
On his right shoulder; struck it through, and laid him breathless there.
For which he insolently bragd, and cried out; Not a dart Polyda^ (...) his
insultation.

From great-soul'd Panthus son, I think, shall ever vainlier part;
But some Greek bosom it shall take, and make him give his ghost.
This brag the Grecians stomackt much, but Telamonius most,
Who stood most near Prothenors fall: and out he sent a lance,
Which Panthus son (declining) escaped, yeet took it to sad chance,
Archelochus, Antenors son, whom heaven did destinate
To that stern end, twixt neck, and head, the iauelin wrought his fate,
And ran in at the upper joint, of all the back long bone,
Cut both the nerves, and such a lode, of strength, laid Ajax on,
As, that small part, he seisd, outwaid, all th'vnder lims; and struck
His heels up so, that head, and face, the earths possessions took,
When all the low parts sprung in air; and thus did Ajax quit
Panthaedes Brave; Now, Panthus son, let thy prophetique wit, Ai^ insults in
requit all of Polydamas.

Consider, and disclose a truth, if this man do not wey
Even with Prothaenor? I conceive, no one of you will say,
That either he was base himself, or sprung of any base;
Antenors brother, or his son, he should be, by his face;
One of his race, past question, his likeness shows he is.
This spoke he, knowing it well enough. The Trojans stormed at this,
And then slew Acamas (to save, his brother yet engaged)
Boeotius, dragging him to spoil; and thus the Greeks enraged.
O Greeks? even borne to bear our darts, yet ever breathing threats;
Not always under tears, and toils, ye see our fortune sweats;
But sometimes you drop under death? see now, your quick among
Our dead, intranc't with my weak lance; to prove I have, ere long
Revenged my brother: it is the wish, of every honest man*
His brother slain in Mars his field, may rest wreakt in his Phane.
This stird fresh envy in the Greeks, but urged Peneleus most,
Who hurld his lance at Acamas; he escaped: nor yet it lost
The force he gave it, for it found, the flocke-rich Phorbas son,
Ilioneus, whose dear Sire, (past all in Ilion)
Was loved of Hermes, and enricht; and to him only bore
His mother, this now slaughterd man. The dart did vndergore
His eyelid, by his eyes dear roots; and out the apple fell,
The eye pierced through: nor could the nerve, that stays the neck, repel
His strong-wing'd lance; but neck and all, gave way, and down he dropped.
Peneleus then vnsheath'd his sword, and from the shoulders chopped
His lucklesse head; which down he threw; the helm still sticking on:
And still the lance, fixed in his eye; which, not to see, alone,
Contented him; but up again, he snatched, and showed it all;
With this stern Brave; Ilians, relate, brave Ilioneus fall,
To his kind parents; that their roofes, their tears may ouerrunne;
For so the house of Promachus, and Alegenors son,
Must with his wives eyes, ouerflow: she never seeing more
Her dear Lord, though we tell his death; when to our native shore,
We bring from ruined Troy our fleet, and men so long forgone.
This said, and seen, pale Fear possessed, all those of Ilion:
And every man cast round his eye, to see, where Death was not,
That he might fly him. Let not then, his graced hand be forgot,
(O Muses you that dwell in heaven) that first embrude the field,
With Trojan spoil; when Neptune thus, had made their irons yield.
First Ajax Telamonius, the Mysian Captain slew
Great Hyrtius Gyrtiades. Antilochus o'rethew
Phalces and Mermer, to their spoil. Meriones gave end,
To Moris and Hippotion. Teucer, to Fate did send,
Prothoon and Periphetes. Atrides Iauelin chac't
Duke Hyperenor; wounding him, d in that part that is placed
Betwixt the short ribs and the bones, that to the triple gut
Have pertinence. The Iauelins head, did out his entrails cut,
His forced soul breaking through the wound: nights black hand closde his eyes.
Then Ajax, great Oileus son, had diverse victories: Ajax Oi^ virtue for
swistnesse.

For when Saturnius sufferd flight; of all the Grecian race,
Not one with swiftness of his feet, could so enrich a chase.
COMMENTARIVS.
a (...). Princeps populorum (the end of Ulysses speech in the beginning of
this book) which ascription our Spond. takes to be given in scorn: and that
all Ulysses speech is (...), or scoffing; which is spoken altogether seriously
and bitterly to this title at the end: which was spoken (...), molliter or
benign; of purpose to make Agamemnon bear the better the justice of his other
austeritie.

b (...), and ego quoad genus glorior esse. The long digression, that follows
this, in the speech of Diomed (being next to Agamemnons reply to Ulysses)
bewrayes an affectation he had by all-any-thing-fit-meanes, to talk of his
pedigree: and by reason of that humor, has shown his desire elsewhere, to
learn the pedigreees of others: as in the sixth book, in his inquiry of
Glaucus pedigree. And herein is expressed part of his character.

c (...), etc. ouerpassing, for speed, many things in this book that cry out
for the praise of our Homer, and note of that, which in most readers I know
will be lost: I must only insist still on those parts that (in my poor
understanding) could never yet find apprehension in any of our Commentors or
translators: as in this simile again of the whirlewind; to which the stone
that Ajax hurled at Hector, is resembled. Valla and Eobanus, Salel in French,
so understanding, Hector turned abo^t with the blow, like a whirlewind. Vallas
words are these, (translating (...), (...), which ad verbum say thus much in
every common translation; Trochum autem sicut concussit feriens, rotatusque est
vndique.) Quo ictu Hector velut turbo, quem Strombum dicunt, ^tato corpore,
etc. Eobanus converting it thus: -- Stetit ille tremens, ceu turbo
rotatus.Which though it harp upon the other, makes yet much worse music,
saying, Hector stood trembling, being wheeled about like a whirlwind. He stood,
yet was turned about violently. How gross both are, I think, the blindest
see: and must needs acknowledge a monstrous unworthiness in these men to touch
our Homer, esteeming it an extreme loss to the world, to have this and the
like undiscovered. For (as I apprehend it) being expressed no better then in my
silly conversion (and the stone, not Hector likened to the ^rlewind) it is
above the wit of a man to imitate our Homers wit, for the m^st fiery
illustration both of Ajax strength, and Hectors: of Ajax for giving such a
force to it, as could not spend it self upon Hector, but turn after upon the
earth, in that whirlewind like violence: of Hector, for standing it so solidly;
for without that consideration, the stone could never have recoild so fiercely.
And here have we a ruled case against our plain and smug writers; that because
their own vnweildinesse will not let them rise themselves, would have every
man grouel like the^: their feathers not passing the pitch of every woman's
capacity. And (indeed) where a man is understood, there is ever a proportion
betwixt the writers wit and the writees (that I may speak with authority)
according to my old lesson in Philosophy: Intellectus in ipsa intelligibilia
transit. But herein this case is ruled against such men, that they affirm
these hyperthe ticall or superlatiue sort of expressions and illustratio^s are
too bold, and bumbasted; and out of that word is spunne that which they call
our Fustian: their plain writing, being stuff nothing so substantial, but
such gross sowtedge, or hairepatch, as every goose may eat oats through.
Against which, and all these plebeian opinions, that a man is bound to write to
every vulgar readers understanding, you see the great master of all ^locution
has written so darkly, that almost three thousand suns have not discovered
him, no more in five hundred other places then here; and yet all peruiall
enough (you may well say) when such a one as I comprehend them. But the chief
end why I extend this annotation, is only to intrea^e your note here of Homers
manner of writing, which (to utter his after store of matter and variety) is so
press, and puts on with so strong a current, that it far over runs the
most laborious pursuer, if he have not a Poetical foot, and Poesies quick
eye to guide it. The verse in question, I refer you to before, which says,
(...), signifying a stone of a handful, or that with one hand may be raised
and cast, spoken of before; and (here being understood) shook Hector at all
parts, in striking him, and like a whirlwind wheeled or whirred about. Wherein
he speaks not of bounding to the earth again, and raising a dust with his
violent turnings: in which the conceit and life of his simile lies, but leaves
it to his reader, and he leaves it to him: notwithstanding he vtters enough to
make a stone understand it; how stupidly soever all his interpreters would have
Hector (being struck into a trembling, and almost dead) turn about like a
whirlewind. I conclude then with this question: What fault is it in me, to
furnish and adorn my verse (being his Translator) with translating and adding
the truth and fullness of his conceit; it being as like to pass my reader, as
his, and therefore necessary? If it be no fault in me, but fit, then may I
justly be said to better Homer? or not to have all my invention, matter and
form from him, though a little I enlarge his sorme? Virgil, in all places
where he is compared and preferred to Homer, does nothing more. And therefore
my assertion in the second Book is true, that Virgil has in all places,
wherein he is compared and preferred to Homer by Scaliger, etc. both his
invention, matter and form from him.

d (...), and c. vulnerauit ad I Will; it is translated: and is in the last verses
of this Book, where Menelaus is said to wound Hyperenor. But (...), dicitur ea
pars corporis quae posita est inter costas nothas, and ossa quae ad Ilia
pertinent, quod inanis sit, and desiderat. Hip. in lib. (...); and therefore I
accordingly translate it. And note this beside, both out of this place and many
others, how excellent an Anatomist our Homer was, whose skill in those times,
me thinks, should be a secret.

The end of the fourteenth Book of Homers Iliads.
THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jove waking, and beholding Troy in flight,
Chides Juno, and sends Iris to the fight,
To charge the sea-god, to forsake the field;
And Phoebus, to invade it, with his shield,
Recovering Hectors broosde, and crased powers.
To field he goes, and makes new conquerours;
The Trojans giving now, the Grecians chase,
Even to their fleet. Then Ajax turns his face,
And feeds, with many Trojan lives, his ire;
Who then brought brands to set the fleet on fire.
Another Argument.
Jove sees in, O, his oversight,
Chides Juno, Neptune calls from fight.
THe Trojans (beat past pale and dike, and numbers prostrate laid)
All got to chariot, feare-driuen all; and feared as men dismaide:
Then Jove, on Idas top, awakt; rose from Saturnias side,
Stood up, and looked upon the war; and all inuerted, spide,
Since he had seen it, the Ilians now, in rowt; the Greeks in fight:
King Neptune, with his long sword, Chief; great Hector put down quite,
Laid flat in field, and with a crown, of Princes compassed;
So stopped up, that he scarce could breath; his minds sound habit fled,
And he still spitting blood. Indeed, his hurt was not set on
By one that was the weakest Greek. But him Jove looked upon
With eyes of pity: on his wife, with horrible aspect;
To whom he said: O thou in ill, most cunning Architect Jupiters wrath against
Iu^.

All Arts, and comments that exceedst! not only to enforce
Hector from fight; but with his men, to show the Greeks a course.
I fear (as formerly) so now, these ils have with thy hands,
Their first fruits sown, and therefore could, lode all thy lims with bands.
Forgetst thou, when I hanged thee up; how to thy feet I tied
Two Anuils; golden manacles, on thy false wrists implied,
And let thee mercilesly hang, from our refined heaven
Even to earths vapors; all the gods, in great Olymp^s, given
To mutinies about thee; yet, (though all stood staring on)
None durst dissolve thee; for these hands (had they but seisd upon
Thy friend) had headlong thrown him off, from our star-bearing round,
Till he had tumbled out his breath; and peecemeale dashed the ground.
Nor was my angry spirit calmed, so soon, for those foul seas,
On which (inducing Northern flawes) thou shipwrack'dst Hercules,
And tossed him to the Coon shore; that thou should tempt again
My wraths importance, when thou see (besides) how grossly vain,
My powers can make thy policies: for from their utmost force,
I freed my son, and set him safe, in Argos, nurse of horse.
These I remember to thy thoughts, that thou may shun these sleights,
And know how badly bed-sports thrive, procured by base deceits.
This frighted the offending Queen, who, with this state, excusde
Her kind unkindness: Witness earth, and heaven, so far diffusde: Iunoes
^th in clearing her self to Jupiter.

Thou Flood, whose silent-gliding waves, the under ground does bear,
(Which is the great'st, and grauest oath, that any god can swear)
Thy sacred head; those secretioyes, that our young bed gave forth,
(By which I never rashly swore) that he who shakes the earth,
Not by my counsel did this wrong, to Hector and his host;
But (pitying the oppressed Greeks, their fleet being nearly lost)
Relieved their hard condition; yet utterly impeld
By his free mind: which since I see, is so offensive held,
To thy high pleasure, I will now, advise him not to tread,
But where thy tempest-raising feet, (O Jupiter) shall lead.
Jove laughed to hear her so submisse; and said: My faire-eyd love,
If still thus thou and I were one, (in counsels held above) Jupiters charge to
Juno, and reconciliation.

Neptune would still, in word and fact, be ours, if not in heart;
If then thy tongue and heart agree, from hence to heaven depart,
To call the excellent in bows; the Rainbow, and the Sun,
That both may visit both the hosts; the Grecian army, one;
And that is Iris; let her haste, and make the sea-god cease,
T'assist the Greeks; and to his court, retire from war, in peace.
Let Phoebus (on the Trojan part) inspire with wonted power
Great Hectors spirits: make his thoughts, forget the late stern hour,
And all his anguish; setting on, his whole recouer'd man
To make good his late grace in fight, and hold inconstant wane
The Grecian glories, till they fall, in flight before the fleet
Of vexed Achilles; which extreme, will prove the mean to greet
Thee with thy wish: for then the eyes, of great Aeacides,
(Made witness of the general ill, that does so near him prease)
Will make his own particular, look out; and by degrees
Abate his wrath, that through himself, for no extremities
Will seem reflected; yet his friend, may get of him the grace,
To help his country, in his Arms; and he shall make fit place,
For his full presence, with his death; which shall be well forerunne:
For I will first renown his life, with slaughter of my son,
(Divine Sarpedon) and his death, great Hectors power shall wreake,
Ending his ends. Then at once, out shall the fury break
Of fierce Achilles: and with that, the flight now felt, shall turn;
And then last, till in wrathful flames, the long-sieg'd Ilion burn.
Mineruaes counsel shall become, grave mean, to this my will;
Which no god shall neglect, before, Achilles take his fill
Of slaughter, for his slaughterd friend: even Hectors slaughter, thrown
Under his anger; that these facts, may then make fully known
My vows performance, made of late: and with my bowed head,
Confirmed to Thetis, when her arms, embraced my knees, and praid
That to her citie-racing son, I would all honor show.
This heard, his charge she seemed t'intend, and to Olympus flew.
But, as the mind of such a man, that has a great way gone, S^.

And either knowing not his way; or then would let alone
His purposde journey, is distract; and in his a vexed mind
Resolves now not to go; now goes, still many ways inclined:
So reverend Juno headlong flew, and'gainst her stomach strived.
For (being amongst the immortal gods, in high heaven, soon arrived,
All rising, welcoming with cups, her little absence thence)
She all their courtships ouerpast, with solemn negligence,
Save that which faire-cheekt Themis showed; and her kind ^up she took: T^ ^o
(...).

For first, she ran and met with her, and asked; What t^oubled look
She brought to heaven? She thought (for truth) that Jove had terti^
Her spirits strangely, since she went. The fair armed Queen replide:
That truth may easily be supposde, you (goddess Themis) know (...) ^ply.

His old severity and pride; bu^ you bear't out with show,
And like the banquets arbiter, amongst The Immortals fare,
Though well you hear amongst them all, how bad his actions are;
Nor are all here, nor any where, mortals, nor gods (I fear)
Entirely pleased with what he does, though thus ye banquet here.
Thus took she place, displeasedly; the feast in general,
Bewraying privy splenes at Jove; and then (to color all)
She laughed, but merely from her lips: for, over her black brows
Her still-bent forehead was not cleared; yet this her passions throws,
Brought forth in spite, being lately schooled; alas, what fools are we?
That envy Jove? or that by act, word, thought, can fantasy,
Any resistance to his will? he sits far off, nor cares,
Nor moves, but says he knows his strength, to all degrees compares
His greatness, past all other gods: and that in fortitude,
And every other godlike power; he reigns, past all indude.
For which great eminence, all you Gods, what ever ill he does
Sustain with patience: here is Mars, I think, not free from woes;
And yet he bears them like himself. The great God had a son, I^ speech of
purpose to in^ M^ Scopti^.

Whom he himself yet iustifies, one that from all men won,
Just surname of their best beloved, Ascalaphus; yet he
(By Jove's high grace to Troy) is slain. Mars started horribly
(As Juno knew he would) at this; beat, with his hurld out hands,
His brawnie thighs; cried out, and said: O you that (...) commands
In these high temples, bear with me, if I revenge the death
Of such a son; I Will to the fleet; and though I sink beneath
The fate of being shot to hell, by Jove's fell thunder stone:
And lie all grim'd amongst the dead, with dust and blood; my son,
Revenge shall honor. Then he charged, Fear and Dismay to join
His horse and chariot: he got arms, that over heaven did shine:
And then a wrath, more great and grave, in Jove had been prepared
Against the gods, then Juno causde; if Pallas had not cared
More for the peace of heaven then Mars; who leap^ out of her throne,
Rapt up her helmet, lance, and shield, and made her Phanes porch groan,
With her egression to his stay: and thus his rage defers:
Furious, and foolish? thou art undone; have thou, for naught, thine ears?
Pallas to Mars.

Heard'st thou not Juno, being arrived, from heavens great king but now?
Or would thou he himself should rise (forced with thy rage) to show,
The dreadful power she urged in him, so justly being stird?
Know (thou most impudent and mad) thy wrath had not inferd
Mischief to thee; but to us all: his spirit had instantly
Left both the hosts, and turned his hands, to vprores in the sky.
Guilty and guiltless, both to wrack, in his high rage had gone;
And therefore (as thou love thy self) cease fury for thy son.
Another, far exceeding him, in heart and strength of hand,
Or is, or will be shortly slain. It were a b work would stand
Jove in much trouble, to free all, from death, that would not die.
This threat, even nailed him to his throne, when heavens chief Majesty,
Called bright Apollo from his Phane; and Iris that had place
Of Internunciesse from the Gods; to whom she did the grace
Of Jupiter, to this effect: It is Saturnius will, Juno to Apollo and Iris.

That both, with utmost speed, should stoop, to the Idalian hill,
To know his further pleasure, there. And this let me advise,
When you arrive, and are in reach, of his refulgent eyes:
His pleasure heard, perform it all, of whatsoever kind.
Thus moved she back, and used her throne. Those two outstript the wind,
And Ida (all enchac't with springs) they soon attaind, and found
Where farre-discerning Jupiter, in his repose, had crowned
The brows of Gargarus, and wrapped, an odoriferous cloud
About his bosom. Coming near, they stood; nor now he showd'
His angry countenance, since so soon, he saw they made th'accesse
That his loved wife enioyn'd. But first, the fair Ambassad^esse,
He thus commanded; Iris, Go, to Neptune, and relate Jove to Iris.

Our pleasure truly, and at large; command him from the Fate
Of humane war; and either greet, the gods society,
Or the divine sea, make his seat. If proudly he deny,
Let better counsels be his guides, then such as bid me war,
And tempt my charge, though he be strong; for I am stronger far,
And elder borne: nor let him dare, to boast even state with me,
Whom all Gods else prefer in fear. This said: down hasted she
From Idaes top to Ilion; and like a mighty snow,
Or gelide hail, that from the clouds, the Northern spirit does blow;
So fell the windie-footed Dame; and found with quick repair
The watrie God; to whom she said: God, with the sable hair, Iris to (...).

I came from Aegis-bearing Jove, to bid thee cease from fight,
And visit heaven, or th'ample seas; which, if in his despite,
Or disobedience, thou deniest; he threatens thee to come
(In opposite fight) to field himself: and therefore warnes thee home,
His hands eschewing; since his power, is far superior;
His birth before thee; and affirms, thy loved heart should abhor
To vaunt equality with him, whom every deity fears.
He answered, O unworthy thing! though he be great, he bears (...) to Iris,
being (...) with Jupiter.

His tongue too proudly; that our self, borne to an equal share
Of state and freedom, he would force. Three brothers borne, we are,
To Saturn; Rhea brought us forth: this Jupiter, and I,
And Pluto, god of vnder-grounds. The world indifferently The (...) proper to
(...).

Disposde betwixt us; every one his kingdom; I, the seas;
Pluto the black lot; Jupiter, the principalities Neptune and Pluto being
three brothers.

Of broad heaven; all the sky and clouds, was sorted out: the earth
And high Olympus, common are, and due to eithers birth.
Why then should I be awed by him? Content he his great heart,
With his third portion; and not think, to amplify his part
With terrors of his stronger hands, on me, as if I were
The most ignoble of us all: let him contain in fear,
His daughters and his sons, begot, by his own person: this
Holds more conuenience: they must hear, these violent threats of his.
Shall I (said Iris) bear from thee, an answer so austere?
Or will thou change it? Changing minds, all noble natures bear: Iris to
N^tune.'

And well thou know, these greatest borne, the Furies follow still. Neptune
again to Iris.

He answered: Iris, thy reply, keeps time, and shows thy skill:
O it is a most praiseworthy thing, when messengers can tell
(Besides their messages) such things, as fit the occasion well.
But this much grieves my heart and soul, that being in power and state
All ways his equal, and so fixed, by one decree in fate,
He should to me, as under him, ill language give, and chide;
Yet now (though still incenst) I yield, affirming this beside:
And I enforce it with a threat, that if without consent
Of me, Minerua, Mercury; the Queen of regiment,
And Vulcan; he will either spare, high Ilion, or not race
Her turrets to the lowest stone; and (with both these) not grace
The Greeks, as victors absolute: inform him this from me;
His pride and my contempt shall live, at endless enmity.
This said, he left the Greeks, and rusht, into his watrie throne;
Much mist of all the th'heroicke host. When Jove discerned him gone,
Apolloes service he employed, and said: Loved Phoebus, go
To Hector: now th'earth-shaking god, has taken sea, and so Jupiter to Apoll^

Shrunk from the horrors I denounc't; which standing, he, and all
The vnder-seated deities, that circle Saturnes fall,
Had heard of me in such a fight, as had gone hard for them.
But both for them and me, it is best, that thus they fly th'extreme,
That had not past us without sweat. Now then, in thy hands take
My Adder-fring'd affrighting shield, which, with such terror shake,
That Fear may shake the Greeks to flight: besides this, add thy care
(O Phoebus farre-off-shooting god) that this so sickly fare,
Of famous Hector be recur'd; and quickly so excite
His amplest powers, that all the Greeks, may grace him with their ^iht,
Even to their ships, and Hellespont; and then will I devise
All words and facts again for Greece, that largely may suffice,
To breathe them from their instant toiles. Thus from th'Idean height,
(Like airs swift-pigeon-killer, stoupt, the far-shot God of light,
And found great Hector, sitting up, not stretched upon his bed; Apollo visits
Hector.

Not wheasing with a stopt-vp spirit; not in cold sweates; but fed
With fresh and comfortable veins: but his mind, all his own;
But round about him, all his friends, as well as ever known.
And this was with the mind of Jove, that flew to him before
Apollo came; who (as he saw, no sign of any sore)
Asked (like a cheerful visitant) why in this sickly kind
(Great Hector) sitst thou so apart? can any grief of mind,
Invade thy fortitude? He spoke; but with a feeble voice: Hector to Apollo

O thou, the best of deities! why (since I thus rejoice
By thy so serious benefit) demandst thou (as in mirth,
And to my face) if I were ill? for (more then what thy worth
Must needs take note of) does not Fame, from all mouths fill thine (...);
That (as my hand at th'Achiue fleet, was making massacres
Of men, whom valiant Ajax led) his strength, struck with a stone,
All power of more hurt from my breast? my very soul was gone:
And once to day, I thought to see, the house of Dis and Death.
Be strong (said he) for such a spirit, now sends the god of breath Apollo to
Hector

From airie Ida, as shall run, through, all Greek spirits in thee;
Apollo with the golden sword, the clear farre-seer, see,
Him, who betwixt death and thy life; twixt ruin and those towers,
Ere this day, often has held his shield. Come then, be all thy powers,
In wonted vigor: let thy knights, with all their horse assay
The Grecian fleet; my self will lead, and scour so clear the way,
That Flight shall leave no Greek a Rub. Thus instantly inspired
Were all his nerves with matchless strength; and then his friends he fired
Against their foes; when (to his eyes) his ears confirmed the god.
Then, as a goodly headed Heart, or Goat, bred in the wood, Simile.

A rout of country huntsmen chase, with all their hounds in cry;
The beast yet, or the shadie woods, or rocks excessive hie,
Keep safe; or our vnwieldie fates (that even in hunters sway)
Bar them, the poor beasts pulling down; when straight the clamorous fray,
Calls out a Lion, hugely manned; and his abhorred view
Turns headlong in vnturning flight (though ventrous) all the crew:
So hitherto the chasing Greeks, their slaughter dealt by troops;
But, after Hector was beheld, range here and there; then stoupes
The boldest courage; then their heels, took in their dropping hearts,
And then spoke Andremonides, a man of farre-best parts
Of all the Aetolians, skild in darts; strenuous in fights of stand;
And one of whom few of the Greeks, could get the better hand,
(For Rhetorique) when they fought with words; with all which, being wise,
Thus spoke he to his Grecian friends: O mischief! now mine eyes Andremonides
to the Greeks.

Discern no little miracle; Hector escapt from death,
And all recouerd, when all thought, his soul had sunk beneath
The hands of Ajax: but some God, has saved and freed again,
Him that but now dissolved the knees, of many a Grecian.
And now I fear will weaken more; for not without the hand
Of him that thunders, can his powers, thus still the forefights stand;
Thus still triumphant: hear me then; our troops in quick retreat,
Let Us draw up to our fleet, and we, that boast our selves, the Great,
Stand firm, and try, if these that raise, so high their charging da^ts,
May be resisted: I believe, even this great heart of hearts,
Will fear, himself to be too bold, in charging through us.
They easily heard him, and obeyed, when all the generous
They called t'encounter Hectors charge, and turned the common men
Back to the fleet: and these were they, that bravely furnished then
The fierce forefight; the Aiaces both; the worthy Cretan king;
The Mars-like Meges; Merion, and Teucer. Up then, bring
The Trojan chiefes, their men in heaps; before whom (amply pac't)
Marched Hector; and in front of him, Apollo, who had cast
About his bright aspect, a cloud; and did before him bear
Jove's huge and each-where shaggie shield; which (to contain in fear
Offending men) the god-smith gave, to Jove; with this he led
The Trojan forces. The Greeks stood; a fervent clamor spread
The air on both sides as they joined; out flew the shafts and darts,
Some falling short, but othersome, found buts in breasts and hearts.
As long as Phoebu^ held but out, his horrid shield, so long (...) sight
discomfits the (...).

The darts flew raging either way, and death grew both ways strong.
But when the Greeks had seen his face, and who it was that shook
The bristled targe, knew by his voice; then all their strengths forsook
Their nerves and minds; and then look how, a goodly herd of Neat, Simil^.

Or wealthy flock of sheep, being close, and dreadlesse at their meat,
In some black midnight, suddenly (and not a keeper near)
A brace of horrid Bears rush in, and then fly here and there
The poor affrighted flocks or herds; So every way dispersed
The heartlesse Grecians: so the Sun, their headstrong chase reuerst
To headlong flight; and that day raisde, with all grace, Hectors head.
Arcesilaus then he slew, and Stichius; Stichius led
Boeotias brazen-coted men: the other was the friend
Of mightie-soul'd Menestheus. Aeneas brought to end,
Medon, and Iasus; Medon was, the brother (though but base)
Of swift Oileades; and dwelt, far from his breeding place,
In Phylaca; the other led, th'Athenian bands: his Sire
Was Spelus, Bucolus his son. Mecistheus did expire
Beneath Polydamas his hand. Polites, Echius slew
Just at the joining of the hosts. Agenor overthrew
Clonius. Bold Deiochus, felt Alexanders lance;
It struck his shoulders upper part, and did his head advance
Quite through his breast, as from the fight, he turned him for retreat.
While these stood spoiling of the flaine, the Greeks found time to get
Beyond the dike, and th'vndik't pales: all scapes they gladly gained,
Till all had past the utmost wall; Necessity so reigned.
Then Hector cried out: Take no spoil, but rush on to the fleet;
From whose assault (for spoil, or flight) if any man I meet, Hector to his
soldiers.

He meets his death: nor in the fire, of holy funeral,
His brothers or his sisters hands, shall cast (within our wall)
His lothed body; but without, the throtes of dogs shall grave
His manlesse lims. This said; the scourge, his forward horses drove
Through every order; and with him, all whipped their chariots on;
All threatningly, out thundering shouts, as earth were overthrown.
Before them marched Apollo still; and, as he marched, digd down, Apollo leads
the Trojans.

(Without all labor) with his feet, the dike; till, with his own,
He filled it to the top; and made, way, both for man and horse,
As broad and long, as with a lance (cast out to try ones force)
A man could measure. Into this, they powered whole troops as fast,
As numerous: Phoebus still, before, for all their have,
Still shaking Jove's vnualewed shield, and held it up to all.
And then, as he had chok't their dike, he tumbled down their wall.
And look how easily any boy, upon the sea-^bd shore, A simile, from how low
things it may be taken, to express the ^ighest.

Makes with a little sand a toy, and cares for it no more;
But as he raisd it childishly, so in his wanton vain,
Both with his hands and feet, he pulls, and spurns it down again:
So slight, O Phoebus, thy hands made, of that huge Grecian toil;
And their late stand, so well resolved, as easily made recoile.
Thus stood they driven up at their fleet, where each heard others thought,
Exhorted: passing humbly prayed: all, all the gods besought,
(With hands held up to heaven) for help; amongst all, the good old man,
Grave Nestor (for his counsels called, the Argiues guardian)
Fell on his aged knees, and prayed; and to the starrie host,
Stretched out his hands for aid to theirs; of all, thus moving most:
O father Jove, if ever man, of all our host did burn Nestors prayer to
Jupiter.

Fat thighs of oxen or of sheep (for grace of safe return)
In fruitful Argos; and obtaind, the bowing of thy head,
For promise of his humble prayers: O now remember him,
(Thou merely heavenly) and clear up, the foul brows of this dim
And cruel day; do not destroy, our zeal for Trojan pride.
He prayed, and heavens great Counselor, with store of thunder tried
His former grace good; and so heard, the old man's hearty prayres.
The Trojans took Jove's sign for them; and powered out their affairs
In much more violence on the Greeks; and thought on naught but fight.
And as a huge wave of a sea, swollen to his rudest height, Simile.

Breaks over both sides of a ship; being all urged by the wind;
For that is it makes the wave so proud: in such a borne-vp kind, (...) they
(...) puffed up by Apollo.

The Trojans ouergat the wall; and getting in their horse,
Fought close at fleet; which now the Greeks, ascended for their force.
Then from their chariots, they with darts; the Greeks with bead-hooks fought,
(Kept still aboard for nauall fights) their heads with iron wrought,
In hooks and pikes. Achilles friend, still while he saw the wall
That stood without their fleet, afford, employment for them all,
Was never absent from the tent, of that man-louing Greek,
Late-hurt Eurypilus; but sat, and every way did seek
To spend the sharp time of his wound, with all the ease he could,
In medicines, and in kind discourse: but when he might behold
The Trojans past the wall; the Greeks, flight driven, and all in cries;
Then cride he out, Cast down his hands, and beat with grief his thighs:
Then, O Eurypilus, (he cride) now all thy need of me, Patroclus to Eurypilus.

Must bear my absence: now a work, of more necessity,
Calls hence; and I must have to call, Achilles to the field:
Who knows, but (God assisting me) my words may make him yield?
The motion of a friend is strong. His feet thus took him thence.
The rest yet stood their enemies firm; but all their violence
(Though Troy fought there with fewer men) lackt vigor to repel
Those fewer from their Nauies charge; and so, that charge as well
Lackt force to spoil their fleet, or tents. And as a shipwrights line A
divine fimile.

(Disposde by such a hand, as learned, from th'Artizan divine,
The perfect practice of his Art) directs or guards so well
The nauall timber then in frame; that all the layd-on steel,
Can hew no further then may serve, to give the timber the end,
Fore-purposde by the skillful wright: so both hosts did contend,
With such a line, or law applide, to what their steel would gain.
At other ships fought other men, but Hector did maintain
His quarrel firm at Ajax ship; and so did both employ,
About one vessel, all their toil: nor could the one destroy
The ship with fire; nor force the man, nor that man yet get gone
The other from so near his ship, for God had brought him on.
But now did Ajax with a dart, wound deadly in the breast,
Calctor, son of Clytius, as he with fire addressed Ajax slaughter^ (...).

To burn the vessel; as he fell, the brand fell from his hand.
When Hector saw his sisters son, lie slaughterd in the sand,
He called to all his friends, and prayed, they would not in that straight
Forsake his nephew, but maintain, about his corse the fight,
And save it from the spoil of Greece. Then sent he out a lance Hector at Ajax.

At Ajax, in his nephews wreake; which mist, but made the chance
On Lycophron Mastorides, that was the household friend
Of Ajax, borne in Cythera, whom Ajax did defend, Hector (...) Ajax, (...)
(...) friend.

(Being fled to his protection) for killing of a man
Amongst the god-like Cytherans: the vengefull Iauelin ran
Quite through his head, above his ear, as he was standing by
His Fautor, then asterne his ship, from whence his soul did fly,
And to the earth his body fell: the hair stood up an end
On Ajax; who to Teucer called, (his brother) saying: Friend,
Our loved consort, whom we brought, from Cythera; and graced,
So like our father; Hectors hand, has made him breathe his la^t.
Where then are all thy death-borne shafts? and that vnuallewed bow
Apollo gave thee? Teucer strait, his brothers thoughts did know,
Stood near him, and dispatched a shaft, amongst the Trojan fight*
It struck Pysenors goodly son, young Clyt^, the delight
Of the renowm'd Polydamas; the bridle in his hand,
As he was laboring his horse, to please the high command
Of Hector, and his Tioian friends; and bring him, where the fight
Made greatest tumult. But his strife, for honor in their sight,
Wrought not what sight or wishes helped; for turning back his look,
The hollow of his neck, the shaft, came singing on, and struck,
And down he fell; his horses back, and hurried through the field
The empty chariot. Panthus son, made all haste, and withheld
Their loose carier; disposing them, to Protiaons son,
Astinous; with special charge, to keep them ever on,
And in his sight: so he again, amongst the foremost went.
At Hector then another shaft, incensed Te^er sent; Teucer at Hector.

Which, had it hit him, sure had hurt; and had it hurt him, slain;
And had it slain him, it had driven, all those to Troy again.
But Jove's mind was not sleeping now; it wak't to Hectors fame,
And Teucers infamy; himself (in Teucers deadly aim) Jove breaks Te^cers
bow.

His well-wrought string disseuering, that served his brauest bow;
His shaft flew quite another way; his bow the earth did strew.
At all which, Teucer stood amazed, and to his brother cride,
O prodigy! without all doubt, our Angel does deride Teucer to Ajax.

The counsels of our fight; he brake, a string, my hands put on
This morning, and was newly made; and well might have set gone
A hundred arrows; and beside, he struck out of my hand
The bow Apollo gave. He ^ayd, Then (good friend) do not stand Ajax to Teucer.

More on thy archerie, since God (preuenter of all grace,
Desired by Grecians) sleights it so. Take therefore in the place,
A good large lance; and on thy neck, a target cast, as bright;
With which, come fight thy self with some, and othersome excite,
That without labor at the least (though we prove worser men)
Troy may not brag it took our ships: come, mind our business then.
This said, he hasted to his tent; left there his shafts and bow, Teucer
changes his arms.

And then his double, double shield, did on his shoulders throw;
Upon his honored head he placed, his helmet, thickly plumed;
And then his strong, and well pilde lance, in his fair hand assumed,
Returned, and boldly took his place, by his great brothers side.
When Hector saw his arrows broke, out to his friends he cride, Hectors
admiration of Jove's breaking Teu^ers ^ow.

O friends! be yet more comforted, I saw the hands of Jove,
Break the great Grecian archers shafts: it is easy to approve,
That Jove's power is direct with men; as well in those set hi^
Upon the sudden, as in those, deprest as suddenly:
And those not put in state at all: as now he takes away
Strength from the Greeks, and gives it us; then use it, and assay
With joined hands this approached fleet. If any bravely buy
His fame or fate, with wounds or death; in Jove's name let him die.
Who for his country suffers death, sustaines no shameful thing:
His wife in honor shall survive, his progeny shall spring
In endless summers; and their roofes, with patrimony swell;
And all this, though with all their freight, the Greek ships we repel.
His friends thus cheered, on the other part, strong Ajax stird his friends:
O Greeks (said he) what shame is this, that no man more defends, (...) to the
Greek^.

His fame and safety; then to live, and thus be for^'t to shrink:
Now either ^aue your fleet, or die; unless ye vainly think,
That you can live, and they destroyed? perceiues no^ every ^are,
How Hector hartens up his men? and has his firebrands here,
Now ready to inflame ourfleet? he does not bid them dance;
That you may take your ease, and see; but to the fight advance.
No counsel can serve us but this: to mix both hands and har^
And bear up close; it is better much, t'expose our utmost parts
To one days certain life or death; then languish in a war
So base as this; beat to our ships, by our inferiors far.
Thus rowsd he up their spirits and strengths: To work then, both sides went
When Hector, the Phocensian Duke, to fields of darkness sent;
Fierce Schedius, Perimedes son; which Ajax did requite,
With slaughter of Laodamas, that led the foot to fight,
And was Antenors famous son. Polydamas did end
Otus, surnamed Cyllenius; whom Phydas made his friend;
Being chief of the Epeians Bands: whose fall, when M^ges viewd,
He let fly at his fellers life; who (shrinking-in) eschew'd
The wel-aym'd lance: Apollos will, denied that Pantbus son
Should fall amongst the foremost fights; the dart, the mid-brest won
Of Craesmus; Meges won his arms. At Meges, Dolops then
Bestowed his lance; he was the son, of Lampus, best of men:
And Lampus, of Laomedon, well skild in strength of mind;
He struck Phylides shield quite through, whose (...), better lined
And hollowed fitly, saved his life: Phyleus left him them,
Who from Epirus brought them home; on that part where the streme
Of famous Selees does run; Euphetes did bestow
(Being guest with him) those wel-prou'd arms, to wear against the foe,
And now they saved his son from death. At Dolops, Meges threw
A spear well pilde; that struck his caske, full in the height; off flew
His purple feather, newly made; and in the dust it fell.
While these thus strived for victory; and eithers hope served well;
Atrides came to Meges aid; and (hidden with his side)
Let loose a lauelin at his foe, that through his back implied
His lusty head, even past his breast; the ground received his weight.
While these made-in, to spoil his arms; great Hector did excite,
All his allies to quick revenge; and first he wrought upon
Strong Menalippus (that was son, to great Hycet^n)
With some reproof. Before these wars, he in Perco^ fed
Clouen-footed Oxen; but did since, ret^rne where he was bred;
Excelled amongst the Ilians, was much of Pri^m loved;
And in his court kept, as his son; him Hect^r thus reprou'd.
Thus Menalippui, shall our blood, accuse us of neglect: Hector to Me^alippui.

Nor moves it thy loved heart (thus urged) thy kinsman to protect?
See thou not, how they seek his spoil? Come, follow; now no more
Our fight must stand at (...), but close: nor leave the close, before
We close the latest eye of them; or they, the lowest ^one
Tear up, and sack the citizens, of lofty Ili^.
He led; he followd like a god: and then must Ajax needs
(As well as Hector) cheer his men; and thus their spirits he feeds:
Good friends bring but your selves to feel, the noble stings of shame, Ajax
to his soldiers, in imitation of Agamem* n^n, observed by him before, ^ing the
same words.

For what ye suffer, and be men: respect each others fame;
For which, who strives, in shames fit fear; and puts on near so far,
Comes oftener off, then stick engaged: these fugitives of war,
Save neither life, nor get renown; nor bear more minds then sheep.
This short speeeh fired them in his aid, his spirit touched them deep;
And turned them all before the fleet, into a wall of brass:
To whose assault, Jove stird their foes: and young Atrides was
Jove's instrument; who thus set on, the young Antilo^us:
Antiloch^s, in all our host, there is not one of us Menelaus to Antilochus.

More young then thou; more swift of foot; nor (with both those) so strong.
O would thou would then (for thou can) one of this lusty throng,
That thus comes skipping out before, (whoeuer, any where)
Make stick (for my sake) twixt both hosts, and leave his bold blood there.
He said no sooner, and retired; but forth he rusht, before
The foremost fighters, yet his eye, did every way explore
For doubt of ods; out flew his lance: the Trojans did abstain
While he was darting; yet his dart, he cast not off in vain:
For Menalippus (that rare son) of great Hycetaon; Anti^ ^ters Me^ppus.

(As bravely he put forth to fight) it fiercely flew upon;
And, at the nipple of his breast, his breast, and life did part.
And then, much like an eager hound, cast off at some young Heart, Simile.

Hurt by the hunter; that had left, his covert then, but new,
The great-in-warte- Antilochus, (O Menalippus) flew
On thy torn bosom, for thy spoil. But thy death could not lie
Hid to great Hector; who all haste, made to thee, and made fly
Antilochus; although in watre, he were at all parts skild:
But as some wild beast, having done, some shrewd turn, (either killed
The heardsman, or the heardsman dog,) and skulks away before
The gatherd multitude makes in: so Nestors son forbore, A Simile suiting the
other before to the life.

But after him, with horrid cries, both Hector and the rest
Showers of teare-thirstie lances powered; who having armed his breast
With all his friends, he turned it then. Then on the ships, all Troy,
Like raw-flesh-nourisht Lions rusht, and knew they did employ
Their powers to perfect Jove's high will; who still their spirits enflamed,
And quenched the Grecians; one, renownd; the other, often shamed;
For Hectors glory still he stood; and ever went about,
To make him cast the fleet such fire, as never should go our;
Heard The^ foul petition; and wished, in any wise,
The splendour of the burning ships, might satiate his eyes.
From him yet, the repulse was then, to be on Troy conferd,
The honor of it given the Greeks; which (thinking on) he stird
(With such addition of his spirit) the spirit Hector bore,
To burn the fleet; that of it self, was hot enough before.
But now he fared like Mars himself, so brandishing his lance;
As through the deep shades of a hill, a raging fire should glance;
Held up to all eyes by a hill; about his lips, a foam H^s (...) app^.

Stood; as when the Ocean is enraged; his eyes were overcome
With fervor, and resembl'd flames; set off, by his dark brows:
And from his temples, his bright helm, abhorred lightnings throws.
For Jove, from forth the sphere of stars, to his state, put his own;
And all the blaze of both the hosts, confined, in him alone.
And all this was, since after this, he had not long to live;
This lightning flew before his death: which Pallas was to give,
(A small time thence, and now prepared) beneath the violence
Of great Pelides. In mean time, his present eminence,
Thought all things under it: and he, still where he saw the stands
Of greatest strength, and brauest armed, there he would prove his hands:
Or no where; offering to break through But that past all his power,
Although his will, * were past all theirs; they stood him like a tower
Conioynd so firm: that as a rock, exceeding high and great;
And standing near the hoarie sea, bears many a boisterous threate
Of high-voic't winds, and billows huge, belcht on it by the storms;
So stood the Greeks great Hectors charge, nor stird the^ battellous forms.
He (guirt in fire, borne for the fleet) still rusht at every troop;
And fell upon it like a wave, high raisd, that then does stoop Simile.

Out from the clouds; grows as it stoops, with storms; then down does come
And cuffe a ship; when all her sides, are hid in brackish some;
Strong gales still raging in her sails; her sailers minds dismayed,
Death being but little from their lives: so Ioue-like Hector fraid,
And plyde the Greeks; who knew not what, would chance, for all their guards.
And as the banefull king of beasts, leapt in to Oxen herds, Simile.

Fed in the meddowes of a fenne, exceeding great; the beasts
In number infinite; among whom, (their heardsmen wanting breasts
To fight with Lions, for the price, of a black Oxes life,)
He here, and there iumps; first, and last, in his bloodthirstie strife,
Chac't and assaulted; and at length, down in the midst goes one,
And all the rest, sperst through the fenne: so now, all Greece was gone.
So Hector (in a flight from heaven, upon the Grecia^s cast)
Turned all their backs; yet only one, his deadly lance laid fast:
Brave Mycenaus Periphes, Cypraeus dearest son;
Who, of the heauens-Queene-lou'd-king, (great (...)) won
The grace, to greet in Ambassie, the strength of Hercules,
Was far superior to his sire; in feet, fight, noblenes
Of all the virtues; and all those, did such a wisdom guide,
As all Mycena could not match: and this man dignified,
(Still making greater his renown) the state of Priams son.
For his unhappy hasty foot, as he addressed to run,
Stuck in th'extreme ring of his shield, that to his ankles reach^;
And down he upwards fell, his fall, up from the center fetched
A huge sound, with his head, and helm; which Hect^ quickly spide;
Ran in, and in his worthy breast, his lances head did hide;
And slew about him all his friends, who could not give him aid:
They grieved; and of his god-like foe, fled so extreme afraid.
And now, amongst the nearest ships, that first were drawn to shore,
The Greeks were driven; beneath whose sides, behind them, and before;
And into them they powered themselves, and thence were driven again
Up to their tents, and there they stood: not daring to maintain
Their guards more outward; but betwixt, the bounds of Fear and Shame,
Cheered still each other; when the old man, that of the Grecian name,
Was called the pillar; every man, thus by his parents praid:
O friends, be men, and in your minds, let others shames be weighed;
Know you have friends besides your selves; possessions, parents, wives; Nestor
to the Greeks.

As well those that are dead to you, as those ye love with lives;
All sharing still their good, or bad, with yours: by these I pray,
That are not present (and the more, should therefore make ye wey
Their miss of you, as yours of them) that you will bravely stand
And this forced flight, you have sustained, at length yet countermand.
Supplies of good words, thus supplide, the deeds and spirits of all;
And so, at last Minerua cleared, the cloud that Jove let fall Minerua cleares
the darkness Jove powered on the Grecian army.

Before their eyes: a mighty light, flew beaming every way;
As well about their ships, as where, their darts did hotest play:
Then saw they Hector great in arms, and his associates;
As well all those, that then abstaind, as those that helped the fates;
And all their own fight at the fleet. Nor did it now content
Ajax, to keep down like the rest; he, up the hatches went,
Stalkt here and there; and in his hand, a huge great beadhooke held,
Twelve cubits long, and full of Iron; And as a man well skild
In horse, made to the martial race; when, (of a number more) A simile of Alax
managing the fight at the fleet.

He chooses four, and brings them forth, to run them all before
Swarms of admiring citizens, amids their towns highway;
And (in their full carier) he leapes, from one, to one; no stay
Enforced on any; nor fails he, in either seat or leap:
So Ajax with his beadhooke leapt, nimbly from ship to ship,
As actiuely, commanding all; them in their men, as well
As men in them: most terribly, exhorting to repel;
To save their navy, and their tents. But Hector nothing needs
To stand on exhortations now, at home; he strives for deeds.
And look how Jove's great Queen of birds, (sharp set) looks out for prey;
Simile of Hector

Knows floods that nourish wild-wing'd fowls, and (from her airie way)
Beholds where Cranes, Swans, Cormorands, have made their foody fall;
Darkens the river with her wings, and stoopes amongst them all:
So Hector flew amongst the Greeks, directing his command
(In chief) against one opposite ship; Jove with a mighty hand
Still backing him, and all his men: and then again there grew,
A bitter conflict at the fleet; you would have said, none drew
A weary breath, nor ever would; they laid so freshly on:
And this was it that fired them both; the Greeks did build upon
No hope, but what the field would yield; flight, an impossible course.
The Trojans all hope entertaind, that sword, and fire should force
Both ships, and lives, of all the Greeks; and thus, unlike affects
Bred like strenuitie in both. Great Hector still directs
His powers against the first near ship. T was that fair bark that brought
Protesilaus to those wars; and now, her self to naught,
With many Greek and T^oian lives; all spoyld about her spoil:
One slew another desperately; and close the deadly toil
Was pitched on both parts: not a shaft, nor farre-of striking dart,
Was used through all: one fight fell out, of one despitefull heart;
Sharp axes, twibils, two-hand swords, and spears with two heads borne,
Were then the weapons; fair short swords, with sanguine hilts still worn,
Had use in like sort; of which last, ye might have numbers viewed,
Drop with dissolved arms from their hands; as many downright hewed
From off their shoulders as they fought, their bawdricks cut in twain:
And thus the black blood flowed on earth, from soldiers hurt and slain.
When Hector once had seisd the ship, he clapped his fair broad hand
Fast on the stern, and held it there; and there gave this command: Hector
(...) (...) ship, to the Trojans.

Bring fire, and altogether showt; now Jove has drawn the veil
From such a day, as makes amends, for all his storms of hail:
By whose blessed light, we take those ships, that in despite of heaven
Took sea, and brought us worlds of woe: all, since our Peers were given
To such a lasinesse and fear; they would not let me end
Our lingering banes; and charge thus home; but keep home, and defend.
And so they ruled the men I led; but though Jove then withheld
My natural spirit: now by Jove, it is freed; and thus impeld.
This more inflamed them; in so much, that Ajax now, no more, (...) (...) to
withdraw himself from the fight.

Kept up, he was so drowned in darts; a little he forbore
The hatches, to a seat beneath, of seven foot long; but thought
It was impossible to escape; he sat yet, where he fought,
And hurld out lances thick as hail, at all men that assaid
To fire the ship; with whom he found, his hands so ouerlaid,
That on his soldiers thus he cried: O friends, fight I alone?
Expect ye more walls at your backs? towns rampir'd, here are none;
No citizens to take ye in; no help in any kind;
We are, I tell you, in Troys fields; have naught but seas behind,
And foes before; far, far, from Greece; for shame, obey commands;
There is no mercy in the wars; your healthes lie in your hands.
Thus raged he, and powered out his darts: who ever he espied
Come near the vessel, armed with fire, on his fierce dart he died;
All that pleased Hector, made him mad: all, that his thanks would erne;
Of which twelve men, his most resolved, lay dead before his stern.
COMMENTARIVS.
a I must here be enforced (for your easier examination) of a simile before, to
cite the original words of it; which of all Homers translators and commentors
have been most grossly mistaken; his whole intent and sense in it, utterly
f^lsified. The simile illustrates the manner of Iunos parting from Jove, being
commanded by him to a business so abhorring from her will, is this:

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Which is thus converted ad verbum by Spondanus:

Sicut autem quando discurrit men's viri, qui per multam
Terram profectus, mentibus prudentibus considera^it,
Huc iueram vel illuc, cogitaritque multa;
Sic cito properans peruolauit veneranda Juno.
Which Lauren. Valla in prose thus translates.

Subuolauit Juno in coelum, eadem festinatione, ac celeritate, qua men's
prudentis hominis, and qui multum terrarum peragrauit, recursat, cum multa sibi
agenda instant, huc se conferat an illuc.

Eobanus Hessus in verse thus:

Tam subito, quam sana viri men's plura scientis,
Quique peragrarit vastae loca plurima terrae,
Multa mouens animo, nunc huc, nunc auolat illuc.
To this purpose likewise the Italian and French copies have it. All
understanding Homers intent was (as by the speediness of a man's thought or
mind) to illustrate Iunos swiftness in ha^ing about the commandment of
Jupiter, which was utterly otherwise: viz. to show the distraction of Iunos
mind, in going against her will, and in her despite about Jove's commandment,
which all the history before, in her inueterate and inflexible grudge to do any
thing for the good of the Trojans, confirms without question. Besides, her
mor^tie, and solemn appearance amongst the gods and goddesses, (which Themis
notes in her looks) shows, if she went willingly, much less swiftly about
that business. Nor can the illustration of swiftnes be Homers end in this
simile, because he makes the man's mind, to which he resembles her going,
stagger; inclining him to go this way, and that; not resolved which way to go:
which very poorly expresses swiftness, and as properly agrees with the
property of a wise man; when he has undertaken, and gone far in a journey,
not to know whether he should go forward or backward. Let us therefore examine
the original words.

(...), etc. Sicut vero quando discurrit vel prorumpit; vel cum impetu exurgit
men's viri, (...) signifying ruo, prorumpo, vel cum impetu exurgo: as having
traveled far on an irksome journey (as Juno had done for the Greeks;
faining to Jove and Venus, she was going to visit (...), multa nutrientes
fines terrae,) and then knows not whether he should go backward or forward,
sustaines a vehement discourse with himself, on what course to resolve: and
vexed in mind, (which the words, (...), express: being to be understood
mentibus amaris, vexatis, or distractis: with a spiteful, sorrowful, vexed, or
distracted mind: not mentibus prudentibus, as all most unwisely in this place
convert it: though in other places it intimates so much. But here the other
holds congruence with the rest of the simile; from which in the wise sense it
abhorres: (...) signifying amarus more properly then prudens; being translated
prudens merely metaphorically, acccording to the second deduction; where here
it is used more properly according to the first deduction: which is taken from
(...) the Larcher tree, whose gum is exceeding bitter; and because things
irksome and bitter, (as afflictions, crosses, etc.) are means to make men
wise, and take heed by others harms: therefore according to the second
deduction, (...) is taken for cautus or prudens. But now, that the (...) or
application seems to make with their sense of swiftness, the words (...),
being translated by them sic cito properans; it is thus to be turned in this
place, sic rapide and impetu pulsa, so snatchingly or headlongly driven, flew
Juno. As we often see with a clap of thunder, Doves or other fowls driven
headlong from their seats, not in direct flight; but as they would break
their necks with a kind of reeling: (...) being derived of (...) signifying
impetu ferri, vel furibundo impetu ferri: all which most aptly agrees with
Iunos enforced and wrathful parting from Jove, and doing his charge
distractedly. This for me; if another can give better, let him show it, and
take it. But in infinite other places is this divine Poet thus profaned; which
for the extreme ^bour I cannot yet touch at.

b (...), etc, Difficile est, it is a hard thing (says Minerua to Mars, when
she answers his anger for the slaughter of his son Ascalaphus) for Jove to
deliver the generation and birth of all men from death; which Commentors thus
understand; There were some men that never died; as Tython the husband of
Aurora, Chyron, Glaucus made a sea god, etc. and in holy Writ (as Spondanus
pleases to mix them) Enoc and Elias: but because these few were freed from
death, Mars must not look that all others were. But this interpretation (I
think) will appear to all men at first sight, both ridiculous and profane.
Homer making Minerua only jest at Mars here, (as she does in other places)
bidding him not storm that his son should be slain more then better borne,
stronger, and worthier men; for Jove should have enough to do (or it were hard
for Jove) to free all men from Death that are unwilling to die. This mine, with
the rest: the other others; accept which you please.

The end of the fifteenth Book.
THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Chilles, at Patroclus suite, does yield
His arms, and Myrmidons; which brought to field,
The Trojans fly. Patroclus has the grace
Of great Sarpedons death, sprung of the race
Of Jupiter; he having slain the horse
Of Thetis son, (fierce Pedasus,) the force
Of Hector does revenge, the much-ru'dend
Of most renowned Sarpedon, on the friend
Of Thetides; first, by Euphorbus, harmed
And by Apollos personal power disarmed.
Another Argument.
In (...), Patroclus bears the chance
Of death, imposd by Hectors lance.
THus fighting for this well built ship; Patroclus all that space
Stood by his friend, preparing words, to win the Greeeks his grace
With power of vncontained tears: and (like a fountain poured
In black streams, from a lofty rock) the Greeks, so plagued, deplored.
Achilles (ruthful for his tears) said: Wherefore weeps my friend
So like a girl, who, though she sees, her mother cannot tend Achilles chides
Patroclus for his tears.

Her childish humors, hangs on her, and would be taken up;
Still viewing her, with teare-drownd eyes, when she has made her stoop.
To nothing liker, I can shape, thy so unseemly tears;
What causes them? has any ill, solicited thine ears,
Befalne my Myrmidons? or news, from loved Phthia brought,
Told only thee? lest I should grieve, and therefore thus has wrought
On thy kind spirit? Actors son, the good Me^tius,
(Thy father) lives; and Peleus (mine) great son of Aeacus,
Amongst his Myrmidons; whose deaths, in duty we should mourn.
Or is it what the Greeks sustain, that does thy stomach turn?
On whom (for their injustice sake) plagues are so justly laid?
Speak man, let both know eithers heart. Patroclus (sighing said)
O Peleus son, (thou strongest Greek, by all degrees, that lives)
Still be not angry; our sad state, such cause of pity gives. Patroclus
answer to Achilles.

Our greatest Greeks lie at their ships, sore wounded; Ithachus,
King Agamemnon, Diomed, and good Eurypilus:
But these, much-medcine-knowing men (Physicians) can recure;
Thou yet vnmedcinable still; though thy wound, all endure.
Heaven bless my bosom from such wrath, as thou sooth'st as thy bliss,
(Unprofitably virtuous) How shall our progenies,
Borne in thine age, enjoy thine aid? when these friends in thy flower
Thou leau'st to such unworthy death? O idle, cruel power;
Great Peleus never did beget, nor Thetis, bring forth thee;
Thou, from the blew sea, and her rocks, deriu'st thy pedigree.
What so declines thee? If thy mind, shuns any augurie,
Related by thy mother Queen, from heavens foreseeing eye,
And therefore thou forsak'st thy friends; let me go ease their mones
With those brave relics of our host, thy mighty Myrmidons;
That I may bring to field more light, to Conquest then has been;
To which end grace me with thine arms, since any shadow seen
Of thy resemblance; all the power, of perjured Troy will fly,
And our so tired friends will breathe: our fresh-set-on supply
Will easily drive their wearied off. Thus (foolish man) he su'd
For his sure death; of all whose speech, Achilles first renu'd
The last part, thus: O worthy friend, what have thy speeches been? Achilles to
(...).

I shun the fight for Oracles? or what my mother Queen
Has told from Jove? I take no care, nor note of one such thing;
But this fit anger stings me still, that the insulting king,
Should from his equal take his right; since he exceeds in power.
This, (still his wrong) is still my grief; he took my Paramour
That all men gave: and whom I won, by virtue of my spear,
That (for her) ouerturn'd a Town. This rape he made of her,
And used me like a fugitive; an Inmate in a town,
That is no city libertine, nor capable of their gown.
But, bear we this, as out of date; it is past, nor must we still
Feed anger in our noblest parts; yet thus, I have my will
As well as our great king of men; for I did ever vow,
Never to cast off my disdain, till (as it falls out now)
Their miss of me, knocked at my fleet; and told me in their cries,
I was revenged, and had my wish, of all my enemies.
And so of this repeat enough: Take thou, my fame-blaz'd arms,
And my fight-thirstie Myrmidons, lead to these hot alarmes.
Whole clouds of Trojans circle us, with hateful eminence:
The Greeks shut in a little shore; a sort of citizens
Skipping upon them: all because, their proud eyes do not see
The radiance of my helmet there, whose beams had instantly
Thrust back, and all these ditches filled, with carrion of their flesh,
If Agamemnon had been kind: where now, they fight as fresh,
As thus far they had put at ease; and at our tents contend.
And may; for the repulsiue hand, of Diomed, does not spend
His raging darts there, that their Death, could fright out of our fleet:
Nor from that head of enmity, can my poor hearers meet
The voice of great Atrides now: now Hectors only voice,
Breaks all the air, about both hosts; and with the very noise,
Bred by his loud encouragements, his forces fill the field,
And fight the poor Achaians down. But on; put thou my shi^ld
Betwixt the fire-plague and our fleet: rush bravely on, and turn
Wars tide as headlong on their throtes. No more let them aiourne
Our sweet-home-turning: but observe, the charge I lay on thee
To each least point, that thy ruled hand, may highly honor me;
And get such glory from the Greeks, that they may send again
My most sweet wench, and gifts to boot; when thou have cast a rain
On these so headstrong citizens, and forced them from our fleet.
With which grace, if the god of sounds, thy kind egression greet; Jupiter
called the god of sounds for the chief sound his thunder.

Retire, and be not tempted on (with pride, to see thy hand
Rain slaughterd carcasses on earth) to run forth thy command
As far as Ilion; left the gods, that favor Troy, come forth
To thy encounter; for the Sun, much loves it; and my worth
(In what thou suffer'st) will be wronged, that I would let my friend
Assume an action of such weight, without me; and transcend
His friends prescription; do not then, affect a further fight,
Then I may strengthen: let the rest, (when thou have done this right)
Perform the rest. aO would to Jove, thou Pallas, and thou Sun,
That not a man housd underneath, those towers of Ilion,
Nor any one of all the Greeks, (how infinite a sum
Soever, altogether make) might live vnouercome:
But only we two (scaping death) might have the thundering down
Of every stone, stuck in the walls, of this so sacred town.
Thus spoke they only twixt themselves. And now the foe no more
Could Ajax stand, being so oppressed, with all the iron store
The Trojans powered on; with whose darts, and with Jove's will beside,
His powers were cloyd, and his bright helm, did deafning blows abide;
His plume, and all head* ornaments, could never hang in rest:
His arm yet labored up his shield; and, having done their best,
They could not stir him from his stand; although he wrought it out
With short respirings, and with sweat; that ceaseless flowed about
His reeking lims: no least time given, to take in any breath;
Ill strengthened ill; when one was up, another was beneath.
Now Muses, you that dwell in heaven, the dreadful mean inspire
That first enforced the Grecian fleet, to take in Trojan fire:
First Hector with his huge broad sword, cut off, at setting on,
The head of Ajax Ashen lance; which Ajax seeing gone;
And that he shook a headless spear (a little while unware)
His wary spirits told him straight, the hand of heaven was there,
And trembled under his conceit; which was, bthat it was Jove's deed:
Who, as he pold off his darts heads; so, sure he had decreed,
That all the counsels of their war, he would polle off like it,
And give the Trojans victory: so, trusted he his wit,
And left his darts. And then the ship, was heapt with horrid brands
Ofkindling fire; which instantly, was seen through all the strands,
In vnextinguishible flames, that all the ship embraced:
And then Achilles beat his thighs; cried out, Patroclus, haste,
Make way with horse; I see at fleet, a fire of fearful rage:
Arm, arm, lest all our fleet it fire, and all our power engage;
Arm quickly, I Will bring up the troops. To these so dreadful wars
Patroclus, in Achilles arms, (enlightened all with stars,
And richly ameld) all haste made: he wore his sword, his shield,
His huge-plum'd helm; and two such spears, as he could nimbly wield.
But the most famed Achilles spear, big, solid, full of weight,
He only left, of all his arms; for that, far past the might
Of any Greek to shake, but his; Achilles only i^e
Shook that huge weapon; that was given, by Chyron to his sire,
Cut from the top of Pelion, to be Heroes deaths.
His steeds, Automedon straight joined; like whom no man that breaths
(Next Peleus son) Patroclus loved; for like him, none so great Automedon
friend to Patro clus, and mana ger of Achilles horses.

He found, in faith, at every fight, nor to out*looke a threat:
Automedon did therefore guide (for him) Achilles steeds,
( Xanthus, and Balius swift as wind) begotten by the seeds
Of Zephyr, and the Harpie borne, Pordarge; in a meade
Close to the wauie Ocean, where that fierce Harpye feade.
Automedon joined these before, and with the hindmost geres
He fastn'd famous Pedasus, whom, from the massakers
Made by Achilles, when he took, Eetions wealthy town,
He brought; and (though of mortal race) yet gave him the renown
To follow his immortal horse. And now, before his tents,
Himself had seen his Myrmidons, in all habiliments
Of dreadful war: And when ye see (upon a mountain bred) A simile most
lively expressiu^.

A den of Wolves, (about whose hearts, vnmeasur'd strengths are fed)
New come from currie of a Stagge; their jaws all blood-besmeard;
And when from some black water-fount, they altogether herd;
There having plentifully lapt, with thin, and thrust out tongs,
The top and clearest of the spring; go belching from their lungs
The clotterd gore; look dreadfully, and entertain no dread,
Their bellies gaunt; all taken up, with being so rawly fed:
Then say, that such, in strength, and look, were great Achilles men,
Now orderd for the dreadful fight: and so with all them then
Their Princes, and their Chiefes did show, about their Generals friend;
His friend, and all, about himself: who chiefly did intend The powers
Achilles brought to Troy.

Th'embattelling of horse, and foot. To that siege, held so long,
Twice five and twenty sail he brought; twice five and twenty strong
Of able men, was every sail: five Colonels he made
Of all those forces, trusty men; and all of power to lead,
But he, of power, beyond them all. Menesthius was one,
That ever wore discolored arms; he was a rivers son
That fell from heaven, and good to drink, was his delightful stream:
His name, unwearied Sperchius; he loved the lovely dame
Fair Polydora, Peleus seed; and dear in Borus sight,
And she, to that celestial flood, gave this Menesthius light:
A woman, mixing with a god. Yet Borus bore the name
Of father to Menesthius: he marrying the dame,
And giving her a mighty dowre; he was the kind descent
Of Perieris. The next man, renowned with regiment,
Was strong Eudorus; brought to life, by one supposd a maid;
Bright Polymela (Phylas seed;) but had the wanton played,
With Argus-killing Mercury; who (fired with her fair eyes
As she was singing in the quire, of her that makes the cries
In clamorous hunting, and does bear, the crooked bow of gold)
Stole to her bed, in that chaste room, that Phebe chaste did hold;
And gave her that swift-warrelicke son, ( E^dirys) brought to light
As she was dancing: but as soon, as she that rules the plight Eudorus borne
as Polymela his mother was dancing.

Of laboring women, easd her throws; and showed her ^onne the Sun,
Strong Echeclaeus, Actors heir; wooed earnestly, and won
Her second favor, feeing her, with gifts of infinite prise;
And after brought her to his house; where, in his grandsires eyes,
(Old Phylas) Polymelas son, obtaind exceeding grace,
And found as careful bringing up, as of his natural race
He had descended. The third chief, was fair Memalides Memalides the third
Collonell.

Pysandrus; who in skill of darts, obtaind supremest praise
Of all the Myrmidons, except, their Lords companion.
The fourth charge aged Phoenix had. The fifth, Alcimedon, Phoenix the fourth.

Son of Laercus, and much famed. All these digested thus (...) the fif^h.

In fit place, by the mighty son, of royal Peleus;
This stern remembrance he gave all: You Myrmidons, (said he) Achilles to his
Myrmidons.

Lest any of you should forget, his threatenings used to me
In this place; and through all the time, that my just anger reigned;
Attempting me with bitter words, for being so restrained
(For my hot humor) from the fight: remember them, as these:
Thou cruel son of Peleus, whom she that rules the seas,
Did only nourish with her gall; thou do ungently hold
Our hands, against our wills, from fight; we will not be controld;
But take our ships and sail for home; before we loyter here,
And feed thy fury. These high words, exceeding often were
The threats, that in your mutinous troops, ye used to me, for wrath
To be detaind so from the fi^ld: now then, your splenes may bath
In sweat of those great works ye wished; now he that can employ
A generous heart, go fight, and fright, these bragging sons of Troy.
This set their minds, and strengths on fire; the speech enforcing well,
Being used in time; but being their kings, it much more did impell;
And closer rusht-in all the troops. And, as for buildings hie, (...).

The Mazon lays his stones more thick, against th'extremitie
Of wind and weather; and even then, if any storm arise,
He thickens them the more for that; the present act so plies
His honest mind to make sure work. So, for the high estate
This work was brought to, these men's minds, (according to the rate)
Were raisd, and all their bodies joined: but there well-spoken king,
With his so timely-thought-on speech, more sharp made valors sting;
And thickn'd so their targets bost; so all their helmets then;
That shields propt shields; helmes helmets knocked, and men encouraged men.
Patroclus, and Automedon, did arm before them all Patroclus and Automedon
arm together.

Two bodies, with one mind informed; and then the General,
Betook him to his private Tent, where (from a coffer wrought
Most rich and curiously; and given, by Thetis, to be brought
In his own ship, top-fild with vests; warm robes to check cold wind;
And tapistries, all golden fringed, and curled with thrumbs behind:
He took a most vnualewed boule, in which none drank but he; Achilles
sacrifice for his friends safe return.

Nor he, but to the deities; nor any deity,
But Jove himself was served with that; and that he first did cleanse
With sulphur, then with fluences, of sweetest water rense.
Then washed his hands, and drew himself, a boule of mighty wine;
Which (standing midst the place enclosde, for services divine,
And looking up to heaven and Jove, who saw him well) he poured
Upon the place of sacrifice, and humbly thus implored:
Great Dodonaeus, President, of cold Dodonaes towers; Achilles (...).

Divine Pelasgicus, that dwell'st, far hence; about whose bowres
Th'austere prophetique Selli dwell, that still sleep on the ground,
Go bare, and never cleanse their feet: as I before have found
Grace to my vows, and hurt to Greece, so now my prayres intend.
I still stay in the gatherd fleet, but have dismissed my friend
Amongst my many Myrmidons, to danger of the dart.
O grant his valor my renown; arm with my mind his heart,
That Hectors self may know, my friend, can work in single war;
And not then only show his hands, so hot and singular,
When my kind presence seconds him: but, fight he nere so well;
No further let him trust his fight: but when he shall repel
Clamor and Danger from our fleet, vouchsafe a safe retreat
To him and all his companies, with fames and arms complete.
He prayed, and heavens great Counselor, gave satisfying ear,
To one part of his orisons, but left the other there:
He let him free the fleet of foes, but safe retreat denide.
Achilles left that utter part, where he his zeal applide;
And turned into his inner tent; made fast his cup; and then
Stood forth, and with his mind beheld, the foes fight and his men,
That followed his great minded friend, embattail'd, till they brake
With gallant spirit upon the foe: And as fell waspes, that make Simile.

Their dwellings in the broad high way; which foolish children use
(Their cottages being near their nests) to anger and abuse
With ever vexing them, and breed (to sooth their childish war)
A common ill to many men; since if a traveler
(That would his iourneys end apply, and pass them vnassayd)
Come near and vex them, upon him, the childrens faults are laid;
For on they fly, as he were such, and still defend their own:
So fared it with the fervent mind, of every Myrmidon,
Who poured themselves out of their fleet, upon their wanton foes,
That needs would stir them, thrust so near; and cause the overthrows
Of many others that had else, been never touched by them,
Nor would have touched. Patroclus then, put his wind to the stream, Patroclus
to the (...).

And thus exhorted: Now my friends, remember you express
Your late-v^g'd virtue, and renown, our great Aeacides;
That he being strongst of all the Greeks, his eminence may dim
All others likewise in our strengths, that far off imitate him.
And Agamemnon now may see, his fault as general,
As his place high; dishonoring him, that so much honors all.
Thus made he sparkle their fresh fire, and on they rusht; the fleet
Filled full her hollow sides with sounds, that terribly did greet
The Amazed Trojans: and their eyes, did second their amaze,
When great Men^tius son they saw, and his friends armor blaze; The terror of
Patroclus to the Trojans.

All troops stood troubled with conceit, that Peleus son was there;
His anger cast off at the ships; and each looked every where
For some authority to lead, the then prepared flight.
Patroclus greeted with a lance, the region where the fight
Made strongest tumult; near the ship, Protesilaus brought,
And struck Pyrechmen, who before, the faire-helmd P^ons fought,
Led from Amydon, near whose walls, the broad streamed Axius flows.
Through his right shoulder flew the dart, whose blow struck all the blows
Pyrechmen slain by Patroclus, and the (...).

In his power, from his powrelesse arm; and down he groaning fell:
His men all flying (their Leader fled.) This one dart did repel
The whole guard placed about the ship; whose fire extinct, half burned
The Paeons left her; and full cry, to clamorous flight returned.
Then spread the Greeks about their ships; triumphant tumult flowed:
And as from top of some steep hill, the lightner strips a clowd, Simile.

And lets a great sky out from heaven; in whose delightsome light,
All prominent foreheads, forests, towers, and temples cheer the sight:
So cleared these Greeks, this Trojan cloud; and at their ships and tents
Obtained a little time to breathe, but found no present vents
To their inclusions; nor did Troy (though these Paeonians fled)
Lose any ground, but from this ship, they needfully turned head.
Then every man, a man subdude; Patroclus in the thigh
Struck Areilicus; his dart, the bone did break, and fly
Quite through, and sunk him to the earth. Good Menelaus slew
Accomplished Thoas, in whose breast (being naked) his lance he threw,
Above his shield, and freed his soul. Phylides (taking note
That bold Amphidus bent at him) prevented him, and smote
His thighs extreme part, where (of man) his fattest muscle lies,
The nerves torn with his lances pile, and darkness closde his eyes.
Antilochus, Atymnius seizd, his steel lance did impresse
His first three guts, and loosd his life. At young Nestorides,
Maris, Atymnius bother flew; and at him, Thrasimed,
(The brother to Antilochus) his eager Iauelins head,
The muscles of his arm cut out, and shiuer'd all the bone;
Night closde his eyes; his liuelesse corse, his brother fell upon.
And so by two kind brothers hands, did two kind brothers bleed:
Both being divine Sarpedons friends; and were the darting seed
Of Amisodarus, that kept, the bane of many men,
Abhord Chim^ra; and such bane, now caught his childeren.
Ajax Oileades did take, Cleobulus alive,
Inuading him, (staid by the prease) and at him then let drive,
With his short sword, that cut his neck; whose blood warmed all the steel:
And cold Death, with a violent fate, his sable eyes did secle.
Peneleus and Lycon, cast, together off their darts;
Both mist, and both together then, went with their swords; in parts
The blade and hilt went, laying on, upon the helmets height;
Peneleus sword caught Lycons neck, and cut it thorough quite.
His head hung by the very skin. The swift Meriones,
(Pursuing flying Acamas) just as he got access
To horse and chariot, ouertooke, and took him such a blow
On his right shoulder, that he left, his chariot, and did strew
The dustie earth; life left his lims, and night his eyes possessed.
Idomenaeus his stern dart, at Erymas addressed,
As (like to Acamas) he fled; it cut the sundry bones
Beneath his brain, betwixt his neck, and foreparts, and so runs
(Shaking his teeth out) through his mouth; his eyes all drowned in blood:
So through his nostrils and his mouth (that now dart-open stood)
He breathed his spirit. Thus had death, from every Grecian Chief,
A Chief of Troy. For, as to Kids, or Lambs, their cruelst thief Simil^.

(The Wolf) steals in; and when he sees, that by the shepherds sloth,
The dams are sperst about the hills; then serves his ravenous tooth
With ease, because his prey is weak: So served the Greeks their foes,
Discerning well, how shrieking flight, did all their spirits dispose;
Their biding virtues quite forgot; And now the natural spleen
That Ajax bore to Hector, still, by all means would have been
Within his bosom with a dart: but he, that knew the war,
(Well covered in a well-lin'd shield) did well perceive how far
The arrows and the iauelins reached, by being within their sounds
And ominous singings; and observed, the there-inclining bounds
Of Conquest, in her aid of him, and so obeyed her change;
Took safest course for him and his, and stood to her as strange.
And as when Jove intends a storm, he lets out of the stars Simile.

From steep Olympus, a black cloud, that all heavens splendour bars
From men on earth: so from the hearts, of all the Trojan host,
All comfort lately found from Jove, in flight and cries was lost.
Nor made they any fair retreat; Hectors unruly horse,
Would needs retire him; and he left, engaged his Trojan force;
Forced by the steepness of the dike, that in ill place they took,
And kept them that would feign have gone. Their horses quite forsook
A number of the Trojan kings, and left them in the dike;
Their chariots in their foreteames broke. Patroclus then did strike
While steel was hot, and cheered his friends; nor meant his enemies good:
Who when they once began to fly, each way received a flood,
And chok't themselves with drifts of dust. And now were clouds begot
Beneath the clouds; with flight, and noise; the horse neglected not
Their home intendments; and where rout, was busiest, there poured on
P^troclus most exhorts and threats; and then lay overthrown
Numbers beneath their axle-trees, who (lying in flights stream)
Made th'after chariots jot and iumpe, in driving ou^r them.
The Immortal horse Patroclus rode, did pass the dike with ease,
And wished the depth and danger more: and Menetiades
As great a spirit had to reach, retiring Hectors have;
But his fleet horse had too much law, and fetched him off too fast.
And as in Autumn the black earth, is laden with the storms, Simile.

That Jove in gluts of rain poures down; being angry with the forms
Of iugdement in authorisde men, that in their courts maintain
(With violent office) wrested laws, and (fearing gods, nor men)
Exile all justice; for whose faults, whole fields are overflowed,
And many valleys cut away, with torrents headlong thrown,
From neighbor mountains; till the sea, receive them, roaring in;
And judged men's labors then are vain, plagued for their Judges sin:
So now the foul defaults of some, all Troy were laid upon:
So like those torrents roared they back, to windy Ilion;
And so like tempests, blew the horse, with rauishing back again
Those hot a^sailants, all their works, at fleet now rendered vain.
Patroclus (when he had dispersed, the foremost Phalanxes)
Called back his forces to the fleet, and would not let them prease
(As they desired) too near the town; but twixt the ships and flood,
And their steep rampire, his hand steept, Revenge in seas of blood.
Then Pronous was first that fell, beneath his fiery lance,
Which struck his bare breast, near his shield. The second, Thestors chance
(Old Enops son) did make himself; who shrinking, and set close
In his fair seat (even with th'approch, Patroclus made) did lose
All manly courage; insomuch, that from his hands, his raines
Fell flowing down; and his right iaw, Patroclus lance, attaines;
Struck through his teeth, and there it stuck, and by it, to him drew
Dead Thestor to his chariot: it showed, as when you view Simile.

An Anglet from some prominent rock, draw with his line and hook
A mighty fish out of the sea: for so the Greek did pluck
The Trojan gaping from his seat; his jaws op't with the dart;
Which when Patroclus drew, he fell; his life and breast did part.
Then rusht he on Eryalus, at whom he hurled a stone,
Which struck his head so in the midst, that two was made of one;
Two ways it fell, cleft through his caske: and then Tlepolemus,
Epaltes, Damastorides, Euippus, Echius,
Ipheas, bold Amphoterus, and valiant Erymas,
And Polymelus (by his sire, surnamed Argeadas)
He heapt upon the much-fed earth. When Jove's most worthy son
(Divine Sarpedon) saw these friends thus stayed, and others run; ^arpedon to
the (...).

O shame! why fly ye, then he cride? now show ye feet enough:
O^, keep your way; my self will meet, the man that startles you;
To make me understand his name, that flants in conquest thus,
And has so many able knees, so soon dissolved to us.
Down iumpt he from his chariot; down leapt his foe as light:
And as on some farre-looking rock, a cast of Vultures fight, Simile.

Fly on each other, strike, and trusse, part, meet, and then stick by,
Tug, both with crooked beakes, and seres; cry, fight; and fight, and cry:
So fiercely fought these angry kings, and showed as bitter gals.
Jove (turning eyes to this stern fight) his wife and sister calls, (...) to
(...) (...) the fate of (...).

And (much moved for the Lycian Prince) said: O that to my son,
Fate, by this day, and man should cut, a thread so nobly spunne.
Two minds distract me; if I should, now ravish him from fight,
And set him safe in Lycia; or give the Fates their right.
Austere Saturnius, (she replide) what unjust words are thei^e? (...) to (...).

A mortal long since marked by Fate, would thou immortalise?
Do; but by no god be approved; free him, and numbers more
(Sons of immortals) will live free, *that death must taste before
These gates of Ilion; every god, will have his son a god,
Or storm extremely. Give him then, an honest period,
In brave fight, by Patroclus sword, if he be dear to thee,
And grieves thee, for his danger'd life: of which, when he is free,
Let Death and Somnus bear him hence; till Lycias natural womb
Receive him from his brothers hands, and citizens; a Tomb
And column raisd to him; this is, the honor of the dead.
She said; and her speech ruled his power: but in his safeties stead,
For sad ostent of his near death, he steept his living name
In drops of blood, heaven swet for him, which earth drunk to his fame.
And now, as this high combat grew, to this too humble end;
Sarpedons death had this state more; it was vsherd by his friend,
And chariotere, brave Thrasimed; whom, in his bellies rim,
Patroclus wounded with his lance, and endless ended him.
And then another act of name, foreranne his princely fate;
His first lance missing, he let fly, a second that gave date Sarpedon (...)
Pedasus, one of ^chilles horse.

Of violent death to Pedasus; who (as he joyed to die
By his so honorable hand) did (even in dying) ney.
His ruin startled the other steeds; the geres cracked, and the raines
Strappl'd his fellows; whose mis-rule, Automedo^ restraines,
By cutting the intangling geres; and so dissundering quite,
The braue-slaine Beast; when both the rest, obeyed, and went foreright:
And then the royal combattants, fought for the final stroke, The last (...)
of Sarpedon and Patroclus.

When Lycias General mist again; his high-raisde (...) took,
Above his shoulder, empty way. But no such (...) flight
Patroclus let his spear perform, that on the breast did light,
Of his brave foe; where life's strings close, about the solid heart,
Impressing a recurelesse wound; his k^ees then, left their part,
And let him fall; when like an Oak, a Poplar, or a Pine,
New feld by arts-men on the hills; ^e stretched his form (...)
Before his horse and chariot. And as a Lion leapes Simile.

Upon a goodly yellow Bull, drives all the herd in heaps;
And under his vnconquerd jaws, the brave beast sighing di^s*
So sighed Sarpedon underneath, this prince of enemies;
Called Glaucus to him (his dear friend,) and said: Now (...) (...) (...) (...)
dying* to Glaucus his friend.

Much duty owe to fight, and arms* now, for my love, it (...)
Thy heart in much hand to approve, that war (...) harmefull* (...)
How active all thy forces are, this one hours act must show* (...)
First call our Lycian Captains up, look round, and bring up (...),
And all exhort, to stand like friends, about Sarpedons fall;
And spend thy self thy steel for me: for be assurd, no day
Of all thy life, to thy last hour, can clear thy black dismay
In woe and infamy for me; if I be taken hence,
Spoiled of mine arms; and thy renown, despoiled of my defense.
Stand firm then, and confirm thy men. This said; the bounds of death
Concluded all sight to his eyes, and to his nosthrils breath.
Patroclus (though his guard was strong) forced way through every doubt:
Climbed his high bosom with his foot, and plucked his iauelin out;
And with it dr^w the filme and strings, of his yet-panting heart;
And last, together with the pile, his princely soul did part.
His horse (spoiled both of guide and king, thick sno^ing, and amazed,
And apt to flight) the Myrm^dons, made nimbly to, and seaz'd.
Glaucus, to hear his friend ask aid, of him past all the r^st;
(Though well he knew his wound vncur'd) Confusion filled his breast, The sorrow
of Glaucus for Sarpedon, and prayer to Ph^bus.

Not to have good in any power; and yet so much good will.
And (laying his hand upon his wound, that pained him sharply still;
And was by Teucers hand set on, from their assailed steep wall,
In keeping hurt from other men) he did on Phoebus call
(The god of Medcines) for his cure: Thou king of cures (said he)
That art perhaps in Lycia, with her rich progeni^,
Or here in Troy; but any where, since thou have power to hear;
O give a hurt, and woeful man (as I am now) thine ear.
This arm sustaines a cruel wound, whose pains shoot every way,
Afflict this shoulder, and this hand, and nothing long can stay,
A flux of blood still issuing; nor therefore can I stand
With any enemy in fight, nor hardly make my hand
Support my lance; and here lies dead, the worthiest of men;
Sarpedon, worthy son to Jove; (whose power could yet abstain
From all aid in this deadly need) give thou then aid to me,
(O king of all aid to men hurt) assuage th'extremitie
Of this arms anguish; give it strength, that by my president,
I may excite my men to blows; and this dead corse prevent
Of further violence. He praid, and kind Apollo heard;
Allayd his anguish, and his wound, of all the black blood cleared,
That vexed it so; infusde fresh powers, into his weakened mind,
And all his spirits flowed with joy, that Phoebus stood inclined
(In such quick bounty) to his prayres. Then, as Sarpedon wild,
He cast about his greedy eye, and first of all instild
To all his Captains, all the stings, that could inflame their fight,
For good Sarpedon. And from them, he stretched his speedy pace,
TO Agenor, Hector, Venus son, and wise Polydamas;
And (only naming Hector) said: Hector, you now forget (...) (...) (...), to
Hector.

Your poor auxiliarie friends, that in your toiles have swet
Their friendlesse souls out, far from home; Sarpedon, that sustained
With Justice, and his virtues all, broad Lycia has not gained
The like guard for his person here; for yonder dead he lies,
Beneath the great Patroclus lance: but come, let your supplies
(Good friends) stand near him: O disdain, to see his corse defiled
With Grecian fury; and his arms, by their oppressions spoiled;
The Myrmidons are come enraged, that such a mighty boot
Of Greeks, Troys darts have made at fleet. This said, from head to foot
Grief struck their powers, past patience, and not to be restrained,
To hear news of Sarpedons death; who, though he appertained
To other cities; yet to theirs, he was the very Fort,
And led a mighty people there; of all whose better sort,
Himself was best. This made them run, in flames upon the foe;
The first man, Hector, to whose heart, Sarpedons death did go.
Patroclus stird the Grecian spirits; and first, the Aiaces, thus: Patroclus to
the Grecians, and particularly to both the (...).

Now brothers, be it dear to ^ou, to fight, and succor us,
As ever heretofore ye did, wi^ men first excellent.
The man lies slain, that first did scale, and raze the battlement,
That crowned our wall; the Lycian Prince. But if we now shall add
Force to his corse, and spoil his arms, a prise may more be had
Of many great ones, that for him, will put on to the death.
To this work, these were prompt enough; and each side orders
Those Phalanxes that most had rate, of resolutions;
The Troia^s, and the Lycian powers; the Greeks, and Myrmido^s.
These ran together for the corse, and closde with horrid cries;
Their armours thundering with the claps, laid on about the prise.
And Jove about the impetuous broile, pernicious night powered out,
As long as for his loved son, pernicious Labor fought.
The first of Troy, the first Greeks foiled, when, not the last indeed,
Amongst the Myrmidons was slain: the great Aiacleus seed;
Divine Epigeus, that before, had exercisde command
In fair Budaeus; but because, he laid a bloody hand
On his own sisters valiant son; To Peleus, and his Queen,
He came for pardon, and obtained; His slaughter being the mean
He came to Troy, and so to this. He ventured even to touch
The princely carcass, when a stone, did more to him, by much;
(Sent out of able Hectors hand) it cut his skull in twain,
And struck him dead. Patroclus (grieved, to see his friend so slain)
Before the foremost thrust himself: and as a Faulcon frayes Si^ile.

A flock of Stares or Caddesses; such fear brought his assayes
Amongst the Trojans, and their friends; and (angry at the heart,
As well as grieved) for him so slain: another stony dart,
As good as Hectors, he let fly, that dusted in the neck
Of Sthenelaus; thrust his head, to earth first, and did break
The nerves in sunder, with his fall; off fell the Troia^s too;
Even Hectors self, and all as far, as any man can throw,
(Prouokt for games, or in the wars, to shed an enemies soul)
A light, long dart. The first that turned, was he that did control
The Targatiers of Lycia; Prince (...), who to hell
Sent Bathycleus, Chalco^s son; he did in Hellas dwell,
And shined, for wealth and happiness, amongst the Myrmidons;
His bosoms midst the Iauelin struck, his fall gat earth with groans.
The Greeks grieved, and the Tro^ns joyed, for so renowm'd a man;
About whom stood the Grecians firm: and then the death began
On Troyes side by Meriones; he slew one great in war,
(...), On^tors son, the Priest of Jupiter,
Created in th'Idean hill. Betwixt his iaw and ear
The dart stuck fast, and loosde his soul; sad mists of Hate and Fear
Inuading him. Anchises son, dispatched a brazen lance
At bold Meriones; and hoped, to make an equal chance
On him, with bold (...); though under his broad shield
He lay so close. But he discerned, and made his body yield,
So low, that over him it flew, and, trembling took the ground;
With which, Mars made it quench his thirst; and since the head could wound
No better body; and yet thrown, from nere the worse a hand;
It turned from earth, and looked awrie. Aeneas let it stand, (...) (...) to
(...).

Much angry at the vain event; and told Meriones,
He escaped but hardly; nor had cause, to hope for such success
Another time; though well he knew, his dancing faculty,
By whose agilitie he escaped; for had his dart gone by
With any least touch, instantly, he had been ever slain.
He answered: Though thy strength be good, it cannot render vain (...) to (...).

The strength of others with thy jests; nor art thou so divine,
But when my lance shall touch at thee, with equal sp^d to thine,
Death will share with it, thy life's powers; thy confidence can shun
No more then mine, what his right claims. Men^tius noble son
Rebuk't Meriones, and said: What needst thou use this speech?
Nor thy strength is approved with words, (good friend) nor can we reach
The body, nor make the enemy yield, with these our counterbraues;
We must enforce the binding earth, to hold them in her graves.
If you will war, Fight; will you speak? give counsel; counsel, blows
Are th'ends of wars, and words; talk here, the time in vain bestows.
He said, and led, and nothing less, for any thing he said,
(His speech being seasoned with such right) the Worthy seconded.
And then, as in a sounding vale, (near neighbor to a hill) Simile.

Wood-fellers make a farre-heard noise, with chopping, chopping still,
And laying on, on blocks and trees: so they, on men laid lode,
And beat like noises into air, both as they struck and trod.
But (past their noise) so full of blood, of dust, of darts, lay smit
Divine Sarpedon, that a man, must have an excellent wit,
That could but know him; and might fail: so from his utmost head,
Even to the low plants of his feet, his form was altered.
All thrusting near it every way, as thick as flies in spring,
That in a sheepe-cote (when new milk, assembles them) make wing,
And buzze about the top-full pailes: nor ever was the eve
Of Jove auerted from the fight; he viewd, thought, ceaslesly,
And diversely upon the death, of great Achilles friend:
If Hector there (to wreake his son) should with his iauelin end
His life, and force away his arms, o^ still augment the field;
He then concluded, that the flight, of much more soul, should yield
Achilles good friend more renown; and that, even to their gates
He should drive Hector and his host: and so disanimates
The mind of Hector, that he mounts, his chariot, and takes Flight
Up with him, tempting all to her; affirming, his insight
Knew evidently, that the beam, of Jove's all-ordering scoles,
Was then in sinking on their side, surcharged with flocks of souls.
Then, not the noble Lycians staid, but left their slaughterd Lord
Amongst the corses common heap; for many more were poured
About, and on him; while Jove's hand, held out the bitter broile.
And now they spoiled Sarpedons arms; and to the ships the spoil
Was sent by Menaetiades. Then Jove, thus charged the Sun:
Haste, honored Phoebus, let no more, Greek violence be done Iou^ to Ph^bus.

To my Sarpedon; but his corse, of all the sable blood
And iauelins purged; then carry him, far hence to some clear flood,
With whose waves wash, and then embalme, each thorough-cl^nsed lim,
With our Ambrosia; which performed, divine weeds put on him:
And then to those swift mates, and twins, sweet Sleep and Death commit
His princely person, that with speed, they both may carry it
To wealthy Lycia; where his friends, and brothers will embrace,
And tomb it in some monument, as fits a Princes place.
Then flew Apollo to the fight, from the Idalian hill, Apollo sends (...)
pedo^s body by Sleep and Death to Lycl^.

At all parts putting into act, his great Commanders will:
Drew all the darts, washed, balm'd the corse; which (decked with ornament,
By Sleep and Death, those featherd twins) he into Lycia sent
Patroclus then, Automedon, commands to give his steeds
Large raines, and all way to the chase: so madly he exceeds
The strict commission of his friend; which had he kept, had kept
A black death from him. But Jove's mind, has evermore outstept
The mind of man; who both affrights, and takes the victory
From any hardiest hand, with ease; which he can justify,
Though he himself commands him fight: as now, he put this chase
In Menaetiades his mind. How much then weighs the grace
( Patroclus?) that Jove gives thee now, in scoles put, with thy death?
Of all these great and famous men, the honorable breath.
Of which, Adrestus first he slew, and next Autonous;
Epistor^, and Perimus; Pylartes, Elasus,
Swift Menalippus, Molius; all these were overthrown (...) ^ling the walls of
Troy, resisted by Phoebus.

By him, and all else, put in rout; and then proud Ilion
Had stoopt beneath his glorious hand: he raged so with his lance,
If Phoebus had not kept the tower, and helped the Ilians,
Sustaining ill thoughts against the Prince. Thrice to the prominence
Of Troys steep wall he bravely leapt: thrice Phoebus thrust him thence:
Obiecting his all-dazeling shield, with his resistlesse hand.
But fourthly, when (like one of heaven) he would have stird his stand,
Apollo threatened him, and said; Cease, it exceeds thy fate Apollo threatens
P^traclus.

(Forward Patroclus) to expugne, with thy bold lance, this state;
Nor under great Achilles powers, (to thine superior far)
Lies Troyes grave ruin. When he spoke, Patroclus left that war:
Leapt far back; and his anger shund. Hector detained his horse
Within the Scaean ports, in doubt, to put his personal force
Amongst the rout, and turn their heads, or shun in Troy the storm.
Apollo seeing his suspense, assumed the goodly form
Of Hectors uncle, Asius, the Phrygian Dymas son, Apollo in shape of Asius to
Hector.

Who near the deep Sangarius, had habitation;
Being brother to the Trojan Queen. His shape Apollo took;
And asked of Hector, why his spirit, so clear the fight forsook;
Affirming it was unfit for him: and wished his forces were
As much above his, as they moved, in an inferior sphere:
He should (with shame to him) be gone; and so bad, drive away
Against Patroclus, to approve, if he that gave them day,
Would give the glory of his death, to his preferred lance.
So left he him; and to the fight, did his bright head advance,
Mixed with the multitude, and stird, foul Tumult for the foe.
Then Hector bad Cebriones, put on; himself let go
All other Greeks within his reach, and only gave command,
To front Patroclus. He at him; iumpt down; his strong left hand
A Iauelin held; his right, a stone; a marble sharp; and such
As his large hand had power to gripe; and gave it strength as much
As he could lie to: nor stood long, in fear of that huge man
That made against him; but full on, with his huge stone he ran
Discharged, and drove it twixt the brows, of bold Cebriones:
Nor could the thick bone there prepared, extenuate so th'accesse,
But out it drove his broken eyes, which in the dust fell down;
And he diu'd after; which conceit, of diuing, took the son
Of old Menatius, who thus played, upon the others bane.
O heavens! for truth, this Trojan was, a passing active man; Patroclus (...)
at the fall of Cebriones.

With what exceeding ease he dives? as if at work he were
Within the fishie seas. This man, alone would furnish cheer
For twenty men; though twere a storm; to leap out of a sail,
And gather oisters for them all; he does it here as well;
And there are many such in Troy. Thus iested he so near
His own grave death; and then made in, to spoil the Chariotere,
With such a Lions force, and fate; as (often ruining,
Stals of fat oxen) gets at length, a mortal wound to sting
His soul, out of that ravenous breast, that was so insolent;
And so his life's bliss proves his bane: so deadly confident
Were thou Patroclus, in pursuit, of good Cebriones,
To whose defense now Hector leapt. The opposite address, A simile expressing
Patroclus encounter and Hectors.

These masters of the cry in war, now made, was of the kind
Of two fierce kings of beasts, opposd, in strife, about a Hind
Slain on the forehead of a hill; both sharp, and hungry set,
And to the Currie never came, but like two Deaths they met:
Nor these two entertained less mind, of mutual prejudice,
About the body; close to which, when each had pressed for prise,
Hector the head laid hand upon; which once gript, never could
Be forced from him; Patroclus then, upon the feet got hold,
And he pincht with as sure a nail: so both stood ^ugging there,
While all the rest, made eager fight, and grappl'd every where.
And as the East and South wind strive, to make a lofty wood Simile.

Bow to their greatness; barkie Elmes, wild Ashes, Beeches bowd
Even with the earth; in whose thick arms, the mighty vapors lie,
And toss by turns, all, either way; their leaves at randon fly,
Boughs murmr, and their bodies crack; and with perpetual din,
The Syluans falter, and the storms, are never to begin:
So raged the fight; and all from Flight, plucked her forgotten wings;
While some still stuck; still new wingd shafts, flew dancing from their
strings;
Huge stones sent after, that did shake, the shields about the corse,
Who now (in dusts soft forehead stretched) forgot his guiding horse.
As long as Phoebus turned his wheels, about the midst of heaven,
So long the touch of eithers darts, the falls of both made even:
But when his waine drew near the West, the Greeks past measure were
The abler soldiers, and so swept, the Trojan tumult clear
From off the body; out of which, they drew the hurl'd-in darts;
And from his shoulders stripped his arms; and then to more such parts
Patroclus turned his striving thoughts, to do the Trojans ill:
Thrice, like the god of war, he charged; his voice as horrible:
And thrice nine those three charges slew; but in the fourth assay,
O then Patroclus, showed thy last; the dreadful Sun made way
Against that onset; yet the Prince, discerned no deity;
He kept the prease so; and besides, obscured his glorious eye
With such felt darkness. At his back, he made a sudden stand,
And twixt his neck and shoulders laid, downright with either hand,
A blow so weighty, that his eyes, a giddie darkness took,
And from his head, his three-plum'd helm, the bounding violence shook,
That rung beneath his horses hooues; and like a water-spout,
Was crushed together with the fall. The plumes that set it out,
All spatterd with black blood and dust; when ever heretofore
It was a capital offense, to have, or dust, or gore
Defile a triple-feather'd helm; but on the head divine,
And youthful temples of their Prince, it used, untouched, to shine.
Yet now Jove gave it Hectors hands; the others death was near.
Besides whose lost and filed helm, his huge long weighty spear,
Well bound with iron, in his hand, was shiuerd, and his shield
Fell from his shoulders to his feet; the bawdricke strewing the field.
His Curets left him, like the rest; and all this only done
By great Apollo. Then his mind, took in confusion;
The vigorous knittings of his joints, dissolved; and (thus di^maid)
A Dardan (one of Panthus sons, and one that ouerlaid
All Trojans, of his place, with darts, swift footing, skill, and force,
In noble horsmanship; and one, that tumbled from their horse,
One after other, twenty men: and when he did but learn
The art of war; nay when he first, did in the field discern
A horse and chariot of his guide: this man, with all these parts
(His name Euphorbus) comes behind, and twixt the shoulders darts
Forlorn Patroclus, who yet lived, and the other (getting forth
His Iauelin) took him to his strength; nor durst he stand the worth
Of thee Patroclus, though disarmd; who yet (discomfited
By Phoebus, and Euphorbus wound) the red heap of the dead
He now too late shund, and retired. When Hector saw him yield,
And knew he yielded with a wound, he scoured the armed field;
Came close up to him, and both sides, struck quite through with his lance;
He fell, and his most weighty fall, gave fit tune to his chance.
For which, all Greece extremely mourned. And as a mighty strife Simile.

About a little fount, begins, and rises to the life
Of some fell Bore, resolved to drink; when likewise to the spring
A Lion comes, alike disposde; the Bore thirsts, and his King;
Both proud, and both will first be served; and then the Lion takes
Advantage of his sovereign strength; and the other (fainting) makes
Resign his thirst up with his blood: Patroclus (so enforced
When he had forced so much brave life) was, from his own diuorc't.
And thus his great Diuorcer brau'd; Patroclus, thy conceit, Hectors
insultation over Patroclus being woun ded under him.

Gave thee th'euersion of our Troy; and to thy fleet a freight
Of Trojan Ladies, their free lives, put all in bands by thee:
But (too much priser of thy self) all these are propt by me.
For these, have my horse stretched their hoofes, to this so long a war;
And I (far best of Troy in arms) keep off from Troy as far;
Even to the last beam of my life, their necessary day.
And here (in place of us and ours) on thee shall Vultures prey,
Poor wretch; nor shall thy mighty Friend, afford thee any aid,
That gave thy parting much deep charge; And this perhaps he said;
Martial Patroclus, turn not face, nor see my fleet before
The curets from great Hectors breast, all gilded with his gore,
Thou hew'st in pieces: if thus vain, were his far-stretcht commands;
As vain was thy heart to believe, his words lay in thy hands.
He languishing, replide: This proves, thy glory worse then vain, Patroclus
langu, to Hector.

That when two gods have given thy hands, what their powers did obtain,
(They conquering, and they spoiling me, both of my arms and mind,
It being a work of ease for them) thy soul should be so blind,
To ouersee their evident deeds, and take their powers to thee;
When, if the powers of twenty such, had dared t'encounter me,
My lance had strewn earth with them all. Thou only do obtain
A third place in my death; whom first, a harmfull fate has (...)
Effected by Latonas son; second and first of men,
Euphorbus. And this one thing more, concerns thee; note it then:
Thou shall not long survive thy self; nay, now Death calls for thee,
And violent fate; Achilles lance, shall make this good for me.
Thus death joined to his words, his end; his soul took instant wing,
And to the house that has no lights, descended, sorrowing
For his sad fate, to leave him young, and in his ablest age.
He dead; yet Hector asked him why, in that prophetique rage,
He so forespake him? when none knew, but great Achilles might
Prevent his death; and on his lance, receive his latest light.
Thus, setting on his side his foot, he drew out of his wound,
His brazen lance, and upwards cast, the body on the ground;
When quickly, while the dart was hot, he charged Autom^don, Hector charges
(...) Autom^don for Achilles horses.

(Divine guide of Achilles steeds) in great contention
To seize him to: but his so swift, and deathlesse horse, that fetch
Their gift to Peleus from the gods, soon raped him, from his reach.
COMMENTARIVS.
a (...), and c. These last verses in the original, by many (...) ancients
have suffered expunction; as being unworthy the mouth of an Hero, because he
(...) to make such a wish in them: which is as poorly conceipted of the
exp^gers, as the rest of the places in Homer, that have groned or laughed under
their (...). Achilles not out of his heart (which any true eye may see) wishing
it; but out of a (...) and delightsome humor, being merry with his friend in
private, which the verse following in part expresses:

(...).

Sic hi quidem talia inter se loquebantur. Inter se, intimating the meaning
aforesaid. But our divine Masters most (...) (...) the life of things, (which
is the soul of a Poem) is never respected nor (...) by his Interpreters only
standing pedantically on the Grammar and words, utterly ignorant of the sense
and grace of him.

b (...). etc. (...), etc. Agnouit autem Ajax in animo inculpato, operadeorum;
(...): exhorruitque. Another most ingenious and spritefull imitation of the
life, and ridiculous humor os Ajax, I must needs note here, because it flies
all his Translators and Interpreters; who take it merely for serious, when it
is apparently scopticall and ridiculous; with which our author would delight his
understanding Reader; and mix mirth with matter. He says, that Hector cut off
the head of Ajax lance, which he seeing, would needs affect a kind of
prophetique wisdom (with which he is never charged in Homer) and imagined
strongly, the cutting off his lances head, cast a figure thus deep; that as
Hector cut off that, Jove would utterly cut off the heads of their counsels to
that fight, and give the Trojans victory: which to take seriously and gravely,
is most dull (and as I may say) Aianticall: the voice (...) (which they expound
praecidebat, and indeed i^ tondebat; (...) signifying most properly tondeo)
helping well to decipher the Ironie. But to understand gravely that the cutting
off his lances head, argued Jove's intent to cut off their counsels, and to
allow the wit of Ajax for his so farre-fetcht apprehension: I suppose no man
can make less then idle, and witless. A plain continuance therefore it is of
Ajax humor, whom in diverse other places he plays upon: as in (...) him in the
eleventh book to a mill Ass, and else where to be noted hereafter.

c (...)] by Sleep and Death (which he ingeniously calls Twins) was the body
of Jove's son Sarpedon taken from the fight, and borne to Lycia. On which
place, Eustathius doubts, whether truly and indeed it was transferd to Lycia:
and he makes the cause of his doubt, this: That Death and Sleep are inania
quaedam, things empty and void; (...), not solid or firm persons, (...), but
quae nihil far possunt. And therefore he thought there was (...) quoddam;
that is, some void or empty sepulcher or monument prepared for that Hero in
Lycia, etc. or else makes another strange translation of it, by wonder; which
Spondanus thinks to have happened truly. But rather would interpret it merely
and nakedly apoeticall fiction: his reason I will forbear to utter because it
is unworthy of him. But would not a man wonder that our great and gra^e
Eustathius, would doubt whether Sleep and Death carried Sarpedons person
personally to Lycia: or not rather make no question of the contrary? Homer nor
any Poets end in such poetical relations, being to affirm the truth of things
personally done; but to please with the truth of their matchless wits, and
some worthy doctrine conveyed in it. Nor would Homer have any one believe the
personal transportance of Sarpedon by Sleep and Death, but only varieth and
graceth his Poem with these Prosopopeiaes, and delivers us this most ingenious
and grave doctrine in it: that the Heroes body, for which both those mighty
Hosts so mightily contended, Sleep and Death (those same quaedam inania) took
from all their personal and solid forces. Wherein he would further note to us,
that from all the bitterest and deadliest conflicts and tyrannies of the world,
Sleep and Death, when their worst is done, delivers and transfers men: a
little mocking withal, the vehement, and greedy prosecutions of tyrants, and
soldiers against, or for that, which two such deedlesse poor things takes
from all their Emperie. And yet, against Eustathius manner of sleighting their
powers, what is there of all things belonging to man, so powerful over him as
Death and Sleep? And why may not our Homer (whose words I hold with Spondanus
ought to be an vndisputable deed and authority with us) as well personate
Sleep and Death, as all men besides personate Love, Anger, Sloth, etc? Thus
only where the sense and soul of my most worthily reverenced Author is
abused, or not seen, I still insist; and gleane these few poor corn ears
after all other men's haruests.

The end of the sixteenth Book.
THE XVII. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Dreadful fight, about Patroclus corse.
Euphorbus slain, by Menelaus force.
Hector, in th'armour of Aeacides.
Antilochus, relating the decease
O slain Patroclus, to fair Thetis son.
The body from the striving Toians won.
The Aiaces, making good the after field,
Make all the subject that this book does yield.
Another Argument.
In Rho, the ventrous hosts maintain
A slaughterous conflict, for the slain.
NOr could his slaughter rest conceald, from Menelans ear;
Who flew amongst the foremost fights, and with his targe and spear
Circled the body: as much grieved, and with as tender heed
To keep it theirs; as any damme, about her firstborn seed;
Not proving what the pain of birth, would make the love before;
Nor to pursue his first attaint, Euphorbus spirit forbore;
But seeing Menelaus chief, in rescue of the dead, Euphorbu^ to Menelaus. This
Euphorbus was he, that in Ovid, Pythagoras says he was in the wars of Troy.

Assaid him thus: Atrides, cease, and leave the slaughtered
With his embrew'd spoil, to the man, that first, of all our state
And famous succors, in fair fight, made passage to his fate;
And therefore suffer me to wear, the good name I have won
Amongst the Trojans; lest thy life, repay what his has done.
O Jupiter (said he, incenst) Thou art no honest man Menclaus to Euphorbus.

To baost, so past thy power to do. Not any Lion can;
Nor spotted Leopard; nor Bore, (whose mind is mightiest
In pouring fury from his strength) advance so proud a crest
As Panthus fighting progeny. But Hyperenors pride,
That joyed so little time his youth; when he so vilifide
My force in arms, and called me worst, of all our cheualrie,
And stood my worst; might teach ye all, to shun this surcuidrie:
I think he came not safely home, to tell his wife his acts.
Nor less right of thy insolence, my equal fate exacts;
And will obtain me, if thou stay'st; retire then, take advise:
A fool sees naught, before it is done; and still too late is wise.
This moved not him, but to the worse; since it renewed the sting,
That his slain brother shot in him; rememberd by the king,
To whom he answered: Thou shall pay, for all the pains endured
By that slain brother; all the wounds, sustaind for him, recur'd
With one, made in thy heart by me. It Is true, thou made his wife
A heavy wid ow; when her joys, of wedlock scarce had life;
And hurt'st our parents with his grief; all which thou gloriest in:
Forespeaking so, thy death, that now, their griefs end shall begin.
To Panthus, and the snowy hand, of Phrontes, I will bring
Those arms, and that proud head of thine; and this laborious thing
Shall ask no long time to perform: nor be my words alone,
But their performance; Strength, and Fight, and Terror thus sets on.
This said, he struck his all-round shield; nor shrunk that, but his lance
Euphorbus slain by Menelaus.

That turned head in it: then the king, assaid the second chance,
First praying to the king of gods, and his dart, entry got
(The force much driving back his foe) in low part of his throat,
And ran his neck through. Then fell pride, and he, and all with gore
His locks, that like the Graces were; and which he ever wore
In gold and silver ribands wrapped; were piteously wet.
And, when alone, in some choice place, a husbandman has set Simile*

The young plant of an Olive tree, whose root being ever fed
With plenty of delicious springs; his branches bravely spread,
And all his fresh and lovely head, grown curld with snowy flowers,
That dance, and flourish with the winds, that are of gentlest powers:
But when a whi^lewind (got aloft) stoopes, with a sudden gale;
Tears from his head his tender curles, and tosseth there withal
His fixed root, from his hollow mines: it well presents the force
Of Spartas king; and so the Plant, Euphorbus, and his Corse.
He slain; the king stripped off his arms, and with their worthy prise,
(All fearing him) had clearly past: if heavens fair eye, of eyes,
Had not (in envy of his acts) to his encounter stird
The Mars-like Hector; to whose powers, the rescue he preferred
Of those fair arms: and took the shape, of Mentas (Colonel
Of all the Cicones that near, the Thracian Hebrus dwell)
Like him, he thus put forth his voice. Hector, thou scow^'st the field
In head strong pursuit of those horse, that hardly are compeld
To take the draught of chariots, by any mortals hand.
The great grand child of Aeacus, has only their command; Achilles.

Whom an immortal mother bore: while thou attendst on these,
The young Atrides in defense, of Menatiades, Patroclus, so call led, of
Me^etius his father.

Has slain Euphorbus. Thus the god, took troop with men again,
And Hector (heartily perplexed) looked round, and saw the slain,
Still shedding rivers from his wound: and then took envious view
Of brave Atrides with his spoil; in way to whom he flew,
Like one of Vulcans quenchlesse flames: Atrides heard the cry Note the manly!
and wise discourse of Menelaus (...) himself,* (...) Hector ad. uancing
toward him.

That ever vsherd him, and sighed, and said: O me, if I
Should leave these goodly arms, and him, that here lies dead for me;
I fear I should offend the Greeks. If I should stay, and be
Alone with Hector and his men, I may be compast in;
Some slight or other they may use. Many may quickly win
Their wills of one; and all Troy comes, ever where Hector leads.
But why (dear mind) do thou thus talk? when men dare set their heads
Against the gods, (as sure they do, that fight with men they love)
Straight one or other plague ensues: it cannot therefore move
The grudge of any Greek, that sees, I yield to Hector; he
Still fighting with a spirit from heaven. And yet if I could see
Brave Ajax; he and I, would stand, though against a god; and sure
It Is best I seek him: and then see, if we two can procure
This Corses freedom through all these: a little then let rest
The body, and my mind be still; of two bads choose the best.
In this discourse, the troops of Troy, were in with him; and he
Made such a Lionlike retreat; as when the herdsmen see
The royal savage; and come on, with men, dogs, cries, and spears, (...)*

To clear their horned stall; and then, the kingly heart he bears,
(With all his high disdain) falls off: so, from this ods of aid
The golden-haird Atrides fled: and, in his strength, displaid
Upon his left hand, him he wished; extremely busied
About encouraging his men; to whom, an extreme dread
Apollo had infusde: the king, reached Ajax instantly,
And said; Come friend, let us two haste, and from the tyranny Menelaus to
(...).

Of Hector, free Patroclus corse. He strait, and gladly went;
And then was Hector haling of, the body, with intent
To spoil the shoulders of the head, and give the dogs the rest;
(His arms he having prisde before.) When Ajax brought his breast
To bar all further spoil; with that, he had sure, Hector thought
It Was best to satisfy his spleen; which temper Ajax wrought
With his mere sight, and Hector fled: the arms he sent to Troy,
To make his citizens admire, and pray Jove send him joy.
Then Ajax gatherd to the corse, and hid it with his targe:
There setting down as sure a foot, as (in the tender charge
Of his loved whelps) a Lion does: two hundred hunters near, Simile.

To give him onset; their more force, make him the more austere;
Drownes all their clamors in his (...); darts, dogs, does all despise,
And lets his rough brows down so low, they cover all his eyes.
So Ajax looked, and stood, and stayed, for great Priamides.
When Glaucus Hippol^chides, saw Ajax thus depresse (...) vp^ (...).

The spirit of eHctor: thus he chid; O goodly man at arms;
In Fght, a Paris; why should Fame, make thee fort against our harms,
Being such a fugitive? now mark, how well thy boasts defend,
Thy city only with her own. Be sure, it shall descend,
To that proof wholly. Not a man, of any Lycian rank;
Shall strike one stroke more, for thy town: for no man's gets a thank,
Should he ete^nally fight here: nor any guard of thee.
How will thou (worthless that thou art) keep off an enemy
From our poor soldiers, when their Prince, Sarpedon, guest and friend
To thee, (and most deservedly) thou flew'st from in his end,
And left'st to all the lust of Greece? O gods, a man that was
(In life) so huge a good to Troy; and to thee such a grace,
(In death) not kept by thee from dogs? if my friends will do well;
We Will take our shoulders from your walls, and let all sink to hell:
As all will, were our faces turned. Did such a spirit breath
In all you Trojans, as becomes, all men that fight beneath
Their countries standerd; you would see, that such as prop your cause
With like exposure of their lives, have all the honored laws
Of such a dear confederacy, kept to them to a thread:
As now ye might reprise the arms, Sarpedon forfeited,
By forfeit of your rights to him; would you but lend your hands,
And force Patroclus to your Troy? Ye know how dear he stands
In his love, that of all the Greeks, is (for himself) far best,
And leads the best, neare-fighting men: and therefore would (at least)
Redeem Sarpedons arms: nay him, whom you have likewise lost.
This body drawn to Ilion, would after draw, and cost
A greater ransom, if you pleased: but Ajax startles you;
It Is his breast, bars this right to us. His looks are darts enough
To mix great Hector with his men. And, not to blame ye are,
You choose foes underneath your strengths; Ajax exceeds ye far.
Hector looked passing sour at this; and answered, why dare thou, Hector to
Glaucu^.

(So under) talk above me so? O friend, I thought till now,
Thy wisdom was superior, to all the inhabitants
Of gleby Lycia; but now, impute apparent wants
To that discretion thy words show; to say I lost my ground
For A^ax greatness: nor fear I, the field in combats drowned;
Nor force of chariots: but I fear, a power much better seen,
In right of all war, then all we: I hat god that holds between,
Our victory and us, his shield: lets conquest come and go
At his free pleasure; and with fear, conuerts her changes so
Upon the strongest: men must fight, when his just spirit impels,
Not their vain glories. But come on, make thy steps parallels
To these of mine; and then be judge, how deep the work will draw:
If then I spend the day in shifts? or thou can give such law
To thy detractiue speeches then? or if the Grecian host,
Holds any, that in pride of strength, holds up his spirit most,
Whom (for the carriage of this Prince, that thou enforcest so)
I make not stoop in his defense. You, friends? ye hear and know,
How much it fits ye to make good, this Grecian I have slain,
For ransom of Jove's son, our friend; play then the worthy men,
Till I endue Achilles arms. This said, he left the fight,
And called back those that bore the arms; not yet without his sight,
In conuoy of them toward Troy. For them, he changed his own;
Removed from where it rained tears, and sent them back to town.
Then put he on the eternal arms, that the celestial states
Gave Peleus; Peleus being old, their use appropriates
To his Achilles, that (like him) forsook them not for age.
When he, whose Empire is in clouds, saw Hector bent to wage
War in divine Achilles arms; he shook his head, and said:
Poor wretch, thy thoughts are far from death; though he so near has laid
Jove's discourse with himself of Hector in the arms of Achilles

His ambush for thee. Thou putst on, those arms (as brauing him)
Whom others fear; have slain his friend, and from his youthful lim,
Torn rudely off his heavenly arms; himself, being gentle, kind,
And valiant. Equal measure then, thy life in youth must find.
Yet since the justice is so strickt, that not Andromache,
(In thy denied return from fight) must ever take of thee
Those arms; in glory of thy acts: thou shall have that frail blaze
Of excellence, that neighbors death: a strength even to amaze.
To this, his sable brows did bow; and he made fit his lim
To those great arms; to fill which up, the War god entered him;
Austere and terrible: his joints, and every part extends
With strength and fortitude; and thus, to his admiring friends,
High Clamor brought him. He so shined, that all could think no less,
But he resembl'd every way, great-soul'd Aeacides.
Then, every way he scowr'd the field; his Captains calling on;
Asteropaeus, Eunomus, (that foresaw all things done)
Glaucus, and Medon, Desinor, and strong Thersilochus;
Phorcis, and Mestheies, Chronius, and great Hippothous:
To all these, and their populous troops; these, his excitements were: Hector
to his Captains and soulders.

Hear us, innumerable friends; neare-bordering nations, hear;
We have not called you from our towns, to fill our idle eye
With number of so many men, (no such vain Emperie
Did ever joy us;) but to fight, and of our Trojan wives
With all their children, manfully, to save the innocent lives.
In whose cares, we draw all our towns, of aiding soldiers dry,
With gifts, guards, victual, all things fit; and hearten their supply The
secret of War.

With all like rights; and therefore now, let all sides set down this,
Or live, or perish: this, of war, the special secret is.
In which most resolute design, who ever bears to town
Patroclus (laid dead to his hand) by winning the renown
Of Ajax slaughter; the half spoil, we wholly will impart The promise of
Hector if Patroclus body could be forced off to their part.

To his free use; and to our self, the other half convert:
And so the glory shall be shared; our self will have no more
Then he shall shine in. This drew all, to bring abroad their store
Before the body: every man, had hope it would be his,
And forced from Ajax: Silly fools, Ajax prevented this,
By raising rampires to his friend, with half their carcasses.
And yet his humor was to rore, and fear and now, no less
To startle Spartas king; to whom, he cried out: O my friend!
O Menelaus! nere more hope, to get off; here is the end Ajax to Menelaus.

Of all our labors: not so much, I fear to lose the Corse,
(For that is sure gone, the fowls of Troy, and dogs, will quickly force
That peece-meale) as I fear my head, and thine o Atreus son;
Hector a cloud brings, will hide all; instant destruction
Grievous, and heavy comes; o call, our Peers to aid us; fly.
He hasted, and used all his voice; sent far, and ne^e his cry:
O Princes, chief lights of the Greeks; and you that publicly
Eat with our General and me: all men of charge* O know,
Jove gives both grace, and dignity, to any that will show
Good minds, for only good it self; though presently the eye
Of him that rules discern him not. It Is hard for me t'espie
(Through all this smoke of burning fight) each Captain in his place,
And call assistance to our need. Be then each others grace,
And freely follow each his next; disdain to let the joy
Of great Aeacides be forced, to feed the beasts of Troy.
His voice was first heard and obeyed, by swift Oileades.
Idomeneus, and his mate, (renowned Meriones)
Were seconds to Oileus son: but, of the rest, whose mind
Can lay upon his voice the names, that after these combind,
In settting up this fight on end? the Trojans first gave on;
And as into the seas vast mouth, when mighty rivers run, Simile.

Their billows, and the sea, resound; and all the utter shore
Rebellowes (in her angry shocks) the seas repulsiue rore.
With such sounds gave the Trojans charge; so was their charge represt:
One mind filled all Greeks; good brass shields, close coucht to every breast:
And on their bright helmes Jove powered down, a mighty deal of night
To hide Patroclus. Whom alive, and when he was the knight
Of that grand child of Aeacus, Saturnius did not hate;
Nor dead, would see him dealt to dogs, and so did instigate
His fellows, to his worthy guard. At first the Trojans drove
The blacke-ey'd Grecians from the Corse; but not a blow they gave
That came at death. A while they hung, about the bodies he^les,
The Greeks quite gone. But all that while, did Ajax whet the steeles
Of all his forces; that cut back, way to the Corse again.
Brave Ajax (that for form, and fact, past all that did maintain
The Grecian fame, next Thetis son;) now flew before the first:
And as a sort of dogs, and youths, are by a Bore dispersed Simile.

About a mountain: so fled these, from mighty Ajax, all
That stood in conflict for the Corse. Who thought, no chance could fall
Betwixt them and the prise, at Troy. For bold Hippothous,
( Lethus, Pelasgus famous son) was so aduenturous,
That he would stand, to bore the Corse, about the ankle bone,
Where all the neruie fiuers meet, and ligaments in one,
That make the motion of those parts: through which he did convey
The thong or bawdricke of his shield; and so was drawing away
All thanks from Hector, and his friends: but in their steed he drew
An ill that no man could auert: For Telamonius threw
A lance that struck quite through his helm; his brain came leaping out:
Down fell Letheides; and with him, the bodies hoisted foot.
Far from Larissas soil he fell; a little time allowed
To his industrious spirits, to quit, the benefits bestowed
By his kind parents. But his wreake, Priamides assaid,
And threw at Ajax; but his dart, (discovered) past, and staid
At Schedius, son of Iphitus: a man of ablest hand
Of all the strong Phocensians; and lived with great command,
In Panopaeus. The fell dart, fell through his channel bone;
Pierced through his shoulders upper part; and set his spirit gone.
When (after his) another flew; the same hand gluing wing
To martial Phorcis startled soul, that was the after spring
Of Phaenops seed: the iauelin struck, his curets through, and tore
The bowels from the bellies midst. His fall made those before
Give back a little: Hectors self, enforced to turn his face.
And then the Greeks bestowed their showts, took vantage of the chase;
Drew off, and spoild Hippothous; and Phorcis of their arms;
And then ascended Ilion, had shaken with alarmes,
(Discovering th'impotence of Troy) even past the will of Jove;
And by the proper force of Greece: had Phoebus faild to move
Aeneas, in similitude, of Periphas (the son
Of grave* Epytes) king at arms; and had good service done
To old Anchises; being wise, and even with him in years. Apollo (...) like
(...) to (...).

But (like this man) the farre-seene god, to Venus son appears,
And asked him how he would maintain, steep Ilion in her height,
In spite of gods (as he presumed) when men approved so slight,
All his presumptions? and all theirs, that puffed him with that pride,
Believing in their proper strengths? and generally supplied
With such vnfrighted multitudes? But he well knew that Jove,
(Besides their self conceits sustaind, their forces with more love
Then theirs of Greece; and yet all that, lackt power to hearten them.
Aeneas knew the god, and said; It was a shame extreme (...) to the Troia^.

That those of Greece should beat them so; and by their cowardice,
Not want of man's aid, nor the gods; and this (before his eyes)
A deity stood, even now, and voucht, affirming Jove their aid.
And so bad Hector, and the rest, (to whom all this he said)
Turn head; and not, in that quick ease, part with the Corse to Greece.
This said, before them all he flew; and all (as of a piece)
Against the Greeks flew. Venus son, Leocritus did end,
Son of Arisbas; and had place, of Lycomedes friend;
Whose fall he friendly pitied: and in revenge, bestowed
A lance, that Apisaon struck, so sore, that strait he strow'd
The dustie center; it did stick, in that congealed blood
That forms the liver. Second man, he was of all that stood
In name for arms, amongst the troop, that from Poeonia came;
Asteropaeus being the first: who was, in ruth, the same
That Lycomedes was; like whom, he put forth for the wreake
Of his slain friend: but wrought it not, because he could not break
That bulwark made of Grecian shields; and bristl'd wood of spears
Combined about the body slain. Amongst whom Ajax bears
The greatest labor; every way, exhorting to abide,
And no man fly the Corse a foot; nor break their ranks in pride
Of any foremost daring spirit; but each foot hold his stand, Ajax his
souldlerly command

And use the closest fight they could. And this was the command
Of mighty Ajax: which observed; they steept the earth in blood.
The Trojans and their friends fell thick. Nor all the Grecians stood
(Though far the fewer suffered fate) for ever they had care
To shun confusion, and the toil, that still oppreffeth there.
So set they all the field on fire; with which you would have thought,
The Sun and Moon had been put out, in such a smoke they fought
About the person of the Prince. But all the field beside
Fought underneath a lightsome heaven: the Sun was in his pride,
And such expansure of his beams, he thrust out of his throne,
That not a vapor durst appear, in all that region:
No, not upon the highest hill. There fought they still and breathd;
Shund danger; cast their darts aloof; and not a sword vnsheathd.
The other plyde, it and the war, and Night, plyde them as well:
The cruel steel afflicting all; the strongest did not dwell
Unhurt within their iron roofes. Two men of special name,
Antilochus, and Thrasimed, were yet vnseru'd by Fame
With notice of Patroclus death: they thought him still alive,
In foremost tumult: and might well: for (seeing their fellows thrive
In no more comfortable sort, then Fight, and Death would yield)
They fought apart; for so their Sire, old Nestor, strictly wild,
Enioyning fight, more from the fleet: war here increast his heat
The whole day long; continually, the labor, and the sweat,
The knees, calves, feet, hands, faces, smeared, of men that Mars applide
About the good Achilles friend. And a as a huge Ox hide, An imi^able Simile.

A Currier gives amongst his men, to supple, and extend
With oil, till it be drunk withal; they tug, stretch out, and spend
Their oil, and licour liberally, and chase the leather so,
That out they make a vapor breathe; and in their oil does go:
A number of them set on work, and in an Orb they pull;
That all ways, all parts of the hide, they may extend at full:
So here and there, did both parts hale, the Corse in little place,
And wrought it, always, with their sweat; the Trojans hoped for grace
To make it reach to Ilion; the Grecians to their fleet:
A cruel tumult they stird up, and such, as should Mars see it;
(That horrid hurrier of men) or she that betters him,
Minerna, never so incenst; they could not disesteeme.
So banefull a Contention, did Jove, that day extend
Of men and horse about the slain. Of whom, his god-like friend
Had no instruction. So far off, and underneath the wall
Of Troy, that conflict was maintaind: which was not thought at all
By great Achilles; since he charged, that having set his foot
Upon the Ports, he would retire; well knowing Troy no boot
For his assaults, without himself; since not by him, as well,
He knew, it was to be subdued. His mother often would tell
The mind of mighty Jove therein; ofs hearing it in heaven;
But of that great ill to his friend, was no instruction given
By careful Thetis: by degrees, must ill events be known.
The foes cleft one to other still, about the overthrown.
His death, with death infected both. Even private Greeks would say
Either to other; Twere a shame, for us to go our way;
And let the Trojans bear to Troy, the praise of such a prise:
Which let the black earth gasp and drink, our blood for sacrifise,
Before we suffer: it is an act, much less unfortunate,
And then would those of Troy resolve; Though certainly our fate, The common
soldiers resolutions.

Will fell us altogether here: of all not turn a face.
Thus either side, his fellows strength, excited past his place;
And thus through all th'vnfruitfull air^, an iron sound ascended
Up to the golden firmament; when strange affects contended,
In these immortal heauen-bred horse, of great Aeacides;
Whom (once removed from forth the fight) a sudden sense did seize
Of good Patroclus death; whose hands, they often had undergone;
And bitterly they wept for him: nor could Automedon,
With any manage make them stir; often use the scourge to them;
Often use his fairest speech; as often, threats never so extreme;
They neither to the Hellespont, would bear him; nor the fight: Simil^.

But still as any tombe-stone lays, his neuer-stirred weight
On some good man, or woman's grave, for rites of funeral:
So unremoved stood these steeds; their heads to earth let fall,
And warm tears gushing from their eyes, with passionate desire,
Of their kind manager; their manes, that florisht with the fire
Of endless youth allotted them: fell through the yokie sphere,
Ruthfully rufl'd and defilde. Jove saw their heavy cheer,
And (pitying them) spoke to his mind; Poor wretched beasts (said he)
Why gave we you t'a mortal king? when immortality,
And incapacitie of age, so dignifies your states? Jove's discourse with
himself of the wretched state of humanity.

Was it to have the miseries, poured out on humane fates?
Of all the miserabl'st things that breathe, and creep on earth,
No one more wretched is then man. And for your deathlesse birth,
Hector must fail to make you prise: is it not enough he wears,
And glories vainly in those arms? your chariots, and rich geares,
(Besides you) are too much for him. Your knees and spirits again
My care of you shall fill with strength; that so ye may sustain
Automedon, and bear him off. To Troy I still will give
The grace of slaughter, till at fleet, their bloody feet arrive:
Till Phoebus drink the Western sea; and sacred darkness throws,
Her sable mantle, twixt their points. Thus in the steeds he blows
Excessive spirit; and through the Greeks, and Ilians they rapt
The whirring chariot; shaking off, the crumbl'd center, wrapped
Amongst their tresses: and with them, Automedon let fly
Amongst the Trojans; making way, through all as frightfully.
As through a langling flock of Geese, a lordly Vulture beats; Simile.

Given way with shrikes, by every Goose, that comes but near his threats;
With such state fled he through the preasse, pursuing as he fled;
But made no slaughter; nor he could: alone being carried
Upon the sacred chariot. How could he both works, do,
Direct his iauelin, and command, his fiery horses too?
At length, he came where he beheld, his friend Alcimedon,
That was the good Laercius, the son of Aemons son;
Who close came to his chariot side, and asked; What god is he, Alcimedon to
Automedon.

That has so robbed thee of thy soul, to run thus frantickly
Amongst these forefights, being alone? thy fighter being slain,
And Hector glorying in his arms? he gave these words again:
Alcimedon, what man is he? of all the Argiue race, Automedon to Alcimedon.

So able as thy self, to keep, in use of preasse, and pace
These deathlesse horse? himself being gone, that like the gods had thou art,
Of their high manage? therefore take, to thy command his part,
And ease me of the double charge, which thou have blamed with right.
He took the scourge and reins in hand, Automedon the fight:
Which Hector seeing, instantly ( Aeneas standing near) Hector to Aeneas

He told him, he discerned the horse, that mere immortal were,
Add^est to fight, with coward guides; and therefore hoped to make
A rich prise of them; if his mind, would help to undertake:
For those two could not stand their charge. He granted, and both cast
Dry solid hides upon their necks, exceeding soundly brast;
And forth they went, associate, with two more god-like men,
Aretus, and bold Chronius; nor made they question then
To prise the goodly crested horse, and safely send to hell
The souls of both their guardians: O fools, that could not tell,
They could not work out their return, from fierce Automedon
Without the liberal cost of blood; who first made Orizon
To father Jove, and then was filled, with fortitude, and strength;
When (counselling Alcimedon, to keep at no great length
The horse from him; but let them breathe, upon his back, because
He saw th'aduance that Hector made; whose fury had no laws
Proposd to it, but both their lives, and those horse, made his prise,
Or his life theirs) he called to friend, these well-approu'd supplies;
The A^aces, and the Spartan king: and said, Come, Princes, leave Automedon
calls for aid to the Aiaces and Menelaus.

A sure guard with the corse; and then, to your kind care receive
Our threatened safeties; I discern, the two chief props of Troy
Prepared against us: But herein, what best men can enjoy,
Lies in the free knees of the gods; my dart shall lead ye all; In the Greek
always this phrase i^ used, not in the hands, but (...), in the kne^s of the
gods lies our helps, etc

The sequel, to the care of Jove, I leave, what ever fall.
All this, spoke good Automedon; then, brandishing his lance,
He threw, and struck Aretus shield, that gave it entrance
Through all the steel, and (by his belt) his bellies inmost part
It pierced, and all his trembling lims, gave life up to his dart.
Then Hector at Automedon, a blazing lance let fly,
Whose flight he saw, and, falling flat, the compass was too hie,
And made it stick beyond in earth, th'extreme part burst, and the^e
Mars buried all his violence. The sword then, for the spear,
Had changed the conflict, had not haste, sent both the Aiaies in,
(Both serving close their fellows call) who, where they did begin
There drew the end. Priamides, Aeneas, Chronius,
(In doubt of what such aid might work) left broken hearted thus,
Aretus to Automedon, who spoild his arms, and said: Automedon insui^s.

A little this reuiues my life, for him so lately dead,
(Though by this nothing counteruail'd) And with this little vent
Of inward grief, he took the spoil; with which, he made ascent,
Up to his Chariot; hands and feet, of bloody stains so full,
That Lion-like he looked, new turned, from tearing up a Bull.
And now another bitter fight, about Patroclus grew;
Teare-thirstie, and of toil enough; which Pallas did renew,
Descending from the cope of stars, dismissed by sharp-eyd Jove,
To animate the Greeks; for now, inconstant change did move
His mind from what he held of late: And as the purple bow, Simile.

Jove bends at mortals, when of war, he will the signal show;
Or make it a presage of cold, in such tempestuous sort,
That men are of their labors easde, but laboring cattle hurt:
So Pallas in a purple cloud, inuolu'd her self, and went
Amongst the Grecians; stird up all; but first encouragement
She breathed in Atreus younger son; and (for disguise) made choice
Of aged Phoenix shape; and spoke, with his unwearied voice.
O Menelaus, much defame, and equal heaviness, Pallas like Ph^uix to Menela^.

Will touch at thee; if this true friend, of great Aeacides,
Dogs tear beneath the Trojan walls; and therefore bear thee well,
Toil through the host; and every man, with all thy spirit, impell.
He answered: O thou long-since borne? O Phoenix? that have won Menelaus to
Pallas suppos^d Ph^nix.

The honored foster-fathers name, of Thetis god-like son:
b I would Minerua would but give, strength to me; and but keep
These busy darts off; I would then, make in indeed, and steep
My income in their bloods, in aid, of good Patroclus; much
His death afflicts me; much: but yet, this Hectors grace is such
With Jove; and such a fiery strength, and spirit he has, that still
His steel is killing, killing still. The kings so royal will,
Minerua joyed to hear; since she, did all the gods outgo
In his remembrance. For which grace, she kindly did bestow
Strength on his shoulders, and did fill, his knees as liberally
With swiftness, breathing in his breast, the courage of a fly.
Which loves to bite so, and does bear, man's blood so much good will,
That still (though beaten from a man) she flies upon him still:
With such a courage Pallas filled, the black parts near his heart;
And then he hasted to the slain; cast off a shining dart;
And took one Podes, that was heir, to old E^tion,
A rich man, and a strenuous; and by the people done
Much honor; and by Hector too, being consort, and his guest;
And him the yellow-headed king, laid hold on at his waste;
In offering flight, his iron pile, struck through him; down he fell;
And up Atrides drew his corse. Then Phoebus did impell
The spirit of Hector; Phoenops like, surnamed Asiades, Phoebus like Asiades to
Hector.

Whom Hector used (of all his guests) with greatest friendlinesse;
And in Abydus stood his house; in whose form, thus he spoke:
Hector? what man of all the Greeks, will any terror make,
Of meeting thy strength any more; when thou art tertified
By Menelaus? who before, he slew thy friend, was tried,
A passing easy soldier; where now (besides his end,
Imposde by him) he draws him off (and not a man to friend)
From all the Trojans. This friend is, Podes, E^tions son.
This hid him in a cloud of grief; and set him foremost on;
And then Jove took his Snake-fring'd shield; and Ida covered all
With sulphurie clouds; from whence he let, abhorred lightnings fall,
And thunderd till the mountain shook: and with this dreadful state,
He vsherd victory to Troy; to Argos flight and fate.
Peneleus Boeotius, was he that foremost fled,
Being wounded in his shoulders height; but there the lances head
Struck lightly, glancing to his mouth, because it struck him near,
Thrown from Polydamas: Leitus, next left the fight in fear,
(Being hurt by Hector, in his hand) because he doubted sore
His hand, in wished fight with Troy, would hold his lance no more.
Idomeneus sent a dart, at Hector (rushing in, Idomeneus at Hector.

And following Leitus) that struck, his bosom, near his chin,
And brake at top; the Ilians, for his escape did shout.
When Hector, at Deucalides, another lance sent out,
As in his chariot he stood; it mist him narrowly;
For (as it fell) Caeranus drove, his speedy chariot by,
And took the Trojan lance himself; he was the Chariotere
Of stern Meriones; and first, on foot did service there,
Which well he left to govern horse; for saving now his king,
With driving twixt him and his death; though thence his own did spring;
Which kept a mighty victory, from Troy, in keeping death
From his great Sovereign: the fierce dart, did enter him beneath
His ear, betwixt his iaw and it; drove down, cut through his tongue,
And struck his teeth out; from his hands, the horses raines he flung;
Which now Meriones received, as they bestrew'd the field,
And bad his Sovereign scourge away; he saw that day would yield
No hope of victory for them. He feared the same, and fled.
Nor from the mighty minded son, of Telamon, lay hid
(For all his clouds) high Jove himself; nor from the Spartan king.
They saw him in the victory, he still was varying
For Troy; for which sight, Ajax said: O heavens, what fool is he,
That sees not Jove's hand in the grace, now done our enemy?
Not any dart they touch, but takes; from whom soever thrown,
Valiant or coward; what he wants, Jove adds; not any one Ajax good counsel.

Wants his direction to strike sure; nor ours, to miss, as sure:
But come, let us be sure of this, to put the best in ure
That lies in us; which twofold is; both to fetch off our friend,
And so to fetch him off, as we, may likeliest contend
To fetch our selves off; that our friends, suruiuing may have right
In joy of our secure retreat; as he that fell in fight,
Being kept as sure from further wrong: of which perhaps they doubt;
And looking this way, grieve for us, not able to work out
Or pass from this man-slaughterer, great Hector, and his hands,
That are too hot for men to touch; but that these thirsty sands,
Before our fleet will be enforced, to drink our headlong death.
Which to prevent by all fit means, I would the parted breath
Of good Patroclus, to his friend, with speed imparted were
By some he loves: for I believe, no heavy messenger
Has yet informed him; but alas, I see no man to send;
Both men and horse are hid in mists, that every way descend.
O father Jupiter, do thou, the sons of Greece release
Of this felt darkness; grace this day, with fit transparences;
And give the eyes thou give, their use; destroy us in the light,
And work thy will with us, since needs, thou will against us fight.
This spoke he weeping; and his tears, Saturnius pity showed,
Dispersed the darkness instantly, and drew away the clowd,
From whence it fell: the Sun shined out, and all the host appeared;
And then spoke Ajax, (whose heard prayre, his spirits highly cheered.
Brave Menelaus, look about; and if thou can descrie Ajax to Menelaus.

Nestors Antilochus alive, incite him instantly,
To tell Achilles, that his friend, most dear to him, is dead.
He said; nor Menelaus stuck, at any thing he said,
(As loath to do it) but he went; as from a Grasiers stall,
A Lion goes, when ouerlaid (with men, dogs, darts, and all Simile.

Not easily losing a fat Ox, but strong watch, all night held)
His teeth yet watering; often he comes, and is as often repeld;
The adverse darts so thick are poured, before his brow-hid eyes,
And burning firebrands; which for all, his great hearts heat, he flies,
And (grumbling) goes his way betimes: So from Patroclus went
Atrides, much against his mind; his doubts being vehement,
Lest (he gone from his guard) the rest, would leave (for very fear) Another
direct scoff at Menelaus.

The person to the spoil of Greece. And yet his guardians were,
The Aiaces, and Meriones, whom much, his care did press,
And thus exhort; Aiaces both, and you Meriones: Menelaus to the Aiaces, like
himself.

Now let some true friend call to mind, the gentle and sweet nature
Of poor Patroclus; let him think, how kind to every creature,
His heart was, living, though now dead. Thus urged the faire-hair'd king,
And parted, casting round his eye. d As when upon her wing Simile.

An Eagle is, whom men affirm, to have the sharpest sight
Of all aires region of fowls; and though of mighty height,
Sees yet within her leauie form, of humble shrubs, close laid
A light-foote Hare, which straight she stoupes, trusses, and strikes her dead:
So dead thou strook'st thy charge (O king,) through all wars thickets so
Thou look'dst, and swiftly found'st thy man; exhorting against the foe,
And heartning his plied men to blows, used in the wars left wing:
To whom thou said; Thou god-lou'd man, come here, and hear a thing,
Which I wish never were to hear; I think even thy eye sees
What a destruction God has laid, upon the sons of Greece;
And what a conquest he gives Troy; in which, the best of men
( Patroclus) lies exanimate; whose person, passing feign,
The Greeks would rescue, and bear home; and therefore give thy speed
To his great friend, to prove if he, will do so good a deed,
To fetch the naked person off; for Hectors shoulders wear
His prised arms. Antilochus, was highly grieved to hear Antilochus grief for
Patroclus.

This heavy news; and stood surprisde, with stupid silence long;
His fair eyes standing full of tears; his voice so sweet and strong,
Stuck in his bosom; yet all this, wrought in him no neglect
Of what Atrides gave in charge: but for that quick effect,
He gave Laodolus his arms, (his friend that had the guide
Of his swift horse) and then his knees, were speedily applide
In his sad message, which his eyes, told all the way in tears.
Nor would thy generous heart assist, his sore-charg'd soldiers Another
notable Ironi^, expressing what Homer made of Menelaus.

(O Menelaus) in mean time, though left in much distress;
Thou sentst them god-like Thrasimede, and made thy kind regresse
Back to Patroclus; where arrived, half breathless thou did say
To both the Aiaces this: I have sent, this messenger away
To swift Achilles, who, I fear, will hardly help us now,
(Though mad with Hector;) without arms, he cannot fight, ye know:
Let us then think of some best mean, both how we may remove
The body; and get off our selves, from this vociferous drove,
And fate of Trojans. Bravely spoke, at all parts ( A^x said)
O glorious son of Atreus; take thou then strait the dead,
And thou Meriones. We two, of one mind, as one name,
Will back ye soundly; and on us, receive the wildfire flame,
That Hectors rage breathes after you, before it come at you.
This said, they took into their arms, the body; all the show
That might be, made to those of Troy, at arms end bearing it. Menelaus and
Meriones bear off the body of Patroclus. Simile.

Out shriekt the Trojans, when they saw, the body borne to fleet;
And rusht on: As at any Bore, gasht with the hunters wounds,
A kennell of the sharpest set, and sorest bitten hounds,
Before their youthful huntsmen haste; and eagerly a while
Pursue, as if they were assured, of their affected spoil;
But when the Savage (in his strength, as confident as they)
Turns head amongst them; back they fly, and every one his way:
So troope-meale Troy pursued a while, laying on with swords and darts;
But when the Aiaces turned on them, and made their stand; their hearts
Drunk from their faces all their bloods; and not a man sustained
The forechace, nor the after fight. And thus Greece nobly gained,
The person toward home: but thus, the changing warte was rackt
Out to a passing bloody length: For as once put in act
A fire inuading city roofes, is suddenly engrost, Simile.

And made a wondrous mighty flame; in which is quickly lost
A house, long building; all the while, a boisterous gust of wind
Lumbring amongst it: So the Greeks (in bearing of their friend)
More and more foes drew: at their heels, a tumult thundering still
Of horse and foot. Yet, as when Mules, in haling from a hill Simile.

A beam or mast, through foul deep way, well clapped and heartned, close
Lie to their labor, tug, and sweat, and passing hard it goes:
(Urged by their driuers, to all have) So dragged they on the corse;
Still both the Aiaces at their backs; who back still turned the force;
Though after, it grew still the more; yet as a syluane hill
Thrusts back a torrent, that has kept, a narrow channel still, Simile,
(...) the (...) of both the (...).

Till at his Oken breast it beats; but there a check it takes,
That sends it over all the vale, with all the stir it makes;
Nor can with all the confluence, break through his rootie sides:
In no less firm and brave repulse, the Aiaces curbed the prides
Of all the Trojans: yet all held, the pursuit in his strength;
Their chiefes being Hector, and the son, of Venus, who at length
Put all the youth of Greece besides, in most amazefull rout;
Forgetting all their fortitudes, distraught, and shrieking out;
A number of their rich arms lost, fallen from them, here and there
About, and in the dike; and yet, the war concludes not here.
COMMENTARIVS.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thus translated ad verbum by Spondanus:

Sicut autem quando vir tauri bouis magni pellem
Populis dederit distendendam temulentam pinguedine,
Accipientes autem vtique hi dispositi extendunt
In orbem; statim autem humor exijt, penetratque adeps.
Multis trahentibus: tenditur autem tota vndique;
Sic hi huc and illuc cadauer paruo in spacio
Trahebant vtrique.
Laurent. Valla thus in prose:

Et quemadmodum si quis pinguem Tauri pellem a pluribus extendi iuberet; inter
extendendum and humor and pingue desudat. Sic illi huc pa^o in spacio
distrahebant.

Eobanus thus in verse:

-- Ac si quis distendere pellem
Taurinam iubeat, crassam pinguedine multa,
Multorum manibus, terrae desudet omasum
Et liquor omnis humi. Sic ipsum tempore paruo
Patroclum in diuersa, manus numerosa, trahebat, etc.
To answer a hot objection made to me by a great scholar, for not translating
Homer word for word, and letter for letter (as out of his heat he strained
it,) I am enforced to cite this admirable Simile, (like the other before in my
annotations at the end of the fifteenth Book) and refer it to my judicial
readers examination, whether such a translation becomes Homer or not; by noting
so much as needs to be by one example; whether the two last aboue-said
translators, in being so short with our everlasting master; do him so much
right, as my poor conversion; expressing him by necessary exposition and
illustration of his words and meaning, with more words, or not. The reason of
his Simile, is to illustrate the strife of both the armies for the body of
Patroclus; which it does perform most inimitably; their toil and sweat about
it, being considered (which I must pray you to (...) to before:) the Simile it
self yet, I thought not unfit to insert here, to come up the closer to them,
with whom I am to be compared. My pains and under standing converting it thus:

-- And as a huge ox hide,
A Currier gives amongst his men, to supple and extend
With oil, till it be drunk withal: they tug, stretch out, and spend
Their oil and licour liberally; and chafe the leather so,
They make it breathe a vapor out; and in their licours go,
A number of them set a work; and in an orb they pull,
That all ways, all parts of the hide, they may extend at full:
So here and there did both hosts hale, the corse in little place;
And wrought it all ways with their sweat, etc.
In which last words of the application considered, lies the life of this
illustration. Our Homers divine invention wherein, I see not in any of their
shorter translations touched at. But what could express more the toil about
this body, forcing it this way and that, as the opposite advantage served on
both sides? An Oxes hide, after the tanning, asking so much labor and oil to
supple and extend it, -- (...), distendendam, temulentam pinguedine; to be
stretched out, being drunk with tallow, oil, or licour: the word (...), which
signifies temulentam; of (...), signifying ebrius sum, (being a metaphor) and
used by Homer, I thought fit to express so; both because it is Homers, and
does much more illustrate then crassam pinguedine multa, as Eoban* turns it.
But Valla leaves it clearly out; and with his briefness, utterly maim^s the
Simile; which (to my under standing being so excellent) I could not but with
thus much repetition and labor inculcate the sense of it; since I see not that
any translator has ever thought of it. And therefore (against the obiector,
that would have no more words then Homer used, in his translator) I hope those
few words I use more, being necessary to express such a sense as I understand
in Homer, will be at least borne withal; without which, and other such
needful explanations, the most ingenious invention and sense of so matchless
a writer, might pass endlesly obscured and unthought on. My man^er of
translation being partly built on this learned and judicious authority: Est
sciti interpretis, non verborum numerum, and ordinem sectari; sed res ipsas,
and sententias attente perpendere; easque verbis, and formulis orationis
vestire idoneis, and aptis ei linguae in quam conuertitur.

b -- (...)* etc. Minerua appearing to Menelaus like Phoenix, and encouraging
him (as you may read before) to fight; he speaks as to Phoenix, and wishes
Minerua would but put away the force or violence of the darts, and he would aid
and fight bravely: which is a continuance of his character, being expressed for
the most part by Homer ridiculous and simple. The original words yet (because
neither Eobanus nor Valla understood the character) they utterly pervert; as if
you please to examine them, you may see. The words are these, (...), which
Spondanus truly interprets telorum vero depulerit impetum; (...), being a
compound of (...); signifying arceo, repello, propulso, abigo; and yet they
(...) the words, and telis vim afferret: as if Menelaus wished that Pallas would
give force to his darts; which Eobanus follows, saying, and tela valentia
praestet, most ignorantly and vnsufferably converting it; supposing them to be
his own darts he spoke of; and would have blessed with Miueruaes addition of
virtue and power; where Homers are plain; he spoke of the enemies darts; whose
force if she would auer^, he would fight for Patroclus.

`(...), etc. Et ei Muscae audaciam in pectoribus immisit. Minerua inspired him
with the courage of a fly; which all his interpreters very ridiculously laugh
at in Homer; as if he heartily intended to praise Menelaus by it* not
understanding his Ironie here, agreeing with all the other silliness noted in
his character. Eobanus Hessus, in pity of Homer, leaves it utterly out; and
Valla comes over him with a little salve for the sore disgrace he has by his
ignorant readers laughters; and expounds the words abouesaid thus: Lene namque
eius ingenium prudenti audacia impleuit: laying his medicine nothing near the
place. Spondanus (disliking Homer with the rest in this Simile) would not have
Lucian forgotten in his merry Encomium of a Fly; and therefore cites him upon
this place, playing upon Homer; which, because it is already answered in the
Ironie to be understood in Homer, (he laughing at all men so ridiculous) I for
bear to repeat; and cite only Eustathius, that would salve it, with altering
the word (...), which signifies confidentia, or audacia (per Metathesin
literae*) for (...), which is temeritas; of which I see not the end: and yet
cite all, to show how such great Clerks are perplexed, and abuse Homer, as not
being satis compotes mentis Poeticae; for want of which (which all their
reading and language cannot supply) they are thus often graueld and mistaken.

d(...), etc. Veluti Aquila: The sport Homer makes with Menelaus, is here
likewise confirmed and amplified in another Simile, resembling him
intentionally to a harefinder, though for colors sake he uses the word Eagle;
as in all other places where he presents him (being so eminent a person) ^e
hides his simplicity with some shadow of glory or other. The circumstances
making it clear; being here, and in diverse other places made a messenger from
Ajax, and others, to call such and such to their aid; which was unfit for a man
of his place, if he had been in magnanimity and valor equal, or any thing
near it. But to confirm his imperfection therein in diverse other places, he
is called (...), mollis bellator; and therefore was fittest to be employed to
call up those that were ^ardier and abler. In going about which business, Homer
shows how he looks about, leering like a hare-finder: for to make it simply a
Simile illustrating the state of his address in that base affair, had neither
wit nor decorum. Both which being at their height in the other sense (because
our Homer was their great master to all accomplishment) let none detract so
miserably from him, as to take this otherwise then a continuance of his Ironie.

The end of the seventeenth Book.
THE XVIII. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
AChilles mournes, told of Patroclus end;
When Thetis does from forth the sea asc^nd,
And comfort him; aduising to abstain
From any fight, till her request could gain
Fit arms of Vulcan. Juno yet commands
To show himself. And at the dike he stands
In sight of the enemy; who with his sight
Flies; and a number perish in the flight.
Patroclus person (safe brought from the wars)
His soldiers wash. Vulcan the arms prepares.
Another Argument.
Sigma continues the alarmes,
And fashions the renowned arms.
THey fought still, like the rage of fire. And now Antilochus
Came to Aeacides; whose mind, was much solicitous,
For that, which (as he feared) was fallen. He found him near the fleet
With upright saile-yeards, uttering this, to his heroike conceit:
Ay me; why see the Greeks themselves, thus beaten from the field,
And routed headlong to their fleet. O let not heaven yield Achilles to
himself concerning Patroclus.

Effect to what my sad soul fears; that (as I was foretold)
The strongest Myrmidon, (next me) when I should still behold
The Suns fair light, must part with it. Past doubt, Menaetius son
Is he on whom that fate is wrought; O wretch, to leave undone
What I commanded; that the fleet, once freed of hostile fire,
(Not meeting Hector) instantly, he should his powers retire.
As thus his troubled mind discourst, Antilochus appeared,
And told with tears the sad news thus: My Lord, that must be heard,
Antilochus re^ates Patroclus death.

Which would to heaven I might not tell; Menaetius son lies dead;
And for his naked corse (his arms already forfeited,
And worn by Hector) the debate, is now most vehement.
This said, Grief darkened all his powers. With both his hands he rent
The black mould from the forced earth, and poured it on his head; Achilles
his rage

Smeared all his lovely face; his weeds (divinely fashioned)
All filde and mangled; and himself, he threw upon the shore;
Lay, as laid out for funeral. Then tumbled round, and tore
His gracious curles; his Ecstacie, he did so far extend,
That all the Ladies won by him, and his now slaughterd friend,
(Afflicted strangely for his plight) came shrieking from the tents,
And fell about him; beat their breasts; their tender lineaments
Dissolved with sorrow. And with them, wept Nestors warlike son,
Fell by him, holding his fair hands, in fear he would have done
His person violence; his heart (extremely straightened) burned,
Beat, sweld, and sighd, as it would burst. So terribly he mourned;
That Thetis sitting in the deepes, of her old fathers seas;
Heard, and lamented. To her plaints, the bright Nereides
Flockt all; how many those dark gulfes, soever comprehend.
There Glauce and Cymodoce, and Spyo did attend;
Nesaea and Cymothoa, and calm Amphithoe;
Thalia, Thoa, Panope, and swift Dynanime;
Actaea and Lymnoria; and Halia the fair,
Famed for the beauty of her eyes; Amathia for her hair;
Iaera, Proto, Clymene, and curled Dexamine;
Pherusa, Doris; and with these, the smooth Amphinome;
Chaste Galathea so renowm'd; and Callianira came
With Doto and Orythia, to cheer the mournful Dame;
Apseudes likewise visited; and Callianassa gave
Her kind attendance; and with her, Agaue graced the Cave;
Nemertes, Maera followed; Melita, Ianesse,
With Ianira, and the rest, of those Nereides,
That in the deep seas make abode; all which together beat
Their dewie bosoms; and to all, thus Thetis did repeat
Her cause of mourning: Sisters, hear, how much the sorrows wey, Thou to the
N^reides.

Whose cries, now called ye: hapless I, brought forth unhappily
The best of all the sons of men; who (like a well-set plant,
In best soiles) grew and flourished; and when his spirit did want
Employment for his youth and strength: I sent him with a fleet
To fight at Ilion; from whence, his fate-confined feet
Pass all my deity to retire. The court of his high birth,
The glorious court of Peleus, must entertain his worth,
Never hereafter. All the life, he has to live with me,
Must wast in sorrows; and this son, I now am bent to see,
Being now afflicted with some grief; not usually grave;
Whose knowledge and recure I seek. This said, she left her cave;
Which all left with her; swimming forth; the green waves, as they swom,
Cleft with their bosoms, curld, and gave, quick way to Troy. Being come,
They all ascended; two and two; and trod the honored shore,
Till where the fleet of Myrmidons (drawn up in heaps) it bore.
There stayed they at Achilles ship; and there did Thetis lay Thet is to
Achilles.

Her fair hand on her sons curled head, sighed, wept, and bad him say,
What grief drew from his eyes those tears? conceal it not (said she)
Till this hour, thy vplifted hands, have all things granted thee.
The Greeks (all thrust up at their sternes) have poured ont tears enough;
And in them seen how much they miss, remission of thy vow. Achilles to
Thetis.

He said, It Is true, Olympius, has done me all that grace:
But what joy have I of it all? when thus, ^hrusts in the place,
Loss of my whole self, in my friend? whom, when his foe had slain,
He spoiled of those profaned arms, that Peleus did obtain
From heavens high powers, solemnizing, thy sacred nuptial bands,
As the only present of them all; and fitted well their hands;
Being lovely, radiant, marvelous; O would to heaven thy throne,
With these fair deities of the sea, thou still had sat upon;
And Peleus had a mortal wife; since by his means is done
So much wrong to thy grieved mind; my death being set so soon,
And never suffering my return, to grace of Peleus court;
Nor do I wish it; nor to live, in any man's resort;
But only that the crying blood, for vengeance, of my friend,
Mangled by Hector, may be stild; his foes death paying his end.
She weeping, said: That hour is near, and thy deaths hour then nie; ^etis
to Achil^.

Which in thy wish served of thy foe, succeeds instantly.
And instantly it shall succeed, (he answered) since my fate Achilles to The^is.

Allowed not to my will a power, to rescue (ere the date
Of his late slaughter) my true friend. Far from his friends he died;
Whose wrong therein my eyes had light, and right to see denied.
Yet now I neither light my self, nor have so spent my light,
That either this friend or the rest, (in numbers infinite
Slaughterd by Hector) I can help; nor grace, with wished repair
To our dear country; but breathe here, unprofitable air,
And only live a lode to earth, with all my st^ngth, though none
Of all the Grecians equal it. In counsel, many a one
Is my superior; what I have, no grace gets; what I want,
Disgraceth all. How then too soon, can hastiest death supplant
My (...)-cursed life? her instrument, to my indignity,
Being that black friend Contention; whom, would to God might die
To gods and men; and Anger too, that kindles tyranny
In men most wise; being much more sweet, then ^quid honey is
To men of power, to satiate, their watchful enmities;
And like a pliant fume it spreds, through all their breasts; as late
It stol^ stern passage thorough mine; which he did instigate,
That is our General. But the fact, so long past, the effect
Must vanish with it, though both grieved; nor must we still respect
Our soothed humors; Need now takes, the rule of eithers mind.
And when the loser of my friend, his death in me shall find;
Let death take all. Send him, ye gods; I Will give him my embrace;
Not Hercules himself shund death, though dearest in the grace
Of Jupiter; even him, Fate stoopt, and I^s cruelty;
And if such Fate expect my life; where death strikes, I will lie.
Mean time I wish a good renown, that these deepe-brested Dames
Of ^ion and Dardania, may, for th'extinguisht flames
Of their friends lives, with both their hands, wipe miserable tears
From their so curiously-kept cheeks; and be the officers
To execute my sighs on Troy; when (seeing my long r^ate
But gatherd strength, and gives my charge, an answerable heat)
They well may know it was I lay still; (...) that my being away,
Presented all their happiness. But any further stay,
(Which your much love perhaps may wish) assay not to persuade;
All vows are kept; all prayres heard; now, free way for fight is made.
The siluer-footed Dame replide: It fits thee well, my son, Thetis (...)
Achilles.

To keep destruction from thy friends; but those fair arms are won
And worn by Hector, that should keep, thy self in keeping them,
Though their fruition be but short; a long death being near him,
Whose cruel glory they are yet: by all means then forbear
To tread the massacres of war, till I again appear
From Mulciber with fit new arms; which, when thy eye shall see
The Sun next rise, shall enter here, with his first beams and me.
Thus to her sisters of the sea, she turned, and bad them open
The doors and deepes of Nereus; she, in Olympus top
Must visit Vulcan for new arms, to serve her wreakfull son; Thetis and the
Nymphs (...) Achill^.

And bad inform her father so, with all things further done.
This said, they underwent the sea, her self flew up to heaven;
In mean space, to the Hellespont, and ships, the Greeks were driven,
In shameful rout; nor could they yet, from rage of Priams son,
Secure the dead of new assaults; both horse and men made on,
With such impression: thrice the feet, the hands of Hector seasd;
And thrice the Aiaces thumpt him off. With whose repulse displeasd,
He wreakt his wrath upon the troops; then to the corse again,
Made horrid turnings, crying out, of his rep^sed men,
And would not quit him quite for death. A Lion almost steru'd,
Is not by vpland herdsmen driven, from urging to be served
With more contention, then his strength, by those two of a name;
And had perhaps his much pr^sd will; if th'airie-footed dame
(Swift Iris) had not stoopt in have, Ambassadresse from heaven, Iris
ambass^dresse to Achilles from (...).

To Peleus son, to bid him arm; her message being given
By Juno; kept from all the gods; she thus excited him:
Rise thou most terrible of men, and save the precious lim
Of thy beloved; in whose behalf, the conflict now runs hie
Before the fleet; the either host, fels other mutually;
These to retain, those to obtain; amongst whom, most of all
Is Hector prompt; he is apt to drag, thy friend home; he your pall
Will make his shoulders; his head forced; he will be most famous; (...),
No more lie idle; set the foe, a much more costly prise
Of thy friends value; then let dogs, make him a monument,
Where thy name will be graven. He asked, What deity has sent
Thy presence hither? She replied; Saturnia; she alone,
Not high Jove knowing; nor one god, that does inhabit on
Snowie Olympus. He again; How shall I set upon
The work of slaughter, when mine arms, are worn by Priams son?
How will my goddess mother grieve, that bad I should not arm,
Till she brought arms from Mulciber? But should I do such harm
To her and duty: who is he (but Ajax) that can vant
The fitting my breast with his arms? and he is conversant
Amongst the first, in use of his; and rampires of the foe
(Slain near Patroclus) builds to him. All this (said she) we know,
And wish, thou only would but show, thy person to the eyes
Of these hot Ilians, that (afraid, of further enterprise)
The Greeks may gain some little breath. She wooed, and he was won,
And strait Minerua honored him; who Jove's shield clapped upon
His mighty shoulders; and his head, girt with a cloud of gold,
That cast beams round about his brows. And as when arms enfold
A city in an I Will; from thence, a fume at first appears, Simile.

(Being in the day) but when the Even, her cloudie forehead reares,
Thick show the fires, and up they cast, their splendour, that men nie
Seeing their distress, perhaps may set, ships out to their supply:
So (to show such aid) from his head, a light rose, scaling heaven.
And forth the wall he stepped and stood; nor brake the precept given
By his great mother (mixed in fight,) but sent abroad his voice,
Which Pallas far off ecchoed; who did betwixt them hoise
Shrill Tumult to a toplesse height. And as a voice is heard Simile.

With emulous affection, when any town is spher'd
With siege of such a foe, as kills, men's minds; and for the town
Makes sound his trumpet: so the voice, from Thetis issue thrown,
Won emulously the ears of all. His brazen voice once heard,
The minds of all were startled so, they yielded; and so feared
The faire-man'd horses, that they flew, back, and their chariots turned,
Presaging in their augurous hearts, the labors that they mourned
A little after; and their guides, a repercussiue dread
Took from the horrid radiance, of his refulgent head.
Which Pallas set on fire with grace. Thrice great Achilles spoke;
And thrice (in heat of all the charge) the Trojans started back.
Twelve men, of greatest strength in Troy, left with their lives exhald,
Their chariots and their darts, to death, with his three summons called.
And then the Grecians spritefully, drew from the darts the corse,
And hearst it, bearing it to fleet. His friends, with all remorse
Marching about it. His great friend, dissoluing then in tears,
To see his truly-lou'd returned, so horst upon an hearse,
Whom with such horse and chariot, he set out safe and whole;
Now wounded with vnpittying steel, now sent without a soul,
Never again to be restored, never received but so;
He followed mourning bitterly. The Sun (yet far to go)
Juno commanded to go down; who in his powers despite, Juno commands the
Sun to go down before his time.

Sunk to the Ocean; over earth, dispersing sudden Night.
And then the Greeks, and Trojans both, gave up their horse and darts.
The Trojans all to counsel called, ere they refresht their hearts
With any supper; nor would sit; they grew so stiff with fear,
To see (so long from heavy fight) Aeacides appear.
Polydam as began to speak, who only could discern
Things future by things past; and was, vowed friend to Hector; borne
In one night both; he thus aduisde: Consider well (my friends) Polydamas to
Hector and the Trojans.

In this so great and sudden change, that now it self extends;
What change is best for us to oppose. To this stands my command;
Make now the town our strength; not here, abide lights rosy hand;
Our wall being far off, and our foe, (much greater) still as nere.
Till this foe came, I well was pleased, to keep our watches here;
My fit hope, of the fleetes surprise, inclined me so; but now,
It Is stronglier guarded; and (their strength, increast) we must allow
Our own proportionate amends. I doubt exceedingly
That this indifferency of fight, twixt us and the enemy;
And these bounds we prefixe to them; will nothing so confine,
Th'vncurb'd mind of Aeacides. The height of his design
Aims at our city, and our wives; and all bars in his way
(Being backed with less then walls) his power, will scorn to make his stay;
And ouerrunne, as ouerseene; and not his object. Then
Let Troy be freely our retreat; lest being enforced, our men
Twixt this, and that, be taken up, by Vultures; who by night
May safe come off; it being a time, untimely for his might
To spend at random; that being sure. If next light show us here
To his assaults, each man will wish, that Troy his refuge were;
And then feel, what he hears not now. I would to heaven mine ear
Were free even now of those complaints, that you must after hear,
If ye remove not. If ye yield (though wearied with a fight)
So late and long; we shall have strength, in counsel, and the night.
And (where we here have no more force, then Need will force us to,
And which must rise out of our nerves) high ports, towers, walls will do
What wants in us. And in the morn, all armed upon our towers;
We all will stand out to our foe. Twill trouble all his powers,
To come from fleet, and give us charge; when his high-crested horse,
His rage shall satiate with the toil, of this, and that ways course;
Vain entry seeking underneath, our well-defended walls;
And he be glad to turn to fleet, about his funerals.
For of his entry here, at home; What mind will serve his thirst?
Or ever feed him with sacked Troy? the dogs shall eat him first.
At this speech, Hector bent his brows; and said, This make not great Hectors
angry reply to Polydam^.

Your grace with me, Polydamas; that argue for retreat
To Troys old prison; have we not, enough of those towers yet?
And is not Troy, yet, charged enough, with impositions set
Upon her citizens; to keep, our men from spoil, without?
But still we must impose, within? that houses, with our rout,
As well as purses, may be plagued? Before time, Priams town
Traffickt with diuers-languag'd men; and all gave the renown
Of rich Troy to it; brass, and gold, abounding: but her store
Is now from every house exhaust; possessions evermore,
Are sold out into Phrygia, and lovely Maeonie;
And have been, ever since Jove's wrath. And now his clemency
Gives me the mean, to quit our want, with glory; and conclude
The Greeks in sea-bords, and our seas; to slack it, and extrude
His offered bounty by our flight. Fool that thou art, be wray
This counsel to no common ear; for no man shall obey.
If any will, I Will check his will. But what our self command,
Let all observe: take suppers all; keeepe watch of every hand.
If any Trojan have some spoil, that takes his too much care,
Make him dispose it publicly; it is better any fare
The better for him, then the Greeks. When light then deckes the skies,
Let all arm for a fierce assault. If great Achilles rise,
And will enforce our greater toil; it may rise so to him;
On my back, he shall find no wings; my spirit, shall force my lim
To stand his worst; and give, or take; Mars is our common Lord,
And the desirous sword-mans life; he ever puts to sword.
This counsel gat applause of all; so much were all unwise;
Minerua robbed them of their brains, to like the ill advice
The great man gave; and leave the good, since by the meaner given.
All took their suppers; but the Greeks, spent all the heavy Even
About Patroclus mournful rites; Pelides leading all
In all the forms of heaviness: he, by his side did fall;
And his man-slaughtering hands imposd, into his oft-kist breast;
Sighs, blew up sighs: and Lion-like, graced with a goodly crest, Simile.

That in his absence being robbed, by hunters of his whelps,
Returns to his so desolate den: and (for his wanted helps)
Beholding his unlooked for wants, flies roaring back again;
Hunts the sly hunter; many a vale, resounding his disdain.
So mourned Pelides, his late loss; so weighty were his mones,
Which (for their dumb sounds) now gave words, to all his Myrmidom. Achilles
to his Myrmidons.

O gods (said he) how vain a vow, I made, (to cheer the mind)
Of sad Menaetius, when his son, his hand to mine resigned;
That high-towr'd Opus he should see; and leave rac't Ilion,
With spoil, and honor, even wi^h me? but Jove vouchsafes to none,
Wished passages to all his vows; we both were destinate
To bloody one earth here in Troy; nor any more estate
In my return, has Peleus, or Thetis; but because,
I, last must undergo the ground, I Will keep no funeral laws
(O my Patroclus) for thy Corse; before I hither bring, Achilles to Patroclus
body.

The arms of Hector, and his head, to thee for offering.
Twelve youths, the most renowned of Troy, I Will sacrifise beside,
Before thy heap of funeral, to thee vnpacifide.
In mean time, by our crooked sternes, lie drawing tears from me;
And round about thy honored Corse, these dames of Dardanie,
And Ilion, with the ample breasts (whom our long spears, and powers,
And labors, purchased from the rich, and by-vs-ruind towers,
And cities strong, and populous, with diuers-languag'd men)
Shall kneel, and neither, day, nor night, be licenst to abstain
From solemn watches; their toiled eyes, held open with endless tears.
This passion past; he gave command, to his near soldiers;
To put a Tripod to the fire, to cleanse the festred gore,
From off the person. They obeyed, and presently did power
Fresh water in it; kindled wood, and with an instant flame,
The belly of the Tripod girt; till fires hot quality came
Up to the water. Then they washed, and filled the mortal wound
With wealthy oil, of nine years old; then wrapped the body round,
In largeness of a fine white sheet, and put it then in bed,
When all, watched all night, with their Lord, and spent sighs on the dead.
Then Jove asked Juno, if at length, she had suffisde her spleen; (...) to (...).

Achilles being won to arms? or if she had not be^e
The natural mother of the Greeks; she did so still prefer
Their quarrel? She incenst, asked why, he still was tanting her,
For doing good to those she loved? since man to man might show
Kind offices, though thrall to death; and though they did not know
Half such deep counsels, as disclosd; beneath her farre-seeing state: (...)
to (...).

She, reigning Queen of goddesses; and being ingenerate
Of one stock with himself; besides, the state of being his wife;
And must her wrath, and ill to Troy, continue such a strife
From time to time, twixt him and her? This private speech they had;
And now the siluer-footed Queen, had her ascension made, The^ enters the
Court of Vul^n.

To that incorruptible house, that starry golden court
Of fiery Vulcan; beautiful, amongst the immortal sort.
Which yet the lame god built himself: she found him in a sweat,
About his bellows; and in haste, had twenty Tripods beat,
To set for stools about the sides, of his well-builded hall.
To whose feet, little wheels of gold, he put, to go withal;
And enter his rich dining room; alone, their motion free
And back again go out alone, miraculous to see.
And thus much he had done of them; yet handles were to add;
For which he now was making studs. And while their fashion had
Employment of his skillful hand; bright Thetis was come near,
Whom first, fair well-haird Charis saw, that was the nuptial fere,
Of famous Vulcan; who, the hand, of Thetis took, and said;
Why, faire-train'd, loved, and honored Dame, are we thus visited Charis the
wife of Vulcan to Thetis.

By your kind presence? You I think, were never here before;
Come near, that I may banquet you, and make you visit more.
She led her in, and in a chair, of silver (being the fruit
Of Vulcans hand) she made her sit: a footstool, of a suite,
Apposing to her Cristall feet; and called the god of fire
For Thetis was arrived (she said) and entertained desire,
Of some grace, that his art might grant. Thetis to me (said he) Vulcan to
Charis

Is mighty, and most reverend, as one that nourisht me,
When Grief consumed me; being cast, from heaven, by want of shame
In my proud mother, who because, she brought me forth so lame,
Would have me made away; and then, had I been much distressed,
Had Thetis and Eurynome, in eithers silver breast
Not rescued me. Eurynome, that to her father had
Reciprocal Oceanus; nine years with them I made
A number of well-arted things; round bracelets, b^ons brave;
Whistles, and Carquenets: my forge, stood in a hollow Cave,
About which (murmuring with foam) th'vnmeasur'd Ocean
Was ever beating; my abode, known no^ to god, nor man,
But Thetis, and Eury^one, and they would see me still:
They were my loving guardians: now then the starry hill,
And our particular roof thus graced, with bright-hair'd Thetis here;
It fits me always to repay, a recompense as dear
To her thoughts, as my life to me. Haste Charis, and appose
Some dainty guest-rites to our friend, while I my bellows lose
From fire, and lay up all my tools. Then from an anuile rose
Th'vnweildy Monster; halted down, and all awry he went.
He took his bellows from the fire, and every instrument
Locked safe up in a silver chest. Then with a sponge he dressed
His face all over, neck and hands, and all his hairie breast:
Put on his Cote, his Scepter took, and then went halting forth:
Handmaids of gold, attending him; resembling in all worth, Vulcans attendants.

Living young damzels; filled with minds, and wisdom, and were trained
In all immortal ministry; virtue, and voice contained,
And moved with voluntary powers: and these still waited on
Their fiery Sovereign; who (not apt, to walk) sat near the throne
Of faire-hair'd Thetis; took her hand; and thus he courted her:
For what affair, o faire-train'd Queen, reverend to me, and dear, Vulcan to
Thetis.

Is our Court honored with thy state? That have not heretofore
Performed this kindness? Speak thy thoughts; thy suite can be no more,
Then my mind gives me charge to grant; can my power get it wrought?
Or that it have not only power, of only act in thought?
She thus: O Vulcan, is there one, of all that are of heaven, That to Vulcan.

That in her neuer-quiet mind, Saturnius has given
So much affliction as to me? whom only he subjects
(Of all the Sea-Nymphs) to a man; and makes me bear th'affects
Of his frail bed: and all against, the freedom of my will.
And he worn to his root, with age: from him, another ill,
Arises to me; Iup^ter, you know, has given a son
(The excellenst of men) to me; whose education,
On my part, well has answered, his own worth; having grown,
As in a fruitful soil, a tree, that puts not up alone,
His body to a naked height; but jointly gives his growth
A thousand branches; yet to him, so short a life I brought,
That never I shall see him more, returned to Peleus Court.
And all that short life he has spent, in most unhappy sort.
For first he won a worthy Dame, and had her by the hands
Of all the Grecians: yet this Dame, Atrides countermands:
For which, in much disdain he mourned, and almost pined away,
And yet, for this wrong, he received, some honor, I must say;
The Greeks being shut up at their ships; not sufferd to advance,
A head out of their batterd sternes; and mighty suppliance,
By all their grave men has been made, gifts, honors, all proposde
For his reflection; yet he still, kept close, and saw enclosde
Their whole host, in this general plague. But now his friend put on
His arms; being sent by him to field, and many a Myrmidon
In conduct of him; all the day, they fought before the gates
Of Scaea; and most certainly, that day had seen the dates,
Of all Troyes honors, in her dust; if Phoebus (having done
Much mischief more) the enuyed life, of good Men^tius son,
Had not with partial hands enforced; and all the honor given
To Hector, who has prisd his arms; and therefore I am driven,
To Embrace thy knees, for new defense, to my loved son: ahlas,
His life prefixed, so short a date, had need spend that with grace.
A shield then for him, and a helm, fair greaues, and curets such,
As may renown thy workmanship; and honor him as much;
I sue for, at thy famous hands. Be confident (said he)
Let these wants breed thy thoughts, no care; I would it lay in me,
To hide him from his heavy death; when Fate shall seek for him; Vulcan to
(...)

As well, as with renowned arms, to fit his goodly limme;
Which thy hands shall convey to him; and all eyes shall admire:
See, and desire again to see, thy satisfied desire.
This said, he left her there; and forth, did to his bellows go, Vulcan (...)
to forge arms for Achille^.

Apposde them to the fire again, commanding them to blow.
Through twenty holes made to his harth, at once blew twenty pair,
That ^it'd his coals, sometimes with soft, sometimes with vehement air;
As he willed, and his work required. Amids the flame he cast,
Tin, Silver, precious Gold, and Brass; and in the stock he placed,
A mighty anuile; his right hand, a weighty hammer held;
His left his tongs. And first he forged, a strong and spacious shield
Adornd with twenty several hewes: about whose verge he beat,
A ring, threefold and radiant; and on the back he set,
A silver handle; fiue-fold were, the equal lines he drew
About the whole circumference: in which, his hand did show,
(Directed with a knowing mind) a rare variety:
For in it he presented earth; in it, the sea, and sky:
In it, the-neuer-wearied Sun; the Moon exactly round,
And all those stars, with which the brows, of ample heaven are crowned;
Orion, all the Pleiades; and those seven Atlas got;
The close-beam'd Hyades. The Bear, surnamed the Chariot,
That turns about heavens axeltree; holds o^a a constant eye*
Upon Orion; and, of all, the Cressets in the sky,
His golden forehead never bows, to the Ocean Emperie.
Two cities in the spacious shield, he built with goodly state, Two cities
forged in Achilles arms

Of diuerse-languag'd men: the one, did nuptials celebrate,
Observing at them, solemn feasts: the Brides from forth their bowres
With torches, vsherd through the streets: a world of Paramours
Excited by them; youths, and maids, in lovely circles (...):
To whom the merry Pipe, and Harp, the spritely sounds advanced;
The matrones standing in their doors, admiring. Otherwhere,
A solemn Court of law was kept, were throngs of people were:
The case in question, was a fine, imposde on one, that slew
The friend of him that followed it, and for the fine did sue;
Which the other pleaded he had paid. The adverse part denied,
And openly affirmed he had, no penny satisfied.
Both put it to arbiterment; the people cried it was best
For both parts; and th'Assistants too, gave their doomes like the rest.
The Heralds made the people peace: the Seniors then did bear
The voicefull Heralds scepters; sat, within a sacred sphere
On polisht stones; and gave by turns, their sentence. In the Court
Two talents gold were cast, for him, that iugd'd in iustest sort.
The other city, other wars, employed as busily, The martial city in the
shield of Achilles.

Two armies glittering in arms, of one confederacy,
Besieged it; and a parle had, with those within the town;
Two ways they stood resolved; to see, the city overthrown:
Or that the citizens should heap, in two parts all their wealth,
And give them half. They neither liked, but armed themselves by stealth:
Left all their old men, wives, and boys, behind, to man their walls;
And stole out to their enemies town. The Queen of martials,
And Mars himself conducted them; both which being forged of gold,
Must needs have golden furniture: and men might so behold,
They were presented deities. The people, Vulcan forged
Of ^eaner metal. When they came, where that was to be urged
For which they went; within a vale, close to a flood, whose stream
Used to give all their cattle drink; they there enambusht them:
And sent two scouts out to descrie, when the enemies herds, and sheep
Were setting out. They strait come forth, with two that used to keep
Their pass^ge always; both which pip't, and went on merrily;
Nor dreamed of Ambuscados there. The Ambush then let fly;
Slew all their white fleec't sheep, and neat, and by them laid their guard.
When those in si^ge before the town, so strange an uproar heard,
Behind, amongst their flocks, and herds; (being then in counsel set)
They then start up, took horse, and soon, their subtle enemy met;
Fought with them on the rivers shore, where both gave mutual blows
With w^ll pil'd darts. Amongst them all: perverse Contention rose,
Amongst them Tumult was enraged: amongst them ruinous Fate,
Had her red-finger; some they took, in an unhurt estate;
Some hurt; yet living; some quite slain: and those they tug'd to them
By both the feet; stripped off and took, their weeds, with all the stream
Of blood upon them; that their steeles, had manfully let out.
They fared as men alive indeed, drew dead indeed about.
To these, the fiery Artizan, did add a new-ear'd field A new (...) (...) in
the shield.

Larg'd and thrice plowd; the soil being soft, and of a wealthy yield,
And many men at plow he made, that drove earth here and there,
And turned up stitches orderly; at whose end when they were,
A fellow ever gave their hands, full cups of luscious wine;
Which emptied, for another stitch, the earth they undermine;
And long till the utmost bound be reached, of all the ample Close:
The soil turned up behind the plow, all black like earth arose,
Though forged of nothing else but gold, and lay in show as light,
As if it had been plowd indeed; miraculous to sight.
There grew by this, a field of corn, high, ripe; where reapers wrought, A
field of cor^e.

And let thick handfuls fall to earth; for which, some other brought
Bands, and made sheaues. Three binders stood, and took the handfuls reapt,
From boys that gatherd quickly up; and by them armefuls heapt.
Amongst these at a ^urrowes end, the king stood pleased at heart;
Said no word, but his scepter showed. And from him, much apart,
His harvest Bailiffes, underneath, an Oak, a feast prepared:
And having killed a mighty Ox, stood there to see him shared;
Which women, for their harvest folks (then come to sup) had dressed;
And many-white-wheate-cakes bestowed, to make it up a feast.
He set near this, a vine of gold; that cracked beneath the weight A (...) of
gold.

Of bunches, black with being ripe, to keep which, at the height,
A silver rail ran all along; and round about it flowed
An azure mote; and to this guard, a quick-set was bestowed
Of Tin, one only path to all; by which the pressemen came
In time of vintage; youths, and maids, that bore not yet the flame
Of manly Hymen; baskets bore, of grapes, and mellow fruit.
A lad that sweetly touched a harp, to which his voice did suite,
Centerd the circles of that youth; all whose skill could not do
The wantons pleasure to their minds, that danced, sung, whistl'd to.
A herd of Oxen then he carved, with high raisd heads; forged all A heard of
oxen

Of Gold and Tin (for color mixed) and bellowing from their stall,
Rusht to their pastures, at a flood, that echoed all their throtes;
Exceeding swift, and full of ^eeds; and all in ^ellow cotes,
Four heardsmen followed; after whom, nine Mastiues went. In head
Of all the heard, upon a Bull, that deadly bellowed,
Two horrid Lions rampt, and seisd, and (tugged off) bellowing still,
Both men, and dogs came; yet they tore, the hide, and lapt their fill
Of black blood; and the entrails eat. In vain the men assayd,
To set their dogs on: none durst pinch, but curre-like stood and bayd
In both the faces of their kings; and all their onsets fled.
Then in a passing pleasant vale, the famous Artsman fed, Flocks of sheep.

(Upon a goodly pasture ground) rich flocks, of white-fleec't sheep;
Built stables, cottages, and cotes; that did the sheapheards keep
From wind and weather. Next to these, he cut a dancing place, A labyrinth.

All full of turnings; that was like, the admirable maze
For faire-hair'd Ariadne made, by cunning Dedalus;
And in it, youths, and virgins danced; all young and beauteous,
And glewed in another palms. Weeds that the wind did toss,
The virgins wore: the youths, wouen cotes, that cast a faint dim gloss,
Like that of oil. Fresh garlands to, the virgins temples crowned;
The youths guilt swords wore, at their thighs; with silver baw dricks bound:
Sometimes all wound close in a ring; to which as fast they spunne,
As any wheel a Turner makes, being tried how it will run,
While he is set; and out again, as full of speed, they wound;
Not one left fast, or breaking hands. A multitude stood round;
Delighted with their nimble sport: to end which two begun
(Mids all) a song, and turning sung, the spo^s conclusion.
All this he circl'd in the shield, with pouring round about
(In all his rage) the Ocean, that it might never out.
This shield thus done, he forged for him, such curets, as out shined
The blaze of fire: a helmet then (through which no steel could find
Forced passage) he composde, whose hu^, a hundred colors took;
And in the crest, a plume of gold, that each breath stirred, he stuck.
All done; he all to Thetis brought, and held all up to her;
She took them all, and liked the hawke, (surnamed the Osspringer)
From Vulcan to her mighty son; with that so glorious show,
Stoopt from the steep Olympian hill, hid in eternal snow.
COMMENTARIVS.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thus turned by Spondanus ad verbum:

Vt autem cognitu facilis vox est, cum clangit tuba
Vrbem obsidentes hosts propter perniciosos:
Sic tunc clara vox fuit Aeacid^,
Hi autem postquam igitur audiuerunt vocem ferream Aeacidae:
Omnibus commotus est animus.
Valla thus:

Sicut enim cum obsidentibus saeuis vrbem hostibus, vel clarior vox, vel
classicum perstrepit; ita nunc Achilles magna voce inclamauit. -- quam cum
audirent Troiani, perturbati sunt animis. Eobanus Hessus thus:

-- Nam sicut ab vrbe Obsessa increpuere tubae, vel classica cantu Ferrea; sic
Troas vox perturbabat Achillis. Mine own harsh conversion (in which I will be
bold to repeat after these, thus closely for your easier examination) is this;
as before,

-- And as a voice is heard
With emulous attention, when any town is spher'd
With siege of such a foe as kills, men's minds; and for the town
Makes sound his trumpet: so the voice, from Thetis issue thrown,
Won emulously the ears of all. His brazen voice once heard,
The minds of all were startled so, they yielded.
In conference of all our translations, I would gladly learn of my more
learned Reader; if the two last conuersions do any thing near express the
conceit of Homer, or if they bear any grace worth the signification of his
words, and the sense of his illustration. Whose intent was not to express the
clearenesse or shrilnesse of his voice in it self; but the envious terror it
wrought in the Trojans. (...), not signi^ing in this place clara, or cognitu
facilis vox; but emulanda vox. (...) signifying, que^ valde aemulamur, aut
valde aemulandus: though these interpreters would rather receive it here for
(...), verso (...) in (...), vt sit clarus, illustris, etc. But how silly a
curiosity is it to alter the word upon ignorance of the signification it has
in his place? the word (...) being a compound of (...), which signifies valde,
and (...), which is aemulatio: or of (...) which signifies aemulor? To this
effect then (says Homer in this Simile,) As a voice that works a terror,
carrying an envy with it, sounds to a city besieged when the trumpet of a
dreadful and mind-destroying enemy summons it, (for so (...), signifies,
(...) signifying animum destruens, being a compound of (...), which signifies
destruo; and (...) which is animus,) that i^, when the parle comes, after the
trumpets sound, uttering the resolution of the dreadful enemy before it. The
further application of this simile is left out by mischance.

The end of the eighteenth Book.
THE XIX. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
THetis, presenting armor to her son;
He calls a Court, with full reflection
Of all his wrath. Takes of the king of men
Free-offerd gifts. All take their breakefast then*
He (only fasting) Arms, and brings abroad,
The Grecian host. And (heairng the abode
Of his near death by Xanthus prophesied)
The horse, for his so bold presage, does chide.
Another Argument.
(...) gives the anger period
And great Achilles comes abroad.
THe Morn arose, and from the Ocean, in her saffron robe,
Gave light to all: as well to gods, as men of th'vnder globe.
Thetis stoopt home, and found the prostrate person of her son, Thetis
appears To Achilles.

About his friend; still pouring out, himself in passion:
A number more, being heavy consorts to him in his cares.
Amongst them all, Thetis appeared; and sacred comforters
Made these short words. Though we must grieve, yet bear it thus; (my son)
It was no man that prostrated, in this sad fashion
Thy dearest friend; it was a god, that first laid on his hand;
Whose will is law: the gods decrees, no humane must withstand.
Do thou embrace this Fabric of a god; whose hand, before,
Nere forged the like; and such as yet, no humane shoulder wore.
Thus (setting down;) The precious metal of the arms was such,
That all the room rung with the weight, of every slendrest touch.
Cold tremblings took the Myrmidons; none durst sustain, all feared Achilles
rapture at the sight of his arms.

To Oppose their eyes: Achilles yet, as soon as they appeared,
Stern Anger enterd. From his eyes (as if the day star rose)
A radiance terrifying men, did all the state enclose.
At length, he took into his hands, the rich gift of the god;
And (much pleased, to behold the art, that in the shield he showed)
He brake forth into this applause; O mother, these, right well,
Show an immortal fingers touch; man's hand must never deal
With arms again. Now I will arm; yet (that no honor make
My friend forgotten) I much fear, lest with the blows of flies,
His brasse-inflicted wounds are filde; life gone; his person lies
All apt to putrefaction. She bad him, doubt no harm,
Of those offenses: she would care, to keep the petulant swarm
Of flies (that usually taint, the bodies of the slain)
From his friends person: though a year, the earths top should sustain
His slaughterd body, it should still, rest sound, and rather hold
A better state, then worse; since time, that death first made him cold:
And so bad call a Council to, dispose of new alarmes,
Where (to the king, that was the Pastor of that flock in arms)
He should depose all anger and, put on a fortitude
Fit for his arms. All this, his powers, with dreadful strength indude.
She, with her fair hand, stilled into, the nostrils of his friend,
Red Nectar, and Ambrosia; with which she did defend
The Corse from putrefaction. He trod along the shore,
And summoned all th'Heroique Greeks; with all that spent before Achilles
(...) all the Greeks to Counsel.

The time in exercise with him; the Masters, Pilots to,
Victlers, and all; all when they saw, Achilles summon so,
Swarmed to the Council, having long, left the laborious wars.
To all these, came two halting kings, true seruitors of Mars,
Tydides, and wise Ithacus, both leaning on their spears:
Their wounds still painful; and both these, sat first of all the (...)*
The last come, was the king of men, sore wounded with the lance
Of Coon Antenorides. All set, the first in utterance, ^hilles (...) (...) in
the Council.

Was Thetis son; who rose, and said; Atrides, had not this
Conferd most profit to us both? when both our enmities
Consumed us (...)? and for a wench? whom, when I chusde for prise,
(In laying Lyrnessus ruined walls, amongst our victories)
I would to heaven (as first she set, her dainty foot abord)
Dian as hand had tumbled off, and with a iauelin gored.
For then, th'vn measurable earth, had not so thick been gnawne,
(In deaths conulsions) by our friends; since my affects were drawn
To such distemper. To our foe, and to our foes chief friend
Our jar brought profit: but the Greeks, will never give an end
To thought of what it preiudic't them. Past things yet, past our aid;
Fit grief, for what wrath ruled in them; must make th'amends repaid
With that necessity of love; that now forbids our ir^;
Which I with free affects obey. It Is for the senseless fire
Still to be burning, having stuff; but men, must curb rage still,
Being framed with voluntary powers, as well to check the will,
As give it raines. Give you then charge, that for our instant fight,
The Greeks may follow me to field; to try if still the Night
Will bear out Trojans at our ships. I hope there is some one,
Amongst their chief encouragers, will thank me to be gone;
And bring his heart down to his knees, in that submission.
The Greeks reioyc't, to hear the heart, of Peleus mighty son,
So quallified. And then the king (not rising from his throne,
For his late hurt) to get good (...); thus orderd his ^plie:
Princes of Greece, your states shall suffer no indignity; (...) to the
Princes of Greece.

If (being far off) ye stand and hear; nor fits it such as stand,
At greater distance, to disturb, the counsel now in hand,
By uproar; in their too much care, of hearing. Some, of force,
Must lose some words: for, hard it is, in such a great concourse,
(Though hearers ears be nere so sharp) to touch at all things spoke.
And in assemblies of such thrust, how can a man provoke
Fit power to hear, or leave to speak? best auditors may there,
Lose fittest words; and the most vocal Orator, fit ear.
My maine end then, to satisfy, Pelides with reply,
My words shall prosecute. To him, my speech especially
Shall bear direction. Yet I wish, the court in general,
Would give fit ear; my speech shall need, attention of all.
Often have our Peers of Greece, much blamed, my forcing of the prise,
Due to Achilles; of which act, not I, but destinies,
And Jove himself; and black Erynnis (that casts false mists still
Betwixt us, and our actions done, both by her power, and will)
Are authors: what could I do then? The very day, and hour,
Of our debate, that fury stole, in that act, on my power.
And more; All things are done by strife: that ancient seed of Jove
Ate, that hurts all, perfects all. Her feet, are soft; and move Ate the
godde^ of cont^ion.

Not on the earth; they bear her still, aloft men heads; and there,
The harmefull hurts them. Nor was I, alone her prisoner;
Jove (best of men, and gods) has been. Not he himself has gone
Beyond her fetters: no she made, a woman put them on.
For when Alcmena was to vent, the force of Hercules,
In well walled Thebes: thus Jove triumphed; Hear gods, and goddesses,
The words, my joys urged: In this day, Lucina (bringing pain,
To laboring women) shall produce, into the light of men,
A man, that all his neighbor kings, shall in his Empire hold;
And vant, that more then manly race, whose honored veins enfold
My eminent blood. Saturnia, conceived a present slight,
And urged confirmance of his vant, t'infringe it; her conceit,
In this sort urged: Thou will not hold, thy word with this rare man;
Or if thou will, confirm it with, the oath Olympian;
That whosoever falls this day, betwixt a woman's knees,
Of those men's stocks, that from thy blood, derive their pedigrees
Shall all his neighbor towns command. Jove (ignorant of fraud) Iuno^
deceit of Jupiter.

Took that great oath, which his great ill, gave little cause t'applaude.
Down from Olympus top, she stoopt; and quickly reached the place
In Argos, where the famous wife, of Sthenelus (whose race
He fetch from Jove, by Perseus) dwelt. She was but seuenths months gone
With issue; yet she brought it forth; Alcmenas matchless son
Delaide from light; Saturnia, represt the teeming throws
Of his great mother. Up to heaven, she mounts again, and shows,
(In glory) her deceit to Jove. Bright lightning Jove (said she)
Now the Argiues have an Emperor; a son derived from thee Iunos insul^ after
her de^ipt

Is borne to Persean Sthenelus; Eurystheus, his name;
Noble and worthy of the rule, thou swor'st to him. This came
Close to the heart of Jupiter; and Ate, that had wrought
This anger by Saturnia, by her bright-haire he caught;
Held down her head, and over her, made this infallible vow:
That never to the cope of stars, should reascend that brow,
Being so unfortunate to all. Thus, swinging her about,
He cast her from the fiery heaven; who ever since thrust out
Her forkt sting, in the affairs of men. Jove ever since did grieve,
Since his dear issue Hercules, did by his vow atchieue,
Th'vniust toils of Eurysteus: thus fares it now with me;
Since under Hectors violence, the Grecian progeny,
Fell so unfitly by my spleen; whose falls will ever stick
In my grieved thoughts; my weakness yet, ( Saturnius making sick
The state my mind held) now recur'd; th'amends shall make even weight
With my offense: and therefore rouse, thy spirits to the fight,
With all thy forces; all the gifts, proposde thee, at thy tent,
(Last day) by royal Ithacus, my officers shall present;
And (if it like thee) strike no stroke, (though never so on thorns
Thy mind stands to thy friends revenge) till my command, adornes
Thy tents, and cofers, with such gifts, as well may let thee know,
How much I wish thee satisfied. He answered, let thy vow, Achilles his noble
answer of Aga^non.

(Renowned Atrides) at thy will, be kept, (as justice would)
Or keep thy gifts, it is all in thee. The counsel now we hold,
Is for repairing our maine field, with all our fortitude.
My fair show made, brooks no retreat; nor must delays delude
Our deeds expectance. Yet undone, the great work is; all eyes
Must see Achilles in first fight, depeopling enemies;
As well as counsel it in court: that every man set on;
May choose his man, to imitate, my exercise upon.
Ulysses answered, do not yet, (thou man, made like the gods) V^sses A^.

Take fasting men to field: suppose, that whatsoever ods,
It brings against them, with full men, thy boundless eminence,
Can amply answer; yet refrain, to tempt a violence.
The conflict wearing out our men, was late, and held as long;
Wherein, though most, Jove stood for Troy; he yet made our part strong
To bear that most. But it was to bear, and that breeds little heart.
Let wine and bread then add to it: they help the twofold part,
The soul, and body in a man; both force, and fortitude.
All day men cannot fight, and fast; though never so indude
With minds to fight; for that supposde, there lurks yet secretly,
Thirst, hunger, in the oppressed joints; which no mind can supply.
They take away a marchers knees. Men's bodies thoroughly fed*
Their minds share with them in their strength; and (all day combatted)
One stirs not, till you call off all. Dismiss them then to meat,
And let Atrides tender here, in sight of all this seat,
The gifts he promised. Let him swear, before us all, and rise
To that oath; that he never touched, in any wanton wise,
The Lady he enforced. Besides, that he remains in mind
As chastely satisfied: not touched, or privily enclind
With future vantages. And last; it is fit he should approve
All these rites, at a solemn feast, in honor of your love;
That so you take no mangled law, for merits absolute.
And thus the honors you receive, resolving the pursuit
Of your friends quarrel, well will quit, your sorrow for your friend.
And thou Atrides in the taste, of so severe an end;
Hereafter may on others hold, a iuster government.
Nor will it ought empaire a king, to give a sound content
To any subject, soundly wronged. I joy (replide the king) (...) to (...).

O Laertiades, to hear, thy liberal counselling.
In which is all decorum kept; nor any point lackes touch,
That might be thought on, to conclude, a reconcilement, such
As fits example; and us two. My mind yet makes me swear,
Not your impulsion. And that mind, shall rest so kind and clear,
That I will not forswear to God. Let then Achilles stay,
(Though never so inflamed for fight) and all men here I pray,
To stay, till from my tents these gifts, be brought here; and the truce,
At all parts finished before all. And thou, of all I choose,
(Divine Ulysses) and command, to choose of all your host,
Youths of most honor, to present, to him we honor most,
The gifts we late vowed; and the Dames. Mean space, about our tents,
Talthybius shall provide a Bore; to crown these kind events,
With thankful sacrifice to Jove, and to the God of light.
Achilles answered: These affairs, will show more requisite Achilles to Ulysses.

(Great king of men) some other time, when our more free estates
Yield fit cessation from the war; and when my spleen abates.
But now (to all our shames besides) our friends by Hector slain,
(And Jove to friend) lie vnfetch off. Haste then, and meat your men;
Though I must still say: My command, would lead them fasting forth,
And all together feast, at night. Meat will be something worth,
When stomachs first have made it way, with venting infamy,
(And other sorrows late sustained) with longed for wreakes, that lie
Heavy upon them, for rights sake. Before which lode be got
From off my stomach; meat nor drink, I vow, shall down my throat;
My friend being dead; who digd with wounds, and bored through both his feet,
Lies in the entry of my tent; and in the tears does fleet
Of his associates. Meat and drink, have little merit then
To comfort me; but blood and death, and deadly groans of men.
The great in counsels, yet made good, his former counsels thus: Ulysses his
r^ly.

O Peleus son, of all the Greeks, by much most valorous;
Better and mightier then my self; no little, with thy lance,
I yield thy worth; in wisdom yet, no less I dare advance
My right above thee; since above, in years, and knowing more.
Let then thy mind rest in thy words; we quickly shall have store,
And all sacietie of fight; whose steel heaps store of straw,
And little corn upon a floor; when Jove (that does withdraw,
And join all battles) once begins, t'encline his balances,
In which he weighs the lives of men. The Greeks you must not press,
To mourning with the belly; death, has naught to do with that,
In healthful men, that mourn for friends. His steel we stumble at,
And fall at, every day you see, sufficient store, and fast.
What hour is it that any breathes? we must not use more have
Then speed holds fit for our revenge: nor should we mourn too much.
Who dead is, must be buried; men's patience should be such,
That one days moan should serve one man: the dead must end with Death,
And life last with what strengthens life. All those that held their breath
From death in fight, the more should eat, that so they may supply
Their fellows that have stuck in field; and fight incessantly.
Let none expect reply to this, nor stay; for this shall stand,
Or fall with some offense to him, that looks for new command;
Who ever in dislike holds back. All join then; all things fit,
Allowed for all; set on a charge; at all parts answering it.
This said, he chusde (for noblest youths, to bear the presents) these,
The sons of Nestor; and with them, renowm'd Meriones. The names of those
that carried the presents to Achilles.

Phylidas, Thoas, Lycomed, and Meges, all which went
(And Menalippus following, Ulysses) to the tent
Of Agamemnon. He but spoke; and with the word, the deed
Had joint effect: the fitness well, was answered in the speed.
The presents, added to the Dame, the General did enforce,
Were twenty Caldrons, Tripods seven, twelve young and goodly horse:
Seven Ladies excellently seen, in all Min^es skill; The presents.

The eight Brisaeis, who had power, to ravish every will.
Twelve talents of the finest gold; all which Ulysses weyd,
And carried first; and after him, the other youths conveyed
The other presents; tenderd all, in face of all the Court.
Up rose the King. Talthybius (whose voice had a report
Like to a god) called to the rites; there, having brought the Bore,
Atrides with his knife took sey, upon the part before; Agame^nons at^ation.

And lifting up his sacred hands, to Jove, to make his vows;
Grave Silence struck the complete Court; when (casting his high brows,
Up to the broad heaven) thus he spoke: Now witness Jupiter,
(First, highest, and thou best of gods) thou Earth, that all do bear;
Thou Sun; ye Furies under earth, that every soul torment,
Whom impious perjury distaines; that naught incontinent,
In bed, or any other act, to any slendrest touch
Of my light vows, has wronged the Dame; and let my plagues be such,
As are inflicted by the gods, in all extremity
On whomsoever perjured men, if godless perjury
In least degree dishonor me. This said, the bristl'd throat
Of the submitted sacrifice, with ruthlesse steel he cut.
Which straight into the horie sea, Talthybius cast, to feed
The sea-borne nation. Then stood up, the halfe-celestiall seed
Of faire-hair'd Thetis, strengthening thus, Atrides innocence.
O father Jupiter, from thee, descends the confluence Achilles to Jupiter.

Of all man's ill; for now I see, the mighty king of men,
At no hand forced away my prise; nor first inflamed my spleen,
With any set ill in himself; but thou, the king of gods,
(Incenst with Greece) made that the mean to all their periods.
Which now, amend we, as we may; and give all suffrages
To what wise Ithacus aduisde. Take breakfasts, and address
For instant conflict. Thus he raisd, the Court, and all took way
To several ships. The Myrmidons, the presents did convey
T'Achilles fleet; and in his tents, disposde them; doing grace,
Of seat, and all rites to the Dames. The horses put in place,
With others of Aeacides. When (like Loves golden Queen)
Brisaeis (all in ghastly wounds) had dead Patroclus seen;
She fell about him, shrieking ou^; and with her white hands tore
Her hair, breasts, radiant cheeks; and drowned, in warm tears, did deplore
His cruel destiny. At length, she gat power to express
Her violent passion; and thus spoke, this-like-the goddesses.
O good Patroclus, to my life, the dearest grace, it had; Bri^ complaint over
the body of (...).

I (wretched dame) departing hence, enforced; and dying sad,
Left thee alive, when thou had cheered, my poor captivity;
And now returned, I find thee dead; misery on misery,
Ever increasing with my steps. The Lord to whom my Sire,
And dearest mother gave my life, in nuptials; his life's fire
I saw before our city gates, extinguished; and his fate,
Three of my worthy brothers lives, in one womb generate,
Felt all, in that blake day of death. And when Achilles hand
Had slain all these, and rac't the town, Mynetes did command;
(All cause of neuer-ending griefs, presented) thou took'st all
On thy endeavor, to convert, to joy as General;
Affirming, he that hurt, should heal; and thou would make thy friend
(Brave Captain that thou were) supply, my vowed husbands end;
And in rich Phthia celebrate, amongst his Myrmidons,
Our nuptial banquets; for which grace, with these most worthy mones,
I never shall be satiate; tho^ ever being kind;
Ever delightsome; one sweet grace, fed still with one sweet mind.
Thus spoke she weeping; and with her, did the other Ladies moan,
Patroclus fortunes in pretext, but in sad truth their own.
About Aeacides himself, the kings of Greece were placed,
Entreating him to food; and he, entreated them as fast,
(Still intermixing words and sighs) if any friend were there
Of all his dearest; they would cease, and offer him no cheer,
But his due sorrows; for before, the Sun had left that sky,
He would not eat; but of that day, sustain th'extremitie.
Thus all the kings (in resolute grief, and fasting) he dismift;
But both the Atrides, Ithacus, and wars *old Martialist, Ne^or.

Idomenaeus and his friend; and Phoenix; these remained
Endeavoring comfort; but no thought, of his vowed woe restrained.
Nor could, till that days bloody fight, had calmed his blood; he still
Rememberd something of his friend; whose good, was all his ill.
Their urging meat, the diligent fashion of his friend renewed,
In that excitement: thou (said he) when this speed was pursued
Against the Trojans; evermore, apposedst in my tent,
A pleasing breakfast; being so free, and sweetly diligent,
Thou made all meat sweet. Then the war, was tearefull to our foe,
But now to me; thy wounds so wound me, and thy overthrow.
For which my ready food I fly, and on thy longings feed.
Nothing could more afflict me: Fame, relating the foul deed
Of my dear fathers slaughter; blood, drawn from my sole sons heart,
No more could wound me. Cursed man, that in this for^ein part,
(For hateful Hellen) my true love; my country, Sire, and son,
I thus should part with. Scyros now, gi^es education (...) was an I Will in the
sea Aegeum, where Achilles himself was brought up as well as his so^

(O Neoptelemus) to thee, (if living yet) from whence
I hoped (dear friend) thy longer life, (safely returned from hence,
And my life quitting thine) had power, to ship him home; and show
His young eyes Phthi^, subjects, court; my father being now
Dead, or most short-liu'd; troublous age, oppressing him, and fear
Still of my deaths news. These sad words, he blew into the ear
Of every visitant, with sighs; all echoed by the Pears,
Remembering who they left at home. All whose so humane tears
Jove pitied: and since they all, would in the good of one
Be much revived; he thus bespake, Minerua: Thetis son, Jove to Minerua

(Now daughter) thou have quite forgot. O, is Achilles care
Extinguished in thee? prostrated, in most extreme ill fare,
He lies before his high-sail'd fleet, for his dead friend; the rest
Are strengthening them with meat; but he, lies desperately oppressed
With heartlesse fasting: Go thy ways, and to his breast instill
Red Nectar and Ambrosia; that Fast procure no ill
To his near enterprise. This spur, he added to the free;
And like a Harpye (with a voice, that shrickes so dreadfully,
And feathers that like needles pricked) she stoopt through all the stars
Amongst the Grecians; all whose tents, were now filled for the wars.
Her seres struck through Achilles tent; and closely she instilled
Heavens most-to-be-desired feast, to his great breast; and filled
His sinews with that sweet supply, for fear unsavory Fast
Should creep into his knees. Her self, the skies again enchac't.
The host set forth; and poured his steel waves, far out of the fleet. The
show of the army, setting forth under Achilles conduct.

And as from air; the frostie Northwind blows a cold thick sleete,
That dazels eyes; flakes after flakes, incessantly descending:
So thick helmes, curets, ashen darts, and round shields, never ending,
Flowed from the nauies hollow womb: their splendors gave heavens eye,
His beams again; Earth laughed to see, her face so like the sky.
Arms shined so hot; and she such clouds, made with the dust she cast,
She thunderd; feet of men and horse, importuned her so fast.
In midst of all; divine Achilles his fair person armed;
His teeth gnasht as he stood; his eyes, so full of fire, they warmed.
Vnsufferd grief and anger at, the Tr^ians so combined.
His greaues first used, his goodly curets on his bosom shined;
His sword, his shield; that cast a brightness from it, like the Moon.
And as from sea, sailers discern, a harmfull fire, let run
By herdsmens faults, till all their stall, flies up in wrestling flame;
Which being on hills, is seen far off; but being alone, none came
To give it quench; at shore no neighbors; and at sea, their friends
Driven off with tempests; such a fire, from his bright shield extends
His ominous radiance; and in heaven, impressed his fervent blaze.
His crested helmet, grave and high, had next triumphant place,
On his curled head: and like a star, it cast a spurrie ray;
About which, a bright thickened bush, of golden hair, did play;
Which Vulcan forged him for his plume. Thus complete armed, he ^ide
How fit they were: and if his motion could with ease abide
Their brave instruction; and so far, they were from hindering it;
That to it they were nimble wings; and made so light his spirit,
That from the earth, the princely Captain they took up to air.
Then from his armoury he drew, his lance, his fathers spear,
Huge, weighty, firm; that not a Greek, but he himself alone
Knew how to shake; it grew upon, the mountain ^elion;
From whose height, Chiron hewed it for, his Sire; and fatal it was
To great-soul'd men. Of Peleus and Pelion, surnamed Pelias.
Then from the stable, their bright horse, Automedon withdrawes,
And Alcymus. Put Poitrils on, and cast upon their ^awes,
Their bridles; hurling back the raines, and hung them on the seat.
The fair scourge then Automedon, takes up, and up does get,
To guide the horse. The fights seat last, Achilles took behind;
Who looked so armed, as if the Sun, there fallen from heaven had shined.
Achilles to hi^ horses.

And terribly, thus charged his steeds. Xanthus, and Balius,
Seed of the Harpye; in the charge, ye undertake of us;
Discharge it not; as when Patroclus ye left dead in field.
But when with blood, for this days fast observed, Revenge shall yield
Our heart sacietie; bring us off. Thus since Achilles spoke,
As if his awed steeds understood: it was Iunoes will to make
Vocal the pallat of the one; who shaking his fair head,
(Which in his mane (let fall to earth) he almost buried)
Thus Xanthus spoke: Ablest Achilles now (at least) our care Xanthus the horse
of Achi. to Achilles.

Shall bring thee off; but not far hence, the fatal minutes are,
Of thy grave ruin. Nor shall we, be then to be reprou'd,
But mightiest Fate, and the great God. Nor was thy best beloved
Spoiled so of arms by our slow pace; or courages empaire;
The best of gods, Latonaes son, that wears the golden hair,
Gave him his deaths wound; though the grace, he gave to Hectors hand.
We, like the spirit of the West, that all spirits can command
For power of wing, could run him off: but thou thy self must go;
So Fate ordaines; God and a man, must give thee overthrow.
This said, the Furies stopped his voice. Achilles far in rage, Achilles reply
to Xanthus.

Thus answered him: It fits not thee, thus proudly to presage
My overthrow; I know my self, it is my fate to fall
Thus far from Phthia; yet that Fate, shall fail to vent her gall,
Till mine vent thousands. These words used, he fell to horrid deeds;
Gave dreadful signal; and forthright, made fly, his one-hou'd steeds.
COMMENTARIVS.
^ (...), etc. Aprum praeparet mactandum Iouique Solique: He shall prepare a
Bore for sacrifice to Jove and the Sun. It is the end of Agamemnons speech in
this book before to Ulysses, and promises that sacrifice to Jove and the Sun,
at the reconciliation of himself and Achilles. Our Commentors (Eustathius and
Spondanus, etc.) will by no means allow the word (...) here for Homers, but an
unskillfulness in the diuulger; and will needs have it (...) or (...); which
Spondanus says is altogether here to be understood: as Eustathius words teach;
for to offer so fierce a beast to Jove as a Bore, he says is absurd: and cites
Natalis lib. 1. cap. 17. where he says, Homer in this place makes a tame Sow
sacrificed to Jove; who was as tamely and simply deceived as the rest.
Eustathius reason for it, is, that sus is animal salax; and since the oath
Agamemnon takes at this sacrifice to satisfy Achilles (that he has not touched
Briseis) is concerning a woman, very fitly is a Sow here sacrificed. But this
seems to Spondanus something ridiculous (as I hope you will easily judge it.)
And, as I conceive, so is his own opinion to have the original word (...)
altered, and expounded suem. His reason for it, he makes nice to utter, saying,
he knows what is set down amongst the learned touching the sacrifice of a
Sow. But because it is (he says) (...), nihil ad rem, (though as they expound
it, it is too much ad rem) he is willing to keep his opinion in silence; unless
you will take it for a splayed or gelded Sow; as if Agamemnon would innuate,
that as this Sow (being splayed) is free from Venus, so had he never attempted
the dishonor of Briseis. And peradventure (says Spondanus) you cannot think
of a better exposition: when a worse cannot be coniectured, unless that of
Eustathius; as I hope you will clearly grant me, when you hear but mine. Which
is this: The sacrifice is not made by Agamemnon, for any resemblance or
reference it has to the Lady now to be restored, (which since these Clerks
will needs have it a Sow, in behalf of Ladies, I disdain) but only to the
reconciliation of Agamemnon and Achilles; for a sacred sign whereof, and that
their wraths were no^ absolutely appeased, Agamemnon thought fit, a Bore (being
the most wrathful of all beasts) should be sacrificed to Jove; intimating,
that in that Bore, they sacrificed their wraths to Iupi^er, and became friends.
And thus is the original word preserved, which (together with the sacred sense
of our Homer) in a thousand other places, suffers most ignorant and barbarous
violence. But here (being weary, both with finding faults, and my labor) till
a refreshing come, I will end my poor Comment. Holding it not altogether unfit
with this ridiculous contention of our Commentors, a little to quicken you, and
make it something probable, that their oversight in this trifle, is accompanied
with a thousand other errors in matter of our divine Homers depth and gravity.
Which will not open it self to the curious austeritie of belabouring art, but
only to the natural and most ingenuous soul of our thrice sacred Poesy.

The end of the nineteenth Book.
THE XX. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
BY Jove's permission, all the gods descend
To aid on both parts. For the Greeks contend,
Juno, Minerua, Neptune, Mul^ber,
And Mercury. The de^ies that prefer
The Trojan part, are, Phoebus, Cyprides, (...).

Phoebe, Latona, and the foe to Peace;
With bright Scamander. Neptune in a mist
Preserues Aeneas, (daring to resist
Achilles;) by whose hand, much skath is done;
Besides the slaughter of old Pria^s son,
(Young Polydor) whose rescue, Hector makes;
Him (flying) Phoebus, to his rescue takes,
The rest (all shunning their importuned fates)
Achilles beats, even to the Ilian gates.
Another Argument.
In Ypsilon Strife stirs in heaven.
The days grace, to the Greeks is given.
THe Greeks thus armed; and made insatiate, with desire of fight,
About thee, Peleus son; The foe, in ground of greatest height,
Stood opposite, ranged. Then Jove charged Themis, from Olympus top
To call a court; she every way, dispersed, and summoned up Jove summons all the
^ties to counsel.

All deities; Not any flood (besides Oceanus)
But made appearance: not a Nymph (that arbours odorous,
The heads of floods, and flowrie meadows make their swee^e abodes)
Was absent there; but all at his court that is king of gods,
Assembled; and in lightsome seats, of admirable frame
(Performed for Jove, by Vulean) sat. Even angry Neptune came;
Nor heard the goddess with unwilling ^are; but with the rest,
Made free ascension from the sea; and did his state inuest
In midst of all: begun the counsel, and inquired of Jove,
His reason for that session; and on what point did move
His high intention for the foes; he thought the heat of war,
Was then near breaking out in flames. To him, the Thunderer:
Thou know this counsel by the rest, of those forepurposes,
That still inclined me; my cares still, must succor the distress
Of Troy; though in the mouth of Fa^e* yet vow I, not to stir
One step from off this top of heaven; but all th*affaire refer
To any one. Here I Will hold state, and freely take the joy
Of eithers fate: help whom ye please; for it is assured, that Tr^y,
Not one days conflict can sustain, against A Eacides,
If heaven oppose not. His mere looks, threw darts enough, t'impresse
Their powers with trembling; but when blows, sent from his fiery hand,
(Thrice heat by slaughter of his friend) shall come and countermand
Their forme^ glories: we have fear, that though Fate keep their wall,
He Will ouerturne it. Then descend; and cease not till ye all
Add all your aides; mix earth and heaven, together with the fight
Achilles urges. These his words, did such a war excite,
As no man's power could wrestle down; the gods with parted hearts,
Departed heaven, and made earth war. To guide the Grecian da^s, The names of
the gods partakers with either part.

Juno and Pallas, with the god, that does the earth embrace,
And most-for-mans-vse, Mercury (whom good wise inwards grace)
Were partially, and all emploid; and with them halted down
(Proud of his strength) lame Mulciber; his walkers quite misgrowne,
But made him tread exceeding sure. To aid the Ilian side,
The changeable in arms, went ( Mars); and him accompanied
Diana, that delights in shafts; and Phoebus, never shorn;
And Aphrodite, laughter-pleasde; and she, of whom was borne
Still young Apollo; and the flood, that runs on golden sands
Bright Xanthus. All these aided Troy; and till these lent their hands,
The Grecians triumphed in the aid, AEacides did add;
The Trojans trembling with his sight; so gloriously clad,
He ouershin'd the field; and Mars, no harmfuller then he.
He bore the iron stream on clear; but when Jove's high decree
^et fall the gods amongst their troops; the field sweld, and the fight
Grew fierce and horrible. The* Dame, that armies does excite, (...).

Thunderd with Clamor; sometimes set, at dike without the wall,
And sometimes on the bellowing shore. On the other side, the Call
Of Mars to fight was terrible; he cried out, like a storm;
Set on the cities pinnacles; and there he would inform
Sometimes his heartnings; Other times, where Simois powers on
His silver current, at the foot, of high Callicolon.
And thus the blessed gods, both sides urged; they all stood in the mids,
And brake Contention to the hosts. And over all their heads, The state of the
preparation to the fight, when the gods were to encounter.

The gods king, in abhorred claps, his thunder rattl'd out.
Beneath them, Neptune tossed the earth; the mountains round about,
Bowed with affright, and shook their heads: Jove's hill, the earth quake felt;
(Steep Ida) trembling at her roots, and all her fountains spilt:
Their brows all crannied. Troy did nod; the Grecian navy played
(As on the sea): the infernal king, that all things frayes, was fraid;
And leapt affrighted from his throne; cried out, lest over him
Neptune should rend in two the earth; and so his house so dim,
So loathsome, filthy, and abhord, of all the gods beside,
Should open, both to gods and men. Thus, all things shook and cried,
When this black bartell of the gods, was joining; thus arraied:
Against Neptune, Phoebus with winged shafts; against Mars the blew-eyd maid:
Against Juno, Phoebe, whose white hands, bore singing darts of gold;
Her side armed with a sheafe of shafts; and (by the birth twofold
Of bright Latona) sister twin, to him that shootes so (...);
Against Latona, Hermes stood (grave guard in peace and war,
Of humane beings;) against the god, whose Empire is in fire;
The watery godhead; that great flood, to show whose power entire
In spoil as the other: all his stream, on lurking (...) trod;
Xanthus, by gods; by men Scamander called. Thus, god against god,
Enterd the field. Aeacides, sustained a fervent mind
To cope with Hector; past all these, his spirit stood inclined,
To glut Mars with the blood of him. And at Aeacides,
Apollo set Anchises son. But first he did impresse,
A more then natural strength in him; and made him feel the excess, Apollo
instigates Aeneas to the encounter of Achilles, in shape of Lyc^.

Infusde from heaven. Lycaons shape, gave show to his address,
(Old Priams son) and thus he spoke: Thou counselor of Troy,
Where now fly out those threats, that late, put all our Peers in joy
Of thy fight with Aeacides? Thy tongue once (steept in wine) (...) to Apollo.

Durst vant as much. He answered him: But why would thou incline
My powers against that proud enemy, and against my present heat?
I mean not now to bid him blows; that fear sounds my retreat,
That heretofore discouraged me: when after he had rac't
Lyrnesus, and strong Pedasus, his still breathed fury chac't
Our oxen from th'Idaean hill, and set on me; but Jove
Gave strength and knees, and bore me off, that had not walked above
This center now, but propt by him. Mineruaes hand (that held
A light to this her favorite; whose beams, showed, and impeld
His powers to spoil) had ruined me. For these ears heard her cry:
Kill, kill the seed of Ilion; kill, th'Asian Lelegi.
Mere man then must not fight with him, that still has gods to friend;
Auerting death on others darts; and giving his no end,
But with the ends of men. If God, like Fortune in the fight,
Would give my forces; not with ease, winged Victory should light
On his proud shoulders; nor he escape, though all of brass he bosts
His plight con^steth. He replide: Pray thou, those gods of hosts,
Whom he implores, as well as he; and his chance may be thine;
Thou came of gods like him: the Queen, that reigns in Salamine,
Fame sounds, thy mother; he derived, of lower deity.
Old Nereus daughter bearing him; Bear then thy heart as hie,
And thy unwearied steel as right; nor utterly be beat
With only cruelty of words; not proof against a threat.
This strengthened him; and forth he rusht; nor could his strengthening fly,
White-wristed Juno; nor his drifts. She, every deity
Of th'Achiue faction called to her; and said: Ye must have care Juno to the gods
of Grace.

( Neptune and Pallas) for the frame, of this important war
Ye undertake here; Venus son (by Phoebus being impeld)
Runs on Achilles; turn him back; or see our friend vpheld
By one of us. Let not the spirit of Aeacides,
Be ouer-dar'd; but make him know, the mightiest deities
Stand kind to him; and that the gods, protectors of these towers
That fight against Greece; and were here, before our eminent powers,
Bear no importance. And besides, that all we s^oope from heaven
To curb this fight, that no empaire, be to his person given
By any Trojans, nor their aides, while this day bears the Sun;
Hereafter, all things that are wrapped, in his birth-threed, and spunne
By Parcas, (in that point of time, his mother gave him air)
He must sustain. But if Report, perform not the repair
Of all this to him, by the Voice, of some immortal state,
He may be fearful, (if some god, should set on him) that Fate,
Makes him her minister. The gods, when they appear to men,
And manifest their proper forms, are passing dreadful then.
Neptune replide: Saturnia, at no time let your Care Neptune to (...)

Exceed your Reason; it is not fit. Where only humanes are,
We must not mix the hands of gods; our ods is too extreme.
Sit we by, in some place of height, where we may see to them,
And leave the wars of men, to men. But if we see from thence,
Or Mars, or Phoebus, enter fight; or offer least offense
To Thetis son; not giving free way to his conquering rage;
Then comes the conflict to our cares; we soon shall dis-engage
Achilles, and send them to heaven, to settle their abode
With Equals; flying vnder-strifes. This said, the blacke-hair'd god,
Led to the tower of of Hercules; built circular and hie
By Pallas and the Ilians, for fit security
To Jove's divine * son, against the Whale, that drove him from the shore,
Hercules.

To th'ample field. There Neptune sat, and all the gods that bore
The Greeks good meaning; casting all, thick mantles made of clouds,
On their bright shoulders. Th'oppos'd gods, sat hid in other shrouds,
On top of steep Callicolon; about thy golden sides,
O Phoebus, brandisher of darts; and thine, whose rage abides
No peace in cities. In this state, these gods in counsel sa^e;
All lingering purposde fight, to try, who first would eleuate
His heavenly weapon. High-thron'd Jove, cried out, to set them on;
Said; all the field was full of men; and that the earth did groan* Jove sets
on the other gods to ^ight.

With feet of proud encounterers, burned with the arms of men,
And barbed horse. Two champions, for both the armies then,
Met in their midst, prepared for blows; divine Aeacides,
And Venus son; Aeneas first, stepped threatening forth the preasse,
His high helm nodding; and his breast, bard with a shadie shield,
And shook his iauelin. Thetis son, did his part to the field,
As when the harmfull king of beasts, (sore threatened to be slain, Simile.

By all the country up in arms) at first makes coy Disdain
Prepare resistance; but at last, when any one has led
Bold charge upon him with his dart; he then turns yawning head;
Fell Anger lathers in his jaws; his great heart swells; his stern
Lasheth his strength up; fides and thighs, wadl'd with stripes to learn
Their own power; his eyes glow; he rores; and in he leapes, to kill,
Secure of killing: So his power, then rowsde up to his will,
Matchless Achilles, coming on, to mee^e Anchises son.
Both near; Achilles thus inquired: Why standst thou thus alone, Achilles to
AEneas.

Thou son of Venus? calls thy heart, to change of blows with me?
Sure Troyes whole kingdom is proposde; some one has promised (...)
The throne of (...) for my life; but Priams self is wise;
And (for my slaughter) not so mad, to make his throne thy prise.
Priam has sons to second him. Is It then some piece of land,
Past others, fit to set and sow, that thy victo^ious hand,
The Ilians offer for my head? I hope that prise will prove
No easy conquest: once, I think, my busy iauelin drove,
(With terror) those thoughts from your spleen. Retain'st thou not the time,
When single on th'Idaean hill, I took thee with the crime
Of Runaway? thy Oxen left? and when thou had no face,
That I could see; thy knees bere^t, it, and Lyrnesus was
The mask for that. Then that mask too, I opened to the air,
(By Jove and Pallas help) and took, the free light from the fair;
Your Ladies bearing prisoners. But Jove and the other gods,
Then saft thee; yet again I hope, they will not add their ods,
To save thy wants, as thou presum'st; retire then, aim not at
Troys throne by me; fly ere thy soul, flies; fools are wise too late.
He answered him: Hope not that words, can child-like terrify AEneas to
Achilles.

My stroke-proofe breast; I well could speak, in this indecencie,
And use tart terms; but we know well, what stock us both put out;
Too gentle to bear fruits so rude. Our parents ring about,
The worlds round bosom; and by fame, their dignities are blown
To both our knowledges; by sight; neither, to either known;
Thine, to mine eyes; nor mine to thine. Fame sounds thy worthiness
From famous Peleus; the sea Nymph, that has the lovely tresse,
( Thetis) thy mother; I my self, affirm my Sire to be
Great-soul'd Anchises; she that holds, the Paphian deity,
My mother; and of these, this light, is now t'exhale the tears
For their loved issue; thee or me; childish, unworthy dates,
Are not enough to part our powers; for if thy spiri^s want
Due excitation (by distrust, of that desert I vant)
To set up all rests for my life; I Will lineally prove
(Which many will confirm) my race. First, cloud commanding Jove (...) (...)

Was sire to Dardanus, that built, Dardania; for the walls
Of sacred Ilion, spread not yet, these fields; those faire-built hals,
Of diverse* languag'd men, not raisd; all then made populous
The foot of Idaes fountfull hill. This Ioue-got Dardanus,
Begot king Ericthonius; for wealth, past all compares,
Of living mortals; in his fens, he fed three thousand mares,
All neighing by their tender foles; of which, twice six were bred
By lofty Boreas; their dams, loved by him, as they fed;
He took the brave form of a horse, that shook an azure mane,
And slept with them. These twice six colts, had pace, so swift they ^anne
Upon the top-ayles of corne-eares; nor bent them any whit.
And when the broad back of the sea, their pleasure was to sit,
The superficies of his waves, they slid upon; their houes
Not dipped in danke sweat of his brows. Of Ericthonius loves
Sprang Tros, the king of Tr^ans; Tros three young princes bred,
Ilus, renowm'd Assaracus, and heavenly G^nymed,
The fairest youth of all that breathed; whom (for his beauties love)
The gods did ravish, to their state, to bear the cup to Jove.
Ilus begot Laomedon; god-like Laomedon
Got Titbon, Priam, Clytius, Mars-like Hycetaon,
And Lampus. Great Assaracus, Capys begot; and he,
Anchises; Prince Anchises, me. King Priam, Hector; we
Sprang both of one high family. Thus, fortunate men give birth;
But Jove gives virtue; he augments; and he empaires the worth
Of all men; and his will, their Rule; he strong'st; all strength affoords;
Why then paint we (like dames) the face, of Conflict with our words?
Both may give language, that a ship, driven with a ^undred ores,
Would ouer-burthen: a man's tongue, is voluble, and poures
Words out, of all sorts; every way; such as you speak, you hear.
What then need we vie calumnies, like women that will wear
Their tongues out, being once incenst; and strive for strife, to part
(Being on their way) they travel so: from words, words may auert;
From virtue, not; it is your steel (divine Aeacides)
Must prove my proof, as mine shall yours. Thus amply did he ease
His great heart of his pedigree; and sharply sent away Aeneas charge
Achilles.

A dart, that caught Achilles shield; and rung so, it did fray
The son of Thetis; his fair hand, farre-thrusting out his shield,
For fear the long lance had driven through; O fool, to think twould yield;
And not to know, the gods firm gifts, want want, to yield so soon
To men's poor powers; the eager lance, had only conquest won
Of two plates; and the shield had five; two forged of tin, two brass,
One (that was center-plate) of gold, and that forbad the pass
Of Anchisiades his lance. Then sent Achilles forth
His lance, that through the first fold struck; where brass of little worth,
Achilles at AEneas.

And no great proof of hides was laid; through all which Pelias ran
His iron head; and after it, his ashen body wanne
Pass to the earth, and there it stuck; his top on the other side:
And hung the shield up; which, hard down, Aeneas plucked to hide
His breast from sword blows; shrunk up round, and in his heavy eye,
Was much grief shadowed; much afraid, that Pelias stuck ^o nie.
Then prompt Achilles rushing in, his sword drew; and the field
Rung with his voice. Aeneas now, left, and let hang his ^hield,
And (all distracted) up he snatched, a two men's strength of stone;
And either, at his shield or caske, he set it ^udely gone,
Nor cared where; so it struck a place, that put on arms, for death;
But he ( Achilles came so close) had doubtless funke beneath,
His own death, had not Neptune seen, and interposde the ods
Of his divine power; uttering this, to the Achaian gods:
I grieve for this great hearted man; he will be sent to hell, Neptune to the
other gods of Greece.

Even instantly, by Peleus son, being only moved to deal
By Phoebus words: What fool is he? Phoebus did never mean,
To add to his great words, his guard; against the ruin then
Summoned against him: and what cause, has he, to head him on
To others miseries? He being clear* of any trespass done
Against the Grecians? thankful gifts, he often has given to us;
Let us then quit him; and withdraw, this combat; for if thus,
Achilles end him: Jove will rage; since his escape in fate,
Is purposde; lest the progeny, of Dardanus take date;
Whom Jove, past all his issue, loved, begot of mortal dames: (...) Proph^cy
of Aene^, to propagate the Trojan race.

All Priams race he hates; and this, must propagate the names
Of Trojans; and their sons sons rule, to all posterity.
Saturni^ said, make free your pleasure; save, or let him die;
Pallas and I have taken many, and most public oaths, I^no to Neptun^

That the will day never shall auert, her eye (red with our wroths)
From hated Troy: No, not when all, in studied fire she flames
The Greek rage, blowing her last coal. This nothing turned his aims
From present rescue: but through all, the whizzing spears he past;
And came where both were combatting; when instantly he cast,
A mist before Achilles eyes; drew from the earth, and shield,
His lance, and laid it at his feet: and then took up, and held
Aloft, the light Anchises son; who past (with Neptunes^ force)
Whole orders of Heroes heads; and many a troop of horse
Leapt over, till the bounds he reached, of all the fervent broyle,
Where all the Caucons quarters lay. Thus (far freed from the toil) Neptune
to Aeneas.

Neptune had time to use these words: Aeneas, who was he
Of all the gods, that did so much, neglect thy good, and thee,
To urge thy fight with Thetis son? who, in immortal rates,
Is better, and more dear then thee? Hereafter, lest (past fates)
Hell be thy headlong home, retire; make bold stand never near,
Where he aduanceth: but his fate, once satisfied; then bear,
A free, and full sail: no Greek else, shall end thee. This reueald;
He left him, and dispersed the cloud, that all this act conceald
From vexed Achilles: who again, had clear light from the skies;
And (much disdaining the escape) said: O ye gods, mine eyes Achilles admir^s
the escape of Aene^.

Discover miracles: my lance, submitted, and he gone
At whom I sent it, with desire, of his confusion?
Aeneas sure was loved of heaven; I thought his vant from thence,
Had flowed from glory. Let him go, no more experience
Will his mind long for, of my hands: he flies them now so clear:
Cheer then the Greeks, and others try. Thus ranged he every where
The Grecian orders; every man, (of which the most looked on
To see their fresh Lord shake his lance) he thus put charge upon:
Divine Greeks, stand not thus at gaze; but man to man apply
Your several valors: it is a task, laid too unequally
On me, left to so many men; one man, opposde to all.
Not Mars, immortal and a god, nor wars she General;
A field of so much fight could chase, and work it out with blows;
But what a man may execute, that all lims will expose,
And all their strength to the utmost nerve (though now I lost some play,
By some strange miracle) no more, shall burn in vain the day;
To any least beam; all this host, I Will ransacke, and have hope,
Of all; not one (again) will escape; whoeuer gives such soope
To his adventure; and so near; dares tempt, my angry lance.
Thus he excited. Hector then, as much strives to advance,
The hearts of his men; adding threats, affirming he would stand,
In combat with Aeacides. Give Fear (said he) no hand, Hector to his Ilians.

Of your great hearts, (b^ue Ilians) for (...) talking Son;
I Will fight with any god with words; but when their spears put on,
The work runs high; their strength exceeds, mortality so far.
And they may make works crown their words; which holds not in the war
Achilles makes; his hands have bounds; this word he shall make good,
And leave another to the field: his worst shall be withstood,
With sole objection of my self. Though in his hands he bear
A rage like fire; though fire it self, his raging fingers were;
And burning steel flew in his strength. Thus he incited his;
And they raisd lances, and to work, with mixed courages;
And up flew Clamor; but the heat, in Hector, Phoebus gave Phoebus to Hector.

This temper: Do not meet (said he) in any single brave,
The man thou threatn'st, but in preasse; and in thy strength impeach
His violence; for far off, or near, his sword, or dart will reach.
The gods voice mad^ a difference, in Hectors own conceit,
Betwixt his, and Achilles words; and gave such ouerweight,
As weighed him back into his strength, and curbed his flying out.
At all threw fierce Aeacides, and gave a horrid shout.
The first of all he put to dart, was fierce Iphition; Iphition slain by
Ach^es.

Surnamed Otryntides, whom Nais, the water Nymph made son
To towne-destroyer Otr^eus. Beneath the snowy hill,
Of Tmolus, in the wealthy town, of I Would: at his will,
Were many able men at arms. He rushing in, took full,
Pelides lance, in his heads midst; that cleft, in two, his skull.
Achilles knew him, one much famed; and thus insulted then:
Thou Art dead Otryntides, though called, the terriblest of men;
Thy race runs at G^us lake, there thy inheritance lay,
Near fishy Hillus; and the gulfs, of H^us: but this day,
Remoues it to the fields of Troy. Thus left he Night to sease
His closed eyes, his body laid, in course of all the prease;
Which Grecian horse, broke with the strakes, naild to their chariot wheels.
Next (through the temples) the burst eyes, his deadly iauelin steeles Demoleon
slain by Achilles.

Of great-in- Troy Antenors son, renowned Demolcon;
A mighty turner of a field. His overthrow, set gone
Hippodamas, who leapt from horse, and as he fled before
Aeacides; his turned back, he made fell P^lias gore,
And forth he puffed his flying soul; and as a tortured Bull;
(To Neptune brought for sacrifice) a troop of yongsters pull Simile.

Down to the earth, and dragge him round, about the hallowed shore;
To please the watery deity, with forcing him to rore;
And forth he powers his utmost throat. So bellowed this slain friend,
Of flying Ilion, with the breath, that gave his being end.
Then rusht he on; and in his eye, had heavenly Polydore,
Old Priams son; whom last of all, his fruitful Princess bore;
And for his youth (being dear to him) the king forbad to fight.
Yet (hot of vnexperienc't blood, to show how exquisite
He was of foot: for which of all, the fifty sons he held
The special name.) He flew before, the first heat of the field; Polydore
(...) by Achilles.

Even till he flew out breath and soul: which, through the back, the lance
Of swift Achilles, put in air, and did his head advance
Out at his nauill: on his knees, the poor Prince crying fell;
And gatherd with his tender hands, his entrails; that did swell
Quite through the wide wound, till a cloud, as black as death, conceald
Their sight, and all the world from him. When Hector had beheld
His brother tumbled so to earth (his entrails still in hand)
Dark sorrow ouercast his eyes; nor far off could he stand
A minute longer: but like fire, he brake out of the throng;
Shook his long lance, at Thetis son; And then came he along, Achilles
passion at the sight of ^ctor.

To feed the encounter: O (said he) here comes the man that most,
Of all the world destroys my mind: the man by whom I lost
My dear Patroclus; now not long, the crooked paths of war,
Can yield us any privy scapes: Come, keep not off so far,
(He cried to Hector) make the pain, of thy sure death as short,
As one, so desperate of his life, has reason. In no sort,
This frighted Hector, who bore close: and said; Aeacides, Hector to Achi^.

Leave threats for children; I have power, to thunder calumnies,
As well as others; and well know, thy strength superior far,
To that my nerves hold; but the gods, (not nerves) determine war.
And yet (for nerves) there will be found, a strength of power in mine,
To drive a lance home to thy life; my lance, as well as thine
Has point, and sharpness, and it is this. Thus brandishing his spear,
He set it flying; which a breath, of Pallas, back did bear Pallas bre^hes
back Hectors lance thrown at Achilles.

From Thetis son, to Hectors self; and at his feet it fell.
Achilles used no dart; but close, flew in; and thought to deal
With no strokes, but of sure dispatch; but what with all his blood
He labored; Phoebus cleared with ease, as being a god; and stood
For Hectors guard; as Pallas did, Aeacides for thine.
He rapt him from him; and a cloud, of much Night cast between
His person, and the point opposde. Achilles then exclaimed
O see, yet more gods are at work; Apollos hand has framed Apollo rescues
Hector.

(Dog that thou art) thy rescue now: to whom, go, pay the vows
Thy safety owes him; I shall vent, in time, those fatal blows,
That yet beat in my heart, on thine; if any god remain,
My equal fautor. In mean time, my anger must maintain
His fire on other Ilians. Then laid he at his feet,
Great Demochus, Philetors, son; and Dryope did greet
With like encounter. Dardanus, and strong Laogonus,
(Wise Byas sons) he hurld from horse, of one, victorious
With his close sword; the others life, he conquered with his lance.
Then Tros, Alastors son made in, and sought to escape their chance,
With free submission. Down he fell, and praid about his knees,
He would not kill him, but take ruth; as one that Destinies
Made to that purpose; being a man, borne in the self same year
That he himself was: O poor fool, to sue to him to bear
A ruthful mind; he well might know, he could not fashion him,
In Ruths soft mould; he had no spirit, to brook that interim
In his hot fury: he was none, of these remorsefull men;
Gentle, and affable: but fierce, at all times, and mad then.
He gladly would have made a prayre, and still so hugged his knee,
He could not quit him: till at last, his sword was feign to free
His fetterd knees: that made a vent, for his white livers blood,
That causd such pitiful affects: of which, it poured a flood
About his bosom; which it filled, even till it drowned his eyes;
And all sense faild him. Forth then flew, this Prince of tragedies,
Who next, stoopt Mulius, even to death, with his insatiate spear:
One ear it enterd, and made good, his pass to the other ear.
Echeclus then, ( Agenors son) he struck betwixt the brows;
Whose blood set fire upon his sword, that coold it till the throws
Of his then laboring brain, let out, his soul to fixed fate,
And gave cold entry to black death. Deucalion then, had state
In these men's beings: where the nerves, about the elbow knit,
Down to his hand his spears steel pierced, and brought such pain to it,
As led Death jointly; whom he saw, before his fainting eyes;
And in his neck felt, with a stroke, laid on so; that off flies
His head: one of the twice twelve bones, that all the back bone make,
Let out his marrow; when the head, he helm and all did take,
And hurled amongst the Ilians; the body stretched on earth.
Rhigmus of fruitful Thrace, next fell; he was the famous birth
Of Pireus: his bellies midsts, the lance took; whose stern force,
Quite tumbled him from chariot. In turning back the horse,
Their guider Areithous, received another lance,
That threw him to his Lord. No end, was put to the mischance Simile.

Achilles enterd: But, as fire, fallen in a flash from heaven;
Inflames the high-woods of dry hills; and with a storm is driven,
Through all the Syluane deepes; and raues, till down goes every where
The smotherd hill: So every way, Ach^lles and his spear
Consumed the Champaine, the black earth, flowed with the veins he tore.
And look how Oxen, (yok't and driven, about the circular floor,
Of some fair barn) tread suddenly, the thick sheaues, thin of corn;
And all the corn, consumed with chafe: so mixed and ouerborne, Simile.

Beneath Achilles one-hou'd horse, shields, spears, and men lay trod;
His axel-tree, and chariot wheels, all spatterd with the blood
Hurled from the steeds houes, and the strakes. Thus to be magnified,
His most inaccessible hands, in humane blood he died.
The end of the twentieth Book.
THE XXI. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN two parts, Troyes host parted; Thetis son;
One to Scamander, one to Ilion
Pursues. Twelve Lords he takes alive, to end
In sacrifice, for vengeance to his friend.
Asteropaeus, dies by his fierc^ hand,
And Priams son, Lycaon, Over land
The flood breaks: where, Achilles being engaged,
Vulcan preserues him; and with spirit enraged,
Sets all the Champaine, and the Flood on fire;
Contention then, does all the gods inspire.
Apollo, in Agenors shape, does stay
Achilles fury; and by giving way,
Makes him pursue; till the deceit gives leave,
That Troy, in safety, might her friends receive.
Another Argument.
Phy, at the floods shore, does express
The labors of Aeacides.
ANd now they reached, the goodly swelling channel of the flood,
Gulfe-eating Xanthus; whom Jove mixed, with his immortal brood:
And there Achilles cleft the host, of Ilion: one side fell
On Xanthus, the other on the town: and that did he impell
The same way, that the last days rage, put all the Greeks in rout,
When Hectors fury reigned. These now, Achilles powered about
The scatterd field. To stay the flight, Saturnia cast before
Their hasty feet, a standing fogge; and then Flights violence bore
The other half full on the flood. The siluer-gulphed deep
Received them with a mighty cry: the billows vast and steep,
Ror'd at their armours; which the shores, did round about resound:
This way, and that, they swum, and shriekt; as in the gulphs they drowned:
And as in fired fields, Locusts rise, as the unwearied blaze Simile.

Plies still their rising, till in swarms, all rush as in amaze,
(For escape) into some neighbor flood: So, the Achilleian stroke,
Here drove the foe. The gulfie flood, with men and horse did choke.
Then on the shore, the Worthy hid, and left his horrid lance
Amids the Tamriskes; and spritelike, did with his sword advance,
Up to the river; ill affairs, took up his furious brain,
For Troyes engagements: every way, he doubled s^aine on slain.
A most unmanly noise was made, with those he put to sword,
Of groans and outcries; the flood blushed, to be so much engor'd
With such base souls: And as small fish, the swift-finn'd Dolphin fly,
Filling the deep pits in the ports; on whose close strength they lie: Simile.

And there he swallows them in sholes: So here, to rocks, and holes,
About the flood, the Trojans fled; and there most lost their souls:
Even till he tired his slaughterous arm. Twelve fair young Prin^es then,
He chusde of all, to take alive; to have them freshly slain
On that most solemn day of wreake, resolved on for his friend.
These led he trembling forth the flood; as fearful of their end,
As any Hind calves: all their hands, he pinnioned behind
With their own girdles; worn upon, their rich weeds; and resigned
Their persons to his Myrmidons, to bear to fleet: and he
Plunged in the stream again; to take, more work of Tragedy.
He met, then issuing the flood; with all intent of flight,
Lycaon, (Dardan Priams son;) whom lately in the night,
He had surprisde; as in a wood, of Priams, he had cut, Achilles his stran^
encounter of Lycaon.

The green arms of a wild fig tree; to make him spokes to put
In Naues of his new chariot. An ill then, ^ll unthought,
Stole on him in Achilles shape, who took him thence, and brought
To well built Lemnos, selling him, to famous Iasons son:
From whom, a guest then, in his house; ( Imbrius Eetion)
Redeemed at high rate, and sent home, to Ari^ba; whence he fled,
And saw again his fathers court: eleven days banquetted,
Amongst his friends; the twelfth god thrust, his hapless head again
In t'hands of stern Aeacides; who now must send him slain,
To Plutos Court; and against his will. Him, when Achilles knew
Naked of helmet, shield, sword, lance; (all which for ease he th^ew
To earth, being overcome with sweat; and labor wearying
His flying knees) he stormed, and said; O heaven, a wondrous thing
Inuades mine eyes; those Ilians, that heretofore I slew,
Rise from the dark dead, quick again: this man, f^te makes eschew
Her own steel fingers: he was sold, in Lemnos; and the deep
Of all Seas, twixt this Troy, and that (that many a man does keep
From his loved country) bars not him; Come then; he now shall taste
The head of Pelias; and try, if st^le will down as fast
As other fortunes; or kind earth, can any surer (...)
On his sly person; whose strong arms, have held down Hercules.
His thoughts thus moved, while he stood firm; to see if he, he (...), Lyc^ons
fear to be see^ of Achilles.

Would offer flight, (which first he thought) but when he had d^ride,
He was d^scried, and flight was vain; fearful, he made more nie,
With purpose to embrace his knees; and now longed much to fly
His black fate, and abhorred death, by coming in. His foe
Observed all this; and up he raisd, his lance, as he would throw;
And then Lycaon close ran in; fell on his breast, and took
Achilles knees; whose lance (on earth, now staid) did ouerlooke,
His ^il-turn'd back; with thirst to glut, his sharp point with the blood,
That lay so ready; but that thirst, Lycaons thirst withstood;
To save his blood, Achilles knee, in his one hand he knit;
His other held the long lance hard, and would not part with it:
But thus besought: I kiss thy knees, divine Aeacides:
Respect me, and my fortunes rue; I now present th'accesse Lyc^s (...)
intercession to Achilles for his life.

Of a poor suppliant, for thy ruth: and I am one that is
Worthy thy ruth (o Jove's beloved.) First hour my miseries
Fell into any hand, it was thine: I tasted all my bread
By thy gift since: O since that hour, that thy surprisall led
From forth the fair wood, my sad feet; far from my loved allies,
To famous Lemnos, where I found, an hundred Oxens prise
To make my ransom: for which now, I thrice the worth will raise.
This day, makes twelve since I arrived, in Ilion: many days
Being spent before in sufferance: and now a cruel fate,
Thrusts me again into thy hands. I should hant Jove with hate,
That with such set malignitie, gives thee my life again.
There were but two of us, for whom, Laothoe sufferd pain,
( Laothoe, old Altes seed; Alte, whose palace stood
In height of upper Pedasus, near Satnius ^iluer flood;
And ruled the warre-like Lelegi. Whose seed (as many more)
King Priam married, and begot, the godlike Polydor,
And me accursed: thou slaughterdst him: and now thy hand on me
Will prove as mortal. I did think, when here I met with thee,
I could not escape thee; yet give ear, and add thy mind to it;
I told my birth to intimate, though one sire did beget;
Yet one womb brought not into light, Hector (that slew thy friend)
And me. O do not kill me then; but let the wretched end
Of Polydor, excuse my life. For half our being bred
Brothers to Hector, he (half) paid, no more is forfeited.
Thus su'd he humbly; but he heard, with this austere reply:
Fool, urge not ruth, no^ price to me; till that solemnity
Resolved on, for Patroclus death, pay all his rites to fate.
Till his death, I did grace to Troy; and many lives did rate
At price of ransom: but none now, of all the brood of Troy,
(Who ever Jove throws to my hands) shall any breath enjoy,
That death can beat out; specially, that touch at Primas race.
Die, die, (my friend) what tears are these? what sad looks spoil thy face?
Patroclus died, that far past thee: nay see thou not beside,
My self, even I, a fair yong-man, and rarely magnifide;
And (to my father, being a king) a mother have, that sits
In rank with goddesses; and yet, when thou have spent thy spirits,
Death, and as violent a fate, must overtake, even me.
By twilight, morne-light, day, high noone; when ever Destiny
Sets on her man, to hurl a lance; or knit out of his string,
An arrow that must reach my life. This said, a languishing
Lycaons heart bent like his knees; yet left him strength t'aduance
Both hands for mercy, as he kneeld. His foe yet leaves his lance,
And forth his sword flies; which he hid, in furrow of a wound
Driven through the ioynture of his neck; flat fell he on the ground,
Stretched with deaths pangs; and all the earth, embrew'd with timelesse blood.
Then gript Aeacides his heel, and to the lofty flood
Flung (swinging) his unpitied corse; to see it swim, and toss
Up on the rough waves: and said; Go, feed fat the fish with loss
Of thy left blood: they clean will suck, thy green wounds; and this saues,
Thy mother tears upon thy bed. Deep Xanthus, on his waves,
Shall hoyse thee bravely to a tomb, that in her burly breast,
The sea shall open; where great fish, may keep thy funeral feast
With thy white fat: and on the waves, dance at thy wedding fate,
Clad in black horror; keeping close, inaccessible state.
So perish Ilians, till we pluck, the brows of Ilion
Down to her feet, you flying still: I flying still upon,
Thus in the rere; and (as my brows, were forckt, with rabid horns) The word
is (...), which they translate caedens. but properly signifies dissipans, ut
boues infestis cornibus.

Toss ye together. This brave flood, that strengthens, and adornes
Your city with his silver gulfes; to whom, so many bulls,
Your zeal has offered; with blind zeal, his sacred current guls,
With casting chariots, and horse; quick to his prayd-for aid;
Shall nothing profit: perish then, till cruell'st Death has laid
All, at the red feet of Revenge, for my slain friend; and all
With whom the absence of my hands, made yours a festival.
This speech, great Xanthus more enraged; and made his spirit contend,
For means to shut up, the o'pt vain, against him; and defend
The Trojans in it, from his plague. In mean time Peleus son,
(And now with that long lance he hid) for more blood, set upon,
Asteropaeus; the descent, of Pelagon; and he
Of brode-stream'd Axius, and the dame (of first nativity,
To all the daughters that renowned, Acesamenus seed)
Bright Periboea; whom the flood; (armed thick with lofty reed)
Comprest. At her grandchild now went, Thetis great son; whose foe
Stood armed with two darts, being set on, by Xanthus; angerd so
For those youths blood, shed in his stream, by vengefull Thetis son,
Without all mercy. (Both being near) great Thetides begun Achilles to
Asteropaeus.

With this high question. Of what race, art thou that dare oppose
Thy power to mine thus? cursed wombs, they ever did disclose,
That stood my anger. He replied, What makes thy furies heat, Asteropaeus
(...) Achilles.

Talk, and seek Pedigrees? far hence, lies my innatiue seat,
In rich Poeonia. My race, from brode-stream'd Axius, runs;
Axius, that gives earth purest drink, of all the watrie sons
Of great Oceanus; and got, the famous for his spear,
Pelegonus, that fatherd me; and these Poeonians here,
Armed with long lances, here I lead: and here th'eleuenth fair light
Shines on us, since we enterd Troy: Come now, (brave man) lets fight.
Thus spoke he, threatening; and to him, Pelides made reply,
With shaken Pelias: but his foe, with two at once let fly;
(For both his hands were dexterous:) one iauelin struck the shield
Asteropaeus with two darts at once at Achilles.

Of Thetis son; but struck not through (the gold (gods gift) repeld
The eager point:) the other lance, fell lightly, on the part
Of his fair right hands cubit; forth, the black blood spunne; the dart
Glanc't over, fastening on the earth, and there his spleen was spent,
That wished the body. With which wish, Achilles, his lance sent,
That quite mist, and infixt it self, fast, in the steepe-vp shore.
Even to the midst, it enterd it; himself then, fiercely bore
Upon his enemy with his sword. His foe was tugging hard,
To get his lance out: thrice he plucked; and thrice, sure Pelias bard
His wished euulsion. The fourth pluck; he bowed, and meant to break
The Ashen plant; but (ere that act) Achilles sword, did check
His bent power, and brake out his soul. Full in the nauill stead (...) slain
by Achilles.

He ripped his belly up; and out, his entrails fell; and dead
His breathless body: whence his arms, Achilles drew, and said:
Lie there, and prove it dangerous, to lift up adverse head, Achilles to the
body of Asterop^us.

Against Jove's sons; although a flood, were Ancetor to thee.
Thy vants urged him; but I may vant, a higher pedigree,
(From Jove himself:) king Peleus, was son to Aeacus;
Infernal Aeacus, to Jove; and I, to Peleus.
Thunder-voic't Jove, far passes floods; that only murmures raise
With earth and water, as they run, with tribute to the seas.
And his seed theirs exceeds as far. A flood, a mighty flood
Raged nere thee now; but with no aid. Jove must not be withstood.
King Achelous, yields to him; and great Oceanus;
Whence all floods; all the sea; all founts; wells; all deepes humorous,
Fetch their beginnings; yet even he, fears Jove's flash, and the crack
His thunder gives; when, out of heaven, it tears atwo his rack. The racks,
or motion of the clouds, for the clouds.

Thus, plucked he from the shore, his lance; and left the waves to wash
The waue-sprung entrails; about which, Fausens, and other fish,
Did shole, to nibble at the fat, which his sweet kidneyes ^id.
This for himself; now to his men, (the-well-rode Peons) did
His rage contend. All which, cold Fear, shook into flight, to see
Their Captain slain: at whose mazde flight (as much enraged) flew he.
And then fell all these, Thrasius, Mydon, Astypilus,
Great Ophelestes, Aenius, Mnesus, Thersilochus.
And on these, many more had fallen; unless the angry flood, Xanthus out of a
whirlepit to Achilles.

Had took the figure of a man; and in a whirlepit stood,
Thus speaking to Aeacides. Past all, power feeds thy will,
(Thou great grandchild of Aeacus) and past all, thou art in ill.
And gods themselves, confederates; and Jove (the best of gods)
All deaths gives thee: all places, not. Make my shores periods
To all shore service. In the field, let thy field acts run hie,
Not in my waters. My sweet streams, choke with mortality
Of men, slain by thee. Carcasses, so glut me, that I fail
To power into the sacred sea, my waves; yet still assail
Thy cruel forces. Cease; amaze, affects me with thy rage,
Prince of the people. He replied; Shall thy command assuage ^chilles to
Xanthus.

(Gulfe-fed Scamander) my free wrath? I Will never leave pursude
Proud Ilions slaughters; till this hand, in her filled walls conclude
Her flying forces; and has tried, in single fight, the chance
Of war with Hector; whose event, with stark death, shall advance
One of our conquests. Thus again, he like a Fury flew
Upon the Trojans: when the flood, his sad plaint did pursue,
To bright Apollo; telling him, he was too negligent Xanth^ compla^ns to Apollo.

Of Jove's high charge; importuning, by all means vehement,
His help of Troy; till latest Even, should her black shadows pour,
On earths broad breast. In all his worst, Achilles yet from shore,
Leapt to his midst. Then sweld his waves, then raged, then boyld again,
Against Achilles: up flew all, and all the bodies slain,
In all his deeps; (of which the heaps, made bridges, to his waves)
He belcht out; roaring like a Bull. The unslain, yet he saues.
In his black whirlepits, vast and deep. A horrid b^low stood
About Achilles. On his shield, the violence of the flood
Beat so; it drove him back, and took, his feet up; his fair palm,
Enforced to caught into his stay, a broad, and lofty Elm,
Whose roots he tossed up with his hold; and tore up all the shore, Note the
continued height, and (...) expres^ of Achilles glory.

With this then, he repeld the waves; and those thick arms it bore,
He made a bridge to bear him off; (for all fell in) when he,
Forth from the channel threw himself. The rage did terrify,
Even his great spirit, and made him add, wings to his swiftest feet,
And tread the land. And yet not there, the flood l^ft his reueate,
But thrust his billows after him; and blackt them all at top,
To make him fear, and fly his charge; and set the broad field open
For Troy to escape in. He sprung out, a darts cast; but came on
Again with a redoubled force: As when the swiftest flowne,
And strong'st of all fowls, ( Jove's black Hawke) the huntresse stoopes upon
A much loved Quarrie: So charged he; his arms with horror rung,
Against the black waves: yet again, he was so urged, he flung
His body from the flood, and fled. And after him again,
The waves flew roaring: As a man, that finds a water vain; Simile.

And from some black fount is to bring, his streams through plants and groves;
Goes with his Mattocke, and all checks, set to his course, remoues;
When that runs freely: under it, the pibbles all give way,
And where it finds a fall, runs swift: nor can the leader stay
His current then: Before himself, full pac't, it murmures on.
So, of Achilles, evermore, the strong flood vantage won;
(Though most deliver) gods are still, above the powers of men.
As often, as th'able godlike man, endeuour'd to maintain
His charge on them, that kept the flood; (and charged as he would try,
If all the gods, inhabiting, the broad vnreached sky,
Could dant his spirit,) so often, still, the rude waves charged him round;
Rampt on his shoulders; from whose depth, his strength, and spirit would bound
Up to the free air, vexed in soul. And now the vehement flood,
Made faint his knees: so overthwart, his waves were, they withstood
All the denied dust, which he wished; and now, was feign to cry;
Casting his eyes, to that broad heaven, that late he longed to try:
And said, O Jove, how am I left? No god vouchsafes to free Achilles com^ to
the gods in (...) ex^.

Me, miserable man; help now, and after torture me,
With any outrage. Would to heaven, Hector, (the mightiest
Bred in this region) had imbrew'd, his iauelin in my breast;
That strong might fall by strong. Where now, weak waters luxury,
Must make my death blush: one, heauen-borne, shall like a hog-herd die,
Drowned in a durtie torrents rage. Yet none of you in heaven,
I blame for this: but she alone, by whom this life was given,
That now must die thus. She would still, delude me with her tales,
Affirming Phoebus shafts should end, within the Trojan walls
My cursed beginning. In this straight, Neptune and Pallas flew
To fetch him off. In men's shapes Both, close to his danger drew:
And, taking both, both hands, thus spoke, the shaker of the world:
Pelides, do not stir a foot; nor these waves, prowdly curld Neptune to
Achilles.

Against thy bold breast, fear a jot; thou have us two thy friends, Pallas
and he rescuing him.

( Neptune and Pallas) Jove himself, approving th'aide we lend.
It Is nothing, as thou fearst with fate; she will not see thee drowned:
This height shall soon down; thine own eyes, shall see it set aground.
Be ruled then, we will advise thee well; take not thy hand away,
From putting all, indifferently, to all, that it can lay
Upon the Trojans; till the walls, of haughty Ilion
Conclude all in a desperate flight: and when thou have set gone,
The soul of Hector, turn to fleet: our hands shall plant a wreath
Of endless glory, on thy brows. Thus, to the free from death,
Both made retreat. He (much impeld, by charge, the godheads gave)
The field, that now was overcome, with many a boundless wave,
He overcame: on their wild breasts, they tossed the carcasses,
And arms of many a slaughterd man. And now the winged knees,
Of this great Captain, bore aloft: against the flood he flies
With full assault: nor could that god, make shrink his rescued thies.
Nor shrunk the flood; but as his foe, grew powrefull, he grew mad: Xanthus to
Simois.

Thrust up a billow to the sky, and cristall Simois bad
To his assistance: Simois, Hoe, brother, (out he cried)
Come, add thy current, and resist, this man half deified;
Or Ilion he will pull down strait; the Trojans cannot stand
A minute longer. Come, assist; and instantly command
All fountains in thy rule to rise; all torrents to make in,
And stuff thy billows; with whose height, engender such a din,
(With trees torn up, and iustling stones) as so immane a man,
May shrink beneath us: whose power thriues, do my power all it can:
He dares things fitter for a god. But, nor his form, nor force,
Nor glorious arms shall profit him: all which, and his dead corse,
I vow to roll up in my hands: Nay, bury in my mud:
Nay, in the very sincks of Troy: that, poured into my flood,
Shall make him drowning work enough: and being drowned, I Will set
A fort of such strong filth on him; that Greece shall never get
His bones from it. There, there shall stand, Achilles sepulcher;
And save a burial for his friends. This Fury did transfer
His high-ridg'd billows on the Prince; roaring with blood, and foam,
And carcasses. The crimson stream, did snatch into her womb,
Surprisd Achilles; and her height, stood, held up by the hand
Of Jove himself. Then Juno cried, and called (to countermand
This watery Deity) the god, that holds command in fire;
Afraid lest that gulf-stomackt flood, would satiate his desire
On great Achilles: Mulciber? my best-lou'd son? (she cried) Juno to Vul^an.

Rouse thee: for all the gods conceive, this flood thus amplified,
Is raisd at thee; and shows as if, his waves would drown the sky,
And put out all the sphere of fire; haste, help thy Emperie:
Light flames, deep as his pits. Our self, the West wind, and the South,
Will call out of the sea; and breathe, in eithers full-charg'd mouth
A storm, t'enrage thy fires against Troy; which shall (in one exhaled)
Blow flames of sweat about their brows; and make their armors sk^d.
Go thou then, and (against these winds rise) make work on Xanthus shore,
With setting all his trees on fire: and in his own breast pour,
A feruor that shall make it burn; nor let fair words or threats
Auert thy fury, till I speak; and then, subdue the heates
Of all thy Blazes. Mulciber; prepared, a mighty fire,
First, in the field used: burning up, the bodies, that the ire
Of great Achilles reft of souls: the quite-drown'd field it dried;
And shrunk the flood up. And as fields, that have been long time cloide
With catching wether; when their corn, lies on the gauill heap;
Are with a constant North wind dried; with which for comfort leap Simil^.

Their hearts that sowed them: So this field, was dride; the bodies burned;
And even the flood into a fire, as bright as day was turned.
Elmes, willowes, tamrisks, were enflamed; the lote trees; sea-grasse reeds,
And rushes, with the galingale roots (of which abundance breeds
About the sweet flood) all were fired: the gliding fishes flew
Upwards, in flames: the groueling Eeeles, crept upright; all which slew
Wise Vulcans unresisted spirit. The flood out of a flame,
Cried to him; Cease, o Mulciber; no deity can tame Xanthus out of a flaming
whirlepit to Vulcan.

Thy matchless virtue: nor would I, (since thou art thus hot) strive.
Cease then thy strife; let Thetis son, with all thy wished have, drive
Even to their gates these Ilians; what touches me their aid,
Or this Contention? Thus in flames, the burning river prayde:
And as a Caldron, vnderput, with store of fire; and wrought
With boiling of a well-fed Brawne, up leapes his wave aloft; Simile.

Bauins of sere wood urging it, and spending flames apace,
Till all the Caldron be engirt, with a consuming blaze.
So round this flood burned; and so sod, his sweet, and tortured streams;
Nor could flow forth, bound in the fumes, of Vulcans fiery beams.
Who (then not moved) his mothers ruth, by all his means he craves;
And asked, why Vulcan should invade, and so torment his waves,
Past other floods? when his offense, rose not to such degree,
As that of other gods, for Troy: and that himself would free,
Her wrath to it, if she were pleased; and prayed her, that her son
Might be reflected: adding this, that he would nere be won,
To help keep off the ruinous day, in which all Troy should burn,
Fired by the Grecians. This vow heard; she charged her son to turn
His fiery spirits to their homes: and said, it was not fit,
A god should suffer so, for men. Then Vulcan did remit
His so vnmeasur'd violence; and back the pleasant ^ood
Ran to his channel. Thus these gods, she made friends; the other ^tood
At weighty difference; both sides ran, together with a sound,
That Earth resounded; and great heaven, about did surrebound.
Jove heard it, sitting on his hill; and laughed to see the gods,
Buckle to arms like angry men: and (he pleased with their ods)
They laid it freely. Of them all, thump-buckler Mars began; Mars against
Minerua.

And at Minerua with a lance, of brass he headlong ran;
These vile words vshering his blows: Thou, dog-flie, what is the cause,
Thou make gods fight thus? thy huge heart, breaks all our peaceful laws,
With thy insatiate shamelessness. Rememberst thou the hour,
When Diomed charged me? and by thee? and thou with all thy power,
Took'st lance thy self; and in all sights, rusht on me with a wound?
Now vengeance falls on thee for all. This said, the shield fringed round
With fighting Adders, borne by Jove, that not to thunder yields,
He clapped his lance on; and this god, that with the blood of fields,
Pollutes his godhead; that shield pierst, and hurt the armed Maid:
But back she leapt; and with her strong, hand rapt a huge stone, laid
Above the Champaine; black and sharp, that did in old time break
Partitions to men's lands; And that, she dusted in the neck
Of that impetuous challenger. Down to the earth he swayd,
And ouerlaid seven Acres land: his hair was all berayd
With dust, and blood mixed; and his arms, rung out. Minerua laughed,
And thus insulted: O thou fool, yet have thou not been taught Minerua insults
over Mars.

To know mine eminence? thy strength, opposest thou to mine?
So pay thy mothers furies then; who for these aides of thine,
(Ever affoorded perjured Troy; Greece ever left) takes spleen,
And vows thee mischief. Thus she turned, her blew eyes, when Loves Queen
The hand of Mars took; and from earth, raisd him with thick-drawne breath,
His spirits not yet got up again. But from the prease of death,
Kind* Aphrodite was his guide. Which, Juno seeing, exclam'd: Venus.

Pallas; see, Mars is helped from field? Dog, fly, his rude tongue named
Thy self even now; but that his love, that dog-flie will not leave,
Her old consort. Upon her; fly. Minerua did receive
This excitation joyfully; and at the Cyprian flew;
Struck with her hard hand, her soft breast, a blow that overthrew Mars and
Venus overthrown by Pallas.

Both her and Mars; and there, both lay together in broad field.
When thus she triumphed. So lie all, that any succors yield
To these false Trojans, against the Greeks; so bold, and patient,
As Venus, (shunning charge of me); and no less impotent
Be all their aides, then hers to Mars: so short work would be made
In our depopulating Troy (this hardiest to invade,
Of all earths cities). At this wish, white-wristed Juno ^mil'd.
Next, Neptune and Apollo stood, upon the point of field;
And thus spoke Neptune: Phoebus! come; why, at the lances end
Stand we two thus? twill be a shame, for us to re-ascend
Jove's golden house, being thus in field; and not to ^ight. Begin;
For it is no graceful work for me: thou have the younger chin;
I older, and know more. O fool! what a forgetful heart
Thou bear about thee? to stand here, pressed to take th'Ilian part,
And fight with me? Forgetst thou then, what we two; we alone
(Of all the gods) have sufferd here? when proud Laomedon,
Enjoyed our service, a whole year, for our agreed reward?
Jove, in his sway would have it so; and in that year I reared
This broad brave wall about this town; that (being a work of mine)
It might be inexpugnable. This service then, was thine,
In Ida (that so many hills, and curld-head forests crown)
To feed his oxen; crooked shankt, and headed like the Moon.
But when the much-ioy-bringing hours, brought term for our reward;
The terrible Laomedon, dismissed us both, and scard
Our high deseruings; not alone, to hold our promised fee,
But give us threats too. Hands and feet, he swore to fetter thee,
And sell thee as a slave; dismissed, far hence to foreign Isles;
Nay more, he would have both our ears. His vows breach, and reuiles,
Made us part angry with him than; and do thou gratulate now,
Such a kings subjects? or with us, not their destruction vow,
Even to their chaste wives, and their babes? He answered, ^e might hold
His wisdom little; if with him (a god); for men he would Apollo to Neptune.

Maintain contention: wretched men, that flourish for a time,
Like leaves; eat some of that, Earth yields; and give Earth, in their prime,
Their whole selves for it. Quickly then, let us fly fight for them;
Nor show it offered: let themselves, bear out their own extreme.
Thus he retired, and feared to change, blows with his uncles hands;
His sister thererefore chid him much, (the goddess that commands Diana
reproues Apollo for leaving the Trojans

In games of hunting) and thus spoke: Fliest thou? and leau'st the field
To Neptunes glory? and no blows? O fool! why do thou wield
Thy idle bow? no more my ears, shall hear thee vant in skies,
Dares to meet Neptune; but I Will tell, thy cowards tongue, it lies.
He answered nothing; yet Jove's wife, could put on no such raines;
But spoke thus loosly: How dare thou, dog, whom no fears contains, I^no to
Diana.

Encounter me? twill prove a match, of hard condition:
Though the great Lady of the bow; and Jove has set thee down,
For Lion of thy sex; with gift, to slaughter any Dame
Thy proud will enuies; yet some Dames, will prove, thou had better tame
Wild Lions upon hills, then them. But if this question rests
Yet under judgment, in thy thoughts; and that thy mind contests;
I Will make thee know it. Suddenly, with her left hand she caught
Both Cynthias palms, locked fingers fast; and with her right, she snatched
From her fair shoulders, her guilt bow; and (laughing) laid it on,
About her ears; and every way, her turnings seisd upon,
Till all her arrows scatterd out; her quiver emptied quite.
And as a Dove, that (flying a Hawk) takes to some rock her flight; Simile.

And in his hollow breasts sits safe; her fate, not yet to die:
So fled she mourning; and her bow, left there. Then Mercury,
His opposite, thus undertook: Latona, at no hand,
Will I bide combat; it is a work, right dangerous to stand,
At difference with the wives of Jove; Go therefore, freely vant
Amongst the deities, thou have subdued, and made thy combattant
Yield with plain power. She answered not, but gathered up the bow
And shafts fallen from her daughters side, retiring. Up did go
Diana to Jove's starrie hall; her incorrupted veil
Trembling about her; so she shook. Phoebus (lest Troy should fail
Before her Fate) flew to her walls; the other deities flew
Up to Olympus; some enraged, some glad. Achilles slew
Both men and horse of Ilion. And as a city fired,
Casts up a heat, that purples heaven; Clamors and shriekes expired Simil^.

In every corner; toil to all; to many, misery;
Which fire, the incensed gods let fall; Achilles so let fly,
Rage on the Trojans; toiles and shriekes, as much by him imposde.
Old Priam in his sacred tower, stood; and the flight disclosde,
Of his forced people; all in rout, and not a stroke returned,
By fled Resistance. His eyes saw, in what a fury burnd
The son of Peleus; and down, went weeping from the tower, Priams amaze at
Achilles.

To all the port-guards; and their Chiefes, told of his flying power,
Commanding th'opening of the ports; but not to let their hands
Stir from them; for Aeacides, would pour in with his bands.
Destruction comes; O shut them straight; when we are in (he praid);
For, not our walls I fear, will check, this violent man. This said,
Off lifted they the bars; the ports, haled open; and they gave
Safety her entry, with the host; which yet they could not save,
Had not Apollo sallied out, and struck Destruction
(Brought by Achilles in their necks) back; when they, right upon
The ports bore all, dry, dustie, spent; and on their shoulders rode
Rabide Achilles with his lance; still Glory being the good
That pricked his Fury. Then the Greeks, high-ported Ilion
Had seized; had not Apollo stird, Antenors famous son,
Divine Agenor; and cast in, an undertaking spirit Agenor spirited by Apollo.

To his bold bosom; and himself, stood by to strengthen it,
And keep the heavy hand of death, from breaking in. The god
Stood by him, leaning on a beach, and covered his abode
With night-like darkness; yet for all, the spirit he inspired;
When that great citie-racers force, his thoughts struck, he retired;
Stood, and went on; A world of doubts, still falling in his way,
When (angry with himself) he said: Why suffer I this stay,
In this so strong need to go on? If, like the rest, I fly;
It Is his best weapon to give chase, being swift; and I should die Agenors
^scourse with himself.

Like to a coward. If I stand, I fall too. These two ways,
Please not my purpose; I would live. What if I suffer these,
Still to be routed? and (my feet, affoording further length)
Pass all these fields of Ilion, till Idas syluane strength,
And steep heights shroud me; and at Even, refresh me in the flood,
And turn to Ilion? O my soul, why drown'st thou in the blood
Of these discourses? If this course, that talks of further flight,
I give my feet; his feet more swift, have more ods. Get he sight
Of that pass; I pass least; for pace, and length of pace, his thies
Will stand out all men. Meet him then; my steel has faculties
Of power to pierce him; his great breast, but one soul holds; and that
Death claims his right in (all men say); but he holds special state
In Jove's high bounty: that is past man, that every way will hold; Io^es
bounty serves all men all ways.

And that serves all men, every way. This last heart, made him bold,
To stand Achilles; and stird up, a mighty mind to blows.
And as a Panther (having heard, the hounds traile) does disclose Simile.

Her freckl'd forhead; and stares forth, from out some deepe-growne wood,
To try what strength dares her abroad; and when her fiery blood
The hounds have kindled; no quench serves, of love to live, or fea^e;
Though struck, though wounded; though quite through, she feels the mortal
spear;
But till the man's close strength she tries, or strowes earth with his dart;
She puts her strength out: So it fared, with brave Agenors heart;
And till Achilles he had proved; no thoughts, no deeds, once stird
His fixed foot. To his broad breast, his round shield he preferred,
And up his arm went, with his aim; his voice out, with this cry:
Thy hope is too great ( Peleus son), this day to show thine eye
Troys Ilion at thy foot; O fool! the Greeks with much more woes, Agenor to
Achilles.

More then are sufferd yet, must buy, great Ilions overthrows.
We are within her many strong, that for our parents sakes,
Our wives and children, will save Troy; and thou (though he that makes
Thy name so terrible) shall make, a sacrifice to her,
With thine own ruins. Thus he threw; nor did his iauelin err;
But struck his foes leg, near his knee; the fervent steel did ring
Against his tin greaues, and leapt back. The fires strong-handed king,
Gave virtue of repulse; and then, Aeacides assailed
Divine Agenor; but in vain; Apollos power prevailed,
And rapt Agenor from his reach; whom quietly he placed
Without the skirmish; casting mists, to save from being chac't,
His tenderd person; and (he gone) to give his soldiers escape;
The deity turned Achilles still, by putting on the shape
Of him he thirsted; evermore, he fed his eye, and fled;
And he with all his knees pursued. So cunningly he led;
That still he would be near his reach, to draw his rage, with hope,
Far from the conflict; To the flood, maintaining still the scope
Of his attraction. In mean time, the other frighted powers,
Came to the city, comforted, when Troy, and all her towers,
Strooted with fillers; none would stand, to see who staid without,
Who escaped, and who came short; the ports, cleft to receive the rout,
That poured it self in. Every man, was for himself; Most fleet,
Most fortunate; who ever escaped, his head might thank his feet.
The end of the one and twentieth Book.
THE XXII. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
ALl Trojans housd but Hector; only he,
Keeps field, and undergoes th'extremitie.
Aeacides assaulting; Hector flies.
Minerua stays him: he resists, and dies.
Achilles to his chariot does enforce;
And to the nauall station, drags his corse.
Another Argument.
Hector (in Chi) to death is done,
By power of Peleus angry sonn^.
THus (chac't like Hinds) the Ilians, took time to drink and eat,
And to refresh them; getting off, the mingled dust and sweat;
And good strong ra^pires on in stead. The Greeks the^ cast their shields
Aloft their shoulders; and now Fate, their near invasion yields
Of those tough walls. Her deadly hand, compelling Hectors stay
Before Troy at the Scaean ports. Achilles still made way
At Phoebus; who, his bright head turned; and asked: Why ( Peleus son) Apollo
to Achilles.

Pursu'st thou (being a man) a god? thy rage has never done.
Acknowledge not thine eyes my state? esteems thy mind no more
Thy honor in the chase of Troy; but puts my chase before
Their utter conquest? they are all, now housde in Ilion,
While thou hunt'st me. What wishest thou? my blood will never run
On thy proud iauelin. It is thou (replied Aeacides)
That putst dishonor thus on me, (thou worst of deities) Achilles to Apollo.

Thou turndst me from the walls, whose ports, had never entertaind
Numbers now entered; over whom, thy saving hand has reigned,
And robbed my honor. And all is, since all thy actions stand,
Past fear of reckoning: but held I, the measure in my hand,
It should afford thee deare-bought fcapes. Thus with elated spirits,
(Steed-like, that at Olympus games, wears garlands for his merits,
And rattles home his chariot, extending all his pride)
Achilles so parts with the god. When aged Priam spide
The great Greek come, (sphear'd round with beams, and show'ng as if the star,
Surnamed Orions hound; that springs, in Autumn, and sends far
His radiance through a world of stars; of all whose beams, his own
Cast greatest splendour: the midnight, that renders them most shown,
Then being their foil; and on their points; cure-passing Fevers then,
Come shaking down, into the joints, of miserable men:
As this were fallen to earth; and shot, along the field his rays,
Now toward Priam (when he saw, in great Aeacides) Priams fright at the sight
of Achilles.

Out flew his tender voice in shriekes; and with raisde hands he smit
His reverend head; then up to heaven, he cast them; showing it,
What plagues it sent him; Down again, then threw them to his son,
To make him shun them. He now stood, without steep Ilion,
Thirsting the combat; and to him, thus miserably cride
The kind old king: O Hector! fly, this man, this homicide, Priam to Hector

That strait will stroy thee. He Is too strong; and would to heaven he were,
As strong in heavens love as in mine; Vultures and dogs should tear
His prostrate carcass; all my woes, quenched with his bloody spirits.
He has robbed me of many sons; and worthy; and their merits
Sold to far Islands. Two of them (aye me) I miss but now;
They are not enterd; nor stay here; Laothoe, O it was thou,
(O Queen of women) from whose womb, they breathed: O did the tents
Detain them only; brass and gold, would purschase safe events,
To their sad durance: it is within. Old Altes (young in fame)
Gave plenty for his daughters dowre; but if they fed the flame
Of this man's fury, woe is me; woe to my wretched Queen.
But in our states woe, their two deaths, will naught at all be seen;
So thy life quit them: take the town; retire (dear son) and save
Troys husbands and her wives; nor give, thine own life to the grave,
For this man's glory: pity me; me, wretch, so long alive;
Whom in the door of Age, Jove keeps; that so he may deprive
My being, in Fortunes utmost curse; to see the blackest thread
Of this life's miseries; my sons slain; my daughters ravished;
Their resting chambers sacked; their babes, torn from them, on their knees
Pleading for mercy; themselves dragd, to Grecian slaueries,
(And all this drawn through my red eyes.) Then last of all kneel I,
Alone, all helpless, at my gates, before my enemy,
That (ruthlesse) gives me to my dogs: all the deformity
Of age discovered; and all this, thy death (sought wilfully)
Will pour on me. A fair young man, at all parts it beseemes,
(Being bravely slain) to lie all gasht; and wear ^he worst extremes
Of wars most cruelty; no wound, of whatsoever ruth,
But is his ornament: but I, a man so far from youth;
White head, white bearded, wrinkl'd, pined; all shames must show the eye:
Live; prevent this then; this most shame, of all man's misery.
Thus wept the old king, and tore off, his white hair; yet all these
Retired not Hector. Hecuba, then fell upon her knees;
Stripped nak't her bosom, showed her breasts, and bad him reverence them,
And pity her: if ever she, had quieted his exclaim,
He would cease hers, and take the town; not tempting the rude field,
When all had left it: think (said she) I gave thee life to yield
My life recomfort; thy rich wife, shall have no rites of thee,
Nor do thee rites: our tears shall pay, thy corse no obsequie,
Being ravished from us; Grecian dogs, nourisht, with what I n^rst.
Thus wept both these; and to his ruth, proposde the utmost worst,
Of what could chance them; yet he staid. And now drew deadly near,
Mighty Achilles; yet he still, kept deadly station there.
Look how a Dragon, when she sees, a traveler bent upon A Simile expressing
how Hector stood Achilles.

Her breeding den; her bosom fed, with fell contagion,
Gathers her forces, sits him firm, and at his nearest pace,
Wraps all her Cauerne in her folds, and thrusts a horrid face
Out at his entry: Hector so, with vnextinguisht spirit,
Stood great Achilles; stird no foot; but at the prominent turret,
Bent to his bright shield, and resolved, to bear fallen heaven on it.
Yet all this resolute abode, did not so truly fit
His free election; but he felt, a much more galling spur
To the performance, with conceit, of what he should incur,
Entering, like others; for this cause; to which, he thus gave way.
O me, if I shall take the town, Polydamas will lay
This flight, and all this death on me; who counseld me to lead Hectors
discourse

My powers to Troy: this last black night, when so I saw make head,
Incenst Achilles; I yet staid; though (past all doubt) that course
Had much more profited then mine; which, (being by so much worse,
As comes to all our flight, and death) my folly now I fear,
Has bred this scandal; all our town, now burns my ominous ear^
With whispering: Hectors self conceit, has cast away his host.
And (this true) this extremity, that I rely on most,
Is best for me; stay, and retire, with this man's life; or die
Here for our citi^ with renown; since all else fled, but I.
And yet one way, cuts both these ways; what if I hang my shield,
My helm and lance here, on these walls; and meet in humble field,
Renowm'd Achilles, offering him, Hellen, and all the wealth,
What ever in his hollow keeles, bore Alexanders stealth
For both the Atrides? For the rest; what ever is possessed
In all this city, known, or hid, by oath shall be confessed
Of all our citizens; of which, one half the Greeks shall have;
One half themselves. But why (loved soul) would these suggestions save
Thy state still in me? I Will not sue; nor would he grant; but I,
(Mine arms cast off) should be assured, a woman's death to die.
To men of oak and rock, no words; virgins and youths talk thus;
Virgins and youths, that love, and woo; there is other war with us:
What blows and conflicts urge, we cry; hates and defiances;
And with the garlands these trees bear, try which hand Jove will bless.
These thoughts emploid his stay; and now, Achilles comes; now near Achilles
dreadful approach to Hector.

His Mars-like presence, terribly, came brandishing his spear;
His right arm shook it; his bright arms, like day came glittering on,
Like fire-light, or the light of heaven, shot from the rising Sun.
This sight outwrought discourse; cold Fear, shook Hector from his stand;
No more stay now; all ports were left; he fled in fear the hand
Of that Feare-master, who hauk-like, aires swiftest passenger,
That holds a timorous Dove in chase; and with command does ^are
His fiery onse^ the Dove hasts; the Hawk comes whizzing on;
This way, and that, he turns, and winds, and cuffes the Pigeon;
And till he trusse it, his great spirit, lays hot charge on his wing:
So urged Achilles, Hectors flight; so still, Fears point did sting
His troubled spirit; his knees wrought hard; along the wall he flew;
In that fair chariot way, that runs, beneath the tower of view,
And Troys wild fig tree; till they reached, where those two mother springs,
Of deep Scamander, poured abroad, their silver murmurings. The (...)
description of two springs under the walls of Troy

One warm, and casts out fumes, as fire; the other, cold as snow,
Or hail dissolved. And when the Sun, made ardent summer glow,
There waters concrete cristall shined; near which, were cisternes made,
All pau'd, and clear; where Trojan wives, and their fai^e daughters had
Landrie for their fine linen weeds; in times of cleanly Peace,
Before the Grecians brought their siege. These Captains noted these;
One flying; the other in pursuit; a strong man flew before; (...) (...) from
Achilles, and his chase of (...).

A stronger followed him by far, and close up to him bore.
Both did their best; for neither now, ran for a sacrifice;
Or for the sacrificers hide, (our runners usual prise)
These ran for tame-horse Hectors soul. And as two running Steeds,
Backed in some set race for a game, that tries their swi^est speeds,
(A tripod, or a woman given, for some man's funerals):
Such speed made these men; and on foot, ran Up and down the walls, it is to
be understood. (...) grief for Hector.
thrice about the walls.
The gods beheld them; all much moved; and Jove said: O ill sight!
A man I love much, I see forced, in most unworthy flight
About great Ilion; my heart grieves; he paid so many vows,
With thighs of sacrificed beeues; both on the lofty brows
Of Id^, and in Ilions height. Consult we; shall we free
His life from death? or give it now, to Achilles victory?
Minerua answered: Alter Fate? one, long since marked for death, Pall^ against
Hectors preser^.

Now take from death? do thou; but know, he still shall run beneath,
Our other censures. Be it then, (replide the Thunderer)
My loved Tritonia, at thy will; in this I will prefer
Thy free intention; work it all. Then stoopt she from the sky,
To^ his great combat. Peleus son, pursued incessantly
Still-flying Hector: As a Hound, that having roused a Heart, (...).

Although he tappish never so often; and every shrubbie part,
Attempts for strength, and trembles in; the Hound does still pursue
So close, that not a foot he fails; but hunts it still at view:
So plied Achilles, Hectors steps; as often as he assailed
The Dardan ports and towers for strength, (to fetch from thence some aid,
With winged shafts) so often forced he, amends of pace; and (...)
Twixt him and all his hopes; and still, upon the field he kept
His utmost turnings to the town. And yet, as in a dream, A most (...) (...),
used ((...) all our Homer besides) by Virgil, but this as a translator merely.

One thinks he gives another chase; when such a feigned extreme
Possesses both; that he in chase, the chacer cannot fly;
Nor can the chacer get to hand, his flying enemy:
So, nor Achilles chase could reach, the flight of Hector^ pace;
Nor Hectors flight enlarge it self, of swift Achilles chase.
But how chanced this? how, all this time, could Hector bear the knees
Of fierce Achilles, with his own; and keep off Destinies,
If Phoebus (for his last and best) through all that course had failed,
To add his succors to his nerves? And (as his foe assailed)
Near, and within him, fed his escape. Achilles yet well knew,
His knees would fetch him; and gave signs, to some friends (making show
Of shooting at him) to forbear, lest they detracted so
From his full glory; in first wounds; and in the overthrow,
Make his hand last. But when they reached, the fourth time, the two founts;
Then Jove, his golden skoles weighed up; and took the last accounts
Of Fate for Hector; putting in, for him, and Peleus son,
Two fates of bitter death; of which, high heaven received the one,
The other hell: so low declined, the light of Hectors life.
Then Phoebus left him, when wars Queen, came to resolve the strife, Pallas
to Achilles.

In the others knowledge: Now (said she) Ioue-lou'd Aeacides,
I hope at last to make Renown, perform a brave access
To all the Grecians; we shall now, lay low this champions height;
Though never so insatiate, was his great heart of fight.
Nor must he escape our pursuit still; though all the feet of Jove,
Apollo bows into a sphere, soliciting more love,
To his most favored. Breath thee then, stand firm; my self will have,
And hearten Hector to change blows. She went, and he stood fast;
Leaned on his lance; and much was joyed, that single strokes should try
This fadging conflict. Then came close, the changed deity, Pallas like
Deiphobus to Hector

To Hector, like Deiphobus, in shape, and voice; and said:
O brother, thou art too much urged, to be thus combatted
About our own walls; let us stand, and force to a retreat
The Insulting Chaser. Hector joyed, at this so kind deceit;
And said: O good Deiphobus, thy love was most before Hector to Pallas for
Deiphobus.

(Of all my brothers) dear to me; but now, exceeding more
It costs me honor; that thus urged, thou come to part the charge
Of my last fortunes; other friends, keep town, and leave at large
My rackt endeavors. She replide: Good brother, it is most true;
One after other, King and Queen; and all our friends did sue
(Even on their knees) to stay me there; such tremblings shake them all,
With this man's terror: but my mind, so grieved to see our wall
Girt with thy chases; that to death, I longed to urge thy stay.
Come, fight we, thirsty of his blood; no more let us fear to lay
Cost on our lan^es; but approve, if bloudied with our spoils,
He can bear gl^tie to their fleet, or shut up all their toiles,
In his one suffe^ce on thy lance. With this deceit, she led;
And (both come near) thus Hector spoke: Thrice I have compassed Hector to
Achil^.

This great town ( Peleus son) in flight, with auersation,
That out of Fate put off my steps; but now, all flight is flowne;
The short course set up; death or life. Our resolutions yet,
Must shun all rudeness; and the gods, before our valor set,
For use of victory; and they, being worthiest witnesses
Of all vows; since they keep vows best; before their deities,
Let vows of fit respect, pass both; when Conquest has bestowed
Her wreath on either. Here I vow, no fury shall be showed,
That is not manly, on thy corse; but, having spoiled thy arms,
Resign thy person; which swear thou. These fair and temperate terms,
Far fled Achilles; his brows bent; and out flew this reply.
Hector, thou only pestilence, in all mortality, Achilles stern reply to
Hector.

To my sere spirits; never set, the point twixt thee and me
Any conditions; but as far, as men and Lions fly,
All terms of covenant; lambs and wolves: in so far opposite state,
(Impossible for love t'attone) stand we; till our souls satiate
The god of soldiers; do not dream, that our disjunction can
Endure condition. Therefore now, all worth that fits a man,
Call to thee; all particular parts, that fit a soldier;
And they, all this include, (besides, the skill, and spirit of war)
Hunger for slaughter; and a hate, that eats thy heart, to eat
Thy foes heart. This stirs; this supplies, in death, the killing heat;
And all this needst thou. No more flight; Pallas Athenia
Will quickly cast thee to my lance; now, now together draw
All griefs for vengeance; both in me, and all my friends late dead
That bled thee; raging with thy lance. This said, he brandished
His long lance; and away it sung: which, Hector giving view, Achilles first
encounter with Hector.

Stoupt low, stood firm, (foreseeing it best) and quite it ouerflew,
Fastening on earth. Pallas.
Athenia, drew it, and gave her friend,
Unseen of Hector. Hector then, thus spoke: Thou want thy end,
(God-like Achilles:) now I see, thou have not learned my fate,
Of Jove at all; as thy high words, would bravely intimate;
Much tongue affects thee; cunning words, well serve thee to prepare
Thy blows with threats, that mine might faint, with want of spirit to dare;
But my back never turns with breath; it was not borne to bear
Burdens of wounds; strike home, before; drive at my breast thy spear,
As mine at thine shall; and try then, if heavens will favor thee
With escape of my lance; O would Jove, would take it after me,
And make thy bosom take it all; an easy end would crown
Our difficult wars, were thy soul fled; thou most bane of our town.
Thus flew his dart, touched at the midst, of his vast shield, and flew Hector
at Achilles.

A huge way from it; but his heart, wrath enterd with the view
Of that hard escape; and heavy thoughts, struck through him, when he spide
His brother vanished; and no lance, beside left; out he cride,
Deiphobus! another lance. Lance, nor Deiphobus H^ctors amaze with the deceit
of Pallas.

Stood near his call. And then his mind, saw all things ominous,
And thus suggested: Woe is me; the gods have called, and I
Must meet Death here; Deiphobus, I well hoped had been by,
With his white shield; but our strong walls, shield him; and this deceit
Flows from Minerua; now, o now, ill death comes; no more flight,
No more recovery: O Jove, this has been otherwise;
Thy bright son, and thy self, have set, the Greeks a greater prise
Of Hectors blood then now; of which, (even jealous) you had care;
But Fate now conquers; I am hers; and yet, not she shall share
In my renown; that life is left, to every noble spirit;
And that, some great deed shall beget; that all lives shall inherit.
Thus, forth his sword flew, sharp and broad, and bor^ a deadly weight; The
last encounter of Achilles and Hector.

With which, he rusht in: And look how, an Eagle from her height,
Stoopes to the rapture of a Lamb; or cuffes a timorous Hare:
So fell in Hector; and at him, Achilles; his minds ^are,
Was fierce and mighty: his shield cast, a Sun-like radian^;
Helm nodded; and his four plumes shook; and when he raisde his lance,
Up Hesperus rose, amongst th'euening stars. His bright and sparliling (...),
Looked through the body of his foe; and sought through all that prise,
The next way to his thirsted life. Of all ways, only one
Appeared to him; and thas was, where, th'vnequall winding bone,
That ioynes the shoulders and the neck, had place; and where there lay
The speeding way to death: and there, his quick eye could display
The place it sought; even through those arms, his friend Patr^lus wore,
When Hector slew him. There he aimed, and there his iauelin tore
Stern passage quite through Hectors neck; yet mist it so his throat,
It gave him power to change some words; but down to earth it got H^ctor
wounded to death.

His fainting body. Then triumphed, divine Aeacides;
Hector, (said he) thy heart supposde, that in my friends deceasse, Achilles
insultation.

Thy life was safe; my absent arm, not cared for: Fool! he left
One at the fleet, that bettered him; and he it is that re^t
Thy strong knees thus; and now the dogs, and fowls, in foulest use
Shall tear thee up; thy corse exposde, to all the Greeks abuse.
He, fainting, said: Let me implore, even by thy knees, and soul, H^ctors
d^ing request to Achilles.

And thy great parents; do not see, a cruelty so foul
Inflicted on me; brass and gold, receive at any rate,
And quit my person; that the Peers, and Ladies of our state,
May tomb it; and to sacred fire, turn thy profane decrees.
Dog, (he replied) urge not my ruth, by parents, ^oule, nor knees; Achill^
infle^bilitie.

I would to God that any rage, would let me eat (...) raw,
Slic't into pieces; so beyond, the right of any law,
I taste thy merits; and believe, it flies the force of man,
To rescue thy head from the dogs. Give all the gold they can;
If ten or twenty times so much, as friends would rate thy price,
Were tenderd here, with vows of more; to buy the cruel^es
I here have vowed; and after that, thy father with his gold
Would free thy self; all that should fail, to let ^hy mother hold
Solemnities of death with thee; and do thee such a grace,
To mourn thy whole corse on a bed; which (...) I Will de^ce
With fowls and dogs. He (dying) said: I (k^owing the well) (...)
Thy now tried tyranny; nor hop^, for any other ^aw,
Of nature, or of nations: and that fear, fore't much more
Then death, my flight; which never touched, at Hect^s (...) before. Hectors
prophecy of Achilles de^h

A soul of iron informs thee; mark, what (...) (...) (...)
Will give me of thee, for this rage; when in the Sc^ri gates,
Phoebus and Paris meet with thee. Thus death^ hand (...) his eyes;
His soul flying his ^aire ^ms, to hell; mourning (...) (...),
To part so with his youth and strength. The d^d* thus T^is son,
His prophecy answered: Die thou now; when my short thread is spunne,
I Will bear it as the will of Jove. This said, his brazen spear,
He drew, and stuck by: then his arms (that all embrewed were)
He spoiled his shoulders off. Then all, the Greeks ran in to him,
To see his person; and admired, his terror-stirring lim: The Greeks ad^ration
of Hectors person being slain.

Yet none stood by, that gave no wound, to his so goodly form;
When each to other said: O Jove, he is not in the storm,
He came to fleet in, with his fire; he handles now more soft.
O friends, (said stern Aeacides) now that the gods have brought Achilles to
the Grecians.

This man thus down; I Will freely say, he brought more bane to Greece,
Then all his aiders. Try we then, (thus armed at every piece,
And girding all Troy with our host) if now their hearts will leave
Their city clear; her clear stay slain; and all their lives receive;
Or hold yet, Hector being no more. But why use I a word
Of any act, but what concerns, my friend? dead, vndeplor'd,
Vnsepulcherd; he lies at fleet, unthought on; never hour
Shall make his dead state, while the quick, enioyes me; and this power,
To move these mouers. Though in hell, men say, that such as die,
Oblivion seiseth; yet in hell, in me shall Memory
Hold all her forms still, of my friend. Now, (youths of Greece) to fleet
Bear we this body; Paeans sing; and all our navy greet
With endless honor; we have slain, Hector, the period
Of all Troys glory; to whose worth, all vowed, as to a god.
This said; a work, not worthy him, he set to: of both feet, Achilles tyranny
to Hectors person, which we lay on his fury, and l^e to his slain friend, for
whom himself living, sufferd so much.

He bored the nerves through, from the heel, to th'ankle; and then knit
Both to his chariot, with a thong, of whitleather; his head
Trailing the center. Up he got, to chariot; where he laid
The arms repurchac't; and scourged on, his horse, that freely flew.
A whirlewind made of startled dust, drove with them, as they drew;
With which were all his black-browne curls, knotted in heaps, and filled.
And there lay Troys late Gracious; by Jupiter exiled
To all disgrace, in his own land, and by his parents seen.
When (like her sons head) all with dust, Troys miserable Queen,
Distained her temples; plucking off, her honored hair; and tore
Her royal garments, shrieking out. In like kind, Pri^ bore
His sacred person; like a wretch, that never saw good day,
Broken, with outcries. About both, the people pros^ate lay;
Held down with Clamor; all the town, veiled with a cloud of tears. Priam
and Hecubas miserable plight for Hector

Ilion, with all his tops on fire, and all the massacres,
Left for the Greeks, could put on looks, of no more overthrow
Then now fraid life. And yet the king, did all their looks outshow.
The wretched people could not bear, his soueraign^ wretchedness,
Plaguing himself so; thrusting out, and praying all the preasse
To open him the Dardan po^; that he alone might fetched
His dearest son in; and (all filled, with ^bling) did beseech
Each man by name, thus: Loved friends, be you co^ent; let me Priam to his
friend.

(Though much ye grieve) be that poo^ mean, to ou^ sad remedy,
Now in our wishes; I will go, and pray this impious man,
(Author of horrors) making proof, if ages reverence can
Excite his pity. His own sire, is old like me; and he,
That got him to our giefes; perhaps, may (for my likeness) be
Mean for our ruth to him. Ahlas, you have no cause of cares,
Compared with me; I, many sons, graced, with their freshest years
Have lost by him: and all their deaths, in slaughter of this one,
(Afflicted man) are doubled: this, will bitterly set gone
My soul to hell. O would to heaven, I could but hold him dead
In these pined arms: then tears, on tears, might fall, till all were shed
In common fortune. Now amaze, their natural course does stop,
And pricks a mad vein. Thus he mourned; and with him, all brake open
Their store of sorrows. The poor Queen, amongst the women wept, ^bas
complaint for Hector.

Turned into anguish: O my son, (she cried out) why, still kept,
Patient of horrors, is my life, when thine is vanished?
My days thou glorifiedst; my nights, rung of some honored deed,
Done by thy virtues: joy to me, profit to all our care.
All made a god of thee; and thou, made them, all that they are.
Now under fate, now dead. These two, thus vented as they could,
Their sorrows furnace. Hectors wife, not having yet been told
So much, as of his stay without. She in her chamber close,
Sat at her Loome: a piece of work, graced with a both sides gloss,
Strewn curiously with varied flowers, her pleasure was; her care,
To heat a Caldron for her Lord, to bath him, turned from war:
Of which, she chief charge gave her maids. Poor Dame, she little knew
How much her cares lackt of his case. But now the Clamor flew
Up to her turret: then she shook; her work fell from her hand,
And up she started, called her maids; she needs must understand
That ominous outcrie. Come (said she) I hear through all this cry
My mothers voice shrieke; to my throat, my heart bounds; Ecstasie
V^terly alters me: some fate, is near the hapless sons
Of fading Priam: would to god, my words suspicions
No ear had heard yet: O I fear, and that most heartily;
That with some stratageme, the son, of Peleus has put by
The wall of Ilion, my Lord; and (trusty of his feet)
Obtaind the chase of him alone; and now the curious heat
Of his still desperate spirit is cooled. It let him never keep
In guard of others; before all, his violent foot must step,
Or his place, for^eited he held. Thus fury like she went,
Two women (as she willed) at hand; and made her quick a^nt
Up to the tower, and preasse of men; her spirit in uproar. Round
She cast her greedy eye, and saw, her Hector slain, and bound
TO Achilles chariot; manlesly, dragged to the Grecian fleet.
Black night struck through her; under her, Tr^ ^ke away her feet,
And back she shrunk, with such a sway; that off her head-tire flew;
Her Coronet, Call, Ribands, Veil, that golden Venus threw
On her white shoulders; that high day, when warre-like Hector won
Her hand in nuptials, in the Court, of king Eetion;
And that great dowre, then given with her. About her, on their kn^s,
Her husbands sisters, brothers wives, ^ell round, and by degrees
Recouerd her. Then, when again, her respirations found
Free pass, (her mind and spirit met) these thoughts her words did sound.
O Hector, O me cursed dame; both borne beneath one fate: Andromaches complaint
for Hector.

Thou here, I in Cilician Thebes; where Placus does elate,
His shadie forehead, in the Court, where king Eetion,
(Hapless) begot unhappy me; which would he had not done,
To live past thee: thou now art di^'d, to Putos gloomie throne,
Sunk through the couerts of the earth: I, in a hell of moan,
Left here thy widow: one poor babe, borne to unhappy both,
Whom thou leau'st helpless, as he thee; he borne to all the wroth
Of woe, and labor. Lands left him, will others ^se upon:
The Orphan day, of all friends helps, robs every mothers son.
An Orphan, all men suffer sad; his eyes stand still with tears.
Need tries his fathers friends; and fails. Of all his favorers
If one the cup gives, it is not long; the wine he finds in it,
Scarce moists his palate: if he chance, to gain the grace, to sit;
Suruiuing fathers sons repine; use contumelies, strike,
Bid, leave us; where is thy fathers place? He (weeping with dislike)
Retires to me. To me, ahlas, Astyanax is he
Borne to these miseries. He that late, fed on his fathers knee,
To whom all knees bowed; daintiest fare, apposde him; and when Sleep
Lay on his temples, his cries stilled (his heart, even laid in steep,
Of all things precious) a soft bed; a careful nur^s arms
Took him to guardiance; but now, as huge a world of harms,
Lies on his suffrance; now thou wantst, thy fathers hand to friend:
O my Astyanax, O my Lord; thy hand that did defend,
These gates of Ilion: these long walls, by thy arm, measured still,
Amply, and only: yet at fleet, thy naked corse must ^ll
Vile worms, when dogs are fatiate; far from thy parents care;
Far from those funeral ornaments; that thy mind would prepare,
(So sudden being the chance of arms) ever expecting death. Andromache
wrought many funeral ornaments for Hector before his death.

Which task (though my heart would not serve, t'employ my hands beneath)
I made my women yet perform. Many, and much in price
Were those integuments they wrought, t'adorne thy Exequies:
Which, since they fly thy use, thy Corse, not laid in their attire;
Thy sacrifice they shall be made; these hands in mischievous fire
Shall vent their vanities. And yet, (being consecrate to thee)
They shall be kept for citizens; and their fair wives, to see.
Thus spoke she weeping; all the dames, endeavoring to cheer
Her desert state; (fearing their own) wept with her tear for tear.
The end of the two and twentieth Book.
THE XXIII. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Chilles orders Iusts of exequies
For his Patroclus; and does sacrifise
Twelve Trojan Princes; most loved hounds and horse;
And other offerings, to the honored Corse.
He institutes, besides, a funeral game;
Where Diomed, for horse-race, wins the fame*
For foot, Ulysses; others otherwise
Strive, and obtain: and end the exequies.
Another Argument.
Psi, sings the rites of the decease
Ordaind by great Aeacides.
THus mourned all Troy: but when at fleet, and Hellespontus shore,
The Greeks arrived, each to his ship: only the Conqueror
Kept vndisperst his Myrmidons: and said, Loved countrymen, Achilles to his
Myrmidons.

Disioyne not we, chariots, and horse: but (bearing hard our reine)
With state of both; march soft, and close, and mourn about the corse:
It Is proper honor to the dead. Then take we out our horse;
When with our friends kinds woe, our hearts, have felt delight to do
A virtuous soul right, and then sup. This said, all full of woe,
Circl'd the Corse. Achilles led, and thrice about him, close
All bore their goodly coted horse. Amongst all, Thetis rose,
And stirred up a delight, in grief; till all their arms with tears
And all the sands, were wet: so much, they loved that Lord of Fears.
Then to the center fell the Prince; and (putting in the breast)
Of his slain friend, his slaughtring hands;) began to all the rest
Words to their tears. Rejoice (said he) O my Patroclus: Thou Achilles to the
person of Patro^lus.

Courted by Dis now: now I pay, to thy late overthrow,
All my reuenges vowed before; Hector lies slaughterd here
Dragd at my chariot; and our dogs, shall all in pieces tear
His hated lims. Twelve Trojan youths, borne of their noblest strains,
I took alive: and (yet enraged) will empty all their veins
Of vital spirits; sacrifisde, before thy heap of fire.
This said, a work unworthy him, he put upon his ire,
And trampled Hector under foot, at his friends feet. The rest
Disarmed; took horse from chariot, and all to sleep addressed,
At his black vessel. Infinite, were those that rested there.
Himself yet sleeps not; now his spirits, were wrought about the chere,
Fit for so high a funeral. About the steel used then,
Oxen in heaps lay bellowing; preparing food for men.
Bleating of sheep, and goats, filled air; numbers of white-tooth'd swine,
(Swimming in fat) lay sindging there: the person of the slain
Was girt with slaughter. All this done, all the Greek kings conuaid
Achilles to the king of men; his rage, not yet allaid,
For his Patroclus. Being arrived, at Agamemnons tent;
Himself bad Heralds put to fire, a Caldron; and present
The service of it to the Prince; to try if they could win
His pleasure, to admit their pains, to cleanse the blood sok't in
About his conquering hands, and brows. Not, by the king of heaven
(He swore). The laws of friendship damn, this false-heart license given
Achilles ouerhearing, used this abruption.

To men that lose friends: not a drop, shall touch me till I put
Patroclus in the funeral pile; before these curles be cut;
His tomb erected. It Is the last, of all care, I shall take,
While I consort the careful: yet, for your entreaties sake,
(And though I loathe food) I will eat: but early in the morn,
Atrides, use your strict command, that lodes of wood be borne
To our designed place; all that fits, to light home such a one,
As is to pass the shades of Death; that fire enough, set gone
His person quickly from our eyes; and our diuerted men
May plie their business. This all ears, did freely entertain,
And found observance. Then they supt, with all things fit; and all
Repaired to tents and rest. The friend, the shores maritimall,
Sought for his bed, and found a place, fair, and upon which plaide Achilles
retreat from company to the seas short.

The murmuring billows. There, his lims, to rest, not sseepe, he laid,
Heavily sighing. Round about (silent, and not too near)
Stood all his Myrmidons; when strait, (so ouer-labour'd were
His goodly lineaments, with chase, of Hector; that beyond
His resolution not to sleep:) Sleep cast his fodaine bond
Over his sense, and losde his care. Then, of his wretched friend,
The soul appeared; at every part, the form did comprehend Patroclus appears
to Achilles sleeping.

His likeness; his fair eyes, his voice, his stature; every weed
His person wore, it fantased; and stood above his head,
This sad speech uttering: Do thou sleep? Aeacides, am I
Forgotten of thee? Being alive, I found thy memory
Ever respectfull: but now dead, thy dying love abates.
Interre me quickly; enter me, in Plutoes iron gates;
For now, the souls (the shades) of men, fled from this being, beat
My spirit from rest; and stay, my much desired receipt
Amongst souls, placed beyond the flood. Now every way I err
About this brode-dor'd horse of Dis. O help then, to prefer
My soul yet further; here I mourn: but had the funeral fire
Consumed my body; never more, my spirit should retire
From hels low region: from thence, souls never are retriu'd
To talk with friends here; nor shall I; a hateful fate deprived
My being here; that at my birth, was fixed; and to such fate,
Even thou, o god-like man, art marked; the deadly Ilion gate,
Must entertain thy death. O then, I charge thee now, take care
That our bones part not: but as life, combinde in equal fare,
Our loving beings; so let Death. When, from Opuntas towers,
My father brought me, to your roofes, (since (against my will) my powers
Incenst, and indiscreet, at dice, slew fair Amphidamas)
Then Peleus entertaind me well; then in thy charge I was
By his iniunction, and thy love: and therein, let me still
Receive protection. Both our bones, provide, in thy last Will,
That one Vrne may contain; and make, that vessel all of gold,
That Thetis gave thee; that rich Vrne. This said; Sleep ceast to hold
Achilles waking to the shade of (...).

Achilles temples; and the shade, thus he received: O friend,
What needed these commands? my care, before, meant to commend
My bones to thine, and in that Vrne. Be sure, thy will is done.
A little stay yet, lets delight, with some full passion
Of woe enough; eithers affects, embrace we. Opening thus
His greedy arms; he felt no friend: like matter vaporous
The spirit vanished under earth, and murmured in his stoop.
Achilles started; both his hands, he clapped, and lifted up,
In this sort wondering; O ye gods, I see we have a soul
In th'vnderdwellings; and a kind, of man-resembling idol: Achi^s his
discourse with him self about the apparition of (...) shade.

The souls seat yet, all matter felt, stays with the carcass here.
O friends, hapless Patroclus soul, did all this night appear,
Weeping, and making moan to me; commanding every thing
That I intended toward him; so truly figuring
Himself at all parts, as was strange. This accident did turn
To much more sorrow; and begat, a greediness to mourn
In all that heard. When mourning thus, the rosy morn arose: The morning.

And Agamemnon, through the tents, wak't all; and did dispose,
Both men and Mules for carriage, of matter for the fire. Agamemnon sends out
companies to fetch fuel for the funeral heap, of which company Meriones was
Capta^.

Of all which work, Meriones, (the Cretan soueraigns squire)
Was Captain, and abroad they went. Wood-cutting tools they bore;
Of all hands, and well-twisted cords. The Mules marched all before.
Up hill, and down hill; ouerthwarts, and breake-necke clifts they past:
But when the fountfull Idas tops, they scaled, with utmost haste,
All fell upon the high-hair'd Oaks; and down their curled brows
Fell busling to the earth: and up, went all the boles and bows,
Bound to the Mules; and back again, they parted the harsh way
Amongst them, through the tangling shrubs; and long they thought the day,
Till in the plain field all arrived: for all the woodmen bore
Logs on their necks; Meriones, would have it so: the shore
At last they reached yet; and then, down, their cariages they cast,
And sat upon them; where the son, of Peleus had placed,
The ground for his great sepulcher, and for his friends, in one,
They raisd a huge pile; and to arms, went every Myrmidon,
Charged by Achilles; chariots, and horse were harnessed;
Fighters and charitoters got up; and they, the sad march led:
A cloud of infinite foot behind. In midst of all was borne
Patroclus person, by his Peers: on him, were all heads shorn;
Even till they covered him with curles. Next to him, marched his friend
Embracing his cold neck, all sad; since now he was to send,
His dearest, to his endless home. Arrin'd all, where the wood,
Was heapt for funeral, they set down. Apart Achilles stood;
And when enough wood was heapt on, he cut his golden hair; Achilles cuts his
hair over his friends body.

Long kept, for Sperchius, the flood; in hope of safe repair
To Ph^hi^, by that rivers power, but now, left hopeless thus,
(Enraged, and looking on the sea) he cried out: Sperchius;
In vain, my fathers piety, vowed; (at my implored return,
To my loved country) that these curls, should on thy shores be shorn.
Besides a sacred Hecatombe; and sacrifice beside,
Of fifty Weathers; at those founts, where men have edifide
A lofty temple; and perfumed, an altar to thy name.
There vowed he all these offerings; but fate preuents thy fame;
His hopes not suffering satisfied: and since, I never more
Shall see my loved soil; my friends hands, shall to the Stygian shore
Convey these Tresses. Thus he put, in his friends hands the hair.
And this bred fresh desire of moan; and in that sad affair,
The Sun had set amongst them all; had Thetis son not spoke
Thus to Atrides: King of men, thy aid I still inuoke, Achilles to Agamemnon.

Since thy Command, all men still hear; dismiss thy soldiers now,
And let them victle; they have mourned, sufficient; it is we owe
The dead this honor; and with us, let all the Captains stay.
This heard; Atrides instantly, the soldiers sent away;
The funeral officers remained, and heapt on matter still,
Till, of an hundred foot about, they made the funeral pile:
In whose hot height, they cast the Corse; and then they poured on tears.
Numbers of fat sheep, and like store, of crooked-going steres,
They slew before the solemn fire: stripped off their hides and dressed.
Of which, Achilles took the fat; and covered the deceast
From head to foot: and round about, he made the officers pile
The beasts nak't bodies; vessels full, of honey, and of oil,
Poured in them, laid upon a bear; and cast into the fire.
Four goodly horse; and of nine hounds, two most in the desire
Of that great Prince, and trencher-fed; all fed that hungry flame.
Twelve Trojan Princes last stood forth; young, and of toward fame: Twelve
Princes sacrifised on the funeral pile of Patroclus.

All which, (set on with wicked spirits) there struck he, there he slew.
And to the iron strength of fire, their noble lims he threw.
Then breathed his last sighs, and these words: Again rejoice my friend,
Even in the ioylesse depth of hell: now give I complete end
To all my vows. Alone thy life, sustained not violence;
Twelve Trojan Princes wait on thee, and labor to incense
Thy glorious heap of funeral. Great Hector I Will excuse,
The dogs shall eat him. These high threats, performed not their abuse;
Jove's daughter, Venus, took the guard, of noble Hectors Corse,
And kept the dogs off: night, and day, applying sovereign force
Of rosy balmes; that to the dogs, were horrible in taste:
And with which she the body filled. Renowm'd Apollo cast
A cloud from heaven; lest with the Sun, the nerves and lineaments
Might dry, and putrify. And now, some powers deni^e consents
To this solemnity: the fire, (for all the oily fuel
It had iniected) would not burn; and then the loving Cruel
Studied for help, and standing off; inuokt the two fair winds
( Zephyr and Boreas) to afford, the rage of both their kinds,
To aid his outrage. Precious gifts, his earnest zeal did vow,
Powered from a golden bowl much wine; and prayde them both to blow
That quickly, his friends Corse might burn; and that heaps sturdy breast
Embrace Consumption. Iris heard; The winds were at a feast;
All in the Court of Zephyrus (that boisterous blowing air) Iris to the winds.

Gathered together. She that wears, the thousand-colourd hair,
Flew thither, standing in the porch. They (seeing her) all arose;
Called to her; every one desired: she would a while repose,
And eat with them. She answered; No, no place of feate is here;
Retreat calls to the Ocean, and Aethiopia; where
A Hecatombe is offering now, to heaven: and there must I
Partake the feast of sacrifise; I come to signify
That Thetis son implores your aides (Princes of North and West) (...) North
and West wind fly to incense the f^nerall pile.

With vows of much fair sacrifise; if each, will set his breast
Against his heap of funeral, and make it quickly burn;
Patroclus lies there; whose deceasse, all the Achai^ans mourn.
She said, and parted; and out rusht, with an vnmeasur'd rore,
Those two winds, tumbling clouds in heaps; vshers to eithers blore.
And instantly they reached the sea. Up flew the waves; the gale
Was strong; reached fruitful Troy; and full, upon the fire they fall.
The huge heap thunderd. All night long, from his chok't breast they blew
A liberal flame up; and all night, swift-foote Achilles threw
Wine from a golden bowl, on earth; and steept the soil in wine,
Still calling on Patroclus soul. No father could incline
More to a son most dear; nor more, mourn at his burned bones,
Then did the great Prince, to his friend, at his combustions;
Still creeping near and near the heap; still sighing, weeping still:
But when the day star looked abroad, and promised from his hill The morning.

Light, which the saffron morn made good, and sprinkled on the seas;
Then languisht the great pile; then sunk, the flames; and then calm Peace
Turned back the rough winds to their homes, the Thra^ billow rings
Their high retreat; rufl'd with cuffes, of their triumphant wings.
Pelides then forsook the pile; and to his tired limme
Chusd place of rest; where laid, sweet sleep, fell to his wish on him.
When all the kings guard (waiting then, perceiving will to rise
In that great Session,) hurried in, and op't again his eyes
With tumult of their troop, and haste. A little then he reared
His troubled person; sitting up, and this affair referd,
To wished commandment of the kings; Atrides, and the rest
Of our Commanders general, vouchsafe me this request Achilles to Agamemnon
and the other kings.

Before your parting: Give in charge, the quenching with black w^e,
Of this heaps relics; every brand, the yellow fire made shine.
And then, let search Patroclus bones, distinguishing them well;
As well ye may; they kept the midst: therest, at random fell,
About th'extreme part of the pile; Men's bones, and horses mixed.
Being found, I Will find an vrne of gold, t'enclose them; and betwixt
The air and them; two kels of fat, lay on them; and to Rest
Commit them, till mine own bones seal, our love; my soul deceast.
The sepulcher, I have not charged, to make of too much state;
But of a model something mean: that you of younger Fate,
(When I am gone) may amplify; with such a breadth and height,
As fits your judgments, and our worths. This charge received his weight
In all observance: first they quenched, with sable wine, the heap,
As far as it had fed the flame. The ash fell wondrous deep,
In which, his consorts, that his life, religiously loved,
Searched, weeping, for his bones; which found, they conscionably proved
His will, made to Aeacides; and what his love did add.
A golden vessel, double fat, containd them; all which (clad
In vailes of linen, pure and rich) were solemnly conuaid
TO Achilles tent. The platform then, about the pile they laid,
Of his fit sepulcher; and raisd, a heap of earth; and then
Offered departure. But the Prince, retaind there still his men;
Employing them to fetch from fleet, rich Tripods for his games,
Caldrons, Horse, Mules, brode-headed Beeues, bright steel, and brighter dames.
The best at horse race, he ordained, a Lady for his prise,
Generally praisefull; fair, and young, and skild in house wiferies, The ^ames
for Patroclus funeral.

Of all kinds fitting; and withal, a Trivet, that enclosde
Twenty two measures room, with ears. The next prise he proposde,
Was (that, which then had high respect) a mare of six years old,
Vnhandl'd; horsed with a mule: and ready to have foald.
The third game, was a Caldron, new, fair, bright, and could for sise
Contain two measures. For the fourth, two talents quantities,
Of finest gold. The fifth game was, a great new standing boule,
To set down both ways. These brought in, Achilles then stood up,
And said; Atrides, and my Lords, chief horsemen of our host,
These games expect ye. If my self, should interpose my most, Achilles to the
Grecian kings.

For our horse race; I make no doubt, but I should take again
These gifts proposde. Ye all know well, of how divine a strain
My horse are, and how eminent. Of Neptunes gift they a^e
To Peleus; and of his to me. My self then, will not share
In gifts given others; nor my steeds, breathe any spirit to shake
Their airie pasterns; so they mourn, for their kind guiders sake,
Late lost; that used with humorous oil, to slick their lofty manes;
Clear water having cleansd them first: and (his bane, being their banes)
Those lofty manes now strew the earth; their heads held shaken down.
You then, that trust in chariots, and hope with horse to crown
Your conquering temples; gird your selves; now fame and prise stretch for,
All that have spirits. This fired all; the first competitor
Was king Eumelus; whom the Art, of horsemanship did grace,
Son to Admetus. Next to him, rose Diomed to the race,
That under reins ruled Trojan horse; of late, forced from the son
Of Lord Anchises; himself freed, of near confusion
By Phoebus. Next to him set forth, the yellow-headed king
Of Laced^mon, Jove's high seed; and in his managing,
Podargus, and swift Aethe trod, steeds to the king of men.
Aethe, given by Echepolus; the Anchisiaden,
As bribe to free him from the war, resolved for Ilion.
So Delicacie feasted him; whom Jove bestowed upon
A mighty wealth; his dwelling was, in broad Sicyone.
Old Nestors son, Antilochus, was fourth for chivalry
In this Contention: his fair horse, were of the Pylian breed,
And his old father (coming near) informed him (for good speed)
With good Race notes; in which himself, could good instruction give.
Antilochus, though young thou art; yet thy grave virtues live Nestor to his son
Antilochus gives instructions for the race with chariots.

Beloved of Neptune, and of Jove: their spirits have taught thee all
The art of horsemanship; for which, the less thy merits fall
In need of doctrine. Well thy skill, can wield a chariot
In all fit turnings; yet thy horse, their slow feet handle not,
As fits thy manage; which makes me, cast doubts of thy success.
I well know, all these are not seen, in art of this address,
More then thy self: their horses yet, superior are to thine,
For their parts: thine want speed to make, discharge of a design
To please an Artist. But go on, show but thy art and heart
At all points; and set them against, their horses, heart, and art;
Good Judges will not see thee lose. A Carpenters desert
Stands more in cunning then in power. A Pylote does auert
His vessel from the rock, and wrack, tossed with the churlish winds,
By skill, not strength: so sorts it here; One chariotere that finds
Want of another power in horse, must in his own skill set
An overplus of that, to that; and so the proof will get
Skill, that still rests within a man, more grace, then power without.
He that in horse and chariots trusts, is often hurled about,
This way, and that, unhandsomely; all heaven wide of his end.
He better skild, that rules worse horse, will all observance bend,
Right on the scope still of a Race; bear near; know ever when to reine,
When give reine, as his foe before, (well noted in his vein,
Of manage, and his steeds estate) presents occasion.
I Will give thee instance now, as plain, as if thou saw it done.
Here stands a dry stub of some tree, a cubite from the ground;
(Suppose the stub of Oak, or Larch; for either are so sound
That neither rots with wet) two stones, white (mark you) white for view A
Comment might well be bestowed upon this speech of Nestor.

Parted on either side the stub; and these lay where they drew
The way into a straight; the Race, betwixt both lying clear.
Imagine them some monument, of one long since tomb'd there;
Or that they had been lists of race, for men of former years;
As now the lists Achilles sets, may serve for charioteres
Many years hence. When near to these, the race grows; then as right,
Drive on them as thy eye can judge; then lay thy bridles weight
Most of thy left side: thy right horse, then ^witching; all thy throat
(Spent in encouragments) give him; and all the reine let flote
About his shoulders: thy near horse, will yet be he that gave
Thy skill the prise; and him reine ^o, his head may touch the Naue
Of thy left wheel: but then take care, thou runst not on the stone,
(With wrack of horse and chariot) which so thou bear upon.
Shipwreck within the haven avoid, by all means; that will breed
Others delight, and thee a shame. Be wise then, and take heed
(My loved son) get but to be first, at turning in the course;
He lives not that can cote thee then: not if he backed the horse
The gods bred, and Adrastus owed. Divine Arions speed,
Could not outpace thee; or the horse, Laomedon did breed;
Whose race is famous, and fed here. Thus sat Nele^es,
When all that could be said, was said. And then Meriones Nestors aged love of
speech, was here briefly noted.

Set fifthly forth his faire-man'd horse. All leapt to chariot;
And every man then for the start, cast in, his proper lot.
Achilles drew; Antilochus, the lot set foremost forth;
Eumelus next; Atrides third; Meriones the fourth.
The fifth and last, was Diomed; far first in excellence.
All stood in order, and the lists, Achilles fixed far thence
In plain field; and a seat ordained, fast by. In which he set
Renowned Phoenix, that in grace, of Peleus was so great; Phoenix chief judge
of the best deseruers in the race.

To see the race, and give a truth, of all their passages.
All start together, scourged, and cried; and gave their business
Study and order. Through the field, they held a winged pace.
Beneath the bosom of their steeds, a dust so dimmed the race:
It stood above their heads in clouds; or like to storms amazed.
Manes flew like ensigns with the wind; the chariots sometime grazed*
And sometimes iumpt up to the air; yet still sat fast the men:
Their spirits even panting in their breasts, with fervor to obtain.
But when they turned to fleet again: then all men's skils were tried;
Then stretched the pasternes of their steeds. Eumelus horse in pride
Still bore their Sovereign. After them, came Diomeds coursers close,
Still apt to leap their chariot, and ready to repose
Upon the shoulders of their king, their heads. His back even burned
With fire, that from their nostrils flew. And then, their Lord had turned
The race for him, or given it doubt, if Phoebus had not smit
The scourge out of his hands; and tears, of helpless wrath with it,
From forth his eyes; to see his horse, for want of scourge, made slow;
And the others (by Apollos help) with much more swiftness go.
Apollos spite, Pallas discerned, and flew to Tydeus son;
His scourge reached, and his horse made fresh. Then took her angry run
At king Eumelus; brake his geres; his mares on both sides flew;
His draught tree fell to earth; and him, the tossed up chariot threw
Down to the earth; his elbowes torn; his forehead, all his face
Struck at the center; his speech lost. And then the turned race
Fell to Tydides: before all, his conquering horse he drove:
And first he glittered in the race: divine Athenia gave
Strength to his horse, and fame to him. Next him, drove Spartas king.
Antilochus, his fathers horse, then urged, with all his sting
Of scourge and voice. Run low (said he) stretch out your lims, and fly.
Antilochus to his steeds.

With Diomeds horse, I bid not strive; nor with himself strive I.
Athenia wings his horse, and him, renowmes. Atrides steeds
Are they ye must not fail but reach; and soon, lest soon succeeds
The blot of all your fames: to yield, in swiftness to a mare:
To femall Aethe. What Is the cause (ye best that ever were)
That thus ye fail us? Be assured, that Nestors love ye lose
For ever if ye fail his son: through both your both sides goes
His hot steel, if ye suffer me, to bring the last prise home.
Haste, overtake them instantly; we needs must overcome.
This harsh way next us: this my mind, will take; this I despise
For peril; this I Will creep through; hard, the way to honor lies.
And that take I, and that shall yield. His horse by all this knew
He was not pleased, and feared his voice; and for a while, they flew:
But strait, more clear, appeared the straight, Antilochus foresaw;
It was a gasp the earth gave, forced, by humors, cold and raw,
Poured out of Winters watrie breast; met there, and cleaving deep
All that near passage to the lists. This Nestors son would keep,
And left the rode way, being about; Atrides feared, and cride: Menelaus in
fear to follow Antilochus, who ye may see played upon ^im.

Antilochus! thy course is mad; contain thy horse; we ride
A way most dangerous; turn head, betime take larger field,
We shall be splitted. Nestors son, with much more scourge impeld
His horse, for this; as if not heard; and got as far before,
As any youth can cast a quoyte; Atrides would no more;
He back again, for fear himself, his goodly chariot,
And horse together, strewn the dust; in being so dustie hot,
Of thirsted conquest. But he chid, at parting, passing sore:
Antilochus (said he) a worse, then thee, earth never bore: Menelaus chid^s
Antilochus.

Farewell; we never thought thee wise, that were wise; but not so
Without oaths, shall the wreath (be sure) crown thy mad temples, Go.
Yet he bethought him, and went too; thus stirring up his steeds:
Leave me not last thus, nor stand vexed; let these fail in the speeds
Of feet and knees; not you: shall these, these old iades, (past the flower
Of youth, that you have) pass you? This, the horse feared, and more power
Put to their knees; strait getting ground. Both flew, and so the rest;
All came in smokes, like spirits; the Greeks, (set to see who did best,
Without the race, aloft:) now made, a new discovery,
Other then that they made at first; Idomeneus eye
Distinguished all; he knew the voice, of Diomed; seeing a horse
Of special mark, of color bay, and was the first in course;
His forehead putting forth a star, round, like the Moon, and white.
Up stood the Cretan, uttering this; Is it alone my sight, Idomenaeus the king
of Crete first discouers the runners.

(Princes, and Captains) that discernes, another lead the race,
With other horse, then led of late? Eumelus made most pace,
With his fleet mares; and he began, the flexure, as we thought.
Now all the field I search, and find, no where his view; has naught
Befalne amiss to him? perhaps, he has not with success
Performed his flexure: his reins lost, or seat, or with the tresse
His chariot faild him; and his mares, have outraid with affright:
Stand up, try you your eyes; for mine, hold with the second sight.
This seems to me, the Etolian king; the Tydean Diomed.
To you it seems so, (rustickly) Ajax Oileus said; Ajax Oileus angry with
Idomene^.

Your words are suited to your eyes. Those mares lead still, that led;
Eumelus owes them: and he still, holds reins and place that did;
Not fallen as you hoped: you must prate, before us all, though last
In judgment of all: you are too old, your tongue goes still too fast;
You must not talk so. Here are those, that better thee, and look
For first place in the censure. This, Idomeneus took
In much disdain; and thus replide: Thou best, in speeches worst; Idomeneus to
Ajax.

Barbarous languag'd; others here, might have reprou'd me first:
Not thou, vnfitst of all. I hold, a Tripode with thee here,
Or Caldron; and our General make, our equal arbiter,
Those horse are first; that when thou paist, thou then may know. This fired
Oileades more; and more then words, this quarrel had inspired,
Had not Achilles rose; and used, this pacifying speech.
No more: away with words in war, it touches both with breach Achilles
pacifies Idomeneus and Ajax.

Of that which fits ye; your deserts, should others reprehend,
That give such foul terms: sit ye still, the men themselves will end
The strife betwixt you instantly; and eithers own lode bear,
On his own shoulders. Then to both, the first horse will appear,
And which is second. These words used, Tydides was at hand;
His horse ran high, glanc't on the way, and up they tossed the sand,
Thick on their Coachman; on their pace, their chariot decked with gold
Swiftly attended; no wheel ^eene, nor wheels print in the mould
Impressed behind them. These horse flew, a flight; not ran a race.
Arrived; amids the lists they stood; sweat trickling down apace
Their high manes, and their prominent breasts; and down iumpt Diomed, The
runners arrive at the races end.

Laid up his scorge aloft the seat; and strait his prise was led
Home to his tent: rough Sthenelus, laid quick hand on the dame,
And handled Trivet, and sent both, home by his men. Next came
Antilochus, that won with wiles, not swiftness of his horse,
Precedence of the gold-lockt king; who yet maintaind the course
So close, that not the kings own horse, gat more before the wheel
Of his rich chariot; that might still, the insecution feel
With the extreme hairs of his tail: (and that sufficient close
Held to his leader: no great space, it let him interpose,
Considerd in so great a field.) Then Nestors wily son
Gate of the king: now at his heels, though at the breach he won
A quoytes cast of him; which the king, again, at the instant gaind.
Aethe, Agamemnonides, that was so richly maind,
Gat strength still, as she spent; which words, her worth had proved with deeds,
Had more ground been allowed the race; and coted far, his steeds,
No question leaving for the prise. And now Meriones,
A darts cast came behind the king; his horse of speed much less;
Himself less skild t'importune them; and give a chariot wing.
Admetus son was last; whose plight, Achilles pitying,
Thus spoke: Best man comes last; yet Right, must see his prise not least;
Achilles sentence.

The second, his deserts must bear; and Diomed the best.
He said, and all allowed; and sure, the mare had been his own,
Had not Antilochus stood forth; and in his answer shown, Antilochus to
Achilles.

Good reason for his interest. Achilles, (he replied)
I should be angry with you much, to see this ratified.
Ought you to take from me my right? because his horse had wrong,
Himself being good? he should have used (as good men do) his tongue,
In prayre to their powers that bless good (not trusting to his own)
Not to have been in this good, last. His chariot overthrown,
O'rethrew not me; who is last? who is first? men's goodness, without these
Is not our question. If his good, you pity yet; and please,
Princely to grace it; your tents hold, a goodly deal of gold,
Brass, horse, sheep, women; out of these, your bounty may be bold
To take a much more worthy prise, then my poor merit seeks,
And give it here, before my face, and all these; that the Greeks
May glorify your liberal hands. This prise, I will not yield;
Who bears this (whatsoever man) he bears a tried field.
His hand and mine must change some blows. Achilles laughed, and said:
If thy will be (Antilochus) I Will see Eumelus paid,
Out of my tents; I Will give him the arms, which late I conquered in
Asteropaeus; forged of brass, and wau'd about with tin;
Twill be a present worthy him. This said, Automedon,
He sent for them. He went; and brought; and to Admetus son,
Achilles gave them. He, well pleased, received them. Then arose,
Wronged Menelaus, much incenst, with young Antilochus.
He, bent to speak; a herald took, his Scepter, and gave charge
Of silence to the other Greeks; then did the king enlarge
The spleen he prisoned; uttering this: Antilochus? till now, Note Menelaus
ridiculous speech for conclusion of his character.

We grant thee wise; but in this act, what wisdom vtter'st thou?
Thou have disgraced my virtue; wronged, my horse; preferring thine,
Much their inferiors; but go to, Princes; nor his, nor mine,
Judge of with favor; him, nor me; lest any Grecian use
This scandal; Menelaus won, with Nestors sons abuse,
The prise in question; his horse worst; himself yet wanne the best,
By power and greatness. Yet because, I would not thus contest,
To make parts taking; I Will be judge; and I suppose, none here
Will blame my judgment; I Will do right; Antilochus, come near;
Come (noble gentleman) it is your place; swear by the earth circling god,
(Standing before your chariot, and horse; and that self rod,
With which you scourged them, in your hand) if both with will and wile,
You did not cross my chariot. He thus did reconcile Antilo^us his ironicall
reply.

Grace with his disgrace; and with wit, restored him to his wit;
Now crave I patience: o king, what ever was unfit,
Ascribe to much more youth in me, then you; you more in age,
And more in excellence; know well, the outraies that engage
All young men's actions; sharper wits, but duller wisdoms still
From us flow, then from you; for which, curb with your wisdom, will.
The prise I thought mine, I yield yours; and (if you please) a prise
Of greater value; to my tent, I Will send for, and suffice
Your will at full, and instantly; for in this point of time,
I rather wish to be enioyn'd, your favors top to clime,
Then to be falling all my time, from height of such a grace; Iro^.

(O Ioue-lou'd king) and of the gods, receive a curse in place.
This said; he fetched the prise to him; and it reioyc't him so; This Simile
like^se is merely ^nicall.

That as corne-eares shine with the dew; yet having time to grow;
When fields set all their bristles up: in such a ruff were thou,
(O Menelaus) answering thus; Antilochus, I now,
(Though I were angry) yield to thee; because I see thou had wit,
When I thought nor; thy youth has got, the mastery of thy spirit.
And yet for all this, it is more safe, not to abuse at all,
Great men; then (ventring) trust to wit, to take up what may fall. M^ to Ant^.

For no man in our host beside, had easily calmed my spleen,
Stird with like temp^st. But thy self, have a sustainer been
Of much affliction in my cause: so thy good father too,
And so thy brother, at thy suite; I therefore let all go;
Give thee the game here, though mine own; that all these may discern,
King Menelaus bears a mind, at no part, proud, or stern.
The king thus calmed, Antilochus, received; and gave the steed
To loved Noemon, to lead thenc^; and then received beside
The caldron. Next, M^ones, for fourth game, was to have
Two talents, gold. The fifth (vnwonne) renowm'd Ac^lles gave
To reverend Nestor; being a boule, to set on either end,
Which through the preasse he carried him; Receive (said he) old friend,
Achilles his gift to Nestor.

This gift, as funeral monument, of my dear friend deceast,
Whom never you must see again; I make it his bequest
To you; as without any strife, obtaining it from all.
Your shoulders must not undergo, the churlish whoorlbats fall;
Wrestling is past you; strife in da^s; the footes celeritie;
Harsh age in his years fetters you; and honor sets you free.
Thus gave he it; he took, and ioyd; but ere he thankt, he said;
Now sure my honorable son, in all points thou have played N^ glory in the
gift of A^lles.

The comely Orator; no more, must I contend with nerves;
Feet fail, and hands; arms want that strength, that this, and that swinge
serves
Under your shoulders. Would to heaven, I were so young chind now,
And strength threw such a many of bones, to celebrate this show;
As when the Epi^s brought to fire (actiuely honoring thus)
King ^marynceas funerals, in fair Buprasius.
His sons put prises down for him; where, not a man matched me,
Of all the Epians; or the sons, of great-soul'd Aetolie;
No nor the Pilians themselves, my countrymen. I beat
Great Clydomedeus, E^ops son, at buffets; at the feate
Of wrestling, I laid under me; one that against me rose,
Anc^s called Pl^ius. I made Ipiclus lose
The foot-game to me. At the spear, I conquered P^e,
And strong Phyleus. Actors sons, (of all men) only bore
The palm at horse race; conquering, with lashing on more horse,
And envying my victory; because (before their course)
All the best games were gone with me. These men were twins; one was
A most sure guide; a most sure guide. The other gave the pass
With rod and mettle. This was then. But now, young men must wage
These works; and my joints undergo, the sad defects of age.
Though then I was another man; His desire of praise pants still.
at that time I excelled
Amongst th'heroes. But forth now, let the other rites be held
For thy deceast friend: this thy gift, in all kind part I take;
And much it joys my heart, that still, for my true kindness sake,
You give me memory. You perceive, in what fit grace I stand
Amongst the Grecians; and to theirs, you set your graceful hand.
The gods give ample recompense, of grace again to thee,
For this, and all thy favors. Thus, back through the thrust drove he, Another
note of Nestors humor, not so much being to be plainly observed in all these
Iliads as in this book.

When he had staid out all the praise, of old Neleides.
And now for buffets (that rough game) he orderd passages;
Proposing a laborious Mule, of six years old, v^'d,
And fierce in handling; brought, and bound, in that place where they gam'd:
And to the conquered, a round cup; both which, h^ thus proclames.
Atrides, and all friends of Greece, two men, for these two games; Achilles
proposes the game for buffets.

I bid stand forth; who best can strike, with high *contracted fists,
( Apollo giving him the wreath) know all about these lists,
Shall win a Mule, patient of ^oyle? the vanquished, this round cup.
This vtterd; Panop^s son, Epeus, straight stood up;
A tall huge man; that to the nail, knew that rude sport of hand;
And (^ng the tough mule) thus spoke: Now let some other stand Note the
sharpnes of wit in our Homer, if where you look not for (...)* you can find it

Forth for the cup; this Mule is mine; at cuffes I bost me best;
I^ not enough I am no soldier? who is worthiest*
At all works? none; not possible. At this yet, this I say,
And will perform this; who stands forth; I Will burst him; I will bray
His bones as in a mortar; fetch, s^rgeons enough, to take
His corse from under me. This speech, did all men silent make;
At last stood forth Euryalus; a man, god-like, and son
To king Mecisteus; the grand child, of honored Talaon.
He was so strong, that (coming once to Thebes, when Oedipus
Had like rites solemnized for him) he went victorious
From all the Thebanes. This rare man, Tydides would prepare;
Put on his girdle; oxehide cords, fair wrought; and spent much care,
That he might conquer; heartned him; and taught him tricks. Both dressed
Fit for th'affaire; both forth were brought; then breast opposde to breast;
Fists against fists rose; and they joined; rattling of jaws was there;
Gnashing of teeth; and heavy blows, dashed blood out every where.
At length, Epeus spide clear way; rusht in; and such a blow
Drove underneath the others ear; that his neat lims did strew
The knocked earth; no more legs had he; But as a huge fish laid
Near to the cold-weed-gathering shore, is with a North flaw fraid;
Shootes back; and in the black deep hides: So sent against the ground,
Was foiled E^yalus; his strength, so hid in more profound
Deepes of Epeus; who took up, th'intranc't Competitor;
About whom rusht a crowd of friends, that through the clusters bore
His faltring knees; he spitting up, thick clods of blood; his head
Totterd of one side; his sense gone. When (to a by-place led) Achilles (...)
(...) (...) for (...).

Thither they brought him the round cup. Pelides then set forth
Prise for a wrestling; to the best, a trivet, that was worth
Twelve oxen, great, and fit for fire; the conquered was t'obtaine
A woman excellent in works; her beauty, and her gain,
Prisde at four oxen. Up he stood, and thus proclaimed: Arise
You wrastlers, that will prove for these. Out stepped the ample sise
Of mighty Ajax, huge in strength; to him, Laertes son, Ulysses and Ajax
wrestle.

That crafty one, as huge in slight. Their ceremony done,
Of making ready; forth they stepped; catch elbowes with strong hands; Simile.

And as the beams of some high house, crack with a storm, yet stands
The house, being built by well-skild men: So cracked their back bones wrincht
With horrid twitches. In their sides, arms, shoulders (all bepincht)
Ran thick the walls, red with the blood, ready to start out; both
Longed for the conquest, and the prise; yet showed no play; being loath
To lose both; nor could Ithacus, stir Ajax; nor could he
Hale down Ulysses; being more strong, then with mere strength to be
H^rl'd from all vantage of his slight. Tired then, with tugging play;
Great Ajax Telamonius said: Thou wisest man; or lay Ajax to Ulysses.

My face up, or let me lay thine; let Jove take care for these.
This said, he hoist him up to air, when L^rtiades
His wiles forgot not; Ajax thigh, he struck behind; and flat
He on his back fell; on his breast, Ulysses. Wonderd at
Was this of all; all stood amazed. Then the-much-suffering-man
(Divine Ulysses) at next close; the Telamonian
A little raisde from earth; not quite; but with his knee implide
Locked legs; and down fell both on earth, close by each others side;
Both filled with dust; but starting up, the third close they had made,
Had not Achilles self stood up; restraining them, and bad;
No more tug one another thus, nor moyle your selves; receive Achilles parts
Ulysses and Ajax.

Prise equal; conquest crowns ye both; the lists to others leave.
They heard and yielded willingly; brusht off the dust; and on Prises for
runners.

Put other vests. Pelides then, to those that swiftest run,
Proposde another prise; a boule, beyond comparison
(Both for the sise and workmanship) past all the boules of earth;
It held six measures; silver all; but had his special worth,
For workmanship; receiving form, from those ingenious men
Of Sydon: the Phoenicians, made choice; and brought it then,
Along the green sea; giving it, to Thoas; by degrees
It came to Eunaeus, Iasons son; who, young Priamides,
( Lycaon) of Achilles friend, bought with it; and this, here,
Achilles made best game, for him, that best his feet could bear.
For second, he proposde an Ox; a huge one, and a fat;
And half a talent gold for last. These, thus he set them at.
Rise, you that will assay for these; forth stepped Oileades;
Ulysses answered; and the third, was one, esteemed past these Ulysses, (...)
(...) and Antilochus for the Foot-race.

For footmanship; Antilochus. All rankt; Achilles showed
The race-scope. From the start, they glid; Oileades bestowed
His feet the swiftest; close to him, flew god-like Ithacus;
And as a Lady at her loome, being young and beauteous, Simile.

Her silke-shittle close to her breast (with grace that does inflame,
And her white hand) lifts quick, and often, in drawing from her frame
Her gentle thread; which she vnwinds, with ever at her breast,
Gracing her fair hand: So close still, and with such interest,
In all men's likings, Ithacus, vnwound, and spent the race
By him before; took out his steps, with putting in their place,
Promptly and gracefully his own; sprinkled the dust before;
And clouded with his breath his head: so facilie he bore
His royal person, that he struck, shoutes from the Greeks, with thirst,
That he should conquer; though he flew; yet come, come, o come first,
Ever they cried to him; and this, even his wise breast did move, Ulysses
prays to Minerua for speed.

To more desire of victory; it made him pray, and prove,
Mineruas aid (his fautresse still): O goddess, hear (said he)
And to my feet stoop with thy help; now happy Fautresse be.
She was; and light made all his lims; and now (both near their crown)
Minerua tript up Ajax heels, and headlong he fell down,
Amids the ordure of the beasts, there negligently left,
Since they were slain there; and by this, Mineruas friend bereft
Oileades of that rich bowl; and left his lips, nose, eyes,
Ruthfully smer'd. The fat ox yet, he seisd for second prise,
Held by the horn, spit out the tail; and thus spoke, all besmeared:
O villainous chance! this Ithacus, so highly is indear'd Ajax Oileus (...) out
his fall to the Greeks.

To his Minerua; that her hand, is ever in his deeds:
She, like his mother, nestles him; for from her it proceeds,
(I know) that I am used thus. This, all in light laughter cast;
Amongst whom, quick Antilochus, laughed out his coming last,
Thus wittily: Know, all my friends, that all times past, and now, Antilochus
likewise helps out his coming last.

The gods most honor, most-liu'd men; Oileades ye know,
More old then I; but Ithacus, is of the foremost race;
First generation of men. Give the old man his grace;
They count him of the greene-hair'd eld; they may, or in his flower;
For not our greatest flourisher, can equal him in power,
Of foote-strife, but Aeacides. Thus soothed he Thetis son;
Who thus accepted it: Well youth, your praises shall not run, Achilles to
Antilochus.

With unrewarded feet, on mine; your half a talents prise,
I Will make a whole one: take you sir. He took, and joyed. Then ^lies
Another game forth; Thetis son, set in the lists, a lance,
A shield, and helmet; being the arms, Sarpedon did advance
Against Patroclus; and he prisde. And thus he named th'addresse:
Stand forth, two the most excellent, armed; and before all these, Prise for
the fighters armed.

Give mutual onset, to the touch, and wound of eithers flesh;
Who first shall wound, through others arms, his blood appearing fresh;
Shall win this sword, siluerd, and hatched; the blade is right of Thrace;
Asterop^us yielded it. These arm^hall part their grace,
With eithers valor; and the men, I Will liberally feast
At my pauilion. To this game, the first man that addressed,
Was Ajax Tel^monius; to him, king Di^med; Di^ed and Ajax combat.

Both, in opposde parts of the preasse, full armed; both entered
The lists amids the multitude; put looks on so austere,
And joined so roughly; that amaze, surprisde the Greeks, in fear
Of eithers mischief. Thrice they threw, their fierce darts; and closde thrice.
Then Ajax struck through Diomeds shield, but did no prejudice;
His curets saft him. Diomeds dart, still over shoulders flew;
Still mounting with the spirit it bore. And now rough Ai^x grew
So violent, that the Greeks cried: Hold; no more; let them no more
Give equal prise to either; yet, the sword, proposde before,
For him did best; Achilles gave, to Diomed. Then a stone, Achilles proposes a
game for hur^ing of the stone or b^le.

(In fashion of a sphere) he showed; of no invention,
But natural; only melted through, with iron. T was the boule,
That king Eetion used to hurl: but he, bereft of soul,
By great Achilles; to the fleet, with store of other prise,
He brought it; and proposde it now; both for the exercise,
And prise it self. He stood, and said: Rise you that will approve
Your arms strengths now, in this brave strife: his vigor that can move
This furthest; needs no game but this; for reach he nere so far,
With large fields of his own, in Greece; (and so needs for his Carre,
His Plow, or other tools of thrift, much iron) I Will able this
For five reuolued years; no need, shall use his messages (...).

To any town, to furnish him; this only boule shall yield
Iron enough, for all affairs. This said; to try this field,
First Polypaetes issued; next Leontaeus; third
Great Ajax; huge Epeus fourth. Yet he was first that stird
That mine of iron. Up it went; and up he tossed it so,
That laughter took up all the field. The next man that did throw,
Was Leonteus; Ajax third; who gave it such a hand,
That far past both their marks it flew. But now it was to be manned
By Polypetes; and as far, as at an Ox that strayes,
A herdsman can swing out his goade: so far did he outraise
The stone past all men; all the field, rose in a shout to see it.
About him flockt his friends; and bore, the royal game to fleet.
For Archerie, he then set forth, ten axes, edged two ways; Another ga^.

And ten of one edge. On the shore, far off, he causd to raise
A ship-mast; to whose top they tied, a fearful Dove by th'foote;
At which, all shot; the game put thus: He that the Dove could shoot,
Nor touch the string that fastn'd her; the two-edged tools should bear
All to the fleet. Who touched the string, and mist the Dove, should share
The one-edg'd axes. This proposde; king Teucer force arose;
And with him rose Meriones; and now lots must dispose
Their shooting first; both which, let fall, into a helm of brass;
First Teucers came; and first he shot; and his cross fortune was,
To shoot the string; the Dove untouched: Apollo did envy
His skill; since not to him he vowed (being god of archerie)
A first fallen Lamb. The bitter shaft, yet cut in two the cord,
That down fell; and the Dove aloft, up to the Welkin soared.
The Greeks gave shouts; Meriones, first made a hear^ie vow,
To sacrifice a first fallen Lamb, to him that rules the Bow;
And then fell to his aim; his shaft, being ready nockt before.
He spide her in the clouds, that here, there, every where did soar;
Yet at her height he reached her side, struck her quite through, and down
The shaft fell at his feet; the Dove, the mast again did crown;
There hung the head; and all her plumes, were ruffl'd; she stark dead;
And there (far off from him) she fell. The people wondered,
And stood astonished. Th'Archer pleased. Aeacides then shows
A long lance, and a caldron, new, engrail'd with twenty hewes;
Prisde at an Ox. These games were showed, for men at darts; and then
Up rose the General of all; up rose the king of men:
Up rose late-crown'd Meriones. Achilles (seeing the king
Do him this grace) preuents more deed; his royal offering
Thus interrupting; King of men, we well conceive how far
Thy worth, superior is to all; how much most singular,
Thy power is, and thy skill in darts; accept then this poor prise,
Without contention; and (your will, pleased with what I advise)
Afford Meriones the lance. The king was nothing slow
To that fit grace; Achilles then, the brass lance did bestow
On good Meriones. The king, his present would not save;
But to renowm'd Talthybius, the goodly Caldron gave.
The end of the three and twentieth Book.
THE XXIIII. BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jove, entertaining care of Hectors corse;
Sends Thetis to her son, for his re^rse;
And fit dismission of it. Iris then,
He sends to Priam; willing him to gain
His son for ransom. He, by Hermes led,
Gets through Achilles guards; sleeps deep, and dead,
Cast on them by his guide. When, with access,
And humble suit, made to AEacides,
He gains the body; which, to Troy he bears,
And buries it with fea^s, buried in tears.
Another Argument.
Omega sings the exequies,
And Hectors redemptorie prise.
THe games performed; the soldiers, wholly dispersed to fleet;
Supper and sleep, their only care. Constant Achilles yet,
Wept for his friend; nor sleep it self, that all things does subdue,
Could touch at him. This way, and that, he turned, and did renew
His friends dear memory; his grace, in managing his strength;
And his strengths g^eatnesle. How life rackt, into their utmost length,
Griefs, battles, and the wraths of seas, in their joint sufferance.
Each thought of which, turned to a tear. Sometimes he would advance
(In tumbling on the shore) his side; sometimes his face; then turn^
Flat on his bosom; start upright. Although he saw the morn
Show sea and shore his ecstasy; he left not, till at last
Rage varied his distraction. Horse, chariot, in have
He called for; and (those joined) the corse, was to his chariot tide;
And thrice about the sepulcher, he made his Fury ride;
Dragging the person. All this past; in his pauilion
Rest seisd him; but with Hectors corse, his rage had never done;
Still suffering it t'oppresse the dust. Apollo yet, even dead,
Pitied the Prince; and would not see, inhumane tyranny ^ed,
With more pollution of his lims; and therefore couerd round
His person with his golden shield; that rude dogs might not wound
His manly lin^aments (which threat, Achilles cruelly
Had used in fury). But now heaven, let fall a general eye
Of pity on him; the blessed gods, persuaded Mercury
(Their good obseruer) to his stealth; and every deity
Stood pleased with it, Juno except; Green Nep^, and the Maid
Graced with the blew eyes; all their hearts, stood ha^lly appaid,
Long since; and held it, as at first, to Priam, Ilion,
And all his subjects, for the rape, of his licentious son,
Proud Paris, that despisde these dames, in their divine access,
Made to his cottage; and praisd her, that his sad wantonness,
So costly nourisht. The twelfth morn, now shined on the delay
Of Hectors rescue; and then spoke, the deity of the day, Apollo to the other
gods.

Thus to the immortals: Shameless gods; authors of ill ye are,
To suffer ill. Has Hectors life, at all times showed his care
Of all your rights; in burning thighs, of Beeues and Goats to you,
And are your cares no more of him? vouchsafe ye not even now
(Even dead) to keep him? that his wife, his mother, and his son,
Father and subjects may be moved, to those deeds he has done,
See'ng you preserve him that served you; and sending to their hands
His person for the rites of fire? Achilles, that withstands
All help to others, you can help; one that has neither heart
Nor soul within him, that will move, or yield to any part,
That fits a man; but Lion-like; vplandish, and mere wild;
Slave to his pride; and all his nerves, being naturally compiled
Of eminent strength; stalks out and preyes, upon a silly sheep:
And so fares this man. That fit ruth, that now should draw so deep
In all the world; being lost in him. And Shame (a quality Shame a quality
that hurts and helps men exceedingly.

Of so much weight; that both it helps, and hurts excessiuely,
Men in their manners) is not known; nor has the power to be
In this man's being. Other men, a greater loss then he,
Have undergone; a son, suppose, or brother of one womb;
Yet, after dues of woes and tears, they bury in his tomb
All their deplorings. Fates have given, to all that are true men,
True manly patience; but this man, so soothes his bloody vein,
That no blood serves it; he must have, diuine-soul'd Hector bound
To his proud chariot; and danced, in a most barbarous round,
About his loved friends sepulcher, when he is slain: It Is vile,
And draws no profit after it. But let him now awhile
Mark but our angers; his is spent; let all his strength take heed,
It tempts not our wraths; he begets, in this outrageous deed,
The dull earth, with his furies hate. White-wristed Juno said,
(Being much incenst) This doom is one, that thou would have obaid,
Thou bearer of the silver bow) that we, in equal care
And honor should hold Hectors worth, with him that claims a share
In our deseruings? Hector sucked, a mortal woman's breast;
Aeacides a goddesses? our self had interest,
Both in his infant nourishment, and bringing up with state;
And to the humane Pel^s, we gave his bridal mate,
Because he had the immortals love. To celebrate the feast
Of their high nuptials; every god, was glad to be a guest;
And thou fedst of his fathers cates; touching thy harp, in grace
Of that beginning of our friend; whom thy perfidious face,
(In his perfection) blusheth not, to match with Pri^m son;
O thou, that to betray, and shame, art still companion.
I^e thus received her: Never give, these broad terms to a god. I^e to (...).

Those two men shall not be compared; and yet, of all that trod
The well-pau'd Ili^; none so dear, to all the deities,
As Hector was, at least to me. For offerings most of prise,
His hands would never pretermit. Our altars ever stood,
Furnished with banquets fitting us; odors, and every good,
Smokt in our temples; and for this, (foreseeing it) his fate,
We marked with honor, which must stand: but to give stealth, estate,
In his deliverance; shun we that; nor must we favor one,
To shame another. Privily, with wrong to Thetis son,
We must not work out Hectors right. There is a ransom due,
And open course, by laws of arms: in which, must humbly sue,
The friends of Hector. Which just mean, if any god would stay,
And use the other, twould not serve; for Thetis, night and day,
Is guardian to him. But would one, call Iris hither; I
Would give directions, that for gifts, the Tr^n king should buy
His Hectors body; which the son, of Thetis shall resign.
This said, his will was done; the Dame, that does in vapors shine,
Dewie and thin, footed with storms; iumpt to the sable seas
Twixt Samos, and sharp Imbers cliffes; the lake gron'd with the press
Of her rough feet; and (plummet-like, put in an oxes horn
That bears death to the raw-fed fish) she diu'd, and found forlorn
Thetis, lamenting her sons fate; who was in Troy to have Iris to Thetis.

(Far from his country) his death served. Close to her Iris stood,
And said; Rise Thetis: prudent Jove (whose counsels thirst not blood)
Calls for thee. Thetis answered her, with asking; What Is the cause
The great god calls? my sad powers feared, to break the immortal laws,
In going, filled with griefs, to heaven. But he sets snares for none
With colored counsels; not a word, of him, but shall be done.
She said, and took a sable veil; a blacker never wore
A heavenly shoulder; and gave way. Swift Iris swum before;
About both rowld the brackish waves. They took their banks and flew
Up to Olympus, where they found, Sat^nius (farre-of-view)
Spher'd with heauens-euerbeing states. Minerua rose, and gave
Her place to Thetis, near to Jove; and I^no did receive
Her entry with a cup of gold; in which she drank to her,
Graced her with comfort; and the cup, to her hand did refer.
She drank, resigning it. And then, the sire of men and gods,
Thus entertained her; Come thou up, to these our blessed abodes,
(Fair goddess Thetis) yet art sad? and that in so high kind,
As passes suffrance? this I know; and tried thee, and now find
Thy will by mine ruled; which is rule, to all worlds government.
Besides this trial yet; this cause, sent down for thy ascent;
Nine days Contention has been held, amongst the immortals here,
For Hectors person, and thy son; and some aduices were,
To have our good spy Mercury, steal from thy son the Corse:
But that reproach I kept far off; to keep in future force,
Thy former love, and reverence. Haste then, and tell thy son,
The gods are angry; and my self, take that wrong he has done
To Hector, in worst part of all: the rather, since he still
Detaines his person. Charge him then, if he respect my will,
For any reason; to resign, slain Hector; I will send
Iris to Priam, to redeem, his son; and recommend
Fit ransom to Achilles grace; in which right, he may joy,
And end his vain grief. To this charge, bright Thetis did employ
Instant endeavor. From heavens tops, she reached Achilles tent;
Found him still sighing; and some friends, with all their complements
Soothing his humor: othersome, with all contention
Dressing his dinner: all their pains, and skils consumed upon Thetis to
Achilles.

A huge wooll-bearer, slaughterd there. His reverend mother then,
Came near, took kindly his fair hand; and asked him: Dear son, when
Will sorrow leave thee? How long time, will thou thus eat thy heart?
Fed with no other food, nor rest? twere good thou would divert
Thy friends love, to some Lady; cheer, thy spirits with such kind parts
As she can quit thy grace withal: the joy of thy deserts,
I shall not long have; death is near, and thy all-conquering fate,
Whose haste thou must not haste with grief; but understand the state,
Of things belonging to thy life, which quickly order. I
Am s^nt from Jove t'aduertise thee, that every deity
Is angry with thee, himself most; that rage, thus reigns in thee,
Still to keep Hector. Quit him then; and for fit ransom free
His injured person. He replied; Let him come that shall give
The ransom; and the person take. Jove's pleasure must deprive
Men of all pleasures. This good speech, and many more, the son,
And mother used, in ear of all, the nauall Station.
And now to holy Ilion, Saturnius, Iris sent:

Go swiftfoote Iris, bid Troys king, bear fit gifts, and content Jove's s^ds
Iris to Priam.

Achilles for his sons release; but let him greet alone
The Grecian navy; not a man, excepting such a one,
As may his horse and chariot guide: a herald, or one old,
Attending him; and let him take, his Hector. Be he bold,
Discouraged, nor with death, nor fear; wise Mercury shall guide
His passage, till the Prince be near. And (he gone) let him ride
Resolved, even in Achilles tent. He shall not touch the state
Of his high person; nor admit, the deadliest desperate
Of all about him. For (though fierce) he is not yet unwise,
Nor inconsiderate; nor a man, past awe of deities:
But passing free, and curious, to do a suppliant grace.
This said, the Rainbow to her feet, tied whirlewinds, and the place
Reached instantly: the heavy Court, Clamor, and Mourning filled.
The sons all set about the sire; and there stood Grief, and stilled
Tears on their garments. In the midst, the old king ^ate: his weed
All wrinkl'd; head, and neck dust filled; the Princesses, his feed;
The Princesses, his sons fair wives, all mourning by; the thought
Of friends so many, and so good, (being turned so soon to naught
By Grecian hands) consumed their youth; rained beauty from their eyes.
^ris came near the king; her sight, shook all his faculties;
And therefore spoke she soft, and said; Be glad Dard^ides; Iri^ to Pri^.

Of good occurrents, and none ill, am I Ambassadresse.
I^e greets thee; who, in care (as much, as he is distant) daines
Eye to thy sorrows, pitying thee. My ambassie contains
This charge to thee, from him; he wills, thou should redeem thy son;
Bear gifts to Achilles, cheer him so: but visit him alone;
None but some herald let attend; thy mules and chariot,
To manage for thee. Fear, nor death, let dant thee; Jove has got
Hermes to guide thee; who as near, to Thetis son as needs,
Shall guard thee: and being once with him; nor his, nor others deeds,
Stand touched with, he will all contain. Not is he mad, nor vain, (...)
witness of Achilles.

Nor impious; but with all his nerves, studious to entertain,
One that submits, with all fit grace. Thus vanished she like wind.
He mules and chariot calls: his sons, bids see them joined, and bind
A trunk behind it; he himself, down to his wardrobe goes,
Built all of Cedar; highly rooft, and odoriferous;
That much stuff, worth the sight containd. To him he called his Queen,
Thus greeting her: Come, hapless dame; an Angel I have seen, Priam to
Hecuba.

Sent down from Jove; that bad me free, our dear son from the fleet,
With ransom pleasing to our foe; what holds thy judgment meet?
My strength, and spirit, lays high charge, on all my being, to bear
The Greeks worst, ventring through their host. The Queen cried out to hear
Hecuba to Pri^.

His ventrous purpose; and replied: O whither now is fled,
The late discretion that renowned, thy grave, and knowing head,
In foreign; and thine own ruled realms? that thus thou dare assay,
Sight of that man? in whose brows sticks, the horrible decay
Of sons so many, and so strong? thy heart is iron I think.
If this stern man (whose thirst of blood, makes cruelty his drink)
Take, or but see thee, thou art dead. He nothing pities woe,
No^ honors age. Without his sight, we have enough to do,
To mourn with thought of him: keep we, our Palace, weep we here;
Our son is past our helps. Those throws, that my deliuerers were,
Of his unhappy lineaments; told me they should be torn
With black foot dogs. Almighty fate, that black hour he was borne
Spunne, in his springing thread that end; far from his parents reach.
This bloody fellow, then ordained, to be their mean: this wretch,
Whose stony liver, would to heaven, I might devour; my teeth,
My sons Reuengers made. Cursed Greek, he gave him not his death
Doing an ill work; he alone, fought for his country; he
Fled not, nor feared, but stood his worst; and cursed policy
Was his undoing. He replied, What ever was his end,
Is not our question; we must now, use all means to defend
His end from scandal: from which act, dissuade not my just will;
Nor let me nourish in my house, a bird presaging ill
To my good actions: it is in vain. Had any earthly spirit
Given this suggestion: if our Priests, or Soothsayers, challenging merit
Of Prophets, I might hold it false; and be the rather moved
To keep my Palace; but these ears; and these self eyes approved
It was a goddess, I will go; for not a word she spoke,
I know was idle. If it were; and that my fate will make,
Quick riddance of me at the fleet; kill me Achilles; Come;
When, getting to thee, I shall find, a happy dying room,
On Hectors bosom; when enough, thirst of my tears finds there,
Quench to his fervor. This resolved, the works most fair, and dear,
Of his rich screenes, he brought abroad; twelve veiles wrought curiously;
Twelve plain gowns; and as many suits, of wealthy tapistry;
As many mantles; horsemens coats; ten talents of fine gold;
Two Tripods; Caldrons four; a bowl, whose value he did hold
Beyond all price; presented by, th'Ambassadors of Thrace.
The old king, nothing held too dear, to rescue from disgrace,
His gracio^s Hector. Forth he came. At entry of his Court,
The Trojan citizens so pressed; that this opprobrious sort,
Of check he used; Hence cast-awayes; away ye impious crew; Pri^ ^aged against
his citizens.

Are not your griefs enough at home? what come ye here to view?
Care ye for my griefs? would ye see, how miserable I am?
Is It not enough, imagine ye? ye might know ere ye came,
What such a sons loss weighed with me. But know this for your pains,
Your houses have the weaker doors: the Greeks, will find their gains
The easier for his loss, be sure: but o Troy, ere I see
Thy ruin; let the doors of hell, receive, and ruin me.
Thus, with his scepter set he on, the crowding citizens;
Who gave back, seeing him so urge. And now he entertaines
His sons as roughly; Hellenus, Paris, Hippothous,
Pammon, divine Agathones, renowm'd Deiphobus,
Agauus, and Antiphonus; and last, not least in arms,
The strong Polites. These nine sons, the violence of his harms,
Helped him to vent, in these sharp terms: Haste you infamous brood, Priam
en^ged against his sons.

And get my chariot; would to heaven, that all the abject blood,
In all your veins, had Hector scusde: O me, accursed man,
All my good sons are gone; my light, the shades Cimmerian
Have swallowed from me: I have lost, Mestor, surnamed the fair;
Troilus, that ready knight at arms; that made his field repair,
Ever so prompt and joyfully. And Hector, amongst men,
Esteemed a god; not from a mortals seed; but of the eternal strain
He seemed to all eyes. These are gone; you that survive, are base;
Liers, and common free-boo^ers: all faulty, not a grace
But in your heels, in all your parts; dancing companions,
Ye all are excellent: Hence ye brats: love ye to hear my mones?
Will ye not get my chariot? command it quickly; fly,
That I may perfect this dear work. This all did terrify;
And strait his mule-drawne chariot came, to which they fast did bind
The trunk with gifts: and then came forth, with an afflicted mind,
Old Hecuba. In her right hand, a bowl of gold she bore,
With sweet wine crowned; stood near, and said; Receive this, and implore
(With sacrificing it to Jove) thy safe return. I see
Thy mind likes still to go; though mine, dislikes it utterly.
Pray to the blacke-cloud-gathering god, ( Idaean Jove) that viewes
All Troy, and all her miseries; that he will deine to use,
His most loved bird, to ratify, thy hopes; that her broad wing,
Spread on thy right hand; thou may know, thy zealous offering
Accepted; and thy safe return, confirmed; but if he fail;
Fail thy intent, though never so, it labors to prevail.
This I refuse not (he replide) for no faith is so great,
In Io^s high favor; but it must, with held up hands entreat.
This said; the chamber* maid that held, the Ewre, and Basin by,
He bad power water on his hands; when looking to the sky,
He took the bowl; did sacrifice, and thus implored: O Jove,
From Ida using thy commands, in all deserts above Pri^s prayer to I^e.

All other gods; vouchsafe me safe; and pity in the sight
Of great Achilles: and for trust, to that wished grace; excite
Thy swift-wing'd messenger, most strong; most of aires region loved,
To sore on my right hand; which fight, may firmly see approved
Thy former summons, and my speed. He prayed, and heavens king heard;
And instantly, cast from his fist, aires all commanding bird;
The black winged huntresse, perfectest, of all fowls; which gods call
Perc^s; the Eagle. And how broad, the chamber nuptial
Of any mighty man, has doors; such breadth cast either wing; Io^e to Mer^ry

Which now she used; and spread them wide, on right hand of the king.
All saw it, and reioyc't; and up, to chariot he arose;
Drove forth: the Portall, and the Porch, resounding as he goes.
His friends all followed him, and mourned; as if he went to die:
And bringing him past town, to field; all left him: and the eye
Of I^piter was then his guard; who pi^ied him, and used
These words to Hermes: Mercurit, thy help has been profusde,
Ever, with most grace, in consorts, of trauailers distressed;
Now consort Pri^ to the fleet: but so, that not the least
Suspicion of him be attaind, till at Ac^illes tent,
Thy co^uoy has arrived him safe. This charge incontinent,
He put in practice. To his feet, his featherd shoes he tide,
Immortal, and made all of gold; with which he used to ride
The rough sea; and th'vnmeasur'd earth; and equald in his pace,
The pufts of wind. Then took he v^, his rod, that has the grace
To shut what eyes he lists, with (...)* and ^pen them again
In strongest trances. This he held; flew forth, and did attain
To Troy, and Hellespontus strait: then, like a fair young Prince,
First-downe chinn'd; and of such a grace, as makes his looks convince
Contending eyes to view him: forth, he went to meet the king.
He, having past the mighty tomb, of Ilus; watering
His Mules in (...); the dark Even, fell on the earth; and then
Idaeu^ (guider of the Mules) discerned this Grace of men;
And spoke affraide to Pri^; Beware (...),
Our states ask counsel: I discern, the dangerous access
Of some man near us; Now I fear, we perish. Is it best
To fly? or kiss his knees, and ask, his ruth of men distressed?
Confusion struck the king, cold Fear, extremely quenched his veins;
Upright, upon his languishing head, his hair stood; and the chains
Of strong Amaze, bound all his powers. To both which, then came near Priams
amaze

The Prince-turn'd Deity; took his hand, and thus bespake the Peer:
To what place (father) driu'st thou out, through solitary Night, Mercury
appears to him.

When others sleep? give not the Greeks, sufficient cause of fright,
To these late travails? being so near, and such vowed enemies?
Of all which; if with all this lode; any should cast his eyes
On thy adventures; what would then, thy mind esteem thy state?
Thy self old; and thy follower old? Resistance could not rate
At any value: As for me; be sure, I mind no harm
To thy grave person; but against, the hurt of others arm.
Mine own loved father did not get, a greater love in me
To his good; then thou do to thine. He answered: The degree Priam to Mercury.

Of danger in my course (fair son) is nothing less then that
Thou vrgest; but some gods fair hand, puts in, for my safe state,
That sends so sweet a Guardian, in this so stern a Time
Of night, and danger, as thy self; that all grace in his prime,
Of body, and of beauty show: all answered with a mind
So knowing; that it cannot be, but of some blessed kind,
Thou art descended. Not untrue (said Hermes) thy conceit
In all this holds; but further truth, relate, if of such weight
As I conceive thy carriage be? and that thy care conuaies
Thy goods of most price, to more guard? or go ye all your ways,
Frighted from holy Ilion? So excellent a son
As thou had, (being your special strength) fallen to Destruction;
Whom no Greek betterd for his fight? O what art thou (said he)
(Most worthy youth?) of what race borne? that thus recountst to me,
My wretched sons death with such truth? Now father (he replide)
You tempt me far, in wondering how, the death was signifide
Of your divine son, to a man, so mere a stranger here,
As you hold me: but I am one, that often have seen him bear
His person like a god, in field; and when in heaps he slew,
The Greeks, all routed to their fleet: his so victorious view,
Made me admire; not feel his hand; because Aeacides
(Incenst) admitted not our fight; my self being of access
To his high person, serving him; and bo^ to Ilion
In one ship saild. Besides, by birth, I breathe a Myrmidon;
Polystor (called the rich) my sire; declined with age like you.
Six sons he has; and me a seventh; and all those six live now
In Phthia; since all casting lots, my chance did only fall,
To follow hither. Now for walk, I left my General.
To morrow all the Sunne-burn'd Greeks, will circle Troy with arms;
The Princes rage to be withheld, so idly; your alarmes
Not given half hot enough they think; and can contain no more.
He answered; If you serve the Prince, let me be bold t'implore
This grace of thee; and tell me true, lies Hector here at fleet,
Or have the dogs his flesh? He said, Nor dogs, nor foul have yet
Touched at his person: still he lies, at fleet, and in the tent Mer^rie to
Priam.

Of our great Captain; who indeed, is much too negligent
Of his fit usage: but though now, twelve days have spent their heat
On his cold body; neither worms, with any taint have eat,
Nor putrefaction perished it: yet ever when the Morn
Lifts her divine light from the sea; unmercifully borne
About Patroclus sepulcher; it bears his friends disdain,
Bound to his chariot; but no Fits, of further outrage, reign
In his distemper: you would muse, to see how deep a dew,
Even steepes the body, all the blood, washed off, no slenderst show
Of gore, or quitture; but his wounds, all closde; though many were
Opened about him. Such a love, the blessed immortals bear,
Even dead to thy dear son; because, his life showed love to them.
He joyful answered; O my son, it is a grace supreme, Priam to ^curie.

In any man, to serve the gods. And I must needs say this;
For no cause (having season fit) my Hectors hands would miss
Advancement to the gods with gifts; and therefore do not they
Miss his remembrance after death. Now let an old man pray
Thy graces to receive this cup, and keep it for my love;
Not leave me till the gods and thee, have made my prayres approve
Achilles pity; by thy guide, brought to his Princely tent.
Hermes replid^; You tempt me now, (old king) to a consent,
Far from me; though youth aptly erres. I secretly receive Hermes again to
Pr^am.

Gifts, that I cannot brodely vouch? take graces that will give
My Lord dishonor? or what he, knows not? or will esteem
Perhaps unfit? such briberies, perhaps at first may seem
Sweet, and secure; but futurely, they still prove sour; and breed
Both fear, and danger. I could wish, thy grave affairs did need
My guide to Argos; either shipped, or lackying by thy side;
And would be studious in thy guard; so nothing could be tried,
But care in me, to keep thee safe; for that I could excuse,
And vouch to all men. These words past, he put the deeds in use,
For which Jove sent him; up he leapt, to Priams chariot,
Took scourge and reins, and blew in strength, to his free steeds; and got
The nauall towers and deep dike strait. The guards were all at meat,
Those he enslumberd; op't the ports, and in he safely let
Old Priam, with his wealthy prise. Forthwith they reached the Tent
Of great Achilles. Large, and high; and in his most ascent
A shaggie roof of seedy reeds, mowne from the meades; a hall
Of state they made their king in it, and strengthened it withal,
Thick with fur rafters; whose approach, was let in, by a door
That had but one bar; but so big, that three men evermore
Raisd it, to shut; three fresh take down: which yet Aeacides
Would shut and open himself. And this with far more ease
Hermes set open, entering the king; then leapt from horse, and said:
Now know (old king) that, Mercury (a god) has given this aid
To thy endeavor, sent by Jove; and now, away must I:
For men would envy thy estate, to see a Deity
Affect a man thus: enter thou, embrace Achilles knee;
And by his sire, son, mother pray, his ruth, and grace to thee.
This said; he high Olympus reached, the king then left his coach (...) (...)
(...) (...).

To grave Idaeus, and went on; made his resolved approach:
And enterd in a goodly room; where, with his Princes sat
Ioue-lou'd Achilles, at their feast; two only kept the state
Of his attendance, Alcymus, and Lord Automedon.
At Priams entry; a great time, Achilles gazed upon
His wonderd at approach; nor eat: the rest did nothing see,
While close he came up; with his hands, fast holding the bent knee
Of Hectors conqueror; and kissed, that large man-slaughtring hand,
That much blood from his sons had drawn; And as in some strange land,
And great man's house; a man is driven, (with that abhor^'d dismay, Simile.

That follows wilful bloodshed still; his fortune being to slay
One, whose blood cries alowde for his) to plead protection
In such a miserable plight, as frights the lookers on:
In such a stupefied estate, Achilles sat to see,
So unexpected, so in night, and so incrediblie,
Old Priams entry; all his friends, one on another star'd,
To see his strange looks, seeing no cause. Thus Priam then prepared Priam to
Achill^.

His sons redemption: See in me, O godlike Thetis son,
Thy aged father; and perhaps, even now being outrunne
With some of my woes; neighbor foes, (thou absent) taking time
To do him mischief; no mean left, to terrify the crime
Of his oppression; yet he hears, thy graces still survive,
And joys to hear it; hoping still, to see thee safe arrive,
From ruined Troy: but I (cursed man) of all my race, shall live
To see none living. Fifty sons, the Deities did give,
My hopes to live in; all alive, when near our trembling shore
The Greek ships harbor'd; and one womb, nineteen of those sons bore.
Now Mars, a number of their knees, has strengthlesse left; and he
That was (of all) my only joy, and Troyes sole guard; by thee
(Late fighting for his country) slain; whose tenderd person, now
I come to ransom. Infinite, is that I offer you,
My self conferring it; exposde, alone to all your odds:
Only imploring right of arms. Achilles, fear the gods,
Pity an old man, like thy ^ire; different in only this,
That I am wretcheder; and bear, that weight of miseries
That never man did: my cursed lips, enforced to kiss that hand
That slew my children. This moved tears; his fathers name did stand
(Mentioned by Priam) in much help, to his compasfion;
And moved Aeacides so much, he could not look upon
The weeping father. With his hand, he gently put away
His grave face; calm remission now, did mutually display
Her power in eithers heaviness; old Priam, to record
His sons death; and his deaths man see, his tears, and bosom poured
Before Achilles. At his feet, he laid his reverend head.
Achilles thoughts, now with his sire, now with his friend, were fed.
Betwixt both, Sorrow filled the the tent. But now Aeacides,
(Satiate at all parts, with the ruth, of their calamities) Achilles remorse of
Pria^.

Start up, and up he raisd the king. His milke-white head and beard,
With pity he beheld, and said; Poor man, thy mind is scared,
With much affliction; how durst, thy person thus alone,
Venture on his sight, that has ^aine, so many a worthy son,
And so dear to thee? thy old heart, is made of iron; sit
And settle we our woes, though huge; for nothing profits it.
Cold mourning wastes but our lives heates. The gods have destinate,
That wretched mortals must live sad. It Is the immortal state
Of Deity, that lives secure. Two Tons of gifts there lie
In Jove's gate; one of good, one ill, that our mortality,
Maintain, spoil, order: which when Jove, does mix to any man;
One while he frolicks, one while mourns. If of his mournful Kan
A man drinks only; only wrongs, he does expose him to.
Sad hunger, in th'abundant earth, does toss him to and froe,
Respected, nor of gods, nor men. The mixed cup Peleus drank,
Even from hi^ birth, heaven bl^st his life; he lived not that could thank
The gods for such rare benefits, as set forth his estate.
He reigned among his Myrmidons, most rich, most fortunate.
And (though a mortal) had his bed, decked with a deathlesse Dame.
And yet with all this good, one ill, god mixed, that takes all name
From all that goodness; his Name now, (whose preservation here,
Men count the crown of their most good) not blessed with power to bear
One blossom, but my self: and I, shaken as soon as blown.
Nor shall I live to cheer his age, and give nutrition
To him that nourisht me. Far off, my rest is set in Troy,
To leave thee restless, and thy seed. Thy self, that did enjoy,
(As we have heard) a happy life: what Lesbos does contain,
(In times past being a blessed man's seat:) what the vnmeasur'd maine
Of Hell^spontus, Phrygi^ holds; are all said to adorn
Thy Empire; wealth, and sons enough: but when the gods did turn
Thy blessed state to partake with bane; war, and the bloods of men,
Circl'd thy city, never clear. Sit down and suffer then;
Mourn not inevitable things; thy tears can spring no deeds
To help theee, nor recall thy son: impacience ever breeds
Ill upon ill; mak^s worst things worse; and therefore sit. He said,
Give me no seat (great seed of Jove) when yet vnransomed, Priam to A^.

Hector lies ritelesse in thy tents: but daigne with utmost speed
His resignation, that these eyes, may see his person freed;
And thy grace satisfied with gifts. Accept what I have brought,
And turn to Phthia; it is enough, thy conquering hand has fought,
Till Hector faltred under it; and Hectors father stood
With free humanity safe. He frowned, and said; Give not my blood Achilles
angry with Pri^.

Fresh cause of fury; I know well, I must r^signe thy son;
Jove by my mother vtterd it; and what besides is done,
I know as amply; and thy self, (old Priam) I know too.
Some god has brought thee: for no man, durst use a thought to go
On such a service; I have guards; and I have gates to stay
Easy accesses; do not then, presume thy will can sway,
Like Jove's will; and incense again, my quenched blood; lest nor thou,
Nor Jove gets the command of me. This made the old king bow,
And down he sat in fear; the Prince, leapt like a Lion forth;
Automedon, and Alcymus, attending; all the worth
Brought for the body, they took down, and brought in; and with it,
Idaeus (herald to the king,) a cote embroderd yet,
And two rich cloakes, they left to hide, the person. Thetis son
Called out his women, to anoint; and quickly ouerrunne
The Corse with water; lifting it, in private, to the coach;
Lest Priam saw; and his cold blood, embraced a fiery touch,
Of anger, at the turpitude, profaning it; and blew
Again his wraths fire to his death. This done; his women threw
The cote and cloak on; but the Corse, Achilles own hand laid
Upon a bed; and with his friends; to chariot it conuaide.
For which forced grace (abhorring so, from his free mind) he wept;
Cried out for anger, and thus praide: O friend, do not except
Against this favor to our foe (if in the deep thou hear)
And that I give him to his Sire; he gave fair ransom; dear
In my observance, is Jove's will; and whatsoever part
Of all these gifts, by any mean, I fitly may convert
To thy renown here; and will there; it shall be poured upon
Thy honored sepulcher. This said, he went, and what was done,
Told Priam, saying: Father, now, thy wills fit rites are paid,
Thy son is given up; in the morn, thine eyes shall see him laid
Decked in thy chariot, on his bed; in mean space, let us eat.
The rich-hair'd Niobe, found thoughts, that made her take her meat;
Though twelve dear children she saw slain: six daughters, six young sons.
The sons, incenst Apollo slew: the maids confusions
Diana wrought; since Niobe, her merits durst compare
With great Latona^; arguing, that she did only bear
Two children; and her self had twelve; For which, those only two
Slew all her twelve; nine days they lay, steept in their blood: her woe
Found no friend, to afford them fire; Saturnius had turned
Humanes to stones. The tenth day yet; the good celestials burnd
The trunkes themselves; and Niobe, when she was tired with tears,
Fell to her food; and now with rocks; and wild hills mixed she bears
(In Sypilus) the gods wraths still; in that place, where it is said,
The Goddess Fairies use to dance, about the funeral bed
Of Achelous; where (though turned, with cold grief, to a stone)
Heaven gives her heat enough to feel, what plague comparison
With his powers (made by earth) deserves: affect not then too far
Without grief, like a god, being a man; but for a man's life care,
And take fit food: thou shall have time, beside to mourn thy son;
He shall be tearefull; thou being full; not here, but Ilion
Shall find thee weeping rooms enough. He said, and so arose;
And causd a siluer-fleec't sheep, killed; his friends skils did dispose
The fleaing, cutting of it up; and cookely spitted it;
Roasted; and drew it artfully. Automedon as fit
Was for the reverend Sewers place; and all the brown joints served
On wicker vessel to the board; Achilles own hands keru'd;
And close they fell too. Hunger stancht; talk, and observing time Their
mutual observation of eithers fashion at the table.

Was used, of all hands; Priam sat, amazed to see the prime
Of Thetis son; accomplished so, with stature, looks, and grace;
In which, the fashion of a god, he thought had changed his place.
Achilles fell to him as fast; admired as much his years;
(Told, in his grave, and good aspect;) his speech even charmed his ears:
So orderd; so material. With this food feasted too,
Old Priam spoke thus: Now ( Jove's seed) command that I may go, Priam to
Achilles.

And add to this feast grace of rest: these lids nere closde mine eyes
Since under thy hands fled the soul, of my dear son; sighs, cries,
And woes; all use from food, and sleep, have taken: the base courts
Of my sad Palace, made my beds; where all the abject sorts
Of sorrow, I have varied; tumbled in dust, and hid;
No bit, no drop of sustenance touched. Then did Achilles bid
His men and women see his bed, laid down, and covered
With purple Blankets; and on them, an Arras Couerlid;
Wast costs of silk plush laying by. The women strait took lights,
And two beds made, with utmost speed; and all the other rites
Their Lord named, used; who pleasantly, the king in hand thus bore:
Good father, you must sleep without; lest any Counselor Achilles to Priam.

Make his access in depth of night; as often their industry
Brings them t'impart our warre-affaires; of whom should any eye
Discern your presence, his next steps, to Agamemnon fly;
And then shall I lose all these gifts. But go to, signify,
(And that with truth) how many days, you mean to keep the state
Of Hectors funerals: because, so long would I rebate
Mine own edge, set to sack your town; and all our host contain
From interruption of your rites. He answered; If you mean
To suffer such rites to my son; you shall perform a part
Of most grace to me. But you know, with how dismayed a heart,
Our host took Troy; and how much Fear, will therefore apprehend
Their spirits to make out again, so far as we must send
For wood, to raise our heap of death; unless I may assure,
That this your high grace will stand good; and make their pass secure;
Which if you seriously confirm; nine days I mean to mourn;
The tenth, keep funeral and feast: th'eleuenth raise, and adorn
My sons fit Sepulcher. The twelfth (if we must needs) we will fight.
Be it (replied Aeacides) do Hector all this right;
I Will hold war back those whole twelve days: of which, to free all fear,
Take this my right hand. This confirmed, the old king rested there.
His Herald lodged by him; and both, in forepart of the tent;
Achilles in an in most room, of wondrous ornament;
Whose side, bright-cheekt Briseis warmed. Soft Sleep tamed gods and men;
All, but most useful Mercury; Sleep could not lay one chain
On his quick temples; taking care, for getting off again
Engaged Priam, vndiscern'd, of those that did maintain
The sacred watch. Above his head, he stood with this demand.
O father, sleep'st thou so secure, still lying in the hand Mercury appears
to Priam in his sleep.

Of so much ill? and being dismissed, by great Aeacides?
It Is true, thou have redeemed the dead; but for thy life's release
(Should Agamemnon hear thee here) three times the price now paid,
Thy sons hands must repay for thee. This said; the king (afraid)
Start from his sleep; Idaeus called; and (for both) Mercury
The horse, and mules, (before losde) joined, so soft and curiously,
That no ear heard; and through the host, drove; but when they drew
To gulphy Xanthus bright-wau'd stream, up to Olympus flew
Industrious Mercury. And now, the saffron morning rose;
Spreading her white robe over all, the world. When (full of woes)
They scourged on, with the Corse to Troy; from whence, no eye had seen
(Before Cassandra) their return. She, (like loves golden Queen,
Ascending Pergamus) discerned, her fathers person nie;
His Herald, and her brothers Corse; and then she cast this cry
Round about Troy; O Trojans, if every did greet
Hector, returned from fight alive; now, look ye out, and meet Cassandra to
the Tr^ians.

His ransomed person. Then his worth, was all your cities joy;
Now do it honor. Out all rusht; woman, nor man, in Troy
Was left: a most vnmeasur'd cry, took up their voices. Close
To Scaeas Ports they met the Corse; and to it, headlong goes
The reverend mother; the dear wife; upon it, strowe their hair,
And lie entranced. Round about, the people broke the air
In lamentations; and all day, had staid the people there;
If Priam had not cried; Give way, give me but leave to bear
The body home; and mourn your fills. Then cleft the preasse; and gave
Way to the chariot. To the Court, Herald Idaeus drove,
Where on a rich bed they bestowed, the honored person; round
Girt it with Singers; that the woe, with skillfull voices crowned.
A woeful Elegy they sung, wept singing, and the dames,
Sighed, as they sung: Andromache, the downeright prose exclames Andromaches
lamentation for her husband.

Began to all; she on the neck, of slaughterd Hector fell
And cried out: O my husband! thou, in youth badst youth farewell,
Left'st me a widow: thy sole son, an infant; our selves cursed
In our birth, made him right our child; for all my care, that nursed
His infancy, will never give, life to his youth; ere that,
Troy from her top, will be destroyed; thou guardian of our state;
Thou even of all her strength, the strength; thou that in care were past
Her careful mothers of their babes, being gone; how can she last?
Soon will the swollen fleet fill her womb, with all their servitude,
My self with them, and thou with me (dear son) in labors rude,
Shall be emploid; sternely suruaid, by cruel Conquerors;
Or rage not (suffering life so long;) some one, whose hate abhorres
Thy presence; (putting him in mind, of his sire slain by thine; Andromaches
lamentation for Hector.

His brother, son, or friend) shall work, thy ruin before mine;
Tossed from some tower; for many Greeks, have eat earth from the hand
Of thy strong father: In sad fight, his spirit was too much manned;
And therefore mourn his people; we; thy Parents (my dear Lord)
For that, thou make endure a woe; black, and to be abhorred.
Of all yet, thou have left me worst; not dying in thy bed;
And reaching me thy last-raisd hand: in nothing counseled;
Nothing commanded by that power, thou had of me; to do
Some deed for thy sake: O for these; never will end my woe;
Never my tears cease. Thus wept she; and all the Ladies closde,
Her passion with a general shrieke. Then Hecuba disposde,
Her thoughts in like words: O my son, of all mine, much most dear; Hecubas
lamentation.

Dear, while thou liu'dst too, even to gods: and after death they were
Careful to save thee. Being best; thou most were envied;
My other sons, Achilles sold; but thee, he left not dead.
Imber and Samos; the false Ports, of Lemnos entertained
Their persons; thine, no Port but death; nor there, in rest remained,
Thy violated Corse; the Tomb, of his great friend was spher'd
With thy dragged person; yet from death, he was not therefore rer'd.
But (all his rage used) so the gods, have tenderd thy dead state;
Thou lie as living; sweet and fresh, as he that felt the Fate
Of Phoebus holy shafts. These words, the Queen used for her moan;
And next her; Hellen held that state; of speech and passion.
O Hector, All my brothers more, were not so loved of me, Hellens lamentation.

As thy most virtues. Not my Lord, I held so dear as thee;
That brought me hither; before which, I would I had been brought
To ruin; for, what breeds that wish (which is the mischief wrought
By my access) yet never found, one harsh taunt; one words ill
From thy sweet carriage. Twenty years, do now their circles ^ill,
Since my arrival; all which time, thou did not only bear
Thy self without check; But all else, that my Lords brothers were;
Their sisters Lords; sisters themselves; the Queen my mother in law;
(The king being never but most mild) when thy man's spirits saw
Sour, and reproachful; it would still, reprove their bitterness
With sweet words. And thy gentle soul. And therefore thy deceasse,
I truly mourn for; and my self, curse, as the wretched cause;
All broad Troy yielding me not one; that any humane laws
Of pity, or forgiveness moved, t'entreate me humanely,
But only thee; all else abhorred, me for my destiny.
These words, made even the commons mourn; to whom the king said, Friends,
Priam to the Trojans.

Now fetch wood for our funeral fire; nor fear the foe intends
Ambush, or any violence; Achilles gave his word,
At my dismission; that twelve days, he would keep sheathed his sword,
And all men's else. Thus oxen, mules, in chariots strait they put;
Went forth; and an vnmeasur'd pile, of Syluane matter cut;
Nine days emploide in carriage; but when the tenth morn shinde
On wretched mortals; then they brought, the-fit-to-be-diuin'd,
Forth to be burned: Troy swum in tears. Upon the piles most height
They laid the person, and gave fire; all day it burned; all night.
But when th'eleuenth morn let on earth, her rosy fingers shine,
The people flockt about the pile; and first, with blackish wine
Quenched all the flames. His brothers then, and friends, the snowy bones
Gatherd into an vrne of gold; still pouring on their mones.
Then wrapped they in soft purple veiles, the rich vrne; dug a pit;
Grau'd it; ramb'd up the grave with stones, and quickly built to it
A sepulcher. But while that work, and all the funeral rites
Were in performance, guards were held, at all parts, days and nights,
For fear of false surprise before, they had imposde the crown
To these solemnities. The tomb, advanced once, all the town,
In Ioue-nurst Priams Court partooke, a passing sumptuous feast;
And so horse-taming Hectors rites, gave up his soul to Rest.
Thus far the Ilian Ruins I have laid
Open to English eyes. In which (repaid
With thine own value;) go vnualu'd Book
Live, and be loved. If any envious look
Hurt thy clear fame; learn that no state more hie
Attends on virtue, then pined Enuies eye.
Would thou were worth it, that the best does wound;
Which this Age feeds, and which the last shall bound.
THus with labor enough (though with more comfort in the merits of my divine
Author) I have brought my translation of his Iliads to an end. If either
therein, or in the harsh utterance, or matter of my Comment before; I have, for
haste, scatterd with my burden (less then fifteen weeks being the whole
time, that the last twelve books translation stood me in) I desire my present
will, and (I doubt not) hability (if God give life) to reform and perfect all
heareafter, may be ingenuouslly accepted for the absolute work. The rather,
considering the most learned (with all their helps and time) have been so
often and unanswerably, miserably taken halting. In the mean time; that most
assistfull and unspeakable spirit, by whose thrice sacred conduct and
inspiration, I have finished this labor, diffuse the fruitful horn of his
blessings through these goodnesse-thirsting watchings; without which, utterly
dry and bloodlesse is whatsoever Mortality sows.

But where our most diligent Spondanus ends his work with a prayer to be taken
out of these Maeanders; and Euripian rivers (as he terms them) of Ethnicke,
and profane writers (being quite contrary to himself at the beginning) I
thrice humbly beseech the most dear and divine mercy (ever most incomparably
preferring the great light of his truth in his direct, and infallible
Scriptures) I may ever be enabled, by resting wondering in his right comfortable
shadows in these; to magnify the clearenesse of his almighty appearance in the
other.

And with this salutation of Poe^ie given by our Spondanus in his Preface to
these Iliads. (All hail Saint-sacred Poesy; that under so much gall of
fictio^, such abundance of honey doctrine have hidden; not revealing them to
the unworthy worldly; would thou but so much make me, that amongst thy
N^uices I might be numbered; no time should ever come near my life, that could
make me forsake thee.) I will conclude with this my daily and nightly prayer;
learned of the most learned Symplicius.

Supplico tibi Domine, Pater, and Dux rationis nostrae; vt nostrae nobilitatis
recordemur qua tu nos ornasti; and vt tu nobis praesto sis, vt ijs qui per sese
mouentur: vt and a corporis contagio, brutorumque affectuum repurgemur, eosque
superemus, and regamus, and, sicut decet, pro instrumentis ijs vtamur. Deinde
vt nobis adiumento sis, ad accuratam rationis nostrae correctionem; and
coniunctionem cum ijs quae vere sunt, per lucem veritatis. Et tertium,
Saluatori supplex oro; vt ab oculis animorum nostrorum caliginem prorsus
abstergas, vt (quod apud Homerum est) Norimus been qui Deus, aut mortalis
habendus.

Amen.
FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT GRACIOUS and worthy, the Duke of LENNOX.
AMongst th'Heroes of the Worlds prime years,
Stand here, great Duke, and see the^ shine about you:
Inform your princely mind and spirit by theirs,
And then, like them, live ever; look without you,
For subjects fit to use your place, and grace:
Which throw about you, as the Sun, his Rays;
In quickening, with their power, the dying Race
Offriendlesse Virtue; since they thus can raise
Their honored Raisers, to Eternity.
None ever lived by Self-love: Others good
Is th'obiect of our own. They (living) die,
That bury in them selves their fortunes brood.
To this soul, then, your gracious countenance give;
That gave, to such as you, such means to live.
TO THE MOST GRAVE AND honored Temperer of Law, and Equity, the Lord
CHANCELLOR, etc.
THat Poesy is not so removed a thing
From grave administry of public weals,
As these times take it; hear this Poet sing,
Most judging Lord: and see how he reueales
The mysteries of Rule, and rules to guide
The life of Man, through all his choicest ways.
Nor be your timely pains the less applied
For Poesies idle name; because her Rays
Have shined through greatest Counselors, and Kings.
Hear Royal Hermes sing The Egyptian Laws;
How Solon, Draco, Zoroastes sings
Their Laws in verse: and let their just applause
(By all the world given) yours (by us) allow;
That, since you grace all virtue, honor you.
TO THE MOST WORTHY Earl, Lord Treasurer, and Treasure of our Country, the
Earl of SALISBVRY, etc.
VOuchsafe, great Treasurer, to turn your eye,
And see the opening of a Grecian Mine;
Which, Wisdom long since made her Treasury;
And now her title does to you resign.
Wherein as The Ocean walks not, with such waves,
The Round of this Realm, as your VVisedomes seas;
Nor, with his great eye, sees; his Marble, saues
Our State, like your Vlyssian policies:
So, none like HOMER has the World enspher'd;
Earth, Seas, and heaven, fixed in his verse, and moving;
Whom all times wisest Men, have held vnper'de;
And therefore would conclude with your approving.
Then grace his spirit, that all wise men has graced,
And made things ever flitting, ever last.
An Anagram.
Robert Cecyl, Earl of Salisburye.
Curbfoes; thy care, is all our erly Be.
TO THE MOST HONOR'DRE storer of ancient Nobility, both in blood and virtue,
the Earl of SVFFOLKE, etc.
Join, Noblest Earl, in giving worthy grace,
To this great gracer of Nobility:
See here what sort of men, your honored place
Does properly command; if Poesy
(Professed by them) were worthily expressed.
The grauest, wisest, greatest, need not, then,
Account that part of your command the least;
Nor them such idle, needless, worthless Men.
Who can be worthier Men in public weals,
Then those (at all parts) that prescribed the best?
That stird up noblest virtues, holiest zeales;
And evermore have lived as they professed?
A world of worthiest Men, see one create,
(Great Earl); whom no man since could imitate.
TO THE MOST NOBLE AND learned Earl, the Earl of NORTHAMTON, etc.
TO you, most learned Earl, whose learning can
Reject unlearned Custom, and Embrace
The real virtues of a worthy Man,
I prostrate this great Worthy, for your grace;
And pray that Poesies well-deseru'd ill Name
(Being such, as many modern Poets make her)
May naught eclipse her clear essential flame:
But as she shines here, so refuse or take her.
Nor do I hope; but even your high affairs
May suffer intermixture with her view;
Where Wisdom fits her for the highest chaires;
And minds, grown old, with cares of State, renew:
You then (great Earl) that in his own tongue know
This king of Poets; see his English show.
TO THE MOST NOBLE, MY singular good Lord, the Earl of Arundell.
STand by your noblest stock; and ever grow
In love, and grace of virtue most admired;
And we will pay the sacrifice we owe
Of prayre and honor, with all good desired
To your divine soul; that shall ever live
In height of all bliss prepared here beneath,
In that ingenuous and free grace you give
To knowledge; only Bulwark against Death.
Whose rare sustainers here, her powers sustain
Hereafter. Such reciprocal effects
Meet in her virtues. Where the love does reign,
The Act of knowledge crowns our intellects.
Where The Act, nor Love is, there, like beasts men die:
Not Life, but Time is their Eternity.
TO THE LEARNED AND most noble Patron of learning the Earl of PEMBROOKE, etc.
Above all others may your Honor shine;
As, past all others, your ingenuous beams
Exhale into your grace the form divine
Of godlike Learning; whose exiled streams
Run to your succor, charged with all the wrack
Of sacred Virtue. Now the barbarous witch
(Foul Ignorance) sits charming of them back
To their first Fountain, in the great and rich;
Though our great Sovereign counter-checke her charms
(Who in all learning, reigns so past example)
Yet (with her) Turkish Policy puts on arms,
To raze all knowledge in man's Christian Temple.
(You following yet our king) your guard redouble:
Pure are those streams, that these times cannot trouble.
TO THE RIGHT GRACIOUS Illustrator of virtue, and worthy of the favor Royal,
the Earl of MONTGOMRIE.
THere runs a blood, fair Earl, through your clear vains
That well entitles you to all things Noble;
Which still the living Sydnian soul maintains,
And your Names ancient Noblesse does redouble:
For which I needs must tender to your Graces
This noblest work of Man; as made your Right.
And though Ignoblesse, all such works defaces
As tend to Learning, and the souls delight:
Yet since the sacred Pen does testify,
That Wisdom (which is Learnings natural birth)
Is the clear Mirror of Gods Majesty,
And Image of his goodness here in earth;
If you the Daughter wish, respect the Mother:
One cannot be obtained, without the other.
TO THE MOST LEARNED and Noble Concluder of the Wars Art, and the Muses, the
Lord LISLE, etc.
NOr let my pains herein (long honored Lord)
Fail of your ancient Nobly-good respects;
Though obscure Fortune never would afford
My service show, till these thus late effects.
And though my poor deserts weighed never more
Then might keep down their worthless memory
From your high thoughts (enricht with better store)
Yet yours, in me, are fixed eternally;
Which all my fit occasions well shall prove.
Mean space (with your most Noble Nephews) daine
To show your free and honorable love
To this Greek Poet, in his English vain.
You cannot more the point of death control;
Then to stand close by such a living soul.
TO THE GREAT AND VER tuous, the Countess of MONTGOMRIE.
YOur Fame (great Lady) is so loud resounded,
By your free Trumpet, my right worthy friend;
That, with it, all my forces stand confounded,
Armed, and disarmed at once, to one just end;
To honor and describe the blessed consent
Twixt your high blood and soul, in virtues rare.
Of which, my friends praise is so eminent,
That I shall hardly like his Echo fare,
To render only th'ends of his shrill Verse.
Besides; my Bounds are short; and I must, me^rely,
My will to honor your rare parts, rehearse;
With more time, singing your renown more clearly.
Meane-time, take Homer for my wants supply:
To whom adioyn'd, your Name shall never die.
TO THE HAPPY STAR, DI scouered in our Sydneian Asterisme; comfort of
learning, Sphere of all the virtues, the Lady VVROTHE.
WHen all our other Stars set (in their skies)
To Virtue, and all honor of her kind;
That you (rare Lady) should so clearly rise,
Makes all the virtuous glorify your mind.
And let true Reason, and Religion try,
If it be Fancy, not judicial Right,
In you to oppose the times Apostasy,
To take the souls part, and her saving Light,
While others blind and bury both in Sense;
When, it is the only end, for which all live.
And, could those souls, in whom it dies, dispense
As much with their Religion; they would give
That as small grace. Then shun their course, fair Star;
And still keep your way, pure, and circular.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE PA tronesse and Grace of Virtue, the Countess of BEDFORD.
TO you, fair Patroness, and Muse to Learning;
The Fount of learning and the Muses sends
This Cordial for your virtues; and forewarning
To leave no good, for the will the world commends.
Custom seduceth but the vulgar sort:
With whom, when Noblesse mixeth, she is vulgar;
The truly-Noble, still repair their Fort,
With gracing good excitements, and gifts rare;
In which the narrow path, to Happiness,
Is only beaten. Vulgar pleasure sets
Nets for her self, in swinge of her excess;
And beats her self there dead, ere free she gets.
Since pleasure then with pleasure still does waste;
Still please with virtue Madame: That will last.
TO THE RIGHT VALOROVS and virtuous Lord, the Earl of SOVTH-HAMTON, etc.
IN Choice of all our Countries Noblest spirits
(Borne slauisher barbarism to conuin^)
I could not but in uoke your ho or'd Merits,
To follow the swift virtue of our Prince.
The cries of Virtue, and her Fortress, Learning,
Brake earth, and to Elysium did descend,
To call up Homer: who therein discerning
That his excitements, to their good, had end
(As being a Grecian) puts-on English arms;
And to the hardy Natures in these climes
Stikes-vp his high and spiritfull alarmes,
That they may clear earth of those impious Crimes
Whose conquest (though most faintly all apply)
You know (learned Earl) all live for, and should die.
TO MY EXCEEDING GOOD Lord, the Earl of SUSSEX: with duty always remembered to
his honored Countess.
YOu that have made, in our great Princes Name
(At his high birth) his holy Christian vows;
May witness now (to his eternal Fame)
How he performs them thus far: and still grows
Above his birth in virtue; past his years,
In strength of Bounty, and great Fortitude.
Amongst this train, then, of our choicest Peers,
That follow him in chase of vices rude,
Summoned by his great Herald Homers voice;
March you; and ever let your Family
(In your vows made for such a Prince) rejoice.
Your service to his State shall never die.
And, for my true observance, let this show,
No means escapes when I may honor you.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND Heroical, my singular good Lord, the Lord of WALDEN,
etc.
NOr let the vulgar sway Opinion bears
(Rare Lord) that Poesies favor shows men vain,
Rank you amongst her stern disfauourers;
She all things worthy favor does maintain.
Virtue, in all things else, at best she betters;
Honor she heightens, and gives Life in Death;
She is the ornament, and soul of letters:
The worlds deceit before her vanishes.
Simple she is as Doves, like Serpents wise;
Sharp, grave, and sacred: naught but things divine,
And things divining, fit her faculties;
(Accepting her as she is genuine.)
If she be vain then, all things else are vile;
If virtuous, still be Patron of her style.
TO THE MOST TRVLY-NO ble and Uertue-gracing Knight Sir Thomas HOWARD.
THe true, and nothing-lesse-then sacred spirit
That moves your feet so far from the profane;
In skorne of Pride, and grace of humblest merit,
Shall fill your Names sphere; never seeing it wane.
It is so rare, in blood so high as yours
To entertain the humble skill of Truth;
And put a virtuous end to all your powers;
That th'honor Age asks, we give you in youth.
Your Youth has won the maistrie of your Mind;
As Homer sings of his Antilochus,
The parallel of you in every kind,
Valiant, and mild, and most ingenious.
Go on in Virtue, after Death and grow,
And shine like Ledas twins; my Lord and you.
Ever most humbly and faithfully devoted to you, and all the rare Patrons of
divine Homer. Geo. Chapman.


