THE ANSWER OF Mr. RICHARD HOOKER TO A SVPPLICATION PREFERRED by Mr WALTER
TRAVERS to the H H. Lords of the Privy Counsel.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes
dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1612.

Mr HOOKERS ANSWER to the Supplication that Mr Travers made to the Counsel.
TO MY LORD OF CANTER-BVRIE HIS GRACE.
MY duty in most humble wise remembered. May it please your Grace to vnde:
stand, that whereas there has been a late controversy raised in the Temple,
and persued by M. Travers upon conceit taken at some words by me uttered with a
most simple and harmless meaning in the heat of which persuit, after three
public invectiues silence being enioined him by authority; he has hereupon
for defense of his proceedings, both presented the right Honorable LL. and
others of Her Majesty's privy Counsel with a writing, and also caused or
suffered the same to be copied out and spread through the hands of so many, that
welnigh al sorts of me^ have it in their bosoms; the matters wherewith I am
therein charged being of such quality as they are, and my self being better
known to your Grace, then to any of their HH. besides; I have chosen to offer
to your Graces hands, a plain declaration of my innocence in all those things
wherewith I am so hardly and so heavily charged, least if I still remain
silent, that which I do for quietness sake be taken as an argument that I
lack what to speak truly and justly in mine own defense.

2 First, because M. Travers thinks it is expedient to breed an opinion in
men's minds, that the root of all inconvenient events which are now sprung out,
is the surly and unpeaceable disposition of the man with whom he has to do,
therefore the first in the rank of accusations laid against me is my
inconformitie which have so little inclined to so many and so earnest
exhortations and conferences, as my self he says can witness to have been
spent upon me, for my better fashioning unto good correspondence and agreement.

3 Indeed when at the first, by means of special welwillers, without any suit
of mine, as they very well know, (although I do not think it had been a
mortal sin in a reasonable sort to have showed a moderate desire that way)
yet when by their endeavor without instigation of mine, some reverend and
honorable, favorably affecting me had procured her Majesty's grant of the
place, at the very point of my entering thereinto, the evening before I was
first to preach, he came and two other Gentlemen joined with him: the effect
of his conference then was, that he thought it his duty to advise me not to
enter with a strong hand, but to change my purpose of preaching there the next
day, and to stay till he had given notice of me to the Congregation, that so
their allowance might seal my calling. The effect of mine answer was, that as
in place where such order is, J would not break it; so here where it never
was, I might not of mine own head take upon me to begin it; but liking very
well the motion, for the opinion which J had of his good meaning who made it,
requested him not to mislike my answer though it were not correspondent to his
mind.

4 When this had so displeased some, that whatsoever was afterward done, or
spoken by me, it offended their taste, angry informations were daily sent out,
intelligence given far and wide what a dangerous enemy was crept in, the worst
that jealousy could imagine was spoken and written to so many, that at the
length some knowing me well, and perceiving how injurious the reports were which
grew daily more and more unto my discredit; wrought means to bring M. Travers
and me to a second conference. Wherein when a common friend unto us both, had
quietly requested him to utter those things wherewith he found himself any way
grieved, he first renewed the memory of my entering into this charge by virtue
only of an humane creature (for so the want of that A mere formalitie it had
bin to me in that place whe^eas no man had ever used it before me; so it could
neither further me if I did use it, nor hinder me if I did not.
formalitie of popular allowance was then censured;) and unto this was annexed
a Catalogue, partly of causlesse surmyses; as that I had co^spired against him,
and that J sought superiority over him; and partly of faults which to note I
should have thought it a greater offense then to commit, if I did account them
faults and had heard them so curiously observed in any other then my self,
they are such silly things; as praying in the entrance of my sermons only and
not in the end, naming Bishops in my prayer, kneeling when I pray, and kneeling
when I receive the Communion with such like, which I would be as loath to
recite as I was sorry to hear them objected, if the rehearsal thereof were not
by him thus wrested from me. These are the conferences wherewith I have been
wooed to entertain peace and good agreement.

5 As for the vehement exhortations he speaks of, I would gladly know some
reason wherefore he thought them needful to be used. Was there any thing found
in my speeches or dealings which gave the^ occasion, who are studious of peace,
to think that I deposed my self to some unquiet kind of proceedings? Surely
the special providence of God, J do now see it was, that the first words I
spoke in this place, should make the first thing whereof J am accused, to
appear not only untrue, but improbable to as many as then heard me with
indifferent ears, and do J doubt not in their consciences clear me of this
suspicion. Howbeit J grant this were nothing if it might be showed that my
deeds following were not suitable to my words. If J had spoken of peace at the
first and afterward sought to molest and grieve him, by crossing him in his
function, by storming if my pleasure were not asked and my will obeyed in the
least occurrences, by carping needlessly sometimes at the manner of his
teaching; sometimes at this, sometimes at that point of his doctrine; I might
then with some likelihood have been blamed as one disdaining a peaceable hand
when it has been offered. But if J be able (as J am) to prove, that my self
have now a full year together borne the continuance of such dealings, not only
without any manner of resistance; but also without any such complaint as might
let or hinder him in his course; J see no cause in the world, why of this I
should be accused, unless it be least J should accuse, which J meant not. If
therefore I have given him occasion to use conferences and exhortations unto
peace, if when they were bestowed upon me J have despised them; it will not be
hard to show some one word or deed wherewith J have gone about to work
disturbance: one is not much, J require but one. Only I require if any thing
be showed, it may be proved, and not objected only as this is, That I have
joined with such as have always opposed to any good order in this Church, and
made themselves to be thought indisposed to the present estate and proceedings.
The words have reference as it seems, unto some such things as being
attempted before my coming to the Temple, went not so effectually perhaps
forward as he which devised them would have wished. An order as I learn there
was tendered, that Communicants should neither kneel, as in the most places of
the Realm; nor sit as in this place the custom is; but walk to the one side
of the Table, and there standing till they had received, pass afterward away
round about by the other. Which being on a sudden begun to be practiced in the
Church, some sat wondering what it should mean, others deliberating what to
do: till such time as at length by name one of them being called openly
thereunto, requested that they might do as they had bin accustomed which was
granted, and as M. Travers had ministered his way to the rest, so a Curate was
sent to minister to them after their way. Which unprosperous beginning of a
thing, (saving only for the inconvenience of needles alterations otherwise
harmless) did so disgrace that order in their conceit who had to allow or
disallow it, that it took no place. For neither they could ever induce
themselves to think it good, and it so much offended Mr Travers who supposed
it to be the best, that he since that time, although contented himself to
receive it as they do at the hands of others, yet has not thought it meet
they should ever receive it out of his, which would not admit that order of
receiving it, and therefore in my time has been always present not to
minister but only to be ministered unto.

6 Another order there was likewise devised but an order of much more weight
and importance. This soil in respect of certain immunities and other
specialties belonging unto it seemed likely to bear that which in other places
of the Realm of England does not take. For which cause request was made to
some of her Majesty's Privy Counsel, that whereas it is provided by a statute
there should be collectors and sidemen in Churches, which thing or somewhat
correspondent unto it this place did greatly want, it would please their HH. to
motion such a matter to the Ancients of the Temple. And according to their
honorable manner of helping forward al motions so grounded, they wrote their
letters, as I am informed, to that effect. Whereupon although these houses
never had use of such collectors and sidemen as are appointed in other places,
yet they both erected a box to receive men's devotion for the poor, appointing
the Treasurer of both houses to take care for bestowing it where need is, and
granting further that if any could be entreated (as in the end some were) to
undertake the labor of observing men's slacknesse in divine duties they should
be allowed, their complaints hard all times, and the faults they complained of,
if Mr Alveyes private admonition did not serve, then by some other means
redressed, but according to the old received orders of both houses. Whereby the
substance of their H. letters were indeed fully satisfied. Yet because Mr
Travars intended not this, but as it seemed an other thing, therefore
notwithstanding the orders which have been taken and for any thing I know do
stand still in as much force in this Church now as at any time heretofore: He
complains much the good orders which he does mean have been withstood. Now
it were hard if as many, as any way oppose unto these and the like orders in
his persuasion good, do thereby make themselves to be thought dislikers of the
present state and proceedings. If they whom he aims at have any otherwise
made themselves to be thought such, it is likely he does know wherein, and will
I hope disclose to whom it appertains, both the persons who^ he thinks and
the causes why he thinks them so ill affected. But whatsoever the men be, do
their faults make me faulty? They do if I join my self with them. I beseech
him therefore to declare wherein I have joined with them. Other ioining then
this with any man here I cannot imagine: It may be I have talked or walked or
caten or interchangeably used the duties of common humanity with some such as
he is hardly persuaded of. For I know no law of God or man by force whereof
they should be as Heathens and Publicans unto me that are not gracious in the
eyes of another man perhaps without cause, or if with cause, yet such cause as
he is privy unto and not I. Could he or any reasonable man think it a
charitable course in me to observe them that show by external courtesies a
favorable inclination toward him, and if I spy out any one amongst them of
whom I think not well, hereupon to draw such an accusation as this against him
and to offer it where hec has given up his against me? Which notwithstanding I
will acknowledge to be just and reasonable if he or any man living shall show
that I use as much as the bare familiar company but of one who by word or
deed has ever given me cause to suspect or conjecture him such as here they
are termed with whom complaint is made that I join my self. This being
spoken therefore and written without all possibility of proof, does not Mr
Travers give me over great cause to stand in some fear least he make to little
conscience how he uses his tongue or pen? These things are not laid
against me for nothing, they are to some purpose if they take place. For in a
mind persuaded that I am as he deciphereth me, one which refuse to be at peace
with such as embrace the truth, and side my self with men sinisterly affected
thereunto, any thing that shall be spoken concerning the unsoundness of my
Doctrine cannot choose but be favorably entertained. This presupposed it will
have likelihood enough which afterward follows that many of my Sermons have
tasted of some sower leaven or other, that in them he has discovered sundry
unsound matters. A thing much to be lamented that such a place as this which
might have been so well provided for, has fallen into the hands of one no
better instructed in the truth. But what if in the end it be found that he
judges my words, as they do colors which look upon them with green
spectacles, and think that which they see is green, when indeed that is
green whereby they see.

7 Touching the first point of his discovery which is about the matter of
Predestination, to set down that I spoke, (for I have it written) to declare
and confirm the several branches thereof, would be tedious now in this
writing, where I have so many things to touch that I can but touch them only.
Neither is it herein so needful for me to justify my speech, when the very
place and presence where I spoke does it self speak sufficiently for my
clearing. This matter was not broached in a blind Alley, or uttered where none
was to hear it that had skill with authority to control, or covertly
insinuated by some glyding sentence.

8 That which I taught was at Paul's Cross; it was not hudled in amongst other
matters in such sort that it could pass without noting. it was opened, it was
proved, it was some reasonable time stood upon. I see not which way my L. of
London, who was present and heard it, can excuse so great a fault as patiently
without rebuke or controlement afterward, to hear any man there teach
otherwise then the word of God does, not as it is understood by the private
interpretation of some one or two men, or by a special construction received
in some few books, but as it is understood by all Churches professing the
Gospel, by them all and therefore even by our own also amongst others. A man
that did mean to prove that he speaks, would surely take the measure of his
words shorter.

9 The next thing discovered, is an opinion about the assurance of men's
persuasion in matters of faith J have taught he says; That the assurance of
things which we believe by the word, is not so certain as of that we perceive
by sense. And is it as certain? Yea, J taught as he himself J trust will not
deny, that the things which God does promise in his word, are surer unto us
then anything we touch, handle, or see; but are we so sure and certain of
them? if we be, why does God so often prove his promises unto us, as he does
by arguments taken from our sensible experience? We must be surer of the
proof then of the thing proved, otherwise it is no proof. How is it, that if
ten men do all look upon the moon, every one of them knows it as certainly
to be the moon as another: but many believing one and the same promises, all
have not one and the same fullness of persuasion? How falls it out, that men
being assured of any thing by sense can be no surer of it then are, whereas
the strongest in faith that lives upon the earth, has always need to labor,
and strive, and pray, that his assurance concerning heavenly and spiritual
things, may grow, increase, and be augmented.

10 The Sermon wherein J have spoken somewhat largely of this point, was long
before this late controversy rose between him and me, upon request of some of
my friends seen, and read by many, and amongst many, some who are thought able
to discern: and J never heard that any one of them hitherto has condemned it
as containing unsound matter. My case were very hard, if as often as any thing J
speak displeasing one man's taste, my doctrine upon his only word should be
taken for sower leven.

11 The rest of this discovery is all about the matter now in question,
wherein he has two faults predominant, which would tire out any that should
answer unto every point severally: unapt speaking of school controversies; and
of my words sometimes so untoward a reciting, that he which should promise to
draw a man's countenance and did indeed express the parts at leastwise the
most of them truly, but perversely place them, could not represent a more
offensive visage, then unto me my own speech seems in some places as he has
ordered it. For answer whereunto, that writing is sufficient wherein J have
set down both my words and meaning in such sort, that were this accusation does
deprave the one, and either misinterpret, or without just cause mislike the
other, it will appear so plainly that J may spare very well to take upon me a
new and a needless labor here.

12 Only at one thing which is there to be found, because Mr Travers does here
seem to take such a special advantage, as if the matter were unanswerable,
he constrains me either to detect his oversight, or to confess mine own in
it. In setting the question between the Church of Rome and us about Grace and
Justification, least J should give them an occasion to say, as commonly they
do, that when we cannot refute their opinions, we propose to our selves such
instead of theirs as we can refute, J took it for the best and most
perspicuous way of teaching, to declare first, how far we do agree, and then
to show our disagreement; not generally (as Mr Travers his words would carry
it, for the easier fast His words be these. The next Saboth day after this M.
Hooker kept the way he had entered into before, and bestowed his whole hour and
more only upon the questions he had moved and maintained. Wherein he so set
out the agreement of the Church of Rome with us and their disagreement from us,
as if we had consented in the greatest and waightiest points, and differed
only in certain smaller matters. Which agreement noted by him in two chief
points, is not such as he would have made men believe: The one, in that he
said they acknowledge all men sinners, even the blessed Uirgin, though some of
them freed her from sin: for the Council of Trent holds that she was free
from sin: Another in that he said, They teach Christ's righteousness to be
the only meritorious cause of taking away sin, and differ from us only in the
applying of it. For Thom. Aquinas their chief schooleman and Archbish.
Catharmus teach that Christ took away only original sin, and that the rest
are to be taken away by our selves yea the Council of Trent teaches that the
righteousness whereby we are righteous in Gods sight is inherent
righteousness, which must needs be of our own works, and cannot be
understood of the righteousness inherent only in Christ's person and accounted
unto us.
ning that upon me, wherewith saving only by him J was never in my life
touched;) but about the matter only of justification for farther J had no cause
to meddle at that time. What was then my offense in this case? I did as he
says so set it out as if we had consented in the greatest and waightiest
points and differed only in smaller matters. It will not be found when it
comes to the balance a light difference where we disagree, as I did
acknowledge that we do about the very essence of the medicine whereby Christ
cures our disease. Did J go about to make a show of agreement in the
waightiest points, and was J so fond as not to conceal our disagreement about
this? J do wish that some indifferency were used by them that have taken the
waighing of my words.

13 Yea but our agreement is not such in two of the chiefest points, as J would
have men believe it is: and what are they? The one is J said, They acknowledge
all men sinners even the blessed Virgin, though some of the^ free her from
sin. Put the case J had affirmed that only some of them free her from sin,
and had delivered it as the most current opinion amongst them, that she was
conceived in sin: does not Bonaventure say plainly, Omnes fere; In a manner
all men do hold this? both he not bring many reasons wherefore all men should
hold it? Were their voices since that time ever counted, and their number found
smaller which hold it, then theirs that hold the contrary? Let the question
then be whether J might say the most of them acknowledged all men sinners even
the blessed Virgin her self. To show that their general received opinion is
the contrary, the Tridentine Council is alleged peradventure not altogether
so considerately. For if that Council have by resolute determination freed
her, if it hold as M. Travers says it does, that she was free from sin, then
must the Church of Rome needs condemn the^ that hold the contrary. For what
that Council holds, the same they all do and must hold. But in the Church
of Rome who knows not that it is a thing indifferent to think and defend the
one or the other? So that by this argument; the Council of Trent holds the
Virgin free from sin, Ergo it is plain that none of them may, and therefore
untrue that most of them do acknowledge her a sinner were forcible to
overthrowe my supposed assertion, if it were true that the Council did hold
this. But to the end it may clearly appear how it neither holds this nor
the contrary I will open what many do conceive of the Canon that concerns
this matter. The Fathers of Trent perceived that if they should define of this
matter, it would be dangerous howsoever it were determined. If they had freed
her from her original sin, the reasons against them are unanswerable which
Bonaventure and others do allege, but especially Thomas whose line as much as
may be they follow. Again if they did resolve the other way, they should
control themselves in an other thing which in no case might be altered. For
they profess to keep no day holy in the honor of an unholy thing; and the
Virgins conception they honor with a This does much trouble Thomas holding her
conception stained with the natural blemish inhere^t in mortal seed. And
therefore he puts it off with two Answers; the one that the Church of Rome
does not allow but tolerate the Feast, which answer now will not serve; the
other that being sure she was sanctified before birth, but unsure how long a
while after her conception, therefore under the name of her conception day,
they honor the time of her sanctification. So that besides this they have now
no soder to make the certain allowance of their feast, and their uncertain
sentence concerning her sin to cleave together. Thomas 3. part. quaest. 27
art. 2. ad 2m and 3m.
Feast; which they could not abrogate without cancelling a constitution of
Xystus quartus. And that which is worse the world might perhaps hereupon
suspect, that if the Church of Rome did amiss before in this, it is not
impossible for her to fail in other things. In the end they did wisely quote
out their Canon by a middle thread, establishing the feast of the Virgins
conception, and leaving the other question doubtful as they found it: giving
only a caveat that no man should take the decree which pronounces all menkind
originallie sinful, for a definitive sentence concerning the blessed Virgin.
This in my sight is plain by their own words, Declarat haec ipsa sancta
Synodus etc: wherefore our cou^trymen at Rhemes me^tioning this point are
marvelous wary how they speak; they touch it as though it were a hot cole:
Many godly devout men judge that our blessed Annotat. in Rom 5. See 9.
Lady was neither borne nor conceived in sin. Is it their w^nt to speak
nicely of things definitiuely set down in that council? In like sort we
find that the rest which have since the time of the Tridentine Synod written of
original sin, are in this point for the most part either silent or very
sparing in speech; and when they speak either doubtful what to think, or
whatsoever they think themselves, fearful to set down any certain
determination. If I be thought to take the Canon of that council otherwise
then they themselves do, let him expound it whose sentence was neither last
asked nor his pen least occupied in setting it down. I mean Andradius whom
Gregory the 13. has allowed Lib. 5. defens. fidei.
plainly to confess, that it is a matter which nether express evidence of
Scripture, nor the tradition of the Fathers, nor the sentence of the Church
has determined; that they are too surly and selfewilled which defending either
opinion, are displeased with them by whom the other is mainetained; finally
that the Fathers of Trent have not set down any certainetie about this
question, but left it doubtful and indifferent. Now whereas my words which I
had set down in writing before I uttered them were indeed these, Although they
imagine that the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ were for his honor and by his
special protection preserved clean from all sin, yet concerning the rest
they teach as we do that all have sinned. Against my words they might with
more pretense take exception because so many of them think she had sin: which
exception notwithstanding, the proposition being indefinite and the matter
contingent, they cannot take, because they grant that many whom they count
grave and devout amongst them think that she was clear from all sin. But
whether Mr Travers did note my words himself, or take them upon the credit of
some other man's noting, the tables were faulty wherein it was noted: All men
sinners even the blessed Virgin. When my speech was rather All men except the
blessed Virgin. To leave this; another fault he finds that I said, They teach
Christ's righteousness to be the only meritorious cause of taking away sin, and
differ from us only in the applying of it. J did say and do, They teach as we
do, that although Christ be the only meritorious cause of our justice, yet as
a medicin which is made for health does not heal by being made, but by being
applied: So by the merits of Christ there can be no life nor justification
without the application of his merits: But about the manner of applying Christ,
about the number and power of means whereby he is applied we dissent from
them. This of our dissenting from them is acknowledged.

14 Our agreement in the former is denied to be such as J pretend. Let their
own words therefore, and mine concerning them be compared. Does not Andradius
O^^^od. lib. 3
plainly confess, Our sins does shut and only the In 4 Sent. d. 1 ^u. 4.
art 6.
merits of Christ open the entering unto blessedness. And Soto, It is put for a
ground, that all since the fall of Adam obtain salvation only by the passion
of Christ: howbeit as no cause can be effectual without applying, so neither
can any man be saved to whom the suffering of Christ is not applied. In a word
who not? when the Council of Trent reckoning up the causes of our first
instificatio^, does name no end but Gods glory and our felicity; no efficient,
but his mercy; no isntrumental, but baptism; no meritorious, but Christ.
whom to have merited the taking away of no sin but original is not their
opinion: which himself will find when he has well examined his witnesses
Catharinus and Thomas. Their Jesuits are marveilous angry with the men out of
whose gleanings Mr Travers seems to have taken this, they openly Bellarm.
Iudic. d^lio Concor. Menda^. 18. Nemo Catholicorum vnquam sic docuit; sed
credimus and profitemur Christum in cr^ce pro omni^^^ omnino peccatu (...),
(...) originalibus, quam actualibus.
disclaim it, they say plainly, of all the Catholics there is no one that did
ever so teach, they make solemn protestation, we believe and profess that
Christ upon the Cross has altogether satisfied for all sins, as well
original as actual. Indeed they teach that the merit of Christ does not take
away actual sin in such sort as it does original, wherein if their doctrine
had been understood, J for my speech had never been accused. As for the
council of Trent concerning inherent righteousness what does it here? No man
doubts but they make another formal cause of justification then we do. In
respect whereof, J have showed already that we disagree about the very
essence of that which cures our spiritual disease. Most true it is which the
grand Philosopher has Every man judges well of that which he knows, and
therefore till we know the things thoroughly whereof we judge, it is a point
of judgment to stay our judgment.

15 Thus much labor being spent in discovering the unsoundness of my doctrine,
some pains he takes further to open faults in the manner of my teaching, as
that I bestowed my whole hour and more, my time and more then my time in
discourses utterly impertinent to my text. Which if J had done it might have
past without complaining of to the Privy Counsel.

16 But J did worse as he says, I left the expounding of the Scriptures and my
ordinary calling, and discoursed upon schoolepoints, and questions, neither of
edification, nor of truth. J read no lecture in the Law or in Physic. And
except the bounds of ordinary calling may be drawn like a purse, how are
they so much wider unto him then to me, that he which in the limits of his
ordinary calling should reprove that in me which he understood not, and I
laboring that both he and others might understand, could not do this without
forsaking my calling. The matter whereof I spoke was such as being at the first
by me but lightly touched, he had in that place openly contradicted and
solemnly taken upon him to disprove. If therefore it were a school question
and unfit to be discoursed of there, that which was in me but a proposition
only at the first, wherefore made he a problem of it? Why took he first upon
him to maintain the negative of that which I had affirmative lie spoken only
to show mine own opinion, little thinking that ever it would have a question.
Of what nature soever the question were of I could do no less the^ there
explain my self to them, unto whom I was accused of unsound doctrine, wherein
if to show what had been through ambiguitie mistaken in my words, or
misapplyed by him in this cause against me, I used the distinctions and helps
of schools, I trust that herein I have committed no unlawful thing. These
school implements are acknowledged by * grave and wise me^ (...).
not unprofitable to have been invented? The most approved for learning and
judgment do use them with out blame; the use of them has been well liked in
some that have taught even in this very place before me; the quality of my
hearers is such, that I could not but think them of capacity very sufficient
for the most part to conceive harder then I used any; the cause I had in hand
did in my judgment necessarily require them which were then used; when my
words spoken generally without distinctions had been perverted, what other
way was there for me but by distinctions to lay them open in their right
meaning, that it might appear to all men whether they were consonant to truth
or no. And although Mr Travers be so invred with the city that he thinks it
unmeet to use my speech which savoureth of the school, yet his opinion is no
canon, though unto him his mind being troubled, my speech did seem like
fetters and manicles, yet there might be some more calmely affected which
thought otherwise; his private judgment will hardly warrant his bold words,
that the things which I spoke were neither of edification nor truth. They might
edify some other for any thing he knows, and be true for any thing he
proves to the contrary. For it is no proof to cry Absurdities, the like
whereunto have not been hard in public places within this Land since Queen
Mary's days. If this came in earnest from him I am sorry to see him so much
offended without cause. More sorry that his fit should be so extreme to make
him speak he knows not what. That I neither affected the truth of God, nor
the peace of the Church. Mihi pro minimo est, It does not much move me when Mr
Travers does say that which I trust a greater then Mr Travers will gainesaie.

17 Now let all this which hitherto he has said be granted him, let it be as
he would have it, let my doctrine and manner of teaching be as much disallowed
by all men's judgment as by his, what is all this to his purpose? He alleges
this to be the cause why he brings it in: The high Commissioners charge him
with an indiscretion and want of duty, in that he inveighed against certain
points of doctrine taught by me as erroneous not conferring first with me nor
complaining of it to them. Which faults a sea of such matter as he has
hitherto waded in will never be able to scowre from him. For the avoiding of
Schism and disturbance in the Church which must needs grow if all men might
think what they list and speak openly what they think; therefore by a In
the Advertisements published in the 7, year of her Majesty's reign. If any
preacher or person, vicar, or curat so licensed shall fortune to preach any
matter tending to disse^tion or to derogation of the religion and doctrine
received, that the hearers denou^ce the same to the Ordinary or the next Bishop
of the same place, but not openly to contrary or to impugn the same speech so
disorderly uttered whereby may grow offense and disquiet of the people, but
shall be convinced and reproved by the Ordinary after such agreeable order as
shall be scene to him according to the gravitie of the offense. And that it be
presented within one month after the words spoken.
decree agreed upon by the Bishops and confirmed by her Majesty's authority it
was ordered that erroneous doctrine if it were taught publicly should not be
publicly refuted, but that notice thereof should be given unto such as are
by her Highness appointed to hear and to determine such causes. For breach of
which order when he is charged with lack of duty, all the faults that can be
heaped upon me will make but a weak defense for him: as surely his defense is
not much stronger when he alleges for himself that, He was in some hope his
speech in proving the truth and clearing those scruples which I had in my
self, might cause me either to embrace sound doctrine or suffer it to be
embraced of others, which if I did he should not need to co^plain; that, It was
meet he should discover first what I had sown and make it manifest to be
tares, and then desire their sith to cut it down; that conscience did bind
him to do otherwise the^ the foresaid order requires; that he was unwilling
to deal in that public manner and wished a more convenient way were taken
for it; that he had resolved to have protested the next Saboth day that he
would some other way satisfy such as should require it and not deal more in
that place. Be it imagined [let me not be taken as if I did compare
th'offenders when I do not, but their answers only] be it imagined that a
libeller did make this apology for himself, I am not ignorant that if I have
just matter against any man the Law is open, there are judges to hear it, and
courts where it ought to be complained of; I have taken an other course against
such or such a man, yet without breach of duty for as much as I am able to
yield a reason of my doing, I conceive some hope that a little discredit
amongst men would make him ashamed of himself, and that his shame would work
his amendment; which if it did other accusation there should not need; could
his answer be thought sufficient, could it in the judgment of discreet men
free him from all blame? No more can the hope which Mr Tarvers conceived to
reclaim me by public speech justify his fault against the established order
of the Church.

18 His thinking it meet he should first openly discover to the people the
tares that had been sown amongst the^, and then require the hand of authority
to mow them down, does only make it a question whether his opinion that this
was meet may be a privilege or protection against that lawful constitution
which had before determined of it as of a thing unmeet. Which question I leave
for them to discuss whom it most concerns. If the order be such that it
cannot be kept without hazarding a thing so precious as a good conscience, the
peril whereof could be no greater to him then it needs must be to all others
whom it touches in like causes, when this is evident it will be a most
effectual motive not only for England, but also for other reformed Churches
even Geneva it self [for they have the like] to change or take that away which
cannot but with great inconvenience be observed. In the mean while the breach
of it may in such consideration be pardoned [which truly I wish howsoever it
be,] yet hardly defended as long as it stan death in force vncanceld.

19 Now whereas he confesses another way had been more convenient, and that
he found in himself secret unwillingness to do that which he did, does he
not say plainly in effect that the light of his own understanding proved the
way he took perverse and crooked; reason was so plain and pregnant against
it, that his mind was alienated, his will averted to another course? yet
somewhat there was which so far overruled, that it must needs be done even
against the very stream, what does it bewraie? Finally his purposed
protestation whereby he meant openly to make it known that he did not allow
this kind of proceeding, and therefore would satisfy men otherwise, and deal
no more in this place, shows his good mind in this, that he meant to stay
himself from further offending, but it serves not his turn. He is blamed
because the thing he had done was amiss, and his answer is, That which I would
have done afterward had been well, if so be I had done it.

20 But as in this he stands persuaded that he has done nothing besides
duty, so he takes it hardly that the high Commissioners should charge him
with indiscretion. Wherefore as if he could so wash his hands he makes a long
and a large declaration concerning the carriage of himself: how he waded in
matters of smaller weight, and how in things of greater moment; how warily he
dealt; how naturally he took his things rising from the text; how closely he
kept himself to the Scripture he took in hand; how much pains he took to
confirm the necessity of believing justification by Christ only, and to show
how the Church of Rome denies that a man is saved by faith alone without
works of the Law; what the sons of thunder would have done if they had been
in his case; that his answer was very temperate without immodest or
reproachful speech; that when he might before all have reproved me, he did
not, but contented himself with exhorting me before all to follow Nathans
example and revisit my doctrine; when he might have followed S. Paul's example
in reproving Peter, he did not, but exhorted me with Peter to endure to be
withstood. This testimony of his discreet carrying himself in the handling of
his matter being more aagreeably framed and given him by an other then by
himself, might make somewhat for the praise of his person, but for defense of
his action unto them by whom he is thought indiscreet for not conferring
privately before he spoke, will it serve to answer that when he spoke he did it
consideratly? He perceives it will not, and therefore adds reasons such as
they are. As namely how he purposed at the first to take an other course and
that was this, publicly to deliver the truth of such doctrine as I had
otherwise taught, and at convenient opportunity to confer with me upon such
points. Is this the rule of Christ, If thy brother offend openly in his speech,
control it first with contrary speech openly and confer with him afterward
upon it when convenient opportunity serves? Is there any law of God or of
man whereupon to ground such a resolution, any Church extant in the world where
teachers are allowed thus to do or to be done unto? He cannot but see how weak
an all^gation it is when he brings in his following this course first in one
matter and so afterward in another to approve himself now following it
again. For if the very purpose of doing a thing so uncharitable be a fault,
the deed is a greater fault, and does the doing of it twice make it the third
time fit and allowable to be done? The weight of the cause which is his third
defense relieveth him as little. The waightier it was the more it required
considerat advise and consultation, the more it stood him upon to take good
heed that nothing were rashly done or spoken in it. But he means weighty
in regard of the wonderful danger except he had presently withstood me
without expecting a time of conference. This cause being of such moment that
might prejudice the faith of Christ, encourage the ill affected to continue
still in their damnable ways, and other weak in faith to suffer themselves to
be seduced to the destruction of their souls, he thought it his bounden duty
to speak before he talked with me. A man that should read this and not know
what I had spoken might imagine that I had at the least denied the Divinity of
Christ. But they which were present at my speech and can testify that nothing
passed my lips more then is contained in their writings, whom for soundnes of
doctrine, learning, and judgment Mr Travers himself does, I dare say, not only
allow, but honor, they which hard and do know that the doctrine here signified
in so fearful manner, the doctrine that was so dangerous to the faith of
Christ, that was so likely to encourage ill affected men to continue still in
damnable ways, that gave so great cause to tremble for fear of the present
destruction of Souls was only this, I doubt not but God was merciful to save
thousands of our Fathers living heretofore in popish superstitions, in as much
as they sinned ignorantly, and this spoken in a sermon the greatest part
whereof was against popery, they will hardly be able to discern how
Christianity should herewith be so grievously shaken.

21 Whereby his fourth excuse is also taken from him. For what does it boot him
to say The time was short wherein he was to preach after me, when his
preaching of this matter perhaps ought, surely might have bin either very well
omitted, or at the least more conveniently for a while differd, even by their
judgments that cast the most favorable aspect toward these his hasty
proceedings. The poison which men had taken at my hands was not so quick and
strong in operation as in eight days to make them past cure; by eight days
delay there was no likelihood that the force and power of his speech could die;
longer meditation might bring better and stronger proofs to mind then
extemporall dexterity could furnish him with; and who does know whether time
the only mother of sound judgment and discreet dealing, might have given that
actio^ of his some better ripeness, which by so great festination has as a
thing borne out of time brought small joy unto him that begat it? Does he
think it had not been better that neither my speech had seemed in his eyes as
an arrow sticking in a thigh of flesh, nor his own as a child whereof he must
needs be delivered by an hour? His last way of disburdening himself is by
casting his load upon my back, as if J had brought him by former co^ferences
out of hope that any fruit would ever come of conferring with me. Loath J am to
rip up those conferences whereof he makes but a slippery and loose relation.
In one of them the question between us was, whether the persuasion of faith
concerning remission of sins, eternal life, and whatsoever God does promise
unto man, be as free from doubting as the persuasion which we have by sense
concerning things tasted, selt, and seen. For the negative J mentioned their
example whose faith in Scripture is most commended, and the experience which
all faithful men have continually had of themselves* For proof of the
affirmative which he held, J desiring to have some reason, heard no thing but
All good writers oftentimes inculcated. At the length upon request to see some
one of them, Peter Martyr's common places were brought, where the leaves were
turned down at a place sounding to this effect, that The Gospel does make
Christians more virtuous, then moral Philosophy does make Heathens: which
came not near the question by many miles.

22 In the other conference he questioned about the matter of reprobation,
misliking first that I had termed God a permissiue and no positive cause of
the evil which the schoolmen do call malum culpae; secondly that to their
objection who say, If I be elected, do what I will, I shall be saved, I had
answered that the will of God in this thing is not absolute but conditional to
save his elect believing, fearing, and obediently serving him; Thirdly that to
stop the mouths of such as grudge and repine against God for rejecting
castawaies, J had taught that they are not rejected no not in the purpose and
counsel of God, without a foreseen worthiness of reiection going, though not
in time, yet in order before. For if Gods electing do in order (as needs it
must) presuppose the foresight of their being that are elected though they be
elected before they be, nor only the positive foresight of their being but
also the permissiue of their being miserable, because election is through
mercy, and mercy does always presuppose misery: it follows that the very
chosen of God acknowledge to the praise of the riches of his exceeding free
compassion, that when he in his secret determination set it down Those shall
live and not die, they lay as ugly spectacles before him, as lepers covered
with dung and mire, as ulcers putrified in their fathers loins, miserable, worcester
thie to be had in detestation; and shall any forsaken creature be able to say
unto God, Thou did plunge me into the depth and assign me unto endless
torments only to satisfy thine own will finding nothing in me for which J
could seem in thy sight so well worthy to feel everlasting flames?

23 When J saw that Mr Travers carped at these things only because they lay not
open, J promised at some co^venient time to make them clear as light both to
him and all others. Which if they that reprove me will not grant me leave to
do, they must think that they are for some cause or other more desirous to
have me reputed an unsound man, then willing that my sincere meaning should
appear and be approved. When J was farther asked what my grounds were, J
answered that Saint Paul's words concerning this cause were my grounds. His
next demand, what Author J did follow in expounding Saint Paul and
gathering the doctrine out of his words, against the judgment, (he says) of
All Churches and All good writers. I was well assured that to control this
overreaching speech, the sentences which I might have cited out of Church
confessions, together with the best learned monuments of former times, and not
the meanest of our own, were mo in number then perhaps he would willingly have
hard of, but what had this booted me? For although he himself in generality
do much use those formal speeches All Churches and All good writers: yet as he
holds it in pulpit lawful to say in general the Painims think this, or the
Heathens that, but utterly unlawful to cite any sentence of theirs that say
it; so he gave me at that time great cause to think that my particular
alleging of other men's words to show their agreement with mine, would as much
have displeased his mind as the thing it self for which it had been
alleged. For he knows how often he has in public place bitten me for
this, although I did never in any sermon use many of the sentences of other
writers, and do make most without any, having always thought it meetest
neither to affect nor to contemn the use of them.

24 He is not ignorant that in the very entrance to the talk which we had
privately at that time, to prove it unlawful altogether in preaching either for
confirmation, declaration, or otherwise to cite any thing but mere canonical
scripture, he brought in The scripture is given by inspiration, and is
profitable to teach, improve, etc. Urging much the vigor of these two clauses
The man of God and every good work. If therefore the work were good which he
required at my hands, if privately to show why I thought the doctrine I had
delivered to be according to S. Paul's meaning were a good work, can they
which take the place before alleged for a law condemning every man of God who
in doing the work of preaching any way uses humane authority, like it in me
if in the work of strengthening that which I had preached, I should bring forth
the testimonies and the sayings of mortal men? I alleged therefore that which
might under no pretense in the world be disallowed namely reasons, not
meaning thereby my own reason as now it is reported, but true sound divine
reason; reason whereby those conclusions might be out of S. Paul demonstrated,
and not probably discoursed of only; reason proper to that science whereby the
things of God are known; Theological reason without principles in scripture
that are plain soundly deduceth more doubtful inferences, in such sort that
being hard they cannot be denied, nor any thing repugnant unto them received,
but whatsoever was before otherwise by miscollecting gathered out of dark
places, is thereby forced to yield it self, and the true co^sonant meaning of
sentences not understood is brought to light. This is the reason which I
intended. If it were possible for me to escape the Ferula in any thing I do or
speak, I had undoubtedly escaped it in this. In this I did that which by some
is inioined as the only allowable, but granted by all as the most sure and safe
way whereby to resolve things doubted of in matters appertaining to faith and
christian religion. So that Mr Travers had here small cause given him to be
weary of conferring, vnlesle it were in other respects then that poor one
which is here pretended, that is to say, the little hope he had of doing me
any good by conference.

25 Yet behold his first reason of not complaining to the high Commission is,
that since J offended only through an overcharitable inclination, he conceived
good hope, when J should see the truth cleared and some scruples which were in
my mind removed by his diligence, J would yield. But what experience soever he
had of former conferences, how small soever his hope was that fruit would come
of it if he should have conferred, will any man judge this a cause sufficient
why to open his mouth in public without any one word privately spoken? He
might have considered that men do sometimes reap where they sow but with
small hope; he might have considered that although unto me (whereof he was not
certain neither) but if to me his labor should be as water spilt or powered
into a torn dish, yet to him it could not be fruitless to do that which
order in Christian Churches, that which charity amongst Christian men, that
which at many men's hands even common humanity it self, at his many other
things besides did require. What fruit could there come of his open
contradicting in so great have with so small advise but such as must needs be
unpleasant and mingled with much acerbitie? Surely he which will take upon him
to defend that in this there was no oversight, must beware least by such
defenses, he leave an opinion dwelling in the minds of men that he is more
stiff to maintain what he has done, then careful to do nothing but that
which may justly be maintained.

26 Thus have J as near as I could, seriously answered things of weight, with
smaller I have dealt as J thought their quality did require. I take no joy in
striving, I have not been nozled or trained up in it. I would to Christ they
which have at this present enforced me hereunto had so ruled their hands in any
reasonable time, that I might never have been constrained to strike so much as
in mine own defense. Wherefore to prosecute this long and tedious contention
no further, shall I wish that your Grace and their HH. (unto whose intelligence
the dutiful regard which I have of their judgments makes me desirous that as
accusations have been brought against me, so that this my answer thereunto may
likewise come) did both with the one and the other, as Constantine with books
containing querulous matter. Whether this be co^venient to be wished or no, J
cannot tell. But since there can come nothing of contention, but the mutual
wast of the parties contending, til a common enemy dance in the ashes of them
both, I do wish heartily that the grave advise which Constantine gave for
reuniting of his Clergy so many times upon so small occasions in so
lamentable sort divided, or rather the strict commandment of Christ un to his
that they should not be divided at all, may at the length, if it be his blessed
will, prevail so far at the least in this corner of the Christian world to the
burying and quite forgetting of strife, together with the causes which have
either bred it or brought it up: that things of small moment never disioine
them, whom one God, one Lord, one faith, one spirit, one baptism, bands of so
great force have linked, that a respective eye toward things wherewith we
should not be disquieted make us not as through infirmity the very Patriarchs
themselves sometimes were, full gorged, unable to speak peaceably to their
own brother, finally that no strife may ever be hard of again but this, who
shall hate strife most, who shall pursue peace and unity with swiftest paces.

FINIS.

