A COPY OF THE SPEECH: MADE by the Mathematical Lecturer, unto the
Worshipful Company present.

At the house of the Worshipful M. Thomas Smith, dwelling in Gracious Street:
the 4. of November, 1588.

T. Hood

Imprinted at London by Edward Allde.

Auspicante Deo, 4. Nouembris 1588.
I Know not Right woorshipfull, and Gentlemen of singular expectation, whether
this present exercise which now we have in hand does breed in me a greter cause
of joy, or fear. When I consider with my self the malicious mind of ill
disposed men, who think no boat well rowed wherein they want an oar, I cannot
be but touched with fear. Again, when as I call to mind the great commodity
that will henceforth arise unto our Realm in that this day there is a platform
laid for the better increace of the Mathematical science, a science never
worthily to be commended, then do I begin to be somewhat glad, yea openly to
confess what secretly I do: I triumph in deed and leap for joy. But when I
see the burden of the thing to lie in my neck, and my self to sit in so
envied a place, then does my former fear return, and every joint well nigh
begin to shake. Again when sitting in this seat although envied, I cast mine
eye about to every corner of this Room, and see as yet none other here, but
either such as do desire to learn, and therefore cannot but wish me well,
whom they have chosen their instructor, or such as are already learned, and
therefore needs must love the thing whose woorthines they know, and also the
professors of ye same, I feel my joy renewed a fresh. The which my joy, Right
woorshipfull that it may continue still, till you your selves here present,
shall minister occasion otherwise (which your years, discretion, constancy,
and wisdom persuade me you will never do) I humbly request such favorable
attention and good will to the end of my speech, as you have given the
beginning. The which because I will not have it over long, I will set my self
certain limmets and bounds which I will not pass, dividing it into 2. several
parts. The one shall concearne the occasion of this exercise begun, the other
the commodity of the same: of these in as short a manner as I may. It is no
secret Right woorshipfull to any of you all, for we have seen them on our
coaste, and heard the thunder of their shot, in how cruel manner the proud
disdaynfull insolent Spaniard of late days has threatened our Cuntrie, Queen
and City, with fire and sword, and whatsoever outrageous torment else their
villainous mind could worse invent. The Citizens of London duetifull to their
Prince, to their Cuntrie loving, and careful of the City: made ready presently
for their defense a band of men, in number not great, yet for the time
sufficient, til farther danger called for a fresh supply. The men thus levied
required Captains, for what is the body without an head, or the Scholars
without a Master, or soldiers wanting such as might instruct them in feats
of war? The Citizens, chiefly those, who both for their wisdom, and
experience were best able to judge, and for their fatherly care they have most
provident to foresee what kind of government is best for this City, those
Citizens I say did think it good to choose out Captains among themselves, to
whom they might commit this military care. Yet least they should presume too
much upon their own devise, or rashly seem to contemn the warlike policy of
other men, they acquaint her Majesty with the thing. Her Majesty as she is
always glad to gratify her subjects in their honest petitions, so in this she
showed her self willing to satisfy their minds, being induced thereto by the
grave advise of her honorable Council. Heervpon, these and diverse other
woorshipfull Gentlemen, were chosen Captains, their Soldiers were trained, and
trained in such sort as few indeed or none were better, so the event ensuing
did declare. For this we see, Right woorshipfull, that envy never follows
the worser sort. Summa petit liuor says the Poet, Perflantquae altissima
venti, and what needs disgrace where the thing is bad? Our Captains were
sought to be disgraced, I need say no more, judge you your selves now what
men they were, seeinge enuies blast does always beat the highest hills. But
be it so to avoid contention, and because comparisons are always odious, our
Captains themselves are willing to deny their deserte. They acknowledge that,
which their ill willers object, they have not encamped in open feelde, nor
besieged towns, nor raised sconses, nor battered walls, nor burnte and
spoiled Cities as they have done, for why? neither their years, nor calling,
nor trade of life has so required: Yet have they virtuous and valiant minds,
they love their Cuntrie, they honor their Prince, they care for this City, and
they have knowledge not to be contemned, till tract of time affoordeth
experience. Now that these their virtues may increace, and also their learning
be enlarged, and they more fit for experience to come, it pleased them (diverse
grave, wise and pollitick men, giving encouragement thereunto) for their private
instruction to erecte a lecture for ye mathematical science, a knowledge most
convenient for military men. But here some men perhaps will say, what
needs this cost? what? those famous Captains of ours now in the low
Cuntries, or those of ancient time before, whose notable prowese is left in
writing, were they trained up in this kind of learning which you have named,
and highlye commend? In truth Right woorshipfull it is hard to avouch this of
all them that are and have been entitled with this warlike name, yet am I not
ignorant what to answer. I acknowledge, and confess, that there have been
many of noble virtue and excellent minds, who without learning by their divine
and heavenly nature alone have showed themselves worthy and valiant men yea
also I co^descend to this, ye oftentimes nature without learning, is more
auailable to virtue and renown, then learning without nature, yet
notwithstanding this I must needs affirm, that when to a notable and excellent
inclination of nature there is joined the devise and help which learning
breeds, then springs up that singular and peerless man, whom you and I
may better in mind concieue, then utter in words. Such was Scipio Affrycanus
the Roman Captain, a mortal God, such was Cato that valiant and learned
old man, and many more, who questionless if they could have received no
help by learning, either in attaining to virtue, or enlarging their name: they
would never have followed the study thereof. Thus have you breeflye heard ye
cause why this lecture was ordained and for whom, with the answer made to an
objection concerning the same. It follows now Right woorshipfull and courteous
auditors, to displaye the commodities of our profession namely of Astronomy,
Arithmeticke, and Geometry: contained under the title of the mathematical
arts, which thing I presently would enter into, were it not that I had a few
words to utter concerning my self, for it may be peradventure that some of
you do wonder with your selves considering your universities abound and swarm
with learned doctors, why I especially by degree but a Master of art, should
occupy this place, who neither for years, nor learning, nor experience, seem
any way comparable unto them. What then? am I bolder then they all? no
forsooth. What am I more officious then the rest? no neither, I am not so
desirous of that praise, that I would withdraw it from other men. But thus it
is: other men though indeed better learned then I and of higher degree, yet
seeing the envy of the place, and not being called theru^to: withold
themselves. I not like to be so much envied, as being inferior in degree: have
ventured on the thing, moreover those parties have requested it at my hands
who both for acquaintance and great good will, and woorshipfull countenance
might have commanded a greater thing, whose pleasure for so much as I would
not withstand it, nor neglect their request, nor refuse their good turn, I
have submitted my neck to the burden. Which though it seem too heavy for me
to bear, yet shall you not see me shrink thereat, whilste you your selves are
willing to learn, which so long you ought to be willing to do, until it
repent you of the profit.

This proffit the better to understand what it will be, I will now hasten to
the last part of my speech, requesting heerin also your attentive ear,
although I think it a needless request, in that you have so favorably heard
me hitherto. Wherein Right woorshipfull I will labor to be brief, I say I
will labor to be brief, for that I know the worthiness of these arts to
be such, that it is an harder matter to find an end in commending the same,
then a beginning to their praise. For what soever several co^mendations there
are in other things in this profession: they all concur and meet together.
If either antiquity of any art may magnify the same, or the professors
thereof bring credit thereto, or the wonderful effects and strange devises
extol the thing, or the subject matter set forth the praise, then shall the
mathematics surpass them all: they were invented before all other, imbrased
by Kings and wisest men, strange in devises and effects, and for the subject
matter they have the world. Their antiquity is fet from our creation.

Nam cum prona spectent animalia caetera terram
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre
Iussit, et erectos ad sidera toll re vultus.
To this intent were our eyes, and bodies framed as you see, that not looking
groueling on the ground as senseless beasts, but lifting up our face to
heaven we might behold, and in beholding learn the wonderful mysteries
contained therein. For Right Woorshipfull: there is more required of us men
concerning heaven, the^ the only view of the outward frame: the beasts
themselves can view the thing, they can behold it as well as we, but we must
tread the footsteppes of Adam and Seth his Son, whose study was continual
in these things, yea they had such a care thereof, that knowing the proffit
exceeding great and foreseeing both the flood to come, and also the consuming
of the world by fire, they left the secrets of their arts engraven curiously
in two Pillars, one of Brick, the other of brass, that if ye world were burnt
the brick might last, if it were drowned, ye brass might continue the
perpetual memory of that which they knew. It is too long to run through all
those men, whose affection was singular to these kind of studies

Abraham is renowned for his knowledge therein, and Jacob also, whose staff we
use. The Egiptians learning these arts of Abraham, found afterward such
singularity therein, that it was a decree for ever with them, that none should
govern among the^ as King, that had no insight in this learning, whose Law
the Persians also followed. From Egypt: it flowed over Affricke like Nilus
flood, and after went over sea into Greece, from Greece it was translated to
Rome, from Rome to Germany, France, and Spain, and now at length after many
years England does lend it a listening ear, and as I hope will yield it
also a loving heart. At Rome Julius Caesar made the Calender which we use, in
Greece Plato by that art did stay the plague in doubling the altar of Apollo.
In Affricke King Atlas did so toil therein. that the Poets laid the heaven in
his neck, and made him as a pillar to hold it up. Archimedes played the
Devil thereby in the Romain host, and kept them all at such a baye, that they
durst not come near Syracusa, neither by Land nor yet by Sea, Dionysius the
King he sent for Plato to be his Master in this science, and made bonfiers for
joy of his coming, Alfonsus King of Aragon spent a mighty sum of money
heerin, and makes us beholding to him still and shall be for ever. Ptolomie
took such pains herein, that the whole world enioyes his travel. If then
Right woorshipfull, the students in this science were such famous men, imagine
the excellency of the study, which also they commended unto us by singular
works. I mean not your Cathedral Churches, or place of Exchange, or other
statelye buildinges whatsoever, whose stillest stone is the sounding Trumpet of
this profession, but they left behind them manifold other rare devises, to
sight wonderful, incredible to ye ear, yet to ear and sight exceeding
pleasant. Suppose, for what cannot the mind devise? suppose I say, that over
your head there flewe a Dove, not such a feathered foul as commonly we keep,
but a Dove of wood, such a one as Archytas made. Put case you saw here Vulcanes
treuets, which made of Iron could fight alone: and set them selves in battle
raye, retiring and marching orderly. What if you saw Daedalus in the air? or
Archimedes Sphere turning alone? would you not wonder at these things? Yes no
doubt, and wondering, thirst after the knowledge of that art, which daily
affoordes such strange conceits.

These be no fables that I tell, our present age affirms them true. Who has
not heard of the brazen Cock in Strasborowe town, as I remember, which
croweth alowd 3. times a day: wherein the heavenly Orbs do move alone? Who
has not seen our Clock in Paul's, or such small pieces of work as this?
which being but small in regard of the rest, bring great commendations to
these arts. Here again me think, I hear one say, indeed these toys
delight men's eyes, but I desire to see some use, or some commodity fit for a
common weal: this question Right woorshipfull, I could answer with an other,
altogether as foolish as it. What profit has the Diamond on your finger, for
which you gave an hundred pound? you can not answer me at a blush, except you
aleadge your pleasure alone. But I will not cross this objection thus, I will
answer directly thereunto, although the pleasure might suffice, as being a
study pleasant in youth, delightful to age, beautiful in prosperity,
releeuing our adversity, and yielding us comfort, it pleasureth at home, it
hinders not abroad, it watches with us, and trauelleth with us up and down,
and does us service every where. The mind is able Right woorshipfull, to
conceive that which the bodily eye cannot see, the eye can behold more then
the tung can express, yet devise with your mind, and cast your sight about,
and try if you can either spy with your eye, or think in your mind what
thing is free from the use of these arts. Look up if you please to the heaven
above, or turn your eye down to earth beneath, or round about to the
wandering Sea, think on your wars, and traffic abroad, or other your
private affairs at home, your business at home, your wares abroad, your
traffic beyond sea, the earth beneath you, the Sea about you, the heaven
above you is fully fraught with the praise heerof. In heaven Astronomye does
reign as Queen, commanding all the secrets thereof, and laying them open to
our eyes. Yet Astronomye is but a part of this science, whose proffit
notwithstanding is wonderful great. What can be compared to the knowledge of
God, which is the butte and end of our creation? next to the ordenary means of
our instruction, I mean his word, the art of astronomye does cheefely
breed the knowledge of him. First in considering the number of the heavens,
which being 10. are so cunningly wrought and knit together, that the hand of
man is not able to counterfeite the woorste of them all, without some blemish,
either swelling outward, or dented in, their rowndnesse is such, so precize, so
perfect, so correspondent to it self. If then the fashion be so strange, and
broedeth this proffit, what may we conceive of the wonderful course, which
rolling about without any rest, is an higher step to the foresaid
knowledge. Of these 10. Spheres or Orbs, there are not two whose natural
course precizelye bends one manner of way. Some run from East to West, and
others again from West to East, an other in trembling manner from North to
South, reuersed back from South to North. The Nethermost 7. from west to East
in such a sundry and manifold course, that neither the one is like the other,
nor in many years scarce like themselves, yet all so certain in their race,
that neither the time does breed an error, nor yet their number a confusion.
Which constancy of course being well known to Dionysius Areopagita an heathen
man, it made him cry out when our Savior Christ was nailed to the Cross,
(though he him self were then in Egypt) that then, either the God of nature
did suffer, or the frame of this world did break a sunder: because against
the order and time of natural course, he saw the Moon eclipse the Sun.
Seeing then Astronomye leads us to the knowledge of God, that were proffit
enough if it had no more: but this commodity is not alone, for as this is the
welfare of the soul: so does it woork our bodies good: as physic can witness
sufficiently, which taking care of this our body, can warrant us nothing
without this art. For if it does not deligently observe the face of heaven in
ministering potions or opening veins, it may serve us as Paris did Achilles at
Troy, whose prick in the heel did pearse his heart. What shall I say of
Navigations the cheifest pillar of your gain? how much does Astronomy help
therein? whose launching forth and haling in, and restless course both too and
fro is surely guided by this heavenly art, though Sea does roar, and winds
do rage, and heaven and earth should meet together. As for the tilling of the
ground or whatsoever else the Cuntrie does, it is as much for it to want this
Art, as Vulcanes forge to lack his fire, or Apelles shop his colors and
oil: I would not have you measure each thing by the price, for commonly
scholars are not covetous men. There is among you a little book, the
Almanacke I mean usually bought for a penny or two, if it were wanting but a
time, I guess it would be worth a pound. Right woorshipfull I will use your
patience a little longer, because I see you give such attentive ear: You have
heard what great commodity Astronomy yields, being but a part of the
Mathematical science, there are other two as good as it, harken also what
profit they bring, Arithmeticke namely teaching the art of number, and
Geometry the knowledge of measuring well. Believe me, for why I speak the
thing I know, being daily conversant in those parts, and having conference
with many me^, there is no calling whatsoever that can want the aid of one of
these. Perhaps you will except Astronomy, because the heaven seems very high
beyond the reach of rule and compass. Our Globes and Spheres and celestial
draughts, which here we have, will witness the falsehood of that exception,
wherein each several star is so truly pricked that they miss not an hair
of their natural place. Then if Geometry reach so high that it can justly
measure the Cope of heaven: no doubt on earth it performs most excellent
things. Let Geographie witness in universal Mappes, let Topographie witness
in several Cards, let Hydrographie witness in the Mariners plat, you your
selves may witness in Martial affairs, let the Gunner witness in planting
his shot, witness the Surveior in measuring land, witness all those, that
labor in mines, and those that practice conueying of water, whose skill being
told us, we would scarsely believe it, were it not lying at our doors. The
Lawyer thinks him self cunning enough to handle his case, and therefore would
laugh, if he should here, that he stands in need of our profession, yet have
I known his sentence reclaimed by one of my coat. Divinity contains matter
of salvation, and nothing is superfluous in the word of God, yet can it not be
expounded without these arts, else let them describe the feast of Easter, or
iustefie the historye of the three wise men. If you your selves were not
Merchant men, I would tell you what proffit you reap heerby, but your daily
experince saves me that labor. The Scholar in reading of his Poet must have
this help, or else perhaps he may quickly be posed. The Historiographer must
not want these arts, nor he that reads the history penned, or else their
labor and light may be lost. (...) It was the sentence Right woorshipfull
auditors of Plato the wise set over his School, whereby he forbad them the
entrance in, that were no^t capable of this learning, for as it is pretely, so
it is truly said by one Vt ignis aurum, ita Mathemataeca ingenium, The
Mathematickes are unto the wit, as fire is to the gold, and he that in some
measure is not capable thereof, is fitter for a stie, then for a study.
Persuade your selves Captains of excellent hope, for now I turn my speech to
you, for whose commodity this thing is intended, persuade your selves I say,
that there is some notable thing in this kind of study, that is not common to
other arts, else could it not breed such exceeding joy in the lovers thereof, as
we see it does. Thales the Philosopher offered up an Ox for joy, and Plato an
hundred having found out certain Geometrical conclusions. Archimedes sifting
out the Goldesmithes deceipte in making of King Hiero his Crown, could not
contain him self for joy, but ran as he was stark naked through the street
Aristippus suffering shipwreck on the coast of Rhodes found described in the
sand Geometrical figures, wherein he took such singular comfort, that
forgetting his loss, and cause of sorrow: he cried out thus unto his fellows,
be of good cheer my mates quoth he, for lo I see the footesteppes of men. If
then noble Captains and loving Scholars, (for now I am bold to use that
name) If the commodities of our profession be so great as nothing more, if the
pleasure be without comparison, if these be the footsteppes of men wherein you
must tread, whose very sight may counteruaile your sorrow, if you have a care
of your honorable name, if you think it a foul disgrace for want of knowledge
to be circumuented, as Haniball was by Fabivs Maximus, or as Cyrus the King by
Tomiris the Queen: If it be the hazard of your life and name in skaling a
forte to bring a Ladder too short by the half, as King Phillip did, whereby he
cast away all his men: if you loathe to have your inferior Soldiers triumph
over you for want of art, as Palamedes did over Agamemnon the King, begin
better seen in marshalling his men: to be short, If you think it a blessed
thing, to compass the world, and return again enriched with gold, or if you
tender your credit in any respect which ought to be more deer then gold, now
have an especial care unto the same. Let not ye thing begun to your honor be
intermitted to your disgrace, so many woorshipfull men bearing witness thereof,
but buckle your selves to purchase knowledge, that by your endeavor out of this
place, as out of the Greekish Horse at Troy, many worthy, wise, and learned
Captains may proceed. Your cost is small, your pains as little, for all the
labor shall be mine, your profit great: your comfort more, there wantes but
will, which if you bring, upon my credit, God going before whom I beseech to
bless our studies, you shall not think your time (...) but be beholding as to
this Gentlem^^ (...) place, so unto me for taking pains.

Dixi.

