THE SAFEGUARD OF THE SOVLE.

DECLARING SUNDRY SOVEREIGN salues tending to the comfort and salvation of the
same: Very necessary to be learned and observed of all men, and at all times,
but chiefly in the extremity of Sickness, and grievous pangs of DEATH.

Composed by Lawrence Banks, Preacher of the Word of God: and Parson of
Staunton, in the County of Gloucester.

JOB 14. 14. All the days of mine appointed time will I wait, till my
changing shall come. LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Clarke, and are to be
sold under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1619.

TO THE CHRISTIAN AND GENTLE REAder, and specially to my own Parishioners of
Drowfeild and Staunton, of whom I have had Charge, and to whom I wish salvation
and safety of soul in Christ Jesus.
GOod Christian Reader, I have led my life above forty years in two several
places, to wit, in Drowfeild, in the County of Darby, of which Church I was
Vicar fifteen years; and at this present in Staunton in the County of
Gloucester, wherein I do now live, and have been resident these twenty and
seven years. In the former place my Charge was great and wide, and being
occasioned oftentimes (as duty required) to visit the Sick there, and in some
other places near adjoining: whereof some were Lunatike, and troubled in their
passions and extremities: Others, I found fearful of Death and Damnation, and
therefore to have need of ghostly counsel and comfort in their molestations and
perplexities: and finding not much matter of that Subject in the visitation of
the Sick, contained in the Book of Common Prayer, to comfort and bridle their
outrageous humors and maladies: I bethought my self, it were expedient for
me to invent and devise, by Gods assistance, some necessary help, both for
mine own use, and for more full discharge of my duty in such cases. And
therefore not daring to presume of my self, either to pray or persuade of the
sudden in such fearful and lamentable accidents: I presently devised to my
simple skill, to invent and dispose partly of my self, and partly by
collection out of other Authors, such matter, and observe such method therein,
as might be to the better performance of my duty toward God, the quieting of
the afflicted soul, the comfort of my dear flock, and also some help to such
of mine own Calling, as were at that time as ignorant as my self. And
hereupon I took me to my pen and paper, and so did set down this plain and
simple Treatise in writing, which for the most part thereof has lain by me
many years, serving only mine own turn in time of need, and as occasion
was offered. And albeit I had thought never to have published or committed it
to the Press in my life time; yet now being old, and not so well able to
perform mine Office in the Pulpit, and otherwise, as I have been in times
past, by reason that my sight and memory, with other powers of nature fail
me; I thought good to avoid idleness, to reuiew and present this small volume
to you my fore said flocks, and to offer you a little taste of my first
fruits, and so to leave behind me in writing some pledge and taken of my love
toward you, whereby you may the better remember me, when the mould has
covered my body, and the Magots and Worms consumed my frail flesh. And if any
others besides you shall be quickened and strengthened thereby in their greatest
griefs, and last combats, I shall in heart be most glad, and think my
pains the better bestowed: And therefore have been bold to offer this my myte
to God and your charitable acceptance and allowance: Humbly craving pardon, if
in any point I have given occasion of offense or mislike, in omitting any part
of my duty therein, either toward God and your selves, or in committing any
offense unto others that are more learned and judicial them my self, who
willingly acknowledge mine own want and infirmity in these my last and
declining years: and therefore submit my self to the censure of those which
are of riper wit, and profounder knowledge; for I speak not to them, but to
the unlearned and simple sort like my self. Wherefore as I have plainly set it
forth, only for the instruction and comforts of the ignorant and afflicted: So
(I beseech thee gentle Reader) to permit it to pass with out thy curious
carping, pardoning therein any fault or defect wherein I have failed, and
friendly accepting my good meaning toward the afflicted Soul, and troubled
Conscience, for whose sake I have published it to the view of the world, which
I framed first only for the use of mine own flock: whose safeguard and
salvation. I tender in my heart; and so commit them and the Reader to Christ
Jesus.

Your Pastor in times past, and your well-willer ever even until death, L. B.

THE SAFEGUARD OF THE SOVLE:
Declaring sundry sovereign salues, tending to the comfort and salvation of
the same: very necessary to be regarded of all men, especially in the time of
their Visitation and grievous pangs of Death.
A Preparatiue for the Sick.
BEfore I search the sinews of the souls safety, or enter in to the Bowels
of this Book; I have thought good in stead of a Preface, to set down a
Preparatiue or premeditation to the mind of Man, to move him to be careful
and vigilant for the safety of his soul, even then when he feels himself
at rest, in health, and perfect remembrance, before the weight of Christ Cross
be laid upon him, and before he be visited either in body or mind.

First, it is meet for every man, be he never so big, and look he never so
high, to persuade himself, that he has two daily Seruitors or Secretaries
attending upon him, from which he can never be freed, during the date of his
days, until his life be ended, and his doom take place.

The one is without thee,

The other is within and unfolds the secrets of thy soul, and inwardly
bewrays all thy thoughts, words, and works.

These two are destinate to all men, and cannot be avoided.

First, Death cannot be escaped, for he is always at thine elbow; yea,
peradventure he is then nearest thee in thy bosom, hacking at thy heart, when
thou think least of him: for, in the midst of life, we be in death. We are
no sooner borne, but, Mors est in limine, Death is at the threshold. And yet
many one thinks himself to be in health and safety, even then when he
bears Death in his heart, and hell in his Conscience.

It is good therefore for every man to be in a readiness every moment, lest
Death cite him on the sudden, and so he be taken tardie in his sins: For
this Messenger has not any respect either of person, people, or place: He
regards no more the Princes Palace, then the poor man's Cotage: a blunt
Messenger, and therefore goes bluntly and boldly to work with us; his
condition is, come he early, come he late, he will give neither day, nor
hour, but speedily and readily he will dispatch his errant, and serve such a
Sub poena upon us, that he will have our personal appearance, before the
eternal Judge, without surety, bail, or mayne-prize.

He will not be bribed of the Rich; he will not be entreated of the Poor; he
weighs not friendship; he cares not for rewards; he will pardon no person,
be he never so mighty; he fears no man's face, look he never so lofty; there
is but a word and a blow with him; he kills down right where he hitteth.

Let us therefore keep our selves continually in that estate wherein we desire
to die: for although this Messenger come, and tell us not when he will fetch
us, whether in our nonage, middle age, old age, or dotage; yet
notwithstanding, our merciful and good God by diverse means does warn and
summon us before, by other Messengers.

Gods summoners before Death, are four. First, his preachers exhort us.
Secondly, his plagues do threaten us. Thirdly, old age admonishes us.
Fourthly, Sickness calls us.


Finally, death arresteth us, and takes us with him. And then the earth whereof
we are made, deuoureth us, Magots breed upon us, corruption rotteth us, and the
Worms eat us. This is the life and end of all flesh good and bad. The body
then putrifyeth and consumes to dust: But the Spirit returns to Eccl. 12. 7.
the Lord which gave it.

Now when Death is about to do his office, which is, to separate the Soul and
the Body of Man: Then our second order, and to prepare our selves to appear
before the celestial Judge: Then our Conscience (which is a continual
beholder of all our thoughts, words and works) as a clear light or Lantern
bewrays all our former life and conversation: it is the very Register of God,
and book (...) Record, which discloseth all our counsels, and reuealeth the
inward secrets of our hearts: for there is nothing hid, that Mar. 4. 22.
shall not be opened: neither is there a secret, but that it shall come to light.
Can there be any thing hid from the Highest? Do nor his eyes pierce our hearts?
Is not he the searcher of Secrets, and Discerner of spirits? Yes verily, he
that will not now believe it, must one day both find it, and feel it.

The thickest Trees in Paradise could not hide our first Parents Adam and Eve
from the presence of God. They both appear at the first call, even naked as
they were; their Figgeleaues will not serve their turn; their vain excuses
will do them no good; the more they go about to cloak their sin, the more
lively it appears; yea, their own Conscience accuses them, and causes them
to make confession of their fact, will they, nill they.

We cannot then hide our sins, because which way soever we go, our
conscience accompanies us; it is our Porter, carring with it whatsoever we
have done, be it good or bad; it judges all our words and works, and
pronounces inward sentence of us all: it is a Worm always biting, and never
dying: it is a fire always burning, and never quenching: for immediately after
the committing of sin, the Conscience of the sinner is his Accuser, his
Witness, his Judge, and his Hangman.

Therefore when thine own Conscience bewrays thee, and provoke a feeling
of sin: think then with thy self, God speaks unto thee: for that inward
feeling of thy sin, is as it were the peculiar and prerogative Court of God,
whereby he exercises his jurisdiction: Beware therefore lest thou being
guilty, do harden thy heart; for that is all one, as to kick against God,
and resist the motion of his holy Spirit, when we reject such cogitations as
are prouocations and summoners unto Repentance: when God therefore by his holy
Spirit knocks at the door of thine heart, and moves any such motion, either
to embrace this Virtue, or avoid that Vice, thou had best open unto him at
first call, and let him in: for if he call thee now, thou can not tell
whether he will call again or no: and if he open thee the gate of his Grace
to day, and will thee friendly to enter in, thou can not tell whether ever
he will open it again, or never. Thy contempt and unthankfulness may move
him in his wrath to shut the door upon thee for ever: and then thou will
repent, but all too late.

Remember Christ's words: When the good man Luke 13. 25
of the house is risen, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to stand
without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, and he
shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are: Depart from me,
all 27,
ye workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when
ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the
Kingdom of God, and your selves thrust out at doors.

These are words of weight, and able to pierce a stony heart, most fearful to
impenitent sinners, when they shall behold a far off with the rich surfeiting
Glutton the happy estate of the godly in Heaven in Abraham's bosom, and
themselves to be thrust out into utter darkness, and so to take their leave and
last farewell of God, his Angels, and all the joys of Heaven for ever, never
to meet again, nor once to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, or of his
Saints: the deep consideration hereof, is able to shake the Conscience, to
burst the heart of a sinner, and end his days, if any feeling of Gods Spirit
be in him.

It is good therefore to have the testimony of a clear Conscience
accompanying thee even to thy grave: that when thou shall appear before Christ
his Throne of just judgment, it may be a witness with thee of thy wealth, and
not to thy woe; a defender of thy purity, and not an Accuser of thine
iniquity: a iustifier of thy Righteousness, and not a condemner of thy
Wickedness.

Pray to God betime, that it may be thy Helper, as it was to Paul, and not thy
2. Cor. 1. 12.
Hangman, as it was to Judas.

It is not to be spoken what a sure and singular Treasure a good Conscience
will be at that day; it shall stand steadfast by thy side as thy dearest friend,
when all the world shall be set on a flaming fire, above thee, beneath thee,
and on every side thee: when the elements shall melt with heat: when the
ungodly shall be at their wits end: when men's hearts shall fail them: when
the Sea and waters shall rore: when heaven and earth shall perish: when all thy
goods and gold shall be turned to dross and Copper: when all thy Lands and
riches forsake thee; yea when all thy friends and kinsfolk fail thee, as they
did Job in his greatest extremity.

Therefore let this present Preparatiue be a sufficient caveat for thee, to be
careful and circumspect for the comfort of thy Conscience, and safety of thy
soul. And so I will proceed to the visitation of the Sick: Wherein

First, we must note, that commonly God does visit before man, and so by Gods
Visitation, occasion is given to man, brotherly and charitably o visit one
another for their comfort.

God does visit us diverse ways.
1. Sometime by loss of worldly wealth, Goods, Lands, Offices, Dignities, etc.
especially when we are too proud of them, or abuse them: then he pulls down
one, and sets up another.

2. Sometime by persecutions or manifold troubles of our deadly foes, as
private Grudges, open Wars, Slanders, Suites in Law, etc.

3. Sometime God does visit us by punishing our bodies with sickness, lamenes,
blindness, ach, penury, famine, or other calamities, whereby we feel
intolerable pain and torment; and all this is not unworthily, but deservedly.

4. Sometime in Mind, by taking away our senses, wit, reason, memory and
understanding: or by taking from us our dearest and nearest friends; as our
Parents, Husband, Wife, Children, Brethren, Sisters, etc. which under God are
our greatest comfort in this world: and by this means we are vexed in Mind,
our souls are sad, and we wonderfully troubled, and so had need of some
comfortable counsel to cure us in this case.

In Gods Visitation consider three things.
In body, 1. The Sickness. 2. The Physician. 3. The Medicine.
In mind, 1. Our Sickness is sin. 2. Our Physician is God. 3. Our Medicine is
repentance, restitution, almesdeeds, prayer and patience.

The first Duty of the Pastor.
THE first Office or Duty of the Minister, is fatherly, and yet familiarly to
confer and reason with the Sick person. For as the Physicion of the body most
perfectly perceives the state of his Patient, by questioning with him, by
seeing his state, and feeling his Pulses: even so the Physicion of the soul,
if he understand the mind and affection of the Sick person, he may the better
apply his exhortation to

The Sum of this Book.
The Medicine or curing of our Diseases, pertains to two sorts of Persons. 1.
The one is the Minister or Pastor, who ought willingly to visit. The duty of
the Minister when he visits, consists chiefly in four things:
First, in questioning with the Sick person, whereby he may feel how he is
inclined and affectioned toward God, and so apply a fit plaster to his sore.
Secondly, in faithful and zealous Prayer for the party visited, both public
and private. Thirdly, in godly counsel, in admonishing the Sick by his wise
discretion, according as he sees occasion. Fourthly, in comforting the pensive
person, or sobbing soul, whose Conscience is laden with the remembrance of
sin, and whose body is tormented with grief of sickness.
2. The other is the Person visited, who ought to give diligent ear unto the
Minister. The duty of the sick Person consists in three things.
First, in the confession of his Faith and protestation of the same, before the
Minister and others standing by, that they may be witnesses with him of his
Christian and godly end. Secondly, in faithful and hearty Prayer unto God,
either to recover his health, or else a happy deliverance out of his pain.
Thirdly, in bearing his sickness patiently, without grudging or murmuring
against God, who sends it for our amendment.


1. In the first part of this Book, I will speak of the Pastor, and his
Office in visiting. 2. In the second, the duty of the People visited.
the comfort of his Conscience, and amendment of life.

Questions be of two sorts. 1. Some be temporal. 2. Others spiritual.

Examples of Temporal Questions.
Quest. 1. NOW, good Brother, God bless you. How is it with you? How do you?
etc.

Answ. Well, Sir, I thank God, but I take no rest; by reason of the extremity
of my pain in this my sickness, and lack of sleep, my memory and
understanding (I praise God for it) is yet perfect and good, but my body is
sore visited and tormented: God of his mercy, in time when it shall please him,
assuage it, and in the mean season grant me patience to bear it.

Quest. 2. You say well, truly, and as becomes a good Christian, and I am
glad to hear such godly words proceed from you, as taste so sweetly of the
Spirit of God, for they signify how well you are affectioned and minded to
Godward: And therefore assure your self, that with the Omnipotent Physician,
there is no disease or pain incurable. As God does send it for your good, no
doubt: So he can assuage or take it quite away at his pleasure: we are in the
Lords hand, as the clay in the Potters, to do with us, whatsoever his pleasure
is: for sickness is the loving rod of our heavenly Father, wherewithal he does
chastise our sins, that we may the better know our own frailety, and our
duty toward his Majesty; therefore you are to think that this bodily grief
of Sickness, after a time of trial, shall turn to your greater joy and
comfort. Tell me, truly, are you not thus persuaded?

Answ. Yes verily, I have always been of that mind, I thank my heavenly
Father for it; and I pray God continue me in the same to my lives end: for I
wish not to live longer, then I may acknowledge my Maker to be both an
omnipotent Lord* and my merciful God.

Quest. 3. I pray God preserve you, and keep you in that mind to your lives end.

Sir, I understand, and partly I know of my self, that you are a man whom God
has blessed with abundance of worldly substance: But because lands and goods
are oftentimes the cause of much strife and unquietness, by reason of the
inordinate covetousness and greedy desire of man: it were good to set your house
in order now, before your departure, like a good householder, which when he
goes from home any whither, he sets all his things in order among his
Family and people, tells them his will, what is to be done, and so
commending them to God, takes his leave, and bids them farewell until his
return. So you being now taking your journey toward Heaven a far Country,
bid adieu to the world, and take your leave thereat willingly and orderly as a
good Christian ought to do: That is, dispose your Temporal goods as may be
most to Gods glory, the commodity and comfort of your Wife and Children, and
others your friends, to whom you wish well, and to your own salvation and
discharge before God, at whose hands you have received them, and to whom you
must give an account for them. So that this being done, your reckoning is the
sooner made, your Conscience discharged, and the world satisfied: neither need
you to be further troubled with worldly matters, if God lay his hand more
heavily upon you, but only think of heavenly things. Tell me therefore have
you made your Will?

Answ. I have made none yet, but I purpose to do hereafter, if I feel my
self far wrong.

Quest. 4. O good Brother, you must think that you are already far wrong, and
far from right and reason too, if you defer the disposing of your temporal
things until the last gasp, when peradventure both your speech and memory
shall fail you: now you may and will not, then you would and perhaps cannot:
many have so done and repented too late, even then when it had bin more fit to
have minded heavenly things only. Therefore (I beseech you) take the good time
and occasion which God presently offers: if he give you life and memory this
day, or this week, you know not whether you shall have it the next week or
no: if you put the good time off, which GOD has given you, and defer your
business till this day, or that day, or until this friend come, or that
kinsman be present; then peradventure your friends shall come too late, and you
your self be cut short of your purpose: Therefore beware in the Name of God
betime, for you know not whether God will give you the like occasion again or
no: you may purpose, but God will dispose both you and your wealth as he will:
when you are once gone, your riches are none of yours, but the worlds, and are
at the disposition of other men, who by corruption may deal unfaithfully, and
so contrary to your will, your substance which you have swea^ for, may come to
those that neither need them, nor did ever deserve well at your hands in your
life time: too many at this day know this to be true by experience, and have
lamented their state all too late, when they could not remedy it: Therefore
never put that thing in doubt, which may be out of doubt.

Answ. Lord, Lord, see how forgetful men be of their duty in time of their
Sickness! I beseech you Sir, bear with my weakness: I confess I was out of
the way in this point, but you have brought me unto it, and to a further
consideration of my state: I must needs say your counsel is good and
comfortable: and therefore I were a very unreasonable person, if I should not
be ordered by you to mine own good. Wherefore I purpose now (God willing) to
do as you have said, with your better advice, and others of my friends. And
therefore I pray you take pains to set my mind down in writing: and so that
matter being dispatched, I will then commend my self both body and soul
unto God the giver of all goodness, and the Author of life.

Here the Minister may persuade the Testator to impart some portion of his
substance to the Poor, to Schools, exhibition of Scholars, Churches,
Colleges, Bridges, Highwayes, and other public commodities, as shall seem to
him most expedient for the time, the place, the ability, and state of the
person; for hereupon in times past have proceeded such works of Charity, and
large liberality toward the Church and godly uses, which now is pilled, and
little regarded.

Quest. 5. Here (good Brother) you are furthermore deeply to consider and
ponder with your self, how you have come by your wealth, directly or
indirectly, lawfully or unlawfully: if honestly and according to your Vocation
or Art, you are the more to rejoice in Conscience, and your account before God
is sooner made: if not, but that you have gotten them by fraud, deceit, lying,
forging, flattering, swearing, forswearing of your self, briberie, polling and
pilling of the poor, cruelty, Usury, Extortion or Oppression, gaming,
cheating and the like, as too many do at this day: Then you are the more
deeply charged before the Judgment seat of God, and the testimony of your
own Conscience, and you must endeavor your self to make satisfaction so near
as you may: for that ancient rule of the Father is true, Non remittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: That is, the sin is not pardoned, except
restitution be made, as Zacheus did, who heard not that sweet sentence of
Christ, This day is Salvation Luke 19. 8.
come to this house, before he had made restitution.

Tell me therefore (good Brother) are you willing to recompense every one whom
you have wronged or deceived, and to restore your evil gotten goods with just
Zacheus, to the uttermost of your power, and validity of your wealth?

Answ. God forbid else, for it is meet and right that all men should so do;
but I know not any whom I have in such sort defrauded: if any man find
himself injured by me, I am willing even with all my heart to satisfy him to
the uttermost farthing: And therefore my desire is, that notice be given
thereof to the whole Congregation in the Church this next Sunday, with my
hearty request that they would commend me to God in their faithful Prayers:
And if any debt be due, either to be paid by me to them, or by them to me,
whereof we have no specialtie, that they would come to me, because I am now
Gods Prisoner, and am not able to repair to them. And I pray you (good Sir)
publish my mind herein, and advertise me in all other things which you think
necessary for the salvation of my Soul, and my full discharge before God and
the world.

Quest. 6. You have well done (good Brother) and have showed your self a
faithful Steward of Gods blessings, in disposing your self and your substance
so well toward God and the world: for here you found them, and here you must
leave them.

Furthermore, seeing all things here on earth are but fickle; as Offices,
Dignities, Wife, Children, Friends, Goods, Gold and Possessions; are you not
willing to forsake these worldly vanities, and transitory trash, and to change
the same for heavenly joy and felicity?

Answ. Yes verily; for I never made them my God, neither did I ever repose any
confidence in them, but used them for the time, knowing always that they were
not mine, but lent me to use for a season; and the time being now expired, I
willingly resign and surrender the same to the world, and where I had them,
there I leave them; committing my self to the Mercy-Seat of God, and rendering
him most hearty thanks for the use and commodity I have reaped thereby in my
life time, and for all other his benefits, his name be praised for ever, who is
the preserver of men and lover of souls, and his holy will and pleasure be
fulfilled in me every way, whether it be in life or death: God grant it may
be to his glory, and then I have my hearts desire.

Quest. 7. Your words are comfortable to me and the hearers, and you have
hitherto played the part of a good Christian, in renouncing the vanities of this
wicked world, and committing your self wholly both body and soul to Gods
careful tuition, whose arms of mercy (no doubt) are now spread wide open,
ready to embrace you.

But because you answer so directly, I will be bold to put more questions unto
you.

Do you from the bottom of your heart, ask forgiveness of all those whom you
have offended in this world, by thought, word, or deed: and are you in heart
sorry for the same?

Answ. I am heartily sorry for my offenses, both toward God and Man: I must
needs confess, I have not once, but often offended both; and therefore I
humbly crave pardon of both whom I have often abused: and I must desire you to
signify so much to the Congregation, among other remembrances of me.

Quest. 8. Do you your self for Christ's sake unfeignedly and from the bottom
of your heart forgive all those, that by any means have injured and offended
you, either in speeches, thought, or actions?

Answ. I willingly and freely forgive all the world, even as I look to be
forgiven my self at the hands of my heavenly Father, whom many times and
sundry ways I have offended: Or otherwise I know I could never with a good
conscience repeat that Petition of the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses,
as Math. 6. 12
we forgive them that trespass against us.

And furthermore our Savior Christ says: If you do not forgive men their
Math. 6. 15
trespasses, no more will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses,
etc. And therefore I know assuredly, if I had a stout and stony stomach, and
not a fleshy and tender heart, apt and prone to forgive, I could not die in
love and charity with the world, and then not in Gods favor: For as Saint
John says; If 1. Ioh. 4. 11
God have so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Which we cannot do,
except we forgive one another, and that daily; for in many things we offend
all: Iam. 3. 2.
and who knows how often he offends? And therefore it remains, seeing the
case so stands, that if we will be beloved, we must love: if we will be
forgiven, we must forgive: if we will be blessed, we must bless, and not
curse: and if we will have mercy, we must show mercy. God grant us his mercy,
and give us grace so to do, and so to live, that we may make a godly and quiet
end, and so die the death of the righteous.

Quest. 9. I pray God both now and ever show the light of his countenance upon
you, and continue this good which he has begun in you even to the end: for
most Christianly and like a good servant of God, you have taken your leave of
the world, in disposing your self and yours toward God and Man: And I find
you so furnished and fit for God, that you may boldly assure your self of his
favor and love toward you, if you continue in so good and godly a mind to
the end.

And truly I am glad, and so are all your wel-willers here present this day,
to hear and see in you so good fruits of a Christian, whose end is commonly
according to his life.

If any other thing be in your mind that you would have done touching worldly
matters, I pray you advertise me thereof, and I will do my diligence to have
your mind and will fulfilled therein, so far forth as is requisite.

Answ. Sir, I am at a point with the world, and all worldly affairs, and I
have no more to say or to deal with such matters, but leave them and their
appurtenances to those that come after: And I renounce here (before you and the
rest) all worldly wealth, pleasures, goods, lands, and livings; I yield and
surrender them up to the longest liver, and now resign my self wholly to God
that made me and saved me: And my hearty desire is now to dwell with the
Lord, in the Land of the living. My faith is there fixed, and I hope assuredly
to attain unto it, by the blood of the Innocent Lamb of God, Jesus Christ my
Redeemer.

Quest. 10. The Lord increase your faith, and God grant you your hearts desire,
and that Land which you long for; you are in the highway toward it, God keep
you in it: for if you live and die as you have professed, assure your self the
gate is open already, and you are longed and looked for: it was prepared for
such as you are, from the beginning: and that you may be the better persuaded
hereof, I will put forth unto you a few spiritual questions; which being
answered as before, you shall sufficiently satisfy me and all that hear you
this day, that you are the Child of God, and an Inheritour of his heavenly
Kingdom, and so we will proceed to Prayers. But I fear I am too tedious and
troublesome unto you.

Answ. No, good Sir, think not so hardly of me (I beseech you) though I be
weary of sickness; yet I am not weary of well-doing and of good counsel, I
had never more need of it, neither can it come in a better time, and I take
great pleasure therein, being now past the pleasure of the world: therefore (I
pray you) in Gods name say on: for my earnest desire is to be prepared and made
ready for the good hour that God has appointed for my deliverance out of
this wretched world, and I look every moment for the coming of the
Bridegroom; I am ready with my Lamp burning, and my trust is, he is ready to
let me in.

Examples of Spiritual Questions.
Quest. 1. GOd be thanked for your good remembrance, and for your steadfast
belief, and I pray God continue it even to the end. But now I will (by your
patience) apply the rest of my speech only to the safety of your Soul.

Do you not acknowledge your self to be a sinner, and grievously to have
offended God, in not living so well and uprightly in this world, as you ought
to have done?

Answ. I must needs acknowledge and confess, that I am a grievous sinner, and
that I have oftentimes and many ways disobeyed and broken the Law and will of
God, both in my thoughts, words, and works.

Quest. 2. How do you know the same?

Answ. By the Law of God. For the Law has said, Do this, and I have not done
it: Do not that, and yet I have done it: and in this sort I have sinned both
by omitting that which was good, and by committing that which was bad.

Quest. 3. What danger have you incurred by this means, and what has your
negligence and disobedience herein deserved at Gods hands?

Answ. Of my self, I must needs say, that I have thereby deserved at Gods
hands eternal death and damnation, a curse and not a blessing: and so I am
taught by the word it self: For it is written, Cursed is Gal. 3. 10.
every man that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law, to do them.

Quest. 4. Good Lord, if this be true, then what a miserable case are all we
in, being wicked and cursed creatures?

Answ. Truly, our state indeed is wretched and damnable: and but that God of
his infinite goodness has provided a salve for this sore, we should utterly
perish, and then were 1. Cor. 15. 19.
we of all men most miserable.

Quest. 5. Do you believe then that there is a salve for so grievous a wound,
and a remedy for so great a mischief?

Answ. Yea verily, I firmly believe and know it, or else I could not with so
cheerful and patient a mind bear this cross which God has now laid upon
me.

Quest. 6. I pray you what remedy is there against the sting of sin, and the
curse of the Law? Is there any thing in the world, that can pacify Gods wrath,
and move him to such mercy, as may cause him to take away this deadly curse,
and give us a blessing?

Answ. Yea, God be thanked that there is: I can tell you so much, though I be
not Booke-learned; yet I have heard it, and I do undoubtedly believe it,
because Gods Word does teach it: That when there was no means to be found for
man to be saved, neither in heaven nor earth, it pleased our heavenly Father,
of his mere mercy to send his only begotten Son Romans 8. 3.
into the world, to the end that all that believe in him should not perish, but
have life everlasting. So that (that which was impossible to the Law, in as
much as it was weak, because of the flesh) God sending his own Son, in the
similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.

I do therefore believe, that this Son of God Jesus Christ, has quite taken
away the curse of the Law, Col. 2. 14.
and nailed it upon the Cross.

Quest. 7. These are good words indeed, and generally spoken to all sinners:
but how can you apply this to your self?

Answ. Because I know assuredly that I am Christ's, and have the testimony of
the Holy Ghost in me, comforting me, and bearing witness to my Spirit, that I
am the child of God, and therefore may boldly cry, Abba Father, Gal 4. 6.
etc.

Quest. 8. Then I perceive, if you be thus faithfully minded, as you do
profess, that you are not afraid to die; neither is death so dread full unto
you* as it is to many in these sinful days?

Answ. Although indeed death seems detestable to the most part of men,
especially to impenitent sinners, and such as have the wealth of the world at
will: Yet notwithstanding I see no reason why any wise man should fear that
which cannot be avoided; but rather (all things considered aright) they have
cause to covet it with the holy Apostle Saint Paul, who desires to be loosed,
and Phil. 1. 23.
to be with Christ, which is best of all; because death is the door to
eternal life, for we connot live for ever, but first we must dye: And
therefore the godly man (after he is mortified here by crosses and grief of
sickness) may cheerfully sing and say with the same Apostle: Christ is to me
Phil. 1. 21.
both in life and death, advantage.

And most comfortable to a good conscience is that sentence of Ecclesiastes: A
good name is better then a Eccl. 7. 3.
good ointment, and the day of death, then the day that one is borne. The
Preacher spoke not this without book, nor without reason; for then we change
sickness for health; woe for wealth; transitory vanities, for perpetual joys;
and earthly trash, for heavenly treasure, etc.

Quest. 9. You are in the right of it, and have hit the nail on the head in
this point; keep you there and my life for yours. But because I find you in
answering both wise and willing, it incourageth me to be bold in questioning.
Do you believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, which the true and
Catholic Church does hold at this day, and all other Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, to be the very and lively Word of God, the food of your soul,
and the perfect way to eternal life; and that there is sufficient matter
contained in them, to establish your mind and conscience to salvation,
according to the consent of Christ's Apostles in the Primitive Church?

Answ. I constantly and unfeignedly believe all this you have said to be true,
and grounded upon the Word of God, as upon a sure foundation which shall never
fail nor fall. And therefore it is called the Word of Life, the Word of Romans
3. 16.
Grace, the Word of Truth: and the power of God to Salvation, to every one that
believes.

Quest. 10. Do you detest and abhor all Idolatry, Heresies, errors, schisms,
innouations and opinions, which in any point do dissent or disagree from this
lively Word of GOD, and the ancient Catholic and Primitive Church?

Answ. As these enormities of themselves are detestable and damnable; even so I
do from my very heart detest and abhor them all, and most ardently I embrace
the Truth of Gods Word, with all due reverence to the same, as to the heavenly
will of GOD therein specified, and revealed to us by his Servants the
Patriarks, and Apostles of God, and his Son Christ Jesus our Savior the Head
of the Church: And I am desirous to die a member of the same Church, being the
body and Spouse of Christ.

Quest. 11. And do you even in heart rejoice to live and die in this Christian
Faith, and in the unity of this true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic
Church, militant here on earth, which is and shall be the Communion of Saints,
and the triumphant Church of God in Heaven?

Ans. I rejoice in nothing so much: for I know, that out of the Church there is
no salvation or safety. Those in old time that were found out of Noah's Arc
(being a Type of the Church) perished by water; but they which are not of the
Catholic Church of Christ, shall be tormented in Hell fire, which shall never
be quenched.

Quest. 12. Good Lord! me think it is a fearful thing, that the wicked
should enter into everlasting pain, and unquenchable fire. And the words which
are usual in the Scriptures, are able to make any man tremble even at the
heart; as Hell Mat. 8. 12.
fire, the bottomless pit, utter darkness, unquenchable fire, perpetual
pain, etc. where shall be weeping and Mar. 9. 44.
gnashing of teeth: where their worm dies not, and the fire never goes out.
Me thinks this word never is a long one; for if there were any hope that ever
the wicked might feel any release or easement of their pain, or that the
damned might have any end of their torment; yea if it were but after a
thousand, or a thousand thousands of years, there were some comfort to be
expected in time to come, though it were long first; yet time would once make
an end and wear it out. But these words everlasting, perpetual, and never;
these and such like pierce the heart, dismay the mind, and cut the throat of a
sinner; they crucify the guilty Conscience, and at one blow they kill down
right where they hit. How think you, are not you of the same mind?

Answ. Indeed I must needs confess they be words of great weight,
intolerable and heavy to bear, especially to a Conscience clogged with sin;
and words not once, but often to be deeply considered of, even of the best of
us all; for the best are too bad, and of our selves we are all sinners, and
deserve such reward for our hyre as these words do threaten: but they take
effect only in the Reprobate, desperate, and impenitent sinners, such as
neither fear Gods Justice, nor feel his Mercy, neither any operation of his
Holy Spirit: But are (for their contempt, obstinacy and impenitent hearts)
given over of God into a Reprobate sense: whose eyes are blinded, whose ears
are stopped, and whose hearts are hardened, that they disdain and reject the
Word of God, and all motions of his Spirit, whereby they should attain to a
full measure of faith in Christ Jesus, who came into 1. Tim. 1. 15.
the world to save sinners. For we are sure, That whosoever Ioh 3. 15.
believes in him, shall not perish, but have life ever lasting. For the souls
of the righteous Wisd. 3. 1.
are in the hand of GOD, and no torment shall touch them: but they Ioh. 5. 24.
shall pass from death to life: and their spirits shall return to the Lord
which gave them. Whose hands of mercy are wide open to receive them. For
although it be said: It is a Heb. 10. 31
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: Yet that is to be
understood before repentance, not after; for God rejects not penitent
sinners, but if we repent and turn to God, he will turn to us: As he has
promised: Turn unto Esa. 45. 22.
me, and ye shall be saved: So that there is now no condemnation to those that
are in Christ Jesus: but we may boldly triumph, and say, Death is swallowed up
1. Cor. 15. 54, 55
into victory. O death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy victory?

Quest. 13. You have well answered, and like a Divine: you said even now, you
were not Booke-learned, but you may be (God be thanked) for your direct
answering by the Word: I cannot but marvel how you can recite so many places
of Scripture, and to so good purpose, being not learned.

Surely it seems you carry not your Bible under your arm for fashion sake,
or to please men, as many do in these days, but to please God, and pleasure
both your self, and others. Therefore you have taken a good course in this
life, for the life to come. And you have chosen the better part with Mary, and
that which shall never be taken away Luke 10. 42
from you: the most part in these days take part with Martha, and are too
careful for the things of this world, but seldom or never look for the life
to come: and therefore it is to be doubted, they will come short of the reward
and crown of glory: But I will leave them to themselves, and to the equity of
Gods Justice, and (with your good liking) proceed forward with you in a
question or two.

Quest. 14 Do you believe and acknowledge Jesus Christ, the Son of the living
God, to have dyed and suffered his Passion for your sins, and that he did
rise again for your justification, and ascended into heaven, to prepare the
way for you, and all true believers?

Answ. I do assuredly believe all that to be true, or else I must think my
self accursed, and in most miserable case, calling to mind my rude race, and
my sinful life led, even from my Cradle.

Quest. 15. Do you also believe that you can be saved by no other means, but
by the merit of Christ his Passion, and by the sheading of his innocent blood
who suffered once for all; and that the oblation of himself upon the Cross,
is a sufficient sacrifice for the sins of the whole world.

Answ. I do believe that Christ his Passion is a full satisfaction for my
transgression, and his precious blood a perfect purgation for my sins.
Neither is Act. 4. 12.
there salvation in any other: for among men there is given none other name
under heaven whereby we must be saved: But only the sweet name of Jesus my
Savior.

Quest. 16. And do you (for this his inestimable benefit, and all other his
manifold graces) give him hearty thanks? And will you daily most dutifully
endeavor your self so to do, so long as the breath shall remain in your body?

Answ. I do, and by Gods grace I will from time to time (so long as life
lasts) do my best to show my self thankful, as I am indeed most bounden.
For I am fully persuaded, his Fatherly goodness toward me, is so great (being a
sinful wretch, and unworthy to gather up the crummes under his table) that I
can never give him condign thanks for the multitude of his mercies, and
divine graces bestowed upon me, both touching my body and soul: but God of
his infinite goodness pardon that which is lacking in my self, and fulfill it
in his dear Son Jesus Christ my Redeemer.

Quest. 17. You must therefore desire at the hands of God, of whom we receive
the bread we eat, the ground we tread upon, and the light we behold, that he
would with the eyes of his mercy and compassion look upon you, increase your
faith, lighten your understanding, strengthen your body, grant you patience in
this your sickness, and move your mind to all thankfulness and dutiful
obedience toward his Majesty; so that, come life, come death, you may be
persuaded in your mind, and believe steadfastly in your heart, that you are the
Lords.

Answ. My earnest request unto my heavenly Father is, to grant all such good
gifts as you have named: And I pray God, even with all my heart, give me grace
so to believe, and so to do, all the days and hours of my life. And that I
may the better do according to your friendly counsel, and perform some part
of my duty toward God and the world; I pray you, good Sir, both privately
when you are absent, pray to God for me, and join with me in prayer now
before your departing, that it may please God my heavenly Father (whose rod of
castigation I willingly suffer) to dispose of me in this his visitation, as
may make most for his glory, and mine own salvation, in Christ Jesus my
Savior.

These and such like questions may the careful Pastor propound to the Sick
person, according as occasion shall be offered, always helping his
infirmity, if he fail in answering: but he must beware that he do not
reason further then the capacity of the sick will admit; that so he may
rather win by favor, then lose by rigor. For like as too great noise
hurts the ear, too much meat hurts the body, too much rain hurts the
ground: even so weak wits, and fearful consciences may soon be surcharged
and oppressed with ouer-hard questions; especially when the mind is disquieted
with troubles, and the body grieved with sickness.

The second Duty of the Pastor.
THe second Duty of the Pastor, is to use faithful and hearty prayer for the
sick: For as he is the mouth of God unto the people: even so he is the mouth
of the people unto God, by his zealous suit, and by pouring out pure prayers
unto his Majesty in their behalf. Therefore Saint James says, Is any Iam. 5.
14.
man sick among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them
pray for him, and anoint him with oil in the Name of the Lord, and the Prayer
of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. I will not take upon me simply
to prescribe any man a form of Prayer, but as the Spirit of God shall move
him, and according as time and occasion shall serve; so let him with ^ groaning
Spirit frame his prayers unto him that is able to help, and can save both
body and soul. Nevertheless, I have thought good to set down a form of
some, for the further instruction of the unlearned.

But before Prayer, I think it not amiss to read any one of these three
selected Psalms, as preparatiues to Prayer, which I have collected and
received at David's own mouth, most meet for that purpose.

The first Psalm.
OVt of the deep have Psalm. 130.
I called unto thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice.

O let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint.

If thou (O Lord) straightly markest iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand, or who
shall be able to abide it?

( For sure and certain it Psalm. 1.
is) that the ungodly shall not be able to stand in judgment: neither the
sinners in the Congregation of the righteous.

O Lord, rebuke me not Psalm. 6.
( therefore) in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones
are vexed.

My soul also is sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou punish me?

Turn thee (O Lord) and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death no man remembers thee: and who shall give thee thanks in the
pit?

I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed: and water my couch with
my tears.

My God, my God, look Psalm. 22.
upon me, why have thou forsaken me: and art so far from my health, and
from the words of my complaint?

O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not: and in the night
season also I take no rest.

But thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope,
when I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts.

I have been left unto thee, ever sithence I was borne: thou art my God even
from my mothers womb.

O go not from me then, for trouble is hard at hand: and there is none to help
me.

I am powered out like water, all my bones are out of joint: my heart also in
the midst of my body, is even like melting Wax.

My strength is dried up like a pot-sheard: and my tongue cleaves to my gummes.

Turn thee (therefore) Psalm. 25.
unto me (O Lord) and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and in misery.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of al my troubles.

Look upon mine adversity and misery: and forgive me all my sin.

How long will thou forget Psalm. 13.
me (O Lord) for ever? How long will thou hide thy face from me?

How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart?

The pains of hell came Psalm. 18.
about me: the snares of death ouertooke me.

But in my trouble will I call upon the Lord: and complain unto my God.

So shall he hear my voice out of his holy Temple: and my complaint shall come
before him, it shall enter even into his ears.

O Lord, let it be thy pleasure Psalm. 40.
to deliver me: Make haste, O Lord, to help me.

For innumerable troubles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold
upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea, they are more in number, then
the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me.

For thine arrows stick Psalm. 38.
fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.

There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

For my wickednesses are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden too
heavy for me to bear.

I am feeble and sore smitten: I have rored for the very disquietnesse of my
heart.

Lord, thou know all my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

My heart pants, my strength has failed me: and the sight of mine eyes is
gone from me.

Take thy plague away Psalm. 39.
from me (O Lord) I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy hand.

( For) when thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his
beauty to consume away, like as it were a moth sretting a garment: every man
therefore is but vanity.

O spare me a little (O Lord) that I may recover my strength, before I go
hence, and be no more seen.

O tarry thou the Lords Psalm. 27.
leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart, and put thou thy trust in
the Lord. Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the etc.

The second Psalm.
O Lord God of my salvation, Psalm. 88.
I have cried day and night before thee: O let my prayer enter into thy
presence; incline thine ear unto my calling.

For my soul is full of trouble: and my life draws nigh unto hell.

Up ( therefore) O Lord, Psalm. 44.
why sleep thou? Awake, and be not absent ( from us) for ever.

Wherefore hidest thou thy face? and forgettest our misery and affliction?

Rise up for our succor: and redeem us for thy mercies sake.

My soul is athirst for Psalm. 42.
God, yea even for the living God: when shall I come to appear before the
presence of God?

O remember not the sins Psalm. 25.
and offenses of my youth: but according to thy mercy think upon me, O Lord,
for thy goodness.

For thy name sake, O Psalm. 69.
Lord: be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

Hide not thy face from thy servant: for I am in trouble, oh haste thee, and
hear me.

Thy rebuke has broken my heart, I am full of heaviness: I looked for some to
have pity on me, but there was no man, neither found I any to comfort me.

Therefore I will cry unto Psalm. 77.
God with my voice: and he shall hearken unto me.

When I am in heaviness, I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed, I will
complain.

Will the Lord absent himself for ever: and will he be no more entreated?

Is his mercy clean gone for ever: and his promise come utterly to an end for
evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious? and will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure?

Hear me, O Lord, hide Psalm. 102.
not thy face from me in the time of my trouble: Incline thine ears unto me
when I call, O hear me, and that right soon.

For my days are consumed away like smoke: and my bones are burnt up as it
were a firebrand.

My heart is smitten down and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat my
bread.

For the voice of my groaning: my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.

( But) they that sow in Psalm. 126.
tears: shall reap in joy.

He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed: shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him.

( For) the Lord is full of Psalm. 103.
compassion and mercy: long suffering, and of great goodness.

He will not always be childing: neither keeps he his anger for ever.

He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
wickedness.

For look how high the heaven is in comparison of the earth: so great is his
mercy also toward them that fear him.

Look how wide also the East is from the West: so far has he set our
sins from us.

Yea like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful
unto them that fear him.

For he knows whereof we be made: he remembers that we are but dust.

The days of man are but as grass: he flourishes as a flower of the field.

For as soon as the wind goes over it, it is gone: and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

But the merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon them
that fear him: and his righteousness upon childrens children.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the, etc.

The third Psalm.
BLessed is he that considers Psalm. 41.
the poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble.

The Lord comfort him when he lies sick upon his bed: make thou all his bed
in his sickness.

I said, Lord be merciful unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against
thee.

O hide not thou thy face Psalm. 27.
from me: nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thou have been my succor: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.

Hear me ( therefore) O Psalm. 69.
God, in the multitude of thy mercy: even in the truth of thy salvation.

In thee (O Lord) have I Psalm. 31.
put my trust: let me never be put to confusion, deliver me in thy righteousness.

Bow down thine ear to me: make haste to deliver me.

And be thou my strong Rock, and the house of defense: that thou may save me.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou
God of truth.

I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considered my trouble,
and have known my soul in adversity.

( And therefore) like as the Psalm. 42.
Heart desires the waterbrookes: so longs my soul after thee, O God.

Have mercy upon me Psalm. 51.
( therefore) O God, after thy great goodness: according to the multitude of thy
mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

Turn thy face (O Lord) from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, (O God:) and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

O remember not our old Psalm. 79.
sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon: for we are come to great
misery.

Hear my prayer, O Psalm. 143.
Lord, and consider my desire: Hearken unto me for thy truth and righteousness
sake.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thirsty
land.

Hear me (O Lord) and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint: hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

O remember how short Psalm. 89.
my time is: wherefore have thou made all men, for naught?

( For) what man is he that lives, and shall not see death: and shall he
deliver his own soul from hell?

Lord, what is man, that Psalm. 14. 4.
thou have such respect unto him: or the son of man, that thou so regardest
him?

Man is like a thing of naught: his time passes away like a shadow.

For when thou art angry, Psalm 90.
all our days are gone: we bring our years to an end, as it were a tale that
is told.

The days of our age are threescore years and ten, and though men be so
strong, that they come to fourscore years: yet is their strength then but
labor and sorrow, so soon passes it away, and we are gone.

Teach us ( therefore O Lord) to number our days: that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.

Lord, let me know mine Psalm. 39.
end, and the number of my days: that I may be certified how long I have to
live.

Behold, thou have made my days as it were a span long: and mine age is even
as nothing in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

And now (Lord) what is my hope? Truly my hope is even in thee.

One thing have I desired Psalm. 27.
of the Lord, which I will require: even that I may dwell in the House of the
Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to
visit his holy Temple.

( For) I should utterly have fainted: but that I believe verily to see the
goodness of the Lord, in the Land of the living.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the, etc.

When the Minister, or any other good Christian that visits the Sick, has
read one of these Psalms: Then let him with all dutiful reverence, pray and
say, as hereafter follows.

Let us pray.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father which art in heaven, etc.
The mighty God of Jacob be our defense, both now and in the hour of Death.

And let us not be overcome by any evil temptation.

O Lord save this thy Sick servant.

Which puts his full trust in thee.

Send him help, O Lord, from thy holy place.

And ever more most mightily defend him.

Let the enemy have none advantage of him.

Nor the wicked once approach to hurt him.

Be unto him, O Lord, a strong tower.

From the face of his enemy.

Grant that he may dye the death of the righteous.

And be made partaker of thine inheritance.

Receive his soul, O Lord, into thy holy hands.

And place it with thy Saints in heaven.

Lord hear our prayers.

And let our cry come unto thee.

A pithy Prayer for a Patient being pained with Sickness.
IT is thou, O Lord, only to whom all power and praise belongs. It is thou
that raignest in heaven in glory, in earth in mercy, and in hell in judgment.
It is thy voice, O Lord, whereunto both the seas and winds are obedient. It is
thy name, O Lord God of Hosts, that makes all the Devils in hell to tremble
and quake: and they can do nothing without thy permission. Thou bring down
to hell, and raisest up again. Thou pluckest down the mighty from their
Throne, and exaltest the humble and meek. Thou make both poor and rich,
strong and weak. Thou sendest sickness, and restorest health again in thy good
time. Thou give life, and take it away at thy pleasure. O Lord, whose
majesty and might no creature is able to withstand, neither in heaven, earth,
or under the earth: Thou that have made the Sea and the dry land, and all
things therein contained: Thou that know our weakness, and what metal we
be made of: have regard unto the workmanship of thy hands: Pierce the heavens,
O Lord, and give ear unto our prayers, which with sorrowful hearts, trickling
tears, bowed knees, and unfeigned lips we power out before thy presence. We
acknowledge (O Lord) our own frailetie and unworthiness, and how that all men
living are but vanity, even as the grass in the field, which to day
flourishes, and to morrow withers away, as the smoke in the furnace, the
bubble in the water, or the could that swiftly passes away and is no more
seen: So soon also fedeth away our time, and our years come to an end. Thou
only (O Lord) know the number of our days, and appointest us our bounds
which we cannot pass. We confess (O most merciful God) that we have sinned
against heaven, and against thee, and are no more worthy to be called thy
children, no nor to tread upon the earth, or to have the light of the Sun to
shine upon us: but rather to be burned with fire, drowned in the waters,
swallowed up of the earth, overwhelmed with mountains, or devoured with wild
beasts and fowls of the air. Our transgressions and sins are so great, so
grievous, and many in number, wherewithal we have and do daily offend thy
Majesty, both in thought, word, and deed, that our weak consciences being
laden and burdened with the remembrance of them, are afraid to approach into
thy presence, for fear of thy wrath and just judgment. Yet (O Lord) for so much
as thy mercy is above all thy works, and because thou art a gentle and
pitiful God, long-suffering, and full of compassion, and would not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live. We are therefore the
bolder not of our selves, but in the name of thy dear Son Jesus Christ (with
whom thou art well pleased) to call upon thee for mercy and comfort: That it
would please thee of thy gracious goodness to forgive and blot out of thy
remembrance all our sins and wickedness, and never hereafter to impute them
unto us. Regard not (good Lord) our deserts which is death and damnation, but
be mindful of thy loving promises in Jesus Christ our Savior, who in all
temptations of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, is our only Rock, and
sure stay and defense, and never shrinketh from those which be wrapped in woe
and misery. Comfort (O Lord) this thy Servant, upon whom thou have laid the
scourge of sickness, and rod of visitation, as a sure token and pledge of thy
love, and fatherly good will toward him: for whom thou love, those thou
correctest, not to destruction, but to amendment and salvation. Thou have
promised, that wheresoever two or three are gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests. We (therefore thy humble servants) here assembled
according to thy blessed commandment, do cry and call upon thee with feruant
hearts, to be merciful to this thine afflicted creature, that it would please
thee either to release his smart and pain in thy good time, and so to restore
him to his former health, or else to grant him abundantly the graces of thy
holy Spirit, that with patience and meek mind he may abide such trial, as it
shall please thy godly Majesty to lay upon him: That neither the tyranny of
Satan, grief of sickness, love of the world, terror of hell, infirmity of the
flesh, remembrance of sin, or fear of death, withdraw him from thee, and thy
sweet promises in his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who came not for the just,
but to call sinners to repentance. So guide him (good Lord) by thy blessed
Spirit in his great and last journey, that passing quietly all troubles of this
transitory world, and this painful pilgrimage once ended, he may safely by
thy mighty power be conducted to the Haven of continual quietness and rest,
which is the Kingdom of Heaven, and there reign with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the holy company of Angels and Saints in perpetual joy and
safety, which thou have prepared and promised for all thine elect children, and
faithful servants from the beginning of the world. Grant this (O heavenly
Father) which we have prayed for, in the behalf of this thy poor and pensive
prisoner, and all other things necessary for our salvation, and thy glory,
through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: In whose holy name, we beseech thee
from the bottom of our hearts, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A comfortable Prayer against desperation.
O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, continue thy goodness toward us
unworthy wretches, which do here with contrite hearts, and bowed knees,
appeal unto the height of thy mercy: Beseeching thee (O Father) ^o to remember
the contempt and injury thou have received at our hands; but pardon our passed
faults, and accept the pitiful Passion of thy dear Son, in full
satisfaction of our transgression. Let his precious blood wipe away, and wash
all our filthiness. Let his wounds heal the sores of our sins: and let the
holy oblation of himself, present our prayers acceptable and blameless before
thy Majesty. Let no sin be so great and grievous in our eyes, that it
pluck away hope of pardon: No offense so ponderous, that it may be ^^le to
overcome thy goodness. All have sinned, and have need of thy mercy, which thou
offerest abundantly to every one that faithfully asks the same of thee. Our
wickedness (O Lord) cannot exceed thy merits. The greater the sinner is on whom
thou bestowest thy compassion; so much the greater is thy glory. And therefore
thou reioycest more at the finding of one lost sheep which has long gone
astray, then over ninety and nine just persons which need no repentance. Thou
art ready to meet and embrace with the arms of thy mercy the Prodigal Son,
when he turns homewards toward thee, repenting his former folly, and humbly
craving thy mercy. Therefore there is nothing better for man, then continually
to consider thy great love and fidelity toward him: and contrariwise, his
own infidelity and ingratitude toward thee: for the Devil is so envious
toward thy servants, that he omitteth no time in tempting them; yea, even
then, when they are about to repent and bewail their sins, he causes them to
doubt of their salvation, to waver in faith, and cloggeth their consciences
with the curse of the Law, and equity of Gods justice in punishing their
sin, that thereby they might never be at quietness or rest in themselves; but
straight fall into the dungeon of desperation. It is thou only (O Lord) that
can heal their diseases, ease their burden, cure their wounds, and refresh
their hungry spirits. Wherefore if at any time the Devil move us to doubt or
despair of Gods goodness and grace; yet let us not faint in faith, or be
hollow-hearted, but rather be bold in the bowels of Jesus Christ, and with a
sure confidence approach unto the Mercy-Seat of God the Father, who accepts
the satisfaction of his Son, and allows the same to be a full ransom for all
our sins; and by this means we may find favor at the hands of our heavenly
Father. Many examples we have to persuade us herein.

The Woman of Canaan cried, and her Daughter was cured. The Centurion believed,
and his Servant was made whole. The Father prayed, and his Son was clenfed of
the foul spirit. The Apostles cried out, Help Lord, for we perish: and
straightway they were delivered. Christ perceived but the Faith of the people;
and he said to the sick of the Palsy, Be of good cheer, my son, thy sins
are forgiven thee. The Mother and her companions do but weep, and her son
is raised from death to life. Martha and Mary did but mourn, and Lazarus was
revived. Mary the sinner sheadeth tears, and he said unto her, Thy sins be
forgiven thee. A poor blind man cried out, O Son of David, have mercy on me,
and he received his sight. The Thief hanging on the Cross, said but only,
Lord remember me: and Christ answered, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. O singular Faith of sinners! what man has at any time cried Jesus
have mercy on me; but forthwith he has found favor, and obtained grace. A
sure faith procures any thing at Gods hands; but he that mistrusteth the
Physician, hinders his own health. Our Savior Christ has opened unto us the
gate of his goodness: therefore let not us run headlong to the dungeon of
desperation, the dunghill of the Devil. He has stretched out his hand to us;
therefore let not us turn away our face from him. He has opened unto us the
Kingdom of Heaven; therefore let not us haste to destruction, nor creep to
the lake of unhappiness: but let us by these examples of Gods graces to
others, acknowledge the mercies of God to be many and marvelous toward man.
For whose cause does the Sun shine by day, the Moon and the Stars by night,
but for man? For whose sake does the Lord water the earth with deaw drops and
showers of rain, but for man? Why blow the Winds? Why run the Rivers? Why
spread the Springs? Why budde the Trees? Why grow the fruits of the earth? And
why increase the fishes of the seas, but for the use of man? He is King and
Lord of all creatures under the cope of heaven. There is nothing that God has
not made subject to man, only he would that man should be obedient unto him.
Yet many times our merciful God sends us adversity, either to clear us of
our transgressions, or to fear us from sin, or to minister occasion of
well-doing. Thus was Abraham tried: So was Job proved with many miseries: Thus
is every one which lives godly in Christ Jesus tried in this world with sundry
afflictions, as the gold in the fire: for whom the Lord loves, those he
chasteneth.

Therefore (we beseech thee, O Lord) assist us by thy might and mercy, that we
may patiently bear all trouble, need, poverty, sickness, slander, hatred,
imprisonment, grief and anguish of mind, temptations of our deadly Enemy,
loss of lands, and worldly wealth, and all other calamities, and
discommodities. Look not on us or our sins (O Lord) but behold thy Little one
which was borne for us: He was wounded for our offenses, and by his stripes we
are healed. He gave his body to be beaten, his cheeks to be stricken for us
finners. He turned not away his face from them that scorned him, and spit upon
him. Look (O Lord) upon all the parts of his body, from the crown of his
head, to the sole of his foot, and no pain shall be found like unto his
pain.

Behold (O blessed Lord) the holy head of thy dear Son crowned with sharp
Thorns, and the blood running down on his goodly visage.

Behold his tender body how it is scourged, his naked breast is stricken and
beaten, his bloody side is thrust through with a spear, his heart pants, his
sinews be stretched forth, his crystal eyes dazell and lose their sight,
his princely face is wan and pale, his pleasant tongue is enflamed with pain,
his inward parts wax dry and stark, his arms both blue and black, his bones
sore, his comely legs be feeble and weak, and the streams of blood gush out
of his side down to the ground. O Lord of mercy, and God of comfort, let all
these sufferings of thine only, and dear beloved Son pacify thy wrath, and be
a sufficient recompense for all our misdemeanour toward thy Majesty; defend us
outwardly by thy might, and cheer us inwardly by thy holy Spirit, that we may
both in body and soul glorify thy Name, fear thy might, and love thy mercy,
and hereafter walk in thy ways so long as the breath is in our bodies: And
after that receive us body and soul into the heavenly Kingdom, for the tender
Death and Passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with thee and
the Holy Ghost, be all honor, power and praise, world without end.

Amen.
An effectual Prayer for those which be Lunatike, or possessed with any evil
Spirit.
O Most mighty and merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Prince of power, and the God of all comfort and consolation, our strong Rock,
our sure refuge and defense against the damnable and dangerous assaults of our
enemies both bodily and ghostly, which have commanded us in our greatest perils
and necessities to fly unto thee for safety, and boldly to call upon thee for
our delivery: which also by thy divine power, and unsearchable wisdom have
made heaven and earth, and all things therein contained; as Angels, Archangels,
Men, Women, Children, the beasts of the field, the fishes in the Sea, the
Fowls of the Air, and the Fruits of the Earth; which all were made at thy
Word, and are subject to thy power, to use at thy good will and pleasure, as
seems best to thy Majesty; whether it be to honor or dishonor, salvation,
or condemnation. We entirely beseech thee of thy goodness (O Lord) and that with
sorrowful hearts, trickling tears, watery cheeks, and groaning spirits, to be
merciful unto us all here assembled, and to all thy people vexed with woe
throughout the wide world: but especially at this present, we heartily desire
thee to look down from heaven with the eyes of compassion and pity upon this
thy creature and workmanship of thy hands, who is now grievously vexed and
tormented in mind. O Lord, enter not into judgment with thy servants: for then
no flesh can be saved in thy sight. We acknowledge (O Lord) that we are
miserable sinners, unworthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, or to gather up the
crumbs which fall from thy table. Yet notwithstanding, we humbly beseech thee
(O dear Father) not to deal with us according to our deserts, which is
everlasting death, utter shame and confusion, hell fire, perpetual pain and
damnation: But according to thy accustomed clemency, take from us all
ignorance, hardness of heart, desperation, and all the wyly suggestions and
grievous temptations of Satan our old enemy. Let not the Devil (O Lord) nor
any hellish hound spoil thine inheritance, which thou have bought with the
price of the precious blood of thy dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ. Thou
only (O Lord) reignest in heaven in glory, in earth in mercy, and in hell in
judgment. Thou only art the author of life and death, sickness and health, joy
and pain. It is thou which castest down to hell, and raisest up again to
heaven: yea, it is thou, and none other which give thy holy Spirit to be a
comfort to thine elect people, and sometimes troublest their minds with
illusions and vanities; suffering Satan the roaring Lion, and his Ministers, to
have dominion for a time over them, as appears at this present by thy just
judgment, declared and inflicted upon this comfortless cay^ife, thy poor
prisoner, and afflicted creature, unto the great anguish and torment of his
soul and body, to the discomfort of his wife, friends and kinsfolk, and to
the terror and fear of all that ever hear or see him in this woeful case.

O Lord, thy judgments are deep, and thy counsel unsearchable, and unworthy
are we to know the counsels and secrets of the Highest: much less ought we
curiously to search to understand the causes of this woe, and the occasion of
this thy plague and grievous cross laid upon this miserable man.
Notwithstanding, whether thou have thus visited him for his former sins, and
by that means to call him to repentance and amendment of life: or to exercise
his faith by the trial of thy justice, or for the terror, and warning of all
those that see or hear of him, that they may thereby fear thy name,
acknowledge thy power, avoid thy heavy displeasure, repent their sinful
living, and call to thee betimes for mercy and grace; or else to the end to
show thy great might and glory upon him, and so to signify unto all people
that thou art God alone, that rulest both heaven and earth, that stayest the
madness of the people, and the furiousnes of the Fiend, or for what cause so
ever it be that thou have laid thy heavy hand of judgment upon him. Yet we
humbly beseech thee (O Lord God) not of our selves, or for our selves, but in
the bowels of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, whom thou have made the Redemption
of the world; to mitigate thy sury by tender mercy; assuage thy wrath, and stay
thy heavy hand already begun and continued in frail flesh. Let not the
Devil nor all the powers in hell tempt him, above that which he shall be able
through Christ his Savior to bear. O Lord, restore in him of thy goodness,
whatsoever has been decayed by the malice or suggestion of Satan, or by his
own frailty and wicked disposition, or by any his enemies, the flesh, world,
Devil, or sin. We confess unto thee, O Lord, that sin is rife in us, the
flesh is frail, the world is wicked, and the Devil is most malicious. O Lord
God, among these so many and mischievous enemies, what shall we devise to do?
Whithershal we fly? There is no way with us but one, we must lift up our eyes,
our hands and our hearts unto thee (O Lord:) Our help is from above, our
victory proceeds from thy grace and Throne of thy Majesty: To heaven
therefore we lift up both heart, hands, eyes, and all our powers; and unto
thee (O gracious Lord) we call and cry for help. Break the heavens and come
down (O Lord;) let our prayers pierce thine ears. Arise (O God) and scatter
thine enemies and ours; stay the race of Satan, thon that art the glory of
Sion, and strength of Israel, take from him his weapons and harness, wherewith
he goes about to spoil thine Inheritance: Bruze and break the head of
Leuiathan that subtle Serpent, which seeks nothing but our destruction.
Weaken his force, disperse and confound all his politic practices, whereby
he daily goes about to overthrow thy seeble flock. Let not this ramping and
roaring Lion devour us, but chain him up, and tie him short, halter and bridle
his cruel devices, wherewithal he works woe unto thy servants and Saints,
for he can do nothing without thy permission: thou which rulest the raging of
the Sea that it cannot pass her bounds, and have Satan fettered and fast bound
in chains, so that he cannot do what he would, but what pleases thee: for
thy mercy has conquered his cruelty to our great comfort. Thou have commanded
us to call upon thee in the day of our trouble, and thou will deliver us, and
we shall glorify thee. Thou have also promised in thy holy Word, to grant our
godly Petitions, saying unto us like a most loving Father: Ask, and you shall
have: Seek, and you shall find: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you: We
ask of thee with pensive souls, and would gladly obtain mercy and forgiveness
of all our offenses: We seek, and would gladly find that which we have lost
by our unthankfulness and sin: we knock at the gate of Grace, and will never
cease knocking, until thou open unto us the bowels of compassion and pity,
and grant us the feeling of thy good graces, to the full satisfaction and
quieting of our troubled spirits, and careful consciences. Therefore O God the
Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, hear our prayers, and grant our
humble requests, which with sobbing sighs and contrite hearts cry unto thee for
succor.

O Lord have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful Father: and for
thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, destroy not this afflicted creature in thy fury:
suffer not this troubled and tormented person to perish everlastingly. Take
away from him (good Lord) this evil spirit, and vilde affection, wherewithal
he is grieved and turmoiled: and indue him with thy holy Spirit, which may
comfort his afflicted Spirit, and frame his disposition hereafter to lead a
godly conversation, and a quiet life: So that after the trial and sharp taste
of this thy fearful judgment, he may make a godly and quiet end, and be
delivered from everlasting damnation and destruction. O Lord, the mo and the
greater his sins be; so much the more shall thy might and mercy appear in
his deliverance and restoration. Thy mercy (O Lord) is above all thy works,
and thy power is wonderful and invincible. Thou did command Mat. 3. 28.
the Devils which were very fierce in two persons (yea and so terrible, that no
man might go by that way where they were) to go out of them into the Herd of
Swine, insomuch that they were quiet at thy commandment, where before they
were bound with chains and fetters, and no man could tame them, but night and
day they cried in the Mountains, and in the Graves, and struck themselves
with stones. Thou did also deliver Mat. 9. 32.
a man which was dumb, and possessed with a Devil, so that the people
marvelled thereat. Thou (O Lord) with the eyes of compassion and pity did
look upon the Woman of Canaan, who cried, saying, Have mercy on me, O Mat.
15. 22
Lord, the son of David: my Daughter is miserably vexed with a Devil: and
her Daughter was made whole the same hour. Thou also had mercy on the man
that kneeled Mat. 17. 14
down to thee, and said: Master, have on pity my Mar. 9. 18.
Son, for he is Lunatike and sore vexed: for oftentimes he falls into the
water, and oftentimes into the fire; and wheresoever the dumb spirit takes
him, he teareth him, and he fometh, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth
away: and as soon as the spirit saw thee (O Lord) he tare him, and he fell
down to the ground, wallowing and foming. But thou (incontinently) did
rebuke the unclean spirit, and said unto him; thou dumb and deaf spirit, I
charge thee come out of him, and enter no more into him: and presently he
departed, and took his vltimum vale of him.

And many other times (O Lord) thou have showed as well thy might as mercy, in
delivering the halt, the maimed, the dumb, the blind, the furious, the sick,
the Lepers, and the lunatike, and those which were possessed with Devils, by
the ministry of thy Apostles and true Disciples. And thou have moreover
commanded us, saying: Go into all the world, preach the Gospel, heal the
Sick, comfort the Weak, raise the Dead, cleanse the Lepers, and cast out
Devils. Grant unto us thy dear children, and faithful servants, who are most
earnest suitors unto thee at this present, that we may in like manner find
favor in thy sight, so far forth, as we may obtain our request at thy
gracious hands, and have our Petitions heard, and that by the power of thy
Word, hearty Prayer, and a true Faith in Christ Jesus, thou will put Satan to
flight, destroy his Kingdom, and utterly extinguish all his suggestions, and
dangerous temptations: and so restore unto this afflicted person here present,
his former health, senses, and understanding, for thy dear Son Jesus Christ
his sake. Create (O Lord) a new heart, and revive thy holy Spirit in him, that
he do not blaspheme thy holy name; but rather take thy visitation patiently,
and be content to submit himself to thy good will and pleasure: So that come
life, come death, come sickness, come health, come joy, come pain, both he and
we and the whole world may magnify and extol thy blessed Name in all
actions: and as our bounden duty is, daily and hourly give thee honor and
praise for thy great goodness and mercies toward us, through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A fruit full Prayer in time of any common sickness or Plague.
O Lord God of Hosts, most mighty and terrible, our guide and gracious
Governor, whose judgments and mercy are daily and diversely showed unto us
here on earth, whose praise the Angels and Saints above extol and magnify;
whose power the Devils themselves are forced to acknowledge and fear, and
whose voice both winds and raging Seas do obey: Thou most mighty and eternal
God, from whom proceeds blessing, and cursing; mercy, and judgment; health,
and sickness: Mercy to the penitent and godly, judgment without mercy to the
Reprobate and wicked. Thou it is which renuest thy plagues against man when he
offends, whose vengeance from heaven is so sudden and fearful toward the
rebellious and disobedient, that for one sin in David, thou did destroy
with the loathsome disease of the Pestilence, many thousands of his people: Cast
thine eyes of mercy upon us (O thou preserver of men) which languish in this
Land with the same diseases and sickness: Where not David only has offended in
trusting to his strength, but every Congregation, and every household has not
one way, but many ways provoked thee to plague so ungodly and ungracious a
people: and now that the door of thy storehouse is open, and thy plagues
appear: we see we have offended, and we sorrow at the sight of our sins.

Now we consider we have offended grievously, we have done amiss, we have
dealt wickedly, we have lived ungodly, we have swarued from the way of Truth
without any godly fear, or remorse of conscience: Thy benefits of peace,
health, and wealth, have brought too too many of us to such security and
contempt of Religion, that we abuse thy blessings as fast as thou powrest them
upon us: Our thoughts, words, and works are vain, carnal and devilish: The
fruits of the flesh have ouergrowne the force of the Spirit; Faith fails,
sin has gotten the upper hand, and our reason is so ouer-ruled with
affections, that few are found settled in a dutiful form of upright and
spiritual obedience. Wherefore we confess, thou might justly forsake us,
as we forsake thee, and not only proceed to sting the whole body of this Land
with sundry Plagues and Diseases; but also for our sins condemn us most justly
to eternal death: whose consciences are so guilty, that they condemn our
selves. And yet for all this, thy mercy is unmeasurable toward the humble and
penitent, though once thou spakest to Jeremy against thine own people being
disobedient to thee, saying: Though Moses and Samuel Ier. 15. 1.
stood before me, yet have I no heart (or affection) unto this people: Cast
them out of my sight, and let them depart, some unto Death, some to the Sword,
some to Famine, and some to Captivity. This people was in a pitiful case, and
we are more miserable and sinful, and have deferued a more heavy hand of thy
judgment to be laid upon us. Notwithstanding (O Lord) we humbly beseech thee
to deal with us in mercy, stay thy hand, and bid thine Angel cease from
punishing: Look with a cheerful countenance upon thy people: Bless us (O
heavenly Father) within and without: Be thou our guard, thy Word our guide, thy
Spirit our comfort, and thy Son our Savior. Stay by us continually, hold us
up by thy right hand strongly, and direct us by thy counsel wisely. So shall
we be inwardly comforted, though the world conspire, Satan rore, the wicked
rise up against us; yea, though the earth be moved, the pillars of heaven
shake, the Sea rage, plagues fall, and all creatures frown: Yet shall not we
either fear, tremble, or be dismayed with any boisterous blast of adversity,
so long as we trust in thee, lean to thee, serve thee, and rest upon thee, as
our strong Rock: for thou art mighty in the heat of judgment, and yet
merciful in the midst of miseries. Have pity therefore upon us most
miserable sinners, mitigate thy fury, assuage our pain, release our smart, and
pardon our passed faults. We confess (O dear Father) that we of our selves
are the cause of our own woe, and prouokers of this thy plague and grievous
punishment which is fallen upon us most worthily. Yea, our own detestable
deeds committed against thy sacred will, our obstinate pride, in time of
plenty, our security in time of health; our unthankfulness toward thy
goodness, in time of prosperity; our contempt of thy Word daily read and
preached unto us, did threaten long before this thy rod and scourge of
sickness, or some greater judgment.

Our continual transgressions; as our Idleness, Wantonness, Whoredom,
Drunkenness, Gaming, Swearing, Swilling, Slandering, Stealing, Fighting,
Quarrelling, Polling, Pilling, Usury, Extortion and Oppression of the poor;
our Bribery, Covetousness, Defrauding of the Widow and Fatherless, with a huge
heap more of such like vices, have been the causes of this our misery and
smart, which now we feel to our torment and grief, and have moved thee the
holy One of Israel to power out the fearful cup of thy wrath and vengeance
upon us, which thy justice does crave, and we daily deserve. Nevertheless
(dear Father of mercy) though we have through our sins showed our selves
enemies unto thee, and vessels of thy wrath, and unworthy to pray unto thee
with our lying lips, and polluted mouths, much less to obtain our suites at
thy hands. Yet (most merciful Father) we beseech thee be favorable unto us,
in showing thy mercy unto us that are miserable: For, if thou O Lord, do
strictly mark what is done amiss among men, and wilt retain our iniquity: O
Lord, who shall then be able to abide it, or to stand in thy sight? Verily no
flesh, no not the iustest man that lives this day upon the face of the earth.

Therefore (O Lord) we return to thee with our hearts, and come home with the
Prodigal Son, although late at night, repenting the rude race we have
runned, and being heartily sorry for the lewd life we have led: we prostrate
our selves, and fall down flat to the ground before the Throne of thy Grace;
beseeching thee as our tender and pitiful Father, to embrace us with the arms
of mercy and compassion, to turn away thy face from our loathsome sins, and
blot out of thy remembrance our former offenses. Revive (O Lord) our sorrowful
and penitent spirits after the time of our try all; comfort our careful and
contrite hearts, for give us our trespasses: Turn to us in thy mercy, which
return to thee from sin; direct our ways hereafter in the works of thy
commandments; increase our Faith, and make these thy judgments and grievous
plagues, which thou have worthily inflicted upon us for our wickedness, be a
caveat and warning blow unto us hereafter, that we never fall again to our
former folly, nor heap upon our own heads thy wrath and vengeance, lest a
worse thing happen unto us: but that this our chasticement may work in our
minds true and unfeigned repentance: So that when thy heavenly hand shall slake
from the execution of thy just judgment, when thy wrath is appeased, and we
safely delivered, acquitted, and discharged of this misery wherein we are now
wrapped, we may indeed amend that which is amiss in us, tread Satan under our
feet, contemn the world, mortify the lusts of the flesh, crucify the whole
body of sin, and as newborn Babes show our selves hereafter more thankful
for thy benefits powered upon us in most plentiful manner: as for our health,
wealth, tranquillity and liberty; the preaching of thy Gospel; the true
knowledge of thy will revealed in thy Word; the outward peace of our bodies,
and the inward comfort of our souls: All which graces, with many more, we have
enjoyed a long time in more ample manner, then any other People or Nation under
heaven. O Lord, we humbly beseech thee, continue thy good blessings toward us
thine unworthy and unthankful servants; and grant that thy holy Name may be
so glorified hereafter, in all our thoughts, words, and works, during this
transitory life; that in the end when thou have wrought thy will with us, we
may reign with thee and all the holy company of heaven in the life everlasting.
Grant also (dear Father) relaxation, and release of thy plagues and
punishments unto this thine afflicted town of and to all other countries,
towns, houses, and people which be in the like calamity and distress, for the
love and precious Passion of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, in whose
blessed name we bow the knees both of our souls and bodies, and humbly
prostrate our selves here before the Throne of thy glorious Majesty, praying
unto thee as he has taught us, and saying, Our Father, which art in Heaven,
etc.

The third Duty of the Pastor.
THe third thing pertaining to a good Pastor, is his godly counsel or
admonition: as for example,

Good Brother, you must now in this time of Gods visitation, call to mind your
former life: The more vicious and faulty you have been, the deeper you ought
to sigh and groan in spirit for your offenses: and whereinsoeuer you have
displeased God, consider, that amendment of life to come, and repentance for
your sins past, is the way and means to become friends with him, and to be
at peace in your own conscience. But this repentance may not be in mouth
outwardly, but inwardly in simplicity of heart, continually detesting that
which is evil, and ardently loving that which is good and acceptable to God:
And so though unworthy of your self, you may be accepted of God, by faith in
his beloved Son, with whom the Father is well pleased; but with us and our
unrighteousness, he cannot be but highly displeased: it is good therefore to
acknowledge and confess your sin to God, and to submit your self to his
Majesty, by true conversion and sorrow of heart, with an inward grief and
lothing of those sins, which before you took pleasure in; and craving of
mercy and pardon at his hands whom you have so often offended. So did David the
King; so did the poor Publican knock at the door of his heart, and being
pressed and overwhelmed with sorrow, he cried: Lord be merciful unto me a Luke
18. 13.
sinner. So we, spare us, O Lord, spare thy people. And this must be done in
time, even now presently: For now is that acceptable time. 2. Cor. 6. 2.
Now is the Day of salvation, Now is the Day of hearing.

Christ lamented the state of Jerusalem, because she knew not the times of her
visitation. Therefore (good brother) apply this plaster to your sore: you are
now visited of God by sickness, it is now your time to call your sins to
remembrance, defer it not, but watch for your salvation offered: they say,
warned men may live. Jerusalem warnes you, sickness warnes you, your gray head
warnes you, your friends warn you, I warn you, and God warnes you in his Word
to repent, to renounce this world, to watch for your delivery, to look for your
redemption, and to have your conversation in heaven, from whence Phil. 3. 20.
you look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ.

The five foolish Virgins would not watch, but slept and slumbred, and
therefore had heaven gates shut up against them. The doors were opened, but
they were not ready with their Lamps burning, but were taken napping in their
security and sin.

Therefore, they may now knock, and thumpe, and cry, and call as loud as they
can, and yet they shall never be heard, it is but lip-labor, all is in vain.
The time was, but it never shall be again: Mercy was offered, which being
refused, Justice must take place. Such examples are set down for our
instruction; and happy is that man which can take heed by other men's harms.
If Gods judgment cannot fear us to forsake sin, yet his mercy should move
us, and lead us by the hand to warch and be careful for our salvation: for
God pitieth us, his Angels favor us, his benefits provoke us, yea all his
creatures, Sun, Moon and Stars, Heaven and earth do admonish us, and
should provoke us to beware, to watch and ward for our salvation: They cry
continually, Repent and amend. The shortness of our time may move us hereunto.
We see by daily experience, to day a man, to morrow none, he that lives the
longest, his race is soon finished and ended: and that made Job to say, Man
has but a short time to Job 14. 1.
live, and in that time he is subject to many miseries, as poverty, slanders,
persecutions, blindness, lamenesse, oldnesse, coldness, trouble and
sickness: All these molestations and thousands mo warn us, by course to
beware that we run right. Let us therefore (good Brother) tuck up our
garments, and prepare our selves for the life to come; for the time of our
departing is at hand. That little time that remains, let us bestow it in the
service of God, and not of the devil: Let us not walk with the wicked in the
wide way that leads to damnation, but rather keep company with the servants
of God, and walk in the narrow way with them; though it be painful and
cumbersome for a while, yet it is comfortable in the end; when we shall have
our recompense with the righteous, then shall death be welcome to us, which
now is shunned of the most; then the Day of Judgment shall lighten our hearts,
when it shall load the conscience of the impenitent sinner; we may then with
comfort lift up our heads and hearts, when the ungodly may hang them down,
and be ashamed to look either God or man in the face. I would to God all men
would remember this day of reckoning and reward; then if love of salvation
could not make us do well, yet fear of damnation would somewhat bridle and
stay us from doing evil. It would move the rich to pity the poor, the
Usurer and Extortioner to restore their evil gotten goods with just Zacheus:
the Landlord not to cut his Tenants throat, by making him and al he has, his
bondslaues: for those wicked worldings which will not now be drawn to
repentance by hearing, shall then be tormented both body and soul by feeling,
when they shall be taken tardie in their sins, apprehended, accused,
indicted, and arraigned at the Bar of Gods Tribunal Judgment Seat; where the
ungodly shall not be able to stand, much less to answer their crime, when
Gods sword is drawn ready to strike and take vengeance; at that day no
entreaty will take place, nor prayer be heard either of men or Angels in their
behalf: for all the creatures of God shall refuse to do them service at their
death, because they refused to do God service in their life; and for that
occasion they shall hear and see all things cry vengeance upon them: nothing
in heaven or earth to minister comfort, but rather cause of grief and horror:
let this geere enter into your brain betime (good brother) and let it pearce
your heart now in your life time; for after death you shall have no time to
repent and turn to God, neither is there then any mercy to be hoped for at his
hands, but a fearful looking for the sentence of Gods just judgment: Go
Math. 25. 41.
ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. Then they may yell, houle and cry, and
yet never find grace, after Gods curse has once taken place: All their mirth
shall then be turned to mourning, their honor to shame, their pleasure to
pain, their wealth to woe, and their delicate fare on earth, to the bitter
torments of hell, where they shall remain for ever in darkness and
perpetual pain.

This shall be the portion of the ungodly: whereas contrariwise the righteous
shall be shrouded under the wings of Gods mercy, and safely preserved from those
tortures by the blood of the Lamb: the Angels shall guard them, the Saints
shall embrace them, the heavens receive them, and the pleasures of the
Celestial Paradise shall replenish them with unspeakable joy and continual
comfort: therefore let us prepare our selves for that Day of reward: perhaps it
is nearer then we are aware: let us have continually in our minds the joys
of heaven, and the pains of hell: let the one move us to love God, the other
to fear him, lest we be damned with the wicked. Let us turn to the Lord
betime: Let us promise, and perform; for many promise in their woe, that which
they soon forget when they wax wanton. They are then secure, they dream of a
dry Summer, as the rich Cormorant did, which forgetting God, and wallowing in
worldly wealth, cast away all care of doing his duty, and said, Soul, thou
Luke 12. 19
have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take
thy pastime. Oh, jolly Gentleman, this fellow is now in his ruff: but behold a
cooling card! the Lord answered again, and that speedily and readlly, O fool,
this night will they setch away thy soul from thee: whose then shall thy goods
be that thou have provided?

It is wisdom therefore for man to provide for God, and then God will provide
for him. Therefore (good brother) I beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ,
repent, and correct your self betime, reform your manners and behavior by
the rule of Gods Law, that you may avoid the curse thereof, and be preserved
and saved: that when Jesus Christ shall come to his Judgment from the highest
heavens, in power and Majesty, accompanied with his holy Angels and Saints, you
may meet him with a joyful heart, and obtain the crown of glory and
victory, which is the reward of Gods children: and so reign with that
righteous Judge, in perpetual peace. continual comfort, and endless joy:
which God grant to you and me, and all that love his coming, Amen.

And that we may the better perform the Premises, let us in all our actions
set these four things before our eyes, that is, the Day of Death, the Day of
Doom, that Condemnation of the wicked, and the Salvation of the godly.

To the wicked and damned sort, death is miserable, Gods Judgments terrible,
and their pain intolerable: To the godly and such as shall be saved, death is
pleasant, judgment comfortable, and their joy perpetual: therefore it is
better betime to repent and reform our selves with the godly, then to drive
off from day to day, with the wicked, which neither by Gods mercy nor judgment
will be drawn to amendment, but neglect all means and occasions: and there
is no better time, nor fitter occasion to prepare our selves to our end, then
when we feel Gods heavy hand laid upon us by any kind of cross, sickness,
or other visitation; for thereby God gives us friendly warning to make our
selves in a readiness, and to give over the world: and happy man is he
(whosoever he be) which forsakes sin, before sin forsake him, and that
gives over the world, before the world give him over: for when we have
discharged our selves of this world, and this world shall be discharged of us,
then we have the greatest account of all to reckon for: Therefore (my dear
brother) that fear God and beleeuest in him, while thou art now chastised
with sickness and pain, and perceiuest death to approach, bestur your self
betime, follow Christ at foot, prostrate your self before him, fall down
flat on the earth, deny your self, acknowledge your sin, trust in him, never
give over, cry and call aloud, Miserere mei, Domine, miserere mei: i. Have
mercy on me, O Lord, have mercy on me, Cry with the Cananite: O son of
David, have Mat. 15. 22
mercy on me: and at length he will look back, take pity upon you, forgive
you your sins, and receive you to his mercy.

Let the innocent Lamb of God be an example unto you herein: for Christ
himself in his extreme agony, when his sweat was like drops of blood trick
ling down to the ground, yet he prayed earnestly to have his Fathers Will
fulfilled. So must you do, that is now weak and feeble in body be fervent in
spirit, renounce the wicked world, with all the vanities therein, tread them
under your feet, Sursum cor, Lift up Col. 3. 1, 2
your heart to God, meditate upon heavenly things, for it is high time: Behold,
the Son of GOD your merciful Redeemer, that sweat water and blood for your
sins, behold him sitting on the right hand of his Father, making intercession
for you, join your self to him, pray unto God fervently in his name, and say
as he himself did in the anguish of his Spirit here on earth; Father, into
thy Luke 23. 46
hands I commend my Spirit. Thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, Lord
have mercy upon me, and forgive me my sins. Sweet Jesus, receive my soul into
thy Kingdom, etc.

I beseech you (gentle Brother) think upon my words in my absence, and
continue in this mind, having a firm faith in Christ Jesus, even to your end.

And withal, take in good part this my friendly admonition: Let it work in
your heart true repentance to salvation, and if you doubt any thing touching
your belief, life or Religion, or any other private causes that may in some
sort trouble your conscience: I pray you let me resolve you, and I will do my
endeavor to satisfy you therein, so far forth as may tend to your salvation
and comfort, which I heartily wish in Christ Jesus: And so for this time I
leave you, committing you to the tuition of him that is able to save you.

The fourth duty of the Pastor.
THe fourth duty of the Pastor is, to comfort the sick in all their
distress, danger and fear, with sentences, examples, and persuasions out of
the Word of God, especially toward their end.

We fear chiefly two things, 1 Death in this life. 2. Damnation after death

I purpose not to speak much of either, for if I did, I should but make the
volume of this book to large, and so cause the Printer to waste paper, to his
further charges, and my greater pains, and yet say nothing but that which is
set down already by those that are better learned then my self, and have
trodden the way before me. Therefore having partly touched the same in my
Questions, I will only add these few lines following, touching both for example
sake.

It is an old rule in Physic: Take away the cause, and the effect is taken
away with it. Understand therefore (good Brother) that the causes why men so
much fear death, be many, according to the multitude of men and their manners.

The first cause is, for that daily coueted while life lasts, and yet
dreadful death dispatcheth us of all these delights even at a blow: this is
the fear of worldlings.

Secondly, we fear death,

The third cause why men whereof our faith is grounded.

The fourth cause why

But to be short, one comfortable blast of Gods spirit, will extinguish and
drive all these terrors quite away from us, even as the wind does drive away
the thick clouds or mists, which do separate us from the light and sight of the
Sun.

First therefore, for the the dross therein, it is indeed no loss, but gain
to those that by death enjoy the company of God and his Angels in heaven, where
they shall be immortal and incorruptible; freed from all carnal desires and
diseases of the body, and delivered from all sorrow and trouble of mind: no
loss therefore to the godly that have gained Christ, but to the wicked
worldlings that have lost their riches and pleasures here, and in stead thereof
possess perpetual pains elsewhere, to them it shall be said: Look how much
pleasure they have had, and give them so much torment.

Secondly, touching the

Thirdly, against incredulity lighted and not hid under a bushel, but openly
reueiled to the wide world, and that to the comfort and salvation of every one
that believes: for the knowledge of Gods Law, and the Gospel, are necessary
to our salvation: the reasons be diverse.

The one does fear us.

The other does comfort us.

The Law utters sin.

The Gospel forgiueth it.

The Law makes weak.

The Gospel makes strong.

The Law kills.

The Gospel quickens.

The Law throws down to hell.

The Gospel lifts up to heaven.

Fourthly, against the world, damnation, punishment, dangers, sin, death,
devil and hell.

Be at utter defiance with them all, and say boldly with the Apostle S. Paul,
It is Romans 8. 33.
God that justifies, who then can condemn? and again, God shall shortly
tread down Ro^. 16. 20.
Satan under your feet, etc.

If you believe this, and apply it right to your soul, you may then
cheerfully dye, and on your dying day sing and say that merry note, to your
great comfort and joy, viz. I desire to be Phil. 1. 23.
loosed, and to be with Christ.

This was the mark that the blessed Apostle Saint Paul did aim at, all his
life long; and therefore rejoicing in heart, he says, toward the end of his
course,

I am now ready to be offered, 2 Timothy 4. 6
and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good battle, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith: from henceforth there remains for
me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord a just Judge shall give me at
that day, not only unto me, but to all those that love his coming. This made
Stephen that faithful witness of his Master Christ, (seeing the glory of God)
constantly to call upon him, and say in his greatest torment of body, Lord Act
7. 59.
Jesus, receive my spirit. These men and many mo such like, have willingly
yielded their necks to the block, their bodies to torment, and their souls to
God, and boldly to depart out of the miseries of this world, embracing the
counsel of the wise man: who says, Fear Eccl. 4. 1, 3
not the judgment of death, remember them that have bin before thee, and that
come after: this is the ordinance of the Lord over all flesh.

And why would thou be against the pleasure of the most Highest? whether it
be ten, or an hundredth, or a thousand years, there is no defense for life
against the grave. No striving against the stream, no resisting against death.

But (alas) what means this? There is nothing that men so often behold as
death, and nothing that men so soon forget as death. As men ought not to be
careless of their final end: so they ought not to fear death, especially if
they have lived in the fear of God; for seeing all must dye, wherefore should
the godly be afraid of Bugges? what a fool is he that will fear his own
shadow? what good will it do us, either to complain or lament for that thing
which by no means we can escape?

Tell me, if thou can, with all thy skill, what man is he alive, that
breaths upon the earth, that shall live until he be an hundredth years
old? or, what one can thou name for thy life, with whom thou have been
acquainted an hundredth years since? crack me this Nut, read me this Riddle,
Et eris mihi magnus Apollo: that is, I will account thee as a God for thy skill.
Seeing then that our life is both short and uncertain, and that these things
are general to all, and not to thee or to me alone; Why should we not in good
fellowship taste of the same sauce, and drink of the same cup one after
another, and that without fear or grudging, as all our predecessors have done?
Let us yield our pampred bodies to the earth, and our sinful souls to the
trial of justice: for so have the godly always done, they account the world
to be but a Race, a Vale of miseries, and a paineful Pilgrimage, and therefore
they covet to have the course of this life finished, they wait continually for
the good hour, looking after death for a joyful resurrection. And of this
hope they have the sweet and comfortable Testimony of Gods Spirit within them,
as a gage or pledge of their salvation, which will never forsake them, until
it have presented them before the Majesty of God, as heirs and coheires with
Jesus Christ of his heavenly Kingdom, purchased for us with his own blood,
wherein our souls and filthy bodies are sprinkled and thoroughly washed. What a
comfort is this to a Christian heart? What need a man thus minded to fear
death after this life, any more then the laboring man (after he has toyled
sore all the day long) need to fear sleep and his quiet rest at night? No,
no, he may rather with a cheerful conscience wish for death, because as
Christ says, He shall pass from death Ion. 5. 24.
to life.

Let us therefore (good Christian Brother) so live with Christ, that we may dye
in him; and let us so glorify him in this life by our godly conversation, that
we may be glorified of him in the life to come, to our comfort and salvation.
The best remedy to avoid this frivolous fear of death, is to repent our former
sins, and hereafter to apply our selves to live in his true service and fear.

So that first we may finish

Secondly, that we may receive at Gods hands in

Thirdly, that we may avoid

Fourthly and finally, that

Amen.
Consolation against damnation.
IT is most certain (good Brother) that when we lie sick in the pangs of
death, then presently our sins committed against the holy Will and
Commandment of God, do present themselves unto us, rushing in upon us with
great violence: Then we can behold nothing but Gods Judgment above us, hell
beneath us, damnation before us, and our sins within us; then there is nothing
but fear, trembling, and horror on every side us. All our enemies are now
gathered together to assault us with sorrow and heaviness: now we had need of a
strong faith and a good courage in this case: for no doubt, our old enemy Satan
will now play his part in tempting of us; he will with boldness present unto
us all the sins we have committed all our life time, he will heap together
whole VVain-loads of our trespasses in great abundance, to the end, to dash us
out of countenance with God, and to make us doubt of Gods mercy, and so to fall
to desperation; here now we stand in more need of godly counsel and comfort,
then ever we did in all our life time: we are now put to our plunge, and
forced to seek shifts, for Satan will then press silly souls with fear and
perplexity, that they cannot tell how to wind themselves out of his claws, he
will make of every molehill, a mountain; of a Fly, an Elephant; and of every
light sin, a deep wound in our conscience, which breeds such hurly-burly
within us, that we can be at no rest with our selves: when it it is day, we
wish for night, and when it is night, we would have it day our meat does us no
good, our sleep is unsound, our heart cannot be merry, sorrow ouerwhelmeth
us, all comfort forsakes us, there is no joy nor pleasure in the world that
can delight us. And thus the Devil, which before allured us unto sin, writes
up all in his book, and in the time of danger, or toward our death, when he
comes to accuse, he will bring the whole reconing, and then turn all our
former pleasure into present pain; then the pearcing sting and woeful worm of
our conscience pricketh and biteth us in such fearful sort, that many men
have been forced even openly with trembling flesh and sorrowful souls to cry
out of their sins: now the^ being brought to this woeful case, what is to be
done? The next way is, to seek for remedy; when we lack our bodily health,
and are pained with sickness, we straightway post, yea we run and we ride
with all speed unto a Physician, we let for no labor, we spare no cost to
procure medicines, and remedies for our earthly bodies: why do we not then
with like diligence seek out remedies against the noisome diseases and
infections of the soul, being much more grievous and more dangerous then these
of the body?

Now therefore (dear Brother) to apply these words to the comfort of your
careful conscience, and wearisome body, being afflicted inwardly, and pained
outwardly: Are you desirous of salvation? would you willingly dye in Gods
favor? would you be received into his heavenly Tabernacle? do you desire to
be blessed with old Jacob? And do you covet to be a Citizen of the heavenly
Jerusalem? then give ear and take good heed unto such comfortable counsel, as
by Gods gift and grace I shall minister unto you.

First, prostrate your self before the divine Majesty of God: Let your sin
be a grief unto you, but let it not grieve you to confess it: for of all
other things, our sins do bite the soarest, and pearce our souls the
deepest, because they are aggrauated with all the threatenings of Gods
vengeance, which makes us loath to have them searched or known to the world,
or any way touched by the Word; we had rather have them plaistred with sweet
promises, and bathed in the mercies of God, whereas it is more safe to have
them pricked and made manifest by the rigor of the Law, although it bring both
shame and blame.

Therefore (my good Brother) if you be ashamed of your self, and of your
sin (as all men may be) yet for all that, be neither abashed or ashamed to
acknowledge it and crave pardon. If you see no worthiness in your self, but
the world accusing you without, and your own conscience within, yet despair
not utterly, but lift up your eyes to heaven, and there behold Jesus Christ
your Savior, sitting on the right hand of God, as a Mediator, making
intercession for you to his heavenly Father: he was a Savior on earth, so he
remains Heb. 13. 8.
in heaven. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same also is for ever.

Yesterday, he called to sinners, and said: Come unto me, Mat. 11. 28.
all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. And to day he cries
and calls in like manner, and will do to the worlds end: Yesterday he said, I
came not to call the Mat. 9. 12
just, but sinners to repentance. And to day he says the same. Yesterday he
forgave Mat. 18. 27
ten thousand Talents to one debtor; his arm is not shortened to day, he is the
same God he was. Yesterday he forgave the prodigal son, his sin in leading
a lascivious and lewd life, and to day he does the like to many more.

Yesterday he forgave Peter his perjury, Paul his blasphemy, the sons of
Zebede their pride, Mary Magdalene her whooredome. As he was a merciful
Christ yesterday, so he is to day, and will be to morrow. Yesterday he came
to save sinners, and to day he comes to save, and to morrow he will come, and
for ever he will not reject them, if they repent.

Therefore, Satan, what can thou say, or allege against me? or how dare
thou presume to charge me or any one of Gods Elect? If God will save, thou
can not condemn: If Christ will show mercy, I defy thy cruelty.

It may be, thou will object against me, and say, These are particular
examples, and they became holy men afterward. This makes nothing for you, but
against you: you are no such man, neither are you to expect such mercy. But I
say unto thy teeth, Satan, Thou art and have been a liar from the beginning.
Gods Word and his promise are stablished in Heaven. And this one sentence is
sufficient to comfort me, and convince thee: Jesus Christ yesterday, to day,
and the same also for ever: Always one and the same, he cannot deny himself:
he is mercy it self; by nature merciful; by office merciful; in his life
merciful; in his death merciful. He is no changeling: I may change, the
world may change, but he is immutable, and cannot change. He still continues
always alike mighty, always alike liberal, always alike merciful: A
Savior yesterday, a Savior to day, and a Savior to morrow, and so to the
worlds end, and after. Therefore avoid and away Satan, tempt me no longer, do
not threaten me damnation. For I know and believe assuredly, that there is
Romans 8. 1.
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. O how sweet is this blessed
name Jesus, which signifies a Savior, to the pensive soul of a sinner! O how
much and how deeply are we bound to God our heavenly Father, for our
salvation wrought by this his dear and only Son, in whom he acknowledges
himself to be fully satisfied and appeased Mat. 3. 1^.
for our sins! This testimony proceeding from Heaven, is so certain, that
all the Devils in hell, and enemies in earth, shall never be able to withstand
it; for no creature but Christ alone, has power to remit sins. He it is
alone, that has taken upon him our Esaias 53. 4.
sins, and borne our pains. They that are strong, need not Mat. 9. 12, 13.
the Physician, but they that are sick. Christ came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance. Our names are Luke 10. 20
written in heaven, and recorded for ever in the Book of Life. For God so loved
the Ioh. 3. 16,
world, that he has given us his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent
not his Son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. These are comfortable words to all those that
are clogged in conscience: these are general words uttered to the wide world,
by him that came to save the world; by him that has promised and will
perform; by him that calls all, and exempteth none, as appears by that
general Sentence, which cannot too often be recited: Come unto Mat. 2. 28.
me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. This comfortable
call and cheerful cry of Christ, should be printed in our hearts, and ring
in our ears as an alarm night and day, they should awake us out of the sleep
of sin, and move us to come at the first bidding. You see how friendly and
fatherly we are called, no place or country is excepted, no time prohibited,
no sinner rejected, but to all he calls, and daily he calls, Come, Come.

This word may serve for the first Call in this world, and warn us of the last
Call in the day of Judgment; for the Judge shall then rehearse the same, Come,
ye blessed. If you will obey the first Call here, you shall hear the second
Call hereafter to your great joy and comfort. We are all here laden with
sin, we are all weary of the burden, it is too heavy for the best to bear.
Therefore let us come to Christ our Lord and Master for ease, he has already
borne the burden of our sins upon his own shoulders, and nailed them fast
upon his Cross. When we are most laden, then lifts he for life: when we are
most in misery, then he is most merciful and mighty: when we are fallen flat
to the earth, and brought low to hell gate, then he stretches out his long
and large arm of mercy, and plucketh us out of all danger, delivers us from
the dunghill and danger of the Devil, and so leads us ready by the hand to
his Fathers Kingdom. Thus he does to all (there is no respect of persons) bond
Gal. 3. 28.
and free, Jew and Gentile. He refuses not Publicans, as Zacheus: no not
Whoremongers Luke 19. 5.
and murderers, as David: not Drunkards, as Noah and Lot: not great sinners,
as Mary Magdalen: not the Thief, hanging on his right hand: not persecutors,
as Paul: no, not swearers and forswearers of themselves, as Peter: but most
tenderly and lovingly he accepts their repentance, embraces them with the
arms of his mercy, and forgiueth them their sins.

Now therefore (good Brother) in the time of this your trial and Visitation, I
would wish you to apply these comfortable sentences and examples to your self,
for the better safety of your own soul. Are you injured by your enemies? Come
to Christ, he is able to redress it. Are you falsely accused or slandered? You
are the more like to your Master Christ Jesus: for he was so handled before
you. Are you troubled by mighty men? Come to Christ: for he pulls down the
mighty from their seat. Are you forsaken of your friends? Come to Christ, for
he forsakes none, except they first forsake him. Art thou tormented with
bodily sickness? Come to Christ, for he smites and heals. Art thou in danger
of death? Come to Christ, for he is the life that shall never have end. Do
you fear hell and damnation? Come to Christ, who has delivered you from hell,
and wrought your salvation: who defying the Devil, has said by his Apostle: O
death, where 1. Cor. 15. 55,
is thy sting? O hell, where is thy victory? Let us clap our hands, rejoice at
heart, and say, Thanks be unto God, which has given us victory, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. We may now boldly say with just Job, the faithful servant
of God, I am Job 19. 25,
sure that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth. And
though after 26,
my skin, worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh. Whom I my
self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my
reins are consumed within me.

So that neither death, nor damnation is terrible to those that behold Christ
aright with the eyes of their Faith. A sure faith obtains any thing at Gods
hands: as for example: The Mat. 15. 22
woman of Canaan cried, O son of David, have mercy on me, and her Daughter
was healed.

The Publican cried, God Luke 18. 13
be merciful unto me a sinner, and he went home justified. The Centurion
believed, and Mat. 8. 13.
his son was restored. The Mar. 5. 23.
Master of the Synagogue prays, and his Daughter was revived.

The Apostles cry, Save Mat. 8. 25.
us, O Lord, we perish: and they are saved every one. Not one person can
perish, Mat. 10. 33
no, nor one hair of his head, without Gods divine providence and permission.
For although our heavenly Father try us by troubles in this world, as the gold
is tried in the fire; yet after the time of trial he is never the further
off. But the more grievous our sickness is, the greater our afflictions be, and
the more heavy our hearts wax, the more we ought to rejoice, seeing our reward
is great in Mat. 5. 12.
heaven, as Christ has said, whom we ought to follow with our cross on our
backs here on earth, if we mean to reign with him in heaven.

Therefore (good Brother) in your grief and agony, hold up your hands, and
lift up your heart to heaven, despair not at all, fear not too much, but be
of good comfort. And as Saint Augustine faith; Aug. sent. de Poenit.
Ille solus diffidat qui tantum penare potest, quantum Deus bonus est: that is,
let that man only distrust or despair, whose sin exceeds Gods goodness.
But the Devil himself, and all our iniquity is less then Gods mercy: and
therefore the greatest sinners in the world, ought not to despair, if they
repent, seeing his mercy is above all his works: for of his mercy there is
neither number, nor measure, nor end. The mercy of the Lord embraces us on
every side. The sentence of Ezechiel is sure and sealed up in Heaven: That God
will not have the Ezec. 18. 32.
death and damnation of a sinner, but rather his life and conversion. Wherefore
will thou perish, O Israel? And wherefore will thou despair, O sinful flesh?
Come to God: Come to his beloved Son Christ Jesus: the Master calls thee,
he offers thee his mercy; he promises thee forgiveness: Come thou early,
come thou late, if thou come at all, (whether it be at noone day, or at night)
thou shall have thy penny, as well as he that came in the morning. The thief
on Christ's right hand was called the last hour, and came, and cried to Christ,
that he Luke 23. 42
would remember him. He knocked so hard at the door of Gods mercy, that Christ
promised him that day, to have the door of Paradise opened unto him, and to
enter in with himself. This gate shall be open to us, if we do as he did.
For it is shut to no man but of himself; neither is it open to any, but by
Christ Jesus. If we believe in this Christ Jesus, that he is a Savior, and
that he dyed for our sins, and did rise again for our justification, we
need not to dread either death or damnation, the gates of hell shall not
prevail against us: because Christ is our foundation, our cornerstone to
lean unto, our buckler and shield to defend us from our enemies, our head, our
good Shepherd, the Bishop of our souls, our only Master, and merciful
Redeemer. Let us therefore be of good cheer: Let us trust in his mercy, whose
merits have purchased our salvation with God the Father: And so we may with
safety of our souls depart from worldly troubles, to heavenly rest; from
death, to life; from damnation, to salvation; which God of his goodness
vouchsafe to give us in Christ Jesus our Savior: to whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be all honor, power, and praise, world without end.

Amen.
THE SECOND PART OF THIS Book pertaining to the SICK.
THe first duty of the sick person, visited by God, is to confess his Faith,
and to make open protestation of the same before his Pastor, and the rest that
stand by at his end, that they may be witnesses with him, and testify after
God has received his soul into eternal rest, that he lived and dyed the
Child of God, the true Servant of Jesus Christ his Savior, and as becomes a
charitable Christian, and one of the household of Faith.

The confession of the Faith.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

The sum of this Belief confessed.
I Am fully persuaded, and undoubtedly I do confess and acknowledge before
God, and all you here present, that every point and Article of this my
belief, is true and necessary unto salvation: for without Faith we cannot
Heb. 11. 6.
please God, or be saved. And therefore I steadfastly believe in my heart, that
this in very deed is the true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic faith, which
all good Christians ought to hold, to the hazard both of living and life, if
cause require.

Of this our belief there be 4. principal parts. The first concerns GOD the
Father. The second, God the Son. The third, God the holy Ghost. The fourth,
the holy Church, or congregation of God.


Of which faith, I make protestation, as follows.

I constantly believe in heart, that which I now outwardly confess with my
mouth: ( viz.) That there is but one true, almighty, everlasting, living, just
and merciful God; of incomprehensible glory, majesty and might, invisible,
infinite and immortal. And yet in this Godhead are included three distinct
persons; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, united together in Deity
and substance inseparably: of like equality in will, might, and glory: without
beginning, without ending: from whom (as from a most clear fountain) all
virtue and goodness proceeds to man, and every living creature: By whom we
live, move, and Act. 17. 28.
are. In whom alone we are blessed, and without whom we are accursed,
miserable, and wretched. Which incomprehensible, and invisible God has
reueiled himself unto man many ways:

1. Miraculously by his works.

2. Outwardly by his Word: And

3. Inwardly by his holy Spirit.

First, I will confess my belief touching the Father; Then I will proceed to
the Son; and finally to the Holy Ghost: not that I prefer one person before
another; but because naturally man does best apprehend and conceive this order:
namely, that the Father should be set before the Son, and the Father and the
Son together, before him that proceeds from them both. And yet,
nevertheless, all the three persons be but one God, equal and coeternall.

First, therefore, I do believe Moon, and Stars, the Fowls of the Air,
the Beasts of the Field, the fruits of the Earth, and the fishes of the Sea.
All these of his great goodness he has made, blessed, and increased for man to
do him service, and that in most wonderful and plentiful manner. Yea, they
were all created before man was made, to the end that Man at his first entry
into the world, should come (as it were) into a house ready furnished, and so
take full and quiet possession of all Gods creatures, and become Lord and Ruler
over them: and they all from time to time to be serviceable unto him as to
their King. Only he would that man should be obedient, and show himself
thankful unto his God for these his blessings. In performing which duty, I for
mine own part have too often failed; God grant that I may hereafter both know
his will, and by the fruits of Faith show my self more dutiful toward his
Majesty, even to my lives end.

Secondly, I believe in God the Son, the second Person in Trinity, who of his
great goodness has mercifully redeemed me and all mankind, from Gal. 3. 13.
Tit. 2. 14. Apoc. 5. 9.
the thraldom of Satan, Death, and Sin, and from the torment of Hell fire
due to the same, being of my self condemned thereunto by Gods just judgment,
through disobedience and transgression. Yet I firmly believe that I am
acquitted, discharged, and fully ransomed from the same, by my sweet Savior
Jesus Christ, that did sweat water and blood for my sin; who willingly of his
own accord came down from the seat of his Majesty in the highest heavens,
into the vile and stinking bowels of the earth, where he for my sake, and all
his elect, did not abhor to take flesh of the pure Virgin Mary, and became
man, and in the same flesh, suffered most bitter pain and torment, being
condemned by an earthly judge, to the most shameful death of the Cross, and
so was buried, and descended into Hell, rising again for our justification,
and ascending into heaven, for our glorification, and to open us the gate of
salvation, which before was barred, and fast shut up against us. And my belief
is, that as before he came as a Lamb in humility and mercy to seek and
save sinners: So he shall come again as a Lion in the end of the world, in
great glory and Majesty, Mat. 25. 31
accompanied with Angels and heavenly Soldiers, as a righteous Judge of the
quick and dead; separating the Sheep from the Goats, adiudging the one as
hirelings of Hell, and the other as inheritors of Heaven. And this (among many
others) is a singular comfort to me, to know assuredly that no other shall be
my judge, but he that is the Savior of my soul, and suffered for my sins.
So that in all my perplexity, peril, and danger, I set this Jesus a Savior
before mine eyes, as a shield, a buckler, and sure wall between me and my
spiritual so the Devil, and all his tyranny, assuring my self by this
confidence, that neither he by his cruelty, nor all the Army of hell can ever
hurt or harm me, or any of Gods Elect.

Thirdly, I believe in expounds unto me the divine mysteries of God, and
moves me to lead a godly life.

This is that blessed wind which blows where it lists, even the Spirit of
God, which of carnal, makes us spiritual; of cruel, meek; of malicious,
charitable; of covetous, liberal; of dissolute, temperate; of foolish, wise;
of earthly, heavenly; of the bondslaues of Satan, the dear sons of GOD,
whereby we may boldly cry, Abba Father. I believe that this holy Ghost is the
earnest penny here on earth, of my salvation in heaven, and that he will never
forsake me, no not in the hour of death and my greatest danger: but that he
will comfort me continually in all woe and temptations: so that although I be
tried by the touchstone of affliction, grieved with extreme pain of body, or
torinented with inward vexation of mind; yet I shall not be overcome, neither
shall my cross be greater then I shall be able to bear and endure. For I know
assuredly, that this holy Ghost will mercifully preserve me both in body and
soul unto the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to judgment, at the
dreadful day of doom, and there present me holy and without blame, before his
Throne of grace, (although of my self unworthy,) yet this sweet Comforter Romans
8. 15, 16.
does, of his especial grace, bear witness with my spirit and conscience, and
that in most comfortable manner, that I am of the number of those which shall
be saved, and that I shall stand in the last day on the right hand of Christ,
and hear that cheerful sentence to my great joy and comfort* Come, ye
blessed of my Father, Mat. 25. 34
possess the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. You
have been long Pilgrims on earth, but now you shall be Citizens in heaven: you
have mourned a long time, but now you shall laugh for ever. I will wipe away
all tears from your eyes. Enter at last (now that the heat of the day is
past) into your Masters joy.

All these three persons before rehearsed, I believe to be one God in essence,
whose seat is in the heavens above, and whose footstool is the earth beneath.
Unto whom all the Powers, Angels, and Saints in heaven are subject, and do
their daily service in setting forth his praises, casting down their crowns
at his foot, and ascribing all honor and glory to the crowned King that
sits upon the Throne, and reigns for evermore; and also to the Lamb his
beloved son and our Savior. God grant that we may do him like service here
on earth.

Fourthly, and finally, I Apoc. 21.
only is Prince; of this body, Christ only is Head; and of this Spouse,
Christ only is the Bridegroom. This Church is called the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, a spiritual House, a holy Nation, a Royal Priesthood, the Citizens of
Heaven, the Pillar of Truth, the Arc of Noah, the Communion of Saints:
Agreeing at this day in all points of Scripture, Faith and Religion, with the
Primitive Church of God: Firmly holding, and boldly confessing one God, one
Faith, one Baptism, one Lord and Savior of all, Jesus Christ: being the
sheep of Gods pasture, to whom belongs one fould, and one Shepherd, which
here on earth is called the militant Church, and in Heaven the triumphant
Church of God. Out of which Arc all perish, and out of which Church there is
no salvation: but whosoever is not found therein, he is, without all doubt,
damned. Of this Catholic Church of God, I believe, and am fully resolved that
I am a member, and that GOD has a care of me, and will preserve me safe,
until I have the fruition of his heavenly Jerusalem.

This Church is knit together, and united by faith, through the operation of
the Holy Ghost, as members of one body.

This Church has the pure Word of God truly and sincerely preached, and the
Sacraments duly and faithfully administered among them: These sheep hear the
voice of the true Shepherd Christ Jesus, and he knows them, and Ioh. 10. 3.
they follow him, and he will give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hand; nay, the gates of
Mat. 16. 18
hell shall not prevail nor overcome this Church. They which be of this
Church, shall have remission of their sins, continual peace and joy: They
shall shine and glister as the Stars of Heaven: they shall be clad with white
garments, and follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he goes: they shall have golden
crowns clapped on their heads, and shall see God face to face, and have
fellowship with his Saints who continually sing praifes to the eternal King,
which was, and is, and is to come. And I believe, that they which continue in
this Church on earth, shall after the Resurrection and general Judgment,
obtain everlasting life, and rest from their labors; which life and perpetual
peace God grant me and all his children. And from this Church I pray God I
never at any time swerve or decline, either in faith, doctrine, life, or
Religion; but that I may dye and live therein. And I humbly beseech God, even
with al my heart, to kindle and increase this Faith in me; that this hope being
steadfastly fixed in my heart, I may toward mine end cry and call with the
Saints of God, and with a good Apoc. 22. 20.
conscience, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, and hasten thy Kingdom, that we
may reign with thee in perpetual joy in the life everlasting.

Amen.
The protestation of the Sick.
I A wretched sinner, redeemed to God: So in like manner I may be reconciled
to the world. And therefore I most heartily pray as well all you that be here
present before me, as others that be absent, to forgive me wherein soever I
have offended you, being most willing to part out of this world in the favor
of God and good men.

I protest and acknowledge, my Lord God and the world, as I ought to have done.
I acknowledge my offenses to be mo in number then the Stars of Heaven, or the
sands in the Sea: for my negligence in not doing that which is good, and my
daily transgressions, in committing the things which are evil, are infinite. I
acknowledge that all my life has been such, as looking my self now at last in
the glass of my conscience, I find daily confusion, and my mind and body so
blemished with spots of uncleanness and filthiness, that I may be ashamed to
look God in the face, or once to lift up mine eyes toward Heaven. Therefore I
fall down to the earth with the poor Publican, and with lowly spirit, and
humble mind, I ask mercy and forgiveness of my Lord God, being sorry in my
heart, that ever I offended this my dear Father, and being fully purposed
with my self (if God restore my former health) never so grievously to offend
him again; but to avoid Vice, and embrace Virtue: yea, to hate and abhor the
sin, which before I loved, and wholly to conform my self to the will of God
in his Word.

I do protest, that albeit 3*
I have thus grievously and many ways offended God; yet I do not despair nor
distrust the loving mercy of my sweet Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ. But I
hope, by the merit of his death and Passion (and not mine own merits which are
nothing but a loathsome life) to be partaker of the heavenly inheritance.

I protest furthermore, holy Passion of Jesus Christ is a sure Rock, Refuge,
and defense whereunto I may boldly trust and stay my self. And therefore in
all adversity and trouble, I set the same against my invisible enemies, as a
strong Tower, bulwark, or spiritual harness, wherewithal the faithful
Soldier and Servant of Christ ought to be armed: Assuring my self, that the
punishment of all my sins is thereby fully discharged, the ransom paid, and
the obligation, whereby I was tied to the Law, cancelled: and that the virtue
of this Passion of Christ pertains not only to others, but also to me.

I protest before the omnipotent God, and before all his holy. Angels and
Saints, that I covet and desire to end my life in that faith, which becomes a
true Christian, and the Child of God: That is, I believe all the Canonical
Scriptures mentioned in the Old and New Testament, and set down by the holy
Prophets of God, and the Apostles of his Son Christ, as the Penmen and
writers; but instinct and prompted by the holy Ghost, the finger of God, as the
Author and Inditer: which have been from time to time, and in all ages,
received and believed of the true Catholic Church and Congregation of Jesus
Christ: So that, if through the tentation or suggestion of the Devil, or being
oppressed with the violence or smart of sickness, I should think, speak, or
do any thing contrary to this my confession and protestation made, I do now
beforehand utterly debar, and revoke the same, and do witness and confess
before God and you, that by no means I will willingly consent or yield my self
in the knowledge and understanding of my heart, to any such thoughts, words, or
works.

Finally, I protest, that I by whose unspeakable goodness, I trust, I shall dye
the Servant of God: and into whose holy hands and tuition, I commend my body
and soul, both now and in the hour of my death.

Amen.
The second duty of the sick Person.
THe second thing that is requisite in a sick person, is faithful and hearty
Prayer to God, either for his speedy deliverance out of all woe and
wretchedness: or else for constancy in his conflict, and patience in his
pain.

A godly metion or Meditatation before Prayer: In which, we crave for Grace,
Faith, and Patience.
O Lord, I am very sick, my body is weak, my strength fails me, my sinnewes
shrink, my hands and my feet wax feeble, mine eyes dazell and lose their
sight, all things are unsavory to me, my flesh putrifyeth, my breath
stinketh, my heart pants, and my life draws to an end. I perceive there is
but one way with me: The Lord be merciful unto me, and be my guide in this
my last journey: go I must, death is at door with his dart ready to strike,
he steals nearer and nearer toward me: he is even now at my bedside ready
to work his feate; I cannot prevent him, neither can I avoid or fly from him.
Therefore (O Lord) I make haste to run to thee for succor, which art the
true Physician both of body and soul. Heal me (O Lord) and I shall be whole;
preserve me, and I shall be safe under thy protection: for thou being my
defense and shield, I need not to fear the force of any foe. But who am I (O
merciful God) that beggeth so boldly at the door of thy mercy? I am a sinner,
and in sin I was begotten of my Father, and conceived of my Mother. I
confess my wretchedness, and my uncleanness is too manifest, both to thee,
and the world, it troubles my mind, and wounds my guilty conscience: woe is
me therefore. Yet spare me (O Lord) I humbly beseech thee, destroy me not in
thine anger, but chastise me in lenity. And albeit I am a grievous sinner; yet
I persuade my self I am thy son, and that thou can not but have a fatherly
care over me, for my elder Brothers sake, Christ Jesus thy beloved. Wherefore
arise and help me (O Lord) arise, I say, and cast me not away for ever: forgive
me all my sins, and raise thy poor Servant out of the dunghill, that being
released by thee from pain and grief, and also delivered from eternal death,
I may pray unto thee faithfully during my life: and after death obtain of thee
everlasting life, which thou have prepared for me, by the death and Passion of
thy dear Son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior, in whom thou art well
pleased, and by whose stripes I am cured, and trust to be saved, whose holy
name be blessed and praised, now and for ever.

Amen.
A fruitful Prayer for the assistance of God, in the extremity of sickness.
O Dear Father of Heaven, and Governor of the wide world, and the worker of
our wealth: whose goodness is unspeakable, and whose wifedome is incomparable:
whose mercy reaches unto the Clouds, and unto whose power all creatures are
subject. Thou God of the quick and the dead, which have placed me here on
earth, as a pilgrim or tenant at will, to remove at thy pleasure, and have
appointed me and all men living our bounds which we cannot pass: Have respect
unto the work of thy hands, bow down thine eyes of compassion (O Lord) visit
and comfort the pensive soul of thy poor prisoner. Open thy gracious ears,
and hear my petition, thou which art the Savior of my soul; grant me pardon
of my sin, and patience in my pain, that I never blaspheme thy holy name,
but suffer this thy scourge and punishment meekely, as becomes a good
Christian and servant of God: So that in this conflict of sickness, when my
flesh consumes away, my limbs wax lame, my sight fails, my heart faints,
and all my senses become nummed; yea, when life and death struggle and war
within me for superiority, and I lie linked in woe, in the pain and pangs of
death; receiving no food, taking no rest, but being past all recovery of
health to the judgment of man; Then look upon me with the eyes of mercy, O
thou glory of Sion: Thou Comfort of Israel, and beauty of Jerusalem. Then let
thy strength help my weakness, and thy mercy cure my misery. Then deliver
poor Joseph thy Servant out of Prison: Defend thy dear darling from the
devouring Dog: Stop the mouth, and weaken the force of the roaring Lion, and all
his devilish practices, that they never prevail against me. O Lord have mercy
upon me, and establish my heart, that I never faint in this my last and bitter
death. Remember (O Lord) what metal I am made of, that I am but sraile flesh
and filthy earth. Let it be thy pleasure therefore (O gracious God) to forgive
me my sins; to remit and utterly blot out of thy reckoning Book the ten
thousand Talents, which I owe thee. I acknowledge the debt, cancel therefore
the Obligation: for seeing I am not able to pay the debt, I must needs crave a
general pardon, or else perish for ever.

Spare me therefore (dear Father) and comfort the soul of thy Servant, which
repents his former folly, and humbles himself here before thy Majesty. O
Lord, let not the terror of Hell, the fear of death, the vexation of mind,
the bitter torment of sickness, the loss of life or worldly wealth withdraw my
soul from thee: But as thou did create it, and breathe it into my body:
Even so vouchsafe of thy great goodness, to preserve it during life, and after
death receive it with the souls of the righteous into thine own hands and
custody, and place it in perpetual felicity: So that at the general
Judgment, and the glorious Resurrection of all flesh, I may both body and
soul rise to life everlasting, and praise thee continually with the Angels and
Saints in Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Savior: to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, and glory, world without end.

Amen.
A pithy and profitable Prayer when we are in danger of death: wherein we
commit our selves to God, renounce the world, crave pardon for our sins, and
forgive our enemies.
O Lord, my good and gracious God, the Creator of Heaven and earth, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, which have made me of nothing to thine own likeness,
and redeemed me with thine own blood: whom I a wretched sinner am unworthy to
name, to call upon, or once to think in my heart: Here I prostrate and submit
my self before thy divine Majesty, and acknowledge my grievous sins, which
I have committed against thee, in thought, word, and deed: humbly craving
pardon thereof at thy fatherly hands. And I do also for mine own part, most
willingly forgive all men that have offended me, even as I look to be
forgiven of thee my loving and merciful God, whose wrath and just judgment I
have too often and that deservedly provoked against me. But nevertheless,
howsoever I have lived hitherto in my frail flesh, and in this body of sin:
yet I trust that thou, of thy gracious goodness, wilt grant me a happy end:
for I utterly renounce the world, and the vanities thereof, which all my life
time hitherto, I have too much coueted and delighted in; only I am now
careful for my soul, that it may be saved: and my earnest desire is, that I
may dwell with the Lord in the land of the living, which I trust to obtain by
the blood of the innocent Lamb of God Jesus Christ, and so to be partaker of
the heavenly joys, and Communion of Saints in the triumphant Church of God. In
the mean time, vvhilest I remain in this earthly Tabernacle, I beseech thee (O
Lord) to increase my faith, comfort my silly soul, lighten my understanding,
strengthen my feeble body, and grant me patience in my pain, that my faith
never fail. And I willingly surrender my body and soul to thy careful
disposition, and as willingly leave my goods to the world where I had them:
Rendering to thee most hearty thanks for the use I have had of them hitherto,
and for all other thy greater benefits, and spiritual blessings; as my
Election, Creation, Salvation, Sanctification, Preservation, and hope of
Glorification in thy heavenly habitation. O Lord, thy holy Name be praised
therefore, and thy blessed will be fulfilled in me every way; whether it be by
life, or by death; let it be to thy glory, and then I have my hearts desire:
for I am in thy hands, as the Clay is in the Potters; therefore do with me as
best pleases thee. Make me (O Lord) a fit sacrifice for thy self, by
punishing my fleshly body, and pardoning my sinful soul. Grant me perfect
remembrance of the hour of my death and last gasp, that I may thankefully
take this thy fatherly visitation, and willingly bear my cross, after thy
dear Son Jesus Christ my Savior. O Lord, prepare me for the good hour which
thou have appointed for the delivery of my soul out of this wretched world:
settle my thoughts, and fix my faith on the life to come, that I never shrink
from thee and thy saving health, what pain or torment soever thou inflictest
upon me here on earth: yet (dear Father) let heaven be my reward in the end.
Finally, so dispose of me, good Lord, as may be most meet for thy glory, and
mine own salvation in Christ Jesus my merciful Redeemer and Savior: to whom
with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor, power, and praise, world without
end.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said in the pangs of Death.
O Infinite Deity and unmeasurable goodness! O blessed and glorious Trinity! O
perfect love and charity, have mercy on me, and open the bowels of compassion
upon me a wretched sinner, wrapped in woe, and overwhelmed with anguish of
soul, and vexation of spirit. Into thy hands (O Lord) I wholly commit and
resign my self: make haste (O Lord) to deliver me, for it is high time. My
flesh trembles, my bones are bruised, mine eyes wax dim, my strength fails,
my heart pants, and my sorrow and pain every way increases. O merciful
Creator, show mercy to thy creature. In thee (O Lord) alone is all my trust. In
my misery and smart I have no other to make my moan unto, but only to thee, O
thou preserver of men. Therefore forsake me not utterly, but stand by me, and
with comfort relieve me in this my extremity and last combat. Stretch out
thine arm (O Lord) and hold thy hands of pity over me that lies here in woe
and misery. O Jesus, O sweet Jesus, mercy. O Son of David, have mercy upon
me: O Father of Heaven, help me: O holy Spirit of God, confirm and comfort me.
O God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three persons and one
God, have mercy upon me.

O Jesus, my sweet Savior, receive my silly soul into thy holy hands. Place
it (O LORD) for thy mercy sake, with thine own self in thy heavenly
Kingdom, among thine holy Angels and Saints. O my good God, and my heavenly
Father, pity my case, ease my pain, comfort my soul, and be merciful unto
me. Lord show the light of thy loving countenance upon me: And in the hour of
my death strengthen my faith; So that my body returning to the earth from
whence it came, my soul may ascend to thee which gave it: and at the day of
doom, and general judgment, when they shall both meet again, they may rise
to life everlasting, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Short Petitions collected for the Sick: Partly out of other Authors.
BEhold (O gracious Father) thereby redeemed. O Lord look down from Heaven,
incline thine ears unto my prayers, confort my sobbing soul, cheer my
careful conscience, increase my faith, forgive me my sins, and have mercy
upon me, through Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

O Lord, I beseech thee, Amen.

O GOD the Father, Amen.

Glory be to thee O Father thee, O holy Ghost my Comforter; from age to age;
from posterity, to posterity; both here and in the world to come: and let all
people say, Amen.

The peace of our Lord Amen.

O Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Thou have redeemed me (O Lord)
thou God of Truth. Lord Jesus, at thy pleasure, and at the time which may be
acceptable unto thee; receive my spirit into thy heavenly Kingdom.

Amen.
The third Duty of the Sick.
THe third and last duty of the sick person, is to be patient in his sickness
or any other adversity, willingly to bear the burden of Christ's Cross, and
so to follow him: for the better performance whereof, I have thought good to
annex to the premises, this short Treatise of Patience: wherein I will observe
this order:

First, I will persuade by

Secondly, I will produce

Thirdly, I will show

1. Precepts persuading.
FIrst, it is an old saying; Patience in adversity is a goodly virtue: and
truly so it is: and Patience is a rare virtue, and so it may well be; because
it is so seldom seen, and never so seldom as in these our days, wherein we
have many motions to evil; but few or none to that which is good.

We offer wrong, we will take none: We give shrewde words to others, we can
brook none toward our selves: We have Eagles eyes to espy a mote in our
Brothers eye, but like blind buzzards, we see none at all in our own: We
complain of every grief in our selves, be it never so little: we pity none
in others, be it never so great. And therefore we had need both of Precepts to
persuade, and Examples to provoke: but I fear, neither the one nor the other
will prevail or take place in us. And why? Men's hearts are steeped in bitter
gall: their hands are cruel; their feet swift to shead blood; their brain
busy to invent mischief: And to speak the truth without flattery; Love is
lost, Charity is cold, Faith is not to be found, Piety makes moan, being
pinched by adversity, and patience is gone, being forced by extremity. Well,
what is to be done in this woeful case? We must comfort our selves with
sentences and examples, which are written for our instruction in holy
Scriptures.

Indeed, this I must needs confess, that no kind of cross, be it of mind
or body, is simply on our parts to be wished, because it is grievous to flesh
and blood, and not delightful to the mind of man. And yet notwithstanding,
such crosses and calamities are daily to be expected of the godly, and when
they come, patiently to be suffered, without either murmuring or grudging
against God that sends them, or against man that offers them. Always
persuading our selves, that they come not unto us by chance or fortune, but by
Gods divine providence and permission, who will not suffer one hair of our
heads to perish, neither permit us to be 1. Cor. 10. 13.
tempted above our strength. And therefore we may assure our selves, in all our
afflictions and trials, that GOD has some good work in hand; the end whereof
shall, at last turn to our great joy and comfort.

For we must weigh and consider with our selves, that God our heavenly Father
sends us sundry crosses, for sundry causes.

Sometime to set forth

Sometime to punish our former sins, and thereby to call us to repentance.

Sometime to keep us,

Sometime to try our By your patience possess your Luke 21. 19.
souls: that is, Be of good comfort, faint not, but live cheerfully under the
cross; let patience be a plaster for every wound, and a sovereign salve for
every fore. It seems that the Apostle Saint Paul was of the same mind, in
his experienced grief; where he says, We rejoice in tribulations; Romans 5. 3.
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience; and patience, experience;
and experience, love. And therefore in his greatest perils by Land and by Sea,
at home, and abroad; yea, even when he was whipped, beaten, stoned, and cast
into Prison, he rejoiced greatly. So the 2. Cor. 11. 24.
Apostles being beaten, rejoice that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke
for Christ's name, Act. 5. 41.

Therefore, Cast not away Heb. 10. 35,
your confidence which has great recompense of reward. 36,
For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the Promise. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry. Christ never comes empty-handed: Come he soon,
come he late, he brings his Fathers blessing with him for all his loving
children, which patiently bear the rod of his correction. And therefore happy
is that servant, whose manners his Master amendeth, while he remains in this
life, that he may be blessed in the life to come. For our God is a plentiful
rewarder of the patient: if thou sustain injury, he is a revenger of wrong: if
thou sustain loss, he is a restorer of right: if thou sustain sickness, he is
a skillful Physician: if thou suffer death, he can raise thee up to life. Yea,
this patience is such a Noble Virtue, that it fenceth our Faith; preserves
Peace; increases Love; helps Humility; moves Repentance; rules the Flesh;
reuiueth the Spirit; brideleth the Tongue; refraineth the hand; comfort the
poor, and stays the rich: of enemies it makes friends, it heapeth up coals
upon their heads, and conuerteth their hatred into love. For we read of cruel
and wicked Tyrants, who beholding the force of patience in the godly, have
presently turned to God, and forsaken their cruelty.

Lactantius makes mention of one Tyrant, which persecuted three Christians;
who when he beheld and saw their constancy and patience, that they feared no
punishment, but meekly suffered torment; he presently vowed and said, Et ego
Christianus ero: that is, I will become a Christian also. In like manner:
Nebuchadnezzar seeing the Faith, Constancy, and Patience of Shadrach, Meshach
and Abednego in the fiery furnace, that they would not be forced to worship
his feigned and false god Bell, he was suddenly moved to bless and praise the
living God, and say: Blessed be the God Dan. 3. 28.
of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his
Servants, that put their trust in him, and have changed the Kings commandment,
and yielded their bodies, rather then they would serve or worship any god, save
their own God.

Thus also the Vulgar sort, when they see men torn in pieces with diverse kind
of torments; as Whipping, Racking, Hanging, Burning, etc. willingly to take
their death, yea, and to weary their Tormentors and Hangmen, with their
invincible patience, they are of the same mind that some were, who beholding
our Savior Christ's end, said, Verily, this was Mat. 27. 54.
the Son of God. So, they seeing the patience and constancy of these men,
are moved in their conscience to think (as well they may) that neither the
consent of so many men; neither the patience and constancy of those that dye,
is in vain; and that they were never able to overcome such pain, except God
himself were with them: for Traitors, Murderers, Thieves and Malefactors,
neither can, nor will abide such torment, if by any means they may escape it.
But they cry, they mourn, they fret, they fume, they swear, they rage, they
blaspheme God, and revile men: They despair, and are swallowed up of sorrow.
Contrariwise, the godly endure all adversity patiently, and that with boldness;
contemning the punishment and threatenings of cruel tyrants, resigning and
committing themselves to God; who in the midst of our misery, shows most
mercy. Therefore the more we are tried by adversity, the purer we are. The
more the Gold is beaten, the better it is: The more the iron is rubbed with the
fyle, the brighter it is: The more the corneis threshed and fanned, the cleerer
it is: So the more that God tries us in the furnace of tribulation, the more
he loves us, and the more we glorify him.

A Vessel, if it be foul, must be scowred before Wine be put in it: and be
that will make his ground fruitful, must first pull up the weeds, before he
sow good seed: Even so by these sharp medicines of Gods correction must the
body be purged, that the mind may bring forth her due fruit in fear and
reverence.

The good Corn for a time lies under the Chafe, Flowers grow among weeds,
and the sweet Rose that smells, comes up with the sharp Thorn that
pricketh: So the godly for a time are kept under, and vexed with the wicked,
and oftentimes God does more punish them with poverty, pain, and sickness,
then he does the wicked weeds of the world: but all this is for out good, to
make us more obedient in duty toward his Majesty. And therefore all these
crosses and losses, are patiently of our parts to be suffered, as infallible
tokens of Gods love.

Let no man therefore cast down his heart in sickness, or any other affliction:
for he that smites, heals; and he that sends trouble, gives strength;
and against every extremity God has prepared a remedy, that fearful man
should not distrust Gods careful providence; but have his soul settled in him
that can both bind and loose, save and destroy: that can send health after
sickness; life after death; and joy after pain.

Sickness, sores, afflictions, adversities, vexation and troubles, all these are
no novelties to the godly. Our forefathers the Patriarchs and Prophets had good
experience hereof, and we must taste of the same sauce, if we mean to enjoy
the same reward with them in Heaven. For all that will live godly in 2. Tim. 3.
12.
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. So likewise Saint James advises us,
saying, Be patient therefore, my Brethren, Iam. 5. 7.
unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the Husbandman waits for the precious
fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until he receive the former
and the later rain. Be ye also 8,
patient, and settle your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws near.
Take, my Brethren, the Prophets for an ensample of suffering adversity, and of
long patience, which have spoken in the Name of the Lord, etc.

Two Examples provoking.
Works are of more worth the^ words, and the life of any person, especially of
a Preacher, is more regarded then his Doctrine: the reason is, because me^ are
more moved by Examples which they see with their eyes, then by naked and bare
Precepts, which they hear with their ears: For we count words, be they
never so good, but a lip-labor, or as a blast of wind, that enters in at the
one ear, and passes out at the other. When the old Crab said to the young,
daughter, go forward (for the nature of the Crab is to go backward:) The young
answered again, I prae, sequar: that is, Go you before (you are my elder) and
I will follow after. As the old Cock crows, the young learnes: and all the
world is bent to follow the examples of their elders or betters. Therefore we
commonly say, Such a Master, such a Man: Such a Father, such a Son: Such a
Mother, sach a Daughter: A good Jack makes a good Gill: a good Husband, a good
wife: a good Father, a good Son: a good Mother, a good Daughter. A vicious
Father cannot make a virtuous Son: a sluttish Mother can never make a cleanly
Daughter: a rude Mistress shall hardly make a mannerly Maid: neither can a
negligent or ignorant Schoolmaster make a diligent or learned Scholar. I will
not deny, but words may sometimes persuade a man to bear the burden of
adversity, and to be patient therein: but examples of others do more move us.

We read in profane Histories of diverse, which for their constancy in their
profession, and for their patience in affliction, have willingly suffered many
torments.

Some have been burned by Arrians.

Some stripped naked, to the shame of the world.

Some hewed in pieces and cast to Hogs.

But my purpose is not to name or recite any out of profane Authors. We have
Christians good store (God be thanked) that have in their life time both
learned, and borne the burden of Christ's Cross, which have begun with
Christ's cross from the A. B. C. continued under it all their life long, and
ended with it at their death.

Among infinite examples, I will rehearse but some special persons, whereof I
have warrant in the Word.

First, I will begin with Abraham, the father of the faithful. When Abraham,
that good old man, was commanded by Gods own mouth to offer up his only Son
Isaac, his greatest joy under God in this world: for so says the Text; Take
thine only Son, Genesis 22. 2.
whom thou love, and therefore his present death must needs be the fathers
grief: It is a wonder to see how faithfully and patiently he went about that
woeful work: He rises up early, saddled his Ass, and went to the place
appointed: he does neither stagger nor study at the matter; neither does he
murmr or grudge against God, saying, Is this Gods promise, that said he
would bless all Nations in my seed? Has he given me a son past expectation
in my old days; and shall I now go cut his throat with mine own hands? I
would to God I had never begotten him. How can God fulfill his promise to me?
No, no, we must debar all Howes? and Cans? if we have to deal with him,
with whom nothing is impossible. Neither must we match man's reason, with Gods
wisdom. And therefore Abraham makes no doubt, but regarding Gods will, makes
haste with his son, to the place appointed, without stay or delay. And there
he binds his obedient son, hand and foot, stretching forth his own hand
with the knife to cut his throat: But that good God, who is always at hand in
our extremities, sent forth his Angel to restrain that bloody fact; who
called unto him from heaven, saying; Abraham, Abraham: 11,
Stay thy hand, lay not thine hand upon the Child for any worlds good. For now
12,
I know that thou fear God. And therefore he cried unto him the second time
from Heaven, and said, By my self I have sworn 15,
I will multiply thy seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the sand which is
upon the Sea shore, etc. Let old Abraham therefore, for his faith and patience,
be set in the forefront to lead the way.

Well, who shall be ^.
next? Surely some of his seed, but they are innumerable as the Stars of
Heaven; and therefore I must skip a great number, or else weary my self in
writing, and you in reading or hearing. Oh, remember now another old Abraham,
or at leastwise one of his seed; whose piety and patience, neither man, nor
the Devil could move, do what they could. And who is that, I pray you? We
will follow him by Gods grace, if we may but know his name.

It is just Job, one that feared Job 1. 1.
God, and eschewed evil. Whose mouth is able to utter the suffering and
patience of Job, the mirror of meekenes, who has the name at this day, and
shall have to the end of the world, of patient Job? Neither has he his name
for naught, for he well deserves it: who being suddenly cast down from the
highest top of earthly felicity, to the very dust and bottom of calamity:
when God had taken away his Oxen and Asses, a great part of his wealth: when he
had burnt up his Sheep and Servants with celestial fire: when he had taken
away his Camels by the Chaldeans, and his children by sudden death: when the
Messengers came hastily with these heavy news, and that, thick and threefold,
one in the neck of another; so that this godly man could not have any time to
breathe himself in, God heaping loss upon loss, and sorrow upon sorrow; and
that in fearful manner:

Notwithstanding all these calamities: What does this Man of God? What be his
words? or what answer gives he to the Messengers in this his misery? Does he
despair of Gods goodness? Does he grudge at his losses? Does he fret and fume
in himself? Does he chide the Messengers for bringing so bad tidings? Does he
rage, or blaspheme God? No, no: Job did nothing, spoke nothing, imagined
nothing, unfitting or unseemly a patient and perfect person. In all this Job
1. 22.
did not Job sin, neither does he charge God foolishly, as the wicked do:
But he humbled himself, fell down to the earth, and worshipped. And then he
cried, and said: The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it: Blessed be
the Name of the Lord. Thus this innocent and just man is content to suck up
his own sorrow in silence; confessing God to be gracious, albeit he had laid
his heavy hand upon him and his: for after all losses and crosses, Job himself
was smitten with sore Byles, from the sole of his foot, unto his crown: He
sat in sorrow upon the dunghill: his Wife also Job 2. 7,
rebuking him, who 8,
should have relieved him. Nevertheless, Job regarded 9,
not her words, but remains righteous, and says, Thou speak like a
foolish woman. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive
evil? As though he should say, Shall we taste of the sweet, and not of the
sour?

Shall we always be merry, and never sorry? always laugh, and never weep?
Should we always live in health, and never be sick? Always have plenty,
and never feel penury? Then should we be like Angels in heaven, free from all
adversities; and not like men on earth, subject to many miseries.

Behold here a plain picture of patience; take him for an ensample of
suffering adversity, and of long patience. His suffering was intolerable; his
patience unspeakable; and, except Christ's, incomparable. Let no man therefore
excuse himself, and say, I cannot be quiet, I cannot forgive, I cannot be
patient; The injury offered is so great: Such slanderous words, and hard
dealing, is able to provoke any man to impatiencie, if he were a Saint. Soft a
little (good Brother) stay thy self: Remember just Job, let him be an
ensample to thee. I pray thee, had not he an occasion of impatiencie? Yes
truly, and of utter blasphemy, had not Gods grace prevented man's strength.
Job had the whole world, Sun, Moon, and Stars against him: heaven and earth
against him. For first and foremost, God himself seemed for a season to forsake
him, and to have no care of him. The Devil in the mean season never ceased to
tempt him, and that in sundry sorts. His Wife that lay in his bosom, and
should have bound up his head, and comforted him; she disdained him, and
vpbraided him even with his good deeds. She counseled him to renounce God,
and to blaspheme him even to his face.

What should I speak more of this man? Within him, he had heaviness of heart;
without him, his kindred and friends discouraging him; on every side him,
signs of sorrow. His Goods were spoiled, his Cattle destroyed, his Children
suddenly killed, his own body pitifully plagued, and no whole part of him
from top to toe free from filthy sores and Byles: which way so ever he turned
him, he could find no rest, but wallowed in woe, and lay in extreme misery:
Not on soft Down, but on the stinking dunghill, tossing and tumbling his
loathsome and blistered body in the ashes, scrawling and scraping his scuruy
and scabbed skin with potsheards. O miserable man! O meek mind! O woeful
wight! O rufull and pitiful sight! And O spiteful Serpent, what have thou
done? whom have thou stinged, and so dolefully wounded? Do thou know whom?
Could thou find no other to spit thy spiteful poison against, but just
Job; and honest man, an upright man both in the sight of God, and man; the
singular Servant of God, and the patientest man that ever the earth did bear?

O cruel and cursed Wife, where is thy natural affection toward so loving
and godly a Husband? And O unnatural Cousins, and fained friends, where is
your comfort and compassion toward your poor afflicted Kinsman? But O just
Job! O constant creature! O perfect picture of long patience! In all this did
not Job sin with his lips, but manfully brideled his affections, committing
himself and his cross, to him that sent it, and suffered it. And so ought we
to do in all extremities, and miseries, be it of body or mind, loss of
goods, loss of friends, loss of lands, or loss of life; which is so dear
and sweet to some, that I fear, they never look for any other life; they are
so wedded to the world, and the vanity thereof, as it may easily appear by
their impatiencie, if God deal with them, as he did with his Servant Job: that
is, if he do but once touch their goods or bodies never so little.

We read also of godly Tobias, notwithstanding Tob. 1. 3.
his innocent life, his truth, almsdeeds, justice and friendly goodwill in
burying the dead, with peril of his own life: Yet for all that, he was led
captive to Niniue, where he was sought to be slain, and had all his goods
confiscate and spoiled: So that in heaviness of heart, and sorrow of soul,
he was forced to weep. Yet for Tob. 2. 7.
all this, he continued constant in his goodness, made graves, buried the dead,
if not by day, yet by night; patiently suffering the mockes and taunts of his
spiteful neighbors, and nothing fearing death, in so good a cause; but
meekely abode the reproaches of his own Wife, who cast him in the teeth,
saying, Where are thine alms, and thy righteousness? This moved Tobias no Tob.
3. 1.
deal, but he praised God, and gave himself to Prayer, confessed his sins,
and most worthily in all these assaults, acknowledges Gods justice, his mercy,
and truth.

There be infinite others, Men, Women, Old and Young; of all sorts, and of all
ages and degrees, which being simple and silly sheep (and yet the faithful
servants of GOD) have had their blood sought and sucked; whose mild minds, the
wicked have vexed; whose godly conversation, they have falsely slandered; whose
lives they long lay in wait for; and whose bodies in the end, they have most
maliciously murdered, racked and tormented, and that without all mercy, and
measure: As Abel, Esau, Jeremy, etc.

But I will not trouble the gentle Reader, nor weary the attentive Hearer, with
many mo examples. I will therefore pass over the Old Testament, and come to
the New, and there among many, set down one or two, for our further
instruction.

And here I may not Stephen, whose example of suffering, may be a glass to
look our selves in.

This holy man, and Martyr of God, when he should be slain of the Jews, and
cruelly stoned to death, what does he? Does he revile his enemies? Does he
vvithstand his persecutors? or does he blaspheme his Maker? No, no, He
patiently takes his Martyrdom. He does not curse or desire vengeance from
heaven to light upon his Adversaries: but most humbly falls down upon his
knees, praying for his persecutors, and saying, Lord, lay not this sin Act.
7. 60.
to their charge.

Behold here an example of a witness, and true Professor of Christ Jesus; a
Martyr of such modesty and meekness, as seldom or never has bin seen.

This Disciple had both learned and recorded his Masters lesson: Resist not
Mat. 5.
evil, but love your enemies: Bless them that curse you: Do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that persecute you. See how near this man
follows his Masters manners. Christ cries in the midst of his enemies:
Father, forgive them, they wot not what they do. Stephen cries in the midst
of his Stoners, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.

Christ said in his Passion, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.
Stephen Act 7. 59.
said in his stoning, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit. Christ being crucified,
meekely gave up the Ghost: Stephen being stoned, Stephens steps, and do as he
did, and then we shall have that he had, that is, in the end of our suffering
here on earth, we shall have heaven opened unto us, see the glory of God, and
Act. 7. 55.
Jesus standing at the right hand of God.

But what should I stand Yea, and more then a Prophet, of whom all the Prophets
have prophesied: The Prince of Prophets, the Prince of Peace, and the Prince of
Patience: Who as he is most commendable, even so he is incomparable. I need
not to name him, he was named of the Angel in his mothers womb, before he was
borne into this sinful world. You know whom I mean: the King of Glory, the
Head of the Church, the Savior of the World, Christ Jesus the innocent Lamb
of God, who patiently suffered death for our sins: Of whom S. Peter reports,
saying, Christ suffered 1. Pet. 2. 21
for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps: Who being his
Fathers best Beloved, in whom Mat. 3. 17.
his soul was well pleased, yet suffered he continual crosses. He that did
many good deeds, suffered many evil. He suffered the Devil to tempt him, his
own Disciple to betray him, the Jews to deride him, the malicious to
blaspheme him, and his enemies to slander him.

Again, being spitted upon, beaten back and side, buffeted on his face with
fists, whipped on his bare body, clothed in purple, crowned with thorn, etc.
he behaved himself as meekely as the Innocent Lamb, or shiftles sheep under
the hand of the shearer. His adversaries cry alowd: Cruoifie him, Crucify him:
Christ cries as fast, Forgive them, forgive them. They cry against him: He
prays for them. He that might have commanded all the Angels and Saints in
heaven, and have had them at a beck to revenge his quarrel, and defend his
innocence; was so far from requiting wrong, that he sharply rebuked the
rash enterprise of Peter, that drew his sword, and gave but one blow; and he
heals the party whom he never wounded. He cured the unthankful* he gave
place to those that laid in wait for him; and refused not to kiss the venomous
lips of Judas that betrayed him. He despised no man's person, were he never so
poor; he refused no man's house, were it never so homely; and yet for all this,
his doctrine was contemned, and his person persecuted. He that gives victory
to those that overcome, was beaten on the face with rods. He that gave
heavenly and wholesome meat to others, had bitter gall offered to himself: He
that gave the water of life, had vinegar given to drink: He that was
Innocence it self, was counted among the wicked: He that healed others, was
wounded himself: He that was the Truth, was condemned by false witness: And he
that must judge all men, was judged of man.

And when his blameless and innocent life drew near to an end, and he ready
to suffer a most shameful and bitter death, the death of the Cross; How
meekely he took it: how modestly he answers: how patiently he suffers:
how fervently he prays; and how freely he forgiueth: it is a matter worthy to
be noted, and printed in the perpetual memory of man, and to be an example to
all posterities.

Art thou a Christian or follower of Christ in his cross? Art thou slandered
and handled as he was? Then follow him, look upon him, and take him for an
ensample of suffering adversity, and of long patience. He was not crowned
before he was crucified, and thou must not be crowned before the victory. If
the world be injurious to thee, Christ is a rewarder, cleave to him, forsake
thy sin, and take up his cross and follow him. Forsake the world, and fear
neither the Devil, nor affliction; set Christ naked, whipped, crowned and
crucified continually before thine eyes. See how he was bought and sold,
hated, slandered, and rejected of his own.

The Jews cry, Away with him, let him be crucified: that is, let him be
tormented and hanged. What evil has he done, says the Judge? I find no
fault in the man. He has committed nothing worthy of death, I take him to be
an innocent or simple man; Let us therefore whip him, and send him packing. O
no (say they) if thou let him go, thou art not Caesar's friend. The Judge
seeming still to favor his innocence, makes another offer: You have (says
he) a custom to let one prisoner loose unto you: We have one Barabbas who is
in for a Bird, and fast in hold; a Thief, a Murderer, and a seditious fellow:
ye shall hang him, and save Christ alive. Ah no (say they) Barabbas is a good
fellow: Deliver him, and Crucify Christ.

Well, if there be no remedy (says Pilate) I will Mat. 27. 24
wash my hands here before you all, in witness that I am innocent from the
shedding of the blood of this Just Man. This protestation of the Judge, and
clearing of Christ, might have bridled them and their affected cruelty. But
alas, they were as the world is now, and ever will be, perverse and wilful. No
reason could rule them, no counsel could move them, no words could persuade
them. They run headlong on their own destruction, saying, His blood Mat. 27.
25
be upon us, and on our children.

The more that Pilate seemed to favor him, the more they seek means to
murder him. To be short, they have their desire, they prevail in their suite,
The Son of Man is delivered up into the hands of sinners; the Sheep to the
Wolf; the Lamb to the Lion: the wicked work their will with him, there is no
way but one with them: suffer he must, die he must, and he is content to submit
himself with all modesty that may be. It is no asking any reason or cause
wherefore. Unreasonable men can yield no reason of any thing they do, but that
which is tyrannical; Sic volo, sic iubeo, etc. that is, So we will, and so we
command: let will in place of reason stand. If he Ioh. 18. 30.
were not an evil doer, we would not have delivered him unto thee. Well,
well, behold the end of this dealing: In the mean season, they take him, they
blindfold him, they bob him and box him about the ears, they spet in his face,
they wagge their heads, they make mowes and jest at him, they make themselves
sport with him, tossing him to and fro, as it were a Tennis ball.

All these reproaches he patiently abides: he runs not from them: he offreth
no strokes: he gives them not one foul word. At last, when his enemies had
even wearied themselves in their wickedness, they proceed forward, they cause
him to carry his own cross on his weak and feeble body to be hanged on.
After sentence of condemnation, he is brought to the place of execution. He is
crowned with Thorn, which was himself the Crowned King of the Heaven, which
came to crush the sharp and bitter thorns of our sins, and crowns Martyrs
with eternal Glory. He is fast bound hand and foot, which freeth others from
their fetters. He is pierced heart and head, which heals the sins of the
people, and saves their souls from destruction.

I would ask one question of thee (gentle Reader:) What could these villainous
Jews, and sworn enemies of our Savior Christ Jesus have done more against
him, if he had been the vilest creature upon the earth; the arrantest thief
in the world; or the greatest devil in Hell? I admonish thee therefore (good
Brother) apply Christ's suffering to thy soul, and follow his patience.

Now what says Christ to this gear? or what does He to his Tormentors? Does
he go roundly to work with them? or does he handle them in their kind? that
is, Does he cause the earth to open her mouth and swallow them up alive, as
unworthy men to live any longer therein? Or does he command fire from Heaven
to destroy them as they well deserved? Or does he of himself condemn them
presently to hell fire, as he could if he would?

No verily, no such matter, he suffers them thus far forth: He blesses,
and yet curses not: he seeks still to save, and not to destroy.

O merciful Christ! O Prince of Peace, and pattern of patience! What man is
he this day that bears breath in his body (if he be flesh and blood) that is
able to suffer such torment, without offering any stroke or one froward word?
Christ does neither, which might and could have done both: but he came to
suffer, and not to smite: for his death gave life to his enemies; yea, they
that shed the blood of Christ, were saved by the blood of Christ. Such was his
love, such was his patience, that he suffered all these things for our sake.
His Righteousness covered our filthiness; his labor, lightened our load; his
shame, was our joy; and his damnation, was our Salvation.

But O stiffenecked Jews! O cruel Crucifiers! O corrupt Judge! O wicked
world, that wrought this woe upon him, that suffered for thy sin! Is this thy
thankfulness for so great a benefit? Is this thy reward for the work of
Salvation?

Tell me one thing, but tell me truly. Have thou any reason to wound him,
that healed thee; to bind him, that loosed thee; to condemn him, that saved
thee; to deride him, that redeemed thee; and to hang him that helped thee? Let
Heaven, let Earth, let Hell it self cry out against this cruelty. O wicked
Nation! O proud City Jerusalem, and O innocent Christ! his death declared his
innocence. The earth trembled thereat: the Elements were troubled: the Stars
were abashed: yea, all the powers of Heaven were moved: the Moon gave no
light. the Sun shined not: but darkness closed up the light of the day, lest
the Sun should be forced to behold the bloody and cruel fact of the Jews.
The Temple rent in twain: the stones claue in sunder: the Graves opened, and
the dead bodies did rise: insomuch that the beholders of his Passion, and some
of those which consented to his death, and wished that his blood might light
upon them, and their children, are now so wounded in heart, and pricked in
conscience, that they now change their mind, sing a new song, and confess
indeed he was the Son of God. They now become blanke, which before were so
bold. They now accuse themselves, which before condemned Christ. They now wish
him aline again with a wring by the ear, which before crucified him. They now
lament, which before laughed. They now mourn, which before mocked. They now
knock their breasts full of heaviness, with tears in their eyes, water on their
cheeks, and sorrow in their hearts, which before shaked their heads, spet in
his face, called him wretch, and cried fie upon him. I will say no more, either
of Christ, either of any Prophet before him, or Martyr that shall come after,
as of late there have been many: but conclude all that have been, are, or
shall be, in one round Ring, seemly Circle, and sure Seal. viz. Qui patitur,
vincit: that is, That man whatsoever he be, that suffers adversity
patiently, in the end he overcomes and gets the victory.

Three Reasons alluring.
THe precepts going before, and the examples propounded, may of themselves
seem reasonable to persuade most men (if they be not void of reason) to suffer
adversity, and to be patient. For the Lord himself is patient, Psalm. 145. 8
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great goodness. He bears with our
sins, and patiently expects our amendment. And therefore we must bear one
with another. The Husband must bear with his Wife as with the weaker vessel;
the Master with his servants; and the Creditor must have patience with his
Debtor, etc.

But the greatest reason to move a man to suffer adversity, and to be
patient therein, is the reward after suffering; for being made like to Christ
by suffering, we shall in the end be made partakers with him in glory: Who,
after his patient suffering, was so exalted of his Father, that he has given
him a name Phil 2. 9, 10.
above every name, that at the name of Jesus, should every knee bow, both of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the carth. If therefore
we suffer Romans 8. 17.
with Christ, we shall also reign with him.

Art thou desirous to live for ever? and to reign with Christ in eternal
glory? Then arm thy self with patience to suffer adversity here on earth,
that thou may have place in Heaven. Take counsel of Saint Paul, who says:
Let us by Heb. 12. 1, 2.
patience run in the race which is set before us, looking to Jesus the
Captain, and finisher of our Faith; which for the joy that was set before him,
suffered the Cross, contemned the shame, and sits on the right hand of the
Throne of God.

Behold here a reward after the race, and a crown after the conflict. The
consideration whereof moved all the Martyrs and holy men of GOD to bear
Christ's Cross, were it never so grievous and heavy for the time, and to suffer
mocks, stripes, bands, rackings, famine, imprisonments and death: and so must
we do: the whole course of our life here on earth shows the same.

Troubles try our patience, and tame the flesh, lest we should be condemned
with the wicked world; and therefore we begin our life with tears, before we
be able to speak; we lead it in sorrow and care, and we part from it with
great grief: or otherwise we should put too much confidence in our quiet
estate, as David testifies: I Psalm. 30. 6.
said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved. And therefore, lest we
should be too proud in our prosperity, the Lord oftentimes bridleth our
appetites by losses and crosses, and so shows his love by afflicting us for
our good. As for example, if for Gods cause, or his Truth, we be shriuen of all
our riches here on earth, our portion shall be the greater in Heaven. If we
be thrust out of our houses, or offices, we shall be received into the Family
of God. If we be contemned among men, we shall be highly esteemed with God. If
we be cast down in the world, our seats shall be the higher in Gods Kingdom.
If we be murdered, and so lose our life, this shall be a means to bring us
to eternal life. For if there were no grief in poverty; no torment in
sickness; no sorrow in slander, nor horror in death, what trial could there be
of Gods people? None at all. Therefore in our greatest extremity, let us say,
Fiat voluntas Domini, that is, The will of the Lord be fulfilled in me; come
life, come death; come sickness, come health; come prosperity, or adversity.
And let that man never boast himself to be an Abel, whom the malice of Cain
has not afflicted: Nor a Jacob, whom an Esau has not hated: nor a faithful
Mardocheus, whom a spiteful Haman has not slandered: nor a Paul, whom a Nero
has not persecuted: nor a Christian, whom a Judas has not betrayed.

Where the good are, there must of necessity be some bad to try them. The
Wheat is tried by the Fan; the Iron by the file, and the gold by the fire:
even so is a Christian known by affliction: and being so tried, he cannot lose
his reward. It is great in heaven, and not for gotten on earth. For we see
daily, that joy follows sorrow; life, death; glory, miserty; and prosperity,
poverty. Patient Job had his substance doubled. The holy Patriarks, Prophets
and Martyrs of Christ, which suffered sundry sorrows here on earth, are now
crowned Kings in Heaven. And so shall we, if we run their race: for many
run, but it is the wrong way, that leads to destruction: But we must so
run, that we 1. Cor. 9. 24.
may obtain, and in the end get the wager. The Merchant resuseth no peril by
Sea; the Husbandman no labor by Land; the Captain no wound in wars: and
they do it for a temporal reward: How much more ought we patiently to endure
any loss of goods, torment of body, or grief of mind, for everlasting life,
and heavenly joy?

The Wise man considering this, affirms, that the day of death, is better
Eccl. 7 3.
then the day of birth.

Saint Paul was of the same mind, when he said, I desire Phil. 1. 23.
to be loosed, and to be with Christ, which is best of al: for then shall
Christ our Savior wipe away all tears Apoc. 4. 21
from our eyes, and sorrow from our hearts. We shall need to suffer no more,
our troubles are at an end. Neither shall there be any more death, neither
grief, neither crying, neither pain. Our pains here have endured but a time,
the pleasures there shall be perpetual. What is he therefore in the universal
world, but would willingly hazard life and living; yea, and yield his soul to
God, his body to the block, and his flesh to the fire, for such celestial
joys as are prepared for those that fight Gods battle here on earth?

Therefore (my dear Brethren) to conclude; Let us run our race, and pass
our painful pilgrimage in this transitory world, so godly and patiently, by
the example of the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, that in the end of the
course, when death shall shut up the eyes of our bodies, we may with a firm
faith and good conscience, say with Saint Paul: I have fought a 2. Tim. 4.
good fight: I have finished my course: I have kept the Faith. For henceforth
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord a righteous
Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but to all them that love
his appearing.

Then in the end of our race we shall have rest and joy, yea perfect, complete,
and full joy: Joy above us, joy beneath us: joy before us, joy behind us: joy
on our right hand, joy on our left hand: joy within us, joy without us: and joy
on every side us. Unto the which joy he vouchsafe to bring us, which dearly
has bought it for us, not with silver and gold (for it cost a great price) but
with the sheading of his precious blood, even Jesus Christ the righteous: unto
whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one everlasting,
just, and merciful God, be all honor, power, and glory both now and ever.

Amen.
A general and fruitful Prayer for all Christians, to be reverently said at
all times, Morning, Evening, Night, or Day.
O God our Maker, thou most mighty and holy JEHOVAH, in thy name, and to thine
honor and glory, we begin, continue, and end these our Prayers. And we offer
this our dutiful service unto thy divine Majesty, as to our Sovereign Lord,
and mighty Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all things therein contained. O
sweet Lord Jesus Christ, we offer unto thee our selves, body and soul, and
all the powers and parts thereof within us, and without; for by right they are
all thine, because thou have dearly bought and paid for the same, with the
peerless price of thy precious blood. And we most humbly beseech thee, O
holy Ghost our Comforter, to give us grace and strength to do thy will in all
things, and to offer these our prayers with cleanness of heart, vprightnes of
action, and in the unity of thy true Church, and Catholic Faith; that so they
may ascend into thy sight as a sweet sacrifice of incense, for our health,
help, and other things necessary for our bodies and souls; for the true
mortification of our flesh, and the right direction of our whole life, that
hereafter it may be pleasing and acceptable unto thee; and so by faith in
Jesus Christ, bring us to everlasting bliss. And we offer the same for the
health and help of all other persons, that thy blessed will is to have prayed
for, within the Church, and without, in special, and in general. And for whom
and whatsoever else thy wisdom knows necessary, and our frailetie cannot
ask, that may be most convenient for us to receive, and best becomes thee to
give. That it may please thee of thy gracious goodness, to grant unto us true
and unfeigned repentance for our former sinful life; patience in all our
temptations and tribulations, ghostly and bodily: protection and defense
against our enemies, visible and invisible: constancy and perseverance in all
virtue and goodness: help and relief in all our needs and necessities: succor
and comfort, in all our woe and distress: ease and delivery out of all our
troubles, calamities, and afflictions, that we are in, or may any way happen
unto us. O most tender God, and dear Father, we beseech thee also of thy mercy
and forgiveness of sins, for our selves, and all others: and mitigation of thy
justice toward us, now and in the hour of our death and last judgment
particular and general. Open unto us (O Lord) we most humbly beseech thee, the
plentiful stream and fountain of the blood of CHRIST JESUS which for our
sake, and for our salvation, issued most abundantly out of his grievous wounds
hanging on the Cross: Drown us in them: hide us in them: wash us in them:
write and print them deeply in our hearts, that all our sins may be so
bathed in his blood, buried in his death, and hid in his wounds, that they
never more be seen to our confusion in this world, or to our condemnation in
the world to come: But put them al into his most dearly beloved wounds, and
cast them into the bottomless depth of his mercy and merits. We call and cry
daily upon thee for thy fatherly assistance, that we may conquer al our
enemies. Hear us therefore (O Lord) in that mercy which has no measure, and
look not upon us with the eyes of Justice; neither draw against us the sword
of judgment; for then we are utterly lost, and perish for ever: But subdue
all power of Satan and sin in us; and give us strength to resist; patience,
to endure; and constancy, to persevere. And if men assault or tempt us to any
evil, good Lord, give us wisdom to discern them; fear to follow them; and
zeal to defy them. And rule thou ever as Lord and King over us, and over all
that we have: over body and soul; over heart and mind; over work and word:
for Jesus Christ his sake, we heartily crave it, even in favor at thy Fatherly
hands. And furthermore, we commend unto thee (O Lord) in these our Prayers,
the whole Catholic Church. Renew in it (we beseech thee) purity and
sincerity of life and conversation, from the which in these evil and latter
days it is utterly declined and wanting, in all sorts of persons, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Civil. And grant unto every member thereof from the highest
to the lowest; from the Prince unto the People, that they may correct and amend
in themselves, that which is amiss. Nourish and keep among them, unity,
peace, and mutual charity, to love thee above all, and their neighbors as
themselves. Make their hearts so meek and gentle (good Lord) by thy working
power, that they may gladly, and unfeignedly, freely and frankely, heartily and
wholly, forgive all men that have hated or hurted them by word or by deed.
Such as do err and go astray in the path of Perdition, call back and bring
again into the way of Salvation, and understanding. Extinguish all Sects,
Schisms, Innouations, Divisions, Opinions and Heresies, whereby, and
wherewithal thy Church in these evil and latter days has been wonderfully
molested and troubled, and as it were even rent and shaken in pieces: and
convert all those to the knowledge of thy true, ancient, Catholic, Apostolic,
holy and Christian Faith, which as yet go astray and wander out of the right
way. O Lord, of thy gracious goodness fetch them home, as sheep of thy pasture,
to thine own Fold and Family: preserve and keep them ever safe in the lap and
unity of thy Catholic Church: And grant unto them true understanding to know
thee; diligence, to seek thee; wisdom, to find thee; conversation, to
please thee; and evermore faithfully to serve thee unto their lives end.
Comfort and lift up (O Lord) all those that are troubled and vexed in mind, or
in body: and teach them to see their own happiness, through tentations and
troubles, and that the readiest way to Heaven, is even to go thither by Hell,
and that every pain here, is as it were a prevention of the pains of Hell,
and every ease in pain a foretaste of the ease and joys of Heaven.

And finally, grant that we may all with quiet minds, and good conscience,
patiently pass the time of this our painful pilgrimage here on earth,
peaceably spend and end our days in thy service; and so at the last come to
thy heavenly Kingdom, and life everlasting thorough Jesus Christ the Author of
life: In whose holy name we are bold to lift up our hearts, hands, and voices,
praying unto thee, as he has taught us, saying, Our Father, which, etc.

All glory and praise be only given unto God.
A Prayer for Morning.
MOst gracious God, and dear Father, we yield unto thee from the bottom of
our hearts most humble thanks, in that it has pleased thee not only to
defend and preserve us this night from all our enemies both ghostly and bodily:
but also of thy fatherly pity to give unto these our earthly and languishing
bodies such sufficient sleep and rest, as has satisfied the earnest desire of
our weak and feeble nature. And as thou of thy mercy have safely brought us to
the beginning of this present day, and showed us the light thereof: so we
humbly beseech thee (O God) grant that our souls may be spiritually lightened
with the brightness of thy Word and sacred mysteries, whereby we may walk in the
steps of Christianity, and lead a life agreeable to our vocation in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Assist us also with thy grace and holy Spirit, O God, that we
may never shrink from thee for any earthly torments, but diligently apply our
selves to the performance of thy will, and give our selves wholly thereunto,
having a strong and steadfast faith in the truth of thy promises. Indue us with
wisdom from above, that we may daily increase in the fullness of our Savior
Christ. Behold us with the eye of thy mercy, and vouch safe to defend us that
commit our selves wholly unto thee both now and evermore. Give unto us a heart
always affected to honor thee, a mind ever meditating of thy righteousness,
and a spirit burning with zeal of thy worship, that we may warily stand upon
our guard, and never yield to the treachery of the Adversary: Bless and
prosper our enterprises (O Lord) that whatsoever we take in hand, we may by thy
direction bring it to good success, and evermore praise thy holy Name for thy
gracious assistance, and singular goodness: grant this, O Father, for Jesus
Christ his sake, our only Savior and redeemer.

An Evening Prayer.
GOod God, the Creator and Maker of all mankind, seeing it has pleased thee,
of thy divine providence, to ordain the night as a mean to deliver us from
the travels of the day, and to minister ease and gladness to the wearied limbs
of our bodies, to the great comfort and refreshing of the same, by the fruitio^
of quiet sleep and rest, according to humane nature, we beseech thee
therefore (O Lord) of thy unspeakable goodness and mercy, to be our
watchman and defender this night, that we be not overcome by fantasies,
dreams, or other illusions: but that through thy permission, we may take such
quiet rest, and voluntary sleep, as nature requires, and though our gross
senses are at such times stopped; yet vouchsafe ever to grant us the assistance
of thy grace and holy Spirit, that our souls may respect the coming of thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christ, that at what time soever he calls, we may be
sound watchful, and continually ready to perform his will: that after this
life ended, we may eternally rest in glory: and as the brightness of the
Sun does in the morning disperse the dark clouds and thick mists from the
face of the earth, whereby the same was before covered with darkness: so we
humbly beseech thee, vouchsafe to disperse and bury our sins (in the blood
and obedience of thy dear Son) which do as it were shadow us from the
bright beams of thy favorable countenance, and evermore assist us with thy
gracious goodness, that our sleep may be so healthful unto us, that we with
willing minds arising in the morning, may utterly shake off all manner of
drowsinesse, and make haste to exercise our selves in such Christian labors,
as thy divine providence has ordained us unto, to the advancement and renown
of thy holy name, credit of thy Church, comfort and relief of our Christian
Brethren, and our everlasting salvation. In mercy grant this (O Lord, we
beseech thee) for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Redeemer and Savior: unto
whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all power and dominion for ever,

Amen.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A Preparatiue for the Sick. fol. 1. God does visit us diverse ways. fol. 20.
In Gods visitation, consider three things. fol. 23. The first Duty of the
Pastor. fol. 24. Examples of Temporal Questions. fol. 25. Examples of
Spiritual Questions. fol. 55. The second Duty of the Pastor. fol. 84. The
first Psalm. fol. 87. The second Psalm. fol. 95. The third Psalm. fol. 100.
A pithy Prayer for a Patient, being pained with Sickness. fol. 112. A
comfortable Prayer against Desperation. fol. 122. An effectual Prayer for
those which be Lunaticke, or possessed with any evil spirit. fol. 137. A
fruitful Prayer in time of any common sickness or Plague. fol. 159. The third
Duty of the Pastor. fol. 177. The fourth Duty of the Pastor. fol. 201.
Consolation against Damnation. fol. 219. The sum of the Belief confessed.
fol. 250. The Protestation of the Sick. fol. 274. The second Duty of the
sick Person. fol. 283. A godly motion, or Meditation before Prayer: In which,
we crave for Grace, Faith, and Patience. fol. 284. A fruitful Prayer for the
assistance of God, in the extremity of sickness. fol. 289. A pithy and
profitable Prayer when we are in danger of Death: wherein we commit our selves
to God, renounce the world, crave pardon for our sins, and forgive fol. 296.
A Prayer to be said in the pangs of Death. fol. 303. Short Petitions collected
for the Sick. fol. 307. The third Duty of the Sick. fol. 311. Precepts
persuading. fol. 313. Two Examples provoking. fol. 332. Three reasons alluring.
fol. 382. A general and fruitful Prayer for all Christians, to be reverently
said at altimes, Morning, Evening, Night, or Day. fol. 396. A Morning Prayer.
f. 409. Evening Prayer. fol. 412.

