THE Childbirth or Woman's Lecture.

That is: A Lecture upon Chap. 1. ver. 57, 58. of the holy Gospel according
to Luke; very necessary to be read and known of all young married and
teeming Women, and not unprofitable for men of all sorts.

By Chr. H.

Esaias. 66.7. Before she travailed, she brought forth: and before her pain
came she was delivered of a man Child.

emblem with symbols of two entwined snakes, two cornucopias, and two hands
shaking BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY

TO



AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Henry Hook, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, by Raphe Iackson, at the sign of the Swanne. 1590.

To the right Worshipful, and virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistres Elizabeth Sauel,
grace, mercy, and peace, (from Jesus Christ, the fountain of all heavenly
graces) be multiplied.
THis Lecture right (Worshipful) whereof I presume to make you the Patroness,
is compact of the notes observed in my reading, at the birthes of your two most
sweet jewels, Master Henry, and Master Edward Sauels, and now published, as for
the common good of all that please to read it; so to perform my promise made
long since unto you, and to be a testimony of the godly care, which your
Honorable Lady-mother, the Lady Paget and your self had to show all
thankfulness unto the Lord for his great mercy toward you. For no sooner were
you thorough the goodness of God delivered, but that both the one time and the
other, I was sent unto from her Ladyship and your self, to give thanks unto
the Lord on your behalf: so that the sun had not showed his beams before
such time as the same mornings, wherein you received those blessings. We had
the whole family together, the right Worshipful your Father, and your
Husband, being also present; like as was her Ladyship her self, with your
Worshipful sister Mistres Baeshe, performed this exercise, and sang Psalms of
thanksgiving. J wish as I nothing doubt, of your good continuance in this so
holy a course, that all others, who are partakers of the same mercies, would
also imitate and follow your godly example and president herein: which they
should the rather do, if they could or would consider aright, how many singular
blessings in this one thing do concur, for nothing hinders so much our
thankefulnes unto the Lod as the want of a right consideration of his great
benefits, wherewith he ladeth us, which either for lack of insight into them;
or for that they seem ordinary, and befall us every day, and others as well
as us are therefore the less of the greater sort regarded: but were we
affected as we should, the more ordinary that they are, the more thankful
we should be since our sins every day deserve to break the ordinary course
of them; Dani. 4.24.
for that we break not off our sins by righteousness, nor our iniquities by
mercy toward the poor. And since we see daily, many to fail of the^ whom we
may justify in respect of our selves, for not to speak of holy Rahel and Ely
his daughter in law; how many right godly and virtuous women, do daily in
Childe-bed miscarrie? They therefore who have the good success which you now
thrice (the Lord be blessed for it) have had, and always may have; ought (with
Elizabeth and you) acknowledge his great mercies to them. For though it were
ordinary to all in safety to be delivered, which we see is not: yet therein
they shall find many extraordinary blessings, as by this lecture they may
partly conceive, but most plainly may understand of themselves, and by
themselves, if themselves they will call to remembrance of their own
deliverances, and not forget al their former distres (whereout, without the
Lords hand, it had been impossible for them to have been delivered) through joy
of a man child, whom they have brought into the world. Leaving therefore the
further consideration hereof unto your Worship, and to all other godly and
virtuous Matrons, that have tasted herein, how sweet and bountiful the Lord
is. I end, beseeching you to accept of this my poor labor: and praying the
Lord that it may be profitable unto al, in stirring them up to a greater
thankefulnes unto the Lord for his so great mercies bestowed upon them.

Your Worships to God, for you and yours in his prayers. Chr. H.

Luke: 1.57, 58.
Now Elizabeth's time was fulfilled that she should be delivered, and she
brought forth a son.

And her neighbors and Cosins heard tell: how the Lord had showed his great
mercy upon her, and they rejoiced with her.

WHo this Elizabeth was, whom here we have mentioned, none I suppose to be so
ignorant, Luke 1.6,
but that he knows. She was (says this Evangelist) of the daughters of
Aaron: her husband was Zacharias a Priest, and both he and she, just before
GOD, walking in all his comaundements and ordinances without reproof. A
notable pattern and example, not only for ministers, and their wives, whose
blameles conversation in all things, and at all times, ought to be a second
instruction unto the people: but for all couples (as we term them) of what
degree, or calling soever they be, that they themselves fearing the Lord, and
walking in his ways: Job. 1.5. Genesis 18.19.
they may not only teach as did Job, but command also as did Abraham, their
sons, and their household, to know the way of the Lord, to do righteousness
and judgment. For this the godly whom any care of religion has touched, have
always according to his commandment done, and this of his mercy toward
them he has not left unrewarded. Abraham his reward with God was exceeding
great, being made for this, as it were, one of his privy council. For shall I
conceal or keep any thing from Abraham (says God) since he will teach his
sons and his household. Genesis 18.17.
Job who used every day to sanctify his sons, that is to prepare them unto
sanctification, by teaching them how; though for his trial and our example, in
the chiefest of his prosperous felicity he was humbled and cast down; Job.
42.12.
yet the Lord restored him again and blessed his latter days, Psalm. 101. Iosu
24.15. Genesis 35.2. Act. 10.2.
more than his former. The like may be said of David, of Joshua, of Iaacob, of
Cornelius the Italian Captain, and such like; whose careful obedience to the
commandments of the Lord, with the no less dilligent information of their
households therein, is set down; and their reward from the Lord by his singular
blessings in great abundance bestowed upon them, is as it were particularly
noted. Zacharias therefore and Elizabeth as no doubt they performed this
duty, so they are not alone, neither is the reward of their holy
conversation the least: for whereas Elizabeth was barren and long without a
child, whereby she was a reproach among women, the Lord for a reward makes her
fruitful, and the mother, not of a mean babe, but of such a one as a greater
before him of a woman was never borne. This blessing that the Lord bestowed
upon Zacharias and Elizabeth his wife: Matt. 12.11
the Evangelist S. Luke here shows in these two verses, and withal declares
how her neighbors and Cosins with her rejoiced thereat. The blessing is here
amplified by three circumstances: First of the time, It was fulfilled: Secondly
of the deliverance, for at her full time she was delivered: Thirdly of the
fruit it self: which was a son.

To accomplish, and fulfill the full, and the just time, before the
deliverance, how exceeding great a blessing it is, may best be considered by
the contrary, which is when women bring forth untimely fruit, such which as
the Prophet says never sees the sun. Psalm. 58.8.
For this (besides that it is a great grief, to the mother, to have her womb
to be her childs Grave, and withal brings her to exteame darnger of her
own life, if not to death it self) is a curse which the Lord threatens to
punish them with who do rebelliously transgress against him. Hose. 9.11.
Their glory (says the Prophet Hoseah) that is their Children, which me^
account their glory shall fly away from the birth, from the womb, and from the
concedtion: that is either being conceived, they shall not be quickened: or
being quickened, they shall not in the womb accomplish the just time the birth,
whereby for glory they receive a kind of dishonor, and for comfort and joy,
sorrow and grief. Examples of this judgment among the Jews, no doubt but
there were many though they are not recorded: for that as now, so then children
in such sort borne, were hid and not spoken of as appears by this, that Job
wished unto himself. Job. 3.16.
Why was I not hid as an untimely fruit either as infants which have not seen
the light: which manner of secret, and close hiding of them, shows also how
fearful a curse it is, when as thereby it is signified that both the mother
is ashamed of, and loatheth the fruit of her own body, and that the eyes of
others are not able to endure the sight thereof. Now though the wicked are not
always overtaken with this curse, but are made partakers of the contrary
blessing in such great measure that not only themselves do accomplish the
days of their deliverance, but their beasts also: Job. 21.10.11, etc.
according to that which Job says: Their bullock gendreth and fails not;
their Cow calueth and casts not her calfe: they send forth their children
like sheep, signifying thereby the great number of their Children: Yet is this
the special blessing, promised unto the children of God, to them that serve him
and hearken to his laws, to hear and do them, according as we read: Exodus
23. If thou hearken to his voice and do all that I speak, Exo. 23, 26.
there shall none cast their fruit or be barren in the land, the number of thy
days will I fulfill. This promise then we see the Lord makes unto his
children, which he also performs unto them; as here unto Elizabeth: unless
their sins, as they hinder many other good things do also hinder it. Ier.
5.25.
And when he performs it to them, it is a blessing from him, and a most sure
token of his favor and loving kindness toward them: whereas to the wicked,
though they commonly enjoy the commodity thereof, as they do of the sun and
the rain which shines and falls upon the good and the bad, Mat. 5.45.
the just and unjust: Yet it is to them as are all other things of this life
which they vsurp, but as a curse heaping coals upon their heads, and making
their condemnation more grievous.

The next circumstance whereby this blessing is amplified, is, that she was
delivered: which of it self how great a mercy it is, may be considered also
by the contrary, which is, when either a woman who has fulfilled her time,
cannot be delivered, or in such sort after long and gieuous travail is
delivered, as therewith in the anguish, and panges thereof she ends her life:
This is (says Hezechias) a day of tribulation: the Children are come to the
birth, 2. Kin. 19.3.
and there is no strength to bring forth: comparing the estate of Jerusalem
besieged by Zenacherib, and not able of it self to defend it self, to a woman
travailing of Child at the full end of her term, and yet wanting strength
to bring it forth as though he should say, if a woman in such a case is most
miserable, then most miserable is our estate. This then sufficiently declares
the lamentable condition of a woman in such distress. But consider we it
further by examples: what a day of tribulation was it to Rachel, when after
many grievous pangs and great difficulty, being delivered, her sorrows
decreased neither in hearing nor seeing that she had brought forth a man
child into the world: but increased, to the taking away of her life, in so
much that yielding up the ghost; she called her Child Ben-noni, Genesis 35.18
the son of my sorrow. In like manner what a day of tribulation was it to
Phinehas wife, mentioned 1. Sam. 4.19. 1. Sa. 4.19.
when not answering the women that stood about her, who bad her not fear, for
that she had borne a son: nor regarding at all the fruit of her womb, she
named him Ica-bod, saying, The glory of GOD is departed from Israel: and so
with grief of heart, repeating the words again: The glory is departed from
Israel, she departed also and left her life; giving the women standing by to
understand, that the glory of God being gone out of the land, which is, when
his true religion and service is taken away, as it was then from them, the Arc
being taken by the Philistines: that there can no comfort be received, by
Children, nor by life it self. A notable example for the women to make them
careful of the true religion of God, who now together with their husbands are
so careless thereof, that whether it depart from them or tarry with them,
they make no reckoning, for they account not the gospel the glory of England,
as Phinehas wife accounted the Arc the glory of Israel: to the therefore we
must preach, Esaias. 32.9.
as Esaias preached to the women of his time: Rise up ye women that are at ease,
hear my voice ye careless daughters, hearken unto my words: For assure your
selves that what day the gospel (which now ye neglect, and do not regard,
respecting only your pride, pleasure, and profit) be taken from you, the fame
day shall be taken from you the ornaments of your pride: as your high corked
slippers, your golden Calls, etc. yea your husbands, who have cherished you,
and your Children; whom in great sorrow ye have brought forth: Esaias. 3.24.
and the Lord shall give you for husbands widowhead, for children disolutenes,
for sweet savor stinck, for a girdle a rent, for dressing of the hair
baldnes, for a fine stomacher sackcloth, and for beauty burning.

Thus it befell to the women of Siloh: and thus the Lord threatens to do, as
he did unto them, and to all other that are careless of his service, and
rebellious against him. And therefore he sends us to Siloh, saying: Go ye
now to my place which was in Siloh, Ierem. 7.12
where I set my name at the beginning: and behold what I did to it for the
wickedness of my people Israel. But to return from this digression unto
Phinehas wife, she is a pattern as I said, in whom we may see the great
distress and misery of a woman lying in such plight, that though at length
she be delivered of her child, yet she is not delivered from her pains,
until she be delivered of her life: Yet this case in comparison of theirs, who
having accomplished their full time and cannot be delivered at all, seems
somewhat tolerable. And of such, histories record some, and women no doubt,
are privy to many mo: from these perils and dangers, when the Lord delivers
a woman, that not only she brings forth with the safeguard of her life, but
that before the travail she brings forth, and before her pain come she
be delivered of her Child: how great mercy does the Lord show unto that
woman? Esaias. 66.7.
This the Lord speaks of the sudden restawration of the Church: Before she
travailed she brought forth, and before her pains came she was delivered of
a man Child: declaring thereby that as he pleases to give such a speedy and
easy deliverance to some, whom it pleases him, that as it were before their
pains come they are delivered; so he can and will when his Church is by all
likelihood in greatest danger, even as a woman is when she boweth her self to
travail of Child, upon the sudden, deliver it without pain and trouble, in
the turning of an hand. This is more manifestly showed in the Reuela, Apoc.
12.2.
12. where the great danger of the Church of God, and the miraculous
deliverance thereof, is set forth under the similitude of a woman travailing
in birth ready to be delivered. Let women therefore, who are partakers of this
mercy, as was Elizabeth: namely, to be both delivered, and that without the
doleful continuing in labor and travail many days, as many do acknowledge
that the Lord bestows upon them an extraordinary blessing to be wondered at;
as it is in the former place of Esaias: Who has heard such a thing? Esaias. 66.8.
Who has seen such things? as soon as Sion travailed she brought forth her
children. For what is one woman in comparison of the whole Church of God, men
and women; and what greater mercy does or can the Lord in this life bestow
upon them, than speedily (in such distress) when they call to hear and
deliver to them:

The last circumstance in this first verse observed is, yt she brought forth a
Son: diverse we know bring forth monsters, Luke 16, ^
which can have the name neither of sons nor of daughters. In that therefore
the Lord freeeth Elizabeth from this curse, and grants her to bring forth a
child, and he a man child, and such a child who should be filled with the
holy ghost, eue^ from his mothers womb, to be the Prophet of the most high, and
to go before him in the spirit and power of Elias; it is the sum and the
perfection of the former benefits: and that which makes ordinarily, even in
ordinary births, the sorrows in travail to be forgotten. This women know to
be true by their own experience: Ioh. 16.21.
And our Savior Christ (from whom nothing is hid) teaches us also the same,
saying; A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow because her hour is come: but
so soon as she is delivered of her Child, she remembers no more the anguish:
for joy that a man is borne into the world. Where by Man he means as well
the woman Child as the man Child, both being the great blessings of the Lord,
though in some respects: the man child is preferred to the woman, as by whom
the name, which men and godly men most of all earthly blessings do desire, is
the longest in remembrance continued. And therefore the Godly men and women in
the Scripture who have been barren have especially asked of the Lord a son:
Genesis 15.2.
so Abraham desired a son, that Eliezer the steward of his house might not be
his heir. 1. Sa. 1.11.
And Anna prayed for a man child that she might dedicate him to the service of
the Lord in his Temple: In which respect also it appears that the godly then
desired rather sons than daughters; howsoever to serve the Lord in that
office, seems now a thing so co^temptible; though the ministry of the gospel
be far more glorious, as the Apostle notably shows to the Corinth. 2. Cor.
3.8.
than was the ministry of the law: That every man (be he never so mean)
disdaineth; save that necessity for want of other maintenance constrains him,
to train up his Son as Anna did her Samuel, to serve the Lord in that
vocation: No marvel therefore though the Lord disdain to give them sons,
who do disdain to consecrate them unto him; or if he give such sons, no
marvel though as commonly we see his blessing be not upon them, since of many
they will not spare him one, but if all other mean fail they will rather
bestow them upon (...)at is to (...) Phisiti^^s, civil or ^^mmon ^^wyers
^^rchants, etc. Hose. 9.14.
Galen Justinian and Littleton, and commit them to the winds and the Seas, to
adventure thereupon their wits, their goods, and their lives, and to other
handiecraftes, than that they should serve him to his glory in his Church. But
to leave complaining of such to whom the Lord for this cause I doubt not gives
oftentimes barren wombes and dry breasts. The issue whether it be of Sons
or daughters, it is a singular blessing, and the chief blessing of this life:
for to be blessed in the fruit of the womb, excels the blessing in the
fruit of the ground; (...) 128.3.
the wife to be as the fruitful Vine, Judge. 9.9. and 13.
and the Children to be as the Olive branches round about the table,
surmounteth the fatnes of the olive, wherewith are honored, and the red blood
of the Grape, whereby are cheered both God and men; for sons are more
pleasing than pleasant plants, and daughters are more lovely and glorious in
parents eyes, than are the polished corners of a temple. The Prophet David in
the 127. Psalm, Psalm. 127.4.
compares Children to arrows in the hand of a strong man, and pronounces him
blessed, that has his quiver full of them: showing also, wherein that
blessedness does consist, namely in this, 1. Sam. 1.6.
for whereas their enemies would have vpbraided them as accursed, by reason of
their barrennes, like as Peninnah did Anna, 1. Sam. 2.1.
this their opprobrie by their having of Children, is taken away according to
that with Elizabeth here says of her self: and their mouths as Anna says,
enlarged over their enemies. Thus then we see what a blessing this was to
Elizabeth, that she was made fruitful, and brought forth a son, and how
generally the fruit of the womb, Psalm. 127.3.
is an inheritance and blessing that comes of the Lord. And this that it is
so, is a most necessary doctrine in these days to be taught, in respect of
two sorts of people; the one who thinks Children to be a charge: and
therefore if they might have their choice, had rather to be without them than
have them. Prou. 17.6,
How far are such from the knowledge of Gods truth in this behalf, which
teaches us, that Children are a blessing, an inheritance, a reward, and a
crown unto us from the Lord: this if such would duly consider, it would both
reform their corrupt, and wicked judgment in this behalf, and it would also
comfort them in their distress, being ouercharged in their own eyes, with a
charge of Children: for what greater comfort can there be, than with our eyes,
sensibly to see the Lords blessings and signs of his favor before us, which
because many in their Children cannot see, by reason of their ignorant hearts,
which never were instructed in Gods school, they take more comfort in the
increase of their swine, than they do in the increase of sons and of
daughters. The other sort, for whom the knowledge of this doctrine is
necessary, are they who taking delight, and that great as great may be in
their Children, they yet sound not to the deapth of this blessing; they
perceive it not to be a blessing from the Lord, but do take it to be a
natural and ordinary work of nature, whereby they both rob the Lord of
that honor, and thanks which is due unto him, and deprive themselves also of
that inward joy: which in the consideration thereof the godly do coonceiue,
who thereby perceive the Lord, to have a special regard unto them, according
as Elizabeth did, as it is manifest by these her own words: Luke. 1.25.
Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days that he looked upon me. Where we
see that by her son that she had conceived, and afterward brought forth:
she makes an argument unto her self, that the Lord looked down upon her; or
as the Virgin Marie says: Luke. 1.48.
regarded her estate: than which assuredly to know, as she knew it perfectly
hereby, what greater joy could her heart conceive? But least by this general
speech, it should be thought, that children are unto all a token of God his
favor, and that from them they may reason as did Elizabeth: Thus has the Lord
dealt with me, in the days that he looked upon me. It must be understood,
as partly in the beginning I signified, that these temporal things which the
Lord bestows indifferently, both upon the good and the bad; are then unto us
blessings and signs, and assurances of the Lords favor and loving kindenes
toward us: when as we, upon whom they are bestowed are such, who do from
our hearts, love, serve, and fear him? For otherwise, if he who receives them
from the Lord is wicked and ungodly, and do continue therein without
repentance, they are not unto him blessings, but cursings, not pledges of his
salvation thorough the grace and favor of God in Christ: but heavy tokens,
and certain of his more grievous condemnation. The Scripture therefore to put
a difference, it thus speaks: Blessed is every one, that serves the Lord,
Psalm. 128.
and walks in his ways. And thereupon reckoning God his blessings upon such,
in respect of the labors of their hands, in respect of the fruitefulnes of
their Wives, in respect of the towardlines of their Children: it thus
concludes: Lo thus shall the man be blessed, that fears the Lord. The
fear therefore of the Lord, which is manifested, by a careful watching in his
ways: is it that sanctifies to us the fruit of the womb, and the fruit of
the ground, which halloweth our basket and our store; and which blesses our
goings out, and our commings in: and makes what ever we have, be it small or
great, to be an exceeding blessing unto us. But with the wicked it is nothing
so, Job. 21.7. etc.
for though to use again the words of holy Job; They live, wax old, and
grow in wealth, though their seed be established in their sight with them,
and their generation before their eyes: though their houses be peaceable and
without fear, and the rod of God be not upon them: though their Bullock
gendereth and falls not, their cow calueth and casts not her calfe: though
they send forth their Children like sheep, and their sons dance: though
they take the Tabret and Harp, and rejoice in the sound of the Organes:
though they want nothing that their heart wishes, or their eye lusts after.
In which case, thus laded with the things of this life, we (like as did Job)
do often see the most ungodly men, according to that the Psalmist says. Lo
these are the wicked, they prosper and increase in riches, their eyes stand out
for fatnes. Though I say all these things, and al other good things of this
life befall them, according to their own hearts desire: yet neither Children
nor any other thing else, though they have gathered gold as dust, and silver
as the stones of the streat, is, or can be a crown, or a blessing unto them.
For notwithstanding all those things, the increase of their house says Job,
Job. 20.7.
shall go away, it shall flow away, in the day of the Lords wrath, they shall
perish for ever, like their dung, and they that have seen them, shall see them
no more. Thus it is apparent, how that to the godly only, Children and all
things are a blessing: as was this Son to Elizabeth, which she brought
forth, for that she together with her husband feared the Lord: walking in all
his ways and ordinances without reproof. So that to conclude this first part,
we see, how in every circumstance, which the Evangelist here notes, the Lord
his mercy toward her appears: ^uke. 1
as it does also to all them, to whom he shows the like favor to
conceive, to fulfill their time, to be delivered, and to bring forth their
issue, whether it be Son or Daughter.

Now follows the second part, which shows how her Neighbors, ^uke. 1
and Cousins rejoiced thereat. And herein these circumstances are to be
observed, first, who they were that rejoiced, secondly how, and thirdly for
what.

They that rejoiced were her Neighbors, and Cousins that is kinsfolk in
general. And here in part began to be fulfilled, that which the Angel
foreshewed to Zacharias himself, Luke. 1.14
to wit, that many should rejoice at his birth. Which they did as in respect
of Elizabeth, whose reproache hereby they saw to be done away, whereof they
could not, but be right glad: so especially in regard of that hope, which
they had conceived of the Child, by the relation of the Angel unto Zacharias:
both therefore for the benefit, as it respected Elizabeth and her Husband
particularly, and for the blessing: which hereby the Church of GOD should
receive generally, did they thus at this birth rejoice. In the former they
performed the duty of kind Neighbors and kindred; and in the latter the
part of good and godly Christians. For to speak of the former, it is the
duty of good Neighbors and kinsfolk to be glad, and to rejoice at the good
of their Kindred, and Neighbors. So did (as the last year upon like occasion
I showed) the Neighbors of Naomie in the book of Ruth: for when Ruth her
Daughter in Law, was delivered of a Child by Obed, Ruth. 4.14.
The Women her Neighbors (says the text) said unto her in rejoicing manner.
Blessed be God which has not left thee this day without a kinseman: this shall
bring thy life again, and cherrish thine old age, for thy daughter in law
which loves thee, has borne unto him, etc. Thus also did Job his brethren,
friends and acquaintance, Job. 42.11.
for they after the Lord had turned the captivity of Job, came unto him, and
brought presents with them, to comfort him over the evil that the Lord had
brought upon him, and to rejoice with him for his recovery there from. Romans
12.15.
This is to Rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep with them that weep:
like as the Apostle commands: whereby it appears that such good
Neighborhood was then, and that it ought to be also now: for which cause,
their example, and this commandment is left unto us. But good neighborhood
is now gone, the common complaint in every place is: and Cousins kindness is
such, that even the name it self through Cousins that are Cousiners, is grown
to be odious, and a name of reproach: for so far are men in these days from
rejoicing at the good of each others, though they be Neighbors the next door
together, or kinsemen of the nearest blood, that they rather repine and grudge,
that any fat should fall besides their own beards: and as for the weeping with
them that are in affliction, thereby to comfort them, it may be said, as Job
said of his friends in the same respect: that in his behalf men have forsaken
the fear of the Almighty; Job. 6.14.
for whereas, He that is in misery should be comforted of his Neighbor, all
his friends and neighbors (as Solomon says of the brethren of the poor) do
hate him, if not revile him, as Jobs friends did him. This is a complainte more
fit for another place, Prou. 19.7.
yet not amiss here, for that by the churlishnes, and unnaturalness of men in
these days, the love of these Neighbors and Kinsfolks may the better
appear. For how ever men in these days, malice and grudge, they rejoiced and
were glad at the great blessing of the Lord bestowed upon Zacharias and
Elizabeth, and would no doubt, if occasion had been, have also comforted them,
as many of the Jews did comfort Marie and Martha for the death of their
broher Lazarus. Ioh. 11.19.


But as men fail in this duty, so do they no less in that other, which is,
to rejoice for the good which generally befalls the Church of God, for so
careless are they of such spiritual things, that for the most part, they see
them not, or seeing them, they regard them not, for though an hundredth Ihon
Baptists were borne, that is, though an hundredth, or a thousand such, who were
able to preach unto us the Gospel of Christ, for the remission of sins, were
sent forth by the Lord of the harvest to furnish our own Churches, and such
other as want their ministry: yet far would many be from rejoicing
thereat, and from praising and blessing the Lord for so visiting of his people,
which also they would be, as they are in respect of sundry other good
blessings, as for the blessing of good Magistrates, of peace, of plenty, etc.
whereby the Church of God is made to flourish. For though these things done,
they do well like, and chiefelie desire: yet it is only in respect of their
owns private commodity, and for the body sake, for that they thereby also
receive benefit and pleasure: for otherwise, they would not respect them, in
regard of the good that comes thereby, either to their own souls, or to the
Church of GOD, for whose cause yet, and not for their own, they do inioye
them.

This their corruption appears manifestly hereby, for that though they hear
of never so great distress of the Church of God beyond the Seas, they are
thereby no more affected to weep quam si dura silex, aut stet marpesia mutis:
than is the hardest flint, nor though they hear of never so good the success
thereof, are they at all more affected to rejoice, than was Timon of Athens:
whereby they show them selves not to be of the communion of Saints, nor members
of the mystical body of Christ: betwixt whom is the like or greater Sympathy,
than is betwixt the members of this our natural body, wherein if one member
suffer, all suffer with it, and if one member be had in honor, 1. Cor. 1 26.
all the other members rejoice with it. This fellow feeling of the good of the
church of God in general, by the birth of John Baptist, had these neighbors
and Cousins of Elizabeth, for which cause at her deliverance of him, they
rejoiced. And the like have all they that are in deed of the communion of
Saints, neither can any truly say, that he is a member of the body of
Christ, until in some measure, he be partaker of the same: And this may
suffice for the parties that rejoiced.

The manner of their rejoicing follows to be considered, which though here
it be not expressed: yet in what sort, the Godly have used to rejoice, we
cannot be ignorant, since elsewhere it is often and at large declared. Simeon
rejoiced in singing, Luke. 2.29
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Marie in singing, My soul
does magnify the Lord. Luke 1.46
This Zacharias in singing, Luke 1.64.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel that has visited and redeemed his people.
And the women that were at Ruths labor in saying, Ruth. 4.14.
Blessed be God, which has not left thee this day without a kinseman. By
these and sundry others, as by that song of Anna, 1. Sam. 2, 1, 2. etc. we may
gather, 1. Sa. 2.1.2 etc.
that the spiritual manner of rejoicing either for this, or any other benefit,
is, in yielding thanks unto the Lord, and praise unto his name. For this the
Lord requires of us, and this the Godly has bound themselves, (as it were by
solemn promise) to perform unto him. Psa. 116.12 13
What shall I render unto the Lord (says the Prophet David,) for all his
benefits toward me? (...). 118.
I will take the Cup of salvation and call upon or praise the name of the Lord.
And again, Open ye unto me the gates of righteousness, that I may enter in
and praise the Lord. And why? because though he has chastened me sore, (as
justly I have deserved) yet has he not delivered me to death (as in justice
he might.) Lea, when she had conceived, and borne her fourth son, she said,
Now will I praise the Lord: And that she might the better be put in mind of
her promise in this behalf, she called his name Judah, that is in English,
(...). 29.35.
praise. Thus to allege no more examples, we see how our manner of rejoicing,
as for other benefits, so namely for this great blessing of God, in giving
unto us an happy increase of Children, consists in rendering praise and
thanks unto him. This if it goes before, not in hypocrisy for a fashion and
show, but in the sincerity of heart, and simplicity of mind, then may other
reioycinges follow after, Genesis 21.8
then may we which Abraham make a feast, and use such other semblances of joy
which the Godly in the fear of God have used, for by that, these are
sanctified and made holy unto us, and without that, these are very profane
and heathenish, how glittering a show soever they make in the eyes of the
world. Our first care therefore must be, if we be true neighbors and kindred,
to give thanks unto the Lord, to bless his name, to yield praises unto him
for his benefits and blessings bestowed upon him, or them, by whom we dwell,
and with whom we are alied, for in such sort no doubt, as all the Godly have
used to do, so the Godly neighbors, and Cousins of Elizabeth rejoiced, and
were glad; wherein they showed themselves rightly religious toward God; and
hearty (not fained neighbors and friends) to their good neighbor and Cousin
Elizabeth. But not only they, as I should have noted in the former part,
rejoiced, but she also: for it is here said, that they rejoiced with her.
Elizabeth her self, as she was the chief upon whom this mercy was bestowed,
so was she the chief, and as it were the ring leader, in giving of thanks;
for she both stirred up her self in thankfulness to rejoice, and also used
means to declare unto her neighbors, and her Cousins, what the Lord had done
for her, that they also for it, with her might rejoice. For thus much do these
words declare, wherein it is said, that her neighbors and Cousins heard tell,
how the Lord had showed his great mercy upon her. For by whom should they
hear it, (especially her husband being dumb) but by her, or her means, who
had received it, and therefore could best tell how to express it: For not
only outwardly as others, but inwardly also did she see, ca^^ and feel,
this great mercy of the Lord bestowed vp^^ her. According therefore to that
which in every respect, more than others she knew, could she, (as no doubt
she did) express each thing more fully to the glory of God.

And this has been the practice of the godly, always in this behalf to be
blabs as we say, to blab forth and declare, what mercies the Lord has powered
forth upon them. Come unto me, says the Prophet: and I will tell you what the
Lord has done for my Soul. Psalm. 66.16.
So Peter, when by the Angel of the Lord he was delivered out of prison: he
told the manner thereof to them that were gathered together at Mary's house,
Act. 12.17.
and willed them to show the same things unto James, and other the brethren:
The like at our Savior Christ his commandment, did the man out of whom the
devil was cast: Luke 8.27. He went and preached (says the Evangelist) verse,
39. thoroughout all the City what great things Jesus had done unto him. Luke.
8.27.
For this, even as by this one example it is manifest, the Lord requires of
us, that we should do both concerning private and public benefits: to
rehearse and to show the^ forth unto others; least the remembrance of them
should die, and be forgotten: and so the Lord lose his honor due unto him for
them. This was most carefully observed by the Israelites, so long as among them
remained any, either care or conscience of the true service of God, Psalm 78
2.3. etc.
as is manifest by the 78. Psalm: wherein is showed both how the Lord
commanded, and they performed unto him this duty, by showing forth his
praises, his power, and wonderful works unto their Children, according as he
established it for a testimony in Iaacob, and ordained it for a law in Israel.
But when they began to be careless of his service, and to wax weary of his
religion; then decayed likewise in them, this duty of remembering each other
of the benefits of God toward them: insomuch that it is said in the 2. of
Judges: Judge. 2.10.
that Iosuah being dead and that generation: there followed a generation, which
neither knew the Lord nor the works which he had done for Israel: yea even
that miraculous work of bringing them forth of Aegipt was quite buried in
oblivion, as if it had never been. And thus it is to be doubted, it will fare
or ere it be long with us: for whereas the Lord has bestowed upon every one
of us particularly, and upon this land generally, as great blessings, in
respect both of ye things of this life, and of the things concerning the life
to come; as ever he bestowed upon that people of Israel: yet so careless is both
preacher and people, one and other, that I fear me shortly all will be
forgotten, and not so much as that our miraculous deliverance from the Spanish
invasion be kept in remembrance: we can talk and prate fast enough of vanity,
and of the idle conceits of our own heart and brain: Yea we can readely
blabbe, and tell forth what may injury one another in his goods or good name,
for to one of these ends tends most of our communication in these dayos,
save that much of it also is wanton and unbeseeming Christians, such as
corrupts good manners, and grieueth the holy spirit of God by whom we are
sealed unto the day of redemption. Ephe. 4.39.
But to tell forth what the Lord has done for our souls, as did David, Psalm.
66.16.
what great things Jesus has done for us, as did the possessed; what great
mercies he has showed upon us, Luke. 8.39.
as Elizabeth here did: or what deliverances, benefits, and blessings he has,
and still daily does bestow upon us, and our land, that thereby we might the
rather stir up our selves and others to praise the Lord, to pray for the
continuance of his loving kindness toward us: in these cases, and such like,
we are mute as a fish, or as the dumb, that opens not his mouth. This
corruption howsoever it has overtaken us: yet now let us be scholed by this
virtuous woman, and learn of her for our amendment in this behalf these two
lessons: namely our selves upon whom God has powered forth his blessings;
first to rejoice in thankfulness and praise to his name: and then to communicate
and declare it to others, that they with us, and we with them may do the
same. For thus we see Elizabeth did, her self she rejoiced, and certified her
neighbors and Cosins how great mercy the Lord had showed upon ner: for which
cause they also (when they heard tell thereof) rejoiced with her.

What this great mercy was which the Lord had showed upon Elizabeth, may be
understood by that which has been said: to wit, that whereas she had been a
long time barren, and thereby a reproach among women; now the Lord had given
her to conceive, to accomplish her full time, to be delivered, and to bring
forth a Son. Every one of these is a great mercy, as severally it has been
showed, how much more then, when they come all together in their full
perfection, as a reeke of Corn comes in due season into the Barn. This
teaches women especially, and so al other generally, what account they have to
make of the conception and bearing of their Children, and from whence it does
proceed: namely that they have to account of it as of a great mercy, and as
proceeding from the great mercy of God. Wretched therefore are they that
account it as an ordinary thing, proceeding only from the mutual conjunction
of man and woman: for who has so bewitched them, that they see not many to
want this blessing? to die without an heir, and to leave their possession to
strangers, if not to enemies; though a long time begininng in the flower of
their age: they have lived a married life?

Genesis 30.1.2
This opinion it seems Rahel had conceived, when she said to Iaacob, give me
Children or else I die; but Iaacob corrected her fondnes saying: am I in Gods
steed that I should give thee Children. Children therefore again we see come
of God; without whose blessing a woman remains barren, not able to conceive:
or conceiving, without strength to bring forth her fruit. Look therefore,
and account how many Children you have borne, and reckon that so many mercies,
yea great mercies, (whereof every one contains a number of mercies) ye have
received from the Lord.

That whereas others have remained as dry Chippes, you have been as fruitful
Olyues in your husbands houses. And this, as you must account a mercy, so you
must acknowledge it to proceed from the free mercy of God; without any desert
or merit of yours, it is from his mercy that you conceive, that you fulfill
your time, that you are delivered of Children, not of Monsters. Were it not for
his mercy, your sins (even the best of the whole Sex) deserve, that in some
of these, if not in all of these you should miscarrie. Genesis 3.16.
The multipliyng of your pains in the conception and bringing forth, it
proceeded of the curse of God, the deliverance from those pains, that therein
you perish not, it is of the great mercy of God. This Elizabeth and her
Cousins here confess, and and this no doubt, all such women as fear God, do
with thanksgiving acknowledge.

And this cannot be, but a great comfort unto you, to consider when as in other
things, so in your children especially, you have such notable pledges of the
Lord his mercy toward you; for thus may you say, if the Lord in this and this
child, and so in all the rest had not showed me contrary to my deserts great
mercy, the curse of sorrows (which justly I deserve) had overwhelmed me, that
I should never have lived to have praised the Lord in the Land of the living.
As therefore (to conclude) you have the greatest tokens of God his mercy
toward you, so you must labor, that in you may appear the greatest signs of
all dutiful obedience unto the Lord: otherwise the Lord for your
unthankfulness will cut off his mercies from you, whereby you shall die, not
only in your sorrows, to the loss of your lives, but in your sins, to the
loss of your souls. But if according to the example of all holy Matrons, and
especially of this our Elizabeth, you render thanks vnfaynedlie, and cause
thanks by many to be rendered unto the Lord for his great mercies upon you, then
be you assured, that his mercies shall never cease from following you in this
life, till you have received the sum of all mercies in life everlasting.

Thus we have heard what blessings the Lord bestowed upon Elizabeth, and how
she, her neighbors and Cosins rejoiced thereat, in rendering praise and thanks
for the same unto the Lord. Now let us pray unto our good God, and loving
father in Jesus Christ, yielding unto him all praises and thanks for his great
mercy already showed, as generally upon us all, so particularly for his
great mercies toward her, for whose cause especially we are assembled, to
rejoice in thankefulnes unto him.

FINIS.
Errata
In the 4 Page lin. 1. for Lod read Lord. Page 11. lin. 15. for deliver to read
to deliver. Page 15. lin. 9. for serves, read fears, and li. 16. for
watching, walking. and lin. 28 for falls, fails. Page 18. li. 6 for his,
this. Page 19. lin. 14. for mutis, cautes. Page 20. lin. 9. for spiritual,
special.

The thanksgiving.
O Lord our God most gracious and most merciful father in Jesus Christ, we
thine humble servants do yield unto thy divine Majesty through him, (in who^
only thou art well pleased;) all possible thanks from the bottom of our
hearts, for all thy benefits and blessings, both public and private of body
and of soul, which from thy bountiful hands in great mercy we have received.
And especially O Lord we praise and magnify thy glorious name, for thy great
mercies bestowed upon thine handmaide, in giving her to conceive, to accomplish
her full time, and to bring forth a man-child into the world. This mercy thou
have revealed unto us out of thine holy word, to be a great mercy, and from
thy great mercy only to proceed: so O Lord we do acknowledge it, so we
accept it; confessing no power to be in any creature in Heaven or in earth to
bring the same to pass, nor worthiness, or merit to bind thee thereunto. For
this thy great mercy therefore toward her; we extol and laud thy name,
rejoicing with her in all thankfulness and reverence (on her behalf,) unto thy
majesty: and we further in Jesus Christ his name, most humbly beseech thy
fatherly goodness, as thou have thus mercifully begun so to continue on thy
loving favor and kindenes toward her, and the sweet infant which she has
brought forth into the world. O Lord strengthen her by thy power, comfort her
by thy spirit, that howsoever now she be brought into a low and a weak
estate, that yet in due time, she may recover her former strength, and be able
to come to give thee praise for her gracious deliverance, and for all other thy
blessings, with the rest of thy Saints in the great congregation. Bless also O
Lord her infant, that as she has sustained sorrow and pain in bearing it in
her womb, and in bringing it forth, so by thy blessings upon it, she may
receive comfort and joyce; when not only she may see it to have received the
Sacrament of new birth, but when coming to age of discretion, it shall
manifest, by a godly and an holy life: that it is borne a new and regenerate
in spirit, and is of the number of them, with whom thou have made this
precious covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. For these
graces, O Lord our God as we pray thus particularly, (in regard of this present
occasion) so we beseech thee to enlarge thy self in all other necessary
mercies to us, and to thy whole Church generally, especially in the
pardoning, and forgiving of our sins, according to thy promise in Jesus
Christ, in whose name (with the same words which he has taught us,) we pray
further unto thee, saying, Our Father, etc.

FINIS.

