A Brief of the Bill exhibited against Bankrupts.
THe Bill extends only to make such Bankrupts as seek their living by
buying and selling, as the former acts did, only it makes a Scriuener,
receiving other men's monyes into his trust or custody, liable to the same, and
an alien. It further describes a Bankrupt, and provides that the remedies
appointed by the former acts of 13. Eliza. and 1. Iac. shall be extended to
such as are described by this act to be Bankrupt. It enlarges the remedies in
some cases, not sufficiently provided for by the former laws, and in special
cases inflicteth corporal punishment.

It enlarges the description of a Bankerupt, and adds to the former Laws.
1. Such as shall obtain or seek protections against Creditors, unless only
in time of Parliament. 2. Such as shall prefer or exhibit into any his
Majesty's Courts, any bill or bills, or to his Majesty any petition, or
petitions of conformity, to compel Creditors take less, the^ their just
debts, or to procure longer days of payment. Reasons.
1. Experience shows, that this is done only to delay and hinder Creditors.
2. That they spend, and consume their estates in the mean time. 3. The money
spent in this course, and given to undertakers, may help pay his just debts.
4. This is by pretense of a course of Law, to hinder Law. 5. This is to compel
charity, which should be free.
3. Such as owing an hundred pound or more, shall not pay or compound for the
same, within six months after the same (...) grow (...) be demanded. 1. Many
men avoid the acts which make a Bankrupt, but make no conscience by delays to
defraud men of their just debts.
4. Such as being arrested for debt, shall lie in prison six months, or being
arrested for two hundred pound just debt, or more, shall get forth by putting
in common or hired bail, in which case the party is to be a Bankrupt, from the
time of the arrest. 1. Not being a Bankrupt til six months, incourageth
Bankrupts, in which time they provide for their allies and friends at pleasure.
2. They pay whom they list, they learn much ill and craft. 3. The common and
hired bail, is a trick merely to defraud Creditors, and a great abuse. 4.
After such bail, they keep their persons private, and yet spend their estates.

The Bil relieueth Creditors in some cases, not sufficiently, or expressly
provided for by the former laws. 1. That the Bankrupts wife, after he is
proved a Bankrupt, shall and may be examined, only for the discovery of his
estate, conveyed or concealed by her, and being in her priuity. For want of
this, the former laws are of small use for the Bankrupt, knowing the wives are
not to be examined; convey their goods by their wives help to persons unknown
to themselves, or any others then their wives.
2. That the Commissioners, or others by their warrant or appointment, may
break open the Bankrupts shop, house, or warehouse, to the intent to seize
his body, goods, and estate. This is doubted, whether sufficiently provided for
by the former laws, whereupon some fearful Commissioners, making scruple,
the Bankrupt in the mean time conuaieth away himself, and his goods at
pleasure.
3. That for the better distributing of the Bankrupts estate, the Commissioners
may examine Creditors, upon the certainty of their just debts, and that they be
relieved for no more then their mere debt, whatsoever security they have, by
judgment, statute, recognisance, or bond forfeited, without respect to the
penalties in such securities. This is not expressly provided for by the former
laws, but is within the intent and equity, and is so done de facto, by
Commisioners: but the not expressing thereof, does breed many times much
question, and sometimes suits in law, some Creditors requiring relief for
penalties and forfeitures.
4. That in case of any lands, goods, chattels, etc. of the Bankrupts, made
over to any person, upon condition of redemption at a day, not due at the time
of his being a Bankrupt, the Commissioners may assign power to any persons to
pay the mere debt; upon tender or payment whereof, the Commissioners may
divide the surplusage of the benefit of the said lands, goods, etc. 1. It has
been conceived, the Commissioners have not power by the law, to assign persons
to perform the condition, whereupon the Creditors are forced to long and
tedious suits, in Courts of equity. 2. It seems very reasonable and equal to
be so.
5. That in case of extents upon any the Bankrupts lands, goods, and chattels,
by any accomptant to his Majesty, the Commissioners may examine such accomptant
upon oath, whether the debt were originally due to himself, or transferred to
him in trust for the use and benefit of the party, whose debt it was: and if it
were, that the same be made subject to the Commission. It has been a usual
course of late years, to transfer debts to accomptants, and to extend for
his Majesty, the accomptants being only used for other men, and yet the
accomptants refuse to answer upon oath, to any such interrogatory, because it
seems to be the Kings case.
6. That where lands, goods, or chattels, of any Bankrupt, be assigned over
upon good consideration, yet the same remaining in the possession, order and
disposition of the Bankrupt, after such grant or gift made to receive the
rents, and take the profits: That such lands, goods, and chattels be made
subject to the Commission. This possession of the Bankrupt, the grant being
concealed, was the motive of the Bankrupts great trust and credit. This
possession of the Bankrupt, is a badge of fraud, and lies in the deck many
years thus concealed.

The Bill inflicteth corporal punishment, by standing on the Pillory in the
County, etc. two hours, and losing one care by course of indictment in cases,
1. Where the Bankrupt does fraudulently, and deceitfully convey away his goods,
or chattels, to the value of five pound, and shall not upon his oath discover,
and (if it be in his power,) deliver unto the Commissioners all that estate,
goods, and chattels so by him or his means kept from the Commissioners. 2.
Where he cannot make it appear unto the Commissioners, that he has sustained
some casual loss, after the buying, and taking up of such wares, monyes and
commodities, whereby he is become unable to pay his just debts. 1. Bankrupts
increase, and trade decreaseth: the best remedy will be fear of corporal
punishment. 2. This corporal punishment is only in case of wilful fraud and
deceit, and where that fraud and deceit does continue after monition and
warning by the Commissioners. 3. The trade of Bankrupting, is the worm that
eats out the heart of all commerce and trade. 4. Without casual loss it is
a wilful wrong.

The Bill appoints the Bankrupt to be pursued, and taken as a Felon, and to
suffer death as in case of felony, without corruption of blood, or forfeiture
of lands, or goods in case, The Bankrupt shall flee away, and will not appear
before the Commissioners, upon or before the fifth proclamation to be made
according to the form of the aforesaid statutes, and after three summons first
made in writing, under the Commissioners hands, and left at the house, or shop,
of the Bankrupts last abode or dwelling. 1. This wilful deceit is worse then
burglary, or robbing by the highway, which may be prevented, this cannot. 2.
The time limited is very sufficient for such to come in and avoid this
punishment. 3. This is more in terror to them, then likely to be prosecuted by
the Creditors.



