A VERY GODly, learned, and fruit full Sermon against the bad spirits of
Malignitie, Malice, and unmercifulness.

Publicly preached by Thomas Banks, Master of Arts, and preacher of the
word.

Seen and allowed.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, near the sign of
the Castle. 1586.

To the most reverend Father (...) God his singular good Lord, John (...) the
providence of God Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan, Thomas Banks wishes and prays for continual increase of
Gods manifold graces.
MY very good Lord, may it please your Grace to recognize, that as Cato the
Censour, when he was asked why he would not have his picture solemnly erected
(as others had) said, He would rather that men should marvel why he wanted
that monument, then murmr because he had it. So likewise have I my self
replied in this case, as most unwilling to condescend to the Press.
Notwithstanding, the sad importunity of some learned wellwillers which took a
liking of this Sermon, and the causeless impatience of other some captious
persons, which did both stomach it, and other such sermons of mine, as
ouerfraught with too too much eloquence (forsooth) have finally won me to
surrender up the copy hereof out of mine own custody. The one instant cause
(well I wot) argues no less but that my obsequious affection has
ouerweighed my discretion, in that I have tendered my friends desire more then
mine own credit, by publishing this so slender a treatise: and the other cause
that moved me, imports no more but that I do rather securely insult over,
then seriously stick at the waspish indignation of the adversaries, especially
having now a fresh recommended this thing to their eyes with boldness, which
their ears before could ^ardly brook with christian patience, and all because I
rolled too much in any rhethorike, (say they) as though the nature of the
sacred scriptures ^ould in no wise admit the serviceable (...)e of profane
sciences, no, not for (...)eir better perspicuitie sake. This (...)e thinks)
should be reputed as a ^^radox amongst the best learned, and (...)t is it
canonized as a resolute truth (...) the general decree of the inferior
(...)t, which for the supply of some Art ^^d faculty they want, smothly
pre^^nd a petty zeal, and modestly with ^he Fox say, they will eat no
grapes. These be they, which when they preach the word, (as oftentimes they do
vnpremeditate) happily catch mostraines by stouping too low, then others do by
looking too high. As for me, whom they partly dislike and disfauor in this
case, I appeal to them selves for their further indifferent sentence, touching
this my Sermon preached, and now unworthily under your most gracious protection
published. Which albeit untimely it seem in respect of the author thereof,
and somewhat homely perchance in regard of the matter therein: yet being
affianced under your good Lordships wings, and perused over without
parcialitie, or prejudice, it may at times afforde the readers such seasonable
and wholesome lessons, as shall be both easy for them to learn, and behouefull
enough to live thereafter. For neither is it in phrase so lofty, but that al
through out may perceive it, nor yet in matter so defective, but that some, I
hope, amongst all may select and single out some good thing which they have
either not heard, forgotten or else neglected: The rifer knowledge, remembrance,
and more lively practice whereof may happily make for the (...)ancement of Gods
kingdom, and (...)ir eternal salvation, which em(...)ce it accordingly with a
good con(...)nce. For herein (so far forth (...)my poor Talent would extend)
(...) I assaied to supplant such foul (...)rfections, as do now a days
o(...)hrow and deface the whole body (...) beauty of Christian innocence:
(...)ch enormities namely are these, (...)ster curiossitie in judging,
Ser(...)ne poison in malice bearing, and (...)rlish illiberalitie in Alms
gi(...). And these three malignant, (...)full, and merciless spirits, though
(...)aue sought to conjure them by one (...)d one: yet do they commonly
(...)epe company, and concur all in ^^e subject. For wheresoever the
(...)estilent spirits of malice and malig^itie do enrage, even there at hand
^ttendeth always the unsavory spirit of unmercifulness, insomuch as if we
peaceably harbor one of these, the other two without nay say, will prease in
after: and if on the other side we put one to flight, the other two
incontinent will bid us farewell. Having therefore (I say) at the instance of
some for the behoof of all, penned this Sermon as a means to suppress and
abolish these three noisome spirits: my humble suit and confident hope is, that
it may and shall be both favorably protected under your Graces name, and
fruitfullie perused of so many as fear God, love me, and favor them selves
aright. Which fortunate success I commit over unto the Almighty, who as he
has largely enriched your Lordship with many singular graces, and has eke
advanced you on high in this his Church and common weal: so still do I pray
him graciousle to multiply the same in you, with a long ^^d prosperous
preservation of your ^erson and calling, and all for the better preferment of
his name, and propagation of his glorious Gospel.

Your Graces most humble in the Lord. Thomas Banks.

THE TEXT. Luke. 6.
37 Judge not, and ye shall not be Judged: Condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: Forgive and ye shall be forgiven.

38 Give, and it shall be given unto you: a good measure, pressed down, shaken
together and running over, shall men give into your bosom: for with what
measure ye mete, with the same shall men mete to you again.

(...)ie godly, learned, and (...)ll Sermon against the bad spi(...)
malignitie, malice, and vnmer(...)es. Publicly preached by Tho(...)as Banks
Master of Arts and Preacher of the word.
(...)dge not, and ye shall not be judged: (...)demne not, and ye shall not
be con(...)mned.
OUr Savior seeking throughout, by virtue of this his Sermon, to turn the
peoples leade^ nature into the golden metal of grace, and (...)ecause nature
did properly hale (...)on to deal as they were, and not (...)ey would be
dealt withal in way (...)engeance: and grace forced them to (...)s they would
be and not as they were (...)e to in way of benevolence: Albeit (...) say) for
the speedier conversion and ex(...)ange sake of their corrupt nature into
(...)ure regenerate substance, the Lord in (...)s own person had immediately
before (...) this chapter, laid hard to their charge: yet nevertheless does
he now afres(...) (as it were) knock upon his Discip(...) breasts, and
roundly now again ru(...) the memories of the residue of his au(...)tors,
charging the^ straightly with th(...) three special branches of
Christianit(...) The first concerns the abandoning (...) curious and rash
judgment, The sec(...) cutteth off all malice and private reueng(...) and the
third is altogether conversant (...)bout the extending of alms: And the(...)
three several precepts have each of the(...) appendent to him, his kindly
promise (...) recompense. So that (as we see) this i(...)stant treatise
stands jointly througho(...) of bare propositions and confirmations, yea,
upon mere precepts and promises^ Well then, touching the first proposition,
sounding in manner of a proclamation against lavish judgment, we must well
think, that Christ's meaning thereby is not, to shorten the arms of civil
Judges, according to the fantastical co^struction of the Anabaptists: yea,
the Lord is so far off from dashing or putting to silence this same
serviceable sort of Magistrates, that by his own ordinance and appointment
they do hold their standing (...)heir pre-eminence, and temporal (...)me^t
seat in justice, as may appear (...)se sundry places of Testament. (...) 10.
Judges and officers shall thou Deuteronomy. 16.
(...) thee in all thy cities, throughout (...)bes. Esai. 1. Judge the
fatherles, Esai. 1. Zach. 7.
(...)nd the widow. Zach. 7. Execute (...)udgement, and show mercy and
(...)assion every one to his brother. (...). By the controlement of
wrong(...)ote righteous judgment co^man(...) thus, How long will ye judge
un(...) psalm. 82.
and accept the persons of the wic(...) So then hereby we learn, y^ civil
(...)racie beautified with upright judge(...) does go for as singular good
pai(...) with the Lord as may be Neither (...) this commandment any whit at
(...)isable or cut short ecclesiastical per(...) from judgment and sentence
giving in (...) causes, as properly appertain to (...) vocation and
jurisdiction. For as before(...)e in ye days of Moses, ye Priests were
(...)thorized to judge of ye lepry: so now in (...)r age, the Church likewise
is by office (...)joined to judge, and for a season to put a(...)art the
retchlesse and notorious evil (...)uers: and this in the Apostles time was
allowed off, as appears when(...) Paul commanded that such a one (...) kept
his fathers wife, Should be delivered up unto Satan for the destruction (...)
1. Cor. 5.
his flesh, that his spirit might be save(...) in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Yea, such judgment of ours (I say) is not prohibited here, as has it warrant
from manifest and infallible proofs, but that we may with John the Baptist,
term the Phraises and Sadduces, A generation of vipers, and say unto the
Scribes as Christ did. How can ye speak any thing that good is, when ye your
selves Math. 3.
are evil? Yea, we may with the Apostle 1. Cor. 6.
thunder out eternal condemnation against such as defile themselves with
fornication, theft, wantonness, adultery drunkenness, idolatry, and such like.
Touching these most profane and gross impieties, which can in no wise
possible proceed from a mean good mind, we may without all danger sears, and
set Satan's mark upon them, in token of their overthrow, which pollute
themselves therewithal unless that by repentance they take up in time, and
turn over a new leaf. For as the bad tree by the evil (...)t may be
accordingly judged of: so (...)y they which through evil conuersa(...),
without remorse of conscience op(...) themselves against the will of God. (...)
reputed and judged off what they are. (...)sides, the Lord, who (as S. Jerome
(...)h) does not here forbid, but teaches (...) judge: dehorteth us not from
iud(...) our selves, but that we may after (...)ostles advise Judge our selves,
that 1. Cor. 11.
(...)e not judged of the Lord. Thus (...)ee, what sorts of judgment are
priui(...)d, untouched, and exempted here: Now (...)s behold a little, what
judgment our (...)iour Christ aims at, and seeks to (...)off in this place,
as a most pestilent (...) noious enemy against al true Chri(...)nitie, and
brotherly consent whatsoe(...). And this it is (my brethren) when (...)en of
sinister judgment do curiously (...)t out the enormities, or openly blaze
(...)discover the nakedness of others, whose (...)ults perhaps are fewer in
number be(...)g truly told, and lighter in weight be(...)g rightly balanced,
then their own (...)e. Touching such peevish and busibo^ies, which for reproach
and not for refor^ation sake, roundly reprove, and disdainfully carpe at other
men: thapostle Paul does disappoint and wipe them of all excuse, where he
says, Therefore thou Romans 2.
art inexcusable (O man) whosoever thou art that iudgest. For this cause ye
same Apostle else where warns ye Corinthians, yt they should in no wise judge
any thing, until the coming of ye Lord. Againd, Who art thou (quoth he) that
(...) Cor. 4.
codemnest an other ma^s servant? For such like rash and rouing condemnation,
our savior Christ rebuked the Scribes, as thus, Wherefore think ye evil things
Mat. 9.
in your hearts? This he said, when falsely within themselves in a mutiny, they
charged him as a blasphemer. S. James likewise gives us this watch word,
Speak not evil one of an other, brethren. ^am. 4.
He that speaks evil of his brother, or he that condemns his brother,
speaks evil of the law, and condemns the law. And if thou condemnest the
law, thou art no obseruer of the law, but a Judge. That we should not upon
superficial and slender evidence judge our neighbors: that place in the book
of Moses is of great force to persuade us, where the Lord said, (...)me on,
let us go down and there co^(...)nd Genesis 10.
their language. Which words (...) our imitation sake, do very
signifi(...)tly import, what leisure and advise the (...)rd took, before he
would dash the buil(...)s with confusion: For he said he would (...) go down,
and then do it. In the Euan(...)st Luke we read, that the rich man Luke 16.
(...)d needs confer, and call his steward (...) him, before he did dimisse him.
In (...) Gospel of the Evangelist John we (...)ow sparing our Savior Christ
was (...)udging the Jews, who because they (...)a little before sought to stone
him, his (...)ciples gave him counsel yt he should (...) no more among them:
and yet he (...)ld not hear on yt side, so lightly to (...) the^ over, but
madly made reply as (...), Are there not twelve hours in Ioh. 12.
(...) day? As if he should have said, Be it (...) that heretofore they
intended mischief (...)ainst us, yet now perhaps their ma(...)e is worn out,
and they will no more (...)eale thus roughly with us. These are (...)xamples to
teach us, and the other before (...)re places of testimony for to assure us
(...)he rather, that the Lord can in no wise (...)rooke such impudent and
unruly persons, as are too rash and headlong in judging other men, by means
whereof they bewray themselves with shame enough to be both exceeding
presumptuous, and no less hipocriticall. Presumptuous, for that they take upon
them as Masters, being unworthy the name of Disciples, For that (I say)
they go about to reach that a far off, which they are too short armd to
apprehend and reach hard at hand: I mean, for that they assay to judge others,
being altogether unable to judge aright of themselves, (unless happily they
do surpass both Peter and Paul, the one whereof was deceived in himself,
when without fail he purposed, yea, and stoutly protested, that though he
(...). 26.
should die with Christ, he would in no wise deny him, and yet when it came
to the push, he both denied him, and forswore him bitterly: and the other for
his share confessed, that he was altogether (...). 4.
unmeet accordingly to judge himself, and that because he knew nothing by
himself.) That such men also as do curiously judge others, are them selves
wonderful hypocritical, (...) case is most plain and evident: (...) the
kindly property of an hypo(...)te, is, to see the sliding of an other
(...)an, but not the downfall of himself: (...) point at other men's blemishes,
be (...)y never so little, but to ouerpasse (...) own deformities, be they
never so (...)at. And therefore well said the (...)e man, An hypocrite with
his prou. 11.
(...)gue hurts his neighbor: whose (...)sight and parcialitie in deed is
such, (...)t the least moate in his fellows (...) seems a more sensible
object, then (...) greatest beam in his own. And (...) was the cause that
moved Christ (...) to say to one of that leaden (...)pe, as also to all the
rest of that (...)risaicall complexion, Thou hy(...)rite, Math. 7.
first cast out the beam out (...) thine own eye, and then shall (...)ou see
clearelie to cast the mote (...)t of thy brothers eye. But this (...)e of the
hipocrite (I fear me) and this (...)eame are as hard to part a sunder, (...)s
the byrd Acalanthis and the thistles (...)herein she breeds, or the
Grasshopper and the grass whereof ^hee springs, which naturally rather choose
to die, then depart thence. Thus doubtless did Thales think, who being asked
what thing of all other he took to be most hard and difficill in performance:
returned this answer, For a man to know him self, (says he.) And again
being asked what thing of all other he thought to be easiest: For a man,
(says he) to admonish or curiously to carpe at others. For so vile in deed is
the disposition naturally of us all, that we blush not one whit to measure
other men's doings by the crooked line of our own imagination: yea, we are
not ashamed to pack up our own faults in the wallets end that hangs behind
us, where they may lie always unseen and out of remembrance: but other men's
we trusse up in the wallettes end that is before us, where they come always
in sight and handling. We glaunce at our own imperfections, as through a net
or lattice: but other men's we view and look at with open Eagles eyes. We
account our own suspicion a sufficient proof against others: but when they
again justly condemn us, we scarcely take it for an accusation against our
selves. We can sooner grant (...)er men's good wine for to be shire (...)ter,
then confess our own vnsaue(...)water not to be wine: yea, so close(...)re
we pinned to our own sleeves, (...) so devoutly addicted to our own
o(...)ons: that we will peeuishlie con(...)ne others which are to be
justified, (...)arciallie justify our selves, which (...)ht are to be
condemned. What (...)ke ye) made Cicero to say, Fit (...)io quo pacto) vt
magis in aliis cerna(...) quid delinquitur, quam in nobismet(...) It happens
(says he,) (I know (...)w) that we can sooner epsy out a (...) in others
then in our selves. Or (...). (I pray you) moved Horace to (...) um tua
peruideas etc. But only (...) that they both of them did see this (...)nation
generally inherent to flesh (...) blood, with the Hen to scrape (...) of the
dunghill other men's rotten (...)ges, with the Puttocke to sit sad(...) upon
other men's sores, and with (...) Pharisie to post over their own (...)ltes,
ripping and ransacking up to (...)e bottom other men's enormities? If (...)ese
two Heathen men were alive in this time, the one might spend all his
Rhethorike hereabouts, and prevail little in persuading: and the other all his
Poetry, and yet (I fear me) leave much vnsaide in the discourse, so large is
the breach which this sin has made into man's heart, and so manifold are the
ways whereby she does work and wind her self in. For some men there are
too too subtle and hollowminded, which having their tongues made of one flesh,
and their hearts of an other: bark not, but pinch before warning. And these
deal as the Butcher does, which claweth the Ox with his hand that he may
the better come to lay his beetle on his head: Or as the Be, which stingeth us
most, when she is fullest of honey. Some there are again of a currish kind,
which though they want teethe to bite us, yet have they tongues to babble, and
open mouths to bark at us: and these (as God would have it) being Dwarfes
and Flies in force, though Giants and Elephants in malice, are like to a kind
of Serpents, which albeeit full of poison (...) be, yet because they be
toothlesse. (...) hurt none but them selves. Yea, (...)e Viper which caught
Paul by the Act. 18.
(...)e, could not harm him, but fell (...) the fire and there perished: And
(...)ee which smote Jason on the breast (...)ding to kill him, broke his
impo(...)e, whereby he cured him and made (...)s sound as a box: so likewise
fa(...)t somewhiles with these evil dogs (...) bark at their own fellows,
(...) these unkindly birds which be(...)heir own nestes, that where they
(...) do harm, they do good in re(...) of the parties against whom they
(...)de it: but to do that harm, that (...) good may come of it, is for them
(in (...)inion) a very indirect way to come (...)ation. And therefore well
says (...)st who is both the way, the truth, Math. 7.
(...) the life, Judge not: that is, Call (...) his name into suspense and
que(...)n, who gives thee very little or no (...)se at all, For some actions
in out(...)ard appearance are of such indifferen(...), that whether way to take
them, it (...) a very hard matter to determine. Touching these we may not (I
say) unadvisedly pass our verdicte, but rather must we suspende our
judgment, breathing often upon our pillow. And for this end serves that
admonition of a learned Father, See thou a man, says he, that does fast
often? Praise him not too much for it, because thou kndwest not whether for
devotion or ambition sake he does it. Again, see thou a Magistrate that
does severely punish? Deem him not evil for it, because he may as well
do it charitablie for public weal sake, as upon stomach for private revenge.
Concerning these and such like, we ought either not to judge at all, or if we
do, our part is to construe them the best way, and that because it is more
sufferable and Christianlike, for us to be deluded on the right hand, by
reputing the bad to be good, then to be deceived on the left hand, by
accounting the good to be bad. And why? We ought one to take another part,
because we are all men of Gods making: we ought one to conceal another
faults and frailties, because we are all fell(...) servants: and we ought one
to (...)e with an others weakness the ra(...) because all of us have our
infirmi(...) for ill may one thief give sentence (...)nst an other: and ill
may one sinful (...) condemn an other of sin. But (...) is our giddie
rashness, that we will (...)utely give sentence upon every (...) similitude
and resemblance, no, we (...) not stick to judge a man's conuer(...)n by a
blush of his countenance, (...)h rule often proves false: a Horse (...)s
furniture, which argument sell(...) proves true: and the people by (...)rish
Church, wherein we can not (...)lie but judge amiss. So that if (...)st and
his Apostle Paul were now (...)ngst us, and the one should say to the (...)e of
the palsy, Son thy sins be Mat. 9. Act. 28.
(...)rgiue^ thee, he would quickly be con(...)mned for a blasphemer: and the
other, (...)he were seen to have a Viper on his (...)and: he would now surely
be appre(...)ended, as he was then but judged for a (...)urderer. But they are
gone, and have left behind them many honest men and godly successors in their
place, which are daily choked with the like sour sauce, and will be still, (I
fear me) till the table be drawn, and al turned vpside down: after which
riddance, dissolution, and breaking up of all, these our saucie enemies shall be
turned over into satan's commons at a dish of sour sops, when we on ye other
side, shall be dieted with the Angels in heaven, and have all things at hearts
desire. This shall be our portion for good, and that shall be their punishment
for evil. What good then have they? or what harm have we by this? if when we
are liberal, they judge us ambitious: if when we are sparing, they esteem us
covetous: if when we are silent, they take us as fools: or if when we are
joyful and merry in the Lord, they account us as dissolute and licentious
persons? Surely, we are so greatly hurt, that we never feel it, and therefore
have no cause to complain. For as a guilty conscience does somewhile with
anguish accuse it self, though it be no way spoken against: so the man which
knows himself to be free from those enormities, wherwithall others do burden
and charge him, does take such heart at grass and comfort in his own
vnguiltinesse, that he waigheth it not a (...)n, but shakes it off with Paul,
(...) being rashly judged off, and wrong(...) discountenanced, said, As for me
I 1. Cor. 4.
(...) little to be judged of you, or of (...)s judgment. And yet surely a kind
(...)sse and punishment it is, for a man to (...)uiled and hardly judged off,
for there (...)man, unless he be past grace and (...)eles, but he tendereth
his own good (...) about al things else. Which as Sa(...)n says, being a thing
much more pto. 22.
(...)ous then riches, it must needs fol(...) that they which rack the same
upon (...)nters, and do all they can to tear it (...)es, are much more faulty
and iniuri(...)hen they which rob and spoil men of (...)ure and goods: for
this comes nothing (...)gh the quick as the other. Let us not (...) (my
brethren) like unruly and untamed (...)ses, leap thus brutishly upon ye backs
(...) others, but rather let us contein, keep (...)ithin compass, and cease
to judge one an (...)there any more. And to the end we may (...) better perform
this, we must first of al (...)ut out ye three sinnowes, whereby this evil eye
is fed: bruise and break ye shoulders by ye which this monstrous head is born
up: and remove the roots from whence this unkindly Impe has her sap: which
namely are these three: Selfeloue, envy, Selfeloue.
and our own native wickedness, which being bred in the bones, will hardly
out of the flesh. The first of these made way for the Pharesie to condemn the
poor Publicane, pointing at him with prejudice, as thus, God, I thank Luke.
18.
thee that I am not as this Publicane is. The second gave matter enough to
Envy.
the Jews for to condemn our Savior to death: Pilate knew that of envy they
Mat. 97.
had delivered him. This was the broker or solicitor that made Joseph to be
sold, Jacob troubled, Abel slain, and David persecuted. The third thing, Our
own na^iue wicked^esse.
which is a man's own native corruption, wrought also this slander against
Christ out of the Jewish people: Thou have a devil (say they) and that because
Ioh. 8.
in deed they them selves were thoroughly polluted and pestered with devils.
For to remedy the first infirmity, which is Pharisaical selfeloue, we must
learn to eye and admire those goodly parts, and gracious gifts of other men,
wherein we our selves are no way their coequals: and again, we must often
vpbraide our (...)with those our own imperfecti(...)ich we neither know nor
suspect (...) others. Whom, though we nei(...)re nor see any good by them,
(...)e we no warrant, rouingly to (...)uil of them. For to fear up the (...)ad
sinnow, which is Jewish en(...)malice, we must at Paul's bid(...) upon us as
the elect of God, the (...) of love and peace. And in so Colos. 3.
(...) other man's eyesalue, shall no (...)se our eye sore, an other man's
(...)p, shall no way become our mis(...), as it fares with the envious, (...)e
it was very fitly said, Quid (...)i would? tuumne bonum, an alienum (...) O thou
envious man, what do(...) seek for? thine own good, or (...)ghbors evil? For
both these two (...) one with the envious men: whose (...)e is so perverse,
yea, so owlish (as I (...)earme it) because as the Owl can (...)bide the
sunshine, so no more can (...) men away with other men's gliste(...) beams and
goodly parts, that if (...)ng Samson were alive, they would (...)elie judge
him a weakling: rich Crae(...), a bankerupt or beggars brat: aged Enoch and
Elias, short livers: fair A(...)solon, a deformed fellow: mighty O(...)uian,
a man of no power: yea and w(...) Solomon, if he were landed and alive (...)
this day, I think surely they would no^ stick to beg him for a stark fool.
This sinnow then must be seared up (as I say) or else, I fear me, all will be
ma^red. Lastly, for the curing and recovering of the third sore, which is our
ow^^ inward corruption and wickedness: we^^ must seek for to have our selves
cast into a new mold after the Apostles aduise^ who wills us for to be
renewed in 1. These. 4.
spirit. And so when we our selves are godly and single hearted, we shall
hardly deem others to be worse then we our selves are, even as before when
we were bad, we could not possibly repute others to be better: resembling
Aesops moule, who because she was blind her self, she could in no wise be
persuaded that any other beast could see. And thus we note, how that by
themselves men commonly measure others. If they be good them selves, they
account others to be no worse: if they be bad, they rekon others to be no
better. The former sort (...)e Be convert that juice into ho^ (...)ch the
latter sort with the Spi(...)e into mere poison. Let us (...)e cast away this
naughty eye (...)hese three sinnowes, and so shall (...) aright: this drouping
head with (...)ree shoulders, and so shall we (...)ight: this unkindly ympe,
with (...)ee roots, and so shall we taste (...) Whereas on the other side if we
(...)em still, our eiesight will be so (...) that every moulehill will seem
(...)taine: our hearing will be so con(...)at every light sound will seem
(...)mne: and our taste so far dis(...)d, that one drop of sour will
(...)entie: yea all our fraternity (...)so impoisoned, that we shall take
(...)rethren as bastards, and rekon (...)ues only for right heirs, ripping
(...)er folks trifling sins, as most (...)us and damnable, and favoring
(...)wn as light and excusable in com(...)on. By means whereof, we degene(...)
from God above, whom in charity (...)ught to resemble: and become all (...)
with Satan beneath in malignity, (...)ome we ought to be as unlike as unlike
may be. For in deed no eas^^ a thing it is for to know the Sun (...) the
brightness thereof, the fire by (...) heat, or the honey by the swetenesse^
then it is to discern Gods chosen children by their friendly relation and
charitable sentence giving, touching other men's doubtful dealings or
demeanou^^ And again, no easier is it to know the night by the darkness, the
serpent by his poison, or the wormwood by the bitterness, then it is to know
bad an^ evil disposed men by their bolting out (...) sharp censures concerning
other men^ indifferent actions: wherein, because they be doubtful, we ought
to be n^ less advised before sentence giving, the^ we would be, for to
adventure a great wager about a pair of equal waights or balances, whether
side should fall down first: which in deed is a very hard matter to foretell.
Yea we ought to be a great deal more advised in the other, then in this, and
that because the losses are much unlike. For the one is but barelie the loss
of our silver, but the other is the shipwreck and loss of our souls. Let us
not then buy this pigge (...)e poke, as some men do, which are (...)redulous,
but rather let us handle (...)d look on it first, and that because (...)rice
and valuation thereof is of all (...)rs the greatest. And here finally (...)
we note this by the way, that as (...)re enjoined not to judge or con(...)e the
righteous, so are we forbid(...)erein to boulster or justify any (...)d and
vicious persons: for both (...) two iniquities as one, are to God (...)an
offensive alike. And therefore (...)aith Solomon, He that justifies prou. 17.
(...)cked, and he that condemns (...)st, even they both are abhomi(...) to
the Lord. Again, He that prou. 24.
(...)to the wicked, Thou art right(...)im shall the people curse, and
(...)ultitude shall abhor him, says (...) Woe unto them, (says Esai) that
(...)ke good of evil, and evil of good, Esa. 5.
(...)ch put darkness for light, and (...)t for darkness. And this woe (I
(...)re me) may well be denounced against (...)umber of wicked and waieward
peo(...) in this age, which taking their (...)arkes amiss, preposterously
misterme (...)ce virtuous, and virtue vicious, wormwood sweet, and honey sower:
evil men good, and good men evil. For many there be doubtless now a days,
licentious and prodigal livers, which will impudently undertake to clear and
justify their fellows, be they never so bad and notorious evil. So that if an
honest zealous man do at any time justly reprove any of that crew for his bad
conditions: O, will an other say, you do him wrong sir, for I will avouch, he
is as honest a man as ever brake bread, yea, thus will he say, though he be as
bad a man as ever broacht drink: and then is he bad enough, for Tapsters we
say are not always the bestliuers. Let them then which are guilty this way,
as well as the other, betimes repent and amend: for better were it for them to
slide an hundred times with their feet, then once to slide thus with their
tongue, by justifying the unjust. It follows in the text, And ye shall not be
judged. And this, in a word, is the confirmation or covenant, annexed to the
proportion and commandment here. Wherein the Lord by way of promise shows,
how good and gracious he is, in recompen(...)a single good turn with a double
re(...)de. For by abandoning of one sort (...)dgement, and the same against
others, (...)re assured here from Christ's own (...)th, for to escape a double
judgment (...)nst our selves: that is to say, the se(...) judgment of God at
ye last dreadful (...)f dome: and beside this, the sharp cen(...) of men
during this our mortality (...)poral life time: for both sorts are (...)y
meant, though not severally me^(...)d, here in this place. The One of these
(...)elfe is most terrible and fearful, and (...)re with all might and maine
now in (...)f grace to be prevented: and the o(...)e all take to be a thing
most odi(...) shameful, and therefore warelie for (...)ly honesty sake to be
avoided. (...)t ye former is most horrible and dread(...) this dooleful and
irreuocable saying of (...) Lord foretold us in the Gospel, does (...)ciently
declare. Depart from me ye Mat. 15.
(...)sed, into everlasting fire. That the (...)er also is a very unseemly
and shame(...)l thing, it appears by the Apo(...)es earnest exhortation
directed to (...)s fellow laborers, where he will(...)th them to contend, that
through due desert they might be honestly reported off among al men, and so
stop the mouths of malignant and evil speakers: who for the most part in
seeking by this means wrongfullie to hurt others, do nothing else but raise up
a dust, whereby they put out their own eyes. For so it fares with these men,
as it does with the Hen, which by long scraping in ye dunghill, discovers the
knife that does afterward cut her own throat: or as it does with a hasty and
hairebraind soldier, who desperately rushing out upon a mischievous purpose for
to smite and wound his fellow, returns home again himself with a broken
pate. And herewithall agrees this saying, Qui quae vult loquitur, quae no^
vult audiet. He that speaks what he will, shall some whiles hear what he
would not. Moses therefore upon good consideration, among other precepts gave
the people this charge, that they should not in any wise speak evil. And why?
because the very custom and practice hereof, is of it self so uncharitable
and deuilish, that there can nothing be devised, which does sooner then it call
for vengeance at Gods hands. Of this mind (...) King David, saying, Him that
(...)ily slaundereth his neighbor, will psalm. 101.
(...)stroy. And so was also King Salo(...), when he said, Put away from thee
prou. 4.
(...)ward mouth, and put wicked lips (...)e from thee. We read of one, which
(...)ng the space of three years kept a (...) within his mouth, for this end,
Vt (...)et tacere, that he might learn the (...) to inure and acquaint
himself (...)silence. We have also by writers (...)uered unto us, the nature
of certain (...)s, which when they draw nigh to (...)ount Taurus, thrust their
bills (...) their wings for fear of noise (...)g, and so consequently for
fear (...)ouring by the Eagles, which fre(...) that place in great abundance.
(...)n whence we are to draw and de(...) thus much for our own security (...)
safety sake, somewhiles to close and (...)e up our mouths, for fear they
(...)ath and pour out any hurtful or un(...)istianlike speech against our
neigh(...)rs, the greatest harm whereof grow(...)h in the end to be our own:
for this one (...) given blow is always sure to bring (...)me with it two
wor^e again. Which harm and inconvenience a great many of pieuish and
waiwarde people do no whit at all foresee, and so by means of this their
gross oversight, they commonly catch their fall where they hoped for to have
had their rising: yea, by poring at other men's, they do nothing else but put out
their own eyes. And why? By reproving and judging amiss of others, they bring
(as I told you before) both the heavy judgment of God, and the like sharp
censures of men upon their own backs. For whereas the Lord says here, Judge
not, and ye shall not be judged, it is as much in effect as if he should have
said, Take this for a warning at me, that if ye will needs be intermedling to
judge others, ye shall verelie in like case be judged your selves, and that
not only by me when the last Trumpet shall sound, but also by other men,
amongst whom ye live here in this world. And albeit the case stands thus,
yet nevertheless sooner may the raging Sea be restrained within a hedge of
willows, then we within the compass and precinct of this precept: so loose
and vnru(...)re we all of us in this behalf. For (...)rre has Satan bewitched
the most (...) of us, that as heretofore among (...) Egyptians, there was no
man ac(...)ted happy, which had not a beast (...)of spots: so now a days
among us, (...)e is no man almost reckoned proui(...) and worldly wise enough,
which (...)not his heart al over bespotted with (...)rmisings, his tongue
beraied with (...)es of reproach, and his hands de(...)with sundry acts of
rash and to(...) condemnation against others. (...) is our glory for a while,
which (...)th us to shame in the end: This (...)ward appearance seems a kind
(...)doom we have, which in it own (...)e proves a point of slavery: This
(...)l take to be a token of wisdom, (...)h in deed is nothing else but a
trick (...)eere foolishness: For thus says (...)omon, Every fool will be
med(...). prou. 20.
And here by ye way we are to note (...) mild and favorable manner of
aduer(...)meant, which the Lord uses where(...) to win and draw us on
obediently to (...)actise this same special commandment (...) his: for hereiu
he does not only execute his regal authority by forbidding us that which he
disliketh, but therwithall he shows also his father lie kindness and clemency
by persuading us thereunto, foretelling us flatly what great good by means of
this his precept keeping, shall afterward ensue to us ward. And yet for all
this, not one of us almost amongst a thousand, does weigh or perform this same
aright, so blockish and careless are we, touching the salvation of our souls,
which we ought to tender a thousand times more, then the safety and good
estate of our bodies. But mark I pray you, how far we are from this: for if
an earthly Prince should forbid us a bad thing, commending unto us no reason
thereof, we would hardly gainsay him, fearing the danger of his displeasure,
yea, if he should forbid us ye practice of a good and godly thing, afording us
no reason but this, Sic volo, sic iubeo. Thus I will have it, thus I command it
to be: the most of us would be afraid to withstand him, fearing the less of
our life and goods. And yet when the Prince of all Princes, who is not only
able to destroy the body, but the soul also, forfendeth a (...)hing, and that
with a most forcible (...)n whereby to persuade, we carelessly (...)ect the
same, and profanely with(...)all fear or trembling incur the (...)h thereof,
as if thereupon there could (...)e no danger, no penalty, or harm (...)
against us: whereas in deed we do (...)y provoke Gods vengeance and (...)full
judgment at the last general (...)nd in the mean time till that be(...), we
shall be as sure as is ye skin be(...) our eyes, for this our own peevish
(...)meant, to be bitterly stung again, (...) mo^thes of malicious and
malig(...)ople. And therefore good is it for (...)es attentively to give ear
to (...)cept, and faithfully to rely upon (...)omise of our Savior Christ, who
(...)re, Judge not, and ye shall not (...)ged. Condemn not, and ye shall
(...)e condemned. For as touching (...)ame latter proposition, because it is
(...)ng else but an (...) a mere expo(...), I mean, of the former, I think
(...) to ouerpasse it without any several (...)ourse, having inclusiuely
handled it (...)ady with this other part aforegoing.

Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.
Forgive (says our Savior Christ) and ye shall be forgiven. In this same
other weighty charge giving us, the Lord does wholly bend his force against
the very ground, and root of the foresaid rash judgment and rouing
condemnation of ours, which I note to be rancour, or malice proceeding of too
too long remembrance of injuries done to us: For when by this means and
occasion, we grow to be out of joint, and at variance with others, then will our
ears itch to hear, and our tongues roundly bestir themselves to speak evil
of our brethren, (be they never so blameless.) For the preventing therefore of
this mischief, our Savior goes about to do away, and to wipe out the cause
here, where he does enjoin us to a certain voluntary forgetfulness and
forgiveness of private harms committed against us, by whom, and how great
soever. For, this iniunction or precept has relation only to private (...)
which through fury and rage of (...)nd blood, most commonly seek re(...)e.
This Commandment (I say) (...)rneth these men only, and not them (...)h sit
in place of Judgment, for just (...)ofe sake and punishment of
pub(...)ffenders: yea, they in regard of (...)alefactors, (as says the
Apostle) (...)not, neither ought to bear the Romans 13.
(...) in vain. For by them, with(...) parcialitie, must the evil dooers
(...)like weal sake, be corrected and (...)f, even as by the Physicians the
(...) and putrified members are seared (...) the preservation sake of ye whole
(...) And yet must they do all this (...)t private grudge or indignation:
(...)ise, these, also as well as the o(...) come within compass and daun(...)
this Statute: for hereby in both (...)s alike, is barred and condemned
(...)athful hatred and enimitie, (what(...)er) may seem either to boil in the
(...), or break out from the stomach (...) man: whose inclination by nature
(...) so furious and malicious, that (unless (...)ods spirit bear the greater
sway) it will sooner break a sunder, then bend to undertake this burdenous and
heavy charge. For, what is it that natural man can more hardly away withal,
the^ patiently to put up, and clearley to forgive all injuries whatsoever are
done or pretended against him, by his deadly enemy? Surely, this is such a
matter, as man's frailty (not regenerate) can of it self in no wise possible
afford the performance of: yea, an easier, and more vnsuall thing it is
throughout amongst us all, for to let a hundred good turns done to us, slip
out of our remembrance, then to blot out by forgetfulness one bare injurious
act or pretense against us. For the impressio^ of a benefit being wrought in to
wax, is quickly wipte out: but an injury, graue^ in marble, is hardly done
away. A benefit like butter melts apace out of our hands: but an injury
like birdlime cleaves fast to our fingers. A benefit has both legs to run,
and wings to fly out of eiesight: but an injury having neither of both,
sits sadly with us, and tarieth still by it. A benefit, when we are waking,
we can seldom remember: but a bad turn, when (...) sleeping, we can oftentimes
dream (...) The one (I say) is sooner wipte of (...) feather, then the other
conveyed (...)pt aside with a beesome. Yea, so (...)ard are we to requite a
good turn, (...) appliable to avenge a bad, yt when (...)d one calls for the
like again, (...) where to be found: but when (...)e knocks, be it never so
light(...)are always at hand to recompense (...)s hardly for want of grace are
we (...) to do good, and thus easily through (...)ne iniquity are we set on
fire to (...). And yet surely (my brethren) Deuteronomy. 32.
(...)ings ought not so to be: For ven(...) and recompense is mine (says
(...)rd) in whom alone as it is a thing (...) most kindly and princelike: so in
(...)s a thing most unnatural, servile, (...)eastlike. For what can the
sottish (...)do more, then when he is hurt or (...)n on, to spurn with his
heel? Or a (...)ish Dog, then when be is bitten, fu(...)sly to bite again?
This (no doubt) is (...) that a beast can do, whose sense rules (...)stead of
reason: and this is more then (...)an ought to do, whose reason should
(...)ache his sensual desire an handmaiden or underling. Well therefore does
Solomon dissuade us from this evil as thus, Say not thou, I will recompense
evil, ^rou. 20.
but put thy trust in the Lord, and he will deliver thee. Here the wise man
begins to find fault with the smoke in toke^ that he can worse abide the
flame or heat following. Here he seems so far to mislike ye preamble, that he
condemns the wrathful words usually going before, which are these, I will
recompense evil, I will be quit with him: (for thus be speaks in very
familiar, and emphaticall manner, saying,) Say not thou, I will recompense
evil, Say it not, once again I tell thee: do it therefore much less. I
forewarne thee, Thou shall not avenge, Leuit. 19.
nor be mindful of wrong against the children of thy people, (says the Lord.)
Again, (says the wise man) Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has
Eccle. 28.
done to thee, so shall thy sins be forgiven thee also when thou praiest:
for if he that is but flesh nourish hatred: (says he) who will entreat for
his sins? Remember the end therefore, and let all enimitie pass. The
Apostle unto the Collossians says, If any man Colloss. 3.
among you have a quarrel to another, (...) Christ forgave you, even so do ye.
(...)d this worthy example of our Saui(...), though it be not the first yt we
read (...)n Scripture, yet is it simply the best (...)t we ought in word and
deed to conform (...) selves after: whose innocent meek(...) was so great,
that he spoke the^ fair (...)ch reviled him, and whose patience (...) zeal
was such, that he instantly (...)d for them yt crucified him, as thus
(...)er, forgive them, for they know Luke 23.
(...) what they do. Other presidents be(...) this, there be many in Gods
book, (...)ch we ought to take our direction by: (...)auid, who when he might
easily 1. Sam. 24.
(...) slain his deadly enemy Saul, cut (...) off the lap of his garment
only, in (...)en that he could have done more, and (...) was touched in
heart, and did great(...)forethink this daliance, as if it had bin (...)matter
of death. The other Prophets (...)sides who^ we read of, were all of them (...)
far off from recompensing evil, that they (...)auelled mightily night and day,
for the (...)enefit and salvation sake of them, which (...)n the other hand
greedily sought their (...)uerthrow and desiructio^. Thus dealt Moses in the
behalf of his enemies ye Israelites, when he prayed unto ye lord his god, and
said, O Lord, why does thy wrath Exodus 32.
wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought out of the land of
Egypt? The godly Martyr S. Steven is also to be enrolled here, as one that
has no little part and share in this cake, who prayed thus for the Jews, whose
hearts brast for anger, whose teeth gnashed at him, and whose hands stoned him
to death, Lord, lay not this sin to their Acts. 7.
charge. Whereby it seems that he was so mindful to forgive, and to entreat
the Lord for them, that he left out and quit^ forgot himself: for we read not
here that he prayed for himself, but for them at his last gasp, For when he
had thus spoken, he slept. And yet may we rightly say, that in this his prayer
for them, was covertly included also another prayer for himself: for as our
right hand by washing the left, cannot miss but also be washed again, so in
praying for our enemies, we are always on the surer hand to pray for our
selves, because we are either copartners with them, or else full possessours
without them, of the final use and benefit of that Prayer. Wisely
there(...)ealt Paul and his fellow Apostles (...) they took this innocent and
harm(...)course, We are reviled, (say they) 1. Cor. 4.
(...) yet we bless: we are persecuted, (...)suffer it. We are evil spoken
of, (...) yet we pray. These cool complexio(...)emperate, and heavenly wise
men (...) well enough, that soft fire made (...)ault, That a gentle answer did
prou. 15.
(...)ay displeasure, and that for a time (...)h they were dashed out of
count(...) and ouercrowed, yet in the end they (...)d either by patience
overcome their (...)ies, as the foresaid David without (...)edding: by
forhearing only, got (...)per hand of Saul: or else if this (...) they
happily failed of their hope, (...)h would have been no more but a (...)hearts
ease for them, yet were they (...)e assured, that on the other side they (...)d
not miscarry, but become coheirs, (...) have share, and share like with the
(...)intes, in that great dole and rich re(...)rd in heaven promised by Christ
him (...)fe to all them, Which should be re(...)ed, Matthew. 5.
persecuted, and have all ma(...)er of evil said against them for (...)s
names sake. This they made reckoning of, as ye largest recompense, though
perhaps it might seem unto them somewhat long in coming: And thus after their
ensample in hope of this heavenly hire, though we miss (as miss we may) of
that other worldly hearts case, we must also forbear, and forgive all men,
whosoever have done or proffered us any wrong: For if we do not thus, we^
shall deal hardly in respect of them, and very unwisely in regard of our
selves: for as we hold him as a fool, and most fit for slavery still, who
will not abide an hours imprisonment for a thousand years liberty: And as
we do account him an unwise husbandman, and worthy himself to starve
through hunger, who refuses to sow that one bushel of grain, which within
a while afterward would yield him a whole barnefull: so likewise may we
repute him an improuident straitlaced striplin, and worthy himself to smart
for his extremity, who will not remit that one poor penie debt to his
brother, which would grow to be a pound in his (...) way at the hands of
his father. (...) thus I speak the rather meta(...)callie, because it is the
very fi(...) in this text used by Christ him(...), derived and drawn from
Cre(...)s, which were wont freely to strike (...)f their debtbookes, the names
of (...)nable debtors, and so likewise (...) we to wipe away out of our
(...)brances, all men's injuries what(...): for otherwise, we our selves (...)e
without all redemption to lie (...) till the uttermost farthing which (...)we,
be also paid. The which (...)nd extreme requital we are fore(...)by Christ
himself, as thus, If Math. 6.
(...)oo not forgive men theirs, no (...) shall your heavenly Father for(...)
you your trespasses. We may not (...) (I say) for any cause (whatsoever,) (...)
such broad way unto malice and in(...)anitie, as that we should account o(...)
men's danger our own security, (...)er men's loss our own advantage, o(...)r
men's dishonor our own credit, (...)er men's weakness our own strength, (...)d
other men's overthrow our own up(...)ng. For in so doing, we shall become
monsters whom nature has no stroke in, streams of a corrupt fountain,
branches of a rotten root, beams of a wrong Sunshine, yea, the very offspring
of Satan, and no true Christians. And why? The Lord no doubt, who says, The
mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my loving kindness
shall in no wise move, even the same Lord I say, looks for some like lovely
agreement, unity, and mutual kindness again at the hands of all of us in
some measure and proportion among our selves, and therefore he says, A new
John. 13.
Commandment give I you, that as I have loved you, so ye love one another.
This must be our conformation to Christ, herein must we have our resemblance
with God, in this must we be at utter discord and defiance with the Devil,
yea thus must we (I say) which be true Gospellers, countrymen and fellow
Christians, inseparably cleave together, as stones of one Temple, orderly
grow up together as impes of one stock, lovingly agree together as children
of one mother, and (if need be) wholly burn together as the leaves of one
book. For (...)ng thus beset and besieged as we (...) with many both foreign
and do(...)ticall enemies: our next way for (...)ipe them of all advantage, and
(...)et the upper hand in this gene(...)quarrel for Gods cause, is,
peacea(...)here at home among our selves, (...) take up all private matters of
(...)burning and variance. And that (...)se our own unity is always
(...)nemies dissolution, our own con(...), their disagreement, and our own
(...)full coherence, their back cast and (...)rance, in whatsoever mischievous
(...)se they have either heretofore, or (...) hereafter take in hand against
(...) Majesty's person and us, whom (...) Lord (as he has thus far,) so
(...) by his outstretched arm mightily (...)e and protect (we beseech him.)
But (...)s (my brethren) we which are all (...) one nation, under one
regiment, (...)id all of one family as it were, like (...)relesse men for our
own safety, and the enemies confusion, are very far off from this same
brotherly affection: for now a days the Courtier against his coequall, the
Preacher against his fellow Preacher, the Citizen against his fellow freeman,
the Commoner against his copartner, the husband against the wife, the father
against the son, and the Mother against the daughter, all and every one of
these (I say) one against another, (yea for the least thing done amiss) do on
every hand breath out vengeance and recompense. Some do it by bloodsheading
in the streets, as the Courtier: Some by defacing their fellow laborers in
the pulpits, as the Preacher: Some by annoying their neighbors about the sale
of their wares, as the Merchaunt: Some by open and causeless defamation where
secrecies should most be concealed, as the husband and the wife: Some by
disinheriting through a little displeasure taking, as the Father against the
son: And some one way, some an other. Seeing therefore all the members of
this whole body of ours are altogether out of ioynte, and are so far off
from being armed in warlike sort, that they want in deed their (...)e natural
habit in way of de(...) against the adversary: what can (...) look for
else, but either to be (...)anted and ouerrunne by foreign (...)er, which
would be a heavy (...): or else to be swallowed up and (...)red one of
another, which would (...)thing much more lamentable and (...)us? For a house
divided a(...) Matthew. 9.
it self can no way stand: but (...)s must it some way fall down (...) For
the appeasing therefore of (...) wrath, which (no doubt) is (...)indled, and
for the preventing (...)s our own universal calamity (...)ownfall, which we
see immi(...) and hard at hand: let us all of (...) of what degree soever,)
acquaint (...) selves to forgive, to brook, and to (...)ear one another, yea
though we (...)e never so great cause of private of(...)ce proffered us. For
greater cause can (...)ee have no way given us, then (...)hrist him self had
by traitorous Iu(...)s, Matthew. 2.
Abell by his malicious brother Genesis 4. Genesis 37.
(...)ain, Joseph by the whole crew of his brethren, and yet took they all in
good worth, as ensamples to us in way of sufferaunce: shall we the^ which
say we are Christians, relinquish Christ's barn, because of the chafe that
is in it? Shall we break asunder the Lords Net, for the bad Fishes sake?
Shall we quite forsake the Lords flock because of the Kiddes, in the end to
be put by? Or shall we give over the Lords house for the Vessels of
dishonor, to be rejected? I mean, shall we so rashly make havoc and
breach of the bond of Charity and peace here among our selves, as to seek
vengeance against a whole corporation, for one members offense? Against a whole
family, for one man's fault? Against the Father for the sons, and against the
Son for the Fathers trespass? Surely, me thinks, this outreacheth the
limittes of all modesty and reason, and yet has it been heretofore, and is a
thing at this instant most rife and usual among us, so that (as I say) if we
take not up quickly and grow to one among our selves by way (...)onstliation,
out of this same foul (...)ie weather of ours here at home: (...)nimies abroad
for their turn will (...)re me) pick a fair harvest time, (...)hich desolate
visitatio^ to us ward, (...)ord for his mercy sake deliver us (...). Forgive
(says our Savior) and (...)ll be forgiven. This the Lords (...)ant together
with the command(...) is all one in nature with that con(...) in his prayer
hard before, wherein (...)ght us thus to say: Lord, forgive (...)r trespasses,
as we forgive them Mat. 6.
(...)trespass against us. This same (...) (sicut dimitttimus, as we forgive)
(...)slike not greatly that it should still (...)e it standing here in the
prayer: but (...) it should be lively, or carry any (...)y at al with us, we
allow not of that (...)ie saucs. For when it should actu(...)e do our errand to
almighty God, (...) remission of our sins, we thrust it (...)t by the
shoulders, and put it by this (...)fice, as though it were unfit for this
(...)essage: and yet none so fit, as it, nay, (...) dare say more, none fit,
but only it. (...)or if this clause be left behind at home, (...)ooke
whosoever goes upon this our errand unto almighty God for remission of
sins, is like to return as empty a^ he went. If we will then speed of th^^
message, Dimitte nobis, we must alwaie^ aforehand send out this same, Sicut
dimittimus. For this is one in deed which carries his warrant about him, and
(...) will not be said nay. Wherefore, truly says Augustine. Vnusquisque
talem indulgentiam accipiet a Deo, qualem ostend^ proximo. That is, Every one
shall have the like favor and benevolence at Gods hands, that he shows to
his neighbor. And this falls flat with that saying in the Gospel, If ye do
forgive men Mat. 6.
their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. For why? God
Eccle. 2.
is gracious and merciful, and forgiueth sins, and saves in time of trouble.
This the Lords indulgencie and goodness is covertly commended unto us by the
story of the prodigal son, who being Luke. 15.
reclaimed, was received into favor again, as also by that parable of the
servant who ought ten thousand talents, Mat. 18.
and yet through humbling himself, had all the whole debt forgiven him. And
this same discharge and acquittance from (...) hands, is a thing worth
gramer(...)therwise David would never have (...), Blessed is the man whose
vnrigh(...)snesse is forgiven, and whose sin psalm. 32.
(...)uered. Besides this, when we our (...)s forgive our trespassers there grow
(...)lso thence a new forgiveness to us (...)e, that is, other men by this
means (...) the rather won to pardon and (...)e us, when we come within their
(...)ger and fall into their hands. This (...) (as you see) is no robbery but
a (...)ge, and such a change, as we have two (...)e: the former at our death,
the o(...)efore: the former celestial, ye other (...)oral: the one we have
immediately (...) Gods own hands, and the other we (...) also from him, but yet
mediately by (...)s means. Two (I say) we have for (...), and that is great
usury, yea and good (...)rye: but there is an other kind of vsu(...)less
profitable, and yet (I fear me) (...)re in practice: but let that go, for so
(...)ll it, and that for good dealing. Seeing (...)en (my brethren) the benefit
of peace(...)le forgiveness and reconsiliation a(...)ong our selves, is thus
behouefull (...)d necessary both these ways: let us not become like unto that
stone, which being once hot can not possibly be cold again. Neither let us
resemble Sydera errantia, the wandering Stars, which being once at discord
could never afterward agree with the heavens: but rather casting aside all
debate and variance, let us by how much the more able we are, be by so much the
less willing to avenge our quarrels. Debet enim nostrum vnusquisque quo magis
nocere potest, hoc minus velle. Every one of us the more able he is, the less
willing he ought to be for to avenge his quarrel. For as in our lot and
ability, there is nothing greater then that we may: so in our good nature and
humanity there is nothing better then that we will freely pardon and forgive
our malefactors. Yea, I say, it is both a great matter for us to be able, and a
good matter also for us, to be willing thus to do. Finally therefore, as
Thrasybulus after the battle at Peloponnesus, and the Roman Senate also after
the death of Caesar, made a law which they called legem (...), a law of
forgetting and forgiving injuries: so likewise must we all (...)us duly
embrace and observe the (...)e law, as we will answer to the (...)trarie at
the last dreadful day of (...)e, when the son of man shall send (...) Angels
with the sound of a great (...)mpet, and come himself in the clouds (...)eauen
with power and great glory, (...)ly to judge them which wrongfullie (...)e
judged others, and to recompense (...) in vengeance, which in way of re(...)ge
have sought the spoil, the dis(...)ce, and overthrow of their brethren.

Give, and it shall be given unto you. etc.
THirdly and lastly, the Lord goes (...)on with his charge, and says, Give,
and it shall be given unto you. And (...)e, as by the giving out of the other
(...)o precepts immediately before, so now (...)y prescribing of this last point
of Christianity, our Savior commends unto us more at large the fullness of
his ^nestimable wisdom and goodness. The former quality appears plainly
in him, by this his wise manner of schooling his auditors: and the other
property of his, we may also perfectly perceive by the due consideration of
the very good matter it self, wherewithal he charge us here. As for
Christ's method and manner in this place, whereby his wisdom is approved, it
is in resemblance and effect all one with the skillful dealing of the cunning
surgeon or physician: Whereof the one uses to remove the putrified matter out
of the wound, before he applies his salve to heal withal: and the other
tells his patient first what meat he shall not eat, before he does enioin
him what diet he must keep. Even so likewise our Savior having already
forewarned and premonished his Disciples, for to keep back from thinking,
speaking or doing evil to any of their brethren, he makes there no final stay
or full period, as though he had said enough so soon as he had barred rash
judgment, condemnation and malice bearing: but he goes on a large step
further, and after his dehortatio^ from doing evil, he charge them afresh
with beneficence, and bountiful dealing, saying thus unto them, Give. And here
as by the gradation and order of these his precepts giving we are to note his
wise(...) to be great, for that he weedeth his (...)d first, before he sows
it, for that (...)seth up ye evil eye, before he opens (...)ood, and cutteth
off the left hand from (...)g evil, before he draws out ye right (...) to
distribute and do good withal: so in (...)rt by the matter it self included
(...), we may gather the perfection and (...) of Christ's own goodness, which
(...)h not only in doing no evil at all, (...)so in doing what good may be done
(...)uallie, and to every one whomsoe(...) For such as in this behalf he
will(...)s to be, such a one is he himself, and (...)and us, if we should
compare with (...) due proportion of perfectnes. And (...)uch in a word,
touching the wise(...)nd goodness of Christ the Author (...) apparently seen
by yt very manner (...)tter of this portion of his preaching. (...) to come to
the very point and charge (...)fe given out for our use and practice: (...)ue
(says Christ) and it shall be given un(...) you. Our Savior having premised
(...)rd before, forgiving, as his forerunner (...) harbenger: now he sends
next after (...)m, liberallity as his chief steward, for (...) take up his
abod and mansion house in ye (...)cry bosom and heart of man. And this
officer under Christ, as we are to worship him for his masters sake, so must
we bid him welcome for his own: and that because he does not any way
tyrannically ouercharge us, but reasonably advertise us for our own best
behoof. For he wills us not to cut off our own legs, to give them to him
who wants legs: to pull out our own eyes, for to give them to him who has
no eyes: to tear off our own skin from our flesh, for to cover the sore and
green wound of an other: or to lay down our own life, for the safegarde of
our brethren: (although S. John accounts it but our duty thus to do, and
that because Christ himself laid down his own life for us:) but the Lord, I
say, 1. Ioh. 3.
gives us here an easier and lighter charge by much then this, which is to
give (as we may spare) of our own temporal goods to the needy and
succourelesse, the reward and recompense whereof grows ten fold again,
from Gods own hands to us ward. And this same work of benevolence, though
the Lord in his mercy make reckoning of it, as a precious thing and gracious
act, (...) eyesight: yet it is no more th(...)rye instinct and law of nature
(...) bound to do. For we find it alto(...)er a thing most natural, that one
(...)ber should suffer with an other, ac(...)ng to Paul's saying, If one
mem(...)uffer, 1. Cor. 12.
all suffer with it: but we be(...)any, are one body in Christ Ie(...) Romans 12.
every one of us one an others (...)ers. Neither is this property of
(...)assion, and sympathy peculiar unto (...)alone, but inherent also in the
na(...)f brute beasts: for they (says the (...)opher) which are of one and
the (...)e kind, have some feeling one (...)there is grief, and after a sort
suf(...)gether, as appears by the Ox. (...) fowls of the air also, as the
Crow (...)sample, when she has found out a (...)y and place of repast, she
calls unto (...) all her fellows for to join with her (...)opartners. In
this behalf then, let (...) ask the beasts, and they shall Job. 12.
(...)ach us, and the fowls of the air, (...)d they shall tell us. And what
shall (...)ey tell us? This forsooth, to be so pit(...)ll and so tenderly
affectioned toward our brethren, that we shall willingly cover their
nakedness with clothing, expel their hunger and thirst with relief and
sustenance, direct their ignorance with good counsel, deliver them from
slavery by redemption, yea, we shall suffer with them in all their woes, as we
ought, and supply all their wants as we may. For look whatsoever the Lord
beyond our necessity gives to any What soever ye Lord beyond our necessity
(...)eth unto us, (...)e gives unto others by us.
of us, he gives it unto others by us. But to many of us (we see) he sends
abundance of meat, and yet but one belly to put it in: great plenty of
clothing and yet but one back to wear it on: huge masses of money, and yet
but one pair of eyes and one pair of hands to behold and handle the same:
What then means this large reckoning and this little place of receipte? This
plentiful harvest, and this narrow houseroome? This great store of wine, and
this small vessel to contain the same? But this, that whatsoever God sends
us over and besides, should freely go to the poor man's box, should covertly
be conneyed into his bosom, and bountifully poured into his pitcher. Again,
what betokens it that we may as easily (...)tch our arms out, as draw them
in(...)d as soon spread our hands open (...)nder, as shut them up closely
toge(...)? But this to put us in remembrance (...)t we ought to be as prompt
and for(...)rde to give, as we are applyable to (...)iue a benefit, and as
willing to prof(...) good turn to others, as we are (...)e to take one again
at their hands. (...)des, what does our stomach teach (...) which conuerteth
the meat that it (...)iueth, to the use and nourishment (...)he whole body.
The Be which for (...)ing the juice out of our herbs, yeel(...) us honey
again? The young (...)nbe which by nature at the first (...)g but slenderly
wolled, casts us (...)rwardes great fleeces of woll^ (...)he earth, which for
one corn re(...)iued, returns us twenty fold? What do they (all these I
say) teach (...)s else but this, that we ought as good Stewardes, to imparte
the Talents of that wisdom and riches which GOD has lent us, to the common
use and benefit of others? Which in deed is such a comfortable and
Christianlike kind of living that Licurgus in regard hereof, and that for
more humanity sake, schooled his Citizens, that they should not privately
live every one to him self, but that they should as Bees join hands all in
one together, for the indifferent behoof sake one of an other. So that as we
see here, man only by natural reason without grace, brute beasts by sense
alone without reason, and the earth it self by vegetation only without sense,
do prescribe and signify unto us, that man ought to be beneficial, harberous
and bountiful to man. Well then, if the Lamp without oil, yield us this
light, the body without soul, proffer us this life, and the earth without
tillage, afford us this croppe of increase: how much more ought the Lamp which
is oyled, to burn more brightlie? The body that is quickened, to be more
lively? and the earth which is tilled, to fructify more plenteously? I mean,
when souls of the air, and beasts of the field without reason, when the earth
without sense or moving, and man without regeneration, appear thus bountiful
and beneficial one to another: How much more ought we, which are regenerate
(...)dren by adoption and grace, and have (...) these wants supplied in us, for
to ex(...)de in benevolence and bountifulnes: (...)he which virtue is so
plausible and (...)recious in the eysight of God, that (...) is taken in, as a
Queen at the gates (...)eauen. And therefore good cause there (...), why, they
which went before (...)is it, Christ himself in his time, and (...) Apostles that
came after in theyrs, (...)all of them mightelie beats at this (...)tue, and
charge us sore therewithal. (...)ou shall not hearden thine heart, Deuteronomy. 15.
(...) shut thine hand from thy poor (...)there, says the Lord by Moses. Show
(...)rcie and compassion every man Zach. 7.
(...) his brother, says Zachary. Give (...) him that asks, and from him
that Mat. 5.
(...)old borrow of thee, turn not a(...)ay, says our Savior Christ. And
(...)hatsoeuer ye would that men should (...)o unto you, even so do ye unto
them, according to the exhortation of the Apostle, who says, Remember them
which Heb. 13.
are in bonds, as though ye were bound with them: and them that are in
affliction, as if ye your selves were afflicted in the body. The same Apostle
also wills the Ephesians, that they should be courteous one to another,
Ephesians. 4.
and tenderhearted. S. Peter likewise says, be ye harberous one to 1. pet. 4.
another without grudging. Thus much then for equivalent sayings by way of
exhortation. Examples and presidents we have a great many, for our better
encouragement and imitation sake, touching hospitality and bountifulness: as
the example of Abraham, and Lot, Job, and Tobias, Joseph, Ezechias and Josias,
David, and Solomon, Zache, and Tabitha, Cornelius and Martha, Nichodemus, with
many more: yea, our Savior Christ we have as a chief pattern in this behalf,
who mercifully in the zeal of his spirit said, (...) I have Mat. 8.
compassion on the mnltitude, and so did thoroughly vittaile and relieve them,
before he would dimisse and send them away from him. He did not by outward
pretense and fair words only bear them in hand, that he pitied them and
would do them good, as many men now a days use to do, resembling the (...)
Taurus, which has a great voice, (...) yet but a little body, the thunder.
(...)ch has a great clap and ye^ but (...) stone, which comfort (as says
Pla(...)is cold and unsavory, because it (...)meth not wrapped with some
kind (...)medie: but the Lord, I say, perfor(...) it in deed, and all for our
ensample (...)the like, accordingly as S. John (...)h us. Let us not love in
word, 1. John. 3.
(...)er in tongue only, but in deed and (...)e. For as it is not the cutting,
but (...)rtue which valueth the precious (...): so is it not the fair gloss in
word, (...)e full performance in deed, where(...) neighbor is helped, God the
sa(...)noured, and we our selves accep(...). For so says S. James, The
wise(...) Iam. 3.
that is from above, is full of mer(...) and good fruits. But so cool (I say)
(...)e devotion, and so churlish is the dis(...)tion of many rich men in this
age. (...) they be found when time serves, (...)ee and forward to give, as the
flint (...)ne is for to yield water: who in deed (...)e more they have, the
less they give, (...)d the more they would have, after (...)e manner of the
insatiable dropsy: yea, by how much the more their coffers do increase in
store and substance, by so much the more do their minds shrink in and
decrease in franknesse and beneficence: wherein they become like the Cypers
tree, which the more it is watered, the more it withers. And this surely is a
strange matter, that ye longer a man's arm is, the shorter should be his
reach: that the stronger a man's bow is, the weaker should be his shet: that the
fuller a man's hands be, the emptier should be his heart: I mean, it is a
wonderful point of ingratitude, that the more substance a man has given him,
the less he again should give and part from: and yet shall we find this
thing most true, if we look into the course of the world and condition of
this time, wherein men for the most part are grown to be so hard hearted,
that rather then they will give to others enough, or nigh enough, moderately
to suffice them, they them selves will surfeit by too much. Yea, rather then
they will put out their Talent to advantage, they will happily bury it so
deeply, as no man (...)have use thereof: and yet better (...) it for them by
much, if they had (...)orldly wealth at all, then having (...)ame, not to cut
and carue it out in (...)sort, as both they themselves and (...)s may be the
better for it. Let us (...), my brethren, be provident and (...)ll in this
case, That our riches Iam. 5.
(...)ne not corrupt, our garments (...)eaten, and our silver and gold (...)ed
by too too long keeping: for so (...)ust of them shall be a witness^ (...)st
us, and shall eat our flesh as (...)re fire. But rather let us always
(...)dfull, to disperse and give to the (...) For so shall our righteousness
psalm. 112.
(...)e for ever. And here for our (...) direction fake in this point, let
(...)nsider a little the parties to whom, (...)anner whereafter, and the end
(...)refore we ought to give. Touching (...)st circumstance, we are thus
taught (...)he prophet Esai, saying: Is not this The parti whom we must give.
Esai. 58.
(...)fasting that I have chosen, to deal (...) bread to the hungry, and that
thou (...)ing the poor that wandreth, unto (...)ine house, when thou see the
naked, (...)at thou cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh.
When thou ^^ke 14.
make a feast (says our Savior Christ) Call the poor, the maimed, the lame
and the blind. And again, If thou will ^atth. (...).
be perfect, says he, Go and sell all that thou have, and give to the poor.
Herewithall agrees that saying of S. James the Apostle, Pure religion, and
undefiled ^am. 1.
before God the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversity. The remembrance of this deuation toward the needy and
succourlesse, was Iobes chiefest comfort and hearts ease, when in the midst
of his own miseries he brake out thus and said, I was the eyes to the blind,
the feet ^^b. 29.
to the lame, and a father unto the poor. Unto this same distressed condition
of men, very bountifully did Zache also put forth his helping hand, when
^^ke 19.
dividing his goods in two shares, he imparted the one half to the poor.
This then, as hereby we learn, is the special state, whereunto by giving we
ought to have regard: Now because as well our own countrymen as strangers
borne, as well Christians as infidels, as well virtuous as godless people,
(...)ewhiles put to the like trial in (...)rnace of adversity: it shall not
(...)se for us to observe a little, when(...)t plunging in like distress and
(...)e, must of duty be supported, (...)lpen first. As for forreiners or
(...)gers, albeit the Lord straightly (...)th us both to love and relieve
them, (...)euiticus. The stranger that Leuit. 19.
(...)h with you, shall be as one (...)r selves, and thou shall love (...)thy
self. And again in Deu(...)y the Lord says, The stranger Deuteronomy. 14.
(...)ome, and the fatherless which (...)hin thy gates, and shall eat
(...)ee, and be satisfied: Although (...) the general title of
Christiani(...)mon to us, and them, should (...)et us at one in mutual love
and (...)ce, then the diverse and several (...)s of Countries separate our
af(...)s asunder, seeing as the Apo(...)aieth, There is one Lord, one Ephe. 4.
(...), one Baptism, one God and (...)er of all, which is above us all, (...)
through us all, and in us all: (...) notwithstanding, as nature co^man(...) us,
so the spirit of God forbids us not, but that we relieve, and every way
befriend our own countreimen and neighbors born before strangers, if th^^ on
both sides there be like necessity, an^ not unlike zeal to Godwarde, else not.
For although we be enjoined by the holy Ghost, to do good unto all men
without exception, whether they be neighbor^ or strangers; friends, or enemies;
grateful, or thanklesse, godly, or graceles^ people: yet be we charged
specially t^ be helpful toward them, which in faith and singlenes of heart
seek the Lord. For so says Paul, While we have time, let Galat. 6.
us do good unto all men, but specially unto them which are of the household
of faith. This discretion d^^ the same Apostle himself use, when h^ carried the
alms to Jerusalem and di^minister it unto saints there. And unto Romans 15.
this same sincere sort of professors ou^ Savior Christ had relation, when
he said, In as much as ye have done alms Matthew. 25.
unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. But now a days
among the richer sort, men of this simple outward condition, be they of never
so sound inward complexio^, eftsoons (...)orst of all: insomuch that
Salo(...)aying is verified, Riches gather prou. 19.
(...)riends, but the poor is separa(...)m his neighbor. Again, Every
(...)ith he) is friend to him that gi(...)fts, according to that proverb,
(...), prosperity is always (...)iended. For look as our sha(...) time of
Sunshine, do accom(...) bodies, and in time of cloudie (...) they vanish away
from us: and (...)olphins of the Sea with joyful(...)n with us, whiles we have
wa(...)l, but when that fails, they (...) and forsake us: so likewise
(...)hile they have full fruition of (...)nour, and wealth, shall be sure
(...)s every where: but when these (...)s wear out and are ouercast, (...)l
friendship wheresoever. This (...) is our frailty from the highest to (...)est,
frankly to give where gifts (...)less, be the parties never so bad (...)ours:
and unkindly to withdraw (...)nds where help is needful, be the (...)s never
so godly and good deser(...) Touching this circumstance there(...)o the end
we may offend the less, we must as nigh as we can resemb^^ the integrity
and incorrupt nature (...) God Almighty, who specially by his power and
providence, does relieve a^ advance the sincerest, best, and worthy(...) men.
Concerning the commendable an^ The manner whereafter we must give.
Christianlike manner of alms giving we must not as men wayward and unwilling,
foreslack the performance he^^ of being once determined where need r^quireth:
for so are we told by the wi(...) man, Say not unto thy neighbor, Come prou.
3.
again, and to morrow will I give thee, if thou now have it: Neither may we do
it frowningly or with an evil will, f^^ this also does ye Apostle forwarn us
off, saying, Let every man do according (...). Cor. 9.
as he is disposed in his heart, not grudgingly or of necessity, and why? God
loves a cheerful giver. In all thy gifts show a cheerful countenance, says
the Preacher. And look what thy hand is able, give with a cheerful eye. For a
man not according to the measure of his gift and largition, but according to
his pitiful mind and charitable affection, is accepted of with the Lord, as
may appear by the great (...)ing he made of the poor wi(...) two mites,
before the rich man's (...)l and large offering. Though I Mark. 12. 1. Cor. 13.
(...) the poor (says the Apostle) (...) all my goods, and have not (...)
me, it profits me no whit (...) So that as we see, this same (...) love and
compassion, affoor(...) kind both of inward and out(...) chearfulnes, must
be as a per(...)r sweet powder whereof our (...)must smell, as a garland
where(...) it must be beautified, and in (...) of a delightsome sauce whereof
(...) taste. Otherwise, the Lord (...) will abhor and abandon it, (...)ng
unpleasant to his nose, un(...)e to his eye, and unsavory to (...)outh. For
in truth, without (...) two foresaid appurtenances, I (...)e both inward and
outward (...)fulness, all men's gifts how great (...)er, are but as flowers
without (...)ur, masses without shape, bones (...)hout marow, and as lamps
with(...) oil. If we will then by dis(...)rging our duty accordingly,
right(...)lease God in this behalf, we must be as forward and prompt to give,
wh^ riches abound, as the Sea men are to sail when wind and tide serves,
the birds to flacker when feathers come on, or the earth to fructify when she
has moisture at will. Yea, we may not be so slack in our benevolence as was
Pericles, who had his memory rubde by his old tutor Anaxagoras, before he
gave him ought, as thus, O Pericle, qui lucerna indiget, oleum instillet. This
he sai^ when Pericles, hearing that through want of maintenance he was about
to make a hand of himself, came to dissua(...) him from doing that violence
against his own person, and the rather, because (as he said) he and she whole
Country besides, could hardly forgo him. Why the, says Anaxagoras, he that
needs a lamp or light, let him pour in oil for to keep it burning: as if
he should have said, He that for his use needs a man, let him relieve and
succor him. This reasonable round saying was Pericles ashamed of, who
afterward took more care over him, but less a great deal to his
commendation and credit, then if he had of his own accord dove it before. For
(...)hich is quickly given, is twice gi(...) Qui cito dat, his dat. And yet be
(...) I fear me) many well able and (...)en, which take as much delight in
(...) as ye Ox in his yoke, or ye Horse (...)eauy harnes. As for these
world(...) which possess not, but rather are (...) of their goods, some will
com(...)em to Hogs, which serve for (...)ill they come to the Butchers (...)
and some will liken them to (...)de Dogs, which before they (...)ewed one
piece of meat, gree(...)e after another: and yet (me (...)) they may be
resembled to a (...)enly beast, though more subtle (...)her of these, and that
is in deed to (...), who had rather bruise and break (...)i will on the ground,
then give or (...) any part of it to the silly Ape (...) wants a tail. Let
us not then, (...)rethren, when we give, be closefi(...) and when we take,
openhanded: (...)rather let us frankly both do and say (...) Zache, Half of
my goods I give Luke 19.
(...)o the poor. For why? Wisdom (...)t is hid, and treasure that is
hourded (...) what profit is there in them both? And thus much for the manner
how we The end wherefore we ought to give.
ought to give. Lastly, touching the right end wherefore, we ought to given
it may in no wise be this, to be seen (...) men: I mean, for vain glory
sake, (...) so we forgo the reward at our heavenly Fathers hand. And
therefore says Christ, When thou give thine Matthew. 6.
alms, thou shall not make a trumpet to be blown before thee, as the
hipocrites do in the Synagogues and street^ to be praised of men: but when tho^
do thine alms, let not thy left hi^ know what thy right hand does, that
thine alms may be in secret, and the father that sees in secret, he will
reward thee openly. Neither may we pass away our alms upon hope of man
reward and retributron again, for this dealing tastes rather of vsur(...)
then of any kindly liberality: b(...) when we give, we must do it
freelie^ through mere pity and compassion toward the needy, and that
because the Lord himself has straightly enioyn^ us so to do. So that, to be
short, t(...) very end and drift of this our ad(...)on must always be this,
to pleas(...) (...), who requires it, whom we ought (...)ache reckoning of
above all, and to (...)ue our neighbor, who needs it, (...)m we ought to
love as our selves. (...) this then suffice that I have spo(...) concerning the
parties to whom, (...) manner whereafter, and the end (...)efore we ought to
give. It fol(...)h in the text as thus. And it shall (...)ue^ unto you, etc.
And this (I say) (...)ris^es promise or covenant of re(...) and retribution,
directed to so many (...), as be faithful Christian almoners, (...)ein for our
better encouragement (...) the lord displaieth unto us, by way (...)iliar
description, the good and gainful (...)ure of the said reward, mutuallie
(...)ing to us ward again, as thus: A (...)d measure, pressed down, shaken
(...)ither, and running over, shall me^ give (...)o your bosom. First then, let
us (...)ndle the promise in general, omitting (...)itle these circumstances,
whereby the (...)me lies here notably enriched, and beau(...)fied. It shall be
given unto you, says Christ. If so be yt in worldly affairs we account an
honest man's word, as a reasonable good pledge, and take an able man's
obligation, for sufficient security, whose conditions are in both kinds
variable, and therefore untrusty and deceivable: how much more securely may we
rely upon Gods promise here, who according to his immutable will and power
orders ma^s goings, disposes his heart, and has under his will all man's will
at a ^eck? And this is he who has here given us his hand, that if by gifts
giving, we be helpful unto others, we our selves likewise shall be courteously
entreated, and frankly recompensed again, both at his and at their hands. Such
reckoning then and reputation must we make of this, that no usury in
comparison, may seem so beneficial unto us, nor yet any treasure, so surely
laid or locked up for our use, as that which is devoutly given, and covertly
conveyed into the needy man's bosom. For why, as says the Apostle, God is not
unrighteous, that ^ebr. 6.
he will forget our works, and labor, that proceeds of love. Who as he
makes the earth to acknowledge ye benefit of the Sun, by yelding again a
reflection of his bright beams: And as he causes the tilled land, seasonably
with (...)ntage for to repay that in harvest, (...)h was sown and lent out to
inte(...)in seed time: so does he by his good (...)te inflame and stir up
men's hearts, (...)ee thankful for the benefits they (...)e by others, and he
enforces them (...)eir ableness grows on, for to re(...) and render the
like again to their (...)ctors and first founders. And (...)this rule holds
not throughout, (...)son of man's slacknes, and ingra(...): Yet does the Lord
of his own (...)e make this his word good, and (...) this his promise, by way
of re(...) him self: according to Salo(...)is saying, He that has pity
prou. 19.
(...)e poor, lends unto the lord, (...)e Lord will recompense him (...)
which he lays out. The libe(...)an then (as we see here) has two (...)ges
for his bow, so that if the one (...), the other will be always ready
(...)and to make supply. For the Lord (...)h not always post over this matter
(...)o man's discretion only, (albeit he (...)keth him somewhiles as his
Fac(...)r or Deputy in this point) but he (...)forms this thing actually
himself also, without means or mediation. And here, for our further assurance
and better resolution sake in this behalf, we will a little ouersee and survey
these several places of scripture following. As first those of Solomon, Honor
the Lord with thy ^ou. 3.
riches, and with the first fruits of all thine increase: So shall thy barnes
be filled with abundance, and thy presses shall burst with new wine. The
liberal ^rou. 11.
persou (says he) shall have plenty, and he that waters, shall have rain.
And again, he holds this as a rule infallible: He which follows after
righteousness ^rou. 21.
and mercy, shall find life, righteousness and glory. This doubtless was
Tobias persuaded of, when he spoke thus to his son, by way of advertisement,
Give alms according to thy Tob. 4.
substance, for thereby thou layest up a good store for thy self against the
day of necessity. Likewise says the wise man, Bestow thy treasure Eccle. 29.
after the commandment of the most high, and it shall bring thee more
profit then Gold. Again he says, Give thine alms secretly, and it shall
keep thee from al affliction, (...)s also did king David think in his
(...)ience, when he said, Blessed is he psalm. 41.
(...) judges wisely of the poor: the (...)de shall deliver him in the time
of (...)ble. And this falls flat with ye A(...)es saying, Whatsoever a
mansow(...) Galat. 6.
that shall he reap. Let us not then, (...)ethren, be weary of well doing,
(...) that in due time We shall reap if Galat. 6.
(...)nt not. For no doubt, the Lord (...)ath here made this francke
coue(...)and promise with us, has already (...)rmed the same to our
forefathers, (...) whence there grows also to us (...) no small encouragement
and hope: (...)ragement (I mean) for to deal (...)lli^, as they our
predecessors (...) and hope again for to have plen(...)lie, even as they
themselves had. (...) some perchance will ask me, who (...)re they? What did
they? And (...)at reward had they? Who they (...)re, I told you before, as
namely (...)raham, Tobias, David, Ezechias, (...)seph, Josias, Solomon,
Corn(...)us, Martha, Nichodemus, with ma(...)ie more besides these, all which
for their (...)mes deeds and compassion toward the poor, received again in
temporal blessings, some more, some less, some single, some double fold,
according as the Lord in his secret wisdom, did foresee it to be best and
most expedient for them: and in the end they also reaped eternal life, which
benefit they found far surpassing the other. Seeing the^ the Lord who
promises, has so duly kept touch with these our elders before us, we for
our parts may hereby assuredly persuade our selves, that we also as well as
they, by scattering shall gather, by losing shall find, by giving shall take,
by lessening shall augment, by emptying to the bottom, shall fill up to the
brim, yea by having nothing, we shall surely possess all things. For so
manifold is the use we have always by our gifts giving, that though we pass
them from us out of time, yet do we receive them again in time: though they
go from us as things superfluous, yet return they to us again, as things
most necessary: and though we give them in earthen Cups, yet do we
receive them again in golden Goblets: and what should I say else: whereby to
rouse and (...) us up unto beneficence and boun(...)nesse, but this, that
contrary(...) by hoording up, we shall make ha(...)t: by keeping, we shall
forgo: by (...)ng, we shall spend: by pinching, we (...) bring on poverty:
yea, when like (...)ardes we think to make all, then (...)gets shall we mar
all? For why, (...)sing to give an inch, we defraude (...)ues of an ell: by
withholding one (...)up of cold water from others, we (...)rred from a whole
fountain our (...): and for not emptying, the one (...) by giving, we forgo
both our hands (...) taking: according to that saying (...)omon, There is that
scatters, prou. 11.
(...) more increased: but he that (...)h more then is right, shall sure(...)e
to poverty. Yea most true it (...)o penny, no paternoster: nothing (...)
nothing take: for so says the wise (...), He that stops his ear at the
prou. 21.
(...)g of the poor, he shall also cry (...) not be heard. And again, He
that (...)draws the corn, the people (...) curse him, says he. Herewithall
a(...)th that saying of the Apostle, There (...)be judgment merciless to him
Iam. 2.
that shows no mercy. The verity and proof hereof appears at large, by
the wrathful subversion of Sodom: For among other iniquities which wrought
her desolation and overthrow, the Prophet Ezechiel names this for one, that
she did not strengthen the Ezech. 16.
hand of the poor and needy. The men of Succoth, for not relieuing Gideon
Judge. 4.
his people, when they craved sustenance, became in thend distressed them
selves, and torn asunder with thorns and briers. The rich glutton, for
withholding Luke. 16.
his helping hand from Lazarus, fell himself finally into a most miserable,
distressed, and helpeles case. Well then if it fares thus with them which give
not of their own substance, when and where need is: what (I pray you) shall
befall unto them, which being come of the takers, as we term them, do not
only not give to, but take from the poor: do not only not help them up
again, when they are fallen down, but assay to hurl them down flat, when
they are fair standing: do not only not salve them when they see them sore
wounded, but bitterly (...) them, when they see them per(...) whole and sound:
do not only not (...)en them, when they see them lie (...)g, but cruelly
smoother and (...)w them up, while they are yet (...)? For such are the ways
of every (...)at is greedy of gain, that he prou. 1.
(...) take away the life of the ow(...)ereof: what shall be their por(...) I
mean, which are so far off (...)iuing to others, that they at(...) by open
violence for to wring (...)rest from them, that which of (...)s theirs? Surely
these men if (...)ten to and believe the two Pro(...) Esais and Ames, shall
find (...)hey have a heavy matter, and (...)e cold suite in hand, and that
(...)se their end shall be utter death (...)esolation. For thus says Esai,
(...)e to thee that spoilest, and wast (...) spoiled, and do wickedlie Esai.
33.
(...) they did not wickedlie against (...)e. When thou shall cease from
(...)iling, thou shall be spoiled, (...)d when thou shall make an end (...)
doing wickedlie, they shall do (...)ckedlie against thee. The same Prophet
also elsewhere, threatens utter overthrow against them which join house to
house, and lay field to field, Esai. 5.
and foretells them that many houses even fair and great ones, shall be
without inhabitant. The Prophet Amos also does thus prophecy of these
merciless and ravenous men: Forasmuch, says he, as your treading is upon the
poor, and ye take from hi^ Amos. 5.
burdens of wheat: ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall no^ dwell
in them, ye have planted pleasant vineyardes, but ye shall not drin^ wine of
them: For thus doubtless falls it out with all extorcioners, and oppressors
whosoever, that in the winding up, they themselves reap no more use by their
spoil and rapine, then Achan did by taking the Babilonish garment, Adoram Ios.
6.
by extorting the Israelites tribute, 1. King. 12.
or Ahab by compassing of Nabothe 1. King. 22.
vineyarde. Yea this bad end and misfortune, as we learn, befell to all the
Canaanites, the Assyrians, the Babilonians, the Persians, the Grecians, and the
Romans, which were themselves merciless, and altogether given to spoil.
(...)efore all mighty men, and rich (...)rdes, by the example of these (...)e
like afterclap, when they do (...)ely with dry eyes look upon (...)ore
tenants miseries, but by op(...) and violence grind their faces, (...)n up and
devour them, eue^ as the (...)es in the Sea devour the less(...), I say,
beware and look to (...) doubtless, the Council of the (...)ching their
shameful fall and (...)n, shall surely stand. And let (...)t only learn
hereby for the pu(...)t sake, to abandon such mon(...)mpietie in oppressing and
ra^(...)ir poor brethren: but let them (...) the reward sake, relieve and
(...) them with their own wealth (...)bstance: for this in deed is that (...)
smelling sacrifice, which the Lord (...)eth here, as a riper branch and (...)r
degree of true Christianity, then (...)there. Yea, this is it finally,
where(...) the Lord affixeth his promise of re(...)all and retribution, saying,
Give and (...)all be given unto you. Wherein (...)dly with one breath (as it
were) is (...)ribed unto us, the perfect measure and manner, how we shall in
due tim^ reap this reward again, as thus a good measure, pressed down, and
(...)forth as follows in the text. And th^^ same familiar means of
persuading (I say) the Lord does solicit us by for this end, that being
acquainted (...) forehand with the gainefull manner (...) the recompense
ensuing, we for ou^ parts, should the more courageously go on, to put in
ure such charitabl^ works of benevolence, as we an^ here charged withal. For
having not only a reward, but the same (...) most bountiful one promised us
according to this our Savior Christ's amplification here, we our selves by
means of this francke proffer must needs become willing, yea most willing to
perform this his will, by way of Alms and liberallitie. And herein as we are
to admire Christ's wisdom, for the familiar and effectual manner sake of this
his promise, as also to magnify his goodness, for the final performance
hereof, when time does serve: so are we to condemn our own dullness in
conceiving, and to prove our own slacknesse in exe(...)g this and other such
like deeds (...)lmes, and all because our sense(...)and churlish nature is
such, that (...)ll not of it own accord, conceive (...)elde from it any
thing that good (...)unless it be thus roused up and (...) on in this manner,
by fair and (...)omises. This knew our Saui(...)ell, who albeit of his own
an(...)tie like a Lord, he might have (...)yned us this charge without any
(...)fer of reward at all: yet has he (...) Father, dealt more mildly with
(...) by way of persuasion, including (...) a bountiful promise, thereby,
(...)awe us on the rather, obedientlie (...) willingly to embrace this his
special desire. And this description of (...)compence formallie framed by our
Savior Christ, may seem indifferently to afforde us, a double sense and
meaning: that is to say, both a celestial and a temporal signification.
Notwithstanding, whether way soever we construe it, we find that the reward
does not only counteruaile ye desert, but does also by many degrees far
outgoe and surpass the same: for by giving an even, proportionable, and an
equal measure unto others, we are here warranted by Christ himself, that we
shall reap the like again, with a mendes, and large interest, either from
them, whom before we our selves have gratified, or else from some other more
thankful persons, whom the Lord in stead of their unthankfulness will stir
up again for to recompense, and befriend us. Hereupon it comes, that Christ
elsewhere in the Gospel promises an hundredth fold in temporal blessings to
them, ward again, which for his names sake and the Gospels, renounce and Mar.
10.
willingly part from their earthly possessions, and substance. Yea we read
that our Savior himself, who by promise stands payable for this targe
account and reckoning, has heretofore miraculously discharged himself
thereof, as namely, when by his mighty power and providence, the Disciples
after the satisfying of five thousand hungry men, with five loaves and two
silly Mar. 6.
fishes, took up again twelve baskets full of the fragments, that were left,
(...)so when through his mighty hand, (...)oore widow found her store fully 2.
King. 16.
(...)e up, after she had frankly and free(...)otcht it out for the Prophets
suste(...)e and behoof sake. Again, besides (...) two miracles, many other
ordina(...)oofes, and ensamples we have, which (...)irectly teach us, that
Christ's li(...) retribution has been always (...) at hand, and answerable
to man's (...)ifulnesse: but of these I made men(...)fore, as occasion served. I
will now (...)fore ouerpasse them. Only thus (...) I say, and say again, that
the (...) himself is so far off from broo(...)or bearing with any worldly
iug(...)egerdemaine, and deceit, that he (...) no wise suffer his chosen
children, (...)g well dealt withal and done to by (...)r brethren, so
disloyallie to entreat (...) delude them again, as to re(...)e them chafe
for good corn, light (...)res for down weight, bad mea(...)e for good, a
stone for bread, or ^erpent in stead of a fish: but being Luke 11.
their superuisour and guide, he will make them (will they, nill they) or to
repay such good measure again, as is here lively described by three several
properties of integrity and perfectness, which namely be these, pressed
down, shaken together, and running over. This measure then (as we see here)
shall not be through any fraudulent or slight devise, heaued up to the
outward appearance, and so afterward fail on us: but it shall be so roundly
hudled up, and so substantially coutcht together, that it shall not possibly
shrink in any whit at all on any side. For first of all, it shall not be
deceitefull in the bottom beneath, because it shall be pressed down: again,
it shall not be hollow or slight about the sides betwixt, because it shall be
shaken together: neither yet shall it deceive us at the top above, because it
shall outreach and ouerflow the brim. Yea, this same measure (I say) promised
us by Christ, shall from head to foot, and from top to toe, as we term it,
be sound without imperfectness, substantial without guilefullnesse, and full
without scarceness, and what else can be wished over and besides, saving only
the safe delivery and conueyance thereof, unto our hands. (...) this also
does our Savior Christ (...) assure us off, where he says that o(...) men
shall give it into our bosoms: (...) if he should have said, This mea(...)
shall not be desperately cast to (...), (for so it might miscarie by the
(...)) neither wrathfullie hurlde at (...) (for so it might offend you) (...)
yet openly or ambitiously given (...) (for so perhaps it might disgrace
(...)discounteuance you:) but it shall (...)onueyed into your bosom,
modest(...)r security sake, chearefully for bet(...)king sake, and covertly
for your (...)t sake. Note here (I pray you) (...)there with the perfectness of
the (...)sure, the secure and singular good (...)er also of the conueyance
thereof, (...)o our besomes. And here finally (...)ncerning this word Bosom,
I ob(...)ue this as a special note among the (...)t, that all men's good gifts
what soever, ought to have their chiefest revolution, affiance, and settling
place, about ^he heart, that is, from a beneuo^nt heart must they come, and to
a thankful heart must they go. For otherwise, if they halt betwixt both,
they must needs degenerate, go out of kind, and so consequently come to no
proof. So that, as you see, our heart must be our hand to give from us, and
our heart must be our hand to take to us, yea, our heart must be all in all.
And thus much concerning the temporal meaning of this our savior Christ's
promised reward, amplified at large as ye have heard already, with a full
description of the properties incident thereto. Now for the other more divine
interpretation, and celestial acception of these words, if I should
particularly by order as they lie, stand deskanting upon them, I should thereby
rather satisfy the curious, then edify the simpler sort: I will not therefore
meddle with the description of this incomprehensible heavenly recompense.
Only thus much and no more dare I boldly say with the Apostle, that no eye
has seen, no ear has heard, 1. Cor. 2.
nor heart of man conceived the joys that the Lord has in store for them
that love him, yea for them which love him above all, and their brethren (...)m
selves, which love must needs (...)re by their works of charity, (...)lmes
deeds. For, with what (...)ure ye mete, with the same shall (...)mete to you
again, says Christ, (...)e which general sentence derived (...)common sense,
and approved by (...)w of nature, all the foresaid seue(...)ts of recompense
are now round(...)prised, wound up, and ratified. (...)us our savior Christ
reasons, (...)what measure ye mete withal, (...)good or bad) with the same
shall (...)ete to you again: If ye then (...)l judging, by forgiving, and by
(...)also, afforde good measure un(...)rs, ye your selves likewise shall (...)
of the like benevolence, mutual(...)ine at their hands. And why, (...) well
thought off, when we think (...) of others, is the still inward har(...)ie: to
be well spoken off when we (...)ke well, is the outward rebounding (...)cho:
and to be well done to, when we (...)well to others, is the kindly proper(...)
of man's nature universally. This (...)ubtlesse did Homer feel by good
ex(...)rience both in himself and others when said, Talia dicentur tibi,
qualia dixeris ipse. that is, Such words as thou broachest abroad by others,
such like shall fall to thine own share again, be they good or bad. And this
same Homers saying may seem of right to have great affinity with that saying
of Solomon, He that seeks good prou. 11.
things, gets favor: but he that seeks evil, evil shall come to him. For
as by Gods favorable appointment, it comes to pass, that men of integrity
and uprightness, such I mean, as delight both to speak well, and to do well
by others, reap again the like good reputation and benevolence at their
hands: even so through Gods just judgment falls it out, that men of
sinister and maleuolent minds, such I would say, as are viperous, hateful and
illiberall persons, meet commonly in ye end with like mates unto them selves,
which will sting them outwardly, disdain them inwardly, and draw back their
helping hands even then, when assistance might stand them in most stead. Thus
were the Sodomites, and the men of Succoth (as (...)e you) for their own
vnmerci(...)sse justly dashed and dealt withal, (...) when they might worst
have born (...)Yea as there be none almost so un(...)full, qui non gratiam been
merenti: (...)ere be none in manner so innocent, (...)alum male merenti non
reponent. As (...) be none (I say) so ungrateful, (...) will not repay a good
turn to (...)at deserves a good one: so is there (...)o harmless, which
will not do (...) bad turn, who deserves no bet(...) Well then, if most men
accor(...) as occasion shall be given them (...) good or bad, use commonly to
render (...)epay the like again, and all through (...) own permission and
ordinance: (...)r our parts, if so that we wish to (...)e back the evil from
us, and to (...)w on the good recompense into our (...)soms, must always
think off, speak (...), and do to our brethren all good and (...) evil. Yea,
we must (I say) con(...)rme our hearts to think well, smooth (...)d file our
tongues to speak well, and (...)oath bow and bend all our iointes to (...)oe
well to others, which no doubt (...)oath may, and will be grateful to us in
like sort, when time shall serve. And here perchance some will ask me, How
may these sayings hang together, and be reconciled aright? For whereas
immediately before, the Lord termed it measure running over that should be
given us, now he seems to fall and light short of that proportion, promising
no more but this, that ye same measure shall be returned us again, that we mete
unto others withal. We answer, that by the same measure here, is meant no
more but this in general, that for our well doing to others, we again shall be
well done unto. So that whether this reward be more or less, whether it
light short or exceed in quantity, touching the verifying of these words,
all (I say) is as one for that. Seeing therefore, my brethren, the Lord
himself has enjoined us here, liberallitie, and benevolence, as asweete
smelling sacrifice in his nostrels, and has also promised a large retribution
thereto, whereby is signified, that the neglecte thereof is a thing punishable
and unrewarded. Let us for these four causes, that is, first (...)e
Commandment sake, second(...) for the dignity of the action it (...) being
elsewhere termed a sacrifice, (...)ly for the promise sake, and lastly,
(...)guard of the penalty proceeding of (...)ntrarie, let us (I say) for these
cau(...) as bountiful, as harberous, and as (...)ciall one toward another, as
pos(...)e may be. And to the end this acti(...) be the more easy and
delightsom (...)s in the performance, let us by (...)f gradation observe and
put in use (...)paratiues, the other two precepts (...)y going before, touching
the aban(...)g of rash judgment and malice (...)g. For these be the chiefest
ene(...)nd obstacles that we have, in the (...)ianlike course of all our
beneuo(...) whatsoever. For the supplanting (...)fore of these enormities,
tending di(...)y by way of alms, to the glory of (...), to the behoof of our
neighbors, and the safeguard of our own souls, let us say) with one accord, in
all humility (...) feruentnes of spirit, crave the assi(...)nce of God the
Father, God the Son, (...) God the holy Ghost, in such devout (...)er and
form as follows.

The Prayer.
ALmighty, most merciful, and gracious Trinity, from whose incomprehensible
godhead, fatherly goodness, and ghostly influence, we receive in hand, and
have derived unto us our creation, our redemption, and sanctification, with all
things else, we thy sorry creatures, ouerlaid with the accusation, and remorse
of our own guilty consciences, for the wilful breach by past of these thy
precepts: do now before thy throne of majesty, prostrate our selves, with
humble confession of our heinous disobedience, against these same fatherly
prescriptio^s of thine, touching true sanctimony of life, and brotherly
conversation For being aforetime too too much in love and liking with our
selves, and so on the other side, out of all league and love with our brethren,
we have parcialli^ (...) wot) justified our own doings, (...) we should have
condemned, (...)aue peeuishly condemned theirs, (...) of right we should have
iustifi(...) Thus have we by flattering our (...), and by defacing our fellow
ser(...), shamefully to thy dishonor, de(...)ur own souls. Yea, albeit we
(...)s watchwoord given us before(...) That by our words we should be iusti(...)
Matthew. 12.
by our words we should be condem(...) (...)t this alas have we done, to our
(...) overthrow and confusion. A(...)over and besides this, we have (...)r at
thy bidding rebuked our tres(...) Luke 17.
nor yet forgiven them upon their re(...)e: but having our hearts by Sa(...)r
heavy lodesman, ouerfraught (...)malice, we have furiously sought (...) ease
and unburden the same, by (...) of vengeance against our euildo(...) Thus also
being out of joint with (...)ers, have we impatiently lasht be(...) the
compass of thy will, and precinct (...)hy sacred word, which seriously
ad(...)th us, That we should not avenge our (...)es, but rather give place
unto wrath and indignation: yea, For hereunto verily were ^om 12. ^et. 3.
we called. Lastly, as for that due benevolence and compassion of ours, which
thou (O Lord) for the behoof of the succourlesse, without all nay say
requirest at our hands, we for our parts, which in substance have most, and
so might best have been bountiful, even we (I say) cannot deny but that we
have churlishly, with that delicious Cormorant Dives, kept back our helping
^uke. 16.
hand from silly pore Lazarus. Yea, thus croslie against thy will have we
dealt in this behalf, and have not made us friends of the riches of iniquity,
to ^uke. 16.
the end they might receive us into everlasting habitations. For as much then,
O heavenly Father, as our demeanor has been so captious, so cankred, and so
cross at all assaies, we thy sinful caitifes relying wholly upon thy mercy
and forgiveness, have now made our appearance before thy judgment seat, with
voluntary arraignment, and condemnation against our selves: and in this our own
citation, and submission, before thee, we crave not only an acquittance, and
full discharge, for (...)ur offenses bypast, but we also (...)ie beseech thee
to afford us (...)orth such copious measure of (...)ace, as we may never
hereafter (...)o the like lapse, and labrinth a(...) For so in deed might our
end (...)s in the Gospel, Become a great Luke. 1^.
(...)se then our first beginning was. (...)s having quashed against the (...)e
brains of these Babilonish (...)spirits, I mean, evil jealousy, (...) and
unmercifulness: grant us, (...) Lord) we pray thee, such ghost(...)r and
assistance of thine, as we (...)aies hereafter be pressed, to give
(...)nstructions in things indiffe(...)o brook and bear out with (...)e, all
men's injuries and bad (...)ces, yea and that which is more (...)is, to feed
our enemies if they (...)r, and to give them drink if they (...): For thus, O
Father, of thy bles(...)ast thou charged us, That we 1. pet. 3.
(...) not be overcome of evil, but overcome (...)ith goodness. Over which
evil we (...)eaklings can never any way get (...)pper hand and
pre-eminence, (...)le thou, who as our general and chief Captain do force
us on to fight this field, le^d us also thy helping hand for to give the foil
to flesh and blood. For these in deed be the two sore enemies, which daily
come upon us in such jolly and giantly manner that if thou thy self do not
aid us they will never surcease till they ha^^ either by mere flattery, or
main(...) force, subdued and conquered us. B(...) yet, O Lord, If thou be with
us, who (b(...) Romans 8.
he never so jolly or giantlike) can p(...)sibly be against us? Defraude us
no(...) therefore, we beseech thee, of thy me(...)cifull assistance, whenever
we com(...) in combat with Satan our Ghostly (...)nemie: so shall we
according to th(...) thy will, with all delectation and pea(...) of conscience
acquaint our hearts (...) think, accustom our tongues to spea(...) and inure
our hands to do well for (...) our brethren and companions sake yea, and all
this shall we rightly do(...) for the due advancement of thy gl(...) yea, for
the temporal behoof of o(...) fellow Christians, and for the perp(...)tuall
salvation of our own soul(...) Which crown of endless saluatio(...) (...)
this our corruptible, shall put (...) corruption, we crave at thy (...)s, O
heavenly Father of bliss, (...)e name be worthily magnified (...) the first
to the last generation. (...).

LONDON (...)inted by John Wolf.


