A LEARNED SERMON OF THE NATVRE OF PRIDE, BY RICHARD HOOKER, SOMEtimes fellow
of Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

AC: OX
printer's or publisher's device

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes
dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1612.

ABAC. 2. 4. His mind swells and is not right in him: But the just by his
faith shall live.
THE nature of man being much more delighted to be led then drawn, does many
times stubbornely resist authority when to persuasion it easily yields. Where
upon the wisest Lawmakers have endeavored always that those laws might seem
most reasonable which they would have most inviolably kept. A law simply
commanding or forbidding is but dead in comparison of that which expresses
the reason where fore it does the one or the other. And surely even in the
Laws of God, although that he has given commandment, be in it self a
reason sufficient to exact all obedience at the hands of men: yet a forcible
inducement it is to obey with greater alacrity and cheerfulness of mind,
when we see plainly that nothing is imposed more then we must needs yield
unto, except we will be unreasonable. In a word, whatsoever we be taught, be it
precept for direction of our manners, or article for instruction of our faith,
or document any way for information of our minds, it then takes root and
abides when we conceive not only what God does speak, but why. Neither is it
a small thing which we derogate as well from the honor of his truth, as from
the comfort, joy, and delight which we our selves should take by it, when we
loosely slide over his speech as though it were as our own is, commonly vulgar
and trivial: whereas he utters nothing but it has besides the substance of
doctrine delivered a depth of wisdom in the very choice and frame of words to
deliver it in: the reason whereof being not perceived but by greater intention
of brain then our nice minds for the most part can well away with, feign we
would bring the world if we might to think it but a needless curiosity to
rip up any thing further then extemporall readiness of wit does serve to
reach unto. Which course if here we did list to follow, we might tell you that
in the first branch of this sentence God does condemn the Babilonians pride,
and in the second teach what happiness of state shall grow to the righteous by
the consta^cie of their faith, notwithstanding the troubles which now they
suffer; and after certain notes of wholesome instruction hereupon collected,
pass over without detaining your minds in any further removed speculation.
But as I take it there is a difference between the talk that beseems Nurces
amongst children, and that which men of capacity and judgment do or should
receive instruction by.

The mind of the Prophet being erected with that which has been hitherto
spoken, receives here for full satisfaction, a short abridgement of that which
is afterward more particularly unfolded. Wherefore as the question befores
disputed of does concern two sorts of men, the wicked flourishing as the Bay,
and the righteous like the withered grass; the one full of pride the other
cast down with utter discouragement: so the answer which God does make for
resolution of doubts hereupon arisen has reference unto both sorts, and this
present sentence containing a brief abstract thereof, comprehends summarily
as well the fearful estate of iniquity over exalted, as the hope laid up for
righteousness oppressed. In the former branch of which sentence, let us first
examine what this rectitude or straight nesse imports which God denies to be
in the mind of the Babylonian. All things which God did create he made them at
the first, true good, and right. True, in respect of correspondence unto that
pattern of their being, which was eternally drawn in the counsel of Gods
fore knowledge; Good, in regard of the use and benefit which each thing
yields unto other; Right, by an apt conformity of all parts with that end
which is outwardly proposed for each thing to tend unto. Other things have ends
proposed, but have not the faculty to know, judge, and esteem of them, and
therefore as they tend thereunto unwittingly, so likewise in the means whereby
they acquire their appointed ends, they are by necessity so held, that they
cannot divert from them. The ends why the heavens do move, the heavens
themselves know not, and their motions they cannot but continue. Only men in
all their actions know what it is which they seek for, neither are they by any
such necessity tied naturally unto any certain determinate mean to obtain
their end by, but that they may, if they will, forsake it. And therefore in
the whole world no creature but only man which has the last end of his actions
proposed as a recompense and reward: whereunto his mind derectly bending it
self, is termed right or straight, otherwise perverse.

To make this somewhat more plain, we must note, that as they which travel
from city to city, enquire ever for the straightest way, because the
straightest is that which soonest brings them unto their iourneies end: So we
having here as the Apostle speaks no abiding City, but being always in
travel toward that place of joy, immortality, and rest, cannot but in every
of our deeds, words, and thoughts, think that to be best which with most
expedition leads us thereunto, and is for that very cause termed right. That
Sovereign good, which is the eternal fruition of all good, being our last and
chiefest felicity, there is no desperate despiser of God and godliness living
which does not wish for. The difference between right and crooked minds, is in
the means which the one or the other do eschew or follow. Certain it is, that
al particular things which are naturally desired in the world, as food,
raiment, honor, wealth, pleasure, knowledge, they are subordinated in such
wise unto that future good which we look for in the world to come, that even
in them there lies a direct way tending unto this. Otherwise we must think
that God making promises of good things in this life, did seek to pervert men
and to lead them from their right minds. Where is then the obliquitie of the
mind of man? His mind is perverse, came, and crooked, not when it bends it
self unto any of these things, but when it bends so, that it swarveth either
to the right hand or to the left by excess or defect from that exact rule
whereby humane actions are measured. The rule to measure and judge them by is
the law of God. For this cause the Prophet does make so often and so earnest
suit, O direct me in the way of thy commandments: As long as J have respect to
thy Statuts I am sure not to tread amiss. Under the name of the Law we must
comprehend not only that which God has written in tables and leaves, but that
which nature also has engraven in the hearts of men. Else how shall those
heathen which never had books but heaven and earth to look upon be convicted
of perverseness? But the Gentiles which had not the law in books, had, says
the Apostle, the effect of the law written in their hearts.

Then seeing that the heart of man is not right exactly unless it be found in
all parts such that God examining and calling it unto account with all severity
of rigor be not able once to charge it with declining or suar ving aside,
(which absolute perfection when did God ever find in the sons of mere mortal
men?) Does it not follow that all flesh must of necessity fall down and
confess, we are not dust and ashes but worse, our minds from the highest to
the lowest are not right? If not right, then undoubtedly not capable of that
blessedness which we naturally seek, but subject unto that which we most
abhor, anguish, tribulation, death, woe, endless misery. For whatsoever
misseth the way of life, the issue thereof cannot be but perdition. By which
reason all being wrapped up in sin, and made thereby the children of death,
the minds of all men being plainly convicted not to be right: shall we think
that God has endued them with so many excellencies, mo not only then any, but
then all the creatures in the world besides, to leave them in such estate that
they had been happier if they had never been? Here comes necessarily in a
new way unto salvation, so that they which were in the other perverse, may in
this be found straight and righteous. That the way of nature, this the way of
grace. The end of that way salvation merited presupposing the righteousness
of men's works, their righteousness a natural ability to do them, that
ability the goodness of God which created them in such perfection. But the end
of this way salvation bestowed upon men as a gift presupposing not their
righteousness, but the forgiveness of their unrighteousness, justification;
their justification not their natural ability to do good, but their hearty
sorrow for not doing, and unfeigned belief in him for whose sake not doers are
accepted, which is their vocation; their vocation the election of God taking
them out from the number of lost children; their election a mediator in whom to
be elect; this mediation inexplicable mercy, his mercy their misery, for
whom he vouchsafed to make himself a mediator. The want of exact
distinguishing between these two ways, and observing what they have common,
what peculiar, has been the cause of the greatest part of that confusion
whereof christianity at this day labors. The lack of diligence in
searching, laying down, and invring men's minds with those hidden grounds of
reason, whereupon the least particulars in each of these are most firmly and
strongly builded; is the only reason of all those scruples and uncertainties
wherewith we are in such sort inta^gled that a number despair of ever
discerning what is right or wrong in any thing. But we will let this matter
rest whereinto we stepped to search out away how some minds may be and are
right truly even in the sight of God, though they be simply in themselves not
right.

Howbeit there is not only this difference between the just and impious, that
the mind of the one is right in the sight of God because his obliquitie is
imputed, the other perverse because his sin is unrepented of: but even as
lines that are drawn with a trembling hand, but yet to the point which they
should, are thought ragged and uneven, nevertheless direct in comparison of
them which run clean another way; so there is no incongruitie in tearming them
right minded men, who^ though God may charge with many things amiss, yet they
are not as those hideous and ougly monsters, in whom because there is nothing
but wilful opposition of mind against God, a more then tolerable deformity is
noted in them by saying that their minds are not right. The Angel of the
Church of Thyatira unto who^ the son of God sends this greeting, I know thy
works and thy love, and service, and faith: Notwithstanding I have a few things
against thee, was not as he unto whom St Peter, Thou have no fellowship in this
business, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. So that whereas the
orderly disposition of the mind of man should be this, perturbations and
sensual appetities all kept in aw by a moderate and sober will; will in all
things framed by reason; reason directed by the law of God and nature; this
Babyloman had his mind as it were turned vpside down. In him unreasonable
cecitie and blindness trampled al laws both of God and nature under feet;
wilfulness tyrannized over reason, and brutish sensuality over will. An
evident token that his outrage would work his overthrow and procure his
speedy ruin. The mother whereof was that which the Prophet in these words
signifies; His mind does swell.

Immoderate swelling, a token of very eminent breach, and of inevitable
destruction; Pride, a vice which cleaves so fast unto the hearts of men that
if we were to strippe our selves of all faults one by one, we should
undoubtedly find it the very last and hardest to put of. But J am not here to
touch the secret itching humor of vanity wherewith men are generally touched.
It was a thing more then meanly inordinat wherewith the Babylonian did swell.
Which that we may both the better conceive, and the more easily reap profit
by the nature of this vice which sett^th the whole world out of course, and
has put so many even of the wisest besides themselves, is first of all to be
inquired into; secondly the dangers to be discovered, which it draws
inevitable after it, being not cured; and last of all the ways to cure it.

Whether we look upon the gifts of nature, or of grace, or whatsoever is in
the world admired as a part of man's excellency, adorning his body, beutifying
his mind, or externally any way commending him in the account and opinion of
men, there is in every kind somewhat possible which no man has, and somewhat
had which few men can attain unto. By occasion whereof there grows
disparagement necessarily; and by occasion of disparagement, pride through men's
ignorance. First therefore although men be not proud of any thing which is not
at the least in opinion good, yet every good thing they are not proud of, but
only of that which neither is common unto many, and being desired of all,
causes them which have it to be honored above the rest. Now there is no man so
void of brain, as to suppose that pride consists in the bare possession of
such things; for then to have virtue were a vice, and they should be the
happiest men who are most wretched, because they have least of that which they
would have. And though in speech we do intimate a kind of vanity to be in
them of whom we say, They are wise me^ and they know it, yet this does not
prove that everywise man is proud which does not think himself to be
blockish. What we may have and know that we have it without offense, do we
then make offensive when we take joy and delight in having it? What difference
between men enriched with all abundance of earthly and heavenly blessings, and
Idols gorgeously attired, but this, the one takes pleasure in that which they
have, the other none? If we may be possessed with beauty, strength, riches,
power, knowledge, if we may be privy what we are every way, if glad and
joyful for our own welfare and in all this remain unblameable, nevertheless
some there are who granting thus much, doubt whether it may stand with
humility to except those testimonies of praise and commendation, those titles,
rooms, and other honors which the world yields as acknowledgements of some
men's excellency above others. For in as much as Christ has said unto those
that are his; The kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear
rule over them are called gracious Lords: Be ye not so; The Anabaptist
hereupon urges equality amongst Christians, as if all exercise of authority
were nothing else but heathenish pride. Our Lord and savior had no such
meaning. But his Disciples feeding the^ selves with a vain imagination for the
time, that the Messiah of the world should in Jerusalem erect his thron, and
exercise dominion with great pomp and outward stateliness, advanced in honor
and terrene power above all the Princes of the earth, began to think how with
their Lords condition, their own would also rise: that having left and
forsaken all to follow him, their place about him should not be mean: and
because they were many it troubled them much, which of the should be the
greatest man. When sure was made for two by name, that of them one might sit at
his right hand, and the other at his left, the rest began to stomach, each
taking it grievously that any should have what all did affect. Their Lord and
Master to correct this humor turns aside their cogitations from these vain
and fansifull conceits, giving them plainly to understand that they did but
deceive themselves. His coming was not to purchase an earthly but to bestow
an heavenly kingdom, wherein they (if any) shall be greatest whom unfeigned
humility makes in this world lowest, and least amongst others: Ye are they
which have continued with me in my temptations, therefore I leave unto you a
kingdom as my father has appointed me, that ye may eat and drink at my
table in my kingdom, Luke 22, 28.
and sit on seats, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. But my kingdom is
no such kingdom as ye dream of. And therefore these hungry ambitious
contentions are seemlier in heathens the^ in you. Wherefore from Christ's intent
and purpose nothing further removed then dislike of distinctions in titles and
callings annexed for orders sake unto authority, whether it be Ecclesiastical
or civil. And when we have examined thoroughly what the nature of this vice is
no man knowing it, can he so simple as not to see an ugly: shape thereof
apparent many times in rejecting honors offered, then in the very exacting of
them at the hands of men. For as Judas his care for the poor was mere
covetousness, and that franckhearted wastfulnesse spoken of in the Gospel,
thrift; so there is no doubt but that going in rags may be pride, and
thrones be challenged with unfeigned humility.

We must go further therefore and enter somewhat deeper before we can come to
the closet wherein this poison lies. There is in the heart of every proud man,
first an error of understanding; a vain opinion where by he thinks his own
excellency, and by reason thereof, his worthiness of estimation, regard, and
honor, to be greater then in truth it is. This makes him in all his
affections accordingly to raise up himself, and by his inward affections his
outward acts are fashioned. Which if you list to have exemplified, you may
either by calling to mind things spoken of them whom God himself has in
Scripture specially noted with this fault, or by presenting to your secret
cogitations that which you daily behold in the odious lives and manners of high
minded men. It were too long to gather together so plentiful an harvest of
examples in this kind as the sacred Scripture affords. That which we drink
in at our ears does not so percingly enter, as that which the mind does
conceive by sight. Is there any thing written concerning the Assyrian Monarch
in the 10. of Esaias, of his swelling mind, his hawtie looks, his great and
presumptuous vaunts; By the power of mine own hand I have done all things, and
by mine own wisdom I have subdued the world? Any thing concerning the dames
of Sion in the third of the Prophet Esaias, of their stretched out necks, their
immodesteies, their pageantlike, stately, and pompous gate? Any thing
concerning the practices of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; of their impatience to
live in subjection, their mutinies, repining at lawful authority, their
grudging against their superiors Ecclesiastical and Civil? Any thing
concerning pride in any sort or sect which the present face of the world does
not as in a glass represent to the view of all men's beholding? So that if
books, both profane and holy, were all lost, as long as the manners of men
retain the state they are in: for him which observes how that when men have
once conceaved an overweaning of themselves it makes them in all their
affections to swell how deadly their hatred, how heavy their displeasunre, how
unappeasable their indignation and wrath is above other men's, in what manner
they compose themselves to be as Heteroclites without the compass of all such
rules as common sort are mesured by; how the oaths which religious hearts do
tremble at they affect as principal graces of speech; what felicity they take
to see the enormitie of their crimes above the reach of laws and punishments;
how much it delights them when they are able to appale with the cloudinesse
of their look; how far they exceed the terms wherewith man's nature should
be limited; how high they bear their heads over others, how they browbeat
al men which do not receive their sentences as oracles with marvelous applause
and approbation; how they look upon no man but with an indirect countenance,
nor hear any thing saving their own praise with patience, nor speak without
scornefulnesse and disdain; how they use their servants as if they were
beasts, their inferiors as servants, their equals as inferiors, and as for
superiors acknowledge none; how they admire themselves as venerable, puissant,
wise, circumspect, provident, every way great, taking all men besides
themselves for ciphers, poor, inglorious, silly creatures, needless burdens
of the earth, of scourings nothing: in a word for him which marketh how
irregular and exorbitant they are in all things, it can be no hard thing hereby
to gather, that pride is nothing but an inordinate elation of the mind
proceeding from a false conceit of men's excellency in things honored, which
accordingly frames also their deeds and behavior unless there be cunning to
conceal it. For a foul scarre may be covered with a fair cloth. And as
proud as Lucifer, may be in outward appearance lowly.

No man expects grapes of thistles: nor from a thing of so bad a nature can
other then suitable fruits be looked for, What harm soever in private families
there grows by disobedience of children, stubbornes of servants,
vntractablenesse in the^, who, although they otherwise may rule, yet should in
consideration of the imparitie of their sex be also subject; whatsoever by
strife amongst me^ combined in the fellowship of greater societies, by tyranny
of potentates, ambition of nobles, rebellion of subjects in civil states; by
heresies, schisms, divisions in the Church; naming pride we name the mother
which brought them forth, and the only nurse that feeds them. Give me the
hearts of all men humbled, and what is there that can overthrew or disturb the
peace of the world? Wherein many things are the cause of much evil, but pride
of all.

To declaime of the swarms of evils issuing, out of pride is an easy labor.
I rather wish that I could exactly prescribe and persuade effectually the
remedies whereby a so are so grievous might be cured, and the means how the
pride of swelling minds might be taken down. Whereunto so much we have
already gained, that the evidence of the cause which breeds it points
directly unto the likeliest and fittest helps to take it away: diseases that
come of fullness, emptiness must remove. Pride is not cured, but by abating
the error which causes the mind to swell. Then seeing that they swel by
misconceit of their own excellency; for this cause al which tend to the beating
down of their pride, whether it be advertiseme^t from men, or from God himself
chastisment, it then makes the^ cease to be proud, when it causes them to see
their error in overseeing the thing they were proud of. At this mark Job in
his apology unto his eloquent friends aims. For perceiving how much they
delighted to hear themselves talk, as if they had given their poor afflicted
familiar a schooling of marvelous deep and rare instruction, as if they had
taught him more then all the world besides could acquaint him with, his answer
was to this effect. Ye swell as though ye had conceived some greater matter,
but as for that which ye are delivered of who knows it not? Is any man
ignorant of these things? At the same mark the blessed Apostle drives; ye
abound in all things, ye are rich, ye reign, and would to Christ we did
reign with you. But boast not. For what have ye or are ye of your selves? To
this mark all those humble confessions are referred, which have been always
frequent in the mouths of Saints truly wading in the trial of themselves: as
that of the Prophet, we are nothing but soarenesse and festered corruption, our
very light is darkness and our righteousness it self unrighteousness; that of
Gregory, Let no man ever put confidence in his own deserts, Sordet in
conspectu indicis, quod fulget in conspectu operantis, In the fight of that
dreadful Judge it is noisome, which in the dooers judgment makes a beautiful
show; That of Anselm, I adore thee, I bless thee Lord God of heaven and
redeemer of the world with all the power, ability, and strength of my heart
and soul, for thy goodness so vnmeasurably extended, not in regard of my
merits whereunto only torments were due, but of thy mere vnprocured benignity.
If these fathers should be raised again from the dust and have the books laid
open before them wherein such sentences are found as this Works no other then
the value, desert, price, and worth of the joys of the kingdom of heaven;
Annot. ^he^ in 1. Cor. 3.
Heaven in relation to our works as the very stipend which the hired labourer
covenanteth to have of him whose works he does, a thing equally and tustly
answering unto the time and weight of his travailes rather then to a voluntary
or bountiful gift. If I say those reverend fore-rehearsed fathers whose books
are so full of sentences witnessing their Christian humility should be raised
from the dead, and behold with their eyes such things written; would they not
plainly pronounce of the authors of such writ, that they were fuller of
Lucifer then of Christ, that they were proud-hearted men, and carried more
swelling minds then sincerely and feelingly known Christianity can tolerate?

But as unruly children with whom wholesome admonition prevails little are
notwithstanding brought to fear that ever after which they have once well
smarted for: so the mind which falls not with instruction, yet under the rod
of divine chastisement cease to swell. If therefore the Prophet David
instructed by good experience have acknowledged, Lord I was even at the point
of clean forgetting my self, and so straying from my right mind: but thy rod
has been my reformer, it has been good for me even as much as my foul is
worth that I have been with sorrow troubled: if the blessed Apostle did need
the corrosiue of sharp and bitter strokes least his heart should swell with
too great abundance of heavenly revelations, surely upon us whatsoever God in
this world does, or shall inflict, it cannot seem more then our pride does
exact, not only by way of revenge, but of remedy. So hard it is to cure a fore
of such quality as pride is, in as much as that which rooteth out other vices,
causes this, and (which is even above all conceit) if we were clean from all
spot and blemish both of other faults and of pride, the fall of Angels does
make it almost a question whether we might not need a preservatiue still least
we should happily wax proud that we are not proud. What is virtue but a
medicine, and vice but a wound? Yet we have so often deeply wounded our selves
with medicines, that God has been feign to make wounds medicinable, to cure
by vice where virtue has stricken, to suffer the just man to fall that being
raised he may be taught what power it was which vpheld him standing. I am not
afraid to affirm it boldly with S. Augustine, that men puffed up through a
proud opinion of their own sanctity and holiness receive a benefit at the
hands of God and are assisted with his grace, when with his grace they are not
assisted but permitted and that greevously to transgress, whereby as they were
in over great liking of themselus supplanted, so the dislike of that which did
supplant them may establish them afterward the surer. Ask the very soul of
Peter, and it shall undoubtedly make you it self this answer; my eger
protestations made in the glory of my ghostly strength I am ashamed of, but
those christ all tears wherewith my sin and weakness was bewailed have
procured my endless joy, my strength has been my ruin, and my fall my stay.

FINIS.

