OF THE LAWS of Ecclesiastical Polity, Eight books.

By Richard Hooker.

.JESUS.CHRISTVS.
CONTERET CAPVT TVV^. GEN: 3

ERO MORSVS INFERN. TVVS. OSE. 13

CONFIDITE VICI MV^DV^. IOA. 16.

VBI TVA MORS VICTORIA 1 COR: 15.



Printed at London by John Windet, dwelling at the sign of the Crosse-keyes
near Paul's wharffe, and are thereto be sold. 1604.

TO THE READER.
THis unhappy controversy, about the received ceremonies and discipline of
the Church of England, which has so long time withdrawn so many of her
Ministers from their principal work, and employed their studies in
contentious oppositions: has by the unnatural growth and dangerous fruits
thereof, made known to the world, that it never received blessing from the
father of peace. For whose experience does not find, what confusion of order,
and breach of the sacred bond of love has sprung from this dissension; how it
has rent the body of the Church into diverse parts, and divided her people
into diverse Sects; how it has taught the sheep to despise their pastors, and
alienated the Pastors from the love of their flocks: how it has strengthened
the irreligious in their impieties, and has raised the hopes of the
sacrilegious deuourers of the remains of Christ's patrimony; and given way to
the common adversary of Gods truth and our prosperity, to grow great in our
land without resistance; who sees not how it has distracted the minds of the
multitude, and shaken their faith, and scandalized their weakeness, and has
generally killed the very heart of true piety and religious devotion, by
changing our zeal toward Christ's glory, into the fire of envy and malice,
and hart-burning, and Zeal to every man's private cause? This is the sum of
all the gains which the tedious contentions of so many years have brought in,
by the ruin of Christ's kingdom, the increase of Satan's, partly in
superstition, and partly in impiety. So much better were it in these our
dwellings of peace, to endure any inconvenience whatsoever in the outward
frame, then in desire of alteration, thus to set the whole house on fire. Which
moved the religious heart of this learned writer, in Zeal of Gods truth, and in
compassion to his Church, the mother of us all, which gave us both the first
breath of spiritual life, and from her breasts has fed us unto this
whatsoever measure of growth we have in Christ, to stand up and take upon him a
general defense both of her self, and of her established laws; and by force
of demonstration, so far as the nature of the present matter could bear, to
make known to the world, and these oppugners of her, that all those bitter
accusations laid to her charge, are not the faults of her laws and orders,
but either their own mistakes in the misunderstanding, or the abuses of men in
the ill execution of them. A work subject to manifold reprehensions and
oppositions, and not suitable to his soft and mild disposition, desirous of a
quiet private life, wherein he might bring forth the fruits of peace in peace.
But the love of God and of his country, whose greatest danger grew from this
division, made his heart hot within him, and at length the fire kindled, and
amongst many other most reverend and learned men, he also presumed to speak
with his pen. And the rather, because he saw that none of these ordinary
objections of partialities could eleuate the authority of his writing, who
always affected a private state, and neither enjoyed nor expected any the
least dignity in our Church. What admirable height of learning, and depth of
judgment dwelled within the lowly mind of this true humble man, great in all
wise men's eyes, except his own; with what gravity and majesty of speech his
tongue and pen uttered heavenly mysteries, whose eyes in the humility of his
heart were always cast down to the ground* how all things that proceeded from
him were breathed as from the spirit of love, as if he like the bird of the
holy Ghost, the Dove, had wanted gall; let them that knew him not in his
person, judge by the these living Images of his soul, his writings. For out of
these, even those who otherwise agree not with him in opinion, do afford him
the testimony of a mild and a loving spirit: and of his learning what greater
proof can we have then this, that his writings are most admired by those who
themselves do most excel in judicious learning, and by them the more often
they are read, the more highly they are extolled and desired. Which is the
cause of this second edition of his former books, and that without any
addition or diminution whatsoever. For who will put a pencile to such a work,
from which such a workman has taken his? There is a purpose of setting forth
the three last books also, their fathers Posthumi. For as in the great
declining of his body, spent out with study, it was his ordinary petition to
almighty God, that if he might live to see the finishing of these books, then
Lord let thy servant depart in peace (to use his own words) so it pleased God
to grant him his desire. For he lived till he saw them perfected; and though
like Rachel he dyed as it were in the travel of them, and hastened death upon
himself, by hastening to give them life: yet he held out to behold with his
eyes these partus ingenii, these Beniamins, sons of his right hand, though to
him they were Benonies, sons of pain and sorrow. But some evil disposed
minds, whether of malice, or covetousness, or wicked blind Zeal, it is
uncertain, as if they had been Egyptian Mid-wiues, as soon as they were
borne, and their father dead, smothered them, and by conueying away the perfect
Copies, left unto us nothing but certain old imperfect and mangled draughts,
dismembered into pieces, and scattered like Medeas Abyrtus, no favor, no grace,
not the shadows of themselves almost remaining in them. Had the father lived
to see them brought forth thus defaced, he might rightfully have named them
Benonies, the sons of sorrow. But seeing the importunities of many great and
worthy persons will not suffer them quietly to dye and to be buried, it is
intended that they shall see them as they are. The learned and judicious eye
will yet perhaps delight it self in beholding the goodly lineaments of their
well set bodies, and in finding out some shadows and resemblances of their
fathers face. God grant that as they were with their brethren dedicated to the
Church for messengers of peace: so in the strength of that little breath of
life that remains in them, they may prosper in their work; and by satisfying
the doubts of such as are willing to learn, may help to give an end to the
calamities of these our civil wars.

ST
A Preface. To them that seek (as they term it) the reformation of Laws and
orders Ecclesiastical, in the Church of ENGLAND.
THough for no other cause, The cause and occasion of handling these things:
and what might be wished in them for whose sakes so much pain is taken.
yet for this; that posterity may know we have not loosely through silence
permitted things to pass away as in a dream, there shall be for men's
information extant thus much concerning the present state of the Church of God
established amongst us, and their careful endeavor which would have vpheld the
same. At your hands beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (for in him
the love which we bear unto all that would but seem to be borne of him, it is
not the sea of your gall and bitterness that shall ever drown) I have no great
cause to look for other then the selfsame portion and lot, which your manner
has been hitherto to lay on them that concur not in opinion and sentence with
you. But our hope is, that the God of peace shall (notwithstanding man's nature
too impatient of contumelious maledictio^) enable us quietly and eue^ gladly to
suffer al things, for that work sake which we covet to perform. The wonderful
zeal and fervor wherewith ye have withstood the received orders of this
Church, was the first thing which caused me to enter into consideration,
whether (as all your published books and writings peremptorily maintain) every
Christian man fearing God, stand bound to join with you for the furtherance of
that which ye term the Lords Discipline. Wherein I must plainly confess unto
you, that before I examined your sundry declarations in that behalf, it could
not settle in my head to think, but that undoubtedly such numbers of otherwise
right well affected and most religiously inclined minds, had some marvelous
reasonable inducementes which led the^ with so great earnestnes that way. But
when once, as near as my slender ability would serve, I had with travel and
care performed that part of the Apostles advise and counsel in such cases,
whereby he wills to try al things; and was come at the length so far, that
there remained only the other clause to be satisfied, wherein he concludes
that what good is must be held: there was in my poor understanding no
remedy, but to set down this as my final resolute persuasion; Surely the
present form of Church government which the laws of this land have
established, is such, as no law of God, nor reason of man has hitherto been
alleged, of force sufficient to prove they do ill, who to the uttermost of
their power withstand the alteration thereof: Contrariwise, The other which
instead of it we are required to accept, is only by error and misconceipt named
the ordinance of Jesus Christ, no one proof as yet brought forth, whereby it
may clearly appear to be so in very deed. The explication of which two
things I have here thought good to offer into your own hands: heartily
beseeching you even by the meekness of Jesus Christ, whom I trust ye love;
that, as ye tender the peace and quietness of this Church, if there be in you
that gracious humility which has ever been the crown and glory of a
christianly disposed mind, if your own souls, hearts and consciences, (the
sound integrity whereof can but hardly stand with the refusal of truth in
personal respects) be, as I doubt not but they are, things most dear and
precious unto you, Let not the faith which ye have in our Lord Jesus Christ, be
blemished with partialities, Ia. 2.1.
regard not who it is which speaks, but weigh only what is spoken. Think
not that ye read the words of one, who bends himself as an adversary
against the truth which ye have already embraced; but the words of one, who
desires even to embrace together with you the self same truth, if it be the
truth; and for that cause (for no other God he knows) has undertaken the
burdensome labor of this painful kind of conference. For the plainer
access whereunto, let it be lawful for me to rip up to the very bottom how
and by whom your Discipline was planted, at such time as this age we live in
began to make first trial thereof.

2. A founder it had, whom, for mine own part, The first establishment of new
discipline by M. Caluins industry in the Church of Geneua: and the beginning of
strife about it amongst our selves.
I think incomparably the wisest man that ever the french Church did enjoy,
since the hour it enjoyed him. His bringing up was in the study of the Civil
Law. Divine knowledge he gathered not by hearing or reading so much, as by
teaching others. For though thousands were debtors to him, as touching
knowledge in that kind; yet he to none but only to God, the author of that
most blessed fountain the book of life, and of the admirable dexterity of
wit, together with the helps of other learning which were his guides: till
being occasioned to leave France, he fell at the length upon Geneua: Which
City, the Bishop and Clergy thereof had a little before (as some do
affirm) forsaken, being of likelihood frighted with the peoples sudden attempt
for abolishment of popish religion: the event of which enterprise they thought
it not safe for themselves to wait for in that place. At the coming of Calvin
thither, the form of their civil regiment was popular, as it continues at
this day: neither King, nor Duke, nor Noble man of any authority or power over
them, but officers chosen by the people yearly out of themselves, to order all
things with public consent. For spiritual government, they had no laws at
all agreed upon, but did what the pastors of their souls by persuasion could
win them unto. Calvin being admitted one of their Preachers and a divinity
Reader amongst them, considered how dangerous it was that the whole estate of
that Church should hang still on so slender a thread, as the liking of an
ignorant multitude is, if it have power to change whatsoever it self lists.
Wherefore taking unto him two of the other ministers for more countenance of
the action, (albeit the rest were all against it) they moved, and in the end
persuaded with much ado, the people to bind themselves by solemn oath, first
never to admit the Papacy amongst them again; and secondly, to live in
obedience unto such orders concerning the exercise of their religion, and the
form of their ecclesiastical government, as those their true and faithful
Ministers of Gods word had agreeablie to Scripture set down for that end and
purpose. When these things began to be put in ure, the people also (what
causes moving them thereunto, themselves best know) began to repent them of
that they had done, and irefully to champe upon the bit they had taken into
their mouths, the rather for that they grew by means of this innovation into
dislike with some Churches near about them, the benefit of whose good
friendship their state could not well lack. It was the manner of those times
(whether through men's desire to enjoy alone the glory of their own
enterprises, or else because the quickness of their occasions required present
dispatch,) so it was, that every particular Church did that within it self,
which some few of their own thought good, by whom the rest were all
directed. Such number of Churches the^ being, though free within themselves,
yet small, common conference before hand might have eased them of much
aftertrouble. But a greater inconvenience it bred, that every later endeavored
to be certain degrees more removed from conformity with the Church of Rome,
then the rest before had been: whereupon grew marvelous great dissimilitudes,
and by reason thereof, iealousies, hartburnings, iarres and discords amongst
them. Which notwithstanding might have easily been prevented, if the orders
which each Church did think fit and convenient for it self, had not so
peremptorily been established under that high commanding form, which tendered
them unto the people, as things everlastingly required by the law of that Lord
of Lords, against whose statutes there is no exception to be taken. For by this
mean it came to pass, that one Church could not but accuse and condemn
another of disobedience to the will of Christ, in those things where manifest
difference was between them: whereas the selfsame orders allowed, but yet
established in more wary and suspense manner, as being to stand in force till
God should give the opportunity of some general conference what might be best
for every of them afterward to do; this I say had both prevented all occasion
of just dislik^ which others might take, and reserved a greater liberty unto
the authors themselves of entering into farther consultatio^ afterward. Which
though never so necessary they could not easily now admit, without some fear
of derogation from their credit: and therefore that which once they had done,
they became for ever after resolute to maintain. Calvin therefore and the other
two his associats stiffely refusing to administer the holy Communion to such as
would not quietly without contradiction and murmur submit themselves unto the
orders which their solemn oath had bound them to obey, were in that quarrel
banished the town. A few years after (such was the leuitie of that people)
the places of one or two of their Ministers being fallen void, they were not
before so willing to be rid of their learned Pastor, as now importunate to
obtain him again from them who had given him entertainment, and which were
loath to part with him, had not irresistable earnestnes been used. One of the
town ministers that saw in what manner the people were bent for the
reuocation of Calvin, gave him notize of their affection in this sort. The
Senate of two hundred being assembled, Epist. Call. 24.
they all crave Calvin. The next day a general convocation. They cry in like
sort again all: We will have Calvin that good and learned man Christ's
Minister. This, says he, when I understood I could not choose but praise God,
nor was I able to judge otherwise, then that this was the Lords doing, Luc.
20.17.
and that it was marvelous in our eyes, and That the stone which the builders
refused, was now made the head of the corner. The other two whom they had
thrown out (together with Calvin) they were content should enjoy their exile.
Many causes might lead them to be more desirous of him. First, his yielding
unto them in one thing, might happily put them in hope, that time would breed
the like easines of condescending further unto them. For in his absence he had
persuaded them, with whom he was able to prevail, that albeit himself did
better like of common bread to be used in the Eucharist, yet the other they
rather should accept, then cause any trouble in the Church about it. Again,
they saw that the name of Calvin waxed every day greater abroad, and that
together with his fame their infamy was spread, who had so rashly and
childishly eiected him. Besides it was not unlikely but that his credit in the
world, might many ways stand the poor town in great stead: as the truth is,
their ministers foreign estimation hitherto has been the best stake in their
hedge. But whatsoever secret respects were likely to move them, for contenting
of their minds Calvin returned (as it had been an other Tully) to his old
home. He ripely considered how gross a thing it were for men of his quality,
wise and grave men, to live with such a multitude, and to be tenants at will
under them, as their ministers, both himself and others, had been. For the
remedy of which inconvenience, he gave them plainly to understand, that if
he did become their teacher again, they must be content to admit a complet
form of discipline, which both they and also their pastors should now be
solemnly sworn to observe for ever after. Of which discipline the maine and
principal parts were these: A standing ecclesiastical Court to be
established: perpetual Judges in that Court to be their ministers; others of
the people annually chosen (twice so many in number as they) to be judges
together with them in the same Court: these two sorts to have the care of all
men's manners, power of determining all kind of Ecclesiastical causes, and
authority to convent, to control, to punish, as far as with
excommunication, whomsoever they should think worthy, none either small or
great excepted, This devise I see not how the wisest at that time living could
have bettered, if we duly consider what the present estate of Geneua did then
require. For their Bishop and his Clergy being (as it is said) departed from
them by moonelight, or howsoever, being departed; to choose in his room any
other Bishop, had been a thing altogether impossible. And for their ministers
to seek that themselves alone might have coerciue power over the whole Church,
would perhaps have been hardly construed at that time. But when so frank an
offer was made, that for every one minister there should be two of the people
to sit and give voice in the Ecclesiastical Consistory, what inconvenience
could they easily find which themselves might not be able always to remedy?
Howbeit (as evermore the simpler sort are, even when they see no apparent
cause, jealous notwithstanding over the secret intents and purposes of wiser
men) this proposition of his did somewhat trouble them. Of the Ministers
themselves which had stayed behind in the City when Calvin was gone, some,
upon knowledge of the peoples earnest intent to recall him to his place again,
had beforehand written their letters of submission, and assured him of their
allegiance for ever after, if it should like him to harken unto that public
suite. But yet misdoubting what might happen, if this discipline did go
forward; they objected against it the example of other reformed Churches,
living quietly and orderly without it. Some of chiefest place and countenance
amongst the laity professed with greater stomach their judgments, that such
a discipline was little better then popish tyranny disguised and tendered unto
them under a new form. This sort, it may be, had some fear that the filling
up of the seats in the Consistory, with so great a number of lay men, was but
to please the minds of the people, to the end they might think their own
swaye somewhat; but when things came to trial of practice, their Pastors
learning would be at all times of force to ouerperswade simple men, who
knowing the time of their own Presidentship to be but short, would always
stand in fear of their ministers perpetual authority: and among the
ministers themselves, one being so far in estimation above the rest, the
voices of the rest were likely to be given for the most part respectively with
a kind of secret dependencie and awe: so that in show a marvelous
indifferently composed Senate Ecclesiastical was to govern, but in effect one
only man should, as the Spirit and soul of the residue, do all in all. But
what did these vain surmises boot? Brought they were now to so straight an
issue, that of two things they must choose one; namely, whether they would to
their endless disgrace, with ridiculous lightness, dismiss him, whose
restitution they had in so impotent manner desired: or else condescende unto
that demand, wherein he was resolute either to have it, or to leave them.
They thought it better to be somewhat hardly yoked at home, then for ever
abroad discredited. Wherefore in the end those orders were on all sides
assented unto: An. D* 1541.
with no less alacrity of mind, then Cities unable to hold out longer are
wont to show, when they take conditions such as it likes him to offer them
which has them in the narrow streightes of advantage. Not many years were
ouerpassed, before these twice sworn men adventured to give their last and
hotest assault to the fortress of the same discipline, childishly granting by
common consent of their whole Senate, and that under their town seal, a
relaxation to one Bertelier whom the Eldership had excommunicated; further also
decreeing, with strange absurdity, that to the same Senate it should belong to
give final judgment in matter of excommunication, and to absolve whom it
pleased them; clean contrary to their own former deeds and oaths. The report
of which decree being forth with brought unto Calvin; Before (says he) this
decree take place, either my blood or banishment shall sign it. Again two
days before the Communion should be celebrated, his speech was publicly to
like effect, Kill me if ever this hand do reach forth the things that are holy,
to the^ whom THE CHVRCH has judged despisers. Whereupon, for fear of tumult,
the forenamed Bertelier was by his friends advised for that time not to use the
liberty granted him by the Senate, nor to present himself in the Church, till
they saw somewhat further what would ensue. After the Communion quietly
ministered, and some likelihood of peaceable ending these troubles without any
more ado, that very day in the afternoon, besides all men's expectation,
concluding his ordinary sermon, he tells them, that because he neither had
learned nor taught to strive with such as are in authority, therefore (says
he) the case so standing as now it does, let me use these words of the Apostle
unto you, I commend you unto God and the word of his grace, and so bad them
heartily all A dew. It sometimes comes to pass, that the readiest way which a
wise man has to conquer, is to fly. This voluntary and unexpected mention of
sudden departure, caused presently the Senate (for according to their woonted
manner they still continued only constant in inconstancy) to gather themselves
together, and for a time to suspend their own decree, leaving things to proceed
as before, till they had heard the judgment of four Heluetian Cities
concerning the matter which was in strife. This to have done at the first
before they gave asse^t unto any order, had showed some wit and discretion in
the^: but now to do it, was as much as to say in effect, that they would play
their parts on stage. Calvin therefore dispatcheth with all expedition his
letters unto some principal pastor in every of those cities, craving earnestly
at their hands, to respect this cause as a thing whereupon the whole state of
religion and piety in that church did so much depend, yt God and all good men
were now ineuitably certain to be trampled under foot, unless those four
Cities by their good means might be brought to give sentence with the ministers
of Geneua, when the cause should be brought before them: yea so to give it,
that two things it might effectually contain; the one an absolute approbation
of the discipline of Geneua, as consonant unto the word of God, without any
cautions, qualifications, ifs or ands; the other an earnest admonition not to
innouate or change the same. His vehement request herein as touching both
points was satisfied. For albeit the said Heluetian Churches did never as yet
observe that discipline, Ep. 166.
nevertheless the Senate of Geneua having required their judgment concerning
these three questions: First, after what manner, by Gods commandment,
according to the Scripture and unspotted religion, excommunication is to be
exercised: Secondly, whether it may not be exercised some other way then by the
Consistory: Thirdly, what the use of their Churches was to do in this case:
answer was returned from the said Churches, That they had heard already of
those consistoriall laws, and did acknowledge them to be godly ordinances
drawing toward the prescript of the word of God, for which cause that they did
not think it good for the Church of Geneua by innovation to change the same,
but rather to keep them as they were. Which answer, although not aunswering
unto the former demands, but respecting what Master Calvin had judged
requisite for them to answer, was notwithstanding accepted without any
further reply: in as much as they plainly saw, that when stomach does strive
with wit, the match is not equal. And so the heat of their former contentions
began to flake. The present inhabitants of Geneua, J hope, will not take it in
evil part, that the faltinesse of their people heretofore, is by us so far
forth laid open, as their own learned guides and Pastors have thought
necessary to discover it unto the world. For out of their books and writings
it is that I have collected this whole narration, to the end it might thereby
appear in what sort amongst them that discipline was planted, for which so
much contention is raised amongst our selves. The reasons which moved Calvin
herein to be so earnest, Quod eam vrbem videret omnino his frenis indigere.
was, as Beza himself testifies, for that he saw how needful these bridles
were to be put in the jaws of that City. That which by wisdom he saw to be
requisite for that people, was by as great wisdom compassed. But wise men are
men, and the truth is truth. That which Calvin did for establishment of his
discipline, seems more commendable, then yt which he taught for the
countenancing of it established. Nature works in us all a love to our own
counsels. The contradiction of others is a fan to inflame that love. Our love
set on fire to maintain that which once we have done, sharpeneth the wit to
dispute, to argue, and by all means to reason for it. Wherefore a marvel it
were if a man of so great capacity, having such incitements to make him
desirous of all kind of furtherances unto his cause, could epsy in the whole
Scripture of God nothing which might breed at the least a probable opinion of
likelihood, that divine authority it self was the same way somewhat
inclinable. And all which the wit even of Calvin was able from thence to draw,
by sifting the very utmost sentence and syllable, is no more then that certain
speeches there are which to him did seem to intimate, that all Christian
Churches ought to have their Elderships endued with power of excommunication,
and that a part of those Elderships every where should be chosen out from
amongst the laity after that form which himself had framed Geneua unto. But
what argument are ye able to show, whereby it was ever proved by Calvin, that
any one sentence of Scripture does necessarily enforce these things, or the
rest wherein your opinion concurreth with his against the orders of your own
Church? We should be injurious unto virtue it self, if we did derogate from
them whom their industry has made great. Two things of principal moment
there are which have deservedly procured him honor throughout the world: the
one his exceeding pains in composing the Institutions of Christian Religion;
the other his no less industrious travails for exposition of holy Scripture
according unto the same institutions. In which two things who soever they were
that after him bestowed their labor; he gained the advantage of prejudice
against them, if they gain said; and of glory above them, if they consented.
His writings published after the question about that discipline was once
begun, omit not any the least occasion of extolling the use and singular
necessity thereof. Of what account the Master of sentences was in the Church
of Rome, the same and more amongst the Preachers of reformed Churches Calvin
had purchased: so that the perfectest divines were judged they, which were
skilfullest in Caluins writings. His books almost the very Canon to judge both
doctrine and discipline by French Churches, both under others abroad, and at
home in their own Country, all cast according unto that mould which Calvin
had made. The Church of Scotland in erecting the fabric of their reformation
took the self same pattern. Till at length the discipline, which was at the
first so weak, that without the staff of their approbation, who were not
subject unto it themselves, it had not brought others under subjection; began
now to challenge universal obedience, and to enter into open conflict with
those very Churches, which in desperate extremity had been relieuers of it. To
one of those Churches which lived in most peaceable sort, and abounded as well
with men for their learning in other professions singular, as also with divines
whose equals were not elsewhere to be found; a Church ordered by Gualters
discipline, and not by that which Geneua adoreth: unto this Church, the Church
of Heidelberge, there comes one who craving leave to dispute publicly,
defends with open disdain of their government, that To a Minister with his
Eldership power is given by the law of God to excommunicate whomsoever, yea
even kings and princes themselves. Here were the seeds sown of that
controversy which sprang up between Beza and Erastus about the matter of
excommunication, whether there ought to be in all Churches an Eldership having
power to excommunicate, and a part of that Eldership to be of necessity
certain chosen out from amongst the laity for that purpose. In which
disputation they have, as to me it seems, divided very equally the truth
between them; Beza most truly maintaining the necessity of excommunication;
Erastus as truly the nonnecessitie of layelders to be ministers thereof.
Amongst our selves, there was in King Edwards days some question moved by
reason of a few men's scrupulositie touching certain things. And beyond Seas,
of them which fled in the days of Queen Mary, some contenting themselves
abroad with the use of their own Service book at home authorized before their
departure out of the Realm; others liking better the Common prayer book of
the Church of Geneua translated; those smaller contentions before begun were by
this mean somewhat increased. Under the happy reign of her Majesty which now
is, the greatest matter a while contended for was the wearing of the Cap and
Surplesse, till there came Admonitions directed unto the high Court of
Parliament, by men who concealing their names thought it glory enough to
discover their minds and affections, which now were universally bent even
against all the orders and laws wherein this Church is found uncomfortable to
the platform of Geneua. Concerning the defendor of which admonitions, all that
I mean to say is but this: There will come a time when three words uttered
with charity and meekness, shall receive a far more blessed reward, then
three thousand volumes written with disdainefull sharpnes of wit. But the manner
of men's writing must not alienate our hearts from the truth, if it appear they
have the truth: as the followers of the same defendor do think he has, and in
that persuasion they follow him, no otherwise then himself does Calvin, Beza,
and others, with the like persuasion that they in this cause had the truth. We
being as fully persuaded otherwise, By what means so many of the people are
trained into the liking of that discipline.
it rests that some kind of trial be used to find out which part is in error.

3 The first mean whereby nature teaches men to judge good from evil as well
in laws as in other things, is the force of their own discretion. Hereunto
therefore Saint Paul refers oftentimes his own speech to be considered of
by them that heard him, 1. Cor. 10, 13.
I speak as to them which have understanding, judge ye what I say. Again
afterward, 1. Cor. 1^, 13, Luc. 12.56*57.
Judge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray uncovered? The exercise
of this kind of judgment our Savior requires in the Jews. In them of Berea
the Scripture commends it. Finally whatsoever we do, Act,. 17.11.
if our own secret judgment consent nor unto it as fit and good to be done;
the doing of it to us is sin, although the thing it self be allowable. Saint
Paul's rule therefore generally is, Let every man in his own mind be fully
persuaded of that thing which he either allows or does. Romans 14.5.
Some things are so familiar and plain, that truth from falsehood, and good
from evil is most easily discerned in them, even by men of no deep capacity.
And of that nature, for the most part, are things absolutely unto all men's
salvation necessary, either to be held or denied, either to be done or
avoided. For which cause Saint Augustine acknowledges that they are not only
set down, but also plainly set down in Scripture: so that he which hears
or reads, may without any great difficulty understand. Other things also
there are belonging (though in a lower degree of importance) unto the offices
of Christian men: which because they are more obscure, more intricate and hard
to be judged of, therefore God has appointed some to spend their whole time
principally in the study of things divine, to the end that in these more
doubtful cases, their understanding might be a light to direct others. If the
understanding power or faculty of the soul, Galen. de opt* docen. ge^.
be (says the grand Physician) like unto bodily sight* not of equal
sharpness in all; what can be more convenient, then that, even as the
darkesighted man is directed by the clear about things visible, so likewise in
matters of deeper discourse the wise in heart do show the simple where his way
lies? In our doubtful cases of law, what man is there who sees not how
requisite it is, that professors of skill in that faculty be our directors? So
it is in all other kinds of knowledge. And even in this kind likewise the Lord
has himself appointed, Mal 2.7.
that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and that other men should
seek the truth at his mouth, because he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.
Gregory Nazianzene offended at the peoples too great presumption in controlling
the judgment of them to whom in such cases they should have rather submitted
their own, Greg. Naz. orat. qua se ^^cusat.
seeks by earnest entreaty to stay them within their bounds: Presume not ye
that are sheep to make your selves guides of them that should guide you,
neither seek ye to ouerskip the fold which they about you have pitched. It
suffices for your part, if ye can well frame your selves to be ordered. Take
not upon you to judge your selves, nor to make them subject to your laws who
should be a law to you. For God is not a God of sedition and confusion, Matthew.
15.14.
but of order and of peace. But ye will say that if the guides of the people be
blind, Mal. 2.9.
the common sort of men must not close up their own eyes and be led by the
conduct of such; if the Priest be partial in the law, the flock must not
therefore depart from the ways of sincere truth, and in simplicity yield to
be followers of him for his place sake and office over them. Which thing,
though in it self most true, is in your defense notwithstanding weak: because
the matter, wherein ye think that ye see and imagine that your ways are
sincere, is of far deeper consideration then any one amongst five hundred of
you conceiueth. Let the vulgar sort amongst you know, that there is not the
least branch of the cause wherein they are so resolute, but to the trial of it
a great deal more appertains then their conceit does reach unto. I write
not this in disgrace of the simplest that way given; but I would gladly they
knew the nature of that cause wherein they think themselves thoroughly
instructed and are not: by means whereof they daily run themselves, Iud ver.
10*2. Pet. 2.12. Call. instit. li. 4. cap. 20. Sect. 8
without feeling their own hazard, upon the d^nt of the Apostles sentence
against evil speakers as touching things wherein they are ignorant. If it be
granted a thing unlawful for private men, not called unto public
consultation, to dispute which is the best state of civil Policy (with a
desire of bringing in some other kind then that under which they already live,
for of such disputes I take it his meaning was;) if it be a thing confessed that
of such questions they cannot determine without rashness, in as much as a
great part of them consists in special circumstances, and for one kind as
many reasons may be brought as for another; is there any reason in the world,
why they should better judge what kind of regiment Ecclesiastical is the
fittest? For in the Civil state more insight, and in those affairs more
experience a great deal must needs be granted them, then in this they can
possibly have? When they which write in defense of your discipline, The author
of the petition directed to her Majesty p. 3.
and commend it unto the Highest not in the least cunning manner, are forced
notwithstanding to acknowledge, that with whom the truth is they know not,
they are not certain; what certainty or knowledge can the multitude have
thereof? Weigh what does move the common sort so much to favor this
innovation, and it shall soon appear unto you, that the force of particular
reasons which for your several opinions are alleged, is a thing whereof the
multitude never did, nor could so consider as to be there with wholly carried;
but certain general inducements are used to make saleable your Cause in
gross: and when once men have cast a phancie toward it, any slight
declaration of specialties will serve to lead forward men's inclinable and
prepared minds. The method of winning the peoples affection unto a general
liking of the Cause (for so ye term it) has been this. First in the hearing
of the multitude, the faults especially of higher callings are ripped up with
marvelous exceeding severity and sharpness of reproof; which being
oftentimes done, begets a great good opinion of integrity, zeal and
holiness, to such constant reproouers of sin, as by likelihood would never
be so much offended at that which is evil, unless themselves were singularly
good. The next thing hereunto is to impute all faults and corruptions wherewith
the world abounds, unto the kind of Ecclesiastical government established.
Wherein, as before by reproving faults, they purchased unto themselves with the
multitude a name to be virtuous; so by finding out this kind of cause, they
obtain to be judged wise above others: whereas in truth unto the form even of
Jewish government, which the Lord himself (they all confess) did establish,
with like show of reason they might impute those faults which the Prophets
condemn in the governors of that common wealth; as to the English kind of
regiment Ecclesiastical (whereof also God himself though in other sort is
author) the stains and blemishes found in our State; which springing from the
root of human frailty and corruption, not only are, but have been always
more or less, yea and (for any thing we know to the contrary) will be till the
worlds end complained of, what form of government soever take place. Having
gotten thus much sway in the hearts of men, a third step is to propose their
own form of Church government, as the only sovereign remedy of all evils;
and to adorn it with all the glorious titles that may be. And the nature, as
of men that have sick bodies, so likewise of the people in the crazednes of
their minds possessed with dislike and coffeehouse at things present, is to
imagine that any thing (the virtue whereof they here commended) would help
them; but that most, which they least have tried. The fourth degree of
inducements, is by fashioning the very notions and conceits of men's minds in
such sort, that when they read the Scripture, they may think that every thing
sounds toward the advancement of that discipline, and to the utter disgrace
of the contrary. Pythagoras, Arist. Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 5.
by bringing up his Scholars in the speculatiue knowledge of numbers, made
their conceits therein so strong, that when they came to the contemplation of
things natural, they imagined that in every particular thing they even beheld
as it were with their eyes, how the elements of number gave essence and being
to the works of nature. A thing in reason impossible: which notwithstanding
through their misfashioned preconceipt, appeared unto them no less certain,
then if nature had written it in the very foreheads of all the creatures of
God. When they of the family of love have it once in their heads, that Christ
does not signify any one person, but a quality whereof many are partakers;
that to be raised is nothing else but to be regenerated or endued with the said
quality; and that when separation of them which have it from them which have it
not is here made, this is judgment; how plainly do they imagine that the
Scripture every where speaks in the favor of that sect? And assuredly the
very cause which makes the simple and ignorant to think they even see how the
word of God runs currantly on your side, is that their minds are forestalled
and their conceits perverted before hand, by being taught that an Elder does
signify a lay man admitted only to the office of rule or government in the
Church; a Doctor one which may only teach and neither preach nor administer the
Sacraments; a Deacon one which has charge of the alms box and of nothing
else: that the Scepter, the rod, the throne and kingdom of Christ, are a form
of regiment, only by Pastors, Elders, Doctors and Deacons: that by mystical
resemblance mount Sion and Jerusalem are the Churches which admit, Samaria and
Babylon the Churches which oppugn the said form of regiment. And in like sort
they are taught to apply al things spoken of repairing the walls and decayed
parts of the city and temple of God, by Esdras, Nehemias, and the rest: as if
purposely the holy Ghost had therein meant to foresignifie, what the authors of
admonitions to the Parliament, of supplications to the Council, of petitions
to her Majesty, and of such other like writs, should either do or suffer in
behalf of this their cause. From hence they proceed to an higher point, which
is the persuading of men credulous and over capable of such pleasing errors,
that it is the special illumination of the holy Ghost, whereby they discern
those things in the word, which others reading yet discern them not. Dearly
beloved says S. John, Give not credit unto every Spirit. ^. Ioh. ^.^.
There are but two ways whereby the spirit leads men into (...) truth: the
one extraordinary, the other common; the one belonging but unto some few, the
other extending it self unto all that are of God; the one that which we call
by a special divine excellency Revelation, the other Reason. If the Spirit by
such revelation have discovered unto the^ the secrets of that discipline out of
Scripture, they must profess themselves to be all (even men, women, and
children) Prophets. Or if reason be the hand which the Spirit has led them by,
for as much as persuasions grounded upon reason are either weaker or stronger
according to the force of those reasons whereupon the same are grounded, they
must every of them from the greatest to the least be able for every several
article to show some special reason as strong as their persuasion therein is
earnest. Otherwise how can it be but that some other sinews there are from
which that overplus of strength in persuasion does arise? Most sure it is, that
when men's affections do frame their opinions, they are in defense of error more
earnest a great deal, then (for the most part) sound belieuers in the
maintenance of truth apprehended according to the nature of that evidence which
Scripture yields: which being in some things plain, as in the principles of
Christian doctrine; in some things, as in these matters of discipline, more
dark and doubtful, frames correspondently that inward assent which Gods most
gracious Spirit works by it as by his effectual instrument. It is not
therefore the fervent earnestnes of their persuasion, but the soundnes of those
reasons whereupon the same is built, which must declare their opinions in these
things to have been wrought by the holy Ghost, 2. These. 2.11.
and not by the fraud of that evil Spirit which is even in his illusions
strong. After that the phancie of the common sort has once thoroughly
apprehended the Spirit to be author of their persuasion concerning discipline,
then is instilled into their hearts, that the same Spirit leading men into this
opinion, does thereby seal them to be Gods children; and that as the state of
the times now stands, the most special token to know them that are Gods own
from others, is an earnest affection that way. This has bred high terms of
separation between such and the rest of the world; whereby the one sort are
named The ^rethren, The godly, and so forth; the other, worldlings,
timeseruers, pleasers of men not of God, with such like. From hence, they are
easily drawn on to think it exceeding necessary, for fear of quenching that
good Spirit, to use all means whereby the same may be both strengthened in
themselves, and made manifest unto others. This makes them diligent hearers of
such as are known that way to incline; this makes them eager to take and to
seek all occasions of secret conference with such; this makes them glad to
use such as Counselors and directors in all their dealings which are of
weight, as contracts, testaments, and the like; this makes them, through an
unweariable desire of receiving instruction from the masters of that company,
to cast off the care of those very affairs which do most concern their
estate, and to think that then they are like unto Marie, commendable for
making choice of the better part. Finally, this is it which makes them willing
to charge, yea oftentimes even to ouercharge themselves, for such men's
sustenance and relief, least their zeal to the cause should any way be
vnwitnessed. For what is it which poor beguiled souls will not do through so
powerful incitements? In which respect it is also noted, that most labor has
been bestowed to win and retain toward this cause them whose judgments are
commonly weakest by reason of their sex. 2. Tim. 3.6.
And although not women laden with sins, as the Apostle S. Paul speaks, but
(as we verily esteem of them for the most part) women propense and inclinable
to holiness, be otherwise edified in good things rather then carried away as
captives into any kind of sin and evil, by such as enter into their houses
with purpose to plant there a zeal and a love toward this kind of discipline:
yet some occasion is hereby ministered for men to think, that if the cause
which is thus furthered, did gain by the soundnes of proof whereupon it does
build it self, it would not most busily endeavor to prevail, where least
hability of judgment is: and therefore that this so eminent industry in making
proselytes more of that sex then of the other, grows for that they are deemed
apter to serve as instruments and helps in the cause. Apter they are through
the eagernes of their affection, that makes them which way soever they take,
diligent in drawing their husbands, children, servants, friends and allies the
same way; apter through that natural inclination unto pity, which breeds in
them a greater readiness then in men, to be bountiful toward their Preachers
who suffer want; apter through sundry opportunities which they especially have,
to procure encouragements for their brethren; finally, apter through a singular
delight which they take in giving very large and particular intelligence, how
all near about them stand affected as concerning the same cause. But be they
women or be they men, if once they have tasted of that cup, let any man of
contrary opinion open his mouth to persuade them, they close up their ears, 1.
John. 4.6.
his reasons they weigh not, all is answered with rehearsal of the words of
John, We are of God, he that knows God, hears us; as for the rest, ye are
of the world, for this worlds pomp and vanity it is that ye speak, and the
world whose ye are hears you. Which cloak sits no less fit on the back
of their cause, then of the Anabaptists, when the dignity, authority and
honor of Gods Magistrate is vpheld against them. Show these egerly affected
men their inhabilitie to judge of such matters; their answer is, 1. Cor. ^.27.
God has chosen the simple. Convince them of folly, and that so plainly, Act.
26.24. Sap. 5.4. We foole^ thought his life madness. M^rc. Tris. ad Asculap.
(...)
that very children vpbraid them with it; they have their bucklers of like
defense, Christ's own Apostle was accounted mad; The best men evermore by the
sentence of the world have been judged to be out of their right minds. When
instruction does them no good, let them feel but the least degree of most
mercifully tempered severity, they fasten on the head of the Lords vicegerents
here on earth, whatsoever they any where find uttered against the cruelty of
bloud-thirstie men; and to themselves they draw all the sentences which
Scripture has in the favor of innocence persecuted for the truth: (...).
Vide Lactant. de ^ust^t. lib. ^. cap. 16 August. Ep^st. 50.
yea they are of their due and deserved sufferings no less proud, then those
ancient disturbers, to whom S. Augustine writes, saying: Martyrs rightly so
named are they, not which suffer for their disorder, and for the ungodly breach
they have made of Christian unity; but which for righteousness sake are
persecuted. For Agar also suffered persecution at the hands of Sara; wherein,
she which did impose was holy, and she unrighteous which did bear the bu^then.
In like sort, with thieves was the Lord himself crucified, but they who were
matched in the pain which they suffered, were in the cause of their sufferings
disioyned. If that must needs be the true Church which does endure persecution,
and not that which persecuteth, let them ask of the Apostle what Church Sara
did represent, when she held her maid in affliction. For even our mother which
is free, the heavenly Jerusalem, that is to say, the true Church of God, was*
as he does affirm, prefigured in that very woman by whom the bondmaide was so
sharply handled. Although, if all things be thoroughly skanned, she did in truth
more persecute Sara by proud resistance, then Sara her, by severity of
punishment. These are the paths wherein ye have walked that are of the
ordinary sort of men, these are the very steps ye have trodden, and the manifest
degrees whereby ye are of your guides and directors trained up in that school:
a custom of inuring your cares with reproof of faults especially in your
governors; an use to attribute those faults to the kind of spiritual regiment
under which ye live; boldness in warranting the force of their discipline for
the cure of all such evils; a slight of framing your conceits to imagine that
Scripture every where favors that discipline; persuasion that the cause, why
ye find it in Scripture is the illumination of the spirit, that the same spirit
is a seal unto you of your neernes unto God, that ye are by all means to
nourish and witness it in your selves, and to strengthen on every side your
minds against whatsoever might be of force to withdraw you from it.

4. Wherefore to come unto you whose judgment is a lantern of direction for
all the rest, you that frame thus the peoples hearts, What has c^used so many
of the l^arne^er sort to approve the same disciplin^.
not altogether (as I willingly persuade my self) of a politic intent or
purpose, but your selves being first ouerborne with the weight of greater men's
judgments: on your shoulders is laid the burden of upholding the cause by
argument. For which purpose sentences out of the word of God ye allege
diverse: but so, that when the same are discust, thus it always in a manner
falls cut, that what things by virtue thereof ye urge upon us as altogether
necessary, are found to be thence collected only by poor and marvelous
slight conjectures. I need not give instance in any one sentence so alleged,
for that I think the instance in any alleged otherwise a thing not easy to
be given. A very strange thing sure it were, that such a discipline as ye
speak of should be taught by Christ and his Apostles in the word of God, and
no Church ever have found it out, nor received it till this present time;
contrariwise, the government against which ye be^d your selves, be observed
every where throughout all generations and ages of the Christian world, no
Church ever perceiving the word of God to be against it. We require you to
find out but one Church upon the face of the whole earth, that has been
ordered by your discipline, or has not been ordered by ours, that is to say,
by episcopal regiment, sithence the time that the blessed Apostles were here
conversant. Many things out of antiquity ye bring, as if the purest times of
the Church had observed the selfsame orders which you require; and as though
your desire were, that the Churches of old should be paternes for us to
follow, and even glasses wherein we might see the practice of that which by you
is gathered out of scripture. T.C. lib. 1. p. 97
But the truth is ye mean nothing less. All this is done for fashions sake
only, for ye complain of it as of an injury, that me^ should be willed to
seek for examples and paternes of government in any of those times that have
been before. Ye plainly hold, that from the very Apostles times till this
present age wherein your selves imagine ye have found out a right pattern of
sound discipline, there never was any time safe to be followed. Which thing ye
thus endeavor to prove. Out of Egesippus ye say that Eusebius writes, Eusebius.
3. lib. 32
how although as long as the Apostles lived, the Church did remain a pure
virgin; yet after the death of the Apostles, and after they were once gone whom
God vouchsafed to make hearers of the divine wisdom with their own ears,
the placing of wicked error began to come into the Church. Lib. Strom. somewhat
after the beginning. Lib. 7. c. 11.
Clement also in a certain place, to confirm that there was corruption of
doctrine immediately after the Apostles times, alleges the proverb, that
There are few sons like their fathers. Socrates says of the church of Rome
and Alexandria, the most famous Churches in ye Apostles times, that about the
year 430. the Romain and Alexandrian Bishops leaving the sacred function, were
degenerate to a secular rule or dominion. Hereupo^ ye conclude, that it is not
safe to fetch our government from any other then the Apostles times. Wherein by
the way it may be noted, that in proposing the Apostles times as a pattern for
ye Church to follow, though the desire of you all be one, the drift and purpose
of you all is not one. The chiefest thing which lay reformers yawne for is,
that the Clergy may through conformity in state and condition be
Apostolical, poor as the Apostles of Christ were poor. In which one
circumstance if they imagine so great perfection, they must think that Church
which has such store of mendicant Friars, a Church in that respect most happy.
Were it for the glory of God, and the good of his Church in deed, that the
Clergy should be left even as bare as the Apostles when they had neither
staff nor scrip; that God, which should lay upon them the condition of his
Apostles, would I hope, endue them with the selfsame affection which was in
that holy Apostle, whose words concerning his own right virtuous contentment
of heart, As well how to want, Phil. 4.1^.
as how to abound, are a most fit episcopal emprese. The Church of Christ is a
body mystical. A body cannot stand, unless the parts thereof be
proportionable. Let it therefore be required on both parts, at the hands of the
Clergy, to be in meannesse of state like the Apostles; at the hands of the
laity, to be as they were who lived under the Apostles: and in this
reformation there will be though little wisdom, yet some indifferency. But
your reformation which are of the Clergy (if yet it displease ye not that I
should say ye are of the Clergy) seems to aim at a broader mark. Ye
think that he which will perfectly reform, must bring the form of Church
discipline unto the state which then it was at. A thing neither possible, nor
certain, nor absolutely convenient. Concerning the first, what was used in the
Apostles times, the scripture fully declares not; so that making their times
the rule and Canon of Church polity, ye make a rule which being not possible
to be fully known, is as impossible to be kept. Again, since the later even of
the Apostles own times, had that which in the former was not thought upon; in
this general proposing of the Apostolical times, there is no certainty which
should be followed, especially seeing that ye give us great cause to doubt how
far ye allow those times. For albeit the lover of Antichristian building were
not, ye s^y, as then set up, yet the foundations thereof were secretly and
under the ground laid in the Apostles times* so that all other times ye
plainly reject, and the Apostles own times ye approve with marvelous great
suspicion, leaving it intricat and doubtful wherein we are to keep our selves
unto the pattern of their times. Thirdly, whereas it is the error of the common
multitude, to consider only what has been of old, and if the same were well,
to see whether still it continue; if not, to condemn that presently which is,
and never to search upon what ground or consideration the change might grow:
such rudenes cannot be in you so well borne with, whom learning and judgment
has enabled much more soundly to discern how far the times of the Church,
and the orders thereof may alter without offense. True it is, (...) ceremoniis
atque f^ni^ tantum sanctitatis tribuere co^sueuit quantum adstruxerit
vetustatis. Arno. p. 746.
the auncienter, the better ceremonies of religion are; howbeit, not absolutely
true, and without exception, but true only so far forth as those different
ages do agree in the state of those things, for which at the first those rites,
orders, and ceremonies, were instituted. In the Apostles times that was
harmless, which being now revived would be scandalous; as their Romans 16.16. 2.
Cor 13.12. 1. These. 5.25. 1. Pet. 5.14. In their meetings to serve God, their
manner was in the end to salute one an other with a kiss, using these words*
Peace be with you. For which cause Tertull. does call it sig^aculum orationis,
the seal of prayer. lib. d^ Orat.
oscula sancta. Those Epist. Iud. verse. 12. Concerning which feasts, 5.
Chrysostom. s^ith, Stati^ diebus mesas faciebant commune^, and peract^ synaxi
post sacramentorum co^munionem iniba^t conuiuium, diuiti^us quidemcibos
affere^ribus, pau peribus au^em and qu^ ni^il habebant etiam vocati^* in 1.
Cor. 11. hom. 27. Of the same feasts in like sort Tertull. Coena nostra de
n^mine rationsui oftendit. Vocatur en^m (...) ^d quod est penes Graecos
d^lectio. Quantis cunq* sumptibusconste^, lucrum est, ^etatis nomine fa^ere
sumptum. Apolog. c. 39.
feasts of charity, which being instituted by the Apostles, were retained in
the Church long after, are not now thought any where needful. What man is
there of understanding, unto whom it is not manifest, how the way of providing
for the Clergy by tithes, the devise of almes-houses for the poor, the
sorting out of the people into their several parishes, together with sundry
other things which the Apostles times could not have, (being now established)
are much more convenient and fit for the Church of Christ, then if the same
should be taken away for conformities sake with the auncientest and first
times? The orders therefore which were observed in the Apostles times, are not
to be urged as a rule universally, either sufficient or necessary. If they be,
nevertheless on your part it still remains to be better proved, that the
form of discipline which ye entitle apostolical, was in the Apostles times
exercised. For of this very thing ye fail even touching that which ye make
most account of, as being matter of substance in discipline, I mean the power
of your lay elders, and the difference of your Doctors from the Pastors in all
Churches. So that in sum, we may be bold to conclude, that besides these last
times, which for insolency, pride, and egregious contempt of all good order
are the worst, there are none wherein ye can truly affirm, that the complete
form of your discipline, or the substance thereof was practiced. The evidence
therefore of antiquity failing you, ye fly to the judgments of such learned
men, as seem by their writings to be of opinion that all Christian Churches
should receive your discipline, and abandon ours. Wherein, as ye heap up the
names of a number of men not unworthy to be had in honor; so there are a number
whom when ye mention, although it serve ye to purpose with the ignorant and
vulgar sort, who measure by tale and not by weight, yet surely they who know
what quality and value the men are of, will think ye draw very near the
dregs. But were they all of as great account as the best and chiefest amongst
them, with us notwithstanding neither are they, neither ought they to be of
such reckening, that their opinion or conjecture should cause the laws of the
Church of England to give place. Much less when they neither do all agree in
yt opinion, and of the^ which are at agreement, the most part through a
courteous inducement, have followed one man as their guide, finally, that one
therein not unlikely to have swarued. If any chance to say it is probable that
in ye Apostles times there were layelders, or not to mislike the continuance of
them in the Church; or to affirm that Bishops at the first were a name, but
not a power distinct from presbyters; or to speak any thing in praise of those
Churches which are without episcopal regiment, or to reprove the fault of such
as abuse that calling; all these ye register for men, persuaded as you are,
that every christian Church stands bound by the law of God to put down
Bishops, and in their rooms to erect an eldership so authorized as you would
have it for the government of each parish. Deceived greatly they are therefore,
who think that all they whose names are cited amongst the favorers of this
cause, are on any such verdict agreed. Yet touching some material points of
your discipline, a kind of agreement we grant there is amongst many divines of
reformed Churches abroad. For first to do as the Church of Geneua did, the
learned in some other churches must needs be the more willing, who having used
in like manner not the slow and tedious help of proceeding by public
authority, but the peoples more quick endeavor for alteration, in such an
exigent I see not well how they could have stayed to deliberat about any other
regiment the^ that which already was devised to their hands, yt which in like
case had been taken, that which was easiest to be established without delay,
that which was likeliest to content the people by reason of some kind of sway
which it gives them. When therefore the example of one Church was thus at the
first almost through a kind of co^straint or necessity followed by many, their
concurrence in persuasion about some material points belonging to the same
policy is not strange. For we are not to marvel greatly, if they which have
all done the same thing, do easily embrace the same opinion as concerning their
own doings. Besides, mark I beseech you that which Galen in matter of
philosophy notes, for the like falls out even in questions of higher
knowledge. Galen. Clas. 2. lib. de cuiosque anim. peccat. notitia atque medela.
It fares many times with men's opinions, as with rumors and reports. That
which a credible person tells, is easily thought probable by such as are well
persuaded of him. But if two, or three, or four, agree all in the same tale,
they judge it then to be out of controversy, and so are many times overtaken,
for want of due consideration; either some common cause leading them all in^^
error, or one man's oversight deceiving many through their too much credulity
and easiness of belief. Though ten persons be brought to give testimony in
any cause, yet if the knowledge they have of the thing whereunto they come as
witnesses, appear to have grown from some one amongst them, and to have spread
it self from hand to hand, they all are in force but as one testimony. Nor is
it otherwise here where the daughter Churches do speak their mothers dialect;
here where so many sing one song, by reason that he is the guide of the quier
concerning whose deserved authority amongst even the grauest divines, we have
already spoken at large. Will ye ask what should move those many learned to be
followers of one man's judgment, no necessity of argument forcing them
thereunto? Petit. to the Q*M.P. 14.
your demand is answered by your selves. Loath ye are to think that they whom
ye judge to have attained as sound knowledge in all points of doctrine, as any
since the Apostles time, should mistake in discipline. Such is naturally our
affection, that whom in great things we mightily admire; Eccles. 10.1.
in them we are not persuaded willingly that any thing should be amiss. The
reason whereof is, for that as dead flies putrify the ointment of the
Apothecarie, so a little folly him that is in estimation for wisdom. This in
every profession has too much authorized the judgment of a few. This with
Germans has caused Luther, and with many other Churches Calvin, to prevail in
all things. Yet are we not able to define, whether the wisdom of that God
(who sets before us in holy Scripture so many admirable paternes of virtue,
and no one of them without somewhat noted wherein they were culpable, to the end
that to him alone it might always be acknowledged, Thou only art holy, thou
only art just) might not permit those worthy vessels of his glory to be in
some things blemished with the stain of human frailty, even for this
cause, least we should esteem of any man above that which behooves.

Their calling for trial by disputation.
5. Notwithstanding, as though ye were able to say a great deal more then
hitherto your books have revealed to the world, earnest chalengers ye are of
trial by some public disputation. Wherein if the thing ye crave be no more
then only leave to dispute openly about those matters that are in question,
the schools in Universities (for any thing I know) are open unto you: they
have their yearly Acts and Commencements, besides other disputations both
ordinary and upon occasion, wherein the several parts of our own
Ecclesiastical discipline are oftentimes offered unto that kind of
examination; the learnedest of you have been of late years noted seldom or
never absent from thence at the time of those greater assemblies; and the
favor of proposing there in convenient sort whatsoever ye can object (which
thing my self have known them to grant of Scholasticall courtesy unto
strangers) neither has (as I think) nor ever will (I presume) be denied you.
If your suite be to have some great extraordinary confluence, in expectation
whereof the laws that already are should sleep and have no power over you,
till in the hearing of thousands ye all did acknowledge your error and renounce
the further prosecutio^ of your cause; happily they whose authority is required
unto the satisfying of your demand, do think it both dangerous to admit such
co^course of divided minds, and unmeet yt laws which being once solemnly
established are to exact obedience of all men, and to constrain thereunto,
should so far stoup, as to hold themselves in suspe^se from taking any effect
upon you, till some disputer can persuade you to be obedient. A law is the deed
of the whole body politic, whereof if ye judge your selves to be any part, the^
is the law eue^ your deed also. And were it reason in things of this quality,
to give me^ audience pleading for the overthrow of that which their own very
deed has ratified? Laws that have bin approved, may be (no man doubts) again
repealed, and to yt end also disputed against, by the authors thereof
themselves. But this is when the whole does deliberate what laws each part shall
observe, and not when a part refuses the laws which the whole has orderly
agreed upon. Notwithstanding, for as much as ye cause we maintain is (God be
thanked) such as needs not to shun any trial, might it please the^ on whose
approbatio^ the matter depends to co^descend so far unto you in this behalf,
I wish heartily that proof were made even by solemn conference in orderly and
quiet sort, whether you would your selves be satisfied, or else could by
satisfying others draw the^ to your part. Provided always, first in as much as
ye go about to destroy a thing which is in force, and to draw in that which
has not as yet bin received; to impose on us that which we think not our
selves bound unto, and to overthrow those things whereof we are possessed; yt
therefore ye are not to claim in any such co^fere^ce other the^ the plaintifs
or opponents part, which must consist altogether in proof and confirmation of
two things: the one, yt our orders by you condemned we ought to abolish, the
other yt yours, we are bound to accept in the stead thereof. Secondly, because
the questions in controversy between us are many, if once we descend unto
particularities, that for ye easier and more orderly proceeding therein, ye most
general be first discussed, nor any question left off, nor in each question ye
prosecutio^ of any one argument given over and another taken in hand, til ye
issue whereunto by replies and answers both parts are come, be collected red and
acknowledged as well on ye one side as on the other to be ye plain co^clusio^
which they are grown unto. Thirdly for avoiding of the manifold inco^uenie^ces
whereunto ordinary and exte^poral disputes are subject, as also because if ye
should singly dispute one by one as every man's own wit did best serve, it
might be conceived by ye rest yt happily some other would have done more; the
chiefest of you do all agree in this action, yt whom ye shall then choose your
speaker, by him yt which is publicly brought into disputation be acknowledged
by all your co^se^ts not to be his allegatio^ but yours, such as ye all are
agreed upon, and have required him to deliver in all your names: ye true copy
whereof being taken by a notarie, that a reasonable time be allowed for return
of answer unto you in the like form. Fourthly, whereas a number of
conferences have been had in other causes with the less effectual success, by
reason of partial and untrue reports, published afterward unto the world,
that to prevent this evil, there be at the first a solemn declaration made on
both parts of their agreement to have yt very book and no other set abroad,
wherein their present authorized notaries do write those things fully and only,
which being written and there read, are by their own open testimony
acknowledged to be their own. Other circumstances hereunto belonging, whether
for the choice of time, place, and language, or for prevention of impertinent
and needless speech, or to any end and purpose else, they may be thought on
when occasion serves. In this sort to broach my private conceit for the
ordering of a public actio^, I should be loath, (albeit I do it not otherwise
the^ under correction of the^ whose gravity and wisdom ought in such cases
to ouerrule) but yt so venterous boldness I see is a thing now general, and am
thereby of good hope, yt where al me^ are licensed to offend, no man will show
himself a sharp accuser.

No end of contention, without submission of both parts unto some definitive
sentence.
6. What success God may give unto any such kind of conference or disputation,
we cannot tell. But of this we are right sure, yt nature, scripture, and
experience it self, have all taught the world to seek for ye ending of
contentions by submitting it self unto some judicial and definitive sentence,
whereunto neither part that co^tendeth may under any pretense or color refuse
to stand. This must needs be effectual and strong. As for other means without
this, they seldom prevail. J would therefore know whether for ye ending of
these irksome strifes, wherein you and your followers do stand thus formally
divided against ye authorized guides of this Church, and the rest of the people
subject unto their charge, whether I say ye be content to refer your cause to
any other higher judgment then your own; or else intend to persist and
proceed as ye have begun, til your selves can be persuaded to co^demn your
selves. If your determination be this, we can be but sorry that ye should
deserve to be reckened with such, Romans ^.17.
of whom God himself pronounces, The way of peace they have not known. Ways
of peaceable conclusion there are but these two certain: the one, a sentence
of judicial decision given by authority thereto appointed within our selves;
the other, the like kind of sentence given by a more universal authority. The
former of which two ways God himself in the law prescribes: and his Spirit
it was which directed the very first Christian Churches in the world to use the
later. The ordinance of God in the law was this. Deuteronomy. 17.8.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment between blood and
blood, between plea etc. then shall thou arise, and go up unto the place
which the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall come unto the Priests of
the Levites* and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and ask, and
they shall show thee the sentence of judgment, and thou shall do according to
that thing which they of that place which the Lord has chosen show thee; and
thou shall observe to do according to all that they enform thee, according to
the law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they
shall tell thee shall thou do, thou shall not decline from the thing which they
shall show thee to the right hand nor to the left. And that man that will do
presumptuously, not harkning unto the Priest (that stands before the Lord thy
God to minister there) or unto the Judge, that man shall dye, Act 15.
and thou shall take away evil from Israel. When there grew in the Church of
Christ a question, Whether the Gentiles believing might be saved, although they
were not circumcised after the manner of Moses, nor did observe the rest of
those legal rites and ceremonies whereunto the Jews were bound; After great
dissension and disputation about it, their conclusion in the end was, to have
it determined by sentence at Jerusalem; which was accordingly done in a
Council there assembled for the same purpose. Are ye able to allege any just
and sufficient cause wherefore absolutely ye should not condescend in this
controversy to have your judgments ouerruled by some such definitive
sentence, whether it fall out to be given with or against you, that so these
tedious contentions may cease? Ye will perhaps make answer, that being
persuaded already as touching the truth of your cause, ye are not to harken
unto any sentence, no not though Angels should define otherwise, as the blessed
Apostles own example teaches: again that men, yea Councels may err; and
that unless the judgment given do satisfy your minds, unless it be such as
ye can by no further argument oppugn, in a word, unless you perceive and
acknowledge it your selves consonant with Gods word, to stand unto it not
allowing it, were to sin against your own consciences. But consider I beseech
you first as touching ye Apostle, how that wherein he was so resolute and
peremptory, our Lord Jesus Christ made manifest unto him even by intuitive
revelation, wherein there was no possibility of error: That which you are
persuaded of* ye have it no otherwise then by your own only probable
collectio^* and therefore such bold asseuerations as in him were admirable,
should in your mouths but argue rashness. God was not ignorant yt the Priests
and Judges, whose sentence in matters of controversy (...) ordained should
stand, both might and oftentimes would be deceived in their judgment. Howbeit,
better it was in the eye of his understanding, that sometime an erroneous
sentence definitive should prevail, till the same authority perceiving such
oversight, might afterward correct or reuerse it, then that strifes should
have respit to grow, and not come speedily unto some end. Neither wish we that
men should do any thing which in their hearts they are persuaded they ought not
to do, but this persuasion ought (we say) to be fully settled in their hearts,
that in litigious and controuersed causes of such quality, the will of God is
to have them to do whatsoever the sentence of judicial and final decision
shall determine, yea though it seem in their private opinion to swerve utterly
from that which is right: as no doubt many times the sentence amongst the Jews
did seem unto one part or other contending; and yet in this case God did then
allow them to do that which in their private judgment it seemed (yea and
perhaps truly seemed) that the law did disallow* For if God be not the author
of confusion, but of peace; then can he not be the author of our refusal, but
of our contentment, to stand unto some definitive sentence; without which
almost impossible it is, that either we should avoid confusion, or ever hope
to attain peace. To small purpose had the Council of Jerusalem been
assembled, if once their determination being set down, men might afterward
have defended their former opinions. When therefore they had given their
definitive sentence, all controversy was at an end. Things were disputed
before they came to be determined; men afterward were not to dispute any
longer, but to obey. The sentence of judgment finished their strife, which
their disputes before judgment could not do. This was ground sufficient for
any reasonable man's conscience to build the duty of obedience upon, whatsoever
his own opinion were as touching the matter before in question. So full of
wilfulnes and selfeliking is our nature, that without some definitive sentence,
which being given may stand, and a necessity of silence on both sides
afterward imposed; small hope there is that strifes thus far prosecuted, will
in short time quietly end. Now it were in vain to ask you whether ye could be
content that the sentence of any Court already erected, should be so far
authorized, as that among the Jews established by God himself, for the
determining of all controversies: That man which will do presumptuously, not
harkning unto the Priest that stands before the Lord to minister there, nor
unto the Judge, let him dye. Ye have given us already to understand, what your
opinion is in part concerning her sacred Majesty's Court of high Commission,
the nature whereof is the same with that amongst the Jews, albeit the power be
not so great. The other way happily may like you better, because Master Beza
in his last book save one written about these matters, ^res. tract, (...)
excom. and presbyt.
professes himself to be now weary of such combats and encounters, whether by
word or writing, in as much as he finds that controversies thereby are made
but braules; and therefore wishes that in some common lawful assembly of
Churches, all these strifes may at once be decided. Shall there be then in the
mean while no doings? Yes. There are the waightier matters of the law,
judgment and mercy and fidelity. Math. 23.2^*
These things we ought to do; and these things, while we contend about less,
we leave undone. Happier are they, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find
doing in these things, then disputing about Doctors, Elders, and Deacons. Or if
there be no remedy but somewhat needs ye must do which may tend to the setting
forward of your discipline; do that which wise men, who think some Statute of
the realm more fit to be repealed then to stand in force, are accustomed to do
before they come to Parliament where the place of enacting is; that is to say,
spend the time in reexamining more duly your cause, and in more thoroughly
considering of that which ye labor to overthrow. As for the orders which are
established, since equity and reason, the law of nature, God and man, do all
favor that which is in being, till orderly judgment of decision be given
against it; it is but justice to exact of you, and perverseness in you it should
be to deny thereunto your willing obedience. Not that I judge it a thing
allowable for men to observe those laws which in their hearts they are
steadfastly persuaded to be against the law of God: but your persuasion in this
case ye are all bound for the time to suspend, and in otherwise doing, ye
offend against God, by troubling his church without any just or necessary
cause* Be it yt there are some reasons inducing you to think hardly of our
laws. Are those reasons demonstratiue, are they necessary, or but mere
probabilities only? An argument necessary and demonstratiue is such, as being
proposed unto any m^ and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly
assent. Any one such reason, discharges J grant the conscience, and sets
it at full liberty. For the public approbatio^ given by the body this whole
Church unto those things which are established, does make it but probable yt
they are good. And therefore unto a necessary proof yt they are not good, it
must be give place, But if the skilfullest amongst you can show, yt all the
books ye have hitherto written be able to afford any one argument of this
nature, let the instance be given. As for probabilities, what thing was there
ever set down so agreeable with so^^^d reason, but some probable show against
it might be made? Is it meet that when publicly things are received and have
taken place, general obedience thereunto should cease to be exacted, in case
this or that private person led with some probable conceit, should make open
protestation, I Peter or John disallow them, and pronounce them naught. In
which case your answer will be, T.C. li. ^. p. 17*
that concerning the laws of our Church, they are not only condemned in the
opinion of a private man, but of thousands, yea and even of those amongst which
d^uers are in public charge and authority. As though when public consent
of the whole has established anything, every man's judgment being thereunto
compared were not private, howsoever his calling be to some kind of public
charge. So that of peace and quietness there is not any way possible, unless
the probable voice of every intier society or body politic, ouerrule all
private of like nature in the same body: Which thing effectually proves, that
God being author of peace and not of confusion in the Church, must needs be
author of those men's peaceable resolutions, who concerning these things, have
determined with themselves to think and do as the Church they are of decrees,
till they see necessary cause enforcing them to the contrary.

The matter contained in these eight books.
7. Nor is mine own intent any other in these several books of discourse,
then to make it appear unto you; that for the ecclesiastical laws of this
land, we are led by great reason to observe them, and ye by no necessity bound
to impugn them. It is no part of my secret meaning to draw you hereby into
hatred, or to set upon the face of this cause any fairer glass then the naked
truth does afford: but my whole endeavor is to resolve the conscience, and to
show as near as I can what in this controversy the heart is to think, if it
will follow the light of sound and sincere judgment, without either clowd of
prejudice or mist of passionate affection. Wherefore seeing that laws and
ordinances in particular, whether such as we observe, or such as your selves
would have established, when the mind does sift and examine them, it must
needs have often recourse to a number of doubts and questions about the
nature, kinds, and qualities of laws in general, whereof unless it be
thoroughly informed, there will appear no certainty to stay our persuasion
upon: I have for that cause set down in the first place an introduction on
both sides needful to be considered: Declaring therein what law is, how
different kinds of laws there are, and what force they are of according unto
each kind. This done, because ye suppose the laws for which ye strive are
found in scripture; but those not, against which we strive; and upon this
surmise are drawn to hold it as the very maine pillar of your whole cause,
that scripture ought to be the only rule of all our actions, and consequently
that the Church-orders which we observe being not commanded in scripture, are
offensive and displeasant unto God: I have spent the second book in sifting of
this point, which stands with you for the first and chiefest principle
whereon ye build. Whereunto the next in degree is, that as God will have
always a Church upon earth while the world does continue, and that Church
stand in need of government, of which government it behooves himself to be
both the author and teacher: so it cannot stand with duty that man should ever
presume in any wise to change and alter the same; and therefore* That in
Scripture there must of necessity be found some particular form of polity
Ecclesiastical, the laws whereof admit not any kind of alteration. The first
three books being thus ended, the fourth proceeds from the general grounds
and foundations of your cause, unto your general accusations against us, as
having in the orders of our Church (for so you pretend) corrupted the right
form of Church polity with manifold popish rites and ceremonies, which
certain reformed Churches have banished from amongst them, and have thereby
given us such examples as (you think) we ought to follow. This your assertion
has herein drawn us to make search, whether these be just exceptions against
the customs of our Church, when ye plead that they are the same which the
Church of Rome has, or that they are not the same which some other reformed
Churches have devised. Of those four books which remain and are bestowed
about the specialties of that cause which lies in controversy, the first
examineth the causes by you alleged, wherefore the public duties of
Christian religion, as our prayers, our Sacramants and the rest, should not be
ordered in such sort as with us they are* nor that power whereby the persons of
men are consecrated unto the ministry, be disposed of in such manner as the
laws of this Church do allow. The second and third are concerning the power
of jurisdiction: the one, whether la^ men, such as your governing Elders are,
ought in all congregations for ever to be invested with that power; the other,
whether Bishops may have that power over other Pastors, and there withal that
honor which with us they have, And because besides the power of order which
all consecrated persons have, and the power of jurisdiction which neither they
all nor they only have* there is a third power, a power of Ecclesiastical
Dominion, communicable as we think unto persons not Ecclesiastical, and most
fit to be restrained unto the Prince or Sovereign commander over the whole
body politic* the eight book we have allotted unto this question, and have
sifted therein your objections against those preeminences royal which
thereunto appert^ine* Thus have J laid before you the brief of these my
travails, and presented under your view the limbs of that cause litigious
between us: the whole intier body whereof being thus compact, it shall be no
troublesome thing for any man to find each particular controversies resting
place, and the coherence it has with those things, either on which it
depends, or which depend on it.

How just cause there is to fear the manifold dangerous events likely to ensue
upon this intended reformation, if it did take place.
8. The case so standing therefore my brethren as it does, the wisdom of
governors ye must not blame, in that they further also forecasting the manifold
strange and dangerous innouations, which are more then likely to follow if your
discipline should take place, have for that cause thought it hitherto a part of
their duty to withstand your endeavors that way. The rather, for that they have
seen already some small beginninges of the fruits thereof, in them who
concurring with you in judgment about the necessity of that discipline, have
adventured without more ado, to separate themselves from the rest of the
Church, and to put your speculations in execution. These men's hastines the
warier sort of you does not commend, ye wish they had held themselves longer
in, and not so dangerously flowne abroad before the feathers of the cause had
been grown; their error with merciful terms ye reprove, naming them in
great commiseration of mind, your poor brethren. They o^ the contrary side
more bitterly accuse you as their false brethren, and against you they plead
saying: From your breasts it is that we have sucked those things, which when
ye delivered unto us, ye termed that heavenly, sincere, 1. Pet. 2.2.
and wholesome milk of Gods word, howsoever ye now abhor as poison that
which the virtue thereof has wrought and brought forth in us. Ye sometime our
companions, Psalm. 55.13.
guides and familiars, with whom we have had most sweet consultations, are
now become our professed adversaries. because we think the
statute-congregations in England to be no true Christian Churches; because
we have severed our selves from them; and because without their leave or
license that are in Civil authority, we have secretly framed our own
Churches according to the platform of the word of God. For of that point
between you and us there is no controversy. Alas what would ye have us to
do? At such time as ye were content to accept us in the number of your own,
your teachinges we heard, we read your writings: and though we would, yet
able we are not to forget with what zeal ye have ever professed, that in the
English congregations (for so many of them as be ordered according unto their
own laws,) the very public service of God is fraught, as touching matter,
with heaps of intolerable pollutions, and as concerning form, borrowed from
the shop of Antichrist; hateful both ways in the eyes of the most holy: the
kind of their government by Bishops and Archbishops, Antichristian, that
discipline which Christ has essentially tied, that is to say, so united unto
his Church, Pref. against D. Baner.
that we cannot account it really to be his Church which has not in it the
same discipline, that very discipline no less there despised, then in the
highest throne of Antichrist, all such parts of the word of God as do any way
concern that Discipline, no less vnsoundlie taught and interpreted by all
authorized English Pastors, then by Antichrists factors themselves; at Baptism
crossing, at the Supper of the Lord kneeling* at both a number of other the
most notorious badges of Antichristian recognisance usual. Being moved with
these and the like your effectual discourses, whereunto we gave most attentive
ear, till they entered even into our souls, and were as fire within our
bosoms; we thought we might hereof be bold to conclude, that since no such
Antichristian synagogue may be accounted a true Church of Christ, ye by
accusing all congregations ordered according to the laws of England as
Antichristian, did mean to condemn those congregations, as not being any of
them worthy the name of a true Christian Church. Ye tell us now it is not your
meaning. But what meant your often threatenings of them, who professing
themselves the inhabitants of mount Sion, were too loath to depart wholly as
they should out of Babylon? Whereat our hearts being fearfully troubled, we
durst not, we durst not continue longer so near her confines, least her
plagues might suddenly overtake us, before we did cease to be partakers with
her sins: for so we could not choose but acknowledge with grief that we
were, when they doing evil, we by our presence in their assemblies seemed to
like thereof, or at least wise not so earnestly to dislike, as became men
heartily zealous of Gods glory. For aduenturing to erect the discipline of
Christ without the leave of the Christian Magistrate, happily ye may condemn
us as fools, in that we hazard thereby our estates and persons, further then
you which are that way more wise think necessary: but of any offense or sin
therein committed against God, with what conscience can you accuse us, when
your own positions are, that the things we observe should every of them be
dearer unto us then ten thousand lives; that they are the peremptory
commandments of God; that no mortal man can dispense with them, and that the
Magistrate grievously sins in not constraining thereunto? Will ye blame any
man for doing that of his own accord, which all men should be compelled to do
that are not willing of themselves? When God commands, shall we answer that
we will obey, if so be Caesar will grant us leave? Is discipline an
Ecclesiastical matter or a Civil? If an Ecclesiastical, it must of
necessity belong to the duty of the Minister. And the Minister (ye say)
holds all his authority of doing whatsoever belongs unto the spiritual
charge of the house of God, even immediately from God himself, without
dependency upon any Magistrate. Whereupon it follows, as we suppose, that the
hearts of the people being willing to be under the Scepter of Christ, the
Minister of God, into whose hands the Lord himself has put that Scepter, is
without all excuse if thereby he guide them not. Nor do we find that hitherto
greatly ye have disliked those Churches abroad, where the people with direction
of their godly ministers, have even against the will of the Magistrate brought
in either the doctrine or discipline of Jesus Christ. For which cause we must
now think the very same thing of you, which our Savior did sometime utter
concerning false hearted Scribes and Pharisees, They say and do not. Thus the
foolish Barrowist deriueth his schism by way of conclusion, Matthew. 23.3.
as to him it seems, directly and plainly out of your principles. Him
therefore we leave to be satisfied by you from whom he has sprung. And if such
by your own acknowledgement be persons dangerous, although as yet the
alterations which they have made are of small and tender groath; the changes
likely to ensue throughout all states and vocations within this land, in case
your desire should take place, must be thought upon. First concerning the
supreme power of the highest, they are no small prerogatives which now
thereunto belonging the form of your discipline will constrain it to resign,
as in the last book of this treatise we have showed at large. Again it may
justly be feared, whether our English Nobility, when the matter came in trial,
would contentedly suffer themselves to be always at the call, and to stand to
the sentence of a number of mean persons, assisted with the presence of their
poor teacher, a man (as sometimes it happens) though better able to speak,
yet little or no whit apter to judge then the rest: from whom, be their
dealings never so absurd (unless it be by way of complaint to a Synod) no
appeal may be made unto any one of higher power, in as much as the order of
your discipline admits no standing inequality of Courts, no spiritual
judge to have any ordinary superior on earth, but as many supremacies as there
are parishes and several Congregations. Neither is it altogether without cause
that so many do fear the overthrow of all learning, as a threatened sequel of
this your intended discipline. For if the worlds preservation depend upon the
multitude of the wise; and of that sort the number hereafter be not likely to
wax over great, Sap. 6.24.
when (that where with the son of Syrach professes himself at the heart
grieved) men of understanding are already so little set by: Eccl. 16.29.
how should their minds whom the love of so precious a jewel fills with
secret jealousy even in regard of the least things which may any way hinder
the flourishing estate thereof, choose but misdoubt least this discipline,
which always you match with divine doctrine as her natural and true sister,
be found unto all kinds of knowledge a stepmother; seeing that the greatest
worldly hopes, which are proposed unto the chiefest kind of learning, ye seek
utterly to extirpate as weeds; and have grounded your platform on such
propositions, as do after a sort undermine those most renowned habitations,
where through the goodness of almighty God all commendable arts and sciences
are with exceeding great industry hitherto (and so may they ever continue)
studied, proceeded in, and professed. To charge you as purposely bent to the
overthrow of that wherein so many of you have attained no small perfection,
were injurious. Only therefore I wish that your selves did well consider how
opposite certain your positions are unto the state of Collegiate societies,
whereon the two Universities consist. Those degrees which their statutes bind
them to take, are by your laws taken away; your selves who have sought them ye
so excuse, as that ye would have men to think ye judge them not allowable, but
tolerable only, and to be borne with for some help which ye find in them unto
the furtherance of your purposes, till the corrupt estate of the Church may be
better reformed. Your laws forbidding Ecclesiastical persons utterly the
exercise of Civil power, must needs deprive the Heads and Masters in the same
Colleges of all such authority as now they exercise, either at home, by
punishing the faults of those, who not as children to their parents by the law
of Nature, but altogether by civil authority are subject unto them; or abroad,
by keeping Courts amongst their tenants. Your laws making permanent
inequality amongst Ministers a thing repugnant to the word of God, enforce
those Colleges, the Seniors whereof are all or any part of them Ministers
under the government of a master in the same vocation, to choose as often as
they meet together a new president. For if so ye judge it necessary to do in
Synods, for the avoiding of permanent inequality amongst Ministers, the same
cause must needs even in these Collegiate assemblies enforce the like. Except
per adventure ye mean to avoid all such absurdities, by dissoluing those
Corporations, and by bringing the Universities unto the form of the School of
Geneua. Which thing men the rather are inclined to look for, in as much as the
Ministry, whereinto their founders with singular providence have by the same
statutes appointed them necessarily to enter at a certain time, your laws
bind them much more necessarily to forbear, till some parish abroad call for
them. Your opinion concerning the law Civil is, Humb. Motion to the L L. p. 50.
that the knowledge thereof might be spared, as a thing which this land does
not need. Professors in that kind being few, ye are the bolder to spurn at
them, and not to dissemble your minds as concerning their remoouall: in whose
studies although my self have not much been conversant, nevertheless
exceeding great cause I see there is to wish that thereunto more encouragement
were given, as well for the singular treasures of wisdom therein contained,
as also for the great use we have thereof both in decision of certain kinds of
causes arising daily within our selves, and especially for commerce with
Nations abroad, whereunto that knowledge is most requisite. The reasons
wherewith ye would persuade that Scripture is the only rule to frame all our
actions by, are in every respect as effectual for proof that the same is the
only law whereby to determine all our Civil controversies. And then what does
let, but that as those men may have their desire, who frankely broch it already
that the work of reformation will never be perfect, till the law of Jesus
Christ be received alone; so pleaders and Counselors may bring their books of
the Common law, and bestow them as the students of curious and needless arts
did theirs in the Apostles time? Act. 19.19.
J leave them to scanne how far those words of yours may reach, Mumb. M^t. p.
74.
wherein ye declare, that whereas now many houses lie waste through inordinate
suites of law, This one thing will show the excellency of Discipline for the
wealth of the Realm, and quiet of Subjects, that the Church is to censure such
a party who is apparently troublesome and contentious, and without REASONABLE
CAUSE upon a mere will and stomach does vex and molest his brother and
troble the Country. For mine own part I do not see but that it might very
well agree with your principles, if your discipline were fully planted, even to
send out your writs of surcease unto all Courts of England besides, for the
most things handled in them. A great deal further I might proceed and descend
lower. Counterp. p. 108.
But for as much as against all these and the like difficulties your answer is,
that we ought to search what things are consonant to Gods will, not which be
most for our own ease; and therefore that your discipline being (for such is
your error) the absolute commandment of Almighty God, it must be received
although the world by receiving it should be clean turned vpside down; herein
lies the greatest danger of all. For whereas the name of divine authority is
used to countenance these things, which are not the commandments of God, but
your own erroneous collections; on him ye must father whatsoever ye shall
afterward be led, either to do in withstanding the adversaries of your cause,
or to think in maintenance of your doings. And what this may be, God does
know. In such kinds of error, the mind once imagining it self to seek the
execution of Gods will, labors forthwith to remove both things and persons
which any way hinder it from taking place; and in such cases if any strange or
new thing seem requisite to be done, a strange and new opinion concerning the
lawfulness thereof, is withal received and broched under countenance of divine
authority. One example herein may serve for many, to show that false opinions
touching the will of God to have things done, are wont to bring forth mighty
and violent practices against the hindrances of them; and those practices new
opinions more pernicious then the first, yea most extremely sometimes opposite
to yt which the first did seem to intend. Where the people took upon them the
reformation of the Church by casting out popish superstition, Matthew. 1^.1^.
they having received from their Pastors a general instruction yt whatsoever
the heavenly father has not planted must be rooted out, proceeded in some
foreign places so far, yt down went oratories and the very temples of God
themselves. For as they chanced to take the compass of their commission
stricter or larger, so their dealings were accordingly more or less moderate.
Amongst others there sprang up presently one kind of me^, with whose zeal and
forwardness the rest being compared, were thought to be marvelous cold and
dull. These grounding themselves on rules more general; that whatsoever ye law
of Christ commands not, thereof Antichrist is the author; and that whatsoever
Antichrist or his adherents did in the world, the true professors of Christ are
to undo; found out many things more then others had done, the extirpation
whereof was in their conceit as necessary as of any thing before removed.
Hereupon they secretly made their doleful complaints every where as they went,
that albeit the world did begin to profess some dislike of that which was
evil in the kingdom of darkness, yet fruits worthy of a true repentance were
not seen; and that if men did repent as they ought, they must endeavor to
purge the earth of all manner evil, to the end there might follow a new world
afterward, wherein righteousness only should dwell. Private repentance they
said must appear by every man's fashioning his own life contrary unto the
custom and orders of this present world, both in greater things and in less.
Guy de Bres contre l'errent des Anabapa. tistes. p. 4.
To this purpose they had always in their mouths those greater things,
Charity, Faith, the true fear of God, the Cross, the mortification of the
flesh. All their exhortations were to set light of the things in this world, to
count riche^ and honors vanity, and in token thereof not only to seek
neither, but if men were possessors of both, even to cast away the one and
resign ye other, that all men might see their unfeigned conversion unto Christ.
They were sollicitors of men to fasts, to often meditations of heavenly things,
p. 5.
and as it were co^ferences in secret with God by prayers, not framed according
to the frosen manner of the world, but expressing such fervent desires as might
even force God to hearken unto them. Where they found men in diet, attire, p.
16. p. 1.8.119.
furniture of house, or any other way obseruers of Civility, and decent order,
such they reproved as being carnally and earthly minded. 120.
Every word otherwise then severely and sadly uttered, seemed to pierce like a
sword through them. If any man were pleasant, p. 116.
their manner was presently with deep sighs to repeat those words of our
Savior Christ, p. 124. Luc. 6.12.
Woe be to you which now laugh, for ye shall lament. So great was their delight
to be always in trouble, yt such as did quietly lead their lives, they judged
of all other men to be in most dangerous case. p. 117.
They so much affected to cross the ordinary custom in every thing, yt when
other men's use was to put on better attire, they would be sure to show
themselves openly abroad in worse: the ordinary names of the days in the week
they thought it a kind of prophanes to use, and therefore accustomed themselves
to make no other distinction then by numbers, The First, Second, Third day.
From this they proceeded unto public reformation, first Ecclesiastical, p. 40.
and then Civil. Touching the former, they boldly aduouched, that themselves
only had the truth, which thing upon peril of their lives they would at all
times defend; and that since the Apostles lived, the same was never before in all points sincerely taught. Wherefore that things might again be brought to
that ancient integrity which Jesus Christ by his word requires, they began
to control the ministers of the Gospel for attributing so much force and
virtue unto the Scriptures of God read, whereas the truth was, that when the
word is said to engender faith in the heart, and to convert the soul of man,
or to work any such spiritual divine effect, these speeches are not thereunto
appliable as it is read or preached, but as it is ingrafted in us by the power
of the holy Ghost opening the eyes of our understanding, and so revealing the
mysteries of God, according to that which Jeremy promised before should be,
Ier. 31.34.
saying, I will put my law in their inward parts, and I will write it in their
hearts. p. 29.
The book of God they notwithstanding for the most part so admired, p. 27.
that other disputation against their opinions then only by allegation of
Scripture they would not hear; besides it, they thought no other writings in
the world should be studied; in so much as one of their great Prophets
exhorting them to cast away all respects unto humane writings, so far to his
motion they condescended, that as many as had any books save the holy Bible in
their custody, they brought and set them publicly on fire. When they and
their Bibles were alone together, what strange fantastical opinion soever at
any time entered into their heads, their use was to think the Spirit taught it
them. Their phrensies concerning our Saviors incarnation, the state of souls
departed, and such like, are things needless to be rehearsed. And for as much
as they were of the same suite with those of whom the Apostle speaks, 2. Tim.
3.7.
saying, They are still learning, but never attain to the knowledge of truth,
it was no marvel to see them every day broach some new thing, not heard of
before. Which restless leuitie they did interpret to be their growing to
spiritual perfection, and a proceeding from faith to faith. p. 65.6^.
The differences amongst them grew by this mean in a manner infinite, so that
scarcely was there found any one of them, the forge of whose brain was not
possessed with some special mystery. p. 135.
Whereupon, although their mutual contentions were most fiercely prosecuted
amongst themselves; yet when they came to defend the cause common to them all
against the adversaries of their faction, they had ways to lick one another
whole, the sounder in his own persuasion, P. 25.
excusing THE DEAR BRETHREN, which were not so far enlightened, and
professing a charitable hope of the mercy of God toward them notwithstanding
their swaruing from him in some things. P. 71. 124.
Their own ministers they highly magnified as men whose vocation was from God:
the rest their manner was to term disdainfully Scribes and Pharisees, to account
their calling an human creature, and to deteine the people as much as might
be from hearing them. p. 764.
As touching Sacraments; baptism administered in ye church of Rome, they judged
to be but an execrable mockery and no baptism; both because the Ministers
thereof in the papacy are wicked idolaters, lewd persons, thieves, and
murderers, cursed creatures, ignorant beasts; and also for that to baptize is a
proper action belonging unto none but the Church of Christ, whereas Rome is
Antichrists synagogue. p. 748.
The custom of using Godfathers and Godmothers at Christnings they scorned.
Baptising of infants, although confessed by themselves to have bin continued eue^
since the very Apostles own times, p. 112.
yet they altogether condemned: partly because sundry errors are of no less
antiquity; p. 518.
and partly for yt there is no commandment in the Gospel of Christ which
says, p. 722.
Baptize infants, but he contrariwise in saying, Go preach and Baptize, p. 726.
does appoint yt the minister of Baptism shall in that action first administer
doctrine, and the^ Baptism, as also in saying, p. 6^8.
whosoever does believe and is baptized, he appoints yt the party to who^
baptism is administered shall first believe* and then be baptized; to the end
yt believing may go before this sacrament in the receiver, no otherwise then
preaching in the giver, since equally in both, the law of Christ declares not
only what things are required, p. 38.
but also in what order they are required. The Eucharist they received
(pretending our Lord and Saviors example) after supper: and for avoiding all
those impieties which have bin grounded upon ye mystical words of Christ's,
This is my body, This is my blood; they thought it not safe to mention either
body or blood in yt Sacrament, but rather to abrogate both, and to use no words
but these, Take, eat, declare the death of our Lord: drink, p. 122.
show forth our Lords death. In rites and ceremonies their profession was
hatred of all co^formity with ye Church of Rome: for which cause they would
rather endure any torment then observe the solemn festiuals which others did,
in as much as Antichrist (they said) was ye first inuentor of the^. The
pretended end of their civil reformation, was yt Christ might have dominion
over all, that all crowns and scepters might be thrown down at his feet,
that no other might reign over Christian me^ but he, no regiment keep the^ in
awe but his discipline, amongst them no sword at all be carried besides his, the
sword of spiritual excommunication. For this cause they labored with all
their might in ouerturning the seats of Magistracy, P. 841.
because Christ has said, Kings of Nations; p. 8^3.
in abolishing the execution of justice, because Christ has said, Resist not
evil; in forbidding oaths the necessary means of judicial trial, because
Christ has said, p. 849.
Swear not at all; finally in bringing in community of goods, p. 40.
because Christ's by his Apostles has given the world such example, to the end
that men might excel one another, not in wealth the pillar of secular
authority, but in virtue. These men at the first were only pitied in their
error, and not much withstood by any; the great humility, zeal, and devotion
which appeared to be in them, was in all men's opinion a pledge of their
harmless meaning. The hardest that me^ of sound understanding conceived of
them was but this, La^ant. de. Iustit. lib. 5. Cap. 19.
O quam honesta voluntate miseri errant? With how good a meaning these poor
souls do evil. Luther made request unto Frederick Duke of Saxony, p. 6.
that within his dominion they might be favorably dealt with and spared, for
that (their error exempted) they seemed otherwise right good men. By means of
which merciful tolleration they gathered strength, much more then was safe for
the state of the common wealth wherein they lived. p. 4.20.
They had their secret corner-meetings and assemblies in the night, the people
flocked unto them by thousands. p. 5^.
The means whereby they both allured and retained so great multitudes were
most effectual; first a wonderful show of zeal toward God, where with they
seemed to be even rapt in every thing they spoke: secondly an hatred of sin,
and a singular love of integrity, which men did think to be much more then
ordinary in them, by reason of the custom which they had to fill ye ears of
the people with inuectiues against their authorized guides, as well spiritual
as civil: thirdly the bountiful relief where with they eased the broken
estate of such needy creatures, as were in yt respect the more apt to be
drawn away: fourthly, a tender compassion which they were thought to take upon
the miseries of the common sort, over whose heads their manner was even to
power down showers of tears in complaining yt no respect was had unto the^,
that their goods were devoured by wicked cormorants, p. 6 7.
their persons had in contempt, all liberty both temporal and spiritual taken
from them, that it was high time for God now to hear their groans, and to send
them deliverance: lastly a cunning slight which they had to stroke and smooth
up the minds of their followers, as well by appropriating unto them all the
fauourble titles, the good words, and the gracious promises in Scripture; as
also by casting the contrary always on the heads of such as were severed from
that retinue. Whereupon the peoples common acclamation unto such deceivers was,
7.
These are verily the men of God, these are his true and sincere Prophets. If
any such Prophet or man of God did suffer by order of law condign and deserved
punishment; were it for felony, rebellion, murder, or what else, p. 17.
the people (so strangely were their hearts enchanted) as though blessed Saint
Stephen had been again martyred, did lament that God took away his most dear
servants from them. In all these things being fully persuaded, that what they
did, it was obedience to the will of God, and that all men should do the like;
there remained after speculation practice, p. 6.
whereby the whole world thereunto (if it were possible) might be framed. This
they saw could not be done, but with mighty opposition and resistance: against
which to strengthen themselves, they secretly entered into league of
association. And peradventure considering, that although they were many, yet
long wars would in time waste them out; they began to think whether it might
not be that God would have them do for their speedy an mighty increase, the
same which sometime Gods own chosen people, the people of Israel did. Glad
and feign they were to have it so: which very desire was it self apt to breed
both an opinion of possibility, and a willingness to gather arguments of
likelihood that so God himself would have it. Nothing more clear unto their
seeming, then that a new Jerusalem being often spoken of in Scripture, they
undoubtedly were themselves that new Jerusalem, and the old did by way of a
certain figurative resemblance signify what they should both be and do. Here
they drew in a Sea of matter, by applying all things unto their own company,
which are any where spoken concerning divine favors and benefits bestowed
upon the old Commonwealth of Israel; concluding that as Israel was
delivered out of Egypt, so they spiritually out of the Egypt of this worlds
servile thraldom unto sin and superstition; as Israel was to root out the
Idolatrous nations, and to plant in steed of them a people which feared God,
so the same Lords goodwill and pleasure was now, that these new Israelites
should under the conduct of other Iosuaes, Sampsons, and Gedeons, perform a
work no less miraculous in casting out violently the wicked from the earth,
and establishing the kingdom of Christ with perfect liberty: and therefore as
the cause why the children of Israel took unto one man many wives, might be
least the casualties of war should any way hinder the promise of God
concerning their multitude from taking effect in them; so it was not unlike
that for the necessary propagation of Christ's kingdom under the Gospel, the
Lord was content to allow as much. Now whatsoever they did in such sort
collect out of Scripture, when they came to justify or persuade it unto
others, all was the heavenly fathers appointment, his commandment, his will
and charge. Which thing is the very point in regard whereof I have gathered
this declaration. For my purpose herein is to show, that when the minds of men
are once erroniously persuaded that it is the will of God to have those things
done which they phancie; their opinions are as thorns in their sides, never
suffering them to take rest till they have brought their speculations into
practice: the lets and impediments of which practice their restless desire and
study to remove, leads them every day forth by the hand into other more
dangerous opinions, sometimes quite and clean contrary to their first
pretended meanings: so as what will grow out of such errors as go masked under
the cloak of divine authority, impossible it is that ever the wit of man
should imagine, till time have brought forth the fruits of them: for which
cause it behooves wisdom to fear the sequels thereof, even beyond all
apparent cause of fear. These men in whose mouths at the first, sounded
nothing but only mortification of the flesh; were come at the length to think
they might lawfully have their six or seven wives apeece: they which at the
first thought judgment and justice it self to be merciless cruelty;
accounted at the length their own hands sanctified with being imb^ued in
Christan blood: they who at the first were wont to beat down all dominion,
and to urge against poor Constables, Kings of Nations; had at the length both
Consuls and Kings of their own erection amongst themselves: finally they which
could not brook at the first that any man should seek, no not by law, the
recovery of goods injuriously taken or withheld from him; were grown at the
last to think they could not offer unto God more acceptable sacrifice, then by
turning their adversaries clean out of house and home, and by enriching
themselves with all kind of spoil and pillage; P. 41.
which thing being laid to their charge, they had in a readiness their answer,
that now the time was come, when according to our Saviors promise, Matt. 5.5.
Exodus 11.2.
The meek ones must inherit the earth, and that their title hereunto was the
same which the righteous Israelites had unto ye goods of the wicked Egyptians.
Wherefore since the world has had in these men so fresh experience, how
dangerous such active errors are, it must not offend you though touching the
sequel of your present misperswasions much more be doubted, then your own
intents and purposes do happily aim at. And yet your words already are
somewhat, when ye affirm that your pastors, Doctors, Matt. in his ^. libel. p.
28.
Elders, and Deacons, ought to be in this Church of England, whether her
Majesty and our state will or no; when for the animating of your consederates
ye publish the musters which ye have made of your own bands, and proclaim
them to amount I know not to how many thousands; when ye threaten, that since
neither your suites to the Parliament, nor supplications to our Convocation
house, neither your defenses by writing; nor chalenges of disputation in
behalf of that cause are able to prevail, Demonstr. in the praef.
we must blame our selves if to bring in discipline some such means hereafter
be used as shall cause all our hearts to ache. That things doubtful are to be
constered in the better part, is a principle not safe to be followed in matters
concerning the public state of a common weal. But howsoever these and the
like speeches be accounted as arrows idly shot at randon, without either eye
had to any mark, or regard to their lighting place: has not your longing
desire for the practice of your discipline, brought the matter already unto
this demurrer amongst you, whether the people and their godly pastors that way
affected, ought not to make separation from the rest, and to begin the exercise
of discipline without the license of Civil powers, which license they have
sought for, and are not heard? Upon which question as ye have now divided your
selves, the warier sort of you taking the one part, and the forwarder in zeal
the other; so in case these earnest ones should prevail, what other sequel
can any wise man imagine but this, that having first resolved that attempts for
discipline without superiors are lawful, it will follow in the next place to
be disputed what may be attempted against superiors which will not have the
scepter of that discipline to rule over them? Yea even by you which have stayed
your selves from running headlong with the other sort, somewhat notwithstanding
there has been done without the leave or liking of your lawful superiors, for
the exercise of a part of your discipline amongst the Clergy thereunto
addicted. And least examination of principal parties therein should bring
those things to light, which might hinder and let your proceedings; behold for
a bar against that impediment, one opinion ye have newly added unto the rest
even upon this occasion, an opinion to exempt you from taking oaths which may
turn to the molestation of your brethren in that cause. The next neighbor
opinion whereunto, when occasion requires, may follow for dispensation with
oaths already taken, if they afterward be found to import a necessity of
detecting ought which may bring such good men into trouble or damage,
whatsoever the cause be. O merciful God, what man's wit is there able to found
the depth of those dangerous and fearful evils, whereinto our weak and
impotent nature is inclinable to sink itself, rather then to show an
acknowledgement of error in that which once we have unadvisedly taken upon us
to defend, against the stream as it were of a contrary public resolution!
Wherefore if we any thing respect their error, who being persuaded even as ye
are, have gone further upon that persuasion then ye allow; if we regard the
present state of the highest governor placed over us, if the quality and
disposition of our Nobles, if the orders and laws of our famous Universities,
it the profession of the Civil, or the practice of the Common law amongst us,
if the mischiefs whereinto even before our eyes so many others have fallen
headlong from no less plausible and fair beginnings then yours are: there is
in every of these considerations most just cause to fear, least our hastines
to embrace a thing of so perilous consequence, should cause posterity to feel
those evils, which as yet are more easy for us to prevent, then they would be
for them to remedy.

The conclusion of all.
9. The best and safest way for you therefore my dear brethren is, to call your
deeds past to a new reckening, to reexamine the cause ye have taken in hand,
and to try it even point by point, argument by argument, with all the diligent
exactness ye can; to lay aside the gall of that bitterness wherein your minds
have hitherto over abounded, and with meekness to search the truth. Think ye
are men, deem it not impossible for you to err: sift impartially your own
hearts, whether it be force of reason, or vehemence of affection, which has
bred, and still does feed these opinions in you. If truth do any where manifest
it self, seek not to smother it with glosing delusions, acknowledge the
greatness thereof, and think it your best victory when the same does prevail
over you.

That ye have been earnest in speaking or writing again and again the
contrary way, should be no blemish or discredit at all unto you. Amongst so
many so huge volumes as the infinite pains of Saint Augustine have brought
forth, what one has gotten him greater love, commendation and honor, then
the book wherein he carefully collecteth his own ouersights, and sincerely
condemns them? Many speeches there are of Iobes, whereby his wisdom and
other virtues may appear: but the glory of an ingenuous mind he has purchased
by these words only, Job. 39.37.
Behold, I will lay mine hand on my mouth; I have spoken once, yet will I not
therefore maintain argument; yea twice, howbeit for that cause further I will
not proceed. Far more comfort it were for us (so small is the joy we take in
these strifes) to labor under the same yoke, as men that look for the same
eternal reward of their labors, to be joined with you in bands of
indissoluble love and amity, to live as if our persons being many our souls
were but one, rather then in such dismembered sort to spend our few and wretched
days in a tedious prosecuting of wearisome contentions* the end whereof, if
they have not some speedy end, will be heavy even on both sides. Brought
already we are even to that estate which Gregory Nazianzene mournefully
describes, saying.

My mind leads me (since there is no other remedy) to fly and to convey my
self into some corner out of sight, Greg. Na^. in Apol.
where I may escape from this cloudie tempest of malitiousnesse, whereby all
parts are entered into a deadly war amongst themselves, and that little
remnant of love which was, is now consumed to nothing. The only godliness we
glory in, is to find out somewhat whereby we may judge others to be ungodly.
Each others faults we observe, as matter of exprobration, and not of grief. By
these means we are grown hateful in the eyes of the Heathens themselves; and
(which wounds us the mo^e deeply) able we are not to deny but that we have
deserved their hatred. With the better sort of our own, our fame and credit is
clean lost. The less we are to marvel if they judge vilely of us, who
although we did well, would hardly allow thereof. On our backs they also build
that are lewd, and what we object one against an other, the same they use to
the utter scorn and disgrace of us all. This we have gained by our mutual
homedissentions. This we are worthily rewarded with, which are more forward to
strive, then becomes men of virtuous and mild disposition. But our trust in
the almighty is, that with us contentions are now at their highest floate, and
that the day will come (for what cause of despair is there) when ye passions
of former enmity being allaied, we shall with ten times redoubled tokens of our
unfeignedly reconciled love, show our selves each toward other the same, which
Joseph and the brethren of Joseph were at the time of their enteruiew in
Egypt. Our comfortable expectation and most thirsty desire whereof what man
soever amongst you shall any way help to satisfy, (as we truly hope there is
no one amongst you but some way or other will) the blessings of the God of
peace both in this world and in the world to come, be upon him more then the
stars of the firmament in number.

What things are handled in the Books following.
THe first Book, concerning laws in general.

The second, of the use of divine law contained in scripture; whether that be
the only law which ought to serve for our direction in all things without
exception.

The third, of laws concerning Ecclesiastical Polity; whether the form
thereof be in scripture so set down, that no addition or change is lawful.

The fourth, of general exceptions taken against the laws of our polity, as
being popish and banished out of certain reformed Churches.

The fifth, of our laws that concern the public religious duties of the
Church; and the manner of bestowing that power of order which inableth men in
sundry degrees and callings to execute the same.

The sixth, of the power of jurisdiction, which the reformed platform claymeth
unto lay elders, with others.

The seventh, of the power of jurisdiction and the honor which is annexed
thereunto in Bishops.

The eighth, of the power of ecclesiastical dominion or supreme authority,
which with us the highest governor or Prince has, as well in regard of
domestical jurisdictions, as of that other forreinly claimed by the Bishop of
Rome.

The first Book: Concerning Laws, and their several kinds in general.
The matter contained in this first Book.
1 THe cause of writing this general discourse concerning laws* 2 Of that
law which God from before the beginning has set for himself to do all the
things by. 3 The law which natural agents observe, and their necessary manner of
keeping it* 4 The law which the Angels of God obey. 5 The law whereby man is
in his actions directed to the imitation of God. 6 Men's first beginning to
understand that law. 7 Of man's will, which is the first thing that laws of
action are made to guide. 8 Of the natural finding out of laws by the light
of reason to guide the will unto that which is good. 9 Of the benefit of
keeping that law which reason teaches. 10 How reason does lead men unto the
making of humane laws whereby politic societies are governed, and to
agreement about laws whereby the fellowship or communion of independent
societies stands. 11 Wherefore God has by scripture further made known such
supernatural laws as do serve for men's direction. 12 The cause why so many
natural or rational laws are set down in holy scripture. 13 The benefit of
having divine laws written. 14 The sufficiency of scripture unto the end for
which it was instituted. 15 Of laws positive contained in scripture, the
mutabilitie of certain of them, and the general use of scripture. 16 A
conclusion, showing how all this belongs to the cause in question.
HE that goes about to persuade a multitude, The cause of writing this
general discourse.
that they are not so well governed as they ought to be, shall never want
attentive and favorable hearers; because they know the manifold defects
whereunto every kind of regiment is subject, but the secret lets and
difficulties* which in public proceedings are innumerable and inevitable, they
have not ordinarily the judgment to consider. And bec^^se such as openly
reprove supposed disorders of state are taken for principal friends to the
common benefit of all, and for men that carry singular freedom of mind; under
this fair and plausible color whatsoever they utter passes for good and
current. That which wants in the weight of their speech, is supplied by the
aptnes of men's minds to accept and believe it. Whereas on the other side, if we
maintain things that are established, we have not only to strive with a
number of heavy preiudices deeply rooted in the hearts of men, who think
that herein we serve the time, and speak in favor of the present state,
because thereby we either hold or seek preferment; but also to bear such
exceptions as minds so auerted before hand usually take against that which they
are loath should be powered into them. Albeit therefore much of that we are to
speak in this present cause, may seem to a number perhaps tedious, perhaps
obscure, dark, and intricate, (for many talk of the truth, which never
sounded the depth from whence it springs, and therefore when they are led
thereunto they are soon weary, as men drawn from those beaten paths
wherewith they have been inured): yet this may not so far prevail, as to cut
off that which the matter it self requires, howsoever the nice humor of some
be therewith pleased or no. They unto whom we shall seem tedious, are in no
wise iniuried by us, because it is in their own hands to spare that labor
which they are not willing to endure. And if any complain of obscurity, they
must consider, that in these matters it comes no otherwise to pass, then in
sundry the works both of art and also of nature, where that which has
greatest force in the very things we see, is notwithstanding it self
oftentimes not seen. The stateliness of houses, the goodlines of trees, when
we behold them delights the eye; but that foundation which bears up the
one, that root which ministers unto the other nourishment and life, is in the
bosom of the earth concealed; and if there be at any time occasion to search
into it, such labor is then more necessary then pleasant, both to them which
undertake it, and for the lookers on. In like manner the use and benefit of
good laws, all that live under them may enjoy with delight and comfort, albeit
the grounds and first original causes from whence they have sprung be
unknown, as to the greatest part of men they are. But when they who withdraw
their obedience, pretend that the laws which they should obey are corrupt and
vicious; for better examination of their quality, it behooves the very
foundation and root, the highest welspring and fountain of them to be
discovered. Which because we are not oftentimes accustomed to do, when we
do it, the pains we take are more needful a great deal then acceptable,
and the matters which we handle seem by reason of newness, (till the mind
grow better acquainted with them) dark, intricate and vnfamiliar. For as much
help whereof as may be in this case, I have endeavored throughout the body of
this whole discourse, that every former part might give strength unto all that
follow, and every later bring some light unto all before. So that if the
judgments of men do but hold themselves in suspense as touching these first
more general meditations, till in order they have perused the rest that ensue:
what may seem dark at the first will afterward be found more plain, even
as the later particular decisions will appear I doubt not more strong, when
the other have been read before. The laws of the Church, whereby for so many
ages together we have been guided in the exercise of Christian religion and
the service of the true God, our rites, customs, and orders of Ecclesiastical
government, are called in question; we are accused as men that will not have
Christ Jesus to rule over them, but have wilfully cast his statutes behind
their backs, hating to be reformed, and made subject unto the scepter of his
discipline. Behold therefore we offer the laws whereby we live unto the
general trial and judgment of the whole world; heartily beseeching almighty
God, whom we desire to serve according to his own will, that both we and
others (all kind of partial affection being clean laid aside) may have eyes
to see, and hearts to embrace, the things that in his sight are most
acceptable. And because the point about which we strive is the quality of our
laws, our first entrance hereinto cannot better be made, then with
consideration of the nature of law in general, and of that law which gives
life unto all the rest which are commendable just and good, n^mely the law
whereby the Eternal himself does work. Proceeding from hence to the law,
first of nature, then of scripture, we shall have the easier access unto those
things which come after to be debated, concerning the particular cause and
question which we have in hand.

2 All things that are, have some operation not violent or casual. Of that
law which God from before the beginning has set for himself to do all things
by.
Neither does any thing ever begin to exercise the same, without some
foreconceiued end for which it works. And the end which it works for is
not obtained, unless the work be also fit to obtain it by. For unto every
end every operation will not serve. That which does assign unto each thing
the kind, that which does moderate the force and power, that which does
appoint the form and measure of working, the same we term a Law. So that no
certain end could ever be attained, unless the actions whereby it is
attained were regular, that is to say, made suitable, fit and correspondent
unto their end, by some Canon rule or law. Which thing does first take plac^
in the works even of God himself. All things therefore do work after a
sort according to law: all other things according to a law, whereof some
superiors unto whom they are subject is author; only the works and
operations of God, have him both for their worker, and for the law whereby
they are wrought. The being of God, is a kind of law to his working: for that
perfection which God is, gives perfection to that he does. Those natural,
necessary, and internal operations of God, the generation of the Son, the
proceeding of the Spirit, are without the compass of my present intent: which
is to touch only such operations as have their beginning and being by a
voluntary purpose, wherewith God has eternally decreed when and how they
should be. Which eternal decree is that we term an eternal law.
Dangerous it were for the feeble brain of man to wade far into the doings of
the most High; whom although to know be life, and joy to make mention of his
name; yet our soundest knowledge is, to know that we know him not as indeed
he is, neither can know him; and our safest eloquence concerning him is our
silence when we confess without confession, that his glory is inexplicable,
his greatness above our capacity and reach. He is above, and we upon earth;
therefore it behooves our words to be wary and few, Our God is one, or
rather very oneness, and mere unity, having nothing but it self in it
self, and not consisting (as all things do besides God) of many things. In
which essential unity of God, a Trinity personal nevertheless subsisteth,
after a manner far exceeding the possibility of man's conceit. The works which
outwardly are of God, they are in such sort of him being one, that each person
has in them somewhat peculiar and proper. For being three, and they all
subsisting in the essence of one deity; from the Father, by the Son, through
the Spirit, Ioh. 1^.13.14.15.
all things are. That which the Son does hear of the Father, and which the
Spirit does receive of the Father and the Son, the same we have at the hands
of the Spirit, as being the last, and therefore the nearest unto us in order,
although in power the same with the second and the first. The wise and learned
among the very Heathens themselves, have all acknowledged some first cause,
whereupon originally the being of all things depends. Neither have they
otherwise spoken of that cause, then as an Agent, which knowing what and why it
works, observes in working a most exact order or law. Thus much is
signified by that which Homer mentions, Iupiter^ Counsel was accomplished.
(...). Thus much acknowledged by Mercurius Trismegist. The creator made the
whole world, not with hands, but by Reason. Stob in eclog. phys.
(...). Thus much co^fest by Anaxagoras and Plato terming the maker of the
world an Intellectual worker. Finally the Stoikes, although imagining the first
cause of all things to be fire, held nevertheless yt the same fire having
art, did Proceed by a certain and a (...) Way in the making of the world.
(...). They all confess therefore in the working of that first cause, that
counsel is used, reason followed, a way observed, that is to say, constant
order and law is kept, whereof it self must needs be author unto it self.
Otherwise it should have some worthier and higher to direct it, and so could
not it self be the first. Being the first, it can have no other then it self
to be the author of that law which it willingly works by* God therefore is a
law both to himself, and to all other things besides. To himself he is a law
in all those things whereof our Savior speaks, saying, My Father works as
yet, Ioh. 5.17.
so I. God works nothing without cause. All those things which are done by
him, have some end for which they are done: and the end for which they are
done, is a reason of his will to do them. His will had not inclined to create
woman, but that he saw it could not be well if she were not created, Genesis 2.18.
Non est bonum, It is not good man should be alone, Therefore let us make an
helper for him. That and nothing else is done by God, which to leave undone
were not so good. If therefore it be demanded, why God having power and
hability infinite, the effects notwithstanding of that power are all so limited
as we see they are: the reason hereof is, the end which he has proposed, and
the law whereby his wisdom has, stinted the effects of his power in such
sort, that it does not work infinitely, but correspo^dently unto that end for
which it works, even al things (...), Sap. 8.1. Sap. 11.17.
in most decent and comely sort, all things in measure, number, and weight. The
general end of Gods external working, is the exercise of his most glorious
and most abundant virtue: Which abundance does show it self in variety, and
for that cause this variety is oftentimes in scripture expressed by the name of
riches. The Lord has made all things for his own sake. Ephesians. 1.7.
Not that any thing is made to be beneficial unto him, Phil. 4.19. Col. ^.3.
but all things for him to show beneficence and grace in them. The particular
drift of every act proceeding externally from God, prou. 16.6.
we are not able to discern, and therefore cannot always give the proper and
certain reason of his works. Howbeit undoubtedly a proper and certain reason
there is of every finite work of God, in as much as there is a law imposed
upon it; which if there were not, it should be infinite even as the worker
himself is. They err therefore who think that of the will of God to do this
or that, there is no reason besides his will. Many times no reason known to
us; but that there is no reason thereof, I judge it most unreasonable to
imagine, in as much as he works all things (...), not only according to his
own will, Ephe. 1.13.
but the counsel of his own will. And whatsoever is done with counsel or
wise resolution, has of necessity some reason why it should be done, albeit
that reason be to us in somethings so secret, that it forces the wit of man
to stand, as the blessed Apostle himself does, amazed thereat, Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, How
unsearchable are his judgments, etc! That law eternal which God himself has
made to himself, and thereby works all things whereof he is the cause and
author; that law in the admirable frame whereof shines with most perfect
beauty the countenance of that wisdom which has testified concerning her
self, The lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, prou. ^.23.
eue^ before his works of old I was set up; that law which has been the
pattern to make, and is the Card to guide the world by; that law which has
been of God, and with God everlastingly; that law the author and obseruer
whereof is one only God to be blessed for ever; how should either men or Angels
be able perfectly to behold? The book of this law we are neither able nor
worthy to open and look into. That little thereof which we darkly apprehend,
we admire; the rest with religious ignorance we humbly and meekly adore. Seeing
therefore that according to this law he works, of whom, through whom, and for
whom are all things; although there seem unto us confusion and disorder in
the affairs of this present world* Romans 11.10. Bor^. lib. 4* des
Tamen quon! am bonus mund^ rector temperat, recte fieri cuncta ne dubites, Let
no man doubt but that every thing is well done, because the world is ruled by so
good a guide, Consol. philo^
as transgresses not his own law, then which nothing can be more absolute,
perfect and just. The law whereby he works, is eternal, and therefore can have
no show or color of mutability: for which cause a part of that law being
opened in the promises which God has made, (because his promises are nothing
else but declarations what God will do for the good of men) touching those
promises the Apostle has witnessed, that God may as possibly deny himself
and not be God; 2. Tim. 2.13.
as fail to perform them. And concerning the counsel of God, he terms it
likewise a thing unchangeable; the counsel of God, Heb. 6.17.
and that law of God whereof now we speak, being one. Nor is the freedom of
the will of God any whit abated, let or hindered by means of this; because the
impositio^ of this law upon himself is his own free and volu^tary act. This
law therefore we may name eternal, being that order which God before al ages
has set down with himself, for himself to do all things by.

3 I am not ignorant that by law eternal the learned for the most part do
understand the order, The law which natural ag^nts have given t^em to observe,
and their necessary manner of keeping it.
not which God has eternally purposed himself in all his works to observe,
but rather that which with himself he has set down as expedient to be kept
by all his creatures, according to the several condition wherewith he has
endued them. They who thus are accustomed to speak, apply the name of Law
unto that only rule of working which superior authority in poseth; whereas we
somewhat more enlarging the sense thereof, term any kind of rule or Canon
whereby actions are framed, a law. Now that law which as it is laid up in the
bosom of God, they call eternal, receives according unto the different kinds
of things which are subject unto it, different and sundry kinds of names. That
part of it which orders natural age^ts, we call usually natures law: that
which Angels do clearly behold, and without any swaruing observe, is a law
celestial and heavenly: the law of reason, that which binds creatures
reasonable in this world, and with which by reason they may most plainly
perceive themselves bound; that which binds them, and is not known but by
special revelation from God, Divine law; humane law, that which out of the law
either of reason or of God, men probably gathering to be expedient, they make
it a law. All things therefore, which are as they ought to be, are conformed
unto this second law eternal, and even those things which to this eternal law
are not conformable, are notwithstanding in some sort ordered by the first
eternal law. For what good or evil is there under the sun, what action
correspondent or repugnant unto the law which God has imposed upon his
creatures, but in or upon it God does work according to the law which himself
has eternally purposed to keep, that is to say, the first law eternal? So
that a twofold law eternal being thus made, it is not hard to conceive how
they both take place in Id omne quod in rebus creatis fit, est materia legis
oeternae. Th 1.2. q 93. art 4 ^.6. Nullo modo aliquid legibus summi creato ris
ordinationique subtrahitur, a quo pax vniuersitatis administratur. August. de
ciu. de^ lib. 19. c. 22. Immo and pece^tum, quatenus ^ Deo ^uste permittitu^,
cadit ^n legemaeter^am. E^^a^leg^aetern^ sub^icitur peccatum* quatenus
Voluntaria legis transgressio poenale quodd^ incommodum animae ^^ser^t, ^uxta
ill^d Augustini, Ius^isti D^mine and sic est, vt poe^ia su ^sib^ sit omnis
animus inordin^tus. Co^fe^. lib 1. c. 1^ Nec male sc^ola^t^ci. Quemadmodum
inquiunt videmus res naturales contingentes, hoc ipso quod a fine particular^
suo atque adeu a lege aeterna exor^itant, in candem legem ae ernam incidere,
qu^t^nucons^q iu^tur alium fine ^ a lege ^riam aeterna ipsis in casu
particulari consti^utum: sic verisimile e^t homines etiam cu n peccant and
desciscunt a lege aeterna ^^praecipiente, re neidere in ordine^ aeternae
legisvt punientis.
all things. Wherefore to come to the law of nature, albeit thereby we sometimes
mean that manner of working which God has set for each created thing to
keep: yet for as much as those things are termed most properly natural
agents, which keep the law of their kind unwittingly, as the heavens and
elements of the world, which can do no otherwise then they do; and for as much
as we give unto intellectual natures the name of voluntary agents, that so we
may distinguish them from the other* expedient it will be, that we sever the
law of nature observed by the one, from that which the other is tied unto.
Touching the former, their strict keeping of one tenure statute and law is
spoken of by all, but has in it more then men have as yet attained to know, or
perhaps ever shall attain, seeing the travel of wading herein is given of God
to the sons of men, that perceiving how much the least thing in the world
has in it more then the wisest are able to reach unto, they may by this means
learn humility. Moses in describing the work of creation, attributes speech
unto God, God said, Let there be light: Let there be afirmame^t: Let the
waters under the heaven be gathered together into one place: Let the earth
bring forth: Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven. Was this only the
intent of Moses, to signify the infinite greatness of Gods power by the easines
of his accomplishing such effects, without travel, pain or labor? Surely it
seems that Moses had herein besides this a further purpose, namely, first to
teach that God did not work as a necessary, but a voluntary agent, intending
before hand and decreeing with himself that which did outwardly proceed from
him: secondly to show that God did then institute a law natural to be observed
by creatures, and therefore according to the manner of laws, the institution
thereof is described, as being established by solemn iniunction. His
commanding those things to be which are, and to be in such sort as they are,
to keep that tenure and course which they do, imports the establishment of
natures law. This worlds first creation, and the preservation since of things
created, what is it but only so far forth a manifestation by execution, what
the eternal law of God is concerning things natural? And as it comes to
pass in a kingdom rightly ordered, that after a law is once published, it
presently takes effect far and wide, al states framing themselves thereunto;
even so let us think it fares in the natural course of the world: since the
time that God did first proclaim the edicts of his law upon it, heaven and
earth have harkned unto his voice, and their labor has been to do his will:
He made a law for the rain, He gave his decree unto the sea, that the waters
should not pass his commandment. Now if nature should intermit her course,
and leave altogether, though it were but for a while, the observation of her
own laws; if those principal and mother elements of the world, whereof all
things in this lower world are made, should loose the qualities which now they
have; if the frame of that heavenly arch erected over our heads should loosen
and dissolve it self; if celestial spheres should forget their wonted
motions, and by irregular volubilitie turn themselves any way as it might
happen; if the prince of the lights of heaven, which now as a Giant does run
his unwearied course, should as it were through a languishing faintnes begin to
stand and to rest himself; psalm. 19.5.
if the Moon should wander from her beaten way* the times and seasons of the
year blend themselves by disordered and confused mixture, the winds breath out
their last gasp, the clouds yield no rain, the earth be defeated of heavenly
influence; the fruits of the earth pine away as children at the withered
breasts of their mother no longer able to yield them relief; what would
become of man himself, whom these things now do all serve? See we not plainly
that obedience of creatures unto the law of nature is the stay of the whole
world? Notwithstanding with nature it comes sometimes to pass as with art.
Let Phidias have rude and obstinate stuff to carue, though his art do that it
should, his work will lack that beauty which otherwise in fitter matter it
might have had. He that strikes an instrument with skill, may cause
notwithstanding a very unpleasant sound, if the string whereon he strikes
chance to be incapable of harmony. In the matter whereof things natural
consist, that of Theophrastus takes place, Pheophr. in Metaph.
(...), much of it is oftentimes such as will by no means yield to receive
that impression which were best and most perfect. Which defect in the matter of
things natural, they who gave themselves unto the contemplation of nature
amongst the heathen observed often: but the true original cause thereof, divine
malediction, laid for the sin of man upon these creatures which God had made
for the use of nia^; this being an article of that saving truth which God has
revealed unto his Church, was above the reach of their merely natural
capacity and understanding. But howsoever these swaruings are now and then
incident into the course of nature, nevertheless so constantly the laws of
nature are by natural agents observed, Arist. Rhet. 1. cap. 39.
that no man denies but those things which nature works, are wrought either
always or for the most part after one and the same manner. If here it be
demanded what that is which keeps nature in obedience to her own law, we
must have recourse to that higher law whereof we have already spoken, and
because all other laws do thereon depend, (...)
from thence we must borrow so much as shall need for brief resolution in
this point. Although we are not of opinion therefore, as some are, that nature
in working has before her certain exemplary draughts or patterns, which
subsisting in the bosom of the Highest, and being thence discovered, she
sixeth her eye upon them, as travelers by sea upon the pole star of the
world, and that according there unto she guides her hand to work by
imitation: although we rather embrace the Oracle of Hippocrates, that Each
thing both in small and in great fulfilleth the task which destenie has set
down: and concerning the manner of executing and fulfilling the same, What
they do they know not, yet is it in show and appearance, as though they did
know what they do, and the truth is they do not discern the things which they
look on: nevertheless for as much as the works of nature are no less exact,
then if she did both behold and study how to express some absolute shape or
mirror always present before her; yea such her dexterity and skill appears,
that no intellectual creature in the world were able by capacity to do that
which nature does without capacity and knowledge; it cannot be, but nature
has some director of infinite knowledge to guide her in all her ways. Act.
17.2^.
Who the guide of nature, but only the God of nature? In him we live, move,
and are. Those things which nature is said to do, are by divine art performed,
using nature as an instrument: nor is there any such art or knowledge divine in
nature her self working, but in the guide of natures work. Whereas therefore
things natural which are not in the number of voluntary agents (for of such
only we now speak and of no other) do so necessarily observe their certain
laws, that as long as they keep those Form in other creatures, is a thing
proportionable unto the soul in living creatures. Sensible it is not, nor
otherwise discernable, then only by effects. According to the diversity of
inward forms, things of the world are distinguished into their kinds.
forms which give them their being, they cannot possibly be apt or inclinable
to do otherwise then they do; seeing the kinds of their operations are both
constantly and exactly framed according to the several ends for which they
serve, they themselves in the mean while though doing that which is fit, yet
knowing neither what they do, nor why: it follows that all which they do in
this sort, proceeds originally from some such agent, as knows, appoints,
holds up, and even actually frames the same. The manner of this divine
efficiencie being far above us, we are no more able to conceive by our
reason, then creatures unreasonable by their sense are able to apprehend after
what manner we dispose and order the course of our affairs. Only thus much is
discerned, that the natural generation and process of all things receives
order of proceeding from the settled stabilitie of divine understanding. This
appoints unto them their kinds of working, the disposition whereof in the
purity of Gods own knowledge and will is rightly termed by the name of
Providence. The same being referred unto the things themselves here disposed by
it, was wont by the ancient to be called natural destiny. That law the
performance whereof we behold in things natural, is as it were an
authentical, or an original draught written in the bosom of God himself;
whose spirit being to execute the same, uses every particular nature, every
mere natural agent, only as an instrument created at the beginning, and ever
since the beginning used to work his own will and pleasure withal. Vide
Thom. in Compend. theol, cap. 3. Omne quod mouetur ab aliquo est quasi
instrumentum quoddam primi mouentis. Ridiculum est autem e^am apud indoctos
ponere instrumentum moueri non ab aliquo principale agente.
Nature therefore is nothing else but Gods instrument: in the course whereof
Dionysius perceiving some sudden disturbance, is said to have cried out, Aut
Deus naturae patitur, aut mundi machina dissolu^tur, Either God does suffer
impediment, and is by a greater then himself hindered; or if that be
impossible, then has he determined to make a present dissolution of the world,
the execution of that law beginning now to stand still, without which the world
cannot stand. This workman, whose seruitor nature is, being in truth but only
one, the Heathens imagining to be more, gave him in the sky the name of
Jupiter, in the air the name of Juno, in the water the name of Neptune, in the
earth the name of Vesta and sometimes of Ceres, the name of Apollo in the
Sun, in the Moon the name of Diana, the name of Aeolus and diverse other in
the winds; and to conclude even so many guides of nature they dreamed of, as
they saw there were kinds of things natural in the world. These they
honored, as having power to work or cease accordingly as men deserved of them.
But unto us there is one only guide of all agents natural, and he both the
creator and the worker of all in all, alone to be blessed, adored and honored
by all for ever. That which hitherto has been spoken, concerns natural
agents considered in themselves. But we must further remember also (which thing
to touch in a word shall suffice) that as in this respect they have their law,
which law directs them in the means whereby they tend to their own
perfection. So likewise an other law there is, which touches them as they are
sociable parts united into one body; a law which binds them each to serve
unto others good, and all to prefer the good of the whole before whatsoever
their own particular; as we plainly see they do, when things natural in
that regard forget their ordinary natural wont, that which is heavy mounting
sometime vpwardes of it own accord, and forsaking the center of the earth,
which to it self is most natural, even as if it did hear it self commanded
to let go the good it privately wishes, and to relieve the present distress
of nature in common.

* But now that we may lift up our eyes (as it were) from the footstool to
the throne of God, and leaving these natural, The law which Angels do work
by. Psalm. 104.4. Heb. 1.7. Ephesians. 3.10.
consider a little the state of heavenly and divine creatures; touching Angels
which are spirits immateriall and intellectual, the glorious inhabitants of
those sacred palaces, where nothing but light and blessed immortality, no
shadow of matter for tears, discontentments, griefs, and uncomfortable
passions to work upon, but all joy* tranquillity, and peace, even for ever and
ever does dwell; Dan. 7.10. Matthew. 26.53.
as in number and order they are huge, mighty, and royal armies; so likewise
in perfection of obedience unto that law, which the Highest, whom they adore,
love, and imitate, Heb. 12.22. Luc. 2.13.
has imposed upon them, such obseruantes they are thereof, that our Savior
himself being to set down the perfect idea of that which we are to pray and
wish for on earth, did not teach to pray or wish for more, then only that
here it might be with us, as with them it is in heaven. Matthew. 6.10.
God which moves mere natural agents as an efficient only, does otherwise
move intellectual creatures, and especially his holy Angels. For beholding
the face of God, Matthew. 18.10.
in admiration of so great excellency they all adore him; and being rapt with
the love of his beauty, they cleave inseparably for ever unto him. Psalm.
91.11.12. Luc. 15.7.
Desire to resemble him in goodness, makes them unweariable, Heb. 1.14.
and even insatiable in their longing to do by all means all manner good unto
all the creatures of God, Act. 10.3. Dan. 9.23.
but especially unto the children of men; in the countenance of whose nature
looking downward they behold themselves beneath themselves, Matthew. 1^.^0. Dan.
4.10. (...)
even as upward in God, beneath whom themselves are, they see that character
which is no where but in themselves and us resembled. Thus far even the
Painims have approached; thus far they have seen into the doings of the
Angels of God; Orpheus confessing, that the fiery throne of God is attended on
by those most industrious Angels, careful how all things are performed amongst
men; and the mirror of human wisdom plainly teaching, that God moves
Angels, even as that thing does stir man's heart, which is thereunto presented
amiable. Arist. Metaph. 12. cap. 7.
Angelical actions may therefore be reduced unto these three general kinds;
first, Job. 38.7.
most delectable love, arising from the visible apprehension of the purity,
glory, Math. 18.10.
and beauty of God, invisible saving only unto Spirits that are pure;
secondly adoration, psalm. 148.2. Heb. 1.6. Esa. 6.3.
grounded upon the evidence of the greatness of God, on whom they see how all
things depend; thirdly imitation, bred by the presence of his exemplary
goodness, This is intimated wheresoever we find them termed the sons of God:
as Job. 1.6. and 38.7. ^. pet. 2.4. Ep. Iud. ver. 6.
who cease not before them daily to fill heaven and earth with the rich
treasures of most free and undeserved grace. Of Angels we are not to consider
only what they are, and do, in regard of their own being; but that also
which concerns them as they are lincked into a kind of corporation amongst
themselves, and of society or fellowship with men. Consider Angels each of
them severally in himself, and their law is that which the Prophet David
mentions, All ye his Angels praise him. Consider the Angels of God
associated, psalm. 148.2. Luke 2.13.
and their law is that which disposes them as an Army, one in order and
degree above an other. Matthew* 26.53. psalm. 148.2.
Consider finally the Angels as having with us that communion which the Apostle
to the Hebrews notes, Heb. 12.22.
and in regard whereof Angels have not disdained to profess themselves our
fellowseruants; from hence there springs up a third law, Apoc, 22.9.
which binds them to works of ministerial employment. Every of which their
several functions are by them performed with joy. A part of the Angels of God
notwithstanding (we know) have fallen, and that their fall has been through
the voluntary breach of that law, which did require at their hands continuance
in the exercise of their high and admirable virtue. Impossible it was that ever
their will should change or incline to remit any part of their duty, without
some object having force to auert their conceit from God, and to draw it an
other way; and that before they attained that high perfection of bliss,
wherein now the elect Angels are without possibility of falling. Of any thing
more then of God they could not by any means like, as long as whatsoever they
knew besides God, they apprehended it not in it self without dependencie upon
God; because so long God must needs seem infinitely better then any thing
which they so could apprehend. Things beneath them could not in such sort be
presented unto their eyes, but that therein they must needs see always how
those things did depend on God. It seems therefore that there was no other
way for Angels to sin, but by reflex of their understanding upon themselves;
when being held with admiration of their own sublimitie and honor, the memory
of their subordination unto God and their dependencie on him was drowned in
this conceit; whereupon their adoration, love, and imitation of God, could not
choose but be also interrupted. The fall of Angels therefore was pride. Since
their fall, their practices have been the clean contrary unto those before
mentioned. For being dispersed some in the air, Ioh. 8.44* 1. pet. 5.8.
some on the earth, some in the water, some amongst the minerals, dens,
Apoc. 9.11. Genesis 3.15.
and caves, that are under the earth: they have by all means labored to
effect an universal rebellion against the laws, and as far as in them
lies, utter destruction of the works of God. 1. Chr. 21, 1, Job. 1.7, and 2, 5
These wicked Spirits the Heathens honored in stead of Gods, Ioh. 13, 27,
both generally under the name of Dii inferi Gods infernal; Act. 5, 3, Apoc.
^0, 8.
and particularly, some in Oracles, some in Idols, some as household Gods,
some as Nymphs; in a word no foul and wicked spirit which was not one way or
other honored of men as God, till such time as light appeared in the world, and
dissolved the works of the devil. Thus much therefore may suffice for Angels,
the next unto whom in degree are men.

5 God alone excepted, who actually and everlastingly is whatsoever he may be,
and which cannot hereafter be that which now he is not; The law whereby man is
in his actions directed to the imitation of God.
all other things besides are somewhat in possibility, which as yet they are
not in act. And for this cause there is in all things an appetite or desire,
whereby they incline to something which they may be: and when they are it, they
shall be perfecte^ then now they are. All which perfections are contained under
the general name of Goodness. And because there is not in the world any thing
whereby another may not some way be made the perfecter, therefore all things
that are, are good. Again since there can be no goodness desired which
proceeds not from God himself, as from the supreme cause of all things; and
every effect does after a sort contain, at least wise resemble the cause from
which it proceeds: all things in the world are said in some sort to seek the
highest, (...).
and to covet more or less the participation of God himself. Yet this does no
where so much appear as it does in man: Arist. de an. lib. 2. cap. 4.
because there are so many kinds of perfections which man seeks. The first
degree of goodness is that general perfection which all things do seek* in
desiring the continuance of their being. All things therefore coveting as
much as may be to be like unto God in being ever, that which cannot hereunto
attain personally, does seek to continue it self another way, that is by
offspring and propagation. The next degree of goodness, is that which each
thing coueteth by affecting resemblance with God, in the constancy and
excellency of those operations which belong unto their kind. The immutabilitie
of God they strive unto, by working either always or for the most part after
one and the same manner; his absolute exactnes they imitate, by tending unto
that which is most exquisite in every particular. (...). Ari. 2. de cael. ca. 5.
Hence have risen a number of axioms in Philosophy, showing, how The works
of nature do always aim at that which cannot be bettered. These two kinds of
goodness rehe^rsed are so nearly united to the things themselves which desire
them, that we scarcely perceive the appetite to stir in reaching forth her
hand toward them. But the desire of those perfections which grow externally is
more apparent; especially of such as are not expressly desired unless they be
first known, or such as are not for any other cause then for knowledge it
self desired. Concerning perfections in this kind, that by proceeding in the
knowledge of truth, and by growing in the exercise of virtue, man amongst the
creatures of this inferior world, aspireth to the greatest conformity with
God; Matthew. 5.48. Sap. 7.27.
this is not only known unto us, whom he himself has so instructed, but even
they do acknowledge, who amongst men are not judged the nearest unto him. (...).
With Plato what one thing more usual, then to excite men unto the love of
wisdom, by showing how much* wise men are thereby exalted above men; how
knowledge does raise them up into heaven; how it makes them, though not Gods,
yet as Gods, high, admirable and divine? And Mercurius Trismegisl^s speaking of
the virtues of a righteous soul, Such spirits (says he) are never cl^yed with
praising and speaking well of all men, with doing good unto every one by word
and deed, because they study to frame themselves according to THE PATTERN of
the father of spirits.

6 In the matter of knowledge, there is between the Angels of God and the
children of men this difference. Men's first beginning to grow to the knowledge
of that law which the^ are to observe. vide Isa. 7.16.
Angels already have full and complete knowledge in the highest degree that
can be imparted unto them: men if we view them in their spring, are at the
first without understanding or knowledge at all. Nevertheless from this utter
vacuitie they grow by degrees, till they come at length to be even as the
Angels themselves are. That which agrees to the one now, the other shall
attain unto in the end; they are not so far disioyned and severed, but that
they come at length to meet. The soul of man being therefore at the first as
a book, wherein nothing is, and yet all things may be imprinted; we are to
search by what steps and degrees it rises unto perfection of knowledge. Unto
that which has been already set down concerning natural agents this we must
add, that albeit therein we have comprised as well creatures living, as void
of life, if they be in degree of nature beneath men; nevertheless a difference
we must observe between those natural agents that work altogether
unwittingly, and those which have though weak, yet some understanding what
they do, as fishes, fowls, and beasts have. Beasts are in sensible capacity
as ripe even as men themselves, perhaps more ripe. For as stones, though in
dignity of nature inferior unto plants, yet exceed them in firmness of
strength or durability of being; and plants though beneath the excellency of
creatures endued with sense, yet exceed them in the faculty of vegetation and
of fertility: so beasts though otherwise behind men, may notwithstanding in
actions of sense and phancie go beyond them; because the endeavors of nature,
when it has an higher perfection to seek, are in lower the more remiss, not
esteeming thereof so much as those things do, which have no better proposed
unto them. The soul of man therefore being capable of a more divine
perfection, has (besides the faculties of growing unto sensible knowledge
which is common unto us with beasts) a further hability* whereof in the^ there
is no show at all, (...). Merc. Trism. Aristot^li^all demonstration
the ability of reaching higher then unto sensible things. Till we grow to some
ripeness of years, the soul of man does only store it self with conceits
of things of inferior and more open quality, which afterward do serve as
instruments unto that which is greater: in the mean while above the reach of
meaner creatures it ascends not. When once it comprehends any thing above
this, as the differences of time, affirmations, negations* and contradictions
in speech; we then count it to have some use of natural reason. Whereunto if
afterward there might be added the right helps of true art and learning,
(which helps I must plainly confess this age of the world, carrying the name
of a learned age, does neither much know nor greatly regard) there would
undoubtedly be almost as great difference in maturitie of judgment between
men therewith inured, and that which now men are, as between men that are now
and innocents. Which speech if any condemn, as being over hyperbolicall, let
them consider but this one thing. No art is at the first finding out so perfect
as industry may after make it. Yet the very first man that to any purpose knew
the way we speak of and followed it, has alone thereby performed more very
near in all parts of natural knowledge, then sithence in any one part
thereof, the whole world besides has done. In the poverty of that other new
devised aid, two things there are notwithstanding singular. A^misty.
Of marvelous quick dispatch it is, and does show them that have it as much
almost in three days, as if it dwell threescore years with them. Again
because the curiosity of man's wit, does many times with peril wade farther in
the search of things, then were convenient: the same is thereby restrained unto
such generalities* as every where offering themselves, are apparent unto men of
the weakest conceit that need be. So as following the rules and precepts
thereof, we may find it to be, an Art which teaches the way of speedy
discourse, and restrains the mind of man that it may not wax over wise.
Education and instruction are the means, the one by use, the other by precept,
to make our natural faculty of reason, both the better and the sooner able to
judge rightly between truth and error, good and evil. But at what time a man
may be said to have attained so far forth the use of reason, as suffices to
make him capable of those laws, whereby he is the^ bound to guide his actions;
this is a great deal more easy for common sense to discern, then for any man
by skill and learning to determine: even as it is not in Philosophers, who best
know the nature both of fire and of gold, to teach what degree of the one will
serve to purify the other, so well as the artisan (who does this by fire)
discerns by sense when the fire has that degree of heat which suffices for
his purpose.

7 By reason man attaineth unto the knowledge of things that are and are not
sensible: Of man's will which is the thing that laws of action are made to
guide.
It rests therefore that we search how man attaineth unto the knowledge of
such things insensible, as are to be known that they may be done. Seeing then
that nothing can move unless there be some end, the desire whereof provoke
unto motion; how should that divine power of the soul, that Spirit of our mind
as the Apostle terms it, ever stir it self unto action, Ephesians. 4.23.
unless it have also the like spur? The end for which we are moved to work,
is sometimes the goodness which we conceive of the very working it self, without
any further respect at all; and the cause that procures action is the mere
desire of action, no other good besides being thereby intended. Salust.
Of certain turbulent wits it is said, Illis quieta mouere magna merces
videbatur, They thought the very disturba^ce of things established an hyre
sufficient to set them on work. Sometimes that which we do is referred to a
further end, without the desire whereof we would leave the same undone, as in
their actions that gave alms to purchase thereby the praise of men. Matthew. 6.2.
Man in perfection of nature being made according to the likeness of his maker,
resembles him also in the manner of working; so that whatsoever we work as
men, the same we do wittingly work and freely; neither are we according to the
manner of natural agents any way so tied, but that it is in our power to leave
the things we do undone. The good which either is gotten by doing, or which
consists in the very doing it self, causes not action, unless apprehending
it as good, we so like and desire it. That we do unto any such end, the same
we choose and prefer before the leaving of it undone. Choice there is not,
unless the thing which we take, be so in our power that we might have refused
and left it. If fire consume the stubble, it chooses not so to do, because the
nature thereof is such that it can do no other. To choose is to will one thing
before another. And to will is to bend our souls to the having or doing of
that which they see to be good. Goodness is seen with the eye of the
understanding. And the light of that eye, is reason. So that two principal
fountains there are of human action, Knowledge and Will; which will in
things tending toward any end is termed Choice. Concerning knowledge, Behold
says Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
I have set before you this day good and evil, life and death. Concerning
Will, he adds immediately, Choose life; that is to say, the things that tend
unto life, them choose. But of one thing we must have special care, as being a
matter of no small moment, and that is, how the will properly and strictly
taken, as it is of things which are referred unto the end that man desires,
differs greatly from that inferior natural desire which we call appetite.
The object of appetite is whatsoever sensible good may be wished for; the
object of will is that good which reason does lead us to seek. Affections, as
joy, and grief, and fear, and anger, with such like, being as it were the
sundry fashions and forms of appetite, can neither rise at the conceit of a
thing indifferent, nor yet choose but rise at the sight of some things.
Wherefore it is not altogether in our power, whether we will be stirred with
affections or no: whereas actions which issue from the disposition of the will,
are in the power thereof to be performed or stayed. Finally appetite is the wills
solicitor, and the will is appetites controller; what we covet according to
the one, by the other we often reject: neither is any other desire termed
properly will, but that where reason and understanding, or the show of reason,
prescribes the thing desired. It may be therefore a question, whether those
operations of men are to be counted voluntary, wherein that good which is
sensible provoke appetite, and appetite causes action, reason being never
called to council; as when we eat or drink, or betake our selves unto rest,
and such like. The truth is, that such actions in men having attained to the
use of reason are voluntary. For as the authority of higher powers has force
even in those things which are done without their priuitie, and are of so mean
reckening that to acquaint them therewith it needs not: in like sort
voluntarily we are said to do that also* which the will if it listed might
hinder from being done, although about the doing thereof we do not expressly
use our reason or understanding, and so immediately apply our wills thereunto. In
cases therefore of such facility, the will does yield her assent, as it were
with a kind of silence, by not dissenting; in which respect her force is not so
apparent, as in express mandates or prohibitions, especially upon advice and
consultation going before. Where understanding therefore needs, in those
things reason is the director of man's will, by discovering in action what is
good. For the laws of well doing are the dictates of right reason. Children
which are not as yet come unto those years whereat they may have; again
innocents which are excluded by natural defect from ever having; thirdly mad
men which for the present cannot possibly have the use of right reason to guide
themselves, have for their guide the reason that guides other men, which are
tutors over them to seek and to procure their good for them. In the rest there
is that light of reason, whereby good may be known from evil, and which
discovering the same rightly is termed right. The will notwithstanding does not
incline to have or do that which reason teaches to be good, unless the same
do also teach it to be possible. For albeit the appetite, being more general,
may wish any thing which seems good, O mihi praeter^tos referat si Jupiter
annos.
be it never so impossible: yet for such things the reasonable will of man does
never seek. Let reason reach impossibility in any thing, and the will of man
does let it go; a thing impossible it does not affect, the impossibility
thereof being manifest. There is in the will of man naturally that freedom,
whereby it is apt to take or refuse any particular object whatsoever being
presented unto it. Whereupon it follows; that there is no particular object
so good, but it may have the show of some dif^icultie or unpleasant quality
annexed to it; in respect whereof the will may shrink and decline it:
contrariwise (for so things are blended) there is no particular evil, which
has not some appearance of goodness whereby to insinuate it self. (...). Paulo
post* (...). A cin de doge man. Pla^.
For evil as evil cannot be desired: if that be desired which is evil, the
cause is the goodness which is or seems to be joined with it. Goodness does
not move by being, but by being apparent; and therefore many things are
neglected which are most precious, only because the value of them lies hid.
Sensible goodness is most apparent, near, and present; which causes the
appetite to be therewith strongly provoked. Now pursuit and refusal in the
will do follow, the one the affirmation, the other the negation of goodness;
which the understanding apprehends* grounding it self upon sense, unless
some higher reason do chance to teach the contrary. And if reason have taught
it rightly to be good, yet not so apparently that the mind receives it with
utter im^ossibility of being ot^erwise; still there is place left for the will
to take or leave. Whereas therefore amongst so many things as are to be done,
there are so few, the goodness whereof reason in such sort does or easily can
discover; we are not to m^ruaile at the choice of evil, eue^ then when the
contrary is probably known. Hereby it comes to pass, that custom inuring
the mind by lo^^ practice, and so leaving there a sensible impression,
prevails more the^ reasonable persuasion wh^t way so ever. Reason therefore
may rightly discern the thing which is good, and yet the will of man not
incline it self theru^to, is often as the prejudice of sensible experience does
ouersway. Nor let any man think that this does make any thing for the just
excuse of iniquity. For there was never sin committed, wherein a less good was
not preferred before a greater, and that wilfully; which cannot be done without
the singular disgrace of nature, and the utter disturbance of that divine
order, whereby the preeminence of chiefest acceptance is by the best things
worthily challenged. There is not that good which concerns us, but it has
evidence enough for it self, if reason were diligent to search it out. Through
neglect thereof, abused we are with the show of that which is not; sometimes the
subtilty of Satan inueagling us, as it did 2. Cor. 11.3.
Eve; co^ruptible body is heavy unto the soul and the earthly mansion keeps
down the min^ that is full of cares.

And hardly can we discern the things that are upon earth, and with great labor
find we out the things which are before us. Who can then seek out the things
that are in heaven?


sometimes the hastiness of our wills preventing the more considerate advice of
found reason, as in Luc. 9.^4.
the Apostles, when they no sooner saw what they liked not, but they forthwith
were desirous of fit from heaven; sometimes the very custom of evil making the
heart obdurate against whatsoever instructions to the contrary, as in the^ over
who^ our Savior spoke weeping, Math. 23.37
O Jerusalem how often, and thou would not? Still therefore that wherw^th we
stand blameable, and can no way excuse it is, In doing evil, we prefer a less
good before a greater the greatness whereof is by reason inuestigable and may be
known. The search of knowledge is a thing painful; and the painfulnes of
knowledge is that which makes the will so hardly inclinable thereunto. The
root hereof, divine maledictio^* whereby the Sap 9.15.
instruments being weakened wherwithall the soul (especially in reasoning) does
work, it prefers rest in ignorance, before wearisome labor to know. For a
spur of diligence therefore we have a natural thirst after knowledge
ingrafted in us. But by reason of that original weakness in the instruments,
without which the understanding part is not able in this world by discourse to
work, the very conceit of painfulness is as a bridle to stay us. Ephesians. 5.14.
Heb. 1^.1.12 1. Cor. 16 13. Prou 2.4. Luc. 13.^4.
For which cause the Apostle who knew right well that the wearines of the flesh
is an heavy clog to the will, strikes mightily upon this key, Awake thou that
sleep, Cast off all which presses down, Watch, Labor, strive to go
forward and to grow in knowledge.

Of the natural way of finding out laws by reason, ^o guide ^he will unto that
which is good.
8* Wherefore to return to our former intent of discovering the natural way,
whereby rules have been found out concerning that goodness wherewith the will of
man ought to be moved in human actions; As every thing naturally and
necessarily does desire the utmost good and greatest perfection whereof nature
has made it capable, even so man. Our felicity therefore being the object and
accomplishment of our desire, we cannot choose but wish and covet it. All
particular things which are subject unto action, the will does so far forth
incline unto, as reason judges them the better for us, and consequently the
more available to our bliss. If reason err, we fall into evil, and are so
far forth deprived of the general perfection we seek. Seeing therefore that
for the framing of men's actions the knowledge of good from evil is necessary;
it only rests that we search how this may be had. Neither must we suppose
that there needs one rule to know the good, (...)A^^st. de an. L. 1.
and another the evil by. For he that knows what is straight, does even
thereby discern what is crooked, because the absence of straightness in
bodies capable thereof is crookedness. Goodness in actions is like unto
straitness* wherefore that which is done well we term right. For as the
straight way is most acceptable to him that trauaileth, because by it he
comes soonest to his iourneys end: so in action, that which does lie the
euenest between us and the end we desire, must needs be the fittest for our
use. Besides which fitnes for use, there is also in rectitude, beauty; as
contrariwise in obliquity, deformity. And that which is good in the actions of
men, does not only delight as profitable, but as amiable also. In which
consideration the Grecians most divinely have given to the active perfection of
men, a name expressing both beauty and goodness, (...).
because goodness in ordinary speech is for the most part applied only to
that which is beneficial. But we in the name of goodness, do here employ
both. And of discerning goodness there are but these two ways; the one the
knowledge of the causes whereby it is made such; the other the observation of
those signs and tokens, which being annexed always unto goodness, argue that
where they are found, there also goodness is, although we know not the cause by
force whereof it is there. The former of these is the most sure and infallible
way, but so hard that all shun it, and had rather walk as men do in the
dark by hap hazard, then tread so long and intricate mazes for knowledge sake.
As therefore Physicians are many times forced to leave such methods of curing
as themselves know to be the fittest, and being ouerruled by their patients
impatiency are fame to try the best they can, in taking that way of cure, which
the cured will yield unto: in like sort, considering how the case does stand
with this present age full of tongue and weak of brain, behold we yield to
the stream thereof; into the causes of goodness we will not make any curious or
deep inquiry; to touch them now and then it shall be sufficient, when they are
so near at hand that easily they may be conceived without any far removed
discourse: that way we are contented to prove, which being the worse in it
self, is notwithstanding now by reason of common imbecility the fitter and
likelier to be brookt. Signs and tokens to know good by, are of sundry kinds:
some more certain* and some less. The most certain token of evident
goodness is, if the general persuasion of all men do so account it. And
therefore a common received error is never utterly overthrown, till such time
as we go from signs unto causes, and show some manifest root or fountain
thereof common unto all, whereby it may clearly appear how it has come to
pass that so many have been ouerseene. In which case surmises and slight
probabilities will not serve; because the universal consent of men is the
perfectest and strongest in this kind which comprehends only the signs and
tokens of goodness. Things casual do vary, and that which a man does but
chance to think well of, cannot still have the like hap. Wherefore although
we know not the cause, yet thus much we may know, that some necessary cause
there is, whenever the judgments of all men generally or for the most part
run one and the same way, especially in matters of natural discourse. For of
things necessarily and naturally done there is no more affirmed but this,
(...). Arist. Rhet. 1. cap. 39.
They keep either always or for the most part one tenure. The general and
perpetual voice of men is as the sentence of God himself. Non potest error
contingere, vbi omnes idem opinantur. Monticat. in 1. Polit. Quicquid in
omnibus indiuiduis vniu^ ^peciei communiter inest, id cause^ co^munem habeat
opo^tet, quaest eorum indiuiduorum species and natura. Idem. Quod a t^ta aliqua
specie fit, vniuersali^ particularisque naturae fit instinctu Ficin. de.
Christ* relig. Si pro^icer^ cupis, primo firm id ve^um puta quod sanmen^
omniu^ hominum attestatur. Cusa. in compend. cap. 1. Non li^er natural
vniuersaleque hominum iudicium falsum van umque existima^e Teles* (...)* A^ist.
Eth. 10. cap. 2.
For that which all men have at all times learned, nature her self must needs
have taught; and God being the author of nature, her voice is but his
instrument. By her from him we receive whatsoever in such sort we learn.
Infinite duties there are, the goodness whereof is by this rule sufficiently
manifested, although we had no other warrant besides to approve them. The
Apostle S. Paul having speech concerning the Heathen says of the^, Romans 2.14.
They are a law unto themselves* His meaning is, that by force of the light of
reason, wherewith God illuminateth every one which comes into the world, me^
being enabled to know truth from falsehood, and good from evil, do thereby
learn in many things what the will of God is; which will himself not
revealing by any extraordinary means unto them, but they by natural discourse
attaining the knowledge thereof, seem the makers of those laws which indeed
are his, and they but only the finders of them out. A law therefore generally
taken, is a directive rule unto goodness of operation. The rule of divine
operations outward, is the definitive appointment of Gods own wisdom set
down within himself. The rule of natural agents that work by simple
necessity, is the determination of the wisdom of God* known to God himself
the principal director of them, but not unto them that are directed to execute
the same. The rule of natural agents which work after a sort of their own
accord, as the beasts do, is the judgment of common sense or fancy concerning
the sensible goodness of those objects wherewith they are moved. The rule of
ghostly or immateriall natures, as spirits and Angels, is their intuitiue
intellectual judgment concerning the amiable beauty and high goodness of that
object, which with unspeakable joy and delight does set them on work. The
rule of voluntary agents on earth, is the sentence that reason gives
concerning the goodness of those things which they are to do. And the sentences
which reason gives, are some more, some less general, before it come to
define in particular actions what is good. The maine principles of reason are
in themselves apparent. For to make nothing evident of it self unto ma^s
understanding, were to take away al possibility of knowing any thing. And
herein that of Theophras^us is true, (...). Theoph. i^ Metaph.
They that seek a reason of all things do utterly overthrow reason. In every
kind of knowledge some such grounds there are, as that being proposed, the mind
does presently embrace them as free from all possibility of error, clear and
manifest without proof. In which kind, axioms or principles more general are
such as this, That the greater good is to be chosen before the less. If
therefore it should be demanded, what reason there is why the will of man,
which does necessarily shun harm and covet whatsoever is pleasant and sweet,
should be commanded to count the pleasures of sin gall, and notwithstanding
the bitter accidents wherewith virtuous actions are compast, yet still to rejoice
and delight in them; surely this could never stand with reason: but that
wisdom thus prescribing, groundeth her laws upon an infallible rule of
comparison, which is, that small difficulties, when exceeding great good is
sure to ensue; and on the other side momentanie benefits, when the hurt which
they draw after them is unspeakable, are not at all to be respected. This
rule is the ground whereupon the wisdom of the Apostle builds a law,
inioyning patience unto himself; The present lightness of our affliction
works unto us even with abundance upon abundance an eternal weight of
glory, ^. Cor. 4.17.
while we look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are
not seen. For the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen eternal. Therefore Christianity to be embraced, whatsoever
calamities in those times it was accompanied withal. Upon the same ground our
Savior proves the law most reasonable, that does forbid those crimes which
me^ for gains sake fall into. For a man to win the world, if it be with the
loss of his soul, Matthew. 16.26.
what benefit or good is it? Axioms less general, yet so manifest that they
need no further proof, are such as these, God to be worshipped, Parents to be
honored, Others to be used by us as we our selves would by them. Such things,
as soon as they are alleged, all men acknowledge to be good; they require no
proof or further discourse to be assured of their goodness. Notwithstanding
whatsoever such principle there is, it was at the first found out by discourse,
and drawn from out of the very bowels of heaven and earth. For we are to note,
that things in the world are to us discernable, not only so far forth as
serves for our vital preservation, but further also in a twofold higher
respect. For first if all other uses were utterly taken away; yet the mind of
man being by nature speculatiue and delighted with co^templation in it self,
they were to be known even for mere knowledge and understandings sake. Yea
further besides this, the knowledge of every the least thing in the whole
world, has in it a second peculiar benefit unto us, in as much as it serves
to minister rules, Canons, and laws for men to direct those actions by, which
we properly term humane. This did the very Heathens themselves obscurely
insinuate, by making Themis which we call Ius or Right to be the daughter of
heaven and earth. We know things either as they are in themselves, or as they
are in mutual relation one to another. The knowledge of that which man is in
reference unto himself, and other things in relation unto man, I may justly
term the mother of al those principles, which are as it were edicts, statutes,
and decrees in that law of nature, whereby human actions are framed. First
therefore having observed that the best things, where they are not hindered, do
still produce the best operations; (for which cause where many things are to
concur unto one effect, the best is in all congruity of reason to guide the
residue, that it prevailing most, the work principally done by it may have
greatest perfection:) when hereupon we come to observe in our selves, of what
excellency our souls are in comparison of our bodies, and the diuiner part in
relation unto the baser of our souls; seeing that all these concur in
producing human actions, it cannot be well unless the chiefest do command
and direct the rest. Arist. Polit. ^. cap. 5.
The soul then ought to conduct the body, and the spirit of our minds the
soul. This is therefore the first law, whereby the highest power of the mind
requires general obedience at the hands of all the rest concurring with it
unto action. Touching the several graund mandates, which being imposed by the
understanding faculty of the mind, must be obeyed by the will of man, they
are by the same method found out, whether they import our duty toward God or
toward man. Touching the one, I may not here stand to open, by what degrees of
discourse the minds even of mere natural men, have attained to know, not
only that there is a God, but also what power, force, wisdom, and other
properties that God has, and how all things depend on him. This being
therefore presupposed, from that known relation which God has unto us (...).
Plat. in Theaet.
as unto children, and unto all good things as unto effects, whereof himself
is the (...). Arist* Metop. lib. 1. cap. 2.
principal cause, these axioms and laws natural concerning our duty have
arisen; (...). Plat. in Tim.
That in all things we go about, his aid is by prayer to be craved; Arist.
Ethi^. lib. 8. ca. vlt.
That he cannot have sufficient honor done unto him, but the uttermost of that
we can do to honor him we must; which is in effect the same that we read,
Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. Which law our Savior does term the Math. 22.2^.
First and the great Commandment. Touching the next, which as our Savior
adds, is like unto this (he means in amplitude and largeness* in as much
as it is the root out of which all laws of duty to men-ward have grown, as
out of the former all offices of religion toward God) the like natural
inducement has brought men to know, that it is their duty no less to love
others then themselves. For seeing those things which are equal, must needs
all have one measure: if I cannot but wish to receive al good, even as much at
every man's hand as any man can wish unto his own soul; how should I look to
have any part of my desire herein satisfied, unless my self be careful to
satisfy the like desire, which is undoubtedly in other men, we all being of
one and the same nature? To have any thing offered them repugnant to this
desire, must needs in all respects grieve them as much as me: so that if I do
harm, I must look to suffer; there being no reason that others should show
greater measure of love to me, then they have by me showed unto them. My desire
therefore to be loved of my equals in nature as much as possible may be,
imposes upon me a natural duty of bearing to them-ward fully the like
affection. From which relation of equality between our selves and them that
are as our selves, what several rules and Canons natural reason has drawn
for direction of life, no man is ignorant; as namely, Quod quis in se approbat,
in alio reprobare no^ posse. ^an arenam C. de ino^. test. Quod quisque iuris in
alium sta^u^^it, ipsum quoque codem vti debere. l. quod quisque. Ab omni
penitu^ iniu^^a atque vi. abstinendu^. l. 1 1. quod vi. autclam.
That because we would take no harm, we must therefore do none; That since we
would not be in any thing extremely dealt with, we must our selves avoid all
extremity in our dealings; That from all violence and wrong we are utterly to
abstain, with such like; which further to wade in would be tedious, and to
our present purpose not altogether so necessary, Matthew. 22.40. On these two
commandments hangs the whole law.
seeing that on these two general heads already mentioned all other
specialties are dependent. Wherefore the natural measure whereby to judge our
doings, is the sentence of reason, determining and setting down what is good
to be done. Which sentence is either mandatory, showing what must be done; or
else permissiue, declaring only what may be done; or thirdly admonitorie,
opening what is the most convenient for us to do. The first takes place,
where the comparison does stand altogether between doing and not doing of one
thing which in it self is absolutely good or evil; as it had been for Joseph
to yield or not to yield to the impotent desire of his lewd mistress, Genesis
39.9.
the one evil, the other good simply. The second is, when of diverse things
evil, all being not euitable, we are permitted to take one; which one saving
only in case of so great vrgency were not otherwise to be taken; Mar. 10.4.
as in the matter of divorce amongst the Jews. The last, when of diverse things
good, one is principal and most eminent; Act. 4.37. Act. 5.4.
as in their act who sold their possessions and laid the price at the Apostles
feet, which possessions they might have retained unto themselves without
sin; again in the Apostle S. Paul's own choice to maintain himself by his
own labor, ^. These. 3.8.
whereas in living by the Churches maintenance, as others did, there had been
no offense committed. In goodness therefore there is a latitude or extent,
whereby it comes to pass that even of good actions some are better then
other some; whereas otherwise one man could not excel another, but all should
be either absolutely good, as hitting iumpe that indivisible point or Center
wherein goodness consists; or else missing it they should be excluded out of
the number of wel-doers. Degrees of well doing there could be none, except
perhaps in the seldomnes and oftennes of doing well. But the nature of
goodness being thus ample, a law is properly that which reason in such sort
defines to be good that it must be done. And the law of reason or human
nature is that, which men by discourse of natural reason have rightly found
out themselves to be all for ever bound unto in their actions. Laws of reason
have these marks to be known by. Such as keep them, resemble most lively in
their voluntary actions, that very manner of working which nature her self
does necessarily observe in the course of the whole world. The works of nature
are all behoouefull, beautiful, without superfluity or defect: even so
theirs, if they be framed according to that which the law of reason teaches.
Secondly those laws are inuestigable by reason, without the help of
revelation supernatural and divine. Finally in such sort they are
inuestigable, that the knowledge of them is general, the world has always
been acquainted with them; according to that which one in Sophocles observes
corcerning a branch of this law, (...). Soph. Anti.
It is no child of two days or yeasterdayes birth, but has been no man
knows how long sithence. It is not agreed upon by one, or two, or few, but by
all: which we may not so understand, as if every particular man in the whole
world did know and confess whatsoever the law of reason does contain; but
this law is such that being proposed no man can reject it as unreasonable and
unjust. Again there is nothing in it, but any man (having natural perfection
of wit, and ripeness of judgment) may by labor and travail find out. And to
conclude, the general principles thereof are such, as it is not easy to find
men ignorant of them. Law rational therefore, which men commonly use to call
the law of nature, meaning thereby the law which human nature knows it
self in reason universally bound unto, which also for that cause may be termed
most fitly the law of reason* this law, I say, comprehends all those things
which men by the light of their natural understanding evidently know, or at
least wife may know, to be beseeming or unbeseeming, virtuous or vicious; good
or evil for them to do. Th. 1.2. q. 94. art. 3. Omnia peccata sunt in
vniuersum contra rationem and naturae legem. Aug. de ciu. dei. lib. 12. ^ap. 1.
Omne vitium naturae noc^t, ac per hoc contra naturam est. De doctr. Christ.
lib. 3. cap. 14.
Now although it be true, which some have said, that whatsoever is done amiss,
the law of nature and reason thereby is transgrest; because even those offenses
which are by their special qualities breaches of supernatural laws, do also,
for that they are generally evil violate in general that principle of reason,
which wills universally to fly from evil: yet do we not therefore so far
extend the law of reason, as to contain in it all manner laws whereunto
reasonable creatures are bound; but (as has been showed) we restrain it to
those only duties, which all men by force of natural wit either do or might
understand to be such duties as concern all men. Certain half waking men
there are, (as Saint Augustine notes) who neither altogether asleep in folly,
nor yet thoroughly awake in the light of true understanding, have thought that
there is not at all any thing just and righteous in it self: but look
wherewith nations are inured, the same they take to be right and just. Whereupon
their conclusion is, that seeing each sort of people has a different kind of
right from other, and that which is right of it own nature must be every where
one and the same, therefore in it self there is nothing right. These good
folk (says he, that I may not trouble their wits with rehearsal of too many
things) have not looked so far into the world as to perceive, that Do as thou
would be done unto, is a sentence which all nations under heaven are agreed
upon. Refer this sentence to the love of God, and it extinguisheth all heinous
crimes* refer it to the love of thy neighbor, and all grievous wrongs it
banisheth out of the world. Wherefore as touching the law of reason, this was
(it seems) Saint Augustines judgment, namely, that there are in it some
things which stand as principles universally agreed upon: and that out of those
principles, which are in themselves evident, the greatest moral duties we owe
toward God or man, may without any great difficulty be concluded. If then it
be here demanded, by what means it should come to pass (the greatest part of
the law moral being so easy for all men to know) that so many thousands of
men notwithstanding have been ignorant even of principal moral duties, not
imagining the breach of them to be sin: I deny not but lewd and wicked
custom; beginning perhaps at the first amongst few, afterward spreading into
greater multitudes, and so continuing from time to time, may be of force even
in plain things to smother the light of natural understanding, because men
will not bend their wits to examine, whether things wherewith they have been
accustomed, be good or evil. For examples sake, that grosser kind of
heathenish idolatry, whereby they worshipped the very works of their own
hands, was an absurdity to reason so palpable, that the Prophet David comparing
idols and idolaters together, makes almost no ods between them, but the one
in a manner as much without wit and sense as the other, They that make them are
like unto them, and so are all that trust in them. That wherein an idolater
does seem so absurb and foolish, Psalm. 35.18.
is by the Wiseman thus expressed, He is not ashamed to speak unto that which
has no life, Sapi. 13.17.
he calls on him that is weak for health, he prays for life unto him which
is dead, of him which has no experience he requires help, for his journey be
s^^th to him which is not able to go, for gain and work and success in his
affairs he seeks furtherance of him that has no manner of power. The cause
of which senseless stupidity is afterward imputed to custom. S^pi. 1^.12.
When a father mourned grieuosly for his son that was taken away suddenly, he
made an image for him that was once dead, whom now he worshipped as a God,
ordeining to his servants ceremonies and sacrifices. Thus by process of time
this wicked custom prevailed, and was kept as a law; the authority of Rulers,
the ambition of craftsmen, and such like means thrusting forward the ignorant,
and increasing their superstition. Unto this which the Wiseman has spoken,
somewhat besides may be added. For whatsoever we have hitherto taught, or shall
hereafter, concerning the force of man's natural understanding, this we always
desire withal to be understood, that there is no kind of faculty or power in
man or any other creature, which can rightly perform the functions allotted to
it, without perpetual aid and concurrence of that supreme cause of all
things. The benefit whereof as often as we cause God in his justice to withdraw,
there can no other thing follow* then that which the Apostle notes, even men
endued with the light of reason to walk notwithstanding in the vanity of their
mind, having their cogitations darkened Ephesians. 4.17.
and being strangers from the life of God through the ignorance which is in
them, because of the hardness of their hearts. And this cause is mentioned by the
Prophet Esaias* speaking of the ignorance idolaters, who see not how the manifest
reason condemns their gross iniquity and sin. Esaias. 44.19.18.
They have not in them, says he* so much wit as to think, shall I bow to the
stock of a tree? All knowledge and understanding is taken from them. For God
has shut their eyes that they cannot see. That which we say in this case of
idolatry, serves for all other things, wherein the like kind of general
blindness has prevailed against the manifest laws of reason. Within the
compass of which laws we do not only comprehend whatsoever may be easily
known to belong to the duty of all men; but even whatsoever may possibly be
known to be of that quality, so that the same be by necessary consequence
deduced out of clear and manifest principles. For if once we descend unto
probable collections what is convenient for men, we are then in the territory
where free and arbitrarie determinations, the territory where humane laws take
place, which laws are after to be considered.

The benefit of keeping that law which reason teaches.
9 Now the due observation of this law which reason teaches us, cannot but be
effectual unto their great good that observe the same. For we see the whole
world and each part thereof so compacted, that as long as each thing performs
only that work which is natural unto it, it thereby preserves both other
things, and also it self. Contrariwise let any principal thing, as the Sun,
the Moon, any one of the heavens or elements, but once cease or fail, or
swerve; and who does not easily conceive, that the sequel thereof would be
ruin both to it self, and whatsoever depends on it? And is it possible that
man, being not only the noblest creature in the world, but even a very world in
himself, his transgressing the law of his nature should draw no manner of harm
after it? Yes, tribulation and anguish unto every soul that does evil. Good
does follow unto all things by observing the course of their nature, and on
the contrary side evil by not observing it: but not unto natural agents that
good which we call Reward, not that evil which we properly term
Punishment. The reason whereof is, because amongst creatures in this world,
only man's observation of the law of his nature is Righteousness, only man's
transgression Sin. And the reason of this is the difference in his manner of
observing or transgressing the law of his nature. He does not otherwise then
voluntarily the one or the other. What we do against our wills, or
constrainedly, we are not properly said to do it, because the mo^iue cause of
doing it is not in our selves but carries us, as if the wind should drive a
feather in the air, we no whit furthering that whereby we are driven. In such
cases therefore the evil which is done, moves compassion; men are pi^^ied for
it, as being rather miserable in such respect their culpable. Some things are
likewise done by man, though not through outward force and impulsion, though
not against, yet without their wills; as in alienation of mind, or any the like
inevitable utter absence of wit and judgment. For which cause, no man did ever
think the hurtful actions of furious men and innocents to be punishable.
Again some things we do neither against nor without, and yet not simply and
merely with our wills; but with our wills in such sor^ moved, that albeit there
b^ no impossibility but that we might, nevertheless we are not so easily
able to do otherwise. In this consideration one evil deed is made more
pardonable then an other. Finally, that which we do being evil, is
notwithstanding by so much more pa^donable, by how much the exigence of so
doing, or the difficulty of doing otherwise is greater; unless this
necessity or difficulty have originally risen from our selves. It is no
excuse therefore unto him, who being drunk commits incest, and alleges
that his wits were not his own, in as much as himself might have chosen
whether his wits should by that mean have been taken from him. Now rewards and
punishments do always presuppose some thing willingly done well or ill*
without which respect though we may sometimes receive good or harm, yet then
the one is only a benefit, and not a reward; the other simply an hurt, not a
punishment. From the sundry dispositions of man's will, which is the root of
all his actions, there grows variety in the sequeie of rewards and
punishments, which are by these and the like rules measured: Take away the
will, and all acts are equal: That which we do not and would do, is
commonly accepted as done. Voluntate subla^a omnem actum parem esse. l.
^oedissimam C. de adult.

Bonam voluntatem plerun^ que pro facto reputari. l. si quis in testamen.


By these and the like rules men's actions are determined of and judged, whether
they be in their own nature rewardable or punishable. Rewards and punishments
are not received, but at the hands of such as being above us, have power to
examine and judge our deeds. How men come to have this authority one over an
other in external actions, we shall more diligently examine in that which
follows. But for this present, so much all do acknowledge, that since every
man's heart and conscience does in good or evil, even secretly committed and
known to none but it self, either like or disallow it self, and accordingly
either rejoice, very nature exulting as it were in certain hope of reward, or
else grieve as it were in a sense of future punishment; neither of which can in
this case be looked for from any other, saving only from him, who discerns
and judges the very secrets of all hearts: therefore he is the only rewarder
and revenger of all such actions, although not of such actions only, Diuo^
cast^ adeunto, pi^tatent adhi^bento. Qui secus faxir, Deus ipsi ^in^ dex crit.
but of all whereby the law of nature is broken, whereof himself is author.
For which cause^* the Roman laws called the laws of the twelve tables,
requiring offices of inward affection, which the eye of man cannot reach unto,
threaten the neglecters of them with none but divine punishment.

10 That which hitherto we have set down, is (I hope) sufficient to show
their brutishnes, How reason does lead men unto the making of humane laws,
whereby politic societies are governed, and to agreement about laws, whereby
the fellowship or communion of independent societies stands. (...). Arist.
Rhet. 1
which imagine that religion and virtue are only as men will account of them;
that we might make as much account, if we would, of the contrary, without any
harm unto our selves, and that in nature they are as indifferent one as the
other. We see then how nature it self teaches laws and statutes to live by.
The laws which have been hitherto mentioned, do bind men absolutely, even as
they are me^, although they have never any settled fellowship, never any solemn
agreement amongst themselves what to do or not to do. But for as much as we
are not by our selves sufficient, to furnish our selves with competent store of
things needful for such a life as our nature does desire, a life fit for the
dignity of man: therefore to supply those defectes and imperfections which are
in us living single and solely by our selves, we are naturally induced to
seek communion and fellowship with others. This was the cause of men's uniting
themselves at the first in politic societies; which societies could not be
without government, nor government without a distinct kind of law from that
which has been already declared. Two foundations there are which bear up
public societies; the one, a natural inclination, whereby al men desire
sociable life and fellowship; the other, an order expressly or secretly agreed
upon, touching the manner of their union in living together. The later is that
which we call the law of a common weal, the very soul of a politic body,
the parts whereof are by law animated, held together, and set on work in such
actions as the common good requires. Laws politic, ordained for external
order and regiment amongst men, are never framed as they should be, unless
presuming the will of man to be inwardly obstinate, rebellious, and auerse from
all obedience unto the sacred laws of his nature^ in a word, unless presuming
man to be in regard of his depraved mind little better then a wild beast, they
do accordingly provide notwithstanding so to frame his outward actions, that
they be no hinderance unto the common good for which societies are instituted:
unless they do this, they are not perfect. It rests therefore that we
consider how nature finds out such laws of government, as serve to direct
even nature depraved to a right end. All men desire to lead in this world an
happy life. That life is led most happily, wherein all virtue is exercised
without impediment or let. 1. Tim. 6.8.
The Apostle in exhorting men to contentment, although they have in this world
no more then very bare food and raiment, gives us thereby to understand, that
those are even the lowest of things necessary, that if we should be stripped
of al those things without which we might possibly be, yet these must be left;
that destitution in these is such an impediment, as till it be removed,
suffers not the mind of man to admit any other care. Genesis 1.29. Genesis 2.17.
For this cause first God assigned Adam maintenance of life and then appointed
him a law to observe. For this cause after me^ began to grow to a number, Genesis
4.2.
the first thing we read they gave themselves unto, was the tilling of the
earth, Genesis 4.26.
and the feeding of cattle. Having by this mean whereon to live, the
principal actions of their life afterward are noted by the exercise of their
religion. Mat. 6.33
True it is that the kingdom of God must be the first thing in our purposes
and desires. But in as much as righteous life presupposes life, in as much as
to live virtuously it is impossible except we live; therefore the first
impediment, which naturally we endeavor to remove, is penury and want of
things without which we cannot live. Unto life many implements are necessary;
more, if we seek (as all men naturally do) such a life as has in it joy,
comfort, delight and pleasure. To this end we see how quickly sundry arts
Mechanical were found out in the very prime of the world. Genesis 4.20.21.^2.
As things of greatest necessity are always first provided for, so things of
greatest dignity are most accounted of by all such as judge rightly. Although
therefore riches be a thing which every man wishes; yet no man of judgment
can esteem it better to be rich, then wise, virtuous and religious. If we be
both or either of these, it is not because we are so borne. For into the world
we come as empty of the one as of the other, as naked in mind as we are in
body. Both which necessities of man had at the first no other helps and
supplies, then only domestical; such as that which the prophet implies,
saying, Can a mother forget her child? such as that which the Apostle
mentions, saying* Esaias. 49.15. 1. Tim. 5.8.
He that cares not for his own is worse then an Infidel; Genesis 18.19.
such as that concerning Abraham, Abraham will command his sons and his
household after him that they keep the way of the Lord. But neither that which
we learn of our selves, nor that which others teach us can prevail, where
wickedness and malice have taken deep root. If therefore when there was but as
yet one only family in the world, no means of instruction humane or divine
could prevent effusion of blood: Genesis 4.8.
how could it be chosen but that when families were multiplied and increased
upon earth, after separation each providing for it self, envy, strife,
contention and violence must grow amongst the^? for has not nature furnished
man with wit and valor, as it were with armor, which may be used as well unto
extreme evil as good? yea, were they not used by the rest of the world unto
evil; unto the contrary only by Seth, Genesis 6.5. Genesis 5.
Enoch, and those few the rest in that line? We all make complaint of the
iniquity of our times: not unjustly; for the days are evil. But compare them
with those times, wherein there were no civil societies, with those times
wherein there was as yet no manner of public regiment established, with those
times wherein there were not above 8. persons righteous living upon the face of
the earth: 2. Pet. 2.5.
and we have surely good cause to think that God has blessed us exceedingly,
and has made us behold most happy days. To take away all such mutual
greeuances, injuries and wrongs, there was no way but only by growing unto
compositio^ and agreement amongst themselves, by ordaining some kind of
government public, and by yielding themselves subject thereunto; that unto
whom they granted authority to rule and govern, by them the peace,
tranquillity, and happy estate of the rest might be procured. Men always knew
that when force and injury was offered, they might be defendors of themselves;
they knew that howsoever men may seek their own commodity, yet if this were
done with injury unto others, it was not to be suffered, but by all men and by
all good means to be withstood, finally they knew that no man might in reason
take upon him to determine his own right, and according to his own
determination proceed in maintenance thereof, in as much as every man is toward
himself, and them whom he greatly affects partial; and therefore that
strifes and troubles would be endless, except they gave their common consent
all to be ordered by some whom they should agree upon: without which consent,
there were no reason that one man should take upon him to be Lord or Judge over
an other; because although there be according to the opinion of some very great
and judicious men, a kind of natural right in the noble, wise, and virtuous,
Arist. Pol. l* ^. and 4.
to govern them which are of servile disposition; nevertheless for
manifestation of this their right, and men's more peaceable contentment on both
sides, the assent of them who are to be governed, seems necessary. To
fathers within their private families nature has given a supreme power; for
which cause we see throughout the world even from the first foundation thereof,
all men have ever been taken as lords and lawful kings in their own houses.
Howbeit over a whole grand multitude, having no such depende^cie upon any one,
and consisting of so many families as every politic society in the world
does, impossible it is that any should have complet lawful power but by consent
of men, or immediate appointment of God; because not having the natural
superiority of fathers, their power must needs be either usurped, and then
unlawful; or if lawful, then either granted or consented unto by them over
whom they exercise the same, or else given extraordinarily from God, unto whom
all the world is subject. Arist. polit. lib. 1. cap. 3. Vide and platonem in 3.
de legibus.
It is no improbable opinion therefore which the Archphilosopher was of, that
as the chiefest person in every household was always as it were a king; so when
numbers of households joined themselves in civil society together, kings were
the first kind of governors amongst them. Which is also as it seems the
reason, why the name of Father continued still in them, who of fathers were
made rulers: as also the ancient custom of governors to do as Melchisedec, and
being kings to exercise the office of priests, which fathers did at the first,
grew perhaps by the same occasion. Howbeit not this the only kind of regiment
that has been received in the world. The inconveniences of one kind have
caused sundry other to be devised. So that in a word all public regiment of
what kind soever, seems evidently to have risen from deliberate advice,
consultation, and compositio^ between men, judging it convenient and
behoueful; there being no impossibility in nature considered by it self, but
that men might have lived without any public regiment. Howbeit the corruption
of our nature being presupposed, we may not deny but that the law of nature
does now require of necessity some kind of regiment; so that to bring things
unto the first course they were in, and utterly to take away all kind of
public government in the world, were apparently to ouerturn the whole world.
The case of man's nature standing therefore as it does, some kind of regiment the
law of nature does require; yet the kinds thereof being many, nature tieth not
to any one, but leaves the choice as a thing arbitrarie. At the first when
some certain kind of regiment was once approved, it may be that nothing was
then further thought upon for the manner of governing, but all permitted unto
their wisdom and discretion which were to rule; Cum premeretur initio
multitudo ab lis qui maiores opes habeba^t, ad vnum aliquem confugiebant
virtute praestantem; qui cum prohiberet iniuria tenuiores, aequitate
constituenda summos cum infimis pari iu re retinebat. Cum id minus contingeret,
leges sunt inuentae. Cic. off. lib. 2. (...) Arist. Rhet. ad Alex.
till by experience they found this for all parts very inconvenient; so as the
thing which they had devised for a remedy, did indeed but increase the soar
which it should have cured. They saw that to live by one man's will, became the
cause of all men's misery. This constrained them to come unto laws, wherein all
men might see their duties before hand, and know the penalties of transgressing
them. b If things be simply good or evil, and withal universally so
acknowledged, there needs no new law to be made for such things. The first kind
therefore of things appointed by laws humane, contains whatsoever being in
it self naturally good or evil, is notwithstanding more secret then that it
can be discerned by every man's present conceit, without some deeper discourse
and judgment. In which discourse, because there is difficulty and
possibility many ways to err, unless such things were set down by laws,
many would be ignorant of their duties which now are not; and many that know
what they should do, would nevertheless dissemble it, and to excuse themselves
pretend ignorance and simplicity which now they cannot. Tanta est enim vis
voluptatum, vt and ignorantiam pro telet in occasionem, and conscientiam
corrumpat in dissimulationem. Tertul. lib. de Spectacul.
And because the greatest part of men are such as prefer their own private
good before all things, even that good which is sensual before whatsoever is
most divine; and for that the labor of doing good, together with the pleasure
arising from the contrary, does make men for the most part slower to the one,
and proner to the other, then that duty prescribed them by law can prevail
sufficiently with them: therefore unto laws that men do make for the benefit
of me^, it has seemed always needful to ad rewards which may more allure unto
good then any hardness deterreth from it, and punishments which may more deter
from evil then any sweetness thereto allureth. Wherein as the generality is
natural, Virtue rewardable and vice punishable: so the particular
determination of the reward or punishment, belongs unto them by whom laws
are made. Theft is naturally punishable, but the kind of punishment is
positive, and such lawful as men shall think with discretion convenient by
law to appoint. In laws that which is natural binds universally, that
which is positive not so. To let go those kind of positive laws which men
impose upon themselves, as by vow unto God, contract with men, or such like;
somewhat it will make unto our purpose a little more fully to consider, what
things are incident into the making of the positive laws for the government of
the^ that live united in public society. Laws do not only teach what is
good, but they inioyne it, they have in the^ a certain co^straining force. And
to co^straine me^ unto any thing inconvenient does seem unreasonable. Most
requisite therefore it is, that to devise laws which all men shall be forced to
obey, none but wise me^ be admitted. Laws are matters of principal
consequence; men of common capacity and but ordinary judgment are not able
(for how should they?) to discern what things are fittest for each kind and
state of regiment. We cannot be ignorant how much our obedience unto laws
depends upon this point. Let a man though never so justly, oppose himself
unto the^ that are disordered in their ways, and what one amongst them
commonly does not stomach at such contradiction, storm at reproof, and hate
such as would reform them? Notwithstanding even they which brook it worst
that men should tell them of their duties, when they are told the same by a
law, think very well and reasonably of it. For why? They presume that the law
does speak with all indifferency, that the law has no side respect to their
persons, that the law is as it were an oracle proceeded from wisdom and
understanding. Howbeit laws do not take their constraining force from the
quality of such as devise them, but from that power which does give them the
strength of laws. That which we spoke before concerning the power of
government, must here be applied unto the power of making laws whereby to
govern; which power God has over all; and by the natural law whereunto he
has made all subject, the lawful power of making laws to command whole
politic societies of men, belongs so properly unto the same entire
societies, that for any Prince or potentate of what kind soever upon earth to
exercise the same of himself, and not either by express commission immediately
and personally received from God, or else by authority derived at the first
from their consent upon whose persons they impose laws, it is no better then
mere tyranny. Laws they are not therefore which public approbation has
not made so. But approbation not only they give who personally declare their
assent by voice sign or act, but also when others do it in their names by right
originally at the least derived from them. As in parliaments, councels, and the
like assemblies, although we be not personally our selves present,
notwithstanding our assent is by reason of others agents there in our behalf.
And what we do by others, no reason but that it should stand as our deed, no
less effectually to bind us then if our selves had done it in person. In many
things assent is given, they that give it not imagining they do so, because the
manner of their assenting is not apparent. As for example, when an absolute
Monark commands his subjects that which seems good in his own discretion,
has not his edict the force of a law, whether they approve or dislike it?
Again that which has been received long sithence and is by custom now
established, we keep as a law which we may not transgress; yet what consent
was ever thereunto sought or required at our hands? Of this point therefore we
are to note, that since men naturally have no full and perfect power to command
whole politic mul^itudes of men; therefore utterly without our consent we
could in such sort be at no man's commandment living. And to be commanded we do
consent, when that society whereof we are part, has at any time before
consented, without reuoking the same after by the like universal agreement.
Wherefore as any man's deed past is good as long as himself continues: so the
act of a public society of men done five hundred years sithence, stands
as theirs, who presently are of the same societies, because corporations are
immortal: we were then alive in our predecessors, and they in their successors
do live still. Laws therefore human of what kind soever are available by
consent. If here it be demanded how it comes to pass, that this being
common unto all laws which are made, there should be found even in good laws
so great variety as there is: we must note the reason hereof to be, the
sundry particular ends, whereunto the different disposition of that subject or
matter for which laws are provided, causes them to have especial respect in
making laws. Arist. polit. lib. ^. c. v^t.
A law there is mentioned amongst the Graecians, whereof Pittacus is reported
to have been author: And by that law it was agreed, that he which being
overcome with drink did then strike any man, should suffer punishment double
as much as if he had done the same being sober. No man could ever have
thought this reasonable, that had intended thereby only to punish the injury
committed, according to the gravity of the fact. For who knows not, that
harm advisedly done is naturally less pardonable, and therefore worthy of the
sharper punishment? But for as much as none did so usually this way offend as
men in that case, which they wittingly fell into, even because they would be
so much the more freely outrageous: it was for their public good where such
disorder was grown, to frame a positive law for remedy thereof accordingly.
To this appertain those known laws of making laws; as that lawemakers must
have an eye to the place where, and to the men amongst whom; that one kind of
laws cannot serve for all kinds of regiment: that where the multitude bears
sway, laws that shall tend unto the preservation of that state, must make
common smaller offices to go by lot, for fear of strife and division likely to
arise; by reason that ordinary qualities sufficing for discharge of such
offices, they could not but by many be desired, and so with danger contended
for, and not missed without grudge and coffeehouse, whereas at an uncertain
lot none can find themselves grieved on whomsoever it lights; contrariwise
the greatest; whereof but few are capable, to pass by popular election, that
neither the people may envy such as have those honors, in as much as
themselves bestow them, and that the chiefest may be kindled with desire to
exercise all parts of rare and beneficial virtue; knowing they shall not loose
their labor by growing in same and estimation amongst the people: if the helm
of chief government be in the hands of a few of the wealthiest, that then
laws providing for continuance thereof must make the punishment of contumely
and wrong offered unto any of the common sort sharp and grievous, that so the
evil may be prevented, whereby the rich are most likely to bring themselves
into hatred with the people, who are not wont to take so great offense when
they are excluded from honors and offices, as when their persons are
contumeliously trodden upon. In other kinds of regiment the like is observed
concerning the difference of positive laws, which to be every where the same
is impossible and against their nature. Staundf. pref, to the pleas of the
Crown.
Now as the learned in the laws of this land observe, that our statutes
sometimes are only the affirmation or ratification of that which by common law
was held before: so here it is not to be omitted, that generally all laws
human which are made for the ordering of politic societies, be either such
as establish some duty whereunto all men by the law of reason did before stand
bound; or else such as make that a duty now which before was none. The one
sort we may for distinctions sake call mixedly, and the other merely humane.
That which plain or necessary reason binds men unto, may be in sundry
considerations expedient to be ratified by humane law: For example, if
confusion of blood in marriage, the liberty of having many wives at once, or
any other the like corrupt and unreasonable custom does happen to have
prevailed far, and to have gotten the upper hand of right reason with the
greatest part, so that no way is left to rectify such soul disorder, without
prescribing by law the same things which reason necessarily does enforce, but
is not perceived that so it does; or if many be grown unto that which thapostle
did lament in some, concerning whom he writes saying, Epis. Iud. v. 10 (...).
Arist. Ethi. lib. 10 cap. 10.
that Even what things they naturally know, in those very things as beasts void
of reason they corrupted themselves; or if there be no such special accident,
yet for as much as the common sort are led by the sway of their sensual
desires, and therefore do more shun sin for the sensible evils which follow
it amongst men, then for any kind of sentence which reason does pronounce
against it* this very thing is cause sufficient why duties belonging unto each
kind of virtue, albeit the law of reason teach them, should notwithstanding be
prescribed even by humane law. Which law in this case we term mixed, because
the mat^er whereunto it binds, is the same which reason necessarily does
require at our hands, and from the law of reason it differs in the manner of
binding only. For whereas men before stood bound in conscience to do as the
law of reason teaches, they are now by virtue of humane law become
constrainable, and if they outwardly transgress, punishable. As for laws
which are merely humane, the matter of them is any thing which reason does but
probably ^each to be fit and convenient; so that till such time as law has
passed amongst men about it, of it self it binds no man. One example whereof
may be this. Lands are by humane law in some places after the owners decease
divided unto all his children* in some all descends to the eldest son. If
the law of reason did necessarily require but the one of these two to be done,
they which by law have received the other, should be subject to that heavy
sentence, which denounces against all that decree wicked unjust, and
unreasonable things, woe. Whereas now which soever be received, Esa. 10.1.
there is no law of reason transgrest; because there is probable reason why
either of them may be expedient, and for either of them more then probable
reason there is not to be found. Laws whether mixtly or merely humane are
made by politic societies: some, only as those societies are ciuilly united;
some, as they are spiritually joined and make such a body as we call the
Church. Of laws humane in this later kind we are to speak in the third
book following. Let it therefore suffice thus far to have touched the force
wherewith almighty God has graciously endued our nature, and thereby enabled
the same to find out both those laws which all men generally are for ever
bound to observe, and also such as are most fit for their behoof who lead
their lives in any ordered state of government. Now besides that law which
simply concerns men as men, and that which belongs unto them as they are
men linked with others in some form of politic society; there is a third
kind of law which touches all such several bodies politic, so far forth
as one of them has public commerce with another. And this third is the Law
of nations. Between men and beasts there is no possibility of sociable
communion; because the w^lspring of that communion is a natural delight which
man has to transfuse from himself into others, and to receive from others
into himself, especially those things wherein the excellency of his kind
does most consist. The chiefest instrument of humane communion therefore is
speech, because thereby we impart mutually one to another the conceiptes of our
reasonable understanding. Arist. pol. 1. c.
And for that cause seeing beasts are not hereof capable, for as much as with
them we can use no such conference, they being in degree although above other
creatures on earth to whom nature has denied sense, yet lower then to be
sociable companions of man to whom nature has given reason; Genesis 2.20.
it is of Adam said that amongst the beasts He found not for himself any
meet companion. Civil society does more content the nature of man, then any
private kind of solitary living; because in society this good of mutual
participation is so much larger then otherwise. Herewith notwithstanding we
are not satisfied, but we covet (if it might be) to have a kind of society
and fellowship even withal mankind. Which thing Socrates intending to signify,
professed himself a Citizen, Cic. Tusc. 5. and 1. de legib.
not of this or that co^mon-welth, but of the world. And an effect of that very
natural desire in us, (a manifest^token that we wish after a sort an universal
fellowship with all men) appears by the wonderful delight men have, some to
visit foreign countries, some to discover nations not heard of in former ages,
we all to know the affairs and dealings of other people, yea to be in league
of amity with them: 1. Reg. 10.1.
and this not only for traffiques sake, or to the end that when many are
co^federated each may make other the more strong; 2. Chr. 9.1.
but for such cause also as moved the Queen of Saba to visit Solomon; Math.
13.42. Luke 11.31.
and in a word because nature does presume that how many me^ there are in the
world, so many Gods as it were there are, or at least wise such they should be
toward men. Touching laws which are to serve men in this behalf; even as
those laws of reason, which (man retaining his original integrity) had bin
sufficient to direct each particular person in all his affairs and duties, are
not sufficient but require the access of other laws, now that man and his
offspring are grown thus corrupt and sinful; again as those laws of polity
and regiment, which would have served men living in public society together
with that harmless disposition which then they should have had* are not able
now to serve when men's iniquity is so hardly restrained within any tolerable
bounds in like manner the national laws of mutual commerce be^weene societies
of that former and better quality might have been other then now, when nations
are so prone to offer violence, injury and wrong. Here upon has grown in
every of these three kinds, that distinction between Primarie and Secundarie
laws; the one grounded upon sincere, the other built upon depraved nature.
Primarie laws of nations are such as concern embassage, such as belong to the
courteous entertainment of forreiners and strangers, such as serve for
commodious traffic and the like. Secundary laws in the same kind, are such
as this present unquiet world is most familiarly acquainted with, I mean laws
of arms* which yet are much better known then kept. But what matter the law of
nations does contain I omit to search. The strength and virtue of that law is
such, that no particular nation can lawfully preiudic^ the same by any their
several laws and ordinances, more then a man by his private resolutions the law
of the whole co^mon-welth or state wherein he lives. For as civil law being
the act of a whole body politic, does therefore ouerrule each several part of
the same body: so there is no reason that any one commo^-welth of it self,
should to the prejudice of another annihilate that whereupon the whole world
has agreed. For which cause the Lacedaemonians forbidding all access of
strangers into their coasts, Iose. lib. 2. contra Applou. Theod. lib. 9. de
Sanand (...) affec^*
are in y^ respect both by Josephus and Theodoret deservedly blamed, as being
enemies to that hospitality which for common humanities sake all the nations on
earth should embrace. Now as there is great cause of communion, and
consequently of laws for the maintenance of communion, amongst nations: So
amongst nations Christian the like in regard even of Christianity has been
a^waies judged needful. And in this kind of correspondence amongst nations,
the force of general councels does stand: For as one and the same law divine,
whereof in the next place we are to speak, is unto al Christian churches a rule
for the chiefest things, by means whereof they al in that respect make one
Church, as having all but One Lord, one faith, and one baptism: Ephesians. 4.^.
So the urgent necessity of mutual communion for preservation of our unity in
these things, as also for order in some other things convenient to be every
where uniformly kept, makes it requisite that the church of God here on earth
have her laws of spiritual commerce between Christian nations, laws by
virtue whereof all Churches may enjoy freely the use of those reverend religious
and sacred consultations which are termed councels general. A thing whereof
Gods own blessed spirit was the author; a thing practiced by the holy Apostles
themselves; Act. 1^.^9.
a thing always afterward kept and observed throughout the world; a thing
never otherwise then most highly esteemed of, till pride ambition and ^yranny
began by factious and vile endeavors, to abuse that divine invention unto the
funherance of wicked purposes. But as the just authority of civil courts and
Parliaments is not therefore to be abolished, because sometime there is cunning
used to frame them according to the private intents of men ouer-potent in the
common-welth: So the grievous abuse which has been of councels, should rather
cause men to study how so gracious a thing may again be reduced to that first
perfection, then in regard of stains and blemishes since growing be held for
ever in extreme disgrace. To speak of this matter as the cause requires,
would require very long discourse. All I will presently say is this. Whether it
be for the finding out of any thing whereunto divine law binds us, but yet
in such sort, that men are not thereof on all sides resolved; or for the
setting down of some uniform judgment to stand touching such things, as
being neither way matters of necessity, are notwithstanding offensive and
scandalous when there is open opposition about them; be it for the ending of
strifes touching matters of Christian belief, wherein the one part may seem
to have probable cause of dissenting from the other; or be it concerning
matters of polity, order, and regiment in the Church; Ioh. 14.27^
I nothing doubt but that Christian men should much better frame themselves to
those heavenly precepts, which our Lord and Savior with so great instancie
gave as concerning peace and unity, if we did all concur in desire to have
the use of ancient councels again renewed, rather then these proceedings
continued, which either make all contentions endless, or bring them to one
only determination, and that of all other the worst, which is by sword. It
follows therefore that a new foundation being laid, we now adioyne hereunto
that which comes in the next place to be spoken of, namely, wherefore God
has himself by scripture made known such laws as serve for direction of men.

Wherefore God has by scripture further made known such supernatural laws as
do serve for men's direction.
11 Al things (God only excepted) besides the nature which they have in
themselves, receive externally some perfection from other things, as has been
showed. In so much as there is in the whole world no one thing great or small,
but either in respect of knowledge or of use it may unto out perfection add
somewhat. And whatsoever such perfection there is which our nature may acquire,
the same we properly term our good; our soueraign good or blessedness, that
wherein the highest degree of all our perfection consists, that which being
once attained unto, there ca^ rest nothing further to be desired, and therefore
with it our souls are fully content and satisfied, in that they have they
rejoice and thirst for no more* wherefore of goo^ things desired, some are such
that for themselves we covet them not, but only because they serve as
instruments unto that for which we are to seek, of this sort are riches: an
other kind there is which although we desire for it self, as health and virtue
and knowledge, nevertheless they are not the last mark whereat we aim, but
have their further end whereunto they are referred; so as in them we are not
satisfied as having attained the utmost we may, but our desires do still
proceed. These things are linked and as it were chained one to another, we
labor to eat, and we eat to live, and we live to do good, and the good which
we do is as seed sown Gal. 6.8. He that sows to the spirit, shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting.
with reference unto a future harvest. But we must come at the length to some
pause. For if every thing were to be desired for some other without any stint,
there could be no certain end proposed unto our actions, we should go on we
know not whether, yea whatsoever we do were in vain, or rather nothing at all
were possible to be done. For as to take away the first efficient of our being,
were ^o annihilate utterly our persons; so we cannot remove the last final
cause of our working, but we shall cause whatsoever we work to cease. Therefore
some thing there must be desired for it self simply and for no other. That is
simply for it self desirable, unto the nature whereof it is opposite and
repugnant to be desired with relation unto any other. The ox and the ass
desire their food, neither propose they unto themselves any end wherefore; so
that of them this is desired for it self; but why? By reason of their
imperfection which cannot otherwise desire it: whereas that which is desired
simply for it self, the excellency thereof is such as permits it not in
any sort to be referred to a further end. Now that which man does desire with
reference to a further end, the same he desires in such measure as is unto
that end convenient: but what he coueteth as good in it self, toward that
his desire is ever infinite. So that unless the last good of all which is
desired altogether for it self, be also infinite; we do evil in making it
our end: even as they who placed their felicity in wealth or honor or
pleasure or any thing here attained; because in desiring any thing as our
final perfection which is not so, we do amiss. Nothing may be infinitely
desired, but that good which in deed is infinite. For the better, the more
desirable; that therefore most desirable, Vide Arist Eth 10. cap. 10. and
Metaph. 12. ca 6. and cap. 4. and cap. 30.
wherein there is infinity of goodness; so that if any thing desirable may be
infinite, that must needs be the highest of all things that are desired. No
good is infinite but only God: therefore he our felicity and bliss. Moreover
desire tends unto union with that it desires. If then in him we be blessed,
it is by force of participation and conjunction with him. Again, it is not the
possession of any good thing can make them happy which have it, unless they
enjoy the thing wherewith they are possessed. Then are we happy therefore, when
fully we enjoy God, as an object wherein the powers of our souls are satisfied
even with everlasting delight: so that although we be me^, yet by being unto
God united, we live as it were the life of God. Happiness therefore is that
estate whereby we attain, so far as possibly may be attained, the full
possession of that which simply for it self is to be desired, and contains
in it after an eminent sort the contentation of our desires, the highest
degree of all our perfection. Of such perfection capable we are not in this
life. For while we are in the world, subject we are unto sundry (...). Mercur.
Trismeg. Aug. de trin. lib. 9. ca. vl^.
imperfections, grief of body, defectes of mind; yea the best things we do
are painful, and the exercise of them grievous, being continued without
intermission; so as in those very actions whereby we are especially perfected
in this life, we are not able to persist, forced we are with very wearines and
that often to interrupt the^; which tediousnes cannot fall into those
operations that are in the state of bliss, when our union with God is
complete. Complete union with him must be according unto every power and
faculty of our minds apt to receive so glorious an object. Capable we are of
God both by understanding and will; by understanding as he is that sovereign
truth, which comprehends the rich treasures of all wisdom* by will, as he is
that sea of goodness, whereof who so tastes shall thirst no more. As the will
does now work upon that object by desire, which is as it were a motion toward
the end as yet vnobtained; so likewise upon the same hereafter received it
shall work also by love. Appetitus inhiantis fit amor fruentis, says Saint
Augustine, The longing disposition of them that thirst, is changed* into the
sweet affection of them that taste and are replenished. Whereas we now love
the thing that is good, but good especially in respect of benefit unto us* we
shall then love the thing that is good, only or principally for the goodness of
beauty in it self. The soul being in this sort as it is active, perfected by
love of that infinite good; shall as it is receptiue, be also perfected with
those supernatural passions of joy peace and delight. All this endless and
everlasting. Math. 25. The just shall go into life everlasting*
Which perpe^uitie, in regard whereof our blessedness is termed a crown which
withers not, does neither depend upon the nature of the thing it self, Math.
22. They shall be a^ the Angels of God. ^. Tim. 4.^. 1. Pet. 1.4.
nor proceed from any natural necessity that our souls should so exercise
themselves for ever in beholding and loving God, but from the will of God, which
does both freely perfect our nature in so high a degree, and continue it so
perfected. Under man no creature in the world is capable of felicity and
bliss; first, because their chiefest perfection consists in that which is
best for the^, but not in that which is simply best, as ours does; secondly,
because whatsoever external perfection they tend unto, it is not better then
themselves, as ours is. How just occasion have we therefore even in this respect
with the Prophet to admire the goodness of God; Lord what is man that thou
should exalt him above the works of thy hands, so far as to make thy
self the inheritance of his rest, Psalm. ^.
and the substance of his felicity? Now if men had not naturally this desire
to be happy, how were it possible that all men should have it? All men have.
Therefore this desire in man is natural. It is not in our power not to do the
same: how should it then be in our power to do it coldly or remissely? so that
our desire being natural, is also in that degree of earnestnes whereunto
nothing can be added. And is it probable that God should frame the hearts of
all me^ so desirous of that which no man may obtain? It is an axiom of
nature, that natural desire cannot utterly be frustrate. Comment in proaem. 2.
Me^^ph.
This desire of ours being natural should be frustrate, if that which may
satisfy the same were a thing impossible for man to aspire unto. Man does
seek a triple perfection, first a sensual, consisting in those things which
very life it self requires, either as necessary supplements, or as beauties
and ornaments thereof; then an intellectual, consisting in those things which
none underneath man is either capable of or acquainted with; lastly a spiritual
and divine, consisting in those things whereunto we tend by supernatural means
here, but cannot here attain unto them. They that make the first of these
three the scope of their whole life, are said by the Apostle to have no God,
but only their belly, to be earthly minded men. Unto the second they bend
themselves, who seek especially to excel in all such knowledge and virtue as
does most commend men. To this branch belongs the law of moral and civil
perfection. Phil. 3.1^.
That there is somewhat higher then either of these two, no other proof does
need, then the very process of man's desire, which being natural should be
frustrate, if there were not some farther thing wherein it might rest at the
length contented, which in the former it cannot do. For man does not seem to
rest satisfied either with fruition of that wherewith his life is preserved, or
with performance of such actions as advance him most deservedly in estimation;
but does further covet, yea oftentimes manifestly pursue with great sedulitie
and earnestnes, that which cannot stand him in any stead for vital use; that
which exceeds the reach of sense; yea somewhat above capacity of reason,
somewhat divine and heavenly, which with hidden exultation it rather surmiseth
then conceiueth; somewhat it seeks and what* that is directly it knows not,
yet very intentive desire thereof does so incite it, that all other known
delights and pleasures are laid aside, they give place to the search of this
but only suspected desire. If the soul of man did serve only to give him
being in this life, then things appertaining unto this life would content
him, as we see they do other creatures: which creatures inioying what they
live by, seek no further, but in this contentation do show a kind of
acknowledgeme^t, that there is no higher good which does any way belong unto
the^. With us it is otherwise. For although the beauties, riches, honors,
sciences, virtues and perfections of all men living, were in the present
possession of one: yet somewhat beyond and above all this there would still be
sought and earnestly thirsted for. So that nature even in this life does
plainly claim and call for a more divine prefectio^, then either of these two
that have been mentioned. This last and highest estate of perfection whereof we
speak, is received of men in the nature of a Math. ^.1^. Rejoice and be glad*
for great is your reward in heaven. Aug. de doct. Christ. cap. 6. Summa merces
est vt ipso per^ru^mur.
reward. Rewards do always presuppose such duties performed as are rewardable.
Our natural means therefore unto blessedness are our works: nor is it
possible that nature should ever find any other way to salvation then only
this. But examine the works which we do, and since the first foundation of the
world what one can say, My ways are pure? Seeing then all flesh is guilty of
that for which God has threatened eternally to punish, what possibility is
there this way to be saved? There rests therefore either no way unto
salvation, or if any, then surely a way which is supernatural, a way which
could never have entered into the heart of man as much as once to conceive or
imagine, if God himself had not revealed it extraordinarily. For which cause we
term it the mystery or secret way of salvation. And therefore S. Ambrose in
this matter appealeth justly from man to God, Ambros. contra Sym.
Caeli mysterium doceat me Deus qui condidit, non homo qui seipsum ignorauit,
Let God himself that made me, let not man that knows not himself, be my
instructor concerning the mystical way to heaven. Magno and excellenti ingenio
viri, cum se doctrinae penitus dedidissent, quicquid laborit poterat impendi
(contemptis omnibus and priuatis and publicis actionibus) ad inquirendae
veritatis studi^ contulerunt; existimentes multo esse praeclarius humanarum
diuinarumque rerum inuestigare ac scire rationem, quam strue^di^ o^ibus aut
cu^nulandis honoribus in haerere. Sed nequ^ adepti sunt id quod volebant* and
operam simul atque industriam pe^ diderunt* quia veritas, id est arcanum summi
Dei qui fecit omnia, ingenio ac propriis sensibu^ non potest co^prehendi.
Alioqui nihil inter deum hominemque distaret, si consilia and dispositiones
illius maiestatis aeternae cogitatio assequeretur hu^lana. Quod quia fieri non
potuit vt homini per seipsum ratio diuina notesceret, non est passus hominem
Deus lumen sapientiae requirentem diutius a berrare, ac sine vllo laboris
effectu vagari pertenebras inextricabiles. A peruit oculo^ eius aliquando, and
noti^nem veritati^ munus suum fecit, vt and humanam sapientiam nullam esse
monstraret, and erranti ac vago ^^am consequendae immortalitatis ostenderet.
Lactan. lib. 1. cap. 1.
When men of excellent wit (says Lactantius) had wholly betaken themselves
unto study, after farewell bidden unto all kind as well of private as public
action, they spared no labor that might be spent in the search of truth;
holding it a thing of much more price to seek and to find out the reason of
all affairs as well divine as human, the^ to stick fast in the toil of
piling up riches and gathering together heaps of honors. Howbeit they both
did fail of their purpose, and got not as much as to quite their charges;
because truth which is the secret of the most high God, whose proper handiworke
all things are, cannot be compassed with that wit and those senses which are
our own. For God and man should be very near neighbors, if man's cogitations
were able to take a suracy of the counsels and appointments of that majesty
everlasting. Which being utterly impossible, that the eye of man by it self
should look into the bosom of divine reason; God did not suffer him being
desirous of the light of wisdom, to stray any longer up and down, and with
bootlesse expense of travail to wander in darkness that had no passage to get
out by. His eyes at the length God did open; and bestow upon him the knowledge
of the truth by way of Donatiue; to the end that man might both be clearly
convicted of folly, and being through error out of the way, have the path that
leads unto immortality laid plain before him. Thus far Lactantius Firmianus
to show that God himself is the teacher of the truth, whereby is made known
the supernatural way of salvation and law for the^ to live in that shall be
saved. In the natural path of everlasting life, the first beginning is that
hability of doing good, which God in the day of man's creation endued him with;
from hence obedience unto the will of his creator, absolute righteousness and
integrity in all his actions; and last of all the justice of God rewarding the
worthiness of his deserts with the crown of eternal glory. Had Adam
continued in his first estate, this had been the way of life unto him and all
his posterite. Wherein I confess notwithstanding with the Scot. lib. 4. Sent.
dict. 49.6 Loquendo de stricta iustitia, Deus nulli nostrum propter quaecun^
que merita est debtor perfectionis reddendae tam intensae, propter immoderatu^
excessum illius perfectionis vltra illa merita. Sed esto quod ex liberalitate
sua determinasset meritis conserre actum tam perfectum tanquam praemium, tali
quidem iustitia qualis decet cum, scilicet supererogantis in praemus: tamen non
sequitur ex hoc necessatio quod perillam iu^titiam sit reddenda perfectio
perennis tanquam praemium, imo abundans fieret retributio in beatitudine vnius
momenti.
wittiest of the School divines, that if we speak of strict justice, God
could no way have been bound to require man's labors in so large and ample
manner as human felicity does import: in as much as the dignity of this
exceeds so far the others value. But be it that God of his great liberality
had determined in lieu of man's endeavors to bestow the same, by the rule of that
justice which best beseems him, namely the justice of one that requiteth
nothing mincingly, but all with pressed and heaped and even ouer-inlarged
measure: yet could it never hereupon necessarily be gathered, that such
justice should add to the nature of that reward the property of everlasting
continuance; since possession of bliss, though it should be but for a moment,
were an abundant retribution. But we are not now to enter into this
consideration, how gracious and bountiful our good God might still appear in
so rewarding the sons of men, albeit they should exactly perform* whatsoever
duty their nature binds the^ unto. Howsoever God did propose this reward, we
that were to be rewarded must have done that which is required at our hands; we
failing in the one, it were in nature an impossibility that the other should be
looked for. The light of nature is never able to find out any way of obtaining
the reward of bliss, but by performing exactly the duties and works of
righteousness. From salvation therefore and life all flesh being excluded this
way, behold how the wisdom of God has revealed a way mystical and
supernatural, a way directing unto the same end of life by a course which
groundeth it self upon the guiltiness of sin, and through sin desert of
condemnation and death. For in this way the first thing is the tender
compassion of God respecting us drowned and swallowed up in misery; the next
is redemption out of the same by the precious death and merit of a mighty
Savior, which has witnessed of himself saying John. 14.6.
I am the way, the way that leads us from misery into bliss. This
supernatural way had God in himself prepared before all worlds. The way of
supernatural duty which to us he has prescribed, our Savior in the Gospel
of Saint John does note, terming it by an excellency the work of God: John
6.29.
This is the work of God that ye believe in him whom he has sent. Not that
God does require nothing unto happiness at the hands of men saving only a
naked belief, (for hope and Charity we may not exclude:) but that without
belief all other things are as nothing, and it the ground of those other
divine virtues. Concerning faith, the principal object whereof is that
eternal verity which has discovered the treasures of hidden wisdom in
Christ; concerning hope, the highest object whereof is that everlasting
goodness which in Christ does quicken the dead; concerning charity, the final
object whereof is that incomprehensible beauty which shines in the countenance
of Christ the son of the living God; concerning these virtues, the first of
which beginning here with a weak apprehensio^ of things not seen, ends with
the intuitiue vision of God in the world to come; the second beginning here
with a trembling expectation of things far removed, and as yet but only heard
of, ends with real and actual fruition of that which no tongue can
express; the third beginning here with a weak inclination of heart toward
him unto whom we are not able to approach, ends with endless union, the
mystery whereof is higher then the reach of the thoughts of men; concerning that
faith hope and charity without which there can be no salvation; was there ever
any mention made saving only in that law which God himself has from heaven
revealed? There is not in the world a syllable muttered with certain truth
concerning any of these three, more then has been supernaturally received from
the mouth of the eternal God. Laws therefore concerning these things are
supernatural, both in respect of the manner of delivering them which is divine,
and also in regard of the things delivered, which are such as have not in
nature any cause from which they flow, but were by the voluntary appointment of
God ordained besides the course of nature, to rectify natures obliquity
withal.

12 The cause why so many natural or rational laws are ^et down in hol*
Scripture.
When supernatural duties are necessarily exacted, natural are not rejected
as needless. The law of God therefore is though principally delivered for
instruction in the one, yet fraught with precepts of the other also. The
scripture is fraught even with laws of nature. In so much that, Ius natural
est quod in lege and Eua^gelio continetur. p. 1. d. 1.
Gratian defining natural right (whereby is meant the right which exacteth
those general duties, that concern men naturally even as they are men)
terms natural right that which the books of the Law and the Gospel do
contain. Neither is it vain that the Scripture abounds with so great store
of laws in this kind. For they are either such as we of our selves could not
easily have found out, and then the benefit is not small to have them readily
set down to our hands* or if they be so clear and manifest that no man endued
with reason can lightly be ignorant of them, yet the spirit as it were
borrowing them from the school of nature as serving to prove things less
manifest, and to induce a persuasion of somewhat which were in it self more
hard and dark, unless it should in such sort be cleared, the very applying of
them unto cases particular is not without most singular use and profit many
ways for men's instruction. Besides, be they plain of themselves or obscure,
the evidence of Gods own testimony added unto the natural assent of reason
concerning the certainty of them, does not a little comfort and confirm the
same. Wherefore in as much as our actions are conversant about things beset
with many circumstances, which cause men of sundry wits to be also of sundry
judgments concerning that which ought to be done: requisite it cannot but
seem the rule of divine law should herein help our imbecility, that we might
the more infallibly understand what is good and what evil. The first
principles of the law of nature are easy, hard it were to find men ignorant of
them: but concerning the duty which natures law does require at the hands of
men in a number of things particular, so Josephus lib. secu^do contra Appio.
Lacedae monii quomodo no^ sunt ob inhospitalitate^ reprehende^di, ^aedumque
neglectum nuptiarum? Elien^e^ vero and Th^bani ob coitu^ cum malculis plane
impudente^ and contra naturam; quem recte and vtiliter exercere pu^abant?
Cumque hae^ Comnino perpetrare^t, etiam luis legibus miscu ere. vide. Th. 12.
q. 49.4.5.6. Lex naturae (...) corrupt^ suit apud (...) manos, ve (...)
trocinium ti^^^ reputare^t peccatum. August. aut quisquis author est lib. de
quaest. non. and vet. test. quis nescia^, quid bonae vitae co^ueniat, aut
ignor^t* quia quod (...) sien non vultali^s minime deb^at facere? At vero vbi
naturali^ lex qua n^st oppressa, consuetudine delinquendi, tunc oportuit
manifestari scriptis, vt dei iudicium omnes audiren^: non quod penitus oblitera
ta est, sed qui^ maxima eius authoritate carebat, idololatriae studebatur,
timor dei in terris no^ erat, fornicatio operabatur, circa rem proximi auida
erat concupiscentia. Data ergo lex est, vt quae sciebantur authoritatem
haberent, and quae latere caeperant manifestarentur.
far has the natural understanding even of sundry whole nations been
darkened, that they have not discerned no not gross iniquity to be sin.
Again, being so prone as we are to fawn upon our selves, and to be ignorant
as much as may be of our own deformities; without the feeling sense whereof we
are most wretched, even so much the more, because not knowing the^ we cannot as
much as desire to have them taken away: how should our fest^ed sores be cured,
but that God has delivered a law as sharp as the two edged sword, pearcing
the very closest and most unsearchable corners of the heart, which the law of
nature can hardly, human laws by no means possible reach unto? Hereby we
know even secret concupiscence to be sin, and are made fearful to offend
though it be but in a wandering cogitation. Finally of those things which are
for direction of all the parts of our life needful, and not impossible to be
discerned by the light of nature it self, are there not many which few men's
natural capacity, and some which no man's has been able to find out? They
are, says Saint Augustine, but a few and they endued with great ripenes of wit
and judgment, free from all such affairs as might trouble their meditations,
instructed in the sharpest and the subtlest points of learning, who have, and
that very hardly, been able to find out but only the immortality of the soul.
The resurrection of the flesh what man did ever at any time dream of, having
not heard it otherwise then from the school of nature? Whereby it appears
how much we are bound to yield unto our creator the father of all mercy
eternal thanks, for that he has delivered his law unto the world, a law
wherein so many things are laid open clear and manifest; as a light which
otherwise would have been buried in darkness, not without the hazard, or
rather not with the hazard, but with the certain loss of infinite thousands
of souls most undoubtedly now saved. We see therefore that our sovereign good
is desired naturally; that God the author of that natural desire had appointed
natural means whereby to fulfill it; that man having utterly disabled his
nature unto those means, has had other revealed from God, and has received
from heaven a law to teach him how that which is desired naturally must now
supernaturally be attained, finally we see that because those later exclude not
the former quite and clean as unnecessary, therefore together with such
supernatural duties as could not possibly have been otherwise known to the
world, the same law that teaches them, teaches also with them such natural
duties as could not by light of nature easily have been known.

The benefit of having divine laws written.
13. In the first age of the world God gave laws unto our fathers, and by
reason of the number of their days, their memories served in steed of books;
whereof the manifold imperfections and defects being known to God, he
mercifully relieved the same by often putting them in mind of that whereof it
behooved them to be specially mindful. In which respect we see how many times
one thing has been iterated unto sundry even of the best and wisest amongst
them* After that the lives of men were shortened, means more durable to
preserve the laws of God from oblivion and corruption grew in use, not without
precise direction from God himself. First therefore of Moses it is said, that
he wrote all the words of God; Exodus 24.4.
not by his own private motion and devise: for God takes this act to
himself, Ose. 8.1^.
I have written. Furthermore were not the Prophets following commanded also to
do the like? Unto the holy Evangelist Saint John how often express charge is
given, Apoc. 1^ 11. and 14.13.
Scribe, write these things? Concerning the rest of our Lords Disciples the
words of Saint Augustine are, Quic quid ille de suis factis and dictis nos
legere voluit* Aug. lib. 1. de cons. Euang. cap. v^c.
hoc scribendu^ illis tanqua^ suis manibus imperauit. Now although we do not
deny it to be a matter merely accidental unto the law of God to be written;
although writing be not that which adds authority and strength thereunto,
finally though his laws do require at our hands the same obedience howsoever
they be delivered; his providence notwithstanding which has made principal
choice of this way to deliver them, who sees not what cause we have to admire
and magnify? The singular benefit that has grown unto the world by receiving
the laws of God, even by his own appointment committed unto writing, we are
not able to esteem as the value thereof deserves* When the question therefore
is, whether we be now to seek for any revealed law of God other where then
only in the sacred Scripture, whether we do now stand bound in the sight of
God to yield to traditions-vrged by the Church of Rome the same obedience and
reverence we do to his written law, honoring equally and adoring both as
Divine: our answer is, no. They that so earnestly plead for the authority of
Tradition, as if nothing were more safely conveyed then that which spreads it
self by report, and descends by relation of former generations unto the ages
that succeed, are not all of the them (surely a miracle it were if they should
be) so simple, as thus to persuade themselves; howsoever if the simple were so
persuaded, they could be content perhaps very well to enjoy the benefit, as
they account it, of that common error. What hazard the truth is in when it
passes through the hands of report, how maimed and deformed it becomes; they
are not, they cannot possibly be ignorant. Let them that are indeed of this
mind, consider but only that little of things Divine, which the Heathen have in
such sort received. I mean those historical matters concerning the ancient
state of the first world, the deluge, the sons of Noah, the children of Isreal's
deliverance out of Egypt, the life and doings of Moses their Captain, with
such like: the certain truth whereof delivered in holy Scripture, is of the
Heathen which had the^ only by report, so intermingled with fabulous vanities,
that the most which remains in them to be seen, is the show of dark and
obscure steps, where some part of the truth has gone.
How miserable had the state of the Church of God been long ere this, if
wanting the sacred Scripture* we had no record of his laws but only the
memory of man, receiving the same by report and relation from his predecessors?
By Scripture it has in the wisdom of God seemed meet to deliver unto the
world much but personally expedient to be practiced of certain men; many deep
and profound points of doctrine, as being the maine original ground whereupon
the precepts of duty depend* many prophecies the clear performance whereof
might confirm the world in belief of things unseen; many histories to serve
as looking glasses to behold the mercy, the truth, the righteousness of God
toward all that faithfully serve* obey and honor him; yea many entire
meditations of piety, to be as patterns and presidents in cases of like
nature; many things needful for ^^plication* many for application unto
particular occasions, such as the providence of God from time to time has
taken to have the several books of his holy ordinance written. Be it them
that together with the principal necessary laws of God, there are sundry
other things written, whereof we might happily be ignorant, and yet be saved.
What shall we hereupon think them needless? shall we esteem them as riotous
branches wherewith we sometimes behold most pleasant vines ouergrown? Surely no
more then we judge our hands, on our eyes ^^perfluou^* or what part soever,
which if our bodies did want, we might notwithstanding any such defect retain
still the complete being of men. As therefore a complete man is neither
destitute of any part necessary, and has some parts whereof though the want
could not deprive him of his essence, yet to have them stands him in singular
stead in respect of the special uses for which they serves in (...) all those
writings which contain in them the law of God, all those ^^n^r^ble books of
Scripture, all those sacred tomes and volumes of holy wri^, ^^ey are with such
absolute perfection framed, that in them there neither (...) any thing, the
lack whereof might deprive us of life; nor any thing in such wise abounds,
that as being superfluous; unfruitful* and altogether needless, we should
think it no loss or danger at all if we did want it.

14* Although the scripture of God therefore be stored with infinite variety
of matter in all kinds, although it abound with all sorts of laws, yet the
principal intent of scripture is to deliver the laws of duties supernatural.
Oftentimes it has been in very solemn manner disputed, The sufficiency of
Scripture unto the end for which it was instituted. V^rum cognitio
supernaturalis necessaria viatori, sit sufficienter tradita in sacra scriptura.
whether all things necessary unto salvation be necessarily set down in the
holy Scriptures or no. If we define that necessary unto salvation, whereby the
way to salvation is in any sort made more plain, apparent, and easy to be
known; then is there no part of true Philosophy, no art of account, no kind
of science rightly so called, but the Scripture must contain it. If only
those things be necessary, as surely none else are, without the knowledge and
practice whereof it is not the will and pleasure of God to make any ordinary
grant of salvation; it may be notwithstanding, This question proposed by
Scotus, i^ affirmatively concluded.
and oftentimes has been demanded, how the books of holy Scripture contain
in them all necessary things, when of things necessary the very chiefest is to
know what books we are bound to esteem holy; which point is confessed
impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. Whereunto we may answer with
truth, that there is not in the world any Art or Science, which proposing unto
it self an end (as every one does some end or other) has been therefore
thought defective, if it have not delivered simply whatsoever is needful to
the same end: but all kinds of knowledge have their certain bounds and
limits; each of them presupposes many necessary things learned in other
sciences and known before hand. He that should take upon him to teach men how
to be eloquent in pleading causes, must needs deliver unto them whatsoever
precepts are requisite unto that end, otherwise he does no^ the thing which he
takes upon him. Seeing then no man can plead eloquently, unless he be able
first to speak, it follows that ability of speech is in this case a thing
most necessary. Notwithstanding every man would think it ridiculous, that he
which undertakes by writing to instruct an Orator, should therefore deliver all
the precepts of Grammar; because his profession is to deliver precepts
necessary unto eloquent speech, yet so, that they which are to receive them
be taugt before hand, so much of that which is thereunto necessary as
comprehends the skill of speaking. In like sort, albeit Scripture do profess
to contain in it all things which are necessary unto salvation; yet the
meaning cannot be simply of all things which are necessary, but all things
that are necessary in some certain kind or form; as all things that are
necessary, and either could not at all, or could not easily be known by the
light of natural discourse; all things which are necessary to be known that
we may be saved, but known with presupposall of knowledge concerning certain
principles, whereof it receaueth us already persuaded, and then instructs us
in all the residue that are necessary. In the number of these principles one is
the sacred authority of Scripture. Being therefore persuaded by other means
that these Scriptures are the oracles of God* themselves do then teach us the
rest, and lay before us all the duties which God requires at our hands as
necessary unto salvation. Further, there has been some doubt likewise, whether
containing in scripture do import express setting down in plain terms, or
else comprehending in such sort that by reason we may from thence conclude all
things which are necessary. Against the former of these two constructions,
instance has sundry ways been given. For our belief in the Trinity, the
Coeternity of the Son of God with his Father, the proceeding of the Spirit
from the Father and the Son, the duty of baptizing infants, these with such
other principal points, the necessity whereof is by none denied, are
notwithstanding in Scripture no where to be found by express literal mention,
only deduced they are out of scripture by collection. This kind of
co^prehension in scripture being therefore received, still there is no doubt
how far we are to proceed by collection, before the full and complete measure
of things necessary be made up. For let us not think that as long as the world
does endure* the wit of man shall be able to found the bottom of that which may
be concluded out of the scripture; especially if things contained by collection
do so far extend, as to draw in whatsoever may be at any time out of scripture
but probably and coniecturally surmised. But let necessary collection be made
requisite, and we may boldly deny, that of all those things which at this day
are with so great necessity urged upon this Church under the name of reformed
Church discipline, there is any one which their books hitherto have made
manifest to be contained in the Scripture. Let them if they can allege but one
properly belonging to their cause, and not common to them and us, and show the
deduction thereof out of scripture to be necessary. It has been already
showed, how all things necessary unto salvation in such sort as before we have
maintained, must needs be possible for men to know; and that many things are
in such sort necessary, the knowledge whereof is by the light of nature
impossible to be attained. Whereupon it follows, that either all flesh is
excluded from possibility of salvation, which to think were most barbarous; or
else that God has by supernatural means revealed the way of life so far
forth as does suffice. For this cause God has so many times and ways spoken
to the sons of men. Neither has he by speech only, but by wilting also
instructed and taught his Church. The cause of writing has been to the end
that things by him revealed unto the world, might have the longer continuance,
and the greater certainty of assurance; by how much that which stands on
record, has in both those respects preeminence above that which passes from
hand to hand, and has no pens but the toongs, no books but the ears of men
to record it. The several books of scripture having had each some several
occasion and particular purpose which caused them to be written, the contents
thereof are according to the exigence of that special end whereunto they are
intended. Hereupon it grows, that every book of holy scripture does take out
of all kinds of truth, Ephesians. 5.29.
natural, 2. Tim. 3.8.
historical, Tit. 1.12.
foreign, 2. Pet. 2.4.
supernatural, so much as the matter handled requires. Now for as much as
there has been reason alleged sufficient to conclude, that all things
necessary unto salvation must be made known, and that God himself has
therefore revealed his will, because otherwise men could not have known so
much as i^ necessary; his surceasing to speak to the world since the
publishing of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the delivery of the same in
writing, is unto us a manifest token that the way of salvation is now
sufficiently opened, and that we need no other means for our full
instruction, then God has already furnished us withal. The maine drift of the
whole new Testament, John. ^0.31.
is that which Saint John sets down as the purpose of his own History*
These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the Son
of God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name. The drift
of the old, that which the Apostle mentions to Timothy, The holy Scriptures
are able to make thee wise unto salu^tion. 2. Tim. ^.15*
So that the general end both of old and new is one; the difference
between them consisting in this, that the old did make wise by teaching
salvation through Christ that should come; the new by teaching that Christ the
Savior is come, and that Jesus whom the Jews did crucify, and whom God did
raise again from the dead, is he. When the Apostle therefore affirms unto
Timothy, that the old was able to make him wise to salvation, it was not his
meaning that the old alone can do this unto us which live sithence the
publication of the new. For he speaks with presupposall of the doctrine of
Christ known also unto Timothy; and therefore first it is said, Continue thou
in those things which thou have learned and art persuaded, knowing of whom thou
have been taught them. 2. Tim. 3.14.
Again those Scriptures he grants were able to make him wise to salvation;
Verse. 15.
but he adds, through the faith which is in Christ. Wherefore without the
doctrine of the new Testament teaching that Christ has wrought the redemption
of the world, which redemption the old did foreshewe he should work; it is
not the former alone which can on our behalf perform so much as the Apostle
does avouch, who presupposes this when he magnifieth that so highly. And as
his words concerning the books of ancient Scripture, do not take place but
with presupposall of the Gospel of Christ embraced: so our own words also
when we extol the complete sufficiency of the whole entire body of the
Scripture, must in like sort be understood with this caution, that the
benefit of natures light be not thought excluded as unnecessary, because the
necessity of a diuiner light is magnified. There is in Scripture therefore no
defect, but that any man what place or calling soever he hold in the Church of
God, may have thereby the light of his natural understanding so perfected,
that the one being relieved by the other, there can want no part of needful
instruction unto any good work which God himself requires, be it natural or
supernatural, belonging simply unto men as men, or unto men as they are united
in whatsoever kind of society. It suffices therefore that nature and
Scripture do serve in such full sort, that they both jointly, and not severally
either of them, be so complete, that unto everlasting felicity we need not the
knowledge of any thing more then these two may easily furnish our minds with
on all sides: and therefore they which add traditions as a part of
supernatural necessary truth, have not the truth, but are in error. For they
only plead, that whatsoever God reuealeth as necessary for all Christian men
to do or believe, the same we ought to embrace, whether we have received it by
writing or otherwise; which no man denies: when that which they should
confirm who claim so great reverence unto traditions is, that the same
traditions are necessarily to be acknowledged divine and holy. For we do not
reject them only because they are not in the Scripture, but because they are
neither in Scripture, nor can otherwise sufficiently by any reason be proved to
be of God. That which is of God, and may be evidently proved to be so, we deny
not but it has in his kind, although unwritten, yet the self same force and
authority with the written laws of God. It is by ours acknowledged,
VVhitake^us aduersu. B^llarmin quaest. 6. cap. 6.
that the Apostles did in every Church institute and ordeene some ^i^es and
customs serving for the seemelenesse of Church regiment, which rites and
customs they have not committed unto writing. Those rites and customs being
known to be Apostolical, and having the nature of things changeable, were no
less to be accounted of in the Church then other things of the like degree,
that is to say, capable in like sort of alteration, although set down in the
Apostles writings. For both being known to be Apostolical, it is not the
manner of delivering them unto the Church* but the author from whom they
proceed, which does give them their force and credit.

15 Laws being imposed either by each man upon himself, Of lawe^ positive
contained in scripture, the mutability of certain of them, and the general
use of scripture.
or by a public society upon the particulars thereof, or by all the nations
of men upon every several society, or by the Lord himself upon any or every
of these, there is not amongst these four kinds any one, but contains sundry
both natural and positive laws. Impossible it is but that they should fall
into a number of gross errors, who only take such laws for positive, as have
been made or invented of men, and holding this position hold also, that all
positive and none but positive laws are mutable. Laws natural do always
bind; laws positive not so, but only after they have been expressly and
wittingly imposed. Laws positive there are in every of those kinds before
mentioned. As in the first kind the promises which we have past unto men, and
the vows we have made unto God; for these are laws which we tie our selves
unto, and till we have so tied our selves they bind us not. Laws positive in
the second kind are such the civil constitutions peculiar unto each particular
common weal. In the third kind the law of Heraldy in wa^re is positive: and in
the last all the judicials which God gave unto the people of Israel to
observe. And although no laws but positive be mutable, yet all are not mutable
which be positive. Positive laws are either permanent or else changeable*
according as the matter it self is concerning which they were first made.
Whether God or man be the maker of them, alteration they so far forth admit, as
the matter does exact. Laws that concern supernatural duties, are all
positive* and either concern men supernaturally as men, or else as parts of a
supernatural society, which society we call the Church. To concern men as men
supernaturally, is to concern them as duties which belong of necessity to
all, and yet could not have been known by any to belong unto them, unless God
had opened them himself, in as much as they do not depend upon any natural
ground at all out of which they may be deduced, but are appoi^^ed of God to
supply the defect of those natural ways of salvation, by which we are not now
able to attain thereunto. The Church being a supernatural society, does
differ from natural societies in this; that the persons unto whom we
associate our selves, in the one are men simply considered as men; but they to
whom we be joined in the other, are God, Angels, and holy men. Again the
Church being both a society, and a society supernatural; although as it is a
society, it have the self same original grounds which other politic
societes have, namely the natural inclination which all men have unto sociable
life, and consent to some certain bond of association, which bond is the law
that appoints what kind of order they shall be associated in: yet unto the
Church as it is a society supernatural this is peculiar, that part of the
bond of their association which belong to the Church of God, must be a law
supernatural, which God himself has revealed concerning that kind of worship
which his people shall do unto him. The substance of the service of God
therefore, so far forth as it has in it any thing more then the law of
reason does teach, may not be invented of men, as it is amongst the Heathens;
but must be received from God himself, as always it has been in the Church,
saving only when the Church has been forgetful of her duty. Wherefore to end
with a general rule concerning all the laws which God has tied men unto:
Esa. 29.13. Their fear toward me was taught by the precept of men.
those laws divine that belong whether naturally or supernaturally, either to
men as men, or to men as they live in politic society, or to men as they are
of that politic society which is the Church, without any further respect had
unto any such variable accident as the state of men and of societies of men and
of the Church it self in this world is subject unto; all laws that so belong
unto men, they belong for ever, yea although they be positive laws, unless
being positive God himself which made them alter them. The reason is, because
the subject or matter of laws in general is thus far forth constant: which
matter is that for the ordering whereof laws were instituted, and being
instituted are not chaungeable without cause, neither can they have cause of
change, when that which gave them their first institution, remains for ever
one and the same. On the other side laws that were made for men or societies
or Churches, in regard of their being such as they do not always continue,
but may perhaps be clean otherwise a while after, and so may require to be
otherwise ordered then before: the laws of God himself which are of this
nature, no man endued with common sense will ever deny to be of a different
constitution from the former, in respect of the ones constancy, and the
mutabilitie of the other. And this does seem to have been the very cause why
Saint John does so peculiarly term the doctrine that teaches salvation by
Jesus Christ, Apoc. 14.6.
Euangelium aeternum, an eternal Gospel; because there can be no reason
wherefore the publishing thereof should be taken away, and any other in stead
of it proclaimed, (...). Plat. in sine. 2. Polit.
as long as the world does continue: where as the whole law of rites and
Ceremonies, although delivered with so great solemnity, is notwithstanding
clean abrogated, in as much as it had but temporary cause of Gods ordeining
it. But that we may at the length conclude this first general introduction
unto the nature and original birth, as of all other laws, so likewise of
those which the sacred Scripture contains, concerning the author whereof, even
infidels have confessed, that he can neither err nor deceive; albeit about
things easy and manifest unto all men by common sense there needs no higher
consultation, because as a man whose wisdom is in weighty affairs admired,
would take it in some disdain to have his counsel solemnly asked about a
toye, so the meannesse of some things is such that to search the Scripture of
God for the ordering of them were to derogate from the reverend authority and
dignity of the Scripture, no less then they do by whom Scriptures are in
ordinary talk very idly applied unto vain and childish trifles: yet better
it were to be superstitious, then profane; to take from thence our direction
even in all things great or small, then to wade through matters of principal
weight and moment, without ever caring what the law of God has, either for or
against our disseignes. Concerning the custom of the very Paynimes, thus much
Strab^ witnesses, (...). Stra. Geogr. lib. 16.
Men that are civil do lead their lives after one common law appointing them
what to do. For that otherwise a multitude should with harmony amongst
themselves, concur in the doing of one thing, (for this is ciuilly to live)
or that they should in any sort menage community of life, it is not possible.
Now laws or statutes are of two sorts. For they are either received from
Gods, or else from men. And our ancient predecessors did surely most honor and
reverence that which was from the Gods; for which cause consultation with
Oracles was a thing very usual and frequent in their times. Did they make so
much account of the voice of their Gods, which in truth were no Gods: and shall
we neglect the precious benefit of conference with those Oracles of the true
and living God, whereof so great store is left to the Church, and whereunto
there is so free, so plain, and so easy access for all men? Psalm. ^19.98*
By the Commandments (this was David's confession unto God) thou have made me
wiser then mine enemies. Again, I have had more understanding then all my
teachers, because thy testimonies are my meditations. What pains would not
they have bestowed in the study of these books, who travailed sea and land to
gain the treasure of some few days talk, with men whose wisdom the world
did make any reckoning of? Vide Orphei carmina.
That little which some of the Heathens did chance to hear, concerning such
matter as the sacred Scripture plentifully contains, they did in wonderful
sort affect; their speeches as often as they make mention thereof are strange,
and such as themselves could not utter as they did other things, but still
acknowledged that their wits which did every where else conquer hardness, were
with profoundnesse here ouer-matched. Wherefore seeing that God has endued us
with sense, to the end that we might perceive such things as this present life
does need, and with reason, least that which sense cannot reach unto, being
both now and also in regard of a future estate hereafter necessary to be
known, should lie obscure; finally with the heavenly support of d prophetical
revelation, which does open those hidden mysteries that reason could never have
been able to find out, (...).
or to have known the necessity of them unto our everlasting good: use we the
precious gifts of God unto his glory and honor that gave them, seeking by all
means to know what the will of our God is, what righteous before him, in his
fight what holy, perfect, and good, that we may truly and faithfully do it.

16 Thus far therefore we have endeavored in part to open, Philo de Mos. A
conclusion showing how all this belongs to the cause in question.
of what nature and force laws are, according unto their several kinds; the
law which God with himself has eternally set down to follow in his own
works; the law which he has made for his creatures to keep, the law of
natural and necessary agents; the law which Angels in heaven obey; the law
whereunto by the light of reason men find themselves bound in that they are
men; the law which they make by composition for multitudes and politic
societies of men to be guided by; the law which belongs unto each nation; the
law that concerns the fellowship of all; and lastly the law which God
himself has supernaturally revealed. It might peradventure have been more
popular and more plausible to vulgar ears, if this first discourse had been
spent in extolling the force of laws, in showing the great necessity of them
when they are good; and in aggravating their offense by whom public laws are
injuriously traduced. But for as much as with such kind of matter the passions
of men are rather stirred one way or other, then their knowledge any way set
forward unto the trial of that whereof there is doubt made; I have therefore
turned aside from that beaten path, and chosen though a less easy, yet a more
profitable way in regard of the end we propose. Least therefore any man should
maruail^ whereunto all these things tend, the drift and purpose of all is this,
even to show in what manner as every good and perfect gift, Iam. 117.
so this very gift of good and perfect laws is derived from the father of
lights; to teach men a reason why just and reasonable laws are of so great
force, of so great use in the world; and to inform their minds with some
method of reducing the laws whereof there is present controversy unto their
first original causes, that so it may be in every particular ordinance thereby
the better discerned, whether the same be reasonable just and righteous or no.
Is there any thing which can either be thoroughly understood, or soundly judged
of, till the very first causes and principles from which originally it
springs be made manifest? If all parts of knowledge have been thought by
wise men to be then most orderly delivered and proceeded in, Arist. Phys. II.
1. cap. 1.
when they are drawn to their first original* seeing that our whole question
concerns the quality of Ecclesiastical laws, let it not seem a labor
superfluous that in the entrance thereunto all these several kinds of laws
have been considered, in as much as they all concur as principles, they all
have their forcible operations therein, although not all in like apparent and
manifest manner. By means whereof it comes to pass, that the force which
they have is not observed of many. Easier a great deal it is for men by law to
be taught what they ought to do, then instructed how to judge as they should do
of law; the one being a thing which belongs generally unto all, the other
such as none but the wiser and more judicious sort can perform. Arist. Eth.
10. (...). Intelligit de legum qualitate iudicium.
Yea the wisest are always touching this point the readiest to acknowledge,
that soundly to judge of a law is the waightiest thing which any man can take
upon him. But if we will give judgment of the laws under which we live, first
let that law eternal be always before our eyes, as being of principal force
and moment to breed in religious minds a dutiful estimation of all laws, the
use and benefit whereof we see; because there can be no doubt but that laws
apparently good, are (as it were) things copied out of the very tables of that
high everlasting law, even as the book of that law has said concerning it
self, By me Kings reign, and by me Princes decree justice. Not as if men did
behold that book, Prou. 8.15.
and accordingly frame their laws; but because it works in them* because it
discovers and (as it were) reads it self to the world by them, when the
laws which they make are righteous. Furthermore although we perceive not the
goodness of laws made; nevertheless since things in themselves may have that
which we peradventure; discern not; should not this breed a fear in our
hearts, how we speak or judge in the worse part concerning that, the unadvised
disgrace whereof may be no mean dishonor to him, toward whom we profess all
submission and awe? Surely there must be very manifest iniquity in laws,
against which we shall be able to justify our contumelious inuectiues. The
chiefest root whereof, when we use them without cause, is ignorance how laws
inferior are derived from that supreme or highest law. The first that receive
impression from thence are natural agents. The law of whose operations might
be happily thought less pertinent, when the question is about laws for humane
actions, but that in those very actions which most spiritually and
supernaturally concern men, the rules and axioms of natural operations have
their force. What can be more immediate to our salvation, then our persuasion
concerning the law of Christ toward his Church? What greater assurance of
love toward his Church, then the knowledge of that mystical union whereby the
Church is become as near unto Christ, as any one part of his flesh is unto
other? That the Church being in such sort his, he must needs protect it; what
proof more strong, then if a manifest law so require, which law it is not
possible for Christ to violate? And what other law does the Apostle for this
allege, but such as is both common unto Christ with us, and unto us with other
things natural, No man hates his own flesh, but does love and cherish it?
The axioms of that law therefore, whereby natural agentes are guided, Ephesians.
5.29.
have their use in the moral, yea even in the spiritual actions of men, and
consequently in all laws belonging unto men howsoever. Neither are the Angels
themselves, so far severed from us in their kind and manner of working, but
that between the law of their heavenly operations, and the actions of men in
this our state of mortality, such correspondence there is, as makes it
expedient to know in some sort the one, for the others more perfect direction.
Apoc. 19.10.
Would Angels acknowledge themselves fellow servants with the sons of men,
but that both having one Lord, there must be some kind of law which is one
and the same to both, whereunto their obedience being perfecter, is to our
weaker both a pattern and a spur? 1. Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10. 1. Tim. 5.21.
Or would the Apostle speaking of that which belongs unto Saints, as they
are linked together in the bond of spiritual society, so often make mention
how Angels are therewith delighted, if in things publicly done by the Church
we are not somewhat to respect what the Angels of heaven do? Yea so far has
the Apostle S. Paul proceeded, 1. Cor. 11.10
as to signify that even about the outward orders of the Church which serve
but for comeliness, some regard is to be had of Angels; who best like us when
we are most like unto them in all parts of decent demeanor. So that the law of
Angels we cannot judge altogether impertinent unto the affairs of the Church
of God. Our largeness of speech how men do find out what things reason
binds them of necessity to observe, and what is guides them to choose in
things which are left as arbitrary; the care we have had to declare the
different nature of laws which severally concern all men, from such as belong
unto men either ciuilly or spiritually associated, such as pertain to the
fellowship which nations, or which Christian nations have amongst themselves,
and in the last place such as concerning every or any of these, God himself
has revealed by his holy wor^, all serves but to make manifest, that as the
actions of men are of sundry distinct kinds, so the laws thereof must
accordingly be distinguished. There are in men operations some natural, some
rational, some supernatural, some politic, some finally Ecclesiastical.
Which if we measure not each by his own proper law, whereas the things
themselves are so different; there will be in our understanding and judgment
of them confusion. As that first error shows whereon our opposites in this
cause have grounded themselves. For as they rightly maintain, that God must be
glorified in all things, and that the actions of men cannot tend unto his
glory, unless they be framed after his law: So it is their error, to think
that the only law which God has appointed unto men in that behalf is the
sacred Scripture. By that which we work naturally, as when we breath, Ps.
148.7, 8, 9.
sleep, move, we set forth the glory of God as natural agents do, albeit we
have no express purpose to make that our end, nor any advised determination
therein to follow a law, but do that we do (for the most part) not as much as
thinking thereon. In reasonable and moral actions another law takes place,
Romans 1.21.
a law by the observation whereof we glorify God in such sort, as no creature
else under man is able to do; because other creatures have not judgment to
examine the quality of that which is done by them, and therefore in that they
do, they neither can accuse nor approve themselves. Men do both, Romans 2.15.
as the Apostle teaches; yea those men which have no written law of God to
show what is good or evil, carry written in their hearts the universal law
of mankind, the law of reason, whereby they judge as by a rule which God has
given unto all men for that purpose. The law of reason does somewhat direct
men how to honor God as their Creator; but how to glorify God in such sort as
is required, to the end he may be an everlasting Savior, this we are taught by
divine law, which law both ascertaineth the truth and supplieth unto us the
want of that other law. So that in moral actions, divine law helps
exceedingly the law of reason to guide man's life; but in supernatural it
alone guides. Proceed we further, let us place man in some public society
with others, whether Civil or Spiritual: and in this case there is no remedy
but we must add yet a further law. For although even here likewise the laws
of nature and reason be of necessary use; yet somewhat over and besides them is
necessary, namely humane and positive law, together with that law which is of
commerce between grand societies, the law of nations and of nations Christian.
For which cause the law of God has likewise said, Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers. Romans 13.1.
The public power of all societies is above every soul contained in the same
societies. And the principal use of that power is to give laws unto all that
are under it; which laws in such case we must obey, unless there be reason
showed which may necessarily enforce, that the law or reason or of God does
enjoin the contrary. Because except our own private, and but probable
resolutions, be by the law of public determinations ouerruled; we take away
all possibility of sociable life in the world. A plainer example whereof then
our selves we cannot have. How comes it to pass that we are at this present
day so rent with mutual contentions, and that the Church is so much troubled
about the polity of the Church? No doubt if men had been willing to learn how
many laws their actions in this life are subject unto, and what the true force
of each law is, all these controversies might have dyed the very day they were
first brought forth. It is both commonly said, and truly, that the best men
otherwise are not always the best in regard of society. The reason whereof is,
for that the law of men's actions is one, if they be respected only as men; and
another, when they are considered as parts of a politic body. (...). Arist.
Eth. 5. cap. 3.
Many men there are, then whom nothing is more commendable when they are
singled. And yet in society with others, none less fit to answer the duties
which are looked for at their hands. Yea I am persuaded, that of them with
whom in this cause we strive, there are whose betters among men would be
hardly found, if they did not live amongst men, but in some wilderness by
themselves. The cause of which their disposition so vnframable unto societies
wherein they live, is for that they discern not aright: what place and force
these several kinds of laws ought to have in all their actions. Is there
question either concerning the regiment of the Church in general, or about
conformity between one Church and another, or of ceremonies, offices, powers*
jurisdictions in our own Church? Of all these things they judge by that r^le
which they frame to themselves with some show of probability; and what seems
in that sort convenient, the same they think themselves bound to practice, the
same by all means they labor mightily to uphold; whatsoever any law of man
to the contrary has determined they weigh it not. Thus by following the law
of private reason, where the law of public should take place, they breed
disturbance. For the better inu^ing therefore of men's minds with the true
distinction of laws and of their several force, according to the di^ferent
kind and quality of our actions, it shall no^ peradventure be amiss to show in
some one example how they all take place. To seek no further, let but that be
considered then which there is not any thing more familiar unto us, our food.
What things are food, and what are not, we judge naturally by sense, Job.
34.3.
neither need we any other law to be our director in that behalf then the
selfsame which is common unto us with beasts. Ps. 14^.15.16.
But when we come to consider of food, as of a benefit which God of his
bounteous goodness has provided for all things living; the law of reason does
here require the duty of thankfulness at our hands, toward him at whose
hands we have i^. And least appetite in the use of food, should lead us
beyond that which is mere* we owe in this case obedience to that law of
reason, which teaches mediocritie in meats and drinks. The same things
divine law teaches also, as at large we have showed it does all parts of
moral duty, whereunto we all of necessity stand bound, in regard of the life
to come. But of certain kinds of food the Jews sometime had, and we our
selves likewise have, a mystical, reli^ious, and supernatural use; they of
their Pas^ all lamb and oblations, we of our bread and wine in the Eucharist;
which use none but divine law could institute. Now as we live in civil
society, the state of the common wealth wherein we live, both may and does
require certain laws concerning food; which laws, saving only that we are
members of the common wealth where they are of force, we should not need to
respect a^ rules of action, whereas now in their place and kind they must be
respected and obeyed. Yea the self same matter is also a subject wherein
sometime Ecclesiastical laws have place; so that unless we will be authors
of confusion in the Church, our private discretion, which otherwise might guide
us a contrary way, must here submit it self to be that way guided, which the
public judgment of the Church has thought better. In which case that of
Zonaras concerning f^stes may be remembered. Fastinges are good, (...). Zonarin
can. Apo^t. 66.
but let good things be done in good and conueni^nt manner. He that
transgresses in his fasting the orders of the holy fathers, the positive laws
of the Church of Christ* must be plainly told that good things do loose the
grace of their goodness, when in good sort they are not performed. And as here
men's private phansies must give place to the higher judgment of that Church
which is in authority a mother over them: so the very actions of whole
Churches, have in regard of commerce and fellowship with other Churches, been
subject to laws concerning food, Act. 15.20.
the contrary unto which laws had else been thought more convenient for them
to observe; as by that order of abstinence from strangled and blood may
appear; an order grounded upon that fellowship which the Churches of the
Gentiles had with the Jews. Thus we see how even one and the self same thing
is under diverse considerations conveyed through many laws; and that to measure
by any one kind of law all the action of men, were to confound the admirable
order wherein God has disposed all laws, each as in nature, so in degree,
distinct from other. Wherefore that here we may briefly end, of law there can
be no less acknowledged, then that her seat is the bosom of God, her voice
the harmony of the world, all things in heaven and earth do her homage, the
very least as feeling her care, and the greatest as not exempted from her
power; both Angels and men and creatures of what condition so ever, though each
in different sort and manner, yet all with uniform consent, admiring her as
the mother of their peace and joy.

The second Book: Concerning their first position who urge reformation in the
Church of England; Namely That Scripture is the only rule of all things which
in this life may be done by men.
The matter contained in this second Boooke.
1 AN answer to their first proof brought out of scripture. Prou. 2.9. 2 To
their second. 1 Cor. 10.31. 3 To their third. 1. Tim. 4.5. 4 To their fourth.
Romans 14.23. 5 To their proofs out of Fathers, who dispute negatiuely from the
authority of holy scripture. 6 To their proof by the scriptures custom of
disputing from divine authority negatiuely. 7 An examination of their opinion
concerning the force of arguments taken from humane authority for the ordering
of men's actions and persuasions. 8 A declaration what the truth is in this
matter.
AS that which in the title has been proposed for the matter whereof we treat,
is only the Ecclesiastical law whereby we are governed; So neither is it my
purpose to maintain any other thing, then that which therein truth and reason
shall approve. For concerning the dealings of men who administer government,
and unto whom the execution of that law belongs; they have their judge who
sits in heaven, and before whose tribunal seat they are accomptable for
whatsoever abuse or corruption, which (being worthily misliked in this Church)
the want either of care or of conscience in them has bred. We are no Patrones
of those things therefore; the best defense whereof is speedy redress and
amendment. That which is of God we defend, to the uttermost of that ability
which he has given: that which is otherwise, let it wither even in the root
from whence it has sprung. Wherefore all these abuses being severed and set
apart, which rise from the corruption of men, and not from the laws
themselves: come we to those things which in the very whole intier form of our
Church-politie have been (as we persuade our selves) injuriously blamed, by
them who endeavor to overthrow the same, and in stead thereof to establish a
much worse* only through a strong misconceipt they have, that the same is
grounded on divine authority. Now whether it be that through an earnest
longing desire to see things brought to a peaceable end, I do but imagine the
matters whereof we contend, to be fewer then indeed they are; or else for that
in truth they are fewer when they come to be discust by reason, then otherwise
they seem, when by heat of contention they are divided into many slippes, and
of every branch an heap is made: surely as now we have drawn them together,
choosing out those things which are requisite to be severally all discust, and
omitting such mean specialties as are likely (without any great labor) to
fall afterward of themselves; I know no cause why either the number or the
length of these controversies should diminish our hope, of seeing them end with
concord and love on all sides; which of his infinite love and goodness the
father of all peace and unity grant. Unto which scope that our endeavor may
the more directly tend, it seems fittest that first those things be
examined, which are as seeds from whence the rest that ensue have grown. And
of such the most general is that, wherewith we are here to make our entrance;
a question not moved (I think) any where in other Churches, and therefore in
ours the more likely to be soon (I trust) determined. The rather for that it
has grown from no other root, then only a desire to enlarge the necessary
use of the word of God; which desire has begotten an error enlarging it
further then (as we are persuaded) soundness of truth will bear. For whereas
God has left sundry kinds of laws unto men, and by all those laws the
actions of men are in some sort directed: T.C. l. 1. p. 59. and 60.
they hold that one only law, the scripture, must be the rule to direct in
all things, even so far as to the taking up of a rush or straw. About which
point there should not need any question to grow, and that which is grown
might presently end, if they did yield but to these two restraints: the first
is, not to extend the actions whereof they speak so low as that instance does
import, of taking up a straw, but rather keep themselves at the least within
the compass of moral actions, actions which have in them vice or virtue; the
second, not to exact at our hands for every action the knowledge of some place
of scripture out of which we stand bound to deduce it, as by diverse
testimonies they seek to enforce, but rather as the truth is, so to
acknowledge, that it suffices if such actions be framed according to the law
of reason; the general axioms, rules, and principles of which law being so
frequent in holy scripture, there is no let but in that regard, even out of
scripture such duties may be deduced by some kind of consequence, (as by long
circuit of deduction it may be that even all truth out of any truth may be
concluded); howbeit no man bound in such sort to deduce all his actions out of
scripture, as if either the place be to him unknown whereon they may be
concluded, or the reference unto that place not presently considered of, the
action shall in that respect be condemned as unlawful. In this we dissent, and
this we are presently to examine.

The first pretended proof of the first position out of scripture. Pro. 2.9.
T.C.l. 1. p. 20. I say that the word of God contains whatsoever things can
fall into any part of man's life. For so Solomon says in the 2. chapter of the
Proverbs, My son, if thou receive my words etc. then thou shall understand
justice, and judgment, and equity, and every goodway.
1 In all parts of knowledge rightly so termed, things most general are most
strong: Thus it must be, in as much as the certainty of our persuasion
touching particulars, depends altogether upon the credit of those
generalities out of which they grow. Albeit therefore every cause admit not
such infallible evidence of proof, as leaves no possibility of doubt or
scruple behind it; yet they who claim the general assent of the whole world
unto that which they teach, and do not fear to give very hard and heavy
sentence upon as many as refuse to embrace the same, must have special regard
that their first foundations and grounds be more then slender probabilities.
This whole question which has been moved about the kind of Church regiment,
we could not but for our own resolutions sake, endeavor to unrip and sift;
following therein as near as we might, the conduct of that judicial method
which serves best for invention of truth. By means whereof having found this
the head theoreme of all their discourses, who plead for the change of
Ecclesiastical government in England, namely, That the Scripture of God is in
such sort the rule of humane actions, that simply whatsoever we do, and are
not by it directed thereunto, the same is sin; we hold it necessary that
the proofs hereof be waighed: be they of weight sufficient or otherwise it is
not ours to judge and determine: only what difficulties there are, which as
yet withhold our assent, till we be further and better satisfied, I hope no
indifferent amongst them will scorn or refuse to hear. First therefore
whereas they allege that wisdom does teach men every good way; and have
thereupon inferred, that no way is good in any kind of action, unless wisdom
do by scripture lead unto it: see they not plainly how they restrain the
manifold ways which wisdom has to teach men by, unto one only way of
teaching, which is by scripture? The bounds of wisdom are large, and within
them much is contained. Wisdom was Adams instructor in Paradise: wisdom
endued the fathers, who lived before the law, with the knowledge of holy things
by the wisdom of the law of God, David attained to excel others in
understanding; and Solomon likewise to excel David, Psalm. 119.95.
by the self same wisdom of God teaching him many things besides the law. The
ways of well-doing are in number even as many, as are the kinds of voluntary
actions: so that whatsoever we do in this world and may do it ill, we show our
selves therein by well doing to be wise* Now if wisdom did teach men by
scripture not only all the ways that are right and good in some certain
kind, according to that of 2. Tim. 3 16. The whole Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute being made
perfect unto all good works. He means all and only those good works, which
belong unto us as we are men of God, and which unto salvation are necessary. Or
if we understand by men of God, Gods Ministers* there is not required in them
an universal skill of every good work or way, but an ability to teach
whatsoever men are bound to do that they may be saved. And with this kind of
knowledge the scripture suffices to furnish them as touching matter.
S. Paul concerning the use of scripture; but did simply without any manner of
exception, restraint, or distinction, teach every way of doing well; there is
no art but scripture should teach it, because every art does teach the way how
to do some thing or other well. To teach men therefore wisdom professes, and
to teach them every good way: but not every good way by one way of teaching.
Whatsoever either men on earth, or the Angels of heaven do know, it is as a
drop of that vnemptiable fountain of wisdom; which wisdom has diversely
imparted her treasures unto the world. As her ways are of sundry kinds, so
her manner of teaching is not merely one and the same. Some things she opens
by the sacred books of Scripture; some things by the glorious works of nature:
with some things she inspireth them from above by spiritual influence; in some
things she leads and traineth them only by worldly experience and practice.
We may not so in any one special kind admire her, that we disgrace her in any
other; but let all her ways be according unto their place and degree adored.

The second proof out of Scripture. 1. Cor. 10.31. T.C. l. 1. p. 16. S. Paul
says that whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do, we must do it to the
glory of God. But no man can glorify God in any thing but by obedience; and
there is no obedience but in respect of the commandment and word of God:
Therefore is follows that the word of God directs a man in all his actions.
2 That all things be done to the glory of God, the blessed Apostle (it is true)
exhorts. The glory of God is the admirable excellency of that virtue divine,
which being made manifest, causes men and Angels to extol his greatness, and
in regard thereof to fear him. By being glorified, it is not meant that he
does receive any augmentation of glory at our hands; but his name we glorify,
when we testify our acknowledgement of his glory. Which albeit we most
effectually do by the virtue of obedience: nevertheless it may be perhaps a
question, whether S. Paul did mean that we sin as often as ever we go
about any thing, without an express intent and purpose to obey God therein. He
says of himself, I do in all things please all men, seeking not mine own
commodity, but rather the good of many, that they may be saved. Shall it
hereupon be thought, that S. Paul did not move either hand or foot, but with
express intent even thereby to further the common salvation of men? We move,
we sleep, we take the cup at the hand of our friend, a number of things we
oftentimes do, only to satisfy some natural desire, without present
express and actual reference unto any commandment of God. Unto his glory
even these things are done which we naturally perform, and not only that
which morally and spiritually we do. For by every effect proceeding from the
most concealed instincts of nature, his power is made manifest. But it does not
therefore follow, that of necessity we shall sin, unless we expressly
intend this in every such particular. But be it a thing which requires no more
then only our general presupposed willingness to please God in all things;
or be it a matter wherein we cannot so glorify the name of God as we should,
without an actual intent to do him in that particular some special
obedience: yet for any thing there is in this sentence alleged to the
contrary, God may be glorified by obedience, and obeyed by performance of his
will, and his will be performed with an actual intelligent desire to fulfill
that law which makes known what his will is, although no special clause or
sentence of scripture be in every such action set before men's eyes to warrant
it. For scripture is not the only law whereby God has opened his will
touching all things that may be done; but there are other kinds of laws
which notify the will of God, as in the former book has been proved at
large: Nor is there any law of God, whereunto he does not account our obedience
his glory. Do therefore all things unto the glory of God (says the Apostle),
be inoffensiue both to the Jews and Graecians, and the Church of God; even as
I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own commodity, but manies
that they may be saved. In the least thing done disobediently toward God, or
offensiuely against the good of men, whose benefit we ought to seek for as
for our own, we plainly show that we do not acknowledge God to be such as
indeed he is, and consequently that we glorify him not. This the blessed
Apostle teaches: but does any Apostle teach, that we cannot glorify God
otherwise, then only in doing what we find that God in Scripture commands
us to do? The Churches dispersed amongst the Heathen in the East part of the
world, are by the Apostle S. Peter exhorted, to have their conversation honest
amongst the Gentiles, 1. Pet. 2.12.
that they which spoke evil of them as of evil doers, might by the good
works which they should see, glorify God in the day of visitation. As long as
that which Christians did was good, and no way subject unto just reproof;
their virtuous conversation was a mean to work the Heathens conversion unto
Christ. Seeing therefore this had been a thing altogether impossible, but that
Infidels themselves did discern, in matters of life and conversation, when
believers did well, and when otherwise; when they glorified their heavenly
father, and when not: it follows that some things wherein God is glorified,
may be some other way known, then only by the sacred Scripture; of which
Scripture the Gentiles being utterly ignorant, did notwithstanding judge
rightly of the quality of Christian men's actions. Romans 2.34.
Most certain it is that nothing but only sin, does dishonor God. So that
to glorify him in all things; 1. Cor. 10.32.
is to do nothing whereby the name of God may be blasphemed; nothing whereby
the salvation of Jew or Grecian or any in the Church of Christ may be let or
hindered; nothing whereby his law is transgrest. Romans 2.23.
But the question is, whether only Scripture do show whatsoever God is
glorified in.

3 And though meats and drinks be said to be sanctified by the word of God,
and by prayer: yet neither is this a reason sufficient to prove, The third
scripture prof. 1. Tim. 4.5. And that which S. Paul said of meats and drink^
that they are sanctified unto us by the word of God, the same is to b^
understood of all things else whatsoever we have the use of. T.C. l. 1. p. 20.
that by scripture we must of necessity be directed in every light and common
thing which is incident into any part of man's life. Only it shows that unto
us the word, that is to say, the Gospel of Christ, having not delivered any
such difference of things clean and unclean, as the law of Moses did unto
the Jews; there is no cause but that we may use indifferently all things, as
long as we do not (like swine) take the benefit of them, without a
thankful acknowledgement of his liberality and goodness, by whose
providence they are inioyed: and therefore the Apostle gave warning before hand
to take heed of such as should inioyne to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving, by them which believe and know the
truth. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving, 1. Tim. 4.
because it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. The Gospel by not
making many things unclean, as the law did, has sanctified those things
generally to all, which particularly each man unto himself must sanctify by a
reverend and holy use: which will hardly be drawn so far, as to serve their
purpose, who have imagined the word in such sort to sanctify all things, that
neither food can be tasted, nor raiment put on, nor in the world any thing
done, but this deed must needs be sin in them, which do not first know it
appointed unto them by scripture before they do it.

4 But to come unto that which of all other things in scripture is most stood
upon; that place of S. Paul they say, is of all other most clear, The fourth
Scripture-proofe. Romans 14.23. T.C. lib. 1, p. 27.
where speaking of those things which are called indifferent, in the end he
concludes, that whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. But faith is not but in
respect of the word of God. Therefore whatsoever is not done by the word of
God, is sin. Whereunto we answer, that albeit the name of faith being
properly and strictly taken, it must needs have reference unto some uttered
word, as the object of belief: nevertheless since the ground of credit is
the credibilitie of things credited; and things are made credible, either by
the known condition and quality of the vtterer, Psalm. 19.8. Apoc. 3.14.
or by the manifest likelihood of truth which they have in themselves; hereupon
it rises, 2. Cor. 1.18.
that whatsoever we are persuaded of, the same we are generally said to
believe. In which generality, the object of faith may not so narrowly be
restrained, as if the same did extend no further then to the only scriptures
of God. Ioh. 10.38.
Though (says our Savior) ye believe not me, believe my works; that ye may
know and believe that the father is in me, and I in him. The other Disciples
said unto Thomas, Ioh. 20.25.
we have seen the Lord; but his answer unto them was, Except I see in his
hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into them, I will not believe.
Can there be any thing more plain, then that which by these two sentences
appears, namely that there may be a certain belief grounded upon other
assurance then Scripture; any thing more clear, then that we are said not
only to believe the things which we know by another relation, but even
whatsoever we are certainly persuaded of, whether it be by reason, or by sense?
For as much therefore as And if any will say, that S. Paul means there a
full (...) and persuasion that that which he does is well done, I grant it.
But from whence can that spring but from faith? how can we persuade and assure
our selves that we do well, but whereas we have the word of God for our
warrant? T.C. lib. 1. cap. 27.
it is granted, that S. Paul does mean nothing else by Faith, but only a
full persuasion that that which we do is well done; against which kind of
faith or persuasion, as S. Paul does count it sin to enterprise any thing,
What also that some even of those Heathen men have taught, that nothing ought
to be done, whereof thou doubtest whether it be right or wrong? Whereby it
appears, that even those which had no knowledge of the word of God, did see
much of the equity of this which the Apostle requires of a Christian man: and
that the chiefest difference is, that where they sent men for the difference of
good and evil to the light of reason, in such things the Apostle sends them
to the School of Christ in his word, which only is able through faith to
give them assurance and resolution in their doings. T.C. lib. 1. page 60.
so likewise some of the very Heathen have taught, as Tully, that nothing ought
to be done whereof thou doubtest whether it be right or wrong; whereby it
appears that even those which had no knowledge of the word of God, did see
much of the equity of this which the Apostle requires of a Christian man: I
hope we shall not seem altogether unnecessarily to doubt of the soundness of
their opinion, who think simply that nothing but only the word of God, can
give us assurance in any thing we are to do, and resolve us that we do well.
For might not the Jews have been fully persuaded that they did well to think
(if they had so thought) that in Christ God the father was, although the only
ground of this their faith, had been the wonderful works they saw him do?
Might not, yea did not Thomas fully in the end persuade himself, that he did
well to think that body, which now was raised, to be the same which had been
crucified? That which gave Thomas this assurance was his sense; Ioh. 20.29.
Thomas because thou have seen, thou beleeuest, says our Savior. What
scripture had Tully for his assurance? Yet I nothing doubt but that they who
allege him, think he did well to set down in writing a thing so consonant
unto truth. Finally, we all believe that the Scriptures of God are sacred, and
that they have proceeded from God; our selves we assure that we do right
well in so believing. We have for this point a demonstration sound and
infallible. But it is not the word of God which does or possibly can assure
us, that we do well to think it his word. For if any one book of Scripture
did give testimony to all; yet still that Scripture which gives credit to
the rest, would require another Scripture to give credit unto it: neither
could we ever come unto any pause whereon to rest our assurance this way: so
that unless besides scripture there were some thing which might assure us that
we do well, we could not think we do well, no not in being assured that
scripture is a sacred and holy rule of well doing. On which determination we
might be contented to stay our selves without further proceeding herein, but
that we are drawn on into larger speech by reason of their so great
earnestnes, who beat more and more upon these last alleged words, as being of
all other most pregnant. Whereas therefore they still argue, that wheresoever
faith is wanting, there is sin, and in every action not commanded, faith is
wanting; T.C. li. 2. p. 5^.
Ergo in every action not commanded, there is sin: I would demand of them,
first for as much as the nature of things indifferent is neither to be
commanded nor forbidden, but left free and arbitrarie; how there can be any
thing indifferent, if for want of faith sin be committed, when any thing not
commanded is done. So that of necessity they must add somewhat, and at
leastwise thus set it down: In every action not commanded of God, or
permitted with approbation, faith is wanting, and for want of faith there is
sin. The next thing we are to enquire is, what those things be which God
permits with approbation, and how we may know them to be so permitted. When
there are unto one end sundry means, as for example, for the sustenance of
our bodies many kinds of food, many sorts of raiment to cloathe our
nakedness, and so in other things of like condition: here the end it self
being necessary, but not so any one mean thereunto; necessary that our bodies
should be both fed and clothed, howbeit no one kind of food or raiment
necessary; therefore we hold these things free in their own nature and
indifferent. The choice is left to our own discretion, except a principal
bond of some higher duty remove the indifferency that such things have in
themselves. Their indifferency is removed, if either we take away our own
liberty, as Anantas did, Act. 5.
for whom to have sold or held his possesions it was indifferent, till his
solemn vow and promise unto God had strictly bound him one only way: or if
God himself have precisely abridged the same, by restraining us unto, or by
barring us from, some one or more things of many, which otherwise were in
themselves altogether indifferent. Many fashions of Priestly attire there were,
whereof Aaron and his sons might have had their free choice without sin, but
that God expressly tied them unto one. All meats indifferent unto the Jew,
Exodus 28.4.43. Leuit. 11.
were it not that God by name excepted some, as swines flesh. Impossible
therefore it is we should otherwise think, then that what things God does
neither command nor forbid, the same he permits with approbation either to
be done or left undone. All things are lawful unto me, says the Apostle,
speaking as it seems, in the person of the Christian Gentile for maintenance
of liberty in things indifferent: 1. Cor. 6.12.
whereunto his answer is, that nevertheless All things are not expedient; in
things indifferent there is a choice, they are not always equally expedient.
Now in things although not commanded of God, yet lawful because they are
permitted, the question is, what light shall show us the conueniencie which
one has above another. For answer, their final determination is, that
whereas the Heathen did send men for the difference of good and evil to the
light of reason, in such things the Apostle sends us to the school of Christ
in his word, which only is able through faith to give us assurance and
resolution in our doings. Which word Only, is utterly without possibility of
ever being proved. For what if it were true concerning things indifferent, that
unless the word of the Lord had determined of the free use of them, there
could have been no lawful use of them at all; which notwithstanding is untrue,
because it is not the Scriptures setting down such things as indifferent, but
their not setting down as necessary that does make them to be indifferent:
yet this to our present purpose serves nothing at all. We inquire not now
whether any thing be free to be used, which scripture has not set down as
free: but concerning things known and acknowledged to be indifferent, whether
particularly in choosing any one of them before another we sin, if any thing
but scripture direct us in this our choice. When many meats are set before me,
all are indifferent, none unlawful; I take one as most convenient. If
scripture require me so to do, then is not the thing indifferent, because I
must do what scripture requires. They are all indifferent, I might take any,
scripture does not require of me to make any special choice of one: I do
notwithstanding make choice of one, my discretion teaching me so to do. A hard
case, that hereupon I should be justly condemned of sin. Nor let any man
think, that following the judgment of natural discretion in such cases, we
can have no assurance that we please God. For to the author and God of our
nature, how shall any operation proceeding in natural sort be in that respect
unacceptable? The nature which himself has given to work by, he cannot but
be delighted with, when we exercise the same any way without commandment of
his to the contrary. My desire is to make this cause so manifest, that if it
were possible, no doubt or scruple concerning the same might remain in any
man's cogitation. Some truths there are, the verity whereof time does alter:
as it is now true that Christ is risen from the dead; which thing was not true
at such time as Christ was living on earth, and had not suffered. It would be
known therefore, whether this which they teach concerning the sinful stain
of all actions not commanded of God, be a truth that does now appertain unto
us only, or a perpetual truth, in such sort that from the first beginning of
the world unto the last consummation thereof, it neither has been, nor can be
otherwise. I see not how they can restrain this unto any particular time, how
they can think it true now and not always true, that in every action not
commanded there is for want of faith sin. Then let them cast back their eyes
unto former generations of men, and mark what was done in the prime of the
world. Seth, Enoch, Noah, Sem, Abraham, Job, and the rest that lived before any
syllable of the law of God was written, did they not sin as much as we do
in every action not commanded? That which God is unto us by his sacred word,
the same he was unto them by such like means as Eliphas in Job describes.
Job. 4.19.
If therefore we sin in every action which the scripture commands us not,
it follows that they did the like in all such actions as were not by
revelation from heaven exacted at their hands. Unless God from heaven did by
vision still show them what to do, they might do nothing, not eat, not
drink, not sleep, not move. Yea but even as in darkness candle light may
serve to guide men's steps, which to use in the day were madness; so when God had
once delivered his law in writing, it may be they are of opinion, that then
it must needs be sin for men to do any thing, which was not there
commanded them to do, whatsoever they might do before. Let this be granted,
and it shall here upon plainly ensue, either that the light of Scripture once
shining in the world, all other light of nature is there with in such sort
drowned, that now we need it not, neither may we longer use it; Arist. Pol. 1.
or if it stand us in any stead, yet as Aristotle speaks of men whom nature
has framed for the state of servitude, saying They have reason so far forth
as to conceive when others direct them, but little or none in directing
themselves by themselves, so likewise our natural capacity and judgment must
serve us only for the right understanding of that which the sacred Scripture
teaches. Had the Prophets who succeeded Moses, or the blessed Apostles which
followed them, been settled in this persuasion, never would they have taken so
great pains in gathering together natural arguments, thereby to teach the
faithful their duties. To use unto the^ any other motive then Scriptum est,
Thus it is written* had been to teach them other grounds of their actions then
scripture; which I grant they allege commonly, but not only. Only scripture
they should have alleged, had they been thus persuaded, that so far forth we
do sin, as we do any thing otherwise directed then by ^cripture. Saint
Augustine was resolute in points of Christianity to credit none, how godly and
learned soever he were, unless he confirmed his sentence by the Scriptures, or
by some reason not contrary to them. August, Ep. 18.
Let them therefore with Saint Augustine reject and condemn that which is not
grounded either on the Scripture, or on some reason not contrary to Scripture*
and we are ready to give them our hands in token of friendly consent with them.

5 But against this it may be objected, and is, The first assertion endeavored
to be proved by the use of taking arguments negatiuely from the authority of
Scripture: which kind of disputing is usual in the Fathers.
that the Fathers do nothing more usually in their books, then draw arguments
from the Scripture negatiuely in reproof of that which is evil; Scriptures
teach it not, avoid it therefore; these disputes with the Fathers are ordinary,
neither is it hard to show that the Prophets themselves have so reasoned. Which
arguments being sound and good, it should seem that it cannot be unsound or
evil to hold still the same assertion against which hitherto we have disputed.
For if it stand with reason thus to argue, Such a thing is not taught us in
Scripture, therefore we may not receive or allow it; how should it seem
unreasonable to think, that whatsoever we may lawfully do, the Scripture by
commanding it must make it lawful. But how far such arguments do reach, it
shall the better appear by considering the matter wherein they have been
urged. First therefore this we constantly deny, that of so many testimonies as
they are able to produce for the strength of negative arguments, any one does
generally (which is the point in question) condemn either all opinions as
false, or all actions as unlawful, which the scripture teaches us not. The
most that can be collected out of the^ is only, that in some cases a negative
argument taken from scripture is strong; whereof no man endued with judgment
can doubt. But does the strength of some negative argumen^ prove this kind of
negative argument strong, by force whereof all things are denied which
Scripture affirms not, or all things which Scripture prescribes not,
condemned* The question between us is concerning matter of action, what things
are lawful or unlawful for men to do. The sentences alleged out of the
Fathers, are as peremptory and as large in every respect for matter of opinion,
as of action* which argues that in truth they never meant any otherwise to tie
the one then the other unto scripture, both being thereunto equally tied, as
far as each is required in the same kind of necessity unto salvation. If
therefore it be not unlawful to know, and with full persuasion to believe, much
more then scripture alone does teach; if it be against all sense and reason to
condemn the knowledge of so many arts and sciences as are otherwise learned
then in holy scripture, notwithstanding the manifest speeches of ancient
Catholic fathers, which seem to close up within the bosom thereof all manner
good and lawful knowledge* wherefore should their words be thought more
effectual, to show that we may not in deeds and practice, then they are to
prove that in speculation and knowledge, we ought not to go any farther then
the scripture? Which scripture being given to teach matters of belief no less
then of action* the Fathers must needs be, and are even as plain against
credit, besides the relation; as against practice, without the iniunction of
the scripture. Saint Augustine has said, August-contr. liter. Petil. li. 3.
cap. 6.
Whether it be question of Christ, or whether it be question of his Church, or
of what thing soever the question be; I say not if we, but if an Angel from
heaven shall tell us any thing beside that you have received in the scripture
under the Law and the Gospel, Tertull. de prescrip. aduers.
let him be accursed. In like sort Tertullian, We may not give our selves this
liberty to bring in any thing of our will, nor choose any thing that other men
bring in of their will; we have the Apostles themselves for authors, which
themselves brought nothing of their own will, T.C. l. 2. p. 8^. Augustine
says* Whether it be question of Christ, or whether it be question of his
Church, etc.

And least the answerer should restrain the general saying of Augustine unto
the doctrine of the Gospel* so that he would thereby shut out the discipline*
even Tertullian himself before he was embrued with the Heresy of Montanus,
g^ueth testimony unto the discipline in these words, We may not give our
selves, etc.


but the discipline which they received of Christ they delivered faithfully
unto the people. In which place, the name of discipline imports not as they
who allege it would feign have it construed; but as any man who notes the
circumstance of the place, and the occasion of uttering the words, will easily
acknowledge; even the self same thing it signifies which the name of doctrine
does, and as well might the one as the other there have been used. Hieron.
contra Heluid.
To help them farther, does not Saint Jerome after the self same manner
dispute, We believe it not because we read it not? Yea, We ought not so much
as to know the things which the book of the Law contains not, Hilar. in
Psalm. 132.
says Saint Hilarie. Shall we hereupon then conclude that we may not take
knowledge of, or give credit unto any thing, which sense or experience or
report or art does propose, unless we find the same in scripture? No, it is
too plain that so far to extend their speeches, is to wrest them against
their true intent and meaning. To urge any thing upon the Church, requiring
thereunto that religious assent of Christian belief, wherewith the words of
the holy Prophets are received; to urge any thing as part of that supernatural
and Celestially revealed truth which God has taught, and not to show it in
Scripture, this did the ancient Fathers evermore think unlawful, impious,
execrable. And thus as their speeches were meant, so by us they must be
restrained. As for those alleged words of Cyprian, T.C. l. 2. p. 8. Let him
hear what Cyprian says: The Christian Religion (says he) shall find, that
etc.
The christian religion shall find, that out of this scripture, rules of all
doctrines have spr^ng, and that from hence does spring and hither does return
whatsoever the Ecclesiastical discipline does co^teine: surely this place
would never have bin brought forth in this cause, if it had been but once read
over in the author himself out of whom it is cited. For the words are uttered
concerning that one principal commandment of love, in the honor whereof he
speaks after this sort: Surely this commandment contains the Law and the
Prophets, and in this one word is the abridgement of all the volumes of
scripture. This nature and reason and the authority of thy word O Lord does
proclaim, Ver^ hoc mandatum legem complectitur and Prophetas, and in hoc verbo
omnium scripturarum volumina coarcta^iur. Hoc natura, hoc ratio* hoc, Domin^,
verbi tui clamat authoritas, hoc ex ere tuo Iudiuimu^, h^c inuenit
consummationem omnis religio. Primum est hoc mandatum and vltimum* hoc in libro
vitae conscriptum indeficientem and hominibus and Angelis exhibet lectionem.
Legate hoc vnum verbum and in hoc mandato meditetur christiana relig^o, and
inueniet ex H AC scriptura omnium doctrinarum regulas emanasse, and hinc nasci
and huc reuerti quicquid ecclesiastica continet disciplina, and in omnibus
irritum esse and friuolum quicquid dilectio non confirmat.
this we have heard out of thy mouth, herein the perfection of all religion
does consist. This is the first commandment and the last: thing being written
in the book of life, is (as it were) an everlasting lesson both to men and
Angels. Let Christian religion read this one word, and meditate upon this
commandment, and out of this scripture it shall find the rules of all
learning to have sprung, and from hence to have risen, and hither to return,
whatsoever the Ecclesiastical discipline contains; and that in all things it
is vain and bootelesse which charity confirms not. Was this a sentence (trow
you) of so great force to prove that Scripture is the only rule of all the
actions of men? Might they not hereby even as well prove, that one commandment
of Scripture is the only rule of all things, and so exclude the rest of the
Scripture, as now they do all means besides Scripture? But thus it fares when
too much desire of contradiction causes our speech rather to pass by number,
then to stay for weight. Well, but Tertullian does in this case speak yet more
plainly: Tertul. lib* de Monog. T. C. l. 2. p. 81. And in another place
Tertullian says, that the scripture denies that which it notes not.
The scripture* says he, denies what it notes not: which are indeed the
words of Tertullian. But what? the scripture reckons up the Kings of Israel,
and amongst those Kings David: the scripture reckons up the sons of David,
and amongst those sons Solomon. To prove that amongst the Kings of Israel
there was no David but only one, no Solomon but one in the sons of David,
Tertullians argument will fitly prove. For in as much as the scripture did
propose to reckon up all, if there were more it would have named them. In this
case the scripture does deny the thing it notes not. Howbeit I could not but
think that man to do me some piece of manifest injury, which would hereby
fasten upon me a general opinion, as if I did think the scripture to deny the
very reign of King Henry the eight, because it no where notes that any such
King did reign. Tertullians speech is probable concerning such matter as he
there speaks of. There was, says Tertullian, no second Lamech like to him
that had two wives; the scripture denies what it notes not. As therefore it
notes one such to have been in that age of the world; so had there been more,
it would by likelihood as well have noted many as one. What infer we now
hereupon? There was no second Lamech; the scripture denies what it notes not.
Were it consonant unto reason to divorce these two sentences, the former of
which does show how the later is restrained; and not marking the former, to
conclude by the later of them, that simply whatsoever any man at this day does
think true, is by the scripture denied, unless it be there affirmed to be
true? I wonder that a cause so weak and feeble has been so much persisted in.
But to come unto those their sentences wherein matters of action are more
apparently touched; the name of Tertullian is as before, T. C. l. ^. p. 80. And
that in indifferent things it is not enough that they be not against the word,
but that they be according to the word, it may appear by other places, where
he says, that whatsoever, pleases, not the Lord, displeases him, and with
hurt is received. lib. 2. ad vxorem.
so here again pretended; who writing unto his wife two books, and exhorting
her in the one to live a widow, in case God before her should take him unto
his mercy; and in the other, if she did marry, yet not to join her self to an
infidel, as in those times some widows Christian had done for the advancement
of their estate in this present world, he urges very earnestly Saint Paul's
words, only in the Lord: whereupon he demands of them that think they may
do the contrary, what Scripture they can show where God has dispensed and
granted license to do against that which the blessed Apostle so strictly does
inioyne. And because in defense it might perhaps be replied, seeing God does
will that couples which are married when both are infidels, if either party
chance to be after converted unto Christianity, this should not make
separation between them, as long as the unconverted was willing to retain the
other on whom the grace of Christ had shined; wherefore then should that let
the making of marriage, which does not dissolve marriage being made? after great
reasons showed why God does in Conuerts being married allow continuance with
infidels, and yet disallow that the faithful when they are free should enter
into bonds of wedlock with such, concludes in the end concerning those women
that so mary, They that please not the Lord, do even thereby offend the Lord,
Qua domino non placent, vtique Dominum offendunt* vtique Malo se inferunt.
they do even thereby throw themselves into evil: that is to say, while they
please him not by marying in him, they do that whereby they incur his
displeasure, they (...) an offer of themselves into the service of that enemy
with whose servants they link themselves in so near a bond. What one syllable
is there in all this, prejudicial any way to that which we hold? For the words
of Tertullian as they are by them alleged, are two ways misunderstood; both
in the former part, where that is extended generally to all things in the
neuter gender, which he speaks in the feminine gender of women's persons; and
in the later, where received with hurt, is put in stead of wilful incurring
that which is evil. And so in sum Tertullian does neither mean nor say as
is pretended, Whatsoever pleases not the Lord displeases him, and with hurt
is received; but Those women that please not the Lord by their kind of marying,
do even thereby offend the Lord, they do even thereby throw themselves into
evil. Somewhat more show there is in a second place of Tertullian, which
notwithstanding, when we have examined it, will be found as the rest are. The
Roman Emperors custom was at certain solemn times to bestow on his
soldiers a Donatiue; T. C. l. 2. p. 81.
which Donatiue they received, And to come yet nearer, Where he disputes
against the wearing of crown or garland, (which is indifferent of it self) to
those which obiecting asked, where the scripture says that a man might not
wear a crown; he answers by asking where the scripture says that they may
wear? And unto them replying that it is permitted which is not forbidden; he
answers, that it is forbidden which is not permitted. Whereby appears, that
the argument of the scriptures negatiuely holds, not only in the doctrine
and ecclesiastical discipline, but even in matters arbitrary and variable by
the advice of the Church. Where it is not enough that they be not forbidden,
unless there be some word which does permit the use of them: it is not enough
that the scripture speaks not against them, unless it speak for them: and
finally where it displeases the Lord which pleases him not, we must of
necessity have the word of his mouth to declare his pleasure.
wearing garlands upon their heads. There were in the time of the Emperors
Seuerus and Antoninus, many who being soldiers, had been converted unto
Christ, and notwithstanding continued still in that military course of life.
In which number, one man there was amongst all the rest, who at such a time
coming to the Tribune of the army to receive his Donatiue, came but with a
garland in his hand, and not in such sort as others did. The Tribune offended
hereat demands, what this great singularity should mean. To whom the
soldier, Christianus sum, I am a Christian. Many there were so besides him,
which yet did otherwise at that time; whereupon grew a question, whether a
Christian soldier might herein do as the unchristian did, and wear ^s they
wore. Many of them which were very sound in Christian belief, did rather
commend the zeal of this man, then approve his action. Tertullian was at the
same time a Montanist, and an enemy unto the Church for condemning that
prophetical Spirit, which Monta^^s and his followers did boast they had
received; as if in them Christ had performed his last promise; as if to them he
had sent the Spirit that should be their perfecter and final instructor in the
mysteries of Christian truth. Which exulceration of mind made him apt to take
all occasions of contradiction. Wherefore in honor of that action, and to gall
their minds who did not so much commend it, he wrote his book De corona
militis, not dissembling the stomach wherewith he wrote it. For first the man
he commends as one more constant then the rest of his brethren, Who presumed,
says he, that they might well enough serve two Lords. Tert. de corona militis.
Afterward choler somewhat more rising within him, he adds, It does even
remain that they should also devise how to rid themselves of his martyrdomes,
toward the prophecies of whose holy spirit they have already showed their
disdain. They mutter that their good and long peace is now in hazard. I doubt
not but some of them send the Scriptures before, trusse up bag and baggage,
make themselves in a readiness, that they may fly from City to City. For
that is the only point of the Gospel which they are careful not to forget. I
know even their Pastors very well what men they are, in peace Lions, Hearts in
time of trouble and fear. Now these men, says Tertullian, They must be
answered where we do find it written in Scripture that a Christian man may not
wear a garland. And as men's speeches uttered in heat of distempered
affection, have often times much more egernes then weight; ^o he that shall
mark the proofs alleged, and the answers to things objected in the book,
will now and then perhaps epsy the like imbecility. Such is that argument
whereby they that wore on their heads garlands, are charged as transgressors of
natures law, and guilty of sacrilege against God the Lord of nature, in as
much as flowers in such sort worn, can neither be smelt nor seen well by
those that wear them* and God made flowers sweet and beautiful, that being
seen and smelt unto, they might so delight. Neither does Tertullian bewray
this weakness in striking only, but also in repelling their strokes with whom he
contendeth. They ask says he, What scripture is there which does teach that
we should not be crowned? And what scripture is there which does teach that we
should? For in requiring on the contrary part the aid of scripture, they do
give sentence before hand that their part ought also by scripture to be aided.
Which answer is of no great force. There is no necessity, that if I confess I
ought not to do that which the scripture forbids me, I should thereby
acknowledge my self bound to do nothing which the Scripture commands me not.
For many inducements besides Scripture may lead me to that, which if scripture
be against, they all give place, and are of no value* yet otherwise are strong
and effectual to persuade. Which thing himself well enough understanding,
and being not ignorant that Scripture in many things does neither command nor
forbid, but use silence; his resolution in fine is; that in the Church a number
of things are strictly observed* whereof no law of scripture makes mention one
way or other; that of things once received and confirmed by use, long usage is
a law sufficient; that in civil affairs when there is no other law* custom
it self does stand for law; that in as much as law does stand upon reason, to
allege reason serves as well as to cite scripture; that whatsoever is
reasonable, the same is lawful whosoever is author of it; that the authority
of Custom is great; finally that the custom of Christians was then and had
been a long time not to wear garlands, and therefore that undoubtedly they did
offend, who presumed to violate such a custom by not observing that thing, the
very inueterate observation whereof was a law sufficient to bind all men to
observe it, unless they could show some higher law, some law of scripture to
the contrary. This presupposed, it may stand then very well with strength and
soundness of reason, even thus to answer; Whereas they ask what scripture
forbids them to wear a garland, we are in this case rather to demand what
scripture commands them. They cannot here allege that it is permitted which
is not forbidden them: no, that is forbidden them which is not permitted. For
long received Custom forbidding them to do as they did (if so be it did forbid
them) there was no excuse in the world to justify their act, unless in the
scripture they could show some law, that did license them thus to break a
received custom. Now whereas in all the books of Tertullian besides, there is
not so much found as in that one, to prove not only that we may do, but that
we ought to do sundry things which the Scripture commands not; out of that
very book these sentences are brought to make us believe that Tertullian was
of a clean contrary mind. We cannot therefore hereupon yield, we cannot
grant, that hereby is made manifest the argument of Scripture negatiuely to be
of force, not only in doctrine and ecclesiastical discipline, but even in
matters arbitrary. For Tertullian does plainly hold even in that book, that
neither the matter which he entreats of was arbitrary but necessary, in as
much as the received custom of the Church did tie and bind them not to wear
garlands as the Heathens did; yea and further also he reckons up particularly
a number of things, whereof he expressly concludes; Harum and aliarum eiusmodi
disciplinarum si legem expostules scripturarum, nullam inuenies; which is as
much as if he had said in express words, Many things there are which concern
the discipline of the Church and the duties of men, which to abrogate and take
away, the scriptures negatiuely urged may not in any case persuade us, but they
must be observed, yea although no scripture be found which requires any such
thing. Tertullian therefore undoubtedly does not in this book show himself to
be of the same mind with them by whom his name is pretended.

6 But since the sacred scriptures themselves afford oftentimes such arguments
as are taken from divine authority both one way and other, The first assertion
endeavored to be confirmed by the scriptures custom of disputing from divine
authority negatiuely. 1. John. 2.5* God is light, and there is in him no
darkness at all. Hebr. 6.18. It is imposble that God should lie. Number. 23.19.
God is not as man that he should lie.
The Lord has commanded, therefore it must be; And again in like sort, He
has not, therefore it must not be; some certainty concerning this point
seems requisite to be set down. God himself can neither possibly err, nor
lead into error. For this cause his testimonies, whatsoever he affirms, are
always truth and most infallible certainty. Yea further, because the things
that proceed from him are perfect without any manner of defect or maime; it
cannot be but that the words of his mouth are absolute, and lack nothing which
they should have, for performance of that thing whereunto they tend. Whereupon
it follows, that the end being known whereunto he directs his speech, the
argument even negatiuely is evermore strong and forcible, concerning those
things that are appara^tly requisite unto the same end. As for example, T. C.
l. 2. p. 48* It is ^er hard to show that the Prophets have reasoned negatiuely.
A^ when in the person of the Lord the Prophet says* Whereof I have not spoken*
Jeremy 19.5. and* Which never entered into my heart* Ier^mie 7.31.32. and
where he condemne^h them because* They have not asked counsel at the mouth of
the Lord, Esaias. 30 2. And it may be showed* that the same kind of argument has
been used, in things which are not of the substance of salvation or damnation,
and whereof there was no commaund^ment to the contrary (as in the former there
was* Leuit. 18.21. and 20.3. Deuteronomy. 17.16.) In Joshua the children of Israel are
charged by the Prophet that they asked not counsel of the^ mouth of the Lord
when they entered into covenant with the Gabeonites, Josh. 9.14. And yet that
covenant was not made contrary unto any commandment of God. Moreover we
read that when David had taken this counsel to build a temple unto the Lord,
albeit the Lord had revealed before in his word that there should be such a
standing place* where the Arc of the covenant and the service should have a
certain abiding* and albeit there was no word of God which ^orbad David to
build the Temple: yet the Lord (with commendation of his good affection and
zeal he had to the advancement of his glory) concludes against Dauid^
resolution to build the Temple, with this reason* namely that he had given no
commandment of this who should build it. 1. Chr. 17.6.
God intending to set down sundry times that which in Angels is most
excellent, has not any where spoken so highly of them as he has of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; therefore they are not in dignity equal unto him.
It is the Apostle Saint Paul's argument. The purpose of God was to teach his
people, both unto whom they should offer sacrifice* and what sacrifice was to
be offered. To burn their sons in fire unto Baal he did not command them,
he spoke no such thing* neither came it into his mind: therefore this they
ought not to have done. Which argument the Prophet Jeremy uses more then
once, as being so effectual and strong, that although the thing he reproves
were not only not commanded but forbidden them, and that expressly; Leuit.
18.21. and 20.3. Deuteronomy. 28.10.
yet the Prophet chooses rather to charge them with the fault of making a law
unto themselves, then with the crime of transgressing a law which God had
made. For when the Lord has once himself precisely set down a form of
executing that wherein we are to serve him, the fault appears greater to do
that which we are not, then not to do that which we are commanded. In this we
seem to charge the Law of God with hardness only* in that with
foolishness; in this we show our selves weak and unapt to be doers of his
will, in that we take upon us to be controllers of his wisdom; in this we
fail to perform the thing which God sees meet, convenient and good, in that
we presume to see what is meet and convenient better then God himself. In
those actions therefore the whole form whereof God has of purpose set down
to be observed, we may not otherwise do then exactly as he has prescribed; in
such things negative arguments are strong. Again, with a negative argument
David is pressed concerning the purpose he had to build a Temple unto the Lord;
Thus says the Lord, thou shall not build me an house to dwell in. 1. Chro. 17,
^.
Wheresoever I have walked with all Israel, spoke I one word to any of the
Judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people, saying* Why have ye not
built me an house? The Jews urged with a negative argument touching the aid
which they sought at the hands of the King of Egypt, Woe to those rebellious
children (says the Lord) which walk forth to go down into Egypt, Esaias. 30.1
and have not asked counsel at my mouth, to strengthen themselves with the
strength of Pharao. Finally, the league of Joshua with the Gabeonites is
likewise with a negative argument touched. It was not as it should be: And why?
The Lord gave them not that advise; They sought not counsel at the mouth of
the Lord. By the virtue of which examples* Josh. 9.14.
if any man should suppose the force of negative arguments approved, when they
are taken from Scripture in such sort as we in this question are pressed
therewith, they greatly deceive themselves. For unto which of all these was it
said, that they had done amiss in purposing to do, or in doing any thing at
all which the Scripture commanded them not? Our question is, whether all be
sin which is done without direction by scripture, and not whether the
Israelites did at any time amiss by following their own minds, without asking
counsel of God. No, it was that peoples singular privilege, a favor which
God vouchfafed them above the rest of the world, that in the affairs of their
estate, which were not determinable one way or other by the scripture, himself
gave them extraordinarily direction and counsel as often as they sought it at
his hands. Thus God did first by speech unto Moses; after by Vrim and Thummim
unto Priests; lastly by dreams and visions unto Prophets, from whom in such
cases they were to receive the answer of God. Concerning Joshua therefore thus
spoke the Lord unto Moses saying, Number. 27.21.
He shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask counsel for him by
the judgment of Vrim before the Lord: whereof had Joshua been mindful, the
fraud of the Gabeonites could not so smoothly have past unespied till there was
no help. The Jews had Prophets to have resolved them from the mouth of God
himself, whether Egyptian aides should profit them yea or no: but they
thought themselves wise enough, and him unworthy to be of their Counsel. In
this respect therefore was their reproof, though sharp, yet just, albeit there
had been no charge precisely given them that they should always take heed of
Egypt. But as for David, to think that he did evil in determining to build
God a Temple, because there was in scripture no commandment that he should
build it, were very injurious: the purpose of his heart was religious and godly,
1. Chron. 17.
the act most worthy of honor and renown; neither could Nathan choose but
admire his virtuous intent, exhort him to go forward, and beseech God to
prosper him therein. But God saw the endless troubles which David should be
subject unto during the whole time of his regiment, and therefore gave charge
to differ so good a work till the days of tranquillity and peace, wherein
it might without interruption be performed. David supposed that it could not
stand with the duty which he owed unto God, to set himself in an house of
Cedar trees, and to behold the Arc of the Lords Covenant unsettled. This
opinion the Lord abateth, by causing Nathan to show him plainly, that it
should be no more imputed unto him for a fault, then it had been unto the
Judges of Israel before him, his case being the same which theirs was, their
times not more unquiet then his, nor more unfit for such an action. Wherefore
concerning the force of negative arguments so taken from the authority of
Scripture as by us they are denied, T. C. l. ^. p. 50. M. Harding reprocheth
the B. of Salisbury with this kind of reasoning: unto whom the B. answers,
The argument of authority negatiuely, is taken to be good, whenever proof is
taken of Gods word, and is used not only by us, but also by many of the
Catholic Fathers. A little after he shows the reason why the argument of
authority of the scripture negatiuely is good, namely for that the word of God
is perfect. In another place unto M. Harding casting him in the teeth with
negative arguments, be alleges places out of Iren^^us, Chrysostom, Leo, which
reasoned negatiuely of the authority of the Scriptures. The places which he
alleges be very full and plain in generality, without any such restraint as
the Answerer imagines, as they are there to be seen. ^ Vell. Patere. Iugurtha
as Marius sub codem Africano militantes, in ijsdem castris didicere qua postea
in contrarijs facere^t.
there is in all this less then nothing. And touching that which unto this
purpose is borrowed from the controversies sometime handled between M.
Harding, and the worthiest Divine that Christendom has bred for the space of
some hu^dreds of years, who being brought up together in one University, it
fell out in them which was spoken of two others, They learned in the same, that
which in contrary Ca^ps they did practice: Of these two the one obiecting that
with us arguments taken from authority negatiuely are over common, the Bishops
answer hereunto is, that This kind of argument is thought to be good, Art. 1.
Diuis. 29.
whenever proof is taken of Gods word, and is used not only by us, but also
by Saint Paul, Gal. 3.
and by many of the Catholic Fathers. Saint Paul says, God said not unto
Abraham, In thy seeds all the nations of the earth shall be blessed, but in thy
seed which is Christ, and thereof he thought he made a good argument. Likewise
says Origin, The bread which the Lord gave unto his disciples, saying unto
them, Take and eat, he differred not, Orig. in. Leuitho. 5.
nor commanded to be reserved till the next day. Such arguments Origin and
other learned Fathers thought to stand for good, whatsoever misliking Master
Harding has found in the^. This kind of proof is thought to hold in Gods
commandments, for that they be full and perfect, and God has specially
charged us, that we should neither put to them, nor take fro them: and
therefore it seems good unto them that have learned of Christ, Vnus est
magister vester Christus, and have heard the voice of God the Father from
heaven, Math. 23.
Math. 17.
Ipsum au^ite. But unto them that add to the word of God what them lists,
and make Gods will subject unto their will, and break Gods commandments for
their own traditions sake, unto them is seems not good. Again, the English
Apology alleging the example of the Greeks how they have neither private
Masses, nor mangled Sacraments, Desen. par. 5. ca. 15. diuis. ^.
nor Purgatories, nor pardons; it pleases Master Harding to jest out the
matter, to use the help of his wits where strength of truth failed him, and to
answer with scoffing at negatiues. The Bishops defense in this case is, The
ancient learned Fathers having to deal with impudent heretics, that in
defense of their errors avouched the judgment of all the old Bishops and
Doctors that had been before them, and the general consent of the primitive
and whole universal Church, and that with as good regard of truth, and as
faithfully as you do now; the better to discover the shameless boldness and
nakedness of their doctrine, were oftentimes likewise forced to use the
negative, and so to drive the same heretics as we do you, to prove their
affirmatiues, which thing to do it was never possible. The ancient father
Irenaeus thus stayed himself, as we do by the negative, Hoc neque Prophetae
praedicauerunt, neque Dominus docuit, neque Apostoli tradiderunt, Lib. 1. cap.
1^
This thing neither did the Prophets publish, nor our Lord teach, nor the
Apostles deliver. By a like negative Chrysostom says, This tree neither Paul
planted, De incomp. not. Dei hom. 3.
nor Apollo watered, nor God increased. In like sort Leo says, What needs it
to believe that thing that neither the Law has taught, nor the Prophets have
spoken, Epist. 9^. ca. 12
nor the Gospel has preached, nor the Apostles have delivered? And again,
How are the new devises brought in that our Fathers never knew? S. Augustine
having reekoned up a great number of the Bishops of Rome, by a general
negative says thus, In all this order of succession of Bishops, Epist. 97. ca.
3. Epist. 16^. Lib. 4. ep. 32.
there is not one Bishop found that was a Donatist* Saint Gregory being
himself a Bishop of Rome, and writing against the title of universal Bishop,
says thus, None of all my predecessors ever consented to use this ungodly
title, No Bishop of Rome ever took upon him this name of Singularity. By such
negatiues, M. Harding, we reprove the vanity and nouelty of your religion; we
tell you none of the catholic ancient learned Fathers either Greek or Latin
ever used either your private Mass, or your half communion, or your barbarous
unknown prayers. Paul never planted them, Apollo never watered them, God
never increased them, they are of your selves, they are not of God. In all this
there is not a syllable which any way crosses us. For concerning arguments
negative even taken from humane authority^, they are here proved to be in some
cases very strong and forcible. They are not in our estimation idle reproves,
when the authors of needless innouations are opposed with such negatiues, as
that of Leo, How are these new devises brought in which our fathers never knew?
When their grave and reverend superiors do reckon up unto them, as Augustine
did unto the Donatists, large Catalogues of Fathers wondered at for their
wisdom, piety, and learning, amongst whom for so many ages before us, no one
did ever so think of the Churches affairs, as now the world does begin to be
persuaded; surely by us they are not taught to take exception hereat, because
such arguments are negative. Much less when the like are taken from the sacred
authority of Scripture, if the matter it self do bear them. For in truth the
question is not, whether an argument from scripture negatiuely may be good, but
whether it be so generally good, that in all actions men may urge it. The
fathers I grant do use very general and large terms, even as Hiero the King
did in speaking of Archimedes, From henceforward whatsoever Archimedes
speaks, it must be believed. His meaning was not that Archimedes could simply
in nothing be deceived, but that he had in such sort approved his skill, that
he seemed worthy of credit for ever after in matters appertaining unto the
science he was skillful in. In speaking thus largely it is presumed, that men's
speeches will be taken according to the matter whereof they speak. Let any man
therefore that carries indifferency of judgment, peruse the Bishops speeches,
and consider well of those negatiues concerning scripture, which he produces
out of Irenaeus, Chrysostom, and Leo; which three are chosen from amongst the
residue, because the sentences of the others (even as one of theirs also) do
make for defense of negative arguments taken from humane authority, Their
opinion concerning the force of arguments taken from humane authority for the
ordering of men's actio^^ or perswasio^s.
and not from divine only. They mention no more restraint in the one then in
the other: yet I think themselves will not hereby judge, that the Fathers
took both to be strong, without restraint unto any special kind of matter
wherein they held such arguments forcible. Nor does the Bishop either say or
prove any more, then that an argument in some kinds of matter may be good,
although taken negatiuely from Scripture.

T. C. l. 1. p. 25. When the question is of the authority of a man, it holds
neither affirmatively nor negatiuely. The reason is, because the infirmity of
man can neither attain to the perfection of any thing whereby he might speak
all things that are to be spoken of it; neither yet be free from error in those
things which he speaks or gives out. And therefore this argument neither
affirmatively nor negatiuely compels the hearer, but only induces him to
some liking or disliking of that for which it is brought, and is rather for an
Orator to persuade the simpler sort, then for a disputer to enforce him that is
learned.
7 An earnest desire to draw all things unto the determination of bare and naked
Scripture, has caused here much pains to be taken in abating the estimation
and credit of man. Which if we labor to maintain as far as truth and
reason will bear, let not any think that we travail about a matter not
greatly needful. For the scope of all their pleading against man's authority
is, to overthrow such orders, laws, and constitutions in the Church, as
depending thereupon if they should therefore be taken away, would peradueture
leave neither face nor memory of Church to continue long in the world, the
world especially being such as now it is. That which they have in this case
spoken, I would for breuities sake let pass, but that the drift of their
speech being so dangerous, their words are not to be neglected. Wherefore to
say that simply an argument taken from man's authority does hold no way, neither
affirmatively nor negatiuely, is hard. By a man's authority we here understand,
the force which his word has for the assurance of another mind that builds
upon it; as the Apostle somewhat did upon their report of the house of Cloe, 1.
Cor. 1.11.
and the Samaritanes in a matter of far greater moment upon the report of a
simple woman. For so it is said in Saint John's Gospel, John. 4.35.
Many of the Samaritans of that City believed in him for the saying of the
woman, which testified, He has told me all things that ever* I did. The
strength of man's authority is affirmatively such, that the waightiest affairs
in the world depend ther^on. In judgment and justice are not hereupon
proceedings grounded? Deuteronomy. 19.15.
Says not the law that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word
shall be confirmed? This the law of God would not say, Mat. 18.16.
if there were in a man's testimony no force at all to prove any thing. And if
it be admitted that in matter of fact there is some credit to be given to the
testimony of man, but not in matter of opinion and judgment; we see the
contrary both acknowledged and universally practiced also throughout the world.
The sentences of wise and expert men were never but highly esteemed. Let the
title of a man's right be called in question; are we not bold to rely and build
upon the judgment of such as are famous for their skill in the laws of this
land? In matter of state, the weight many times of some one man's authority is
thought reason sufficient, even to sway over whole nations. And this not only
with the simpler sort; but the learneder and wiser we are, the more such
arguments in some cases prevail with us. The reason why the simpler sort are
moved with authority, is the conscience of their own ignorance; whereby it
comes to pass, that having learned men in admiration, they rather fear to
dislike them, then know wherefore they should allow and follow their
judgments. Contrariwise with them that are skillful, authority is much more
strong and forcible; because they only are able to discern how just cause
there is, why to some men's authority so much should be attributed. For which
cause the name of Hippocrates (no doubt) were more effectual to persuade even
such men as Galen himself, then to move a silly Empiricke. So that the very
self same argument in this kind which does but induce the vulga^ sort to like,
may constrain the wiser to yield. And therefore not Orators only with the
people, but even the very profoundest disputers in all faculties have hereby
often with the best learned prevailed most. As for arguments taken from human
authority and that negatiuely; for example sake, if we should think the
assembling of the people of God together by the sound of a bell, the presenting
of infants at the holy font by such as commonly we call their Godfathers, or
any other the like received custom to be impious, because some men of whom we
think very reuerendly, have in their books and writings no where mentioned
nor taught that such things should be in the Church; this reasoning were
subject unto just reproof, it were but feeble, weak and unsound.
Notwithstanding even negatiuely an argument from human authority may be
strong, as namely thus; The Chronicles of England mention no more then only
six kings bearing the name of Edward, since the time of the last conquest;
therefore it cannot be there should be more. So that if the question be of the
authority of a man's testimony, we cannot simply avouch, either that
affirmatively it does not any way hold, or that it has only force to induce
the simpler sort, and not to constrain men of understanding and ripe judgment
to yield assent, or that negatiuely it has in it no strength at all. For unto
e^uery of these the contrary is most plain. Neither does that which is
alleged concerning the infirmity of men, overthrow or disprove this. Men are
blinded with ignorance and error; many things may escape them, and in many
things they may be deceived; yea those things which they do know, they may
either forget, or upon sundry indirect considerations let pass; and although
themselves do not err, yet may they through malice or vanity, even of purpose
deceive others. Howbeit infinite cases there are wherein all these impediments
and lets are so manifestly excluded, that there is no show or color whereby
any such exception may be taken, but that the testimony of man will stand as a
ground of infallible assurance. That there is a City of Rome, that Pius Quintus
and Gregory the 13. and others have been Popes of Rome, I suppose we are
certainly enough persuaded. The ground of our persuasion, who never saw the
place nor persons before named, can be nothing but man's testimony. Will any man
here notwithstanding allege those mentioned human infirmities, as reasons
why these things should be mistrusted or doubted of? Yea that which is more,
utterly to infringe the force and strength of man's testimony, were to shake the
very fortress of Gods truth. For whatsoever we believe concerning salvation by
Christ, although the scripture be therein the ground of our belief; yet the
authority of man is if we mark it the key, which opens the door of entrance
into the knowledge of the scripture. The scripture could not teach us the
things that are of God, unless we did credit men who have taught us that the
words of Scripture do signify those things. Some way therefore,
notwithstanding man's infirmity, yet his authority may enforce assent. T. C. l.
1. p. 10. Although that kind of argument of authority of men is good, neither
in human nor divine sciences; yet it has some small force in human
sciences, for as much as naturally, and in that he is a man, he may come to
some ripenes of judgment in those sciences; which in divine matters has no
force at all, as of him which naturally, and as he is a man, can no more judge
of them show a blind man of colors. Yea so far is it from drawing credit if
it be barely spoken without reason and testimony of scripture, that it carries
also a suspicion of untruth whatsoever proceeds from him, which the Apostle
did well note when to signify a thing corruptly spoken and against the truth,
he says, that it is spoken according unto man. Romans 3. He says not as a
wicked and lying man, but simply as a man. And although this corruption be
reformed in many; yet for so much as in whom the knowledge of the truth is
most advanced, there remains both ignorance and disordered affections
(whereof either of them turns him from speaking of the truth;) no man's
authority, with the Church especially, and those that are called and persuaded
of the authority of the word of God, can bring any assurance unto the
conscience.
Upon better advise and deliberation so much is perceived, and at the length
confessed, that arguments taken from the authority of men may not only so far
forth as has been declared, but further also be of some force in human
sciences; which force be it never so small, does show that they are not utterly
naught. But in matters divine it is still maintained stiffly, that they have no
manner force at all. Howbeit the very self same reason, which causes to yield
that they are of some force in the one, will at the length constrain also to
acknowledge, that they are not in the other altogether vnforcible. For if the
natural strength of man's wit may by experience and study attain unto such
ripenes in the knowledge of things human, that men in this respect may
presume to build somewhat upon their judgment; what reason have we to think
but that even in matters divine, the like wits furnished with necessary helps,
exercised in scripture with like diligence, and assisted with the grace of
almighty God, may grow unto so much perfection of knowledge, that men shall
have just cause, when any thing pertinent unto faith and religion is doubted
of, the more willingly to incline their minds toward that which the sentence
of so grave, wise, and learned in that faculty shall judge most sound. For the
controversy is of the weight of such men's judgments. Let it therefore be
suspected, let it be taken as gross, corrupt, repugnant unto the truth,
whatsoever concerning things divine above nature shall at any time be spoken as
out of the mouths of mere natural men, which have not the eyes wherewith
heavenly things are discerned. For this we contend not. But whom God has
endued with principal gifts to aspire unto knowledge by, whose exercises,
labors, and divine studies he has so bles^, that the world for their great
and rare skill that way, has them in singular admiration; may we reject even
their judgment likewise, as being utterly of no moment? For mine own part I
dare not so lightly esteem of the Church, and of the principal pillars
therein. The truth is, that the mind of man desires evermore to know the
truth according to the most infallible certainty which the nature of things
can yield. The greatest assurance generally with all men, is that which we have
by plain aspect and intuitiue beholding. Where we cannot attain unto this;
there what appears to be true by strong and invincible demonstration, such
as wherein it is not by any way possible to be deceived, thereunto the mind
does necessarily assent, neither is it in the choice thereof to do otherwise.
And in case these both do fail; then which way greatest probability leads,
thither the mind does evermore incline. Scripture with Christian men being
received as the word of God, that for which we have probable, yea that which we
have necessary reason for, yea that which we see with our eyes is not thought
so sure, as that which the scripture of God teaches; because we hold that his
speech reuealeth there what himself sees, and therefore the strongest proof
of all, and the most necessarily assented unto by us (which do thus receive the
scripture,) is the scripture. Now it is not required or can be exacted at our
hands, that we should yield unto any thing other assent, then such as does
answer the evidence which is to be had of that we assent unto. For which cause
even in matters divine, concerning some things we may lawfully doubt and
suspend our judgment, inclining neither to one side or other, as namely
touching the time of the fall both of man and Angels; of some things we may
very well retain an opinion that they are probable and not unlikely to be
true, as when we hold that men have their souls rather by creation then
propagation, or that the mother of our Lord lived always in the state of
virginity as well after his birth as before (for of these two, the one her
virginity before, is a thing which of necessity we must believe; the other
her continuance in the same state always, has more likelihood of truth then
the contrary;) finally in all things then are our consciences best resolved,
and in most agreeable sort unto God and nature fe^ed, when they are so far
persuaded as those grounds of persuasion which are to be had will bear. Which
thing I do so much the rather set down, for that I see how a number of souls
are, for want of right informatio^ in this point, oftentimes grievously vexed.
When bare and vnbuilded conclusions are put into their minds, they finding not
themselves to have thereof any great certainty, imagine that this proceeds
only from lack of faith, and that the spirit of God does not work in them,
as it does in true believers; by this means their hearts are much troubled,
they fall into anguish and perplexity: whereas the truth is, that how bold and
confident soever we may be in words, when it comes to the point of trial,
such as the evidence is which the truth has either in it self or through
proof, such is the hearts assent thereunto, neither can it be stronger, being
grounded as it should be. I grant that proof derived from the authority of
man's judgment, is not able to work that assurance which does grow by a
stronger proof; and therefore although ten thousand general Councels would set
down one and the same definitive sentence concerning any point of religion
whatsoever, yet one demonstratiue reason alleged, or one manifest testimony
cited from the mouth of God himself to the contrary, could not choose but
ouerweigh them all; in as much as for them to have been deceived, it is not
impossible; it is, that demonstratiue reason or testimony divine should
deceive. Howbeit in defect of proof infallible, because the mind does rather
follow probable persuasions, then approve the things that have in them no
likelihood of truth at all; surely if a question concerning matter of doctrine
were proposed, and on the one side no kind of proof appearing, there should on
the other be alleged and showed that so a number of the learnedest divines in
the world have ever thought; although it did not appear what reason or what
scripture led them to be of that judgment, yet to their very bare judgment
somewhat a reasonable man would attribute, notwithstanding the common
imbecilities which are incident into our nature. And whereas it is thought,
that especially with the Church, and those that are called and persuaded of
thauthority of the word of God, man's authority with them especially should not
prevail; it must and does prevail even with them, yea with them especially as
far as equity requires, and farther we maintain it not. For men to be tied
and led by authority, as it were with a kind of captivity of judgment, T. C.
l. 2. p. 21. Of diverse sentences of the fathers themselves (whereby some have
likened them to brute beasts without reason, which suffer themselves to be led
by the judgment and authority of others* some have preferred the judgment of
ou^ simple rude man alleging reason unto companies of learned men) I will
content my self at this time with two or three sentences. Irenaeus says,
whatsoever is to be showed in the scripture, can, be showed but out of the
scriptures themselves* lib. 3^ cap. 12. Jerome says. No man be he never so
holy or eloquent, has any authority after the Apostles in Ps. 86. Augustine
says, that he will believe none, how godly and learned soever he be, unless
he confirm his sentence by the scriptures, or by some reason not contrary to
them Epist. 18. And in another place, Hear this, the Lord says, hear not
this, Donatus says, Rogatus says, Vincentius says, Hylarius says, Ambrose
says, Augustine says, but hearken to this the Lord says, Epist. 48. And
again having to do with an Arrian, he affirms that neither he ought to bring
forth the council of Nice, nor the other the council of Arimine, thereby to
bring prejudice each to other; neither ought the Arrian to be holden by the
authority of the one, nor himself by the authority of the other, but by the
scriptures which are witnesses proper to neither, but common to both* matter
with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason ought to be debated. contra
Maxim. Arian. 3.14. ca. And in an other place against Petilian the Donatist he
says, Let not these words be heard between us, I say, you say, let us hear
this, Thus says the Lord. And by and by speaking of the scriptures he says,
There let us seek the Church, there let us try the cause. De vnita. Eccles.
cap. 3. Hereby it is manifest, that the argument of the authority of man
affirmatively is nothing worth.
and though there be reason to the contrary, not to listen unto it, but to
follow like beasts the first in the heard, they know not nor care not whether,
this were brutish. Again that authority of men should prevail with men
either against or above reason, is no part of our belief. Companies of learned
men be they never so great and reverend, are to yield unto reason; the weight
whereof is no whit prejudiced by the simplicity of his person which does
allege it, but being found to be sound and good, the bare opinion of men to
the contrary, must of necessity stoop and give place. Irenaeus writing
against Marcion, which held one God author of the old Testament, and another of
the new, to prove that the Apostles preached the same God which was known
before to the Jews, he copiously alleges sundry their sermons and speeches
uttered concerning that matter, and recorded in Scripture. And least any should
be wearied with such store of allegations, in the end he concludes. While we
labor for these demonstrations out of Scripture, and do summarily declare the
things which many ways have been spoken, be contented quietly to hear, and
do not think my speech tedious: Quoniam ostensiones quae sunt in scripturis
non possunt ostendi nisi ex ipsis scripturis; Because demonstrations that are
in scripture, may not otherwise be showed, then by citing them out of the
scriptures themselves where they are. Which words make so little unto the
purpose, that they seem as it were offended at him which has called them thus
solemnly forth to say nothing. And concerning the verdict of Jerome, If no
man, be he never so well learned, have after the Apostles any authority to
publish new doctrine as from heaven, and to require the worlds assent as unto
truth received by prophetical revelation; does this prejudice the credit of
learned men's judgments in opening that truth, which by being conversant in the
Apostles writings, they have themselves from thence learned? Saint Augustine
exhorts not to hear men, but to hearken what God speaks. His purpose is
not (I think) that we should stop our ears against his own exhortation, and
therefore he cannot mean simply that audience should altogether be denied
unto men; but either that if men speak one thing and God himself teach an
other, then he, not they to be obeyed; or if they both speak the same thing,
yet then also man's speech unworthy of hearing, not simply, but in comparison of
that which proceeds from the mouth of God. Yea but we doubt what the will of
God is. Are we in this case forbidden to hear what men of judgment think it
to be? If not, then this allegation also might very well have been spared. In
that ancient strife which was between the Catholic fathers and Arrians,
Donatistes, and others of like perverse and froward disposition, as long as to
fathers or Counsels alleged on the one side, the like by the contrary side
were opposed, impossible it was that ever the question should by this mean
grow unto any issue or end. The scripture they both believed, the scripture
they knew could not give sentence on both sides, by scripture the controversy
between them was such as might be determined. In this case what madness was
it with such kinds of proofs to nourish their contention, when there were
such effectual means to end all controversy that was between them? Hereby
therefore it does not as yet appear, that an argument of authority of man
affirmatively is in matters divine nothing worth. Which opinion being once
inserted into the minds of the vulgar sort, what it may grow unto God
knows. Thus much we see, it has already made thousands so headstrong even
in gross and palpable errors, that a man whose capacity will scarce serve him
to utter five words in sensible manner, blusheth not in any doubt concerning
matter of scripture to think his own bare Yea as good as the Nay of all the
wise, grave, and learned judgments that are in the whole world. Which
insolency must be represt, or it will be the very bane of Christian religion.
Our Lords Disciples marking what speech he uttered unto them, and at the same
time calling to mind a common opinion held by the Scribes, between which
opinion and the words of their Master, it seemed unto them that there was
some contradiction, which they could not themselves answer with full
satisfaction of their own minds; the doubt they propose to our Savior
saying, Why then say the Scribes that Elias must first come? They knew that the
Scribes did err greatly* Matthew. 17.10.
and that many ways even in matters of their own profession. They
notwithstanding thought the judgment of the very Scribes in matters divine to
be of some value; some probability they thought there was that Elias should
come, in as much as the Scribes said it. Now no truth can contradict any truth;
desirous therefore they were to be taught, how both might stand together, that
which they knew* could not be false, because Christ spoke it; and this which to
them did seem true, only because the Scribes had said it. For the scripture
from whence the Scribes did gather it, was not then in their heads. We do not
find that our Savior reproved them of error, for thinking the judgment of
Scribes to be worth the obiecting, for esteeming it to be of any moment or
value in matters concerning God. We cannot therefore be persuaded that the will
of God is, we should so far reject the authority of men, as to reckon it
nothing. No, it may be a question, whether they that urge us unto this, be
themselves so persuaded indeed. Men do sometimes bewray that by deeds, which
to confess they are hardly drawn. Mark then if this be not general with all
men for the most part. When the judgments of learned men are alleged against
them; what do they but either eleuate their credit, or oppose unto them the
judgments of others as learned? Which thing does argue that all men
acknowledge in them some force and weight, for which they are loath the cause
they maintain should be so much weakened as their testimony is available.
Again what reason is there why alleging testimonies as proofs, men give them
some title of credit, honor, and estimation whom they allege, unless before
hand it be sufficiently known who they are; what reason hereof but only a
common in grafted persuasion, that in some men there may be found such
qualities as are able to counteruaile those exceptions which might be taken
against them, and that such men's authority is not lightly to be shaken off?
Shall I add further, that the force of arguments drawn from the authority of
scripture it self, as scriptures commonly are alleged, shall (being sifted)
be found to depend upon the strength of this so much despised and debased
authority of man? Surely it does, and that oftener then we are aware of. For
although scripture be of God, and therefore the proof which is taken from
thence must needs be of all other most invincible; yet this strength it has
not, unless it avouch the self same thing for which it is brought. If there
be either undeniable appearance that so it does, or reason such as cannot
deceive, then scripture-proofe (no doubt) in strength and value exceeds all.
But for the most part, even such as are readiest to cite for one thing five
hundred sentences of holy scripture; what warrant have they, that any one of
them does mean the thing for which it is alleged? Is not their surest ground
most commonly, either some probable conjecture of their own, or the judgment
of others taking those Scriptures as they do? Which notwithstanding to mean
otherwise then they take them, it is not still altogether imposible. So that
now and then they ground themselves on humane authority, even when they most
pretend divine. Thus it fares even clean throughout the whole controversy
about that discipline which is so earnestly urged and labored for. Scriptures
are plentifully alleged to prove, that the whole Christian world for ever
ought to embrace it. Hereupon men term it The discipline of God. Howbeit
examine, sift, and resolve their alleged proofs, till you come to the very
root from whence they spring, the heart wherein their strength lies; and it
shall clearly appear unto any man of judgment, that the most which can be
inferred upon such plenty of divine testimonies is only this, That some
things which they maintain, as far as some men can probably conjecture, do
seem to have been out of scripture not absurdly gathered. Is this a warrant
sufficient for any man's conscience to build such proceedinges upon, T. C. l.
2.21. If at any time it happened unto Augustine (as it did against the
Donatists and others) to allege the authority of the ancient Fathers which
had bin before him; yet this was not done before he had laid a sure foundation
of his cause in the scriptures, and that also being provoked by the adversaries
of the truth, who bare themselves high of some counsel, or of some man of name
that had favored that part.
as have been and are put in ure for the stablishment of that cause? But to
conclude, I would gladly understand how it comes to pass, that they which so
peremptorily do maintain that humane authority is nothing worth, are in the
cause which they favor so careful to have the common sort of men persuaded,
that the wisest, the godliest, and the best learned in all Christendom are
that way given, seeing they judge this to make nothing in the world for them.
Again how comes it to pass, they cannot abide that authority should be
alleged on the other side, if there be no force at all in authorities on one
side or other? Wherefore labor they to strip their adversaries of such
furniture as does not help? Why take they such needless pains to furnish
also their own cause with the like? If it be void and to no purpose that the
names of men are so frequent in their books; what did move them to bring them
in, or does to suffer them there remaining? Ignorant I am not how this is
salued, They do it not but after the truth made manifest first by reason or by
scripture, they do it not but to control the enemies of the truth, who bear
themselves bold upon humane authority, making not for them but against them
rather. Which answers are nothing. For in what place or upon what
consideration soever it be they do it, were it in their own opinion of no
force being done, they would undoubtedly refrain to do it.

8 But to the end it may more plainly appear, what we are to judge of their
sentences, and of the cause it self wherein they are alleged; A declaration
what the truth is in this ma^ter.
first it may not well be denied, that all actions of men endued with the use
of reason are generally either good or evil. For although it be granted that
no action is properly termed good or evil, unless it be voluntary; yet this
can be no let to our former assertion, that all actions of men endued with the
use of reason are generally either good or evil; because even those things
are done voluntarily by us, which other creatures do naturally, in as much as
we might stay our doing of them if we would. Beasts naturally do take their
food and rest, when it offers it self unto them. If men did so too, and
could not do otherwise of themselves; there were no place for any such reproof
as that of our Savior Christ unto his disciples, could ye not watch with me
one hour? Math. 26.40.
That which is voluntarily performed in things tending to the end, if it be
well done, must needs be done with deliberate consideration of some reasonable
cause, wherefore we rather should do it the^ not. Whereupon it seems that in
such actions only those are said to be good or evil, which are capable of
deliberatio^: so yt many things being hourly done by men, wherein they need
not use with themselves any manner of consultation at all, it may perhaps
hereby seem that well or ill doing belongs only to our waightier affairs,
and to those deeds which are of so great importance that they require advise.
But thus to determine were perilous, and peradventure unsound also. I do rather
incline to think, that seeing all the unforced actions of me^ are volu^tary;
and al volu^tary actions te^ding to the end have choice; and al choice
presupposes the knowledge of some cause wherefore we make it: where the
reasonable cause of such actions so readily offers it self, that it needs
not to be sought for; in those things though we do not deliberat, yet they are
of their nature apt to be deliberated on, in regard of the will which may
incline either way, and would not any one way bend it self, if there were not
some apparent motive to lead it. Deliberatio^ actual we use, when there is
doubt what we should incline our wills unto. Where no doubt is, deliberation
is not excluded as impertinent unto the thing, but as needless in regard of
the agent, which sees already what to resolve upon. It has no apparent
absurdity therefore in it to think, that all actions of men endued with the
use of reason, are generally either good or evil. Whatsoever is good; the same
is also approved of God: and according unto the sundry degrees of goodness,
the kinds of divine approbation are in like sort multiplied. Some things are
good, yet in so mean a degree of goodness, that men are only nor disproued
nor disalowed of God for them. No man hates his own flesh. If ye do good
unto them that do so to you, the very Publicans themselves do as much. They
are worse then Infidels that have no care to provide for their own. Ephesians.
5.29. Matthew. 5.46. 1. Tim. 5.8.
In actions of this sort, the very light of nature alone may discover that
which is so far forth in the sight of God allowable. Some things in such
sort are allowed, that they be also required as necessary unto salvation, by
way of direct immediate and proper necessity final; so that without
performance of them we cannot by ordinary course be saved, not by any means be
excluded from life observing them. In actions of this kind, our chiefest
direction is from scripture, for nature is no sufficient teacher what we should
do that we may attain unto life everlasting. The insufficiency of the light
of nature, is by the light of scripture so fully and so perfectly herein
supplied, that further light then this has added there does not need unto
that end. Finally some things although not so required of necessity, that to
leave them undone excludes from salvation, are notwithstanding of so great
dignity and acceptance with God, that most ample reward in heaven is laid
up for them. Hereof we have no commandment either in nature or scripture which
does exact them at our hands: Matthew. 10.42.
yet those motives there are in both, which draw most effectually our minds
unto them. In this kind there is not the least action but it does somewhat make
to the accessory augmentation of our bliss. For which cause our Savior does
plainly witness, that there shall not be as much as a cup of cold water
bestowed for his sake without reward. Hereupon depends whatsoever difference
there is between the states of Saints in glory: hither we refer whatsoever
belongs unto the highest perfection of man by way of service toward God:
Act. 4.31. 1. These. 2.7.9.
hereunto that feruor and first love of Christians did bend it self, causing
them to sell their possessions, and lay down the price at the blessed Apostles
feet: hereat S. Paul undoubtedly did a^me, in so far abridging his own
liberty, and exceeding that which the bond of necessary and enjoined duty
tied him unto. Wherefore seeing that in all these several kinds of actions,
there can be nothing possibly evil which God approves; and that he approves
much more then he does command; and that his very commandments in some kind,
as namely his precepts comprehended in the law of nature, may be otherwise
known then only by scripture; and that to do them, howsoever we know them,
must needs* be acceptable in his sight* let them with whom we have hitherto
disputed consider well, how it can stand with reason to make the bare ma^date of
sacred scripture the only rule of all good and evil in the actions of mortal
men. The testimonies of God are true, the testimonies of God are perfect, the
testimonies of God are all sufficient unto that end for which they were given.
Therefore accordingly we do receive them; we do not think that in the^ God has
omitted any thing needful unto his purpose, and left his intent to be
accomplished by our diuisings. What the scripture purposes, the same in all
points it does perform. Howbeit, that here we swerue not in judgment, one
thing especially we must observe, namely that the absolute perfection of
scripture is seen by relation unto that end whereto it tends. And even hereby
it comes to pass, that first such as imagine the general and maine drift of
the body of sacred scripture not to be so large as it is* nor that God did
thereby intend to deliver, as in truth he does, a full instruction in all things
unto salvation necessary, the knowledge whereof man by nature could not
otherwise in this life attain unto: they are by this very mean induced, either
still to look for new revelations from heaven, or else daungerously to ad to
the word of God uncertain tradition, that so the doctrine of man's salvation
may be complete, which doctrine we constantly hold in all respects without
any such thing added to be so co^pleat, that we utterly refuse as much as once
to acquaint our selves with any thing further. Whatsoever to make up the
doctrine of man's salvation is added, as in supply of the scriptures
insufficiency, we reiec^ it. Scripture purposing this, has perfectly and
fully done it. Again the scope and purpose of God in delivering the holy
scripture, such as do take more largely the^ behooves, they on the contrary
side racking and stretching it further the^ by him was meant, are drawn into
sundry as great inco^ueniences. These prete^ding the scriptures perfection,
infer thereupon, that in scripture all things lawful to be done must needs be
contained. We count those things perfect which want nothing requisite for the
end whereto they were instituted. As therefore God created every part and
particle of man exactly perfect, that is to say* in all points sufficient unto
that use for which he appointed it; so the scripture, yea every sentence
thereof is perfect, and wants nothing requisite unto that purpose for which
God delivered the same. So that if hereupon we conclude, that because the
scripture is perfect, therefore all things lawful to be done are comprehended in
the scripture* we may even as well conclude so of every sentence, as of the
whole sum and body thereof, unless we first of all prove that it was the drift,
T. C. l. 2. p. 6. Where this doctrine is accused of bringing men to despair,
it has wrong. For when doubting it the way to despair, against which this
doctrine offers the remedy; it must needs be that it brings comfort and
^^y to the conscienc^ of man.
scope and purpose of almighty God in holy scripture, to comprise all things
which man may practice. But admit this, and mark* I beseech you, what would
follow* God in delivering scripture to his Church, should clean have abrogated
amongst them the law of nature; which is an infallible knowledge imprinted in
the minds of all the children of men, whereby both general principles f^^
directing of humane actions are comprehended, and conclusions derived from
them; upon which conclusions grows in particularitie the choice of good and
evil in the daily affairs of this life. Admit this; and what shall the
scripture be but a snare and a torment to weak consciences, filling the^ with
infinite perplexities, scrupulosities, doubts insoluble, and extreme
despaires? Not that the scripture it self does cause any such thing, (for it
tends to the clean contrary, and the fruit thereof is resolute assurance
and certainty in that it teaches:) but the necessities of this life urging
men to do that which the light of nature, common discretion and judgment of
it self directs them unto* on the other side this doctrine teaching them
that so to do were to sin against their own souls, and that they put forth
their hands to iniquity, whatsoever they go about and have not first the
sacred scripture of God for direction; how can it choose but bring the simple a
thousand times to their wits end; how can it choose but vex and amaze them?
For in every action of common life to find out some sentence clearly and
infallibly setting before our eyes what we ought to do, (seem we in
scripture never so expert) would trouble us more then we are aware. In weak
and tender minds we little know what misery this strict opinion would
breed, besides the stoppes it would make in the whole course of all men's lives
and actions. Make all things sin which we do by direction of natures light,
and by the rule of common discretion without thinking at all upon scripture;
admit this position, and parents shall cause their children to sin, as often as
they cause them to do any thing, before they come to years of capacity and be
ripe for knowledge in the scripture. Admit this, and it shall not be with
masters, as it was with him in the Gospel; but servants being commanded to
go shall stand still, till they have their errand warranted unto them by
scripture. Which as it stands with Christian duty in some cases, so in
common affairs to require it, Due. 7.8.
were most unfit. Two opinions therefore there are concerning sufficiency of
holy scripture, each extremely opposite unto the other, and both repugnant
unto truth. The schools of Rome teach scripture to be so insufficient, as if,
except traditions were added, it did not contain all revealed and
supernatural truth, which absolutely is necessary for the children of men in
this life to know that they may in the next be saved. Others justly condemning
this opinion, grow likewise unto a dangerous extremity, as if scripture did
not only contain all things in that kind necessary, but all things simply,
and in such sort that to do any thing according to any other law, were not
only unnecessary, but even opposite unto salvation, unlawful and sinful.
Whatsoever is spoken of God, or things appertaining to God, otherwise then as
the truth is; though it seem an honor, it is an injury. And as incredible
praises given unto men, do often abate and impair the credit of their
deserved commendation; so we must likewise take great heed, least in
attributing unto scripture more then it can have, the incredibilitie of that do
cause even those things which indeed it has most abundantly, to be less
reuerendly esteemed. I therefore leave it to themselves to consider, whether
they have in this first point or not ouershot themselves; which God does know
is quickly done, even when our meaning is most sincere, as I am verily
persuaded theirs in this case was.

The third Book: Concerning their second assertion, that in Scripture there
must be of necessity contained a form of Church-politie, the laws whereof
may in no wise be altered.
The matter contained in this third Book.
1 What the Church is, and in what respect laws of polity are thereunto
necessarily required. 2 Whether it be necessary that some particular form of
Church-politie be set down in scripture, since the things that belong
particularly to any such form are not of necessity to salvation. 3 That
matters of Church-politie are different from matters of faith and salvation,
and that they themselves so teach which are our reprouers for so teaching. 4
That hereby we take not from Scripture any thing which thereunto with
soundness of truth may be given. 5 Their meaning who first urged against the
polity of the Church of England, that nothing ought to be established in the
Church more then is commanded by the word of God. 6 How great injury men by
so thinking should offer unto all the Churches of God. 7 A shift
notwithstanding to maintain it, by interpreting Commanded as though it were
meant that greater things only ought to be found set down in Scripture
particularly and lesser framed by the general rules of Scripture. 8 An other
devise to defend the same, by expounding Commanded as if it did signify
grounded on Scripture, and were opposed to things found out by light of
natural reason only. 9 How laws for the polity of the Church may be made by
the advice of men, and how those laws being not repugnant to the word of God
are approved in his sight. 10 That neither Gods being the author of laws, nor
yet his committing of them to Scripture, is any reason sufficient to prove that
they admit no addition or change. 11 Whether Christ must needs intend laws
unchangeable altogether, or have forbidden any where to make any other law then
himself did deliver.
ALbeit the substance of those controversies whereinto we have begun to wade,
What the Church is, and in what respect laws of polity are thereunto
necessarily required.
be rather of outward things appertaining to the Church of Christ, then of any
thing wherein the nature and being of the Church consists* yet because the
subject or matter which this position concerns, is A form of
Church-gouernment or Church-politie; it therefore behooves us so far forth to
consider the nature of the Church; as is requisite for men's more clear and
plain understanding, in what respect laws of polity or government are
necessary thereunto. That Church of Christ which we properly term his body
mystical, can be but one; neither can that one be sensibly discerned by any
man, in as much as the parts thereof are some in heaven already with Christ,
and the rest that are on earth (albeit their natural persons be visible) we do
not discern under this property whereby they are truly and infallibly of that
body. Only our minds by intellectual conceit are able to apprehend, that
such a real body there is, a body collectiue, because it contains an huge
multitude; a body mistical, because the mystery of their conjunction is
removed altogether from sense. Whatsoever we read in scripture concerning the
endless love and the saving mercy, which God shows toward his Church; the
only proper subject thereof is this Church. Concerning this flock it is that
our Lord and Savior has promised, I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, Ioh. 10.28.
neither shall any pluck them out of my hands. They who are of this society,
have such marks and notes of distinction from all others, as are not object
unto our sense; only unto God, who sees their hearts and understands all
their secret cogitations, unto him they are clear and manifest. All men knew
Nathaniel to be an Israelite. But our Savior pearcing deeper, gives further
testimony of him then men could have done with such certainty as he did,
Behold indeed an Israelite in whom is no guile. Ioh. 1.47. Ioh. 21.15.
If we profess as Peter did, that we love the Lord, and profess it in the
hearing of men; charity is prone to believe all things, and therefore
charitable men are likely to think we do so, as long as they see no proof to
the contrary. 1. Tim. ^.5.
But that our love is sound and sincere, that it comes from a Pure heart and
a good conscience and a faith unfeigned, who can pronounce, saving only the
searcher of all men's hearts, who alone intuitiuely does know in this kind who
are his? And as those everlasting promises of love, mercy, and blessedness,
belong to the mystical church; even so on the other side when we read of any
duty which the Church of God is bound unto, the Church whom this does concern
is a sensibly known company. And this visible Church in like sort is but one,
continued from the first beginning of the world to the last end. Which company
being divided into two moieties; the one before, the other since the coming of
Christ: that part which since the coming of Christ, partly has embraced, and
partly shall hereafter embrace the Christian Religion, we term as by a more
proper name the Church of Christ. And therefore the Apostle affirms plainly
of all men Christian, that be they Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, they are al
incorporated into one company, they al make but Ephesians. 2.16. that he might
reconcile both unto God in one body. Ephesians. 3.16. that the Gentiles should be
inheritors also and of the same body. Vide Th. p. 3. q. 7. ar. 3.
one body. The unity of which visible body and Church of Christ, 1* Cor. 12.13.
consists in that uniformity, which all several persons thereunto belonging
have, by reason of that One Lord, whose servants they all profess themselves;
that one faith, which they al acknowledge; Ephesians. 4.5.
that one baptism, wherewith they are all initiated. The visible Church of
Jesus Christ is therefore one, in outward profession of those things, which
supernaturally appertain to the very essence of Christianity, and are
necessarily required in every particular christian man. Let all the house of
Israel know for certainty, says Peter, Act. 2.36. Ioh. 13.13.
That God has made him both Lord and Christ, even this Jesus whom ye have
crucified. Christians therefore they are not, which call not him their Master and
Lord. Col. 3.24. Col. 4.1.
And from hence it came, that first at Antioch, and afterward throughout the
whole world, all that were of the Church visible were called Christians, even
amongst the Heathen: which name unto them was precious and glorious; but in the
estimation of the rest of the world, even Christ Jesus himself was 1. Cor.
1.23. Vide and Tacitum lib. Annal. 15. Nero quaesitiss^mis poenis affecit quos
per flagitia inuisos vulgus Christianos appellabat, Auctor nominis eius
Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante per procuratotem Pontium Pilatum supplicio
affectus erat. Repressaque in present exitiabilis superstitio rursus etumpebat,
non modo per Iudaeam, originem eius mali, sed per vrbem etiam. quo cuncta
vndique atrocia aut pudenda confluunt celebranturque.
execrable, for whose sake all men were so likewise which did acknowledge him
to be their Lord. This himself did foresee, and therefore armed his Church,
to the end they might sustain it without discomfort. All these things they
will do unto you for my names sake; yea, the time shall come, that whosoever
kills you will think that he does God good service. These things I tell
you, that when the hour shall come, ye may then call to mind how I told you
before hand of them. But our naming of Jesus Christ the Lord, Ioh. 15.21. Ioh.
16.2.4.
is not enough to prove us Christians, unless we also embrace that faith, which
Christ has published unto the world. To show that the angel of Pergamus
continued in Christianity, behold, how the spirit of Christ speaks, Thou
keep my name, Apoc. 2.13. Tertul. de. virgin. veland.
and thou have not denied my faith. Concerning which faith, The rule thereof
says Tertullian is one alone, immovable, and no way possible to be better
framed a new. What rule that is he shows by rehearsing those few articles
of Christian belief. And before Tertullian, Ireney; Iren. aduers. haer. lib.
1. cap. 2. and 3.
The Church though scattered through the whole world unto the utmost borders of
the earth, has from the Apostles and their disciples received belief. The
parts of which belief he also recites in substance the very same with
Tertullian, and thereupon infers; This faith the Church being spread far
and wide preserves, as if one house did contain them; these things it
equally embraces, as though it had even one soul, one heart, and no more; it
publishes, teaches and delivers these things with uniform consent, as if
God had given it but one only tongue wherewith to speak. He which amongst
the guides of the Church is best able to speak, utters no more then this;
and less then this the most simple does not utter, when they make profession
of their faith. Now although we know the Christian faith and allow of it, yet
in this respect we are but entering; entered we are not into the visible
Church, before our admittance by the door of baptism. Wherefore immediately
upon the acknowledgement of christian faith, Act. 8.38. Act. 22.16.
the Eunuch (we see) was baptized by Philip; Paul by Ananias; Act. 2.41.
by Peter an huge multitude containing three thousand souls, which being once
baptized, were reckoned in the number of souls added to the visible Church. As
for those virtues that belong unto moral righteousness and honesty of life,
we do not mention them, because they are not proper unto Christian men, as
they are Christian, but do concern them, as they are men. True it is, the
want of these virtues excludes from salvation. So does much more the absence
of inward belief of heart; so does despair and lack of hope; so emptines of
Christian love and charity. But we speak now of the visible Church, whose
children are signed with this mark, One Lord, one faith, one baptism. In
whomsoever these things are, the church does acknowledge them for her
children; them only she holds for aliens and strangers, in whom these things
are not found. For want of these it is that Saracens, Jews, and Infidels, are
excluded out of the bounds of the church. Others we may not deny to be of the
visible church, as long as these things are not wanting in them. For apparent
it is, that all men are of necessity either Christians or not Christians. If
by external profession they be Christians, then are they of the visible Church
of Christ: And Christians by external profession they are all, whose mark of
recognisance has in it those things which we have mentioned, yea although
they be impious idolaters, wicked heretics, persons excommunicable, yea and
cast out for notorious improbitie. Such withal we deny not to be the imps and
limbs of Satan, even as long as they continue such. Is it then possible that
the self same men should belong both to the synagogue of Satan, and to the
Church of Jesus Christ? Unto that Church which is his mystical body, not
possible; because that body consists of none but only true Israelites, true
sons of Abraham, true servants and Saints of God. Howbeit of the visible
body and Church of Jesus Christ, those may be and oftentimes are, in respect of
the maine parts of their outward profession; who in regard of their inward
disposition of mind, yea of external conversation, yea even of some parts of
their very profession, are most worthily both hateful in the sight of God
himself, and in the eyes of the sounder parts of the visible Church most
execrable. Matthew. 13.47.
Our Savior therefore compares the kingdom of Heaven to a net, Math. 13.^4.
whereunto all which comes, neither is nor seems fish; his Church he
compares unto a field, where tares manifestly known and seen by all men do
grow intermingled with good corn, and even so shall continue till the final
consummation of the world. God has had ever, and ever shall have, some church
visible upon earth. When the people of God worshipped the calfe in the
wilderness; Exodus 32.
when they adored the brazen serpent; Psalm. 106.19.20.
when they served the Gods of nations; when they bowed their knees to Baal; 2.
King. 18.4.
when they burnt incense and offered sacrifice unto Idols; Ier. 11.13.
true it is, the wrath of God was most fiercely inflamed against them, 2. King.
22.17.
their Prophets justly condemned them, as an adulterous seed and a wicked
generation of miscreantes, Esa. 57.3.
which had forsaken the living God, Esa. 1.4. Esa 60.15.
and of him were likewise forsaken, in respect of that singular mercy
wherewith he kindly and lovingly embraces his faithful children. Howbeit
reteining the law of God, Ier. 13.11.
and the holy seal of his covenant, the sheep of his visible flock they
continued even in the depth of their disobedience and rebellion. ^. King. 19.18.
Wherefore not only amongst them God always had his church, because he had
thousands which never bowed their knees to Baal; but whose knees were bowed
unto Baall, even they were also of the visible church of God. Nor did the
Prophet so complain, as if that church had been quite and clean extinguished;
but he took it as though there had not been remaining in the world any
besides himself, that carried a true and an upright heart toward God, with
care to serve him according unto his holy will. For lack of diligent observing
the difference, first between the Church of God mystical and visible, then
between the visible sound and corrupted, sometimes more, sometimes less; the
ouersightes are neither few nor light that have been committed. This
deceives them, and nothing else, who think that in the time of the first
world, the family of Noah did contain all that were of the visible Church of
God. From hence it grew and from no other cause in the world, that the
Affricane Bishopes in the Council of Carthage, knowing how the administration
of Baptism belongs only to the Church of Christ, and supposing that
heretics which were apparently severed from the sound believing Church could
not possibly be of the Church of Jesus Christ; thought it utterly against
reason, that baptism administered by men of corrupt belief, should be
accounted as a Sacrament* And therefore in maintenance of rebaptization their
arguments are built upon the forealeaged ground, Fortunat. in Council. Car.
Math. 7.24.
That heretics are not at all any part of the Church of Christ. Our Savior
founded his Church on a rock, and not upon heresy; power of baptizing he gave
to his Apostles, Math. 16.1^.
unto heretics he gave it not. Wherefore they that are without the Church,
Math. 28.19.
and oppose themselves against Christ, do but scatter his sheep and flock;
without the Church baptize they cannot. Again, Are heretics Christians, or
are they not? If they be Christians, Secundinus in eodem conci.
wherefore remain they not in Gods Church? If they be no Christians, how make
they Christians? Or to what purpose shall those words of the Lord serve, He
which is not with me, Math. 12.30.
is against me; and, He which gathers not with me* scatters? Wherefore
evident it is, that upon misbegotten children and the brood of Antichrist,
without rebaptization the holy Ghost cannot descend. But none in this case so
earnest as Cyprian; I know no baptizme but one, and that in the Church only;
none without the Church, where he that does cast out the Devil, has the
Devil; he does examine about belief, whose lips and words do breath forth a
canker; the faithless does offer the articles of faith* a wicked creature
forgiueth wickedness, in the name of Christ Antichrist signeth, he which is
cursed of God blesses, a dead carrion promises life, a man unpeaceable gives
peace, a blasphemer calls upon the name of God, a profane person does
exercise priesthood, a sacrilegious wretch does prepare the Altar, and in the
neck of all these that evil also comes, the Eucharist a very Bishop of the
Devil does presume to consecrate. All this was true, but not sufficient to
prove that heretics were in no sort any part of the visible Church of
Christ, and consequently their baptism no baptism. This opinion therefore was
afterward both condemned by a better advised council, In Concilio Niceno vide
Hierony. dial. aduers. Luciferia.
and also revoked by the chiefest of the authors thereof themselves. What is it
but only the self same error and misconceite, wherewith others being at this
day likewise possessed, they ask us where our Church did lurk, in what cave of
the earth it slept, for so many hundreds of years together before the birth of
Martin Luther* As if we were of opinion that Luther did erect a new Church of
Christ. No the Church of Christ which was from the beginning, is, and
continues unto the end. Of which Church all parts have not been always
equally sincere and sound. In the days of Abia it plainly appears that Judah
was by many degrees* more free from pollution then Israel, as that solemn
oration shows wherein he pleads for the one against the other in this wise:
2. Chron. 1^.
O Jeroboam and all Israel hear you me* Have ye not driven away the Priests
of the Lord, the sons of Aaron and the Leuits, and have made you Priests like
the people of nations? whosoever comes to consecrate with a young bullock
and seven Rams, the same may be a Priest of them that are no Gods. But we
belong unto the Lord our God, and have not forsaken him; and the Priests the
sons of Aaron minister unto the Lord every morning and every evening burnt
offerings and sweet incense, and the bread is set in order upon the pure
table, and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof to burn every
evening; for we keep the watch of the Lord our God, but ye have forsaken him.
In Saint Paul's time the integrity of Rome was famous; Corinth many ways
reproved, they of Galatia much more out of square. In Saint John's time Ephesus
and Smyrna in far better state then Thyatira and Pergamus were. We hope
therefore that to reform our selves, if at any time we have done amiss, is
not to sever our selves from the Church we were of before. In the Church we
were, and we are so still. Other difference between our estate before and now,
we know none but only such as we see in Judah, which having some time been
idolatrous, became afterward more soundly religious by renouncing idolatry
and superstition. Hos. 4.15. and 17. Ios. 24.15.
If Ephraim be joined unto idols, the counsel of the Prophet is, Let him
alone. If Israel play the harlot, let not Judah sin. If it seem evil unto
you says Joshua to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve,
whether the Gods whom your fathers served beyond the flood, or the Gods of the
Amorites in whose land ye dwell; but I and mine house will serve the Lord. The
indisposition therefore of the Church of Rome to reform her self, must be no
stay unto us from performing our duty to God; even as desire of retaining
conformity with them, could be no excuse if we did not perform that duty.
Notwithstanding so far as lawfully we may, we have held, and do hold
fellowship with them. For even as the Apostle does say of Israel, Romans 11.28.
that they are in one respect enemies, but in another beloved of God: In like
sort with Rome we dare not communicate concerning sundry her gross and
grievous abominations; yet touching those maine parts of Christian truth
wherein they constantly still persist, we gladly acknowledge them to be of the
family of Jesus Christ; and our hearty prayer unto God almighty is, that being
conjoined so far forth with them, they may at the length, (if it be his
will) so yield to frame and reform themselves, that no distraction remain in
any thing, but that we all may with one heart and one mouth, glorify God the
father of our Lord and Savior, whose Church we are. As there are which make
the Church of Rome utterly no Church at all, by reason of so many, so grievous
errors in their doctrines: so we have them amongst us, who under pretense of
imagined corruptions in our discipline, do give even as hard a judgment of the
Church of England it self. But whatsoever either the one sort or the other
teach, we must acknowledge even heretics themselves to be though a maimed
part, yet a part of the visible Church. If an Infidel should pursue to death
an heretic professing Christianity, only for Christian profession sake:
could we deny unto him the honor of martyrdom? Yet this honor all men know to
be proper unto the Church. Heretics therefore are not utterly cut off from the
visible Church of Christ. If the fathers do any where, as oftentimes they do,
make the true visible Church of Christ and heretical companies opposite, they
are to be construed as separating heretics not altogether from the company of
believers, but from the fellowship of sound believers. For where professed
unbelief is, there can be no visible Church of Christ; there may be, where
sound belief wants. Infidels being clean without the Church, deny directly
and utterly reject the very principles of Christianity; which heretics
embrace, and err only by misconstruction; whereupon their opinions although
repugnant indeed to the principles of Christian faith, are notwithstanding by
them held otherwise, and maintained as most consonant thereunto. Wherefore being
Christians in regard of the general truth of Christ which they openly
profess; yet they are by the fathers every where spoken of, as men clean
excluded out of the right believing Church by reason of their particular
errors, for which all that are of a sound belief must needs condemn them. In
this consideration the answer of Calvin unto Farell concerning the children
of Popish parents does seem crased; Whereas says he, you ask our judgment
about a matter, Call. Epist. 149.
whereof there is doubt amongst you, whether ministers of our order professing
the pure doctrine of the Gospel, may lawfully admit unto baptism an infant
whose father is a stranger unto our Churches, and whose mother has fallen from
us unto the papacy, so that both the parents are popish; thus we have thought
good to answer, namely that it is an absurd thing for us to baptize them,
which cannot be reckoned members of our body. And since Papists children are
such, we see not how it should be lawful to minister baptism unto them.
Sounder a great deal is the answer of the Ecclesiastical College of Geneua
unto Knox, who having signified unto them, that himself did not think it
lawful to baptize bastards or the children of idolaters (he means Papists)
or of parsons excommunicate, till either the parents had by repentance
submitted themselves unto the Church, or else their children being grown unto
the years of understanding should come and sue for their own baptism: For
thus thinking says he, I am thought to be over severe, Epist. 283.
and that not only by them which are Popish, but even in their judgments also
who think themselves maintainers of the truth. Master Knoxes ouer-sight
herein they controlled. Their sentence was, Epist. 285.
wheresoever the profession of Christianity has not utterly perished and been
exstinct, infants are beguiled of their right, if the common seal be denied
them. Which conclusion in it self is sound, although it seems the ground is
but weak whereupon they build it. For the reason which they yield of their
sentence is this; The promise which God does make to the faithful concerning
their seed, reaches unto a thousand generations; it rests not only in the
first degree of descent. Infants therefore whose great graund fathers have been
holy and godly, do in that respect belong to the body of the Church, although
the fathers and graundfathers of whom they descend have been Apostates: Because
the tenure of the grace of God which did adopt them three hundred years*agoe
and more in their ancient predecessors, cannot with justice be defeated and
broken off by their parents imp^etie coming between. By which reason of
theirs, although it seem that all the world may be baptized, in as much as no
man living is a thousand descents removed from Adam himself; yet we mean not
at this time either to uphold or to overthrow it: only their alleged
conclusion we embrace, so it be construed in this sort, That for as much as men
remain in the visible Church, till they utterly renounce the profession of
Christianity; we may not deny unto infants their right by withholding from them
the public sign of holy baptism, if they be borne where the outward
acknowledgement of Christianity is not clean gone and extinguished. For being
in such sort borne, their parents are within the Church, and therefore their
birth does give them interest and right in baptism. Albeit not every error
and fault, yet heresies and crimes which are not actually repented of and
forsaken, exclude quite and clean from that salvation, which belongs unto
the mystical body of Christ; yea they also make a separation from the visible
sound Church of Christ; altogether from the visible Church neither the one nor
the other does sever. As for the act of excommunication, it neither shuts
out from the mystical, nor clean from the visible, but only from fellowship
with the visible in holy duties. With what congruity then does the Church of
Rome deny, that her enemies, whom she holds always for heretics, do at all
appertain to the Church of Christ; when her own do freely grant, that albeit
the Pope (as they say) cannot teach heresy nor propound error, he may
notwithstanding himself worship idols, think amiss concerning matters of
faith, yea give himself unto acts diabolical, even being Pope? How exclude
they us from being any part of the Church of Christ under the color and
pretense of heresy, when they cannot but grant it possible even for him to be
as touching his own personal persuasion heretical, who in their opinion not
only is of the Church, but holds the chiefest place of authority over the
same? But of these things we are not now to dispute. That which already we have
set down, is for our present purpose sufficient. By the Church therefore in
this question we understand no other then only the visible Church. For
preservation of Christianity there is not any thing more needful, then that
such as are of the visible Church, have mutual fellowship and society one
with another. In which consideration, as the maine body of the sea being one,
yet within diverse precincts has diverse names; so the Catholic Church is in
like sort divided into a number of distinct societies, every of which is termed
a Church within it self. In this sense the Church is always a visible society
of men; not an assembly, but a society. For although the name of the Church be
given unto Christian assemblies, although any multitude of Christian men
co^gregated may be termed by the name of a Church; yet assemblies properly are
rather things that belong to a Church. Men are assembled for performance of
public actions; which actions being ended, the assembly dissolueth it self
and is no longer in being; whereas the Church which was assembled, does no less
continue afterward then before. Tertul. exhort. ad castit, vbi tre^, Ecclesia
est, licet laici.
Where but three are, and they of the laity also, says Tertullian, yet there
is a Church, that is to say, a Christian assembly. But a Church, as now we are
to understand it, is a society, that is a number of men belonging unto some
Christian fellowship, the place and limits whereof are certain. That wherein
they have communion, is the public exercise of such duties as those mentioned
in the Apostles acts, Act. 2.47.
Instruction, Breaking of bread, and Prayers. As therefore they that are of the
mystical body of Christ, have those inward graces and virtues, whereby they
differ from all others which are not of the same body; again whosoever
appertain to the visible body of the Church, they have also the notes of
external profession, whereby the world knows what they are: after the same
manner even the several societies of Christian men, unto every of which the
name of a Church is given with addition betokening severally, as the Church of
Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, England, and so the rest, must be endued with
correspondent general properties belonging unto them, as they are public
Christian societies. And of such properties common unto all societies
Christian, it may not be denied, that one of the very chiefest is
Ecclesiastical Polity. Which word I therefore the rather use, because the
name of government as commonly men understand it in ordinary speech, does not
comprise the largenes of that whereunto in this question it is applied. For
when we speak of government, what does the greatest part conceive thereby, but
only the exercise of superiority peculiar unto rulers and guides of others? To
our purpose therefore the name of Church-politie will better serve, because it
contains both government, and also whatsoever* besides belongs to the
ordering of the Church in public. Neither is any thing in this degree more
necessary then Church polity, which is a form of ordering the public
spiritual affairs of the Church of God.

2 But we must note, Whether it be necessary that some particular form of
Church-poli^y be set down in Scripture^ since the things that belong
particularly unto any such form, are not of necessity to salvation* Tertul.
^^ ha^^bitu mul. Aemuli sint necesse est, quae Dei non sunt.
that he which affirms speech to be necessary amongst all men throughout
the world, does not thereby import that all men must necessarily speak one
kind of language. Even so the necessity of polity and regiment in all
Churches may be held, without holding any one certain form to be necessary
in them all. Nor is it possible that any form of polity, much less of
polity Ecclesiastical, should be good, unless* God himself be author of
it. Those things that are not of God (says Tertullian) they can have no other
then Gods adversary for their author. Be it whatsoever in the Church of God,
if it be not of God, we hate it. Of God it must be, either as those things
sometime were, which God supernaturally revealed and so delivered them unto
Moses for government of the common wealth of Israel; or else as those things
which men find out by help of that light, which God has given them unto that
end. The very law of nature it self, which no man can deny but God has
instituted, is not of God, unless that be of God, Romans 2.15. Lactan. lib. 6.
ca. 8. Ille legi^ huius inuentor, disceptator, lator* Cic. T ^* de (...)
whereof God is the author as well this later way as the former. But for as
much as no form of Church-politie is thought by them to be lawful, or to be
of God, unless God be so the author of it, that it be also set down in
Scripture; they should tell us plainly, whether their meaning be, that it must
be there set down in whole or in part. For if wholly, let them show what one
form of polity ever was so. Their own to be so taken out of Scripture they
will not affirm; neither deny they that in part, even this which they so much
oppugn is also from thence taken. Again they should tell us, whether only
that be taken out of Sripture, which is actually and particularly there set
down; or else that also, which the general principles and rules of Scripture
potentially contain. The one way they cannot as much as pretend, that all the
parts of their own discipline are in scripture; and the other way their
mouths are stopped, when they would plead against all other forms besides
their own; seeing the general principles are such* as do not particularly
prescribe any one, but sundry may equally be consonant unto the general
axioms of the Scripture. But to give them some larger scope, and not to close
them up in these streights* let their allegations be considered, wherewith
they earnestly bend themselves against all, which deny it necessary that any
one complete form of Church*politie should be in Scripture. First therefore
whereas it has been told them, that matters of faith, and in general matters
necessary unto salvation, Two things misliked, the one, that we distinguish
matters of discipline or Church-gouern^^nt from matters of faith and necessary
unto salvation ^ the other, that we are injurious to the Scripture of God?
(...) abridging the large and rich content^ thereof. Their words are these: You
which distinguish between these, and say that matter of faith and necessary
unto salvation may not be tolera^^ in the Church, unless they be expressly
contained in the word of God, or manifestly gathered; but that ceremonies,
order, d^scipline, government in the Church, may not be received against the
word of God, and consequently may be received, if there be no word against
them, although there be none for them; you (I say) distinguishing or dividing
after this sort, do prove your self an evil diuider. Although matters of
discipline and kind of government were not matters necessary to salvation and
of faith. It is no small injury which you do unto the word of God to pin it in
so narrow room, as that it should be able to dir^ct (...) in the principal
points of our religion, or as though the substance of religion or some rude and
unfashioned matter of building of the Church were v^tered in them* and th^^e
things were left out that should pertain to the form and fashion of it, or as
if there were in the scriptures only to cover the Churches nakedness and not
also cha^nes* and bracelets, and rings, and other jewels to adorn her and set
her out* or that to conclude, these were sufficient to quench her thirst and
kill her hunger, but not to minister unto her a more liberal, and (as it were)
a more delitious and dainty dies. Those things you seem to say, when you say
that matters necessary to salvation and of faith are contained in scripture*
especially when you oppose these things to ceremonies, order, discipline, and
government. T. C. lib. 1 p. 16.
are of a different nature from Ceremonies, order, and the kind of Church
government* that the one are necessary to be expressly contained in the
word of God, or else manifestly collected out of the same, the other not so;
that is necessary not to receive the one* unless there be some thing in
Scripture for them, the other free, if nothing against them may thence be
alleged: although there do not appear any just or reasonable cause to reject
or dislike of this, nevertheless as it is not easy to speak to the
contentation of minds exulcerated in themselves, but that somewhat there will
be always which displeases, so herein for two things we are reproved; the
first is misdistinguishing, because matters of discipline and
Church*gouernement are (as they say) matters necessary to salvation and of
faith, whereas we put a difference between the one and the other; our second
fault is injurious dealing with the Scripture of God, as if it contained only
the principal points of religion, some rude and unfashioned matter of building
the Church, but had left out that which belongs unto the form and fashion of
it; as if there were in the Scripture no more then only to cover the Churches
nakedness, and not chains, bracelets, rings, jewels to adorn her; sufficient
to quench her thirst, to kill her hunger, but not to minister a more liberal
and (as it were) a more delitious and dainty diet. In which case our apology
shall not need to be very long.

That matters of discipline are different from matters of faith and salvation,
and that they them selves so teach which are our reproouers.
3 The mixture of those things by speech, which by nature are divided, is the
mother of all error. To take away therefore that error which confusion breeds
distinction is requisite. Rightly to distinguish is by conceit of mind to
sever things different in nature, and to discern wherein they differ. So that
if we imagine a difference where there is none, because we distinguish where
we should not, it may not be denied that we misdistinguish. The only trial
whether we do so, yea or no, depends upon comparison between our conceit
and the nature of things conceived. Touching matters belonging unto the Church
of Christ this we conceive, that they are not of one suit. Some things are
merely of faith, which things it does suffice that we know and believe: some
things not only to be known, but done, because they concern the actions of
men. Articles about the Trinity are matters of mere faith, and must be
believed. Precepts concerning the works of charity, are matters of action,
which to know, unless they be practiced, is not enough. This being so
clear to all men's understanding, I somewhat marvel that they especially
should think it absurd to oppose Church-gouernement a plain matter of action
unto matters of faith, T. C. lib. 2. page 1. We offer to show the discipline
to be a part of the Gospel. And again page 5. ^ speak of the discipline as
of a part of the Gospel. If the discipline be one part of the Gospel, what
other part can they assign but doctrine, to answer in division to the
discipline?
who know that themselves divide the Gospel into Doctrine and Discipline. For
if matters of discipline be rightly by them distinguished from matters of
doctrine, why not matters of government by (...) as reasonably set against
matters of faith? Do not they under doctrine comprehend the same which we
intend by matters of faith? Do not they under discipline comprise the regiment
of the Church? When they blame that in us, which themselves follow, they give
men great cause to doubt that some other thing then judgment does guide their
speech. What the Church of God stands bound to know or do, the same in part
nature teaches. And because nature can teach them but only in part, neither
so fully, as is requisite for man's salvation; nor so easily, as to make the way
plain and expedite enough, that many may come to the knowledge of it and so be
saved; therefore in Scripture has God both collected the most necessary
things, that the School of nature teaches unto that end; and reuealeth also
whatsoever we neither could with safety be ignorant of, nor at all be
instructed in but by supernatural revelation from him. So that Scripture
containing all things that are in this kind any way needful for the Church,
and the principal of the other sort, this is the next thing wherewith we are
charged as with an error: we teach that whatsoever is unto salvation termed
necessary by way of excellency, whatsoever it stands all men upon to know
or do that they may be saved, whatsoever there is whereof it may truly be
said, This not to believe is eternal death and damnation, or, This every soul
that will live must duly observe, of which sort the Articles of Christian
faith, and the Sacraments of the Church of Christ are; all such things if
Scripture did not comprehend, the Church of God should not be able to measure
out the length and the breadth of that way wherein for ever she is to walk.
Heretics and Schismatiques never ceasing, some to abridge, some to enlarge,
all to pervert and obscure the same. But as for those things that are
accessorie hereunto, those things that so belong to the way of salvation, as to
alter them is no otherwise to change that way, then a path is changed by
altering only the uppermost face thereof, which be it laid with gravel, or
set with grass, or paued with stone, remains still the same path; in such
things because discretion may teach the Church what is convenient, we hold not
the Church further tied herein unto Scripture, then that against Scripture
nothing be admitted in the Church, least that path which ought always to be
kept even, do thereby come to be ouer-growne with brambles and thorns. If this
be unsound, wherein does the point of unsoundness lie? It is not that we make
some things necessary, some things accessorie and appendent only. Matthew.
23.23.
For our Lord and Savior himself does make that difference, by termin^
judgment, and mercy, and fidelity, with other things of like nature, the
greater and waightier matters of the law. Is it then in that we account
Ceremonies (wherein we do not comprise Sacraments, or any other the like
substantial duties in the exercise of Religion, but only such external rites
as are usually annexed unto Church-actions,) is it an oversight, that we reckon
these things and The government of the Church of Christ granted by Fennar
himself, to be though a matter of great moment, yet not of the substance of
religion. Against D* Bridges. page 121. if it be Fennar which was the author of
that Book.
matters of government in the number of things accessorie, not things
necessary in such sort as has been declared? Let them which therefore think
us blameable, consider well their own words. Do they not plainly compare the
one unto garments which cover the body of the Church, the other unto rings,
braslets, and jewels that only adorn it; the one to that food which the
Church does live by, the other to that which makes her diet liberal, dainty,
and more delitious? Is dainty fare a thing necessary to the sustenance, or to
the clothing of the body rich attire? If not, how can they urge the necessity
of that which themselves resemble by things not necessary? Or by what
construction shall any man living be able to make those comparisons true,
holding that distinction untrue, which puts a difference between things of
external regiment in the Church, and things necessary unto salvation?

That we do not take from Scripture any thing which may be thereunto given
with soundness of truth: Arist. pol. li. 1. cap. 8. and Plato in Menex. Arist.
lib. 3. de Anima. cap. 45.
4 Now as it can be to nature no injury, that of her we say the same which
diligent beholders of her works have observed, namely, that she provides for
all living creatures nourishment which may suffice, that she brings forth no
kind of creature whereto she is wanting in that which is needful; although we
do not so far magnify her exceeding bounty, as to affirm that she brings
into the world the sons of men adorned with gorgeous attire, or makes costly
buildings to spring up out of the earth for them: So I trust that to mention
what the Scripture of God leaves unto the Churches discretion in some things,
is not in any thing to impair the honor which the Church of God yields to
the sacred scriptures perfection. Wherein seeing that no more is by us
maintained, then only that scripture must needs teach the Church whatsoever is
in such sort necessary as has been set down; and that it is no more disgrace
for scripture to have left a number of other things free to be ordered at the
discretion of the Church, then for nature to have left it unto the wit of man
to devise his own attire, and not to look for it as the beasts of the field
have theirs: If neither this can import, nor any other proof sufficient be
brought forth, that we either will at any time or ever did affirm the sacred
Scripture to comprehend no more then only those bare necessaries; if we
acknowledge that as well for particular application to special occasions, as
also in other manifold respects infinite treasures of wisdom are over and
besides abundantly to be found in the holy Scripture; yea that scarcely there
is any noble part of knowledge, worthy the mind of man, but from thence it
may have some direction and light; yea that athough there be no necessity it
should of purpose prescribe any one particular for^^ of Church-gouernement, yet
touching the manner of governing in general, the precepts that Scripture
sets down are not few, and the examples many which it proposes for all
Church-gouernors, even in particularities to follow; yea that those things
finally which are of principal weight in the very particular form of
Church-politie, (although not that form which they imagine, but that which we
against them uphold) are in the self same Scriptures contained: if all this
be willingly granted by us, which are accused to pin the word of God in so
narrow room, as that it should be able to direct us but in principal points
of our Religion, or as though the substance of Religion or some rude and
unfashioned matter of building the Church were uttered in them, and those
things left out that should pertain to the form and fashion of it; let the
cause of the accused be referred to the accusers own conscience, and let that
judge whether this accusation be deserved where it has been laid.

5 But so easy it is for every man living to err, Their meaning who first did
plea^e against the polity of the Church of England, urging that Nothing ought
to be established in the Church, which is not commanded by the word of God:
and what scripture they thought they might ground this assertion upon.
and so hard to wrest from any man's mouth the plain acknowledgement of error,
that what has been once inconsiderately defended, the same is commonly
persisted in, as long as wit by whetting it self is able to find out any
shift, be it never so slight, whereby to escape out of the hands of present
contradiction. So that it comes here in to pass with men unadvisedly fallen
into error, as with them whose state has no ground to uphold it, but only
the help which by subtle conueyance they draw out of casual events arising
from day to day, till at length they be clean spent. They which first gave
out, that Nothing ought to be established in the Church which is not commanded
by the word of God, thought this, principle plainly warranted by the manifest
words of the law; Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I command you,
neither shall ye take ought therefrom, that ye may keep the commandments of
the Lord your God, which I command you, Wherefore having an eye to a number of
rites and orders in the Church of England, as marrying with a ring, crossing in
the one Sacrament, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and Deuteronomy. 12.32. Whatsoever I command you take
heed you do it^ thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take ough^^ therefrom.
kneeling at the other; observing of festival days more then only that which
is called the Lords day, inioyning abstinence at certain times from some
kinds of meat, churching of women after Child birth, degrees taken by divines
in Universities, sundry Church-offices, dignities, and callings, for which they
found no commandment in the holy Scripture, they thought by the one only
stroke of that axiom to have cut them off. But that which they took for an
Oracle, being sifted was repeld. True it is concerning the word of God, whether
it be by misconstruction of the sense, or by falsification of the words,
wittingly to endeavor that any thing may seem divine which is not, or any
thing not seem which is* were plainly to abuse, and even to falsify divine
evidence, which injury offered but unto men is most worthily counted ha^nous.
Which point I wish they did well observe, with whom nothing is more familiar
then to plead in these causes, The law of God, The word of the Lord: who
notwithstanding when they come to allege what word and what law they mean,
their common ordinary practice is, to quote by-speeches in some historical
narration or other, and to urge them as if they were written in most exact
form of law. What is to add to the law of God, if this be not? When that
which the word of God does but deliver historically, we conster without any
warrant as if it were legally meant, and so urge it further then we can prove
that it was intended, do we not add to the laws of God, and make them in
number seem more then they are? It stands us upon to be careful in this
case. For the sentence of God is heavy against them, that wittingly shall
presume thus to use the Scripture.

6 But let that which they do hereby intend be granted them, The same
assertion we cannot hold, without doing wrong unto all Churches.
let it once stand as consonant to reason, that because we are forbidden to
add to the law of God any thing, or to take ought from it, therefore we may
not for matters of the Church make any law more then is already set down in
Scripture: who sees not what sentence it shall enforce us to give against all
Churches in the world, in as much as there is not one, but has had many things
established in it, which though the Scripture did never command, yet for us to
condemn were rashness. Let the Church of God even in the time of our Savior
Christ serve for example unto all the rest. In their domestical celebration of
the passover, Ioh. ^3.
which supper they divided (as it were) into two courses, what Scripture did
give commandment that between the first and the second, he that was Chief
should put off the residue of his garments, Caenatorium: de* qu^ Math. 22.12.
Ibi de caenatori^ nu^tiali.
and keeping on his feast-robe only, wash the feet of them that were with
him? What Scripture did command them never to lift up their hands unwashed in
prayer unto God, which custom Aristaeus (be the credit of the author more or
less) shows wherefore they did so religiously observe? What Scripture did
command the Jews every festival day to fast till the sixth hour? The custom
both mentioned by Josephus in the history of his own life, and by the words of
Peter signified. Act. 2.
Tedious it were to rip up all such things, as were in that Church established,
yea by Christ himself and by his Apostles observed, though not commanded any
where in Scripture.

A shift to maintain that.

Nothing ought to be established in the Church, which is not commanded in the
word of God; Namely that commandments are of two sorts* and that all things
lawful in the Church are commanded, if not by special precepts, yet by
general rules in the word. 1. Cor. 10.32. 1. Cor. 14.40. 1. Cor. 14 26. Romans
14.6.7.


7 Well, yet a gloss there is to color that paradoxe, and notwithstanding all
this, still to make it appear in show not to be altogether unreasonable. And
therefore till further reply come, the cause is held by a feeble distinction;
that the commandments of God being either general or special, although there
be no express word for every thing in specialtie, yet there are general
commandments for all things, to the end that even such cases as are not in
Scripture particularly mentioned, might not be left to any to order at their
pleasure, only with caution that nothing be done against the word of God: and
that for this cause the Apostle has set down in scripture four general
rules, requiring such things alone to be received in the Church, as do best and
nearest agree with the same rules, that so all things in the Church may be
appointed, not only not against, but by and according to the word of God. The
rules are these, Nothing scandalous or offensive unto any, especially unto the
Church of God; All things in order and with seemelinesse; All unto edification;
finally All to the glory of God. Of which kind how many might be gathered out
of the Scripture, if it were necessary to take so much pains? Which rules they
that urge, minding thereby to prove that nothing may be done in the Church but
what Scripture commands, must needs hold that they tie the Church of Christ
no otherwise, then only because we find them there set down by the finger of
the holy Ghost. So that unless the Apostle by writing had delivered those
rules to the Church, we should by observing them have sinned, as now by not
observing them. T. C. l. 1. p. 35.
In the Church of the Jews is it not granted, that the appointment of the
hour for daily sacrifices; the building of Synagogues throughout the land to
hear the word of God and to pray in, when they came not up to Jerusalem; the
erecting of Pulpets and Chaires to teach in; the order of burial, the rites of
marriage, with such like, being matters appertaining to the Church, yet are not
any where prescribed in the law, but were by the Churches discretion
instituted? What then shall we think? Did they hereby add to the law, and so
displeas^ God by that which they did? None so hardly persuaded of them. Does
their law deliver unto the^ the self same general rules of the apostle, that
framing thereby their orders they might in that respect clear themselves from
doing amiss? S. Paul would then of likelihood have cited them out of the Law,
which we see he does not. The truth is, they are rules and Canons of that law,
which is written in all men hearts; the Church had for ever no less then now
stood bound to observe them, whether the Apostle had mentioned them or no.
Seeing therefore those Canons do bind as they are edicts of nature, which the
Jews observing as yet unwritten, and thereby framing such Church-orders as in
their law were not prescribed, are notwithstanding in that respect vnculpable;
it follows that sundry things may be lawfully done in the Church, so as they
be not done against the Scripture, although no Scripture do command them, but
the Church only following the light of reason, judge them to be in discretion
meet. Secondly unto our purpose and for the question in hand, whether the
commandments of God in Scripture be general or special, it skilleth not.
For if being particularly applied, they have in regard of such particulars a
force constraining us to take some one certain thing of many, and to leave the
rest, whereby it would come to pass, that any other particular but that one
being established, the general rules themselves in that case would be broken;
then is it utterly impossible that God should leave any thing great or small
free for the Church to establish or not. Thirdly if so be they shall grant, as
they cannot otherwise do, that these rules are no such laws as require any one
particular thing to be done; but serve rather to direct the Church in all
things which she does, so that free and lawful it is to devise any Ceremony,
to receive any order, and to authorize any kind of regiment, no special
commandment being thereby violated, and the same being thought such by them to
whom the judgment thereof appertains, as that it is not scandalous, but
decent, tending unto edification, and setting forth the glory of God, that is
to say agreeable unto the general rules of holy Scripture; this does them no
good in the world for the furtherance of their purpose. That which should make
for them, must prove that men ought not to make laws for Church regiment, but
only keep those laws which in Scripture they find made. The plain intent of
the book of Ecclesiastical discipline is to show, that men may not devise
laws of Church government; but are bound for ever to use and to execute only
those, which God himself has already devised and delivered in the Scripture.
The self same drift the Admonitioners also had, in urging that nothing ought
to be done in the Church according unto any law of man's devising, but all
according to that which God in his word has commanded. Which not remembering,
they gather out of Scripture general rules to be followed in making laws;
and so in effect they plainly grant, that we our selves may lawfully make
laws for the Church, and are not bound out of Scripture only to take laws
already made, as they meant who first alleged that principle whereof we
speak. One particular platform it is which they respected, and which they
labored thereby to force upon all Churches; whereas these general rules do not
let, but that there may well enough be sundry. It is the particular order
established in the Church of England, which thereby they did intend to alter,
as being not commanded of God; whereas unto those general rules they know we
do not defend that we may hold any thing uncomfortable. Obscure it is not what
meaning they had, who first gave out that graund axiom: and according unto
that meaning it does prevail far and wide with the favorers of that part.
Demand of them, wherefore they conform not themselves unto the order of our
Church, and in every particular their answer for the most part is, We find no
such thing commanded in the word. Whereby they plainly require some special
commandment for that which is exacted at their hands, neither are they
content to have matters of the Church examined by general rules and Canons. As
therefore in controversies between us and the Church of Rome, that which they
practice is many times even according to the very grosnesse of that which the
vulgar sort conceiueth; when that which they teach to maintain it is so nice
and subtle, that hold can very hardly be taken thereupon; in which cases we
should do the Church of God small benefit, by disputing with them according
unto the finest points of their dark conueyances, and suffering that sense of
their doctrine to go uncontrolled, wherein by the common sort it is ordinarily
received and practiced: So considering what disturbance has grown in the
Church amongst our selves, and how the authors thereof do commonly build
altogether on this as a sure foundation, Nothing ought to be established in the
Church which in the word of God is not commanded; were it reason that we should
suffer the same to pass without controulement, in that current meaning whereby
every where it prevails, and still till some strange construction were made
thereof, which no man would lightly have thought on but being driven thereunto
for a shift?

8 The last refuge in maintaining this position, Another answer in defense of
the former assertion, whereby the meaning thereof is opened in this sort. All
Church orders must be commanded in the word, that is to say, grounded upon the
word, and made according at the leastwise unto the general rules of holy
Scripture. As for such things as are found out by any star or light of
reason, and are in that respect received so they be not against the word of
God, all such things it holds unlawfully received.
is thus to conster it; Nothing ought to be established in the Church, but that
which is commanded in the word of God; that is to say, All Church-orders must
be grounded upon the word of God, in such sort grounded upon the word, not that
being found out by some star or light of reason, or learning, or other help,
they may be received, so they be not against the word of God; but according at
least wise unto the general rules of Scripture they must be made. Which is
in effect as much as to say, We know not what to say well in defense of this
position; and therefore least we should say it is false, there is no remedy
but to say that in some sense or other it may be true, if we could tell how.
First that Scholie had need of a very favorable Reader and a tractable, that
should think it plain construction, when to be commanded in the word and
grounded upon the word are made all one. If when a man may live in the state of
Matrimony, seeking that good thereby which nature principally desires, Arist.
polit. 1. 1. Cor. 7.
he make rather choice of a contrary life in regard of Saint Paul's judgment;
that which he does is manifestly grounded upon the word of God, yet not
commanded in his word, because without breach of any commandment he might
do otherwise. Secondly whereas no man in justice and reason can be reproved,
for those actions which are framed according unto that known will of God,
whereby they are to be judged; and the will of God which we are to judge our
actions by, no sound Divine in the world ever denied to be in part made
manifest even by light of nature and not by scripture alone; if the Church
being directed by the former of these two, (which God has given who gave the
other, that man might in different sort be guided by them both,) if the Church
I say do approve and establish that which thereby it judges meet, and finds
not repugnant to any word or syllable of holy scripture, who shall warrant our
presumptuous boldness controwling herein the Church of Christ? But so it is, the
name of the light of nature is made hateful with men; the star of Reason and
learning, and all other such like helps, begins no otherwise to be thought
of, then if it were an unlucky Comet, or as if God had so accursed it, that it
should never shine or give light in things concerning our duty any way
toward him, but be esteemed as that star in the Revelation called
wormwood, Apoc. 8.10.
which being fallen from heaven, makes rivers and waters in which it falls
so bitter, that men tasting them dye thereof. A number there are, who think
they cannot admire as they ought the power and authority of the word of God,
if in things divine they should attribute any force to man's reason. For which
cause they never use reason so willingly as to disgrace reason. Their usual
and common discourses are unto this effect. 1. Cor. 2.14.
1. The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: for they
are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Col. 2.^.
2. It is for nothing that Saint Paul gives charge to beware of Philosop^ie,
that is to say, such knowledge as men by natural reason attain unto. 3.
Consider them that have from time to time opposed themselves against the
Gospel of Christ, and most troubled the Church with Heresy. Have they not
always been great admirers of humane reason? Has their deep and profound
skill in secular learning, made them the more obedient to the truth, and not
armed them rather against it? 4. They that fear God will remember how heavy
his sentences are in this case; I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, 1. Cor.
1.19.
and will cast away the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? Where
is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Has not God made the
wisdom of this world foolishness? Seeing the world by wisdom knew not God
in the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
believers. 5. The word of God in it self is absolute, exact, and perfect. The
word of God is a two edged sword: as for the weapons of natural reason, they
are as the armor of Saul, rather cumbersome about the soldier of Christ then
needful. They are not of force to do that, which the Apostles of Christ did
by the power of the holy Ghost. My preaching, therefore says Paul, has not
been in the intising speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the
spirit and of power; 1. Cor. ^
that your faith might not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
6. If I believe the Gospel, there needs no reasoning about it to persuade
me: If I do not believe, it must be the spirit of God, and not the reason of
man, that shall convert my heart unto him. By these and the like disputes an
opinion has spread it self very far in the world, as if the way to be ripe
in faith, were to be raw in wit and judgment; as if reason were an enemy
unto religion, childish simplicity the mother of ghostly and divine wisdom.
The cause why such declamations prevail so greatly, is for that men suffer
themselves in two respects to be deluded; one is that the wisdom of man
being debased, either in comparison with that of God, or in regard of some
special thing exceeding the reach and compass thereof, it seems to them
(not marking so much) as if simply it were condemned: an other, that learning,
knowledge, or wisdom falsely so termed, usurping a name whereof they are not
worthy, and being under that name controlled, their reproof is by so much the
more easily misapplied, and through equivocation wrested against those things
whereunto so precious names do properly and of right belong. This duly observed,
does to the former allegations it self make sufficient answer. Romans 1.21.
how they knew both God, and the law of God. Other things of God there be,
verse 31.
which are neither so found, nor though they be showed, can ever be approved
without the special operation of Gods good grace and spirit. Of such things
sometime spoke the Apostle S. Paul, declaring how Christ had called him to be a
witness of his death and resurrection from the dead, according to that which
the Prophets and Moses had foreshewed. Festus a mere natural man, an
Infidel, a Roman, one whose ears were unacquainted with such matter, heard
him, but could not reach unto that whereof he spoke; the suffering and the
rising of Christ from the dead* he rejects as idle superstitious phancies not
worth the hearing. Act. 25.19.
The Apostle that knew them by the spirit, and spoke of them with power of the
holy Ghost, Act. 26.24.
seemed in his eyes but learnedly mad. Which example makes manifest what
elsewhere the same Apostle teaches, namely that nature has need of grace; 1.
Cor. 2.14.
whereunto I hope we are not opposite, by holding that grace has use of nature.
Take heed least any spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit. He that
exhorts to beware of an enemies policy, Col. 2.8.
does not give counsel to be impolitique; but rather to use all provident
foresight and circumspection, least our simplicity be ouerreacht by cunning
sleights. The way not to be inueigled by them that are so guilefull through
skill, is thoroughly to be instructed in that which makes skillful against
guile, and to be armed with that true and sincere philosophy, which does teach,
against that deceiptfull and vain, which spoileth. Cresconius the heretic
complained greatly of S. Augustine, as being too full of logical subtilties.
Heresy prevails only by a counterfeit show of reason; whereby
notwithstanding it becomes invincible, unless it be convicted of fraud by
manifest remonstrance, clearly true, and unable to be withstood. When
therefore the Apostle requires ability to convict Heretics, can we think
he judges it a thing unlawful, Tit. 1.9.11.
and not rather needful to use the principal instrument of their conviction,
the light of reason? It may not be denied but that in the Fathers writings
there are sundry sharp inuectiues against Heretics, even for their very
philosophical reasonings. The cause whereof Tertullian confesses, not to have
been any dislike conceived against the kind of such reasonings, but the end.
Tertul. de Resur. carnis.
We may (says he) even in matters of God, be made wiser by reasons drawn
from the public persuasions which are grafted in men's minds, so they be used
to further the truth, not to bo^ster error; so they make with, not against that
which God has determined. For there are some things even known by nature, as
the immortality of the soul unto many, our God unto all* I will therefore my
self also use the sentence of some such as Plato, pronouncing every soul
immortal. I my self too will use the secret acknowledgement of the
co^munaltie, bearing record of the God of Gods. But when I hear men allege,
That which is dead is dead; and, while thou art alive be alive; and, After
death an end of all even of death it self: then will I call to mind both that
the heart of the people with God is accounted dust, and that the very wisdom
of the world is pronounced folly. If then an heretic fly also unto such
vicious popular and secular conceits, my answer unto him shall be; Thou
heretic avoid the heathen; although in this ye be one, that ye both belly God;
yet thou that do this under the name of Christ, differest from the heathen,
in that thou seem to thy self a christian. Leave him therefore his conceits,
seeing that neither will he learn thine. Why do thou having sight, trust to
a blind guide, thou which have put on Christ, take raiment of him that is
naked? If the Apostle have armed thee, why do thou borrow a strangers
shield? Let him rather learn of thee to acknowledge, then thou of him to
renounce the resurrection of the flesh. In a word* the Catholic Fathers did
good unto all by that knowledge, whereby heretics hindering the truth in
many, might have furthered therewith themselves, but that obstinately following
their own ambitious or otherwise corrupted affections, in stead of framing
their wills to maintain that which reason taught, they bent their wits to
find how reason might seem to teach that which their wills were set to
maintain. For which cause the Apostle says of them justly, Tit. 3.11.
that they are for the most part (...), men condemned even in and of
themselves. For though they be not all persuaded that it is truth which they
withstand; yet that to be error which they uphold, they might undoubtedly the
sooner a great deal attain to know, but that their study is more to defend
what once they have stood in, then to find out sincerely and simply what truth
they ought to persist in for ever. Moses and Daniell were furnished; Act. 7.22.
or that natural, moral, and civil wisdom, wherein Solomon excelled all
men; Dan. 1.17. 1. King. 4.29.30
or that rational and oratoriall wisdom of the Graecians, which the Apostle
Saint Paul brought from Tarsus; or that Judicial; Act. 22.3
which he learned in Jerusalem sitting at the feet of Gamaliell; to detract
from the dignity thereof, were to injury even God himself, who being that
light which none can approach unto, has sent out these lights whereof we are
capable, eue^ as so many sparkls rese^bling the bright fou^tain from which they
rise. But there are that bear the title of wise men and Scribes, and great
disputers of the world, and are nothing indeed less then what in show they
most appear. These being wholly addicted unto their own wills, use their
wit, their learning, and all the wisdom they have, to maintain that which
their obstinate hearts are delighted with* esteeming in the phrentique error of
their minds, the greatest madness in the world to be wisdom, and the
highest wisdom foolishnes. Such were both Jews and Graecians, which professed
the one sort legal, and the other secular skill, neither enduring to be
taught the mystery of Christ: unto the glory of whose most blessed name, who so
study to use both their reason and all other gifts as well which nature as
which grace has endued the^ with* let them never doubt but that the same God,
who is to destroy and confound utterly that wisdom falsely so named in others,
does make reckoning of them as of true Scribes, Matthew. 13.52.
Scribes by wisdom instructed to the kingdom of heaven, not Scribes against
that kingdom hardened in a vain opinion of wisdom, which in the end being
proved folly, must needs perish, true understanding, knowledge, judgment and
reason, continuing for evermore. Hebr. 4.12.
but in the hands of reasonable men; and reason as the weapon that slew
Goliath, if they be as David was that use it. Touching the Apostles, he which
gave them from above such power for miraculous confirmation of that which they
taught, endued, the^ also with wisdom from above to teach that which they so
did confirm. Our Savior made choice of 12* simple and unlearned men, that the
greater their lack of natural wisdom was, the more admirable that might
appear, which God supernaturally endued the^ with from heaven. Such therefore
as knew the poor and silly estate wherein they had lived, could not but wonder
to hear the wisdom of their speech, and be so much the more attentive unto
their teaching. They studied for no tongue they spoke withal; of themselves
they were rude and knew not so much as how to premeditate, the spirit gave them
speech and eloque^t v^terance. But because with S. Paul it was otherwise then
with the rest, in as much as he never conuersed with Christ upon earth as they
did; and his education had bin scholasticall altogether, which theirs was not;
hereby occasion was taken by certain malignants, secretly to undermine his
great authority in the Church of Christ, as though the Gospel had bin taught
him by others then by Christ himself* and as if the cause of the Gentiles
conversion and belief through his means, had bin the learning and skill which
he had by being conversant in their books, which thing made the^ so willing to
hear him, and him so able to persuade the^, whereas the rest of the Apostles
prevailed, because God was with them, and by miracle from heaven confirmed his
word in their mouths. They were mighty in deeds: As for him, being abse^t his
writings had some force, in presence his power not like unto theirs. In sum,
concerning his preaching, their very by word was, (...), ^. Cor. 10.10.
Addle speech, Empty talk. His writings full of great words, but in the power
of miraculous operatio^s his presence not like the rest of the Apostles.
Hereupon it rises, that S. Paul was so often driven to make his apologies.
Herevpo^ it rises, that whatsoever time he had spent in the study of humane
learning, he makes earnest protestation to them of Corinth, that the Gospel
which he had preached amongst them, did not by other means prevail with
them, 1. Cor. 2.4.
then with others the same Gospel taught by the rest of the Apostles of Christ.
My preaching, says he, has not been in the perswasiue speeches of humane
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and of power, that your faith may
not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. What is it which the
Apostle does here deny? Is it denied that his speech amongst the^ had bin
perswasiue? No, for of him the sacred history plainly testifies, that for the
space of a year and a half he spoke in their Synagogue every Saboth, and
persuaded both Jews and Graecians. How then is the speech of men made
perswasiue? Surely there can be but two ways to bring this to pass, Act.
18.^1. v. 4.
the one humane, the other divine. Either S. Paul did only by art and
natural industry cause his own speech to be credited; or else God by miracle
did authorize it, and so bring credit thereunto, as to the speech of the rest
of the Apostles. Of which two the former he utterly denies. For why? If the
preaching of the rest had been effectual by miracle, his only by force of his
own learning; so great inequality between him and the other Apostles in this
thing* had bin enough to subvert their faith. For might they not with reason
have thought, that if he were sent of God as well as they, God would not have
furnished the^ and not him with the power of the holy Ghost? Might not a great
part of them being simple happily have feared, least their assent had been
cunningly gotten unto his doctrine, rather through the weakness of their own
wits, the^ the certainty of that truth which he had taught them? How unequal
had it bin, that al believers through the preaching of other Apostles should
have their faith strongly built upon the evidence of Gods own miraculous
approbatio^, and they who^ he had converted should have their persuasion built
only upon his skill and wisdom who persuaded them? As therefore calling from
men may authorize us to teach, although it could not authorize him to teach as
other Apostles did: so although the wisdom of man had not bin sufficient to
enable him such a teacher as the rest of the Apostles were, unless Gods miracles
had strengthened both the one and the others doctrine; yet unto our ability
both of teaching and learning the truth of Christ, as we are but mere
Christian me^ it is not a little which the wisdom of man may add. Heb. 11.6.
are effectual to persuade reasonable minds and none other, that honor
obedience and credit belong aright unto God. No man comes unto God to offer
him sacrifice, to pour out supplications and prayers before him, or to do him
any service, which does not first believe him both to be, and to be a rewarder
of them who in such sort seek unto him. Let men be taught this either by
revelation from heaven, or by instruction upon earth, by labor, study and
meditation, or by the only secret inspiration of the holy Ghost; whatsoever
the mean be they know it by, if the knowledge thereof were possible without
discourse of natural reason, why should none be found capable thereof but only
me^, nor me^ til such time as they come unto ripe and full ability to work by
reasonable understanding* The whole drift of the scripture of God, what is it
but only to teach Theology. 1. Cor. 10.15.
Theology what is it but the science of things divine? What science can be
attained unto without the help of natural discourse and reason? Judge you of
that which I speak, says the Apostle. In vain it were to speak any thing of
God, but that by reason me^ are able somewhat to judge of that they hear, and
by discourse to discern how co^sona^t it is to truth. Scripture indeed
teaches things above nature, things which our reason by it self could not
reach unto. Yet those things also we believe, knowing by reason yt the
scripture is the word of God. In the presence of Festus a Roman, and of King
Agrippa a Jew, S. Paul omitting the one, who neither knew the Jews religion,
nor the books whereby they were taught it, speaks unto the other of things
foreshewed by Moses and the Prophets, and performed in Jesus Christ; intending
thereby to prove himself so unjustly accused, Act. 26.22.
that unless his judges did condemn both Moses and the Prophets, him they
could not choose but acquit, who taught only that fulfilled, which they so
long since had foretold. His cause was easy to be discerned; what was done
their eyes were witnesses; what Moses and the Prophets did speak, their books
could quicly show; it was no hard thing for him to compare them, which knew the
one, and believed the other. King Agrippa beleeuest thou the Prophets? I know
thou do. The question is how the books of the Prophets came to be credited
of king Agrippa. For what with him did authorize the Prophets, the like with us
does cause the rest of the scripture of God to be of credit. Because we
maintain that in scripture we are taught all things necessary unto salvation,
hereupon very childishly it is by some demanded, what scripture can teach us
the sacred authority of the scripture, upon the knowledge whereof our whole
faith and salvation depends. As though there were any kind of science in the
world, which leads men into knowledge, without presupposing a number of
things already known. No science does make known the first principles
whereon it builds; but they are always either taken as plain and manifest
in themselves, or as proved and granted already, some former knowledge having
made them evident. Scripture teaches al supernaturally revealed truth, without
the knowledge whereof salvation cannot be attained. The maine principle whereupon
our belief of al things therein contained depends, is that the scriptures are
the oracles of God himself. This in it self we cannot say is evident. For
the^ all men that hear it would acknowledge it in heart, as they do when they
hear that every whole is more then any part of that whole, because this in it
self is evident. The other we know that all do not acknowledge when they hear
it. There must be therefore some former knowledge presupposed, which does
herein assure the hearts of all believers. Scripture teaches us that saving
truth which God has discovered unto the world by revelation; and it presumes
us taught otherwise that it self is divine and sacred. The question the^ being
by what means we are taught this; some answer that to learn it we have no
other way then only tradition; as namely that so we believe, because both we
from our predecessors, and they from theirs have so received. But is this
enough? That which al men's experience teaches them, may not in any wise be
denied. And by experience we all know, that the first outward motive leading
men so to esteem of the scripture, is the authority of Gods church. For when
we know the whole church of God has that opinion of the scripture, we judge it
even at the first an impudent thing for any man bredde and brought up in the
Church, to be of a contrary mind without cause. Afterward the more we bestow
our labor in reading or hearing the mysteries thereof, the more we find that
the thing it self does answer our received opinion concerning it. So that the
former inducement prevailing somewhat with us before, does now much more
prevail, when the very thing has ministered farther reason. If Infidels or
Atheists chance at any time to call it in question, this gives us occasion to
sift what reason there is, whereby the testimony of the church concerning
scripture, and our own persuasion which scripture it self has confirmed, may
be proved a truth infallible. In which case the ancient fathers being often
constrained to show, what warrant they had so much to rely upon the
scriptures, endeavored still to maintain the authority of the books of God, by
arguments such as unbelievers themselves must needs think reasonable, if they
judged thereof as they should. Neither is it a thing impossible or greatly hard,
even by such kind of proofs so to manifest and clear that point, that no man
living shall be able to deny it, without denying some apparent principle such as
al men acknowledge to be true. Wherefore if I believe the gospel, yet is
reason of singular use, for that it confirms me in this my belief the more:
If I do not as yet believe, nevertheless to bring me to the number of believers
except reason did somewhat help, and were an instrument which God does use unto
such purposes, what should it boot to dispute with Infidels or godles persons
for their conversion and persuasion in that point? Neither can I think that
when grave and learned men do sometime hold, that of this principle there is no
proof but by the testimony of the spirit, which assures our hearts therein, it
is their meaning to exclude utterly all force which any kind of reason may have
in that behalf: but I rather iucline to interpret such their speeches, as if
they had more expressly set down, that other motives and induceme^ts, be they
never so strong and consona^t unto reason, are notwithstanding vneffectual of
themselves to work faith concerning this principle, if the special grace of
the holy ghost concur not to the inlightning of our minds. For otherwise I
doubt not but me^ of wisdom and judgment will grant, that the Church in this
point especially is furnished with reason, to stop the mouths of her impious
adversaries: and that as it were altogether bootles to allege against the^,
what the spirit has taught us; so likewise that even to our own selves it
needs caution and explication, how the testimony of the spirit may be
discerned, by what means it may be known, least me^ think that the spirit of
God does testify those things, which the spirit of error suggesteth. The
operations of the spirit, especially these ordinary which be common unto all
true christian men, are as we know, things secret and indiscernable even to the
very soul where they are, because their nature is of an other and an higher
kind the^ that they ca^ be by us perceived in this life. Wherefore albeit the
spirit lead us into all truth, and direct us in all goodness; yet because these
workings of the spirit in us are so privy and secret, we therefore stand on a
plainer ground, when we gather by reason from the quality of things believed or
done, that the spirit of God has directed us in both; then if we settle our
selves to believe, or to do any certain particular thing, as being moved
thereto by the spirit. But of this enough. To go from the books of scripture to
the sense and meaning thereof; because the sentences which are by the Apostles
recited out of the Psalms to prove the resurrection of Jesus Christ, did not
prove it, Act. 13.36. and cap. 2.34.
if so be the prophet David meant the^ of himsef; this exposition therefore they
plainly disprove, and show by manifest reason, that of David the words of David
could not possibly be meant. Exclude the use of natural reasoning about the
sense of holy scripture concerning the articles of our faith, and then that the
scripture does concern the articles of our faith, who can assure us? That
which by right exposition builds up Christian faith, being misconstrued
breeds error: between true and false construction, the difference reason must
show. Can Christian men perform that which Peter requires at their hands; 1.
Pet. 3.15.
is it possible they should both believe, and be able, without the use of
reason, to render a reason of their belief, a reason sound and sufficient to
answer them that demand it, be they of the same faith with us or enemies
thereunto? may we cause our faith without reason to appear reasonable in the
eyes of men? This being required even of learners in the school of Christ; the
duty of their teachers in bringing them unto such ripenes, must needs be
somewhat more, then only to read the sentences of scripture, and then
paraphrastically to scholie them, to vary the^ with sundry forms of speech,
without arguing or disputing about anything which they contain. This method of
teaching may commend it self unto the world by that easines and facility
which is in it: but a law or a pattern it is not, as some do imagine, for all
men to follow that will do good in the Church of Christ. Our Lord and Savior
himself did hope by disputation to do some good, yea by disputation not only
of, but against the truth, albeit with purpose for the truth. That Christ
should be the son of David was truth; yet against this truth our Lord in the
Gospel obiecteth, If Christ be the son of David, Matthew. 22.43.
how does David call him Lord? There is as yet no way known how to dispute, or
to determine of things disputed, without the use of natural reason* If we
please to add unto Christ their example, who followed him as near in all
things as they could, the Sermon of Paul and Barnabas set down in the Acts,
where the people would have offered unto them sacrifice* in that Sermon what is
there but only natural reason to disprove their act? O men why do you these
things? We are men even subject to the self same passions with you: Act.
14.15.
we preach unto you to leave these vanities, and to turn to the living God,
the God that has not left himself without witness, in that he has done good
to the world, giving rain and fruitful seasons, filling our heart with joy
and gladness. Neither did they only use reason in winning such unto Christian
belief as were yet thereto unconverted, but with believers themselves they
followed the selfsame course. In that great and solemn assembly of believing
Jews, how does Peter prove that the Gentiles were partakers of the grace of
God as well as they, but by reason drawn from those effects, which were
apparently known amongst them? Act. 15.
God which knows hearts, has borne them witness in giving unto them the
holy Ghost as unto us. The light therefore which the star of natural reason
and wisdom casts, is too bright to be obscured by the mist of a word or
two, uttered to diminish that opinion which justly has been received
concerning the force and virtue thereof, even in matters that touch most
nearely the principal duties of men, and the glory of the eternal God. In all
which hitherto has been spoken touching the force and use of man's reason in
things divine, I must crave that I be not so understood or co^strued, as if
any such thing by virtue thereof could be done without the aid and assistance
of Gods most blessed spirit. The thing we have handled according to the
question moved about it; which question is, whether the light of reason be so
pernicious, that in devising laws for the church, men ough^ not by it to
search what may be fit and convenient. For this cause therefore we have
endeavored to make it appear, how in the nature of reason it self there is no
impediment, but that the self-same spirit, which reuealeth the things that god
has set down in his law, may also be though^ to aid and direct men in finding
out by the light of reason, what laws are expedient to be made for the guiding
of his Church, over and besides them that are in scripture. Herein therefore we
agree with those men, by whom humane laws are defined, to be ordinances which
such as have lawful authorisi^ given them for that purpose, do probably draw
from the laws of nature and God, by discourse of reason, aided with the
influence of divine grace. And for that cause it is not said amiss touching
Ecclesiastical canons, c. Vi^latores. 25. q. 1.
that by instinct of the holy Ghost they have bin made, and consecrated by the
reverend acceptance of all the world.

9 Laws for the church are not made as they should be, How laws for regiment
of the Church may be made by the advice of me^, following therein the light of
reason; and how those laws being not repugnant to the word of God, are
approved in his sight.
unless the makers follow such direction as they ought to be guided by. Wherein
that scripture stands no^ the church of God in any stead, of serves nothing
at a^^o direct, but may be let pass as needles to be consulted with, we judge
it profane* impious, and irreligious to think. For although it were in vain
to make laws which the scripture has already made, because what we are already
there commanded to do, on our parts there rests nothing but only that it be
executed: yet because both in that which we are commanded, in concerns the
duty of the church by law to provide, that the loosenes and slacknes of men may
not cause the commandments of God to be unexecuted; and a number of things
there are for which the scripture has not provided by any law, but left them
unto the careful discretion of the Church; we are to search how the Church in
these cases may be well directed, to make that provision by laws which is most
convenient etc fit. And what is so in these cases, partly scripture, and partly
reason must teach to discern. Scripture comprehending examples and laws,
laws some natural and some positive; examples neither are there for all cases
which require laws to be made, and when they are, they can but direct as
precedents only. Natural laws direct In such sort, that in all things we
must for ever do according unto them; positive so, that against them in no
case we may do any thing, as long as the will of God is that they should
remain in force. Howbeit when scripture does yield us precedents, how far
forth they are to be followed* when it gives natural laws, what particular
order is thereunto most agreeable; when positive, which way to make laws
vnrepugnant unto them; yea though all these should wan^, ye^ what kind of
ordinances would be most for that good of the Church which is aimed at, all this
must be by reason found out. Luminis naturalis ducatum repellere, non modo
stultum est. sed and impium. Aug. 4. de trin. c. 6.
And therefore Tib refuse the conduct of the light of nature, says S.
Augustine, is not folly alone, but accompanied with impiety. The greatest
amongst the School divines, studying how to set down by exact definition the
nature of an humane lawe'^ (of which nature all the Churches constitutions are)
found not which way, better to do it th^n in these words. Out of the precep^s
of the law of nature, Th. Aqui. 12. q. l* 1. art. 3. Ex preceptis Legis
naturalis* quasi ex qui^usdam, principiis communibus and in demo^strabilibus,
necesse est quod ratio humana procedat ad allqua magis particulariter
disponenda. Et istae particulares disposi^^ones ad^nuentae sec^^dum rationem
humana^, dicuntur leg es humanae, obseruatis alii^ conditionibus quae pertinent
ad rationem legis.
as out of certain common and vndemonstrable principles, man's reason does
necessarily proceed, unto certain more particular determinations; which
particular determinations being found out according unto the reason of man,
they have the names of humane laws; so that such other conditions be therein
kept as the making of laws does require, that is, if they whose authority is
thereunto required do establish and publish them as laws. And the truth is,
that all our controversy in this cause concerning the orders of the Church, is
what particulars the Church may appoint. That which does find them out, is the
force of man's reason. That which does guide and direct his reason, is first the
general law of nature, which law of nature and the moral law of scripture are
in the substance of law all one. But because there are also in scripture a
number of laws particular and positive, which being in force may not by any
law of man be violated: we are in making laws to have thereunto an especial
eye. As for example, it might perhaps seem reasonable unto the Church of God,
following the general laws concerning the nature of marriage, to ordain in
particular that cosen germains shall not marry. Which law notwithstanding ought
not to be received in the Church, if there should be in the scripture a law
particular to the contrary, forbidding utterly the bonds of marriage to be so
far forth abridged. The same Thomas therefore whose definition of humane laws
we mentioned before, does add thereunto his caution concerning the rule and
canon whereby to make them: Humane laws are measures in respect of men whose
actions they must direct; howbeit such measures they are, 1.2. q. 95. art. 3.
as have also their higher rules to be measured by, which rules are two, the
law of God, and the law of nature. So that laws humane must be made according
to the general laws of nature, and without contradiction unto any positive
law in scripture. Otherwise they are ill made. Unto laws thus made and
received by a whole Church, they which live within the bosom of that Church,
must not think it a matter indifferent either to yield or not to yield
obedience. Is it a small offense to despise the Church of God? 1. Cor. 11.22.
My son keep thy fathers commandment, says Solomon, Prou. 6.20.
and forget not thy mothers instruction; bind the^ both always about thine
heart. It does not stand with the duty which we owe to our heavenly fathers,
that to the ordinances of our mother the Church we should show our selves
disobedient. Let us not say we keep the commandments of the one, when we
break the law of the other: For unless we observe both, we obey neither. And
what does let but that we may observe both, when they are not the one to the
other in any sort repugnant? For of such laws only we speak, as being made in
form and manner already declared, can have in them no contradiction unto the
laws of almighty God. Yea that which is more, the laws thus made God himself
does in such sort authorize, that to despise them is to despise in them him. It
is a loose and licentious opinion which the Anabaptists have embraced, holding
that a Christian man's liberty is lost, and the soul which Christ has
redeemed unto himself injuriously drawn into servitude under the yoke of
humane power, if any law be now imposed besides the Gospel of Jesus Christ: in
obedience whereunto the spirit of God, and not the constraint of men is to
lead us, according to that of the blessed Apostle, Such as are led by the
spirits of God they are the sons of God, Romans 8.14.
and not such as live in thraldom unto men. Their judgment is therefore that
the Church of Christ should admit no law makers but the Evangelists. The author
of that which causes another thing to be, is author of that thing also which
thereby is caused. The light of natural understanding, wit and reason is from
God; he it is which thereby does illuminate every man entering into the world.
If there proceed from us any thing afterward corrupt and naught, the mother
thereof is our own darkness, John. 1.5.
neither does it proceed from any such cause whereof God is the author. He is
the author of all that we think or do by virtue of that light which himself
has given. And therefore the laws which the very Heathens did gather direct
their actions by, Romans 1.19. and 2.15.
so far forth as they proceeded from the light of nature, God himself does
acknowledge to have proceeded even from himself, and that he was the writer of
them in the tables of their hearts. How much more then he the author of those
laws, which have been made by his Saints, endued further with the heavenly
grace of his spirit* and directed as much as might be with such instructions as
his sacred word does yield? Surely if we have unto those laws that dutiful
regard which their dignity does require, it will not greatly need, that we
should be exhorted to live in obedience unto them. If they have God himself
for their author, contempt which is offered unto them cannot choose but redound
unto him. The safest and unto God the most acceptable way of framing our lives
therefore is, with all humility lowlines and singlenes of heart to study, which
way our willing obedience both unto God and man may be yielded even to the
utmost of that which is due.

10 Touching the mutabilitie of laws that concern the regiment and polity of
the church, changed they are, when either altogether abrogated, That neither
Gods being the author of laws, nor his committing them to scripture, nor the
continuance of the end for which they were instituted, is any reason sufficient
to prove that they are unchangeable.
or in part repealed or augmented with farther additions. Wherein we are to
note, that this question about changing of laws, concerns only such laws
as are positive, and do make that now good or evil by being commanded or
forbidden, which otherwise of it self were not simply the one or the other.
Unto such laws it is expressly* sometimes added, how long they are to
continue in force. If this be no where expressed, then have we no light to direct
our judgments concerning the chaungeablenes or immutabilitie of them, but by
considering the nature and quality of such laws. The nature of every law
must be judged of by the end for which it was made, and by the aptnes of
things therein prescribed unto the same end. It may so fall out, that the
reason why some laws of God were given, is neither opened nor possible to be
gathered by wit of man. As why God should forbid Adam that one tree, there was
no way for Adam ever to have certainly understood. And at Adams ignorance of
this point Satan took advantage, urging the more securely a false cause,
because the true was unto Adam unknown. Deuteronomy. 22.10. Deuteronomy. 22.11.
Why the Jews were forbidden to plow their ground with an ox and an ass, why
to cloth themselves with mingled attire of wool and linen, both it was unto
them, and unto us it remains obscure. Such laws perhaps cannot be abrogated,
saving only by whom they were made: because the intent of them being known
unto none but the author, he alone can judge how long it is requisite they
should endure. But if the reason why things were instituted may be known, and
being known do appear manifestly to be of perpetual necessity, then are
those things also perpetual, unless they cease to be effectual unto that
purpose for which they were at the first instituted. Because when a thing does
cease to be available unto the end which gave it being, the continuance of it
must then of necessity appear superfluous. And of this we cannot be ignorant,
how sometimes that has done great good, which afterward when time has
changed the ancient course of things, does grow to be either very hurtful,
or not so greatly profitable and necessary. If therefore the end for which a
law provides be perpetually necessary, and the way whereby it provides
perpetually also most apt, no doubt but that every such law ought for ever to
remain unchangeable. Whether God be the author of laws, by authorizing that
power of men whereby they are made, or by delivering them made immediately from
himself, by word only, or in writing also, or howsoever; notwithstanding the
authority of their maker, the mutabilitie of that end for which they are made
does also make them changeable. The law of ceremonies came from God. Moses had
commandment to commit it unto the sacred records of scripture, where it
continues even unto this very day and hour; in force still as the Jew
surmiseth, because God himself was author of it, and for us to abolish what
he has established were presumption most intolerable. But (that which they
in the blindness of their obdurate hearts are not able to discern) since the end
for which that law was ordained is now fulfilled past and gone; how should it
but cease any longer to be, which has no longer any cause of being in force
as before? Quod pro necessitate temporis statutum est, cessante necessitate
debet cessare pariter quod vrgebat. 1. q. 1. Quod pro necessit.
That which necessity of some special time does cause to be enjoined, binds
no longer the^ during that time, but does afterward become free. Which thing
is also plain, even by that law which the Apostles assembled at the counsel of
Jerusalem did from thence deliver unto the Church of Christ; the preface
whereof to authorize it was, To the holy Ghost and to us it has seemed good:
which style they did not use as matching themselves in power with the holy
Ghost, but as testifying the holy Ghost to be the author, and themselves but
only vtterers of that decree. Act. 15.
This law therefore to have proceeded from God as the author thereof, no
faithful man will deny. It was of God, not only because God gave the^ the power
whereby they might make laws, but for that it proceeded even from the holy
motion and suggestion of that secret divine spirit, whose sentence they did but
only pronounce. Notwithstanding as the law of ceremonies delivered unto the
Jews, so this very law which the Gentiles received from the mouth of the holy
Ghost, is in like respect abrogated by decease of the end for which it was
given. Counterp. p. 8.
But such as do not stick at this point, such as grant that what has been
instituted upon any special cause needs not to be observed that cause
ceasing, do notwithstanding herein fail; they judge the laws of God only by
the author and maine end for which they were made, so that for us to change
that which he has established, they hold it execrable pride and presumption,
if so be the end and purpose for which God by that mean provides be
permanent. And upon this they ground those ample disputes concerning orders and
offices, which being by him appointed for the government of his Church, if it
be necessary always that the Church of Christ be governed, then does the end
for which God provided remain still; and therefore in those means which he by
law did establish as being fittest unto that end, for us to alter any thing is
to lift up our selves against God, and as it were to countermaund him. Wherein
they mark not that laws are instruments to rule by, and that instruments are
not only to be framed according unto the general end for which they are
provided, but eue^ according unto that very particular which rises out of the
matter whereon they have to work. The end wherefore laws were made may be
permanent, and those laws nevertheless require some alteration, if there be
any unfitness in the means which they prescribe as tending unto that end and
purpose. As for example, a law that to bridle the^^ does punish the ones with a
quadruple ^estitution, has an end which will continue as long as the world it
self continues. Theft will be always, and will always need to be bridled*
But that the mean which this law provides for that end* namely the punishment
of quadruple restitution, that this will be always sufficient to bridle and
restrain that kind of enormity, no man can warrant. Insufficiency of laws
does sometimes come by want of judgment in the makers. Which cause cannot fall
into any law termed properly and immediately divine, as it may and does into
human laws often. But that which has been once most sufficient, may wax
otherwise by alteration of time and place; that punishment which has been
sometimes forcible to bridle sin, may grow afterward too weak and feeble. In
a word we plainly perceive by the difference of those three laws which the
Jews received at the hands of God, the moral, ceremonial, and judicial,
that if the end for which, and the matter according whereunto God makes his
laws, continue always one and the same* his laws also do the like; for which
cause the moral law cannot be altered: secondly that whether the matter whereon
laws are made continue or continue not, if their end have once ceased, they
cease also to be of force; as in the law ceremonial it fares: finally that
albeit the end continue, as in that law of theft specified, and in a great part
of those ancient judicials it does; yet for as mush as there is not in all
respects the same subject or matter remaining for which they were first
instituted, even this is sufficient cause of change. And therefore laws though
both ordained of God himself* and the end for which they were ordained
continuing* may notwithstanding cease* if by alteration of persons or times
they be found vnsufficie^t to attain unto that end. In which respect why may we
not presume, that God does eue^ call for such change or alteration, as the very
condition of things themselves does make necessary? They which do therefore
plead the authority of the lawmakers* as an argument wherefore it should not be
lawful to change that which he has instituted* and will have this the cause
why all the ordinances of our Savior are immutable* they which urge the
wisdom of God as a proof, that whatsoever laws he has made they ought to
stand, ^nlesse himself from heaven proclaim them disanuld* because it is not
in man to correct the ordinance of God; may know, if it please the^ to take
notice thereof, that we are far from presuming to think that me^ can better any
thing which God has done, eue^ as we are from thinking that me^ should presume
to undo some things of men, which God does know they cannot better. God never
ordained any thing that could be bettered. Yet many things he has, that have
been changed, and that for the better. That which succeeds as better now when
change is requisite, had bin worse when that which now is changed was
instituted. Otherwise God had not then left this to choose that, neither would
now reject that to choose this, were it not for some new grown occasion making
that which has been better worse. In this case therefore (...) not presume to
change Gods ordinance* but they yield thereunto requiring it self to be
changed. Against this it is objected, that to abrogate or innouate the gospel
of Christ, if me^ do Angels should attempt, it were most heinous and cursed
sacrilege. And the Gospel as they say contains not only doctrine
instructing men how they should believe, but also precepts concerning the
regiment of the Church* Discipline therefore is a part of the Gospel; and God
being the author of the whole Gospel, We offer to show the discipline to be a
part of the Gospel, and therefore to have a common cause: so that in the
repulse of the discipline, the Gospel receiue^ a check. And again, I speak
of the discipline as of a part of the Gospel, and therefore neither under nor
above the Gospel, but the Gospel*
as well of discipline as of doctrine, it cannot be but that both of them have
a common cause. So that as we are to believe for ever the articles of
evangelical doctrine, so the precepts of discipline we are in like sort bound
for ever to observe. Touching points of doctrine, as for example the unity of
God, the trinity of persons, salvation by Christ, the resurrection of the
body, life everlasting, the judgment to come, and such like, they have been
since the first hour that there was a Church in the world, and till the last
they must be believed. But as for matters of regiment, they are for the most
part of another nature. To make new articles of faith and doctrine no man
thinks it lawful; new laws of government what common wealth or Church is
there which makes not either at one time or another? The rule of faith, says
Tertullian, is but one and that alone immovable, and impossible to be framed
or cast anew. The law of outward order and polity not so. There is no reason in
the world wherefore we should esteem it as necessary always to do, as always
to believe the same things; seeing every man knows that the matter of faith
is constant, T.C. l. 2. p. 1.4. Tertul. de veland virg.
the matter contrariwise of action daily changeable, especially the matter of
action belonging unto Church polity. Neither than I find that men of soundest
judgment have any otherwise taught, Ma^t. in 1.
then that articles of belief, Sam. 14.
and things which all men must of necessity do to the end they may be saved,
are either expressly set down in Scripture, or else plainly thereby to be
gathered. But touching things which belong to discipline and outward polity,
Act. 15.
the Church has authority to make canons, laws, and decrees, even as we read
that in the Apostles times it did. Which kind of laws (for as much as they are
not in themselves necessary to salvation) may after they are made be also
changed as the difference of times or places shall require. Yea it is not
denied I am sure by themselves, that certain things in discipline are of that
nature, as they may be varied by times, places, persons and other the like
circumstances. Whereupon I demand, are those changeable points of discipline
commanded in the word of God, or no? If they be not commanded, and yet may be
received in the Church; how can their former position stand, co^demning all
things in the Church which in the word are not commanded? If they be
commanded, and yet may suffer change* how can this later stand, affirming all
things immutable which are commanded of God? Their distinction touching matters
of substance and of circumstance, though true, will not serve. For be they
great things or be they small, if God have commanded them in the Gospel, and
his commanding them in the Gospel do make them unchangeable, there is no
reason we should more change the one then we may the other. If the authority of
the maker do prove unchangeableness in the laws which God has made; then
must al laws which he has made be necessarily for ever permane^t, though they
be but of circumstance only and not of substance. I therefore conclude, that
neither Gods being author of laws for government of his Church, nor his
committing* them unto Scripture, is any reason sufficient, wherefore all
Churches should for ever be bound to keep them without change. But of one
thing we are here to give them warning by the way. For whereas in this
discourse we have oftentimes professed, that many parts of discipline or Church
polity are delivered in Scripture, they may perhaps imagine that we are driven
to confess their discipline to be delivered in scripture, and that having no
other means to avoid it, we are feign to argue for the changeableness of
laws ordained even by God himself, as if otherwise theirs of necessity
should take place, and that under which we live be abandoned* There is no
remedy therefore but to abate this error in them, and directly to let them
know, that if they fall into any such conceit, they do but a little flatter
their own cause. As for us, we think in no respect so highly of it. Our
persuasion is, that no age ever had knowledged of it but only ours; that they
which defend it, devised it; that neither Christ nor his Apostles at any time
taught it but the contrary. If therefore we did seek to maintain that which
most aduantageth our own cause, the very best way for us, and the strongest
against them, were to hold even as they do, that in Scripture there must needs
be found some particular form of Church-polity, which God has instituted, and
which Disciplin^ est Christian^ ecclesiae politia, a Deo eiurecte
administrandae cause constituta, ac propterea ex cius verbo pe^enda, and ob
^andem causam omnium ecclesiarum communi^, and omnium temporum. lib. de eccles.
discipli. in Analy.
for that very cause belongs to all Churches, to all times. But with any such
partial eye to respect our selves, and by cunning to make those things seem
the truest which are the fittest to serve our purpose, is a thing which we
neither like nor mean to follow. Wherefore that which we take to be generally
true concerning the mutability of laws, the same we have plainly delivered;
as being persuaded of nothing more then we are of this, (...). Arist e^h. 10.
c. 1.
that whether it be in matter of speculation or of practice, no untruth can
possibly avail the patron and defendor long, and that things most truly are
likewise most behoouefully spoken.

11. This we hold and grant for truth, that those very laws which of their
own nature are changeable, be notwithstanding incapable of change, if he which
gave them, being of authority so to do, forbid absolutely to change the^;
neither may they admit alteration against the will of such a law maker.
Whether Christ have forbidden all change of those laws which are set down
in Scripture.
Albeit therefore we do not find any cause, why of right there should be
necessarily an immutable form set down in holy scripture; nevertheless if
indeed there have been at any time a Church-politie so set down, the change
whereof the sacred scripture does forbid, surely for me^ to alter those laws
which God for perpetuity has established, were presumption most intolerable.
To prove therefore that the will of Christ was to establish laws so permanent and
immutable, that in any sort to alter them cannot but highly offend God, thus
they reason. First if Moses being but a servant in the house of God, did therein
establish laws of government for perpetuity, Heb. 1.6. Either that
commendation of the son before the servant is a false testimony, or the son
ordained a permanent government in the Church. ^f parmanent, then not to be
changed. What then do they that hold it may be changed at the magistrates
pleasure, but advise the magistrate by his positive laws to proclaim that it
is his will, that if there shall be a Church within his dominions, he will
maime and deforme the same. M.M. p. 16. He that was as faithful as Moses, left
as clear instruction for the government of the Church. But Christ was as
faithful as Moses. Ergo. Demonst* of Disc. cap. 1.
laws which they that were of the household might not alter: shall we admit
into our thoughts, that the son of God has in providing for this his
household declared himself less faithful then Moses? Moses delivering unto
the Jews such laws as were durable; if those be changeable which Christ has
delivered unto us, we are not able to avoid it, but (that which to think were
heinous impiety) we of necessity must confess, even the son of God himself
to have been less faithful then Moses. Which argument shall need no
touchstone to try it by, but some other of the like making. Moses erected in
the wilderness a tabernacle, which was moveable from place to place; Solomon a
sumptuous and stately Temple, which was not moveable: Therefore Solomon was
faithfuller then Moses; which no man endued with reason will think. And yet by
this reason it does plainly follow. He that will see how faithful the one or the
other was, must compare the things which they both did; unto the charge which
God gave each of them* The Apostle in making comparison between our Savior
and Moses, attributes faithfulness unto both, and makes this difference
between them; Moses in, but Christ over the house of God; Moses in that house
which was his by charge and commission, though to govern it, yet to govern it
as a servant; but Christ over this house, as being his own entire possesion.
John. 17.
Our Lord and Savior does make protestation, I have given unto them the words
which thou gave me. Faithful therefore he was, and concealed not any part of
his fathers will. But did any part of that will require the immutability of
laws concerning Church-polity? They answer, yea. For else God should less
favor us then the Jews. Either God has left a prescript form of government
now* or else he is less careful under the new test^me^t then under the old
Demonst. of Disc. cap. 1.
God would not have their Churches guided by any laws but his own. And seeing
this did so continue even till Christ; now to ease God of that care, or rather
to deprive the Church of his patronage, what reason have we? Surely none to
derogate any thing from the ancient love which God has borne to his Church. An
heathen Philosopher there is, who considering how many things beasts have which
men have not, how naked in comparison of them, how impotent, and how much less
able we are to shift for our selves along time after we enter into this world,
repiningly concluded hereupon, that nature being a careful mother for them, is
toward us a hard hearted Stepdame. No, we may not measure the affection of our
gracious God toward his by such differences. For even herein shines his
wisdom, that though the ways of his providence be many, yea the end which he
brings all at the length unto, is one and the self same. But if such kind of
reasoning were good, might we not even as directly conclude the very same
concerning laws of secular regiment? Ecclesiast. disc. lib. 1*
Their own words are these. In the ancient Church of the Jews, God did
command, and Moses commit unto writing, all things pertinent as well to the
civil as to the Ecclesiastical state. God gave them laws of civil regiment,
and would not permit their common weal to be governed by any other laws then
his own. Does God less regard our temporal estate in this world, or provide
for it worse then for theirs? To us notwithstanding he has not as to them
delivered any particular form of temporal regiment, unless perhaps we
think, as some do, that the grafting of the Gentiles and their incorporating
into Israel, Romans 1^.17.
does import that we ought to be subject unto the rites and laws of their
whole polity. We see then how weak such disputes are, Ephesians. ^12.16.
and how smally they make to this purpose. That Christ did not mean to set
down particular positive laws for all things in such sort as Moses did, the
very different manner of delivering the laws of Moses and the laws of Christ
does plainly show. Moses had commandment to gather the ordinances of God
together distinctly, and orderly to set them down according unto their
several kinds, for each public duty and office the laws that belong thereto,
as appears in the books themselves written of purpose for that end.
Contrariwise the laws of Christ we find rather mentioned by occasion in the
writings of the Apostles, then any solemn thing directly written to comprehend
them in legal sort. Again the positive laws which Moses gave, they were
given for the greatest part with restraint to the land of Jury; Behold says
Moses, I have taught you ordinances and laws as the Lord my God commanded me,
Deuteronomy. 4.5.
that ye should do even so within the land whither ye go to possess it. Which
laws and ordinances positive he plainly distinguishes afterward from the
laws of the two Tables which were moral; The Lord spoke unto you out of the
midst of the fire, ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude,
Verse 12.
only a voice. Then he declared unto you his Covenant which he commanded you
to do, Verse 13.
the ten Commandments, and wrote them upon two Tables of stone. Verse 14.
And the Lord commanded me that same time, that I should teach you ordinances
and laws which ye should observe in the land whither ye go to possess it. The
same difference is again set down in the next Chapter following. For
rehearsal being made of the ten Commandments, it follows immediately; Deuteronomy.
5.22.
These words the Lord spoke unto all your multitude in the Mount out of the
midst of the fire, the cloud and the darkness, with a great voice, and added
no more, and wrote them upon two Tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.
But concerning other laws, the people give their consent to receive them at
the hands of Moses; Go thou nearer, Deuteronomy. 27.
and hear all that the Lord our God says, and declare thou unto us all that
the Lord our God says unto thee, and we will hear it and do it. The peoples
alacrity herein God highly commends with most effectual and hearty speech;
Deuteronomy. 28.
I have heard the voice of the words of this people, they have spoken well.
Deuteronomy. 23.
O that there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to keep all my
Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their
children for ever! Go say unto them* Deuteronomy. 30.
Return you to your tents; But stand thou here with me, Deuteronomy. 31.
and I will tell thee all the Commandments and the Ordinances and the Laws
which thou shall teach them, that they may do them in the land which I have
given them to possess. From this later kind the former are plainly
distinguished in many things. They were not both at one time delivered,
neither both after one sort, nor to one end. The former uttered by the voice
of God himself in the hearing of six hundred thousand men; the former written
with the finger of God; the former termed by the name of a Covenant; the
former given to be kept without either mention of time how long, or of place
where. On the other side the later given after, and neither written by God
himself, nor given unto the whole multitude immediately from God, but unto
Moses, and from him to them both by word and writing; the later termed
Ceremonies. Judgments, Ordinances, but no where Covenants; finally the
observation of the later restrained unto the land where God would establish
them to inhabit. The Laws positive are not framed without regard had to the
place and persons for the which they are made. If therefore Almighty God in
framing their Laws, had an eye unto the nature of that people, and to the
country where they were to dwell; if these peculiar and proper considerations
were respected in the making of their Laws, and must be also regarded in the
Positive Laws of all other Nations besides; then seeing that Nations are not
all alike, surely the giving of one kind of positive Laws unto one only
people, without any liberty to alter them, is but a slender proof, that
therefore one kind should in like sort be given to serve everlastingly for
all. But that which most of all makes for the clearing of this point is, that
the Jews who had Laws so particularly determining and so fully instructing
them in all affairs what to do, were notwithstanding continually inured with
causes exorbitant, and such as their laws had not provided for. T.C. l. 1. p.
35. Whereas you say that they (the Jews) had nothing, but was determined by
the law, and we have many things undetermined and left to the order of the
Church: I will offer for one that you shall bring that we have left to the
order of the Church, to show you that they had twenty which were undecided of
by the express word of God.
And in this point much more is granted us then we ask, namely that for one
thing which we have left to the order of the Church; they had twenty which
were undecided by the express word of God; and that as their ceremonies and
Sacraments were multiplied above ours, even so grew the number of those cases
which were not determined by any express word. So that if we may devise one
law, they by this reason might devise twenty: and if their devising so many
were not forbidden, shall their example prove us forbidden to devise as much as
one law for the ordering of the Church? We might not devise no not one, if
their example did prove that our Savior has utterly forbidden all alteration
of his laws, in as much as there can be no law devised, but needs it must
either take away from his, or add thereunto more or less, and so make some
kind of alteration. But of this so large a grant we are content not to take
advantage. Men are oftentimes in a sudden passion more liberal, then they
would be if they had leisure to take advise. And therefore so bountiful words
of course and frank speeches we are contented to let pass, without turning
them unto advantage with too much rigor. It may be they had rather be listened
unto, when they commend the Kings of Israel which attempted nothing in the
government of the Church without the express word of God; T.C. in the table
to his second book.
and when they urge that God left nothing in his word vndescribed, T.C. l. 2.
p. 446 If he will needs separate the worship of God from the external polity;
yet as the Lord set forth the one, so he left nothing vndescribed in the other.
whether it concerned the worship of God or outward polity, nothing unset
down, and therefore charged them strictly to keep themselves unto that,
without any alteration. Howbeit seeing it cannot be denied, but that many
things there did belong unto the course of their public affairs, wherein
they had no express word at all to show precisely what they should do; the
difference between their condition and ours in these cases, will bring some
light unto the truth of this present controversy. Before the fact of the son
of Shelomith, there was no law which did appoint any certain punishment for
blasphemers. Leuit, 24.12.
That wretched creature being therefore deprehended in that impiety, was held
in ward, till the mind of the Lord were known concerning his case. The like
practice is also mentioned upon occasion of a breach of the Sabbath day. They
find a poor silly creature gathering sticks in the wilderness, Numb. 15.34.
they bring him unto Moses and Aaron and all the congregation, they lay him in
hold, because it was not declared what should be done with him, till God has
said unto Moses, This man shall dye the death. The Law required to keep the
Sabbath; but for the breach of the Sabbath what punishment should be inflicted
it did not appoint. Such occasions as these are rare. And for such things as do
fall scarce once in many ages of me^, it did suffice to take such order as was
requisite when they fell. But if the case were such as being not already
determined by law, were notwithstanding likely oftentimes to come in question,
it gave occasion of adding laws that were not before. Thus it fell out in the
case of those men polluted, Numb. 9. Numb. 27.
and of the daughters of Zelophhad; whose causes Moses having brought before
the Lord, received laws to serve for the like in time to come. The Jews to
this end had the Oracle of God, they had the Prophets: And by such means God
himself instructed them from heaven what to do, in all things that did greatly
concern their state, and were not already set down in the Law. Shall we then
hereupon argue even against our own experience and knowledge? Shall we seek
to persuade men, that of necessity it is with us as it was with them, that
because God is ours in all respects as much as theirs, therefore either no such
way of direction has been at any time, or if it have been, it does still
continue in the Church, or if the same do not continue, that yet it must be at
the least supplied by some such mean as pleases us to account of equal
force? A more dutiful and religious way for us were, to admire the wisdom of
God, which shines in the beautiful variety of all things; but most in the
manifold and yet harmonious dissimilitude of those ways, whereby his Church
upon earth is guided from age to age throughout all generations of men. Genesis
18.18.
The Jews were necessarily to continue till the coming of Christ in the
flesh, and the gathering of nations unto him. Genesis 48.10.
So much the promise made unto Abraham did import. So much the prophecy of
Jacob at the hour of his death did foreshewe. Upon the ^afety therefore of
their very outward state and condition for so long, the after-good of the whole
world, and the salvation of all did depend. Unto their so long safety for two
things it was necessary to provide, namely the preservation of their state
against foreign resistance, and the continuance of their peace within
themselves. Touching the one, as they received the promise of God to be the
rock of their defense, against which who so did violently rush, should but
bruise and batter themselves; so likewise they had his commandment in all
their affairs that way, to seek direction and counsel from him. Men's
consultations are always perilous. And it falls out many times that after
long deliberation, those things are by their wit even resolved on, which by
trial are found most opposite to public safety. It is no impossible thing
for states, be they never so well established, yet by oversight in some one
act or treaty between them and their potent opposites, utterly to cast away
themselves for ever. Wherefore least it should so fall out to them, upon whom
so much did depend; they were not permitted to enter into war, nor conclude
any league of peace, nor to wade through any act of moment between them and
foreign states, unless the Oracle of God or his Prophets were first consulted
with. And least domestical disturbance should wash them within themselves,
because there was nothing unto this purpose more effectual, then if the
authority of their laws and governors were such, as none might presume to take
exception against it, or to show disobedience unto it, without incurring the
hatred and detestation of al men that had any spark of the fear of God;
therefore he gave them even their positive laws from heaven, and as often as
occasion required, chose in like sort Rulers also to lead and govern them.
Notwithstanding some desperately impious there were, which adventured to try
what harm it could bring upon them, if they did attempt to be authors of
confusion, and to resist both Governors and Laws. Against such monsters God
maintained his own by fearful execution of extraordinary judgment upon
them. By which means it came to pass, that although they were a people
infested and mightily hated of all others throughout the world, although by
nature hard hearted, querulous, wrathful and impatie^t of rest and quietness, yet
was there nothing of force either one way or other to work the ruin and
subversion of their state, till the time before mentioned was expired. Thus we
see that there was not no cause of dissimilitude in these things, between that
one only people before Christ, and the kingdoms of the world since. T.C. lib.
^. page 440.
And whereas it is further alleged, that albeit in Civil matters and things
perteining to this present life, God has used a greater particularity with
them then amongst us, framing laws according to the quality of that people and
Country; yet the leaving of us at greater liberty in things civil, is so
far from proving the like liberty in things pertaining to the kingdom of
heaven, that it rather proves a streighter bond. For even as when the Lord
would have his favor more appear by temporal blessings of this life toward
the people under the Law then toward us, he gave also politic laws most
exactly, whereby they might both most easily come into, and most steadfastly
remain in possession of those earthly benefits: even so at this time, wherein
he would not have his favor so much esteemed by those outward commodities, it
is required, that as his care in prescribing laws for that purpose has
somewhat fallen, in leaving them to men's consultations which may be deceived;
so his care for conduct and government of the life to come, should (if it were
possible) rise, in leaving less to the order of men then in times past. These
are but weak and feeble disputes for the inference of that conclusion which is
intended. For saving only in such consideration as has been showed, there is
no cause wherefore we should think God more desirous to manifest his favor by
temporal blessings toward them, then toward us. Godliness had unto them,
and it has also unto us, the promises both of this life and the life to come.
That the care of God has fallen in earthly things, and therefore should rise
as much in heavenly; that more is left unto men's consultations in the one, and
therefore less must be granted in the other; that God having used a greater
particularity with them then with us for matters perteining unto this life, is
to make us amends by the more exact delivery of laws for government of the
life to come; these are proportions, whereof if there be any rule, we must
plainly confess that which truth is, we know it not. God which spoke unto
them by his Prophets, has unto us by his only begotten Son; those mysteries
of grace and salvation which were but darkely disclosed unto them, have unto us
more clearly shined. Such differences between them and us the Apostles of
Christ have well acquainted us withal. But as for matter belonging to the
outward conduct or government of the Church; seeing that even in sense it is
manifest, that our Lord and Savior has not by positive laws descended so
far into particularities with us, as Moses with them; neither does by
extraordinary means, oracles, and Prophets, direct us, as them he did, in those
things which rising daily by new occasions, are of necessity to be provided
for; does it not hereupon rather follow, that although not to them, yet to us
there should be freedom and liberty granted to make laws? 1. Tim. 6.14.
Yea but the Apostle S. Paul does fearfully charge Timothy, even In the sight
of God who quickneth all, and of Christ Jesus who witnessed that famous
confession before Pontius Pilate, John. 18.37.
to keep what was commanded him safe and sound til the appearance of our Lord
Jesus Christ. This does exclude al liberty of changing the laws of Christ,
whether by abrogation or addition, or howsoever. For in Timothy the whole
Church of Christ receives charge concerning her duty. And that charge is to
keep the Apostles commandment: And his commandment did contain the laws
that concerned Church government: And those laws he straightly requires to
be observed without breach or blame, till the appearance of our Lord Jesus
Christ. In Scripture we grant every one man's lesson, to be the common
instruction of all men, so far forth as their cases are like, and that
religiously to keep the Apostles commandments in whatsoever they may concern
us, we all stand bound. But touching that commandment which Timothy was
charged with, we swerve undoubtedly from the Apostles precise meaning, if we
extend it so largely, that the arms thereof shall reach unto all things which
were commanded him by the Apostle. The very words themselves do restrain
themselves unto some one special commandment among many. And therefore it is
not said, Keep the ordinances, laws and constitutions which thou have
received, but (...) that great commandment, which does principally concern
thee and thy calling; John. 21.15.
that commandment which Christ did so often inculcate unto Peter; that
commandment unto the careful discharge whereof they of Ephesus are exhorted,
Attend to your selves and to all flock, Act. 20.28.
wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased by his own blood; finally that commandment which unto
the same Timothy is by the same Apostle even in the same form and manner
afterward again urged, 2. Tim. 4.1.
I charge thee in the sight of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, which will judge
the quick and dead at his appearance and in his kingdom, Preach the word of
God. When Timothy was instituted into that office, then was the credit and
trust of this duty committed unto his faithful care. 1. Tim. 6.20.
The doctrine of the Gospel was the^ given him, as the precious talent or
treasure of Jesus Christ; then received he for performance of this duty, (...).
the special gift of the holy Ghost. To keep this commandment immaculate and
blameless, 1. Tim. 4.14.
was to teach the Gospel of Christ without mixture of corrupt and unsound
doctrine, such as a number did even in those times intermingle with the
mysteries of Christian belief. Til the appearance of Christ to keep it so,
does not import the time wherein it should be kept, but rather the time
whereunto the final reward for keeping it was reserved: according to that of
S. Paul concerning himself, I have kept the faith; 2. Tim. 4.7.
for the residue there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous shall in that day render unto me. If they that labor in
this harvest should respect but the present fruit of their painful travel, a
poor encouragement it were unto them to continue therein all the days of their
life. But their reward is great in heaven; the crown of righteousness which
shall be given them in that day is honorable. The fruit of their industry then
shall they reap with full contentment and satisfaction, but not till then.
Wherein the greatness of their reward is abundantly sufficient, to counteruaile
the tediousness of their expectation. Wherefore till then they that are in
labor must rest in hope. O Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thy
charge, that great commandment which thou have received keep, till the
appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. In which sense although we judge the
Apostles words to have been uttered; yet hereunto we do not require them to
yield, that think any other construction more sound. If therefore it be
rejected, and theirs esteemed more probable which hold that the last words do
import perpetual observation of the Apostles commandment imposed
necessarilly for ever upon the militant Church of Christ; let them withal
consider that then his commandment cannot so largely be taken, as to
comprehend whatsoever the Apostle did command Timothy. For themselves do not
all blind the Church unto some things whereof Timothy received charge, 1. Tim.
5.9.
as namely unto that precept concerning the choice of Widows. So as they
cannot hereby maintain, that all things positiuely commanded concerning the
affairs of the Church, were commanded for perpetuity. And we do not deny,
that certain things were commanded to be, though positive, yet perpetual in
the Church. They should not therefore urge against us places that seem to
forbid change, but rather such as set down some measure of alteration; which
measure if we have exceeded, then might they therewith charge us justly: Whereas
now they themselves both granting, and also using liberty to change, cannot in
reason dispute absolutely against al change. Christ delivered no inconvenient
or unmeet laws. Sundry of ours they hold inconvenient. Therefore such laws
they cannot possibly hold to be Christ's. Being not his, they must of necessity
grant them added unto his. Yet certain of those very laws so added, they
themselves do not judge unlawful; as they plainly confess, both in matter of
prescript attire, and of rites appertaining to burial. Their own
protestations are that they plead against the inconvenience, not the
unlawfulness of popish apparel; and against the inconvenience, not the
unlawfulness of Ceremonies in Burial. Therefore they hold it a thing not
unlawful to add to the laws of Jesus Christ; T.C. l. 3. pa. 241. My reasons
do never conclude the unlawfulness of these ceremonies of burial, but the
inconvenience and inexpediente of them. And in the Table: Of the inconvenience,
not of the unlawfulness of popish apparel and ceremonies in burial.
and so consequently they yield, that no law of Christ forbids addition
unto Church laws. The judgment of Calvin being alleged against them, T.C. l.
1. p. 32. Upon the indefinite speaking of M. Calvin, saying, ceremonies and
external discipline without adding all or some, you go about subtly to make
men believe, that M. Calvin had placed the whole external discipline in the
power and arbiterment of the Church. For if all external discipline were
arbitrary and in the choice of the Church, Excommunication also (which is a
part of it) might be cast away, which I think you will not say. And in the
very next words before. Where you would give to understand that ceremonies and
external discipline are not prescribed particularly by the word of God, and
therefore left to the order of the Church: you must understand that all
external discipline is not left to the order of the Church, being particularly
prescribed in the Scripture^: no more then all ceremonies are left to the order
of the Church, as the sacrament of Baptisms, and Supper of the Lord.
to whom of all men they attribute most, whereas his words be plain, that for
Ceremonies and external discipline the Church has power to make laws: the
answer which herunto they make is, that indefinitly the speech is true, and
that so it was meant by him, namely that some things belonging unto external
discipline and Ceremonies, are in the power and arbitrament of the Church; but
neither was it me^t, neither is it true generally, that al external
discipline, and all Ceremonies are left to the order of the Church, in as much
as the sacraments of Baptism and the Supper of the Lord are Ceremonies, which
yet the Church may not therefore abrogate. Again, excommunication is a part of
external discipline; which might also be cast away, if all external
discipline were arbitrary, and in the choice of the Church. By which their
answer it does appear, that touching the names of Ceremony and external
discipline, they gladly would have us so understood, as if we did herein
contain a great deal more then we do. The fault which we find with them is,
that they overmuch abridge the Church of her power in these things. Whereupon
they recharge us, as if in these things we gave the Church a liberty which has
no limits or bounds; as if all things which the name of discipline co^teineth,
were at the churches free choice, so that we might either have
Church-gouernours and government or want them, either retain or reject Church
censures as we list. They wonder at us, as at men which think it so
indifferent what the Church does in matter of ceremonies, that it may be
feared least we judge the very sacraments themselves to be held at the Churches
pleasure. No, the name of ceremonies we do not use in so large a meaning as to
bring Sacraments within the compass and reach thereof; although things
belonging unto the outward form and seemly administration of them, are
contained in that name, even as we use it. For the name of ceremonies we use as
they themselves do, T.C. l. 3. p. 171.
when they speak after this sort: The Doctrine and Discipline of the Church,
as the waightiest things, ought especially to be looked unto; but the
Ceremonies also, as mynt and common, ought not to be neglected. Besides in the
matter of external discipline or regiment itself, we do not deny but there
are some things whereto the Church is bound till the worlds end. So as the
question is only how far the bounds of the Churches liberty do reach. We
hold that the power which the Church has lawfully to make laws and orders for
it self, does extend unto sundry things of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and
such other matters, whereto their opinion is, that the Churches authority and
power does not reach. Whereas therefore in disputing against us about this
point, they take their compass a great deal wider then the truth of things
can afford, producing reasons and arguments by way of generality, to prove that
Christ has set down all things belonging any way unto the form of ordering
his Church, and has absolutely forbidden change by addition or diminution
great or small (for so their manner of disputing is:) we are constrained to make
our defense, by showing that Christ has not deprived his Church so far of
all liberty in making orders and laws for it self, and that they themselves
do not think he has so done. For are they able to show that all particular
customs, rites and orders of reformed Churches, have been appointed by Christ
himself? No, they grant that in matter of circumstance they alter that which
they have received; T.C. l. 1. p. 27. We deny not but certain things are left
to the order of the Church* because they are of the nature of those which are
varied by times, places, persons, and other circumstances, and so could not at
one be set down and established for ever.
but in things of substance they keep the laws of Christ without change. If
we say the same in our own behalf, (which surely we may do with a great deal
more truth) then must they cancel all that has been before alleged, and
begin to inquire a fresh, whether we retain the laws that Christ has
delivered concerning matters of substance, yea or no. For our constant
persuasion in this point is as theirs, that we have no where altered the laws
of Christ, further then in such particularities only as have the nature of
things chaungeable according to the difference of times, places, persons, and
other the like circumstances. Christ has commanded prayers to be made,
sacraments to be ministered, his Church to be carefully taught and guided.
Concerning every of these somewhat Christ has commanded which must be kept
till the worlds end. On the contrary side in every of the^ somewhat there may
be added, as the Church shall judge it expedient. So that if they will speak
to purpose, all which hitherto has been disputed of they must give over, and
stand upon such particulars only as they can show we have either added or
abrogated otherwise then we ought, in the matter of Church polity. Whatsoever
Christ has commanded for ever to be kept in his Church, the same we take not
upon us to abrogate; and whatsoever our laws have thereunto added besides, of
such quality we hope it is, as no law of Christ does any where condemn.
Wherefore that all may be laid together, and gathered into a narrower room.
forth as the Church is the mystical body of Christ and his invisible spouse,
it needs no external polity. That very part of the law divine which
teaches faith and works of righteousness, is it self alone sufficient for
the Church of God in that respect. But as the Church is a visible society and
body politic, laws of polity it cannot want. Esa. 29.14. Col. 2.22.
for that they imagined all things, which the Church does without commandment
of holy scripture, subject to that reproof which the scripture it self uses
in certain cases, when divine authority ought alone to be followed. Herupon
they thought it enough for the ca^celling of any kind of order whatsoever, to
say, The word of God teaches it not, it is a devise of the brain of man, away
with it therefore out of the Church. Aug. Epist. 26.
S. Augustine was of another mind, who speaking of fasts on the Sunday says,
That he which would choose out that day to fast on, should give thereby no small
offense to the Church of God, which had received a contrary custom. For in
these things whereof the scripture appoints no certainty, the use of the
people of God, or the ordinances of our Fathers must serve for a law. In which
case if we will dispute, and condemn one sort by another custom, it will be
but matter of endless contention; where, for as much as the labor of
reasoning shall hardly beat into men's heads any certain or necessary truth,
surely it stands us upon to take heed, least with the tempest of strife the
brightness of charity and love be darkened. Ios. 22.
If all things must be commanded of God which may be practiced of his Church,
I would know what commandment the Gileadites had to erect that Altar which is
spoken of in the book of Joshua. Did not co^gruity of reason induce them
thereunto, and suffice for defense of their fact? I would know what commandment
the women of Israel had yearly to mourn and lament in the memory of Iephtaes
daughter; Iud. 11.40. ^oh. 10.22.
what commandment the Jews had to celebrate their feast of Dedication never
spoken of in the law, yet solemnized even by our Savior himself; Ioh. 19.40.
what commandment finally they had for the ceremony of odors used about the
bodies of the dead, after which custom notwithstanding (since it was their
custom) our Lord was contented that his own most precious should be intoombd.
Wherefore io reject all orders of the Church which men have established, is to
think worse of the laws of men in this respect, then either the judgment of
wisemen allows, or the law of God it self will bear. Howbeit they which had
once taken upon the^ to condemn all things done in the Church, and not
commanded of God to be done, saw it was necessary for the^ (continuing in
defense of this their opinion) to hold that needs there must be in scripture
set down a co^plete particular form of Church polity, a form prescribing how
all the affairs of the church must be ordered, a form in no respect lawful to
be altered by mortal me^. For reformation of which oversight and error in the^,
there were that thought it a part of Christian love and charity to instruct
the^ better, and to open unto the^ the diference between matters of perpetual
necessity to all men's salvation, and matters of Ecclesiastical polity: the
one both fully and plainly taught in holy scripture, the other not necessary to
be in such sort there prescribed; the one not capable of any diminution or
augmentation at all by men, the other apt to admit both. Herupon the authors
of the former opinion were presently seconded by other wittier and better
learned; who being loath that the form of Church-politie which they sought to
bring in should be otherwise then in the highest degree accounted of, took
first an exception against the difference between Church-politie and matters
of necessity to salvation; secondly against the restraint of scripture, which
they say receives injury at our hands, when we teach that it teaches not as
well matters of polity as of faith and salvation. should be with men. Nisi
reip. suae statum omne^ constituerit, magistratus ordinarit, singulorum munera
potestatemque descripserit, quae iudi ciorum forique ratio habenda, quomodo
ciu^um finiendae lites: non solum minus Ecclesiae Christianae prouidit quam
Moses olim Iudaicae, sed qua^ a Lycurgo, Solone, Numa ciuitatib. suis
prospectu^ fit. Lib. de Ecclesiast. Disc.
so wise as Lycurgus and Solon) must needs have set down in holy scripture
some certain complete and unchangeable form of polity; and partly a colored
show of some evidence, where change of that sort of laws may seem expressly
forbidden, although in truth nothing less be done. I might have added hereunto
their more familiar and popular disputes; as, The Church is a City, yea the
City of the great king, and the life of a City is polity: The Church is the
house of the living God, and what house can there be, without some order for
the government of it? In the royal house of a Prince there must be officers
for government, such as not any servant in the house, but the Prince whose the
house is shall judge convenient: So the house of God must have orders for the
government of it, such as not any of the household, but God himself has
appointed. It cannot stand with the love and wisdom of God, to leave such
order untaken as is necessary for the due government of his Church. The
numbers, degrees, orders, and attire of Salomons servants did show his
wisdom: therefore he which is greater then Solomon, has not failed to leave
in his house such orders for government thereof, as may serve to be as a
looking glass for his providence, care, and wisdom to be seen in. That
little spark of the light of nature which remains in us, may serve us for
the affairs of this life. But as in all other matters concerning the kingdom
of heaven, so principally in this which concerns the very government of that
kingdom, needful it is we should be taught of God. As long as men are
persuaded of any order that it is only of men, they presume of their own
understanding, and they think to devise an other not only as good, but better
then that which they have received. By severity of punishment, this
presumption and curiosity may be restrained. But that cannot work such
cheerful obedience as is yielded, where the conscience has respect to God as
the author of laws and orders. This was it which countenanced the laws of
Moses, made concerning outward polity for the administration of holy things.
The like some law giuers of the Heathens did pretend, but falsely; yet wisely
discerning the use of this persuasion. For the better obedience sake therefore
it was expedient, that God should be author of the polity of his church. But
to what issue does all this come? A man would think that they which hold out
with such discourses, were of nothing more fully persuaded the^ of this, that
the scripture has set down a complete form of Church-politie, universal,
perpetual, altogether unchangeable. For so it would follow if the premises
were sound and strong to such effect as is pretended. Notwithstanding they
which have thus formally maintained argument in defense of the first oversight,
are by the very evidence of truth themselves constrained to make this in effect
their conclusion, that the Scripture of God has many things concerning
Church-politie; that of those many some are of greater weight, some of less;
that what has been urged as touching immutabilitie of laws, it extends in
truth no further then only to laws wherein things of greater moment are
prescribed. Now those things of greater moment, what are they? Forsooth,
Doctors, The defense of godly Minist. against D. Bridges. p. 13^
Pastors, Layelders, Elderships compounded of these three; Synods consisting of
many Elderships; Deacons, women-church-seruants or widows; free consent of the
people unto actions of greatest moment, after they be by Churches or Synodes
orderly resolved. All this form of polity (if yet we may term that a form
of building, when men have laid a few rafters together, and those not all of
the soundest neither) but howsoever, all this form they conclude is prescribed
in such sort, that to add to it any thing as of like importance, (for so I
think they mean) or to abrogate of it any thing at all, is unlawful. In
which resolution if they will firmly and constantly persist, I see not but
that concerning the points which hitherto have been disputed of, they must
agree that they have molested the Church with needelesse opposition; and
henceforward as we said before betake themselves wholly unto the trial of
particulars, whether every of those things which they esteem as principal,
be either so esteemed of, or at all established for perpetuity in holy
scripture; and whether any particular thing in our Church-politie be received
other then the scripture allows of, either in greater things or in smaller.
The matters wherein Church-politie is conversant, are the public religious
duties of the Church, as the administration of the word and sacraments,
prayers, spiritual censures and the like. To these the Church stands always
bound. Laws of polity are laws which appoint in what manner these duties shall
be performed. In performance whereof because all that are of the Church cannot
jointly and equally work, the first thing in polity required, is a difference
of persons in the Church, without which difference those functions cannot in
orderly sort be executed. Hereupon we hold, that Gods clergy are a state
which has been and will be, as long as there is a Church upon earth,
necessary by the plain word of God himself; a state whereunto the rest of
Gods people must be subject as touching things that appertain to their souls
health. For where polity is, it cannot but appoint some to be leaders of
others, and some to be led by others. Luc. 6.^^.
If the blind lead the blind, they both perish. It is with the clergy, if
their persons be respected, even as it is with other men; their quality many
times far beneath that, which the dignity of their place requires. Howbeit
according to the order of polity, they being the lights of the world, Matthew.
5.1^*
others (though better and wiser) must that way be subject unto them. Again,
for as much as where the clergy are any great multitude, order does
necessarily require that by degrees they be distinguished; we hold there have
ever been and ever ought to be in such case, at least wise two sorts of
Ecclesiastical persons, the one subordinate unto the other* as to the Apostles
in the beginning, and to the Bishops always since, we find plainly both in
scripture and in all Ecclesiastical records, other ministers of the word and
sacraments have been. Moreover it cannot enter into any man's conceit to think
it lawful, that every man which lists should take upon him charge in the
Church; and therefore a solemn admittance is of such necessity, that without
it there can be no church-politie. A number of particularities there are, which
make for the more convenient being of these principal and perpetual parts in
Ecclesiastical polity, but yet are not of such constant use and necessity in
Gods Church. Of this kind are times and places appointed for the exercise of
religion; specialties belonging to the public solemnity of the word, the
sacraments and prayer; the enlargement or abridgement of functions ministerial
depending upon those two principal before mentioned; to conclude, even
whatsoever does by way of formalitie and circumstance concern any public
action of the Church. Now although that which the scripture has of things in
the former kind be for ever permanent; yet in the later both much of that which
the scripture teaches is not always needful; and much the Church of God
shall always need which the scripture teaches not. So as the form of
polity by the^ set down for perpetuity, is three ways faulty. Faulty in
omitting some things which in scripture are of that nature, as namely the
difference that ought to be of Pastors when they grow to any great multitude;
faulty in requiring Doctors, Deacons, Widows, and such like; as things of
perpetual necessity by the law of God, which in truth are nothing less;
faulty also in urging some things by scripture immutable, as their Layelders,
which the scripture neither makes immutable, nor at all teaches, for any
thing either we can as yet find, or they have hitherto been able to prove. But
hereof more in the books that follow. As for those marvelous discourses,
whereby they adventure to argue that God must needs have done the thing which
they imagine was to be done; I must confess I have often wondered at their
exceeding boldness herein. When the question is whether God have delivered in
scripture (as they affirm he has) a complet particular immutable form of
Church-politie; why take they that other both presumptuous and superfluous
labor, to prove he should have done it; there being no way in this case to
prove the deed of God, saving only by producing that evidence wherein he has
done it? But if there be no such thing apparent upon record, they do as if one
should demand a legacy by force and virtue of some written testament, wherein
there being no such thing specified, he pleads that there it must needs be,
and brings arguments from the love or goodwill which always the testatour
bore him, imagining that these or the like proofs will convict a testament to
have that in it, which other me^ can no where by reading find. In matters which
concern the actions of God, the most dutiful way on our part is to search what
God has done, and with meeknes to admire that, rather the^ to dispute what he
in congruitie of reason ought to do. The ways which he has whereby to do all
things for the greatest good of his Church, are mo in number the^ we can
search, other in nature the^ that we should presume to determine which of many
should be the fittest for him to choose, till such time as we see he has
chosen of many some one; which one we then may boldly conclude to be the
fittest, because he has taken it before the rest. When we do otherwise,
surely we exceed our bounds, who and where we are we forget; and therefore
needful it is that our pride in such cases be controld, and our disputes
beaten back with those demands of the blessed Apostle. How unsearchable are
his judgments, Romans 11.33.
and his ways past finding out? Who has known the mind of the Lord, or who
was his counselor?

The fourth Book: Concerning their third assertion, that our form of
Church-politie is corrupted with popish orders, rites and ceremonies, banished
out of certain reformed Churches, whose example therein we ought to have
followed.
The matter contained in this fourth Book.
1 HOw great use ceremonies have in the Church. 2 The first thing they blame in
the kind of our ceremonies is, that we have not in them ancient Apostolical
simplicity, but a greater pomp and stateliness. 3 The second, that so many
of them are the same which the Church of Rome uses; and the reasons which they
bring to prove them for that cause blame worthy. 4 How when they go about to
expound what popish ceremonies they mean, they contradict their own arguments
against popish ceremonies. 5 An answer to the argument whereby they would
prove, that since we allow the customs of our fathers to be followed, we
therefore may not allow such customs as the Church of Rome has, because we
cannot account of the^ which are in that Church as of our fathers. 6 To their
allegation that the course of Gods own wisdom does make against our
conformity with the Church of Rome in such things. 7 To the example of the
eldest Church which they bring for the same purpose. 8 That it is not our best
polity (as they pretend it is) for establishment of sound Religion to have in
these things no agreement with the Church of Rome being unsound. 9 That
neither the papists vpbraiding us as furnished out of their store, nor any hope
which in that respect they are said to conceive, does make any more against our
ceremonies then the former allegations have done. 10 The grief which they say
godly brethren conceive, at such ceremonies as we have common with the Church
of Rome. 11 The third thing for which they reprove a great part of our
ceremonies is, for that as we have them from the Church of Rome, so that Church
had them from the Jews. 12 The fourth, for that sundry of them have been (they
say) abused unto idolatry, and are by that mean become scandalous. 13 The
fifth for that we retain them still notwithstanding the example of certain
Churches reformed before us, which have cast them out. 14 A declaration of the
proceedings of the Church of England for the establishment of things as they
are.
1 SVch was the ancient simplicity and softnes of spirit which sometimes
prevailed in the world, How great use ceremonies have in the Church.
that they whose words were even as oracles amongst men, seemed evermore loath
to give sentence against any thing publicly received in the Church of God,
except it were wonderful apparently evil; for that they did not so much
incline to that severity, which delights to reprove the least things it
sees amiss* as to that charity, which is unwilling to behold any thing that
duty binds it to reprove. The state of this present age, wherein zeal has
drowned charity, and skill meeknes, will not now suffer any man to marvel
whatsoever he shall hear reproved by who^soeuer. Those rites and ceremonies of
the church therefore, which are the selfsame now that they were when holy and
virtuous men maintained the^ against profane and deriding adversaries, her
own children have at this day in derision. Whether justly or no, it shall then
appear, when all things are heard which they have to allege against the
outward received orders of this church. Which in as much as themselves do
compare unto mint and comin, Mat. 23.23. The doctrine and discipline of the
Church, as the waightiest things, ought especially to be looked unto: but the
ceremonies also, as mint and comin, ought not to be neglected. T.C. l. 3. p.
171.
granting the^ to be no part of those things which in the matter of polity
are waightier, we hope that for small things their strife will neither be
earnest nor long. The sifting of that which is objected against the orders of
the church in particular, does not belong unto this place. Here we are to
discuss only those general exceptions, which have been taken at any time
against them. First therefore to the end that their nature and use whereunto
they serve may plainly appear, and so afterward their quality the better
be discerned; we are to note that in every grand or main public duty which
God requires at the hands of his Church, there is, besides that matter and
form wherein the essence thereof consists, a certain outward fashion whereby
the same is in decent sort administered. The substance of all Religious actions
is delivered from God himself in few words. For example sake in the sacraments,
Unto the element let the word be added, and they both do make a sacrament,
says S. Augustine. Baptism is given by the element of water, and that
prescript form of words which the church of Christ does use; the sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ is administered in the elements of bread and wine,
if those mystical words be added thereunto. But the due and decent form of
administering those holy sacraments, does require a great deal more. The end
which is aimed at in setting down the outward form of all religious actions,
is the edification of the Church. Now men are edified, when either their
understanding is taught somewhat whereof in such actions it behooves all men to
consider; or when their hearts are moved with any affection suitable thereunto,
when their minds are in any sort stirred up unto that reverence, devotion,
attention and due regard, which in those cases seems requisite. Because
therefore unto this purpose not only speech, but sundry se^sible means besides
have always bin thought necessary, and especially those means which being
object to the eye, the liueliest and the most apprehensiue sense of all other,
have in that respect seemed the fittest to make a deep and strong impression;
from hence have risen not only a number of prayers, readings, questionings,
exhortings, but even of visible signs also; which being used in performance of
holy actions, are undoubtedly most effectual to open such matter, as men when
they know and remember carefully, must needs be a great deal the better
informed to what effect such duties serve. We must not think but that there is
some ground of reason even in nature, whereby it comes to pass, that no
nation under heaven either does or ever did suffer public actions which are
of weight, whether they be civil and temporal, or else spiritual and sacred,
to pass without some visible solemnity; the very strangenes whereof and
difference from that which is common, does cause popular eyes to observe and to
mark the same. Words both because they are common, and do not so strongly
move the phancie of man, are for the most part but slightly heard: and
therefore with singular wisdom it has been provided* that the deeds of men
which are made in the presence of witnesses, should pass not only with words,
but also with certain sensible actions, the memory whereof is far more easy
and durable then the memory of speech can be. The things which so long
experience of all ages has confirmed and made profitable, let not us presume
to condemn as follies and toys, because we sometimes know not the cause and
reason of them. A wit disposed to scorn whatsoever it does not conceive, might
ask wherefore Abraham should say to his servant, Put thy hand under my thigh
and swear: was it not sufficient for his servant to show the Religion of an
oath, Genesis 24.2.
by naming the Lord God of heaven and earth, unless that strange ceremony
were added? In contracts, bargains and conueiances, a man's word is a token
sufficient to express his will. Ruth. 4.7.
Yet this was the ancient manner in Israel concerning redeeming and exchanging
to establish all things; A man did pluck off his shoe, and gave it his
neighbor; and this was a sure witness in Israel. Amongst the Romans in their
making of a bondsman free, was it not wondered wherefore so great a do should
be made? The master to present his slave in some court, to take him by the
hand, and not only to say in the hearing of the public magistrate, I will
that this man become free, but after these solemn words uttered, to strike
him on the cheek, to turn him round, the hair of his head to be shaued off,
the magistrate to touch him thrice with a rod, in the end a cap and a white
garment to be given him. To what purpose all this circumstance? Amongst the
Hebrews how strange and in outward appearance almost against reason, Exodus
21.^.
that he which was minded to make himself a perpetual servant, should not
only testify so much in the presence of the judge, but for a visible token
thereof have also his ear bored through with a nawle? It were an infinite
labor to prosecute these things so far as they might be exempplified both in
civil and religious actions. For in both they have their necessary use and
force. Dionis. p. 12^ (...).
The sensible things which Religion has allowed, are resemblances framed
according to things spiritually understood, whereunto they serve as a hand to
lead and a way to direct. And whereas it may peradventure be objected, that to
add to religious duties such rites and ceremonies as are significant; is to
institute new sacraments: sure I am they will not say that Numa Pompilius did
ordain a sacrament, a significant ceremony he did ordain, in commanding the
Priests Litt. ^. 1. M^nu ad digitos vsque involuta ^em diuina^ facere;
significantes sidem tutandam, sedemque eius etiam in dextris sacratam esse.
to execute the work of their divine service with their hands as far as to
the fingers covered; thereby signifiing that fidelity must be defended, and
that men's right hands are the sacred seat thereof. Again we are also to put
them in mind, that themselves do not hold all significant ceremonies for
sacraments; in as much as imposition of hands they deny to be a sacrament;
and yet they give thereunto a forcible signification. For concerning it their
words are these, Eccl. disci. 101.51.
The party ordained by this ceremony, was put in mind of his separation to the
work of the Lord, that remembering himself to be taken as it were with the
hand of God from amongst others, this might teach him not to account himself
now his own, nor to do what himself lists; but to consider that God has
set him about a work, which if he will discharge and accomplish, he may at the
hands of God assure himself of reward; and if otherwise, of revenge. Touching
significant ceremonies, some of the^ are sacraments, some as sacraments only.
Sacraments are those, which are signs and tokens of some general promised
grace, which always really descends from God unto the soul that duly
receives the^: other significant tokens are only as sacraments, yet no
sacraments. Which is not our distinction but theirs* For concerning the
Apostles imposition of hands, ^ol. 25.
these are their own words; Manuum signum hoc and quasi sacramentum
vsurparunt; They used this sign, or as it were sacrament.

2 Concerning rites and ceremonies, there may be fault, either in the kind, or
in the number and multitude of them. The first thing they blame in the kind of
our ceremonies is, that we have not in them ancient Apostolical simplicity,
but a greater pomp and statelines. lib. eccle. disci. and T.C. l. 3. p. 181.
The first thing blamed about the kind of ours is, that in many things we have
departed from the ancient simplicity of Christ and his Apostles, we have
embraced more outward stateliness, we have those orders in the exercise of
Religion, which they who best pleased God and served him most devoutly never
had. For it is out of doubt, that the first state of things was best, that in
the prime of Christian Religion faith was soundest, the scriptures of God were
then best understood by all men, all parts of godliness did then most abound*
and therefore it must needs follow, that customs laws and ordinances devised
since, are not so good for the Church of Christ; but the best way is to cut off
later inventions, and to reduce things unto the ancient state wherein at the
first they were. Which rule or cano^ we hold to be either uncertain, or at
leastwise insufficient; if not both. For in case it be certain, hard it cannot
be for them to show us, where we shall find it so exactly set down, that we
may say without all controversy, These were the orders of the Apostles times,
these wholly and only, neither fewer nor more then these. True it is that many
things of this nature be alluded unto, yea many things declared, and many
things necessarily collected out of the Apostles writings. But is it necessary
that all the orders of the Church which were then in use should be contained in
their books? Surely no. For if the tenor of their writings be well observed,
it shall unto any man easily appear, that no more of them are there touched,
then were needful to be spoken of sometimes by one occasion and sometimes by
another. Will they allow then of any other records besides? Tom. 7. de bap
contra Dona^ist. l. 5. cap 23.
Well assured I am they are far enough from acknowledging that the church
ought to keep any thing as Apostolical, which is not found in the Apostles
writings* in what other records soever it be found. And therefore whereas S.
Augustine affirms, T.C. l. 1. p. 31. If this judgment of S. Augustine be a
good judgment and sound; then there be some things commanded of God, which
are not in the scripture; and therefore there is no sufficient doctrine
contained in scripture whereby we may be saved. For all the commandments of
God and of the Apostles are needful for our salvation.
that those things which the whole Church of Christ does hold, may well be
thought to be Apostolical, although they be not found written; this his
judgment they utterly condemn. I will not here stand in defense of S.
Augustines opinion, which is that such things are indeed Apostolical; but
yet with this exception, unless the decree of some general council have
happily caused them to be received: for of positive laws and orders received
throughout the whole Christian world, S. Augustine could imagine no other
fountain save these two. But to let pass S. Augustine, they who condemn him
herein, must needs confess it a very uncertain thing what the orders of the
Church were in the Apostles times, seeing the scriptures do not mention them
all, Vid. Epist. 118
and other records thereof besides they utterly reject. So that in tying the
Church to the orders of the Apostles times, they tie it to a marvelous
uncertain rule; unless they require the observation of no orders but only
those which are known to be Apostolical by the Apostles own writings. But
then is not this their rule of such sufficiency, that we should use it as a
touchstone to try the orders of the Church by for ever. Our end ought always
to be the same; our ways and means thereunto not so. The glory of God and
the good of his Church was the thing which the Apostles aimed at, and therefore
ought to be the mark whereat we also level. But seeing those rites and
orders may be at one time more, which at an other are less available unto
that purpose: what reason is there in these things to urge the state of one
only age, as a pattern for all to follow? It is not I am right sure their
meaning, that we should now assemble our people to serve God in close and
secret meetings; or that common brooks or rivers should be used for places of
baptism; or that the Eucharist should be ministered after meat; or that the
custom of Church feasting should be renewed; or that all kind of standing
provision for the ministry should be utterly taken away, and their estate made
again dependent upon the voluntary devotion of men. In these things they
easily perceive how unfit that were for the present, which was for the first
age convenient enough. The faith zeal and godliness of former times is worthily
had in honor: but does this prove that the orders of the Church of Christ must
be still the selfsame with theirs* that nothing may be which was not then, or
that nothing which then was may lawfully since have ceased? They who recall the
Church unto that which was at the first, must necessarily set bounds and
limits unto their speeches. If any thing have been received repugnant unto that
which was first delivered, the first things in this case must stand, the last
give place unto them. But where difference is without repugnancie, that which
has been can be no prejudice to that which is. Let the state of the people of
God when they were in the house of bondage, and their manner of serving God in a
strange land, be compared with that which Canaan and Jerusalem did afford, and
who sees not what huge difference there was between them? In Egypt it may be
they were right glad to take some corner of a poor cottage, and there to serve
God upon their knees, peradventure covered in dust and straw sometimes.
Neither were they therefore the less accepted of God; but he was with them in
all their afflictions, and at the length by working their admirable
deliverance, did testify that they served him not in vain. Notwithstanding in
the very desert they are no sooner possessed of some little thing of their own,
but a tabernacle is required at their hands. Being planted in the land of
Canaan, and having David to be their King, when the Lord had given him rest
from all his enemies, it grieved his religious mind to consider the growth of
his own estate and dignity, the affairs of religion continuing still in the
former manner: Behold now I dwell in an house of Cedar trees, 2. Sam. 7.2.
and the Ark of God remains still within curtains. What he did purpose, it
was the pleasure of God that Solomon his son should perform, and perform it
in manner suitable unto their present, nor their ancient estate and condition.
For which cause Solomon writes unto the King of Tyrus; 2. Chro. ^.^^
The house which I build is great and wonderful; for great is our God above
all Gods. Whereby it clearly appears, that the orders of the Church of God
may be acceptable unto him, as well being framed suitable to the greatness and
dignity of later, as when they keep the reverend simplicity of aunciente^
times. Such dissimilitude therefore between us and the Apostles of Christ, in
the order of some outward things, is no argument of default.

3 Yea but we have framed our selves to the customs of the Church of Rome;
Our orders and ceremonies blamed, in that so many of the^ are the same which
the Church of Rome uses. Eccles. discipl. fol. 12. T.C. lib. 1. p. 131.
our orders and ceremonies are Papisticall. It is espied that our
Church-founders were not so careful as in this matter they should have been,
but contented themselves with such discipline as they took from the Church of
Rome. Their error we ought to reform by abolishing all Popish orders. There
must be no communion nor fellowship with Papists, neither in doctrine,
ceremonies, nor government. It is not enough that we are divided from the
Church of Rome by the single wall of doctrine, reteining as we do part of their
ceremonies, and almost their whole government: but government or ceremonies or
whatsoever it be which is popish, away with it. This is the thing they require
in us, T.C. lib. 1. p. 20.
the utter relinquishment of all things popish. Wherein to the end we may
answer them according unto their plain direct meaning, and not take advantage
of doubtful speech, whereby controversies grow always endless; their maine
position being this, that nothing should be placed in the Church but what God
in his word has commanded, T.C. lib. 1. p. 25
they must of necessity hold all for popish, which the Church of Rome has
over and besides this. By popish orders ceremonies and government they must
therefore mean in every of these so much, as the church of Rome has embraced
without commandment of Gods word: so that whatsoever such thing we have, if
the Church of Rome have it also; it goes under the name of those things that
are Popish, yea although it be lawful, although agreeable to the word of God.
For so they plainly affirm saying: T.C. l. 1. p. 13^.
Although the forms and ceremonies which they (the Church of Rome) used were
not unlawful, and that they contained nothing which is not agreeable to the
word of God; yet notwithstanding neither the word of God, nor reason, nor the
examples of the eldest Churches both Jewish and Christian; do permit us to use
the same forms and ceremonies, being neither commanded of God, neither such as
there may not as good as they and rather better be established. The question
therefore is, whether we may follow the Church of Rome in those orders, rites
and ceremonies, wherein we do not think them blameable; or else ought to
devise others, and to have no conformity with them, no not as much as in these
things. In this sense and construction therefore as they affirm, so we deny,
that whatsoever is popish we ought to abrogate. Their arguments to prove that
generally all popish orders and ceremonies ought to be clean abolished, are in
sum these? First whereas we allow the judgment of Saint Augustine, T.C. l.
1. p. 30.
that touching those things of this kind which are not commanded or
forbidden in the scripture, we are to observe the custom of the people of
God, and decree of our forefathers: how can we retain the customs and
constitutions of the Papists in such things, who were neither the people of
God nor our forefathers? Secondly although the forms and ceremonies of the
Church of Rome were not unlawful, neither did contain any thing which is not
agreeable to the word of God; T.C. l. 1. p. 131.
yet neither the word of God, nor the example of the Eldest Churches of God,
nor reason do permit us to use the same; they being heretics, and so near
about us, and their orders being neither commanded of God, nor yet such but
that as good or rather better may be established. It is against the word of
God, to have conformity with the Church of Rome in such things; as appears
in that the wisdom of God has thought it a good way to keep his people from
infection of Idolatry and superstition, by seuering them from idolaters in
outward ceremonies; and therefore has forbidden them to do things which are
in themselves very lawful to be done: And further whereas the Lord was
careful to sever them by ceremonies from other nations; yet was he not so
careful to sever them from any, as from the Egyptians amongst whom they lived,
and from those nations which were next neighbors unto them, because from the^
was the greatest fear of infection. So that following the course which the
wisdom of God does teach, T.C. l. 1. p. 132 Tom. 2. Br^^. 73.
it were more safe for us to conform our indifferent ceremonies to the Turks
which are far off, then to the Papists which are so near. Touching the
example of the eldest Churches of God, in one council it was decreed, that
Christians should not deck their houses with baye leaves and green boughs,
because the Pagans did use so to do; and that they should not rest from their
labors those days that the Pagans did, that they should not keep the first
day of every month as they did. Con. Africa. cap. 27.
Another council decreed, that Christians should not celebrate feasts on the
birth days of the Martyrs, because it was the manner of the heathen. O says
Tertullian, better is the religion of the Heathen: for they use no solemnity
of the Christians, neither the Lords day, neither the Pentecost, and if they
knew them* they would have nothing to do with them; Lib. de Idololatria.
for they would be afraid least they should seem Christians: but we are not
afraid to be called heathen. The same Tertullian would not have Christians to
sit after they had prayed, He seems to mean the feast of Easter day,
celebrated in the memory of our Saviors resurrection, and for that cause
termed the Lords day. Lib. de Anima
because the Idolaters did so. Whereby it appears, that both of particular
men and of councels, in making or abolishing of ceremonies heed has been taken
that the Christians should not be like the Idolaters, no not in those things
which of themselves are most indifferent to b^ used or not used. The same
co^formitie is not less opposite unto reason; first in as much as Contraries
must be cured by their contraries; and therefore Popery being
Antichristianitie is not healed, but by establishment of orders thereunto
opposite. The way to bring a drunken man to sobriety, is to carry him as far
from excess of drink as may be. To rectify a crooked stick, we bend it on
the contrary side, as far as it was at the first on that side from whence we
draw it; and so it comes in the end to a middle between both, which is
perfect straightnes. Utter Inconformitie therefore with the Church of Rome in
these things, is the best and surest policy which the Church can use. While
we use their ceremonies, they take occasion to blaspheme, saying that our
religion cannot stand by it self, unless it lean upon the staff of their
ceremonies. They hereby conceive great hope of having the rest of their popery
in the end, which hope causes them to be more frozen in their wickedness.
T.C. l. 3. p. 178.
Neither is it without cause that they have this hope, considering that which
master Bucer notes upon the 18. of Saint Matthew, that where these things
have been left, Popery has returned; but on the other part in places which
have been cleansed of these things, it has not yet been seen that it has
had any entrance. None make such clamors for these ceremonies, T.C. l. 3. p. 17^
as the Papists and those whom they suborne; a manifest token how much they
triumph and joy in these things. They breed grief of mind in a number that
are godly minded, and have Antichristianitie in such detestation, that their
minds are martyred with the very sight of them in the Church. Such godly
brethren we ought not thus to grieve with unprofitable ceremonies, yea
ceremonies wherein there is not only no profit, T.C. l. 3. p. 180.
but also danger of great hurt that may grow to the Church by infection,
which popish ceremonies are means to breed. This in effect is the sum and
substance of that which they bring by way of oppositio^ against those orders
which we have common with the church of Rome; these are the reasons wherewith
they would prove our ceremonies in that respect worthy of blame.

That whereas they who blame us in this behalf, when reason euicteth that all
such ceremonies are not to be abolished, make answer that when they condemn
popish ceremonies their meaning is of ceremonies unprofitable, or ceremonies in
stead whereof as good or better may be devised: they cannot hereby get out of
the briers, but contradict and gainesay themselves; in as much as their usual
manner is to prove, that ceremonies uncommanded of God, and yet used in the
Church of Rome, are for this very cause unprofitable to us, and not so good as
others in their place would be.
4 Before we answer unto these things, we are to cut off that, whereunto they
from whom these objections proceed, do oftentimes fly for defense and succor,
when the force and strength of their arguments is elided. For the ceremonies in
use amongst us, being in no other respect retained, saving only for that to
retain the^ is to our seeming good and profitable, yea so profitable and so
good, that if we had either simply taken them clean away, or else removed them
so as to place in their stead others, we had done worse: the plain and direct
way against us herein had bin only to prove, that all such ceremonies as they
require to be abolished are retained by us with the hurt of the Church, or with
less benefit the^ the abolishme^t of the^ would bring. But for as much as they
saw how hardly they should be able to perform this; they took a more
compendious way, traducing the ceremonies of our church under the name of being
popish. The cause why this way seemed better unto them was, for that the name
of Popery is more odious then very Paganism amongst diverse of the more simple
sort; so as whatsoever they hear named popish, they presently conceive deep
hatred against it, imagining there ca^ be nothing contained in that name, but
needs it must be exceeding detestable. The ears of the people they have
therefore filled with strong clamor; The church of England is fraught with
popish ceremonies: They that favor the cause of reformation, maintain nothing
but the sincerity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: All such as withstand them,
fight for the laws of his sworn enemy, uphold the filthy relics of
Antichrist; and are defenders of that which is popish. These are the notes
wherewith are drawn from the hearts of the multitude so many sighs; with these
tunes their minds are exasperated against the lawful guides and governors of
their souls; these are the voices that fill the^ with general disco^tentment, as
though the bosom of that famous Church wherein they live, were more noisome
then any dungeon. But when the authors of so scandalous incantations are
examined and called to account how they can justify such their dealings; when
they are urged directly to answer, whether it be lawful for us to use any
such ceremonies as the Church of Rome uses, T.C. lib. p. 171. What an open
untruth is it, that this is one of our principles not to be lawful to use the
same ceremonies which the Papists did: when as I have both before declared the
contrary, and even here have expressly added* that they are not to be used
when as good or better way be established?
although the same be not commanded in the word of God; being driven to see
that the use of some such ceremonies must of necessity be granted lawful,
they go about to make us believe that they are just of the same opinion, and
that they only think such ceremonies are not to be used when they are
unprofitable, or when as good or better may be established. Which answer is
both idle in regard of us, and also repugnant to themselves. It is in regard of
us very vain to make this answer, because they know that what ceremonies we
retain common unto the Church of Rome, we therefore retain them, for that we
judge them to be profitable, and to be such that others in stead of them would
be worse. So that when they say that we ought to abrogate such Romish
ceremonies as are unprofitable, or else might have other more profitable in
their stead; they trifle and they beat the air about nothing which touches
us, unless they mean that we ought to abrogate all Romish ceremonies, which
in their judgment have either no use, or less use then some other might have.
But then must they show some commission, whereby they are authorized to sit as
judges, and we required to take their judgment for good in this case.
Otherwise their sentences will not be greatly regarded, when they oppose their
Me thinks unto the orders of the Church of England: as in the question about
surplesses one of them does; If we look to the color, black me thinks is
more decent; if to the form, a garment down to the foot has a great deal
more co^linesse in it. Ecclesi. discipl. fol. 100.
If they think that we ought to prove the ceremonies commodious which we have
retained, they do in this point very greatly deceive themselves. For in all
right and equity; that which the Church has received and held so long for
good, that which public approbation has ratified, must carry the benefit of
presumption with it to be accounted meet and convenient. T.C. l. 3. p. 176. As
for your oft^^ repeating tha^ the ceremonies in question are godly, comely and
decent: it is your old wont of demanding the thing in question, and an
undoubted argument of your extreme poverty.
They which have stood up as yesterday to challenge it of defect, must prove
their challenge. If we being defendants do answer, that the ceremonies in
question are godly, comely, decent, profitable for the Church* their reply is
childish and unorderly to say, that we demand the thing in question, and show
the poverty of our cause, the goodness whereof we are feign to beg that our
adversaries would grant. For on our part this must be the answer, which
orderly proceeding does require. The burden of proving does rest on them. In
them it is frivolous to say, we ought not to use bad ceremonies of the Church
of Rome, and presume all such bad as it pleases themselves to dislike; unless
we can persuade them the contrary. Besides, they are herin opposite also to
themselves. For what one thing is so common with the^, as to use the custom of
the Church of Rome for an argument to prove, that such and such ceremonies
cannot be good and profitable for us, in as much as that church uses them?
Which usual kind of disputing, shows that they do not disallow only those
Romish ceremonies which are unprofitable, T.C. l. p. 174.
but count all unprofitable which are Romish; that is to say, which have been
devised by the Church of Rome, or which are used in that Church, and not
prescribed in the word of God. For this is the only limitation which they can
use suitable unto their other positions. And therefore the cause which they
yield, why they hold it lawful to retain in Doctrine and in Discipline some
things as good, which yet are common to the Church of Rome, is for that those
good things are perpetual commandments, in whose place no other can come; but
ceremonies are changeable. So that their judgment in truth is, that whatsoever
by the word of God is not changeable in the Church of Rome, that Churches using
is a cause, why reformed Churches ought to change it, and not to think it good
or profitable. And least we seem to father any thing upon them more the^ is
properly their own, let them read even their own words, where they complain
that we are thus constrained to be like unto the Papists in Any their
ceremonies; yea they urge that this cause although it were alone, T.C. l. 3. p.
177. And that this complaint of ^urs is just, in that we are thus constrained
to be like unto the Papists in any their ceremonies, and that this cause only
ought to move. them to whom that belongs to do theirs away, for as much (...)
they are their ceremonies: the Reader may further se^ in the B. of Salisbury,
who brings diverse proofs thereof.
ought to move them to whom that belongs to do the^ away, for as much as they
are their ceremonies, and that the B. of Salisbury does justify this their
complaint. The clause is untrue which they add concerning the B. of Salisbury;
but the sentence does show, that we do them no wrong in setting down the state
of the question between us thus; Whether we ought to abolish out of the Church
of England all such orders, rites and ceremonies, as are established in the
Church of Rome, and are not prescribed in the word of God. For the affirmative
whereof we are now to answer such proofs of theirs as have been before
alleged.

5 Let the Church of Rome be what it will, That our allowing the customs of
our fathers to be followed, is no proof that we may not allow some customs
which the Church of Rome has, although we do not account of them as of our
fathers.
let them that are of it be the people of God and our fathers in the Christian
faith, or let them be otherwise, hold them for Catholics, or hold them for
heretics, it is not a thing either one way or other in this present question
greatly material. Our conformity with the^ in such things as have been
proposed, is not proved as yet unlawful by all this S. Augustine has said,
yea and we have allowed his saying; That the custom of the people of God, and
the decrees of our forefathers are to be kept, touching those things whereof the
scripture has neither one way nor other given us any charge. What then? Does
it here therefore follow, that they being neither the people of God nor our
forefathers, are for that cause in nothing to be followed? This consequent were
good, if so be it were granted, that only the custom of the people of God
and the decrees of our forefathers are in such case to be observed. But then
should no other kind of later laws in the church be good, which were a gross
absurdity to think. S. Augustines speech therefore does import, that where we
have no divine precept, if yet we have the custom of the people of God, or a
decree of our forefathers; this is a law and must be kept. Notwithstanding it
is not denied, but that we lawfully may observe the positive constitutions of
our own Churches, although the same were but yesterday made by our selves
alone. Nor is there any thing in this to prove, that the Church of England
might not by law receive orders, rites or customs from the Church of Rome,
although they were neither the people of God nor yet our forefathers. How much
less when we have received from them nothing, but that which they did
themselves receive from such, as we cannot deny to have been the people of God,
yea such as either we must acknowledge for our own forefathers, or else
disdain the race of Christ?

6 The rites and orders wherein we follow the Church of Rome, That the course
which the wisdom of God does teach, makes not against our conformity with
the Church of Rome in such things.
are of no other kind the^ such as the Church of Geneua it self does follow
the^ in. We follow the church of Rome in more things; yet they in some things of
the same nature about which our present controversy is: so that the difference
is not in the kind, but in the number of rites only, wherein they and we do
follow the Church of Rome. The use of wafer-cakes, the custom of godfathers and
godmothers in baptism, are things not commanded nor forbidden in scripture;
things which have been of old, and are retained in the Church of Rome even at
this very hour. Is conformity with Rome in such things a blemish unto the
Church of England, and unto Churches abroad an ornament? Let the^, if not for
the reverence they ow unto this Church, in the bowels whereof they have received
I trust that precious and blessed vigor, which shall quicken the^ to eternal
life; yet at the leastwise for the singular affection which they do bear
toward others, take heed how they strike, least they wound whom they would
not. For undoubtedly it cutteth deeper the^ they are aware of, when they plead
that eue^ such ceremonis of the church of Rome, as co^teine in the^ nothing
which is not of it self agreeable to the word of God, ought nevertheless to
be abolished; and that neither the word of God, nor reason, nor the examples of
the eldest Churches, do permit the Church of Rome to be therein followed.
Heretics they are, and they are our neighbors. By us and amongst us they lead
their lives. But what then? Therefore no ceremony of theirs lawful for us to
use? W^ ^ust yield and will that none are lawful, T.C. lib. 1. p. 89. and 131.
if God himself be a precede^t against the use of any. But how appears it
that God is so? Hereby they say it does appear, in that God severed his people
from the Heathens, but specially from the Egyptians, and such nations as were
nearest neighbors unto them, by forbidding them to do those things, Leuit. 18.3.
which were in themselves very lawful to be done, yea very profitable some and
incommodious to be forborne: such things it pleased God to forbid them, only
because those Heathens did them, with whom conformity in the same things might
have bred infection. Thus in shauing, cutting, apparel wearing, Leuit. 19.27.
Leuit. 19.19.
yea in sundry kinds of meats also, swines flesh, conies, and such like, they
were forbidden to do so and so, because the Gentiles did so. And the end why
God forbad them such things was, Deuteronomy. 22.11. Deuteronomy. 14.7. and Leuit. 11.
to sever them for fear of infection by a great and an high wall from other
nations, Ephesians. 2.14.
as S. Paul teaches. The cause of more careful separation from the nearest
nations, was the greatness of danger to be especially by them infected. Now
Papists are to us as those nations were unto Israel. Therefore if the wisdom
of God be our guide, we cannot allow conformity with them, no not in any such
indifferent ceremony. Our direct answer hereunto is, that for any thing here
alleged we may still doubt, whether the Lord in all such indifferent
ceremonies as those whereof we dispute, did frame his people of set purpose
unto any utter dissimilitude, either with Egyptians, or with any other nation
else. And if God did not forbid them all such indifferent ceremonies; then our
conformity with the Church of Rome in some such is not hitherto as yet
disproued, although Papists were unto us as those heathens were unto Israel.
After the doings of the land of Egypt, Leuit. 18.3.
wherein you dwelt, ye shall not do, says the Lord; and after the manner of the
land of Canaan, whether I will bring you, shall ye not do, neither walk in
their ordinances: Do after my judgments, and keep my ordinances to walk
therein: I am the Lord your God. The speech is indefinite, ye shall not be like
them: It is not general, ye shall not be like them in any thing, or like unto
them in any thing indifferent, or like unto them in any indifferent ceremony of
theirs. Seeing therefore it is not set down how far the bounds of his speech
concerning dissimilitude should reach; how can any man assure us, that it
exte^deth farther then to those things only, wherein the nations there mentioned
were idolatrous, or did against that which the law of God commands? Nay does
it not seem a thing very probable, that God does purposely add, Do after my
judgments; as giving thereby to understand, that his meaning in the former
sentence was but to bar similitude in such things, as were repugnant unto the
ordinances, laws and statutes which he had given* Egyptians and Cananites are
for example sake named unto them, because the customs of the one they had bin,
and of the other they should be best acquainted with. But that wherein they
might not be like unto either of them, was such peradventure as had been no
whit less unlawful, although those nations had never been. So that there is
no necessity to think, that God for fear of infection by reason of neernes
forbad them to be like to the Cananites or the Egyptians, in those things
which otherwise had been lawful enough. For I would know what one thing was in
those nations, and is here forbidden, being indifferent in it self, yet
forbidden only because they used it. In the laws of Israel we find it written,
Leuit. 19.27.
ye shall not cut round the corners of your heads, neither shall thou tear the
tufts of thy beard. These things were usual amongst those nations, and in
themselves they are indifferent. But are they indifferent being used as signs
of immoderate and hopeles lamentation for the dead? In this sense it is that
the law forbids them. For which cause the very next words following are,
Leuit. 21.5.
ye shall not cut your flesh for the dead, nor make any print of a mark upon
you; I am the Lord. The like in Leuiticus, where speech is of mourning for the
dead, Deuteronomy. 14.1.
They shall not make bald parts upon their head, nor shave off the locks of
their beard, nor make any cutting in their flesh. Again in Deuteronomy, ye are
the children of the Lord your God; ye shall not cut your selves, nor make you
baldnes between your eyes for the dead. What is this but in effect the same
which the Apostle does more plainly express, 1. These. 4.13.
saying, Sorrow not as they do which have no hope? The very light of nature it
self was able to see herein a fault; that which those nations did use, having
bin also in use with others, the ancient Roman laws do forbid. That shauing
therefore and cutting which the law does mention, was not a matter in it self
indifferent, and forbidden only because it was in use amongst such idolaters
as were neighbors to the people of God; but to use it had bin a crime, though
no other people or nation under heaven should have done it saving only
themselves. As for those laws concerning attire, Leuit. 19.19.
There shall no garment of linen and woollen come upon thee; Deuteronomy. 22.11.
as also those touching food and diet, wherein swines flesh together with
sundry other meats are forbidden; the use of these things had been indeed of
it self harmless and indifferent: so that hereby it does appear, how the
law of God forbad in some special consideration, such things as were lawful
enough in themselves. Deuteronomy. 14.7.
But yet even here they likewise fail of that they intend. For it does not
appear, Leuit. 11.
that the consideration in regard whereof the law forbids these things* was
because those nations did use them. Likely enough it is that the Cananites used
to feed as well on sheep as on swines flesh; and therefore if the forbidding
of the later had no other reason the^ dissimilitude with that people, they
which of their own heads allege this for reason, Leuit. 19.19.
can show I think some reason more the^ we are able to find, why the former was
not also forbidden. Might there not be some other mystery in this prohibition
then they think of? Yes, some other mystery there was in it by all likelihood.
For what reason is there which should but induce, Deuteronomy. 14. Leuit. 11.
and therefore much less enforce us to think, that care of dissimilitude
between the people of God and the heathen nations about the^, was any more the
cause of forbidding them to put on garments of sundry stuff, then of charging
them withal not to sow their fields with mesline; or that this was any more
the cause of forbidding them to eat swines flesh, then of charging them
withal not to eat the flesh of Eagles, Hawks, and the like? Wherefore
although the Church of Rome were to us, as to Israel the Egyptians and
Cananites were of old; Ephesians. 2.14.
yet does it not follow, that the wisdom of God without respect does teach us
to erect between us and them a partition wall of difference, in such things
indifferent as have been hitherto disputed of.

7 Neither is the example of the eldest Churches a whit more available to this
purpose. That the example of the eldest Churches is not herein against us.
Notwithstanding some fault undoubtedly there is in the very resemblance of
Idolaters. Were it not some kind of blemish to be like unto Infidels and
Heathens, T.C. l. 1. p. 132. The Councels although they did not observe
themselves always in making of decrees this rule, yet have kept this
consideration continually in making of their laws, that they would have the
Christians differ from others in their ceremonies.
it would not so usually be objected; men would not think it any advantage in
the causes of Religion, to be able therewith justly to charge their adversaries
as they do. Wherefore to the end that it may a little more plainly appear,
what force this has, and how far the same extends; we are to note how all
men are naturally desirous, that they may seem neither to judge, not to do
^misse; because every error and offence^s* stain to the beauty of nature, for
which cause it blusheth thereat, but glories in the contrary. From thence it
rises, that they which disgrace or depresse the credit of others, do it either
in both or in one of these. To have been in either directed by a weak and
imperfect rule, argues imbecility and imperfection. Men being either led by
reason, or by imitation of other men's example; if their persons be odious whose
example we choose to follow, as namely if we frame our opinions to that which
condemned heretics think, or direct our actions according to that which is
practiced and done by them; it lies as an heavy prejudice against us, unless
somewhat mightier then their bare example, did move us to think or do the same
things with the^. Christian me^ therefore having besides the common light of all
men so great help of heavenly directions from above, together with the lamps
of so bright examples as the Church of God does yield; it cannot but worthily
seem reproachful for us, to leave both the one and the other, to become
disciples unto the most hateful sort that live, to do as they do, only
because we see their example before us and have a delight to follow it. Thus we
may therefore safely conclude, that it is not evil simply to concur with the
Heathens either in opinion or in action: and that conformity with them is
only then a disgrace, when either we follow them in that they think and do
amiss, or follow them generally in that they do, without other reason then
only the liking we have to the pattern of their example; which liking does
intimate a more universal approbation of them then is allowable. Faustus the
Manichey therefore obiecting against the Jews, To. 6. cont. Faust. M^nich. lib.
20. cap. 4.
that they forsook the Idols of the Gentiles, but their temples, and
oblations, and Altars, and Priesthoods, and all kinds of ministry of holy
things, they exercised even as the Gentiles did, yea more superstitiously a
great deal; against the Catholic Christians likewise, that between them and
the Heathens there was in many things little difference, From them (says
Faustus) ye have learned to hold that one only God is the Author of all, their
sacrifices ye have turned into feasts of charity, their idols into Martyrs
whom ye honor with the like religious offices unto theirs, the ghosts of the
dead ye appease with wine and delicates, the festival days of the Nations ye
celebrate together with them and of their kind of life ye have verily changed
nothing: S. Augustines defense in behalf of both is, that touching the
matters of action, Jews and Catholic Christians were free from the Gentiles
faultines, even in those things which were objected as tokens of their
agreement with the Gentiles; and concerning their consent in opinion, they did
not hold the same with Gentiles because Gentiles had so taught, but because
heaven and earth had so witnessed the same to be truth, that neither the one
sort could err in being fully persuaded thereof, nor the other but err in
case they should not consent with them. In things of their own nature
indifferent, if either Councils or particular me^ have at any time with sound
judgment misliked conformity between the Church of God and Infidels, the
cause thereof has bin somewhat else then only affectation of dissimilitude. They
saw it necessary so to do, T.C. l. 1. p. 132. Also it was decreed in another
Council, that they should not deck their houses with bay leaves and green
boughs, because the Pagans did vses^; and that they should not rest from their
la^or those days that the Pagans did, that they should not keep the first day
of every month as they did.
in respect of some special accident; which the Church being not always
subject unto, has not still cause to do the like. For example, in the dangerous
days of trial, wherein there was no way for the truth of Jesus Christ to
triumph over infidelity, but through the constancy of his Saints whom yet a
natural desire to save themselves from the flame, might peradventure cause to
join with Pagans in external customs, too far using the same as a cloak
to conceal themselves in, and a mist to darken the eyes of Infidels withal:
for remedy hereof, those laws it might be were provided, which forbad that
Christians should deck their houses with boughs as the Pagans did use to do,
or rest those festival days whereon the Pagans rested, or celebrate such
feasts as were, though not Heathenish, yet such that the simpler sort of
Heathens might be beguiled in so thinking the^. T.C. l. 3. p. 132 Tertul.
says, O says he, better is the religion of the Heathen; for they use no
solemnity of the Christians, neither the Lords day, neither, etc: but we are
not afraid to be called Heathen.
As for Tertullians judgment concerning the rites and orders of the Church, no
man having judgment can be ignorant how just exceptions may be taken against
it. His opinion touching the Catholic Church was as vnindifferent, as touching
our Church the opinion of them that favor this pretended reformation is. He
judged all them who did not Montanize, to be but carnally minded, he judged
them still ouer-abiectly to fawn upon the Heathens, and to curry favor with
Infidels. Which as the Catholic Church did well provide that they might not
do indeed, so Tertullian oueroften through coffeehouse carpeth injuriously
at them, as though they did it even when they were free from such meaning. But
if it were so that either the judgment of those counsels before alleged, or
of Tertullian himself against the Christians, T.C. l. 1. p. 133. But having
showed this in general to be the polity of God first, and of h^^ people
afterward, to put as much difference as can be commodiously between the
people of God and others which are not; I shall not, etc.
are in no such consideration to be understood as we have mentioned; if it were
so that men are condemned as well of the one as of the other, only for using
the ceremonies of a religion contrary unto their own; and that this cause is
such as ought to prevail no less with us then with them; shall it not follow
that seeing there is still between our religion and Paganism the self same
contrariety, therefore we are still no less rebukeable, if we now deck our
houses with boughs, or send New yeares-gifts unto our friends, or feast on
those days which the Gentiles then did, or sit after prayer as they were
accustomed? For so they infer upon the premises, that as great difference as
commodiously may be, there should be in all outward ceremonies between the
people of God and them which are not his people. Again they teach as has been
declared, that there is not as great a difference as may be between them,
except the one do avoid whatsoever rites and ceremonies uncommanded of God the
other does embrace. So that generally they teach, that the very difference of
spiritual condition it self between the servants of Christ and others,
requires such difference in ceremonies between them, although the one be
never so far disioyned in time or place from the other. But in case the
people of God and Belial do chance to be neighbors; then as the danger of
infection is greater, so the same difference they say is thereby made more
necessary. In this respect as the Jews were severed from the Heathen, so most
especially from the Heathen nearest them. And in the same respect we, which
ought to differ howsoever from the Church of Rome, are now they say by reason
of our meerenesse more bound to differ from them in ceremonies then from
Turks. A strange kind of speech unto Christian ears, and such as I hope they
themselves do acknowledge unadvisedly uttered. We are not so much to fear
infection from Turks as from Papists. What of that? we must remember that by
conforming rather our selves in that respect to Turks, we should be spreaders
of a worse infection into others* then any we are likely to draw from Papists
by our conformity with them in ceremonies. If they did hate as Turks do, the
Christians; or as Cananites of old did the Jewish religion even in gross; the
circumstance of local neernes in them unto us, might happily enforce in us a
duty of greater separation from them, then from those other mentioned. But for
as much as Papists are so much in Christ nearer unto us then Turks, is there
any reasonable man trow you, but will judge it meeter that our ceremonies of
Christian religion should be Popish then Turkish or Heathenish? Especially
considering that we were not brought to dwell amongst them (as Israel in
Canaan) having not been of them. For even a very part of them we were. And when
God did by his good Spirit put it into our hearts, first to reform our selves,
(whence grew our separation) and then by all good means to seek also their
reformation; had we not only cut off their corruptions, but also estranged our
selves from them in things indifferent; who sees not how greatly prejudicial
this might have been to so good a cause, and what occasion it had given them to
think (to their greater obduration in evil) that through a froward or wanton
desire of innovation, we did vnconstrainedly those things, for which
conscience was pretended? Howsoever the case does stand, as Judah had been
rather to choose conformity in things indifferent with Israel when they were
nearest opposites, then with the farthest removed Pagans: So we in like case,
much rather with Papists then with Turks. I might add further for more full
and complete answer, so much concerning the large odds between the case of
the eldest Churches in regard of those Heathens, and ours in respect of the
Church of Rome, that very cauillation it self should be satisfied, and have no
shift to fly unto.

8 But that no one thing may deteine us over long, That it is not our best
policy for the establishment of sound religion* to have in these things no
agreement with the Church of Rome being unsound.
I return to their reasons against our conformity with that Church. That
extreme dissimilitude which they urge upon us, is now commended as our best and
safest policy for establishment of sound religion. The ground of which
politic position is, that Evils must be cured by their contraries; and
therefore the cure of the Church infected with the poison of Antichristianity,
must be done by that which is thereunto as contrary as may be. A meddled estate
of the orders of the Gospel and the ceremonies of popery, is not the best way
to banish popery. We are co^trarywise of opinion, that he which will perfectly
recover a sick, and restore a diseased body unto health, must not endeavor so
much to bring it to a state of simple co^trariety, as of fit proportion in
contrariety unto those evils which are to be cured. T.C. l. 1. p. 132 Common
reason also does teach, that contraries are cured by their contraries. Now
Christianity, and Antichristianity, the Gospel and Popery* be contra^ies, and
therefore Antichristianitie must be cured, not by itself, but by that which is
(as much as may be) contrary unto it.
He that will take away extreme heat, by setting the body in extremity of cold,
shall undoubtedly remove the disease, but together with it the diseased too.
The first thing therefore in skillful cures, is the knowledge of the part
affected; the next is of the evil which do affect it; the last is not only of
the kind, but also of the measure of contrary things whereby to remove it. They
which measure religion by dislike of the Church of Rome, think every man so
much the more sound; by how much he can make the corruptions thereof to seem
more large. And therefore some there are, namely the Arrians in reformed
Churches of Poland, which imagine the cancre to have eaten so far into the very
bones and marrow of the Church of Rome, as if it had not so much as a sound
belief, no not concerning God himself, but that the very belief of the
Trinity were a part of Antichristian corruption; and that the wonderful
providence of God did bring to pass, that the Bishop of the Sea of Rome should
be famous for his triple crown; a sensible mark whereby the world might know
him to be that mystical beast spoken of in the Revelation, to be that great
and notorious Antichrist in no one respect so much, as in this that he
maintains the doctrine of the Trinity. Wisdom therefore and skill is
requisite to know, what parts are sound in that Church, and what corrupted.
Neither is it to all men apparent which complain of unsound parts, with what
kind of unsoundness every such part is possessed. They can say that in
Doctrine, in Discipline, in Prayers, in Sacraments, the Church of Rome has (as
it has in deed) very foul and gross corruptions: the nature whereof
notwithstanding because they have not for the most part exact skill and
knowledge to discern, they think that amiss many times which is not, and the
salve of reformation they mightily call for; but where and what the sores are
which need it, as they wot full little, so they think it not greatly
material to search. Such men's contentment must be wrought by stratageme: the
usual method of art is not for them. But with those that profess more then
ordinary and common knowledge of good from evil, with them that are able to
put a difference between things naught, and things indifferent in the Church
of Rome, we are yet at controversy about the manner of removing that which is
naught: whether it may not be perfectly helped, unless that also which is
indifferent be cut off with it, so far till no rite or ceremony remain which
the Church of Rome has, being not found in the word of God. If we think this
to extreme, T.C. l. 1. p.132. If a man would bring a drunken man to sobriety,
the best and nearest way is to carry him as far from his excess in drink as
may be: and if a man could not keep a mean, it were better to fault in
prescribing less them he should drink, the^ to fault in giving him more then
he ought. As we see to bring a stick which is crooked to be straight, we do
not only how it so far until it come to be straight, but we bend it so far
until we make it so crooked of the other side, as it was before of the first
side; to this end that at the last it may stand straight, and as it were in the
midway between both the crookes.
they reply that to draw me^ from great excess, it is not amiss though we use
them unto somewhat less then is competent; and that a crooked stick is not
stieightned unless it be bent as far on the clean contrary side, that so it
may settle it self at the length in a middle estate of euennes between both.
But how can these co^parisons stand them in any steed? When they urge us to
extreme opposition against the Church of Rome, do they mean we should be
drawn unto it only for a time, and afterward return to a mediocrity? or was
it the purpose of those reformed churches, which utterly abolished all popish
ceremonies, to come in the end back again to the middle point of evenness and
moderation? Then have we conceived amiss of their meaning. For we have always
thought their opinion to be, that utter inconformity with the Church of Rome
was not an extremity whereunto we should be drawn for a time, but the very
mediocrity it self wherein they meant we should ever continue. Now by these
comparisons it seems clean contrary, that howsoever they have bent
themselves at first to an extreme contrariety against the Romish Church, yet
therein they will continue no longer then only till such time as some more
moderate course for establishme^t of the Church may be concluded. Yea, albeit
this were not at the first their intent, yet surely now there is great cause to
lead the^ unto it. They have seen that experience of the former policy,
which may cause the authors of it to hang down their heads. When Germany had
stricke^ off that which appeared corrupt in the doctrine of the Church of Rome*
but seemed nevertheless in discipline still to retain therewith very great
conformity: France by that rule of policy which has been before mentioned,
took away the Popish orders which Germany did retain. But process of time
has brought more light unto the world; whereby men perceiving that they of the
religion in France have also retained some orders which were before in the
Church of Rome, and are not commanded in the word of God; there has arisen a
sect in England, which following still the very self same rule of policy,
seeks to reform even the French reformation, and purge out from thence also
dregs of Popery. These have not taken as yet such root that they are ^able to
establish any thing. But if they had, what would spring out of their stock,
and how far the unquiet wit of man might be carried with rules of such
policy, God does know. The trial which we have lived to see, may somewhat
teach us what posterity is to fear. But our Lord of his infinite mercy,
auert whatsoever evil our swaruings on the one hand or on the other may
threaten unto the state of his Church.

9 That the Church of Rome does hereby take occasion to blaspheme, That we are
not to abolish our Ceremonies, either because Papists vpbraide us as having
taken from them* or for that they are said hereby to conceive I know not what
great hopes.
and to say our religion is not able to stand of it self, unless it lean
upon the staff of their Ceremonies, T.C. l. 3. p. 178. By using of these
Ceremonies, the Papists take occasion to blaspheme; saying that our religion
cannot stand by it self, unless it l^^ue upon the staff of their Ceremonies.
is not a matter of so great moment, that it did need to be objected, or does
deserve to receive answer. The name of blasphemy in this place, is like the
shoe of Hercules on a child's foot. If the Church of Rome do use any such kind
of silly exprobration, it is no such ougly thing to the ear, that we should
think the honor and credit of our religion to receive thereby any great
wound. They which hereof make so perilous a matter, do seem to imagine, that
we have erected of late a frame of some new religion; the furniture whereof we
should not have borrowed from our enemies, least they relieuing us might
afterward laugh and gibe at our poverty: whereas in truth the Ceremonies which
we have taken from such as were before us, are not things that belong to this
or to that sect, but they are the ancient rites and customs of the Church of
Christ; whereof our selves being a part, we have the self same interest in
them which our fathers before us had, from whom the same are descended unto us.
Again in case we had been so much beholding privately unto them, does the
reputation of one Church stand by saying unto another, I need thee not? If some
should be so urine and impotent, as to mar a benefit with reproachful
vpbraiding, where at the least they suppose themselves to have bestowed some
good turn; yet surely a wise bodies part it were not, to put out his fire,
because his fond and foolish neighbor, from whom he borrowed peradventure
wherewith to kindle it, might happily cast him therewith in the teeth, saying,
were it not for me thou would freeze, and not be able to heat thy self. As
for that other argument derived from the secret affection of Papists, with whom
our conformity in certain Ceremonies is said to put them in great hope, that
their whole religion in time will have reentrance; T.C. l. 1. p. 179. To prove
the Papists triumph and joy in these things, I alleged further that there are
^o^e which make such clamors for these ceremonies, as the Papists and those
which they suborne.
and therefore none are so clamorous amongst us for the observation of these
Ceremonies, as Papists and such as Papists suborne to speak for them, whereby
it clearly appears how much they rejoice, how much they triumph in these
things; our answer hereunto is still the same, that the benefit we have by
such ceremonies ouerweigheth even this also. No man which is not exceeding
partial can well deny, but that there is most just cause wherefore we should
be offended greatly at the Church of Rome. Notwithstanding at such times as we
are to deliberate for our selves, the freer our minds are from all distempered
affections, the sounder and better is our judgment. When we are in a fretting
mood at the Church of Rome, and with that angry disposition enter into any
cogitation of the orders and rites of our Church; taking particular survey of
them, we are sure to have always one eye fixed upon the countenance of our
enemies, and according to the blithe or heavy aspect thereof, our other eye
shows some other suitable token either of dislike or approbation toward our
own orders. For the rule of our judgment in such case being only that of
Homer, (...)
This is the thing which our enemies would have; what they seem contented
with, even for that very cause we reject; and there is nothing but it pleases
us much the better, if we espy that it gauleth them. Miserable were the state
and condition of that Church, the weighty affairs whereof should be ordered by
those deliberations, wherein such an humor as this were perdominant. We have
most heartily to thank God therefore, that they amongst us to whom the first
consultations of causes of this kind fell, were men which aiming at another
mark, namely the glory of God and the good of this his Church, took that
which they judged thereunto necessary, not rejecting any good or convenient
thing, only because the Church of Rome might perhaps like it. If we have that
which is mere and right, although they be glad, we are not to envy them this
their solace; we do not think it a duty of ours, to be in every such thing
their tormentors. And whereas it is said, T.C. l. 3. p. 179. Thus they
conceiving hope of having the rest of their popery in the end* it causes them
to be more frozen in their wickedness, etc. For not the cause, but the
occasion also ought to be taken away, etc. Although let the reader judge,
whether they have cause given to hope that the tails of Popery yet remaining*
they shall the easilier hale in the whole body after: considering also that
Master Bucer notes, that where these things have been left, there Popery has
returned: but on the other part in places which have been cleansed of these
dregs, it has not bin seen that it has had any entrance.
that Popery for want of this utter extirpation has in some places taken root
and flourished again, but has not been able to reestablish it self in any
place, after provision made against it by utter euacuation of all Romish
ceremonies; and therefore as long as we hold any thing like unto them, we put
them in some more hope, then if all were taken away; as we deny not but this
may be true, so being of two evils to choose the less, we hold it better, that
the friends and favorers of the Church of Rome, should be in some kind of hope
to have a corrupt religion restored, then both we and they conceive just fear,
least under color of rooting out Popery, the most effectual means to bear
up the state of religion be removed, and so a way made either for Paganism,
or for extreme barba^ritie to enter. If desire of weakening the hope of others
should turn us away from the course we have taken; how much more the care of
preventing our own fear withhold us from that we are urged unto? Especially
seeing that our own fear we know, but we are not so certain what hope the
rites and orders of our Church have bred in the hearts of others. For it is no
sufficient argument thereof to say, that in maintaining and urging these
ceremonies none are so clamorous as Papists, and they whom Papists suborne;
this speech being more hard to justify then the former, and so their proof
more doubtful then the thing it self which they prove. He that were certain
that this is true, must have marked who they be that speak for Ceremonies; he
must have noted who amongst them does speak oftnest, or is most earnest; he
must have been both acquainted thoroughly with the religion of such, and also
privy what conferences or compacts are passed in secret between them and
others; which kinds of notice are not wont to be vulgar and common. Yet they
which allege this, would have it taken as a thing that needs no proof, a
thing which all men know and see. And if so be it were granted them as true,
what gain they by it? Sundry of them that be Popish are eger in maintenance of
Ceremonies. Is it so strange a matter to find a good thing furthered by ill men
of a sinister intent and purpose, whose forwardness is not therefore a bridle
to such as favor the same cause with a better and sincerer meaning? They that
seek, as they say, the removing of all Popish orders out of the Church, and
reckon the state of Bishop in the number of those orders, do (I doubt not)
presume that the cause which they prosecute is holy. Notwithstanding it is
their own ingenuous acknowledgement, that even this very cause which they
term so often by an excellency, The Lords cause, is gratissima, most
acceptable unto some which hope for pray and spoil by it, and that our age
has store of such, Ecclesi. dis^ fol. 94.
and that such are the very sectaries of Dionysius the famous Atheist. Now if
hereupon we should vpbraide them with irreligious, as they do us with
superstitious favorers; if we should follow them in their own kind of
pleading and say, that the most clamorous for this pretended reformation, are
either Atheists, or else proctors suborned by Atheists; the answer which herein
they would make unto us, let them apply unto themselves, and there an end. For
they must not forbid us to presume, or cause in defense of our Church-orders,
to be as good as theirs against them, till the contrary be made manifest to the
world.

10 In the mean while sorry we are, T.C. l. 3. p. 180. There be numbers which
have Antichristianitie in such detestation, that they c^^not without grief of
mind behold them* And afterward, such godly brethren are not easily to be
grieved, which they seem to be when they are thus martyred in their minds, for
ceremonies which (to speak the best of them) are unprofitable.
The grief which they say godly brethren conceive, in regard of such
Ceremonies as we have common with the Church of Rome.
that any good and godly mind should be grieved with that which is done. But to
remedy their grief, lies not so much in us as in themselves. They do not wish
to be made glad with the hurt of the Church: and to remove all out of the
Church, whereat they show themselves to be sorrowful, would be as we are
persuaded hurtful, if not pernicious thereunto. Till they be able to persuade
the contrary, they must and will I doubt not find out some other good means to
cheer up themselves. Amongst which means the example of Geneua may serve for
one. Have not they the old Popish custom of using Godfathers and Godmothers in
Baptism; the old Popish custom of administering the blessed Sacrament of the
holy Eucharist with Wafer cakes? Those things the godly there can digest.
Wherefore should not the godly here learn to do the like, both in them and in
the rest of the like nature? Some further mean peradventure it might be to
assuage their grief, if so be they did consider the revenge they take on them,
which have been, as they interpret it, the workers of their continuance in so
great grief so long. For if the maintenance of Ceremonies be a corrosiue to
such as oppugn them; undoubtedly to such as maintain them, it can be no great
pleasure, when they behold how that which they reverence is oppugned. And
therefore they that judge themselves Martyrs when they are grieved, should
think withal what they are when they grieve. For we are still to put them in
mind that the cause does make no difference; for that it must be presumed as
good at the least on our part as on theirs, till it be in the end decided who
have stood for truth and who for error. So that till then the most effectual
medicine and withal the most sound to ease their grief, must not be (in our
opinion) the taking away of those things whereat they are grieved, but the
altering of that persuasion which they have concerning the same. For this we
therefore both pray and labor; the more because we are also persuaded, that it
is but conceit in them to think, that those Romish Ceremonies whereof we have
hitherto spoken, T.C. l. 3. p. 171 Although the corruptions in them stick not
straight to the heart, yet as gentle poisons they consume by little and little.
are like leprous clothes, infectious unto the Church, or like soft and gentle
poisons, the venom whereof being insensibly pernicious, works death, and yet
is never felt working. Thus they say: but because they say it only, and the
world has not as yet had so great experience of their art in curing the
diseases of the Church, that the bare authority of their word should persuade
in a cause so weighty; they may not think much if it be required at their
hands to show, first, by what means so deadly infection can grow from
similitude between us and the Church of Rome in these things indifferent;
Secondly, for that it were infinite if the Church should provide against every
such evil as may come to pass, it is not sufficient that they show
possibility of dangerous event, unless there appear some likelihood also of
the same to follow in us, except we prevent it, Nor is this enough, unless it
be moreover made plain, that there is no good and sufficient way of
prevention, but by euacuating clean, and by emptying the Church of every such
rite and Ceremony, as is presently called in question. Till this be done,
their good affection toward the safety of the Church is acceptable, but the
way they prescribe us to preserve it by must rest in suspense. And least hereat
they take occasion to turn upon us the speech of the Prophet Jeremy used
against Babylon, (...). ^1.9.
Behold we have done our endeavor to cure the diseases of Babylon, but she
through her wilfulness does rest uncured: let them consider into what
straights the Church might drive it self, in being guided by this their
counsel. Their axiom is, that the sound believing Church of Jesus Christ, may
not be like Heretical Churches in any of those indifferent things, which men
make choice of, and do not take by prescript appointment of the word of God. In
the word of God the use of bread is prescribed, as a thing without which the
Eucharist may not be celebrated: but as for the kind of bread, it is not denied
to be a thing indifferent. Being indifferent of it self, we are by this axiom
of theirs to avoid the use of unleavened bread in their Sacrament, because
such bread the Church of Rome being Heretical uses. But does not the self
same axiom bar us even from leauened bread also, which the Church of the
Grecians uses; the opinions whereof are in a number of things the same, for
which we condemn the Church of Rome; and in some things erroneous, where the
Church of Rome is acknowledged to be sound; as namely in the Article proceeding
of the holy Ghost? And least here they should say that because the Greek
Church is farther off, and the Church of Rome nearer, we are in that respect
rather to use that which the Church of Rome uses not; let them imagine a
reformed Church in the City of Venice, where a Greek Church and a Popish both
are. And when both these are equally near, let them consider what the third
shall do. Without either leauened or unleavened bread, it can have no
sacrament: the word of God does tie it to neither; and their axiom does
exclude it from both. If this constrain them, as it must, to grant that their
axiom is not to take any place, save in those things only where the Church
has larger scope; it rests that they search out some stronger reason then
they have as yet alleged; otherwise they constrain not us to think that the
Church is tied unto any such rule or axiom, no not then when she has the
widest field to walk in, and the greatest store of choice.

11 Against such Ceremonies generally as are the same in the Church of England
and of Rome, we see what has been hitherto alleged. Their exception against
such Ceremonies as we have received from the Church of Rome, that church having
taken them from the Jews.
Albeit therefore we do not find the one Churches having of such things, to
be sufficient cause why the other should not have them: nevertheless in case
it may be proved, that amongst the number of rites and orders common unto
both, there are particulars the use whereof is utterly unlawful, in regard of
some special bad and noisome quality; there is no doubt but we ought to
relinquish such rites and orders, what freedom soever we have to retain the
other still. As therefore we have heard their general exception against all
those things, which being not commanded in the word of God, were first
received in the Church of Rome, and from thence have been derived into ours, so
it follows that now we proceed unto certain kinds of them, as being
excepted against not only for that they are in the Church of Rome, but are
besides either Jewish, or abused unto Idolatry, and so grown scandalous. The
Church of Rome they say, Eccles. discisol. 98. And T.C. l. 3. p. 181. Many of
these popish ceremonies fault by reason of the pomp in them; where they should
be agreeable to the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ crucified.
being ashamed of the simplicity of the Gospel, did almost out of all
religions take whatsoever had any fair and gorgeous show, borrowing in that
respect from the Jews sundry of their abolished Ceremonies. Thus by foolish
and ridiculous imitation, all their Massing furniture almost they took from
the law, least having an Altar and a Priest, they should want vestments for
their stage; so that whatsoever we have in common with the church of Rome, if
the same be of this kind we ought to remove it. Constantine the Emperor
speaking of the keeping of the feast of Easter says, That it is an unworthy
thing to have any thing common with that most spiteful company of the Jews.
And a little after he says, that it is most absurd and against reason, that
the Jews should vaunt and glory that the Christians could not keep those
things without their doctrine. T.C. l. 1. p. 132. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 17. Socr. 1.
lib. c. 9. To. 1. Council. Laod. can. 38.
And in an other place it is said after this sort; It is convenient so to order
the matter, that we have nothing common with that nation. The council of
Laodicea, which was afterward confirmed by the sixth general Council, decreed
that the Christians should not take vnlea^ened bread of the Jews, or
communicate with their impiety. For the easier manifestation of truth in this
point, two things there are which must be considered; namely the causes
wherefore the church should decline from Jewish Ceremonies; and how far it
ought so to do. One cause is that the Jews were the deadliest and
spitefullest enemies of Christianity that were in the world, and in this
respect their orders so far forth to be shunned, as we have already set down
in handling the matter of heathenish Ceremonies. For no enemies being so
venomous against Christ as Jews, they were of all other most odious, and by
that mean least to be used as fit Church paternes for imitation. An other
cause is the solemn abrogation of the Jews ordinances; which ordinances for
us to resume, were to check our Lord himself which has disanulled them. But
how far this second cause does extend, it is not on all sides fully agreed
upon. And touching those things whereunto it reaches not, although there be
small cause wherefore the Church should frame it self to the Jews example, in
respect of their persons which are most hateful; yet God himself having been
the author of their laws, herein they are (notwithstanding the former
consideration) still worthy to be honored, and to be followed above others, as
much as the state of things will bear. Jewish ordinances had some things
natural, and of the perpetuity of those things no man doubts. That which
was positive, we likewise know to have been by the coming of Christ partly
necessary not to be kept, and partly indifferent to be kept or not. Of the
former kind Circumcision and sacrifice were. For this point Stephen was
accused; and the evidence which his accusers brought against him in judgment
was, This man cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place
and the law, Act. 6.13, 14.
for we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazaret shall destroy this place,
and shall change the ordinances that Moses gave us. True it is that this
doctrine was then taught, which unbelievers condemning for blasphemy, did
therein commit that which they did condemn. The Apostles notwithstanding from
whom Stephen had received it, did not so teach the abrogation, no not of those
things which were necessarily to cease, but that even the Jews being Christian
might for a time continue in them. And therefore in Jerusalem the first
Christian Bishop not Circumcised was Mark; Vide Niceph. lib. 3.cap. 25. and
Sulpit, S^uer. page 149. in edit. Plant. Act. 1^.
and he not Bishop till the days of Adrian the Emperor, after the overthrow
of Jerusalem, there having been fifteen Bishops before him which were all of
the Circumcision. The Christian Jews did think at the first not only
themselves, but the Christian Gentiles also bound, and that necessarily, to
observe the whole law. There went forth certain of the sect of Pharisees which
did believe, and they coming unto Antioch, taught that it was necessary for
the Gentiles to be circumcised, and to keep the law of Moses. Whereupon there
grew dissension, Paul and Barnabas disputing against them. The determination of
the Council held at Jerusalem concerning this matter was finally this, Act.
21.25.
Touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written and determined that they
observe no such thing. Act. 15.24.
Their protestation by letters is, For as much as we have heard that certain
which departed from us have troubled you with words, and combred your minds,
saying, Ye must be circumcised and keep the law; know that we gave them no
such commandment. Paul therefore continued still teaching the Gentiles, not
only that they were not bound to observe the laws of Moses, but that the
observation of those laws which were necessarily to be abrogated, was in them
altogether unlawful. In which point his doctrine was misreported, as though he
had every where preached this, not only concerning the Gentiles, but also
touching the Jews. Wherefore coming unto James and the rest of the Clergy at
Jerusalem, Act. 21.20.
they told him plainly of it, saying, Thou see brother how many thousand
Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of the law. Now they
are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews which are amongst the
Gentiles to forsake Moses, and say that they ought not to circumcise their
children neither to live after the customs. And hereupon they gave him
counsel to make it apparent in the eyes of all men, that those flying reports
were untrue, and that himself being a Jew, kept the law even as they did. In
some things therefore we see the Apostles did teach, that there ought not to
be conformity between the Christian Jews and Gentiles. How many things this
law of inconformitie did comprehend, there is no need we should stand to
examine. This general is true, that the Gentiles were not made conformable
unto the Jews, in that which was necessarily to cease at the coming of
Christ. Touching things positive which might either cease or continue as
occasion should require, Act. 15.28.
the Apostles tendering the zeal of the Jews, thought it necessary to bind
even the Gentiles for a time to abstain as the Jews did, from things offered
unto idols, from blood, from strangled. These decrees were every where
delivered unto the Gentiles to be straightly observed and kept. In the other
matters where the Gentiles were free, Act. 16.4.
and the Jews in their own opinion still tied, the Apostles doctrine unto the
Jew was, Condemn not the Gentile; unto the Gentile, Despise not the Jew:
Romans 14.10.
the one sort they warned to take heed that scrupulositie did not make them
rigorous, in giving unadvised sentence against their brethren which were free;
the other that they did not become scandalous, by abusing their liberty and
freedom to the offense of their weak brethren which were scrupulous. From
hence therefore two conclusio^s there are which may evidently be drawn; the
first, that whatsouer conformity of positive laws the Apostles did bring in
between the Churches of Jews and Gentiles, it was in those things only, which
might either cease or continue a shorter or a longer time, as occasion did most
require; the second, that they did not impose upon the Churches of the Gentiles
any part of the Jews ordinances with bond of necessary and perpetual
observation, (as we al both by doctrine and practice acknowledge) but only in
respect of the conueniencie and fitnes for the present state of the Church as
the^ it stood. The words of the Councels decree concerning the Gentiles are, It
seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no more burden saving
only those things of necessity, abstinence from Idoll-offrings, from strangled
and blood, and from fornication. So that in other things positive which the
coming of Christ did not necessarily extinguish, the Gentiles were left
altogether free. Neither ought it to seem unreasonable, that the Gentiles
should necessarily be bound and tied to Jewish ordinances, so far forth as that
decree imports. For to the Jew, who knew that their difference from other
nations which were aliens and strangers from God, did especially consist in
this, Lib. qui Seder Olam inscribi^tur.
that Gods people had positive ordinances given to the^ of God himself, it
seemed marvelous hard, that the Christian Gentiles should be incorporated into
the same commonwealth with Gods own chosen people, and be subject to no part
of his statutes, (...)
more then only the law of nature, which heathe^s count themselves bound unto.
It was an opinion consta^tly received amongst the Jews, that God did deliver
unto the sons of Noah seven precepts; namely to live in some form of regiment
under 1 public laws; 2 to serve and call upon the name of God; 3 to shun
Idolatry; 4 not to suffer effusio^ of blood; 5 to abhor all unclean knowledge
in the flesh; 6 to commit no ^apine; 7 finally, not to eat of any living
creature whereof the blood was not first let out. if therefore the Gentiles
would be exempt from the law of Moses, yet it might seem hard they should
also cast off even those things positive which were observed before Moses, and
which were not of the same kind with laws that were necessarily to cease. And
peradventure hereupon the Council saw it expedient to determine, that the
Gentiles should according unto the third, the seventh, and the fifth of those
precepts, abstain from things sacrificed unto idols, from strangled and
blood, and from fornication. The rest the Gentiles did of their own accord
observe, nature leading them thereunto. And did not nature also teach them to
abstain from fornication? No doubt it did. Neither can we with reason think,
Heb. 13.4. 1. Cor. 5.13. Gal. 5.19.
that as the former two are positive, so likewise this, being meant as the
Apostle does otherwise usually understand it. But very marriage within a number
of degrees, being not only by the law of Moses, but also by the law of the
sons of Noah (for so they took it) an unlawful discovery of nakedness; this
discovery of nakedness by unlawful marriages, such as Moses in the law
reckons up, 1. L^uit. 18.
I think it for mine own part more probable to have been meant in the words
of that Canon, then fornication according unto the sense of the law of nature.
Words must be taken according to the matter whereof they are uttered. The
Apostles command to abstain from blood. Conster this according to the law of
nature, and it will seem that Homicide only is forbidden. But conster it in
reference to the law of the Jews about which the question was, and it shall
easily appear to have a clean other sense, and in any man's judgment a truer,
when we expound it of eating, and not of sheading blood. So if we speak of
fornication, he that knows no law but only the law of nature, must needs
make thereof a narrower construction, then he which measures the same by a
law, wherein sundry kinds even of conjugal copulation are prohibited as
impure, ^. Cor. ^.1.
unclean, dishonest. Saint Paul himself does term incestuous marriage
fornication. If any do rather think that the Christian Gentiles themselves
through the loose and corrupt custom of those times, took simple fornication
for no sin, and were in that respect offensive unto believing Jews which by
the law had been better taught; our proposing of an other conjecture, is unto
theirs no prejudice. Some things therefore we see there were, wherein the
Gentiles were forbidden to be like unto the Jews; some things wherein they were
commanded not to be unlike. Again, some things also there were, wherein no
law of God did let, but that they might be either like or unlike, as occasion
should require. And unto this purpose Leo says, Apostolical ordinance
(beloved) knowing that our Lord Jesus Christ came not into this world to undo
the law, Leo in Ieiun. men's. sep^ Ser. 9.
has in such sort distinguished the mysteries of the old testament, that
certain of them it has chosen out to benefit evangelical knowledge withal,
and for that purpose appointed that those things which before were Jewish,
might now be Christian customs. The cause why the Apostles did thus conform
the Christians, as much as might be, according to the pattern of the Jews,
was to reine them in by this mean the more, and to make them cleave the
better. The Church of Christ has had in no one thing so many and so contrary
occasions of dealing as about Iudaisme; some having thought the whole Jewish
law wicked and damnable in it self; some not condemning it as the former sort
absolutely, have notwithstanding judged it either sooner necessary to be
abrogated, or further unlawful to be observed then truth can bear; some of
scrupulous simplicity urging perpetual and universal observation of the law
of Moses necessary, as the Christian Jews at the first in the Apostles times;
some as Heretics, holding the same no less even after the contrary
determination set down by consent of the Church at Jerusalem; finally some
being herein resolute through mere infidelity, and with open professed enmity
against Christ, as unbelieving Jews. To co^trowle slaunderers of the law and
Prophets, such as Marcionites and Manichees were, the Church in her liturgies
has intermingled with readings out of the new Testament, lessons taken out of
the law and Prophets; whereunto Tertullian alluding, Tertull. de praescript.
aduers. haeret.
says of the Church of Christ; It intermingleth with evangelical and
apostolical writings, the law and the Prophets; and from thence it drinks in
that faith, which with water it seals, T.C. l. 3. p. 171 What an abusing also
is it to affirm, the mangling of the Gospels and Epistles to have been brought
into the Church by godly and learned men?
clotheth with the spirit, nourishes with the Eucharist, with martirdom
sets forward. They would have wondered in those times to hear, that any man
being not a favorer of heresy, should term this by way of disdain, mangling
of the Gospels and Epistles. They which honor the law as an image of the
wisdom of God himself, are notwithstanding to know that the same had an end
in Christ. But what? was the law so abolished with Christ, that after his
ascension the office of Priests became immediately wicked, and the very name
hateful, as importing the exercise of an ungodly function? No, as long as the
glory of the temple continued, T.C. l. 1. p. 216 Seeing that the office and
function of Priests was after our savior Christ's asce^sion naught and ungodly;
the name whereby they were called which did exercise that ungodly function,
cannot be otherwise taken then in the evil part.
and till the time of that final desolation was accomplished, the very
Christian Jews did continue with their sacrifices and other parts of legal
service. That very law therefore which our Savior was to abolish, did not so
soon become unlawful to be observed as some imagine: nor was it afterward
unlawful so far, that the very name of Altar, of Priest, of Sacrifice it
self, should be banished out of the world. For though God do now hate
sacrifice, whether it be Heathenish or Jewish, so that we cannot have the same
things which they had, but with impiety; yet unless there be some greater let
then the only euacuation of the law of Moses, the names themselves may (I
hope) be retained without sin, in respect of that proportion which things
established by our Savior have unto them which by him are abrogated. And so
throughout all the writings of the ancient fathers we see that the words which
were do continue; the only difference is, that whereas before they had a
literal, they now have a metaphorical use, and are as so many notes of
remembrance unto us, that what they did signify in the letter, is accomplished
in the truth. And as no man can deprive the Church of this liberty, to use
names whereunto the law was accustomed; so neither are we generally forbidden
the use of things which the law has; though it neither command us any
particularitie, as it did the Jews a number; and the waightiest which it did
command them, are unto us in the Gospel prohibited. Touching such as through
simplicity of error did urge universal and perpetual observation of the law
of Moses at the first, we have spoken already. Against Jewish heretics and
false Apostles teaching afterward the self same, Saint Paul in every Epistle
commonly either disputes or gives warning. Jews that were zealous for the
law, but withal infidels in respect of Christianity, and to the name of
Jesus Christ most spiteful enemies, did while they flourished no less
persecute the Church then Heathens. After their estate was overthrown, they
were not that way so much to be feared. Howbeit because they had their
Synagogues in every famous City almost throughout the world, and by that
means great opportunity to withdraw from the Christian faith, which to do
they spared no labor; Council. Laod. Can. ^7.38. T.C. l. 1. p. 132.
this gave the Church occasion to make sundry laws against them. As in the
Council of Laodicea; The festival presents which Jews or Heretics use to
send must not be received; nor Holy days solemnized in their company. Again,
From the Jews men ought not to receive their unleavened, nor to communicate
with their impieties. Which Council was afterward indeed confirmed by the
sixth general Council. But what was the true sense or meaning both of the one
and the other? T.C. l. 3. p. 176
Were Christians here forbidden to communicate in unleavened bread, because the
Jews did so being enemies of the Church? He which attentively shall weigh the
words, will suspect that they rather forbid communion with Jews, Council.
Constantinop. 6. cap. 11.
the^ imitation of them: much more, if with these two decrees be compared a
third in the Council of Constantinople; Let no man either of the Clergy or
Laity eat the unleavened of the Jews, nor enter into any familiarity with
them, nor send for them in sickness, nor take physic at their hands, nor as
much as go into the bath with them, If any do otherwise being a Clergy man,
let him be deposed; if being a lay person, let excommunication be his
punishment. If these Canons were any argument, that they which made them did
utterly condemn similitude between the Christians and Jews, in things
indifferent appertaining unto religion, either because the Jews were enemies
unto the Church, or else for that their ceremonies were abrogated; these
reasons had bin as strong and effectual against their keeping the feast of
Easter on the same day the Jews kept theirs, and not according to the custom
of the West Church. For so they did from the first beginning till Constantines
time. For in these two things the East and West churches did interchangeably
both confront the Jews, and concur with the^: the West church using unleavened
bread, as the Jews in their passover did, but differing from them in the day
whereon they kept the feast of Easter; con^^ariwise the East church celebrating
the feast of Easter on the same day with the Jews, but not using the same kind
of bread which they did. Now if so be the East Church in using leuened bread
had done well, either for that the Jews were enemies to the Church, or because
Jewish ceremonies were abrogated; how should we think but that Victor the B. of
Rome (whom all judicious me^ do in that behalf disallow) did well to be so
vehement and fierce in drawing the^ to the like dissimilitude for the feast of
Easter? Again, if the West Churches had in either of those two respects
affected dissimilitude with the Jews in the feast of Easter, what reason had
they to draw the Eastern Church herein unto them, which reason did not
enforce them to frame themselves unto it in the ceremony of leauened bread?
Difference in rites should breed no controversy between one church and an
other: but if controversy be once bred, it must be ended. The feast of Easter
being therefore litigious in the days of Constantine, who honored of all other
churches most the Church of Rome, which Church was the mother from whose
breasts he had drawn that food, which gave him nourishment to eternal life;
since agreement was necessary, and yet impossible, unless the one part were
yielded unto; his desire was that of the two the Eastern church should rather
yield. And to this end he uses sundry perswasiue speeches. When Stephen the
By. of Rome going about to show what the Catholic Church should do, had
alleged what the heritiques themselves did, namely that they received such as
came unto them, and offered not to baptize them anew: S. Cyprian being of a
contrary mind to him about the matter at that time question, which was, Whether
heretics converted ought to be rebaptised yea or no, answered the allegatio^
of Pope Stephen with exceeding great stomach, saying, To this degree of
wretchedness the church of God and Spouse of Christ is now come, that her ways
she frame^h to the example of heretics; Cyp^. ad pompe^. lib. cont. epist.
Stephani.
that to celebrate the sacraments which heavenly instruction has delivered,
light it self does borrow from darkness, and Christians do that which
Antichrists do. Now albeit Constantine have done that to further a better
cause, which Cyprian did to countenance a worse, namely, the rebaptization of
heretics; and have taken advantage at the odiousness of the Jews, as
Cyprian of heretics, because the Eastern Church kept their feast of Easter
always the fourteenth day of the Month as the Jews did, what day of the
week soever it ^el; Socr. Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 5 cap. 21. Plerique in Asia^
minore antiquitus 14. die mensis, nulla ratione die^ Sabbati habita hoc ^estum
obseruarunt. Quod dum faciebant, cum aliis qui aliam rationem in codem festo
agendo sequebantur vsque co^nequaquam dissenserunt, quoad Victor Episcopus
Romanus supra modum iracundia inflammatus, omnes in Asia qui erant (...)
appellati excommunica^erit. Ob quod factum Irenaeus Episcopus Lugduni in
Victorem per Epistolam grauiter inuectus est. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3.
ca. 17. Quid praestabilius, quidue augustiu^ esse poterat, quam veboc festum
per quod spem immortalitatis nobis often tatam habemus, vno modo and ratione
apud omnes integ^e sincereque obseruaretur? Ac primum onmium indignum plane
videbatur, vt ritum and consuetudine^ imitantes Iudaeorum, (qui quoniam sua^
ipsorum manus im^ani scesere polluerunt, merito, vt scelestos decet, coeco
animorum errore tenentur irretiti) istud festum sanctissimum ageremu^. In
nostra enim situm est potestate, vt illorum more reiecto, veriore ac magis
sincero instituto, (quod quidem vsque a prima passionis die hactenus
recoluimus) huius fetti celebrationem ad posterorum seculoru^ memoriam
propagemus. Nihil igitur sit nobis cum Iudaeorum turba omnium odiosa maxim.
or how soever Constantine did take occasion in the handling of that cause to
say, It is unworthy to have any thing common with that spiteful Nation of the
Jews; shall every motive argument used in such kind of conferences, be made a
rule for others still to conclude the like by, concerning all things of like
nature, when as probable inducements may lead them to the contrary?* Let both
this and other allegations suitable unto it, cease to bark any longer idly
against that truth, the course and passage whereof it is not in them to hinder.

12 But the waightiest exception, and of all the most worthy to be respected,
is against such kind of ceremonies, as have been so grossly and shamefully
abused in the Church of Rome, Their exception against such Ceremonies as have
been abused by the church of Rome, and are said in that respect to be
scandalous.
that where they remain they are scandalous, yea they cannot choose but be
stumbling blocks and grievous causes of offense. Concerning this point
therefore we are first to note, what properly it is to be scandalous or
offensive; secondly what kind of Ceremonies are such; and thirdly when they
are necessarily for remedy thereof to be taken away, and when not. The common
conceit of the vulgar sort is, whenever they see any thing which they
mislike and are anrgy at, to think that every such thing is scandalous, and
that themselves in this case are the men concerning whom our Savior spoke in
so fearful manner, saying, Matthew. 18.6.
Whosoever shall scandalize or offend any one of these little ones which
believe in me [that is as they conster it, whosoever shall anger the meanest
and simplest Artizan which carries a good mind, by not removing out of the
Church such rites and Ceremonies as displease him] better he were drowned in
the bottom of the sea. But hard were the case of the church of Christ if this
were to scandalize. Men are scandalized when they are moved, led, and provoked
unto sin. At good things evil men may take occasion to do evil; 1. Pet.
2.^.
and so Christ himself was a rock of offense in Israel, they taking occasion
at his poor estate, and at the ignominy of his cross, to think him unworthy
the name of that great and glorious Messiah, whom the Prophets describe in such
ample and stately terms. But that which we therefore term offensive, because it
inuiteth me^ to offend, and by a dumb kind of provocation encourage, thmoueth,
or any way leads unto sin, must of necessity be acknowledged actiuely
scandalous. Now some things are so even by their very essence and nature, so
that wheresoever they be found, they are not, neither can be without this force
of provocation unto evil; of which kind all examples of sin and wickedness
are. Thus David was scandalous in that bloody act, whereby he caused the
enemies of God to be blasphemous: thus the whole state of Israel scandalous,
when their public disorders caused the name of God to be ill spoken of
amongst the nations. 2. Sam. 1^.14. Romans 2.24.
It is of this kind that Tertullian means; Offense or scandal, if I be not
deceived says he, Ezech. 36.20. Tertul. lib. de virgin* veland.
is when the example not of a good but of an evil thing, does set men forward
unto sin. Good things can scandalize none save only evil minds: good things
have no scandalizing nature in them. Yet that which is of it own nature either
good or at least not evil, may by some accident become scandalous at certain
times, and in certain places, and to certain men, the open use thereof
nevertheless being otherwise without danger. The very nature of some rites
and Ceremonies therefore is scandalous, as it was in a number of those which the
Manichees did use, and is in all such as the law of God does forbid. Some are
offensive only through the agreement of men to use them unto evil, and not
else; as the most of those things indifferent which the Heathens did to the
service of their false Gods; which an other in heart condemning their
idolatry, could not do with them in show and token of approbation, without
being guilty of scandal given. Ceremonies of this kind are either devised at
the first unto evil; as the Eunomian Heretics in dishonor of the blessed
Trinity, brought in the laying on of water but once, to cross the custom of
the Church, which in Baptism did it thrice: or else having had a profitable
use, they are afterward interpreted and wrested to the contrary; as those
Heretics which held the Trinity to be three distinct not persons but
natures, abused the Ceremony of three times laying on water in Baptism unto
the strengthening of their heresy. The element of water is in Baptism
necessary: once to lay it on or twice is indifferent. Epist. ad Lean drum Hisp.
For which cause Gregory making mention thereof, says; To diue an infant
either thrice or but once in Baptism, can be no way a thing reproueable;
seeing that both in three times washing, the Trinity of persons; and in one,
the Unity of Godhead may be signified. So that of these two Ceremonies,
neither being hurtful in it self, both may serve unto good purpose; yet one
was devised, and the other converted unto evil. Now whereas in the Church of
Rome certain Ceremonies are said to have been shamefully abused unto evil, as
the Ceremony of Crossing at Baptism, of kneeling at the Eucharist, of using
Wafer-cakes, and such like; the question is, whether for remedy of that evil
wherein such Ceremonies have been scandalous, and perhaps may be still unto
some even amongst our selves, whom the presence and sight of them may confirm
in that former error whereto they served in times past, they are of necessity
to be removed. Are these or any other Ceremonies we have common with the
Church of Rome, scandalous and wicked in their very nature? This no man
obiecteth. Are any such, as have been polluted from their very birth, and
instituted even at the first unto that thing which is evil? That which has
been ordained impiously at the first, may wear out that impiety in tract of
time; and then what does let, but that the use thereof may stand without
offense. The names of our months and of our days, we are not ignorant from
whence they came, and with what dishonor unto God they are said to have been
devised at the first. What could be spoken against any thing more effectual to
stir hatred, then that which sometime the ancient Fathers in this case
speak? Yet those very names are at this day in use throughout Christendom,
without hurt or scandal to any. Hom 11. de Pasch. Idololatriae consuetudo in
tantum homines occoecauerat; vt Solis, Lunae, Martis atque Mercurii, louis,
Veneris, Saturni, and diuersi^ eleme^torum ac Da^monu^ appellationibus dies
vocitarent, and luci tenebra^um nomen imponerent. Beda de ratione temp. cap. 4.
Octauus dies idem primus est, ad quem reditur, indeque ru^sus heb^omada
inchoatur. His nomina a planetis Gentilitas indidir, habere se credentes a Sole
Spiritum; a Luna corpus, a Mart sanguinem, a Mercurio inge^um and linguam, a
love temperantiam, a Venere voluptatem, a Saturno tarditatem: I sid. Hisp. lib.
^. Etymol. ca. 30. Dies dicti a Diis, quorum nomina Romani quibusda^* syderibus
sacrauerunt.
Clear and manifest it is; that things devised by Heretics, yea devised of
a very heretical purpose even against religion, and at their first devising
worthy to have been withstood, may in time grow meet to be kept; as that
custom the inuentors whereof were the Eunomian Heretics. So that customs
once established and confirmed by long use, being presently without harm, are
not in regard of their corrupt original to be held scandalous. But concerning
those our Ceremonies, which they reckon for most Popish, they are not able to
avouch that any of them was otherwise instituted; the^ unto good, yea so used
at the first. It follows then that they all are such, as having served to
good purpose, were afterward converted unto the contrary. And since it is not so
much as objected against us, that we retain together with them the evil,
wherewith they have bin infected in the Church of Rome; I would demand who they
are whom we scandalize, by using harmles things unto that good end for which
they were first instituted. Amongst our selves that agree in the approbation of
this kind of good use, no man will say that one of us is offensive and
scandalous unto another. As for the favorers of the church of Rome, they know
how far we herein differ and dissent from them; which thing neither we
conceal; and they by their public writings also profess daily how much it
grieueth them; so that of the^ there will not many rise up against us, as
witnesses unto the indictment of scandal, whereby we might be condemned and
cast, as having strengthened the^ in that evil wherewith they pollute themselves
in the use of the same Ceremonies. And concerning such as withstand the Church
of England herein, and hate it because it does not sufficiently seem to hate
Rome, they (I hope are far enough from being by this mean drawn to any kind
of popish error. The multitude therefore of them, unto whom we are sca^dalous
through the use of abused ceremonies, is not so appare^t, that it can justly be
said in general of any one sort of me^ or other, we cause the^ to offend. If it
be so that now or the^ some few are espied, who having bin accustomed
heretofore to the rites and ceremonies of the Church of Rome, are not so
scowred of their former rust, as to forsake their ancient persuasion which
they have had, howsoever they frame themselves to outward obedience of laws and
orders: because such may misconster the meaning of our ceremonies, and so take
the^ as though they were in every sort the same they have bin, shall this be
thought a reason sufficient whereon to conclude, that some law must necessarily
be made to abolish al such ceremonies? They answer that there is no law of God
which does bind us to retain the^. And S. Paul's rule is, that in those things
from which without hurt we may lawfully abstain, we should frame the usage of
our liberty with regard to the weakness and imbecillitie of our brethren.
Wherefore unto them which stood upon their own defense, saying, All things are
lawful unto me; he replyeth, 1. Cor. 6.12.
But all things are not expedient in regard of others. All things are clean,
all meats are lawful; but evil unto that man that eats offensiuely. If for
thy meats ^ake thy brother be grieved, Romans 14. Romans 15.1.
thou walk no longer according to charity. Destroy not him with thy meat
for whom Christ dyed. Dissolve not for foodes sake the work of God. We that
are strong, must bear the imbecillities of the impotent, and not please our
selves. It was a weakness in the Christian Jews, and a maime of judgment in
them, that they thought the Gentiles polluted by the eating of those meats,
which themselves were afraid to touch for fear of transgressing the law of
Moses; yea hereat their hearts did so much rise, that the Apostle had just
cause to fear, least they would rather forsake Christianity, then endure any
fellowship with such, as made no conscience of that which was unto them
abominable. And for this cause mention is made of destroying the weak by
meats, and of dissoluing the work of God, which was his church, a part of the
living stones whereof were believing Jews. Now those weak brethren before
mentioned are said to be as the Jews were, and our ceremonies which have been
abused in the Church of Rome, to be as the scandalous meats from which the
Gentiles are exhorted to abstain in the presence of Jews, for fear of
auerting them from Christian faith. Therefore as charity did bind them to
refrain from that for their brethrens sake, which otherwise was lawful enough
for them; so it binds us for our brethrens sake likewise to abolish such
Ceremonies, although we might lawfully else retain them. But between these
two cases there are great odds. For neither are our weak brethren as the
Jews, nor the ceremonies which we use as the meats which the Gentiles used.
The Jews were known to be generally weak in that respect; whereas
contrariwise the imbecillitie of ours is not common unto so many, that we can
take any such certain notice of them. It is a chance if here and there some
one be found; and therefore seeing we may presume men commonly otherwise, there
is no necessity that our practice should frame it self by that which the
Apostle does prescribe to the Gentiles. Again their use of meats was not like
unto our of Ceremonies; that being a matter of private action in common life,
where every man was free to order that which himself did; Vide Harmenop. lib.
1. ^it. 1.. 28.
but this a public constitution for the ordering of the Church: and we are not
to look that the Church should change her public laws and ordinances, made
according to that which is judged ordinarily and commonly fittest for the
whole, although it chance that for some particular men the same be found
inco^uenient; especially when there may be other remedy also against the sores
of particular inconveniences. In this case therefore where any private harm
does grow, we are not to reject instruction, as being an unmeet plaster to
apply unto it; neither can we say that he which appoints teachers for
physicians in this kind of evil, T.C. l. 3. p. 178
is as if a man would set one to watch a child all day long least he should
hurt himself with a knife, whereas by taking away the knife from him, the
danger is avoided, and the service of the man better employed. For a knife may
be taken away from a child, without depriving them of the benefit thereof
which have years and discretion to use it. But the Ceremonies which children
do abuse, if we remove quite and clean, as it is by some required that we
should; then are they not taken from children only, but from others also;
which is as though because children may perhaps hurt themselves with knives,
we should conclude that therefore the use of knives is to be taken quite and
clean even from men also. Those particular Ceremonies which they pretend to be
so scandalous, we shall in the next book have occasion more thoroughly to sift,
where other things also traduced in the public duties of the Church whereunto
each of these appertains, are together with these to be touched, and such
reasons to be examined as have at any time been brought either against the one
or the other. In the mean while against the conueniencie of curing such evils
by instruction, T.C. l. 3. p. 177. It is not so convenient that the Minist^r
having so many nec^ssary points to bestow his time in, should be driven to
spend it in giving warning of not abusing them, of which (although they were
used to the best) there is no profit.
strange it is that they should object the multitude of other necessary
matters, wherein Preachers may better bestow their time, then in giving men
warning not to abuse Ceremonies; a wonder it is that they should object this,
which have so many years together troubled the Church with quarrels concerning
these things, and are even to this very hour so earnest in them, that if they
write or speak publicly but five words, one of them is lightly about the
dangerous estate of the Church of England in respect of abused ceremonies. How
much happier had it been for this whole Church, if they which have raised
contention therein about the abuse of rites and Ceremonies, had considered in
due time that there is indeed store of matters fitter and better a great deal
for teachers to spend time and labor in? It is through their importunate and
vehement asseuerations, more then through any such experience which we have had
of our own, that we are forced to think it possible for one or other now and
then, at leastwise in the prime of the reformation of our Church, to have
stumbled at some kind of Ceremonies. Wherein for as much as we are contented
to take this upon their credit, and to think it may be; since also they
further pretend the same to be so dangerous a snare to their souls, that are
at any time taken therein; they must give our teachers leave for the saving of
those souls (be they never so few) to intermingle sometime with other more
necessary things, admonition concerning these not unnecessary. Wherein they
should in reason more easily yield this leave, considering that hereunto we
shall not need to use the hundredth part of that time, which themselves think
very needful to bestow in making most bitter inuectiues against the
ceremonies of the Church.

13 But to come to the last point of all, Our ceremonies except^d against, for
that some Churches reformed before ours have cast ou^ those things, which we
notwithstanding their example to the contrary do retain still.
the Church of England is grievously charged with forgetfulness of her duty,
which duty had been to frame her self unto the pattern of their example,
T.C. l. 1. p. 1^3.
that went before her in the work of reformation. For as the Churches of
Christ ought to be most unlike the synagogue of Antichrist in their indifferent
ceremonies; so they ought to be most like one unto an other, and for
preservation of unity to have as much as possible may be all the same
Ceremonies. 1. Cor. 1^.1.
And therefore S. Paul to establish this order in the Church of Corinth, That
they should make their gatherings for the poor upon the first day of the
Saboth (which is our sunday) alleges this for a reason, that he had so
ordained in other Churches. Again, as children of one father and servants of
one family, so all Churches should not only have one diet in that they have one
word, but also wear as it were one liuerie in using the same Ceremonies.
Thirdly, this rule did the great Council of Nice follow, when it ordained,
Can. 20.
that where certain at the feast of Pentecoste did pray kneeling, The Canon of
that Council which is here cited, does provide against kneeling at prayer on
Sundays, or for fifty days after Easter on any day, and not at the feast of
Pentecost only.
they should pray standing; the reason whereof is added, which is, that one
custom ought to be kept throughout all Churches. It is true that the
diversity of Ceremonies ought not to cause the Churches to dissent one with
another; but yet it makes most to thauoyding of dissension, that there be
amongst them an unity, not only in doctrine, but also in Ceremonies. And
therefore our form of service is to be amended, not only for that it comes
too near that of the Papists, but also because it is so different from that
of the reformed Churches. T. C. lib. 3. p. 182.183.
Being asked to what Churches ours should conform it self, and why other
reformed Churches should not as well frame themselves to ours; their answer
is, That if there be any Ceremonies which we have better then others, they
ought to frame themselves to us; if they have better then we, then we ought to
frame our selves to them; if the Ceremonies be alike commodious, the later
Churches should conform themselves to the first, Romans 16.5.7.
as the younger daughter to the elder. For as S. Paul in the members, where all
other things are equal, notes it for a mark of honor above the rest, that one
is called before another to the Gospel; 1. Cor. 14.37.
so is it for the same cause amongst the Churches. And in this respect he
pincheth the Corinthes, that not being the first which received the Gospel,
yet they would have their several manners from other Churches. Moreover where
the Ceremonies are alike commodious, the fewer ought to conform themselves
unto the more. For as much therefore as all the Churches (so far as they know
which plead after this manner) of our confession in doctrine, agree in the
abrogation of diverse things which we retain; our churches ought either to show
that they have done evil, or else she is found to be in fault that does not
conform her self in that, which she cannot deny to be well abrogated. In
this axiom that preservation of peace and unity amongst Christian Churches
should be by all good means procured, we join most willingly and gladly with
them. Neither deny we but that to the avoiding of dissension it avails much,
that there be amongst the^ an unity as well in ceremonies as in doctrine. The
only doubt is about the manner of their unity, how far churches are bound to
be uniform in their ceremonies, and what way they ought to take for that
purpose. Touching the one, the rule which they have set down is; that in
ceremonies in different all churches ought to be one of them unto another as
like as possibly they may be. Whcih possibly we cannot otherwise conster, the^
that it does require them to be even as like as they may be, without breaking
any positive ordinance of God. For the ceremonies whereof we speak being matter
of positive law; they are indifferent, if God have neither himself commanded
nor forbidden the^, but left the^ unto the Churches discretion. So that if as
great uniformity be required as is possible in these things, seeing that the
law of God forbids not any one of the^; it follows, that from the greatest
unto the least they must be in every Christian Church the same, except mere
impossibility of so having it be the hindera^ce. To us this opinion seems
over extreme and violent: we rather incline to think it a just and
reasonable cause for any Church, the state whereof is free and independent, if
in these things it differ from other Churches, only for that it does not judge
it so fit and expedient to be framed therein by the pattern of their example,
as to be otherwise framed then they. That of Gregory unto Leander is a
charitable speech and a peaceable; In vna fide nil officit Ecclesiae sanctae
consuetudo diuersa, Where the faith of the holy Church is one, a difference in
customs of the Church does no harm. That of S. Augustine to Cassulanus is
somewhat more particular, and touches what kind of ceremonies they are,
wherein one Church may vary from the example of an other without hurt; Let the
faith of the whole church how wide so ever it have spread it self be always
one, although the unity of belief be famous for variety of certain
ordinances, Respon. ad Media^.
whereby that which is rightly believed suffers no kind of let or impediment.
Calvin goes further, As concerning rites in particular let the sentence of
Augustine take place, which leaves it free, unto all Churches to receive their
own custom. Yea sometime it profits and is expedient that there be
difference, least men should think that religion is tied to outward
ceremonies. Always provided that there be not any emulation, nor that churches
delighted with novelty affect to have that which others have not. They which
grant it true that the diversity of Ceremonies in this kind ought not to
cause dissension in churches, must either acknowledge that they grant in
effect nothing by these words; or if any thing be granted, there must as much
be yielded unto, as we affirm against their former strict assertion. For if
Churches be urged by way of duty to take such ceremonies as they like not of;
how can dissension be avoided? Will they say that there ought to be no
dissension, because such as are urged ought to like of that whereunto they are
urged? If they say this, they say just nothing. For how should any Church like
to be urged of duty, by such as have no authority or power over it, unto
those things which being indifferent it is not of duty bound unto them? Is it
their meaning, that there ought to be no dissension, because that which
Churches are not bound unto, no man ought by way of duty to urge upon them;
and if any man do, he stands in the sight both of God and men most justly
blameable, as a needelesse disturber of the peace of Gods Church, and an author
of dissension? In saying this they both condemn their own practice, when they
press the Church of England with so strict a bond of duty in these things,
and they overthrow the ground of their practice, which is that there ought to
be in all kind of ceremonies uniformity, unless impossibility hinder it.
For proof whereof it is not enough to allege what S. Paul did about the
matter of collections, or what Noblemen do in the liueries of their servants,
or what the Council of Nice did for standing in time of prayer on certain
days: because though S. Paul did will them of the Church of Cori^th, T.C. l.
1. p. 133. And therefore S. Paul to establish this order in the Church of
Corinth, that obey should make their gatherings for the poor upon the first
day of the Saboth, (which is our sunday) alleges this for a reason that he
had so ordained in other Churches.
every man to lay up somewhat by him upon the Sunday, and to reserve it in
store, till himself did come thither to send it unto the Church of Jerusalem
for relief of the poor there; signifying withal that he had taken the like
order with the Churches of Galatia; yet the reason which he yields of this
order taken both in the one place and the other, shows the least part of his
meaning to have been that, whereunto his words are writhed. 1. Cor. 16.^^
Concerning collection for the Saints, (he means them of Jerusalem) as I
have given order to the Church of Galatia, so likewise do ye, (says the
Apostle) that is, in every first of the week let each of you lay aside by
himself, and reserve according to that which God has blessed him with, that
when I come collections be not then to make; and that when I am come, whom you
shall choose, them I may forthwith send away by letters to carry your
beneficence unto Jerusalem. Out of which word^ to conclude the duty of
uniformity throughout all Churches in all manner of indifferent ceremonies
will be very hard, and therefore best to give it over. But perhaps they are by
so much the more loath to forsake this argument, for that it has, though
nothing else, T.C. li. 3. page 133. So that as children of one father, and
ser^ants of one master, he will have all the Churche^ not only have one diet in
that they have one word, but also we are as it were one livery in using the
same ceremonies.

T. C. l. 1. p. 133 This rule did the great coun^^ll of Nice follow, etc.

Die Dominico and per omnem Penticostem, nec de geniculis ado^are, and iciunium
soluere. De Coro. (...).


yet the name of Scripture, to give it some kind of countenance more then the
next of liuerie coats affords them. For neither is it any man^ duty to
cloth all his children or all his servants with one weed; nor theirs to cloth
themselves so, if it were left to their own judgments, as these ceremonies
are l^ft of God to the judgment of the Church. And seeing Churches are rather
in this case like diverse families; then like diverse servants of one family;
because every Church, the state whereof is independent upon any other, has
authority to appoint orders for it self in things indifferent; therefore of
the two we may rather infer, that as one family is not abridged of liberty
to be clothed in Friars gray, for that an other does wear clay-colour; so
neither are all Churches bound to the self same indifferent Ceremonies which
it likes sundry to use. As for that Canon in the Council of Nice, let them
but read it and weigh it well. The ancient use of the Church throughout all
Christendom was, for fifty days after Easter (which fifty days were called
Pentecost, though most commonly the last day of them which is Whitsunday be so
called) in like sort on all the Sundays throughout the whole year their
manner was to stand at prayer, whereupon their meetinges unto that purpose on
those days had the name of Stations given them. Of which custom Tertullian
speaks in this wise; It is not with us thought sit either to fast on the
Lords day, or to pray kneeling. The same immunitie from fasting and kneeling
we keep all the time which is between the Feasts of Easter and Pentecost.
This being therefore and order generally received in the Church; when some
began to be singular and different from all others, and that in a ceremony
which was then judged very convenient for the whole Church even by the whole,
those few excepted which brake out of the common pale: the Council of Nice
thought good to enclose them again with the rest, by a law made in this sort:
Because there are certain which will needs kneel at the time of prayer on the
Lords day, and in the fifty days after Easter, the holy Synod judging it
meet that a convenient custom be observed throughout all churches, has
decreed that standing we make our prayers to the Lord. Whereby it plainly
appears that in things indifferent, what the whole Church does think
convenient for the whole, the same if any part do wilfully violate, it may be
reformed and inrayled again by that general authority whereunto each
particular is subject, and that the spirit of singularity in a few ought to
give place unto public judgment; this does clearly enough appear: but not
that all Christian Churches are bound in every indifferent ceremony to be
uniform; because where the whole has not tied the parts unto one and the same
thing, they being therein left each to their own choice, may either do as
other do or else otherwise, without any breach of duty at all. Concerning
those indifferent things, wherein it has been heretofore thought good that
all Christian Churches, should be uniform, the way which they now conceive to
bring this to pass was then never thought on. For till now it has been
judged, that seeing the law of God does not prescribe all particular
ceremonies which the Church of Christ may use, and in so great variety of them
as may be found out, it is not possible that the law of nature and reason
should direct all Churches unto the same things; each deliberating by it self
what is most convenient: the way to establish the same things indifferent
throughout them all, must needs be the judgment of some judicial authority
drawn into one only sentence, which may be a rule for every particular to
follow. And because such authority over all Churches, is too much to be
granted unto any one mortal man; there yet remains that which has been
always followed, as the best, the safest, the most sincere and reasonable way,
namely the verdict of the whole Church orderly taken, and set down in the
assembly of some general council. But to maintain that all Christian
Churches ought for unities sake to be uniform in all ceremonies, and then to
teach that the way of bringing this to pass must be by mutual imitation, so
that where we have better ceremonies then others they shall be bound to
follow us, and we them where theirs are better; how should we think it
agreeable and consonant unto reason? For since in things of this nature there is
such variety of particular inducements, whereby one Church may be led to
think that better, which another Church led by other inducements judges to be
worse: (For example, the East Church did think it better to keep Easter day
after the manner of the Jews, the West Church better to do otherwise; the
Greek Church judges it worse to use unleavened bread in the Eucharist, the
Latin Church leauened; one Church esteems it not so good to receive the
Eucharist sitting as standing, another Church not so good standing as sitting;
there being on the one side probable motives as well as on the other:) unless
they add somewhat else to define more certainly what ceremonies shall stand
for best, in such sort that all Churches in the world shall know them to be the
best, and so know them that there may not remain any question about this
point; we are not a whit the nearer for that they have hitherto said. They
themselves although resolved in their own judgments what ceremonies are best,
the foreseeing that such as they are addicted unto, be not all so clearly and
so incomparably best, but others there are or may be at least wise when all
things are well considered as good, T. C. l. ^. p. 183. if the cerem^nies be
alike ^ommodio^^, the later Churches should conform themselves to the first,
etc. And again, The fewer ought to conform themselves unto the (...).
knew not which way smoothly to rid their hands of this matter, without
providing some more certain rule to be followed for establishment of
uniformity in ceremonies, when there are diverse kinds of equal goodness;
and therefore in this case they say, that the later Churches and the fewer
should conform themselves unto the elder and the mo. Hereupon they conclude,
that for as much as all the reformed Churches (so far as they know) which are
of our confession in doctrine, have agreed already in the abrogation of diverse
things which we retain: our Church ought either to show that they have done
evil, or else she is found to be in fault for not conforming her self to
those Churches, in that which she cannot deny to be in them well abrogated. For
the authority of the first Churches, (and those they account to be the first
in this cause which were first reformed) they bring the comparison of younger
daughters conforming themselves in attire to the example of their elder
sisters; Romans 16.5.
wherein there is just as much strength of reason as in the livery coats
before mentioned. S. Paul they say, notes it for a mark of special honor,
that Epaenetus was the first man in all Achaia which did embrace the Christian
faith; after the same sort he touches it also as a special preeminence of
Iunias and Andronicus, 1. Cor. 14.36.
that in Christianity they were his ancients; the Corinthians he pincheth with
this demand, Has the word of God gone out from you, or has it lighted on you
alone? But what of all this* If any man should think that alacrity and
forwardnes in good things does add nothing unto men's commendation; the two
former speeches of S. Paul might lead him to reform his judgment. In like
sort to take down the stomach of proud conceited men, that glory as though
they were able to set all others to school, there can be nothing more fit then
some such words as the Apostles third sentence does contain; wherein he
teaches the Church of Corinth to know, that there was no such great odds
between them and the rest of their brethren, that they should think
themselves to be gold and the rest to be but copper. He therefore uses speech
unto them to this effect: Men instructed in the knowledge of Jesus Christ there
both were before you, and are besides you in the word* ye neither are the
fountain from which first, nor yet the river into which alone the word has
flowed. But although as Epaenetus was the first man in all Achaia, so Corinth
had been the first Church in the whole world that received Christ: the Apostle
does not show that in any kind of things in different whatsoever, this should
have made their example a law unto all others. Indeed the example of sundry
Churches for approbation of one thing does sway much; but yet still as having
the force of an example only, and not of a law. They are effectual to move
any Church, unless some greater thing do hinder; but they bind none* no not
though they be many; saving only when they are the mayor part of a general
assembly, and then their voices being more in number must ouersway their
judgments who are fewer, because in such cases the greater half is the whole.
But as they stand out single each of them by it self, their number can
purchase them no such authority, that the rest of the Churches being fewer
should be therefore bound to follow them, and to relinquish as good ceremonies
as theirs for theirs. Whereas therefore it is concluded out of these so weak
premises, T.C. l. 3. p. 183. Our Church ought either to show that they have
done evil, or else she i^ found to be in fault that does not conform her
self in that which she cannot deny to be well abrogated.
that the reteining of diverse things in the Church of England, which other
reformed Churches have cast out, must needs argue that we do not well* unless
we can show that they have done ill; what needed this wrest to draw out from
us an accusation of foreign Churches? It is not proved as yet that if they
have done well, our duty is to follow them, and to forsake our own course,
because it different from theirs, although indeed it be as well for us every
way, as theirs for them. And if the proofs alleged for conformation hereof
had been ^ound, yet seeing they lead no further then only to show, that where
we can have no better ceremonies theirs must be taken; as they cannot with
modesty think themselves to have found out absolutely the best which the wit
of men may devise, so liking their own somewhat better then other men's, even
because they are their own, they must in equity allow us to be like unto them
in this affection; which if they do, they case us of that vncourteou^ burden*
whereby we are charged either to condemn them, or else to follow them. They
grant we need not follow them, if our own ways already be better. And if
our own be but equal, the law of common indulgence allows us to think them
at the least half a thought the better because they are our own; which we may
very well do, and never draw any indictment at all against theirs, A
declaration of the proceedings of the Church of England, for establishment of
things as they are.
but think commendably even of them also.

14 To leave reformed Churches therefore and their actions for him to judge of,
in whose sight, they are as they are, and our desire is that they may even in
his sight be found such, as we ought to endeavor by all means that our own
may likewise be: somewhat we are enforced to speak by way of simple
declaration, concerning the proceedings of the Church of England in these
affairs* to the end that men whose minds are free from those partial,
co^structions, whereby the only name of difference from some other Churches is
thought cause sufficient to condemn ours, may the better discern whether that
we have done be reasonable, yea or no. The Church of England being to alter her
received laws concerning such orders, rites and ceremonies, as had been in
former times an hinderance unto piety and Religious service of God, was to
enter into consideration first, that the change of laws, especially concerning
matter of Religion, must be warily proceeded in. Laws, as all other things
human, are many times full of imperfection, and that which is supposed
behoofefull unto men, proves oftentimes most pernicious. The wisdom which
is learned by tract of time, finds the laws that have been in former ages
established, needful in later to be abrogated. Besides that which sometime is
expedient, does not always so continue: and the number of needless laws
vnabolisht, does weaken the force of them that are necessary. But true withal
it is, that alteration though it be from worse to better has in it
inconveniences and those weighty; unless it be in such laws as have been made
upon special occasions, which occasions ceasing, laws of that kind do abrogate
themselves. But when we abrogate a law as being ill made, the whole cause for
which it was made still remaining; do we not herein revoke our very own deed,
and vpbraid our selves with folly, yea all that were makers of it with over
sight and with error? Further if it be a law which the custom and continual
practice of many ages or years has confirmed in the minds of men, to alter it
must needs be troublesome and scandalous. It amazeth them, it causes the^ to
stand in doubt, whether any thing be in it self by nature either good or evil,
and not al things rather such as men at this or that time agree to account of
them, when they behold even those things disproued, disanulled, rejected, which
use had made in a manner natural. What have we to induce me^ unto the willing
obedience and observation of laws, but the weight of so many men's judgment,
as have with deliberate advise assented thereunto; the weight of that long
experience, which the world has had thereof with consent and good liking? So
that to change any such law, must needs with the common sort impair and weaken
the force of those grounds, whereby all laws are made effectual.
Notwithstanding we do not deny alteration of laws to be sometimes a thing
necessary; as when they are unnatural, or impious, or otherwise hurtful unto
the public community of me^, and against that good for which human
societies were instituted. When the Apostles of our Lord and Savior were
ordained to alter the laws of Heathnish Religion received throughout the whole
world; chosen I grant they were ( Paul excepted) the rest ignorant, poor,
simple, vnschooled altogether and unlettered men; howbeit extraordinarily
endued with ghostly wisdom from above before they ever undertook this
enterprise, yea their authority confirmed by miracle; to the end it might
plainly appear that they were the Lords Ambassadors, unto whose Sovereign
power for all flesh to stoop, for all the kingdoms of the earth to yield
themselves willingly conformable in whatsoever should be required, it was their
duty. In this case therefore their oppositions in maintenance of public
superstition against Apostolic endeavors, as that they might not condemn the
ways of their ancient predecessors, that they must keep Religiones traditas,
the rites which from age to age had descended, that the ceremonies of Religion
had been ever accounted by so much holier as elder, these and the like
allegations in this case were vain and frivolous. Not to stay longer therefore
in speech concerning this point, we will conclude, that as the change of such
laws as have been specified is necessary, so the evidence that they are such
must be great. If we have neither voice from heaven that so pronounces of
them; neither sentence of men grounded upon such manifest and clear proof,
that they in whose hands it is to alter them may likewise infallibly even in
heart and conscience judge them so; upon necessity to urge alteration is to
trouble and disturb without necessity. As for arbitrary alterations, when
laws in themselves not simply bad or unmeet are changed for better and more
expedient; if the benefit of that which is newly better devised be but small,
since the custom of easiness to alter and change is so evil, no doubt but to
bear a tolerable soar is better then to venture on a dangerous remedy. Which
being generally thought upon, as a matter that touched nearly their whole
enterprise; whereas change was notwithstanding concluded necessary, in regard
of the great hurt which the Church did receive by a number of things then in
use, whereupon a great deal of that which had been was now to be taken away
and removed out of the Church; yeat since there are diverse ways of abrogating
things established, they saw it best to cut off presently such things, as might
in that sort be extinguished without danger, leaving the rest to be abolished
by disusage through tract of time. And as this was done for the manner of
abrogation: so touching the stint or measure thereof, rites and ceremonies and
other external things of like nature being hurtful unto the Church, either in
respect of their quality, or in regard of their number; in the former there
could be no doubt or difficulty what should be done, their deliberation in the
later was more hard. And therefore in as much as they did resolve to remove
only such things of that kind as the Church might best spare, reteining the
residue; their whole counsel is in this point utterly condemned, as having
either proceeded from the blindness of those times, or from negligence, or from
desire of honor and glory, or from an erroneous opinion that such things might
be tolerated for a while, or if it did proceed (as they which would seem most
favorable are content to think it possible) from a purpose partly the
easilier to draw Papists unto the Gospel, by keeping so many orders still the
same with theirs, T.C. l. 2. p. 29. It may well be their purpose was by that
temper of Popish ceremonies with the Gospel, partly the ^asilier to draw the
Papists to the Gospel, etc. partly to redeem peace thereby.
and partly to redeem peace thereby, the breach whereof they might fear would
ensue upon more through alteration, or howsoever it came to pass; the thing
they did is judged evil. But such is the lot of all that deal in public
affairs whether of Church or commonwealth, that which men list to surmise of
their doings be it good or ill, they must before hand patiently arm their
minds to endure. Wherefore to let go private surmises, whereby the thing in it
self is not made either better or worse; if just and allowable reasons might
lead the^ to do as they did, then are these censures al frustrate. Touching
ceremonies harmless therefore in themselves, and hurtful only in respect of
number: was it amiss to decree, that those things which were least needful
and newliest come should be the first that were taken away, as in the
abrogating of a number of saints days and of other the like customs it
appears they did, till afterward the form of common prayer being perfited,
articles of sound Religion and discipline agreed upon, Catechismes framed for
the needful instruction of youth, Churches purged of things that indeed were
burdensome to the people, or to the simple offensive and scandalous, all was
brought at the length unto that wherein now we stand? Or was it amiss, that
having this way eased the Church as they thought of superfluity, they went not
on till they had plucked up even those things also, which had taken a great
deal stronger and deeper root; those things which to abrogate without
constraint of manifest harm thereby arising, had been to alter unnecessarily
(in their judgments) the ancient received custom of the whole Church, the
universal practice of the people of God, and those very decrees of our
fathers, which were not only set down by agreement of general councels, but
had accordingly bin put in ure and so continued in use till that very time
present? True it is that neither councels nor customs, be they never so
ancient and so general, can let the Church from taking away that thing which
is hurtful to be retained. Where things have been instituted, which being
convenient and good at the first, do afterward in process of time wax
otherwise; we make no doubt but they may be altered, T. C. l. 3. p. ^0.
yea though councels or customs general have received them. And therefore it
is but a needles kind of opposition which they make who thus dispute, If in
those things which are not expressed in the Scripture, that is to be observed
of the Church, which is the custom of the people of God and decree of our
forefathers; then how can these things at any time be varied, which heretofore
have been once ordained in such sort? Whereto we say, that things so ordained
are to be kept, howbeit not necessarily any longer, then till there grow some
urgent cause to ordain the contrary. For there is not any positive law of men,
whether it be general or particular, received by formal express consent, as
in councels; or by secret approbation, as in customs it comes to pass, but
the same may be taken away it occasion serve. Even as we all know, that many
things generally kept heretofore, Aug. epist. 11^
are now in like sort generally unkept and abolished every where.
Notwithstanding till such things be abolished, what exception can there be
taken against the judgment of S. Augustine, who says, that Of things
harmless whatsoever there is, which the whole Church does observe throughout
the world; to argue for any man's immunitie from observing the same, it were a
point of most insolent madness. And surely odious it must needs have been for
one Christian Church, to abolish that which all had received and held for the
space of many ages, and that without any detriment unto Religion so manifest
and so great, as might in the eyes of impartial men appear sufficient to
clear the^ from all blame of rash and inconsiderate proceeding, if in fervor
of zeal they had removed such things. Whereas contrariwise so reasonable
moderation herein used, has freed us from being deservedly subject unto that
bitter kind of obloquie, whereby as the Church of Rome does under the color of
love toward those things which be harmless, maintain extremely most
hurtful corruptions; so we peradventure might be vpbraided, that under color
of hatred toward those things that are corrupt, we are on the other side as
extreme, even againts most harmless ordinances. And as they are obstinate to
retain that, which no man of any conscience is able well to defend: so we might
be reckoned fierce and violent, to tear away that, which if our own mouths
did condemn, our consciences would storm and repine thereat. The Romans
having banished Tarquinius the proud, and taken a sollemne oath that they never
would permit any man more to reign, could not herewith content themselves, or
think that tyranny was thoroughly extinguished, till they had driven one of
their Consuls to depart the City, against whom they found not in the world
what to object, saving only that his name was Tarquine, and that the
commonwealth could not seem to have recovered perfect freedom, as long as a
man of so dangerous a name was left remaining. For the Church of England to
have done the like, in casting out of Papal tyranny and superstition; to have
showed greater willingness of accepting the very ceremonies of the Turk Christ's
professed enemy, T. C. l. 1. p. 131 For indeed it were more safe for us to
conform our indifferent ceremonies to the Turks which are far off, then to
the Papists which are so near.
then of the most indifferent things which the Church of Rome approves; to
have left not so much as the names which the Church of Rome does give unto
things innocent; to have eiected whatsoever that Church does make account of,
be it never so harmless in it self, and of never so ancient continuance,
without any other crime to charge it with, then only that it has been the hap
thereof to be used by the Church of Rome; and not to be commanded in the word
of God; this kind of proceeding might happily have pleased some few men, who
having begun such a course themselves, must needs be glad to see their example
followed by us. But the Almighty which gives wisdom and inspireth with
right understanding who^ soever it pleases him, he foreseeing that which man's
wit had never been able to reach unto, namely what tragedies the attempt of so
extreme alteration would raise in some parts of the Christian world, did for
the endless good of his Church (as we cannot choose but interpret it) use the
bridle of his provident restraining hand, to stay those eager affections in
some, and to settle their resolution upon a course more calm and moderate;
least as in other most ample and heretofore most flourishing dominions it has
since fallen out, so likewise if in ours it had come to pass, that the adverse
part being enraged, and betaking it self to such practices as men are commonly
wont to embrace, when they behold things brought to desperate extremities, and
no hope left to see any other end, then only the utter oppression and clean
extinguishment of one side; by this mean Christendom flaming in all parts of
greatest importance at once, they all had wanted that comfort of mutual
relief, whereby they are now for the time sustained, (and not the least by this
our Church which they so much impeach) till mutual combustious bloudsheads and
wastes (because no other inducement will serve) may enforce them through very
faintness, after the experience of so endless miseries, to enter on all sides
at the length into some such consultation, as may tend to the best
reestablishment of the whole Church of Jesus Christ. To the singular good
whereof it cannot but serve as a profitable direction, to teach men what is
most likely to prove available, when they shall quietly consider the trial
that has been thus long had of both kinds of reformation, as well this
moderate kind which the Church of England has taken, as that other more
extreme and rigorous which certain Churches elsewhere have better liked. In
the mean while it may be, that suspense of judgment and exercise of charity
were safer and seemelier for Christian men, then the hot pursuit of these
controversies, wherein they that are most fervent to dispute, be not always
the most able to determine. But who are on his side and who against him, our
Lord in his good time shall reveal. And since thus far we have proceeded in
opening the things that have been done, let not the principal doers
themselves be forgotten. When the ruins of the house of God (that house which
consisting of religious souls is most immediately the precious temple of the
holy Ghost) were become not in his sight alone, but in the eyes of the whole
world so exceeding great, that very superstition began even to feel itself
too far grown: the first that with us made way to repair the decays
thereof by beheading superstition, was King Henry the eight. The son and
successor of which famous King as we know was Edward the Saint: in whom (for
so by the event we may gather) it pleased God righteous and just to let
England see, what a blessing sin and iniquity would not suffer it to enjoy.
Howbeit that which the wise man has said concerning Enoch (whose days were
though many in respect of ours, yet scarce as three to nine in comparison of
theirs with whom he lived) the same to that admirable child most worthily may
be applied, Though he departed this world soon, yet fulfilled he much time.
But what ensued? That work, which the one in such sort had begun, and the
other so far proceeded in, was in short space so overthrown, as if almost it
had never been: till such time as that God, whose property is to show his
mercies then greatest when they are nearest to be utterly despaired of, caused
in the depth of discomfort and darkness a most glorious star to arise, and on
her head settled the Crown, whom him self had kept as a lamb from the
slaughter of those bloody times, that the experience of his goodness in her own
deliverance, might cause her merciful* disposition to take so much the more
delight in saving others, whom the like necessity should press. What in this
behalf has been done toward nations abroad, the parts of Christendom most
afflicted can best testify. That which especially concerns our selves in the
present matter we treat of, is the state of reformed religion, a thing at her
coming to the Crown even raised as it were by miracle from the dead, a thing
which we so little hoped to see, that even they which beheld it done, scarcely
believed their own senses at the first beholding. Yet being then brought to
pass, thus many years it has continued, standing by no other worldly mean
but that one only hand which erected it, that hand which as no kind of
imminent danger could cause at the first to withholde it self, so neither
have the practices so many so bloody following since been ever able to make
weary. Nor can we say in this case so justly, that Aaron and Hur the
Ecclesiastical and Civil states have sustained the hand which did lift it
self to heaven for them; as that heaven it self has by this hand sustained
them, no aid or help having thereunto been ministered for performance of the
work of reformation, other then such kind of help or aid as the Angel in
the Prophet Zachary speaks of, saying, Neither by an army nor strength, but
by my spirit says the Lord of Hosts. Which grace and favor of divine
assistance, having not in one thing or two showed it self, nor for some few
days or years appeared, but in such sort so long continued, our manifold
sins and transgressions striving to the contrary; what can we less
thereupon conclude, then that God would at leastwise by tract of time teach the
world, that the thing which he blesses, defends, keeps, so strangely,
cannot choose but be of him? Wherefore if any refuse to believe us disputing
for the verity of religion established, let them believe God himself thus
miraculouslie working for it, and wish life even for ever and ever unto that
glorious and sacred instrument whereby he works.

FINIS
An Advertisement to the Reader*
I Have for some causes, (gentle Reader) thought it at this time, more fit to
let go these first four Books by themselves, then to stay both them and the
rest, til the whole might together be published. Such generalities of the cause
in question as here are handled, it will be perhaps not amiss to consider
apart, as by way of introduction unto the books that are to follow concerning
particulars. In the mean while thine helping hand must be craved, for the
amendment of such faults committed in printing, as (omitting others of less
moment) I have set down.

Page line Fault* Correction Page line Fault Correction 25 37 be ordained he
ordained 138 19 still stay 31 23 if any of any 139 19 It is for nothing It is
not for nothing 51 mar. (...) (...) 157 33 wash waste 55 mar. (...) (...) 162
32 precious should precious body should 64 mar. (...) (...) 180 43 meerenes
neerenes 66 19 manifest reason manifest law of reason 183 39 urine vain 83 12
or that of that 184 ma. (...) (...) 87 24 ase such are such 185 18 do (I doubt)
not presume, do(I doubt not) presume 91 44 holy work holy word 186 mar. stick
strike 130 38 severally seueraltie. 202 3 word world


